--- Page 1 ---
Neural Variational Inference and Learning
in Undirected Graphical Models
V olodymyr Kuleshov
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
kuleshov@cs.stanford.edu
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ermon@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Many problems in machine learning are naturally expressed in the language of
undirected graphical models. Here, we propose black-box learning and inference
algorithms for undirected models that optimize a variational approximation to the
log-likelihood of the model. Central to our approach is an upper bound on the log-
partition function parametrized by a functionq that we express as a ﬂexible neural
network. Our bound makes it possible to track the partition function during learning,
to speed-up sampling, and to train a broad class of hybrid directed/undirected
models via a uniﬁed variational inference framework. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method on several popular generative modeling datasets.
1 Introduction
Many problems in machine learning are naturally expressed in the language of undirected graphical
models. Undirected models are used in computer vision [1], speech recognition [2], social science [3],
deep learning [4], and other ﬁelds. Many fundamental machine learning problems center on undirected
models [5]; however, inference and learning in this class of distributions give rise to signiﬁcant
computational challenges.
Here, we attempt to tackle these challenges via new variational inference and learning techniques
aimed at undirected probabilistic graphical modelsp. Central to our approach is an upper bound on
the log-partition function ofp parametrized by a an approximating distributionq that we express as a
ﬂexible neural network [ 6]. Our bound is tight whenq =p and is convex in the parameters ofq for
interesting classes ofq. Most interestingly, it leads to a lower bound on the log-likelihood function
logp, which enables us to ﬁt undirected models in a variational framework similar to black-box
variational inference [7].
Our approach offers a number of advantages over previous methods. First, it enables training
undirected models in a black-box manner, i.e. we do not need to know the structure of the model to
compute gradient estimators (e.g., as in Gibbs sampling); rather, our estimators only require evaluating
a model’s unnormalized probability. When optimized jointly overq andp, our bound also offers a
way to track the partition function during learning [8]. At inference-time, the learned approximating
distributionq may be used to speed-up sampling from the undirected model by initializing an MCMC
chain (or it may itself provide samples). Furthermore, our approach naturally integrates with recent
variational inference methods [6, 9] for directed graphical models. We anticipate that our approach
will be most useful in automated probabilistic inference systems [10].
As a practical example for how our methods can be used, we study a broad class of hybrid di-
rected/undirected models and show how they can be trained in a uniﬁed black-box neural variational
inference framework. Hybrid models like the ones we consider have been popular in the early deep
learning literature [4, 11] and take inspiration from the principles of neuroscience [12]. They also
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.


--- Page 2 ---
possess a higher modeling capacity for the same number of variables; quite interestingly, we identify
settings in which such models are also easier to train.
2 Background
Undirected graphical models. Undirected models form one of the two main classes of probabilistic
graphical models [ 13]. Unlike directed Bayesian networks, they may express more compactly
relationships between variables when the directionality of a relationship cannot be clearly deﬁned
(e.g., as in between neighboring image pixels).
In this paper, we mainly focus on Markov random ﬁelds (MRFs), a type of undirected model
corresponding to a probability distribution of the form pθ(x) = ˜pθ(x)/Z(θ), where ˜pθ(x) =
exp(θ·x) is an unnormalized probability (also known as energy function) with parametersθ, and
Z(θ) =
∫
˜pθ(x)dx is the partition function, which is essentially a normalizing constant. Our approach
also admits natural extensions to conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) undirected models.
Importance sampling. In general, the partition function of an MRF is often an intractable integral
over ˜p(x). We may, however, rewrite it as
I :=
∫
x
˜pθ(x)dx =
∫
x
˜pθ(x)
q(x) q(x)dx =
∫
x
w(x)q(x)dx, (1)
whereq is a proposal distribution. IntegralI can in turn be approximated by a Monte-Carlo estimate
ˆI := 1
n
∑n
i=1w(xi), wherexi∼q. This approach, called importance sampling [14], may reduce
the variance of an estimator and help compute intractable integrals. The variance of an importance
sampling estimate ˆI has a closed-form expression: 1
n
(
Eq(x)[w(x)2]−I 2)
. By Jensen’s inequality,
it equals 0 whenp =q.
Variational inference. Inference in undirected models is often intractable. Variational approaches
approximate this process by optimizing the evidence lower bound
logZ(θ)≥ max
q
Eq(x) [log ˜pθ(x)− logq(x)]
over a distributionq(x); this amounts to ﬁnding aq that approximatesp in terms ofKL(q||p). Ideal
q’s should be expressive, easy to optimize over, and admit tractable inference procedures. Recent
work has shown that neural network-based models possess many of these qualities [15, 16, 17].
Auxiliary-variable deep generative models. Several families ofq have been proposed to ensure
that the approximating distribution is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to ﬁtp. This work makes use of a class
of distributions q(x,a ) = q(x|a)q(a) that contain auxiliary variablesa [18, 19]; these are latent
variables that make the marginal q(x) multimodal, which in turn enables it to approximate more
closely a multimodal target distributionp(x).
3 Variational Bounds on the Partition Function
This section introduces a variational upper bound on the partition function of an undirected graphical
model. We analyze its properties and discuss optimization strategies. In the next section, we use this
bound as an objective for learning undirected models.
3.1 A Variational Upper Bound on Z(θ)
We start with the simple observation that the variance of an importance sampling estimator (1) of the
partition function naturally yields an upper bound onZ(θ):
Eq(x)
[ ˜p(x)2
q(x)2
]
≥Z(θ)2. (2)
As mentioned above, this bound is tight when q = p. Hence, it implies a natural algorithm for
computingZ(θ): minimize (2) overq in some familyQ.
2


--- Page 3 ---
We immediately want to emphasize that this algorithm will not be directly applicable to highly peaked
and multimodal distributions ˜p (such as an Ising model near its critical point). If q is initially very far
from ˜p, Monte Carlo estimates will tend to under-estimate the partition function.
However, in the context of learningp, we may expect a random initialization of ˜p to be approximately
uniform; we may thus ﬁt an initialq to this well-behaved distribution, and as we gradually learn or
annealp,q should be able to trackp and produce useful estimates of the gradients of ˜p and ofZ(θ).
Most importantly, these estimates are black-box and do not require knowing the structure of ˜p to
compute. We will later conﬁrm that our intuition is correct via experiments.
3.2 Properties of the Bound
Convexity properties. A notable feature of our objective is that ifq is an exponential family with
parametersφ, the bound is jointly log-convex inθ andφ. This lends additional credibility to the bound
as an optimization objective. If we choose to further parametrize φ by a neural net, the resulting
non-convexity will originate solely from the network, and not from our choice of loss function.
To establish log-convexity, it sufﬁces to look at˜pθ(x)2/q(x) for onex, since the sum of log-convex
functions is log-convex. Note that log ˜pθ(x)2
q(x) = 2θTx− logqφ(x). One can easily check that a
non-negative concave function is also log-concave; sinceq is in the exponential family, the second
term is convex, and our claim follows.
Importance sampling. Minimizing the bound onZ(θ) may be seen as a form of adaptive impor-
tance sampling, where the proposal distributionq is gradually adjusted as more samples are taken
[14, 20]. This provides another explanation for why we need q≈ p; note that when q = p, the
variance is zero, and a single sample computes the partition function, demonstrating that the bound is
indeed tight. This also suggests the possibility of taking 1
n
∑n
i=1
˜p(xi)
q(xi) as an estimate of the partition
function, with thexi being all the samples that have been collected during the optimization ofq.
χ2-divergence minimization. Observe that optimizing (2) is equivalent to minimizing Eq
( ˜p−q)2
q2 ,
which is theχ2-divergence, a type ofα-divergence withα = 2 [21, 22]. This connections highlights
the variational nature of our approach and potentially suggests generalizations to other divergences.
Moreover, many interesting properties of the bound can be easily established from this interpretation,
such as convexity in terms ofq, ˜p (in functional space).
3.3 Auxiliary-Variable Approximating Distributions
A key part of our approach is the choice of approximating family Q: it needs to be expressive,
easy to optimize over, and admit tractable inference procedures. In particular, since ˜p(x) may be
highly multi-modal and peaked, q(x) should ideally be equally complex. Note that unlike earlier
methods that parametrized conditional distributionsq(z|x) over hidden variablesz (e.g. variational
autoencoders [15]), our setting does not admit a natural conditioning variable, making the task
considerably more challenging.
Here, we propose to address these challenges via an approach based on auxiliary-variable approxi-
mations [18]: we introduce a set of latent variables a intoq(x,a ) =q(x|a)q(a) making the marginal
q(x) multi-modal. Computing the marginalq(x) may no longer be tractable; we therefore apply the
variational principle one more time and introduce an additional relaxation of the form
Eq(a,x)
[p(a|x)2˜p(x)2
q(x|a)2q(a)2
]
≥ Eq(x)
[ ˜p(x)2
q(x)2
]
≥Z(θ)2, (3)
where,p(a|x) is a probability distribution overa that lifts ˜p to the joint space of (x,a ). To establish
the ﬁrst inequality, observe that
Eq(a,x)
[p(a|x)2˜p(x)2
q(x|a)2q(a)2
]
= Eq(x)q(a|x)
[p(a|x)2˜p(x)2
q(a|x)2q(x)2
]
= Eq(x)
[ ˜p(x)2
q(x)2· Eq(a|x)
(p(a|x)2
q(a|x)2
)]
.
The factor Eq(a|x)
(
p(a|x)2
q(a|x)2
)
is an instantiation of bound (2) for the distribution p(a|x), and is
therefore lower-bounded by 1.
3


--- Page 4 ---
This derivation also sheds light on the role of p(a|x): it is an approximating distribution for the
intractable posteriorq(a|x). When p(a|x) = q(a|x), the ﬁrst inequality in (3) is tight, and we are
optimizing our initial bound.
3.3.1 Instantiations of the Auxiliary-Variable Framework
The above formulation is sufﬁciently general to encompass several different variational inference
approaches. Either could be used to optimize our objective, although we focus on the latter, as it
admits the most ﬂexible approximators for q(x).
Non-parametric variational inference. First, as suggested by Gershman et al. [23], we may take
q to be a uniform mixture ofK exponential families:q(x) =∑K
k=1
1
Kqk(x;φk).
This is equivalent to letting a be a categorical random variable with a ﬁxed, uniform prior. The
qk may be either Gaussians or Bernoulli, depending on whether x is discrete or continuous. This
choice ofq lets us potentially model arbitrarily complexp given enough components. Note that for
distributions of this form it is easy to compute the marginalq(x) (for smallK), and the bound in (3)
may not be needed.
MCMC-based variational inference. Alternatively, we may setq(a|x) to be an MCMC transition
operatorT (x′|x) (or a sequence of operators) as in Salimans et al. [24]. The priorq(a) may be set to
a ﬂexible distribution, such as normalizing ﬂows [ 25] or another mixture distribution. This gives a
distribution of the form
q(x,a ) =T (x|a)q(a). (4)
For example, if T (x|a) is a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM; Smolensky [26]), the Gibbs
sampling operatorT (x′|x) has a closed form that can be used to compute importance samples. This
is in contrast to vanilla Gibbs sampling, where there is no closed form density for weighting samples.
The above approach also has similarities to persistent contrastive divergence (PCD; Tieleman and
Hinton [27]), a popular approach for training RBM models, in which samples are taken from a Gibbs
chain that is not reset during learning. The distributionq(a) may be thought of as a parametric way
of representing a persistent distribution from which samples are taken throughout learning; like the
PCD Gibbs chain, it too tracks the target probabilityp during learning.
Auxiliary-variable neural networks. Lastly, we may also parametrizeq(a|x) by an ﬂexible func-
tion approximator such as a neural network [18]. More concretely, we setq(a) to a simple continuous
prior (e.g. normal or uniform) and set qφ(x|a) to an exponential family distribution whose nat-
ural parameters are parametrized by a neural net. For example, if x is continuous, we may set
q(x|a) = N(µ(a),σ (a)I), as in a variational auto-encoder. Since the marginalq(x) is intractable,
we use the variational bound (3) and parametrize the approximate posterior p(a|x) with a neural
network. For example, ifa∼N (0, 1), we may again setp(a|x) =N(µ(x),σ (x)I).
3.4 Optimization
In the rest of the paper, we focus on the auxiliary-variable neural network approach for optimizing
bound (3). This approach affords us the greatest modeling ﬂexibility and allows us to build on
previous neural variational inference approaches.
The key challenge with this choice of representation is optimizing (3) with respect to the parameters
φ,φ ofp,q . Here, we follow previous work on black-box variational inference [6, 7] and compute
Monte Carlo estimates of the gradient of our neural network architecture.
The gradient with respect top has the form 2Eq
˜p(x,a)
q(x,a)2∇φ˜p(x,a ) and can be estimated directly via
Monte Carlo. We use the score function estimator to compute the gradient ofq, which can be written
as−Eq(x,a)
˜p(x,a)2
q(x,a)2∇φ logq(x,a ) and estimated again using Monte Carlo samples. In the case of a
non-parametric variational approximation∑K
k=1
1
Kqk(x;φk), the gradient has a simple expression
∇φk Eq
˜p(x)2
q(x)2 =−Eqk
[
˜p(x)2
q(x)2dk(x)
]
, wheredk(x) is the difference ofx and its expectation underqk.
4


--- Page 5 ---
Note also that if our goal is to compute the partition function, we may collect all intermediary samples
for computing the gradient and use them as regular importance samples. This may be interpreted as a
form of adaptive sampling [20].
Variance reduction. A well-known shortcoming of the score function gradient estimator is its high
variance, which signiﬁcantly slows down optimization. We follow previous work [6] and introduce
two variance reduction techniques to mitigate this problem.
We ﬁrst use a moving average¯b of ˜p(x)2/q(x)2 to center the learning signal. This leads to a gradient
estimate of the form Eq(x)( ˜p(x)2
q(x)2− ¯b)∇φ logq(x); this yields the correct gradient by well known
properties of the score function [7]. Furthermore, we use variance normalization, a form of adaptive
step size. More speciﬁcally, we keep a running average¯σ2 of the variance of the ˜p(x)2/q(x)2 and
use a normalized formg′ =g/ max(1, ¯σ2) of the original gradientg.
Note that unlike the standard evidence lower bound, we cannot deﬁne a sample-dependent baseline,
as we are not conditioning on any sample. Likewise, many advanced gradient estimators [9] do not
apply in our setting. Developing better variance reduction techniques for this setting is likely to help
scale the method to larger datasets.
4 Neural Variational Learning of Undirected Models
Next, we turn our attention to the problem of learning the parameters of an MRF. Given data
D ={x(i)}n
i=1, our training objective is the log-likelihood
logp(D|θ) := 1
n
n∑
i=1
logpθ(x(i)) = 1
n
n∑
i=1
θTx(i)− logZ(θ). (5)
We can use our earlier bound to upper bound the log-partition function by log
(
Ex∼q
˜pθ(x)2
q(x)2
)
. By
our previous discussion, this expression is convex inθ,φ ifq is an exponential family distribution.
The resulting lower bound on the log-likelihood may be optimized jointly over θ,φ ; as discussed
earlier, by trainingp andq jointly, the two distributions may help each other. In particular, we may
start learning at an easyθ (wherep is not too peaked) and useq to slowly trackp, thus controlling the
variance in the gradient.
Linearizing the logarithm. Since the log-likelihood contains the logarithm of the bound (2), our
Monte Carlo samples will produce biased estimates of the gradient. We did not ﬁnd this to pose
problems in practice; however, to ensure unbiased gradients one may further linearize the log using
the identity log(x)≤ax− log(a)− 1, which is tight fora = 1/x. Together with our bound on the
log-partition function, this yields
logp(D|θ)≥ max
θ,q
1
n
n∑
i=1
θTx(i)− 1
2
(
aEx∼q
˜pθ(x)2
qψ(x)2− log(a)− 1
)
. (6)
This expression is convex in each of (θ,φ ) anda, but is not jointly convex. However, it is straightfor-
ward to show that equation (6) and its unlinearized version have a unique point satisfying ﬁrst-order
stationarity conditions. This may be done by writing out the KKT conditions of both problems and
using the fact thata∗ = (Ex∼q
˜pθ(x)2
q(x)2 )−1 at the optimum. See Gopal and Yang [28] for more details.
4.1 Variational Inference and Learning in Hybrid Directed/Undirected Models
We apply our framework to a broad class of hybrid directed/undirected models and show how they
can be trained in a uniﬁed variational inference framework.
The models we consider are best described as variational autoencoders with a Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine (RBM; Smolensky [26]) prior. More formally, they are latent-variable distributions
of the form p(x,z ) = p(x|z)p(z), where p(x|z) is an exponential family whose natural param-
eters are parametrized by a neural network as a function of z, and p(z) is an RBM. The latter
is an undirected latent variable model with hidden variables h and unnormalized log-probability
log ˜p(z,h ) =zTWh +bTz +cTh, whereW,b,c are parameters.
5


--- Page 6 ---
We train the model using two applications of the variational principle: ﬁrst, we apply the standard
evidence lower bound with an approximate posteriorr(z|x); then, we apply our lower bound on the
RBM log-likelihood logp(z), which yields the objective
logp(x)≥ Er(z|x) [logp(x|z) + log ˜p(z) + logB(˜p,q )− logr(z|x)]. (7)
Here,B denotes our bound (3) on the partition function ofp(z) parametrized withq. Equation (7)
may be optimized using standard variational inference techniques; the termsr(z|x) andp(x|z) do
not appear inB and their gradients may be estimated using REINFORCE and standard Monte Carlo,
respectively. The gradients of ˜p(z) andq(z) are obtained using methods described above. Note also
that our approach naturally extends to models with multiple layers of latent directed variables.
Such hybrid models are similar in spirit to deep belief networks [ 11]. From a statistical point
of view, a latent variable prior makes the model more ﬂexible and allows it to better ﬁt the data
distribution. Such models may also learn structured feature representations: previous work has
shown that undirected modules may learn classes of digits, while lower, directed layers may learn to
represent ﬁner variation [29]. Finally, undirected models like the ones we study are loosely inspired
by the brain and have been studied from that perspective [12]. In particular, the undirected prior has
been previously interpreted as an associative memory module [11].
5 Experiments
5.1 Tracking the Partition Function
We start with an experiment aimed at visualizing the importance of tracking the target distributionp
usingq during learning.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Iteration
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36logZ
True value
Our method
Loopy BP
Gibbs sampling
We use Equation 6 to optimize the likeli-
hood of a 5×5 Ising MRF with coupling
factor J and unaries chosen randomly
in{10−2,−10−2}. We set J =−0.6,
sampled 1000 examples from the model,
and ﬁt another Ising model to this data.
We followed a non-parametric inference
approach with a mixture of K = 8
Bernoullis. We optimized (6) using SGD and alternated between ten steps over the φk and one
step overθ,a . We drew 100 Monte Carlo samples perqk. Our method converged in about 25 steps
overθ. At each iteration we computed logZ via importance sampling.
The adjacent ﬁgure shows the evolution oflogZ during learning. It also plots logZ computed by
exact inference, loopy BP, and Gibbs sampling (using the same number of samples). Our method
accurately tracks the partition function after about 10 iterations. In particular, our method fares better
than the others whenJ≈− 0.6, which is when the Ising model is entering its phase transition.
5.2 Learning Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Next, we use our method to train Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) on the UCI digits dataset
[30], which contains 10,992 8× 8 images of handwritten digits; we augment this data by moving
each image 1px to the left, right, up, and down. We train an RBM with 100 hidden units using
ADAM [31] with batch size 100, a learning rate of 3· 10−4,β1 = 0.9, andβ2 = 0.999; we chooseq
to be a uniform mixture ofK = 10 Bernoulli distributions. We alternate between trainingp andq,
performing either 2 or 10 gradient steps onq for each step onp and taking 30 samples fromq per
step; the gradients ofp are estimated via adaptive importance sampling.
We compare our method against persistent contrastive divergence (PCD; Tieleman and Hinton[27]),
a standard method for training RBMs. The same ADAM settings were used to optimize the model
with the PCD gradient. We used k = 3 Gibbs steps and 100 persistent chains. Both PCD and our
method were implemented in Theano [32].
In Figure 1, we plot the true log-likelihood of the model (computed with annealed importance
sampling with step size 10−3) as a function of the epoch; we use 10 gradient steps onq for each step
onp. Both PCD and our method achieve comparable performance. Interestingly, we may use our
6


--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1: Learning curves for an RBM trained with PCD-3 and with neural variational inference on
the UCI digits dataset. Log-likelihood was computed using annealed importance sampling.
0 50 100 150 200 250
Epochs
30
28
26
Log-likelihood
Persistent contrastive divergence
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Epochs
30
28
26
Log-likelihood
Neural variational inference
true
predicted
Table 1: Test set negative log likelihood on binarized MNIST and Omniglot for V AE and ADGM
models with Bernoulli (200 vars) and RBM priors with 64 visible and either 8 or 64 hidden variables.
Binarized MNIST Omniglot
Model Ber(200) RBM(64,8) RBM(64,64) Ber(200) RBM(64,8) RBM(64,64)
V AE 111.9 105.4 102.3 135.1 130.2 128.5
ADGM 107.9 104.3 100.7 136.8 134.4 131.1
approximating distributionq to estimate the log-likelihood via importance sampling. Figure 1 (right)
shows that this estimate closely tracks the true log-likelihood; thus, users may periodically query
the model for reasonably accurate estimates of the log-likelihood. In our implementation, neural
variational inference was approximately eight times slower than PCD; when performing two gradient
steps onq, our method was only 50% slower with similar samples and pseudo-likelihood; however
log-likelihood estimates were noisier. Annealed importance sampling was always more than order of
magnitude slower than neural variational inference.
Visualizing the approximating distribution. Next, we
trained another RBM model performing two gradient steps
forq for each step of p. The adjacent ﬁgure shows the
mean distribution of each component of the mixture of
Bernoullisq; one may distinguish in them the shapes of
various digits. This conﬁrms thatq indeed approximatesp.
Speeding up sampling from undirected models. After the
model has ﬁnished training, we can use the approximating q
to initialize an MCMC sampling chain. Sinceq is a rough approx-
imation ofp, the resulting chain should mix faster. To conﬁrm
this intuition, we plot in the adjacent ﬁgure samples from a Gibbs
sampling chain that has been initialized randomly (top), as well
as from a chain that was initialized with a sample fromq (bottom).
The latter method reaches a plausible-looking digit in a few steps,
while the former produces blurry samples.
5.3 Learning Hybrid Directed/Undirected Models
Next, we use the variational objective (7) to learn two types of hybrid directed/undirected models:
a variational autoencoder (V AE) and an auxiliary variable deep generative model (ADGM) [ 18].
We consider three types of priors: a standard set of 200 uniform Bernoulli variables, an RBM with
64 visible and 8 hidden units, and an RBM with 64 visible and 64 hidden units. In the ADGM,
the approximate posterior r(z,u|x) = r(z|u,x )r(u|x) includes auxiliary variables u∈ R10. All
the conditional probabilities r(z|u,x ),r (u|x),r (z|x),p (x|z) are parametrized with dense neural
networks with one hidden layer of size 500.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2: Samples from a deep generative model using different priors over the discrete latent
variablesz. On the left, the priorp(z) is a Bernoulli distribution (200 vars); on the right,p(z) is an
RBM (64 visible and 8 hidden vars). All other parts of the model are held ﬁxed.
We train all neural networks for 200 epochs with ADAM (same parameters as above) and neural
variational inference (NVIL) with control variates as described in Mnih and Rezende [9]. We
parametrizeq with a neural network mapping 10-dimensional auxiliary variables a∈N (0,I ) to
x via one hidden layer of size 32. We show in Table 1 the test set negative log-likelihoods on the
binarized MNIST [33] and 28× 28 Omniglot [17] datasets; we compute these using 103 Monte Carlo
samples and using annealed importance sampling for the 64× 64 RBM.
Overall, adding an RBM prior with as little as 8 latent variables results in signiﬁcant log-likelihood
improvements. Most interestingly, this prior greatly improves sample quality over the discrete latent
variable V AE (Figure 2). Whereas the V AE failed to generate correct digits, replacing the prior with
a small RBM resulted in smooth MNIST images. We note that both methods were trained with
exactly the same gradient estimator (NVIL). We observed similar behavior for the ADGM model.
This suggests that introducing the undirected component made the models more expressive and easier
to train.
6 Related Work and Discussion
Our work is inspired by black-box variational inference [7] for variational autoencoders and related
models [15], which involve ﬁtting approximate posteriors parametrized by neural networks. Our work
presents analogous methods for undirected models. Popular classes of undirected models include
Restricted and Deep Boltzmann Machines [4, 26] as well as Deep Belief Networks [11]. Closest to
our work is the discrete V AE model; however, Rolfe[29] seeks to efﬁciently optimizep(x|z), while
the RBM priorp(z) is optimized using PCD; our work optimizesp(x|z) using standard techniques
and focuses onp(z). Our bound has also been independently studied in directed models [22].
More generally, our work proposes an alternative to sampling-based learning methods; most vari-
ational methods for undirected models center on inference. Our approach scales to small and
medium-sized datasets, and is most useful within hybrid directed-undirected generative models. It
approaches the speed of the PCD method and offers additional beneﬁts, such as partition function
tracking and accelerated sampling. Most importantly, our algorithms are black-box, and do not
require knowing the structure of the model to derive gradient or partition function estimators. We
anticipate that our methods will be most useful in automated inference systems such as Edward [10].
The scalability of our approach is primarily limited by the high variance of the Monte Carlo estimates
of the gradients and the partition function when q does not ﬁtp sufﬁciently well. In practice, we
found that simple metrics such as pseudo-likelihood were effective at diagnosing this problem. When
training deep generative models with RBM priors, we noticed that weakq’s introduced mode collapse
(but training would still converge). Increasing the complexity ofq and using more samples resolved
these problems. Finally, we also found that the score function estimator of the gradient ofq does not
scale well to higher dimensions. Better gradient estimators are likely to further improve our method.
7 Conclusion
In summary, we have proposed new variational learning and inference algorithms for undirected
models that optimize an upper-bound on the partition function derived from the perspective of
8


--- Page 9 ---
importance sampling andχ2 divergence minimization. Our methods allow training undirected models
in a black-box manner and will be useful in automated inference systems [10].
Our framework is competitive with sampling methods in terms of speed and offers additional beneﬁts
such as partition function tracking and accelerated sampling. Our approach can also be used to train
hybrid directed/undirected models using a uniﬁed variational framework. Most interestingly, it makes
generative models with discrete latent variables both more expressive and easier to train.
Acknowledgements. This work is supported by the Intel Corporation, Toyota, NSF (grants
1651565, 1649208, 1522054) and by the Future of Life Institute (grant 2016-158687).
References
[1] Yongyue Zhang, Michael Brady, and Stephen Smith. Segmentation of brain mr images through
a hidden markov random ﬁeld model and the expectation-maximization algorithm. IEEE
transactions on medical imaging, 20(1):45–57, 2001.
[2] Jeffrey A Bilmes. Graphical models and automatic speech recognition. In Mathematical
foundations of speech and language processing, pages 191–245. Springer, 2004.
[3] John Scott. Social network analysis. Sage, 2012.
[4] Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep boltzmann machines. InArtiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, pages 448–455, 2009.
[5] Martin J Wainwright, Michael I Jordan, et al. Graphical models, exponential families, and
variational inference. Foundations and TrendsR⃝ in Machine Learning, 1(1–2):1–305, 2008.
[6] Andriy Mnih and Karol Gregor. Neural variational inference and learning in belief networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.0030, 2014.
[7] Rajesh Ranganath, Sean Gerrish, and David Blei. Black box variational inference. In Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics, pages 814–822, 2014.
[8] Guillaume Desjardins, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C Courville. On tracking the partition
function. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2501–2509, 2011.
[9] Andriy Mnih and Danilo J Rezende. Variational inference for monte carlo objectives. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1602.06725, 2016.
[10] Dustin Tran, Alp Kucukelbir, Adji B Dieng, Maja Rudolph, Dawen Liang, and David M
Blei. Edward: A library for probabilistic modeling, inference, and criticism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.09787, 2016.
[11] Geoffrey E. Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep
belief nets. Neural Computation, 18:1527–1554, 2006.
[12] Geoffrey E Hinton, Peter Dayan, Brendan J Frey, and Radford M Neal. The" wake-sleep"
algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science, 268(5214):1158, 1995.
[13] Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques.
MIT press, 2009.
[14] Rajan Srinivasan. Importance sampling: Applications in communications and detection .
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[15] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. CoRR, abs/1312.6114,
2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
[16] Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation
and approximate inference in deep generative models. In Proceedings of the 31th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2014, Beijing, China, 21-26 June 2014, pages 1278–
1286, 2014. URL http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v32/rezende14.html.
[17] Yuri Burda, Roger B. Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders.
CoRR, abs/1509.00519, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.00519.
[18] Lars Maaløe, Casper Kaae Sønderby, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Auxiliary deep
generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05473, 2016.
9


--- Page 10 ---
[19] Rajesh Ranganath, Dustin Tran, and David Blei. Hierarchical variational models. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 324–333, 2016.
[20] Ernest K. Ryu and Stephen P. Boyd. Adaptive importance sampling via stochastic convex
programming. Unpublished manuscript, November 2014.
[21] Tom Minka et al. Divergence measures and message passing. Technical report, Technical report,
Microsoft Research, 2005.
[22] Adji B Dieng, Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, John Paisley, and David M Blei. Variational
inference via chi-upper bound minimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2017.
[23] Samuel Gershman, Matthew D. Hoffman, and David M. Blei. Nonparametric variational
inference. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2012, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2012.
[24] Tim Salimans, Diederik Kingma, and Max Welling. Markov chain monte carlo and variational
inference: Bridging the gap. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML-15), pages 1218–1226, 2015.
[25] Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing ﬂows.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.05770, 2015.
[26] Paul Smolensky. Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations of harmony theory.
Technical report, DTIC Document, 1986.
[27] Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton. Using fast weights to improve persistent contrastive
divergence. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 1033–1040. ACM, 2009.
[28] Siddharth Gopal and Yiming Yang. Distributed training of large-scale logistic models. In
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, Atlanta,
GA, USA, pages 289–297, 2013.
[29] Jason Tyler Rolfe. Discrete variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02200, 2016.
[30] Fevzi Alimoglu, Ethem Alpaydin, and Yagmur Denizhan. Combining multiple classiﬁers for
pen-based handwritten digit recognition. 1996.
[31] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[32] Frédéric Bastien, Pascal Lamblin, Razvan Pascanu, James Bergstra, Ian Goodfellow, Arnaud
Bergeron, Nicolas Bouchard, David Warde-Farley, and Yoshua Bengio. Theano: new features
and speed improvements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.5590, 2012.
[33] Hugo Larochelle and Iain Murray. The neural autoregressive distribution estimator. In AISTATS,
volume 1, page 2, 2011.
10
