--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Machine Learning Research 21 (2020) 1-55 Submitted 6/18; Revised 12/19; Published 3/20
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical
Models
Carson Eisenach eisenach@princeton.edu
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Florentina Bunea fb238@cornell.edu
Yang Ning yn265@cornell.edu
Claudiu Dinicu cd535@cornell.edu
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
Editor: Nicolas Vayatis
Abstract
Motivated by modern applications in which one constructs graphical models based on a
very large number of features, this paper introduces a new class of cluster-based graphical
models, in which variable clustering is applied as an initial step for reducing the dimension
of the feature space. We employ model assisted clustering, in which the clusters contain fea-
tures that are similar to the same unobserved latent variable. Two diﬀerent cluster-based
Gaussian graphical models are considered: the latent variable graph, corresponding to the
graphical model associated with the unobserved latent variables, and the cluster-average
graph, corresponding to the vector of features averaged over clusters. Our study reveals
that likelihood based inference for the latent graph, not analyzed previously, is analytically
intractable. Our main contribution is the development and analysis of alternative estima-
tion and inference strategies, for the precision matrix of an unobservable latent vector Z.
We replace the likelihood of the data by an appropriate class of empirical risk functions, that
can be specialized to the latent graphical model and to the simpler, but under-analyzed,
cluster-average graphical model. The estimators thus derived can be used for inference on
the graph structure, for instance on edge strength or pattern recovery. Inference is based on
the asymptotic limits of the entry-wise estimates of the precision matrices associated with
the conditional independence graphs under consideration. While taking the uncertainty in-
duced by the clustering step into account, we establish Berry-Esseen central limit theorems
for the proposed estimators. It is noteworthy that, although the clusters are estimated
adaptively from the data, the central limit theorems regarding the entries of the estimated
graphs are proved under the same conditions one would use if the clusters were known in
advance. As an illustration of the usage of these newly developed inferential tools, we show
that they can be reliably used for recovery of the sparsity pattern of the graphs we study,
under FDR control, which is veriﬁed via simulation studies and an fMRI data analysis.
These experimental results conﬁrm the theoretically established diﬀerence between the two
graph structures. Furthermore, the data analysis suggests that the latent variable graph,
corresponding to the unobserved cluster centers, can help provide more insight into the
c⃝2020 Carson Eisenach, Florentina Bunea, Yang Ning and Claudiu Dinicu.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/18-357.html.


--- Page 2 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
understanding of the brain connectivity networks relative to the simpler, average-based,
graph.
Keywords: Berry-Esseen bound, Graphical model, Latent variables, High-dimensional
inference, Clustering, False discovery rate
1. Introduction
Over the last several decades, graphical models have become an increasingly popular method
for understanding independence and conditional independence relationships between com-
ponents of random vectors. More recently, the challenges posed by the estimation and
statistical analysis of graphical models with many more nodes than the number of obser-
vations has led to renewed interest in these models, such as Meinshausen and B¨ uhlmann
(2006); Yuan and Lin (2007); Friedman et al. (2008); Verzelen (2008); Lam and Fan (2009);
Rothman et al. (2008); Peng et al. (2009); Ravikumar et al. (2011); Yuan (2010); Cai et al.
(2011); Sun and Zhang (2012); Liu et al. (2012); Xue and Zou (2012); Ning and Liu (2013);
Cai et al. (2016); Tan et al. (2016); Fan et al. (2017); Yang et al. (2018); Feng and Ning
(2019), to give only an incomplete list.
Nonetheless, when the dimension (number of nodes) grows very large and the sample
size is small, the dependency among the components of a random vector may become weak,
if it exists at all, and diﬃcult to detect without additional information. If the dimension
of the random vector is in the thousands, even if the dependency structure can be detected
by an estimated graphical model, it can be diﬃcult to interpret the results and extract
meaningful scientiﬁc insights.
One solution to both of the aforementioned issues is to employ an initial dimension
reduction procedure on the high dimensional vector. For example, in neuroscience applica-
tions, a typical functional magnetic resonance image (fMRI) consists of blood-oxygen-level-
dependent (BOLD) activities measured at 200,000+ voxels of the brain, over a period of
time. Instead of analyzing voxel-level data directly, scientists routinely cluster voxels into
several regions of interest (ROI) with homogeneous functions using domain knowledge, and
then carry out the analysis at the ROI-level. In this example, using the language of graph-
ical models, the group structure of variables may boost the dependency signals. Similar
pre-processing steps are used in other application domains, such as genomics, ﬁnance and
economics.
Motivated by a rich set of applications, we consider variable clustering as the initial
dimension reduction step applied to the observed vector X =: (X1,...,X d)∈ Rd. To
the best of our knowledge, very little is known about the eﬀect of clustering on down-
stream analysis and, consequently, on the induced graphical models. Our contribution is
the provision of a framework that allows for such an analysis. We introduce cluster-based
graphical models, show how they can be estimated and, furthermore, provide the asymptotic
distribution of the edge strength estimates.
These models are built on the assumption that the observed variablesX = (X1,...,X d)∈
Rd can be partitioned into K unknown clusters G∗ ={G∗
1,...,G ∗
K} such that variables in
the same cluster share the same behavior. Following the intuition behind widely-used K-
means type procedures, we deﬁne a population-level cluster as a group of variables that
2


--- Page 3 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
are noise corrupted versions of a hub-like variable. This hub-like variable is not directly
observable, and is treated as a latent factor.
Formally, we assume there exists a latent random vector Z∈ RK, with mean zero and
covariance matrix Cov(Z) = C∗, such that
X = AZ +E, (1)
for a zero mean error vectorE with independent entries. The entries of the d×K matrix A
are given byAjk = I{j∈G∗
k}. A cluster of variables consist in those components of X with
indices in the same G∗
k. We denote Cov(E) = Γ∗, a diagonal matrix with entries Γ ∗
jj =γ∗
j
for any 1≤j≤d. We also assume that the mean-zero noise E is independent ofZ. Bunea
et al. (2018) show that the clusters are uniquely deﬁned by the model in (1), provided that
the smallest cluster contains at least two variables and C∗ is strictly positive deﬁnite; this
result holds irrespective of distributional assumptions.
To keep the presentation focused, in this work we assume that Z ∼ N(0, C∗) and
E∼N (0, Γ∗), which implies X∼N (0, Σ∗) with Σ∗ = AC∗AT + Γ∗. In this context we
consider two related, but diﬀerent, graphical models:
(i) The latent variable graph, associated with the sparsity pattern of the precision matrix
Θ∗ := C∗−1 (2)
of the Gaussian vector Z∈ RK. The latent variable graph encodes conditional inde-
pendencies (CI’s) among the unobserved, latent variables Z.
(ii) The cluster-average graph, associated with the sparsity pattern of the precision matrix
Ω∗ :=S∗−1, (3)
whereS∗ is the covariance matrix of ¯X∈ RK, and ¯X =: ( ¯X1,..., ¯XK) is the within
cluster average given by ¯Xk =: 1
|G∗
k|
∑
i∈G∗
k
Xi. The cluster-average graph encodes CI’s
among averages of observable random variables. In particular, we have
S∗ = C∗ + ¯Γ∗,
where ¯Γ∗ = diag(¯γ∗
1,..., ¯γ∗
K) with ¯γ∗
k = 1
|G∗
k|2
∑
j∈G∗
k
γ∗
j .
Although both these graphs correspond to vectors of dimension K and are constructed
based on the partitionG∗, they are in general diﬀerent as the sparsity patterns ofΘ∗ and Ω∗
will typically diﬀer, and have diﬀerent interpretations. Therefore it would be misleading to
use one as a proxy for the other when drawing conclusions. For instance, in the neuroscience
example, if we interpret each latent variable as the function of a ROI, then the latent
variable graph encodes the CI relationships between functions, which is one question of
scientiﬁc interest. The diﬀerence between Θ∗ and Ω∗ shows that this question will not be
typically answered by studying the cluster-average graph, although that may be tempting
to do by practitioners.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
1.1. Our Contributions
Since the two cluster-based graphical models introduced above can both be of interest in
a large array of applications, we provide inferential tools for both of them in this work.
We assume that we observe n i.i.d. copies X1,..., Xn ofX. The focus of our work is on
post-clustering and post-regularization inference for these two sparse precision matrices. To
this end, we derive the asymptotic distribution of novel estimators of their entries. These
estimators can be used to answer any inferential questions of interest at the edge strength
level, or can be combined to provide sparsity pattern recovery under FDR control. In
Section 4.3 we provide an instance of the latter.
Inference for the entries of a Gaussian precision matrix has received a large amount of
attention in the past few years, most notably post-regularization inference, for instance Ren
et al. (2013); Zhang and Zhang (2014); Jankova and van de Geer (2014); Gu et al. (2015);
Barber and Kolar (2015); Jankov´ a and van de Geer (2017); Javanmard and Montanari
(2013); van de Geer et al. (2013); Ning and Liu (2017); Cai and Guo (2017); Neykov et al.
(2018); Ning et al. (2017); Fang et al. (2017). These works generalize the classical ideas
of one-step estimation (Bickel, 1975) to the high-dimensional setup by ﬁrst constructing a
sparse estimator of the precision matrix via regularization, and then building de-sparsiﬁed
updates that are asymptotically normal. The eﬀect of the initial regularization step is
controlled in the second step, and inference after regularization becomes valid.
In this paper we consider a similar estimation strategy, but diﬀers from the existing
literature in several important ways. In our work, we add another layer of data-dependent
dimension reduction, via clustering, and provide a framework within which the variability
induced by clustering can be controlled. Even after controlling for the clustering variability,
we note that the existing procedures for estimation and, especially, post-regularization
inference in Gaussian graphical models are not immediately applicable to our problem for
the following reasons:
1. They are developed for variables that can be observed directly. From this perspective,
they could, in principle, be applied to the cluster-average graph, but are not directly
extendable to the latent graph;
2. To the best of our knowledge, all existing methods for precision matrix inference
require the largest eigenvalue of the corresponding covariance matrix to be upper
bounded by a constant. Such an assumption implies, in turn, that the Euclidean
norm of each row of the covariance matrix is bounded, which reduces signiﬁcantly the
parameter space for which inference is valid. The assumption holds, for instance, when
the number of variables is bounded, or when the entries of each row are appropriately
small.
To overcome these limitations, we take a diﬀerent approach in this work, that allows us
to lift unpleasant technical conditions associated with other procedures, while maintaining
the validity of inference for both the latent and the average graph. We summarize our main
contributions below.
1. Methods for estimation tailored to high dimensional inference in latent,
cluster-based, graphical models. We develop a new estimation strategy tailored to
4


--- Page 5 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
our ﬁnal goal, that of constructing approximately Gaussian estimators for the entries of
the precision matrices Θ∗ and Ω∗ given in (2) and (3) above. Although we work under
the assumption that the data is Gaussian, likelihood based estimators may be unsatisfac-
tory, because their analysis can require stringent assumptions, as explained above (see also
Jankova and van de Geer (2014)), or may become analytically intractable, as argued in Sec-
tion 3.3, for the latent graph. We propose a method that mimics very closely the principles
underlying the construction of an eﬃcient score function for estimation in the presence of
high dimensional nuisance parameters (see for instance Bickel et al. (1993)), but we do not
base it on the corresponding likelihood-derived quantities. The underlying principles are
explained in Section 3.1. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst estimation method
of the latent precision matrix, that can be analyzed theoretically for inferential purposes.
As an added beneﬁt of our estimation framework, the same principles can be applied for
the estimation, and analysis, of the cluster-average graph.
2. The analysis of estimators of the precision matrix of unobserved cluster
centers: Berry-Esseen-type bounds for Gaussian approximations. We verify, the-
oretically, that the estimators constructed with an inferential goal in mind do indeed have
the desired properties. To this end, we derive the asymptotic distribution of the proposed
entry-wise estimates of the latent graph, and also of the cluster-average graph. Moreover,
we quantify the speed with which this limit is obtained, which we show to be proportional
to 1/√n in both cases. We do so by establishing Berry-Esseen type bounds on the diﬀer-
ence between the cumulative distribution function of our estimators and that of a standard
Gaussian random variable that are valid for eachK,d andn, and are presented in Theorems
3 and 4, respectively. As immediate applications, we can construct approximate conﬁdence
intervals for one or a ﬁnite number of entries of the latent or average graph, or known linear
functionals of such entries. While the answers we thus provide at the average graph level
are similar to existing results, established for the full CI graph based on all d nodes, for
instance by (Ren et al., 2013; Zhang and Zhang, 2014; Jankova and van de Geer, 2014;
Gu et al., 2015; Barber and Kolar, 2015; Jankov´ a and van de Geer, 2017; Javanmard and
Montanari, 2013; van de Geer et al., 2013; Ning and Liu, 2017; Cai and Guo, 2017; Neykov
et al., 2018), the results for the latent graph are, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst such
results in the literature.
We note, furthermore, that the average cluster graph can be viewed as a graph with
observable nodes, the cluster averages, only after the clusters are estimated from the data.
Our theoretical analysis takes this step into account. We discuss, in Section 2.2, clustering
methods tailored to model (1), where the number of clustersK is unknown and is allowed to
grow with n. Using the results of Bunea et al. (2018), these methods yield a partition ˆG =
G∗, with high probability, provided thatλmin(C∗)>c , for a small positive quantity c made
precise in Section 2.2. A lower bound on the smallest eigenvalue of the covariance matrix
is the minimal condition under which inference in any graphical model can be performed.
Therefore, consistent clustering via the model (1) does not require a further reduction of the
parameter space for which the more standard post-regularized inference can be developed.
Moreover, as Section 4 shows, asymptotic inference based on the estimated clusters reduces
to asymptotic inference relative to the true clusters,G∗, without any need for data splitting.
This fact holds true for both the average and the latent variable graph, and is in sharp
contrast with a phenomenon often encountered in post-model selection inference, such as
5


--- Page 6 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
in variable selection in linear regression (Lockhart et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2013; Tibshirani
et al., 2014). In that case, reducing inference to the consistently selected set of variables can
only be justiﬁed over a reduced part of the parameter space (Bunea, 2004), and is therefore
not a popular practice.
Another technical contribution is that the asymptotic normality of the estimators is
established under relaxed conditions. Unlike the existing literature on de-biased inference
on graphical models (Jankova and van de Geer, 2014; Jankov´ a and van de Geer, 2017),
we do not require the bounded operator norm condition for the covariance matrix such as
λmax(S∗)≤C for cluster-average graph. As shown by Jankova and van de Geer (2014) and
explained above, the analysis of the multivariate Gaussian likelihood may require stringent
assumptions for cluster-average graph and becomes intractable for the latent graph. By
using the proposed pseudo-likelihood function which has a much simpler form, we can
remove the unpleasant assumption on the bounded operator norm. In addition, we re-
analyze the CLIME estimator (Cai et al., 2011) ˆΩ·k (the kth column of ˆΩ) under our
Assumption 4.1 and 4.2, which is used as the initial estimator for inference. As explained in
Section 3.2, we can show that the CLIME estimator satisﬁes ∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1 ≲s1
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
wheres1 is the sparsity of Ω∗
·k. This result does not require the bounded operator norm or
matrix L1 norm condition and can be of independent interest.
To illustrate how one can use these newly developed inferential tools, we focus on the
estimation of the sparsity pattern of the graphs, which can be equivalently viewed as a
multiple-testing problem. It is well known that the exact sparsity pattern can be recovered,
with high probability, only if the entries of each precision matrix are above the minimax
optimal noise level O(
√
logd/n) (Ravikumar et al., 2011; Meinshausen and B¨ uhlmann,
2006). Since our aim is inference on the sparsity pattern without further restrictions on the
parameter space, the next best type of error that we can control is the False Discovery Rate
(FDR) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). In Section 4.3 we use these results for pattern
recovery under FDR control, and explain the eﬀect of the asymptotic approximations on
this quantity.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 below contains a brief summary of existing
results on model-assisted clustering, via model (1). Section 3 describes the estimation
procedures for the latent variable graph and the cluster-average graph, respectively. In
Section 4 we establish Berry-Esseen type central limit theorems for the estimators derived
in Section 3, and provide bounds on the FDR associated with each graphical model under
study, respectively. Section 5 gives numerical results using both simulated and real data
sets.
2. Background
2.1. Notation
The following notation is adopted throughout this paper. Let d denote the ambient dimen-
sion, n the sample size, K the number of clusters and m the minimum cluster size. The
matrix C∗ denotes the population covariance of the latent vectorZ. Likewise, the matrices
Γ∗, Σ∗, Θ∗,S∗ and Ω∗ denote population-level quantities.
6


--- Page 7 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
For v = (v1,...,v d)T ∈ Rd, and 1 ≤ q≤∞ , we deﬁne ∥v∥q = (∑d
i=1|vi|q)1/q,∥v∥0 =
|supp(v)|, where supp( v) = {j : vj ̸= 0} and|A| is the cardinality of a set A. Denote
∥v∥∞ = max1≤i≤d|vi| and v⊗2 = vvT . Assume that v can be partitioned as v = (v1, v2).
Let∇f(v) denote the gradient of the function f(v), and∇1f(v) = ∂f (v)/∂v1. Similarly,
let∇2f(v) denote the Hessian of the function f(v) and∇2
12f(v) =∂2f(v)/∂v1∂v2.
For a d×d matrix M = [Mjk], let ∥M∥max = maxjk|Mjk|,∥M∥1 = ∑
jk|Mjk|, and
∥M∥∞ = maxk
∑
j|Mjk|. If the matrix M is symmetric, then λmin(M) and λmax(M) are
the minimal and maximal eigenvalues of M. Let [ d] = {1, 2,....,d}. For any j∈ [d], we
denote the jth row and jth column of M as Mj· and M·j, respectively. Similarly, let
M−j,−k be the sub-matrix of M with the jth row and kth column removed. The notation
Sd×d refers to the set of all real, symmetric d×d matrices. Likewise, Sd×d
+ ⊂ Sd×d is
the positive semi-deﬁnite cone. We use ⊗ and◦ to denote the Kronecker and Hadamard
product of two matrices, respectively; we also may write M⊗2 = M⊗ M. Let ej denote
the vector of all zeros except for a one in the jth position. The vector 1 is the vector of all
ones. a∨b = max(a,b ).
2.2. Model Assisted Variable Clustering
In this section we review existing results on variable clustering. Bunea et al. (2018) showed
that if we use model (1) to deﬁne clusters of variables, these clusters are uniquely deﬁned,
up to label switching, so long as m =: min1≤k≤K|G∗
k|≥ 2 and the components of the latent
vectorZ are diﬀerent almost surely, or equivalently
∆(C∗) =: min
j<k
E(Zj−Zk)2> 0.
Since
∆(C∗) = min
j<k
(ej− ek)TC∗(ej− ek)≥ 2λmin (C∗),
the clusters are uniquely deﬁned as soon as λmin (C∗)> 0, which is the minimal condition
under which one can study properties of the corresponding precision matrix.
In addition, Bunea et al. (2018) developed two algorithms, PECOK and COD, that are
shown to recover the clusters exactly, from n i.i.d. copies X1,..., Xn ofX, as soon as
λmin (C∗)≥c,
for a positive quantity c that approaches 0 as n grows. For the COD procedure,
c =O
(
∥Σ∗∥max
√
log(d∨n)/n
)
.
On the other hand, for the PECOK procedure
c =O
(
∥Γ∗∥max
√
K log(d∨n)/mn
)
,
which can be much smaller when one has a few, balanced, clusters.
These values ofc are shown to be minimax or near-minimax optimal for cluster recovery.
We refer to Theorems 3 and 4 in Bunea et al. (2018) for the precise expressions and details.
Under these minimal conditions on λmin (C∗), the exact recovery of the clusters holds with
7


--- Page 8 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
probability larger than 1− 1/(d∨n). Because these conditions are suﬃciently weak, we are
able to show, in Section 4, that inference in cluster-based graphical models is not hampered
by the clustering step.
For completeness, we outline the PECOK algorithm below, which consists in a con-
vex relaxation of the K-means algorithm, further tailored to estimation of clusters G∗ =
{G∗
1,...,G ∗
K} deﬁned via the interpretable model (1). The PECOK algorithm consists in
the following three steps:
1. Compute an estimator ˜Γ of the matrix Γ∗.
2. Solve the semi-deﬁnite program (SDP)
ˆB = argmax
B∈D
⟨ ˆΣ− ˜Γ, B⟩, (4)
where ˆΣ is the sample covariance matrix and
D :=



B∈Rd×d :
•B ≽ 0 (symmetric and positive semideﬁnite)
• ∑
aBab = 1, ∀b
• Bab≥ 0, ∀a,b
• tr(B) =K



. (5)
3. Compute ˆG by applying a clustering algorithm on the rows (or equivalently columns)
of ˆB.
The construction of an accurate estimator ˜Γ of Γ∗, before the cluster structure is known,
is a crucial step for guaranteeing the statistical optimality of the PECOK estimator. Its
construction is given in Bunea et al. (2018), and included in Appendix F, for the convenience
of the reader.
We will employ an eﬃcient algorithm for solving (4). Standard black-box SDP solvers,
for a ﬁxed precision, exhibit O(d7) running time on (4), which is prohibitively expensive.
Eisenach and Liu (2019) recently introduced the FORCE algorithm, which requires worst
caseO(d6K−2) time to solve the SDP, and in practice often performs the clustering rapidly.
The key idea behind the FORCE algorithm is that an optimal solution to (4) can be
attained by ﬁrst transforming (4) into an eigenvalue problem, and then using a ﬁrst-order
method. Iterations of the ﬁrst-order method are interleaved with a dual step to round the
current iterate to an integer solution of the clustering problem, and then searches for an
optimality certiﬁcate. By using knowledge of both the primal and the dual SDPs, FORCE
is able to ﬁnd the solution much faster than a standard SDP solver. We refer to Eisenach
and Liu (2019) for the detailed algorithm.
3. Estimation of Cluster-based Graphical Models
In this section, we propose a uniﬁed estimation approach, that utilizes similar loss functions
for estimation and inference in the cluster-average and the latent variable graphs. We ﬁrst
describe our general principle, and then demonstrate its application to the two graphical
models.
8


--- Page 9 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
3.1. One-step Estimators for High-Dimensional Inference
Assume that we observe n i.i.d. realizations X1,...,Xn ofX∈ Rd. Let Q(β,X) denote a
known mapping of β andX to R, where β is a q-dimensional unknown parameter of the
distribution of X. Often this Q is referred to as the loss function. We deﬁne the target
parameterβ∗ as
β∗ = argmin E(Q(β,X)).
Next, let us partitionβ asβ = (θ,γ), whereθ∈ R is the univariate parameter of interest,
and γ ∈ Rq−1 is a nuisance parameter. Our goal is to construct a n1/2-consistent and
asymptotically normal estimator for θ in high-dimensional models with q = dim(β)≫ n.
In this case, the dimension of the nuisance parameter γ is large, which makes the inference
on θ challenging. We start from the empirical risk function over n observations deﬁned as
Qn(β) = 1
n
n∑
i=1
Q(β,Xi). (6)
One standard choice for Qn is the negative log-likelihood function of the data. In this
work, we conduct inference based on an alternative loss function, as the analysis of the
log-likelihood can require unpleasant technical conditions that we would like to avoid, as
discussed in Sections 4.1. That said, we mimic likelihood principles as much as possible, in
order to make intuitive the construction below. For these reasons we will refer to Qn(β) as
the negative pseudo-likelihood function.
For now we leaveQn(β) unspeciﬁed – a detailed discussion of its selection for inference
in the latent variable graph and the cluster-average graph will be given in the following two
subsections. In terms of Qn, we deﬁne the pseudo-information matrix for one observation
as I(β) = E(∇2Q(β∗,Xi)). We can partition this matrix as
I(β) =
[I11 I12
I21 I22
]
, (7)
with the partitions corresponding to those of β = (θ,γ).
WhenQn is the negative log-likelihood function, and the dimension of the parameter is
independent of n, then h(θ;γ) given by (8) is called the eﬃcient score function for θ, and
classical theory shows that it admits solutions that are consistent, asymptotically normal
and attain the information bound given by the reciprocal of (9) (Van der Vaart, 1998; Bickel
et al., 1993).
With these goals in mind, we similarly deﬁne the corresponding pseudo-score function
for estimating θ in the presence of the nuisance parameter γ as
h(θ;γ) =∇1Qn(β)− I12I−1
22∇2Qn(β)
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
(
∇1Q(β,Xi)− I12I−1
22∇2Q(β,Xi)
)
(8)
and deﬁne the pseudo information of θ, in the presence of the nuisance parameter γ, as
I1|2 = I11− I12I−1
22 I21. (9)
9


--- Page 10 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
When the dimension ofγ is ﬁxed, one can easily estimate I12 and I22 in (8) by their sample
versions ˆI12 and ˆI22. However, such simple procedure fails when the dimension of γ is
greater than the sample size, as ˆI22 is rank deﬁcient. To overcome this diﬃculty, rather
than estimating I12 and I−1
22 separately, we directly estimate
wT = I12I−1
22 (10)
by
ˆw = argmin∥w∥1, s.t. ∥∇2
12Qn( ˆβ)− wT∇2
22Qn( ˆβ)∥∞≤λ′, (11)
where λ′ is a non-negative tuning parameter, and ˆβ = (ˆθ, ˆγ) is an initial estimator, which
is usually deﬁned case by case, for a given model. Then, we can plug ˆw and ˆγ into the
pseudo-score function, which gives
ˆh(θ, ˆγ) =∇1Qn(θ, ˆγ)− ˆwT∇2Qn(θ, ˆγ). (12)
Following the Z-estimation principle (Van der Vaart, 1998; Bickel et al., 1993), one could
deﬁne the ﬁnal estimator ofθ as the solution of the pseudo-score function ˆh(θ, ˆγ). However,
in many examples, the pseudo-score function ˆh(θ, ˆγ) may have multiple solutions and it
becomes unclear which root serves as a consistent estimator; see Small et al. (2000) for
further discussion of the general estimating function context. To bypass this issue, we
consider the following simple one-step estimation approach. Given the initial estimator ˆθ
from the partition of ˆβ, we perform a Newton-Raphson update based on the pseudo-score
function ˆh(θ, ˆγ), to obtain ˜θ, which is traditionally referred to as a one-step estimator by
Bickel (1975). Speciﬁcally, we construct
˜θ = ˆθ− ˆI−1
1|2
ˆh(ˆθ, ˆγ), (13)
where ˆI1|2 is an estimator of the partial information matrix I1|2. In Sections 3.2 and 3.3
below we show that, under appropriate conditions, the one-step estimator ˜θ constructed
using the empirical risk functions Qn – deﬁned in (16) and (31), respectively – satisﬁes
n1/2(˜θ−θ∗) =−I−1
1|2n1/2h(β∗) +op(1). (14)
By applying the central limit theorem to h(β∗), we establish the asymptotic normality of ˜θ
in Theorems 3 and 4.
WhenQn(β) is the negative log-likelihood of the data, Ning and Liu (2017) successfully
used this approach and the resulting estimator ˜θ is asymptotically equivalent to the de-
biased estimator in Zhang and Zhang (2014); van de Geer et al. (2013). As we explain in
the following subsections, analysis based on the log-likelihood becomes intractable for the
latent graphical model and requires stringent technical conditions for the cluster-average
graphical model. To overcome this diﬃculty, we employ pseudo-score functions derived
from (16) and (31). The resulting one-step estimator still attains the information bound
established in the literature, and more importantly requires weaker technical assumptions
than the existing methods. In addition to (14), we derive explicitly the speed at which the
normal approximation is attained.
10


--- Page 11 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
3.2. Estimation of the Cluster-Average Graph
Recall that we assumeZ∼N (0, C∗) andE∼N (0, Γ∗), which impliesX∼N (0, Σ∗) with
Σ∗ = AC∗AT +Γ∗. The within-cluster average ¯X =: ( ¯X1,..., ¯XK)∈ RK is given by ¯Xk =:
1
|G∗
k|
∑
i∈G∗
k
Xi, corresponding to the population level clusters. Because X∼N (0, Σ∗), we
can verify that ¯X∼N (0,S∗), where
S∗ = C∗ + ¯Γ∗, (15)
and ¯Γ∗ = diag(¯γ∗
1,..., ¯γ∗
K) with ¯γ∗
k = 1
|G∗
k|2
∑
j∈G∗
k
γ∗
j . Recall that the precision matrix of ¯X
is
Ω∗ =S∗−1 = (C∗ + ¯Γ∗)−1.
In this section we give the construction of the estimators of the cluster-average graph
corresponding to ¯X. Speciﬁcally, we use the generic strategy outlined in the previous
section in order to construct n1/2-consistent and asymptotically normal estimators for each
component Ω∗
t,k of the precision matrix Ω∗, for 1≤t<k ≤K. For the estimation of each
entry, the remainingK(K + 1)/2− 1 parameters in Ω∗ are treated as nuisance parameters.
Since we observe n i.i.d. samples of X ∈ Rp, if the clusters and their number were
known, then we would implicitly observe n i.i.d. samples of ¯X∈ RK. A priori, the clusters
are not known else this problem would simply reduce to the standard setting. However to
explain our method, we ﬁrst assume that clustering is given, and then show how to lift this
assumption.
Following our general principle, we would naturally tend to choose the negative log-
likelihood function of the cluster-averages ( ¯X1,..., ¯Xn) as the empirical risk function Qn(β)
in (6). Along this line, Jankova and van de Geer (2014) proposed the de-biased estimator for
Gaussian graphical models. However, the inference requires the irrepresentable condition
(Ravikumar et al., 2011) onS∗, which can be restrictive. The alternative methods proposed
by Ren et al. (2013); Jankov´ a and van de Geer (2017) imposed the condition that the largest
eigenvalue of S∗ is bounded. These technical conditions on S∗ are diﬃcult to justify and
can be avoided by using our approach. We propose to estimate each sparse row of Ω∗ as
explained below.
Let ¯S =n−1 ∑n
i=1 ¯Xi ¯XT
i denote the sample covariance matrix of ¯Xi. When K is small,
the maximum likelihood estimator of Ω∗ is ¯S−1, which can be viewed as the solution of the
following equation ¯SΩ−IK = 0. Thus, in the low dimensional setting, this equation deﬁnes
the maximum likelihood estimator. Since we are only interested in Ω∗
t,k, we can extract the
kth column from the left hand side of the above equation, and use it as the pseudo-score
functionUn(Ω·k) = ¯SΩ·k− ek. To apply the inference strategy in Section 3.1, we need to
construct a valid empirical risk function Qn(Ω·k) such that∇Qn(Ω·k) =Un(Ω·k).
Simple algebra shows that a possible choice is
Qn(Ω·k) = 1
2ΩT
·k ¯SΩ·k− eT
k Ω·k = 1
n
n∑
i=1
(1
2ΩT
·k ¯Xi ¯XT
i Ω·k− eT
k Ω·k), (16)
which we view in the sequel as the empirical risk corresponding to the population level risk
EQ(Ω·k, ¯X) = 1
2ΩT
·kS∗Ω·k− eT
k Ω·k, (17)
11


--- Page 12 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
based on the loss function
Q(Ω·k, ¯X) =: 1
2ΩT
·k ¯X ¯XTΩ·k− eT
k Ω·k. (18)
Since
∇EQ(Ω∗
·k, ¯X) =S∗Ω∗
·k− ek = 0 (19)
and
∇2EQ(Ω∗
·k, ¯X) =S∗, (20)
then the population risk EQ(Ω∗
·k, ¯X) has the rows Ω∗
·k of the target precision matrix Ω∗ as
the unique minimizers, as desired, provided that S∗ is positive deﬁnite, an assumption we
make in Section 4.1.
We note that the choice of the empirical riskQn(·) and that of the corresponding pseudo-
scoreUn(·) is not unique. We chose the particular form (16) because it is quadratic in Ω·k,
which greatly simpliﬁes the theoretical analysis and leads to weaker technical assumptions.
Moreover, the property (19) is the same as that of the score function corresponding to the
negative log-likelihood function, supporting our terminology.
We use the general strategy presented in Section 3.1 to construct estimators that employ
the empirical risk Qn(·) deﬁned by (16) above. We ﬁrst recall that Qn(·) depends on the
unknown cluster structure G∗ via ¯Xi. We note that in general the estimated group ˆGk
may diﬀer from G∗
k by a label permutation. For notational simplicity, we ignore this label
permutation issue and treat ˆGk as an estimate of G∗
k (rather than G∗
j for some j̸=k). To
deﬁne our estimator of Ω∗
t,k, we ﬁrst replace ¯Xi by ˆXi and denote ˆS = n−1 ∑n
i=1 ˆXi ˆXT
i ,
where ˆXik = 1
| ˆGk|
∑
j∈ ˆGk
Xij.
Let (t,k ) be arbitrary, ﬁxed. Replacing ¯S by ˆS inQn(·), we follow Section 3.1 to deﬁne
the pseudo-score function
h(Ω·k) = v∗T
t ( ˆSΩ·k− ek), (21)
where v∗
t is a K-dimensional vector with ( v∗
t )t = 1 and ( v∗
t )−t = −w∗
t with w∗
t =
(S∗
−t,−t)−1S∗
−t,t, which is consistent with the deﬁnition in (10) above. To make inferences
based on h(Ω·k), we further need to estimate w∗
t and Ω∗
·k. Following (11), an estimate of
w∗
t is given by
ˆwt = argmin∥w∥1, s.t ∥ ˆSt,−t− wT ˆS−t,−t∥∞≤λ′, (22)
where λ′ is a tuning parameter. Then we can deﬁne ˆvt accordingly, and
ˆh(Ω·k) = ˆvT
t ( ˆSΩ·k− ek). (23)
Recall that the construction of the one-step estimator (13) requires an initial estimator of
Ω∗
·k.
To be concrete, we consider the following initial estimator of Ω∗
·k,
ˆΩ·k = argmin∥β∥1, s.t ∥ ˆSβ− ek∥max≤λ, (24)
whereλ is a tuning parameter. This estimator has the same form as the CLIME estimator
for the k-th column of Ω (Cai et al., 2011). However, unlike the CLIME estimator which
12


--- Page 13 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
requires λ≍∥ Ω∗
·k∥1
√
logK/n, in our Theorem 3 we assume λ =C
√
log(K∨n)/n, where
C only depends on the minimum eigenvalue of C∗ and the largest diagonal entries of C∗
and Γ∗ which are assumed bounded by constants in Assumptions 1 and 2. With this choice
of λ, we show in Lemma 15 in Appendix A that
∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1 ≲s1
√
log(K∨n)
n , (25)
with high probability, where s1 is the sparsity level of Ω∗
·k. The sharp concentration of the
gradient and Hessian of the empirical risk function provided in Lemma 14 is the key for
this result. As a comparison, Theorem 6 in Cai et al. (2011) only implies ∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1 ≲
s1∥Ω∗
·k∥2
1
√
logK
n . For many sparse matrices, the ℓ1 norm of a column, ∥Ω∗
·k∥1, can grow to
inﬁnity with K or s1, and thus (61) gives a faster rate.
In this case, and when λmin(C∗) > c, Lemma 14 is instrumental in showing that the
extra∥Ω∗
·k∥2
1 factor in the rate of the original CLIME estimator can be avoided, whereas
if only the marginal components of X are assumed to be sub-Gaussian, as in Cai et al.
(2011), it may be unavoidable, without further conditions on Ω∗. We direct the reader to
Appendix G for a more detailed discussion of the distinction between our results and those
in Cai et al. (2011, 2016).
Leveraging the block matrix inverse formula, we can show that the partial pseudo in-
formation matrix reduces to I1|2 = 1/Ω∗
t,t. Finally, the one-step estimator is deﬁned as
˜Ωt,k = ˆΩt,k− ˆh( ˆΩ·k)ˆΩt,t, (26)
in accordance with (13). In Section 4, we show that under mild regularity conditions
n1/2(˜Ωt,k− Ω∗
t,k) ⇝ N(0,s 2
tk), where s2
tk = Ω∗2
t,k + Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k. If ˆs2
tk = ˆΩ2
t,k + ˆΩt,t ˆΩk,k is a
consistent estimator of the asymptotic variance, then a (1 −α)× 100% conﬁdence interval
for Ωt,k is
[˜Ωt,k−z1−α/2ˆstk/n1/2, ˜Ωt,k +z1−α/2ˆstk/n1/2],
where zα is the α-quantile of a standard normal distribution.
Equivalently, we can use the scaled test statistics˜Ωt,k to construct a test forH0 : Ω∗
t,k = 0
versusH1 : Ω∗
t,k̸= 0 with α signiﬁcance level. Namely, the null hypothesis is rejected if and
only if the above (1 −α)× 100% conﬁdence interval does not contain 0. We will employ
such tests in Section 4.
3.3. Latent Variable Graph
Recall that the structure of the latent variable graph is encoded by the sparsity pattern
of Θ∗ = C∗−1, which is generally diﬀerent from the cluster-average group as C∗−1 and
Ω∗ = (C∗ + ¯Γ∗)−1 may have diﬀerent sparsity patterns. In this section, we focus on the
inference on the component Θ∗
t,k, for some 1 ≤ t < k≤ K. Similar to the cluster-average
graph, we ﬁrst discuss the likelihood approach. The negative log-likelihood corresponding
to model (1) indexed by the parameter ( Θ, Γ) is, up to some additive and multiplicative
constants,
ℓ(Θ, Γ) = log|(AΘ−1AT + Γ)| + tr( ˆΣ(AΘ−1AT + Γ)−1),
13


--- Page 14 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
where ˆΣ = n−1 ∑n
i=1XiXT
i . It is straightforward to show that the Fisher information
matrix for (Θ, Γ) is given by
I(Θ, Γ) =
[(M∗ATΓ∗−1Σ∗Γ∗−1AM∗)⊗2 (M∗ATΓ∗−1Σ−1F∗T )⊗2Dd
DT
d (F∗Σ∗−1Γ∗−1AM∗)⊗2 DT
d (F∗Σ∗−1F∗T )⊗2Dd
]
, (27)
where Dd = (Id⊗ 1T
d )◦ (1T
d⊗ Id), M∗ = (Θ∗ + ATΓ∗−1A)−1 and F∗ = Id− AM∗ATΓ∗−1.
As seen in Section 3.1, the inference based on the likelihood or equivalently eﬃcient score
function (8) requires the estimation of I12I−1
22 which, given the complicated structure of the
information matrix (27), becomes analytically intractable.
A solution to this problem is inference based on an empirical risk function similar to (16),
but tailored to the latent variable graph. With a slight abuse of notation, and reasoning as
in (19) and (20), we notice that, for each k,
EQ(Θ·k,X) = 1
2ΘT
·kC∗Θ·k− eT
k Θ·k, (28)
has the target Θ∗
·k as a unique minimizer, where the loss function Q(Θ·k,X) is deﬁned as
Q(Θ·k,X) = 1
2ΘT
·k ¯CΘ·k− eT
k Θ·k, (29)
and the matrix ¯C := ( ¯Cjk)j,k has entries
¯Cjk = 1
|G∗
j||G∗
k|
∑
a∈G∗
j,b∈G∗
k
(XaXb− ¯Γab), (30)
and ¯Γab = 0 if a̸=b and ¯Γaa =XaXa− 1
|G∗
k|−1
∑
a∈G∗
k,a̸=jXaXj. Since E( ¯C) = C∗, the risk
relative to the loss function in (29) is indeed (28), and the empirical risk is
Qn(Θ·k) = 1
n
n∑
i=1
(1
2ΘT
·k ¯C(i)Θ·k− eT
k Θ·k), (31)
where ¯C(i) is obtained by replacing X in ¯Cjk byXi. Similar to the cluster-average graph,
Qn(Θ·k) also depends on the unknown cluster structure. We estimate G∗
k by ˆGk, and deﬁne
ˆΓ = (ˆΓab), where ˆΓab = 0 if a̸= b and ˆΓaa = 1
n
∑n
i=1(XiaXia− 1
| ˆGk|−1
∑
a∈ ˆGk,a̸=jXiaXij),
and ˆC = ( ˆCjk) where ˆCjk = 1
n
∑n
i=1( 1
| ˆGj|| ˆGk|
∑
a∈ ˆGj,b∈ ˆGk
(XiaXib− ˆΓab)). We replace ¯C by
ˆC in (31) above and follow exactly the strategy of Section 3.2, with ˆS replaced by ˆC, to
construct the corresponding pseudo-score function ˆh(Θ·k), similarly to (23), and the initial
estimator ˆΘ·k, similarly to (24). We combine these quantities, following the general strategy
(13), as above, to obtain the ﬁnal one-step estimator of Θ ∗
t,k, deﬁned as
˜Θt,k = ˆΘt,k− ˆh( ˆΘ·k) ˆΘt,t, (32)
after observing that, in this case, I1|2 = 1/Θ∗
t,t.
Although the form of this estimator is similar to (26), derived for the cluster-average
graph, the study of the asymptotic normality of ˜Θt,k reveals that its asymptotic variance is
much more involved, as will be discussed in detail in Section 4.2.2.
14


--- Page 15 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
4. Main Theoretical Results
4.1. Assumptions
In this section we state the two assumptions under which all our results are proved.
Assumption 1 The covariance matrix C∗ ofZ satisﬁes: c1≤λmin (C∗) and maxtC∗
t,t≤
c2, for some absolute constants c1,c 2> 0.
Assumption 2 The matrix Γ∗ satisﬁes: max1≤i≤dγ∗
i ≤ c3 for some absolute constant
c3> 0, where γ∗
i are the entries of the diagonal matrix Γ∗.
Assumptions 1 and 2 are minimal conditions for inference on precision matrices. Fur-
thermore, they imply the conditions needed for clustering consistency derived in Bunea et al.
(2018) and discussed in Section 2.2, for n suﬃciently large. Their work only requires that
λmin (C∗) is bounded from below by a sequence that converges to zero, as soon as ∥Σ∗∥max
and∥Γ∗∥max are bounded. This is strengthened by our assumptions. In general, a constant
lower bound on C∗ is standard in any inference on graphical models and is needed to show
the asymptotic normality of the estimator introduced above (Ren et al., 2013; Jankova and
van de Geer, 2014; Jankov´ a and van de Geer, 2017).
4.2. Asymptotic Normality via Berry-Esseen-type Bounds
4.2.1. Results for the Cluster-A verage Graph
In the section, we show that the estimators ˜Ωt,k given by (26) are asymptotically normal,
for all t<k . We deﬁne the sparsity of the cluster-average graph as s1∈ N such that
max
1≤j≤K
K∑
k=1
I(Ω∗
j,k̸= 0)≤s1.
Recall that the estimators (22) and (24) depend on the tuning parameters λ andλ′. In the
following theorem, we choose λ≍ λ′≍
√
log(K∨n)
n . For notational simplicity, we use C to
denote a generic constant, the value of which may change from line to line.
Theorem 3 If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, we have
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P( ˆTt,k≤x)− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐≤ C
(d∨n)3 + Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 + C
(K∨n)3 (33)
where ˆTt,k =
n1/2(˜Ωt,k−Ω∗
t,k)
ˆstk
, ˆs2
tk = ˆΩ2
t,k + ˆΩt,t ˆΩk,k and C is a positive constant.
Theorem 3, proved in Appendix A, gives the rate of the normal approximation of the
distribution of the scaled and centered entries ˜Ωt,k. The right hand side in (33) is non-
asymptotic and is valid for each K, n and d. Its ﬁrst, small, term is the price to pay
for having ﬁrst used the data for clustering, and it is dominated by the other two terms.
From this perspective, the clustering step is the least taxing, as long as we can ensure
15


--- Page 16 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
its consistency, which in turn can be guaranteed under the minimal assumptions 1 and 2
already needed for the remaining steps.
The second, and dominant, term regards the normal approximation of the distribution
of
n1/2(˜Ωt,k− Ω∗
t,k). (34)
Speciﬁcally, as an intermediate step, Proposition 10 in Appendix A shows that the diﬀerence
between the c.d.f. of (34), scaled bystk =
√
Ω∗2
t,k + Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k, and that of a standard Gaussian
random variable is bounded by s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 . Therefore, asymptotic normality holds as soon
as this quantity converges to zero, which agrees with the weakest sparsity conditions for
Gaussian graphical model inference in the literature (Ren et al., 2013; Jankov´ a and van de
Geer, 2017). In addition, the asymptotic variance s2
tk agrees with the minimum variance
bound in Gaussian graphical models (Jankov´ a and van de Geer, 2017). Thus, inference based
on the empirical risk function (16) does not lead to any asymptotic eﬃciency loss. Unlike
the previous works, we do not require the bounded operator norm condition,λmax(S∗)≤C.
This condition is avoided in our analysis by using a more convenient empirical risk function
(16), as opposed to the log-likelihood in Jankova and van de Geer (2014), and a CLIME-
type initial estimator (24) satisfying (61), as opposed to the node-wise Lasso estimator in
Jankov´ a and van de Geer (2017).
The last term in the normal approximation is O((K∨n)−3) which is dominated by the
second one, and is associated with the replacement of the true variance s2
tk by the estimate
ˆs2
tk. Finally, we note that the powers of the ﬁrst and the third term in the right hand side
of (33) can be replaced by 2 + δ, for any δ >0, and a change in this power also changes
the associated constant C in the term Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 . As shown in Theorem 5, to obtain valid
FDR control, we need K2/(K∨n)2+δ =o(1), which holds for any δ >0. For simplicity, we
choose δ = 1 which gives the power 3.
4.2.2. Results for the Latent V ariable Graph
In this section we show that the estimators ˜Θt,k given by (32) are asymptotically normal,
for all t<k . We deﬁne the sparsity of the latent graph as s0∈ N such that
max
1≤j≤K
K∑
k=1
I(Θ∗
j,k̸= 0)≤s0.
Inference for the estimator ˜Θtk follows the general approach outlined in Section 3.1. We
prove in Proposition 17 in Appendix B that
n1/2( ˜Θt,k− Θ∗
t,k) = 1
n1/2
n∑
i=1
Θ∗
t,tv∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek) +op(1), (35)
where v∗
t is a K-dimensional vector with ( v∗
t )t = 1 and ( v∗
t )−t = −w∗
t with w∗
t =
(C∗
−t,−t)−1C∗
−t,t. and ¯C(i) is deﬁned in (30). The terms of the sum in display (35) are
mean zero random variables, and their variance is
σ2
tk = E(Θ∗
t,tv∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek))2,
16


--- Page 17 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
which does not have an explicit closed form, unlike the asymptotic variance of the estimates
of the entries of Ω∗. However, we show in Proposition 23 in Appendix B that σ2
tk admits
an approximation that is easy to estimate:
⏐⏐⏐σ2
tk− [(Θ∗
t,k)2 + Θ∗
k,kΘ∗
t,t]
⏐⏐⏐ ≲ s0
m,
where m = min1≤k≤K|G∗
k|. Guided by this approximation, we estimate σ2
tk by
ˆσ2
tk = ˆΘ2
t,k + ˆΘk,k ˆΘt,t.
When all clusters have the equal size, we obtain K = d/m. Thus the O(s0
m) terms can
be ignored asymptotically in the sense that s0
m = s0K
d ≤ K2
d = o(1), when the clusters
are approximately balanced, and their number satisﬁes K2 = o(d). This is a reasonable
assumption in most applied clustering problems. We note that the estimator ˆσ2
tk may be
inconsistent when the size of some clusters is too small. However, we recall that our ultimate
goal is to use these estimators for recovering the sparsity pattern of Θ∗ under FDR control.
To evaluate the sensitivity of our overall procedure to the size of the smallest cluster, we
conduct simulation studies in Section 5. The results shows that the proposed method works
well as soon as m> 4.
The following theorem gives the Berry–Esseen normal approximation bound for the
estimators of the entries of the precision matrix corresponding to the latent variable graph.
Theorem 4 If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P( ˆTt,k≤x)− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐≤ C
(d∨n)3 + C
(K∨n)3 + Cs0 log(K∨n)
n1/2 + Cs0
m , (36)
where ˆTt,k =
n1/2( ˜Θt,k−Θ∗
t,k)
ˆσtk
and C is a positive constant.
Compared to the average graph, the Berry-Esseen bound in (36) contains an additional
O(s0
m) term, stemming from the approximation of the analytically intractable asymptotic
variance by an estimable quantity. The proof is deferred to Appendix B.
4.3. Application to Post-clustering FDR Control
Given the edge-wise inferential results for the cluster-average and latent variable graphs
established above, we explain in this section how to combine them to control graph-wise
inferential uncertainty. Speciﬁcally, we view the task of recovering the sparsity pattern as
a multiple testing problem by selecting:
H0;tk : Ω∗
t,k = 0 vs . H1;tk : Ω∗
t,k̸= 0 for all 1 ≤t<k ≤K, (37)
for the cluster-average graph, and
H
′
0;tk : Θ∗
t,k = 0 vs . H
′
1;tk : Θ∗
t,k̸= 0 for all 1 ≤t<k ≤K. (38)
for the latent variable graph. In the following, we apply the B-Y procedure by Benjamini
and Yekutieli (2001) for FDR control in the cluster-average graph. The procedure for latent
17


--- Page 18 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
variable graph is identical. In this section, we are not claiming to develop a diﬀerent FDR
procedure; rather we make the simple point that if you can obtain asymptotic p-values ofd
dependent statistics we can combine them in standard ways to control the FDR, which is a
direct consequence of the Berry-Esseen bounds derived in Section 4.2.
Deﬁne the set of true null hypotheses, H0 :={(t,k ) : 1 ≤t<k ≤K, such that Ω∗
t,k =
0}, as the set of indices ( t,k ) for which there is no edge between the nodes t and k. To
control the error incurred by multiple testing, we focus on the false discovery rate (FDR),
which is the average number of Type I errors relative to the total number of discoveries
(Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Recall that ˜Ωt,k is a consistent and asymptotically normal
estimator of Ωt,k. We consider the natural test statistic ˜Wt,k =n1/2 ˜Ωt,k/ˆstk for H0;tk, where
ˆs2
tk = ˆΩ2
t,k + ˆΩt,t ˆΩk,k. Given a cutoﬀ τ >0, the total number of discoveries is
Rτ :=
∑
1≤t<k≤K
I[|˜Wt,k|>τ ].
Similarly, the number of false positives or false discoveries is given by
Vτ :=
∑
(t,k)∈H0
I[|˜Wt,k|>τ ].
The FDR is formally deﬁned as the expected ratio of Vτ overRτ,
FDR(τ) := E
[Vτ
Rτ
I[Rτ > 0]
]
,
where the indicator function is included to remove the trivial case Rτ = 0.
Our goal is to ﬁnd a data-dependent cutoﬀ τ such that FDR(τ)≤ α +o(1) for any
given 0 < α <1. This is the best one can hope for when, as in our case, the distribution
of the test statistics ˜Wt,k is only available asymptotically. The Berry-Esseen type bounds,
derived in Theorems 3 and 4, allow us to precisely quantify the price we must pay for the
asymptotic approximation and are instrumental to understanding asymptotic FDR control.
In addition, the test statistics ˜Wt,k for diﬀerent hypotheses are dependent. To allow for
the dependence, instead of the standard B-H procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), we
consider the more ﬂexible B-Y procedure by Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001). The resulting
FDR procedure is as follows: reject all hypotheses such that |˜Wt,k|≥ ˆτ, where
ˆτ := min
{
τ >0 :τ≥ Φ−1
(
1− αRτ
2NBY|H|
)}
and NBY =
|H|∑
i=1
1
i, (39)
where|H| =K(K− 1)/2 is the total number of hypotheses.
Our next result shows when the FDR based on our test statistics is guaranteed to be
no greater than α, asymptotically. The proofs can be found in Appendix A.
Theorem 5
1. Assume that the conditions in Theorem 3 hold. For any 0<α< 1, we have
FDR(ˆτ)≤α + 2|H0|bn, (40)
18


--- Page 19 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
wherebn = C
(d∨n)3 + C
(K∨n)3 +Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 , and|H0| is the number of true null hypotheses
in (37).
2. Assume that the conditions in Theorem 4 hold. If we deﬁne the test statistic as
˜Wt,k =n1/2 ˜Θt,k/ˆσtk, and ˆτ as in (39), we have
FDR(ˆτ)≤α + 2|H′
0|cn, (41)
wherecn = C
(d∨n)3 + C
(K∨n)3 + Cs0 log(K∨n)
n1/2 + Cs0
m , and|H′
0| is the number of true null
hypotheses in (38).
This theorem implies that our method can control the FDR asymptotically, in the sense
that FDR(ˆτ)≤α +op(1), provided thats1|H0| log(K∨n) =o(n1/2), for the average graph,
ands0|H
′
0| log(K∨n) =o(n1/2) for the latent graph. Gaussian graphical model estimation
under FDR control was recently studied by Liu (2013). They showed that the B-H procedure
can control FDR asymptotically under certain conditions. Their approach is based on the
following Cramer-type moderate deviation result using our terminology,
max
(t,k)∈H0
sup
0≤t≤2√logK
⏐⏐⏐ P( ˆTt,k≥t)
2− 2Φ(t) − 1
⏐⏐⏐ =o(1), (42)
where ˆTt,k is test statistic they proposed for estimation of the Gaussian graphical model
structure. The result (42) controls the relative error of the Gaussian approximation within
the moderate deviation regime [0 , 2√logK], whereas our result is based on the control
of the absolute error via the Berry-Esseen-type Gaussian approximation. One of the main
advantages of their result is that the number of clusters is allowed to beK =o(nr), wherer is
a constant that can be greater than 1. However, to prove (42), they required that the number
of strong signals tends to inﬁnity, that is |{(t,k ) : Ω∗
t,k/
√
Ω∗
k,kΩ∗
t,t≥ C
√
logK/n}|→∞ ,
which reduces signiﬁcantly the parameter space for which inference is valid. In contrast, the
aim of this work is the study of pattern recovery without conditions on the signal strength
of the entries of the target precision matrices, as in practice it is diﬃcult to assess whether
these conditions are met. For completeness, we provide the detailed analysis of the B-H
procedure including technical conditions, theoretical results and further discussion of the
B-H procedure in Appendix H.
The overall message conveyed by Theorem 5 is that, in the absence of any signal strength
assumptions, cluster-based graphical models can still be recovered, under FDR control,
provided that the number of clusters K is not very high relative to n, and provided that
the clusters are not very small. This further stresses the importance of an initial dimension
reduction step in high-dimensional graphical model estimation. For instance, results similar
to those of Theorem 3 can be derived along the same lines for the estimation of the sparsity
pattern of Σ−1, for a generic, unstructured, covariance matrix of X, where one replaces K
byd throughout, ands1 is replaced bys, the number of non-zero entries in the d×d matrix
Σ−1. Then, the analogue of (41) of Theorem 5 shows that FDR control in generic graphical
models, based on asymptotic approximations of p-values, cannot generally be guaranteed if
d>n . Our work shows that extra structural assumptions, for instance those motivated by
clustering, do alleviate this problem. The simulation study presented in the next section
provides further support to our ﬁndings.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
5. Numerical Results
This section contains simulations and a real data analysis that illustrate the ﬁnite sample
performance of the inferential procedures developed in the previous sections for the latent
variable graph and cluster-average graph, respectively.
5.1. Synthetic Datasets
In this subsection, we demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the FDR control procedures on
synthetic datasets. We consider two settings ( n,d ) = (800 , 400) and (500, 1000), and in
each setting we vary the value of K and m. The error variable E is sampled from the
multivariate normal distribution with covariance Γ∗ whose entries γ∗
i are generated from
U[0.25, 0.5]. Recall that the latent variable Z follows from Z∼N (0, C∗). We consider
three diﬀerent models to generate the graph structure of Z. Once the graph structure
is determined, the corresponding adjacency matrix W is found, and the precision matrix
Θ∗ = C∗−1 is taken as Θ∗ =cW + (|λmin (W)| + 0.2)I, where c = 0.3 when d = 400 and
c = 0.5 when d = 1000. Finally, we assign the cluster labels for all variables so that all
clusters have approximately equal size, which gives us the matrix A. Given A,Z andE,
we can generate X according to the model (1).
We consider the following three generating models for the graph structure of Z:
• Scale-Free Graph – The Scale-Free model is a generative model for network data,
whose degree distribution follows a power law. To be concrete, we generate the graph
one node at a time, starting with a 2 node chain. For nodes 3 ,...,K , node t is added
and one edge is added between t and one of the t− 1 previous nodes. Denoting by ki
the current degree of node i in the graph, the probability that node t and node i are
connected is pi = ki/(∑
iki). The number of edges in the resulting graph is always
K.
• Hub Graph – TheK nodes of the graph are partitioned evenly into groups of size N.
Within each group, one node is selected to be the group hub, and an edge is added
between it and the remainder of its group. N is either 5 or 6 depending upon the
choice of K. The number of edges in the graph is K(N− 1)/N, so for K = 100 with
N = 5, the number of edges in the resulting graph is 80.
• Band3 Graph – This model generates a graph with a Toeplitz adjacency matrix.
There is an edge between node i and node j if and only if |i−j|≤ B, where we set
B = 3 in this scenario. In general, the number of edges in a band graph with K nodes
is given by BK− 3
2B2 + 5
2B. So, for K = 100 and B = 3, the number of edges in the
graph is 294.
Recall that ¯X∼N (0,S∗), where S∗ is deﬁned in (15). To determine the structure of
the average graph, we numerically compute S∗−1 and threshold the matrix at 10−8.
We examine the empirical FDR of our procedures on some synthetic datasets. The
following protocol is followed in all the experiments:
1. Generate the graph structure of Z as speciﬁed above.
2. Simulate n observations from our model (1).
20


--- Page 21 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
3. Estimate the cluster partition ˆG. For computational convenience, we apply the
FORCE algorithm (Eisenach and Liu, 2019) with known K.
4. Construct the test statistic ˜Wt,k deﬁned in Section 4.3. The regularization parameters
λ and λ′ are chosen by 5-fold cross validation.
5. Find the FDR cutoﬀ (39) at level α; we consider three cases α = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2.
The simulation is repeated 100 times. To compare with our Benjamini-Yekutieli based
FDR procedure, we also report the empirical FDR based on the more classical Benjamini-
Hochberg procedure. That is, we apply the same procedures 1-4, but in step 5 we replace
the FDR cutoﬀ in (39) with the Benjamini-Hochberg (B-H) cutoﬀ, i.e.,
ˆτBH := min
{
τ >0 :τ≥ Φ−1
(
1− αRτ
2|H|
)}
.
Table 1 compares the empirical FDR based on our method with the B-H procedure under
diﬀerent m,K settings when d = 400. When m is relatively large (e.g., m = 20), both
methods can control FDR on average, although our method is relatively more conservative.
As expected, the FDR control problem becomes more challenging for large K and small m.
In this case the graph contains more nodes and each cluster contains fewer variables. We
observe that when m = 5 our method can still control FDR reasonably well but the B-H
method produces empirical FDR far beyond the nominal level, especially for hub graphs.
The inferior performance of the B-H procedure is due to the fact that the dependence among
the test statistics is not accounted for, demonstrating that the B-Y procedure is indeed
necessary at least in the current simulation settings. Finally, we examine the empirical
power of the FDR procedure under each scenario, which is deﬁned as
Average

 ∑
(t,k)∈H1
I[˜Wt,k≥ ˆτ]
|H1|

,
whereH1 is the set of alternative hypothesis. Table 2 gives the empirical power of our FDR
procedure, and the B-H procedure when d = 400. It shows that our procedure and the B-H
procedure have very high power in all scenarios. The same phenomenon is observed when
d is large, i.e., d = 1000; see Tables 3 and 4. In summary, our proposed procedure can
identify most of the signals in the graph while keeping FDR well controlled.
Remark 6 (Inexact Recovery) While our FORCE algorithm guarantees the estimated
number of clusters is always K since we use the true value K as the input, the recovered
partition ˆG may still diﬀer from the true partition G∗. In order to compare our results
to the ground-truth, we need to ﬁnd an “aligned“ version of Θ∗ (or Ω∗). Speciﬁcally, we
calculate the mapping f : [K]→ [K] deﬁned by
f(k) = argmax
l∈[K]
| ˆGk∩G∗
l|,
and then construct the matrix Θ∗
A, deﬁned entry-wise by
(Θ∗
A)s,t := (Θ∗)f(s),f(t).
21


--- Page 22 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Once we have obtained the “aligned” ground-truth matrix Θ∗
A, we can proceed with comput-
ing the metric of interest (FDR and power). Although the preceding discussion is in terms
of Θ∗, the same procedure applies to Ω∗.
Remark 7 (Discussion of the B-H procedure) Based on the results in Tables 3 and
4, it is clear that the power of both our procedure and the B-H procedure are satisfactory.
However, for both setups ( d = 400, 1000), the B-H procedure leads to the inﬂated FDR rel-
ative to the nominal level. While Appendix H shows that the B-H procedure can control
FDR asymptotically under certain conditions, it seems in numerical examples the depen-
dence among the test statistics leads to substantial errors in FDR control that are indeed
not ignorable.
α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
K m Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub
B-Y Based Procedure
Latent
80 5 1.16% 1.42% 5.99% 2.01% 2.64% 7.60% 4.01% 4.73% 10.33%
66 6 0.93% 1.03% 1.08% 1.99% 1.98% 1.96% 3.73% 3.68% 4.00%
50 8 1.16% 0.99% 1.09% 2.20% 1.77% 1.98% 3.90% 3.49% 3.73%
20 20 0.99% 0.88% 1.30% 1.81% 1.66% 2.26% 3.75% 3.38% 4.71%
Grp. Av.
80 5 1.15% 1.40% 6.29% 2.14% 2.67% 7.89% 4.00% 4.70% 10.43%
66 6 0.91% 1.04% 1.04% 1.85% 2.00% 2.14% 3.70% 3.71% 3.83%
50 8 1.16% 1.00% 1.11% 2.22% 1.80% 1.94% 3.98% 3.49% 3.61%
20 20 0.94% 0.88% 1.23% 1.81% 1.68% 2.26% 3.65% 3.38% 4.71%
B-H Based Procedure
Latent
80 5 8.23% 9.24% 15.60% 15.01% 16.39% 24.00% 28.16% 28.97% 38.58%
66 6 7.18% 7.38% 7.31% 14.12% 14.01% 13.78% 26.56% 25.84% 27.28%
50 8 6.94% 6.75% 6.69% 13.23% 12.73% 12.74% 25.20% 23.62% 26.05%
20 20 5.43% 4.54% 6.38% 11.09% 8.47% 10.71% 21.46% 17.15% 20.75%
Grp. Av.
80 5 8.42% 9.26% 15.77% 15.25% 16.43% 24.15% 28.03% 29.02% 38.57%
66 6 7.21% 7.37% 7.45% 13.99% 13.92% 13.81% 26.19% 25.77% 27.17%
50 8 6.82% 6.78% 6.67% 13.23% 12.67% 12.89% 25.10% 23.61% 25.91%
20 20 5.38% 4.51% 6.49% 11.01% 8.52% 10.66% 21.58% 17.09% 20.71%
Table 1: Averaged empirical FDR for synthetic data experiments withd = 400 andn = 800.
Group Average Procedures Do Not Recover Latent Graphs
In this section we demonstrate through simulation studies that procedures speciﬁcally tai-
lored to recovering the latent variable graph are necessary. We do this by using both the
methodology for the latent variable graph and the group-average graph to recover the latent
graph structure. Because the diﬀerences between the latent and group-average graph can
be small, we use larger sample sizes than in the previous studies.
The experimental procedure is almost exactly the same as before, but now we hold most
of the parameters of the generating distribution ﬁxed and examine the eﬀects of the error
variance Γ∗ and sample size n on the eﬃcacy of our methodologies for recovering the latent
variable graph. In all the experiments, we impose a Band3 structure on the latent graph,
set Γ∗ =γI, and use (d,K,m ) = (400, 20, 20).
22


--- Page 23 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
K m Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub
B-Y Based Procedure
Latent
80 5 88.22% 99.99% 99.00% 91.10% 100.00% 99.04% 93.38% 100.00% 99.11%
66 6 93.62% 100% 100% 95.42% 100% 100% 96.86% 100% 100%
50 8 97.18% 100% 100% 97.90% 100% 100% 98.47% 100% 100%
20 20 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Grp. Av.
80 5 88.27% 99.99% 98.93% 91.06% 100.00% 98.98% 93.37% 100.00% 99.07%
66 6 93.62% 100% 100% 95.40% 100% 100% 96.91% 100% 100%
50 8 97.18% 100% 100% 97.86% 100% 100% 98.47% 100% 100%
20 20 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
B-H Based Procedure
Latent
80 5 95.75% 100.00% 99.18% 97.15% 100.00% 99.23% 98.48% 100.00% 99.26%
66 6 97.85% 100% 100% 98.78% 100% 100% 99.34% 100% 100%
50 8 99.27% 100% 100% 99.57% 100% 100% 99.80% 100% 100%
20 20 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Grp. Av.
80 5 95.82% 100.00% 99.14% 97.14% 100.00% 99.18% 98.53% 100.00% 99.23%
66 6 97.88% 100% 100% 98.78% 100% 100% 99.34% 100% 100%
50 8 99.24% 100% 100% 99.59% 100% 100% 99.78% 100% 100%
20 20 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Table 2: Averaged FDR power for synthetic data experiments with d = 400 and n = 800.
α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
K m Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub
B-Y Based Procedure
Latent
80 12 1.40% 1.52% 1.78% 2.78% 2.81% 3.29% 5.71% 5.09% 6.30%
66 15 1.23% 1.29% 1.31% 2.62% 2.39% 2.69% 5.08% 4.33% 4.84%
50 20 1.05% 0.94% 1.26% 2.27% 1.85% 2.79% 4.28% 3.65% 4.58%
20 50 1.04% 1.03% 1.05% 1.81% 1.96% 2.20% 3.46% 3.26% 4.19%
Grp. Av.
80 12 1.55% 1.57% 1.78% 2.78% 2.80% 3.26% 5.57% 5.13% 6.13%
66 15 1.30% 1.30% 1.24% 2.64% 2.35% 2.64% 5.07% 4.34% 4.89%
50 20 1.09% 0.93% 1.26% 2.32% 1.89% 2.75% 4.29% 3.64% 4.51%
20 50 1.09% 1.01% 1.05% 1.91% 1.96% 2.14% 3.50% 3.28% 4.25%
B-H Based Procedure
Latent
80 12 10.99% 10.04% 12.00% 20.04% 18.18% 21.47% 35.50% 31.46% 37.24%
66 15 9.28% 8.20% 9.14% 16.88% 14.94% 16.82% 31.53% 27.75% 31.81%
50 20 7.73% 6.91% 7.96% 14.74% 13.13% 15.33% 27.03% 23.92% 28.72%
20 50 5.00% 4.85% 6.38% 11.01% 9.38% 11.60% 21.49% 17.00% 23.15%
Grp. Av.
80 12 10.99% 10.00% 12.00% 20.29% 18.20% 21.38% 35.56% 31.48% 37.10%
66 15 9.28% 8.24% 8.99% 17.03% 14.87% 16.87% 31.49% 27.82% 31.63%
50 20 7.60% 6.93% 7.94% 14.61% 13.13% 15.40% 27.12% 23.94% 28.71%
20 50 4.95% 4.91% 6.38% 10.97% 9.35% 11.60% 21.36% 16.94% 23.41%
Table 3: Averaged empirical FDR for synthetic data experiments with d = 1000 and n =
500.
First we note that if Γ∗ = 0, the two graph structures are actually the same – it is only
as we introduce error into the observed variables that the latent variable and group-average
graphs begin to diﬀer. In Tables 5 and 6 we see that as we increase the error variance, the
the group averages methodology applied to the latent graph is unable to control the Type
I error rate and the FDR at the desired level. Further, by increasing the sample size n,
23


--- Page 24 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
K m Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub Scalefree Band3 Hub
B-Y Based Procedure
Latent
80 12 71.42% 99.95% 100.00% 77.14% 99.97% 100.00% 82.29% 99.98% 100.00%
66 15 82.98% 99.98% 100.00% 86.32% 99.99% 100.00% 90.02% 100.00% 100.00%
50 20 90.45% 99.99% 100.00% 93.04% 99.99% 100.00% 94.86% 100.00% 100.00%
20 50 99.95% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Grp. Av.
80 12 71.54% 99.95% 100.00% 77.13% 99.97% 100.00% 82.25% 99.98% 100.00%
66 15 82.74% 99.98% 100.00% 86.26% 99.99% 100.00% 90.08% 100.00% 100.00%
50 20 90.45% 99.99% 100.00% 93.00% 99.99% 100.00% 94.76% 100.00% 100.00%
20 50 99.95% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
B-H Based Procedure
Latent
80 12 87.15% 99.99% 100.00% 91.33% 100.00% 100.00% 94.66% 100.00% 100.00%
66 15 93.57% 100.00% 100.00% 95.63% 100.00% 100.00% 97.38% 100.00% 100.00%
50 20 96.27% 100.00% 100.00% 97.78% 100.00% 100.00% 98.94% 100.00% 100.00%
20 50 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Grp. Av.
80 12 87.22% 99.99% 100.00% 91.33% 100.00% 100.00% 94.58% 100.00% 100.00%
66 15 93.52% 100.00% 100.00% 95.65% 100.00% 100.00% 97.35% 100.00% 100.00%
50 20 96.33% 100.00% 100.00% 97.78% 100.00% 100.00% 98.94% 100.00% 100.00%
20 50 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Table 4: Averaged FDR power for synthetic data experiments with d = 1000 and n = 500.
we observe that the performance of the group average procedures applied to recovering the
latent graph gets worse – this is as expected because with increased n, the tests become
accurate, but are by construction estimating the wrong graph!
L.V. T est Procedure G.A. T est Procedure
n γ α = 0.01 α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2 α = 0.01 α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
1600 0.5 0.56% 2.67% 5.83% 10.22% 0.61% 3.00% 6.39% 10.39%
1.0 0.78% 3.11% 5.22% 10.61% 0.78% 3.83% 6.89% 13.39%
1.5 0.61% 2.89% 5.11% 8.72% 0.94% 3.33% 6.22% 10.50%
2.0 1.00% 3.39% 6.39% 11.06% 1.39% 4.78% 7.61% 12.44%
2.5 0.56% 3.50% 6.17% 11.22% 1.89% 5.33% 9.17% 15.28%
3.0 1.72% 5.11% 8.61% 14.28% 3.00% 8.56% 11.89% 17.61%
3.5 1.06% 3.83% 6.78% 11.72% 3.39% 8.44% 12.94% 18.44%
4.0 1.50% 4.33% 8.33% 12.83% 5.22% 10.94% 14.22% 20.78%
3200 0.5 0.28% 1.89% 3.22% 7.50% 0.44% 2.17% 4.00% 8.11%
1.0 0.44% 3.00% 5.11% 9.44% 1.11% 4.22% 7.83% 14.17%
1.5 0.44% 2.72% 4.50% 9.56% 1.78% 5.61% 9.00% 13.61%
2.0 0.89% 3.56% 6.78% 11.61% 2.94% 7.50% 11.33% 16.78%
2.5 1.06% 3.61% 6.06% 10.67% 2.78% 9.67% 13.44% 19.00%
3.0 1.50% 5.44% 8.39% 14.33% 7.72% 13.78% 18.00% 22.78%
3.5 1.67% 5.44% 9.72% 15.72% 7.61% 13.83% 18.22% 22.89%
4.0 2.78% 5.83% 10.06% 16.28% 11.28% 17.11% 22.22% 27.06%
Table 5: Averaged Type I for the latent variable graph using both the latent variable and
group averages methodology.
24


--- Page 25 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
L.V. T est Procedure G.A. T est Procedure
n γ α = 0.01 α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2 α = 0.01 α = 0.05 α = 0.1 α = 0.2
1600 0.5 0.83% 3.81% 4.95% 11.44% 0.41% 3.23% 5.51% 12.57%
1.0 0.62% 3.23% 6.07% 10.11% 1.03% 4.00% 7.51% 14.13%
1.5 0.21% 3.61% 5.88% 10.61% 1.23% 4.76% 6.25% 12.25%
2.0 1.23% 3.81% 6.43% 13.51% 1.64% 5.88% 9.26% 14.74%
2.5 0.83% 4.00% 7.16% 12.25% 3.23% 5.88% 10.95% 16.52%
3.0 2.24% 6.61% 10.11% 16.81% 3.23% 9.94% 15.19% 20.66%
3.5 1.23% 4.95% 6.98% 13.36% 3.81% 10.78% 15.79% 22.08%
4.0 1.64% 4.95% 8.40% 15.19% 6.25% 14.29% 17.95% 24.88%
3200 0.5 0.41% 2.44% 4.00% 7.51% 0.41% 2.64% 4.19% 8.75%
1.0 0.83% 3.42% 6.80% 10.61% 1.03% 4.57% 8.05% 16.38%
1.5 0.41% 3.23% 5.70% 9.09% 2.64% 7.34% 10.45% 16.81%
2.0 0.62% 4.38% 6.98% 12.25% 4.00% 9.77% 13.36% 20.27%
2.5 1.03% 4.57% 7.51% 11.60% 4.00% 12.09% 16.81% 23.44%
3.0 1.84% 7.51% 10.45% 16.38% 9.94% 17.81% 22.95% 28.14%
3.5 1.64% 6.98% 11.28% 18.92% 10.95% 18.23% 23.08% 27.93%
4.0 4.38% 8.57% 11.60% 18.92% 15.94% 22.95% 27.16% 31.82%
Table 6: Averaged empirical FDR error rates for the latent variable graph using both the
latent variable and group averages methodology.
5.2. fMRI Dataset
The study of brain relationships in humans via modern neuroimaging techniques has at-
tracted an enormous amount of scientiﬁc interest in recent years. One fundamental goal in
these studies is to understand the functional communication between brain regions, which
plays a key role in complex cognitive processes. To study the functional connectivity net-
work, Power et al. (2011) partitioned the human brain into regions of interest (ROIs) and
represented each ROI by a node in a graph. They identiﬁed several “subgraphs” of highly
related nodes (i.e, clusters), which can represent the major functional systems of the brain.
One of the main goals in their work is to understand the relationship between diﬀerent
subgraphs or clusters. To this end, they estimated the relationship between clusters by
thresholding the correlation matrix of all nodes in the same clusters in an adhoc way. The
analysis of “network of clusters” can be conducted under a rigorous statistical framework
by using the proposed cluster-based graphical models. In the section, we will apply the pro-
posed method to study the dependence structure among functional systems of the brain.
As an illustration, we focus on the publicly available resting-state fMRI data from the
Neuro-bureau pre-processed repository (Bellec et al., 2015). Speciﬁcally, we use the data
from patient 1018959, session 1 in the KKI dataset. This fMRI dataset was pre-processed
using the Athena pipeline and mapped to T1 MNI152 coordinate space. We choose this
dataset to make our experiments easily reproducible, as the data are available pre-processed
using standard alignment and denoising procedures. In a recent work, Luo (2014) estimated
the fMRI network in a similar clustering model by an iterative procedure that maximizes
the likelihood function with respect to the unknown cluster assignment and the precision
25


--- Page 26 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
matrix. However, their optimization problem is non-convex due to estimating the unknown
cluster assignment and the algorithm is computationally intensive in high dimension.
Following Power et al. (2011), we directly extract the 264 ROIs, which gives us d = 264
mean activities across n = 148 time periods. Since the FORCE algorithm requires to know
the number of clusters in advance, we ﬁrst apply the CORD algorithm (Bunea et al., 2018)
to estimate the number of clusters, which gives us K = 53. Then we reapply the FORCE
algorithm with K = 53 to obtain the corresponding clusters. Recall that the goal is to
analyze the dependence structure among functional systems of the brain. Under the latent
variable model (1), we treat the measurement of ROIs as the observed variable X and
the underlying brain function as the latent variable Z. Thus, the relationship between
brain functional systems can be modeled by the latent variable graph. Using the FDR
control procedures with α = 0.01, the estimated latent variable graph is shown in Figure
1. As a comparison, we also show the cluster average graph in Figure 2. However, in this
example the biological meaning of the cluster-average variables ¯X is unclear so that the
interpretation of the cluster average graph seems diﬃcult.
For purposes of clarity, we only display the nodes and connections corresponding to the
10 largest groups in these two ﬁgures. The groups are colored according to the functional
network the majority of their nodes belong to as given in Power et al. (2011). It is known
that the default mode may comprise multiple interacting subsystems (Andrews-Hanna et al.,
2010). Thus our graph contains multiple nodes for the default mode, where each node may
represent diﬀerent subsystems. To demonstrate the diﬀerence between the latent variable
graph and the cluster average graph, we focus on three regions, default mode (pink), dorsal
attention (brown) and salience (yellow). In the latent variable graph, dorsal attention and
salience are connected and both of them are strongly connected with many subsystems
of the default mode. This dependence structure is supported by the neuroscience theory
that “the default mode, engaged during rest and internally directed tasks, should exhibit
anticorrelation with networks engaged during externally directed tasks, such as the dorsal
attention network and the salience network” (Zhou et al., 2017). Moreover, this ﬁnding
is also consistent with many existing empirical results such as Fox et al. (2005); Fransson
(2005); Smith et al. (2009); Raichle (2015). However, in the cluster-averages graph, dorsal
attention is conditionally independent of any subsystems of the default mode and salience is
only loosely connected with the default mode. In summary, the latent variable graph seems
to be more biologically meaningful than the cluster-average graph in order to interpret the
dependence structure of the functional systems of the brain.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers and editor for their suggestions to improve this paper.
Florentina Bunea was partially supported by NSF-DMS 712709. Yang Ning was partially
supported by NSF-DMS 1854637. We are grateful to Xi Luo for help with the interpretation
of our data analysis results.
26


--- Page 27 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Z32
Z3
Z5Z8
Z44
Z16
Z23
Z26 Z29
Z30
FMRI - Latent Graph ( ˆK = 53)
Uncertain
Auditory
Default mode
Salience
Cingulo-opercular Task Control
Dorsal Attention
Sensory/Somatomotor Hand
Figure 1: Recovered latent graph structure between 10 largest clusters in fMRI data with
FDR level α = 0.01 colored according to their functions.
¯X32
¯X3
¯X5¯X8
¯X44
¯X16
¯X23
¯X26 ¯X29
¯X30
FMRI - Averages Graph ( ˆK = 53)
Uncertain
Auditory
Default mode
Salience
Cingulo-opercular Task Control
Dorsal Attention
Sensory/Somatomotor Hand
Figure 2: Recovered cluster-averages graph structure between 10 largest clusters in fMRI
data with FDR level α = 0.01.
27


--- Page 28 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Appendix A. Estimation in the Cluster-Average Graph
In this section we provide the proofs of the results needed for establishing the asymptotic
normality of the estimators of the entries of Ω∗. These results make use of the fact that
consistent clustering is possible, under our assumptions, as stated below.
Lemma 8 LetE =:{ ˆG =G∗}, for ˆG estimated by either the COD or the PECOK algorithm
of Bunea et al. (2018). Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2, we have
P(E)≥ 1− C
(d∨n)3.
The conclusion of this Lemma is proved in Theorem 3, for the COD algorithm, and Theorem
4, for the PECOK algorithm, of Bunea et al. (2018). Lemma 8 allows us to replace ˆG by
G∗ in all the results below, while incurring a small error, of order O
(
C
(d∨n)3
)
, which will be
shown to be dominated by other error bounds.
Remark 9 While Assumptions 1 and 2 are made for C∗, they do imply that c1≤λmin (S∗)
and maxtS∗
t,t≤ c2 +c3 holds for S∗. Furthermore Lemma 29 implies the same restricted
eigenvalue condition on λmin (S∗) as on C∗.
A.1. Main Proofs for the Cluster-Average Graph Estimators
Before proving Theorem 3 and Claim 1 of Theorem 5, we state two propositions – one
regarding the asymptotic normality of ˜Ωt,k and the other regarding the convergence rate of
the variance estimator. The proofs are deferred until after that of the main result
Proposition 10 (Asymptotic Normality of ˜Ωt,k) Under the same conditions as in The-
orem 3, we have
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P
(n1/2(˜Ωt,k− Ω∗
t,k)
stk
≤x,E
)
− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐≤ C
(K∨n)3 + Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 .
Proposition 11 (Convergence Rate of the Variance Estimator) Under the same con-
ditions as in Theorem 3, we have
max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆs2
t,k−s2
t,k|≤ C
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n , max
1≤t<k≤K
⏐⏐⏐ ˆst,k
st,k
− 1
⏐⏐⏐≤C
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− (K∨n)−3.
Proof of Theorem 3
The proof relies crucially on Proposition 10. Once that result is established, the proof of
Theorem 3 follows standard steps as explained below.
DenoteE′ ={max1≤t<k≤K|ˆstk/stk−1|≤ r}, wherer =C
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n , and let ¯E′ signify
the complement of the event E′. Let Tt,k and ˆTt,k denote the statistics
n1/2(˜Ωt,k−Ω∗
t,k)
stk
and
28


--- Page 29 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
n1/2(˜Ωt,k−Ω∗
t,k)
ˆstk
, respectively. We ﬁrst consider the bound
P
(
ˆTt,k≤x
)
− Φ(x)≤ P
(
ˆTt,k≤x,E′,E
)
− Φ(x) + P( ¯E′) + P( ¯E)
= P
(
Tt,k≤x ˆstk
stk
,E′,E
)
− Φ(x) + P( ¯E′) + P( ¯E).
Proposition 11 implies P( ¯E′)≤C(K∨n)−3 and Lemma 8 above implies P( ¯E)≤C(d∨n)−3
for some constant C. In addition, for x≥ 0,
P
(
Tt,k≤x ˆstk
stk
,E′,E
)
− Φ(x)≤ P
(
Tt,k≤x(1 +r),E
)
− Φ(x)
=
{
P
(
Tt,k≤x(1 +r),E
)
− Φ(x(1 +r))
}
+
{
Φ(x(1 +r))− Φ(x)
}
. (43)
For the ﬁrst term, Proposition 10 implies
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P
(
Tt,k≤x(1 +r),E
)
− Φ(x(1 +r))
⏐⏐⏐ ≲ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 .
By the mean value theorem, the second term Φ(x(1 +r))− Φ(x) =φ(x(1 +tr))xr, for some
t∈ [0, 1]. It is easily seen that sup x∈R supt∈[0,1]|φ(x(1 +tr))x|≤ C for some constant C.
Plugging it into (43), we obtain
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
{
P
(
Tt,k≤x ˆstk
stk
,E′,E
)
− Φ(x)
}
≲ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 +r ≲ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 . (44)
When x< 0, similar to (43), the bound is
P
(
Tt,k≤x ˆstk
stk
,E′,E
)
− Φ(x)
≤
{
P
(
Tt,k≤x(1−r),E
)
− Φ(x(1−r))
}
+
{
Φ(x(1−r))− Φ(x)
}
.
Thus (44) holds for x< 0 as well. Combining these results, we obtain
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
{
P
(
ˆTt,k≤x
)
− Φ(x)
}
≲ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 + 1
(K∨n)3 + 1
(d∨n)3.
Following the similar argument, we can also derive
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
{
Φ(x)− P
(
ˆTt,k≤x
)}
≲ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 + 1
(K∨n)3 + 1
(d∨n)3.
This completes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 5, Claim 1
The proof follows verbatim that of Theorem 8.5 in Giraud (2014), with the exception
of the fact that exact p-values are replaced by approximate p-values, including the rate
29


--- Page 30 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
of approximation. We include the full proof for the convenience of the reader. By the
deﬁnition of the FDR,
FDR(ˆτ) = E
[ ∑
(t,k)∈H0 I[|˜Wt,k|> ˆτ]I[Rˆτ > 0]
Rˆτ
]
=
∑
(t,k)∈H0
E
[ I[|˜Wt,k|> ˆτ]I[Rˆτ > 0]
Rˆτ
]
. (45)
To handle the Rˆτ in the denominator, we use the identity 1 = ∑∞
i=Rˆτ
Rˆτ
i(i+1). This implies
1/Rˆτ =
∞∑
i=Rˆτ
1
i(i + 1) =
∞∑
i=1
I[i≥Rˆτ]
i(i + 1)
Plugging this into (45) and bringing the expectation inside the summation gives that
FDR(ˆτ) =
∑
(t,k)∈H0
∞∑
i=1
1
i(i + 1)E
[
I[|˜Wt,k|> ˆτ]I[Rˆτ > 0]I[i≥Rˆτ]
]
≤
∑
(t,k)∈H0
∞∑
i=1
1
i(i + 1)E
[
I[|˜Wt,k|> Φ−1
(
1− αRˆτ
2NBY|H|
)
]I[Rˆτ > 0]I[i≥Rˆτ]
]
≤
∑
(t,k)∈H0
∞∑
i=1
1
i(i + 1)E
[
I[|˜Wt,k|> Φ−1
(
1− α(i∧|H| )
2NBY|H|
)
]
]
, (46)
where the second line follows from the deﬁnition of the FDR cutoﬀ and the last inequality
holds since Rˆτ≤ (i∧|H| ). The Berry-Esseen bound in Theorem 3 implies that
P(|˜Wt,k|> Φ−1
(
1− α(i∧|H| )
2NBY|H|
)
)≤ α(i∧|H| )
NBY|H| + 2bn.
Thus, it follows that
FDR(ˆτ)≤
∑
(t,k)∈H0
∞∑
i=1
1
i(i + 1)
(α(i∧|H| )
NBY|H| + 2bn
)
=α|H0|
|H|
(|H|∑
i=1
i
i(i + 1)NBY
+
∞∑
i=|H|+1
|H|
i(i + 1)NBY
)
+ 2|H0|bn
=α|H0|
|H|
(|H|∑
i=1
1
i + 1
1
NBY
+ |H|
|H| + 1
1
NBY
)
+ 2|H0|bn
≤α + 2|H0|bn,
where the last step follows from |H0|
|H| ≤ 1 and the deﬁnition of NBY . This completes the
proof of the Theorem 5, Claim 1.
30


--- Page 31 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Proof of Proposition 10
Proof The proof is done in two steps. In Step 1, we show that intersected with the event
E,
n1/2|(˜Ωt,k− Ω∗
t,k)/st,k + Ω∗
t,th(Ω∗
·k)/st,k|≤ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 , (47)
with probability at least 1−C/(K∨n)3 and then use Lemma 16 to obtain the result. To
prove (47), we decompose it as
n1/2|(˜Ωt,k− Ω∗
t,k) + Ω∗
t,th(Ω∗
·k)|
=n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)− ˆΩt,tˆh( ˆΩ·k) + Ω∗
t,th(Ω∗
·k)|
≤n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)− Ω∗
t,t(h( ˆΩ·k)−h(Ω∗
·k))|
  
I.1
+n1/2|Ω∗
t,t(ˆh( ˆΩ·k)−h( ˆΩ·k))|
  
I.2
+n1/2|(ˆΩt,t− Ω∗
t,t)ˆh( ˆΩ·k)|
  
I.3
.
In the following, we study these three terms separately. Recall that h(Ω·k) = v∗T
t ( ˆSΩ·k−
ek), and ˆh(Ω·k) = ˆvT
t ( ˆSΩ·k− ek), where v∗
t is a K-dimensional vector with ( v∗
t )t = 1 and
(v∗
t )−t =−w∗
t with w∗
t = (S∗
−t,−t)−1S∗
−t,t. Term I.1 reduces to
|I.1| =n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)− Ω∗
t,tv∗T
t ˆS( ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k)|
≤n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)(1− Ω∗
t,t( ˆSt,t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,t))| (48)
+n1/2Ω∗
t,t|( ˆSt,−t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,−t)( ˆΩ−t,k− Ω∗
−t,k)|. (49)
Note that 1/Ω∗
t,t =S∗
t,t− w∗T
t S∗
−t,t. The term in (48) can be bounded by
n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)Ω∗
t,t( ˆSt,t−S∗
t,t)| +n1/2|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)Ω∗
t,tw∗T
t ( ˆS−t,t−S∗
−t,t)|
≤n1/2|Ω∗
t,t|∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1 max(∥ ˆS−S∗∥max,∥w∗T
t ( ˆS−t·−S∗
−t·)∥∞)
≤ Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 ,
with probability at least 1− (K∨n)−3, by λmax(Ω∗)≤C and the concentration and error
bound results in Lemmas 13, 14, 15. The term in (49) can be bounded by
n1/2Ω∗
t,t∥ ˆSt,−t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,−t∥∞∥ ˆΩ−t,k− Ω∗
−t,k∥1≤ Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 ,
with probability at least 1 − (K∨n)−3 again by Lemmas 14, 15. Thus, |I.1|≤ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2
with probability at least 1− (K∨n)−3.
For term I.2, we have
|I.2| =n1/2Ω∗
t,t|(ˆvt− v∗)T ( ˆS ˆΩ·k− ek)|
≤n1/2Ω∗
t,t∥ˆvt− v∗∥1∥ ˆS ˆΩ·k− ek∥∞≤ Cs1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 ,
31


--- Page 32 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
with probability at least 1−(K∨n)−3 by Lemma 15 and the constraint of the CLIME-type
estimator.
To control term I.3, ﬁrst we observe that
|ˆh( ˆΩ·k)| =|ˆvT
t ( ˆS ˆΩ·k− ek)|
≤| v∗T
t ( ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek)| +|v∗T
t ˆS( ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k)| +|(ˆvt− v∗
t )T ( ˆS ˆΩ·k− ek)|
≤∥ v∗
t∥1∥ ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek∥∞ +∥ ˆSt,−t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,−t∥∞∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1
+∥ˆvt− v∗
t∥1∥ ˆS ˆΩ·k− ek∥∞.
As shown in the proof of Lemma 16,∥v∗
t∥1≤s1/2
1 ∥v∗
t∥2≤Cs1/2
1 . The rest of the bounds on
the above terms follows easily from Lemmas 14, 15. Thus, we have|ˆh( ˆΩ·k)|≤ C(s1 log(K∨
n)/n)1/2 with high probability. Since
|ˆΩt,t− Ω∗
t,t|≤ C(s1 log(K∨n)/n)1/2,
by Lemma 15, we obtain that|I.3|≤ s1 log(K∨n)
n1/2 with probability at least 1−(K∨n)−3. It is
easily seen that Ω∗
t,t≥ 1
S∗
t,t
≥C >0, see Remark 9. This implies that s2
t,k = Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k + Ω∗2
t,k
is lower bounded by a positive constant. The proof of (47) is complete.
In step 2, we need to verify that
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P
(n1/2Ω∗
t,th(Ω∗
·k)
stk
≤x
)
− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐≤ C
(K∨n)3 + 1
n1/2,
which has been done in Lemma 16. Thus, combining with result (47), we can use the same
simple union bound as in the proof of Theorem 3 to obtain the desired result.
Proof of Proposition 11
Proof By Lemma 15, under the event ˆG =G∗, we have
max
1≤t,k≤K
|ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k|≤ max
1≤k≤K
∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥2≤C1
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− C4
(K∨n)3 . Under this event,
max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆs2
t,k−s2
t,k| = max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆΩ2
t,k + ˆΩt,t ˆΩk,k− (Ω∗2
t,k + Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k)|
≤ max
1≤t<k≤K
|(ˆΩt,k− Ω∗
t,k)(ˆΩt,k + Ω∗
t,k)|
+ ˆΩt,t|ˆΩk,k− Ω∗
k,k| + Ω∗
k,k|ˆΩt,t− Ω∗
t,t|
≤C1
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n (4∥Ω∗∥max +δ)
≤C
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n ,
32


--- Page 33 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
for some constant δ >0 since∥Ω∗∥max≤ λmax(Ω∗)≤ C. It is easily veriﬁed that Ω ∗
t,t≥
1
S∗
t,t
≥C >0 (see Remark 9). This implies that s2
t,k = Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k + Ω∗2
t,k is lower bounded by
a positive constant. Thus,
max
1≤t<k≤K
⏐⏐⏐ ˆst,k
st,k
− 1
⏐⏐⏐≤ max
1≤t<k≤K
⏐⏐⏐
ˆs2
t,k−s2
t,k
st,k(st,k + ˆst,k)
⏐⏐⏐≤C
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n .
A.2. Key Lemmas for Estimators of the Cluster-Average Graph
Remark 12 In the following proofs, we always assume the event E ={ ˆG = G∗} holds.
Using a similar argument to that used in the proof of Theorem 3, the following bounds will
hold with probability at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 .
Lemma 13 (Consistency of ˆS) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then with probability greater
than 1− C
(K∨n)3 ,
∥ ˆS−S∗∥max≤C
√
log(K∨n)
n
for some constant C dependent only on c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Proof The proof follows from the proof of Theorem 1 in Cai et al. (2011).
Lemma 14 (Concentration of Gradient and Hessian) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold,
then with probability greater than 1− C
(K∨n)3 , we have that
(a) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek∥∞≤C1
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
(b) max1≤t≤K∥ ˆSt,−t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,−t∥∞≤C2
√
log(K∨n)
n , and
(c) max1≤t≤K∥w∗T
t ( ˆS−t,−t−S∗
−t,−t)∥∞≤C2
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
for some constants C1 and C2 dependent only on c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Proof We start from the decomposition
ˆS−S∗ = (A∗TA∗)−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗(A∗TA∗)−1.
33


--- Page 34 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Denoting by B∗ = A∗TA∗, we can write
(A∗TA∗)−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗(A∗TA∗)−1
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T
{
(A∗Zi +Ei)(A∗Zi +Ei)T− A∗C∗A∗T− Γ∗
}
A∗B∗−1
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i − C∗ + 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiET
i A∗B∗−1 + 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗TEiZT
i
+ 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i − Γ∗)A∗B∗−1. (50)
First, note that ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek = ( ˆS−S∗)Ω∗
·k, and||Ω∗
·k||2≤λmax (Ω∗)≤λmin (S∗)−1. As seen
in Remark 9, we can bound the smallest eigenvalue of S∗ from below by λmin (C∗). We
therefore obtain that||Ω∗
·k||2≤c1 +c3. Using this bound, we apply Lemma 24, part (d) to
control the term
1
n
n∑
i=1
(
ZiZT
i − C∗)
Ω∗
·k.
The remaining terms in (50) can similarly be controlled using Lemma 25 and Lemma 26.
Applying the triangle inequality therefore gives
max
1≤k≤K
∥ ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek∥∞≤C1
√
log(K∨n)
n
with probability at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 , concluding the proof of claim (a).
For the remaining two claims, we can rewrite
w∗
t =
(
S∗
t,t−S∗T
−t,t(S∗
−t,−t)−1S∗
−t,t
)
Ω∗
−t,t = 1
Ω∗
t,t
Ω∗
−t,t
by the block matrix inverse formula. Using Lemma 30, it follows that||w∗
t||2≤λmin (Ω∗) maxtS∗
t,t.
Then we can see that
max
1≤t≤K
|| ˆSt,−t− w∗T
t ˆS−t,−t||∞ = max
1≤t≤K
||( ˆSt,−t−S∗
t,−t)− w∗T
t ( ˆS−t,−t−S∗
−t,−t)||∞
≤ max
1≤t≤K
||( ˆSt,−t−S∗
t,−t)||∞
  
(i)
+ max
1≤t≤K
||w∗T
t ( ˆS−t,−t−S∗
−t,−t)||∞
  
(ii)
.
By using Lemma 13, (i) is bounded with high probability. Following the same step as in the
proof of (a), we have that ( ii)≤ C2
√
log(K∨n)
n , with probability at least 1 − C
(K∨n)3 . Part
(c) is the same as the term (ii), concluding the proof.
Lemma 15 (Consistency of Initial Estimator) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then,
(a) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1≤C1s1
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
34


--- Page 35 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
(b) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥2≤C1
√
s1 log(K∨n)
n ,
(c) max1≤t≤K∥ˆvt− v∗
t∥1≤C2s1
√
log(K∨n)
n , and
(d) max1≤k≤t≤K|(ˆvt− v∗
t )T ˆS( ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k)|≤ C3
s1 log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− C4
(K∨n)3 . C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5 are constants, dependent only
uponc0, c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Proof The proof follows from the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 21 with Lemma
20 replaced by Lemma 14.
Lemma 16 (CLT for the Pseudo-Score Function) Recall that s2
tk = Ω∗2
t,k + Ω∗
t,tΩ∗
k,k.
Let Fn denote the CDF of n1/2v∗T
t ( ˆSΩ∗
·k− ek)/(stk/Ω∗
t,t). If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold,
then
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
|Fn(x)− Φ(x)|≤ C(n−1/2 + (d∨n)−3),
whereC is a constant dependent only upon c0, c1, and c2.
Proof The proof is very similar to that of Lemma 22, so we only summarize the key steps
here. For the cluster averages score function, we have the similar bound that
Fn(x)− Φ(x)≤ ˜Fn(x)− Φ(x) + P( ¯E),
where E is the event ˆG = G∗, and ˜Fn(x) is the CDF of n−1/2 ∑n
i=1 v∗T
t ( ¯Xi ¯XT
i Θ∗
·k−
ek)/(stk/Θ∗
tt). Lemma 8 implies that P( ¯E)≤ (d∨n)−3.
As in Lemma 22, we can verify the Lyapunov condition to control ˜Fn(x)− Φ(x). Lastly,
from the Isserlis’ theorem, we get that
Var(vT
1 ¯X ¯XTv2) = (vT
1S∗v1)(vT
2S∗v2) + (vT
1S∗v2)2,
for any vector v1 andv2. Using this, it is straightforward to shown
E[v∗T
t ( ¯Xi ¯XT
i Θ∗
·k− ek)2] = (stk/Θ∗
tt)2,
concluding the proof.
Appendix B. Estimation in the Latent Variable Graph
This section contains the proofs which establish the asymptotic normality of the estimator
of Θ∗.
35


--- Page 36 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
B.1. Main Proofs for the Latent Variable Graph Estimators
As in Section B we develop the proofs of Theorem 4 and Claim 2 of Theorem 5 by ﬁrst
establishing two supporting propositions.
Proposition 17 (Asymptotic Normality of ˜Θt,k) Under the same conditions as in The-
orem 4, we get
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P
(
n1/2( ˜Θt,k− Θ∗
t,k)
σt,k
<x,E
)
− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐≤ C
(K∨n)3 + Cs0 log(K∨n)
n1/2 .
Proof The proof follows all the steps of Proposition 10, with Lemma 13 replaced by Lemma
19, 14 by 20, 15 by 21 and 16 by 22.
Proposition 18 (Convergence Rate of the Variance Estimator) Under the same con-
ditions as in Theorem 4, we get
max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆσ2
t,k−σ2
t,k|≤ C
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n + Cs0
m , and
max
1≤t<k≤K
⏐⏐⏐ ˆσt,k
σt,k
− 1
⏐⏐⏐≤C
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n + Cs0
m ,
with probability at least 1− (K∨n)−3.
Proof Similar to the proof of Proposition 11, we can prove that
max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆσ2
t,k− (Θ∗2
t,k + Θ∗
t,tΘ∗
k,k)|≤ C
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− (K∨n)−3. Then, by Lemma 23, we obtain
max
1≤t<k≤K
|ˆσ2
t,k−σ2
t,k|≤ C
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n + Cs0
m .
The second statement can be similarly derived.
Having established the asymptotic normality of ˜Θt,k and the convergence rate of ˆσ2
t,k,
we proceed with the proofs of the main results.
Proof of Theorem 4
Proof The proof follows in exactly the same manner as that of Theorem 3, but invokes
Proposition 18, instead of Proposition 11, and Proposition 17, instead of Proposition 10,
as one needs to establish diﬀerent intermediate results, speciﬁcally tailored to estimation of
the latent graph.
36


--- Page 37 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Proof of Theorem 5, Claim 2
Proof The proof follows in exactly the same manner as that of Theorem 5, Claim 1.
B.2. Key Lemmas for Estimators of the Latent Graph
As before, we assume in the following proofs that the event E ={ ˆG = G∗} holds. Using
a similar argument to that used in the proof of Theorem 4, the following bounds will hold
with probability at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 .
Lemma 19 (Consistency of ˆC) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then with probability greater
than 1− C
(K∨n)3 ,
∥ ˆC− C∗∥max≤C
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
for some constant C dependent only on c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Proof Denoting B∗ = A∗TA∗, we begin by using the decomposition
ˆC− C∗ = B∗−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗B∗−1− B∗−1A∗T (ˆΓ− Γ∗)A∗B∗−1. (51)
Next, we can write for i∈G∗
k,
(ˆΓ− Γ∗)i,i = ˆγi−γ∗
i
= ˆΣi,i− 1
|G∗
k|− 1
∑
j∈G∗
k,j̸=i
ˆΣi,j−γ∗
i
= ˆΣi,i− 1
|G∗
k|− 1
∑
j∈G∗
k,j̸=i
ˆΣi,j− Σ∗
i,i + 1
|G∗
k|− 1
∑
j∈G∗
k,j̸=i
Σ∗
i,j
= ˆΣi,i− Σ∗
i,i− 1
|G∗
k|− 1
∑
j∈G∗
k,j̸=i
[
ˆΣi,j− Σ∗
i,j
]
,
which implies that||ˆΓ− Γ∗||max≤ 2|| ˆΣ− Σ∗||max. Therefore from Lemma 27 we see that
||B∗−1A∗T (ˆΓ− Γ∗)A∗B∗−1||max≤ 2
m||B∗−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)B∗−1||max,
demonstrating that it will suﬃce to bound the ﬁrst term in (51), which we now do.
For the ﬁrst term in (51), we have
B∗−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗B∗−1
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T
{
(A∗Zi +Ei)(A∗Zi +Ei)T− A∗C∗A∗T− Γ∗
}
A∗B∗−1
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i − C∗ + 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiET
i A∗B∗−1 + 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗TEiZT
i
+ 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i − Γ∗)A∗B∗−1. (52)
37


--- Page 38 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Using the triangle inequality, we can apply Lemma 24, Lemma 25 and Lemma 26 to bound
52. Combining these results with that P(E)≥ 1−c0/(d∨n)3, we obtain
∥ ˆC− C∗∥max≤C
√
log(K∨n)
n
with probability at least 1 − C
(K∨n) for some constant C dependent only on c1, c2, and c3
from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Lemma 20 (Concentration of Gradient and Hessian of the Loss Function) If As-
sumptions 1 and 2 hold, then with probability greater than 1− C
(K∨n)3 , we have that
(a) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆCΘ∗
·k− ek∥∞≤C1
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
(b) max1≤t≤K∥ ˆCt,−t− w∗T
t ˆC−t,−t∥∞≤C2
√
log(K∨n)
n , and
(c) max1≤t≤K∥w∗T
t ( ˆC−t,−t− C∗
−t,−t)∥∞≤C2
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
for absolute constants C1 and C2 dependent only on c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and
2.
Proof Let B∗ = A∗TA∗ and observe that ˆCΘ∗
·k− ek = ( ˆC− C∗)Θ∗
·k. Following the
decomposition (52), we can similarly show that
B∗−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗B∗−1Θ∗
·k
= 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i Θ∗
·k− C∗Θ∗
·k + 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiET
i A∗B∗−1Θ∗
·k + 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗TEiZT
i Θ∗
·k
+ 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i − Γ∗)A∗B∗−1Θ∗
·k. (53)
As in the proof of Lemma 19, we have that
||B∗−1A∗T (ˆΓ− Γ∗)A∗B∗−1Θ∗
·k||∞≤ 2
m||B∗−1A∗T ( ˆΣ− Σ∗)A∗B∗−1Θ∗
·k||∞,
demonstrating that again it will suﬃce to bound the ﬁrst term in 53.
Note that||Θ∗
·k||2≤ λmax (Θ∗)≤ c−1
1 . Therefore, by using the triangle inequality, we
can apply Lemma 24, Lemma 25 and Lemma 26 to bound the ﬁrst term in 53. Combining
these results and P(E)≥ 1−C/(d∨n)3, we obtain
max
1≤k≤K
∥ ˆCΘ∗
·k− ek∥∞≤C1
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 for some constant C1 dependent only on c1, c2, and c3
from Assumptions 1 and 2.
38


--- Page 39 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
For the remaining two claims, we can rewrite
w∗
t =
(
C∗
t,t− C∗T
−t,t(C∗
−t,−t)−1C∗
−t,t
)
Θ∗
−t,t = 1
Θ∗
t,t
Θ∗
−t,t
by the block matrix inverse formula. Using Lemma 30, it follows that||w∗
t||2≤λmax (Θ∗) maxtC∗
t,t.
Then we see that
max
1≤t≤K
|| ˆCt,−t− w∗T
t ˆC−t,−t||∞ = max
1≤t≤K
||( ˆCt,−t− C∗
t,−t)− w∗T
t ( ˆC−t,−t− C∗
−t,−t)||∞
≤ max
1≤t≤K
||( ˆCt,−t− C∗
t,−t)||∞
  
(i)
+ max
1≤t≤K
||w∗T
t ( ˆC−t,−t− C∗
−t,−t)||∞
  
(ii)
Clearly, using Lemma 19, (i) is bounded with high probability. Likewise, Lemma 19 demon-
strates that ˆC−t,i− C∗
−t,i is a sub-exponential random vector with parameters dependent
only onc1,c2, andc3 from Assumptions 1 and 2. Thus w∗T
t ( ˆC−t,i−C∗
−t,i) is sub-exponential
and because||w∗
t||2≤λmax (Θ∗) maxtC∗
t,t, we obtain that
max
1≤t≤K
∥ ˆCt,−t− w∗T
t ˆC−t,−t∥∞≤C2
√
log(K∨n)
n
with probability at least 1 − C
(K∨n)3 for some constant C2. C2 is dependent only on c1,
c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2. The ﬁnal result is bounded by the previous one,
concluding the proof.
Lemma 21 (Consistency of Initial Estimators) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then
(a) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆΘ·k− Θ∗
·k∥1≤C1s0
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
(b) max1≤k≤K∥ ˆΘ·k− Θ∗
·k∥2≤C1
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n ,
(c) max1≤t≤K∥ˆvt− v∗
t∥1≤C2s0
√
log(K∨n)
n , and
(d) max1≤k≤t≤K|(ˆvt− v∗
t )T ˆC( ˆΘ·k− Θ∗
·k)|≤ C3
s0 log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− C4
(K∨n)3 . C1, C2, C3, C4 are constants, dependent only upon c0,
c1, c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
Proof Below, the constants Ca, C′
a, Cb, C′
b, C′′
b , Cc and C′
c will depend only upon c0, c1,
c2, and c3 from Assumptions 1 and 2.
We ﬁrst prove part (b). The proof of part (a) is similar. Let ˆ∆ = ˆwt− w∗
t , noting that
we can consider wt instead of vt as the tth entries in both the estimated and true value are
1. By S denote the support of w∗
t . w∗
t iss0-sparse because w∗
t is a multiple of Θ∗
−t,k, which
we know to be s0-sparse.
39


--- Page 40 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
By Lemma 20, there exists Cb such that for λ≥ Cb
√
log(K∨n)
n , w∗
t is feasible for (22)
with probability at least 1− C′
b
(K∨n)3 . Assuming w∗
t is feasible, then it follows by deﬁnition
that||(w∗
t )S||1≥|| ( ˆwt)S||1 +||( ˆwt) ¯S||1. This in turn implies by the triangle inequality that
|| ˆ∆S||1≥|| ˆ∆ ¯S||1. Letting λ =Cb
√
log(K∨n)
n , it follows from the triangle inequality that
|| ˆC−t,−t ˆ∆||∞≤|| ˆwT
t ˆC−t,−t− Ct,−t∥|∞ +||w∗T
t ˆC−t,−t− Ct,−t∥|∞
≤ 2Cb
√
log(K∨n)
n .
In addition, note that|| ˆ∆||1≤ 2|| ˆ∆S||1≤ 2√s0|| ˆ∆S||2≤ 2√s0|| ˆ∆||2. Therefore combining
with the above, this gives
ˆ∆T ˆC−t,−t∆≤|| ˆ∆||1|| ˆC−t,−t ˆ∆||∞
≤ 2C
√
log(K∨n)
n || ˆ∆||1
≤ 4Cb
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n || ˆ∆||2.
From Lemma 29, ˆ∆T ˆC−t,−t ˆ∆≥ 4c1
3|| ˆ∆||2
2 with probability at least 1− C′′
b
(K∨n)3 . Therefore
|| ˆ∆||2≤ 16Cc1
3
√
s0 log(K∨n)
n , and
|| ˆ∆||1≤ 32Cbs0c1
3
√
log(K∨n)
n ,
with probability at least 1− max{C′
b,C′′
b}
(K∨n)3 .
To obtain part (c), ﬁrst let δ = max 1≤k≤t≤K|(ˆvt− v∗
t )T ˆC( ˆΘ·k− Θ∗
·k)| and then by
applying Holder’s inequality and the triangle inequality, we obtain
δ≤ max
1≤k≤t≤K
||ˆvt− v∗
t||1|| ˆC( ˆΘ·k− Θ∗
·k)||∞
≤ max
1≤k≤t≤K
||ˆvt− v∗
t||1
(
|| ˆC ˆΘ·k−ek||∞ +|| ˆCΘ∗
·k−ek||∞
)
. (54)
With choice of λ as above, the KKT conditions give that || ˆC ˆΘ·k−ek||∞≤ Cb
√
log(K∨n)
n .
From Lemma 20, we have that|| ˆCΘ∗
·k−ek||∞≤C
√
log(K∨n)
n with probability at least 1−
C
(K∨n)3 . Using part (b), we get that max 1≤t≤K∥ˆvt−v∗
t∥1≤Cs0
√
log(K∨n)
n with probability
at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 . The desired result now follows from (54).
Lemma 22 (CLT for the Pseudo-Score Function) Recall that
σ2
tk = E(Θ∗
ttv∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek))2,
40


--- Page 41 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
with ¯C(i) deﬁned in (30). Let Fn denote the CDF of n−1/2v∗T
t ( ˆCΘ∗
·k− ek)/(σtk/Θ∗
tt). If
Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, then we have
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
|Fn(x)− Φ(x)|≤ C(n−1/2 + (d∨n)−3).
whereC is a constant dependent only upon c0, c1, and c2.
Proof Denote byE the event that ˆG =G∗. We have
Fn(x)− Φ(x)≤ ˜Fn(x)− Φ(x) + P( ¯E),
where ˜Fn(x) is the CDF ofn−1/2 ∑n
i=1 v∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k−ek)/(σtk/Θ∗
tt). To control ˜Fn(x)−Φ(x),
we now verify the Lyapunov condition. As in the proof of Lemma 20, we can write
v∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek) = v∗T
t ( ¯C(i)− C∗)Θ∗
·k.
From Lemmas 24 - 26 we see that the entries in Qi = ( ¯C(i)− C∗)Θ∗
·k are sub-exponential
with parameters α = C1 and ν = C2 which depend only upon λmax (Θ∗), maxkγ∗
k, and
maxtC∗
t,t.
Recall the deﬁnition of v∗
t : (v∗
t )t = 1 and (v∗
t )−t =−w∗
t =−(C∗
−t,−t)−1C∗
−t,t. By the
block matrix inverse formula, we can rewrite
w∗
t =
(
C∗
t,t− C∗T
−t,t(C∗
−t,−t)−1C∗
−t,t
)
Θ∗
−t,t = 1
Θ∗
t,t
Θ∗
−t,t.
Using Lemma 30, it follows that||w∗
t||2≤λmax (Θ∗) maxtC∗
t,t and||v∗
t||2≤λmax (Θ∗) maxtC∗
t,t+
1. From Lemma 33 and the above, v∗T
t Qi is sub-exponential with parameters α =C1 and
ν =||v∗
t||2C2≤
(
λmax (Θ∗) maxtC∗
t,t + 1
)
C2. Therefore, v∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek) has third mo-
ments bounded above by some constant ρ that depends only upon λmax (Θ∗), maxkγ∗
k, and
maxtC∗
t,t. All three quantities are bounded above by constants per Assumptions 1 and 2.
Thus, max1≤t<k≤K supx( ˜Fn(x)− Φ(x))≤ Cn−1/2 by the classical Berry-Esseen Theorem,
and therefore
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
(Fn(x)− Φ(x))≤C(n−1/2 + (d∨n)−3).
Similarly, it can be shown that supx∈R(Φ(x)−Fn(x))≤C(n−1/2+(d∨n)−3). This completes
the proof.
Lemma 23 (Approximation for Asymptotic Variance) Under Assumptions 1 and 2,
we have that
σ2
tk = Θ∗2
t,k + Θ∗
t,tΘ∗
k,k + ∆, (55)
where|∆|≤ Cs0
m and C is a constant dependent only upon c1, c2 and c3.
Proof Recall that σ2
tk = E(Θ∗
ttv∗T
t ( ¯C(i)Θ∗
·k− ek))2. Using the identity vec( M1M2M3) =
(MT
3⊗ M1)T vec(M2)(MT
3⊗ M1), we have
σ2
tk = (Θ∗
t,t)2(Θ∗T
·k ⊗v∗
t )T E
[
vec( ¯C(i)) vec(¯C(i))T
]
(Θ∗T
·k ⊗v∗
t ). (56)
41


--- Page 42 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Computing the expectation: After some straightforward, albeit lengthy, algebra we can show
that
E
[
vec( ¯C(i)) vec(¯C(i))T
]
= M1 + M2 + M3,
where M1 := C∗⊗ C∗ and M2 := [C∗
·jC∗T
·i ]ij. The matrices M1 and M2 contribute to the
ﬁrst two terms in (55). The term M3 := E
[
vec( ¯C(i)) vec(¯C(i))T ]
− M1− M2, however, is
unique to the latent graph and contributes the higher order term ∆ in (55).
Evaluating the ﬁrst order terms : By (56), we have
σ2
tk = (Θ∗
t,t)2(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )T (M1 + M2)(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t ) + ∆
with ∆ deﬁned as
∆ := (Θ∗
t,t)2(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM3(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t ). (57)
Next, we observe that
(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM1(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t ) = Θ∗T
·k C∗Θ∗
·k⊗v∗T
t C∗v∗
t
=
Θ∗
k,k
Θ∗
t,t
,
where we used that v∗T
t C∗v∗
t = (Θ∗
t,t)−1. Similarly, we can ﬁnd that
(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM2(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t ) = Θ∗2
tk
Θ∗2
tt
.
Bounding the higher order terms : What remains is to bound the magnitude of the term ∆
in (57). Lengthy algebra yields:
|(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM3(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )|≤ C′
m (Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )T (M4 + M5 + M6 + M7) (Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t ),
whereC′ depends only on c1,c2 andc3. Here, M4 = I⊗ (11T ). For l = 5, 6, 7 the matrices
Ml are deﬁned block-wise by
M5;ij :=
{
1eT
i if i̸=j
0 o/w and M6;ij :=
{
ej1T if i̸=j
0 o/w and M7;ij :=
{
I if i̸=j
0 o/w .
Further lengthy algebra gives:
|(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM4(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )|≤ s0
2
c2
1
(1 +c2
2
c2
1
),
|(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM5(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )|≤ s0
2
√
2
c2
1
(1 +c2
2
c2
1
),
|(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM6(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )|≤ s0
2
√
2(c2
1 +c2
2)
c4
1
√
1 +c2
2
c2
1
,
42


--- Page 43 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
and
|(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )TM7(Θ∗
·k⊗v∗
t )|≤ s0
2(c2
1 +c2
2)
c4
1
.
Plugging these bounds into the expression for ∆ in (57), we obtain
|∆|≤ Cs0
m ,
concluding the proof.
Appendix C. Concentration Results
The lemmas below provide important results regarding the concentration properties of some
of the estimators ˆC and variablesZ.
Lemma 24
(a) ZiZT
i consists of entries which are sub-exponential with parameters α = 4 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
and ν = 2
√
2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2,
(b) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1ZiZT
i − C∗

max
≥C maxt(C∗
t,t)2
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3
(c) ZiZT
i u consists of entries which are sub-exponential with parametersα = 4 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
and ν = 2
√
2||u||2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2, and
(d) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1
(
ZiZT
i − C∗)
u

max
≥C||u||2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3 ,
whereC = 4
√
3 and u∈ RK.
Proof From Lemma 31, each element in the matrices ZiZT
i are sub-exponential with
parameters α = 4 maxt(C∗
t,t)2 and ν = 2
√
2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2. Therefore by Corollary 33, the
entries in 1
n
∑n
i=1ZiZT
i are sub-exponential with parameters α = 4
n maxt(C∗
t,t)2 and ν =
2
√
2√n maxt(C∗
t,t)2. Therefore by the tail bound for sub-exponential random variables, we see
that
P
((1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i − C∗
)
s,t
≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤



exp
(
− (log(K∨n))D2
1
16 maxt(C∗
t,t)4
)
if 0≤D1
√
log(K∨n)
n ≤ 2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
exp
(
−D1
√
n log(K∨n)
8 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
)
if D1
√
log(K∨n)
n > 2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2
for arbitraryD1> 0. Observe that forn suﬃciently large,D1
√
log(K∨n)/n≤ 2 maxt(C∗
t,t)2,
and thus we need only consider this case. Choose D1≥ 4
√
3 maxt(C∗
t,t)2. Then it is clear
that
P
((1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i − C∗
)
s,t
≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 1
(K∨n)5.
43


--- Page 44 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
By applying the union bound across all entries in the matrix, we get the desired result that
P
( 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiZT
i − C∗

max
≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3,
concluding the proof of parts (a) and (b). The proof of (c) and (d) are very similar and
omitted.
Lemma 25 LetC = 2
√
3, σ2
s = 1
|G∗s|2
∑
i∈G∗s
γi, and Mi =ZiET
i A∗B∗−1. Then,
(a) (Mi)s,t is sub-exponential with parametersα =
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
andν =
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
,
(b) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1Mi

max
≥C maxt(σ2
t∨C∗
t,t)
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3
(c) (Miu)s is sub-exponential with parametersα =
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
andν =
√
2||u||2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
,
and
(d) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1Miu

∞
≥C maxt(σ2
t∨C∗
t,t)||u||2
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3 ,
where u∈ RK.
Proof LetM = ∑n
i=1Mi. From Lemma 27, Y1 = B∗−1A∗TE1 is a K-dimensional vector
where the kth entry is given by
(Y1)k = 1
|G∗
k|
∑
i∈G∗
k
(E1)i.
Because the errors are all independent mean zero Gaussian random variables, ( Y1)s ∼
N (0,σ 2
s). Therefore, as Y1 is independent ofZ1 by deﬁnition, E[(Y1)s(Z1)t] = E[(Y1)s]E[(Z1)t] =
0. Further, Lemma 31 gives that ( Y1)s(Z1)t is sub-exponential with parameters α = ν =√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
.
Using the independence of the samples, Corollary 33 gives that Ms,t is sub-exponential
with parameters α =
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
and ν =
√
2n max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
. Then, Corollary 35
gives that for arbitrary choice of D1> 0,
P
(
1
nMs,t≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤



exp
(
− (log(K∨n))D2
1
4 max(σ2s,C∗
t,t)
2
)
if 0≤D1
√
log(K∨n)
n ≤
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
exp
(
−D1
√
n log(K∨n)√
2 max(σ2s,C∗
t,t)
)
if D1
√
log(K∨n)
n >
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
.
44


--- Page 45 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Observe that for n suﬃciently large, D1
√
logK/n≤
√
2 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
. If we choose D1≥
2
√
3 max
(
σ2
s,C∗
t,t
)
, then we obtain that for n suﬃciently large,
P
(
1
nMs,t≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 1
(K∨n)5.
Then by the union bound we can obtain
P
( 1
n
n∑
i=1
ZiET
i A∗B∗−1

max
≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3
for D1 ≥ 2
√
3 max
(
maxsσ2
s, maxtC∗
t,t
)
, concluding the proof of parts (a) and (b). The
proof of (c) and (d) are very similar and omitted.
Lemma 26 Recall that m = mink|G∗
k|, and let Mi = B∗−1A∗TEiET
i A∗B∗−1 and µ =
B∗−1A∗TΓ∗A∗B∗−1. Then,
(a) (Mi−µ)t,k is sub-exponential with parameters αt,k =
√
2
|G∗
k||G∗
t| maxi∈G∗
t∪G∗
kγ∗
i and
νt,k =
√
2
|G∗
k||G∗
t| maxi∈G∗
t∪G∗
kγ∗
i ,
(b) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1Mi−µ

max
≥C maxkγk
√
log(K∨n)
nm2
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3
(c) ((Mi−µ) u)t is sub-exponential with parametersαt =
√
2
m2 maxkγ∗
k andνt =
√
2
m2||u||2 maxkγ∗
k,
and
(d) P
( 1
n
∑n
i=1 (Mi−µ) u

max
≥C||u||2 maxkγk
√
log(K∨n)
nm2
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3 ,
whereC = 2
√
3 and and u∈ RK.
Proof To obtain the results, we ﬁrst bound the sum M := ∑n
i=1Mi entrywise. From
Lemma 28, Corollary 32 and Corollary 33, we have that ( Mi)t,k is sub-exponential with
parameters
αt,k =
√
2
|G∗
k||G∗
t| max
i∈G∗
t∪G∗
k
γ∗
i and νt,k =
√
2
|G∗
k||G∗
t| max
i∈G∗
t∪G∗
k
γ∗
i.
Therefore 1
nMt,k is sub-exponential with parameters
α =
√
2
n|G∗
k||G∗
t| max
i∈G∗
t∪G∗
k
γ∗
i and ν =
√
2
n|G∗
k||G∗
t| max
i∈G∗
t∪G∗
k
γ∗
i.
45


--- Page 46 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Next, observe that µt,k = E[Mt,k] and denote N = maxi∈G∗
t∪G∗
kγ∗
i . Then, from Lemma 34,
we obtain
P
(
1
nMt,k−µt,k≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n|G∗
k||G∗
t|
)
≤



exp
(
− (log(K∨n))D2
1
4N 2
)
if 0≤D1
√
log(K∨n)
n|G∗
k||G∗
t|≤
√
2N
exp
(
−D1
√
n log(K∨n)√
2N
)
if D1
√
log(K∨n)
n|G∗
k||G∗
t| >
√
2N.
Observe that for n suﬃciently large,D1
√
log(K∨n)
n|G∗
k||G∗
t|≤
√
2N. If we choose D1≥ 2
√
3N, then
we obtain that for n suﬃciently large,
P
(
1
nMt,k−µt,k≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
n|G∗
k||G∗
t|
)
≤ 1
(K∨n)5.
Therefore by taking the union bound, lower bounding n|G∗
k||G∗
t| by nm2 and choosing
D1≥ 2
√
3 maxkγ∗
k,
P
( 1
n
n∑
i=1
B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i − Γ∗)A∗B∗−1

max
≥D1
√
log(K∨n)
nm2
)
≤ 2
(K∨n)3,
concluding the proof of parts (a) and (b). The proof of (c) and (d) are very similar and
omitted.
Appendix D. Auxiliary Technical lemmas
Lemma 27 For 1≤ k≤ K, denote mk =|G∗
k|. Then the matrix (A∗TA∗)−1A∗T is a
K×d dimensional matrix given as
[(A∗TA∗)−1A∗T ]k,i =
{
1
mk
if i∈G∗
k
0 otherwise.
Proof First, we must calculate B∗−1A∗T . For 1 ≤ k ≤ K, denote mk = |G∗
k| and
let ek be a unit vector in RK with 1 on the k position and 0 otherwise. Without loss
of generality, we permute the rows of A∗ such that for any 1 ≤ k ≤ K A∗
j· = ek, for∑k−1
i=1 mi + 1≤ j <∑k
i=1mi + 1 – that is rows are ordered according to ascending group
index. Here, for notational simplicity, we let m0 = 0. Thus, A∗TA∗ = diag(m1,...,m K)
and the result follows immediately.
Lemma 28 The matrices B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i )A∗B∗−1 and B∗−1A∗T (Γ∗)A∗B∗−1 are given
by
(B∗−1A∗T (EiET
i )A∗B∗−1)t,k = 1
|G∗
tG∗
k|
∑
p∈G∗
t
∑
q∈G∗
k
Ei,pEi,q
46


--- Page 47 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
and
(B∗−1A∗T (Γ∗)A∗B∗−1)t,k =
{ 1
|G∗
t|2
∑
p∈G∗
t
γ∗
p if t =k
0 otherwise.
Proof The result can be obtained by a straightforward computation.
Lemma 29 (Restricted Eigenvalue Condition for ˆC) If Assumptions 1 and 2 hold,
then the matrix ˆC satisﬁes with probability at least 1− C
(K∨n)3 ,
κ≤ min
{
vT ˆCv
||v||2
2
: v∈ RK\{ 0},||v ¯S||1≤ 3||vS||1
}
, and
κ≤ min
{
vT ˆC−t,−tv
||v||2
2
: v∈ RK\{ 0},||v ¯S′||1≤ 3||vS′||1
}
,
whereκ≥ 3
4c1
> 0.
Proof We begin by proving the ﬁrst claim. By Lemma 19, we have that ∥ ˆC− C∗∥max≤
C1
√
log(K∨n)
n with high probability. Therefore, for K suﬃciently large and for any v∈
RK\{ 0},
vT ˆCv
||v||2
2
≥ 3
4
vTC∗v
||v||2
2
.
The proof is then done for κ = 3
4c1
as we assume the minimum eigenvalue of C∗ is bounded
below byc−1
0 . The proof of the second claim is identical because C∗ is positive semideﬁnite,
and it is well known that the minimum eigenvalue of any principal submatrix C∗
−t,−t is
bounded below by λmin(C∗)≥c−1
0 .
Lemma 30 Let M be a n×n positive deﬁnite matrix and denote its inverse by L. Then,
for all i = 1,...,n
Mi,iLi,i≥ 1.
Proof By the block matrix inverse formula, it follows that
M−1
i,i =Li,i− LT
−i,iL−1
−i,−iL−i,i. (58)
Because M is positive deﬁnite, so is L. Recall that a matrix is positive deﬁnite if and only
if all its principal minors are also positive deﬁnite. Therefore, L−i,−i is positive deﬁnite, as
is L−1
−i,−i. Therefore, LT
−i,iL−1
−i,−iL−i,i≥ 0 and (58) becomes M−1
i,i ≤Li,i. Lastly, if a matrix
is positive deﬁnite, all its diagonal elements must be nonnegative, giving that Mi,iLi,i≥ 1
as desired.
47


--- Page 48 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Appendix E. Basic Tail Bounds for Random Variables
This section collects some basic tail probability results for random variables. The proof is
standard and omitted.
Lemma 31 Let Y = (Y1,Y 2) be a jointly Gaussian random vector with covariance matrix
C. Then Y1Y2 is sub-exponential with parameters α = 4λmax (CY ) and ν = 2
√
2λmax (CY ).
Corollary 32 Let Y1 ∼N (0,σ 2
1) and Y2 ∼N (0,σ 2
2) where σ2
1 ≥ σ2
2.Then Y1Y2 is sub-
exponential with parameters α =
√
2σ2
1 and ν =
√
2σ2
1.
Corollary 33 Consider ∑n
i=1Xi whereXi are centered, independent sub-exponential ran-
dom variables. Then Y = ∑n
i=1Xi is sub-exponential with parameters α = maxiαi and
ν =
√∑n
i=1ν2
i .
Lemma 34 (Tail Bound for Sub-Exponential Random Variables) LetX be a sub-
exponential random variable with mean µ and parameters α and ν. Then
P(X−µ≥t)≤
{
exp(− t2
2ν2 ) for 0≤t≤ ν2
α
exp(− t
2α) for t> ν2
α.
Corollary 35 ConsiderY = ∑n
i=1Xi, where Xi are centered, independent sub-exponential
random variables. Let α = maxiαi and ν =
√∑n
i=1ν2
i . Then,
P( 1
n
n∑
i=1
Xi≥t)≤
{
exp(− nt2
2ν2/n) for 0≤t≤ ν2
nα
exp(−nt
2α) for t> ν2
nα.
Appendix F. Construction of a Pre-Clustering Variance Estimator
We include in this section the construction of the pre-clustering estimator of Γ needed as
an input of the PECOK algorithm of Section 2.2 above. For any a,b∈ [d], deﬁne
V (a,b ) := max
c,d∈[p]\{a,b}
⏐⏐⏐(ˆΣac− ˆΣad)− (ˆΣbc− ˆΣbd)
⏐⏐⏐
√
ˆΣcc + ˆΣdd− 2ˆΣcd
, (59)
with the convention 0/0 = 0. Guided by the block structure of Σ, we deﬁne
b1(a) := argmin
b∈[p]\{a}
V (a,b ) and b2(a) := argmin
b∈[p]\{a,b1(a)}
V (a,b ),
to be two elements ”close” to a, that is two indices b1 = b1(a) and b2 = b2(a) such that
the empirical covariance diﬀerence ˆΣbic− ˆΣbid,i = 1, 2, is most similar to ˆΣac− ˆΣad, for all
variables c and d not equal to a or bi, i = 1, 2. It is expected that b1(a) and b2(a) either
belong to the same group as a, or belong to some ”close” groups. Then, our estimator ˜Γ is
a diagonal matrix, deﬁned by
˜Γaa = ˆΣaa + ˆΣb1(a)b2(a)− ˆΣab1(a)− ˆΣab2(a), for a = 1,...,d . (60)
48


--- Page 49 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Intuitively, ˜Γaa should be close to Σaa + Σb1(a)b2(a)− Σab1(a)− Σab2(a), which is equal to Γaa
in the favorable event where both b1(a) and b2(a) belong to the same group as a.
In general, b1(a) and b2(a) cannot be guaranteed to belong to the same group as a.
Nevertheless, these two surrogatesb1(a) andb2(a) are close enough toa so that∥˜Γ−Γ∥max ≲
|Γ|max
√
logd/n. This last fact and the above construction are shown in Bunea et al. (2018).
Appendix G. Comparison with Cai et al (2016)
In our work, we bound λmin(S∗)≥c1 and maxtS∗
t,t≤c2 and the sparsity of Ω·k bys1. We
show that the CLIME estimator satisﬁes
∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω∗
·k∥1 ≲s1
√
log(K∨n)
n . (61)
Let us denote our parameter space by
G1 ={Ω : max
k
∥Ω·k∥0≤s1, max
t
{(Ω−1)tt}≤ c2,λ max(Ω)≤ 1/c1}.
By contrast, Cai et al. (2016) considered the following parameter space for the precision
matrix Ω =S−1 (in the exact sparse case)
G ={Ω : max
k
∥Ω·k∥0≤s1,∥Ω∥1≤Mn,κ (Ω) =λmax(Ω)/λmin(Ω)≤M1},
where∥Ω∥1 is the matrix ℓ1-norm, Mn is allowed to increase with n and M1 is a constant
bound for the condition number. Their minimax lower bound over G depends on Mn, that
is for any ˆΩ·k,
sup
Ω∈G
∥ ˆΩ·k− Ω·k∥1 ≳Mns1
√
logK
n . (62)
It seems that the upper bound (61) and the lower bound (62) contradict with each other.
However, this is not the case because the parameter space G1 under which the estimator is
developed is diﬀerent from the parameter spaceG in the lower bound. This therefore opens
up the possibility of obtaining diﬀerent rates over diﬀerent parameter spaces, for instance
one which does not depend on ||Ω∗||1, like in our case. However, neither parameter space
can be viewed as a full relaxation of the other. Below we give explicit examples that show
how the parameter spaces diﬀer.
Consider the sequence of precision matrices, indexed by K
ΩK =|S(K)|I + 1S(K)1⊤
S(K)∈ RK,
whereS(K) is an arbitrary subset of [ K] = {1, 2,...,K} with|S(K)| = K1/4 and 1S(K)
is the vector with 1’s in the indices indicated by S(K) and 0’s elsewhere. By using the
Sherman-Morrison formula, we can verify that the corresponding covariance matrix is
SK = 1
|S(K)|I− 1
2|S(K)|21S(K)1⊤
S(K).
49


--- Page 50 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
It is easy to check that
λmin(ΩK) =|S(K)| =K1/4,
λmax(ΩK) = 2|S(K)| = 2K1/4,
λmin(SK) = 1
2|S(K)| =K−1/4/2.
Thusκ(ΩK) = 2, and therefore Theorem 4.2 from Cai et al. (2016) can be applied to this
sequence of parameters ΩK with s1 =K1/4 + 1 and Mn = 2K1/4. However, ΩK does not
belong to our parameter space G1 because for any choice of c1, once K is suﬃciently large,
λmin(SK)<c 1.
Similarly, we can modify the above example such that ΩK satisﬁes our condition but
does not belong to G. For instance, consider
ΩK = I− 1
1 +|S(K)|1S(K)1⊤
S(K)∈ RK.
We can show that
SK = I + 1S(K)1⊤
S(K),
and
λmin(ΩK) = 1
K1/4 + 1,
λmax(ΩK) = 1,
λmin(SK) = 1.
Our conditions λmin(SK)≥c1 and maxt(SK)t,t≤c2 hold, and thus we obtain the rate (61)
for the CLIME estimator. However, κ(ΩK) =K1/4 + 1→∞ , as K→∞ . Thus, ΩK does
not belong to the parameter spaceG, and Theorem 4.2 in Cai et al. (2016) is not applicable.
Since our goal is to make inference on each entry of the precision matrix say Ω tk, a
lower bound on the minimum eigenvalue on S is a mild and standard assumption for any
high-dimensional inference on graphical models. After some careful analysis as explained in
the main text, we show that under Assumption 4.1 and 4.2 the upper bound for the CLIME
estimator does not depend on ||Ω∗||1 or λmax(S∗).
Appendix H. B-H procedures for FDR control
In this section, we analyze the theoretical properties of the B-H procedure for the cluster-
average graph. The procedure for latent variable graph is identical. Recall that the test
statistic for H0,tk : Ω∗
t,k = 0 is ˜Wt,k. The B-H procedure is deﬁned as follows. Given the
desired FDR level α, deﬁne
ˆρ = inf
{
0≤ρ≤ 2
√
logK : 2(1− Φ(ρ))|H|
max{∑
1≤t≤k≤KI(|˜Wt,k|≥ ρ), 1}
≤α
}
,
where|H| = K(K− 1)/2 is the total number of hypotheses. If ˆρ does not exist, then we
set ˆρ = 2√logK. In the above deﬁnition, we restrict ρ≤ 2√logK in order to apply the
50


--- Page 51 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Cramer-type moderate deviation result (Liu, 2013). The B-H procedure says that we reject
H0,tk if|˜Wt,k|≥ ˆρ. The FDR and FDP are deﬁned as
FDP =
∑
(t,k)∈H0I(|˜Wt,k|≥ ˆρ)
max{∑
(t,k)∈HI(|˜Wt,k|≥ ˆρ), 1}
,
whereH0 :={(t,k ) : 1≤t<k ≤K, such that Ω∗
t,k = 0}, and FDR = E(FDP). Let
A =
{
(t,k ) :
Ω∗
t,k√
Ω∗
k,kΩ∗
t,t
≥ 4
√
logK/n
}
denote the set of strong signals. The following theorem on the B-H procedure holds.
Proposition 36 Assume that the conditions in Theorem 3 hold. Let K ≤ nr for some
r > 0. In addition, assume that |A| ≥√log logK, s1 log3/2(K∨ n)/n1/2 = o(1) and
s1 =O(Kc) for some c< 1/2. Then, as n,K →∞ , we have
FDP
|H0|/|H| =α +op(1) and FDR
|H0|/|H| =α +o(1).
The proof of this proposition follows from Theorem 3.1 in Liu (2013). The conditions |A|≥√log logK and s1 =O(Kc) are equation (12) in Liu (2013). The condition s1 log3/2(K∨
n)/n1/2 =o(1) together with Theorem 3 guarantees that
max
1≤t<k≤K
sup
x∈R
⏐⏐⏐P( ˆTt,k≤x)− Φ(x)
⏐⏐⏐ =o(1/
√
log(K∨n)), (63)
which is equivalent to condition (13) in Liu (2013). We refer to Liu (2013) for the detailed
proof. Proposition 36 implies that the B-H procedure can control FDR asymptotically under
certain assumption. However, our numerical results show that this procedure may fail to
control FDR in our model whenK is relatively large. One possible reason is that the op(1) or
o(1) terms in the approximation of FDP or FDR in the above proposition are not suﬃciently
small in simulations due to the dependence of the test statistics. Thus, if the goal of the
data analysis is to ﬁnd statistically reliable scientiﬁc discoveries, the B-Y method, while
quite conservative, may be the one that’s more suitable for this purpose.
References
Jessica R Andrews-Hanna, Jay S Reidler, Jorge Sepulcre, Renee Poulin, and Randy L
Buckner. Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network. Neuron, 65
(4):550–562, 2010.
Rina Foygel Barber and Mladen Kolar. Rocket: Robust conﬁdence intervals via kendall’s
tau for transelliptical graphical models, 2015.
Pierre Bellec, Carlton Chu, Francois Chouinard-Decorte, Yassine Benhajali, Daniel S. Mar-
gulies, and R. Cameron Craddock. The Neuro Bureau ADHD-200 Preprocessed reposi-
tory. NeuroImage, 2015. ISSN 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.06.034.
51


--- Page 52 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological), pages 289–300, 1995.
Yoav Benjamini and Daniel Yekutieli. The control of the false discovery rate in multiple
testing under dependency. The Annals of Statistics , 29(4):1165–1188, 2001.
Peter J Bickel. One-step huber estimates in the linear model. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 70(350):428–434, 1975.
Peter J Bickel, Chris AJ Klaassen, Peter J Bickel, Y Ritov, J Klaassen, Jon A Wellner,
and YA’Acov Ritov. Eﬃcient and adaptive estimation for semiparametric models . Johns
Hopkins University Press Baltimore, 1993.
Florentina Bunea. Consistent covariate selection and post model selection inference in
semiparametric regression. Annals of Statistics , pages 898–927, 2004.
Florentina Bunea, Christophe Giraud, Xi Luo, Martin Royer, and Nicolas Verzelen. Model
assisted variable clustering: minimax-optimal recovery and algorithms, 2018.
T. Cai, W. Liu, and X. Luo. A constrained ℓ1 minimization approach to sparse precision
matrix estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 106(494):594–607,
2011.
T Tony Cai and Zijian Guo. Conﬁdence intervals for high-dimensional linear regression:
Minimax rates and adaptivity. The Annals of Statistics , 45(2):615–646, 2017.
T Tony Cai, Weidong Liu, and Harrison Zhou. Estimating sparse precision matrix: Optimal
rates of convergence and adaptive estimation. The Annals of Statistics , 44(2):455–488,
2016.
Carson Eisenach and Han Liu. Eﬃcient, certiﬁably optimal clustering with applications
to latent variable graphical models. Mathematical Programming, 2019. doi: 10.1007/
s10107-019-01375-2.
Jianqing Fan, Han Liu, Yang Ning, and Hui Zou. High dimensional semiparametric la-
tent graphical model for mixed data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 79(2):405–421, 2017.
Ethan X Fang, Yang Ning, and Han Liu. Testing and conﬁdence intervals for high dimen-
sional proportional hazards models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 79(5):1415–1437, 2017.
Huijie Feng and Yang Ning. High-dimensional mixed graphical model with ordinal data:
Parameter estimation and statistical inference. In The 22nd International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 654–663, 2019.
Michael D Fox, Abraham Z Snyder, Justin L Vincent, Maurizio Corbetta, David C Van Es-
sen, and Marcus E Raichle. The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102
(27):9673–9678, 2005.
52


--- Page 53 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Peter Fransson. Spontaneous low-frequency bold signal ﬂuctuations: An fmri investigation
of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis. Human brain mapping, 26
(1):15–29, 2005.
J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the
graphical lasso. Biostatistics, 9(3):432–441, 2008.
Christophe Giraud. Introduction to high-dimensional statistics , volume 138. CRC Press,
2014.
Quanquan Gu, Yuan Cao, Yang Ning, and Han Liu. Local and global inference for high
dimensional gaussian copula graphical models, 2015.
Jana Jankova and Sara van de Geer. Conﬁdence intervals for high-dimensional inverse
covariance estimation, 2014.
Jana Jankov´ a and Sara van de Geer. Honest conﬁdence regions and optimality in high-
dimensional precision matrix estimation. Test, 26(1):143–162, 2017.
Adel Javanmard and Andrea Montanari. Conﬁdence intervals and hypothesis testing for
high-dimensional regression, 2013.
C. Lam and J. Fan. Sparsistency and rates of convergence in large covariance matrix
estimation. Annals of Statistics , 37:42–54, 2009.
Jason D Lee, Dennis L Sun, Yuekai Sun, and Jonathan E Taylor. Exact inference after
model selection via the lasso, 2013.
Han Liu, Fang Han, Ming Yuan, John Laﬀerty, and Larry Wasserman. High-dimensional
semiparametric gaussian copula graphical models. The Annals of Statistics , 40(4):2293–
2326, 2012.
Weidong Liu. Gaussian graphical model estimation with false discovery rate control. The
Annals of Statistics , pages 2948–2978, 2013.
Richard Lockhart, Jonathan Taylor, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Robert Tibshirani. A signiﬁ-
cance test for the lasso. The Annals of Statistics , 42(2):413–468, 2014.
Xi Luo. A hierarchical graphical model for big inverse covariance estimation with an appli-
cation to fmri. arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.4698 , 2014.
N. Meinshausen and P. B¨ uhlmann. High dimensional graphs and variable selection with the
lasso. Annals of Statistics , 34(3):1436–1462, 2006.
Matey Neykov, Yang Ning, Jun S Liu, and Han Liu. A uniﬁed theory of conﬁdence regions
and testing for high dimensional estimating equations. Statistical Science, 2018.
Yang Ning and Han Liu. High-dimensional semiparametric bigraphical models. Biometrika,
100(3):655–670, 2013.
53


--- Page 54 ---
Eisenach, Bunea, Ning and Dinicu
Yang Ning and Han Liu. A general theory of hypothesis tests and conﬁdence regions for
sparse high dimensional models. The Annals of Statistics , 45(1):158–195, 2017.
Yang Ning, Tianqi Zhao, Han Liu, et al. A likelihood ratio framework for high-dimensional
semiparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics , 45(6):2299–2327, 2017.
Jie Peng, Pei Wang, Nengfeng Zhou, and Ji Zhu. Partial correlation estimation by joint
sparse regression models. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 104(486):735–
746, 2009.
Jonathan D Power, Alexander L Cohen, Steven M Nelson, Gagan S Wig, Kelly Anne Barnes,
Jessica A Church, Alecia C Vogel, Timothy O Laumann, Fran M Miezin, Bradley L
Schlaggar, and Steven E Petersen. Functional network organization of the human brain.
Neuron, 17(724):665–678, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.006.
Marcus E Raichle. The brain’s default mode network. Annual review of neuroscience , 38:
433–447, 2015.
Pradeep Ravikumar, Martin J Wainwright, Garvesh Raskutti, and Bin Yu. High-
dimensional covariance estimation by minimizing l 1-penalized log-determinant diver-
gence. Electronic Journal of Statistics , 5:935–980, 2011.
Zhao Ren, Tingni Sun, Cun-Hui Zhang, and Harrison H. Zhou. Asymptotic normality and
optimalities in estimation of large gaussian graphical model, 2013.
Adam J Rothman, Peter J Bickel, Elizaveta Levina, and Ji Zhu. Sparse permutation
invariant covariance estimation. Electronic Journal of Statistics , 2:494–515, 2008.
Christopher G Small, Jinfang Wang, and Zejiang Yang. Eliminating multiple root problems
in estimation. Statistical Science, 15(4):313–341, 2000.
Stephen M Smith, Peter T Fox, Karla L Miller, David C Glahn, P Mickle Fox, Clare E
Mackay, Nicola Filippini, Kate E Watkins, Roberto Toro, Angela R Laird, et al. Corre-
spondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences , 106(31):13040–13045, 2009.
Tingni Sun and Cun-Hui Zhang. Sparse matrix inversion with scaled lasso. Technical report,
2012.
Kean Ming Tan, Yang Ning, Daniela M Witten, and Han Liu. Replicates in high dimensions,
with applications to latent variable graphical models. Biometrika, 103(4):761–777, 2016.
Ryan J Tibshirani, Jonathan Taylor, Richard Lockhart, and Robert Tibshirani. Exact
post-selection inference for sequential regression procedures, 2014.
Sara van de Geer, Peter B¨ uhlmann, and Ya’acov Ritov. On asymptotically optimal conﬁ-
dence regions and tests for high-dimensional models, 2013.
A. V. Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
1998.
54


--- Page 55 ---
High-Dimensional Inference for Cluster-Based Graphical Models
Nicolas Verzelen. Gaussian graphical models and Model selection . PhD thesis, Universit´ e
Paris Sud-Paris XI, 2008.
L. Xue and H. Zou. Regularized rank-based estimation of high-dimensional nonparanormal
graphical models. The Annals of Statistics , 40(5):2541–2571, 2012.
Zhuoran Yang, Yang Ning, and Han Liu. On semiparametric exponential family graphical
models. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 19(1):2314–2372, 2018.
M. Yuan. High dimensional inverse covariance matrix estimation via linear programming.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11(8):2261–2286, 2010.
M. Yuan and Y. Lin. Model selection and estimation in the gaussian graphical model.
Biometrika, 94(1):19–35, 2007.
Cun-Hui Zhang and Stephanie S. Zhang. Conﬁdence intervals for low dimensional parame-
ters in high dimensional linear models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 76(1):217–242, 2014. ISSN 1467-9868. doi: 10.1111/rssb.12026.
Yuan Zhou, Karl J Friston, Peter Zeidman, Jie Chen, Shu Li, and Adeel Razi. The hierar-
chical organization of the default, dorsal attention and salience networks in adolescents
and young adults. Cerebral cortex, 28(2):726–737, 2017.
55
