--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Machine Learning Research 18 (2018) 1–46 Submitted 04/17; Revised 04/18; Published 05/18
Making Better Use of the Crowd: How Crowdsourcing Can
Advance Machine Learning Research
Jennifer W ortman V aughan jenn@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
641 Avenue of the Americas, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10011
Editor: Qiang Liu
Abstract
This survey provides a comprehensive overview of the landscape of crowdsourcing research,
targeted at the machine learning community. We begin with an overview of the ways in
which crowdsourcing can be used to advance machine learning research, focusing on four
application areas: 1) data generation, 2) evaluation and debugging of models, 3) hybrid in-
telligence systems that leverage the complementary strengths of humans and machines to
expand the capabilities of AI, and 4) crowdsourced behavioral experiments that improve
our understanding of how humans interact with machine learning systems and technology
more broadly. We next review the extensive literature on the behavior of crowdworkers
themselves. This research, which explores the prevalence of dishonesty among crowdwork-
ers, how workers respond to both monetary incentives and intrinsic forms of motivation,
and how crowdworkers interact with each other, has immediate implications that we distill
into best practices that researchers should follow when using crowdsourcing in their own re-
search. We conclude with a discussion of additional tips and best practices that are crucial
to the success of any project that uses crowdsourcing, but rarely mentioned in the literature.
Keywords: crowdsourcing, data generation, model evaluation, hybrid intelligence, be-
havioral experiments, incentives, mechanical turk
1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing allows us to harness the power of human computation to solve tasks that
are notoriously diﬃcult to solve with computers alone, such as determining whether or not
an image contains a tree, rating the quality of a website, or verifying the phone number of
a business. The machine learning community was early to embrace crowdsourcing as a tool
for quickly and inexpensively obtaining the vast quantities of labeled data needed to train
machine learning systems. Crowdsourcing has been used to generate the image annotations
that are needed to train computer vision systems (Deng et al., 2009; Patterson and Hays,
2012; Raykar et al., 2010; Wah et al., 2011), provide the linguistic annotations needed for
common natural language processing tasks (Callison-Burch and Dredze, 2010; Snow et al.,
2008), and collect the relevance judgments needed to optimize search engines (Alonso, 2013;
Alonso et al., 2008). This simple idea—that crowds could be used to generate training data
for machine learning algorithms—inspired a ﬂurry of algorithmic work on how to best elicit
and aggregate potentially noisy labels (e.g., Ghosh et al., 2011; Karger et al., 2011; Khetan
and Oh, 2016; Liu et al., 2012a; Sheng et al., 2008; Welinder et al., 2010; Zhang et al.,
c⃝2018 Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/17-234.html.


--- Page 2 ---
V aughan
2016b; Zhou et al., 2012), still an active area of research (Zheng et al., 2017). Meanwhile,
machine learning researchers have begun to put crowdsourcing to use in other ways, most
commonly as a tool to evaluate and debug machine learning models (Chang et al., 2009;
Ribeiro et al., 2016).
Crowdsourcing has ﬂourished as a research tool outside of the machine learning com-
munity as well. In human-computer interaction and related ﬁelds, researchers are build-
ing “hybrid intelligence systems” with the goal of expanding the capabilities of current AI
technology by incorporating humans in the loop (e.g., Bernstein et al., 2010; Kamar, 2016;
Lasecki et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2012). And psychologists and social scientists have in-
creasingly moved experiments that traditionally would have been run in physical labs onto
crowdsourcing platforms (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Mason and Suri, 2012). While these bod-
ies of research are less well known within the machine learning community, there are count-
less opportunities for machine learning research to both inﬂuence and beneﬁt from these
lines of work. For example, human-in-the-loop clustering algorithms have been designed
that produce better clusters by drawing on the common sense knowledge and experience of
the crowd (Gomes et al., 2011; Heikinheimo and Ukkonen, 2013; Tamuz et al., 2011), while
behavioral experiments run on the crowd oﬀer insight about how to encourage human trust
in algorithmic predictions (Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2016; Dzindolet et al., 2002).
The ﬁrst goal of this survey is to expand the horizons of how machine learning researchers
think about crowdsourcing, providing a broad overview of ways in which crowdsourcing
can beneﬁt (and sometimes beneﬁt from) machine learning research. Unlike other surveys,
which go into greater depth on algorithms for aggregating crowdsourced labels (Zhang et al.,
2016a; Zheng et al., 2017), we address the label aggregation problem only brieﬂy, devoting
relatively more attention and detail to applications that are less well known within the
machine learning community, in the hope of inspiring new connections and directions of
research. We break the applications into four broad categories:
• Data generation. (Section 2) Crowdsourcing platforms are well suited to generating
data, but challenges arise since the data supplied by crowdworkers can be prone to
errors. We start with a brief review of two lines of research aimed at improving the
quality of crowdsourced labels. The ﬁrst assumes that data points are redundantly
assigned to multiple workers and seeks algorithms for aggregating workers’ responses
that take into account the quality of individual workers (e.g., Zhang et al., 2016a;
Zheng et al., 2017). Though there are many notable exceptions, much of this work
builds on the inﬂuential model and expectation-maximization framework of Dawid
and Skene (1979). The second line of work focuses on developing incentive schemes to
motivate high quality responses. Much of this work builds on the literature on peer
prediction, a framework in which crowdworkers’ payments are a function of their own
reported labels and the labels of other workers (Jurca and Faltings, 2009; Miller et al.,
2005; Radanovic et al., 2016). We then review ways in which crowdsourcing has been
applied to generate other forms of data, including transcriptions of printed text (von
Ahn et al., 2008), translations of sentences from one language to another (Zaidan and
Callison-Burch, 2011), and image annotations (Kovashka et al., 2016).
• Evaluating and debugging models. (Section 3) Crowdsourcing is also commonly
used to evaluate or debug models, including unsupervised learning models, which can
2


--- Page 3 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
be diﬃcult to evaluate objectively since there is often no clear notion of ground truth.
Along these lines, we discuss the use of crowdsourcing to evaluate the coherence of
topic models, generative models used to discover and explore the thematic topics dis-
cussed in a set of documents (Chang et al., 2009). We also explore ways in which
crowdsourcing has been used to evaluate the interpretability of explanations of pre-
dictions in supervised learning settings (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and to debug the compo-
nents of a pipeline in a complex computer vision system (Mottaghi et al., 2013, 2016;
Parikh and Zitnick, 2011).
• Hybrid intelligence systems. (Section 4) Hybrid intelligence or “human-in-the-
loop” systems advance the capabilities of current AI technology by leveraging the com-
plementary strengths of humans and machines. We explore several compelling exam-
ples of hybrid systems that suggest their great potential: hybrid systems for cluster-
ing data points (Gomes et al., 2011; Heikinheimo and Ukkonen, 2013; Tamuz et al.,
2011), transcribing speech in real time (Kushalnagar et al., 2012; Lasecki and Bigham,
2012; Lasecki et al., 2012, 2013, 2017; Naim et al., 2013), scheduling conference ses-
sions (Andr´ e et al., 2013; Bhardwaj et al., 2014; Chilton et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2013),
and forecasting geopolitical or economic events (Atanasov et al., 2017; Baron et al.,
2014; Mellers et al., 2015b). These systems are able to achieve more than would be
possible with state-of-the-art machine learning or AI systems alone because they can
make use of people’s common sense knowledge, life experience, subjective beliefs, and
ﬂexible reasoning skills.
• Behavioral studies to inform machine learning research. (Section 5) As ma-
chine learning becomes a larger part of people’s everyday lives, interest in understand-
ing how real people interact with machine learning systems continues to grow. There
has been a surge of recent research on questions like how to design machine learn-
ing models that are more interpretable (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2016) or
how to understand the ways that algorithmic decisions impact people’s lives (Angwin
et al., 2016; Barocas and Selbst, 2016). These questions are interdisciplinary in na-
ture and require gaining a better understanding of the underlying principles behind
humans’ interactions with machine learning and other technological systems. At the
same time, psychologists and social scientists have started using crowdsourcing plat-
forms as a fast and easy way to gain access to large pools of subjects for behavioral
experiments. This presents a natural opportunity for researchers to conduct studies
on crowdsourcing platforms that improve our understanding of how humans inter-
act with technology broadly and machine learning algorithms in particular. Rather
than evaluating the way in which people interact with one particular algorithm, this
line of research aims to develop an understanding of components of human behavior
that could inform the use and design of machine learning systems more broadly. We
walk through illustrative examples of behavioral studies aimed at understanding user
trust in algorithmic predictions (Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2016; Dzindolet et al., 2002;
Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2018) and how users react to online advertising (Goldstein
et al., 2013, 2014). The latter study, while not directly motivated by a machine learn-
ing question, could provide insights that inform the design of better machine learning
algorithms for ad pricing and display.
3


--- Page 4 ---
V aughan
Having explored these applications and motivated the use of crowdsourcing in machine
learning research, the remainder of the survey addresses our second goal: to provide the
reader with best practices for crowdsourcing by drawing deeply on the vast and cross-
disciplinary literature aimed at studying and understanding the behavior of the crowd
itself. In Section 6, we describe several studies that quantify and measure the prevalence of
dishonest or spammy behavior on crowdsourcing platforms (Chandler and Paolacci, 2017;
Suri et al., 2011; Wessling et al., 2017). We discuss how to set payments for tasks in light of
both ethical considerations (Williamson, 2016) and a body of research that explores how the
quality and quantity of crowdwork are impacted by monetary incentives (e.g., Buhrmester
et al., 2011; Ho et al., 2015; Mason and Watts, 2009; Shaw et al., 2011). We examine how
workers react to intrinsic sources of motivation, such as gamiﬁcation (von Ahn and Dabbish,
2008) or the satisfaction of performing meaningful work (Chandler and Kapelner, 2013;
Rogstadius et al., 2011), and how intrinsically motivating workers can increase workers’
willingness to complete tasks. Finally, we explore communication and collaboration patterns
of workers and see that crowdworkers are not independent and isolated, but rather part of a
rich communication network (Gray et al., 2016; Yin et al., 2016). We discuss the implications
of this work on the practice of using crowdsourcing for research, outlining best practices
that should be followed whether one wishes to use crowdsourcing for data generation, model
evaluation, building hybrid systems, running behavioral studies, or beyond.
Section 7 concludes with a discussion of additional tips and tricks that are crucial for
the success of any crowdsourcing-based project, but rarely discussed in the literature.
1.1 A Note on Scope
As described above, this survey was written with two overarching goals in mind. The ﬁrst is
to inspire machine learning researchers to discover unexpected applications of crowdsourcing
in their own research. Because of this, relatively more space is devoted to applications that
may be less familiar to the machine learning community, such as hybrid intelligence systems
and behavioral studies of users interacting with technology, compared with more familiar
applications like data generation and model evaluation. Full surveys have been written just
on the problem of aggregating noisy labels from a crowd; readers who are most interested
in this problem are encouraged to look at Zheng et al. (2017), Zhang et al. (2016a), or the
comprehensive summary of related work in Zhang et al. (2016b).
The second goal is to introduce machine learning researchers to the extensive cross-
disciplinary literature on crowd behavior and motivate why understanding this literature
is crucial for successfully employing crowdsourcing in research. Because of this, Section 6
draws heavily on work from outside the machine learning community, and emphasizes ex-
perimental work over pure theory.
Several other crowdsourcing surveys have been published, each focused on a diﬀerent
set of themes and problems. Readers interested in gaining a broader perspective on crowd-
sourcing may be interested in recent surveys and guides from the computer vision commu-
nity (Kovashka et al., 2016), the databases community (Li et al., 2016), and the marketing
community (Goodman and Paolacci, 2017), or the older but still widely cited and appli-
cable how-to guides on crowdsourcing user studies (Kittur et al., 2008) and behavioral re-
search (Mason and Suri, 2012).
4


--- Page 5 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
1.2 Background on Mechanical T urk and Other Crowdsourcing Platforms
In this survey, we use the term crowdsourcing very generally to encompass both paid and vol-
unteer crowdwork, done by experts or nonexperts, on any general or specialized crowdsourc-
ing platform. Regardless, the majority of research covered was conducted using paid crowd-
workers, and the majority of that on one particular platform, Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Amazon Mechanical Turk1 is the most commonly used crowdsourcing platform among
researchers. It is designed for crowdsourcing relatively small “microtasks” (often referred
to as “HITs,” for human intelligence tasks) such as labeling a set of images or completing a
survey, though it can also be used for more complex short-term tasks, such as participating
in behavioral experiments (Mason and Suri, 2012) or even writing ﬁction (Kim et al., 2017).
Task requesters come to Mechanical Turk to post their tasks, stating up front the amount
of money that they are willing to pay to have their tasks completed. Requesters can also
specify certain criteria that a crowdworker must meet to be eligible for their task, such as
having an approval rate of more than a particular amount (say, 97%) on previous tasks
or being located in a particular country. Crowdworkers can then browse the set of tasks
available and choose the tasks they would like to work on. After a crowdworker completes
a task, the requester approves her work and a payment is made.
Although Mechanical Turk is used broadly in the research community, it is not the right
choice for everyone. In particular, it can be diﬃcult to use from outside of the United
States. Luckily, many alternatives are available. For example:
• CrowdFlower2 is a crowdsourcing platform widely used in both industry and research.
CrowdFlower oﬀers specialized enterprise solutions for businesses with artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and data science needs including search relevance evaluation, sentiment anal-
ysis, and data classiﬁcation.
• ClickWorker3 is a German crowdsourcing platform that attracts European workers.
It provides support for specialized tasks such as translation, web research, and web
content generation. It also provides tools for mobile crowdsourcing.
• Proliﬁc Academic 4 is a UK-based crowdsourcing platform focused primarily on con-
necting researchers with participants for behavioral or user studies.
• Upwork5 is an online freelancer marketplace focused not on microtasks but rather on
larger scale jobs such as writing an article or designing a website.
• TopCoder6 hosts crowdsourcing contests (Chawla et al., 2015; DiPalantino and Vo-
jnovic, 2009; Gao et al., 2012) in which coders design and develop software in response
to speciﬁc challenges and compete for prizes. Unlike on the other sites mentioned,
only those who create the top-judged submissions are paid.
1. https://www.mturk.com
2. https://www.crowdflower.com
3. https://www.clickworker.com
4. https://www.prolific.ac
5. https://www.upwork.com
6. https://www.topcoder.com
5


--- Page 6 ---
V aughan
Several researchers have compared commercially available platforms along diﬀerent di-
mensions. Vakharia and Lease (2015) provided a thorough qualitative content analysis of
seven platforms: ClickWorker, CrowdComputing Systems (now WorkFusion), CloudFac-
tory, CrowdFlower, CrowdSource, MobileWorks (now LeadGenius), and oDesk (now Up-
work), examining factors like infrastructure and tools, support for fraud protection, and
quality of work. Peera et al. (2017) provided a detailed experimental comparison of three
platforms: Mechanical Turk, CrowdFlower, and Proliﬁc Academic. They compared dropout
rates, response rates, workers’ performance on attention-check questions, workers’ reliabil-
ity, workers’ familiarity with common psychology studies (which would signal an overused
population of subjects), and the ability to replicate classic psychology studies on each plat-
form. They found, for example, that workers on both CrowdFlower and Proliﬁc Academic
were less familiar with common psychology studies and less dishonest than workers on Me-
chanical Turk, with Proliﬁc Academic producing higher quality data than CrowdFlower.
2. Data Generation
Perhaps the most common application of crowdsourcing within the machine learning com-
munity is data generation. We ﬁrst describe techniques for crowdsourcing binary or cate-
gorical labels, reviewing the literature on how to improve label quality through redundancy
and incentives. We then discuss several examples of ways in which crowdsourcing has been
used to generate more complex forms of data, such as image annotations and translations
of text. As mentioned above, entire surveys could be written on the topic of crowdsourced
data generation alone, and indeed some have (Zhang et al., 2016a; Zheng et al., 2017). Our
treatment of this topic is comparatively brief, intended only to give the reader the ﬂavor of
this work with pointers to the literature for readers who wish to learn more.
2.1 Generating Binary or Categorical Labels
We start with the setting in which crowdworkers are presented with unlabeled data instances
(for instance, websites) and are asked to supply labels (for instance, a binary label indicating
whether or not the website contains profanity). The main challenge arises from the fact
that the supplied labels are often noisy or inaccurate, either because workers are imperfect
or because workers are unmotivated to put high eﬀort into the labeling task. There are
two primary lines of work aimed at improving the quality of crowdsourced labels. The ﬁrst
assumes that each instance is presented to multiple crowdworkers and explores algorithmic
techniques for aggregating the workers’ responses (e.g., Abraham et al., 2016; Aydin et al.,
2014; Demartini et al., 2012; Fan et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2016; Ghosh et al., 2011; Ho et al.,
2013; Karger et al., 2011, 2014; Khetan and Oh, 2016; Kim and Ghahramani, 2012; Li et al.,
2014a,b; Liu et al., 2012a,b; Ma et al., 2015; Raykar et al., 2010; Shah and Lee, 2018; Sheng
et al., 2008; Tian and Zhu, 2015; Venanzi et al., 2014; Welinder et al., 2010; Whitehill et al.,
2009; Zhang et al., 2016b; Zhou et al., 2012). The second explores the use of well-designed
incentives to encourage higher quality work (e.g., Dasgupta and Ghosh, 2013; Ho et al.,
2016; Kamar and Horvitz, 2012; Kamble et al., 2015; Radanovic et al., 2016; Shah et al.,
2015; Shah and Zhou, 2016a,b).
Much of the research on label aggregation builds on the model proposed in the seminal
paper of Dawid and Skene (1979). The basic Dawid-Skene model assumes that instances are
6


--- Page 7 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
homogeneous. A worker’s probability of labeling any given instance correctly is controlled by
one or more worker-speciﬁc quality parameters. In the original model, each worker’s quality
is governed by a latent confusion matrix that speciﬁes the worker’s probability of choosing
each possible label conditioned on the true label of the instance. A variety of extensions
have been studied. For example, several papers have explored models in which diﬃculty
varies by instance (Khetan and Oh, 2016; Ma et al., 2015; Whitehill et al., 2009; Zhou et al.,
2012) or workers have diverse sets of skills (Fan et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2013; Welinder et al.,
2010). Most of this work assumes a ﬁxed assignment of instances to workers, but some
assumes that workers arrive online and are assigned to instances upon arrival (Abraham
et al., 2016; Ho and Vaughan, 2012; Ho et al., 2013; Karger et al., 2011, 2014). Some work
requires the existence of “gold-standard” or “control” tasks (Le et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2013;
Oleson et al., 2011), data instances for which ground truth labels are known a priori, while
some does not. Extensions of the Dawid-Skene model have also been applied to the problem
of aggregating ordinal labels or rankings (Zhou et al., 2014).
While there are exceptions, much of this research builds on the general expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithmic framework that Dawid and Skene (1979) proposed. This
framework is outlined in Algorithm 1. The basic approach involves iteratively updating es-
timates of both workers’ quality parameters and the labels of each instance. At each step,
quality parameters are updated treating the current label estimates as ground truth. The
instance labels are then updated to their most likely values treating the quality parameters
as ground truth. The details of these updates vary. Zheng et al. (2017) provide a thor-
ough survey and empirical comparison of seventeen algorithms that are based on this gen-
eral framework, characterizing them in terms of the way in which instances and workers are
modeled as well as the speciﬁcs of how the calculations of quality parameters and label as-
signments are made (through what they call direct computation, using optimization meth-
ods, or using probabilistic graphical models). While their experiments reveal that diﬀerent
algorithms perform best on diﬀerent data sets, they show that the original Dawid-Skene al-
gorithm is itself fairly robust in practice.
Algorithm 1 The basic EM framework of Dawid and Skene (1979).
Input: Sets of worker-generated labels for each instance
Initialize each instance’s label based on a simple majority vote
repeat
for all Workers w do
Calculate w’s quality parameter(s), treating each instance’s current label as ground
truth
end for
for all Instances i do
Calculate the most likely label for i, treating each worker’s approximated quality
parameter(s) as ground truth
end for
until Label assignments have converged
Output: The current label assignments for each instance
7


--- Page 8 ---
V aughan
One broadly studied class of incentive schemes for crowdsourcing is built on the literature
on peer prediction (e.g., Dasgupta and Ghosh, 2013; Jurca and Faltings, 2009; Kamar and
Horvitz, 2012; Kamble et al., 2015; Miller et al., 2005; Prelec, 2004; Prelec et al., 2017;
Radanovic and Faltings, 2013; Waggoner and Chen, 2014; Witkowski and Parkes, 2012), a
framework in which workers are rewarded based on a function of their own reported labels
and the reports of others. Under many peer prediction mechanisms, higher rewards are
given to reports that are “surprisingly common” among workers, where “surprise” could be
measured, for example, in terms of a common prior or the frequency of a label. As just one
example, to determine the payment for a worker w who labels a particular instance as x, the
mechanism proposed by Radanovic et al. (2016) selects another worker w′ at random and
compares the label provided by w to the label provided by w′. If w′ reports x (so the two
workers’ labels agree), then w receives payment 1/f where f is the empirical frequency with
which other workers have reported the label x over all instances. If w′ does not report x,
then w receives no payment. Radanovic et al. (2016) showed that under some assumptions
on workers’ beliefs, truthful reporting (i.e., each worker reporting the label they think is
most likely) is an equilibrium under this mechanism.
The primary beneﬁt of peer prediction style methods is that there is no need to know
ground truth labels in order to calculate payments. One major drawback is that most such
methods leave open the opportunity for workers to beneﬁt by coordinating and colluding on
incorrect reports, behavior that has been observed when these methods were tested on real
workers (Gao et al., 2014). There is an active line of research on developing peer prediction
techniques for which such undesirable equilibria do not exist, or at least are less proﬁtable
than truth telling (Agarwal et al., 2017; Dasgupta and Ghosh, 2013; Shnayder et al., 2016).
When gold-standard labels are available for some instances, workers can be rewarded
directly for the quality of labels they supply for these instances, using either simple bonuses
for accuracy (Ho et al., 2015; Shaw et al., 2011) or more complex incentive schemes (Ho
et al., 2016; Shah et al., 2015; Shah and Zhou, 2016a,b). See Section 6.3 for a more detailed
discussion of how workers respond to monetary incentives in practice.
2.2 Generating T ranscriptions, T ranslations, and Image Annotations
Crowdsourcing is also used to generate more complex and free-form labels, such as tran-
scriptions, translations of language, or image annotations.
Perhaps the best known example of a crowdsourcing system for transcription is re-
CAPTCHA (von Ahn et al., 2008). CAPTCHAs (or Completely Automated Public Tur-
ing tests to tell Computers and Humans Apart) are security tools designed to prevent bots
from accessing online services (von Ahn et al., 2003, 2004). People attempting to access a
website or create an account are asked to perform a task that is diﬃcult for computers to
perform but that humans ﬁnd easy, such as reading and transcribing distorted characters.
CAPTCHAs are used to stop ticket scalpers from using bots to buy out popular shows and
to prevent spammers from opening arbitrary numbers of email accounts.
Von Ahn et al. (2008) found a way to put the vast quantities of human eﬀort exerted
on solving CAPTCHAs to use, harnessing this eﬀort to digitize old books that current
optical character recognition (OCR) systems were unable to handle. Their reCAPTCHA
system presents two images of words, both taken from scanned text on which state-of-the-
8


--- Page 9 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
art OCR systems have failed. One of these images is a gold-standard data point for which
the correct transcription is already known. This is the image used to test whether or not
the transcriber is human. The true label of the second image is unknown. By completing
the CAPTCHA, the human is essentially entering a label for this data. Since reCAPTCHA
was acquired by Google, similar techniques have been used to annotate images and build
other large-scale machine learning data sets. 7
Within the natural language processing community, crowdsourcing has been success-
fully used to generate translations of sentences from one language to another (Ambati et al.,
2012; Callison-Burch and Dredze, 2010; Pavlick et al., 2014; Post et al., 2012; Zaidan and
Callison-Burch, 2011; Zbib et al., 2012). This approach is especially eﬀective for language
pairs for which not much data exists. As one example, Zaidan and Callison-Burch (2011)
used crowdsourcing to generate translations of sentences from Urdu to English. They as-
signed crowdworkers diﬀerent jobs such as translating a sentence, editing other workers’
translations to make them more ﬂuent and grammatical, or ranking the quality of a trans-
lation. Finally, they used machine learning methods to predict the highest quality trans-
lation based on sentence-level features, worker-level features, and worker-generated ranks.
The crowd-generated translations collected by this and other systems can then be used as
training data for machine translation tasks.
Within the computer vision community, crowdsourcing is commonly used to collect
human-generated labels and annotations for images and video (e.g., Deng et al., 2009; Ge-
bru et al., 2017; Patterson and Hays, 2012; Patterson et al., 2014; Raykar et al., 2010; Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015b; Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008; Su et al., 2012; Vijayanarasimhan and
Grauman, 2009; Welinder et al., 2010). For example, the widely used ImageNet database 8
was constructed by leveraging workers on Mechanical Turk to perform tasks such as verify-
ing image annotations and generating bounding boxes (Deng et al., 2009; Russakovsky et al.,
2015a; Su et al., 2012). Other data generation and labeling tasks appropriate for crowd-
sourcing include object classiﬁcation, attribute (or feature) generation, and image segmen-
tation. A full taxonomy of applications of crowdsourcing to computer visions tasks is be-
yond the scope of this paper; see instead the comprehensive survey of Kovashka et al. (2016).
3. Evaluating and Debugging Models
Aside from data generation, the most common use of crowdsourcing within the machine
learning community is to evaluate or debug models. Crowdsourced evaluation is especially
common for unsupervised models, which generally cannot be evaluated in terms of sim-
ple metrics like accuracy or precision because there is no objective notion of ground truth.
More recently, crowdsourcing has been used to evaluate human-centric properties of super-
vised models, such as model interpretability. In this section, we review several examples of
applications of crowdsourcing to model evaluation and debugging. This list of examples is
not intended to be exhaustive, but to give a ﬂavor of diﬀerent ways in which crowdsourcing
can be used in this context.
7. https://www.google.com/recaptcha
8. http://www.image-net.org
9


--- Page 10 ---
V aughan
3.1 Evaluating Unsupervised Models
It is increasingly common to see crowdsourcing used to evaluate unsupervised models, such
as topic models (e.g., Chang et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2014; Newman et al., 2011; Paul and
Dredze, 2014). Topic models are widely used to discover thematic topics from a set of
documents such as New York Times articles from the past year or transcripts of Supreme
Court hearings (Blei and Laﬀerty, 2009; Blei et al., 2003; Boyd-Graber et al., 2017). In this
context, a topic is a distribution over words in a vocabulary. Every word in the vocabulary
occurs in every topic, but with a diﬀerent probability or weight. For example, a topic
model might produce a food topic that places high weight on cheese, kale, and bread, or
a politics topic that places high weight on election, senate, and bill. Each document is
then represented as a distribution over topics.
Topic models are often used for data exploration and summarization, especially in the
social sciences (Boyd-Graber et al., 2017). In order to be useful in these contexts, the
inferred topics must be meaningful to end users. For example, if the set of words that appear
with high weight in an individual topic are not coherent, the topic will not be useful to
end users trying to understand the content of their documents. However, “meaningfulness”
is hard to measure analytically, leading many researchers to instead evaluate topic models
in terms of easier to quantify criteria, such as predictive power. To address this problem,
Chang et al. (2009) proposed using crowdsourcing to measure the quality of a set of topics.
The researchers designed a word intrusion task in which a crowdworker is presented with
a randomly ordered list of the most common words from a topic. Included in that list is
one intruder word that has low weight for the topic but high weight for another topic. The
worker is then asked to identify the intruder. If the topic is coherent, then picking out
the intruder should be easy (think {cheese, bread, steak, election, mushroom, kale}).
If a topic is incoherent, identifying the intruder would be harder. The average error that
crowdworkers make on this task can thus be used as a proxy for how coherent topics are.
The researchers found that previous measures of success like high log likelihood of held out
data do not necessarily imply coherence, illustrating the value of crowd-based evaluation
over other techniques.
3.2 Evaluating Model Interpretability
In supervised learning, models are often evaluated in terms of objective performance metrics
such as accuracy, precision, or recall. However, even if a model performs well in terms of
these criteria, users may hesitate to rely on the model if they do not understand the model’s
predictions, especially in critical domains like health or criminal justice. Because of this,
there is now wide interest in developing models that are human-interpretable (e.g., Doshi-
Velez and Kim, 2017; Jung et al., 2017; Koh and Liang, 2017; Lipton, 2016; Lou et al., 2012,
2013; Paul, 2016; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Ustun and Rudin, 2016). Because of the subjective
and inherently human-centric nature of interpretability, it is natural to use crowdsourcing
to evaluate the interpretability of models.
As one example, Ribeiro et al. (2016) proposed an algorithm, Local Interpretable Model-
agnostic Explanations, or LIME, that generates simple, locally faithful explanations for in-
dividual predictions made by potentially complex black-box models. They used crowdsourc-
ing to test how how these explanations impact people’s ability to perform tasks such as as-
10


--- Page 11 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
sessing the classiﬁer’s quality or determining instances on which the classiﬁer will make a
mistake. In one study, the researchers presented crowdworkers with predictions from two
SVM classiﬁers trained on diﬀerent data sets along with explanations for their predictions.
Workers were asked to select the classiﬁer they believed would have better performance.
The researchers found that explanations improved workers’ ability to choose the best clas-
siﬁer and that LIME produced more eﬀective explanations than a greedy technique. In an-
other study, the researchers used crowdworkers to test which explanations best helped peo-
ple ﬁnd ﬂaws in a trained model by identifying features used in the explanation that are
irrelevant for the prediction task.
In this example, the researchers compared the eﬀectiveness of speciﬁc techniques for
generating explanations of predictions. In Section 5.1, we contrast this with crowdsourcing
approaches that can be used to gain a better general understanding of how various properties
associated with the “interpretability” of a model impact diﬀerent aspects of human behavior
in diﬀerent scenarios.
3.3 Debugging Components of a Pipeline
In ﬁelds like computer vision, speech recognition, translation, and natural language process-
ing, systems often consist of several discrete components linked together to perform a com-
plex task. For example, consider the problem of semantic segmentation, which involves par-
titioning an image into semantically meaningful parts and labeling each part with a class.
There are promising approaches to this problem that use machine learning models such as
conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) to integrate feedback from independent components that
perform various scene understanding tasks like object detection, scene recognition, and seg-
mentation. If a system designer wants to improve performance, it is not always clear which
component to focus attention on.
To solve this problem, Parikh and Zitnick (2011) proposed the idea of “human debug-
ging,” in which humans are used to uncover bottlenecks in AI systems. The goal of human
debugging is to identify which component in a system is the “weakest link.” The basic idea
is simple. To quantify how much potential improvements to a particular component would
beneﬁt the system as a whole, we could imagine replacing the component with something
(close to) perfectly accurate and testing how much the system improves. Since for many
vision and language tasks human performance is an upper bound on what we might expect
from a machine, we can instead replace the component with a human.
Mottaghi et al. (2013, 2016) applied this idea in order to analyze the performance of a
CRF that has been used in the computer vision community for scene understanding (Yao
et al., 2012). They replaced each component with crowdworkers from Mechanical Turk and
measured the change in performance of both the component in isolation and the system as a
whole. One of their most interesting ﬁndings was that humans are actually less accurate than
machines at one particular task (classifying super-pixels), yet when human classiﬁcations
were plugged into the CRF, the system performance improved. One interpretation of this
result is that perhaps making fewer mistakes classifying super-pixels is not enough. Rather
it may be more important that the classiﬁer makes the right kind of mistakes—the kind
made by humans. This kind of feedback helps designers know where to focus their eﬀort.
11


--- Page 12 ---
V aughan
Recently, Nushi et al. (2017) took this idea one step further, allowing crowdworkers to
propose targeted ﬁxes to the machine components of a larger system and then evaluating
the eﬀect of various component ﬁxes on the overall system performance.
4. Hybrid Intelligence Systems
Despite the current hype around AI and the great technological advances that have been
made in recent years, AI systems are still far from perfect. In some cases, AI systems can
beneﬁt by involving humans in the loop to perform tasks that rely on life experience, judg-
ment, or domain knowledge (Kamar, 2016). Such hybrid intelligence systems can leverage
the complementary strengths of humans and machines to accomplish more than would be
possible using humans or machines alone.
Hybrid systems have been designed to perform tasks from grading students’ work (Kulka-
rni et al., 2014; Wright et al., 2015) to writing essays or novels (Bernstein et al., 2010; Kim
et al., 2017; Kittur et al., 2011; Salehi et al., 2017; Teevan et al., 2016) to building bet-
ter topic models (Hu et al., 2014). In this section, we walk through four illustrative exam-
ples: hybrid systems for clustering data points (Gomes et al., 2011; Heikinheimo and Ukko-
nen, 2013; Tamuz et al., 2011), transcribing speech in real time (Kushalnagar et al., 2012;
Lasecki and Bigham, 2012; Lasecki et al., 2012, 2013, 2017; Naim et al., 2013), scheduling
conference sessions (Andr´ e et al., 2013; Bhardwaj et al., 2014; Chilton et al., 2014; Kim
et al., 2013), and forecasting geopolitical or economic events (Atanasov et al., 2017; Baron
et al., 2014; Mellers et al., 2015b).
4.1 Hybrid Clustering
Hybrid intelligence systems can be put to use to solve traditional machine learning prob-
lems like clustering in scenarios in which data points are easier for humans to understand
and categorize than they are for machines. For example, given a data set of celebrity im-
ages, a human could potentially use their life experience and background knowledge to cat-
egorize them into sets like “actors” or “politicians,” while a machine without access to this
knowledge and experience could not.
Many hybrid clustering techniques have been proposed (Davidson et al., 2014; Gomes
et al., 2011; Karaletsos et al., 2016; Mazumdar and Saha, 2016; Tamuz et al., 2011; Vesda-
punt et al., 2014; Vinayak and Hassibi, 2016; Vinayak et al., 2014; Wah et al., 2014; Wang
et al., 2012b; Wauthier et al., 2012; Yi et al., 2012a,b), the majority of which solicit human
judgments or comparisons in order to actively generate a similarity matrix or other simi-
larity function. Approaches vary in terms of the types of queries given to human judges,
the algorithms used to aggregate their responses, and whether or not additional features of
each object are available to the algorithm. Some researchers focus primarily on the entity
resolution setting, in which the goal is to cluster together objects that refer to the same
entity (e.g., Marcus et al., 2011; Mazumdar and Saha, 2016; Vesdapunt et al., 2014; Wang
et al., 2012b), while others consider clustering more broadly.
Tamuz et al. (2011) designed an adaptive algorithm that estimates a similarity matrix
from human judgments based on comparisons of triples (“Is object A more similar to object B
or object C? ”). Their approach requires only a relatively small number of human judgments
to obtain a good approximation. Using this approach, they were able to answer questions
12


--- Page 13 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
like which necktie would be a good substitute for another, a task that would perhaps be
diﬃcult for a machine without specialized human knowledge. As a complement to this
algorithmic work, Wilber et al. (2014) outlined and studied several user interface techniques
that allow high quality comparisons of triples to be collected faster.
Gomes et al. (2011) proposed a crowd-clustering approach in which each member of a
crowd is presented a relatively small set of objects and asked to cluster just these objects.
The sets of objects presented to diﬀerent workers are distinct but overlap. The partial
clusterings generated by the workers are then aggregated into one full clustering of all
objects using an algorithm based on Bayesian inference.
Heikinheimo and Ukkonen (2013) took a diﬀerent approach to hybrid clustering, propos-
ing a crowd-powered version of the k-means algorithm. Running the standard k-means al-
gorithm (Lloyd, 1982) requires the ability to perform two main operations:
1. Given a set S of objects and one new object x, ﬁnd the object in S that is closest to x.
2. Find the center of a set of objects S, that is, the object in S with the lowest sum of
distances to other objects in S.
Heikinheimo and Ukkonen (2013) showed how to perform each of these operations with a
crowd. The ﬁrst operation is straight-forward, assuming the size of the set S (which, in this
case, is the number of clusters k since S is the set of cluster representatives) is suﬃciently
small: they simply present a worker with S and x and ask the worker which object in S
is closest to x. (Noisy responses from multiple workers can be combined using standard
techniques.) To perform the second operation, the researchers proposed the following simple
algorithm, which they call crowd-median. Each crowdworker is presented with a set of
three objects from the set S and asked which object is the outlier. After many such triples
have been presented to workers, the object chosen least often as the outlier is selected as
the center. The researchers gave both theoretical and empirical evidence that the output
of crowd-median coincides with existing deﬁnitions of a centroid, and empirical evidence
that the resulting crowd-powered k-means algorithms produces coherent clusters.
4.2 Hybrid Speech Recognition
Quickly and reliably converting speech to text requires a level of contextual understanding
beyond the capabilities of machines and a level of speed beyond the capabilities of most
humans. Closed captioning systems that rely on automatic speech recognition work very
well under ideal circumstances (for example, when the voice recording is high quality and the
system has been trained on data from the particular speaker), but can fail when presented
with low quality audio, speakers with novel accents, or language with technical jargon that
falls outside the vocabulary on which the system was trained. In these scenarios, professional
stenographers produce the best results, but high quality stenographers can be prohibitively
expensive and are not available on demand.
With this in mind, Lasecki et al. developed Scribe (Kushalnagar et al., 2012; Lasecki
and Bigham, 2012; Lasecki et al., 2012, 2013, 2017; Naim et al., 2013), a hybrid speech
recognition system that provides relatively inexpensive, real-time, and on-demand closed
captioning to deaf or hard of hearing users to help them understand lectures, meetings,
or other day-to-day conversations. As illustrated in Figure 1, Scribe combines algorithmic
13


--- Page 14 ---
V aughan
Figure 1: The architecture of Scribe. Image originally appeared in Lasecki et al. (2012).
techniques with the power of the crowd. As soon as a user starts recording, the recorded au-
dio is sent simultaneously to several crowdworkers. These workers are not expected to fully
transcribe the speech, which is generally not possible without a specialized stenotype key-
board. Instead, each worker transcribes sentence fragments. Scribe adjusts the speed and
volume of the speech adaptively for each worker in order to focus workers’ attention on dis-
tinct, overlapping components. It then uses multiple sequence alignment techniques (Edgar
and Batzoglou, 2006; Lermen and Reinert, 2000; Naim et al., 2013) to combine the work-
ers’ text into one complete and coherent stream that is delivered back to the user with a
delay of only a few seconds.
More recently, Gaur et al. (2015, 2016) developed an approach in which a single crowd-
worker is used to correct mistakes made by an automatic speech recognition system in real
time. The crowdworker views the transcription output by a speech recognition system while
listening to the corresponding audio. She then types out corrections to mistakes in the tran-
scription as she notices them. These corrections are automatically incorporated into the
appropriate spot in the transcription. Initial experiments showed that when this system
was run with crowdworkers from Mechanical Turk, the word error rate improved. However,
only 30% of possible corrections were made, leaving signiﬁcant room for improvement in
future work (Gaur et al., 2015).
As new breakthroughs continue to improve automatic speech recognition (Yu and Deng,
2014), this hybrid approach may eventually become unnecessary. However, the ability for
speech recognition systems to achieve true human parity under nonideal conditions likely
remains far in the future (Bigham, 2017). This example shows that crowdsourcing can be
an eﬀective way of compensating for a lack of suﬃcient machine learning or AI solutions
until a time when the technology improves.
4.3 Hybrid Scheduling
Several researchers have explored the potential use of hybrid intelligence systems to solve
complex tasks with global constraints or consistency requirements. Examples of such tasks
include itinerary planning (Zhang et al., 2012), taxonomy creation (Bragg et al., 2013;
14


--- Page 15 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Chilton et al., 2013), and writing (Bernstein et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2017; Kittur et al.,
2011; Salehi et al., 2017; Teevan et al., 2016). In this section we describe Cobi9 (Andr´ e et al.,
2013; Bhardwaj et al., 2014; Chilton et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2013), a hybrid conference
scheduling system. Rather than enlisting the help of anonymous crowdworkers, Cobi is
based on the idea of “communitysourcing.” It draws on the specialized expertise of people
within a research community.
The problem of scheduling conference sessions can be viewed as a constrained optimiza-
tion problem in which the solver has no direct access to the constraints. The goal of confer-
ence organizers is to group similar talks together in sessions while minimizing conﬂicts be-
tween talks that are scheduled at the same time, but conference organizers generally do not
know which sets of talks attendees want to see. This optimization problem can be large; for
example, Cobi was used to map out the schedule of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI) in 2013, which required scheduling 400 talks in 16 parallel tracks.
Cobi was designed to eﬃciently collect information about attendee preferences from the
community and use this information to optimize the conference schedule. (It is worth noting
that the conference chairs always retain control and can choose to overwrite the optimized
schedule.) As one example, their “authorsourcing” component presents authors with papers
that are potentially similar to their own and asks which ones would be a good ﬁt to appear
in the same session. In order to generate the lists of potentially similar papers in the ﬁrst
place, their “committeesourcing” component makes use of hybrid clustering techniques like
those discussed in Section 4.1 (Andr´ e et al., 2013).
Communitysourcing can be especially eﬀective because the same people who are asked
to provide information also beneﬁt from high quality end results. Although participants
were not directly compensated, when Cobi was ﬁrst deployed at CHI, the authors of 87%
of accepted submissions opted to engage with the system.
Cobi was subsequently deployed several times for scheduling at both CHI and the ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW).
Anecdotally, users of the system found that the constraints generated by the authorsourcing
component were crucial for producing a schedule of coherent and nonconﬂicting sessions;
without this input the scheduler performed poorly.
4.4 Hybrid F orecasting
Signiﬁcant resources are devoted to producing forecasts about geopolitical events and eco-
nomic indicators. Humans are ﬂexible in their ability to reason about arbitrary events, but
human forecasts can be limited by cognitive biases or the inability to digest and process in-
formation at scale. Statistical and data-driven models, on the other hand, are able to take
advantage of vast quantities of available data, but are diﬃcult to design and train for one-
of-a-kind events. Hybrid forecasting systems aim to combine the computational power of
machines with the ﬂexibility of humans to produce accurate forecasts.
In the most basic hybrid forecasting systems, algorithmic techniques are used primarily
as a way to elicit and aggregate human-generated forecasts. One common example is a
prediction market (Berg et al., 2008; Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2004), a ﬁnancial market in
which traders can buy or sell securities with payoﬀs that are linked to future events. For
9. http://projectcobi.com
15


--- Page 16 ---
V aughan
example, in an election market, traders might buy or sell a security that is worth $1 if the
incumbent candidate wins and nothing otherwise. If a trader believes that the probability of
this candidate winning is p and wants to maximize her expected payoﬀ, then she should be
willing to buy this security at any price less than $ p, since with probability p she would get
$1. Similarly, she should be willing to sell at any price greater than $ p. For this reason, we
can think of the current market price of this security as capturing traders’ collective beliefs
about how likely it is that the incumbent will win. Prediction markets can be operated as
continuous double auctions, much like the stock market, requiring very little algorithmic
ingenuity. However, when the level of trade is low, there can be advantages to operating
prediction markets using algorithmic market makers that automatically set prices based on
the history of trade (Chen and Pennock, 2007; Hanson, 2003). Prediction markets have
recently gained more attention in the machine learning community due to the discovery of
strong mathematical connections between these algorithmic market makers and no-regret
online learning algorithms (Abernethy et al., 2013; Chen and Vaughan, 2010).
As part of the Good Judgment Project (Schoemaker and Tetlock, 2016; Tetlock et al.,
2017; Ungar et al., 2012), a large-scale project funded by U.S. Intelligence, researchers eval-
uated and compared a wide range of algorithmic techniques for eliciting and aggregating
human forecasts, including prediction markets and prediction polls, in which forecasters are
asked to directly provide a probability estimate about the likelihood of an event. Through
a series of randomized controlled trials, they found that prediction markets produce more
accurate forecasts than those obtained by simply averaging forecasts from prediction polls.
However, even higher accuracy could be obtained by aggregating prediction poll forecasts
using more clever statistical methods (Atanasov et al., 2017) and extremizing aggregated
forecasts (Baron et al., 2014). They also studied the importance of identifying and teaming
up the top-performing individual forecasters (Mellers et al., 2015b) as well as the psycho-
logical traits shared by these top forecasters (Mellers et al., 2015a).
Building on lessons learned from the Good Judgment Project, the U.S. Oﬃce of the Di-
rector of National Intelligence has recently launched a new program aimed at producing
hybrid forecasting systems that more comprehensively integrate modern data-driven ap-
proaches with human forecasting capabilities. 10
4.5 Hybrid Intelligence Systems in Industry
So far we have focused on hybrid intelligence systems that have come out of the research
community, but it is worth mentioning that human-in-the-loop systems are widely used in
industry as well. To name just a few examples, Stitch Fix, which provides personalized style
recommendations, trains machine learning algorithms to suggest items that a user might
like and then sends the output of these algorithms to a human expert to curate and pare
down.11 Twitter employs contract workers to interpret search terms that suddenly spike
in meaning, often due to recent mentions in the media or pop culture that an algorithm
trained on stale data would miss. 12 PatternEx uses machine learning to identify suspicious
activity that could indicate a security threat. This suspicious activity is then examined by a
10. https://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/research-programs/hfc
11. http://multithreaded.stitchfix.com/blog/2016/03/29/hcomp1/
12. http://nyti.ms/2gzOo4K
16


--- Page 17 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
human, who determines whether there is a real attack, and the human’s feedback is used to
improve the system.13 And even search engines like Google and Bing can be viewed as hybrid
intelligence systems, since the relevance judgments that are used to adaptively improve the
systems are generated by humans (Alonso, 2013; Alonso et al., 2008; Kazai, 2011).
5. Behavioral Studies to Inform Machine Learning Research
Within the past few years, there has been an increased interest, both from within and
outside the machine learning community, in understanding how humans interact with ma-
chine learning systems. Researchers are striving to make machine learning models human-
interpretable (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Jung et al., 2017; Koh and Liang, 2017; Lipton,
2016; Lou et al., 2012, 2013; Paul, 2016; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Ustun and Rudin, 2016), to
make machine learning tools easier to use (Brooks et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2010; Simard
et al., 2017), and to understand how algorithmic decisions impact people’s lives (Angwin
et al., 2016; Barocas and Selbst, 2016; Campolo et al., 2017; Chouldechova, 2017; Corbett-
Davies et al., 2017; Sweeney, 2013).
During the same time period, psychologists and social scientists have increasingly
turned to crowdsourcing platforms to run behavioral experiments that traditionally would
have been conducted on undergraduates in a physical lab. One of the papers frequently
credited with introducing Mechanical Turk to the psychology community, Buhrmester
et al.’s “Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A New Source of Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality,
Data?” (Buhrmester et al., 2011), has been cited almost 5500 times according to Google
Scholar, and this number continues to rise. Crowdsourcing platforms provide fast and easy
access to large pools of subjects, and promote faster iteration between the development of
new theories and experimentation, allowing researchers to speed up their overall research
process (Mason and Suri, 2012). Additionally, studies have shown that classic psychology
and behavioral economics results can be replicated using crowdworkers (Horton et al., 2011;
Paolacci et al., 2010; Simons and Chabris, 2012; Suri and Watts, 2011). On the down side,
there are some concerns about overuse of subjects (Chandler et al., 2014; Peera et al., 2017),
with the same crowdworkers participating in many variants of the same standard psychol-
ogy experiments, with which they have become familiar.
These developments open up the opportunity for interdisciplinary research that uses be-
havioral experiments conducted on crowdsourcing platforms to improve our understanding
of how humans interact with machine learning and AI systems. This line of work goes be-
yond the idea of using crowdsourcing to evaluate one particular machine learning model or
user interface, as discussed in Section 3, and instead seeks a general understanding of the
components of human behavior that could inform the use and design of machine learning sys-
tems more broadly. Such experiments can help us develop better models of human behavior
that could be used, in turn, to develop better algorithms and interfaces (Chen et al., 2016).
It is worth noting that behavioral experiments and other crowdsourced user studies
could beneﬁt other subﬁelds of computer science as well, and there are already examples
where it has. For example, Mechanical Turk experiments have been used to study lay
people’s perceptions of password security (Ur et al., 2016) and perceptions of graphics and
visualizations (Heer and Bostock, 2010).
13. http://tek.io/1Vy01KB
17


--- Page 18 ---
V aughan
Compared with the bodies of work on crowdsourcing for data generation, model evalu-
ation, and hybrid intelligence, there is relatively little research in this area to date. In this
section, we describe a few examples of behavioral studies using crowdsourcing platforms
that have the potential to change the way we think about applications of machine learning
in the hope that these examples will inspire additional research.
5.1 Understanding T rust in Predictive Models
There is a large body of work cutting across psychology, management, and other research
communities that studies human trust in algorithmic predictions and models (Dietvorst
et al., 2015, 2016; Dzindolet et al., 2002; Logg, 2017; Promberger and Baron, 2006; Sinha
and Swearingen, 2001; Yeomans et al., 2017). While the earlier work was performed in
traditional labs, the newer studies primarily rely on crowdworkers or a mix of crowdworkers
and in-person participants (Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2016; Logg, 2017; Yeomans et al., 2017).
This body of work provides invaluable insights about how real end users interact with
machine learning systems in practice that can be put to use immediately in the design of
models and user interfaces.
As one example, there is signiﬁcant evidence in the literature of algorithm aversion, a
phenomenon in which people fail to trust an algorithm once they have seen the algorithm
make a mistake, even if the algorithm outperforms human predictors (Dietvorst et al., 2015;
Dzindolet et al., 2002). This is worrisome since essentially all machine learning models make
errors at least occasionally. Dietvorst et al. (2016) ran a sequence of experiments, some on
crowdworkers and some on students, to examine the question of whether algorithm aversion
can be overcome using simple interventions. In particular, the researchers asked whether
people would choose to use an algorithm more if they were given the ability to intervene and
make minor adjustments to the algorithm’s prediction when they believed it to be wrong.
In one study, they asked crowdworkers to predict students’ test scores on a standardized
test using nine features such as the student’s favorite subject in school and the region of
the country the student lives in. Workers would be paid based on the accuracy of their
predictions. The workers were told that analysts had trained a model to make the same
predictions and were given the average error of the model (and thus explicitly told that the
model was not perfect). They were then asked to decide whether they wanted to use the
model or not. The workers were assigned to one of four randomized conditions. In the ﬁrst,
workers were told that if they chose to use the model they would not be allowed to adjust the
predictions of the model at all. In the other three, workers were told that they would be given
the ability to adjust each prediction of the model by up to 2 points, 5 points, or 10 points
respectively. The researchers found that participants were indeed signiﬁcantly more likely
to choose to use the model if they were given the ability to intervene and adjust the model’s
prediction. In both the adjust-by-5 and adjust-by-10 conditions, 71% of participants chose
to use the model, along with 68% in the adjust-by-2 condition. On the other hand, those who
would not have the opportunity to intervene only chose to use the model 47% of the time.
Participants in the conditions in which adjustments were allowed also had signiﬁcantly
better predictive accuracy than those who were not allowed to adjust the model. This is
not because their adjustments helped; on the contrary, participants would have done better
18


--- Page 19 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
by always following the model exactly. They were more accurate because they were more
willing to rely on the model.
This ﬁnding has immediate implications about which strategies might help gain user
trust in machine learning models. In particular, users might be more willing to trust a
model if they have the ability to intervene. Even if this human intervention leads to a worse
prediction, allowing the intervention may still be beneﬁcial because the user will be more
likely to use the model in the ﬁrst place.
It is natural to imagine that similar ideas could be applied to study model interpretabil-
ity. As one very recent step in this direction, Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. (2018) ran a large-
scale human-subject experiment on Mechanical Turk that was designed to test how two dif-
ferent attributes of a model (the number of features and whether the details of the model
are presented to the user or the model is presented as a black box) impact either users’ un-
derstanding of the model or users’ trust in the model. Unlike the experiments described in
Section 3.2, in which crowdworkers were used to evaluate the interpretability of one speciﬁc
model, Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. (2018) tried to uncover how diﬀerent factors of a model
inﬂuence diﬀerent aspects of interpretability more broadly, with the goal of providing gen-
eral guidance on how to develop future interpretable models.
5.2 Understanding Reactions to Ads
Internet advertising is a huge business. Revenues from internet advertising in the U.S. alone
hit $72.5 billion in 2016, up 22% from the previous year. 14 Naturally, signiﬁcant eﬀort is
devoted to developing and optimizing machine learning algorithms for online advertising,
especially in industry. New algorithms are generally put through rigorous A-B testing before
deployment to quantify and measure their impact when run on real users. However, one
might ask whether it is possible to design better algorithms using general insights about
human behavior that transcend any one particular algorithm.
Goldstein et al. (2013; 2014) set out to quantify the impact of “annoying” display ads
on user behavior, under the hypothesis that web publishers might be losing money and
driving away users by displaying annoying ads. They designed a two-stage experiment
run on Mechanical Turk. The ﬁrst stage was designed to identify examples of “good” and
“bad” ads. To do this, they presented crowdworkers with overlapping sets of display ads
and asked for judgments of how annoying the ads were, a standard data labeling task as
discussed in Section 2.1. By aggregating these judgments across workers, they produced
lists of the most and least annoying banner ads.
In the second stage, Goldstein et al. (2013; 2014) ran a behavioral experiment aimed at
estimating how much monetary value web users get from not being subjected to annoying
ads. They posted another Mechanical Turk task in which workers were asked to label
emails from the Enron email database as either spam or not spam. Workers were randomly
assigned to diﬀerent experimental conditions. Some workers saw good ads (as determined
in stage 1) next to each email, while others saw bad, annoying ads. A third group saw no
ads at all. The researchers also randomly varied how much users were paid for labeling
each email. Workers were free to label as many emails as they wanted. By comparing
the number of emails that workers chose to classify in each experimental condition, the
14. https://read.bi/2Ks0StR
19


--- Page 20 ---
V aughan
researchers produced an estimate of the amount of extra money it would be necessary to
pay workers who were exposed to bad ads in order to get them to perform the same number
of email classiﬁcation tasks as those exposed to good ads or no ads at all. From that, they
were able to measure people’s annoyance at bad ads.
They found that people were willing to classify almost as many emails when shown
good ads compared with no ads at all, suggesting that displaying good ads does not hurt
publishers. The same was not true for annoying ads. The researchers estimated that they
would have to pay approximately $1 extra to generate 1000 views using a bad ad compared
with a good ad or no ad. This is a signiﬁcant amount as a typical banner ad might cost $1-
$5 per 1000 views. In other words, publishers may very well be losing money by displaying
annoying ads unless they charge signiﬁcantly more per view.
While there are some limitations to the applicability of these results (for example, it is
plausible that people react diﬀerently to ads when performing classiﬁcation tasks than they
would when browsing the news), it is a valuable step towards a model of user reactions to
annoying ads. It is easy to imagine that such a model would prove useful when designing
machine learning algorithms for pricing and displaying banner ads.
6. Understanding the Crowd
In the previous section, we argued that crowdsourced studies of human behavior can be
valuable for understanding how lay people interact with machine learning systems. In this
section, we argue that such studies are also useful for understanding the behavior of the
crowd itself. This understanding helps us better model the crowd and allows us to deﬁne
concrete recommendations of best practices that can be put to use whether using the crowd
for data generation, model evaluation, hybrid intelligence systems, behavioral research, or
any other purpose.
The studies described in this section help us understand how real crowdworkers respond
to incentives, yielding immediately applicable guidelines for setting payments in addition
to more accurate ways of modeling crowd behavior in theoretical work on incentive design.
They tell us how to most eﬀectively gamify crowdwork and provide other sources of intrin-
sic motivation for workers. They help us get a grip on the question of how widespread dis-
honesty is on crowdsourcing platforms, and how dishonest behavior can be mitigated. And
they show us that crowdworkers are not independent and isolated workers, but have a rich
social network.
6.1 Crowdworker Demographics
Over the years there have been several studies published that examine the demographics of
workers on Mechanical Turk. We mention only a few key statistics that help paint a picture
of the worker pool. These are based on a November 2016 snapshot from MTurk Tracker, 15
a project aimed at tracking the demographics of Mechanical Turk over time by continually
releasing tasks containing demographic surveys on Mechanical Turk to obtain up-to-date
information about workers (Difallah et al., 2015).
15. http://www.behind-the-enemy-lines.com/2015/04/demographics-of-mechanical-turk-now.html
20


--- Page 21 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
These statistics should be taken with a grain of salt for several reasons. First, worker
demographics change over time. For example, there is evidence that the worker pool on
Mechanical Turk is shifting to be more heavily composed of American workers due to
changes in Amazon’s rules and regulations (Silberman et al., 2015). Second, not all workers
on Mechanical Turk choose to work on surveys, so these statistics perhaps better reﬂect the
population of workers who do survey work. That said, these demographics are more or less
in line with those reported in other contemporaneous studies.
According to the MTurk Tracker data:
• About 70-80% of Mechanical Turk workers are from the United States, while about
10-20% are from India, but the breakdown of workers varies signiﬁcantly throughout
the day. The prevalence of workers from the U.S. and India makes sense because
Mechanical Turk oﬀers payment only in U.S. dollars, Indian rupees, or Amazon credit.
• The breakdown between male and female workers is fairly close to even, though it
varies a bit by country.
• For crowdworkers in the U.S., the (self-reported) median household income is in the
range of $40K-$60K, which is in line with the median U.S. household income. The
median for Indian workers is less than $15K, with many Indian workers reporting a
household income of less than $10K per year.
There is evidence that other crowdsourcing platforms, such as CrowdFlower and Pro-
liﬁc Academic, attract more European workers and lower income workers than Mechanical
Turk (Peera et al., 2017).
Goodman and Paolacci (2017) provide a nice overview of the similarities and diﬀerences
between the population of Mechanical Turk workers and the U.S. population as a whole, as
well as the populations traditionally used for consumer studies.
The demographics of available workers vary widely based on the time of day and, to
a lesser extent, day of the week. Through a large study of intertemporal demographic
diﬀerences on Mechanical Turk, Casey et al. (2017) found that, even restricting attention
to workers from the U.S., the demographics of available workers change dramatically over
the course of a day. For example, they found that workers who completed their task at
night were more likely to be single than those who completed it in the morning, and more
likely to be completing the task on a smartphone.
6.2 Dishonesty Among W orkers
Researchers may be deterred from using crowdsourcing due to concerns about the prevalence
of dishonest workers. In this section, we discuss the results of behavioral experiments aimed
at quantifying the presence of dishonest behavior on Mechanical Turk.
Suri et al. (2011) borrowed a trick from a lab study run by Fischbacher and F¨ ollmi-
Heusi (2013) that allowed them to measure how trustworthy crowdworkers are on the whole
without the ability to detect individual lies. They posted a task on Mechanical Turk in
which each worker was asked to roll a die (or simulate rolling a die on an external website)
and report the value of her roll, a random number between 1 and 6. For completing this
task, the worker received a base payment of $0.25 plus an additional bonus of $0.25 times
her reported roll. For example, if a worker reported rolling a 4, she would receive a total
21


--- Page 22 ---
V aughan
payment of $1.25. Thus the workers, who knew that there was no way for the outcomes of
their rolls to be veriﬁed, were given a direct incentive to lie.
If all workers honestly reported the outcome of a die roll, the mean of the reported rolls
of the 175 participants in the study would be close to 3.5. The researchers instead observed
a mean reported roll of 3.91. On the whole, workers had a tendency to overreport rolls
of 5 and 6 and underreport rolls of 1 and 2. In fact, it is possible that roughly a third of
participants who rolled a 1 or 2 chose to misreport. (It is also possible that some participants
ignored the instructions to roll a die at all, choosing to report an arbitrary number.)
Suri et al. (2011) next examined whether increasing the ability of the task requester to
detect cheating would lead to higher levels of honesty. They conducted a variant of the
die rolling experiment in which each worker was asked to report the results of a sequence
of thirty die rolls instead of just one. Workers in this experiment received a base payment
of $0.25 plus the sum of their reported die rolls, for a total payment between $0.55 and
$2.05. This time, the mean reported role of the 232 participants was 3.57—still statistically
signiﬁcantly higher than the expected mean of 3.5, but practically much closer. Only three
of the 232 experiment participants were found to have an average report signiﬁcantly greater
than what would be expected if they reported their rolls honestly, and only one reported
the payoﬀ-maximizing sequence of thirty rolls of 6. This suggests that dishonest behavior
may be less prevalent when there is a chance that this behavior will be detected (though
the results of the two experiments are not directly comparable since they were performed
at diﬀerent times on potentially diﬀerent populations).
Two recent contemporaneous studies (Chandler and Paolacci, 2017; Wessling et al.,
2017) examined whether crowdworkers misrepresent themselves in order to satisfy the el-
igibility criteria of tasks. Chandler and Paolacci (2017) asked over two thousand crowd-
workers to report whether they are the parent or guardian of a child with autism. Workers
were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions. In one, workers were told
that this question was part of a prescreening test for a subsequent study, while in another
(the control), they were not. 7.8% of workers in the prescreening condition reported being
the parent or guardian of a child with autism, compared with 4.3% in the control, suggest-
ing that at least 3.5% of workers in the prescreening condition provided a fraudulent re-
sponse. While 3.5% of workers may seem small, note that due to the low number of workers
who would truly qualify for a follow-up study based on this question, this level of dishon-
esty would lead to a high prevalence of impostors (45%) in a follow-up study. In a separate
study, the same researchers found that when payments were suﬃciently high, 16% of par-
ticipants made a second attempt to pass a prescreening survey, identifying themselves as a
diﬀerent gender after initially being blocked. Similarly, Wessling et al. (2017) provided ad-
ditional evidence of misrepresentation in prescreening tests.
Based on these ﬁndings, both papers include detailed discussions of best practices that
can be followed to mitigate dishonesty in prescreening tests. One recommendation is to
collect screening data as part of a stand-alone task ahead of time and call back eligible
participants later. As an alternative, when costs are not prohibitive, all workers can be
allowed to perform a task and those who do not meet the screening criteria can be ﬁltered
out after all data have been collected.
All of this work suggests that the rate of dishonest behavior and spam depends on the
particular task and the motivation to lie. There is some anecdotal evidence that spammers
22


--- Page 23 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
are especially drawn to surveys (Mason and Suri, 2012) and multiple-choice questions (Rao
and Michel, 2016) since these are especially easy tasks to complete, so rates of spam may
be even higher on these questions.
It is worth noting that requesters on crowdsourcing platforms can be dishonest or oth-
erwise malicious too. For example, requesters may ask workers to create social media ac-
counts to post speciﬁc content or engage in other dodgy Internet marketing practices. It
fact, there are now entire crowdsourcing platforms in China speciﬁcally devoted to these
“crowdturﬁng” tasks (Wang et al., 2012a).
6.3 Monetary Incentives
One of the ﬁrst questions that many researchers have when they decide to incorporate
crowdsourcing into their work is how much to pay per task. When crowdsourcing ﬁrst
began to gain popularity among researchers, part of the appeal was the ability to generate
data or run experiments cheaply. For example, Snow et al. (2008) boasted that they were
able to oﬀer workers $0.02 to complete a set of 30 annotations, obtaining 1500 annotations
per dollar. However, over the last decade, the views of the community have shifted as the
ethics of crowdsourcing have received more attention (Kittur et al., 2013; Salehi et al., 2015;
Silberman et al., 2010; Williamson, 2016). Although crowdworkers are legally considered
contractors, making minimum wage laws inapplicable, guidelines put forth by the Dynamo
project16 (Salehi et al., 2015) recommend paying the equivalent of the current U.S. federal
minimum wage or more. An eﬀective and widely used method of setting the payment for
a task is to ﬁrst estimate the time it takes to complete the task (for example, by asking
colleagues or students to try out the task, or by posting a small test batch of tasks) and then
use that estimate to ensure that the per-hour payment is higher than U.S. minimum wage.
A natural question is whether paying higher wages increases the quality of work. There
is evidence that, at least in some scenarios, the answer is no. Several behavioral studies
examining the impact of payments on quality found that setting higher payments increased
the quantity of work that crowdworkers were willing to do, but not the quality (Buhrmester
et al., 2011; Litman et al., 2014; Mason and Watts, 2009; Rogstadius et al., 2011). Mason
and Watts (2009) conjectured that this might be due, at least in part, to an anchoring eﬀect:
workers’ opinions about fair payment rates are anchored by the payments they are oﬀered.
In one of their experiments, workers were asked to sort sets of images and were randomly
assigned to experimental conditions in which they received $0.01 per task, $0.05 per task,
or $0.10 per task respectively. (All tasks were advertised at a rate of $0.01 and additional
payments were made via bonuses to avoid selection eﬀects.) In a post-hoc survey, workers
who were paid $0.01 felt they should have received $0.05 for the task on average, while
workers who were paid $0.05 felt they should have received $0.08, and workers who were
paid $0.10 felt they should have received $0.13.
On the other hand, two recent studies have shown that in other scenarios, higher pay-
ments do increase work quality (Ho et al., 2015; Ye et al., 2017). There are several possible
reasons for this discrepancy. One is that the type of task being performed might impact the
eﬀectiveness of increased payments. Ho et al. (2015) and Ye et al. (2017) both used “eﬀort-
responsive tasks”—tasks for which workers are able to improve their output by spending
16. http://wiki.wearedynamo.org/index.php/Guidelines_for_Academic_Requesters
23


--- Page 24 ---
V aughan
more time or eﬀort—in their studies, whereas the study mentioned above used a task that
was fairly easy to complete without much eﬀort. Mason and Watts (2009) did use an eﬀort-
responsive task (solving word puzzles) in a second study, but found that for this particu-
lar task, worker quality was more correlated with enjoyment of word puzzles than the rate
of pay oﬀered, an argument that intrinsic motivation (the topic of Section 6.4) can over-
power monetary incentives. Another possibility is that in some studies, payments were so
low that the diﬀerences between conditions were not salient. Buhrmester et al. (2011) of-
fered either $0.02, $0.10, or $0.50 for up to 30 minutes of work, while Ho et al. (2015) and
Ye et al. (2017) aimed to pay at least minimum wage and had larger per-hour gaps between
payments in diﬀerent experimental conditions.
While this research is somewhat inconclusive, it does appear that paying higher wages
consistently increases the number of tasks that crowdworkers are willing to perform and
therefore speeds up the rate at which a requester’s tasks are completed.
Another body of work is aimed at answering the question of whether the quality of
crowdwork can be improved through the use of performance-based payments, payment
schemes that explicitly reward crowdworkers for higher quality work (Harris, 2011; Ho et al.,
2015; Shaw et al., 2011; Yin et al., 2013, 2014). While in theory, such payment schemes
could be arbitrarily complex (Ho et al., 2016), in practice they are generally implemented in
the form of a bonus payment awarded for exceeding a particular quality threshold. Bonus
payments of this form are common on Mechanical Turk.
Here, too, results have been mixed. Harris (2011) asked workers to evaluate the rele-
vance of resumes and found that performance-based payments increased both quality and
the amount of time that workers spent on the task. On the other hand, Shaw et al. (2011)
compared fourteen incentives schemes, including four that involved performance-based pay-
ments, and did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant increases in quality, and Yin et al. (2013) varied the
bonus sizes oﬀered to workers and found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in quality between exper-
imental conditions.
The most comprehensive experimental study of performance-based payments was per-
formed by Ho et al. (2015). They showed that performance-based payments can improve
quality for particular tasks (again, those that are eﬀort-responsive). They found that the
eﬀectiveness of performance-based payments is not heavily dependent on the precise quality
threshold chosen. They also tested how sensitive their results were to the size of the bonus
oﬀered and found that as long as the bonus oﬀered was big enough, quality improved. Of-
fering a very small bonus (say, $0.05 on a $0.50 base payment) actually led to a small ap-
parent decrease in performance, though this decrease is not statistically signiﬁcant. This
may explain the negative results of Shaw et al. (2011), since their bonus payments were
very small ($0.03 on a base payment of $0.30). It may also explain the results of Yin et al.
(2013), who considered only bonuses that were relatively large compared with the base, a
regime in which Ho et al. (2015) also saw no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in quality
when varying the bonus size.
It is not always immediately apparent whether or not a task is eﬀort-responsive. As an
example, Ho et al. (2015) were surprised to ﬁnd that handwriting recognition is not. When
they gave workers a handwriting recognition task, the majority of workers were able to
identify most words with little eﬀort. When workers could not make out a word, additional
time spent did not help. The researchers suggest that to determine whether or not a task
24


--- Page 25 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
is eﬀort-responsive, a requester should run a pilot experiment in which they ask workers to
complete the task for a ﬁxed payment and examine the relationship between time spent and
quality of results. The results of such a pilot could be used to determine an appropriate
payment scheme for the task.
6.4 Intrinsic Motivation
In addition to monetary incentives, researchers have also explored the ways in which intrinsic
sources of motivation, such as having fun or doing meaningful work, aﬀect the quantity and
quality of work that crowdworkers perform. This research is important for informing the
design of volunteer-based or citizen science platforms, like the Zooniverse 17 and Science at
Home18, as well as paid crowdsourcing platforms like Mechanical Turk.
In one study, Chandler and Kapelner (2013) found that crowdworkers are more active
when the tasks they are asked to perform are framed as meaningful. The researchers re-
cruited workers on Mechanical Turk to label medical images. In one experimental condi-
tion, workers were told that they were labeling tumor cells and that the results of their
work would be used to assist medical researchers. In the control condition, they were given
no context for the task at all. In a third condition, they were given no context and addi-
tionally told that the labels they generated would not be recorded; that is, all of their work
would be discarded. The researchers found that when workers were told their work would
beneﬁt medical research, the quantity of work that they produced increased compared with
the control, but their work was not signiﬁcantly more accurate. On the other hand, when
workers were told their work would be discarded, the quality of their work was worse than
the control, but the quantity of work produced was similar. Similar eﬀects were observed
by Rogstadius et al. (2011), who compared the behavior of workers who were told they
were performing work for a nonproﬁt organization “dedicated to saving lives by improving
health throughout the world” with workers who were told they were working for a for-proﬁt
pharmaceutical manufacturer. This work suggests that when the task being performed has
the potential to do good in the world, it is worth emphasizing this to the workers.
Gamiﬁcation is an another eﬀective way of increasing crowdworkers’ motivation that
can be applied in both paid and unpaid crowdsourcing settings (Feyisetan et al., 2015; Lee
et al., 2013; von Ahn and Dabbish, 2008). Von Ahn and Dabbish (2008) pioneered the
study of “games with a purpose,” computer games in which players, as a side eﬀect of their
play, accomplish tasks that are diﬃcult for machines, such as generating training data for
machine learning algorithms. For example, in the ESP Game (von Ahn and Dabbish, 2004)
(now the Google Image Labeler), randomly matched pairs of players are presented with an
image and asked to type in words that describe it (i.e., labels), as in Figure 2. The players
receive points if both members of the pair produce the same word. Since players are unable
to communicate with each other, their best strategy for producing the same word is to type
in words that are relevant to the image, thus providing useful labels. As another example,
Verbosity (von Ahn et al., 2006) is a game designed to collect common-sense facts about
objects. Players are again randomly paired, with one partner serving as a describer and
the other as a guesser. The describer is given an object (such as a sock) and asked to list
17. https://www.zooniverse.org
18. https://www.scienceathome.org
25


--- Page 26 ---
V aughan
Figure 2: A screenshot of the ESP Game. Image originally appeared in von Ahn and
Dabbish (2008).
facts about the object (“it is a kind of clothing” or “it is related to feet”). The guesser is
shown these facts and must try to guess the object as quickly as possible. To win, it is in
the describer’s best interest to come up with facts that succinctly and accurately describe
the object, which then become a part of a database of common knowledge statements.
Von Ahn and Dabbish (2008) credit the success of these games in part to following known
game-design principles, such as incorporating extra challenges through game features like
timed responses, score keeping and leaderboards, and randomness (Malone, 1980, 1982).
However, there are some caveats of gamiﬁcation. Hamari et al. (2014) recently conducted an
extensive survey of the literature on gamiﬁcation and found that it is more successful with
some types of users than others, and may generally be less eﬀective in scenarios in which
people are prone towards exhibiting rational behavior, which may include paid crowdsourc-
ing sites since at least some crowdworkers are already be in the mindset of maximizing pay.
Law et al. (2016) examined the possibility of appealing to workers’ curiosity as a source
of intrinsic motivation. Their work was inspired by the information gap theory of curiosity,
which suggests that when people are made aware that there is a gap in their knowledge, they
actively seek out the information needed to ﬁll in this gap. They suggested several “curiosity
interventions” aimed at stoking workers’ curiosity and showed that these interventions led to
workers completing more tasks and performing better. Curiosity interventions are especially
eﬀective on tasks that are inherently less interesting.
6.5 Crowdworker Communication and F orum Usage
Finally, several recent papers have explored the questions of how, why, and to what extent
crowdworkers communicate with each other.
Gray et al. (2016) conducted a mixed-method study to understand communication
among crowdworkers on four crowdsourcing platforms. Through extensive ethnographic
ﬁeldwork and in-person interviews with 118 crowdworkers in India, the researchers uncov-
26


--- Page 27 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
ered three common categories of communication among workers. First, workers help each
other with administrative overhead in order to reduce their costs. For example, a crowd-
worker might seek help ﬁguring out how to receive her payments from a crowdsourcing plat-
form, which can be nontrivial for Indian workers. Second, crowdworkers share information
about good tasks and reputable (or irreputable) task requesters. Third, crowdworkers help
each other complete speciﬁc tasks. More generally, crowdworkers seek each other out to
recreate the social connections and support structures that are common in most traditional
jobs but missing from crowdwork. This idea that crowdworkers communicate and collabo-
rate with each other is supported by the work of Gupta et al. (2014), who also conducted
interviews of crowdworkers in India.
This line of work suggests that crowdworkers are not independent, but rather that there
is a hidden communication network among workers. Yin et al. (2016) attempted to quan-
tify and map the hidden network of workers on Mechanical Turk in order to better under-
stand its scale and structure as well as how is it used. To do this, the researchers designed
and launched a task on Mechanical Turk. When a worker accepted the task, she was ﬁrst
asked to create a nickname for herself. She then ﬁlled out a brief demographic survey and
was asked to answer two free-form questions about her experiences on Mechanical Turk:
why she started Turking and what motivated her to keep Turking. (These questions were
selected based on the results of a pilot study in which crowdworkers were asked what they
most wanted to know about other crowdworkers, with the goal of generating interesting
questions.) The worker was then asked to pause and swap nicknames with other workers
she knows who had already completed the task or might be interested in completing it. If
she entered another worker’s nickname, she was asked several questions about their com-
munication patterns, and an edge was created between them in the network. Finally, the
worker was given the chance to explore the partially constructed network, viewing basic
information on all workers (including their answers to the two free-form questions above),
and more extensive information about those workers with whom she had exchanged nick-
names. She was also given a personalized link she could use to return to the network later
and add more connections.
The resulting communication network is shown in Figure 3. Over a period of several
weeks, 10,354 workers completed the task. (Stewart et al. 2015 estimated the number
of active workers on Mechanical Turk to be only 7,300, so it is likely that this task was
completed by a large fraction of active workers, mitigating potential issues with sample
bias.) These 10,354 workers reported a total of 5,268 connections. Since workers were not
ﬁnancially incentivized to add connections, this number is probably an underestimate of
the true number of connected pairs. Roughly 13% of workers were connected to at least
one other worker. On average these workers had 7.6 connections, and the maximum degree
of any worker was 321. The largest connected component contained 994 workers, or about
72% of connected workers.
While many diﬀerent methods of communicating were reported, by far the most com-
mon was through online forums. In fact, 90% of all edges were between pairs of workers
who communicate via forums. This ﬁnding is in line with other work that examined the
important role that forums play in crowdsourcing (Martin et al., 2014). Diﬀerent online fo-
rums create diﬀerent but overlapping subcommunities in the network, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 4. The researchers’ analysis showed that these subcommunities diﬀer in terms of topo-
27


--- Page 28 ---
V aughan
Figure 3: The communication network among Amazon Mechanical Turk workers. Image
originally appeared in Yin et al. (2016).
logical structure, dynamics, and the content of communication, with some acting more as
social communities and others more like broadcasting platforms.
Although it is impossible to establish causal claims on the basis of their study, Yin
et al. (2016) did ﬁnd correlations between a worker’s connectivity and diﬀerent measures
of success on Mechanical Turk. In particular, they found that connected workers tended to
ﬁnd their task faster, were more likely to have been active on Mechanical Turk longer, were
more likely to have achieved Mechanical Turk’s “Master” qualiﬁcation, and had a higher
approval rate on average.
The high level of communication among crowdworkers and widespread use of forums
have several immediate implications for researchers. First, researchers should keep in mind
that the set of crowdworkers who choose to do a task may not be an independent sample of
the worker pool since workers often share good tasks. Second, it can be in a researcher’s best
28


--- Page 29 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
(a) Reddit HWTF
(b) MTurkGrind
(c) TurkerNation
(d) Facebook
(e) MTurkForum
Figure 4: Subnetworks for Reddit HWTF (magenta), MTurkGrind (red), TurkerNation
(green), Facebook (blue), and MTurkForum (black). Images originally appeared
in Yin et al. (2016).
interest to monitor popular forums such as Turker Nation 19, MTurk Forum20, and Reddit
HITs Worth Turking For21 while their tasks are running to be aware of any potential issues
that workers are discussing.
7. Discussion and Additional Best Practices
We have explored examples of four diﬀerent ways in which machine learning researchers can
put crowdsourcing to use in their own research: to generate data, to evaluate and debug
models, to build hybrid intelligence systems, and to run behavioral experiments that inform
the design of future machine learning systems. We have also reviewed the results of a variety
of behavioral and user studies aimed at understanding the crowd and have discussed the
implications of these studies for researchers who use crowdsourcing in their own research.
We conclude this survey with a discussion of additional crowdsourcing best practices that
are rarely mentioned in the literature, despite their importance to the success of a project.
19. http://turkernation.com
20. http://www.mturkforum.com
21. https://www.reddit.com/r/HITsWorthTurkingFor/
29


--- Page 30 ---
V aughan
7.1 Maintain a Good Relationship With Crowdworkers
There are several reasons why it can be valuable for a researcher to build a relationship with
the community of crowdworkers and maintain a good reputation among them. As discussed
in Section 6.5, workers share information about both tasks and requesters among themselves,
especially through forums. Workers will be discouraged from accepting a task if other work-
ers have complained about bugs, slow payments, or other issues. Experienced Mechanical
Turk workers also commonly use tools like TurkOpticon22 that allow them to view requester
ratings broken down by communicativity, generosity, fairness, and promptness (Irani and
Silberman, 2013). There are also tools available that allow workers to be notiﬁed when a fa-
vorite requester posts a new task. Being known as a good requester therefore brings more at-
tention to one’s tasks, while being known as a bad requester can deter experienced workers.
To maintain a good reputation, researchers should actively monitor and respond to any
email or questions from workers so that any potential problems or bugs can be caught
quickly. It is worth planning in advance to make sure that someone will be available to
communicate with workers while a new task is running.
Researchers should pay fair wages (at least the equivalent of U.S. federal minimum wage,
as discussed in Section 6.3) and approve work quickly since on many platforms workers are
not paid until their work is approved. It is also good practice to avoid rejecting work. On
Mechanical Turk, for example, a lowered approval rate can have a damaging eﬀect on a
worker’s ability to ﬁnd new work. Rejecting the work of a well-meaning worker who makes
a mistake can therefore harm that worker’s future income (Mason and Suri, 2012).
Finally, researchers should strive to be a ethical requesters. A good way to start is by
reviewing the Dynamo project’s guidelines for academic requesters 23 (Salehi et al., 2015).
7.2 Good T ask Design Matters
Crowdworkers cannot be expected to excel at a task with unclear instructions or a confus-
ing user interface. Any ambiguity will increase the rate of errors since it is diﬃcult and
time consuming for workers to ask clarifying questions (Rao and Michel, 2016). Both the
instructions and UI should be piloted on a small batch of workers to make sure that they
are clear before launching a task at a large scale. Some evidence suggests that including
examples in a task’s description or instructions is correlated with lower levels of confusion
among workers and with workers more quickly accepting the task (Jain et al., 2017). In-
cluding quiz questions can also be an eﬀective way to check for clarity. In addition to in-
creased clarity, an attractive and easy-to-use UI may help keep workers engaged.
7.3 Pilot, Pilot, Pilot
Last but not least, the eﬀective use of pilots is crucial to a project’s success. Crowdsourcing
platforms allow for quick and easy iteration of task design and experimentation (Mason
and Suri, 2012). One of the primary beneﬁts of crowdsourcing platforms is the ability to
quickly pilot new or modiﬁed task designs on small batches of crowdworkers before making
a commitment. As is the case with any software system, tasks often have bugs that are
22. https://turkopticon.ucsd.edu
23. http://wiki.wearedynamo.org/index.php/Guidelines_for_Academic_Requesters
30


--- Page 31 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
hard to catch until they are deployed on real users. It is often best to launch a task slowly,
iterating as many times as necessary to ensure that the task is clear and bug-free.
Acknowledgments
This survey grew out of lecture notes that were originally prepared to accompany my tutorial
“Crowdsourcing: Beyond Label Generation” at NIPS 2016. Thanks to all of the people—
far too many to name—who sent pointers and suggestions of research to include. Thanks
to Dan Goldstein, Chien-Ju Ho, Jake Hofman, Andrew Mao, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Sid Suri,
Jaime Teevan, Ming Yin, and Haoqi Zhang for discussing their research and sending along
slides and other material while I was preparing the tutorial. Thanks to the authors of
Lasecki et al. (2012) and von Ahn and Dabbish (2004) and to my coauthors on Yin et al.
(2016) for allowing me to include images from their papers. Thanks to Chien-Ju Ho,
Andrew Mao, Joelle Pineau, Sid Suri, Hanna Wallach, and especially Ming Yin for extended
discussions and valuable feedback on previous versions of this survey. Finally, huge thanks
to the four anonymous JMLR reviewers who went above and beyond their duty to give
countless valuable comments, suggestions, and references that greatly improved the breadth
and structure of this survey. This was a crowdsourced eﬀort.
References
Jacob Abernethy, Yiling Chen, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Eﬃcient market making
via convex optimization, and a connection to online learning. ACM Transactions on
Economics and Computation , 1(2):Article 12, 2013.
Ittai Abraham, Omar Alonso, Vasilis Kandylas, Rajesh Patel, Steven Shelford, and Alek-
sandrs Slivkins. How many workers to ask? Adaptive exploration for collecting high qual-
ity labels. In SIGIR, 2016.
Arpit Agarwal, Debmalya Mandal, David C. Parkes, and Nisarg Shah. Peer prediction with
heterogeneous users. In ACM EC, 2017.
Omar Alonso. Implementing crowdsourcing-based relevance experimentation: An industrial
perspective. Information Retrieval, 16(2):101–120, 2013.
Omar Alonso, Daniel E. Rose, and Benjamin Stewart. Crowdsourcing for relevance evalu-
ation. ACM SigIR Forum, 42(2):9–15, 2008.
Vamshi Ambati, Stephan Vogel, and Jaime Carbonell. Collaborative workﬂow for crowd-
sourcing translation. In CSCW, 2012.
Paul Andr´ e, Haoqi Zhang, Juho Kim, Lydia B. Chilton, Steven P. Dow, and Robert C.
Miller. Community clustering: Leveraging an academic crowd to form coherent conference
sessions. In HCOMP, 2013.
Julia Angwin, Je Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias:
There’s software used across the country to predict future criminals and it’s biased
31


--- Page 32 ---
V aughan
against blacks. ProPublica article accessed at https://www.propublica.org/article/
machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing , 2016.
Pavel D. Atanasov, Phillip Rescober, Eric Stone, Samuel A. Swift, Emile Servan-Schreiber,
Philip E. Tetlock, Lyle Ungar, and Barbara Mellers. Distilling the wisdom of crowds:
Prediction markets versus prediction polls. Management Science, 63(3):691–706, 2017.
Bahadir Ismail Aydin, Yavuz Selim Yilmaz, Yaliang Li, Qi Li, Jing Gao, and Murat Demir-
bas. Crowdsourcing for multiple-choice question answering. In AAAI, 2014.
Solon Barocas and Andrew Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. California Law Review ,
104, 2016.
Jonathan Baron, Barbara A. Mellers, Philip E. Tetlock, Eric Stone, and Lyle H. Ungar.
Two reasons to make aggregated probability forecasts more extreme. Decision Analysis,
11(2):133–145, 2014.
Joyce Berg, Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson, and Thomas Rietz. Results from a dozen
years of election futures markets research. Handbook of experimental economics results ,
1:742–751, 2008.
Michael Bernstein, Greg Little, Rob Miller, Bjoern Hartmann, Mark Ackerman, David
Karger, David Crowell, and Katrina Panovich. Soylent: A word processor with a crowd
inside. In UIST, 2010.
Anant Bhardwaj, Juho Kim, Steven P. Dow, David Karger, Sam Madden, Robert C. Miller,
and Haoqi Zhang. Attendee-sourcing: Exploring the design space of community-informed
conference scheduling. In HCOMP, 2014.
Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Reaching dubious parity with hamstrung hu-
mans. Blog post accessed at http://jeffreybigham.com/blog/2017/
reaching-dubious-parity-with-hamstrung-humans.html , 2017.
David M. Blei and John D. Laﬀerty. Topic models. Text mining: Classiﬁcation, clustering,
and applications, 10(71):34, 2009.
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, , and Michael I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 3(Jan):993–1022, 2003.
Jordan Boyd-Graber, Yuening Hu, and David Mimno. Applications of topic models. Foun-
dations and Trends in Information Retrieval , 11(2–3):143–296, 2017.
Jonathan Bragg, Mausam, and Daniel S. Weld. Crowdsourcing multi-label classiﬁcation for
taxonomy creation. In HCOMP, 2013.
Michael Brooks, Saleema Amershi, Bongshin Lee, Steven Drucker, Ashish Kapoor, and
Patrice Simard. FeatureInsight: Visual support for error-driven feature ideation in text
classiﬁcation. In IEEE VAST, 2015.
32


--- Page 33 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Michael Buhrmester, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D. Gosling. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A
new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science,
6(1):3–5, 2011.
Chris Callison-Burch and Mark Dredze. Creating speech and language data with Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. In NAACL HLT Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, 2010.
Alex Campolo, Madelyn Sanﬁlippo, Meredith Whittaker, and Kate Crawford. AI Now 2017
Report. Accessed at https://ainowinstitute.org/AI_Now_2017_Report.pdf, 2017.
Logan Casey, Jesse Chandler, Adam Seth Levine, Andrew Proctor, and Dara Z. Strolovitch.
Intertemporal diﬀerences among MTurk worker demographics. Working paper on
PsyArXiv, 2017.
Dana Chandler and Adam Kapelner. Breaking monotony with meaning: Motivation in
crowdsourcing markets. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 90:123–133,
2013.
Jesse Chandler, Pam Mueller, and Gabriele Paolacci. Nonna¨ ıvet´ e among Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk workers: Consequences and solutions for behavioral researchers. Behavior Re-
search Methods, 46(1):112–130, 2014.
Jesse J. Chandler and Gabriele Paolacci. Lie for a dime: When most prescreening responses
are honest but most study participants are imposters. Social Psychological and Person-
ality Science, 8(5):500–508, 2017.
Jonathan Chang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Chong Wang, Sean Gerrish, and David M. Blei.
Reading tea leaves: How humans interpret topic models. In NIPS, 2009.
Shuchi Chawla, Jason D. Hartline, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Optimal crowdsourcing
contests. Games and Economic Behavior , 2015.
Yiling Chen and David M. Pennock. A utility framework for bounded-loss market makers.
In UAI, 2007.
Yiling Chen and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. A new understanding of prediction markets
via no-regret learning. In ACM EC, 2010.
Yiling Chen, Arpita Ghosh, Michael Kearns, Tim Roughgarden, and Jennifer Wortman
Vaughan. Mathematical foundations of social computing. Communications of the ACM ,
59(12):102–108, December 2016.
Lydia Chilton, Juho Kim, Paul Andr´ e, Felicia Cordeiro, James Landay, Dan Weld, Steven P.
Dow, Robert C. Miller, and Haoqi Zhang. Frenzy: Collaborative data organization for
creating conference sessions. In CHI, 2014.
Lydia B. Chilton, Greg Little, Darren Edge, Daniel S. Weld, and James A. Landay. Cascade:
Crowdsourcing taxonomy creation. In CHI, 2013.
33


--- Page 34 ---
V aughan
Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidi-
vism prediction instruments. Big Data, Special Issue on Social and Technical Trade-Oﬀs,
2017.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic
decision making and the cost of fairness. In KDD, 2017.
Anirban Dasgupta and Arpita Ghosh. Crowdsourced judgement elicitation with endogenous
proﬁciency. In WWW, 2013.
Susan B. Davidson, Sanjeev Khanna, Tova Milo, and Sudeepa Roy. Top-k and clustering
with noisy comparisons. ACM Transactions on Database Systems , 39(4):35:1–39, 2014.
Philip Dawid and Allan Skene. Maximum likelihood estimation of observer error-rates using
the EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series C (Applied Statistics) ,
28(1):20–28, 1979.
Gianluca Demartini, Djellel Eddine Difallah, and Philippe Cudr´ e-Mauroux. Zencrowd:
Leveraging probabilistic reasoning and crowdsourcing techniques for large-scale entity
linking. In WWW, 2012.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-
scale hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.
Berkeley J. Dietvorst, Joseph P. Simmons, and Cade Massey. Algorithm aversion: People
erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 144(1):114, 2015.
Berkeley J. Dietvorst, Joseph P. Simmons, and Cade Massey. Overcoming algorithm aver-
sion: People will use imperfect algorithms if they can (even slightly) modify them. Man-
agement Science, 2016.
Djellel Eddine Difallah, Michele Catasta, Gianluca Demartini, Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, and
Philippe Cudr´ e-Mauroux. The dynamics of micro-task crowdsourcing: The case of Ama-
zon MTurk. In WWW, 2015.
Dominic DiPalantino and Milan Vojnovic. Crowdsourcing and all-pay auctions. In ACM
EC, 2009.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine
learning. CoRR arXiv:1702.08608, 2017.
Mary T. Dzindolet, Linda G. Pierce, Hall P. Beck, and Lloyd A. Dawe. The perceived
utility of human and automated aids in a visual detection task. Human Factors, 44(1):
79–94, 2002.
Robert C. Edgar and Seraﬁm Batzoglou. Multiple sequence alignment. Current opinion in
structural biology, 16(3):368–373, 2006.
Ju Fan, Guoliang Li, Beng Chin Ooi, Kian-lee Tan, and Jianhua Feng. icrowd: An adaptive
crowdsourcing framework. In SIGMOD, 2015.
34


--- Page 35 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Oluwaseyi Feyisetan, Elena Simperl, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. Improving paid
microtasks through gamiﬁcation and adaptive furtherance incentives. In WWW, 2015.
Urs Fischbacher and Franziska F¨ ollmi-Heusi. Lies in disguise: An experimental study on
cheating. Journal of the European Economic Association , 11(3):525–547, 2013.
Chao Gao, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Exact exponent in optimal rates for crowdsourcing.
In ICML, 2016.
Xi Alice Gao, Yoram Bachrach, Peter Key, and Thore Graepel. Quality expectation-variance
tradeoﬀs in crowdsourcing contests. In AAAI, 2012.
Xi Alice Gao, Andrew Mao, Yiling Chen, and Ryan Prescott Adams. Trick or treat: Putting
peer prediction to the test. In ACM EC, 2014.
Yashesh Gaur, Florian Metze, Yajie Miao, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Using keyword spotting
to help humans correct captioning faster. In INTERSPEECH, 2015.
Yashesh Gaur, Florian Metze, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Manipulating word lattices to incor-
porate human corrections. In INTERSPEECH, 2016.
Timnit Gebru, Jonathan Krause, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. Scalable annotation of ﬁne-
grained objects without experts. In CHI, 2017.
Arpita Ghosh, Satyen Kale, and Preston McAfee. Who moderates the moderators? Crowd-
sourcing abuse detection in user-generated content. In ACM EC, 2011.
Daniel G. Goldstein, R. Preston McAfee, and Siddharth Suri. The cost of annoying ads. In
WWW, 2013.
Daniel G. Goldstein, Siddharth Suri, R. Preston McAfee, Matthew Ekstrand-Abueg, and
Fernando Diaz. The economic and cognitive costs of annoying display advertisements.
Journal of Marketing Research , 51(6):742––752, 2014.
Ryan Gomes, Peter Welinder, Andreas Krause, and Pietro Perona. Crowdclustering. In
NIPS, 2011.
Joseph K. Goodman and Gabriele Paolacci. Crowdsourcing consumer research. Journal of
Consumer Research, 44(1):196–210, 2017.
Mary L. Gray, Siddharth Suri, Syed Shoaib Ali, and Deepti Kulkarni. The crowd is a
collaborative network. In CSCW, 2016.
Neha Gupta, David Martin, Benjamin V. Hanrahan, and Jacki O’Neil. Turk-life in India.
In the Intnernational Conference on Supporting Groupwork , 2014.
Juho Hamari, Jonna Koivisto, and Harri Sarsa. Does gamiﬁcation work? – A literature
review of empirical studies on gamiﬁcation. InHawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, 2014.
35


--- Page 36 ---
V aughan
Robin Hanson. Combinatorial information market design. Information Systems Frontiers,
5(1):105–119, 2003.
Christopher G. Harris. You’re hired! An examination of crowdsourcing incentive models
in human resource tasks. In WSDM Workshop on Crwdsourcing for Search and Data
Mining, 2011.
Jeﬀrey Heer and Michael Bostock. Crowdsourcing graphical perception: Using Mechanical
Turk to assess visualization design. In CHI, 2010.
Hannes Heikinheimo and Antti Ukkonen. The crowd-median algorithm. In HCOMP, 2013.
Chien-Ju Ho and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Online task assignment in crowdsourcing
markets. In AAAI, 2012.
Chien-Ju Ho, Shahin Jabbari, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Adaptive task assignment
for crowdsourced classiﬁcation. In ICML, 2013.
Chien-Ju Ho, Aleksandrs Slivkins, Siddharth Suri, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Incen-
tivizing high quality crowdwork. In WWW, 2015.
Chien-Ju Ho, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Adaptive contract de-
sign for crowdsourcing markets: Bandit algorithms for repeated principal-agent problems.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 55:317–359, 2016.
John J. Horton, David Rand, and Richard Zeckhauser. The online laboratory: Conducting
experiments in a real labor market. Experimental Economics, 14(3):399–425, 2011.
Yuening Hu, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Brianna Satinoﬀ, and Alison Smith. Interactive topic
modeling. Machine Learning, 95:423–469, 2014.
Lilly C. Irani and M. Six Silberman. Turkopticon: Interrupting worker invisibility in Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. In CHI, 2013.
Ayush Jain, Akash Das Sarma, Aditya Parameswaran, and Jennifer Widom. Understanding
workers, developing eﬀective tasks, and enhancing marketplace dynamics: A study of a
large crowdsourcing marketplace. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 10(7):829–840,
2017.
Jongbin Jung, Connor Concannon, Ravi Shro, Sharad Goel, and Daniel G. Goldstein. Sim-
ple rules for complex decisions. CoRR arXiv:1702.04690, 2017.
Radu Jurca and Boi Faltings. Mechanisms for making crowds truthful. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, 34:209–253, 2009.
Ece Kamar. Directions in hybrid intelligence: Complementing AI systems with human
intelligence. Abstract for IJCAI Early Career Spotlight Track Talk, 2016.
Ece Kamar and Eric Horvitz. Incentives for truthful reporting in crowdsourcing (short
paper). In AAMAS, 2012.
36


--- Page 37 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Vijay Kamble, David Marn, Nihar Shah, Abhay Parekh, and Kannan Ramachandran. Truth
serums for massively crowdsourced evaluation tasks. CoRR arXiv:1507.07045, 2015.
Theofanis Karaletsos, Serge Belongie, and Gunnar R¨ atsch. Bayesian representation learning
with oracle constraints. In ICLR, 2016.
David Karger, Sewoong Oh, and Devavrat Shah. Iterative learning for reliable crowdsourcing
systems. In NIPS, 2011.
David Karger, Sewoong Oh, and Devavrat Shah. Budget-optimal task allocation for reliable
crowdsourcing systems. Operations Research, 62:1–24, 2014.
Gabriella Kazai. In search of quality in crowdsourcing for search engine evaluation. In
ECIR, 2011.
Ashish Khetan and Sewoong Oh. Achieving budget-optimality with adaptive schemes in
crowdsourcing. In NIPS, 2016.
Hyun-Chul Kim and Zoubin Ghahramani. Bayesian classiﬁer combination. In AISTATS,
2012.
Joy Kim, Sarah Sterman, Allegra Argent Beal Cohen, and Michael S. Bernstein. Mechanical
novel: Crowdsourcing complex work through reﬂection and revision. In CSCW, 2017.
Juho Kim, Haoqi Zhang, Paul Andr´ e, Lydia B. Chilton, Wendy Mackay, Michel Beaudouin-
Lafon, Robert C. Miller, and Steven P. Dow. Cobi: A community-informed conference
scheduling tool. In UIST, 2013.
Aniket Kittur, Ed Chi, and Bongwon Suh. Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical
Turk. In CHI, 2008.
Aniket Kittur, Boris Smus, Susheel Khamkar, and Robert E. Kraut. Crowdforge: Crowd-
sourcing complex work. In UIST, 2011.
Aniket Kittur, Jeﬀrey V. Nickerson, Michael Bernstein, Elizabeth Gerber, Aaron Shaw,
John Zimmerman, Matt Lease, and John Horton. The future of crowd work. In CSCW,
2013.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂuence func-
tions. In ICML, 2017.
Adriana Kovashka, Olga Russakovsky, Li Fei-Fei, and Kristen Grauman. Crowdsourcing in
computer vision. Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision , 10(3):177–
243, 2016.
Chinmay E. Kulkarni, Richard Socher, Michael S. Bernstein, and Scott R. Klemmer. Scaling
short-answer grading by combining peer assessment with algorithmic scoring. In ACM
Conference on Learning@scale, 2014.
Raja S. Kushalnagar, Walter S. Lasecki, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. A readability evaluation
of real-time crowd captions in the classroom. In ASSETS, 2012.
37


--- Page 38 ---
V aughan
Walter S. Lasecki and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Online quality control for real-time crowd cap-
tioning. In ASSETS, 2012.
Walter S. Lasecki, Christopher D. Miller, Adam Sadilek, Andrew Abumoussa, Donato Bor-
rello, Raja Kushalnagar, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Real-time captioning by groups of non-
experts. In UIST, 2012.
Walter S. Lasecki, Christopher D. Miller, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Warping time for more
eﬀective real-time crowdsourcing. In CHI, 2013.
Walter S. Lasecki, Christopher D. Miller, Iftekhar Naim, Raja Kushalnagar, Adam Sadilek,
Daniel Gildea, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Scribe: Deep integration of human and machine
intelligence to caption speech in real-time. Communications of the ACM , 60(11), 2017.
Edith Law, Ming Yin, Joslin Goh, Kevin Chen, Michael Terry, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos.
Curiosity killed the cat, but makes crowdwork better. In CHI, 2016.
John Le, Andy Edmonds, Vaughn Hester, and Lukas Biewald. Ensuring quality in crowd-
sourced search relevance evaluation: The eﬀects of training question distribution. In SI-
GIR Workshop on Crowdsourcing for Search Evaluation , 2010.
Tak Yeon Lee, Casey Dugan, Werner Geyer, Tristan Ratchford, Jamie Rasmussen, N. Sadat
Shami, and Stela Lupushor. Experiments on motivational feedback for crowdsourced
workers. In ICWSM, 2013.
Martin Lermen and Knut Reinert. The practical use of the A* algorithm for exact multiple
sequence alignment. Journal of Computational Biology , 7(5):655–671, 2000.
Guoliang Li, Jiannan Wang, Yudian Zheng, and Michael J. Franklin. Crowdsourced data
management: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 28(9):
2296–2319, 2016.
Qi Li, Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Murat Demirbas, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han.
A conﬁdence-aware approach for truth discovery on long-tail data. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment, 8(4):425–436, 2014a.
Qi Li, Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei Han. Resolving conﬂicts in
heterogeneous data by truth discovery and source reliability estimation. In SIGMOD,
2014b.
Zachary C. Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability. CoRR arXiv:1606.03490, 2016.
Leib Litman, Jonathan Robinson, and Cheskie Rosenzweig. The relationship between mo-
tivation, monetary compensation, and data quality among US- and India-based workers
on Mechanical Turk. Behavioral Research Methods, 47(2):519–528, 2014.
Qiang Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander Ihler. Variational inference for crowdsourcing. In
NIPS, 2012a.
Qiang Liu, Mark Steyvers, and Alexander Ihler. Scoring workers in crowdsourcing: How
many control questions are enough? In NIPS, 2013.
38


--- Page 39 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Xuan Liu, Meiyu Lu, Beng Chin Ooi, Yanyan Shen, Sai Wu, and Meihui Zhang. CDAS: A
crowdsourcing data analytics system. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 5(10):1040–
1051, 2012b.
Stuart P. Lloyd. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 2(28):129–137, 1982.
Jennifer M. Logg. Theory of machine: When do people rely on algorithms? Harvard
Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 17-086, 2017.
Yin Lou, Rich Caruana, and Johannes Gehrke. Intelligible models for classiﬁcation and
regression. In KDD, 2012.
Yin Lou, Rich Caruana, Johannes Gehrke, and Giles Hooker. Accurate intelligible models
with pairwise interactions. In KDD, 2013.
Fenglong Ma, Yaliang Li, Qi Li, Minghui Qiu, Jing Gao, Shi Zhi, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Heng
Ji, and Jiawei Han. FaitCrowd: Fine grained truth discovery for crowdsourced data
aggregation. In SIGMOD, 2015.
Thomas W. Malone. What makes things fun to learn? Heuristics for designing instructional
computer games. In ACM SIGSMALL Symposium and the First SIGPC Symposium on
Small Systems , 1980.
Thomas W. Malone. Heuristics for designing enjoyable user interfaces: Lessons from com-
puter games. In CHI, 1982.
Adam Marcus, Eugene Wu, David Karger, Samuel Madden, and Robert Miller. Human-
powered sorts and joins. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 5(1):13–24, 2011.
David Martin, Benjamin V. Hanrahan, Jacki O’Neill, and Neha Gupta. Being a Turker. In
CSCW, 2014.
Winter Mason and Siddharth Suri. Conducting behavioral research on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk. Behavior Research Methods, 44(1):1–23, 2012.
Winter Mason and Duncan J. Watts. Financial incentives and the “performance of crowds”.
In HCOMP, 2009.
Arya Mazumdar and Barna Saha. Clustering via crowdsourcing. CoRR arXiv:1604.01839,
2016.
Barbara Mellers, Eric Stone, Pavel Atanasov, Nick Rohrbaugh, S. Emlen Metz, Lyle Un-
gar, Michael M. Bishop, Michael Horowitz, Ed Merkle, and Philip Tetlock. The psychol-
ogy of intelligence analysis: Drivers of prediction accuracy in world politics. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied , 21(2):1–14, 2015a.
Barbara Mellers, Eric Stone, Terry Murray, Angela Minster, Nick Rohrbaugh, Michael
Bishop, Eva Chen, Joshua Baker, Yuan Hou, Michael Horowitz, Lyle Ungar, and Philip
Tetlock. Identifying and cultivating superforecasters as a method of improving proba-
bilistic predictions. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(2):267–281, 2015b.
39


--- Page 40 ---
V aughan
Nolan Miller, Paul Resnick, and Richard Zeckhauser. Eliciting informative feedback: The
peer-prediction method. Management Science, 51(9):1359–1373, 2005.
Roozbeh Mottaghi, Sanja Fidler, Jian Yao, Raquel Urtasun, and Devi Parikh. Analyzing
semantic segmentation using hybrid human-machine CRFs. In CVPR, 2013.
Roozbeh Mottaghi, Sanja Fidler, Alan Yuille, Raquel Urtasun, and Devi Parikh. Human-
machine CRFs for identifying bottlenecks in scene understanding. In IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2016.
Iftekhar Naim, Daniel Gildea, Walter Lasecki, and Jeﬀrey P. Bigham. Text alignment for
real-time crowd captioning. In NAACL, 2013.
David Newman, Edwin V. Bonilla, and Wray Buntine. Improving topic coherence with
regularized topic models. In NIPS, 2011.
Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Donald Kossmann, and Eric Horvitz. On human intellect and
machine failures: Troubleshooting integrative machine learning systems. In AAAI, 2017.
David Oleson, Alexander Sorokin, Greg Laughlin, Vaughn Hester, John Le, and Lukas
Biewald. Programmatic gold: Targeted and scalable quality assurance in crowdsourcing.
In HCOMP, 2011.
Gabriele Paolacci, Jesse Chandler, and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Running experiments on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Judgment and Decision Making , 5:411–419, 2010.
Devi Parikh and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Human-debugging of machines. In Second NIPS
Workshop on Computational Social Science and the Wisdom of Crowds , 2011.
Kayur Patel, Naomi Bancroft, Steven M. Drucker, James Fogarty, Andrew J. Ko, and
James A. Landay. Gestalt: Integrated support for implementation and analysis in machine
learning processes. In UIST, 2010.
Genevieve Patterson and James Hays. Sun attribute database: Discovering, annotating,
and recognizing scene attributes. In CVPR, 2012.
Genevieve Patterson, Chen Xu, Hang Su, and James Hays. The sun attribute database:
Beyond categories for deeper scene understanding. International Journal of Computer
Vision, 108(1–2):59–81, 2014.
Michael J. Paul. Interpretable machine learning: Lessons from topic modeling. In CHI
Workshop on Human-Centered Machine Learning , 2016.
Michael J. Paul and Mark Dredze. Discovering health topics in social media using topic
models. PloS one, 9(8):e103408, 2014.
Ellie Pavlick, Matt Post, Ann Irvine, Dmitry Kachaev, and Chris Callison-Burch. The
language demographics of Amazon Mechanical Turk. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2:79–92, 2014.
40


--- Page 41 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Eyal Peera, Laura Brandimarteb, Sonam Samatc, and Alessandro Acquistic. Beyond the
Turk: An empirical comparison of alternative platforms for crowdsourcing online behav-
ioral research. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 70:153–163, 2017.
Matt Post, Chris Callison-Burch, and Miles Osborne. Constructing parallel corpora for
six Indian languages via crowdsourcing. In Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, 2012.
Forough Poursabzi-Sangdeh, Daniel G. Goldstein, Jake Hofman, Jennifer Wortman
Vaughan, and Hanna Wallach. Manipulating and measuring model interpretability. CoRR
arXiv:1802.07810, 2018.
Dra˘ zen Prelec. A Bayesian truth serum for subjective data. Science, 306(5695):462–466,
2004.
Dra˘ zen Prelec, H. Sebastian Seung, and John McCoy. A solution to the single-question
crowd wisdom problem. Nature, 541:532–535, 2017.
Marianne Promberger and Jonathan Baron. Do patients trust computers? Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 19:455–468, 2006.
Goran Radanovic and Boi Faltings. A robust Bayesian truth serum for non-binary signals.
In AAAI, 2013.
Goran Radanovic, Boi Faltings, and Radu Jurca. Incentives for eﬀort in crowdsourcing
using the peer truth serum. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ,
7(4):1–28, 2016.
Srinivas Rao and Amanda Michel. ProPublica’s guide to Mechanical Turk.
ProPublica article accessed at https://www.propublica.org/article/
propublicas-guide-to-mechanical-turk , 2016.
Vikas C. Raykar, Shipeng Yu, Linda H. Zhao, Gerardo Valadez, Charles Florin, Luca Bo-
goni, and Linda Moy. Learning from crowds. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:
1297–1322, 2010.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Why should I trust you?: Ex-
plaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In KDD, 2016.
Jakob Rogstadius, Vassilis Kostakos, Aniket Kittur, Boris Smus, Jim Laredo, and Maja
Vukovic. An assessment of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation on task performance in
crowdsourcing markets. In ICWSM, 2011.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhi-
heng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg,
and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal
of Computer Vision , 115(3):211–252, 2015a.
Olga Russakovsky, Li-Jia Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Best of both worlds: Human-machine collabo-
ration for object annotation. In CVPR, 2015b.
41


--- Page 42 ---
V aughan
Niloufar Salehi, Lilly Irani, Michael Bernstein, Ali Alkhatib, Eva Ogbe, Kristy Milland, and
Clickhappier. We are dynamo: Overcoming stalling and friction in collective action for
crowd workers. In CHI, 2015.
Niloufar Salehi, Jaime Teevan, Shamsi Iqbal, and Ece Kamar. Communicating context to
the crowd for complex writing tasks. In CSCW, 2017.
Paul J. H. Schoemaker and Philip E. Tetlock. Superforecasting: How to upgrade your
company’s judgment. Harvard Business Review, 94:72–78, 2016.
Devavrat Shah and Christina E. Lee. Reducing crowdsourcing to graphon estimation, sta-
tistically. In AISTATS, 2018.
Nihar Shah, Dengyong Zhou, and Yuval Peres. Approval voting and incentives in crowd-
sourcing. In ICML, 2015.
Nihar B. Shah and Dengyong Zhou. Double or nothing: Multiplicative incentive mechanisms
for crowdsourcing. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(165):1–52, 2016a.
Nihar B. Shah and Dengyong Zhou. No oops, you won’t do it again: Mechanisms for self-
correction in crowdsourcing. In ICML, 2016b.
Aaron D. Shaw, John J. Horton, and Daniel L. Chen. Designing incentives for inexpert
human raters. In CSCW, 2011.
Victor Sheng, Foster Provost, and Panagiotis Ipeirotis. Get another label? Improving data
quality using multiple, noisy labelers. In KDD, 2008.
Victor Shnayder, Arpit Agarwal, Rafael M. Frongillo, and David C. Parkes. Informed
truthfulness in multi-task peer prediction. In ACM EC, 2016.
M. Six Silberman, Lilly Irani, and Joel Ross. Ethics and tactics of professional crowdwork.
XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students , 17(2):39–43, 2010.
M. Six Silberman, Kristy Milland, Rochelle LaPlant, Joel Ross,
and Lilly Irani. Stop citing Ross et al. 2010, “Who are the
crowdworkers?”. Accessed at https://medium.com/@silberman/
stop-citing-ross-et-al-2010-who-are-the-crowdworkers-b3b9b1e8d300 , 2015.
Patrice Y. Simard, Saleema Amershi, David M. Chickering, Alicia Edelman Pelton, Soroush
Ghorashi, Christopher Meek, Gonzalo Ramos, Jina Suh, Johan Verwey, Mo Wang, and
John Wernsing. Machine teaching: A new paradigm for building machine learning sys-
tems. CoRR arXiv:1707.06742, 2017.
Daniel J. Simons and Christopher F. Chabris. Common (mis)beliefs about memory: A
replication and comparison of telephone and Mechanical Turk survey methods. PLoS
ONE, 7(12), 2012.
Rashmi R. Sinha and Kirsten Swearingen. Comparing recommendations made by online
systems and friends. In DELOS workshop: Personalisation and recommender systems in
digital libraries, 2001.
42


--- Page 43 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. Cheap and fast—but is
it good?: Evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language tasks. InEMNLP, 2008.
Alexander Sorokin and David Forsyth. Utility data annotation with Amazon Mechanical
Turk. In CVPRW, June 2008.
Neil Stewart, Christoph Ungemach, Adam J. L. Harris, Daniel M. Bartels, Ben R. Newell,
Gabriele Paolacci, and Jesse Chandler. The average laboratory samples a population
of 7,300 Amazon Mechanical Turk workers. Judgment and Decision Making , September
2015.
Hao Su, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. Crowdsourcing annotations for visual object detection.
In HCOMP, 2012.
Siddharth Suri and Duncan J. Watts. Cooperation and contagion in web-based, networked
public goods experiments. PLoS ONE, 6(3), 2011.
Siddharth Suri, Daniel Goldstein, and Winter Mason. Honesty in an online labor market.
In HCOMP, 2011.
Latanya Sweeney. Discrimination in online ad delivery. Communications of the ACM , 56
(5):44–54, 2013.
Omer Tamuz, Ce Liu, Serge Belongie, Ohad Shamir, and Adam Kalai. Adaptively learning
the crowd kernel. In ICML, 2011.
Jaime Teevan, Shamsi Iqbal, and Curtis von Veh. Supporting collaborative writing with
microtasks. In CHI, 2016.
Philip E. Tetlock, Barbara A. Mellers, and J. Peter Scoblic. Bringing probability judgments
into policy debates via forecasting tournaments. Science, 355(6324):481–483, 2017.
Tian Tian and Jun Zhu. Max-margin majority voting for learning from crowds. In NIPS,
2015.
Lyle H. Ungar, Barbara A. Mellers, Ville Satop¨ a¨ a, Philip Tetlock, and Jon Baron. The good
judgment project: A large scale test of diﬀerent methods of combining expert predictions.
In AAAI Fall Symposium: Machine Aggregation of Human Judgment , 2012.
Blase Ur, Jonathan Bees, Sean M. Segreti, Lujo Bauer, and Lorrie Faith Cranor Nico-
las Christin. Do users’ perceptions of password security match reality? In CHI, 2016.
Berk Ustun and Cynthia Rudin. Supersparse linear integer models for optimized medical
scoring systems. Machine Learning Journal, 102(3):349–391, 2016.
Donna Vakharia and Matthew Lease. Beyond Mechanical Turk: An analysis of paid crowd
work platforms. In Proceedings of the iConference, 2015.
Matteo Venanzi, John Guiver, Gabriella Kazai, Pushmeet Kohli, and Milad Shokouhi.
Community-based Bayesian aggregation models for crowdsourcing. In WWW, 2014.
43


--- Page 44 ---
V aughan
Norases Vesdapunt, Kedar Bellare, and Nilesh Dalvi. Crowdsourcing algorithms for entity
resolution. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 7(12):1071–1082, 2014.
Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan and Kristen Grauman. What’s it going to cost you?: Pre-
dicting eﬀort vs. informativeness for multi-label image annotations. In CVPR, 2009.
Ramya Korlakai Vinayak and Babak Hassibi. Crowdsourced clustering: Querying edges vs
triangles. In NIPS, 2016.
Ramya Korlakai Vinayak, Samet Oymak, and Babak Hassibi. Graph clustering with missing
data: Convex algorithms and analysis. In NIPS, 2014.
Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. Labeling images with a computer game. In CHI, 2004.
Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. General techniques for designing games with a purpose.
Communications of the ACM , 51(8):58–67, August 2008.
Luis von Ahn, Manuel Blum, Nicholas Hopper, and John Langford. CAPTCHA: Using
hard AI problems for security. In EUROCRYPT, 2003.
Luis von Ahn, Manuel Blum, and John Langford. Telling humans and computers apart
automatically. Communications of the ACM , pages 56–60, 2004.
Luis von Ahn, Mihir Kedia, and Manuel Blum. Verbosity: A game for collecting common-
sense knowledge. In CHI Notes, 2006.
Luis von Ahn, Benjamin Maurer, Colin McMillen, David Abraham, and Manuel Blum.
reCAPTCHA: Human-based character recognition via web security measures. Science,
321(5895):1465–1468, 2008.
Bo Waggoner and Yiling Chen. Output agreement mechanisms and common knowledge. In
HCOMP, 2014.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California
Institute of Technology, 2011.
Catherine Wah, Grant Van Horn, Steve Branson, Subhransu Maji, Pietro Perona, and Serge
Belongie. Similarity comparisons for interactive ﬁne-grained categorization. In CVPR,
2014.
Gang Wang, Christo Wilson, Xiaohan Zhao, Yibo Zhu, Manish Mohanlal, Haitao Zheng,
and Ben Y. Zhao. Serf and turf: Crowdturﬁng for fun and proﬁt. In WWW, 2012a.
Jiannan Wang, Tim Kraska, Michael J. Franklin, and Jianhua Feng. CrowdER: Crowd-
sourcing entity resolution. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 5(11):1483–1494, 2012b.
Fabian L. Wauthier, Nebojsa Jojic, and Michael I. Jordan. Active spectral clustering via
iterative uncertainty reduction. In KDD, 2012.
44


--- Page 45 ---
Making Better Use of the Crowd
Peter Welinder, Steve Branson, Serge Belongie, and Perona Pietro. The multidimensional
wisdom of crowds. In NIPS, 2010.
Kathryn Sharpe Wessling, Joel Huber, and Oded Netzer. Character misrepresentation by
Amazon Turk workers: Assessment and solutions. Journal of Consumer Research, 44(1):
211–230, 2017.
Jacob Whitehill, Ting-fan Wu, Jacob Bergsma, Javier R. Movellan, and Paul L. Ruvolo.
Whose vote should count more: Optimal integration of labels from labelers of unknown
expertise. In NIPS, 2009.
Michael Wilber, Sam Kwak, and Serge Belongie. Cost-eﬀective hits for relative similarity
comparisons. In HCOMP, 2014.
Vanessa Williamson. On the ethics of crowdsourced research. Political Science & Politics ,
49(1):77–81, 2016.
Jens Witkowski and David C. Parkes. A robust Bayesian truth serum for small populations.
2012.
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. Prediction markets. The Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 18(2):107–126, 2004.
James R. Wright, Chris Thornton, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Mechanical TA: Partially
automated high-stakes peer grading. In ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science
Education, 2015.
Jian Yao, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. Describing the scene as a whole: Joint object
detection, scene classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation. In CVPR, 2012.
Teng Ye, Sangseok You, and Lionel P. Robert Jr. When does more money work? Examining
the role of perceived fairness in pay on the performance quality of crowdworkers. In
ICWSM, 2017.
Michael Yeomans, Anuj K. Shah, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jon Kleinberg. Making sense
of recommendations. Management Science, 2017.
Jinfeng Yi, Rong Jin, Anil K. Jain, and Shaili Jain. Crowdclustering with sparse pairwise
labels: A matrix completion approach. In HCOMP, 2012a.
Jinfeng Yi, Rong Jin, Anil K. Jain, Shaili Jain, and Tianbao Yang. Semi crowdsourced
clustering: Generalizing crowd labeling by robust distance metric learning. In NIPS,
2012b.
Ming Yin, Yiling Chen, and Yu-An Sun. The eﬀects of performance-contingent ﬁnancial
incentives in online labor markets. In AAAI, 2013.
Ming Yin, Yiling Chen, and Yu-An Sun. Monetary interventions in crowdsourcing task
switching. In HCOMP, 2014.
45


--- Page 46 ---
V aughan
Ming Yin, Mary L. Gray, Siddharth Suri, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. The communi-
cation network within the crowd. In WWW, 2016.
Dong Yu and Li Deng. Automatic speech recognition: A deep learning approach . Springer,
2014.
Omar Zaidan and Chris Callison-Burch. Crowdsourcing translation: Professional quality
from non-professionals. In ACL, 2011.
Rabih Zbib, Erika Malchiodi, Jacob Devlin, David Stallard, Spyros Matsoukas, Richard
Schwartz, John Makhoul, Omar F. Zaidan, and Chris Callison-Burch. Machine translation
of Arabic dialects. In NAACL, 2012.
Haoqi Zhang, Edith Law, Krzysztof Gajos, Eric Horvitz, Rob Miller, and David Parkes.
Human computation tasks with global constraints. In CHI, 2012.
Jing Zhang, Xindong Wu, and Victor S. Sheng. Learning from crowdsourced labeled data:
A survey. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 46(4):543–576, 2016a.
Yuchen Zhang, Xi Chen, Dengyong Zhou, and Michael I. Jordan. Spectral methods meet
EM: A provably optimal algorithm for crowdsourcing. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 17(102):1–44, 2016b.
Yudian Zheng, Guoliang Li, Yuanbing Li, Caihua Shan, and Reynold Cheng. Truth inference
in crowdsourcing: Is the problem solved? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 10(5):
541–552, 2017.
Dengyong Zhou, Sumit Basu, Yi Mao, and John Platt. Learning from the wisdom of crowds
by minimax entropy. In NIPS, 2012.
Dengyong Zhou, Qiang Liu, John C. Platt, and Christopher Meek. Aggregating ordinal
labels from crowds by minimax conditional entropy. In ICML, 2014.
46
