Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
An approximate sampler for energy-based models with di-
vergence diagnostics
Bryan Eikema∗ b.eikema@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam
Germán Kruzsewski german.kruzsewski@naverlabs.com
NA VER Labs Europe
Christopher Dance christopher.dance@naverlabs.com
NA VER Labs Europe
Hady Elsahar† hadyelsahar@meta.com
Meta AI
Marc Dymetman† marc.dymetman-contractor@naverlabs.com
Independent researcher
Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= VW4IrC0n0M
Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) allow flexible specifications of probability distributions. How-
ever, sampling from EBMs is non-trivial, usually requiring approximate techniques such as
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). A major downside of MCMC sampling is that it is
often impossible to compute the divergence of the sampling distribution from the target
distribution: therefore, the quality of the samples cannot be guaranteed. Here, we intro-
duce quasi-rejection sampling (QRS), a simple extension of rejection sampling that performs
approximate sampling, but, crucially, does providedivergence diagnostics (in terms off-
divergences, such as KL divergence and total variation distance). We apply QRS to sampling
from discrete EBMs over text for controlled generation. We show that we can sample from
such EBMs with arbitrary precision in exchange for sampling efficiency and quantify the
trade-off between the two by means of the aforementioned diagnostics.1
1 Introduction
Generating samples from a probabilistic model is a fundamental part of many machine learning tasks.
Sometimes, the relation between the probabilistic model and the associated generative process is direct: for
instance, in language modelling, an autoregressive model can both generate a sequence by ancestral sampling
and compute its probability. However, the simplicity of sampling in such models often comes at the cost
of expressivity. A family of models with much greater representational freedom is the family ofenergy-
based models(EBMs) (LeCun et al., 2006). Such models map elementsx of the sample space to real-valued
“energies” E(x), or, equivalently, to non-negative scoresP (x) = e−E(x) which can be seen as unnormalized
probability distributions. However, EBMs can be difficult to sample from.
∗Work done during an internship at NAVER Labs Europe.
†Work done at NAVER Labs Europe.
1To access the code for this work (scheduled for release in Jan. 2023) and for a short introductory video, please go to
https://disco.europe.naverlabs.com/QRS.
1
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
x∼q
accept
reject
P
Pβ
βq
speed quality
Figure 1: Quasi-rejection sam-
pling (QRS) approximates a tar-
get distributionP with a truncated
distribution Pβ (the blue shaded
area). This QRS distribution is de-
fined in terms of a global proposal
distribution q and a scalar param-
eter β that controls the quality of
the approximation.
In this paper, we address the problem of sampling from EBMs (as in
“obtaining samples” and not just computing expectations, which is an-
other popular but different problem), with a particular focus on discrete
spaces of sequences over a finite vocabulary, and study applications to
text generation. A popular approach to sampling from complex, unnor-
malized, probability distributions, such as EBMs, consists in applying
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques, which are guaranteed
to converge to the target distribution in the limit, under mild regularity
conditions (Robert and Casella, 2004). In practice, however, the length of
the Markov chain is finite, in which case often onlyapproximate samples
are obtained. In order to know whether the samples are representative
of the target distribution, ideally, one shouldquantify the divergenceof
the MCMC sampling distribution from the target distribution in terms of
well-established metrics (e.g. total variation distance or KL divergence).
Unfortunately, evaluating convergence is often challenging (Cowles and
Carlin, 1996; Roy, 2020), especially if one makes no assumptions about the sample space. For instance, pop-
ular convergence assessments such as effective sample size (ESS) (Gamerman and Lopes, 2006) orˆR (Gelman
and Rubin, 1992; Vehtari et al., 2021) require Euclidean structure for computing variances and correlations
of real-valued variables (or vectors in multivariate generalizations; Vats et al., 2019; Brooks and Gelman,
1998), which are not intrinsically defined ondiscrete spaces only endowed with a probabilistic structure.
For this reason, prior work on sampling from discrete sequence spaces often relies on proxy metrics (such
as perplexity, diversity metrics and constraint satisfaction). Such proxies are typically insufficient to assess
how representative the samples are of the target distribution, and can be misleading.
In this paper, we introduce a simple approximate sampling technique, quasi-rejection sampling (QRS),
which provides explicit estimates of the divergence from the target distribution for the general class off-
divergences, which includes the total variation distance (TVD), forward and reverse KL, Jensen-Shannon,
and χ2-divergence (Polyanskiy, 2019). This is possible because QRS associates explicit probabilityscores
with samples: a property generally lacking in MCMC samplers. One may use such divergence estimates to
tune the sampler, controlling the trade-off between efficiency (acceptance rate) and quality (divergence).
QRS is a relaxation of rejection sampling that obtains approximate samples from a target distribution (see
Fig. 1). This requires access to aglobal proposal distribution that, ideally, produces samples close to the
target distribution. Traditionally, MCMC methods work with local proposals (conditional distributions
defined around a given point, for instance a distribution defined by performing a set of local edits), since
high-quality global proposals have been hard to construct. Fortunately, with the advent of powerful neural
network training techniques, this situation is rapidly changing and obtaining powerful global proposals is
now possible as we show in our experiments.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of QRS on controlled text generation. Large pre-trained language models
are becoming increasingly useful general purpose tools andgeneration is typically accomplished by sampling
(Nadeem et al., 2020). Controlling the distribution of these language models to accommodate human prefer-
ences can be difficult, but EBMs are a promising way to achieve this (Khalifa et al., 2021). However, sampling
from EBMs defined over a discrete sequence space is non-trivial, making it a challenging task to benchmark
QRS. In this paper, we experiment with EBMs resulting from restricting a GPT-2 language model (Radford
et al., 2019) in some way: either the model is restricted to only generate sequences containing a specific term;
or the model is restricted to have certain moments, for example debiasing a distribution over biographies to
consist of 50% female biographies. We explore a variety of ways to construct proposal distributions for QRS.
In particular, we explore prompting a pre-trained language model, as well as training an autoregressive model
to approximate the EBM (Khalifa et al., 2021). In App. B, we also experiment with a paraphrase generation
task in which we use off-the-shelf machine translation models as conditional proposal distributions. Results
show that we are able to approximate the target distributions to any desired level in exchange for sampling
efficiency. Finally, we include experimental comparisons with both local (random-walk) and global MCMC
methods, showing that QRS performs comparably or better, while providing stronger guarantees.2
2We will release the code for our experiments upon publication.
2
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
• We introduce QRS, a relaxation of rejection sampling that produces approximate samples and, in
contrast to most existing approximate sampling techniques, provides estimates of sampling quality
in the form off-divergences.
• We prove two theorems about QRS: one provides an upper bound on the TVD between the target
and QRS distributions; the second shows thef-divergence is a monotonic function of QRS’s tuning
parameter β. We also exploit the data-processing inequality to at least provide a lower bound on
the divergence of MCMC samplers and compare it to the precise divergence estimate for QRS.
• We show in experiments on text generation how QRS is able to approximate the target EBMs to
any desired level of accuracy in exchange for sampling efficiency.
• We show how to construct efficient global proposal distributions for text generation making use of
recent advances in large language models: prompting, training objectives for approximating EBMs,
and the widespread availability of pre-trained sequence models.
• We compare QRS with both local and global variants of Metropolis-Hastings, and show that QRS
outperforms local variants, while performing on par with global variants, according to proxy metrics.
We show, however, how proxy metrics can fail to reliably estimate the divergence from the target
EBM, a quantity typically not available to MCMC.
2 Formal Approach
Our general problem is the following. We consider a discrete (i.e. countable) sample spaceX. We are
given a nonnegative real function — such as an EBM —P (x) over X, such that the partition function
Z .= ∑
x∈XP (x) is strictly positive and finite. We can then associate with P a normalized probability
distribution p(x) .= P (x)/Z. Our goal is to define a “sampler”ω, that is a generator of elements fromX,
such thatω produces a samplex with a probabilityω(x) as close as possible to our targetp(x), in terms
of distance measures such as KL divergenceDKL(p,ω ) and total variation distanceTVD(p,ω ), and more
generally the large family off-divergences (Liese and Vajda, 2006), which we discuss later. To help us
achieve this goal, we assume that we have at our disposal aglobal proposal distributionq(x) such that i) we
can effectively computeq(x) (i.e. scorex) for anyx∈X, ii) we can efficiently generate samples fromq, and
iii)p is absolutely continuous relative toq (denoted byp≪q), in other words the support ofq includes the
support ofp, i.e.p(x)> 0 ⇒ q(x)> 0.
2.1 Quasi-rejection sampling (QRS)
Our proposed sampling method, QRS, is given as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 QRS
1: Require: TargetP, proposalq, parameterβ, number of required samplesN {0<β <∞}
2: n← 0
3: while n<N do
4: x∼q
5: rx← min (1,P (x)/(βq(x))) {Acceptance prob.}
6: u∼U[0,1] {U[0,1] : unif. dist. over[0, 1]}
7: if u≤rx then
8: output x
9: n←n + 1
10: end if
11: end while
In addition toP and q, QRS requires the input of a finite positive numberβ. For a given β, the QRS
sampler, which we will denote bypβ, produces an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sequence of
3
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
valuesx (line 8), with a probability mass function that we denote bypβ(x).3 Ifβ is a global upper bound on
P (x)/q(x), then the behaviour of the QRS algorithm is identical of that of the classical rejection sampling
(RS) algorithm (von Neumann, 1963).However, QRS does not requireβ to be an upper bound, and the
acceptance probabilityrx in line 5 is an extension of that used in RS to situations whereP (x)>βq (x). In
such situations, the samplex is always accepted at line 7.
QRS has crucial practical advantages over RS. It is well known that for rejection sampling, withβ a finite
global upper bound, we havepβ =p: in other words, rejection sampling is aperfect sampler forp (Robert
and Casella, 2004). This is of course a major advantage, however it comes with serious theoretical and
practical limitations: there may not exist such a finite upper bound, and even if one exists, its value may
not be known. Furthermore, even if such a bound could be found, the resulting sampler could be extremely
inefficient: the “acceptance rate” of rejection sampling is proportional to1/β, which can be very small. By
relaxing the requirement thatβ is a global upper bound, QRS sacrifices the identity betweenpβ and p.
However, QRS becomes much more broadly applicable, and crucially, allows an explicit trade-off between
the samplingefficiency of pβ and itsquality.
2.2 Explicit f-divergence diagnostics for QRS
Let f : (0,∞)→ R be a convex function such thatf(1) = 0, letf(0) .= limt↓0f(t), and letp1 and p2 be
probability distributions over a discrete sample spaceX. Thef-divergence ofp1 fromp2 is defined as
Df(p1,p 2) .= Ex∼p2f
(p1(x)
p2(x)
)
+f′(∞) p1(p2 = 0), (1)
where p1(p2 = 0) denotes thep1-mass of the set{x∈ X : p2(x) = 0}, and wheref′(∞) .= limt↓0t f(1/t).
Here the convention is that ifp1(p2 = 0) = 0 , the product f′(∞) p1(p2 = 0) is taken to be equal to0,
whatever the (possibly infinite) value off′(∞) (Polyanskiy, 2019).4
Unless mentioned otherwise, we will always assume in the rest of the paper thatp1≪ p2, in other words
that p1(p2 = 0) = 0, so that the previous definition simplifies to
Df(p1,p 2) .= Ex∼p2f
(p1(x)
p2(x)
)
. (2)
The family off-divergences enjoys a number of remarkable properties,5 and contains many standard methods
for measuring differences between probability distributions (Polyanskiy, 2019; Liese and Vajda, 2006). In
our experiments, we mainly work with the total variation distanceTVD(p1,p 2) .=∑
x∈X|p1(x)−p2(x)|/2,
obtained withf(x) =|1−x|/2, and KL divergenceDKL(p1,p 2) .=∑
x∈Xp1(x) logp1(x)
p2(x), which hasf(x) =
x logx.
Explicit form for pβ and f-divergence estimation Let Pβ(x) .= min(P (x),βq (x)), and let Zβ
.=∑
x∈XPβ(x) be the associated partition function. Also, define theacceptance rateARβ of the QRS sampler
pβ as the proportion of samples fromq, in line 4 of the algorithm, that are accepted on line 7, a proportion
that provides a measure of the efficiency of the algorithm. We then have the following properties, proved in
App. D:
pβ(x) = min(P (x),βq (x))/Zβ =Pβ(x)/Zβ, (3)
ARβ = Ex∼q min(1,P (x)/(βq(x))) =Zβ/β. (4)
Eq. 3 provides an explicit form forpβ as the normalized distribution associated withPβ, while Eq. 4 shows
that the acceptance rate is a nonincreasing function of parameterβ.
3This involves some abuse of notation, aspβ refers to both a sampler and a distribution that “scores” elements ofX.
4Both f(0) .= limt↓0f(t) and f′(∞) .= limt↓0t f(1/t) can be shown to exist for a convex functionf with domain (0,∞), if
we allow these limits to take the value+∞ (Hiriart-Urruty and Lemaréchal, 1996).
5In particularDf (p1,p 2)≥ 0, and, forf strictly convex att = 1, Df (p1,p 2) = 0 iff p1 = p2. Also, we haveDf (p1,p 2) =
D ˜f (p2,p 1), where ˜f(t) .= t f(1/t) is another convex function with ˜f(1) = 0 known as the perspective of f (Remark 7.2
Polyanskiy, 2019).
4
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
This explicit form given in Eq. 3 enables us to directly compute empirical estimates of thef-divergence of
the target frompβ. It is easy to see that, under our assumption at the beginning of the section thatp≪q,
we have bothp≪pβ and pβ≪p and in particular we can write
Df(p,pβ) = Ex∼pβf
(p(x)
pβ(x)
)
. (5)
Crucially, to estimate this quantity given a collection of samples frompβ we need to compute (or at least
approximate) the two valuesp(x) and pβ(x) for any givenx. And this is something that wecan do with
QRS thanks to the explicit form ofpβ of Eq. 3 and given that we can estimate the partition functionsZ
and Zβ — see Eqs. 6 and 7 below.
The contrast here with a typical Markov chain based samplerω is striking: it is usually unfeasible to
estimate the probabilityω(x) for a givenx (even one sampled fromω): to do so, one might estimate the
chain’s transition matrix or kernel, and repeatedly multiply by it, but this matrix is usually huge, or even
infinite. In other words, unlike QRS, these samplers are not “scorers”, making it impractical to estimate
f-divergencesDf(p,ω ) as in Eq. 5.
Divergence estimates via importance sampling Computing divergences as described above requires
obtaining a different set of samples for every value ofβ. More conveniently, one can use asingle collection
{x1,...,x N} of i.i.d. draws fromq and use importance sampling (IS) (Owen, 2013) to compute such quan-
tities. Let h be a real-valued function onX, such that∑
x∈Xh(x) is well defined (it may be infinite) and
let q(x) = 0 ⇒ h(x) = 0. Then we can then rewrite∑
x∈Xh(x) = ∑
x∈X:q(x)>0q(x) h(x)
q(x) = Ex∼q
h(x)
q(x) ≃
N−1∑N
i=1
h(xi)
q(xi), to compute:
Z≃N−1
N∑
i=1
P (xi)
q(xi), Z β≃N−1
N∑
i=1
Pβ(xi)
q(xi) , (6)
Df(p,pβ)≃N−1
N∑
i=1
Pβ(xi)
Zβq(xi) f
(Zβ P (xi)
Z Pβ(xi)
)
. (7)
In Eq. 7, we exploit the fact thatPβ(x) = min(P (x),βq (x)) is known explicitly.
More details are provided in App. E about how Eq. 7 specializes in the case of TVD and KL divergences,
the measures we use in our experiments. There, we also describe the IS formulas we use for estimating the
acceptance rate ARβ, the expected valueEx∼pβh(x) of a functionh expressing a constraint, as well as the
probabilityp( ¯Aβ) (see next paragraph).
Remark about partition function estimates As the sample mean is an unbiased estimator of the
mean, the estimates in Eq. 6 are unbiased. These estimates converge (almost surely) to Z and Zβ for
N→∞ , a consequence of the strong law of large numbers (Tao, 2008), whether or not the random variables
(RVs) P(x)
q(x) and Pβ(x)
q(x) have finite variances. However, in order to provide guarantees about the accuracy of
these estimates — e.g. in terms of confidence bounds — one would need to estimate these variances, or their
(1 +α)-moment for someα >0 as discussed by Lugosi and Mendelson (2019, p. 8). Apractical approach
consists in providingempirical variance estimates based on the sameN samples, and this is what we will
do in several experiments (see Sec. 3), comforting us about thepractical accuracy of our estimates ofZ
and Zβ. However, in theory, the empirical variance estimates could themselves be wrong, resulting in an
estimation circularity. The only way to avoid this circularity, that we are aware of, consists in cases where
the RVs P(x)
q(x) and Pβ(x)
q(x) can be bounded a priori, in which cases the variances of these RVs can also be
formally bounded using Popoviciu’s inequality (Popoviciu, 1935) or, more aggressively, confidence intervals
produced through Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding, 1994), so that confidence bounds forZ and Zβ can be
obtained. Interestingly, the random variablePβ(x)
q(x) = min(P (x)/q(x),β )≤β appearing inZβ is boundedby
construction, so that one can always provide formal guarantees about theZβ estimate. By contrast, in the
case ofZ, while one can often find proposalsq for which a bound onP(x)
q(x) is known, such proposals can be
5
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
unacceptably inefficient, while other proposals, closer to the target, are much more efficient in practice, but
eschew strict formal guarantees. We provide details and compute such provable bounds onZ for some of
the EBMs that we consider in our experiments in App. I.6
2.3 Two theorems about QRS: bounding and monotonicity
TVD bounds on QRS We first provide a simple upper bound on the TVD between the sampling and
target distributions.
Let ¯Aβ
.={x∈X :P (x)/q(x)>β} be the set of “violators” of theβ bound. It is intuitive that the “fewer”
violators there are, the closerpβ is to the targetp. The following theorem, proven in App. D, makes this
statement precise, in terms of the actualp-mass of the violators:
Theorem 2.1. TVD(p,pβ)≤p( ¯Aβ).
As a corollary of this, observing thatlimβ→∞p( ¯Aβ)→ 0, one sees thatpβ converges top for β→∞ .7
f-divergence monotonicity of QRSWhile the previous upper bound is specific to TVD, QRS enjoys an
attractivemonotonicity property for allf-divergences. We provide two proofs of this result. The first proof,
given in App. D.3, relies on fundamental “majorization” properties of convex functions, does not involve the
differentiation of the divergence, and provides some graphical intuition in terms of gaps associated with
Jensen’s inequality. The second proof,8 given in App. D.4, replaces a large part of the first proof by a
much shorter calculus-based derivation that exploits an extension of the fundamental theorem of calculus
not requiring differentiability, but only absolute continuity.
Theorem 2.2. Let 0<β <β′ <∞. Then Df(p,pβ′)≤Df(p,pβ).
Theorem 2.2 guarantees that increasing the value of parameterβ never increases thef-divergence of the
target distribution from the QRS distribution. Moreover, in the light of footnote 5, increasing β never
increases the divergence of the QRS distribution from the target distribution.
3 Experiments
3.1 Approximating a Poisson distribution and the quality-efficiency trade-off
To demonstrate the usage of QRS we start with a toy setting using two Poissons. The goal is to
sample from a target Poisson distribution p with rate λp = 11 using samples from a proposal Pois-
son distribution q with rate λq = 10 . Rejection sampling is not possible in this setting as the ratio
p(x)/q(x) = (e−1111x/x!)/(e−1010x/x!) = e−1 1.1x can take arbitrarily large values whenx increases, i.e.
the ratio is unbounded. However, it is possible to use QRS here.
We perform ten independent experiments in which we sample104 elements fromq that we use to compute
the quality of the approximation by estimating:TVD(p,pβ) and its upper boundp( ¯Aβ). (See App. C.1 for
additional results onDKL(p,pβ).) In all cases, we useβ values in the interval[0.5, 3.5]. Furthermore, we
compute the sampler’s efficiency by estimating the acceptance rate (AR) for each value ofβ (Eq. 4). As
described previously and detailed in App. E, we compute estimates for all these metrics using importance
sampling. Results are displayed in Fig. 2. As shown, using higher values ofβ improves the TVD, even though
6 In principle, it is possible to construct examples whereZ = Ex∼q
P (x)
q(x) is finite while the variance Varx∼q
P (x)
q(x) is infinite,
see App. I. In practice, for text generation, we have not observed such situations. Note that all the EBMs of Sec. 3.2 are of the
form P (x) = a(x)b(x), witha an autoregressive model andb(x) upper-bounded; therefore if one takesq =a, thenP (x)/q(x)
is bounded so the variance is bounded, although the proposala can be inefficient.
7One reviewer asked whether one could provide guarantees about the asymptotic speed of convergence top. When the
support ofP is a finite set, the answer is easy and positive: there exists a valueβ0 such thatβ >β0 implies thatpβ is identical
to p, by simply takingβ0 = max{P (x)/q(x) : x∈ Supp(P )}. However, when the support ofP is an infinite set, we prove in
App. K the following negative result (Theorem K.1): for an arbitrarily slowly decreasing functiong(β) that converges to0, there
exists some proposalq such thatTVD(p,pβ) converges even more slowly thang(β). In other words, if one plays “adversarially”,
it is always possible to design an arbitrarily bad proposal in terms of asymptotic convergence rate.
8We thank one of the reviewers for suggesting this proof.
6
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2: (a) Estimation of sampling quality asTVD(p,pβ), efficiency (acceptance rate), and the trade-off
betweenthemforaQRSsamplerwhenusingaproposal q = Poisson(λ = 10)toapproximate p = Poisson(λ =
11)computedin10independentexperimentsover 104 samples. (b)Differencesbetweenestimated TVD(p,pβ)
and their true values forβ = 2, computed 1000 times for each different number of samples. The blue line is
the mean and shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
this comes at the cost of lower acceptance rate. In particular, withβ = 3.5, the TVD is tiny (≈ 10−4),
yet the acceptance rate is moderate (0.3, i.e. 30% of proposal samples are accepted). Notably, we can ease
the visualization of the trade-off between quality and efficiency by reparametrizing the divergence metrics in
terms of the acceptance rate (last panel of Fig. 2a). A procedure to map acceptance rates to a corresponding
β is outlined in App. F. We use this concise reparameterized representation to plot subsequent results.
Empirical estimates of the divergence diagnostics In the previous and following experiments, we
use a sufficiently large sample size to obtain accurate estimates of the divergence diagnostics. However, it
is reasonable to wonder about the bias and variance of these estimators for smaller sample sizes. While
it is not possible to provide a definite answer for all EBMs (cf. Sec. 2.2), we can investigate this question
by exploiting the fact that we can compute with great precisionDf(p,pβ) when bothp and q are Poisson
distributions (see App. H for a derivation). We compare this approximation to the true value with the
estimators proposed in Sec. 2 using sample sizesn∈{ 102,..., 106} and repeating the process1000 times.
Results for TVD are shown on Fig. 2b (see App. C.1 for results on KL). As it can be seen, there is some
slight variance when only 100 samples are used for the estimation, and it quickly improves as more samples
are used. In contrast, the estimation bias is tiny.
3.2 Generation with distributional control
The following experiments focus on the task of generation with distributional control, introduced by Khalifa
et al. (2021), a task that requires sampling from an EBM over sequences of discrete tokens, making it an
ideal test bed for QRS. Given a language modela(x), the goal of this task is to sample from a modelp(x)
that, on the one hand, constrains the moments of a vector ofn pre-defined features ϕ(x) to match some
desired value ¯µ (i.e. Ex∼pϕ(x) = ¯µ), while on the other hand minimizingDKL(p,a ), a generalized version
(Csiszar, 1975; Kullback and Khairat, 1966) of the maximum entropy approach (Jaynes, 1957; Rosenfeld,
1996). For example, one might want to debias a language model trained on a corpus of biographies to
produce biographies only of scientists, 50% of which should be female. Thenϕ1(x) and ϕ2(x) would be
binary classifiers assessing whether a sentence speaks about a scientist or a female respectively, and the
desired moments would be set to¯µ = [1, 0.5].
The authors show thatp can be expressed as an unnormalized EBMP (x) = a(x)b(x), and describe two
choices ofb(x). On the one hand, they considerpointwise constraints, where ¯µ∈{ 0, 1}n. For instance, if
there is a single binary feature for which we would like that∀x :ϕ(x) = 1, thenb takes the formb(x) =ϕ(x).
Otherwise, in the case ofdistributional constraints in which¯µ∈ Rn, they show that there is a vectorλ∈ Rn
such thatb(x) = exp(λ·ϕ(x))andp(x)∝a(x)b(x)fulfills the requirements of moment matching and minimal
7
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
prompt
name
prompt
simple Wikileaks.
multiple Wikileaks, Wikileaks, Wikileaks.
knowledge Here is what I know about Wikileaks:
jeopardy This medium was founded by Julian Assange in
2006.
news Here are the latest developments on Wikileaks:
Figure 3: Comparing GPT-2, GPT-2 conditioned on various prompts, and a fine-tuned model (DPG) as
proposals for generating sequences containing “Wikileaks”. Disconnected points in the upper-left corner
indicate TVD(p,q ) for each proposal, while the curves showTVD(p,pβ) as a function of the acceptance rate.
Standard deviation bootstrap estimates are shown as shaded regions for every proposal.
KL divergence from the original model. The vectorλ is found using self-normalized importance sampling
(Owen, 2013; Parshakova et al., 2019a) and stochastic optimization.
3.2.1 Proposals for a pointwise constraint
We first experiment with constraining GPT-2 small (Radford et al., 2019) using one of the pointwise con-
straints (¯µ = 1.0) proposed in Khalifa et al. (2021), namely,b(x) = 1 [x contains “Wikileaks”]. In order to ap-
ply QRS we need to find a suitable proposal distribution. A possible candidate is GPT-2 small itself. An ad-
vantage of this proposal is that we can use pure rejection sampling with an upper-boundβ = 1to obtain exact
samples from the EBM. This is because we can upper bound the ratioP (x)/q(x) =a(x)b(x)/a(x) =b(x)≤ 1.
In fact, for b(x)∈ {0, 1} this process reduces to “naively” filtering out all samples for whichb(x) = 0 .
However, a serious disadvantage is that the acceptance rate will be given by the natural frequency of the
constraint. Using QRS, we can employ proposal distributions leading to better efficiency at a small cost in
quality of approximation top. We explore two such options:
1. First, we make use of the model proposed by Khalifa et al. (2021), which consists of a fine-tuned
autoregressive model obtained by applying thedistributional policy gradient (DPG)algorithm (Par-
shakova et al., 2019b) to approximate the target EBM in a generic way. While this model is
considerably better at satisfying the desired constraints, it does not match the desired distribution
perfectly.
2. Second, in the spirit of “in-context learning” (Brown et al., 2020), we propose tocondition a(x)
on a promptwith the aim of increasing the constraint satisfaction rate in the resulting conditional
distributions. In contrast to the previous approach, this does not require the training of a new
model, even though it does require the manual selection of promising prompts. We experiment with
five such prompts, which we present in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 shows theTVD(p,·) as a function of acceptance rate for different samplers. In this and the following
experiments, we chose a range ofβ values that yields acceptance rates in the range100–10−5 (cf. Table 2
in App. A), using Algorithm 2 in App. F for this purpose. We first show theTVD(p,q ) for each proposal
q, at an acceptance rate of1, before applying QRS (in the upper left corner). Then, we plotTVD(p,pβ) as
a function of acceptance rate for each proposal distribution. We compute IS estimates of the TVD on 1M
samples from each proposal distribution. Variance is estimated using the bootstrap estimator (Wasserman,
2010). Note that all samples obtained from QRS satisfy the constraints perfectly, as sequences that do
not satisfy the constraint are always rejected, and for this reason the curves start with different acceptance
rates. As expected, using GPT-2 small results in zero TVD, but comes at the cost of low efficiency, with
an acceptance rate around10−4. Using prompting, we improve the constraint satisfaction of the resulting
proposal distributions and trade-off approximation quality for greater efficiency using QRS: For instance,
if a TVD of0.3 can be tolerated, then some of the prompt proposals provide a 10-fold higher acceptance
8
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Chandra Pradha Towni (born February 11, 1965) is a social scientist, activist, poet, and author living in Portugal. She is...
Enrella Carrière is a Canadian writer, translator, and philosopher specializing in the history of show business. She has covered
topics such as the direction and psychology of television and the evolution of human...
Albert Fahn (born 1970) is an American scientist who focuses on algorithms for generating biomechanical data. Methods to generate
and construct biomechanical data...
Wyndham Radnor (born 1946) is a British historian and criminologist specialising in the subject of labour law. He has written
extensively on...
Figure 4: Estimation of the divergence from the EBM (TVD), and moments of featuresfemale and science
in sampling debiased GPT-2 biographies talking about scientists. Variance is negligible as shown in Table
10 in App. I. We also show samples from running the QRS sampler at an acceptance rate of10−3. Samples
are cut off at 40 (subword) tokens and are manually chosen to show two male and two female biographies,
for constraint satisfaction (moment matching) results refer to the graph. We color words that fire our female
or science features.
rate with respect to the base GPT-2 model with no further training. Some prompts work notably better
than others and we do not exclude the possibility of there existing prompts that perform even better than
the ones we tested; we leave a more extensive exploration of prompting to create proposal distributions for
future work. The autoregressive policy obtained from the DPG algorithm is the best proposal distribution
we tested. Notably, it allows one to obtain low TVDs at higher acceptance rates than is possible by naively
filtering samples from the base language model. For example, we can obtain a TVD of 0.1 at 100× the
acceptance rate (see Table 10 in App. I for more numerical results).
3.2.2 Distributional constraints
We now turn to the task, also introduced by Khalifa et al. (2021), of generating biographies of scientists while
debiasing the gender distribution to contain female scientists 50% of the time. For this we make use of GPT-2
Biographies (a(x)), a language model fine-tuned on Wikipedia biographies9 and follow the same setup as the
authors to define the binary classifiers identifying sequences talking about scientists or females10 and infer
an EBM that matches the distributional constraints with minimal deviation from the original model. The
frequency with which the modela(·) generates scientist biographies is1.8%, female biographies 7.5%, and
the frequency with which it generates female scientist biographies is only0.14%. As proposal distribution, we
use the DPG model that Khalifa et al. (2021) trained to approximate the EBM, which reaches a constraint
satisfaction of 69.0% scientist, 27.3% female and 19.6% female scientist biographies. (See Table 7 in their
paper for examples generated by this proposal.)
As before, we obtain 1M samples from the proposal distribution to compute importance sampling estimates
(detailed in App. E) ofTVD(p,pβ), acceptance rate (ARβ), and the moments of the features that we wish
to control. We show all metric curves as a function of acceptance rate of the QRS algorithm as well as some
generation examples in Fig. 4.
Wefindthatboth TVD(p,pβ)andtheupper-boundon TVD(p,pβ)steadilyconvergetozeroastheacceptance
rate decreases, meaning that we can perfectly match the target EBM in exchange for sampling efficiency.
As a result, at an acceptance rate of ARβ = 10−3 we nearly perfectly debias the original language model
9https://huggingface.co/mkhalifa/gpt2-biographies
10Gender is estimated by the ratio of female to male pronoun counts, scientists are identified by the mention of at least one
of multiple words associated with the profession.
9
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
while exclusively generating biographies about scientists (49.5% female and 99.8% scientist biographies).
We show some example generations at ARβ = 10−3 chosen manually to illustrate two male and two female
biographies. Notably, we also achieve a good level of constraint satisfaction (48.4% female and99.9% scientist
biographies) and a TVD of0.1 at ARβ = 10−2. This is a considerable improvement in quality with respect
to the proposal distribution (with a TVD of 0.7), and in acceptance rate relative to directly rejecting from
GPT-2 Biographies (which would result in AR≤ 2× 0.14% = 2.8× 10−3). Two more pointwise and two
more distributional constraints including additional metrics such asDKL(p,pβ) and DKL(pβ,a ) are shown
in App. A with similar results.
3.2.3 Comparison with MCMC techniques
We now compare QRS with MCMC samplers, for which we focus on the EBM for apointwise constraint
restricting GPT-2 to only generating sequences containing “amazing”.
Baselines We use the popular Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings,
1970). This algorithm works by constructing a Markov chain of dependent samples, in which the next state
of the chain is equal to a newly proposed sample with a certain acceptance probability, and otherwise the
next state is the same as the current state. When the lengthn of the chain tends to infinity it can be proven
(Robert and Casella, 2004, Theorem 7.4), see App. J, that the average of a statistic on the elements of the
chain converges to its expected value under the target distribution and, more importantly when focussing on
sampling as we do, that the distribution of thenth element of the chain converges (in total variation) to the
target distribution. In practice, the chain is of finite length and only approximate samples are obtained.
Common practices are to discard the first few samples of the chain to reduce the effects of poor starting
conditions (which is known as burn-in), and to only keep everytth sample to reduce autocorrelations (which
is known as thinning). We use both these heuristics in our experiments. We set a burn-in period of 1,000
steps and only keep every1, 000th sample to attain an acceptance rate of10−3. Note that we chose not to
include the burn-in period to compute the acceptance rate of MCMC samplers, as this period is constant
and does not grow with sample size. We also experiment with a reset variant (-R) of the MH samplers
that does away with autocorrelations among samples altogether (i.e. produces i.i.d. samples like QRS) by,
instead of using thinning, resetting the chain after 1,000 steps and only retaining the last sample of the chain
(see Robert and Casella 2004, Theorem 7.4 (ii)). This variant does not make use of a burn-in period.
We experiment with two proposal distributions for use in the MH samplers: i) the global proposal distribution
used in QRS, i.e. DPG, for independent MH (IMH) (Robert and Casella, 2004, Sec. 7.4) and ii) a local
proposaldistributionthatmakeslocaleditstoanevolvingsampleinthechainforrandom-walkMH(RWMH).
As far as we are aware, IMH is not commonly employed in the literature due to global proposals classically
being difficult to come by. We stress that with the advances in neural network training techniques such as
DPG, global proposals are more accessible than ever and we therefore include IMH as a strong baseline in
our experiments. Our design of the local proposal is inspired by uses of MCMC in controlled text generation,
in particular by Miao et al. (2019) and Goyal et al. (2021). The local proposal randomly performs either
an insert, delete or replace operation on the token level, where insert and replace operations are performed
by sampling from BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). Locations of insertions and deletions are chosen uniformly at
random. To inform the local proposal distribution about the target distribution, we implement the insert
and replace operations by randomly mask-filling using BERT (99% of the time) and filling with “amazing”
(1% of the time). We initialize the chain using a sample from the global proposal distribution.11
Metrics As nof-divergence estimates are available for the MCMC samplers, we instead resort to some
proxy metrics specific to controlled text generation to measure the sample quality, extracted from104 samples
over ten independent experiments. In particular we measure constraint satisfaction (% amazing), perplexity
(PPL) of our samples under GPT-2, diversity across samples with Self-BLEU-5 (Zhu et al., 2018) and
percentage of unique samples (% Uniq), and finally, diversity within samples as given by the percentage of
11Note that localized MCMC methods can still take advantage of good starting points, especially the reset variants. We
therefore also provide our variants of RWMH with a global proposal distribution for obtaining good starting points, the same
global proposal as used for QRS.
10
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Method %Amazing PPL ↓ Self-BLEU-5↓ %Uniq↑ Dist-2↑ TVD↓∗
proposal 62.9± 0.4 61 .7± 0.3 85.8± 0.1 100 ± 0.0 96 .1± 0.0 0.67
RWMH 100± 0.0 - 99.8± 0.2 32 .0± 33.7 83.8± 17 Unk.
RWMH-R 100± 0.1 58 .7± 3.3 87.6± 0.4 100 ± 0.0 92 .0± 0.3 Unk. (≥ 0.28± 0.02)
IMH 100± 0.0 - 86.9± 0.3 98 .7± 0.5 96 .3± 0.1 Unk.
IMH-R 100± 0.0 63 .4± 1.5 86.7± 0.1 100 ± 0.0 96 .3± 0.1 Unk. (≥ 0.01± 0.01)
QRS 100± 0.0 62 .8± 1.6 86.6± 0.2 100 ± 0.0 96 .3± 0.1 0.01
Table 1: Comparing with MCMC samplers for the constraint of including “amazing” in the sequence. We
show mean± one standard deviation over 10 runs. All samplers are run at an acceptance rate of10−3. ∗TVD
is estimated on106 independent samples, standard deviations are below 0.01. App. G contains additional
results from these experiments.
distinct bigrams (Dist-2; Li et al., 2016). However, we note that these metrics can easily be cheated. An
example of this is if we would manually construct a sampler that would repeat a small set of reasonably
diverse, high probability (under GPT-2) sequences that meet the target constraint. The resulting sampling
distribution would not be close to the target EBM, but would score well on such proxy metrics. For QRS we
do report the TVD to the target distribution, which cannot be gamed in this way.12 Notably, for MCMC
we can also providelower boundson the TVD thanks to the data-processing inequality (DPI). The DPI tells
us, informally, that thef-divergence of one distribution to another can only decrease by applying the same
“projection” to the two distributions. A precise formulation of this theorem is provided as Theorem 6.2 of
Polyanskiy and Wu (2017), but, for our purposes, the following special case (“lumping property”) proven as
Lemma 4.1 of Csiszár and Shields (2004) will be sufficient:
Theorem 3.1. Let p and q be distributions over a sample spaceX. Let{A1,...,A k} be a finite partition
of X. Then the distributionsp′(i) .=p(Ai) and q′(i) .=q(Ai) over{1,...,k } satisfy Df(p′,q′)≤Df(p,q ).
While it is in general unfeasible to estimate the actual divergence of two distributionsp,q over alarge space
X based only on a moderate number ofsamples (as opposed toscores) fromp and q (Canonne, 2020), by
projecting these samples onto a much smaller numberk of “bins”, it is possible to obtain precise estimates
of the divergence of the “histogram”p′ from q′, and therefore tolower boundthe divergence ofp from q.
We use this result to obtain lower bounds on the TVD to the target distribution of RWMH-R and IMH-R,
for which we have i.i.d. samples, whereas this is not the case for RWMH and IMH. After manually inspecting
a single set of 104 samples out of ten independently sampled sets to look for salient defects, we chose a
binning function that classifies a sample in two bins according to whether it contains a newline character or
not. Then, we used it to bin the samples of the remaining nine sets and compute their mean TVD to the
binned target distribution to obtain lower bounds on the TVD.
Results Our results are shown in Table 1 (with some samples shown in App. G). All samplers satisfy the
constraint of only generating sequences containing the term “amazing”. The EBMp, however, is defined
to be, among all those distributions that satisfy the constraint, the one closest to the original language
model a (GPT-2) underDKL(p,a ). Constraint satisfaction alone thus does not tell us how well the samplers
approximate the target EBM. For MCMC samplers we have to rely on proxy metrics. RWMH-R seems
to excel in terms of perplexity while also obtaining competitive diversity metrics (Self-BLEU-5, % Uniq,
and Dist-2). However, we can identify a large TVD between its sampling distribution and the target one,
showcasing the failure of proxy metrics to reliably measure the approximation accuracy of our samplers, and
12This may raise a question: Could one designany proxy metrics that wouldreliably assess closeness of an MCMC sampler
to the targetp, given a limited number of MCMC samples? When the spaceX is very large, as is the case here, probably not.
For an intuitive example, sayp is the uniform distribution overX andω is the uniform distribution over an unknown subsetY
of X, of size half that ofX. The number of samples to distinguish these distributions clearly grows with the size ofX if only
samples fromω are available, but if the value of theprobabilityω(x) is also available then asingle sample x is sufficient. More
formally, one might consider algorithms that compare two distributionsp andω on a setX of sizen, which should ‘accept’ with
probability 2/3 if TVD(p,ω )≤ ε1 and ‘reject’ with probability2/3 if TVD(p,ω )≥ ε2. Canonne (2020, Theorem 12.9, p. 58)
shows that such algorithms requireO(1/(ε1−ε2)2) samples fromω if the probabilitiesω(x) are known; whereas Canonne et al.
(2022, Theorem 1.1) show thatΩ
(√n
ε2
2
+ n
logn max
{
ε1
ε2
2
,
ε2
1
ε4
2
})
samples are needed if these probabilities are unavailable.
11
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
demonstrating the benefits of having explicit estimates of divergence measures. After qualitatively inspecting
samples of both local MCMC methods (see Tables 6 and 7 in App. G), we found many samples to contain
repetitions, e.g. of punctuation marks. Also, RWMH seems to suffer from low diversity across samples (as
evidenced by the high Self-BLEU-5 and low % Uniq scores), containing many repeated samples. On the
other hand, IMH, IMH-R and QRS do not suffer from this lack of diversity. The variants of IMH and QRS
seem to perform on par in terms of sample diversity, and QRS attains slightly lower perplexity than IMH-R.
An estimate of the TVD around 0.01 shows that QRS closely approximates the target EBM and shows
considerably more diversity within and across samples. It might be that the IMH and IMH-R samplers
would achieve similar results, but we cannot know as no divergence estimates are available. We only know
that the binning strategy failed to detect any large divergences for IMH-R. One case in which we can estimate
f-divergences for IMH-R and RWMH-R variants is the Poisson example that we discussed in Section 3.1. We
present a comparison between QRS and those reset variants of MH for this Poisson example in Appendix C.2,
finding that QRS consistently results in lower divergences for all acceptance rates (for ARβ < 1).
4 Related Work
The vast majority of approaches to approximate sampling from complex probability distributions have been
based on MCMC. However, a few approaches have taken rejection sampling as their starting point. Like
QRS, the method of rejection sampling chains (Tierney, 1992; Chib and Greenberg, 1995, Sec. 6.1) does not
require a global upper bound. This is a hybrid method that uses rejection sampling in a region satisfying
a partial upper bound but combines it with IMH outside of that region to produce a Markov chain that
converges to the correct stationary distribution. Caffo et al. (2002) propose empirical supremum rejection
sampling, an algorithm that adaptively increases theβ upper bound based on the maximum observed so far,
with a focus on convergence in the limit rather than approximation quality.
Closer to our work, some researchers have observed before us that a partial boundβ leads to the probability
distribution presented in Eq. 3. Rejection control (Liu et al., 1998; Liu, 2004, pp. 44-45), in the context
of particle filters, exploits this observation to accelerate the computation of an unbiased IS estimate of the
expectation Ex∼pf(x) in situations where computingf(x) is expensive and must be done repeatedly. While
the focus of that work was not to produce divergence diagnostics, interestingly, on close examination, we
find that one of their proofs (Liu, 2004, App. A.1, Eq. (A.4)) formulated aχ2-divergence between a target
distribution and a proxy distribution similar topβ. Variational rejection sampling (Grover et al., 2018) uses
a relaxation of Eq. 3 to better approximate the variational posterior in a variational inference setting. They
aim to construct a differentiable sampler that can tighten the evidence lower bound, if additional computing
power is available. The focus of our work is more general: we propose a generic sampler for which we can
quantify a trade-off between sampling efficiency and approximation quality and we study the properties of
this sampler.
While this paper is concerned with generating samples fromdiscrete EBMs, much research so far has been
more concerned withcontinuous EBMs, in particular for applications in vision. Continuous EBMs have the
advantage over discrete ones that it is possible to differentiate the EBMP (x) with respect tox, and not only
the approximating modelπθ relative toθ. This opens a range of optimized training techniques (see the survey
by Song and Kingma 2021), including Langevin and Hamiltonian dynamics (Parisi, 1981; Duane et al., 1987),
where the local Markov chain moves are informed by∇x log P (x). While such techniques are not available
for discrete EBMs, some recent efforts are trying to bridge the gap. For instance,continuous relaxation
techniques (Han et al., 2020; Nishimura et al., 2020) relax the original discrete space into a continuous space,
perform the sampling in this space, then map the samples back to the discrete space; while Grathwohl et al.
(2021); Zhang et al. (2022); Rhodes and Gutmann (2022) sample directly in the discrete space, but inform
the local moves of the chain through gradients computed in a larger continuous space. To the best of our
knowledge, while Zhang et al. (2022) do experiment with “text infilling”, the ability to replace some blanks
in a given sentence by actual words, none of the above work has so far directly addressed text generation
applications of the kind we have been considering here, in which the sample space is not only discrete, but
composed of structured objects, namely word sequences of varying length, raising specific challenges.
12
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Monte Carlo sampling techniques are popular for various NLP applications, in particular language modeling.
For example, Miao et al. (2020) propose a sampler that mitigates poor estimation of probabilities due to
overfitting. Deng et al. (2020) train globally normalized language models to combat negative effects of
local normalization, and use a form of sampling importance resampling (Rubin, 1987) to sample from the
resulting EBM using an autoregressive proposal language model. Goyal et al. (2021) develop a Metropolis-
Hastings algorithm to sample from masked language models. For controlled text generation Miao et al. (2019)
propose a random-walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm for sampling from an EBM that encodes sequence-
level preferences on natural text. Their proposal distribution consists of local string editing operations on
randomly selected words or positions. Zhang et al. (2020) improve on this approach by making use of a
tree-search algorithm to more efficiently explore the space of proposals, by allowing several edits in a single
step of the MH algorithm. In contrast to QRS, none of these approaches attempt to directly estimate the
divergence between the sampler and the target EBM, but rely on unreliable proxy metrics.
5 Discussion
QRS is a simple-yet-powerful technique: why has it not previously been promoted as a practical sampling
method? One possible reason is the limited repertoire ofglobal surrogates to complex distributions, apart
from certain special cases in Euclidean domains (e.g. log-concave targets). This lack has strongly moti-
vated the development of MCMC techniques which can exploit simplelocal proposals to compute transition
probabilities between samples. This is now rapidly changing with advances in neural training, such as the
impressive ability of pretrained language models to exploit simple prompts to orient their productions to-
wards certain desired outcomes (but without formal guarantees); or with certain recentgeneric techniques,
such as DPG, for fine-tuning autoregressive models towards arbitrary EBMs (but without the ability to
totally reproduce them).
We believe that, given such global proposals, QRS can be a strong competitor to MCMC approaches. In
particular, QRS has strong theoretical guarantees, not shared by these approaches: i) the ability to estimate,
for any value of theβ parameter, the divergence of the target EBM from the QRS samplerpβ, for any member
of the large class off-divergences, including TVD and KL, ii) the ability totune the sampler to attain a
desired quality-efficiency trade-off, and the intuitive nature of this tuning process thanks to the monotonic
relationship between parameterβ and thef-divergence (Theorem 2.2), iii) the existence of a simple, intuitive
bound on the TVD between the QRS sampler and the target, provided by Theorem 2.1, and iv) the fact
that QRS directly produces i.i.d. samples, rather than the correlated samples of a typical MCMC method.
Our experimental results show that QRS achieves strong results on the task of controlled text generation,
where for instance, the sampler achieves excellent debiasing of the language model for acceptance rates in
the range10−1 to 10−3. We show the versatility of the approach by applying it to different sources of global
proposals: proposals over EBMs obtained by generic DPG-style fine-tuning; proposals based on handcrafted
prompts; and for paraphrase generation (App. B), proposals based on round-trip translation.
Finally, when comparing QRS to variants of Metropolis-Hastings, we find QRS outperforms the local variants
(RWMH and RWMH-R) and performs on par with the global variants (IMH and IMH-R), according to the
proxy metrics available for all samplers. Our results on RWMH and RWMH-R, however, show how proxy
metrics can be deceiving and do not give us a full picture of the approximation accuracy of our samplers.
Therefore, we stress the importance of well-founded divergence measures and, in this work, have proposed a
sampler for which we can estimate these.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers for their thorough feedback and suggestions for improvements. Also
thanks to Jos Rozen for his help with experiments, and to Stéphane Clinchant who, in discussion with one
of the authors, suggested using prompting for the purpose of producing global proposals oriented towards a
certain generation objective.
13
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
References
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. Paraphrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. InProceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’05), pages 597–604, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, June 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/1219840.1219914.
URL https://aclanthology.org/P05-1074.
StephenP.BrooksandAndrewGelman. Generalmethodsformonitoringconvergenceofiterativesimulations.
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 7(4):434–455, 1998.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, G. Krüger, Tom
Henighan, R. Child, Aditya Ramesh, D. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark
Chen, E. Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, J. Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, A. Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners.arXiv,
abs/2005.14165, 2020. GPT-3.
Brian S. Caffo, James G. Booth, and A. C. Davison. Empirical supremum rejection sampling.Biometrika,
89(4):745–754, 2002.
Clément L. Canonne. A Survey on Distribution Testing: Your Data is Big. But is it Blue? Number 9
in Graduate Surveys. Theory of Computing Library, 2020. doi: 10.4086/toc.gs.2020.009. URL http:
//www.theoryofcomputing.org/articles/gs009/gs009.pdf.
Clément L. Canonne, Ayush Jain, Gautam Kamath, and Jerry Li. The price of tolerance in distribution
testing. In Conference on Learning Theory, volume 178 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 573–624, 2022. URLhttps://proceedings.mlr.press/v178/canonne22a.html.
Djalil Chafaï. Back to basics – Total variation distance, 2010. URLhttps://djalil.chafai.net/blog/
2010/10/14/back-to-basics-total-variation-distance/.
Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. The sample size required in importance sampling.The Annals of
Applied Probability, 28(2):1099–1135, 2018.
Siddhartha Chib and Edward Greenberg. Understanding the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. The Amer-
ican Statistician, 49(4):327–335, 1995. doi: 10.1080/00031305.1995.10476177. URL http://amstat.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00031305.1995.10476177.
Mary Kathryn Cowles and Bradley P. Carlin. Markov chain Monte Carlo convergence diagnostics: A
comparative review. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434):883–904, 1996. URLhttp:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2291683.
I. Csiszar.I-Divergence Geometry of Probability Distributions and Minimization Problems.The Annals of
Probability, 3(1):146 – 158, 1975. doi: 10.1214/aop/1176996454. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1214/aop/
1176996454.
Imre Csiszár and Paul C. Shields. Information theory and statistics: A tutorial.Commun. Inf. Theory, 1(4):
417–528, December 2004. doi: 10.1561/0100000004. URL https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~binyu/
212A/papers/cs.pdf.
Yuntian Deng, Anton Bakhtin, Myle Ott, Arthur Szlam, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Residual energy-
based models for text generation. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URLhttps://openreview.net/
forum?id=B1l4SgHKDH.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. InProceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URLhttps://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1423.
14
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Simon Duane, A. D. Kennedy, Brian J. Pendleton, and Duncan Roweth. Hybrid Monte Carlo.Physics Letters
B, 195(2):216 – 222, 1987. ISSN 0370-2693. doi: DOI:10.1016/0370-2693(87)91197-X. URLhttp://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6TVN-46YSWPH-2XF/2/0f89cdc6cf214a2169b03df7414f3df4.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. InProceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages889–898,
Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1082.
URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1082.
Ladislas Fuchs. A new proof of an inequality of Hardy-Littlewood-Polya.Mat. Tidsskr. B, 1947:53–54, 1947.
Dani Gamerman and Hedibert F. Lopes.Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation for Bayesian
Inference. Chapman and all/CRC, 2006.
Andrew Gelman and Donald B. Rubin. Inference from iterative simulation using multiple sequences.Statis-
tical science, pages 457–472, 1992.
Gustavo L. Gilardoni. On a Gel’fand-Yaglom-Peres theorem forf-divergences. arXiv, abs/0911.1934, 2009.
Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Exposing the implicit energy networks behind
masked language models via Metropolis-Hastings.CoRR, abs/2106.02736, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2106.02736.
Will Grathwohl, Kevin Swersky, Milad Hashemi, David Duvenaud, and Chris Maddison. Oops I took a
gradient: Scalable sampling for discrete distributions. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors,Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 ofProceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 3831–3841. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URLhttps://proceedings.mlr.press/
v139/grathwohl21a.html.
Alex Graves. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks.arXiv:1211.3711, 2012. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1211.3711.
Aditya Grover, Ramki Gummadi, Miguel Lazaro-Gredilla, Dale Schuurmans, and Stefano Ermon. Variational
rejection sampling. arXiv:1804.01712, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.01712.
Jun Han, Fan Ding, Xianglong Liu, Lorenzo Torresani, Jian Peng, and Qiang Liu. Stein Variational Inference
for Discrete Distributions.arXiv:2003.00605, 108, 2020. URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2003.00605.
W. Keith Hastings. Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications.Biometrika,
57(1):97–109, 1970.
Jean-Baptiste Hiriart-Urruty and Claude Lemaréchal. Convex Analysis and Minimization Algorithms I:
Fundamentals. Springer, 1996. ISBN 9783540568506.
Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. InThe Collected Works
of Wassily Hoeffding, pages 409–426. Springer, 1994.
E. T. Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechanics.Phys. Rev., 106(4):620–630, May 1957. doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.106.620. URL http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v106/i4/p620_1.
Muhammad Khalifa, Hady Elsahar, and Marc Dymetman. A distributional approach to controlled text
generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=jWkw45-9AbL.
S. Kullback and M. A. Khairat. A Note on Minimum Discrimination Information.The Annals of Mathemat-
ical Statistics, 37(1):279 – 280, 1966. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177699619. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1214/
aoms/1177699619.
Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Fu Jie Huang. A Tutorial on Energy-
Based Learning. InPredicting Structured Data. MIT Press, 2006.
15
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting objective
function for neural conversation models. InProceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 110–119,
San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N16-1014.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N16-1014.
Friedrich Liese and Igor Vajda. On divergences and informations in statistics and information theory.IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 52(10):4394–4412, 2006. ISSN 00189448. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2006.
881731.
Jun S. Liu. Monte Carlo Strategies in Scientific Computing. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New
York, 2004.
Jun S. Liu, Rong Chen, and Wing Hung Wong. Rejection control and sequential importance sampling.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 93(443):1022–1031, 1998.
Gábor Lugosi and Shahar Mendelson. Mean estimation and regression under heavy-tailed distributions: A
survey. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 19(5):1145–1190, 2019.
Jonathan Mallinson, Rico Sennrich, and Mirella Lapata. Paraphrasing revisited with neural machine transla-
tion. InProceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages 881–893, Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/E17-1083.
Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W. Rosenbluth, Marshall N. Rosenbluth, Augusta H. Teller, and Edward
Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines.Journal of Chemical Physics, 21(6):
1087–1092, 1953.
Ning Miao, Hao Zhou, Lili Mou, Rui Yan, and Lei Li. CGMH: constrained sentence generation by Metropolis-
Hastings sampling. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The
Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI
Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, Jan-
uary 27 - February 1, 2019, pages 6834–6842. AAAI Press, 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016834. URL
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016834.
Ning Miao, Yuxuan Song, Hao Zhou, and Lei Li. Do you have the right scissors? Tailoring pre-trained
language models via Monte-Carlo methods. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R.
Tetreault, editors,Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 3436–3441. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.314. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.314.
Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language
models. CoRR, abs/2004.09456, 2020. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09456.
Nathan Ng, Kyra Yee, Alexei Baevski, Myle Ott, Michael Auli, and Sergey Edunov. Facebook FAIR’s
WMT19 news translation task submission. InProceedings of the Fourth Conference on Machine Transla-
tion (Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pages 314–319, Florence, Italy, August 2019. Association for
Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-5333. URLhttps://aclanthology.org/W19-5333.
Akihiko Nishimura, David B. Dunson, and Jianfeng Lu. Discontinuous Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for discrete
parameters and discontinuous likelihoods.Biometrika, 107(2):365–380, Mar 2020. ISSN 1464-3510. doi:
10.1093/biomet/asz083. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biomet/asz083.
Art B. Owen. Importance Sampling. InMonte Carlo Theory, Methods and Examples, chapter 9. Unpublished
Lecture Notes, 2013. URLhttps://statweb.stanford.edu/~owen/mc/Ch-var-is.pdf.
G. Parisi. Correlation Functions and Computer Simulations.Nuclear Physics B, 180:378, 1981. doi: 10.
1016/0550-3213(81)90056-0.
16
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Tetiana Parshakova, Jean-Marc Andreoli, and Marc Dymetman. Global Autoregressive Models for Data-
Efficient Sequence Learning. InProceedings of the 23rd Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL), pages 900–909, Hong Kong, China, November 2019a. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/K19-1084. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K19-1084.
Tetiana Parshakova, Jean-Marc Andreoli, and Marc Dymetman. Distributional Reinforcement Learning For
Energy-Based Sequential Models.arXiv, abs/1912.08517, 2019b.
Yury Polyanskiy. MIT Information Theoretic Methods in Statistics and Computer Science, Lecture 1:f-
Divergences, 2019. URLhttps://people.lids.mit.edu/yp/homepage/data/LN_fdiv.pdf.
Yury Polyanskiy and Yihong Wu. MIT, Yale and UIUC, Lecture Notes on Information Theory, 2017. URL
http://people.lids.mit.edu/yp/homepage/data/itlectures_v5.pdf.
Tiberiu Popoviciu. Sur les équations algébriques ayant toutes leurs racines réelles.Mathematica, 9(129-145):
20, 1935.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models
are unsupervised multitask learners.OpenAI Blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-networks. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
Benjamin Rhodes and Michael Gutmann. Enhanced gradient-based mcmc in discrete spaces.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.00040, 2022.
Christian P. Robert and George Casella. Monte Carlo Statistical Methods (Springer Texts in Statistics).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.
Ronald Rosenfeld. A maximum entropy approach to adaptive statistical language modelling.Comput. Speech
Lang., 10(3):187–228, 1996. doi: 10.1006/csla.1996.0011. URL https://doi.org/10.1006/csla.1996.
0011.
Vivekananda Roy. Convergence diagnostics for Markov chain Monte Carlo. Annual Review of Statistics
and Its Application, 7(1):387–412, 2020. doi: 10.1146/annurev-statistics-031219-041300. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-031219-041300.
Halsey Royden and Patrick Fitzpatrick.Real Analysis. Pearson, fourth edition, 2010.
Donald B. Rubin. Comment on “The calculation of posterior distributions by data augmentation”.Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 82(398):543–546, 1987.
Yang Song and Diederik P. Kingma. How to train your energy-based models.CoRR, abs/2101.03288, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.03288.
Terence Tao. The strong law of large numbers, 2008. URLhttps://terrytao.wordpress.com/2008/06/
18/the-strong-law-of-large-numbers.
Luke Tierney. Exploring posterior distributions using Markov chains. Technical report, Minnesota University,
Minneapolis Department of Statistics, 1992.
Dootika Vats, James M. Flegal, and Galin L. Jones. Multivariate output analysis for Markov chain Monte
Carlo. Biometrika, 2019.
Aki Vehtari, Andrew Gelman, Daniel Simpson, Bob Carpenter, and Paul-Christian Bürkner. Rank-
normalization, folding, and localization: an improvedR for assessing convergence of MCMC (with discus-
sion). Bayesian Analysis, 16(2):667–718, 2021.
JohnvonNeumann. Varioustechniquesusedinconnectionwithrandomdigits. John von Neumann, Collected
Works, 5:768–770, 1963.
17
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Larry Wasserman. All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference. Springer, New York, 2010.
ISBN 9781441923226 1441923225.
Maosen Zhang, Nan Jiang, Lei Li, and Yexiang Xue. Language generation via combinatorial constraint
satisfaction: A tree search enhanced Monte-Carlo approach. InFindings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1286–1298, Online, November 2020. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.115. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
findings-emnlp.115.
Ruqi Zhang, Xingchao Liu, and Qiang Liu. A langevin-like sampler for discrete distributions. InInternational
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 26375–26396. PMLR, 2022.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Texygen: A
benchmarking platform for text generation models. In Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Qiaozhu Mei, Brian D.
Davison, Yiqun Liu, and Emine Yilmaz, editors, The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research & Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, July 08-12, 2018,
pages 1097–1100. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3209978.3210080. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.
3210080.
18
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
A Additional Controlled Text Generation Results
We perform constrained text generation for a variety of distributional and pointwise constraints. In partic-
ular, we constrain the GPT-2 biographies model to contain (a) 50% female biographies about scientists, (b)
50% female biographies about sports, or (c) 50% female biographies without additional constraint. Also, we
constrain GPT-2 small to exclusively generate sequences containing (d) the term “amazing”, or (e) the term
“Wikileaks”. For each of these tasks, we obtained a fine-tuned model using DPG, which serves both as a
baseline and as a proposalq that we can sample from. In the case of pointwise constraints, we also consider
a naive filtersamplerqproj in which the proposal distribution is directly projected onto the constraint man-
ifold by filtering out all samples that do not match the constraint. This sampler also assigns well-defined
probabilities to the sequences that it samples, so we can compute estimates of theTVD and DKL for it.
For each task, we again obtain1M samples from the corresponding proposal, which we use to evaluate the
proposal q, the projected proposalqproj (only for the pointwise constraint), and QRS sampling (pβ) for a
range ofβ values reported in Table 2. For all of these, we compute estimates of a number of metrics including
those of Sec. 3.2.2 (i.e.TVD(p,pβ), DKL(p,pβ), AR, reverse KL divergence from the base language model
DKL(·,a ), and the moments of the features that we wish to control).
Our results are shown in Fig. 5. As expected, the upper bound on the TVD betweenpβ and p, and the
KL divergence of p from pβ both converge monotonically to zero as the acceptance rate decreases. For
the constraints and corresponding proposal distributions shown here, it seems that an acceptance rate of
10−3 is sufficient to match the target EBM nearly perfectly. The feature moments also converge as the
acceptance rate decreases, although in some cases the QRS sampler matches the target EBM so closely that
small inaccuracies in theλ values obtained from the EBM estimation procedure (which is from Khalifa et al.
2021) become apparent. As for the divergence of the QRS distribution from the original language model
DKL(pβ,a ), there is no obvious trajectory that it should follow other than a tendency to converge to the
lowest possible valueDKL(p,a ) when all constraints are satisfied (by definition, the EBMp is the distribution
c which minimizesDKL(c,a ) among all distributions satisfying the constraints). Indeed, our results show
that this metric is a non-monotonic function of AR. We observe that the moments computed downstream
on QRS closely match the IS predictions, giving us confidence in the accuracy of those estimates. Finally,
in the case of our pointwise “amazing” and “Wikileaks” constraints, we find that the naive filter strategy
(qproj) corresponds to running the QRS sampler at a high acceptance rate.
Experiment βmin βmax
50% female and 100% scientists 1.0· 10−12 9.3· 106
50% female and 100% sports 1.0· 10−12 2.9· 107
50% female 4.0· 10−7 4.0· 103
100% “amazing” 1.0· 10−12 5.3· 101
100% “Wikileaks” 1.0· 10−12 6.0
simple 1.0· 10−12 3.8
multiple 1.0· 10−12 2.3
knowledge 1.0· 10−12 24.0
jeopardy 1.0· 10−12 29.0
news 1.0· 10−12 3.0
Table 2: We report the range ofβ values used to obtain the range of acceptance rates in Fig. 3, 4, and 5.
B Applications to Paraphrase Generation
Inspired by Miao et al. (2019), we perform proof-of-concept experiments on paraphrase generation by framing
the task in terms of conditional EBMs. Specifically, given a sentencey to paraphrase, we define our EBM
in terms of a language modela(x) = GPT-2(x), and a pointwise constraintb(x) given by a binary classifier
that classifies a pair (x,y ) as a paraphrase if the cosine similarity between their sentence embeddings is
19
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
(a) 50% female scientist biographies
(b) 50% female sports biographies
(c) 50% female biographies
(d) 100% sequences containing “amazing”
(e) 100% sequences containing “Wikileaks”
Figure 5: We show IS estimates of TVD(p,·), an upper-bound on TVD(p,pβ), DKL(p,·), DKL(·,a ) and
feature moments as a function of acceptance rate. We show three distributional constraints on GPT-2
biographies and two pointwise constraints on GPT-2 small. As proposal distribution, we use a DPG model
trained for each constraint separately. We show separate lines for the target moments and the moments
realized by the EBMs, revealing slight inaccuracies in the EBM moments for some constraints.
20
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Input Sequence Proposal Distribution QRS samples from p at AR= 10−5
How is the two
wheeler insurance
from Bharti Axa
insurance?
What about bicycle insurance from Bharti Axa insur-
ance?
How is the Axa Bharti two-wheeler insurance pol-
icy?
What about the Bharti Axa insurance? How is Bharti Axa insurance for two-wheeler?
What is the Bharti Axa insurance plan? The Bharti Axa Two-wheeler insurance. How is it?
Are there Doctor
Who references in
the Muse song
"Knights of
Cydonia"?
Do you hear a hint of doctors in the Muse songs
"Knights of Cydonia"?
Are there Doctor Who references in Muse’s Knights
of Cydonia?
Can you find a hint at Doctor Who in the "Knights of
Cydonia" line from the book’s Muse song?
Does this Muse song ’Knights of Cydonia’ have any
references to Doctor Who?
Are there any references to Doctor Who in a muse song,
Knights of Cydonia?
Are there Doctor Who references in Muse’s Knights
of Cydonia?
In French, how do
you say "cool"?
How do you call ’cool’ in French? How to Say "cool" in French
How do you keep the language Cool in French? How to Say ’Cool’ in French
How do you say ’cool’ in French? How do you say "cool" in French
Figure 6: TVD(p,pβ) running the QRS sampler at various acceptance rates to generate paraphrases of three
sequences (top). We show some example paraphrases from both the proposal distributionq(x) (round-trip
NMT) as well as the QRS samplerpβ at an acceptance rate of10−5 (bottom).
above 0.95. We obtain high-quality sentence embeddings from sentence-BERT13 (Reimers and Gurevych,
2019). As proposal distribution we do not use GPT-2, but rather illustrate how we can utilize off-the-
shelf deep learning models as proposal distributions for QRS. In particular, we use a round-trip machine-
translation model, which is a well-known tool in generating paraphrases (Bannard and Callison-Burch, 2005;
Mallinson et al., 2017). Specifically, we use the English-to-German and German-to-English models from Ng
et al. (2019). We first obtain a beam-searched (Graves, 2012) translation into German,14 and then define
the proposal distribution as the German-to-English model conditioned on the beam searched translation.
We locally renormalize the model to do top-30 sampling (Fan et al., 2018).
We show IS estimates ofTVD(p,pβ) using 1M samples for three sequences in Fig. 6 along with samples
from both the proposal distribution and QRS at AR= 10−5. The quality of the proposal distribution varies
with the input sequence, as can be seen from the slope of the curve and the low-efficiency starting points
of some curves (non-paraphrases are always rejected and so they have a big influence on the acceptance
rate). Still, QRS gives excellent approximations to the target EBM in two out of the three examples (in the
“insurance” and “cool” examples, the TVD is nearly zero), although the TVD in the “Doctor Who” example
remains above 0.4 even for AR= 10−5). Looking at the examples, we find that the proposal distribution
produces decent paraphrases, but they are not always semantically equivalent or grammatically correct. The
QRS samples are mostly semantically equivalent, though they still contain some mistakes (“Axa Bharthi”
vs “Bharti Axa”) and seem to be insensitive to the question mark and to the casing of words (“Cool”,
“Two-wheeler insurance”). Interestingly, this experiment illustrates how the presented approach could be
employed todisentangle the questions of how to model a problem (by defining the corresponding EBM) and
how to efficiently sample from it (by improving the proposal distributions), making it possible to work on
each of these questions separately.
13We usehttps://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 .
14We use a beam size of5.
21
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
(a)
 (b)
Figure 7: (a) Estimation of sampling quality asDKL(p,pβ), efficiency (acceptance rate), and the trade-
off between them for a QRS sampler when using a proposalq = Poisson(λ = 10) to approximate p =
Poisson(λ = 11) , computed in 10 independent experiments over 104 samples. (b) Differences between
estimated DKL(p,pβ) and their true values forβ = 2, computed 1000 times for each different number of
samples. Shaded areas represent one standard deviation.
C Additional Results for Poisson Distributions
C.1 KL-divergence results for QRS
Fig. 7 shows the convergence of estimates of the KL divergence when using QRS with Poisson distributions.
As in the analogous plots for TVD (Fig. 2), we see that the divergence quickly converges to zero asβ
increases, and that the standard deviation of the estimates is much larger than the bias.
C.2 Comparison of QRS, IMH-R and RWMH-R
We now compare the performance of QRS with other approximate sampling methods, namely the reset ver-
sionsoftheindependentMetropolisHastings(IMH-R)andtherandom-walkMetropolisHastings(RWMH-R)
samplers. As above, we use the proposalq = Poisson(λ = 10) and targetp = Poisson(λ = 11). To ensure
accurate values for the KL divergence and TVD, we implement each method in closed form, as now explained.
Calculating the probability mass functions of the samplersFor QRS, we compute the probability
mass functionpβ and acceptance rate using Eq. 3 and 4. For IMH-R, we takek samples from the proposal
q according to the generative process:
X(0)∼q,
for t = 1,...,k − 1
Y (t)∼q
X(t) =
{
Y (t) with probability min
(
1, p(Y (t))/q(Y (t))
p(X (t−1))/q(X (t−1))
)
X(t−1) otherwise.
For nonnegative integer statesX(t−1) = x0 and X(t) = x1, this corresponds to the transition matrix (or
Markov kernel, noting that the state space is infinite)
Tx1,x0 =q(x1) min
(
1,p(x1)/q(x1)
p(x0)/q(x0)
)
, ∀x1̸=x0
Tx0,x0 = 1−
∑
x1̸=x0
Tx1,x0.
We compute the divergence of the target from the distribution ofX(k−1), which isTk−1q; and for comparison
with QRS, we compute the “acceptance rate” as1/k, i.e. the reciprocal of the number of times we sample
22
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Figure 8: Quality-efficiency trade-off for QRS, IMH-R and RWMH-R samplers, when approximating the
target distributionp = Poisson(λ = 11). We use distributionq = Poisson(λ = 10) as proposal for QRS and
IMH-R, and as initial distribution for RWMH-R. Quality is measured as TVD(p,psampler) in the left plot,
and asDKL(p,psampler) in the right plot. Efficiency is measured as the acceptance rate for QRS; and as the
reciprocal of the number of sampling iterations for IMH-R and RWMH-R, which we call the “acceptance
rate” in this context.
from q. For RWMH-R, we consider the chain:
X(0)∼q,
for t = 1,...,k − 1
Y (t)∼
{
X(t−1)− 1 with probability 1
2
X(t−1) + 1 otherwise
X(t) =
{
Y (t) with probability min
(
1, p(Y (t))
p(X (t−1))
)
X(t−1) otherwise,
corresponding to the transition matrix
Tx1,x0 =



min
(
1, p(x1)
p(x0)
)
if|x1−x0| = 1
0 if|x1−x0|> 1
1−∑
x1:|x1−x0|=1Tx1,x0 if x1 =x0.
We compute the divergence of the target from the distribution ofX(k−1), which isTk−1q; and for comparison
with QRS, we compute the “acceptance rate” as1/k, i.e. the reciprocal of the number of times we must
evaluate the target distributionp (or fork = 1, the number of times we sample from the proposalq). Clearly,
the performance of RWMH-R might be improved by using a different random walk: the±1 random walk is
used here as it seems the simplest and most natural choice.
Truncation errors For all methods, to ensure practical computation, we truncate the distributions, work-
ing only with statesx< 50. To assess the truncation error, we repeat the experiment, this time truncating
with x < 100, and find that the largest relative error in KL, TVD or AR for any method is in the KL
divergence of QRS forβ = 5, which is
⏐⏐⏐⏐
DKL(p,pβ)x<100−DKL(p,pβ)x<50
DKL(p,pβ)x<100
⏐⏐⏐⏐= 1.48···× 10−10.
Results Figure 8 presents the TVD and KL divergence as a function of AR, computed for parameterβ
in the range[0.1, 5] for QRS, and fork = 1, 2,... 5 iterations of IMH-R and RWMH-R. For acceptance rate
AR = 1, all samplers give the same divergence, as they all return samples directly from the proposalq.
23
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
For each lower acceptance rate15, the TVD of QRS is systematically lower than that of IMH-R, and the
TVD of IMH-R is systematically lower than that of RWMH-R; and the same holds for KL divergence. On
investigating the ratios of the divergences, we find that these advantages increase as the acceptance rate
decreases, and for AR≈ 1/5 we have
TVD(p,pIMH-R,k=5)
TVD(p,pQRS,β=5) = 2.24···× 103 and DKL(p,pIMH-R,k=5)
DKL(p,pQRS,β=5) = 3.60···× 102.
D Properties of QRS: Proofs
D.1 Proofs of Eq. 3 and Eq. 4
Proof of Eq. 3 By definition,pβ(x) is the probability that the first16 output from Algorithm 1 is equal
to x. On the first step of the algorithm, the probability that a givenx is accepted isq(x)rx, whereas the
probability that the algorithm rejects its first sample isρ .=∑
x∈Xq(x)(1−rx) = 1−∑
x∈Xq(x)rx. More
generally, the probability forx to be accepted on stepi of the algorithm, while nox was accepted on previous
steps is thenρi−1q(x)rx. Overall, the probabilitypβ(x) that the first sample accepted isx is
∞∑
i=1
ρi−1q(x)rx =q(x)rx
∞∑
i=1
ρi−1 = 1
1−ρq(x)rx
= 1∑
x∈Xq(x)rx
q(x)rx = 1
Zβ
Pβ(x).
Proof of Eq. 4 We have
ARβ = Ex∼q min(1,P (x)/(βq(x)))
=β−1∑
x∈X
min(P (x),βq (x))
=β−1∑
x∈X
Pβ(x) =Zβ/β.
D.2 Proof of Theorem 2.1
We will need a well-known property ofTVD (e.g. see Chafaï 2010), namely that, for any distributionsp1,p 2
overX, we have
TVD(p1,p 2) =
∑
x∈X:p1(x)≥p2(x)
(p1(x)−p2(x)). (8)
The proof, illustrated in Fig. 9, then proceeds as follows:
Let Aβ
.={x∈ X : P (x)≤ βq(x)} and ¯Aβ
.= X\Aβ. We havePβ(x) .= min(P (x),βq (x)) and therefore
Pβ(x) = P (x) for x∈ Aβ, and Pβ(x) < P(x) for x∈ ¯Aβ. Overall, Pβ is less than or equal toP, and
thus Zβ≤ Z. For anyx, we havepβ(x) = Pβ(x)/Zβ and p(x) = P (x)/Z, and hence forx∈ Aβ we have
p(x)≤pβ(x).
If we defineCβ
.={x∈X :p(x)≤pβ(x)}, and ¯Cβ
.=X\Cβ, we haveAβ⊆Cβ and ¯Cβ⊆ ¯Aβ. Using Eq. (8),
we now see that
TVD(p,pβ) =
∑
x∈X:p(x)≥pβ(x)
(p(x)−pβ(x)) =
∑
x∈ ¯Cβ
(p(x)−pβ(x))≤
∑
x∈ ¯Cβ
p(x).
Finally we get
TVD(p,pβ)≤p( ¯Cβ)≤p( ¯Aβ) = 1−p(Aβ). (9)
15The acceptance rates of QRS forβ = 2, 3,... are nearly equal to1/2, 1/3,... because AR =Zβ/β by Eq. 4, and for this
choice ofβ, p and q we haveZβ≈ 1.
16Or, for that matter, due to the obvious i.i.d. nature of the algorithm, for any fixedk, thek-th output.
24
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
𝐴! ̅𝐴! 𝐴" ̅𝐴"𝐶" ̅𝐶"
𝑃!
𝑃 𝑝!𝑝
𝑃!
Figure 9: Visualization of Theorem 2.1. The left panel shows the unnormalized distributionsP and Pβ,
the right panel their normalized versionsp and pβ. In the right panel, the area under the curvesp and pβ
represent the totalp-mass andpβ-mass ofX respectively, which are both1. To simplify visual comparison,
the figure assumes thatZ = 1, in other words thatP = p; thenZβ≤ 1 and pβ is Pβ scaled by the factor
1/Zβ. The TVD betweenp and pβ is equal to the area between the two curves aboveCβ, but also to the
area between the two curves above¯Cβ. This last area is included inside the area below thep curve above
¯Aβ, which is the visual counterpart of Eq. (9).
Proof of the corollary to the theoremFor any (normalized) distributionp over a discrete spaceX,
we have∑∞
i=1p(xi) = 1, hence for anyϵ >0, there exists a finite subsetX′⊆X such thatp(X′)> 1−ϵ,
with X′⊆ Supp(p)⊆ Supp(q). If we take β .= maxx∈X′
P(x)
q(x), then β is finite, X′⊆ Aβ, and therefore
p(Aβ)≥ 1−ϵ, which proves the result.
A generalization to arbitrary q-supports The corollary exploits the assumption — that we made
throughout Sec. 2 — that the support ofp, Supp(p), is contained in the support ofq, Supp(q), in other
terms,p(x)> 0⇒q(x)> 0. If that were not the case thenβ .= maxx∈X′
P(x)
q(x) could be infinite andAβ would
not be defined. However, it is interesting that we can actually generalize the result to the case where Supp(p)
may not be contained in Supp(q). In that case, for anyϵ> 0, there exists a finite subsetY′⊆ Supp(q) such
that p(Y′) > p(Supp(q))−ϵ. If we now takeβ .= maxx∈Y′
P(x)
q(x), thenβ is finite,Y′⊆ Aβ, and therefore
p(Aβ)≥p(Supp(q))−ϵ. For anyβ, each elementx ofAβ is either inSupp(q), or it satisfies0 =βq(x)≥P (x)
so thatp(x) = 0. It follows thatp(Aβ)≤p(Supp(q)). Therefore
p(Supp(q))≥p(Aβ)≥p(Supp(q))−ϵ.
When the support ofp is included in Supp(q), we havep(Supp(q)) = 1, and therefore we get the previous
result back, but now we see that, in the general case
lim
β→∞
(1−p(Aβ)) = 1−p(Supp(q)). (10)
D.3 Proof of Theorem 2.2 (Monotonicity)
Notation It will be convenient to use the notationa∧b to denote min(a,b ).
D.3.1 Preliminaries: majorization of convex functions and a squeezing lemma
We will exploit the following “majorization” result about convex functions.
Theorem D.1(Fuchs 1947). Letp1,...,p n be real numbers, and let
b>y 1≥... ≥yn >a, b>y ′
1≥... ≥y′
n >a
be nonincreasing sequences of real numbers, such that
n∑
i=1
piy′
i =
n∑
i=1
piyi,
k∑
i=1
piy′
i≤
k∑
i=1
piyi, (11)
25
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
••
•
••
•→ ←←→
Squeezing
→
𝑓(𝜇) 𝑓(𝜇)'!𝑝!𝑓(𝑦!) '!𝑝!𝑓(𝑦!′)
'!𝑝!𝑦!"=𝜇='!𝑝!𝑦!𝜇='!𝑝!𝑦!
Figure 10: Squeezing lemma. We letµ =∑
ipiyi, and represent the pointsyi andy′
i through dots with sizes
proportional topi.
for k = 1,...,n − 1. Then for any convex functionf : (a,b )→ R, we have
k∑
i=1
pif(y′
i)≤
k∑
i=1
pif(yi). (12)
Our application of this theorem will be based on the following “squeezing” lemma (see Fig 10).
Lemma D.2. Let p1,...,p n be nonnegative real numbers, with∑n
i=1pi = 1, let f be a convex function
f : (a,b )→ R, and let
b>y 1≥... ≥yn >a, b>y ′
1≥... ≥y′
n >a
be nonincreasing sequences of real numbers, such that
n∑
i=1
piy′
i =
n∑
i=1
piyi.
Suppose that there exists an integerk such thaty′
i≤yi if i≤k and y′
i≥yi otherwise. Then
n∑
i=1
pif(y′
i)≤
n∑
i=1
pif(yi). (13)
Proof. If m≤k then∑m
i=1pi(yi−y′
i)≥ 0, asy′
i≤yi for i≤k. Ifm>k then
m∑
i=1
pi(yi−y′
i) =
n∑
i=m+1
pi(y′
i−yi)≥ 0,
as∑n
i=1pi(yi−y′
i) = 0 and y′
i≥yi for i>k . This means that the conditions (11) are satisfied, and we can
then conclude through (12).
D.3.2 For the main proof, we can focus on the case whereP is normalized, the general case follows
Suppose that p is the normalized version of P, with p(x) = P (x)/Z. We have by definition pβ(x) =
(P (x)∧ (βq (x))/Zβ, in other wordspβ(x)∝P (x)∧ (βq (x)). Let us denote by˜p˜β the similar distribution,
26
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
but this time defined relative to ˜P .= p, in other words ˜p˜β(x) ∝ ˜P (x)∧ ( ˜βq (x)) = p(x)∧ ( ˜βq (x)), or
equivalently, ˜p˜β(x)∝ (Zp (x))∧ (Z ˜βq (x)) =P (x)∧ (Z ˜βq (x)), thus ifβ =Z ˜β then it follows thatpβ = ˜p˜β.
Therefore, in order to prove that0<β <β′ <∞ implies Df(p,pβ′)≤Df(p,pβ), it is enough to prove that
0< ˜β < ˜β′ <∞ implies Df(p, ˜p ˜β′)≤Df(p, ˜p˜β).
D.3.3 Some basic properties of pβ
Let 0<β <∞. We have
Pβ(x) =p(x)∧ (βq(x)), (14)
so that
Zβ =
∑
x
Pβ(x) =
∑
x
p(x)∧ (βq(x)) =
∑
x
p(x) (1∧ (βq (x)/p(x))), (15)
pβ(x) = Pβ(x)
Zβ
= p(x)∧ (βq (x))
Zβ
=p(x)1∧ (βq (x)/p(x))
Zβ
. (16)
The following observations will be key in the proof. For0<β ≤β′ <∞, we have
1
Zβ
≥ 1
Zβ′
, β
Zβ
≤ β′
Zβ′
, (17)
which are simple consequences of the following facts:
Zβ =
∑
x
p(x)∧ (βq(x))≤
∑
x
p(x)∧ (β′q(x)) =Zβ′,
Zβ
β =
∑
x
p(x)
β ∧q(x)≥
∑
x
p(x)
β′ ∧q(x) = Zβ′
β′ .
D.3.4 Using the form Df(pβ,p ) instead of the formDf(p,pβ)
As already remarked in footnote 5,f-divergences have the property thatDf(p1,p 2) = D ˜f(p2,p 1), where
˜f(t) .= tf(1/t) is the “perspective” transform off, which is convex whenf is convex (Polyanskiy, 2019,
Remark 7.2). 17
For the monotonicity proof, it will be more convenient to use the formDf(pβ,p ) than the formDf(p,pβ). We
willthenprovethatforanyconvexfunction f (withtheusualconditionson f-divergences), if0<β <β′ <∞
then Df(pβ′,p )≤Df(pβ,p ), which will imply that for any convex functionf (with the usual conditions on
f-divergences), if 0<β <β′ <∞ then Df(p,pβ′)≤Df(p,pβ), the original formulation of Theorem 2.2.
With p fixed, we will use the abbreviationDβ
.=Df(pβ,p ), so that
Dβ =Df(pβ,p ) =
∑
x
p(x) f
(pβ(x)
p(x)
)
=
∑
x
p(x) f
(1∧ (βq (x)/p(x))
Zβ
)
. (18)
D.3.5 Focusing on the finite caseX ={x1,...,x m} first
Our proof will now proceed by assuming thatX ={x1,...,x m} is finite, but we will show at the end
(Sec. D.3.8) that the proof generalizes to any countable spaceX.
17For discrete distributionsp1,p 2 in particular, this is always true, irrespective of whetherp1≪ p2 or p2≪ p1 — with≪
denoting absolute continuity, that isp1≪ p2 meaning that Supp(p1)⊆ Supp(p2) and similarly for the reverse case — but
this requires a small technical extension of the notion off-divergence, see Polyanskiy (2019), Remark 7.1. In the case where
p1 =pβ,p 2 =p, we do not need this extension because we have bothpβ≪p andp≪pβ, an easy consequence of the fact that
p≪q by our hypotheses and ofpβ(x) =
Pβ (x)
Zβ
= p(x)∧(βq (x))
Zβ
.
27
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Figure 11: Left: three regions forβ. Right: continuity ofDβ.
D.3.6 A reparametrization in terms of importance ratios
Let
r(x) .=p(x)/q(x),
R .={0}∪ r(X) ={r0,r 1,...,r n}
where r0 = 0, and fori> 0, ri is the image byr of somex∈X (where X ={x1,...,x m} is now finite, by
assumption; note that0 may or not appear inr(X) and thatm can be larger thann + 1). We order theri
such thatri <r i+1:
We can re-express Eq. 14–16 and 18 in terms ofri:
p(ri) .=
∑
x∈X:r(x)=ri
p(x), (19)
Zβ =
∑
i
p(ri) (1∧ (β/ri)), (20)
pβ(ri) .=p(ri) 1∧ (β/ri)
Zβ
, (21)
Dβ =
∑
i
p(ri) f
(pβ(ri)
p(ri)
)
=
∑
i
p(ri) f
(1∧ (β/ri)
Zβ
)
. (22)
Note 1 We abuse notation:x∈X andr∈ R≥0 are in different spaces, so we could really write˘p(ri) instead
of p(ri) to distinguish the two spaces.
Note 2 We letp(r0) .= 0 in all cases.
D.3.7 Focusing on sub-intervals is enough
As the right-hand side of Eq. 20 is a continuous and positive function ofβ∈ (0,∞), the right-hand side of
Eq. 22 is also continuous, and thereforeDβ is a continuous function ofβ∈ (0,∞). The index i runs over
a finite set, hence to prove thatDβ is non-increasing inβ it is enough to prove that it is non-increasing on
each interval(rk,rk+1).
It will be useful to distinguish three regions forβ (see left panel of Fig. 11), namely regionA, withβ smaller
than the smallest non-null importance ratior1; regionB with β between r1 and rn; and regionC with β
larger than the largest importance ratiorn.
We start by noting thatpβ is constant onA and onC:
28
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
𝑟!"#…𝑟! …••𝑏𝑏′ 𝑦!… 𝑦#𝑦!"#𝑦$ …••••
1𝑍%→ ←𝑏/𝑟$𝑍%
••••1𝑍%←→𝑏/𝑟!"#𝑍%→ ←
𝑦!… 𝑦#𝑦!"#𝑦$ …
1𝑍%&𝑏′/𝑟$𝑍%& 1𝑍%&𝑏′/𝑟!"#𝑍%&𝑦′!… 𝑦′#𝑦′!"#𝑦′$ …••••
Figure 12: Application of squeezing lemma tork <b<b ′ <r k+1.
• Forβ∈A we have
p(x)∧ (βq(x)) =
{
0 p(x) = 0
βq(x) p(x)> 0
and it follows that
pβ(x) =
{
0 p(x) = 0
q(x)
q(Supp(p)) p(x)> 0,
which is the “normalized” version ofq relative to Supp(p).
• Forβ∈C we havepβ(x)∝p(x)∧ (βq(x)) =p(x). Hencepβ =p (standard RS).
It follows thatDβ is constant forβ∈ A, and again constant (actually null) forβ∈ C. Thus, in order to
prove our monotonicity result, it is sufficient to prove thatDβ decreases forβ increasing inside each interval
(rk,rk+1) for k = 1, 2,...,n − 1 (see right panel of Fig. 11).
Let 1≤k < nand considerrk < b < b′ < rk+1, we want to show thatDb′ =Df(pb′,p )≤Db =Df(pb,p ).
Fori = 1, 2,...,n , let
yi
.=
1∧ b
ri
Zb
, y ′
i
.=
1∧ b′
ri
Zb′
. (23)
From (20) and (22), we have
∑
i
p(ri)yi = 1,
∑
i
p(ri)y′
i = 1, (24)
Db =
∑
i
p(ri)f(yi), D b′ =
∑
i
p(ri)f(y′
i). (25)
We further note that
yi =
{1
Zb
i≤k
b/ri
Zb
i>k
and y′
i =
{1
Zb′ i≤k
b′/ri
Zb′ i>k,
(26)
and we saw earlier in (17) that
1
Zb′
≤ 1
Zb
and b′
Zb′
≥ b
Zb
. (27)
It follows that
y′
i≤yi for i≤k and yi≤y′
i for i>k. (28)
29
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
We can now apply our squeezing lemma,see Fig. 12: we apply Lemma D.2 to theyi,y′
i and k of the
previous paragraph, and letpi =p(ri). By Eq. (24), (25) and (28), the hypotheses of the lemma are satisfied,
and we conclude that∑n
i=1pif(y′
i)≤∑n
i=1pif(yi), so that
Df(pβ′,p )≤Df(pβ,p ). (29)
D.3.8 Concluding the proof: from the finite case to the (countably) infinite case
(A) Having proved the monotonicity result (29) for finite sample spacesX, we now wish to generalize this
result to an arbitrary countable spaceX. We will use the following theorem, adapted from Gilardoni (2009,
Proposition 1) to the case of probabilities over discrete spaces. For a partitionE ={E1,...,E I} of X into
I subsets, and a distributionp overX, letpE denote the projection ofp onto the finite set{1,...,I } given
bypE(i) .=p(Ei).
Theorem D.3 (Gilardoni 2009). Let r and s be probability distributions overX. Let Df denote the f-
divergence for some convex functionf with f(1) = 0. Then
Df(r,s ) = sup
E
Df(rE,sE),
where the sup is taken over all finite partitionsE of X.
(B) Let p,q and pβ be distributions over a countable spaceX, and let a and b be values of the QRS
parameterβ such that0<a<b< ∞. We prove thatDf(p,pb)≤Df(p,pa) by contradiction. Suppose that
Df(p,pb) > Df(p,pa). Then, by Theorem D.3, there exists a finite partitionE ={E1,...,E I} of X such
that
Df(pE, (pb)E)>D f(p,pa). (30)
(C) For eachi∈{ 1,...,I }, let us splitEi into three subsets
E(1)
i
.={x∈Ei :p(x)≤aq (x)≤bq (x)},
E(2)
i
.={x∈Ei :aq (x)<p (x)≤bq (x)},
E(3)
i
.={x∈Ei :aq (x)≤bq (x)<p (x)},
and consider the refinement of partitionE given by
F .={F1,...,F J} .={E(j)
i : 1≤i≤I, 1≤j≤ 3, E(j)
i ̸=∅},
so thatJ≤ 3I. Let β∈{ a,b}. It is easy to see thatF has the followinghomogeneity property: one can
split the indicesInd ={1,...,J } into two disjoint subsetsIndβ and Indβ, with
Indβ
.={j∈Ind :p(x)≤βq(x)∀x∈Fj} and Indβ
.={j∈Ind :p(x)>βq (x)∀x∈Fj}.
(SetsIndβ andIndβ do not necessarily form a partition ofInd as one of these sets may be empty.) We can
now consider the projectionspF and qF of p and q onto Ind, and the associated QRS distribution(pF)β,
which is given by
(pF)β(j) .= pF(j)∧ (βqF(j))
˜Zβ
= p(Fj)∧ (βq(Fj))
˜Zβ
=



p(Fj)
˜Zβ
j∈Indβ
βq(Fj)
˜Zβ
j∈Indβ,
where
˜Zβ =
∑
j∈Ind
p(Fj)∧ (βq (Fj)) =
∑
j∈Indβ
p(Fj) +
∑
j∈Indβ
βq(Fj).
30
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
But we also have
(pβ)F(j) =pβ(Fj) =
∑
x∈Fjp(x)∧ (βq(x))
Zβ
=



p(Fj)
Zβ
j∈Indβ
βq(Fj)
Zβ
j∈Indβ,
where
Zβ =
∑
x∈X
p(x)∧ (βq (x)) =
∑
j∈Indβ
p(Fj) +
∑
j∈Indβ
βq (Fj).
Comparing these two sets of equations, we see that˜Zβ =Zβ and that
(pβ)F = (pF)β.
(D) Let us now go back to Eq. 30. The distributions pE and (pb)E can be seen as projections of the
distributionspF and (pb)F from the set{1,...,J } to the set{1,...,I }, and therefore the DPI (Theorem 3.1)
applies, implying thatDf(pE, (pb)E)≤Df(pF, (pb)F), and therefore:
Df(pF, (pb)F)>D f(p,pa).
A second application of the DPI theorem, this time projectingp andpa fromX to the set{1,...,J }, implies
that Df(pF, (pa)F)≤Df(p,pa), and therefore
Df(pF, (pb)F)>D f(pF, (pa)F).
(E) We saw earlier that(pb)F = (pF)b and (pa)F = (pF)a, hence
Df(pF, (pF)b)>D f(pF, (pF)a),
which contradicts our monotonicity result for the finite set{1,...,J }, concluding the proof.
D.4 Alternative proof of monotonicity for finiteX, based on calculus
Sections D.3.1 to D.3.7 proved the monotonicity of thef-divergence Df(pβ,p ) for distributions on a finite
space X, based on a result aboutmajorization (Theorem D.1). We now give an alternative proof, which
avoids this potentially unfamiliar majorization result, and which is based on the easy-to-prove observation
that the derivative ofDf(pβ,p ) with respect toβ is nonpositive. However, this derivative does not exist for
all β, as neither the partition functionZβ nor the functionf is necessarily differentiable. Thus to prove
monotonicity, we must do some work to show thatDf(pβ,p ) is a Lipschitz continuous function forβ in
an appropriate interval. We prove the following, which readily generalizes to infinite spacesX using the
arguments of Section D.3.8.
Lemma D.4. Let f : R>0→ R be a convex function satisfyingf(1) = 0. Let the setX be finite, and let
0<β <β′ <∞. ThenDf(pβ′,p )≤Df(pβ,p ).
Proof. The partition functionZb of the QRS distribution is
Zb =
∑
i
p(ri)(1∧ (b/ri))
as previously remarked in Eq. 20, where
R .={r0,...,r n} .={0}∪{ p(x)/q(x) :x∈X}.
If b /∈R then this may be written in the form
Zb =
∑
ℓ:rℓ<b
p(rℓ) +b
∑
h:rh>b
(p(rh)/rh),
31
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
so the quotient rule gives
d
db
b
Zb
= Zb−b∑
h:rh>b(p(rh)/rh)
Z2
b
=
∑
ℓ:rℓ<bp(rℓ)
Z2
b
.
Similarly, as remarked in Eq. 22, the divergence is
Df(pb,p ) =
∑
i
p(ri)f
(1∧ (b/ri)
Zb
)
,
and ifb /∈R then this may be written in the form
Df(pb,p ) =
∑
ℓ:rℓ<b
p(rℓ)f
( 1
Zb
)
+
∑
h:rh>b
p(rh)f
( b
rhZb
)
.
Let N be the set of values ofb∈ [β,β′] such thatf is nondifferentiable at one of the arguments1/Zb or
b/(rhZb) in the above expression. Forb /∈R∪N, the chain rule gives
dDf(pb,p )
db =
∑
ℓ:rℓ<b
p(rℓ)f′
( 1
Zb
)(
−
∑
h:rh>b(p(rh)/rh)
Z2
b
)
+
∑
h:rh>b
p(rh)f′
( b
rhZb
)(∑
ℓ:rℓ<bp(rℓ)
rhZ2
b
)
=
∑
ℓ:rℓ<b
∑
h:rh>b
p(rℓ)p(rh)
rhZ2
b
(
f′
( b
rhZb
)
−f′
( 1
Zb
))
≤ 0, (31)
where the final inequality follows from the convexity off.
Now we argue thatDf(pb,p ) is a Lipschitz continuous function ofb∈ [β,β′].
• As the support ofq contains the support ofp, we havemaxR <∞. Thus, the partition function
Zb =∑
ip(ri)(1∧ (b/ri)) is bounded by
∀b∈ [β,β′], 0<Z lo
.= 1∧ (β/ maxR)≤Zb≤ 1.
• It follows that the arguments of functionf appearing inD(pb,p ) are bounded by
∀b∈ [β,β′], 0<Z lo≤ 1∧ (b/ri)
Zb
≤ 1
Zlo
.
That is, all these arguments lie in an interval[x0,x 1] with 0<x 0 <x 1 <∞.
• As f is convex on (0,∞), the restriction off to the domain [x0,x 1] with 0 < x0 < x1 <∞ is
Lipschitz.
• The following are Lipschitz: finite sums of Lipschitz functions; the minimum of two Lipschitz func-
tions; the functionx↦→1/x forx>a wherea> 0; the product of bounded Lipschitz functions; and
the composition of two Lipschitz functions. It follows thatD(pb,p ) is Lipschitz forb∈ [β,β′].
If a function is Lipschitz continuous on a closed bounded interval, then is differentiable almost everywhere
on that interval, and the change in the function over that interval is equal to the integral of its derivative
(see for instance Royden and Fitzpatrick 2010, Chapter 6, Proposition 7 and Theorem 10). Therefore,
Df(pβ′,p )−Df(pβ,p ) =
∫β′
β
dDf(pb,p )
db db≤ 0,
where the inequality follows from Eq. 31. This completes the proof.
32
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
E Importance Sampling (IS) Estimates
Here we provide all relevant IS (Owen, 2013) estimates and their derivations. As mentioned in Sec. 2, we
base all estimates on a sample{x1,...,x N} of i.i.d. draws fromq; and if the sum∑
x∈Xh(x) is well-defined
for a functionh :X→ R, then we have
∑
x∈X
h(x) =
∑
x∈X
q(x)h(x)
q(x) = Ex∼q
h(x)
q(x)≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
h(xi)
q(xi).
In this way, we find
Z =
∑
x∈X
P (x) ≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
P (xi)
q(xi),
Zβ =
∑
x∈X
Pβ(x) ≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
Pβ(xi)
q(xi) ,
ARβ = Ex∼q min
(
1, P (x)
βq(x)
)
≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
min
(
1, P (xi)
βq(xi)
)
,
p(Aβ) =
∑
x∈X
p(x)1 [x∈Aβ] ≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
P (xi)
Zq(xi) 1 [xi∈Aβ],
Ex∼pβh(x) =
∑
x∈X
pβ(x)h(x) ≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
Pβ(xi)
Zβq(xi)h(xi).
(32)
Similarly, we may estimatef-divergences with
Df(p,pβ) = Ex∼q
Pβ(x)
Zβ q(x)f
(Zβ P (x)
Z Pβ(x)
)
≃ 1
N
N∑
i=1
Pβ(xi)
Zβ q(xi) f
(Zβ P (xi)
Z Pβ(xi)
)
,
which for TVD (f(t) =|1−t|/2) and KL divergence (f(t) =t logt) rearranges to
TVD(p,pβ)≃ 1
2N
N∑
i=1
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Pβ(xi)
Zβ q(xi)− P (xi)
Zq(xi)
⏐⏐⏐⏐, (33)
DKL(p,pβ)≃ logZβ
Z + 1
N
N∑
i=1
P (xi)
Zq(xi) log P (xi)
Pβ(xi). (34)
F Estimating the Mapping Betweenβ and AR
Eq. 32 provides a way to estimate the AR given a value ofβ and a set of samples from a proposalq. How
can we go in the opposite direction and estimateβ for a target AR value? One way to do so, is to estimate
the full mapping from AR toβ, and interpolate it at the target AR. Algorithm 2 estimates this mapping
efficiently, based on the observation that Eq. 32 can be rewritten as a sum of two terms:
ARβ≃ (ai +bi)/N at β =βi (35)
where
βi
.=P (xi)/q(xi), a i
.=
N∑
j=1
1 [βj≤βi]βj/βi, b i
.=
N∑
j=1
1 [βj >β i], (36)
noting that botha andb can be computed efficiently given a sorted list ofβi values. (In the case thatβi =βj
for somej̸=i, the output will contain repeated values, which are easily filtered out, if necessary.)
33
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
sampler AR %female %science PPL ↓ Self-BLEU-5↓ %Uniq↑ Dist-1↑ Dist-2↑ Dist-3↑ TVD(p,pβ )↓∗ DKL (p,pβ )↓∗
DPG 1 27 .3± 0.4 69 .1± 0.4 34 .4± 0.2 89.8± 0.1 100 .0± 0 89 .7± 0.1 95.8± 0.0 93.1± 0.0 0.7± 0.00099 2 .28± 0.03
IMH 10−1 46.3± 4.3 99 .8± 0.1 - 95.4± 0.5 55 .7± 5.8 89.3± 0.7 96.0± 0.2 93.4± 0.2 Unk. Unk.
IMH-R 10−1 40.9± 1.5 99 .5± 0.2 29 .2± 0.8 91.3± 0.1 100 .0± 0 89 .5± 0.2 95.9± 0.1 93.3± 0.0 Unk. Unk.
QRS 10−1 44.2± 2.6 99 .7± 0.1 29 .9± 0.8 91.1± 0.2 100 .0± 0 89 .4± 0.2 96.0± 0.1 93.3± 0.0 0.37± 0.0049 0 .77± 0.036
R WMH-base 10−1 29.9± 45.6 70.0± 45.8 - 100.0± 0.0 7 .6± 15.1 89.3± 4.7 96.1± 1.0 93.0± 1.0 Unk. Unk.
R WMH-R-base 10−1 28.0± 1.3 68 .3± 1.5 34 .9± 0.7 89.8± 0.2 100 .0± 0 89 .6± 0.2 95.8± 0.1 93.1± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
IMH 10−3 49.8± 2.1 99 .8± 0.1 - 91.2± 0.2 97 .4± 1.0 89.1± 0.2 95.9± 0.1 93.4± 0.0 Unk. Unk.
IMH-R 10−3 49.8± 1.6 99 .8± 0.1 34 .1± 0.8 90.9± 0.2 100 .0± 0 89 .1± 0.2 95.9± 0.1 93.4± 0.0 Unk. Unk.
QRS 10−3 49.4± 1.4 99 .8± 0.1 34 .1± 0.9 90.9± 0.2 100 .0± 0 89 .1± 0.2 95.9± 0.1 93.4± 0.0 0.012± 0.0055 0 .0084± 0.0048
Table 3: Further comparisons of samplers on the “female-science” EBM described in Sec. 3.2.2. We do not
compute perplexity for IMH and RWMH without reset as it does not yield i.i.d. samples. As noted, TVD
and KL for MCMC methods are unknown (i.e. we have no way of estimating them). Where available we
show mean± one standard deviation over 10 runs.∗TVD and KL are estimated on independent sets of106
samples.
Algorithm 2 Estimate AR→β mapping
1: Require: P, q, N
2: S← [ ]
3: for i = 1, 2,...,N do
4: xi∼q
5: βi←P (xi)/q(xi)
6: S[i]←βi
7: end for
8: Ss← SortAscending(S) {Array of sortedβi}
9: aaux[0]← 0
10: for i = 1, 2,...,N do
11: βi←Ss[i]
12: aaux[i]←aaux[i− 1] +βi {a[i] =∑
j:βj≤βiβj}
13: b[i]←N−i {b[i] =∑
j 1 [βj >β i]}
14: end for
15: for i = 1, 2,...,N do
16: βi←Ss[i]
17: a[i]←aaux[i]/βi {a[i] =∑
j:βj≤βiβj/βi}
18: AR[i]← (a[i] +b[i])/N
19: end for
20: return AR and Ss {Ss[i] is theβ at whichARβ =AR[i]}
G Further Comparisons with MCMC
Table 4 shows results complementing those of Table 1. RWMH-base and RWMH-R-base denote variants
of RWMH and RWMH-R that do not use a mixture distribution to inform the local proposal distribution.
Moreover, Table 3 shows results for similar experiments performed on sampling from the “debiased scientist
biographies” EBM described in Sec. 3.2.2. Here, there is no obvious way to inform the proposal and therefore,
we only use the -base variants for the RWMH sampler. Furthermore, Tables 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 show a collection
of the first 10 samples produced by the QRS, RWMH, RWMH-R, IMH and IMH-R samplers, respectively.
H Computing Divergences for Two Poissons
Given Poisson distributionsp and q with ratesλp >λ q > 0, we wish to find the divergence
Df(p,pβ) =
∞∑
x=0
Pβ(x)
Zβ
f
(p(x)Zβ
Pβ(x)
)
. (37)
34
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
sampler AR %amazing PPL ↓ Self-BLEU-5↓ %Uniq↑ Dist-1↑ Dist-2↑ Dist-3↑ TVD(p,pβ )↓∗ DKL (p,pβ )↓∗
DPG 1 62 .9± 0.4 61 .7± 0.3 85.8± 0.1 100 .0± 0 89 .3± 0.1 96 .1± 0.0 94 .1± 0.0 0 .67± 0.00095 1 .91± 0.04
IMH 10−1 100.0± 0 - 92.0± 0.7 66 .5± 3.9 89 .9± 0.3 96 .3± 0.1 94 .3± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
IMH-R 10−1 100.0± 0 60 .8± 1.4 87.1± 0.2 100 .0± 0 89 .8± 0.2 96 .4± 0.1 94 .4± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
QRS 10−1 100.0± 0 61 .8± 0.8 86.8± 0.4 100 .0± 0 89 .9± 0.2 96 .4± 0.1 94 .3± 0.1 0 .27± 0.0054 0 .45± 0.045
R WMH-base 10−1 80.0± 40.0 - 99.6± 0.9 21 .8± 28.8 85.8± 7.6 91 .1± 11.2 87.2± 14.6 Unk. Unk.
R WMH-R-base 10−1 63.2± 1.3 61 .9± 1.2 86.5± 0.3 100 .0± 0 88 .5± 0.2 96 .2± 0.1 94 .3± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
IMH 10−3 100.0± 0 - 86.9± 0.3 98 .7± 0.5 90 .0± 0.2 96 .3± 0.1 94 .2± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
IMH-R 10−3 100.0± 0 63 .4± 1.5 86.7± 0.1 100 .0± 0 89 .9± 0.2 96 .3± 0.1 94 .3± 0.1 Unk. Unk.
QRS 10−3 100.0± 0 62 .8± 1.6 86.6± 0.2 100 .0± 0 90 .0± 0.2 96 .3± 0.1 94 .3± 0.0 0 .01± 0.0067 0 .011± 0.0093
R WMH 10−3 100.0± 0 - 99.8± 0.1 41 .0± 35.2 71.5± 36.0 69.4± 33.7 63.1± 31.1 Unk. Unk.
R WMH-R 10−3 100.0± 0 57 .7± 3.9 87.8± 0.1 100 .0± 0 82 .9± 0.4 93 .2± 0.4 92 .4± 0.3 Unk. Unk.
Table 4: Further comparisons of samplers on an EBM with a pointwise constraint to include the word
“amazing” in the sequence. We do not compute perplexity for IMH and RWMH without reset as it does
not yield i.i.d. samples. As noted, TVD and KL for MCMC methods are unknown (i.e. we have no way of
estimating them). Where available, we show mean± one standard deviation over 10 runs.∗TVD and KL
are estimated on independent sets of106 samples.
QRS samples at 10−3 acceptance rate
• Cowgirl 87 Care Commission Header now available on our VIP web site. CowboyBillIssues AVAILABLE NOW... Start your website bio examining this amazing cam-
• take note. No wonder Vox isn’t having an amazing day. Screen Snipe Dave ends Neo by christening it #DroppedSummer [] @cloudp
• I got an unprecedented amount of reviews years ago because of such an interesting movie that seemed Nude World will be released in some theaters soon. The movie itself was
pretty amazing. I only had to hear
• Before Charlie Hebdo rendered its amazing save for lost lives, scholarship was blind to the brutal irony. Gregory Wade accidentally shot three bystanders, at least ten more
wounded, and four more dead within three days of
• 4279 watts has passed the bar You can also check your save scores by clicking ‘Save Data to PWSW Audience‘. Shopping Welters also have amazing customer
• Sculpt your beard to stay stylish when you struggle to look like a nerd. This Collection makes all your lengthening amazing, so show it off – Ruler of Salt, Cone of Salt at
Holl
• If you’ve contacted our sponsor, they know who you are and how hard you work. Unless months pass without a postcard. Best Served to meet everything you demand. You are
amazing and are
• I’m sure a lot of people are most excited to see an F-35 Lightning II V2 today because of the amazing kick that’s (understandably) in the engine room now that Benson
• Catherine is serviceable, happy, and successful. She loves teaching, having children, and saving time. She regularly works with can and is an amazing listener. Our
community is full of
• The bellies of the runs was amazing. A ton of complements were good, including some neighboring dressing room appearances. So long worked up info, my 2014 Mustang had lots
of special opening-specific
Table 5: The first 10 examples produced in the first run of QRS on the EBM filtering GPT-2 sequences
containing “amazing”.
R WMH samples at 10−3 acceptance rate
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
• The OnePlus 2 is one of the most amazing smartphones we’ve ever tried. It’s an extremely powerful smartphone you’ve never heard of before, and carries an amazing battery
life, or battery life I’m
Table 6: The first 10 examples produced in the first run of RWMH on the EBM filtering GPT-2 sequences
containing “amazing”.
35
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
R WMH-R samples at 10−3 acceptance rate
• yay!!! this game is amazing!!!!! a cool physical sci fi action game where you play a hardened junkie with an old girlfriend who’s tough
• in the immediate aftermath of the church shutdown, strange and often amazing events raised the question of whether the government had ever given up its restrictive control of
religious provocations for political purposes and assumed a new political leadership
• ... had an amazing 7 out of 10, 8 out of 10, 9 out of 10, 6 out of 5... liked it... the story...
• I do have several solo masters who still have done amazing work to suit/complement orientated-character traits. In particular, I find myself building out secondary mazes
based on their chunks iay
• "She and my son played "Friends," and used songs that I loved from that’s were amazing," Kleutz said. "They were acknowledging responsible themes. They felt I was so
passionate that I
• useful for those in need or those who are distracted in the outside world. qualms ( # 77574 ), pro / pro bizarre ( # 776171 ), amazing 1 / 2 / 3 / 5 ( # 776249 )
• We are inspired by the amazing work of the Reader Space Foundation, which fosters artists who make an impact on a global audience through knowledge, support, and advocacy.
It’s made us an un-
• the casanova is amazing the key to this being a classic, a true black lace bra made from dl’s, lace and all the fabrics that are available in pink and black. go on, have
some fruit, sugar, vitamins, icing. whisper, wow, good for you
• and it is only using standard rules of thumb, but it is amazing that all the use of " " can be taken into account. " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " "
established.
• With so many amazing actors appearing on every level in a stone once it’s filmed, Star Wars Rebels follows the Rebellion throughout 2017 with an unusual archive of credits
from the original and Rebels Two Casts.
Table 7: The first 10 examples produced in the first run of RWMH-R on the EBM filtering GPT-2 sequences
containing “amazing”.
IMH samples at 10−3 acceptance rate
• OF ALL The Verifiers who voted for Dragon Quest Revealed, two amazing choices are going to still be in the fire. To make up for the lost depth, Vulcans will make a busy
• A PO3 sniff tested, protecting the lab from detection by probiotic products, is amazing. 5 years ago, scientists found the cannabinoid-blocking drug O3 responsible
• You have watched The Witcher 3 as a kid. You have eaten plenty of meat at your meals. You’ve seen a video game show before that has been amazing. Very few people have
grown up without
• 11 am 2pm 958-701-99997 to Lift EcoTV, located in Washington, D.C. Do you have more questions about lifting something amazing in the Farm 600 in
• Bringing this gift is a unique opportunity to share with your loved ones about the home we love. Our family stunts cloud of feedback and the truly amazing handmade items we
came upon included, providing a great
• Over a group of homebrew enthusiasts gathered for a beer sampling on Wednesday morning, they shared some amazing homebrew recipes with beer enthusiasts on the craft beer of
the weekend, as well as some star brewers at home
• RIDER VIDEOTAPE | LEON BEVERLY RON OLD AFAIK proud to present you the amazing RADIO available from RON Old Hollywood: http://www.personalradio
• with comments, screenshots collaborating authors & planners Connecting friends & family, live with family of our wonderful amazing people. An Albany
Folklore Center where we are based
• Could She Play The Same Sex Career? Missoula is full of different, amazing lesbian and gay couples to come. It’s so amazing that she’s so welcoming to them. They love
• amazing even or nerdyally I mean it’s true that almost every person touching your skin is under their own skin, but when you have to contribute, you are competing
against art first
Table 8: The first 10 examples produced in the first run of IMH on the EBM filtering GPT-2 sequences
containing “amazing”.
IMH-R samples at 10−3 acceptance rate
• Journey to Mars! Supermassive Black Hole Recovered From Big Bang Rosetta Sky It took an amazingly severe situation to produce an amazing HDR image through single
recombination with massive radio uplink
• Early in the credits game, Sid Meier looked over Randi with his smugly excited face. "What if," he started, "if you think Randi’s doing amazing things to me
• While Gilinda tells everybody what she has in mind in the past, notice that despite their competitiveness and amazing athleticism, they do outlive the Hokies and don’t
recognize one another. It
• ameral bairnsaucer, from Prague No, this wasn’t a blast. It was awesome. My test team was amazing. If you wait against an scent that is
• Last day was so amazing. I was going to lay down for some lunch on the park deck and watch contestants go nuts. Happy morning. Psychos Solid: Winning the Super Bowl
isn’t
• Can Customers Generation Support Field Trawler? Well, it looks like it’s gonna be well taken care of...Tousting can also apparently utilise compiled sound block and got
some amazing gimm
• 64 Explicit Nov 16, 2016 FIVE US SECS CONCLUSIONS On Saturday night you’ll find an amazing bunch of colleges and universities alike as they host the ’THE LAST TENSE’ panel
for
• Pick anything you wish for appears in new like Black Bag Revenge, Savage Comet, Bride of Waibou, Oinnibox and much more. Gamazing Of The Month Star Trade Reply
• At 6 miles in, the Gawdover Range is an amazingly located range within Markham county, NY. I was able to flag down one during the last few kilometres and here is the fun!
• I’m never happy about an OC for a while, since I can like them because the fact that the beautiful side has proven amazing makes sure I learned to love them more and remain
satisfied when looking at
Table 9: The first 10 examples produced in the first run of IMH-R on the EBM filtering GPT-2 sequences
containing “amazing”.
36
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
As (λp/λq)x is increasing inx, for any fixedβ >0 and nonnegative integerx we have
p(x)≤βq(x) ⇔ (λp/λq)x≤β exp(λp−λq) ⇔ x≤k
where
k .=
⌊λp−λq + logβ
log(λp/λq)
⌋
.
Thus the partition function appearing in Eq. 37 is
Zβ =
∞∑
i=0
min (p(i),βq (i)) =
k∑
i=0
p(i) +β
∞∑
i=k+1
q(i) =Fλp(k) +β(1−Fλq(k)),
where Fλ is the cumulative distribution function of a Poisson of rateλ.
Given this value ofZβ, thef-divergence in Eq. 37 may now be approximated by truncating it ton terms
for a suitably largen, provided the convex functionf does not grow too rapidly:
Df(p,pβ)≈
n∑
x=0
Pβ(x)
Zβ
f
(p(x)Zβ
Pβ(x)
)
.
I Importance Sampling and Variance
In this work, we perform many IS estimates of quantities such as acceptance rate, TVD and KL divergence.
We report variance estimates computed using the bootstrap estimator for the experiments on debiasing
scientist biographies (Sec. 3.2.2) and other EBMs reported in Appendix A in Table 10. We report mean±
one standard deviation forβ values within the range used in our experiments (also see Table 2). We find
our estimates to be accurate within reasonable variance.
Secondly, as noted in Sec. 2.2, it is not generally possible to computeZ or its variance for any given EBM
with certainty. This observation can put into question the validity of the above-described estimates. We note,
however, that when we can boundP (x)/q(x) we can have formal bounds on these quantities, allowing us to
double-check the accuracy of these estimates. In particular, this is possible whenP (x) = a(x)b(x), q(x) =
a(x) and b(x)∈ [0,M ], as in that case we haveP (x)/q(x)≤ M. Using Popoviciu’s inequality (Popoviciu,
1935), we know that
Var
[P (x)
q(x)
]
≤ M2
4 , (38)
and thus, the IS estimator ofZ has variance
Var
[
1
N
N∑
i=0
P (xi)
q(xi)
]
≤ M2
4N. (39)
We generated 1M samples with GPT-2, and used them to compute the partition functions of the EBMs for
pointwise constraints, with provable bounds on their variance following Eq. 39. For the 100% “amazing”
EBM, we obtainedZ = 2.5× 10−3± 2.5× 10−7; whereas for 100% “wikileaks” we obtainedZ = 1.5×
10−4± 2.5× 10−7. These are in agreement with the estimates in Table 10. However for our experiments
with distributional constraints, we determinined the rather large boundM = 304868, and we would need to
gather at least1012 samples to obtain a reasonable bound on the variance. This highlights the need for better
proposal distributions to compute these quantities, especially considering that the number of samples that
IS needs to compute partition function ofP (x) is inversely proportional toexp(DKL(p,q )) (Chatterjee and
Diaconis, 2018). This is the reason why,in practice, a good proposal distribution can allow us to compute
accurate estimates, even if that comes at the loss of the above-described formal bounds.
37
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
P β AR TVD(p,pβ ) DKL (p,pβ )
100% amazing
0.02 0 .08± 1.8× 10−4 0.2± 6.5× 10−3 0.3± 0.04
0.3 7 .8× 10−3± 3.2× 10−5 0.04± 8.0× 10−3 0.05± 0.02
2 1 .2× 10−3± 6.8× 10−6 0.01± 6.7× 10−3 0.01± 9.3× 10−3
100% wikileaks
7.4× 10−4 0.1± 2.1× 10−4 0.3± 5.2× 10−3 0.6± 0.03
0.01 8 .5× 10−3± 3.7× 10−5 0.07± 7.3× 10−3 0.09± 0.02
0.2 8 .2× 10−4± 6.6× 10−6 9.7× 10−3± 3.5× 10−3 3.9× 10−3± 1.9× 10−3
50% female
1× 101 0.1± 1.3× 10−4 0.02± 6.2× 10−4 0.01± 1.2× 10−3
1× 102 0.01± 1.5× 10−5 5.9× 10−4± 2.9× 10−4 3.3× 10−4± 1.8× 10−4
2× 103 1.1× 10−3± 1.5× 10−6 2.7× 10−7± 4.4× 10−7 −1.7× 10−8± 9.4× 10−7
50% female + 100% science
7× 103 0.08± 1.7× 10−4 0.3± 6.0× 10−3 0.5± 0.03
1.1× 105 7.1× 10−3± 3.5× 10−5 0.07± 7.1× 10−3 0.08± 0.02
6.4× 105 1.3× 10−3± 1.0× 10−5 0.02± 4.9× 10−3 9.9× 10−3± 4.8× 10−3
50% female + 100% sports
1.2× 105 0.07± 1.3× 10−4 0.1± 4.2× 10−3 0.2± 0.01
7.5× 105 0.01± 3.5× 10−5 0.04± 3.8× 10−3 0.04± 6.2× 10−3
1.2× 107 8.5× 10−4± 4.6× 10−6 4.2× 10−4± 3.2× 10−4 4.2× 10−5± 3.6× 10−5
P β Z Z β
100% amazing
0.02
2.5× 10−3± 2.5× 10−5
0.08± 1.8× 10−4
0.3 7 .8× 10−3± 3.2× 10−5
2 1 .2× 10−3± 6.8× 10−6
100% wikileaks
7.4× 10−4
1.4× 10−4± 1.4× 10−6
0.1± 2.1× 10−4
0.01 8 .5× 10−3± 3.7× 10−5
0.2 8 .2× 10−4± 6.6× 10−6
50% female
1× 101
2± 2.3× 10−3
0.1± 1.3× 10−4
1× 102 0.01± 1.5× 10−5
2× 103 1.1× 10−3± 1.5× 10−6
50% female + 100% science
7× 103
8× 102± 9
0.08± 1.7× 10−4
1.1× 105 7.1× 10−3± 3.5× 10−5
6.4× 105 1.3× 10−3± 1.0× 10−5
50% female + 100% sports
1.2× 105
1× 104± 6× 101
0.07± 1.3× 10−4
7.5× 105 0.01± 3.5× 10−5
1.2× 107 8.5× 10−4± 4.6× 10−6
Table 10: Means and standard deviation of IS estimates of acceptance rate, TVD with the target distribution
and KL divergence to the target distribution for variousβ on various EBMs using a DPG fine-tuned proposal.
We perform 5,000 bootstrap simulations using 1,000,000 samples each to compute the means and standard
deviations. Values ofβ are chosen within the range used for our experiments as reported in Table 2.
38
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Estimating Z: an example with finite mean and infinite varianceAs mentioned in footnote 6, the
variance Varx∼q
P(x)
q(x) may be infinite. For instance, ifP and q are distributions satisfyingP (x)2 =q(x) on
support x = 0, 1,... , then
Ex∼q
P (x)2
q(x)2 =
∞∑
x=0
P (x)2
q(x) =
∞∑
x=0
1 =∞.
As the variance is the mean-square minus the squared-mean, it too is infinite. The conditionP 2 =q holds
for appropriately normalized geometric distributionsp(x)∝ax and q(x)∝a2x for any 0<a< 1.
J About the Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm
Robert and Casella (2004, Theorem 7.4, p. 274) prove the following theorem, withf the target distribution.
Our motivation for reproducing this result is to emphasize point (ii), which is especially relevant in the
context of this paper.
Theorem J.1. Suppose that the Metropolis-Hastings Markov chain(X(t)) is f-irreducible.
(i) If h is anf-integrable function, then
lim
T→∞
1
T
T∑
t=1
h(X(t)) =
∫
h(x)f(x) dx almost surely.
(ii) If, in addition,(X(t)) is aperiodic, then
lim
n→∞
TVD
(
f,
∫
Kn(x,·)µ(dx)
)
= 0
for every initial distributionµ, whereKn(x,·) denotes the kernel forn transitions.
Property (i) says that the average over theT first elements of asingle chain converges to the expectation
of h(x) for x∼f, asT increases. Property (ii) is concerned with the TVD between the target distribution
f and the distribution obtained by repeatedly running ann-step chain and outputting thenth element —
the reset (-R) variant of the MH algorithm that we have denoted by RWMH-R or IMH-R. This distance
converges to zero asn increases.
K Arbitrarily Slow Proposal q
We assume thatX = N ={0, 1, 2,... }, thatp has full support and is strictly decreasing overN.18
Theorem K.1. Let g : (0,∞)→ [0, 1] be a strictly decreasing continuous function withlimβ→∞g(β) = 0.
Then there exist a real numberβ0 > 0 and a proposal probability distributionq over N such that the QRS
distribution pβ for targetp satisfies
TVD(p,pβ)≥g(β) for allβ >β0. (40)
tribution associated top and q at β.
Proof. See below.
In other words, whatever the “slowness” with whichg(β) decreases to 0, we can always find a proposalq
that guarantees that, asymptotically,TVD(p,pβ) decreases even more slowly.19
39
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
0
1𝑚(0)
𝑚(1)𝑚(2)𝑚(3)𝛽0
ℎ
𝛽1𝛽2𝛽3
Figure 13: Illustration of Lemma K.2.
Proof sketch
The proof, which we only sketch, is based on two lemmas.
Lemma K.2. If q is a distribution overN with full support, letVβ
.={x∈ N : p(x)/q(x)≥ β}. Let h(β)
be any strictly decreasing continuous function from(0,∞) to [0, 1], such thatlimβ→∞ h(β) = 0. Then there
exist someq and β1 > 0 such that
β≥β1 ⇒ p(Vβ)≥h(β).
Proof. For x∈ N, let m(x) .= p({x,x + 1,... }) and β(x) .= inf{β : h(β)≤ m(x)}. This is easily seen to
imply thath(β(x)) =m(x) and thatβ(x) is strictly increasing (see Fig. 13). Then construct a distribution
q over{0, 1, 2,... } such that for somex0≥ 1, and for anyx≥ x0, one hasq(x) .= p(x)
β(x+1); and we set
β1
.=β(x0). We note that the intervals[β(x0),β (x0 + 1)), [β(x0 + 1),β (x0 + 2)),... cover the whole interval
[x0,∞). Then consider some integer k≥ x0 and take β in the interval [β(k),β (k + 1)). For x≥ k, we
have p(x)
q(x) = β(x + 1)≥ β(k + 1)≥ β, hence x∈ Vβ. But p({k,k + 1,... }) = h(β(k))≥ h(β), hence
p(Vβ)≥h(β).
Lemma K.3. Let q be a distribution overN with full support, and letWβ
.={x∈ N : p(x)/q(x)≥ 3β}.
Then there exists a real numberβ2 > 0 such that
β≥β2 ⇒ TVD(p,pβ)≥p(Wβ)/2.
Proof. We have
pβ(x) = p(x)∧ (βq(x))
Zβ
= p(x)
Zβ
(
1∧
(
βq(x)
p(x)
))
, Z β =
∑
x
p(x)∧ (βq(x)).
Hence, forx∈Wβ,
pβ(x)
p(x) =
1∧
(
βq(x)
p(x)
)
Zβ
≤ 1
3Zβ
.
Letβ2 > 0 be such thatβ≥β2⇒Zβ > 0.9. (It is easy to see that such aβ2 exists, asZβ is increasing inβ
and converges to 1.) Then forβ≥β2 and forx∈Wβ, we havepβ(x)
p(x) ≤ 1
3×0.9≤ 1
2, so that
p(x)−pβ(x) =p(x)
(
1− pβ(x)
p(x)
)
≥ p(x)
2 ,
and therefore TVD(p,pβ) =∑
x:p(x)≥pβ(x)(p(x)−pβ(x))≥p(Wβ)/2.
18These conditions are WLOG, as can easily be checked.
19Based on the properties proved in the paper, we know that eventuallyTVD(p,pβ) decreases to 0.
40
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (11/2022)
Proof of Theorem K.1.From these two lemmas, the proof of the theorem follows easily. Indeed, leth(β′) .=
min(1, 2g(β′/3)). Forβ′ = 3β, we haveWβ =Vβ′, and therefore, by Lemma K.3,TVD(p,pβ)≥p(Vβ′)/2,
for β≥β2. By Lemma K.2, we havep(Vβ′)≥h(β′) = 2g(β) for β′≥β′
1, so thatTVD(p,pβ)≥g(β) for β
large enough thatg(β)≤ 1/2, and we conclude.
41