--- page 1 ---
False positives using
social cognitive
mapping to identify
children’s peer
groups
Preprint
c⃝The Author(s) 2020
Zachary P . Neal1, Jennifer Watling Neal 1, and Rachel
Domagalski2
Abstract
This pre-print has been relocated to the PsyArXiv server. Subsequent
revisions can be found at https://psyarxiv.com/yfmzd/.
Children and adolescents interact in peer groups, which are known to inﬂuence
a range of psychological and behavioral outcomes. In developmental psychology
and related disciplines, social cognitive mapping (SCM), as implemented with the
SCM 4.0 software, is the most commonly used method for identifying peer groups
from peer report data. However, in a series of four studies, we demonstrate that
SCM has an unacceptably high risk of false positives. Speciﬁcally, we show that
SCM will identify peer groups even when applied to random data. We introduce
backbone extraction and community detection as one promising alternative to
SCM, and offer several recommendations for researchers seeking to identify peer
groups from peer report data.
Keywords
Accuracy, Peer groups, Social networks, Social cognitive mapping, Validity
1Psychology Department, Michigan State University
2Mathematics Department, Michigan State University
0
Corresponding author:
Zachary Neal, Psychology Department, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA;
zpneal@msu.edu
arXiv:1911.05703v3  [cs.SI]  10 Sep 2020

--- page 2 ---
2 Preprint XX(X)
Introduction
Decades of research demonstrate the importance of peers for child and adolescent
development and psychological well-being (Bukowski et al. 2018; Gifford-Smith and
Brownell 2003). Children and adolescents interact in peer groups with structural and
behavioral features that are associated with a wide range of psychological, social,
and academic outcomes (Birkett and Espelage 2015; Espelage et al. 2003; Ryan
2001). However, identifying peer groups can be challenging and represents a critical
measurement task for developmental and clinical researchers (Kindermann and Gest
2018). To overcome these challenges, Cairns and colleagues proposed social cognitive
mapping (SCM), a method of peer group identiﬁcation that involves identifying peer
groups using multiple peer reports of groups of children that interact together in a
setting such as a classroom (Cairns and Cairns 1994; Cairns et al. 1988).
SCM has become a dominant method for identifying children’s peer groups from
peer report data. The data are easy to collect, the ability to triangulate from peers
reduces the impact of non-response, the analysis is easy to perform, and there is
some evidence for its validity (Gest et al. 2003). However, nothing is known about
the extent to which SCM can yield false positives, where the method identiﬁes peer
groups from data that contain no or only weak evidence of their existence. In this
paper, we show that SCM has an high rate of false positives, assigning on average two-
thirds of children to peer groups even when it is applied to random peer report data. We
conclude that researchers should not use SCM, particularly as it is implemented in the
SCM 4.0 program, to identify peer groups , and should explore alternative methods
for identifying peer networks and peer groups from peer report data (Neal 2014).
We begin by reviewing SCM, providing an overview of its origins, where and how
it has been used, how it works, and evidence for its accuracy. Then, in a series of
four related studies, we conﬁrm that SCM can detect true positives, examine SCM’s
risk of false positives under different conditions, and explore backbone extraction and
community detection as an alternative to SCM. In the discussion section, we synthesize
the key ﬁndings from these studies, offering recommendations for researchers seeking
to identify children’s’ peer groups.
Background
What is social cognitive mapping?
Experiences in peer groups play a signiﬁcant role in childhood and adolescent
development (Howe 2010; Kindermann and Gest 2018; Rubin et al. 2015). Speciﬁcally,
aspects of peer group structure (e.g., size, hierarchy) or behavior (e.g., norms) have
been linked to psychological (e.g., depression), social (e.g., aggression, homophobic
name calling, prosocial behavior, resource control) and academic (e.g., motivation,
achievement) outcomes (Birkett and Espelage 2015; Espelage et al. 2003; Ryan 2001;
Zhao et al. 2016; Zarbatany et al. 2019). However, identifying peer groups presents
a range of challenges in developmental studies. For example, self-report methods are
sensitive to self enhancement bias and missing data, while observational methods are
resource intensive (Cairns and Cairns 1994; Kindermann and Gest 2018; Neal and
Neal 2013). To overcome some of these challenges, Cairns and colleagues proposed

--- page 3 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 3
SCM as an alternate method for the identifying of peer groups (Cairns et al. 1988;
Cairns and Cairns 1994). SCM relies on peer informants to provide reports of groups
of children in a particular setting, such as a classroom, that hang out together. Through
a series of aggregating and ﬁltering transformations, SCM uses these peer-reported data
to identify peer groups (Neal and Neal 2013). Speciﬁcally, SCM is intended to answer
two questions: ﬁrst, do the children in this setting interact with one another in peer
groups, and second, if so, which children are members of which groups?
SCM developed in roughly three phases. First, during the development phase in the
late 1980s, a research team at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill led by
Robert Cairns and Beverley Cairns experimented with ways to triangulate multiple
children’s reports of peer groups into a single picture of a setting’s social structure and
its peer groups (Cairns et al. 1985, 1988, 1989). This work concentrated on examining a
matrix of children’s co-occurrence in reported peer groups, evolving from “a decision
rule procedure [in which] arbitrary standards were adopted” to a more objective set
of steps “with minimal reliance on intuitive judgements” (Cairns et al. 1988, p. 817).
Second, during the formalization stage in the early 1990s, these steps were reﬁned into
a consistent procedure that appeared in an essentially identical form across multiple
papers that included fully-worked examples (Farmer and Cairns 1991; Farmer et al.
1993; Cairns and Cairns 1994). This phase also included the development of software
to facilitate the use of SCM (Leung and Alston 1998). 3 Finally, the application phase
from the mid-1990s onward has involved the use of SCM throughout developmental
psychology and related ﬁelds focused on studying children’s peer relations and groups,
as well as the development of variations on the steps developed during the formalization
stage. In particular, two of Cairns’ colleagues developed their own variations: one
relying on conditional probabilities and a binomial z test (Kindermann 1993), and
another relying on principal components analysis (Gest et al. 2007).
How often is SCM used?
To determine the speciﬁc variant of SCM that is most commonly used, we started with
a dataset of 201 papers from a recent review of social network data collection methods
in developmental psychology (Neal 2020). These papers were initially identiﬁed
using Google Scholar and reﬂect papers published or online (a) prior to February
2019 (b) in the 30 top-ranked journals classiﬁed by Web of Science as “Psychology,
developmental” in 2016 (c) that contained the phrase “social network” and one or
more network-relevant keywords (e.g. density, centrality, clique, etc.) Neal (In press).
We reviewed each paper and identiﬁed 73 that attempt to identify network-based peer
groups or cliques. A majority of these papers (N = 46, 63%) used SCM to identify
peer groups. Among those using SCM, most (N = 38, 83%) used the speciﬁc variant
described by Cairns and Cairns (1994). 4 Finally, among the papers using Cairns and
Cairns’ version of SCM, nearly half (N = 16, 42%) explicitly noted that they usedSCM
3Usually SCM 4.0 is attributed to Leung only, however here we cite both Leung who wrote the manual and
original program, and Alston who is identiﬁed in the software itself as the programmer.
4Of the remaining papers, 3 use the variant described by Kindermann (1993), 2 use the variant described
by Gest et al. (2007), and 3 provided insufﬁcient detail to determine the variant.

--- page 4 ---
4 Preprint XX(X)
4.0, a DOS-based program that implements this version of SCM. Because it is the most
widely-used method, in this paper we focus on SCM as described by Cairns and Cairns
(1994) and as implemented in SCM 4.0 (Leung and Alston 1998).
To determine how widely SCM is used and the extent to which it is used outside
developmental psychology, where it wad ﬁrst developed, we examined each paper
citing Leung and Alston (1998). Using Google Scholar we located an additional 26
papers appearing in such youth-focused ﬁelds as school psychology (Farmer et al.
2010), social psychology (Wolfer et al. 2012), special education (Avramidis 2010),
STEM education (Radovic et al. 2017), and substance use (Sheppard et al. 2012). We
also observed that it is used outside North America, by researchers in Latvia (Levina
and Ivanova 2012), Korea (Ahn and Shin 2011), Norway (Fandrem et al. 2010), and
Spain (Bacete and Perrin 2013).
Combining the results from Neal (In press) and our own search, we identiﬁed a
total of 42 papers using SCM. They were published in such ﬂagship journals as
Developmental Psychology and Child Development between 1995 and 2019 (M =
2009.6, SD = 5). We therefore conclude that SCM is among the most widely- and
currently-used methods for identifying peer groups.
What is SCM used to study?
Researchers use the peer groups identiﬁed by SCM in multiple ways. First, some
researchers use SCM-derived peer groups to generate group-level behavioral norms,
then estimate mixed models to examine associations between these group norms and
individual psychological and social outcomes (Chung-Hall and Chen 2010; Zhao et al.
2016). For example, Zhao et al. (2016) found that children who participated in SCM-
derived peer groups with higher levels of average social withdrawal exhibited less
social competence, less positive school attitudes, and higher levels of depression.
Second, some researchers study the association between compositional (e.g., ethnic
composition) or organizational features (e.g., hierarchization) of SCM-derived peer
groups and psychological or social outcomes (Shi and Xie 2014; Zarbatany et al.
2019). For example, Shi and Xie (2014) found that the socialization of aggression
differed depending on the ethnic composition of SCM-derived peer groups. Finally,
some researchers have used SCM-derived peer groups to examine the extent to
which teachers are accurate observers of classroom peer relationships (i.e. teacher
attunement) (Gest 2006; Hoffman et al. 2015). For example, Hoffman et al. (2015)
found that elementary school teachers’ reports of classroom peer groups exhibit only
modest attunement to SCM-derived peer groups.
How does SCM work?
SCM begins by collecting peer reports by asking participating children a question
like Are there people in school who hang around together a lot? Who are they? Each
participating child is permitted to report any number of “hanging around” groups, and
each group they report can contain any number of children including themselves. For
example, Child A might report the existence of a “hanging around” group composed
of children A, B, and C (report 1), and another group composed of children W, X, Y ,
and Z (report 2). Additionally, Child B might report the existence of a group composed

--- page 5 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 5
of children A, B, C, and D (report 3). Thus, different reporters may report different
numbers of groups (e.g. Child A provided two reports, while Child B provided one
report), and these reports may partially overlap (e.g. Child A’s ﬁrst report and Child
B’s ﬁrst report overlap). Then a series of aggregations and transformations are applied
to these raw data to deﬁne a peer network and identify peer groups.
First, these peer report data are organized as a setting-wide “recall matrix” R that
contains a row i for each child in the setting and a column for each report j, so that
each cell in the matrix Rij contains a 1 if child i appeared in report j, and otherwise
is 0.5 Returning to the example above, cell RB1 = 1 and cell RB3 = 1 because child
B appeared in both reports 1 and 3, but RX1 = 0 because child X did not appear in
report 1. The SCM 4.0 software imposes some restrictions on the recall matrix that
are not necessarily required by SCM in general: it can only contain data on up to 2000
peer-reported groups and up to 400 distinct children, and each peer-reported group can
contain up to 20 members.
Second, the reports in the recall matrix R are transformed into a symmetric “co-
occurrence” matrix C using
C = RR′ (1)
whereCij andCji contain the number of times childi and childj were reported to be in
the same group, andCii contains the number of times childi was reported to be in any
group. In this step, SCM mirrors a classic example from the social network literature in
which children’s potential interactions are inferred from their co-participation in school
clubs using bipartite projection (Breiger 1974).
Third, C is transformed into a “similarity” matrix S using
S =cor(C) (2)
where Sij is the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of child i’s and child j’s
column (or row) in C. In this step, SCM mirrors the CONvergence of iterated
CORrelations (CONCOR) algorithm for group detection (Breiger et al. 1975).
However, unlike CONCOR, which repeatedly computes the correlation of the matrix
(e.g. cor(cor(cor(C)))), SCM performs this operation only once.
Fourth, a binary peer network N is constructed by deﬁning child i and child j
as connected if Sij ≥T , where T is a cut-off threshold between 0 and 1. Cairns
and Cairns (1994) recommended using a threshold value of 0.4, and this is the most
commonly reported value used in the 42 papers we located.6
Finally, groups of peers are identiﬁed from the peer network described by N. These
groups are permitted to overlap so that a single child may be a member of none, one, or
5The recall matrix does not contain information aboutwho provided any given report; this information is not
used by SCM when identifying peer groups.
6Studies that included Wendy Ellis as an author always used 0.5; we do not use it here because it is generally
not used by other authors and because it fails to correctly identify peer groups even in Cairns and Cairns
(1994) original data (see study 1 below). Studies that included Thomas Farmer as an author sometimes,
although not always, report using a ‘signiﬁcant’ threshold; we cannot use it here because these studies do not
report what ‘signiﬁcant’ means in this context, how the threshold was identiﬁed, or the actual value of the
threshold.

--- page 6 ---
6 Preprint XX(X)
Peer groups that 
can be directly 
observed in 
patterns of social 
interaction
Peer Reported 
Peer Groups 
(SCM survey)
Identiﬁed Peer 
Groups
(SCM 4.0)
Validity
Tuning
Accuracy
Perceptual
Accuracy
Figure 1. Types of accuracy relevant when social cognitive mapping is used to identify
peer groups from peer report data.
more than one peer group. Cairns and Cairns (1994) do not describe a speciﬁc method,
and seem to suggest that the identiﬁcation of groups in N is a trivial task that can be
performed by visual inspection. At least two different descriptions of the method used
to identify peer groups appear in the literature. Farmer et al. (1993) and others report
that it identiﬁes peer groups so that each member of the group is connected to “at least
50% of the members in the cluster” (p. 234; see Avramidis 2010; Fandrem et al. 2010;
Rodkin et al. 2006). Separately, Bacete and Perrin (2013) report that it identiﬁes peer
groups by adding members to a group until no one “is found who has a correlation
proﬁle equal to or greater than r = .40 with any of the members who have previously
been incorporated into the group” ([translated] p. 64-65). However, by examining the
output generated by SCM 4.0 in the analyses described below, we have veriﬁed that it
does not use either of these methods for identifying peer groups from a peer network.
Thus, we (and, seemingly, others) do not know exactly how SCM identiﬁes peer groups
from a peer network.
All ﬁve of the steps involved in SCM are automated by theSCM 4.0 program (Leung
and Alston 1998), which has been used in at least 42 published studies to identify peer
groups. Although we do not know exactly how SCM 4.0 performs the ﬁnal ‘group
identiﬁcation’ step, in our analyses below we simply use the output generated by the
program.
Is SCM accurate?
Because all methods measure social phenomena with error, the goal of measure
development is to understand and minimize those errors. Therefore, it is often
important to ask whether a given measurement approach is “accurate.” When SCM
is used to study peer groups, there are at least three distinct varieties of accuracy that
might be investigated.
First, validity describes the extent to which peer groups identiﬁed via SCM match
peer groups that can be directly observed in patterns of children’s social interactions.
Because such observational data are difﬁcult to collect (Gest et al. 2003), there have

--- page 7 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 7
been limited attempts to evaluate SCM’s validity. One early study of a 7 th grade
classroom of 26 children, observed that the children were “more likely to interact with
members of their own [SCM-identiﬁed] subgroup than with members of other [SCM-
identiﬁed] clusters” (Cairns and Cairns 1994, p. 107). Similarly, a larger study of 72
children in 4 th through 7th grade found that “Children were observed to interact with
members of their SCMidentiﬁed social cluster at a rate four times higher than with
other samesex classmates” (Gest et al. 2003, p. 513).
Second, perceptual accuracy describes the extent to which the peer groups identiﬁed
by a particular child on an SCM survey and that appear in the recall matrix match the
peer groups that can be directly observed. Because “respondents have only a limited
knowledge of the classroom” it is assumed that “there are frequent errors” in the
reports that each child provides, and thus that perceptual inaccuracy is common (Cairns
and Cairns 1994, p. 104). For example, Neal et al. (2016) found that children have
inaccurate perceptions about which of their classmates hang out together (κ = 0.371),
but that girls, older children, and children in smaller classrooms were more accurate.
Such inaccurate perceptions can still be informative, for example as an indicator of a
child’s social awareness (Cappella et al. 2012), and because an individual’s behaviors
are shaped by their perceptions of reality as much as by reality itself (Krackhardt 1987).
However, SCM aims to overcome the expected perceptual inaccuracies of individual
children by pooling and triangulating multiple children’s reports.
Finally, a third type of accuracy which we call tuning accuracy describes the extent
to which the peer groups identiﬁed by SCM accurately summarize or triangulate the
information contained in the peer reports collected via an SCM survey. To use the
analogy of a radio tuner, the peer report data is a combination of signal (i.e. information
about directly observable peer groups) and noise (i.e. random error due to the children’s
perceptual inaccuracies) (Shannon and Weaver 1963). The purpose of SCM, like a
tuner, is to ﬁlter out the noise to yield a clear signal. There are two ways that SCM
might exhibit tuning accuracy: ﬁrst it can identify peer groups for which the peer
reports contain evidence (true positives), and second it can fail to identify peer groups
for which the peer reports do not contain evidence (true negatives). There are also
two ways that SCM might exhibit tuning inaccuracy: ﬁrst it can identify peer groups
for which the peer reports do not contain evidence (false positives; type I error), and
second it can fail to identify peer groups for which the peer reports do contain evidence
(false negatives; type II error).
Each of these forms of accuracy is important. However, perceptual accuracy and
validity are both challenging to establish because collecting observational data from
many diverse settings would be cost- and time-prohibitive. In contrast, tuning accuracy
can be evaluated without observational data by using simulated data as we describe
below. Moreover, tuning accuracy is a critical prerequisite for validity. Without the
ability to tune in the signal, and tune out the noise, no amount of perceptual accuracy
will allow SCM-identiﬁed peer groups to be valid. Therefore, in this paper, we are
interested in investigating SCM’s tuning accuracy, and speciﬁcally its risk of false
positives.
Three prior studies offer some insight into SCM’s risk of false positives. First, Watts
(2008) explains that when a recall matrix is transformed into a co-occurrence matrix
using Equation 1 “even a random [recall matrix] – one that has no particular structure

--- page 8 ---
8 Preprint XX(X)
built into it at all – will be highly clustered” (p. 128). Second, Pijl et al. (2011)
found that compared to identifying peer groups from a network of reciprocated self-
reported friendships, SCM assigned all children to a peer group, which was “quite
surprising, as it is known from the literature that 4-10% of children do not have friends
in primary classrooms” (p. 484). Finally, Neal and Neal (2013) demonstrated using
illustrative data that “distinct peer groups always appear to be present, no matter what
responses children give” during data collection (p. 605). Guided by these past studies,
we hypothesize that SCM has a high rate of false positives, identifying peer groups even
from peer report data that lack evidence of peer groups. To investigate this hypothesis,
we report on four separate studies: The ﬁrst study conﬁrms that SCM can detect true
positives, the second and third studies examine SCM’s risk of false positives under
different conditions, and the fourth study explores backbone extraction and community
detection as an alternative to SCM for identifying peer groups.
Study 1: True positives in a benchmark classroom
Methods
To examine whether SCM is able to detect true positives, correctly identifying when
children are members of peer groups, we use data described by Cairns and Cairns
(1994). These data consist of a set of 61 peer reports collected from 17 children (11
girls, 6 boys) in a 26 child (15 girls, 11 boys) 7th grade classroom.7 They offer an ideal
benchmark dataset for two reasons. First, these are the data originally used by Cairns
and Cairns (1994) to demonstrate and validate SCM, and therefore ought to offer SCM
the best opportunity for correctly identifying peer groups. Second, independently of
collecting these data, Cairns and Cairns (1994) also conducted “direct observation of
social interactions among children” (p. 107), ﬁnding that all children in the classroom
belonged to a peer group, and that the classroom contained ﬁve distinct peer groups.
This observational data provides a criterion against which to judge SCM’s validity.
In this and subsequent studies, we focus on one statistic of interest,P , the proportion
of children that SCM identiﬁes as a member of a peer group composed of at least 3
children.8 In this benchmark classroom, based on the independent observational data
that all children are members of a peer group, if SCM can detect true positives then P
should equal 1.
Results
Figure 2 shows the peer network obtained by applying SCM to data from a benchmark
7th grade classroom, while the shaded regions outline the peer groups identiﬁed by
SCM. The identiﬁed groups match what Cairns and Cairns (1994) observed: cohesive
groups of 4 girls, 4 boys, and 7 boys, as well as a larger cluster of 7 girls and 3 girls
that are bridged by Heather, who belongs to both groups but here is shown as a member
7The classroom contained 27 children, but one child (Pam) never appeared in any of the peer reports, and
therefore is excluded from these analyses.
8The requirement that peer groups contain at least 3 members is common in the developmental psychology
literature (Shi and Xie 2014; Zhao et al. 2016; Zarbatany et al. 2019)

--- page 9 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 9
Amy
Bea
Cam
Di
Edi
Fay
Gay
Hea
Ida
Joy
Kim
Lyn
Mia
Nia
Ola
Arn
Bil
Cal
Dan
Edd
Foz
Gig
Hal
Ian
Jan
Ken
Figure 2. Applying SCM to peer report data from a benchmark 7th grade classroom.
of the larger group. Because all children are identiﬁed by SCM as a member of a peer
group,P = 1, which matches our expectation based on observational data and conﬁrms
that SCM detects the true positives in this classroom. From this, we conclude that at
least in this benchmark classroom, SCM is able to detect true positives with respect to
whether or not children are members of peer groups.
Study 2: False positives in a benchmark classroom
Methods
Evaluating SCM’s risk of false positives is more challenging than examining its ability
to detect true positives. In this context, a false positive occurs when SCM identiﬁes
children as a members of peer groups when the peer report data lacks evidence of
such peer group membership. The most extreme example of peer report data that lacks
evidence of peer groups is random peer report data, which a researcher might obtain if
the responding children simply guess about peer groups, do not take the data collection
seriously and report nonsense, or lack any perceptual accuracy. Although obtaining
random peer report data may be unlikely in practice, it provides the most conservative
test of SCM’s risk of false positives because it is the case where its risk of false positives
should be smallest.
To test SCM’s false positive rate, we generated 1000 simulated recall matrices. In
each simulated recall matrix, we randomize which children have been reported by their
peers to be members of which groups. However, for the sake of comparability and to
ensure these simulated data sets are plausible, each simulated recall matrix preserves
some features of the original 7th grade classroom described above (Strona et al. 2014).
First, the simulated data contain the same number of children (i.e. 26) and the same
number of peer reports (i.e. 61). Second, they preserve the salience of each child. For

--- page 10 ---
10 Preprint XX(X)
0
50
100
150
200
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Proportion of children in a peer group
Figure 3. False positives applying SCM in a hypothetical 7th grade classroom.
example, in both the original Cairns and Cairns (1994) data and in every simulated
dataset Arn is a high-salience child who was named in 15 peer reports, while Ken
is a low-salience child who was named in only 3 peer reports. Finally, they preserve
the sizes of the peer reported peer groups. For example, in both the original Cairns and
Cairns (1994) data and in every simulated dataset 28 of the 61 peer reported peer groups
contained 4 children, while 1 contained 12 children. This approach yields simulated
recall matrices that have many of the same features as the original 7th grade classroom,
except that by randomizing which children are reported as members of which groups,
should contain no evidence of actual peer groups.
We then use SCM 4.0 to identify peer groups from each of these 1000 simulated
recall matrices. In each case, we compute our statistic of interest, P , the proportion
of children that SCM identiﬁes as a member of a peer group composed of at least 3
children. If SCM yields true negatives, correctly failing to identify children as members
of peer groups, for which we know these data contain no evidence because they are
random, thenP ≈ 0. In contrast, if SCM yields false positives, incorrectly identifying
children as members of peer groups, thenP ≫ 0.
Results
Figure 3 summarizes the value of P obtained by using SCM to identify peer groups
in 1000 random recall matrices with characteristics similar to the 7 th grade classroom
originally studied by Cairns and Cairns (1994). These results can be used to answer two
questions about SCM. First, how often does SCM yield false positives when applied
in a classroom setting like that originally observed by Cairns and Cairns (1994) (i.e.
how often isP >0)? We ﬁnd thatP >0 in all 1000 simulated datasets, and therefore
that SCM always yields false positives in such a setting. Second, how severe are the
false positives when applied in this a setting like this? We ﬁnd that on average SCM
assigns two-thirds (M = 0.67, SD = 0.12, min = 0.27, max = 1) of children to a peer
group, when in fact the recall matrix contains no evidence of peer groups because it is
random.

--- page 11 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 11
Study 3: False positives in other classroom
Methods
In study 2 we investigated SCM’s risk of false positives in simulated classrooms that
were similar to the benchmark classroom originally studied by Cairns and Cairns
(1994). However, classrooms can vary widely, and SCM’s risk of false positives may
be more or less severe in certain types of classrooms. To investigate this possibility,
we generated an additional 1000 random recall matrices, varying ﬁve features of the
simulated classroom: (1) the number of children in the classroom, (2) the number of
peer reports provided, (3) the probability that a child is named in a peer report, (4) the
amount of skew in the number of times children were named in a peer report, and (5) the
amount of skew in the number of children named in a peer report. In this context, skew
in the number of times children were named is a measure of child salience; when skew
is positive, this corresponds to a classroom where a few children are highly salient and
receive many nominations, but most receive few nominations. Skew in the number of
children named in a peer report is a measure of group size; when skew is positive, this
corresponds to a classroom where some reported groups are large, but most are small.
Then, following the same process as study 2, we use SCM 4.0 to identify peer groups
from each recall matrix and compute our statistic of interest,P . Finally, we estimate a
regression to examine how characteristics of classroom settings are associated withP .
Results
Figure 4 summarizes the value ofP obtained by using SCM to identify peer groups in
1000 random recall matrices with the characteristics of classrooms that differ in size,
density, child salience, and reported group size. These results can be used to answer two
questions about SCM. First, how often does SCM yield false positives when applied
in different types of classroom settings (i.e. how often is P >0)? We ﬁnd that across
all settings P >0 in 81.2% of the 1000 simulated datasets, and therefore that SCM
frequently yields false positives in a range of classroom settings. Second, how severe
are the false positives when applied in this a setting like this? Among datasets where
SCM identﬁed peer groups, it assigned nearly two-thirds (M = 0.63, SD = 0.30, min =
0.075, max = 1) of children to a peer group, when in fact the recall matrix contains no
evidence of peer groups because it is random.
Table 1 reports the results of a regression predictingP as a function of the classroom
characteristics that we varied in these datasets, as well as the range of these classroom
characteristics across the 1000 simulated datasets. We ﬁnd that in random data SCM
assigns more children to peer groups (i.e. yields more false positives) when the
classroom is larger, when children are more likely to be reported as group members,
when some children are highly salient, and when some reported groups are large. We
also ﬁnd that SCM assigns fewer children to peer groups when participating children
provide more group reports. These estimates are concerning because they highlight that
whether SCM assigns a child to a peer group is not based only on patterns in the recall
matrix, but is also driven by unrelated characteristics of the data. Moreover, some of
the characteristics associated with false positives are precisely the challenges for which
SCM was developed to overcome: larger settings where direct network data collection

--- page 12 ---
12 Preprint XX(X)
0
50
100
150
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Proportion of children in a peer group
Figure 4. False positives applying SCM in classrooms with varying characteristics.
Classroom characteristic b se β min max
Intercept 0.252 0.043 — — —
Number of children 0.021 0.001 0.413 15 40
Number of group reports -0.008 0.000 -0.880 15 200
Probability of nomination 0.013 0.001 0.189 10 45
Skew in nominations 0.100 0.015 0.115 -1.77 1.99
Skew in reported group size 0.095 0.016 0.114 -0.52 2.37
R2 = 0.7147; P-values are not presented because the datasets are simulated.
Table 1. Impact of classroom characteristics on the number of false positives from SCM.
is impractical, and limited numbers of group reports due to low rates of parental and
child consent to participate.
Study 4: Backbone extraction and community detection as an
alternative
Methods
Studies 2 and 3 suggest that SCM has a very high risk of false positives, identifying
children as members of peer groups even in random data, under a wide range of
circumstances. In this study, we explore one potential alternative to identifying peer
groups from peer report data: backbone extraction and community detection.
Backbone extraction methods offer an alternative way to transform a recall matrix
R into a binary peer network N (Neal 2014). These methods begin similar to SCM
by transforming data such as a recall matrix (known as a bipartite matrix) into a co-
occurrence matrix (known as a bipartiteprojection). Unlike SCM, backbone extraction
then applies a statistical test to determine which pairs of children co-occur enough
times to infer that they likely socially interact, and constructs a peer network using
these statistically signiﬁcant links. There are several methods for performing backbone

--- page 13 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 13
extraction, but here we focus on the Stochastic Degree Sequence Model (SDSM)
because it is fast, well-documented, and easy to compute using the R backbone
package (Domagalski et al. 2019).
Community detection methods offer an alternative way to identify peer groups from
a binary peer network. These methods aim to identify cohesive groups in a network
such that the majority of relationships are located within group and few relationships
are located between groups. There are several methods for identifying these groups,
including methods that allow children to have multiple group memberships, and
methods that allow groups to have fuzzy boundaries (Fortunato 2010). In this study
we use a method known as modularity maximization because it is among the most
commonly used in network analysis, it identiﬁes the optimal way to assign children to
groups, and it is easy to compute using the R igraph package (Csardi et al. 2006).
Like SCM, this method identiﬁes groups with distinct rather than fuzzy boundaries, but
unlike SCM it requires group memberships to be mutually exclusive. While this is an
important difference, in practice it may play a limited role because most studies using
SCM already focus only on each child’s one primary peer group (Berger and Rodkin
2012; Chung-Hall and Chen 2010; Zarbatany et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2016).
In this study, we repeat studies 1 - 3 using a combination of backbone extraction
and community detection (BE-CD) to identify peer groups rather than SCM. Before
turning to the results, we brieﬂy illustrate how BE-CD can be used in the R software.
The ﬁrst time BE-CD is used, thebackbone and igraph packages must be installed
in R by typing:
install.packages("backbone")
install.packages("igraph")
These two packages must be loaded so that R can use them by typing:
library(backbone)
library(igraph)
If the recall matrix is stored as a CSV ﬁle called recall.csv, then the BE-CD
approach to identifying peer groups involves typing:
R <- read.csv(recall.csv)
N <- sdsm(R)
N <- backbone.extract(N, signed=F)
N <- graph_from_adjacency_matrix(N, diag=F,
mode="undirected")
N.groups <- cluster_optimal(N)
This series of ﬁve commands imports the recall matrix data, conducts the SDSM
statistical test, extracts the peer network, converts the network into a form thatigraph
can understand, and identiﬁes peer groups. After these commands, the results can be
examined using:
membership(N.groups)
plot(N.groups, N)

--- page 14 ---
14 Preprint XX(X)
Amy
Bea
Cam
Di
Edi
Fay
Gay
Hea
Ida
Joy
Kim
Lyn
Mia
Nia
Ola
Arn
Bil
Cal
Dan
Edd
Foz
Gig
Hal
Ian
Jan
Ken
A B C
0
250
500
750
1000
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Proportion of children in a peer group
0
250
500
750
1000
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Proportion of children in a peer group
Figure 5. Identifying peer groups using backbone extraction and community detection
(BE-CD). (A) Applied to Cairns and Cairns (1994) 7th grade classroom; (B) Applied to 1000
simulated 7th grade classrooms; (C) Applied to 1000 classrooms with varying
characteristics.
The ﬁrst command will show the peer group membership of each child, while the
second command will plot the peer network and show the boundaries of the peer
groups.
Results
Figure 5A replicates study 1 by using BE-CD to identify peer groups in the benchmark
data described by Cairns and Cairns (1994) (c.f. Figure 2). The identiﬁed peer groups
almost perfectly match those identiﬁed by SCM, and those described by Cairns and
Cairns (1994) from their direct observations. However, there are two exceptions:
Heather and Ken are not assigned to peer groups. These exceptions offer an opportunity
to compare the tuning accuracy of SCM and BE-CD by considering whether the
recall matrix contains sufﬁcient evidence to believe Heather and Ken are members
of peer groups (consistent with SCM), or insufﬁcient evidence than Heather and Ken
are members of peer groups (consistent with BE-CD). Peer reports about Heather’s
hanging out behaviors were mixed: Four children reported that Heather was a member
of the larger group of girls only, another four reported she was a member of the smaller
group only, and no one reported she was a member of both groups. SCM views this as
sufﬁcient evidence to conclude that Heather is a member of both groups, while BE-CD
views this evidence as too mixed to conclude she is a member of either group. Ken
offers a similarly ambiguous case: only three children reported about Kens hanging
around behavior: two reported he hangs around with the larger group of boys, while one
reported he hangs around with the smaller group of boys. SCM views this as sufﬁcient
evidence to deﬁnitively conclude Ken is linked to all the boys in the larger group,
and none in the smaller group, while BE-CD again ﬁnds the evidence too mixed to
draw a conclusion. We are unable to determine whether SCM or BE-CD is ‘right,’ but
based on Cairns and Cairns (1994) description of their observations and on the groups
reported by the children, both seem plausible.

--- page 15 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 15
Figure 5B replicates study 2 by using BE-CD to identify peer groups in 1000
randomized versions of Cairns and Cairns (1994) data (c.f. Figure 3). These results
can be used to ask: how often does BE-CD yield false positives when applied in a
classroom setting like that originally observed by Cairns and Cairns (1994) (i.e. how
often is P >0)? We ﬁnd that BE-CD yields false positives in only 5 of the 1000
datasets. Among those few cases where it did yield false positives, they were not severe,
assigning only 11.5% of children to a peer group when the correct value is 0%.
Figure 5C replicates study 3 by using BE-CD to identify peer groups in 1000
classrooms with varying characteristics (c.f. Figure 4). Again, these results can be used
to ask: how often does BE-CD yield false positives when applied in a classroom setting
like that originally observed by Cairns and Cairns (1994) (i.e. how often isP >0)? We
ﬁnd that BE-CD yields false positives in only 10 of the 1000 datasets. Among those
cases where it did yield false positives, they were not severe, assigning between 7.5%
and 13.6% of children to a peer group when the correct value is 0%.
Discussion
Social cognitive mapping (SCM) is a method for identifying peer groups from peer
report data. As formalized by Cairns and Cairns (1994) and implemented in SCM
4.0 (Leung and Alston 1998), it is the most common method for identifying peer
groups in developmental psychology, and is widely used in other ﬁelds including
school psychology, social psychology, special education, and substance use. In study
1, we found that SCM can identify peer groups that are known from direct observation
to actually exist (true positives). However, in studies 2 and 3, we found that SCM
also frequently identiﬁes peer groups that are known to not exist (false positives).
The results from study 3 also demonstrates that the severity of false positives is
greatest in those settings where SCM was designed to be used: larger classrooms with
lower participation rates. Finally, in study 4, we introduced backbone extraction and
community detection as an alternative to SCM, and found that it has a similar ability
as SCM to detect true positives, but a much lower risk than SCM of detecting false
positives.
Based on our detailed review of SCM, the associated SCM 4.0 program, and
the results of these four studies, we offer four recommendations to developmental
psychologists and others wishing to identity peer groups from peer report data. First,
because SCM as implemented in the SCM 4.0 program has a very high risk of false
positives and because key parts of theSCM 4.0 are undocumented, researchers should
not use the SCM 4.0 program. Second, and for the same reasons, ﬁndings about
peer groups reported in papers using SCM 4.0 should be viewed with caution . Third,
because multiple variants of SCM exist (e.g., Cairns and Cairns 1994; Kindermann
1993; Gest et al. 2007), researchers using SCM should be explicit and detailed about
the exact procedures they employ , including reporting the cut-off threshold and the
method for identifying peer groups from a binary network. Finally, although in 1994
“the scientiﬁc assessment of peer groups [was limited] by a gap in methods available for
social network analysis” (Cairns and Cairns 1994, p. 100), this is no longer the case.
Therefore, when seeking to identify peer groups from peer report data, researchers
should consider using well-documented and statistically-informed network analytic

--- page 16 ---
16 Preprint XX(X)
methods. In this paper we have illustrated how backbone extraction and community
detection (BE-CD) might be used. However, many alternatives to SCM are now
available.
In addition to offering researchers concrete recommendations for identifying peer
groups from peer report data, this work also highlights several opportunities for future
research. First, we have focused on evaluating the risk of false positives in the most
widely-used variant of SCM (Cairns and Cairns 1994), but future studies should
investigate the risk of false positives in other variants of SCM (e.g. Kindermann
1993; Gest et al. 2007). Second, we have focused only on tuning accuracy, however
future studies should investigate the perceptual accuracy and validity of peer group
identiﬁcation methods. Such studies will be challenging because they will require
identifying peer groups through direct behavioral observations, which are challenging
to collect (Gest et al. 2003). Investigation of perceptual accuracy would evaluate
whether the peer groups reported to exist by participating children mirror observed
peer groups, while investigation of validity would evaluate whether the peer groups
identiﬁed by pooling such peer report data mirror observed peer groups.
Studies of peer groups identiﬁed via SCM, and in particular SCM 4.0 , remain
common in the developmental literature. However, SCM has an unacceptably high rate
of false positives, casting doubt on whether the peer groups it identiﬁes actually exist.
Because understanding peer groups remains essential for understanding a wide range
of developmental processes, developmental researchers must adopt alternative methods
for identifying peer groups.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors have nothing to disclose.
References
Ahn LH and Shin MS (2011) A study on the relevance of social cognitive map analysis to peer
subgrouping of elementary school students. Korean Journal of Elementary Counseling 10:
151–165.
Avramidis E (2010) Social relationships of pupils with special educational needs in the
mainstream primary class: peer group membership and peer-assessed social behaviour.
European Journal of Special Needs Education 25: 413–429.
Bacete F and Perrin G (2013) Social cognitive maps. un mtodo para identiﬁcar los grupos sociales
en contextos naturale. Psychosocial Interventions 22: 61–70.
Berger C and Rodkin PC (2012) Group inﬂuences on individual aggression and prosociality:
Early adolescents who change peer afﬁliations. Social Development 21(2): 396–413.
Birkett M and Espelage D (2015) Homophobic name-calling, peer-groups, and masculinity: The
socialization of homophobic behavior in adolescence. Social Development 24: 184–205.
Breiger R (1974) The duality of persons and groups. Social Forces53: 181–190.
Breiger R, Boorman S and Arabie P (1975) An algorithm for clustering relational data with
application to social network analysis and comparison with multidimensional scaling.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology 12: 328–383.
Bukowski W, Laursen B and Rubin K (2018) Peer relations: Past, present, and promise.
Handbook of Peer Interactions, Relationships, and Groups: 3–20.

--- page 17 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 17
Cairns R and Cairns B (1994) Lifelines and risks: Pathways of youth in our time . Cambridge
University Press.
Cairns R, Cairns B and Neckerman H (1989) Early school dropout: Conﬁgurations and
determinants. Child Development 60: 1437–1452.
Cairns R, Cairns B, Neckerman H, Gest S and Garipy J (1988) Social networks and aggressive
behavior: Peer support or peer rejection? Developmental Psychology 24: 815–823.
Cairns R, Perrin J and Cairns B (1985) Social structure and social cognition in early adolescence:
Afﬁliative patterns. Journal of Early Adolescence 5: 339–355.
Cappella E, Neal J and Sahu N (2012) Children’s agreement on classroom social networks:
Cross-level predictors in urban elementary schools. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 58: 285–313.
Chung-Hall J and Chen X (2010) Aggressive and prosocial peer group functioning: Effects on
children’s social, school, and psychological adjustment. Social Development 19: 659–680.
Csardi G, Nepusz T et al. (2006) The igraph software package for complex network research.
InterJournal, complex systems 1695(5): 1–9.
Domagalski R, Neal Z and Sagan B (2019) backbone: Extracts the Backbone from Weighted
Graphs. URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=backbone.
Espelage D, Holt M and Henkel R (2003) Examination of peer-group contextual effects on
aggression during early adolescence. Child Development 74: 205–220.
Fandrem H, Ertesvag S, Strohmeier D and Roland E (2010) Bullying and afﬁliation: A study
of peer groups in native and immigrant adolescents in norway. European Journal of
Developmental Psychology 7: 401–418.
Farmer T and Cairns R (1991) Social networks and social status in emotionally disturbed
children. Behavioral Disorders 16: 288–298.
Farmer T, Hall C, Petrin R, Hamm J and Dadisman K (2010) Evaluating the impact of
a multicomponent intervention model on teachers’ awareness of social networks at the
beginning of middle school in rural communities. School Psychology Quarterly 25: 94–
106.
Farmer T, Stuart C, Lorch N and Fields E (1993) The social behavior and peer relations of
emotionally and behaviorally disturbed students in residential treatment: A pilot study.
Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 1: 223–234.
Fortunato S (2010) Community detection in graphs. Physics reports 486(3-5): 75–174.
Gest S (2006) Teacher reports of children’s friendships and social groups: Agreement with peer
reports and implications for studying peer similarity. Social Development 15: 248–259.
Gest S, Farmer T, Cairns B and Xie H (2003) Identifying children’s peer social networks
in school classrooms: Links between peer reports and observed interactions. Social
Development 12: 513–529.
Gest S, Moody J and Rulison K (2007) Density or distinction? the roles of data structure and
group detection methods in describing adolescent peer groups. Journal of Social Structure
6.
Gifford-Smith M and Brownell C (2003) Childhood peer relationships: social acceptance,
friendships, and peer networks. Journal of School Psychology 41: 235–284.
Hoffman A, Hamm J and Farmer T (2015) Teacher attunement: Supporting early elementary
students’ social integration and status. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 39:
14–23.

--- page 18 ---
18 Preprint XX(X)
Howe C (2010) Peer groups and children’s development. West Sussex,UK: Wiley.
Kindermann T (1993) Natural peer groups as contexts for individual development: The case of
children’s motivation in school.Developmental Psychology 29: 970–977.
Kindermann T and Gest S (2018) The peer group: Linking conceptualizations, theories, and
methods. In: Handbook of Peer Interactions, Relationships, and Groups. Guilford Press, pp.
84–105.
Krackhardt D (1987) Cognitive social structures. Social Networks 9: 109–134.
Leung MC and Alston A (1998) Scm 4.0 [computer software]. Center for Developmental
Science, University of North Carolina .
Levina J and Ivanova N (2012) The self-concept of adolescents with different social status in
peer cliques. Baltic Journal of Psychology 13: 98–112.
Neal J (2020) Systematic review of social network methods in developmental psychology
dataset. ﬁgshare. [dataset]. DOI:https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.11728863.v1.
Neal J (In press) A systematic review of network methods in high impact developmental
psychology journals. Social Development DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/sode.12442.
Neal J and Neal Z (2013) The multiple meanings of peer groups in social cognitive mapping.
Social Development 22: 580–594.
Neal JW, Neal ZP and Cappella E (2016) Seeing and being seen: Predictors of accurate
perceptions about classmates? relationships. Social Networks 44: 1 – 8. DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2015.07.002.
Neal Z (2014) The backbone of bipartite projections: Inferring relationships from co-authorship,
co-sponsorship, co-attendance, and other co-behaviors. Social Networks 39: 84–97.
Pijl S, Koster M, Hannink A and Stratingh A (2011) Friends in the classroom: a comparison
between two methods for the assessment of students’ friendship network.Social Psychology
of Education 14: 475–488.
Radovic D, Black L, Salas C and Williams J (2017) Being a girl mathematician: Diversity
of positive mathematical identities in a secondary classroom. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education 48: 434–464.
Rodkin P, Farmer T, Pearl R and van Acker R (2006) They’re cool: Social status and peer group
supports for aggressive boys and girls. Social Development 15: 175–204.
Rubin K, Bukowski W, and Bowker J (2015) Children in peer groups. In: Handbook of Child
Psychology and Developmental Science, volume 4. Wiley, pp. 175–222.
Ryan A (2001) The peer group as a context for the development of young adolescent motivation
and achievement. Child Development 72: 1135–1150.
Shannon C and Weaver W (1963) The Mathematical Theory of Communication . University of
Illinois Press.
Sheppard C, Golonka M and Costanzo P (2012) Evaluating the impact of a substance use
intervention program on the peer status and inﬂuence of adolescent peer leaders.Prevention
Science 13: 75–85.
Shi B and Xie H (2014) Moderating effects of group status, cohesion, and ethnic composition
on socialization of aggression in children’s peer groups. Developmental Psychology 50:
2188–2198.
Strona G, Nappo D, Boccacci F, Fattorini S and San Miguel-Ayanz J (2014) A fast and unbiased
procedure to randomize ecological binary matrices with ﬁxed row and column totals.Nature

--- page 19 ---
False positives in social cognitive mapping 19
Communications 5: 4114.
Watts DJ (2008) Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. W. W. Norton.
Wolfer R, Bull H and Scheithauer H (2012) Social integration in youth: Insights from a social
network perspective. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice16: 138–147.
Zarbatany L, Ellis WE, Chen X, Kinal M and Boyko L (2019) The moderating role of clique
hierarchical organization on resource control by central clique members. Journal of youth
and adolescence 48(2): 359–371.
Zhao S, Chen X, Ellis W and Zarbatany L (2016) Afﬁliation with socially withdrawn groups and
children’s social and psychological adjustment. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 44:
1279–1290.