--- page 1 ---
Social Psychology 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion          
Regulation and Emotional and Relational Wellbeing in Daily Life          
Lisanne S. Pauw1,2 a
, Rui Sun2,3
, Giulia Zoppolat4
, Francesca Righetti4
, Anne Milek2,5 
1 Department of Psychology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands, 2 University of Münster, Muenster, Germany, 3 Booth School of Business, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA, 4 Department of Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 5 Department of 
Psychology, Witten/Herdecke University, Witten, Germany 
Keywords: Interpersonal Emotion Regulation, Wellbeing, Emotions, Closeness, Romantic Relationships 
https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.90797 
Collabra: Psychology 
Vol. 10, Issue 1, 2024 
People often get support from others in regulating their emotions, a phenomenon known 
as interpersonal emotion regulation (IER). However, the relative effectiveness of specific 
IER strategies for improving emotional and relational wellbeing in daily life is unclear. 
Here, we report two preregistered, ecological momentary assessment studies, in which 
we examined how the use of six key IER strategies relates to emotional and relational 
wellbeing among romantic couples in daily life. Study 1 focused on enacted IER as 
reported by the regulator, whereas Study 2 focused on perceived IER as reported by the 
regulated partner. Using a dyadic experience sampling design (6 beeps/day for 7 days), 
Study 1 (N = 136) showed that when people reported to have given advice or encouraged 
their partner to suppress their emotions, their partners experienced impaired emotional 
wellbeing. When people reported to have distracted their partner, their partner 
experienced enhanced positive affect and felt closer to their partner. The use of 
interpersonal reappraisal, acceptance and ignoring was unrelated to partners’ momentary 
wellbeing. Using a dyadic daily diary design (1 beep/day for 12 days), Study 2 (N = 361) 
showed that perceptions of one’s emotions being ignored by the partner were associated 
with impaired emotional and relational wellbeing on the same day. The perceived use of 
other IER strategies was unrelated to momentary wellbeing. Taken together, the present 
set of studies illuminates how IER processes shape people’s emotions and relationships 
in ecologically valid settings. Our findings indicate that enacted and perceived regulatory 
behaviors are associated with differential outcomes, highlighting the complex nature of 
interpersonal emotion dynamics. 
When in emotional distress, people often get help from 
others in regulating their emotions, a phenomenon known 
as interpersonal emotion regulation (IER; Zaki & Williams, 
2013). Despite the prevalence of this interpersonal phe-
nomenon, surprisingly little is known about which IER 
strategies are most effective from an interpersonal perspec-
tive (Reeck et al., 2016). While a wealth of research on in-
trapersonal emotion regulation indicates which strategies 
are typically effective in changing one’s own emotional ex-
perience, it largely overlooks the role that other people play 
(Campos et al., 2011; Reeck et al., 2016). Yet, it is well 
known that the majority of emotions are experienced, ex-
pressed, and regulated in the presence of others (Kappas, 
2013; Parkinson & Manstead, 2015; Van Kleef, 2009). This 
means that oftentimes, others may help us regulate our 
emotions – whether this help is actively sought out, or 
the result of an intrinsically motivated effort by the other 
(Niven, 2017; Rimé et al., 2020; Zaki & Williams, 2013). In-
deed, recent theoretical papers emphasize the ubiquity of 
IER in daily life, as well as the need to better understand its 
dynamics (Campos et al., 2011; Dixon-Gordon et al., 2015; 
Nozaki & Mikolajczak, 2020). 
IER is particularly common and crucial in romantic re-
lationships, which are characterized by a high degree of 
(emotional) interdependence (Berscheid & Ammazzalorso, 
2001; Butler, 2015). Prior research shows that people are 
more inclined to share their emotions with close others, 
such as romantic partners, as compared to less close others 
(Liu et al., 2021; Rauers & Riediger, 2022). Romantic part-
ners, in turn, are expected to help their partner regulate 
their negative emotions (Clark et al., 2017). Reacting re-
sponsively toward each other’s emotions is crucial for emo-
tional wellbeing, as well as for developing and maintaining 
satisfying relationships (Maisel et al., 2008; Reis & Gable, 
Corresponding Author: Lisanne S. Pauw, l.s.pauw@uu.nl a 
Pauw, L. S., Sun, R., Zoppolat, G., Righetti, F., & Milek, A. (2024). May I Help You? The
Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relational
Wellbeing in Daily Life. Collabra: Psychology, 10(1).
https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.90797
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 2 ---
2015; Williams et al., 2018). However, remarkably little is 
known about the relative effectiveness of specific IER 
strategies enacted in couple’s daily life. Understanding the 
consequences of IER in daily life is important, given that 
this is when people have meaningful emotional experiences 
and regulation is more likely to be consequential (Kuppens 
et al., 2022). 
Therefore, the present set of studies examined the mo-
mentary association between the use of six key IER strate-
gies and emotional and relational wellbeing in couple’s 
daily life. Including these six regulatory strategies within 
one study and analyzing them simultaneously in one model 
allowed us to examine their relative and unique predictive 
value. To capture the dyadic nature of emotion regulation 
as it unfolds in real life, we conducted two empirical studies 
employing dyadic ecological momentary assessment among 
romantic couples. Together, this set of studies allowed us to 
examine how emotion regulation strategies enacted by reg-
ulators, as well as perceived by targets, impact short-term 
emotional and relational outcomes in targets. 
Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Wellbeing      
In the present research, we focused on six key IER strate-
gies: interpersonal acceptance, interpersonal reappraisal, 
interpersonal distraction, interpersonal suppression, inter-
personal ignoring and giving advice. These strategies map 
onto various strategies of James Gross’ Process Model of 
emotion regulation (Gross, 1998, 2015), which outlines 
strategies that people may use to change (or maintain) their 
own emotions. Recent work suggests that people engage in 
similar strategies when trying to regulate others’ emotions 
(Matthews et al., 2021). These strategies vary in the de-
gree to which they engage with the other’s emotions (e.g., 
by encouraging reappraisal) or disengage from the other’s 
emotions (e.g., by ignoring the other’s emotions; Parkin-
son & Totterdell, 1999), which may shape the degree of 
responsiveness they convey. Perceived responsiveness in-
cludes feeling understood, validated and cared for, and is 
crucial for relational wellbeing (Reis & Gable, 2015). Be-
low, we outline our predictions regarding the short-term 
emotional and relational consequences of the various IER 
strategies (see Table 1 for a conceptual overview of our hy-
potheses). These predictions are based on prior work on 
both intrapersonal and interpersonal emotion regulation. 
Whereas in most cases, we theorize that IER strategies 
function similarly to their intrapersonal counterparts, cer-
tain strategies may play out differently in an interpersonal 
context (Christensen et al., 2020). 
First, a potentially important IER strategy is interper-
sonal acceptance. We conceptualize interpersonal accep-
tance as acknowledging or validating the other’s emotions 
without trying to change them (Hayes, 2004; Jurkiewicz 
et al., 2023). Both experimental and ecological momentary 
assessment research on intrapersonal acceptance typically 
shows that this is an effective strategy to improve emo-
tional outcomes (Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Pauw et al., 2020; 
Shallcross et al., 2010; Webb et al., 2012), though findings 
are not unequivocal (Wojnarowska et al., 2020). While we 
are aware of only one study examining interpersonal accep-
tance (Jurkiewicz et al., 2023), it is similar to two widely 
studied concepts: emotional support and responsiveness. 
Emotional support includes providing comfort, care and 
validating the way the other person feels, and is typically 
perceived as beneficial (Rimé, 2009). However, while emo-
tional support has been associated with temporarily re-
duced negative affect (Brans, Van Mechelen, et al., 2013; 
Morelli et al., 2015), most studies suggest it is not effective 
in fostering more long-term emotional recovery (e.g., 
Batenburg & Das, 2014; Nils & Rimé, 2012). Emotional 
support does, however, have interpersonal benefits as it in-
creases closeness between two people (Bodenmann et al., 
2006; Morelli et al., 2015; Nils & Rimé, 2012; Pauw et 
al., 2018). Similarly, responsiveness includes understand-
ing, care and validation, and has been consistently associ-
ated with increased closeness and relationship satisfaction 
(Reis & Gable, 2015). Thus, based on these prior findings, 
we hypothesized interpersonal acceptance to be associated 
with enhanced relational wellbeing, but made no predic-
tions regarding its association with emotional wellbeing. 
Second, cognitive reappraisal entails changing the way 
one thinks about the situation, such as by putting it in per-
spective or trying to find a silver lining, which should alter 
the emotional experience (Reeck et al., 2016). Furthermore, 
both experimental and ambulatory assessment research on 
intrapersonal reappraisal has consistently shown a wide 
range of benefits, including the experience of more positive 
and less negative affect (Aldao et al., 2010; Heiy & Cheav-
ens, 2014; Webb et al., 2012). Similarly, interpersonal reap-
praisal – also termed cognitive support or social reappraisal 
– has been shown to positively impact emotional wellbeing 
(Batenburg & Das, 2014; Jurkiewicz et al., 2023; Nils & 
Rimé, 2012). However, the relational consequences of in-
terpersonal reappraisal are less clear. While interpersonal 
reappraisal is intended to reduce the intensity of the emo-
tional experience, positively reframing the situation or 
putting it in perspective may also be experienced as in-
validating by the listener (Marigold et al., 2014). In line 
with this idea, several studies have shown interpersonal 
reappraisal to be associated with negative relational out-
comes, including reduced popularity (Niven et al., 2015) 
and reduced closeness among low self-esteem individuals 
(Marigold et al., 2014). Other studies, however, found no 
effect of interpersonal reappraisal on feelings of closeness 
(Nils & Rimé, 2012; Pauw et al., 2018), suggesting that the 
relational consequences of interpersonal reappraisal may 
be largely context-dependent. Based on these findings, we 
thus hypothesized interpersonal reappraisal to be posi-
tively associated with emotional wellbeing, but we made no 
predictions regarding the association with relational well-
being. 
Third, advice includes providing recommendations on 
how to feel, think or act in order to cope with an emotion-
eliciting situation (MacGeorge et al., 2004). Research on ad-
vice has suffered from a lack of conceptual clarity, subsum-
ing advice under somewhat broader categories that include 
but are not limited to advice, such as informational support 
(also including information provision), instrumental sup-
port (also including tangible support) and cognitive sup-
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 2
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 3 ---
Table 1. Conceptual Overview of the Pre-Registered Hypotheses Studies 1 and 2.           
Emotional Wellbeing Relational Wellbeing 
Interpersonal Acceptance No prediction + 
Interpersonal Reappraisal + No prediction 
Advice No prediction No prediction 
Interpersonal Distraction No prediction No prediction 
Interpersonal Suppression - - 
Interpersonal Ignoring - - 
Note. The effect of IER strategies (reported by the ‘regulator’ in Study 1 and reported by the ‘target’ in Study 2) on the target’s emotional and relational wellbeing. 
+ indicates a hypothesized positive within-person effect 
– indicates a hypothesized negative within-person effect 
port (also including cognitive reappraisal; Cohen & Wills, 
1985; Morelli et al., 2015; Rimé, 2009; Semmer et al., 2008). 
Whether advice fosters emotional and relational wellbeing 
is unclear. On the one hand, advice could boost people’s 
feelings of control and coping potential (see Cohen & Wills, 
1985), and thereby temporarily reduce distress. Moreover, 
it could be predicted that when advice results in appropri-
ate problem-focused coping, it should help to resolve the 
stressor and associated emotional distress. Advice may also 
benefit relational wellbeing by signaling emotional involve-
ment (Semmer et al., 2008). On the other hand, advice may 
be experienced as undermining and cause reactance, par-
ticularly when it is unsolicited (Goldsmith & MacGeorge, 
2000; Riccioni et al., 2014). Prior work corroborates these 
mixed predictions, and suggests that the emotional and re-
lational consequences of advice are highly dependent on 
contextual features, such as the advice-giver, the recipi-
ent, the type of problem, the framing and the timing (Feng, 
2014; Feng & MacGeorge, 2010; Niven et al., 2015; Siew-
ert et al., 2011; Van Swol et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2012; 
Xu et al., 2021). We therefore made no predictions regard-
ing the association between advice and emotional and rela-
tional wellbeing. 
While the previous three IER strategies involve engaging 
with the target’s emotions, regulators may also try to regu-
late the other’s emotions by trying to help them disengage 
from the emotional experience. Aligned with this goal, the 
fourth strategy we consider is distraction, which is directed 
at diverting the attention away from the emotional situ-
ation (Gross, 1998). In an interpersonal context, this may 
be done directly by distracting the other person with an-
other activity (e.g., going to the movies), or indirectly by 
encouraging the other to do or think about something else. 
Research on intrapersonal distraction suggests that it may 
bring about immediate but short-term emotional relief, as 
primarily evidenced by increases in positive affect, though 
no decreases in negative affect (Brans, Koval, et al., 2013; 
Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Webb et al., 2012). Research on in-
terpersonal distraction is scarce and suggests that its con-
sequences for wellbeing may be largely context dependent. 
On the one hand, interpersonal distraction may be expe-
rienced as a form of companionship, which has been as-
sociated with increased emotional and relational wellbeing 
(Newsom et al., 2005; Ross et al., 2019). On the other hand, 
interpersonal distraction could be experienced as invalidat-
ing when targets prefer to engage with their emotional ex-
perience, while regulators encourage disengagement. Sup-
porting this latter notion, distraction employed by 
customer service providers has been associated with in-
creased negative affect and decreased positive affect of the 
customer (Little et al., 2013). Given these scant and mixed 
findings, we did not make any predictions regarding the 
emotional and relational consequences of interpersonal 
distraction. 
Fifth, encouraging others to engage in suppression – that 
is, not to feel, express or think of an emotion – is hy-
pothesized to be detrimental to both emotional and re-
lational wellbeing. Research on intrapersonal suppression 
shows that this strategy is ineffective in reducing the expe-
rience of negative emotions (though effective in reducing 
the expression of negative emotions; Webb et al., 2012). In 
addition to these emotional costs, intrapersonal suppres-
sion also carries relational costs: suppressing one’s emo-
tions in social interactions disrupts communication and 
negatively affects both partners’ physiological responding 
and intimacy behaviors (Butler et al., 2003; Peters et al., 
2014; Peters & Jamieson, 2016). Encouraging others to en-
gage in suppression has rarely been studied as an IER strat-
egy but is expected to similarly impair emotional and re-
lational wellbeing. One study that examined interpersonal 
suppression by service providers found that it led cus-
tomers to experience greater negative affect (Little et al., 
2013). These harmful effects may be exacerbated by the 
unresponsiveness that interpersonal suppression commu-
nicates, implying that the target’s feelings are not valid or 
appropriate (Little et al., 2012; Reeck et al., 2016). There-
fore, we predicted interpersonal suppression to be associ-
ated with impaired emotional and relational wellbeing. 
Finally, ignoring others’ emotions is an invalidating IER 
strategy that is hypothesized to impair wellbeing. By not 
responding to the other’s emotions, interpersonal ignoring 
may be an indirect way of encouraging the other to hide 
their feelings. Similar to directly encouraged suppression, 
this may be effective in reducing the other’s emotional ex-
pressions, but ineffective in changing their emotional expe-
rience (Webb et al., 2012). Moreover, by not communicat-
ing any understanding, validation or caring, interpersonal 
ignoring can be considered the opposite of responsiveness, 
the latter of which is crucial for maintaining healthy rela-
tionships (Reis et al., 2017; Reis & Gable, 2015). While in-
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 3
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 4 ---
terpersonal ignoring is understudied as an IER strategy, it 
has also been subsumed under hostility and negative dyadic 
coping, which have been shown to induce shame in the tar-
get and to be more prevalent among those with low rela-
tionship satisfaction (Bodenmann, 2005; Bodenmann et al., 
2016; Swerdlow & Johnson, 2022). Therefore, we predicted 
interpersonal ignoring to be associated with impaired emo-
tional and relational wellbeing. 
In sum, we often receive help from others in regulating 
our emotions, particularly from our romantic partners (Zaki 
& Williams, 2013). While the ability to effectively manage 
negative emotions is crucial for healthy psychological func-
tioning (Aldao et al., 2010), it is unclear which interpersonal 
emotion regulation strategies are most effective. Therefore, 
the present research adopted a dyadic approach to examine 
the emotional and relational consequences of various IER 
strategies in the context of romantic relationships. 
The Present Research    
In the present set of studies, we aimed to examine the 
short-term association between six key IER strategies and 
emotional and relational wellbeing in daily life. To this 
end, we ran an experience sampling study (Study 1) and 
a daily diary study (Study 2). We sought to contribute to 
the literature in three main ways. First, we examined the 
contribution of the use of six IER strategies to emotional 
and relational wellbeing within one study. Most of these 
six IER strategies (except interpersonal reappraisal and ad-
vice) remain understudied in the interpersonal context, and 
prior studies have typically only examined a subset of these 
strategies separately. In the present set of studies, we ex-
amined all six strategies simultaneously. This approach al-
lowed us to examine their relative and unique predictive 
value. 
Second, we studied naturally occurring behaviors in real-
world interactions, thereby increasing the likelihood of 
capturing consequential regulation of meaningful emo-
tional events. By using ecological momentary assessment, 
we reduced the likelihood of recall biases, which may affect 
emotional intensity ratings and perceptions of relationship 
functioning (Thomas & Diener, 1990). Moreover, while 
such intensive longitudinal designs are less suited to infer 
causality than experimental designs, the repeated measures 
do enable us to examine how wellbeing varies as a function 
of IER, while controlling for individual differences in these 
patterns (Bolger & Laurenceau, 2013). Indeed, we focused 
on within-person (rather than between-person) effects, 
which indicate whether momentary changes in a person’s 
received IER strategies are accompanied by simultaneous 
changes in that person’s emotional and relational wellbe-
ing. For example, at moments in which people perceive 
their partner to engage in a particular IER strategy more 
than usual, they may experience higher (or lower) emo-
tional and relational wellbeing. Between-person effects, on 
the other hand, indicate whether people who on average 
receive or enact various IER strategies to a greater extent, 
on average also experience greater (or worse) emotional 
and relational wellbeing compared to those who receive 
or enact these strategies less. Given that our focus is on 
within-person effects, we report between-person effects in 
the Supplemental Materials. 
Finally, by employing a dyadic design we captured the 
interpersonal nature of IER. More specifically, we collected 
data from both romantic partners, who may simultaneously 
act as regulators (i.e., when trying to regulate their part-
ner’s emotions) and targets (i.e., when their emotions are 
being regulated by their partner). We thus measured both 
partners’ spontaneous regulatory behaviors (rather than 
assigning roles). In Study 1, we measured the regulator’s 
enacted regulatory strategies, whereas in Study 2, we mea-
sured the perceptions of these strategies from the target’s 
perspective (see Figure 1). Study 1 thus examined the pre-
dictive role of the regulator’s enacted regulatory strategies 
for the target’s emotional and relational wellbeing. Given 
that these regulatory attempts may not always be accu-
rately perceived (Lemay & Neal, 2014) and that the percep-
tion of relationship dynamics may have a different influ-
ence on wellbeing than the partner’s report (e.g., Joel et al., 
2020), Study 2 complemented this approach by examining 
the association between targets’ perceptions of received IER 
and their wellbeing. Finally, the simultaneous assessment 
of six key IER strategies allowed us to examine their relative 
contributions to both emotional and relational wellbeing. 
After the data were collected but before any substantive 
analyses for this paper were conducted, we preregistered 
our hypotheses online (see https://osf.io/z64n5 for Study 1, 
and see https://osf.io/rv2ba for Study 2). 
Study 1   
Method  
Participants  
A total of 71 romantic couples (142 individuals) took part 
in the study. Participants were recruited via social media, a 
popular German psychology magazine, the host university 
in Germany, and through snowball sampling. Eligibility cri-
teria included (1) being 18 years or older, (2) understanding 
and speaking German fluently, (3) owning a smartphone, 
(4) being in a romantic relationship for at least six months 
and (5) both partners agreeing to take part in the study. 
Three couples dropped out of the study. This resulted in a 
final sample of 68 couples (136 individuals, 52.9% female), 
aged between 19 and 59 years old (Mage = 26.0, SDage = 5.5). 
Out of these 68 couples, six couples were same-gender cou-
ples. On average, partners had been in a relationship with 
each other for 3.3 years (SD = 2.4), and 55.9% of the cou-
ples were living together. This sample size allowed us to de-
tect small to medium effects (see Supplemental Materials 
for sensitivity analyses). 
Procedure  
Participants could sign up for the study online by filling 
out a contact form. Those who did not fulfill the inclusion 
criteria were automatically screened out. Those who were 
eligible for the study could sign up for an intake zoom 
call, in which the recruiter provided information and in-
structions about the study. Then, participants took an in-
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 4
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 5 ---
Figure 1. Conceptual Overview of the Design Employed in Study 1 and Study 2.             
Note. Solid lines represent hypothesized effects. Dashed lined represent effects that were controlled for. Errors of the partners were allowed to be correlated. 
take questionnaire, in which participants gave informed 
consent and answered several demographic questions and 
trait questionnaires. This survey took about 30-45 minutes. 
Couples were screened out in case one or both partners did 
not fill out the questionnaire by midnight the day before 
the start of the ESM period. 
Then, over a period of seven days, romantic partners 
were simultaneously beeped seven times per day. Partici-
pants received an SMS with the link to the questionnaire 
(programmed in formR; Arslan et al., 2020). Each beep was 
received simultaneously by both partners. The first six 
beeps included the same survey and were administered 
semi-randomly between 9:30 AM and 9:00 PM.1
 The 7th 
beep included a short evening questionnaire (administered 
at 9:30 PM), with several (other) questions about the entire 
day. We opted for a semi-random sampling design because 
the relative unpredictability of the beeps reduces the likeli-
hood of participants adapting their behavior and enhances 
the representativeness of the data, thereby ensuring high 
ecological validity (Dejonckheere & Erbas, 2022). Moreover, 
the differences in the intervals typically equal out due to 
the semi-random sampling scheme (Dejonckheere & Erbas, 
2022). Compliance with the experience sampling protocol 
ranged between 33.0% and 100% (M = 86.0%, SD = 12.0%). 
At the end of the ESM period, participants answered a 
final questionnaire, including several post-measures (i.e., 
a few trait scales), and questions about their experience 
with the study. At the end of the study, participants were 
thanked and reimbursed on a pro-rata basis, up to 43 euros 
per person, contingent upon their completion of the expe-
rience-sampling protocol and other study components. Al-
ternatively, participants could receive course credits. Par-
ticipants received a 10-euro bonus when they completed 
over 80% of the beeps. Furthermore, participants could re-
ceive individualized feedback on their personality, burnout, 
emotions, emotion regulation strategy use, sleep quality 
and mood, partner contact and relational wellbeing. The 
study procedure was approved by the ethics committee of 
the Psychology department of the University of Münster, 
Germany. 
Measures  
Emotional wellbeing.  Emotional wellbeing was mea-
sured by positive and negative affect, which were assessed 
at the momentary level. Participants were asked: “How do 
you feel right now?”, after which they indicated their agree-
ment with several emotional states on a scale from 1 (“not 
at all”) to 7 (“very much”). The item “happy” was used as 
Each notification was randomly scheduled within one of six 69-minute blocks throughout the day (i.e., notification 1 between 9:30 AM 
and 10:39 AM; notification 2 between 11:30 AM and 12:39 AM, etc.). Given that participants had 30 minutes to open the questionnaire 
and 10 minutes to fill out the questionnaire, and we had to take into account a potential 11-minute CRON job delay for the SMS to be 
sent, a 51-minute window was scheduled between these time blocks, to prevent consecutive notifications from overlapping. 
1 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 5
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 6 ---
an indicator of positive affect. The average of the items 
“angry”, “sad”, “worried”, “stressed” and “depressed” was 
taken as an indicator of negative affect. Reliability of 
change was assessed following guidelines by DiGiovanni et 
al. (2023), taking into account that individuals were nested 
within couples. Between-person (within-couple) reliability 
was excellent at .98, and within-person (within-couple) re-
liability was adequate at .66. 
Relational wellbeing.  Relational wellbeing was as-
sessed by having participants rate their momentary experi-
ence of closeness to their partner (“How close do you feel 
to your partner right now?”) on a scale from 1 (“not at all”) 
to 7 (“very much”). 
Enacted IER.  After rating their affect and closeness, and 
if participants had indicated to have had contact with their 
partner, they were asked whether they had had the impres-
sion that their partner had experienced any negative emo-
tions. If so (i.e., if they rated their partner to have expe-
rienced negative emotions to a greater extent than 1 on a 
scale ranging from 1 “not at all” to 7 “very much”), partic-
ipants were asked: “Since you woke up this morning” (for 
the first beep of the day) or “Since the last beep” (for the 
second to sixth beep of the day), “How did you respond 
to your partner’s negative emotions?”. Then, participants 
rated their use of six different emotion regulation strategies 
on a scale of 1 (‘not at all’) to 7 (‘very much’): interpersonal 
acceptance (“I let my him/her know that their feelings were 
understandable and normal”), interpersonal reappraisal (“I 
tried to change the way he/she was thinking about the sit-
uation”), advice (“I gave my partner advice”), interpersonal 
distraction (“I tried to distract him/her”), interpersonal sup-
pression (“I told him/her not to feel bad (e.g., “don’t cry, 
don’t be sad, don’t worry”)”), and interpersonal ignoring (“I 
ignored his/her feelings”). The items were taken or adapted 
from prior studies to fit an experience-sampling format 
(Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Pauw et al., 2019; Swerdlow & 
Johnson, 2022). 
Data Analytic Procedure    
Our analysis plan was preregistered on OSF (see here; 
https://osf.io/z64n5). Data were analyzed using the nlme 
package (Pinheiro et al., 2021) in R (version 4.2.0). To in-
vestigate the within-person relationship between IER use 
of one partner (the ‘regulator’) and the emotional and re-
lational wellbeing of the other partner (the ‘target’), we 
conducted multilevel models, taking into account that ob-
servations were nested within partners who are part of a 
couple (Kenny et al., 2006). To enhance power and because 
we did not expect gender differences, we used indistin-
guishable actor-partner interdependence models (APIM). 
We thus included actor variables as predictors when in-
vestigating partner effects of interest, and the fixed effects 
were pooled across partners (Cook & Kenny, 2005). We al-
lowed random intercepts and uncorrelated random slopes, 
using a compound symmetry covariance structure. This co-
variance structure allows residuals to be correlated among 
partners, thereby accounting for the statistical dependency 
between both partners’ emotional and relational outcomes. 
We originally preregistered our analyses without random 
slopes as this has been shown to typically result in an 
overdetermined model in dyadic multilevel analyses, re-
sulting in convergence issues (Newsom, 2002). However, 
upon reviewers’ request deviate from our preregistration 
and report our analyses with uncorrelated random inter-
cepts and slopes. These analyses yield the same conclusions 
as our preregistered analyses. Allowing correlated random 
slopes resulted in many convergence issues, but whenever 
the models did converge, we replicated our main findings. 
We did not allow autocorrelations because this is currently 
not possible in combination with specifying random effects 
at the dyad level using nlme. 
In our main models, we included the different IER strate-
gies as time-variant independent variables, and positive af-
fect, negative affect or closeness as time-variant outcome 
variables (i.e., separate models per outcome variable). All 
time-variant predictors were within-person-centered to 
ensure that they reflected purely within-person changes. To 
control for between-couple effects, we also included the be-
tween-person mean of each IER strategy for both the ac-
tor and the partner. In preliminary models, we additionally 
included a main effect for Time to control for time trends. 
Upon reviewers’ request, we deviated from our preregis-
tration and included Time as a continuous variable (i.e., 
as hours passed since first beep; rather than beep 1-42), 
to account for the unequal time difference between beeps. 
Both operationalizations of Time yield the same conclu-
sions. When Time did not significantly predict our outcome 
variables and did not change our results, we omitted this 
variable from our main models for a more parsimonious 
model. All predictors were simultaneously entered into the 
model. 
Results  
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 2, and within-
person correlations are shown in Table 3 (for between-per-
son correlations, see Table S1 in the online supplemental 
materials). Key model estimates related to our hypotheses 
are shown in Table 4. Estimates of all fixed effects for the 
main analyses can be found in Table S2 in the online sup-
plemental materials. Exploratory analyses examining po-
tential moderation of the within-person effects by gender 
are reported in the Supplemental Materials (Table S3-S8, 
Figure S1-S4). 
To examine the association between the various enacted 
IER strategies and emotional and relational wellbeing, we 
looked at the within-person partner effects of the different 
IER strategies on positive affect, negative affect, and close-
ness. Thus, we examined the association between one part-
ner’s regulatory efforts (the ‘regulator’) and the other part-
ner’s wellbeing (the ‘target’). Note that all partners 
functioned as both regulators and targets simultaneously, 
depending on naturally occurring regulatory efforts in re-
sponse to partners’ emotions (see Figure 1 for a conceptual 
overview of our statistical models). Largely contradicting 
our hypotheses, there were no within-person associations 
between regulators’ interpersonal acceptance, interper-
sonal reappraisal and interpersonal ignoring as predictors, 
and targets’ positive affect, negative affect and closeness 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 6
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 7 ---
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics Study 1: Between-Person Means (      M), Within-Person (  SDw) and Between-Person    
Standard Deviations (  SDb), and Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (     ICC)  
Variable M SDw SDb ICC 
Positive Affect 4.85 1.13 0.88 0.35 
Negative Affect 1.83 0.65 0.63 0.43 
Closeness 4.63 1.20 0.97 0.36 
Interpersonal Suppression 2.86 1.49 1.22 0.30 
Interpersonal Reappraisal 2.92 1.53 1.12 0.23 
Interpersonal Acceptance 4.00 1.69 1.28 0.28 
Interpersonal Ignoring 1.60 0.80 0.70 0.28 
Advice 2.62 1.43 1.04 0.27 
Interpersonal Distraction 2.76 1.40 1.12 0.27 
Table 3. Within-Person Correlations Study 1     
Variable Positive 
Affect 
Negative 
Affect Closeness Suppression Reappraisal Acceptance Ignoring Advice 
Negative 
Affect 
-.56*** 
Closeness .37*** -.25*** 
Suppression .01 .01 .14*** 
Reappraisal .05* -.02 .18*** .43*** 
Acceptance .02 <.01 .18*** .43*** .47*** 
Ignoring -.06** .09*** -.08** .01*** -.09*** -.26*** 
Advice .04 .03 .13*** .35*** .43*** .39*** -.08** 
Distraction .12*** -.09*** .23*** .36*** .35*** .34*** -.01 .25*** 
Note. * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001. 
Table 4. Fixed Effect Estimates for Within-Person Partner Effects of Interest in Study 1.             
Target’s Wellbeing 
Negative affect Positive affect Closeness 
Regulator’s enacted IER use B (SE) p B (SE) p B (SE) p 
Acceptance 0.01 (0.02) .535 -0.03 (0.03) .351 -0.01 (0.03) .757 
Reappraisal -0.03 (0.02) .196 0.02 (0.03) .516 <0.01 (0.03) .960 
Advice 0.05 (0.02) .036 -0.05 (0.04) .125 0.03 (0.03) .300 
Distraction -0.01 (0.02) .703 0.06 (0.03) .049 0.08 (0.03) .021 
Suppression 0.07 (0.02) .003 -0.08 (0.03) .028 -0.02 (0.03) .613 
Ignoring <0.01 (0.03) .977 -0.03 (0.05) .547 -0.01 (0.04) .807 
Note. All IER strategies are interpersonal. Effects indicate within-person effects of one partner’s self-reported use of interpersonal regulatory strategies (‘regulator’) on the other 
partner’s self-reported emotional and relational wellbeing (‘target’). 
as outcomes. Thus, at moments in which the regulator re-
ported to have engaged in any of these IER strategies more 
than usual, the target did not experience changes in wellbe-
ing. Partially in line with our hypotheses, regulators’ advice 
and interpersonal suppression were associated with targets’ 
increased negative affect and (only for interpersonal sup-
pression with) decreased positive affect, but no changes 
in experienced closeness. This means that at moments in 
which the regulator indicated to have given advice or en-
couraged suppression more than usual, targets experienced 
greater negative affect and reduced positive affect. Finally, 
regulators’ interpersonal distraction was unrelated to tar-
gets’ negative affect, but associated with increased positive 
affect and closeness. Thus, at moments in which regulators 
indicated to have distracted their partner more than usual, 
targets experienced greater positive affect and closeness to-
wards their partner. 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 7
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 8 ---
Discussion  
Findings of Study 1 showed that only three IER strategies 
(i.e., advice, distraction and suppression) were predictive of 
partners’ emotional and relational wellbeing. It is possible 
that effects were hard to detect due to different reasons. 
First, these findings may be partially explained by the rela-
tively low frequency of IER instances. Although descriptive 
statistics showed that people engaged in IER in most of the 
cases (88%) when they had the impression that their part-
ner was experiencing negative emotions, people reported 
their partner to have experienced negative emotions only 
in a subset of the beeps (i.e., in 34.7% of all beeps). Many 
of the measurement points thus did not consist of regula-
tory instances, possibly making it harder to detect any ef-
fects. Moreover, some regulatory strategies were very in-
frequently reported (e.g., interpersonal ignoring). Second, 
partner effects are usually weaker than actor effects (Joel 
et al., 2020; Podsakoff et al., 2012). In fact, the regula-
tory strategies that the regulator reports to have engaged 
in may not always be perceived by the target (Bolger et 
al., 2000), and therefore may be less predictive of the tar-
get’s emotional and relational wellbeing. Finally, we as-
sessed positive affect with only one item (“happy”). It is 
possible that IER attempts by the partner would have been 
more pronounced if we had included a wider variety of posi-
tive emotions (e.g., low arousal or pro-social emotions). For 
example, as suggested by the literature on responsiveness 
(Debrot et al., 2012; Reis & Gable, 2015), receiving support 
from one’s partner in regulating one’s emotions may elicit 
feelings of gratitude, calm or love. Nevertheless, given that 
happiness tends to reflect the experience of a wide variety 
of positive emotions (Cohn et al., 2009), such specific emo-
tions may still be reflected in our single item measure of 
positive affect. 
Study 2   
Employing a daily diary design, Study 2 aimed to address 
the limitations of Study 1. More specifically, given the rela-
tively low frequency of IER instances as suggested by Study 
1, participants reported on only one emotional event per 
day in Study 2. We thus intended to capture the most signif-
icant or memorable regulatory instance of the day, by hav-
ing participants report on the interaction with their partner 
that was most salient to them. Moreover, Study 2 focused 
on the perspective of the target by examining the relation-
ship between perceived regulatory efforts by the partner and 
emotional and relational wellbeing. Finally, instead of us-
ing a composite score of a few specific positive or nega-
tive emotions to assess emotional wellbeing, Study 2 in-
cluded more general measures assessing the experience of 
‘positive feelings’ and ‘negative feelings’, thereby allowing 
a broader range of emotions. Study 2 aimed to test the same 
hypotheses as Study 1 (see Table 1 for an overview) with 
one exception: Due to a programming error, interpersonal 
reappraisal was unfortunately not assessed in Study 2 and 
its effects could therefore not be tested. 
Method  
Participants  
Couples were recruited through a recruiting agency in 
the Netherlands. In total, 190 couples (380 participants) 
enrolled. Participants who failed at least two out of the 
three attention checks at intake were excluded (N = 9). 
Furthermore, six participants did not complete the survey 
independently from their partner and were therefore ex-
cluded. Finally, four participants dropped out of the study. 
This resulted in a final sample of 361 participants (includ-
ing 176 couples and nine individuals whose partner quit or 
was excluded from the study; 51.9% female). Most of the 
participants identified as Dutch (90.0%), with the remain-
der of the sample identifying as EU resident (2.4%), Indone-
sian-Dutch (1.3%), African/Maghreb (0.3%), Surinamese 
(1.3%), Caribbean (1.1%), Chinese (1.1%), Spanish (non-EU, 
0.3%) and other (2.4%). Participants were aged between 18 
and 57 years old (Mage = 38.7, SDage = 14.5). Out of these 
176 couples, 13 couples were same-gender couples. On av-
erage, partners had been in a relationship with each other 
for 12.7 years (SD = 12.3), and 82.8 % of the couples were 
living together. This sample size allowed us to detect small 
effects (see Supplemental Materials for sensitivity analy-
ses). 
Procedure  
Participants first took an intake survey that lasted ap-
proximately 45 minutes. Then, over a period of 12 days, 
both romantic partners were sent a questionnaire every 
evening at 8 p.m. Participants were instructed to complete 
the survey between 8 p.m. and midnight, though they could 
access the survey indefinitely. However, we excluded cases 
completed the following day after 9 a.m. Each survey on 
average took 4.6 minutes to complete (SD = 5.4). Com-
pliance with the experience sampling protocol ranged be-
tween 17.1% and 100.0% (M = 95.0%, SD = 12.0%). At the 
end of the study, participants were thanked and reimbursed 
on a pro-rata basis, up to 40 euros, contingent upon their 
completion of the daily diary protocol and other study com-
ponents. Participants received a 16-euro bonus when they 
completed 10 out of 12 daily questionnaires. The study pro-
cedure was approved by the ethics committee of Faculty of 
Behavior and Movement Sciences of VU University, Ams-
terdam, the Netherlands. This dataset has been previously 
published on by Zoppolat et al. (2023). 
Measures  
Emotional wellbeing.  Emotional wellbeing was as-
sessed with positive affect (“Today, I experienced many 
positive feelings”), and negative affect (“Today, I experi-
enced many negative feelings”). Participants were asked to 
indicate their agreement on a scale from 1 (“not at all”) to 
7 (“very much”). 
Relational wellbeing.  Relational wellbeing was as-
sessed with relationship satisfaction. Participants indicated 
to which extent they agreed with the following statement 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 8
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 9 ---
“Today, I felt satisfied with my relationship with my part-
ner” on a scale from 1 (“not at all”) to 7 (“very much”). 
Received IER.  After rating their emotional and rela-
tional wellbeing, participants were asked if they had expe-
rienced something stressful that day. If so, they were asked 
to which extent their partner had engaged in any of the 
following IER strategies that day: interpersonal acceptance 
(“My partner said it was OK to feel the way I was feel-
ing”), advice (“My partner gave me practical advice on how 
to solve the problem/issue”), interpersonal suppression (“My 
partner told me not to feel bad (e.g. “don’t cry, don’t be 
sad, don’t worry”)”), interpersonal distraction (“My partner 
distracted me”), and interpersonal ignoring (“My partner ig-
nored my feelings”). Participants rated their agreement on 
a scale from 1 (“not at all”) to 7 (“very much”). The items 
were taken or adapted from prior studies to fit an experi-
ence-sampling format (Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Pauw et al., 
2019; Swerdlow & Johnson, 2022). 
Data-Analytic Procedure   
Study 2 followed a similar analytic procedure to Study 
1, with participants nested within couples and crossed with 
time to account for the multilevel structure of the data. 
There was one major difference: Whereas Study 1 focused 
on partner effects (i.e., one partner’s reported IER use pre-
dicting the other partner’s wellbeing), Study 2 focused on 
actor effects (i.e., targets’ reports of received IER predicting 
their own wellbeing; see Figure 1). Therefore, we ran multi-
level models on indistinguishable dyads including only ac-
tor effects: Positive affect, negative affect and relationship 
satisfaction were predicted by the five within-person cen-
tered IER strategies (interpersonal acceptance, advice, in-
terpersonal suppression, interpersonal distraction and in-
terpersonal ignoring), and the between-person means of 
each IER strategy. Furthermore, we included Time as a co-
variate (i.e., day 1-12) in our preliminary models, following 
a similar procedure as in Study 1. Similar to Study 1, we de-
viated from our pre-registration and allowed random inter-
cepts and uncorrelated random slopes, using a compound 
symmetry covariance structure. Our preregistered analysis 
plan can be found on OSF (see here; https://osf.io/rv2ba). 
Results  
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 5, within-per-
son correlations are shown in Table 6 (see Table S9 for be-
tween-person correlations). Key model estimates related to 
our hypotheses are shown in Table 7. Estimates of all fixed 
effects for the main analyses can be found in Tables S10 
in the online supplemental materials. Exploratory analyses 
examining potential moderation of the within-person ef-
fects by gender are reported in the Supplemental Materials 
(Table S11-S15). 
To examine the association between the various IER 
strategies and emotional and relational wellbeing, we 
looked at the within-person actor effects of the different 
perceived regulatory strategies on positive affect, negative 
affect, and relationship satisfaction. Largely contrary to our 
hypotheses, interpersonal acceptance, advice, interper-
sonal distraction, and interpersonal suppression did not 
significantly predict positive affect, negative affect or re-
lationship satisfaction. Only interpersonal ignoring signif-
icantly predicted an increase in negative affect, and a de-
crease in positive affect and relationship satisfaction, 
meaning that at moments in which participants perceived 
their partner to have ignored their emotions more than 
usual, they reported lower emotional and relational wellbe-
ing. 
Discussion  
In Study 2, we examined the consequences of perceived 
IER strategy use by the partner on emotional and relational 
wellbeing. Using a daily diary format in which participants 
reported on the most salient regulatory experience of the 
day, Study 2 aimed to address the limitations of Study 1. 
Contrary to our hypotheses, interpersonal ignoring was the 
only significant predictor of wellbeing. As predicted, per-
ceiving one’s partner to ignore one’s emotions was associ-
ated with momentary enhanced negative affect and reduced 
positive affect and relationship satisfaction. Below, we re-
flect on these partially inconsistent findings across both 
studies. 
General Discussion   
Main Findings and Theoretical Implications      
When in emotional distress, people often turn to others 
for help to manage their emotions (Liu et al., 2021; Rimé, 
2009). Complementing such efforts, people often also at-
tempt to regulate others’ emotions by engaging in a variety 
of (un)supportive behaviors (Zaki & Williams, 2013). Such 
forms of IER are particularly present and pivotal in the con-
text of romantic relationships, which are characterized by 
a high degree of (emotional) interdependence (Berscheid & 
Ammazzalorso, 2001; Butler, 2015) and a great degree of 
assumed responsibility for the partner’s negative emotions 
(Clark et al., 2017). Given its ubiquity and the fundamental 
role of IER in maintaining relationships, it is crucial to bet-
ter understand the emotional and relational consequences 
of specific IER strategies as they naturally occur in every-
day, interpersonal contexts. 
Therefore, the present set of studies aimed to investigate 
the relationship between the use of six key IER regulation 
strategies by romantic partners and emotional and rela-
tional wellbeing in daily life. Study 1 consisted of an expe-
rience sampling study, examining within-person effects of 
enacted IER strategies as reported by the romantic partner. 
This study showed that within-person changes in inter-
personal distraction by the regulator were associated with 
greater emotional and relational wellbeing in the target, as 
evidenced by greater positive affect and feelings of close-
ness (though no change in negative affect). Partially in line 
with expectations, within-person changes in interpersonal 
suppression and advice by the regulator were associated 
with decreased emotional wellbeing in the target (i.e., in-
creased negative affect and (only for suppression) reduced 
positive affect). Contrary to our hypotheses, interpersonal 
ignoring, reappraisal and acceptance were not associated 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 9
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 10 ---
Table 5. Descriptive Statistics Study 2: Between-Person Means (      M), Within-Person (  SDw) and Between-Person    
Standard Deviations (  SDb), and Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (     ICC)  
Variable M SDw SDb ICC 
Positive Affect 5.68 0.94 0.76 0.31 
Negative Affect 2.34 1.07 0.87 0.31 
Relationship Satisfaction 6.09 0.71 0.78 0.43 
Interpersonal Acceptance 4.03 1.36 1.85 0.47 
Advice 3.70 1.44 1.77 0.33 
Interpersonal Suppression 2.59 1.11 1.56 0.40 
Interpersonal Distraction 3.09 1.23 1.64 0.41 
Interpersonal Ignoring 2.14 1.05 1.34 0.32 
Table 6. Within-Person Correlations Study 2     
Variable Positive 
Affect 
Negative 
Affect 
Relationship 
Satisfaction Acceptance Advice Suppression Distraction 
Negative Affect -.60*** 
Relationship 
Satisfaction 
.40*** -.41*** 
Acceptance .05 -.08* .25*** 
Advice .05 -.08* .20*** .51*** 
Suppression -.01 .02 .12*** .34*** .32*** 
Distraction .03 -.02 .15*** .40*** .31*** .26*** 
Ignoring -.13*** .19*** -.36*** -.36*** -.26*** -.09* -.12*** 
Note. * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001. 
Table 7. Fixed Effect Estimates for Within-Person Actor Effects of Interest in Study 2.             
Target's Wellbeing 
Negative Affect Positive Affect Relationship Satisfaction 
Target's Perceived IER 
Use B (SE) p B (SE) p B (SE) p 
Ignoring 0.21 (0.05) <.001 
-0.14 
(0.05) .003 
-0.29 
(0.04) <.001 
Suppression 0.05 (0.05) .315 
-0.03 
(0.05) .471 
0.04 
(0.03) .282 
Distraction 0.02 (0.05) .693 
0.01 
(0.04) .805 
0.05 
(0.03) .102 
Advice -0.05 (0.04) .221 
0.01 
(0.04) .785 
0.03 
(0.03) .392 
Acceptance <0.01 (0.05) .953 
0.01 
(0.04) .818 
0.06 
(0.04) .078 
N.B. All IER strategies are interpersonal. Effects reflect within-person effects of the target’s self-reported perceptions of their partner’s IER use on their own self-reported emotional 
and relational wellbeing (‘target’). 
with within-person changes in emotional and relational 
wellbeing. 
Study 2 consisted of a daily diary study, examining tar-
gets’ perceptions of their partner’s IER attempts. In this 
study, only perceived interpersonal ignoring appeared as a 
consistently significant within-person predictor of positive 
affect, negative affect and relationship satisfaction, such 
that at moments in which targets perceived their partner 
to have ignored their emotions, they experienced impaired 
emotional and relational wellbeing. The perceived use of all 
other IER strategies was unrelated to emotional and rela-
tional wellbeing. 
While some of our findings are in line with prior liter-
ature, others are not. First, the finding that enacted inter-
personal distraction was associated with a simultaneous in-
crease in partners’ positive affect and feelings of closeness, 
but not with reduced negative affect, replicates and extends 
prior research on intrapersonal distraction (Brans, Koval, et 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 10
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 11 ---
al., 2013; Heiy & Cheavens, 2014). We did not make any a 
priori predictions about the relational consequences of in-
terpersonal distraction, given that it on the one hand may 
be interpreted as invalidating, while on the other hand may 
function as a form of social companionship (e.g., by engag-
ing in other activities with the target). The finding that dis-
traction attempts by the partner were associated with in-
creased feelings of closeness as well as increased positive 
affect suggest that interpersonal distraction may often take 
the form of social companionship, and that this may buffer 
emotional distress (Newsom et al., 2005; Rook, 2015). Nev-
ertheless, it should be noted that interpersonal distrac-
tion was not associated with a reduction in negative affect. 
Moreover, we only assessed relatively short-term outcomes. 
Prior work on intrapersonal distraction indicates that dis-
traction is not effective in attaining more long-term recov-
ery, as it does not allow for evaluating, remembering or 
processing the emotional experience (Sheppes et al., 2014). 
It is plausible that interpersonal distraction functions in a 
similar manner, yielding short-term benefits but no long-
term recovery. Future research is needed to test this predic-
tion. 
Second, the finding that enacted interpersonal suppres-
sion was associated with impaired emotional wellbeing is 
in line with prior literature on intrapersonal suppression, 
highlighting its ineffectiveness in downregulating emo-
tional experiences (Webb et al., 2012). The fact that enacted 
interpersonal suppression was not associated with reduced 
closeness is unexpected and suggests that these suppres-
sion appeals were not experienced as invalidating. This may 
have been due to the wording of our item (“I told him/
her not to feel bad (e.g., “don’t cry, don’t be sad, don’t 
worry”)”), which may have simultaneously conveyed a com-
forting intent by implying that there was no reason to be 
upset. This may also explain why interpersonal suppression 
perceived by targets did not impair target’s emotional and 
relational wellbeing in Study 2. Importantly, in real life, the 
distinction between reappraisal of the situation vs. invali-
dation of the other’s emotions may be similarly blurry, and 
the way in which targets interpret the regulatory strategy 
may instead be most determinant of its outcomes. 
Third, the negative association between advice and emo-
tional wellbeing corroborates prior work suggesting that 
advice can easily backfire, and that a certain sensitivity on 
the part of the support provider may be required for advice 
to be effective. For example, prior research shows that ad-
vice is more appreciated and more likely to be implemented 
when it preceded by emotional support and problem in-
quiry by the regulator (Feng, 2009, 2014). 
Fourth, the finding that enacted interpersonal reap-
praisal was not associated with increased emotional well-
being in daily life speaks to the potential importance of 
contextual features. While prior research suggests no rela-
tionship between interpersonal reappraisal and relational 
wellbeing (Nils & Rimé, 2012; Pauw et al., 2018), we had 
hypothesized interpersonal reappraisal to improve emo-
tional wellbeing. Helping others change their perspective 
on the emotion-eliciting situation is theorized to change 
the emotional experience (Gross, 1998; Rimé, 2009). In-
deed, prior studies support this notion (Batenburg & Das, 
2014; Nils & Rimé, 2012), though also show that people 
are not always receptive to such interpersonal reappraisal 
attempts (Marigold et al., 2014). The consequences of in-
terpersonal reappraisal may depend on the emotion that is 
shared, the combination with other forms of support, the 
quality of the reappraisals, and the self-esteem of the target 
(Marigold et al., 2014; Pauw et al., 2018; Sahi et al., 2022). 
Future research is needed to further map out these bound-
ary conditions, as well as to replicate whether perceived in-
terpersonal reappraisal is similarly ineffective. 
Fifth, the finding that both enacted and perceived in-
terpersonal acceptance did not contribute to greater emo-
tional wellbeing is partially in line with prior research 
showing that the mere acceptance or validation of others’ 
emotions does not facilitate emotional recovery (Batenburg 
& Das, 2014; Jurkiewicz et al., 2023; Nils & Rimé, 2012). 
However, given that acceptance is a crucial component of 
responsiveness (Reis & Gable, 2015), we had hypothesized 
interpersonal acceptance to be associated with greater re-
lational wellbeing. It is possible that acceptance, in the ab-
sence of communicating care and understanding (two other 
key components of responsiveness), does not suffice to en-
hance relational wellbeing. Alternatively, it may be that 
momentary expressions of acceptance have no added pre-
dictive value of relational wellbeing, above and beyond the 
mean level of acceptance that people typically receive in 
their relationship. In a similar vein, it should be noted that 
both enacted and perceived acceptance were positively cor-
related with relational wellbeing (see Table 3 and 6), yet 
they did not show additional predictive value above and be-
yond the other IER strategies. Future research is warranted 
to better understand under which conditions acceptance 
may foster relational wellbeing. 
Finally, and interestingly, enacted ignoring as reported 
by the regulator was not associated with impaired emo-
tional and relational wellbeing of the target, whereas tar-
gets’ perceptions of their emotions being ignored by the 
partner were. These discrepant findings may be partially 
explained by the low base rates of self-reported ignoring 
behavior in Study 1 (possibly due to social desirability bi-
ases). Moreover, these findings highlight the importance of 
perceived responsiveness. Perceived partner responsiveness 
has been associated with a wide range of benefits, including 
enhanced positive affect, reduced negative affect, greater 
coping efficacy and higher relationship satisfaction (for an 
overview, see Reis & Gable, 2015). While perceived respon-
siveness is partially shaped by the accurate perception of 
the partner’s behavior, a large part is also driven by biased 
perceptions (Lemay & Neal, 2014). Particularly in the con-
text of romantic relationships, partners’ behavior is per-
ceived as more responsive to the extent that people feel 
more positive towards their partner (Lemay & Neal, 2014). 
As long as participants perceived their partner to react in 
some way to their emotions, they may have experienced 
their partner’s behavior as well-intended and sufficiently 
responsive for their emotional and relational wellbeing not 
to be impaired. Perceiving one’s partner to ignore one’s 
emotions, however, may be unequivocally experienced as 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 11
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 12 ---
unresponsive, which would explain why this was the strat-
egy with the most detrimental outcomes for participants’ 
emotional and relational wellbeing. 
The complexity of our findings highlights the need to 
replicate and contextualize the present work, while point-
ing to various recommendations for future research on IER. 
First, our findings speak to the importance of differentiat-
ing between regulatory attempts as reported by the regula-
tor and those observed by the target (see also Dixon-Gor-
don et al., 2015). The finding that regulatory behaviors as 
reported by the regulator were more predictive of wellbe-
ing than regulatory behaviors perceived by the target sug-
gests that targets are not always aware of what is helpful (or 
harmful) for them, or that they simply do not recognize all 
regulators’ IER attempts. Such ‘invisible’ IER attempts may 
go unnoticed by targets because they are implicit or indirect 
(e.g., distracting the partner by naturally involving them in 
a pleasant activity, such as cooking dinner; Bolger et al., 
2000; Bolger & Amarel, 2007). Moreover, both regulators 
and targets may not always be aware of (or misinterpret) 
the motivations that underlie regulators’ IER strategy use. 
For example, regulators may ignore their partner’s emo-
tions because they believe disengaging from the emotional 
experience will make their partner feel better (pro-social 
hedonic motivation), or because they themselves do not 
want to be dragged down by their partner’s negative mood 
(egoistic hedonic motivation; Niven, 2016). Whether tar-
gets notice these regulatory attempts, and how (responsive) 
they interpret their underlying motivations likely shapes 
the emotional and relational consequences (Bolger & 
Amarel, 2007; Jurkiewicz et al., 2023; Niven et al., 2019). 
On a more global level, our findings underline that IER is 
a complex process, involving a stressor, two individual par-
ties and their interpersonal dynamics. Consequently, the 
emotional and relational consequences of interpersonal 
regulatory processes are likely to be a product of situational 
(e.g., nature of the stressor), personal (e.g., attachment) 
and relational (e.g., relationship satisfaction) factors (Doré 
et al., 2016; Schoebi & Randall, 2018). Indeed, Randall and 
Schoebi posit that when such naturally occurring regula-
tory processes are sampled “across a multitude of daily life 
situations (e.g., experience sampling) it should be quite dif-
ficult to identify clear links between the strength of inter-
personal emotion dynamics and measures of individual or 
interpersonal adjustment” (Schoebi & Randall, 2018, p. 19). 
The heterogeneity represented by the observed random ef-
fects and our lack of consistent findings corroborate this 
notion and speak to the important role of context. Future 
research is thus needed to better understand which IER 
strategies are best for particular people in particular situa-
tions (Doré et al., 2016), and thereby contribute to a more 
sophisticated and comprehensive understanding of IER. 
Strengths, Limitations and Future Directions      
Several limitations should be acknowledged. First, our 
samples are limited in generality in several ways. Partici-
pants primarily consisted of romantic partners with rela-
tively high relationship satisfaction, with Study 1 including 
a sample of somewhat younger couples and Study 2 includ-
ing a sample with a wider range of age and relationship du-
ration. Given that relational closeness affects the willing-
ness to regulate others’ emotions, as well as the strategies 
that people choose to do so (Tanna & McCann, 2023), the 
naturally occurring interpersonal emotion regulation in-
stances sampled in our studies are likely not representative 
of all relationships. Moreover, relationship satisfaction col-
ors people’s perceptions of both their own responsiveness 
and their partner’s responsiveness (Lemay & Neal, 2014), 
thereby shaping the consequences of IER use for emotional 
and relational wellbeing (e.g., Jurkiewicz et al., 2023). Fu-
ture studies are needed to examine whether our findings 
generalize to people in less satisfying relationships. For ex-
ample, it is possible that the momentary effect of certain 
regulatory strategies is amplified or qualitatively different 
in couples with more precarious relationships with less sta-
bilized relational dynamics (e.g., due to shorter relation-
ship length or lower relationship satisfaction). 
Moreover, our findings rely on two ‘WEIRD’ samples, i.e., 
from populations that are White, Educated, Industrialized, 
Rich, and Democratic (Henrich et al., 2010). Although re-
search suggests that many intrapersonal emotion regula-
tion strategies similarly relate to wellbeing across a wide 
variety of cultural orientations (Pauw et al., 2020), there is 
also work suggesting that expressive suppression, for exam-
ple, is more detrimental in cultures characterized by indi-
vidualistic values (Hu et al., 2014). To our knowledge, it re-
mains unclear to what extent the emotional and relational 
consequences of interpersonal emotion regulation are in-
fluenced by cultural factors. 
Second, we used single items to assess IER strategies 
in daily life, thereby limiting the generality of our mate-
rials. While we are conscious of the limitations of single 
item measures for reliability and validity (e.g., Brose et 
al., 2020), they reduce participant burden and careless re-
sponding, and increase compliance, which is necessary in 
momentary assessments (Eisele et al., 2022). Indeed, re-
liance on single items to assess emotion regulation strategy 
use is commonly used in daily diary and experience sam-
pling research (e.g., Blanke et al., 2020; Brans, Koval, et 
al., 2013; Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Kalokerinos et al., 2019; 
Koval et al., 2015). Consequently, we borrowed our items 
from previous research (Heiy & Cheavens, 2014; Pauw et 
al., 2019; Swerdlow & Johnson, 2022). Future research us-
ing validated scales to assess IER strategy use is warranted 
to replicate our findings. 
Third, we limited our studies to the regulation of nega-
tive emotions. Prior research shows that people much more 
often hold goals to regulate negative (rather than positive) 
emotions in daily life (Riediger et al., 2009). Future research 
is needed to examine whether IER strategies have similar 
affective and relational consequences when employed in re-
sponse to positive emotions. As emotion regulation is typ-
ically hedonically motivated (English et al., 2017; Kalok-
erinos et al., 2017), most IER attempts are likely to be 
directed at downregulating negative emotions and upreg-
ulating positive emotions. Given these different regulatory 
goals for positive and negative emotions, it can be expected 
that certain IER strategies are differentially effective de-
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 12
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 13 ---
pending on the valence of the event: For example, people 
may be more receptive to interpersonal reappraisal at-
tempts in response to negative, rather than positive emo-
tions. 
Finally, it should be mentioned that descriptive analyses 
showed that IER attempts were not as frequent as our sam-
pling rate. For example, in the daily diary study (Study 2), 
participants reported to have experienced a stressor on av-
erage 7.5 out of 12 days. These findings are in line with 
recent studies, showing that people typically reach out to 
others to help them regulate once a day or once every two 
days, while people proactively try to regulate others’ emo-
tions about twice a day (Liu et al., 2021; Tran et al., 2022). 
Future research could address this issue by employing an 
event-contingent sampling scheme, in which both partners 
are prompted when one partner indicates to have experi-
enced an upsetting emotional event. Such a study would 
address several limitations of the present research. First, by 
sampling participant responses only when relevant regula-
tory events occur, such a design would enable less frequent 
but more intense measuring, allowing for multiple-item 
measures. Ideally, both enacted and perceived IER could be 
assessed in order to compare their relative effectiveness, 
and to shed light on where IER may go awry (e.g., when 
certain well-intended strategies are not perceived or misin-
terpreted by the partner). Second, such a design would re-
duce noise, given that both partners’ responses would cor-
respond to the same emotional event in time. Moreover, it 
would allow for a more consistent time frame to assess the 
immediate (and possibly more long-term) emotional and 
relational consequences of regulatory instances. 
These limitations notwithstanding, the present research 
is characterized by several strengths. First, we studied IER 
in a naturalistic setting, thereby preventing recall biases 
and examining these processes as they naturally unfold in 
real-life settings. Second, we combined an experience sam-
pling (Study 1) with a daily diary design (Study 2), which 
each come with their own strengths. By sampling multiple 
times a day, the experience sampling design allowed us to 
track everyday emotional experiences in (almost) real time. 
The daily diary study, on the other hand, focused on the 
most important emotional event of the day, thereby cap-
turing events that may have had particular relevance to the 
participants. Third, we employed a dyadic design, in which 
we collected data of both romantic partners. This enabled 
us to examine how one partner’s behavior predicted the 
other partner’s emotional and relational wellbeing (Study 
1). Such a dyadic perspective has rarely been adopted in 
emotion regulation research, despite it mirroring the truly 
interpersonal nature of emotion regulation. Finally, we ex-
amined enacted IER as reported by the regulator (Study 1) 
and perceived IER as reported by the target (Study 2). This 
approach allowed us to examine the robustness of the asso-
ciation between IER and emotional and relational wellbeing 
across both partners’ perspectives. 
Concluding Remarks   
Across two ecological momentary assessment studies, 
we examined how the use of six key IER strategies relates 
to emotional and relational wellbeing among romantic cou-
ples in daily life. Study 1 employed an experience sampling 
design and showed that while regulators’ reported use of 
interpersonal suppression and advice were associated with 
impaired emotional wellbeing of the target, their use of in-
terpersonal distraction was associated with enhanced emo-
tional and relational wellbeing of the target. Study 2 con-
sisted of a daily diary study and showed that only target 
partners’ perceptions of being ignored by the partner were 
associated with impaired emotional and relational wellbe-
ing. Taken together, the present set of studies illuminate 
how key regulatory processes shape people’s emotions and 
relationships in ecologically valid settings. Our findings in-
dicate that enacted and perceived regulatory behaviors are 
associated with differential outcomes, highlighting the 
complex nature of interpersonal emotion dynamics. Future 
large-scale research is warranted to better understand the 
circumstances in which IER benefits wellbeing, ideally tak-
ing into account personal, relational and situational factors 
(Schoebi & Randall, 2018). 
Contributions  
Contributed to conception and design: LP, RS, GZ, FR, 
AM 
Contributed to acquisition of data: LP, RS, GZ, FR, AM 
Contributed to analysis and interpretation of data: RS, 
LP, AM 
Drafted and/or revised the article: LP 
Approved the submitted version for publication: LP, RS, 
GZ, FR, AM 
Acknowledgments  
The conducted research was preregistered with an analy-
sis plan on the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/
z64n5) for Study 1, and see https://osf.io/rv2ba for Study 2). 
Funding Information   
This research was supported by Vidi grant from the 
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO; 
VI.Vidi.195.010) awarded to FR and a grant 
(311-8.03.03.02-142626) from the Ministry of Culture and 
Science of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia awarded to 
AM. 
Competing Interests   
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Data Accessibility Statement    
All data and scripts relevant to testing our hypotheses 
are available on the Open Science Framework (see 
https://osf.io/cjwgr/). 
Submitted: April 28, 2023 PST, Accepted: November 08, 2023 
PST 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 13
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 14 ---
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License 
(CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecom-
mons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information. 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 14
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 15 ---
References  
Aldao, A., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Schweizer, S. (2010). 
Emotion-regulation strategies across 
psychopathology: A meta-analytic review. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 30(2), 217–237. https://doi.org/1
0.1016/j.cpr.2009.11.004 
Arslan, R. C., Walther, M. P., & Tata, C. S. (2020). formr: 
A study framework allowing for automated feedback 
generation and complex longitudinal experience-
sampling studies using R. Behavior Research Methods, 
52(1), 376–387. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-019-0
1236-y 
Batenburg, A., & Das, E. (2014). An experimental study 
on the effectiveness of disclosing stressful life events 
and support messages: When cognitive reappraisal 
support decreases emotional distress, and emotional 
support is like saying nothing at all. PLoS ONE, 9(12), 
e114169. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.01141
69 
Berscheid, E., & Ammazzalorso, H. (2001). Emotional 
experience in close relationships. In G. J. Fletcher & 
M. S. Clark (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social 
psychology: Interpersonal processes (pp. 308–330). 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
Blanke, E. S., Brose, A., Kalokerinos, E. K., Erbas, Y., 
Riediger, M., & Kuppens, P. (2020). Mix it to fix it: 
Emotion regulation variability in daily life. Emotion, 
20(3), 473–485. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000566 
Bodenmann, G. (2005). Dyadic coping and its 
significance for marital functioning. In T. Revenson, 
K. Kayser, & G. Bodenmann (Eds.), Couples coping 
with stress: Emerging perspectives on dyadic coping. 
(pp. 33–49). American Psychological Association. htt
ps://doi.org/10.1037/11031-002 
Bodenmann, G., Pihet, S., & Kayser, K. (2006). The 
relationship between dyadic coping and marital 
quality: A 2-year longitudinal study. Journal of Family 
Psychology, 20(3), 485–493. https://doi.org/10.1037/0
893-3200.20.3.485 
Bodenmann, G., Randall, A., & Falconier, M. (2016). 
Coping in couples: The Systemic Transactional Model 
(STM). In M. Falconier, A. Randall, & G. Bodenmann 
(Eds.), Couples coping with stress: A cross-cultural 
perspective (pp. 5–22). Routledge. 
Bolger, N., & Amarel, D. (2007). Effects of social 
support visibility on adjustment to stress: 
Experimental evidence. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 92(3), 458–475. https://doi.org/10.1
037/0022-3514.92.3.458 
Bolger, N., & Laurenceau, J.-P. (2013). Intensive 
longitudinal methods: An introduction to diary and 
experience sampling research. The Guilford Press. 
Bolger, N., Zuckerman, A., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). 
Invisible support and adjustment to stress. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 953–961. http
s://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.953 
Brans, K., Koval, P., Verduyn, P., Lim, Y. L., & Kuppens, 
P. (2013). The regulation of negative and positive 
affect in daily life. Emotion, 13(5), 926–939. https://d
oi.org/10.1037/a0032400 
Brans, K., Van Mechelen, I., Rimé, B., & Verduyn, P. 
(2013). The relation between social sharing and the 
duration of emotional experience. Cognition & 
Emotion, 27(6), 1023–1041. https://doi.org/10.1080/0
2699931.2012.762758 
Brose, A., Schmiedek, F., Gerstorf, D., & Voelkle, M. C. 
(2020). The measurement of within-person affect 
variation. Emotion, 20(4), 677–699. https://doi.org/1
0.1037/emo0000583 
Butler, E. A. (2015). Interpersonal affect dynamics: It 
takes two (and time) to tango. Emotion Review, 7(4), 
336–341. https://doi.org/10.1177/1754073915590622 
Butler, E. A., Egloff, B., Wlhelm, F. H., Smith, N. C., 
Erickson, E. A., & Gross, J. J. (2003). The social 
consequences of expressive suppression. Emotion, 
3(1), 48–67. https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.3.1.48 
Campos, J. J., Walle, E. A., Dahl, A., & Main, A. (2011). 
Reconceptualizing emotion regulation. Emotion 
Review, 3(1), 26–35. https://doi.org/10.1177/17540739
10380975 
Christensen, K. A., Seager van Dyk, I., Nelson, S. V., & 
Vasey, M. W. (2020). Using multilevel modeling to 
characterize interpersonal emotion regulation 
strategies and psychopathology in female friends. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 165, 110156. htt
ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2020.110156 
Clark, M. S., Armentano, L. A., Boothby, E. J., & Hirsch, 
J. L. (2017). Communal relational context (or lack 
thereof) shapes emotional lives. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 17, 176–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cop
syc.2017.07.023 
Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, 
and the buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 
98(2), 310–357. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.9
8.2.310 
Cohn, M. A., Fredrickson, B. L., Brown, S. L., Mikels, J. 
A., & Conway, A. M. (2009). Happiness unpacked: 
Positive emotions increase life satisfaction by 
building resilience. Emotion, 9(3), 361–368. https://do
i.org/10.1037/a0015952 
Cook, W. L., & Kenny, D. A. (2005). The Actor–Partner 
Interdependence Model: A model of bidirectional 
effects in developmental studies. International Journal 
of Behavioral Development, 29(2), 101–109. https://do
i.org/10.1080/01650250444000405 
Debrot, A., Cook, W. L., Perrez, M., & Horn, A. B. 
(2012). Deeds matter: Daily enacted responsiveness 
and intimacy in couples’ daily lives. Journal of Family 
Psychology, 26(4), 617–627. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0
028666 
Dejonckheere, E., & Erbas, Y. (2022). Designing an 
experience sampling study. In The open handbook of 
experience sampling methodology: A step-by-step guide 
to designing, conducting, and analyzing ESM studies 
(2nd ed.). Center for Research on Experience 
Sampling and Ambulatory Methods Leuven. 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 15
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 16 ---
DiGiovanni, A. M., Cornelius, T., & Bolger, N. (2023). 
Decomposing variance in co-rumination using dyadic 
daily diary data. Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 14(5), 636–646. https://doi.org/10.1177/1948
5506221116989 
Dixon-Gordon, K. L., Bernecker, S. L., & Christensen, K. 
(2015). Recent innovations in the field of 
interpersonal emotion regulation. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 3, 36–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsy
c.2015.02.001 
Doré, B. P., Silvers, J. A., & Ochsner, K. N. (2016). 
Toward a personalized science of emotion regulation. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 10(4), 
171–187. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12240 
Eisele, G., Vachon, H., Lafit, G., Kuppens, P., Houben, 
M., Myin-Germeys, I., & Viechtbauer, W. (2022). The 
effects of sampling frequency and questionnaire 
length on perceived burden, compliance, and careless 
responding in experience sampling data in a student 
population. Assessment, 29(2), 136–151. https://doi.o
rg/10.1177/1073191120957102 
English, T., Lee, I. A., John, O. P., & Gross, J. J. (2017). 
Emotion regulation strategy selection in daily life: 
The role of social context and goals. Motivation and 
Emotion, 41(2), 230–242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s110
31-016-9597-z 
Feng, B. (2009). Testing an integrated model of advice 
giving in supportive interactions. Human 
Communication Research, 35(1), 115–129. https://do
i.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2008.01340.x 
Feng, B. (2014). When should advice be given? 
Assessing the role of sequential placement of advice 
in supportive interactions in two cultures. 
Communication Research, 41(7), 913–934. https://do
i.org/10.1177/0093650212456203 
Feng, B., & MacGeorge, E. L. (2010). The influences of 
message and source factors on advice outcomes. 
Communication Research, 37(4), 553–575. https://do
i.org/10.1177/0093650210368258 
Goldsmith, D., & MacGeorge, E. (2000). The impact of 
politeness and relationship on perceived quality of 
advice about a problem. Human Communication 
Research, 26(2), 234–263. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14
68-2958.2000.tb00757.x 
Gross, J. J. (1998). The emerging field of emotion 
regulation: An integrative review. Review of General 
Psychology, 2(3), 271–299. https://doi.org/10.1037/10
89-2680.2.3.271 
Gross, J. J. (2015). The extended process model of 
emotion regulation: Elaborations, applications, and 
future directions. Psychological Inquiry, 26(1), 
130–137. https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840x.2015.9897
51 
Hayes, S. C. (2004). Acceptance and commitment 
therapy, relational frame theory, and the third wave 
of behavioral and cognitive therapies. Behavior 
Therapy, 35(4), 639–665. https://doi.org/10.1016/s000
5-7894(04)80013-3 
Heiy, J. E., & Cheavens, J. S. (2014). Back to basics: A 
naturalistic assessment of the experience and 
regulation of emotion. Emotion, 14(5), 878–891. http
s://doi.org/10.1037/a0037231 
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most 
people are not WEIRD. Nature, 466(7302), 29–29. htt
ps://doi.org/10.1038/466029a 
Hu, T., Zhang, D., Wang, J., Mistry, R., Ran, G., & Wang, 
X. (2014). Relation between emotion regulation and 
mental health: A meta-analysis review. Psychological 
Reports, 114(2), 341–362. https://doi.org/10.2466/0
3.20.pr0.114k22w4 
Joel, S., Eastwick, P. W., Allison, C. J., Arriaga, X. B., 
Baker, Z. G., Bar-Kalifa, E., Bergeron, S., Birnbaum, 
G. E., Brock, R. L., Brumbaugh, C. C., Carmichael, C. 
L., Chen, S., Clarke, J., Cobb, R. J., Coolsen, M. K., 
Davis, J., de Jong, D. C., Debrot, A., DeHaas, E. C., … 
Wolf, S. (2020). Machine learning uncovers the most 
robust self-report predictors of relationship quality 
across 43 longitudinal couples studies. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 117(32), 
19061–19071. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.19170361
17 
Jurkiewicz, O., McGarrigle, C. B., & Oveis, C. (2023). 
How to improve others’ emotions: Reappraise and be 
responsive. Affective Science, 4(2), 233–247. https://do
i.org/10.1007/s42761-023-00183-4 
Kalokerinos, E. K., Erbas, Y., Ceulemans, E., & Kuppens, 
P. (2019). Differentiate to regulate: Low negative 
emotion differentiation is associated with ineffective 
use but not selection of emotion-regulation 
strategies. Psychological Science, 30(6), 863–879. http
s://doi.org/10.1177/0956797619838763 
Kalokerinos, E. K., Tamir, M., & Kuppens, P. (2017). 
Instrumental motives in negative emotion regulation 
in daily life: Frequency, consistency, and predictors. 
Emotion, 17(4), 648–657. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo
0000269 
Kappas, A. (2013). Social regulation of emotion: Messy 
layers. Frontiers in Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/10.33
89/fpsyg.2013.00051 
Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic 
data analysis. The Guilford Press. 
Koval, P., Butler, E. A., Hollenstein, T., Lanteigne, D., & 
Kuppens, P. (2015). Emotion regulation and the 
temporal dynamics of emotions: Effects of cognitive 
reappraisal and expressive suppression on emotional 
inertia. Cognition and Emotion, 29(5), 831–851. http
s://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2014.948388 
Kuppens, P., Dejonckheere, E., Kalokerinos, E. K., & 
Koval, P. (2022). Some recommendations on the use 
of daily life methods in affective science. Affective 
Science, 3(2), 505–515. https://doi.org/10.1007/s4276
1-022-00101-0 
Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Neal, A. M. (2014). Accurate and 
biased perceptions of responsive support predict 
well-being. Motivation and Emotion, 38(2), 270–286. h
ttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-013-9381-2 
Little, L. M., Kluemper, D., Nelson, D. L., & Gooty, J. 
(2012). Development and validation of the 
Interpersonal Emotion Management Scale. Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 85(2), 
407–420. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.2011.02
042.x 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 16
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 17 ---
Little, L. M., Kluemper, D., Nelson, D. L., & Ward, A. 
(2013). More than happy to help? Customer-focused 
emotion management strategies. Personnel 
Psychology, 66(1), 261–286. https://doi.org/10.1111/p
eps.12010 
Liu, D. Y., Strube, M. J., & Thompson, R. J. (2021). 
Interpersonal emotion regulation: An experience 
sampling study. Affective Science, 2(3), 273–288. http
s://doi.org/10.1007/s42761-021-00044-y 
MacGeorge, E. L., Graves, A. R., Feng, B., Gillihan, S. J., 
& Burleson, B. R. (2004). The myth of gender 
cultures: Similarities outweigh differences in men’s 
and women’s provision of and responses to 
supportive communication. Sex Roles, 50(3/4), 
143–175. https://doi.org/10.1023/b:sers.000001554
9.88984.8d 
Maisel, N. C., Gable, S. L., & Strachman, A. (2008). 
Responsive behaviors in good times and in bad. 
Personal Relationships, 15(3), 317–338. https://doi.or
g/10.1111/j.1475-6811.2008.00201.x 
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., Wood, J. V., & Cavallo, J. 
V. (2014). You can’t always give what you want: The 
challenge of providing social support to low self-
esteem individuals. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 107(1), 56–80. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0
036554 
Matthews, M., Webb, T. L., & Sheppes, G. (2021). Do 
people choose the same strategies to regulate other 
people’s emotions as they choose to regulate their 
own? Emotion, 22(8), 1723–1738. https://doi.org/10.1
037/emo0001008 
Morelli, S. A., Lee, I. A., Arnn, M. E., & Zaki, J. (2015). 
Emotional and instrumental support provision 
interact to predict well-being. Emotion, 15(4), 
484–493. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000084 
Newsom, J. T. (2002). A multilevel structural equation 
model for dyadic data. Structural Equation Modeling: 
A Multidisciplinary Journal, 9(3), 431–447. https://do
i.org/10.1207/s15328007sem0903_7 
Newsom, J. T., Rook, K. S., Nishishiba, M., Sorkin, D. H., 
& Mahan, T. L. (2005). Understanding the relative 
importance of positive and negative social exchanges: 
Examining specific domains and appraisals. The 
Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 60(6), P304–P312. ht
tps://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/60.6.p304 
Nils, F., & Rimé, B. (2012). Beyond the myth of venting: 
Social sharing modes determine the benefits of 
emotional disclosure: Effects of sharing modes in 
emotional disclosure. European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 42(6), 672–681. https://doi.org/10.1002/ej
sp.1880 
Niven, K. (2016). Why do people engage in 
interpersonal emotion regulation at work? 
Organizational Psychology Review, 6(4), 305–323. http
s://doi.org/10.1177/2041386615612544 
Niven, K. (2017). The four key characteristics of 
interpersonal emotion regulation. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 17, 89–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsy
c.2017.06.015 
Niven, K., Garcia, D., van der Löwe, I., Holman, D., & 
Mansell, W. (2015). Becoming popular: Interpersonal 
emotion regulation predicts relationship formation in 
real life social networks. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. htt
ps://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01452 
Niven, K., Troth, A. C., & Holman, D. (2019). Do the 
effects of interpersonal emotion regulation depend 
on people’s underlying motives? Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 92(4), 
1020–1026. https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12257 
Nozaki, Y., & Mikolajczak, M. (2020). Extrinsic emotion 
regulation. Emotion, 20(1), 10–15. https://doi.org/1
0.1037/emo0000636 
Parkinson, B., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2015). Current 
emotion research in social psychology: Thinking 
about emotions and other people. Emotion Review, 
7(4), 371–380. https://doi.org/10.1177/175407391559
0624 
Parkinson, B., & Totterdell, P. (1999). Classifying affect-
regulation strategies. Cognition & Emotion, 13(3), 
277–303. https://doi.org/10.1080/026999399379285 
Pauw, L. S., Sauter, D. A., van Kleef, G. A., & Fischer, A. 
H. (2018). Sense or sensibility? Social sharers’ 
evaluations of socio-affective vs. cognitive support in 
response to negative emotions. Cognition and 
Emotion, 32(6), 1247–1264. https://doi.org/10.1080/0
2699931.2017.1400949 
Pauw, L. S., Sauter, D. A., van Kleef, G. A., & Fischer, A. 
H. (2019). Stop crying! The impact of situational 
demands on interpersonal emotion regulation. 
Cognition and Emotion, 33(8), 1587–1598. https://do
i.org/10.1080/02699931.2019.1585330 
Pauw, L. S., Vu, T.-V., Sun, R., Vuillier, L., Milek, A., & 
Sauter, D. (2020). Emotion regulation and wellbeing: 
A cross-cultural study during the COVID-19 
outbreak. PsyArXiv. Preprint. https://doi.org/10.3123
4/osf.io/9qrw5 
Peters, B. J., & Jamieson, J. P. (2016). The consequences 
of suppressing affective displays in romantic 
relationships: A challenge and threat perspective. 
Emotion, 16(7), 1050–1066. https://doi.org/10.1037/e
mo0000202 
Peters, B. J., Overall, N. C., & Jamieson, J. P. (2014). 
Physiological and cognitive consequences of 
suppressing and expressing emotion in dyadic 
interactions. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 
94(1), 100–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.201
4.07.015 
Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., & R. Core 
Team. (2021, September 7). Nlme: Linear and 
nonlinear mixed effects models. R package version 
3.1-153. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=nlme 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. 
(2012). Sources of method bias in social science 
research and recommendations on how to control It. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 63(1), 539–569. https://d
oi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100452 
Rauers, A., & Riediger, M. (2022). Ease of mind or ties 
that bind? Costs and benefits of disclosing daily 
hassles in partnerships. Social Psychological and 
Personality Science, 14(5), 551–561. https://doi.org/1
0.1177/19485506221112252 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 17
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 18 ---
Reeck, C., Ames, D. R., & Ochsner, K. N. (2016). The 
social regulation of emotion: An integrative, cross-
disciplinary model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(1), 
47–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.09.003 
Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2015). Responsiveness. 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 1, 67–71. https://doi.or
g/10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.01.001 
Reis, H. T., Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Finkenauer, C. (2017). 
Toward understanding understanding: The 
importance of feeling understood in relationships. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 11(3), 
e12308. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12308 
Riccioni, I., Bongelli, R., & Zuczkowski, A. (2014). 
Mitigation and epistemic positions in troubles talk: 
The giving advice activity in close interpersonal 
relationships. Some examples from Italian. Language 
& Communication, 39, 51–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.langcom.2014.08.001 
Riediger, M., Schmiedek, F., Wagner, G. G., & 
Lindenberger, U. (2009). Seeking pleasure and 
seeking pain: Differences in prohedonic and contra-
hedonic motivation from adolescence to old age. 
Psychological Science, 20(12), 1529–1535. https://doi.o
rg/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02473.x 
Rimé, B. (2009). Emotion elicits the social sharing of 
emotion: Theory and empirical review. Emotion 
Review, 1(1), 60–85. https://doi.org/10.1177/17540739
08097189 
Rimé, B., Bouchat, P., Paquot, L., & Giglio, L. (2020). 
Intrapersonal, interpersonal, and social outcomes of 
the social sharing of emotion. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 31, 127–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cop
syc.2019.08.024 
Rook, K. S. (2015). Social networks in later life: 
Weighing positive and negative effects on health and 
well-being. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
24(1), 45–51. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721414551
364 
Ross, K. M., Rook, K., Winczewski, L., Collins, N., & 
Dunkel Schetter, C. (2019). Close relationships and 
health: The interactive effect of positive and negative 
aspects. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
13(6). https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12468 
Sahi, R. S., He, Z., Silvers, J. A., & Eisenberger, N. I. 
(2022). One size does not fit all: Decomposing the 
implementation and differential benefits of social 
emotion regulation strategies. Emotion, 23(6), 
1522–1535. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0001194 
Schoebi, D., & Randall, A. (2018). Conceptual 
approaches to studying interpersonal emotion 
dynamics. In Interpersonal Emotion Dynamics in Close 
Relationships (pp. 7–26). Cambridge University Press. 
Semmer, N. K., Elfering, A., Jacobshagen, N., Perrot, T., 
Beehr, T. A., & Boos, N. (2008). The emotional 
meaning of instrumental social support. International 
Journal of Stress Management, 15(3), 235–251. http
s://doi.org/10.1037/1072-5245.15.3.235 
Shallcross, A. J., Troy, A. S., Boland, M., & Mauss, I. B. 
(2010). Let it be: Accepting negative emotional 
experiences predicts decreased negative affect and 
depressive symptoms. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 48(9), 921–929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bra
t.2010.05.025 
Sheppes, G., Scheibe, S., Suri, G., Radu, P., Blechert, J., 
& Gross, J. J. (2014). Emotion regulation choice: A 
conceptual framework and supporting evidence. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(1), 
163–181. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030831 
Siewert, K., Antoniw, K., Kubiak, T., & Weber, H. (2011). 
The more the better? The relationship between 
mismatches in social support and subjective well-
being in daily life. Journal of Health Psychology, 16(4), 
621–631. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105310385366 
Swerdlow, B. A., & Johnson, S. L. (2022). The 
Interpersonal Regulation Interaction Scale (IRIS): A 
multistudy investigation of receivers’ retrospective 
evaluations of interpersonal emotion regulation 
interactions. Emotion, 22(6), 1119–1136. https://doi.o
rg/10.1037/emo0000927 
Tanna, V. J., & McCann, C. (2023). I know you so I will 
regulate you: Closeness but not target’s emotion type 
affects all stages of extrinsic emotion regulation. 
Emotion, 23(5), 1501–1505. https://doi.org/10.1037/e
mo0001073 
Thomas, D. L., & Diener, E. (1990). Memory accuracy in 
the recall of emotions. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 59(2), 291–297. https://doi.org/10.1
037/0022-3514.59.2.291 
Tran, A., Greenaway, K. H., Kostopoulos, J., & 
Kalokerinos, E. K. (2022). What does interpersonal 
emotion regulation look like in everyday life? 
PsyArXiv. Preprint. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/3g
xcw 
Van Kleef, G. A. (2009). How emotions regulate social 
life: The emotions as social information (EASI) 
model. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
18(3), 184–188. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2
009.01633.x 
Van Swol, L. M., MacGeorge, E. L., & Prahl, A. (2017). 
Advise with permission? The effects of advice 
solicitation on advice outcomes. Communication 
Studies, 68(4), 476–492. https://doi.org/10.1080/1051
0974.2017.1363795 
Wang, Y.-C., Kraut, R., & Levine, J. M. (2012). To stay or 
leave? The relationship of emotional and 
informational support to commitment in online 
health support groups. Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work - 
CSCW, 12, 833. https://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145
329 
Webb, T. L., Miles, E., & Sheeran, P. (2012). Dealing 
with feeling: A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of 
strategies derived from the process model of emotion 
regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 138(4), 775–808. ht
tps://doi.org/10.1037/a0027600 
Williams, W. C., Morelli, S. A., Ong, D. C., & Zaki, J. 
(2018). Interpersonal emotion regulation: 
Implications for affiliation, perceived support, 
relationships, and well-being. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 115(2), 224–254. https://doi.or
g/10.1037/pspi0000132 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 18
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 19 ---
Wojnarowska, A., Kobylinska, D., & Lewczuk, K. (2020). 
Acceptance as an emotion regulation strategy in 
experimental psychological research: What we know 
and how we can improve that knowledge. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 11, 242. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.202
0.00242 
Xu, S., Li, W., Zhang, W., & Cho, J. (2021). The 
dynamics of social support and affective well-being 
before and during COVID: An experience sampling 
study. Computers in Human Behavior, 121, 106776. htt
ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106776 
Zaki, J., & Williams, W. C. (2013). Interpersonal 
emotion regulation. Emotion, 13(5), 803–810. http
s://doi.org/10.1037/a0033839 
Zoppolat, G., Righetti, F., Faure, R., & Schneider, I. K. 
(2023). A systematic study of ambivalence and well-
being in romantic relationships. Social Psychological 
and Personality Science, 194855062311655. https://do
i.org/10.1177/19485506231165585 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 19
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025


--- page 20 ---
Supplementary Materials   
Peer Review History    
Download: https://collabra.scholasticahq.com/article/90797-may-i-help-you-the-relationship-between-interpersonal-
emotion-regulation-and-emotional-and-relational-wellbeing-in-daily-life/attachment/
188664.docx?auth_token=g7U9ajp61gyfMRbDQrES 
Response Letter 2    
Download: https://collabra.scholasticahq.com/article/90797-may-i-help-you-the-relationship-between-interpersonal-
emotion-regulation-and-emotional-and-relational-wellbeing-in-daily-life/attachment/
188665.pdf?auth_token=g7U9ajp61gyfMRbDQrES 
Response Letter 1    
Download: https://collabra.scholasticahq.com/article/90797-may-i-help-you-the-relationship-between-interpersonal-
emotion-regulation-and-emotional-and-relational-wellbeing-in-daily-life/attachment/
188666.pdf?auth_token=g7U9ajp61gyfMRbDQrES 
Supplemental Materials   
Download: https://collabra.scholasticahq.com/article/90797-may-i-help-you-the-relationship-between-interpersonal-
emotion-regulation-and-emotional-and-relational-wellbeing-in-daily-life/attachment/
188667.docx?auth_token=g7U9ajp61gyfMRbDQrES 
May I Help You? The Relationship Between Interpersonal Emotion Regulation and Emotional and Relation…
Collabra: Psychology 20
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/10/1/90797/827168/collabra_2024_10_1_90797.pdf by University of Amsterdam user on 19 May 2025