--- Page 1 ---
Vol.:(0123456789)
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-025-02907-9
ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT
SocioLex‑CZ: Normative estimates for socio‑semantic dimensions 
of meaning for 2,999 words and 1,000 images
Mikuláš Preininger1 · James Brand2  · Adam Kříž1 · Markéta Ceháková1
Received: 12 December 2024 / Accepted: 30 October 2025 / Published online: 8 December 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
When we encounter words, we activate not only the social information provided by the speaker, but also the rich seman-
tics of the words’ meaning, and quantifying this information is a key challenge for the cognitive and behavioural sciences. 
Although there are many resources available that quantify affective and sensorimotor information, there are relatively few 
resources available that provide information on social dimensions of meaning. We present the SocioLex-CZ norms, where 
the primary focus is on socio-semantic dimensions of meaning. Across two experiments, we introduce normative estimates 
along five dimensions—gender, political alignment, location, valence and age—for a large set of Czech words (Experiment 
1) and images (Experiment 2) from 1,709 participants. We provide a series of analyses demonstrating that the norms have 
good reliability, and present exploratory analyses examining how the variables interact with one another within and between 
words/images. These norms present a valuable dataset that quantifies socio-semantic representations at scale, which we 
hope will be used for a range of novel and multidisciplinary applications, thereby opening up new pathways for innovative 
research. We make the data, code and analysis available at https:// osf. io/ pv9md/ and also provide an interactive web app at 
https:// tinyu rl. com/ socio lex- cz- app.
Keywords Semantics · Norms · Socio-semantics · Concepts · Representation
Introduction
Words have rich and diverse meanings that vary along dif-
ferent semantic dimensions; however, not all of the dimen-
sions contribute to the representations of related concepts 
to the same extent. For example, the sensory dimension of 
olfaction is very important for the word aroma, but is less 
important for amoeba (Lynott et al., 2020). Quantifying rep-
resentations has been a crucial aim of cognitive science, 
psycholinguistics and other interdisciplinary sciences for 
decades, with the pioneering work of Osgood et al. (1957) 
popularising the practical applications of collecting datasets 
of subjective ratings (or norms) along definable dimensions 
of meaning for lists of words.
Recent interest in such datasets has been exemplified 
through the growing body of studies publishing rating norms 
for a wide range of dimensions that capture specific aspects 
of meaning (e.g. humour: Engelthaler & Hills, 2018; iconic-
ity: Winter et al., 2024; survival: Alonso et al.,  2021), even 
investigating different language settings (e.g. multiple lan-
guages: Łuniewska et al., 2016, 2019; sign languages: Sehyr 
et al., 2021; second languages: Ferré et al., 2022; Imbault 
et al., 2021). Despite this diversity in the literature, there 
has traditionally been a concentrated empirical focus on two 
clusters of semantic dimensions, specifically affective (e.g. 
valence, arousal and dominance: Warriner et al., 2013) and 
sensorimotor (e.g. body–object interaction: Pexman et al., 
2019; concreteness: Brysbaert et al., 2014; perceptual and 
action: Lynott et al., 2020), with these norms facilitating 
research on how languages are learnt, processed and rep-
resented in the brain. However, there is growing interest in 
moving beyond psycholinguistic, affective and sensorimotor 
dimensions of meaning, and instead looking towards other 
theoretically important and empirically valuable properties 
of meaning (see e.g. Binder et al., 2016), to further inform 
models of semantic representation and open up new avenues 
OSF repository: https:// osf. io/ pv9md/.
 * James Brand 
 James.brand.ac@gmail.com
1 Faculty of Arts, Charles University, Prague, Czechia
2 Department of Psychology, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk, 
UK


--- Page 2 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 2 of 22
for researchers to better understand linguistic and cognitive 
processes.
One emerging perspective posits that social experi -
ences, contexts and interactions play an important role in 
explaining how certain concepts can be grounded in the 
human conceptual system, with a particular emphasis on 
the grounding of abstract concepts (Barsalou, 2020; Borghi 
et al., 2019; Pexman et al., 2023). To date, two large-scale 
studies have quantified the socialness of thousands of words 
in English (Diveica et al., 2023) and Chinese (Wang et al., 
2023), whereby socialness is defined broadly to capture a 
range of potential features that are socially relevant, e.g. ‘a 
social characteristic of a person or group of people, a social 
behaviour or interaction, a social role, a social space, a 
social institution or system, a social value or ideology, or 
any other socially relevant concept’ (Diveica et al., 2023, 
p. 463), and has been shown to have a facilitatory effect in 
a range of lexical processing tasks (Diveica et al., 2024). 
This would suggest that social semantic information can be 
used as a possible source of grounding for semantic repre-
sentations, particularly when sensorimotor information is 
less readily available, thus providing support for multiple 
representation theories that have long posited a role of social 
experience in the representation of concepts (Barsalou, 
2020; Borghi et al., 2019).
Although the expansive definition provided for the social-
ness norms facilitates the study of a complex construction 
through a single quantitative variable, it may present an issue 
for researchers who are looking to target a specific aspect 
of social experience, context or interaction. For example, in 
the Diveica et al. (2023) English socialness norms, some of 
the words with the highest ratings are romance, socialism, 
mother, festival and funeral, highlighting the breadth of rep-
resentations that socialness as a variable can capture, whilst 
also revealing the acute differences that exist between the 
concepts in terms of the specific types of social information 
that is encoded—festival and funeral are both social events, 
but the semantics are normally quite contrastive in terms of 
the social information they represent. Thus, an alternative 
approach has been to investigate specific attributes that are 
socially relevant and can be theoretically defined, providing 
a more nuanced quantification of socially pertinent dimen-
sions of representations.
One example of a socially relevant dimension being 
examined in this way is semantic gender, where participants 
are asked to rate the extent to which a word’s meaning is 
associated with feminine, masculine or neutral (i.e. neither 
feminine nor masculine) attributes. For example, in Vank -
runkelsven et al. (2024), the word vader (father) is rated 
as masculine, the word moeder (mother) as feminine, and 
the word knoop (button) as neutral. Semantic gender was 
included as a scale in Osgood et al.’s (1957) original seman-
tic differential work, which only focussed on a very small 
set of words (see Vankrunkelsven et al., 2024, for a more 
detailed overview of other studies that have normed seman-
tic gender). However, with the renewed attention to collect-
ing mega-study datasets, there are now conceptual/semantic 
gender ratings available for 5,500 (Scott et al., 2019) and 
2,373 (Lewis et al., 2022) English words, as well as 24,000 
Dutch words (Vankrunkelsven et al., 2024). Even though 
these datasets are still relatively new additions to the larger 
catalogue of norms available to researchers, they have pro-
vided a critical bridge between the social and cognitive sci-
ences, facilitating novel investigations into multidisciplinary 
domains of research—for instance, by uncovering sources 
of gender biases present in children’s literature (Lewis et al., 
2022) or language more generally (Lewis & Lupyan, 2020), 
in addition to testing effects of linguistic relativity, whereby 
grammatical gender may influence the way that semantic 
gender is represented (Brand et al., 2025; Vankrunkelsven 
et al., 2024).
Indeed, the field of sociolinguistics has long demon-
strated the importance of socially meaningful variables that 
can be used to characterise groups of individuals, (e.g. gen-
der, age, location, political alignment) to study language use, 
variation and change (see e.g. Labov, 2011; Trudgill, 1974). 
Whilst such variables are the focus for studies at the popu-
lation level (i.e. which words or variants are produced by 
females/males or younger/older age groups), there has been 
relatively little work looking at how these factors operate at 
the semantic level (i.e. which words have meanings that are 
associated with femininity/masculinity or younger/older age 
groups). Interestingly, when studies have used stimuli that 
have been chosen because of their associations with socially 
relevant dimensions of meaning, the findings have helped 
to inform models of language and memory. For example, 
Walker and Hay (2011) demonstrated that lexical access to 
words that are socially skewed towards either younger or 
older individuals (e.g. internet and libraries) is faster when 
the word is spoken by an age-congruent voice, with these 
results extending to associations for gender and non-spoken 
stimuli, such as images (Hay et al., 2019).
Whilst gender has received some attention in the norming 
literature, there has also been interest in other socially rel -
evant dimensions of meaning, but typically this has looked 
at the way individuals attribute those dimensions to specific 
social groups, to better understand social attitudes and stere-
otyping. For example, semantic differential scales have been 
used to investigate whether there are differences in the way 
older and younger age groups are perceived. Rosencrantz 
and McNevin (1969) devised the Aging Semantic Differen-
tial, where participants were tasked with selecting a point on 
bipolar scales that were anchored by a series of contrasting 
adjective pairs, e.g. optimistic/pessimistic. Participants were 
asked to use the scales based on their perceived associations 
towards younger, middle-aged and older groups of adults, 


--- Page 3 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 3 of 22 18
with the design being adapted into different languages and 
administered to different demographic groups (see Ayalon 
et al., 2019, for review).
Yet, in the semantic norming literature, efforts have 
largely been concentrated on looking at age as a demo-
graphic variable that can explain variation in ratings, e.g. 
the extent to which some words are rated differently for emo-
tional dimensions of meaning (Grandy et al., 2020) and not 
as a semantic variable that can be associated with concepts. 
To our knowledge, there have only been two studies that 
have more directly assessed the extent to which words are 
associated with age—one on German by Grühn and Smith 
(2008) and another on English by Lin et al. (2017). Both 
of these studies focussed on adjectives and assessing the 
extent to which participants associated the meaning of those 
adjectives with young or old age groups using a bipolar rat-
ing scale, with data from young and old participant groups. 
Although limited in the number and diversity of linguistic 
stimuli, with both studies reporting data on ~ 200 adjectives, 
they do offer novel insights into the way age is embedded 
in semantic meaning and how those associations can be 
quantified.
Ratings have also been used in research on political atti-
tudes. Roberts and Utych (2019) examined how the rela-
tionship between gender and affective ratings is influenced 
by the gender and ideology of speakers. They found that 
words associated with masculinity correlate positively with 
dominance, but negatively with positive valence. Moreover, 
such words tend to appear more frequently in the language 
of Republican politicians than in that of Democratic politi-
cians. This pattern aligns with the traits favoured by their 
respective voter bases (Clifford, 2020).
There is also ample research dedicated to studying the 
urban/rural divide, especially in terms of political attitudes. 
Several studies show that rural areas tend to be linked with 
more conservative attitudes and less trust in government, 
while urban areas tend to be more liberal and progressive 
(e.g. Kenny & Luca, 2021; Luca & Kenny, 2024; Luca et al., 
2023). This division is present not only in the attitudes of 
people living in urban/rural areas, but also in how the urban/
rural divide is represented in society. For example, Pospěch 
et al. (2024) analyse how urban and rural concepts are repre-
sented in Czech mass media, and show that they often appear 
in combination with the concepts of strength/weakness, lazi-
ness/diligence and being in/out of touch with reality. Using 
the word ratings to determine whether words strongly associ-
ated with urban/rural environments also tend to be strongly 
associated with liberal/conservative political attitudes or 
which concepts in general tend to be highly associated with 
urbanicity/rurality could further fuel this line of research.
Taken together, there is growing evidence that semantic 
variables that are linked to socially meaningful attributes—
or socio-semantics—are important features of the human 
conceptual system. Although attention has been given to 
the dimension of semantic gender, this is only one possible 
source of socio-semantic information, and there are sev -
eral other dimensions that are currently underexplored. By 
investigating multiple, distinct dimensions of social seman-
tic information—e.g. not just looking at a broad definition 
of socialness, but instead inspecting different facets of that 
concept—we have the potential to uncover a more nuanced 
inspection of the contribution of these variables to theo-
ries of semantic representation. For example, the dimension 
of gender may encompass certain aspects of social roles, 
location associations may relate to social spaces, political 
alignment may underpin social ideologies, and age may be 
directly related to certain social characteristics.
Moreover, when there are datasets that quantify social 
dimensions, they tend to look exclusively at orthographically 
presented word forms, which substantially limits research-
ers who might want or need to design experiments that do 
not use linguistic stimuli. Therefore, if the study of socio-
semantics is to advance, more coverage is needed in terms 
of the types of dimensions and the types of stimuli available 
as norms.
The SocioLex‑CZ norms
In this paper we introduce the SocioLex-CZ norms, the first 
large-scale dataset that quantifies socio-semantic represen-
tations across four distinct dimensions: gender, location, 1 
political alignment and age. Additionally, the dataset con-
tains information on an affective dimension—valence—
which was included because there are several existing stud-
ies with norms available, and it can act not only as a new 
dataset for Czech, but also as a control variable to facilitate 
our reliability analyses.
Across two experiments, we collected data for a diverse 
range of 2,999 words in Czech (Experiment 1 ), with an 
exploratory analysis of how the dimensions relate to each 
other, as well as how they compare to existing datasets in 
other languages. We also collected data for 1,000 images 
(Experiment 2), with another exploratory analysis of how 
the different stimulus types may modulate the ratings.
The primary motivation for developing the SocioLex-
CZ dataset is to provide researchers with a novel resource 
that captures the semantic representations of stimuli along 
several theoretically meaningful social dimensions for both 
words and images. Moreover, this is the largest dataset to 
examine speakers of the Czech language, opening up new 
possibilities for researchers interested in studying a language 
1 To avoid ambiguity, we use the term location to refer only to the 
rural/urban distinction and not to spatial locations.


--- Page 4 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 4 of 22
with a rich morphology and a distinctive recent geopolitical 
history.
The following sections introduce the specific dimen-
sions of interest and the methodology used for data collec-
tion and data pre-processing in the present study. We then 
describe and validate the summarised dataset of normative 
ratings and explore the relationships between the different 
dimensions and the different stimuli versions (words and 
colour/grayscale images). We also assess the extent to which 
these norms can predict lexical processing times. Lastly, we 
outline future directions and applications for the study of 
socio-semantics.
Experiment 1: Word ratings
Following the procedure in previous studies (e.g. Vank -
runkelsven et al., 2024), we collected ratings from a large 
participant sample for a wide range of Czech words, using 
five different socially relevant dimensions (gender, location, 
political, valence and age).
Methods
Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of 2,999 written words (1,902 nouns, 
766 adjectives and 331 verbs). The word list was constructed 
with the aim of including items that refer to a broad range 
of socially relevant and culturally salient concepts, across 
a range of different parts of speech. This was achieved by 
exploring word lists from published datasets. First, we took 
all 501 Czech word labels from the Multilingual Picture 
Database (Duñabeitia et al., 2022), which were the most 
common names for coloured drawings of everyday objects. 
Second, we took all 822 Czech role nouns used in Miser -
sky et al. ( 2014), which focussed on gender stereotypicality. 
Third, we took Czech translations of the Leipzig–Jakarta list 
(Haspelmath & Tadmor, 2009), which contains 100 basic 
cultural concepts. Fourth, we took 400 translation equiva-
lents of German adjectives from Grühn and Smith (2008), 
which focussed on a range of semantic rating scales, includ-
ing age. Fifth, we took the 300 most frequent verbs from 
the Czech National Corpus SYN2020 (Jelínek et al., 2021), 
which consists of contemporary written Czech. Finally, we 
included the remaining 876 items during a brainstorming 
session between the researchers.
Since Czech is a grammatically gendered language, both 
masculine and feminine variants were included whenever 
possible. This concerned mostly role nouns (e.g. pekař/
pekařka, which refer to male/female baker), nouns refer -
ring to animals (e.g. medvěd/medvědice, which refer to male/
female bear) and adjectives (e.g. dřevěný/dřevěná, which 
are adjectives meaning wooden and are used respectively 
for grammatically masculine/feminine heads in a phrase). 
Nouns and adjectives were presented in nominative singular, 
whereas verbs were in their infinitive form.
The list of words was pseudo-randomly divided into 100-
word subsets. Each subset contained approximately the same 
number of nouns, adjectives and verbs. We also controlled 
the distribution of grammatically gendered words by ensur-
ing no subset contained both grammatically feminine/mas-
culine variants of the same word, with the number of gram-
matically feminine/masculine adjectives and nouns being 
roughly comparable across lists. All lists were further com-
plemented with four phonotactically plausible pseudowords 
(e.g. tontota), which served as control words for an attention 
check, as well as a calibrator word for each socio-semantic 
dimension, which was always the first word presented in the 
list. The decision to include only a single calibrator word 
for each dimension was to ensure that the experiment timing 
was kept reasonable, although we acknowledge that more 
calibrator words would have been optimal. The calibrator 
words were chosen on the basis of data from a pilot experi-
ment, whereby participants reliably rated the words towards 
a specific direction on the scale. The calibrator words were 
gender  – náhrdelník (necklace), location  – metro (subway/
underground train), political  – tradice (tradition), valence  
– šikanovat (to bully), age  – důchod (pension).
Participants
An initial sample of 1,475 participants completed the exper-
iment, of which 1,275 participants were recruited from a 
university-wide student participant pool at Charles Uni-
versity in the Czech Republic, with all students receiving 
course credit for taking part. Ethical approval was given by 
Charles University. From this sample, we excluded 48 par -
ticipants who reported that their native language was not 
Czech. An additional 200 participants were also recruited 
using Prolific (www. proli fic. com), who were paid £5.00 for 
taking part and declared that they were currently a univer -
sity student and had Czech as their first language (L1). We 
also decided to only retain participants who reported their 
age as between 18 and 30 years, which meant excluding 
128 participants altogether. The motivation for restricting 
the age was to ensure our dataset would be comparable to 
other existing datasets with predominantly young adults (e.g. 
Vankrunkelsven et al., 2024). After a series of data quality 
checks (see ‘Data cleaning’ section below), we excluded a 
further 45 participants, resulting in a final sample of 1,254 
participants (936 female, 312 male, 6 non-binary/self-report, 
median age = 21, SD = 2.22, range = 18–30).
All participants completed a demographic question-
naire before starting the experiment. This was designed 
to collect a more detailed demographic profile of the 


--- Page 5 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 5 of 22 18
participants and included standard questions, e.g. age, 
categorical gender (female/male/non-binary/self-report), 
highest educational qualification and native language, but 
also questions about their perceived socio-demographic 
profile. This included seven-point Likert scales where par -
ticipants self-assessed their gender stereotypicality (typi-
cal male–typical female), character (very optimistic–very 
pessimistic), location affiliation (very urban–very rural) 
and political alignment (very liberal–very conservative). 
All scales were bipolar, with a neutral midpoint. These 
data are visualised in Fig.  1. We include these variables 
in the OSF repository, but note that the aims of this paper 
are not focussed on providing a detailed analysis of how 
demographic differences may influence ratings. We return 
Fig. 1  Demographic profile of participants from Experiments 1 and 
2. Facets are used to separate the data based on categorical gender, 
with the number of participants given in brackets. The y-axis sepa-
rates the different demographic questions. The values on the x-axis 
represent a numeric transformation of the seven-point Likert scale, 
i.e. − 3 represents very liberal/pessimistic/rural/masculine, 3 repre-
sents very conservative/optimistic/urban/feminine, and 0 represents 
the neutral midpoint. Counts of participants who selected each scale 
point are given as numbers under each density plot. For example, in 
Experiment 1, 52 out of the 936 females identified as very liberal


--- Page 6 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 6 of 22
to this in the general discussion and address this in ongo-
ing work where sufficient depth and attention can be given.
Procedure
The experiment was designed and distributed online 
using Qualtrics (https:// www. qualt rics. com). Participants 
first read a detailed instruction page, provided informed 
consent and completed the demographic questionnaire 
described above. The original Czech and translated ver -
sions are available in the OSF repository. Participants 
were then asked to rate each of the words from a randomly 
selected list (each containing 100 words, one calibrator 
word and four pseudowords). Specifically, participants 
were asked to rate the words based on how they associ-
ated the meaning of the word according with each of the 
following dimensions:
• gender  (scale anchors: very masculine–very feminine). 
Czech version: gender  (silně mužské–silně ženské).
• location  (scale anchors: very rural–very urban). Czech 
version: prostředí  (velmi venkovské–velmi městské).
• political  (scale anchors: very liberal–very conservative). 
Czech version: politické  přesvědčení  (velmi liberální–
velmi konzervativní).
• valence  (scale anchors: very positive–very negative). 
Czech version: emoce  (velmi pozitivní–velmi negativní).
• age  (scale divided into categories of 0–6, 7–17, 18–30, 
31–50, 51–65, 66–80 and 81 + years). Czech version: 
věk .
The instructions given to participants for the rating task, 
as well as Qualtrics files and pdf versions of the full experi-
ment in Czech (and their English translation), can be found 
in the OSF repository. Participants were presented with one 
dimension at a time, which contained all the words from 
one of the subsets. The order of presentation for dimensions 
and words was randomised for each participant (apart from 
the calibrator word, which was always presented first, and 
the age dimension, which was always presented as the last 
dimension). All dimensions (apart from age ) were rated 
using seven-point Likert scales, each with a neutral mid-
point; see Fig.  2A. For the age dimension, participants were 
instructed to select as many age categories as they felt were 
applicable using checkboxes, meaning multiple categories or 
no categories could be chosen. This was done so that partici-
pants could provide a more detailed age selection that was 
not restricted to just one forced choice; e.g., the word pen-
sioner would likely activate both 66–80 and 81 + categories, 
whereas paper would activate no categories. All dimensions 
had the option to skip a word if the meaning was not known 
(toto slovo neznám).
Data cleaning
All cleaning, processing and analyses reported below were 
conducted using R version 4.3.1 (R Core Team,  2023). All 
the code and data (raw and processed) can be found in the 
OSF repository.
We carried out a number of data quality checks to ensure 
that we detected any low-quality responses/participants; this 
process is visualised in Fig.  3. The code used to run these 
checks can be found in the OSF repository.
1. Word knowledge: We checked for any participants who 
reported not knowing over 20% of the words they were 
presented with; however, there were no such partici -
pants.
2. Straightlining: We inspected the variance in the par -
ticipants’ responses to identify straightliners, i.e. par -
ticipants who selected the same response for more than 
80% of the items (Kim et al., 2019; Winter et al., 2024). 
If a participant straightlined on more than three out of 
the five dimensions, we decided not to include them in 
the final dataset, resulting in the exclusion of 17 partici-
pants. Additionally, we removed a participant’s response 
to words on a specific dimension if they straightlined for 
over 95% of the words in this dimension, resulting in the 
exclusion of 31 responses.
3. Calibrator words: We analysed the responses to the cali-
brator words for each of the five dimensions to ensure 
that participants could demonstrate that they were using 
the rating scales as expected. For each calibrator word, 
we identified participants who responded to the word 
in the opposite side as expected. For example, the word 
metro for the location dimension was expected to have 
a response of urban, so if a participant responded to 
this word as rural in any way (i.e. slightly rural, rural 
or very rural), this would be flagged. Any participant 
who responded to two or more calibrator words in the 
opposite direction to our original expectations would be 
excluded, resulting in the exclusion of 10 participants.
4. Control words: We also analysed the responses to the 
control words (pseudowords that were phonotactically 
legal in Czech), excluding any participant who consist-
ently rated all four of these words throughout the experi-
ment instead of choosing the ‘I don’t know this word’ 
option. This resulted in the exclusion of 15 participants.
5. Timing: We inspected the time it took for each partici-
pant to complete the ratings along each of the dimen-
sions. We first transformed the timings to natural log 
values, then calculated the mean and standard devia-
tions for each of the dimensions. A participant was 
then excluded completely if they were quicker than the 
mean by 2.5 times the standard deviation for two or 
more dimensions (this was always less than 116 s, with 


--- Page 7 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 7 of 22 18
the mean values ranging between 349 and 451 s). This 
resulted in the exclusion of three participants. Addition-
ally, we removed a participant’s response to words on a 
specific dimension if their timing was quicker than the 
mean by 2.5 standard deviations, but retained all their 
other responses, resulting in the removal of data for 13 
responses to individual dimensions. There was no upper 
cut-off point, since no time constraints were mentioned 
in the instructions and participants could take however 
long they needed to finish the experiment. Typically, 
participants took around 6 min to complete their rat-
ings on each dimension, with the maximum time spent 
being ~ 17 min.
Fig. 2  Examples of the rating procedure used in Experiment 1 (A) 
and Experiment 2 (B). The translation of the instructions in A is ‘The 
degree to which you associate the word meaning with masculinity or 
femininity. Only one point can be ticked at a time. None of the words 
can be skipped.’ The anchors of the scale (from left to right) trans-
late to ‘very masculine/masculine/slightly masculine/neutral/slightly 
feminine/feminine/very feminine’


--- Page 8 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 8 of 22
Data summaries
We processed the raw data in a number of different ways 
to generate the final summary data for the SocioLex-CZ 
norms. We processed the dimensions of gender , location , 
political  and valence  differently from the age  dimension, 
as the scales differed.
Gender , location , political  and  valence
Descriptive statistics  For the dimensions of gender , loca -
tion , political  and valence , the values were first trans-
formed to numeric scales, ranging from − 3 (very mas-
culine/rural/liberal/negative) to 3 (very feminine/urban/
conservative/positive), with 0 being the neutral midpoint. 
Fig. 3  Filtering procedure applied to the data from Experiments 1 and 2. Turquoise boxes contain summaries of the data that remain after each 
filtering block; red boxes contain summaries of the data removed during each filtering step
Fig. 4  Distribution of mean ratings for the gender , location , politi -
cal  and valence  dimensions for Experiments 1 and 2. Kernel den-
sity estimates are shown with 25%, 50% and 75% quantiles marked 
by solid vertical lines, with the dashed line representing a value of 0 
(neutral). The black point with a horizontal line represents the mean 
and standard deviation of the ratings. Each word is represented by a 
point, with more red/blue colours indicating a stronger association 
towards a specific side of the scale, and yellow points associating 
more with neutral ratings


--- Page 9 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 9 of 22 18
Responses where the participant indicated that they did 
not know the word were coded as NA values. From these 
data we calculated the mean, SD, number of responses 
overall, number of responses where the word was known, 
and the proportion of known responses for each of the 
words across the dimensions; see Fig.  4 for a visualisation 
of the data and Table  1 for sample size summaries. We 
can see that the majority of ratings are around the neutral 
midpoint, with a skew towards more positive ratings for 
the valence  dimension, which has also been reported in 
other studies (e.g. Warriner et al., 2013). Table  2 gives 
examples of the items with the most extreme values for 
each dimension.
Demographic‑based variation As we collected a number of 
different demographic variables that were self-reported by 
participants, we inspected whether there existed any under-
lying variation in the ratings for the stimuli that could poten-
tially be explained by these demographic variables. How -
ever, as our participant sample was skewed towards certain 
demographic characteristics (see Fig.  1), we were limited in 
terms of looking at the variables in a detailed manner—i.e., 
it would be difficult to explore whether participants who 
identified as very conservative differed from those who iden-
tified as slightly conservative, as there were only a very lim-
ited number of participants in those categories. Therefore, 
we used the data from the self-assessed socio-demographic 
questions to categorise participants into three distinct groups 
Table 1  Summary of the number of responses to items across the two experiments
Experiment Median N Range N Median N 
known
Range N known Mean prop 
known
Range prop known
Exp 1: Words 37 [28, 96] 37 [11, 96] .997 [.35, 1]
Exp 2: Images 45 [35, 52] 45 [10, 52] .978 [.26, 1]
Table 2  Items with the most extreme values for each of the dimensions available in the dataset. Items are given in Czech with their associated 
values (means or PC scores) in brackets. See the OSF repository for English translation equivalents
Dimension Items
gender Masculine otec (− 2.74), varlata (− 2.71), táta (− 2.69), muž (− 2.67), Vladimír (− 2.67), penis (− 2.62), mužský (− 2.61), strýc 
(− 2.59), Rudolf (− 2.55), Adam (− 2.53)
Feminine Božena (2.83), princezna (2.75), vagina (2.75), Sofie (2.7), Adéla (2.68), podprsenka (2.68), matka (2.65), Karolína 
(2.64), Viktorie (2.63), žena (2.62)
location Rural venkov (− 2.88), orat (− 2.62), venkovská (− 2.59), vesnice (− 2.59), farmářka (− 2.59), traktor (− 2.58), farma 
(− 2.55), chalupa (− 2.4), stodola (− 2.39), venkovský (− 2.38)
Urban Praha (2.91), velkoměsto (2.78), metropole (2.78), mrakodrap (2.77), město (2.74), Berlín (2.74), New York (2.72), 
fastfood (2.71), Vídeň (2.68), Londýn (2.68)
political Liberal liberalismus (− 2.64), liberální (− 2.3), transgender (− 2.24), bisexuálka (− 2.18), multikulturalismus (− 2.15), bisex-
uál (− 2.14), lesba (− 2.13), transsexuál (− 2.12), veganka (− 2.12), transsexuálka (− 2.07)
Conservative konzervativní (2.55), konzervatismus (2.54), monarchie (2.04), homofobie (1.97), církev (1.92), křeštanství (1.89), 
bible (1.88), království (1.85), šlechta (1.84), staromódní (1.83)
valence Negative znásilnění (− 3), znásilnit (− 2.84), rakovina (− 2.82), terorismus (− 2.82), násilník (− 2.78), terorista (− 2.73), pedo-
fil (− 2.68), vrah (− 2.67), zmrd (− 2.67), nacismus (− 2.65)
Positive šťastný (2.88), zdravá (2.63), šťastná (2.62), láska (2.59), smát se (2.59), spokojenost (2.59), milovat (2.54), radost 
(2.53), svoboda (2.53), štěstí (2.51)
age  pc 1 Old penze (− 5.68), stáří (− 5.66), seniorka (− 5.49), děda (− 5.4), babička (− 5.4), senior (− 5.31), stará (− 5.3), starý 
(− 5.23), alzheimer (− 5.19), stárnutí (− 5.17)
Young beďar (3.79), gymnázium (3.73), panictví (3.69), dospívání (3.6), selfie (3.52), opisovat (3.51), akné (3.48), škola 
(3.47), výtvarka (3.46), drzý (3.42)
age  pc 2 Middle-aged statistik (− 3.72), rozvod (− 3.58), účetní (− 3.53), podnikání (− 3.47), dozorce (− 3.37), architektka (− 3.37), 
popelářka (− 3.35), byznys (− 3.34), exekutorka (− 3.33), manažer (− 3.3)
Young/old hřbitov (4.86), rakev (4.8), kremace (4.8), starý (4.51), zemřít (4.47), stará (4.4), pohřeb (4.4), smrt (4.34), senior 
(4.21), demence (4.12)
age  pc 3 No age přehrada (− 3.31), Litva (− 2.89), tsunami (− 2.78), špičatý (− 2.74), Lotyšsko (− 2.61), Irsko (− 2.61), široká 
(− 2.57), voda (− 2.52), hmyz (− 2.51), hovězí (− 2.5)
Old senior (4.34), rakev (4.26), stáří (4.16), seniorka (4.14), starý (4.13), stará (4.11), hřbitov (4.08), penze (3.94), děda 
(3.83), kremace (3.72)


--- Page 10 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 10 of 22
for each question based on the side of the Likert scale they 
used, namely participant gender typicality (typically mas-
culine or feminine), character (pessimistic or optimistic), 
location affiliation (rural or urban) and political alignment 
(liberal or conservative), with any neutral responses treated 
as an independent category. We then calculated the mean rat-
ings for each of the participant groups for each of the stimuli, 
thus obtaining word profiles across the socio-demographic 
categories of participants. The results revealed very little 
difference across the demographic groups; see Fig.  5. This 
pattern is similar to the findings reported in Vankrunkels-
ven et al. (2024) and Preininger (2025), who also found that 
female and male participants did not show any major differ-
ences in the way they rated words for the gender dimension.
Fig. 5  Distribution of mean ratings for the gender , location , politi -
cal  and valence  dimensions for Experiment 1 based on participant 
socio-demographic categories. The x-axis shows the mean rating for 
the words, with the y-axis representing the kernel density estimates. 
The top panel of facets distinguishes the socio-demographic vari-
ables, whereas the side panel facets indicate the dimensions. The col-
ours indicate the socio-demographic categories of participants


--- Page 11 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 11 of 22 18
Proportions and entropy We also provide additional 
descriptive statistics for each of the items that may be of 
interest to researchers. Specifically, raw counts are avail-
able for each item for each of the dimension’s scale points, 
allowing for a more nuanced description of how often each 
response was selected; these have also been transformed into 
proportional values. Additionally, we used the count data 
to calculate the Shannon entropy (Shannon, 1948) for each 
item, along each dimension, providing an alternative meas-
urement to SD . Entropy was included because it captures 
uncertainty in the ordinal Likert scale, whereas SD is better 
suited to measuring variance in numeric scales.
Latent means For aggregating rating data from Likert 
scales, many datasets have been published with the means 
for each item, where the ratings are treated as integer values, 
e.g. very negative on our valence scale as − 3. However, this 
approach may not be the most suitable, as means do not 
preserve the ordinal nature of the Likert scales being used 
(see Liddell & Kruschke, 2018; Veríssimo, 2021). Therefore, 
we followed the guidance of Taylor et al. (2023) and mod-
elled the participant responses using cumulative link mixed-
effects models with the ordinal package (Christensen, 2023) 
in R. These models account for variation introduced from 
the participant response biases, and thus provide a more 
accurate estimation of a normative estimate for each item. 
We modelled the ratings for each of the dimensions with a 
separate model, predicting the participant responses (coded 
as an ordinal factor, i.e. − 3 < − 2 < − 1 < 0 < 1 < 2 < 3) with 
random intercepts for item and participant. 2 From this we 
were able to extract the random intercepts for each of the 
items, providing us with a numeric estimate of the latent 
mean. We inspected the correlation between the latent means 
and the standard means, with the two variables correlating 
almost perfectly (all rs >.99).
a Ge
To obtain a normative estimate from the age ratings (which 
were not collected using Likert scales, but instead using cat-
egorical checkboxes where a single option, multiple options 
or no option could be selected), we needed to apply a num-
ber of processing steps to generate the summary values.
Weighted proportions We transformed the raw categori-
cal responses to calculate a weighted proportional value for 
each of the age categories. This was based on the number 
of age categories selected by a participant for each item 
(1/n_selected_categories): if a participant selected two 
age categories for an item, each selected category would 
have a weighted rating of 0.5 and all others would have 0; 
if one category was selected, then the value would be 1; if 
all seven categories were selected, the value would be 1/7; 
if no categories were selected, then an additional ‘no age’ 
category would have 1. From the weighted values we could 
then calculate a weighted proportion for each of the result-
ing eight age categories within each item, by summing the 
weighted proportions and dividing that value by the num-
ber of participants who rated the item (excluding responses 
where the participant did not know the word). This gave us 
a value between 0 (no responses for the category) and 1 (all 
participants selected only the one category), which could be 
used as an estimate of the associative strength for an item in 
each of the age categories.
Mode category On the basis of the proportion values, we 
were also able to calculate the mode age category for each 
item, i.e. the category that had the largest proportional value, 
which could be used as a categorical summary variable that 
captured the most likely age association, e.g. školka [kinder-
garten], which has an age mode of 0–6. If there were multi-
ple mode categories for an item, the category was randomly 
selected from the possible categories, e.g. mechanička  
[female mechanic], which had mode values of 18–30 and 
31–50, but was assigned 18–30. Since we also took into 
account instances where no categories were selected, the 
mode could take the form of ‘no age’.
Principal component analysis (PCA) To create a summary 
value for the age  dimension, we used the weighted propor -
tion values (where each row is an item and each column 
is an age category) as a 2,999 × 8 multidimensional space. 
This acted as the input data for a PCA, which allowed us to 
reduce the number of dimensions in the space by identifying 
the underlying structure in the data. The result of the PCA 
is a set of principal components (PCs) that can be inter -
preted based on how the original variables (age categories) 
are loaded, i.e. which variables co-vary together within each 
PC. Additionally, each item will have a principal component 
score that reflects the strength of association with each of the 
components, which will act as the individual item norm for 
each of the PCs (see Venables & Ripley, 2013; Brand et al., 
2021; Wilson Black et al., 2023). The results of the PCA 
provided us with three main principal components (PC), 
each of which explained over 15% of the variance in the 
data and 74.19% of the overall variance. We will interpret 
the PCs individually as PC1, PC2 and PC3. The visualisa-
tions that can be used to guide the interpretation of the PCA 
results are presented in Fig.  6.
PC1: Younger/older. This PC accounted for 33.82% of the 
total variance and is interpreted as capturing the variation 
2 Simplified R syntax for latent mean models: clmm(rating_ordi-
nal ~ 1 + (1|item) + (1|participant), data = dimension_ratings, 
link = "probit").


--- Page 12 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 12 of 22
between age categories that are under the age of 30 (positive 
PC1 scores) or over the age of 30 (negative PC1 scores). We 
highlight that this is not a linear relationship, and the most 
extreme PC1 scores are not directly related to the youngest 
or oldest age categories, but instead represent a more general 
distinction between young and old associations; for example, 
beďar [pimple] has the highest PC1 score of 3.79, whereas 
penze [pension] has the lowest score of − 5.68.
PC2: Middle-aged. This PC accounted for 24.82% of the 
total variance and is interpreted as capturing the variation 
between age categories that are related to middle age and 
those which are not. This appears to be a U-shaped relation-
ship, where negative values are most strongly associated with 
the 31–50 age category and more positive values with the 
youngest (0–6) and oldest age categories (66–80 and 81 +); 
for example, statistik [male statistician] has a PC2 score 
of − 3.72, whereas hřbitov [graveyard] has a score of 4.86.
PC3: No age. This PC accounted for 15.54% of the total 
variance and is interpreted as distinguishing between items 
that have no age associations and those that do. The nega -
tive PC3 scores represent stronger associations with no age, 
whereas positive scores appear to represent stronger associa-
tions with any age category, but specifically the oldest age 
categories; for example, přehrada [dam] has a PC3 score 
of −  3.31, whereas senior [male senior citizen] has 4.34. We 
note that the individual weighted proportion scores for the 
no age category would likely serve as a more accurate rep-
resentation of this PC, as it can be interpreted more straight-
forwardly, whereas the PCA introduces more complexity 
when interpreting the positive values; see Fig.  6B.
Fig. 6  Visualisation of the results from the PCA for the age dimen-
sions. A Distribution of PC scores (y-axis) based on the mode age of 
each word (x-axis) for each of the three PCs (facets). B The weighted 
proportions for each word (x-axis) based on the age categories (top 
facets) and their relationship to PC scores (y-axis) with a GAM 
smooth by PC (side facets)


--- Page 13 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 13 of 22 18
Analysis and results
Reliability analysis
The internal consistency of the individual rating scales was 
assessed using Cronbach's alpha (Cronbach, 1951), allowing 
us to measure the reliability of our item ratings—in this case, 
each of the socio-semantic dimensions. We calculated alpha 
values for each list of words 3 individually for the gender , 
location , political  and valence  dimensions, where only 
one option per word could be selected. In the case of the 
age  dimension, participants could choose as many options 
as they liked, which yielded a large variance in individual 
ratings, rendering the calculation of Cronbach’s alpha 
unsuitable. The range of alpha values across the lists were 
as follows: gender  = [.92,.95], location  = [.89,.95], politi -
cal  = [.88,.95], valence  = [.90,.95]. This indicates that the 
rating scales can be considered to have high reliability.
Correlations between variables
We ran an exploratory correlational analysis to inspect 
whether the mean values for each item were correlated 
across the different socio-semantic dimensions. As the 
means across all the dimensions had a reasonably normal 
Fig. 7  Correlation matrix of all the dimensions in the word ratings 
dataset. The lower left plots are scatter plots of the data fitted with 
a linear (blue) and loess (red) fit, with the data from the dimension 
in the top facets on the x-axis and the data from the right facet on 
the y-axis. The diagonal plots show kernel density distributions of the 
variables. The upper right plots give the Pearson correlation coeffi-
cients between two dimensions. Notable correlations (r >|.18|) are 
highlighted by yellow outlines
3 We excluded two words (talmud [Talmud] and imám [Imam]) from 
their respective lists, as these items were known by < 50% of the par -
ticipants, resulting in missing values. We also excluded the control 
and calibrator words from this analysis, so that we only analysed the 
items that were assigned to the specific lists.


--- Page 14 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 14 of 22
distribution, we conducted Pearson’s correlations between 
each of the dimensions; see Fig.  7 for the visualisation of 
the results. Note that as this was an exploratory analysis 
and we were not directly testing any research hypotheses, 
we purposefully do not report p values from the tests and 
will instead simply describe patterns in the data where the 
correlations were strongest, i.e. r >|.18|.
The strongest correlation was between political  and age  
pc 1 (r = −.533), indicating that liberal items were more likely 
to be associated with youth, and more conservative items 
with older age. political  was also related to location  (r = 
−.354: more liberal items are associated with urban environ-
ments, conservative with rural), valence  (r = −.317: more 
liberal items are associated with positive valence, conserva-
tive with negative), age  pc 2 (r =.253: more liberal items are 
associated with middle age) and gender  (r = −.185: more 
liberal items are associated with femininity, conservative 
with masculinity). location  was also correlated with age  pc 2 
(r = −.468), indicating that more urban items were associ-
ated with middle age. gender  and valence  were also cor -
related (r =.183), with more feminine items associated with 
positive ratings, whereas masculinity was associated with 
negative ratings, which was also reported by Scott et al. 
(2019) for English data (the authors collected both gender 
and valence ratings) and by Vankrunkelsven et al. (2024) and 
Moors et al. ( 2013) for Dutch data (based on their gender 
ratings and Dutch valence ratings from Moors et al., 2013).
We would like to highlight that not all of these relation-
ships were linear; indeed, in Fig.  7 we fitted a loess smooth 
to the data to demonstrate this more nuanced interpretation 
of how the dimensions may relate to one another, especially 
at the more extreme ends of the distributions. However, a 
more detailed examination of these relationships is outside 
the scope of the current paper.
Correlations with other languages
As an additional level of analyses, we were interested in 
looking at how our data correlated to other existing datasets 
with the same underlying dimensions, testing the hypothesis 
that our data would correlate with other datasets in different 
languages. As this is the first large-scale norming dataset 
of variables for Czech words, we unfortunately could only 
assess whether our dataset correlated to existing datasets 
in other languages, instead of other datasets in Czech. We 
included the valence dimension in our norms, as the valence 
norms for English words by Warriner et al. (2013) have been 
used extensively by researchers since they were published, 
and offered a good baseline for comparison. Additionally, 
Scott et al.’s (2019) dataset includes both valence and gender 
norms for English words, which provided us with an addi-
tional resource that was published more recently.
Subsequently, we coded all 2,999 Czech words for trans-
lation equivalents in English (which were translated and 
checked by two native Czech speakers, both highly proficient 
in English), providing us with a basis to compare across the 
different datasets. We then filtered the data so that we had 
the original Czech mean ratings for valence and the mean 
ratings of the translation equivalents in English. Using this 
dataset, we ran Pearson’s correlations to inspect the rela-
tionship between the Czech and the English ratings. From 
Warriner et al.’s (2013) valence ratings, we had 1,546 com-
parable items, which demonstrated a very strong correlation, 
r(1544) =.873, p  <.001. We took both the valence and gen-
der ratings from Scott et al. (2019) with 1,166 comparable 
items and again found a very strong correlation for valence, 
r(1,164) =.916, p <.001, and a strong correlation for gender, 
r(1,164) = −.658,  p <.001.4 These results demonstrate that 
even though there may be cross-linguistic differences in the 
word forms used across different languages, there is strong 
support for the hypothesis that, across the dimensions of 
valence and gender, these differences do not result in large 
differences in the associations perceived by participants, 
although we do note that a more diverse cross-linguistic 
comparison could lead to nuanced differences.
Predicting processing times in a lexical decision task
In order to provide an additional measure of validity, we also 
analysed the extent to which the socio-semantic variables 
were predictive of measures of lexical processing. To do 
this, we used data from a large-scale lexical decision task 
by Brand et al. (in prep), which has data for ~ 10,000 Czech 
words, and the participants responding to each word matched 
the demographic profile of participants in the present study 
(the median number of participants responding to each item 
was 66), in addition to normative ratings for concreteness 
and age of acquisition (AoA) using methodological designs 
that aligned with Brysbaert et al. (2014) and Kuperman et al. 
(2012), respectively (again, the participant sample matched 
the demographics in the present study, with a median of 29 
participants ratings each item). We also extracted word fre-
quencies derived from Czech subtitles using data from Van 
Paridon and Thompson ( 2021), and calculated the ortho -
graphic word length for each of the unigram words in our 
dataset. The frequency data and reaction times for accurate 
responses in the lexical decision data were log-transformed, 
and any items in our word list without a frequency estimate 
or response time were removed (n  = 190). The final dataset 
comprised 2,809 items.
4 Note that the correlation here is negative, as the gender ratings of 
Scott et  al. (2019) had masculine/feminine on opposite sides of the 
scale to our ratings.


--- Page 15 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 15 of 22 18
We then conducted a hierarchical regression analysis on 
this dataset, predicting the log reaction times of items. We 
decided not to conduct an analysis on accuracy data from 
the lexical decision task, as the mean proportion of accurate 
responses on the items was 98.37%. The first step was to 
include linguistic and semantic variables that had previously 
been reported to be reliable predictors of lexical process-
ing—frequency, length, AoA, concreteness and valence 
(see e.g. Diveica et al., 2023). The second step included 
the socio-semantic predictors of gender , location , politi -
cal , age  pc 1 and age  pc 2. As we did not have any theoreti -
cal reason to expect the variables of gender , location  and 
political  to have a directional effect—i.e. we did not expect 
to find a linear relation wherein words that were more femi-
nine were processed faster than words that were more mas-
culine—we transformed the ratings from these variable to 
represent ladenness—the absolute rating value where rat -
ings at the extreme ends of the scale were taken as larger 
values and ratings around the neutral midpoint were taken 
as smaller values. Thus, items that were higher in ladenness 
would be expected to encode stronger socio-semantic repre-
sentation, and therefore be more likely to predict processing 
times, in line with theoretical accounts that predict a role of 
social information in processing (Barsalou, 2020; Borghi 
et al., 2019). We had no specific predictions about the age 
dimensions, as these variables do not necessarily represent 
ladenness given that the dimensions capture a continuity 
between either young and old ( age  pc 1) or young/old and 
middle-aged (age  pc 2).
The results of the analysis are visualised in Fig.  8 and 
also summarised in Table  3. In Step 1, all of the predictor 
variables demonstrated a significant effect, predicting lexical 
times in a way that high-frequency, shorter-length, earlier-
acquired, concrete and positive items were processed faster 
than items that were less frequent, longer, later acquired, 
abstract and negative. In Step 2, a significant improvement 
was obtained in model fit, F (5, 2798) = 11.393,  p <.001, 
∆ R2 =.01. Although the increase in variance explained is 
relatively small (Step 1 R 2 =.495; Step 2 R 2 =.505), it is in 
line with other studies where additional semantic predictors 
were included (e.g. Diveica et al., 2023; Lynott et al., 2020). 
Tests for collinearity revealed no issues, with all variance 
inflation factors < 2.63.
We observed an effect for location ladenness, where 
items with a higher rating for either urban or rural associa-
tion were processed faster than those that were neutral. This 
would suggest that these items may be processed faster as 
a result of the information they encode relating to social 
spaces. However, we observed a surprising effect for gen-
der ladenness, whereby items that had stronger associations 
with femininity or masculinity were processed more slowly 
than items having more neutral associations. Future work 
Fig. 8  Regression coefficients visualised based on the step of the 
hierarchical regression modelling, where log reaction times from 
a lexical decision task are predicted by lexical and psycholinguistic 
predictors in Step 1 (blue) and with socio-semantic predictors added 
in Step 2 (orange). The distributions show 95% confidence intervals; 
standardised coefficients are on the x-axis, and the predictor variable 
names are shown on the y-axis


--- Page 16 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 16 of 22
could further investigate the role of frequency in predicting 
such patterns; for example, menstruace [menstruation] is 
less frequent but heavily gender-laden and was processed 
more slowly than a neutral but more frequent item, e.g. 
ananas [pineapple]. An alternative route would be to explore 
quadratic effects, whereby items with more extreme gen-
der ladenness are processed faster than those with moder -
ate gender ladenness, which may have been obscured with 
a linear regression analysis. We did not observe an effect 
for political ladenness, which may again be explained by 
a frequency effect for items that are related to politics e.g. 
multikulturalismus [multiculturalism]. For the age dimen-
sion, we observed significant effects for both variables, with 
words relating to older items being processed faster than 
those for younger items for age  pc 1, whereas for age  pc 2 we 
observed that items more strongly associated with middle 
age were processed faster than items associated with young/
old age categories.
Experiment 2: Image ratings
Typically, semantic norms are only published for items that 
are represented orthographically, i.e. as words. However, 
we also wanted to provide socio-semantic norms for image 
stimuli, to allow researchers to utilise the resource in a wider 
range of experimental settings, e.g. tasks that might want to 
avoid text-based stimuli. Thus, we also provide an additional 
dataset of socio-semantic norms relating directly to image 
stimuli in colour and grayscale.
Methods
Stimuli
Our stimuli consisted of 1,000 images taken from the Mul-
tilingual Picture Database (Duñabeitia et al., 2022). This 
database contains drawings for commonly encountered 
nouns from a range of semantic categories (e.g. role nouns, 
animals, tools, clothing), with naming data from a number of 
different languages, including Czech. The Multilingual Pic-
ture Database contains 500 unique images, but we decided 
to include both colour and grayscale versions of each image 
in our stimuli (providing us with 1,000 images in total). This 
decision was motivated primarily by the need for diverse 
stimuli sets that could be used in experimental designs that 
may require exclusively colour/grayscale stimuli.
Participants
An initial sample of 495 participants completed the experi-
ment. All participants were recruited from a university-wide 
student participant pool at Charles University in the Czech 
Republic, with all students receiving course credit for tak -
ing part. From this sample, we excluded 11 participants 
who reported that their native language was not Czech. We 
again decided to retain only participants who reported their 
Table 3  Summary of the hierarchical regression results from Experiment 1
Predictor β SE t p R2 ∆R 2
Step 1 0.495
 Intercept     6.776 0.024 280.52  <.001
 Log frequency  − 0.083 0.003  − 26.31 <.001
 Orthographic length     0.014 0.001 10.63  <.001
 AoA     0.012 0.001 10.41  <.001
 Concreteness  − 0.012 0.003  − 4.30  <.001
 Valence  − 0.012 0.002  − 5.55  <.001
Step 2 0.505 0.010
 Intercept    6.711 0.026 253.85  <.001
 Log frequency − 0.078 0.003  − 24.26  <.001
 Orthographic length    0.014 0.001 11.23  <.001
 AoA    0.015 0.001 11.50  <.001
 Concreteness  − 0.007 0.003  − 2.21 0.027
 Valence − 0.010 0.002  − 4.48  <.001
 Gender ladenness    0.017 0.004 4.16  <.001
 Location ladenness − 0.018 0.004  − 4.11  <.001
 Political ladenness    0.001 0.001 0.19 0.854
 Age  PC1    0.004 0.001 2.85 0.004
 Age  PC2    0.008 0.002 3.81  <.001


--- Page 17 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 17 of 22 18
age to be between 18 and 30 years, which meant excluding 
19 participants. After a series of data quality checks (see 
‘Data cleaning’ section below), we excluded a further 10 
participants, resulting in a final sample of 455 participants 
(373 female, 75 male, 7 non-binary/self-report, median 
age = 21, SD = 1.95, range = 19–29). All participants com-
pleted the same demographic questionnaire as described in 
Experiment 1, with the data visualised in Fig.  1.
Procedure
The procedure roughly matched the procedure for Experi -
ment 1, but with a small number of changes. Participants 
were presented with one image at a time and were asked to 
rate the image along the dimensions of gender , location , 
political  and valence  using the same seven-point Likert 
scales; see Fig.  2B. The age  dimension was not included 
for this experiment as it was not possible to incorporate the 
checkbox input required for this variable in the design using 
Qualtrics. Participants could also select an option (nevím, 
o co se jedná [I don’t know what this is]) if they did not 
know what the image was. All participants saw an image of 
a mouse as their first item, which was selected because it was 
very familiar according to Duñabeitia et al’s (2022) data, 
then rated a set of 100 items presented in randomised order.
Data cleaning
We carried out a number of data quality checks to ensure 
that we detected any low-quality responses/participants; 
this process is visualised in Fig.  3. This was similar to the 
process used in Experiment 1 , but we did not implement 
the calibrator and control item steps, as there was only one 
calibrator item and no controls (because control items for 
images was not possible).
1. Image knowledge: We checked for any participants who 
reported not knowing over 20% of the images they were 
presented with; however, there were no such partici -
pants.
2. Straightlining:  If a participant straightlined on more 
than two of the four dimensions, we chose not to include 
them in the final dataset, resulting in the exclusion of 
10 participants. Additionally, we removed a partici-
pant’s response to words on a specific dimension if they 
straightlined for over 95% of the images, resulting in the 
exclusion of 1,919 responses.
3. Timing: We inspected the time taken to complete the 
whole experiment by each participant, by log-transform-
ing the durations. We again applied a filter of any par -
ticipant who was quicker than the mean duration by 2.5 
standard deviations, but there were no such participants. 
Once again, there was no upper cut-off point.
Data summaries
We calculated the same summary statistics for each of the 
images for both colour and grayscale as those reported for 
Experiment 1. See Fig.  4 for a visualisation of the data and 
Table  1 for sample size summaries.
Analysis and results
Reliability analysis
The internal consistency of the individual rating scales 
was assessed using Cronbach's alpha (Cronbach, 1951). 
We calculated alpha values for each list of images. 5 The 
range of alpha values across the lists were as follows: gen -
der  = [.91,.95], location  = [.88,.92], political  = [.88,.93], 
valence  = [.89,.95]. This indicates that the rating scales for 
the images can be considered to have high reliability, as was 
the case in Experiment 1.
Correlations between item versions
In order to assess whether the socio-semantic norms dif-
fered across stimulus types (i.e. words/colour images/gray -
scale images), we inspected the correlations between the 
ratings for each of the dimensions. We analysed the data 
using Pearson’s correlation coefficients with each stimulus 
type comparison (i.e. colour ~ grayscale, colour ~ words, 
grayscale ~ words), with all rs >.76; see Fig.  9.
Colour versus grayscale images: The strongest correla -
tions were found between the two image versions, with all 
rs >.87. Whilst this strong relationship might be expected 
given that stimuli only differ in terms of their visual appear-
ance, there are items that exhibit notable variation. For 
example, in the gender  dimension, the colour and grayscale 
versions of the image for a dressing gown have substan-
tially different ratings, where the colour version displays 
the item in pink, and this has a more feminine association 
(M = 2.02), whereas the grayscale version is much more 
neutral ( M = −  0.06); see item A in Fig.  9. This variation 
might be explained by the stereotyping of pink clothing 
being associated more with femininity, and when the col-
our bias is removed, the gender association bias might also 
be affected. However, there appear to be other sources of 
variation between colour and grayscale items; for example, 
the colour image of a cut (wound) (see item B in Fig.  9) 
has a much more negative rating for valence  (M = −  2.00) 
5 We excluded five images (PICTURE_146_gray, PICTURE_192_
colour, PICTURE_192_gray, PICTURE_616_colour and PIC-
TURE_616_gray) from their respective lists, as these items were 
known by < 50% of the participants, resulting in missing values.


--- Page 18 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 18 of 22



--- Page 19 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 19 of 22 18
than the grayscale version (M  = − 0.58), but the grayscale 
version is much more liberal (M  = − 1.31) than the colour 
version (M = 0.05) in the political  dimension. This might be 
explained as a conceptual difference, as the grayscale image 
may be interpreted as a tattoo rather than a cut/wound, lead-
ing to two different semantic representations (note that the 
Duñabeitia et al. (2022) data were only normed based on the 
colour versions of the images).
Images versus words: The correlations between colour/
grayscale images and words were slightly weaker than the 
colour ~ grayscale relationships, but were still interpreted as 
being very strong, indicating that—in general—images and 
words with the same conceptual meanings in our dataset 
capture very similar socio-semantic representations. How -
ever, there is again variation in the dataset, indicating that 
the alignment between ratings for words and images is not 
always stable. For example, župan is the Czech word for 
dressing gown and was rated as weakly associated with 
femininity (M = 0.78), whereas it was much more strongly 
associated with femininity in the colour version (M = 2.02), 
but close to neutral in the grayscale version (M  = − 0.06). 
Moreover, the Czech word for cut/wound is rána and was 
rated very similarly to the colour version along all dimen-
sions, but varied considerably from the grayscale version for 
valence  and political  dimensions, again suggesting that the 
grayscale version may have been interpreted as something 
conceptually different from the colour and word versions.
General discussion
The SocioLex-CZ norms present a novel and innovative tool 
that can provide an important resource for a diverse range 
of scientific applications, such as understanding the role of 
these dimensions in semantic space, testing embodied theo-
ries of cognition, or considering which stimuli may be suit-
able for psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic experiments. 
The dataset is the largest known resource that captures con-
ceptual associations along a multidimensional set of socially 
relevant dimensions of gender , location , political , valence  
and age , with a number of summary variables and the under-
lying raw data made freely available. Moreover, we provide 
ratings not only for a large set of words in Czech, which 
has typically received little coverage in terms of the norms 
currently available, but also for both colour and grayscale 
images, expanding the range of potential research applica-
tions that the norms can be used for. We hope that the dataset 
will create new synergies between the psychological, social 
and language sciences by opening up new research ques-
tions relating to socio-semantics, where our understanding 
of socially meaningful dimensions of semantic representa-
tions is explored and investigated in more detail.
Researchers have long been interested in how gender is 
represented semantically, with large-scale norms recently 
becoming available in English (Lewis et al., 2022 ; Scott 
et al., 2019) and Dutch (Vankrunkelsven et al., 2024). Our 
Czech norms add to this growing body of work, and as 
Czech is a grammatically gendered language, these norms 
may be of interest to researchers investigating whether gram-
matical and semantic gender interact, i.e. the linguistic rela-
tivity hypothesis (see Samuel et al., 2019). For example, 
Brand et al. (2025) have used the gender norms to explore 
whether explicit and implicit ways of measuring gender 
associations differ for different types of stimuli, specifically 
by investigating ratings made by Czech speakers in their L1 
Czech, with Czech speakers in their L2 English, as well as 
with L1 English speakers.
Moreover, the large number of items in our norms may 
also facilitate further work investigating how abstract con-
cepts are grounded in social aspects of meaning (Barsa -
lou,  2020; Borghi et al.,  2019; Pexman et al., 2023), with 
our location , political  and age  dimensions offering novel 
ways to quantify socio-semantic representations. For exam-
ple, words like demokracie [democracy] and riskantní  
[risky] that are normally considered abstract have high 
association strength along these dimensions. Recent work 
that has investigated the concept of socialness has uncovered 
important insights into possible ways abstract concepts can 
be grounded through social experience (e.g. Diveica et al., 
2023, 2024; Pexman et al., 2023). Although the variables 
presented in the current paper are not by definition the same 
as the broader definition used in socialness norms, they do 
encompass important features of socialness, such as social 
roles, characteristics, spaces and ideologies. These more 
specific dimensions of meaning could be used to further 
investigate the role of social semantics in the grounding of 
abstract concepts, and embodied theories of semantic rep-
resentation more generally (Barsalou, 2020; Borghi et al., 
2019).
We have demonstrated that the individual scales used to 
capture the socio-semantic dimensions are reliable, with 
strong agreement across raters, which is important for our 
new dimensions of location  and political . Additionally, 
our analyses revealed a clear relationship between our word 
stimuli and existing norms for translating equivalent items 
Fig. 9  Comparisons between the colour, grayscale and word ver -
sions of the items from the Multilingual Picture Database (Duñabeitia 
et al., 2022). The facets on the top divide the data by stimuli compari-
son, with the mean rating values given on the x- and y-axis, respec-
tively (e.g., colour ~ gray has ratings for items in colour on the x-axis 
and grayscale items on the y-axis). The facets on the right divide the 
data by the dimensions. The Pearson correlation coefficients are given 
in the top left corner of each facet, with a linear fit to the data added 
in blue. Two example stimuli are represented on the plots as red let-
ters—A (dressing gown) and B (cut/wound)—with the colour, gray -
scale and Czech word versions shown at the bottom of the plot
◂


--- Page 20 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 20 of 22
in English for the dimensions of gender  and valence , pro-
viding further support for their validity, as was the case in 
Scott et al. (2019) and Warriner et al. (2013). Our analyses 
of how the dimensions relate to each other has provided new 
empirical insights, revealing a number of interesting rela-
tionships that highlight how some concepts may co-vary in 
terms of their socio-semantic representations—i.e., concepts 
that are more liberal may also have associations with femi-
ninity, urban environments, positive emotions and younger 
age groups, whereas more conservative concepts may have 
associations with masculinity, rural environments, negative 
emotions and older age groups.
By providing data not only for words but also for colour 
and grayscale images, we have been able to assess the extent 
to which different versions representing the same underlying 
concept may vary in the way they represent socio-semantic 
meaning. Our analyses suggest generally strong alignment 
across the different stimuli versions, but we stress that not 
all items may be represented similarly, indicating that colour 
may bias the representation, or even lead to processing the 
item as something conceptually different. Thus, we empha-
sise the importance of considering how concepts may not 
align across different presentation modalities or versions, if 
only relying on norms derived from word labels.
Nevertheless, there are still a number of important direc-
tions for future research that will help improve the utility 
of socio-semantic norms. We acknowledge that our partici-
pant sample, although relatively large, is heavily skewed 
and restricted to a subset of the more general population. 
Specifically, we collected the data for our norms from a 
predominantly female sample of university students of the 
humanities, aged 18–30, with more liberal attitudes and 
urban affiliation. Although other norming studies have used 
a similar demographic sample (e.g. sensory modality norms 
by Speed and Brysbaert, 2024), the collection of norms 
where the dimensions relate to socially meaningful dimen-
sions, such as gender, location, political and age, may be 
influenced by the socio-demographic profiles of the indi-
vidual participants. The extent to which certain demographic 
groups (e.g. female vs male or young vs old) may differ 
remains a question requiring further attention. Although 
the primary focus of the current paper is to establish and 
introduce the first large-scale socio-semantic norms, we are 
currently collecting more data from more diverse samples 
of participants to address the question of whether socio-
semantic representations are stable or vary across different 
socio-demographic groups.
Similarly, the extent to which the norms are predictive 
of measures that relate to linguistic or cognitive processing 
has only been initially assessed in this paper. Whilst there 
is evidence that some variables predict reaction times on 
a lexical decision experiment, these results would benefit 
from a more comprehensive analysis that takes into account 
different measures of processing, as well as exploring other 
linguistic/semantic effects, such as part of speech or con-
creteness. Emerging evidence suggests that this is the case 
for norms that quantify socialness (Diveica et al., 2023; Pex-
man et al., 2023). This would provide valuable additional 
empirical insights into whether social meaning acts as a 
significant contributor to the way concepts are organised, 
grounded and processed.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank two anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful feedback during the review process. We 
would also like to thank Jan Chromý for his insightful input as this 
work progressed, as well as the ERCEL research group for their valu-
able input, and Jen Hay for her help in the initial stages of developing 
the idea for this project.
Funding This research was supported by a PRIMUS grant (PRI -
MUS/21/HUM/015) from Charles University awarded to JB and a 
GAČR (Grantová Agentura České Republiky) Standard grant (23-
06796S) awarded to JB. The funders had no role in the study design, 
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the 
manuscript.
Availability of data and materials The anonymised raw data and sum-
mary data, as well as the materials and stimuli from the experiments 
reported in this paper, can be accessed on the Open Science Framework 
at this link: https:// doi. org/ 10. 17605/ OSF. IO/ PV9MD
Code availability All code used in the data preprocessing, filtering and 
analysis from the experiments reported in this paper can be accessed 
on the Open Science Framework at this link: https:// doi. org/ 10. 17605/ 
OSF. IO/ PV9MD
Declarations 
Ethics approval This research was conducted with ethical approval 
obtained from the ethics committee at Charles University.
Consent to participate All participants provided informed consent 
prior to participation in the study. They were informed about the pur -
pose of the research, their right to withdraw at any time, and the meas-
ures taken to ensure their confidentiality and anonymity.
Consent for publication All participants involved in this study provided 
consent for the use of their anonymised data for publication purposes. 
Participants were informed that their confidentiality and anonymity 
would be strictly maintained and that any identifying information 
would be removed before publication.
Competing interests The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 


--- Page 21 ---
Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18 
Page 21 of 22 18
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ayalon, L., Dolberg, P., Mikulionienė, S., Perek-Białas, J., Rapolienė, 
G., Stypinska, J., & de la Fuente-Núñez, V. (2019). A systematic 
review of existing ageism scales. Ageing Research Reviews, 54, 
100919.
Alonso, M. A., Díez, E., & Fernandez, A. (2021). A set of 750 words in 
Spanish characterized in two survival-related dimensions: avoid-
ing death and locating nourishment. Behavior Research Methods, 
53(1), 153–166.
Barsalou, L. W. (2020). Challenges and opportunities for grounding 
cognition. Journal of Cognition, 3(1), Article 31.
Binder, J. R., Conant, L. L., Humphries, C. J., Fernandino, L., Simons, 
S. B., Aguilar, M., & Desai, R. H. (2016). Toward a brain-based 
componential semantic representation. Cognitive Neuropsychol-
ogy, 33(3–4), 130–174.
Borghi, A. M., Barca, L., Binkofski, F., Castelfranchi, C., Pezzulo, 
G., & Tummolini, L. (2019). Words as social tools: Language, 
sociality and inner grounding in abstract concepts. Physics of Life 
Reviews, 29, 120–153.
Brand, J., Chromý, J., Smolík, F., Cehákova, M., & Preininger, M. (in 
prep). CzLex: A large scale dataset of lexical decision data and 
psycholinguistic norms for ~10,000 Czech words.
Brand, J., Hay, J., Clark, L., Watson, K., & Sóskuthy, M. (2021). Sys-
tematic co-variation of monophthongs across speakers of New 
Zealand English. Journal of Phonetics, 88, 101096.
Brand, J., Preininger, M., Kříž, A., & Ceháková, M. (2025). Feminine 
fox, not so feminine box: Constraints on linguistic relativity effects 
for grammatical and conceptual gender. Language and Cognition, 
17, e34.
Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A. B., & Kuperman, V. (2014). Concreteness 
ratings for 40 thousand generally known English word lemmas. 
Behavior Research Methods, 46, 904–911.
Christensen, R. (2023). Ordinal: Regression Models for Ordinal Data. 
R Package Version, 2023, 12–14.
Clifford, S. (2020). Compassionate democrats and tough republicans: 
How ideology shapes partisan stereotypes. Political Behavior,  
42(4), 1269–1293.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of 
tests. Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–334.
Diveica, V., Pexman, P. M., & Binney, R. J. (2023). Quantifying social 
semantics: An inclusive definition of socialness and ratings for 
8388 English words. Behavior Research Methods, 55(2), 461–473.
Diveica, V., Muraki, E. J., Binney, R. J., & Pexman, P. M. (2024). 
Socialness effects in lexical–semantic processing. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,  
50(8), 1329–1343.
Duñabeitia, J. A., Baciero, A., Antoniou, K., Antoniou, M., Ataman, 
E., Baus, C., & Pliatsikas, C. (2022). The multilingual picture 
database. Scientific Data, 9(1), 431.
Engelthaler, T., & Hills, T. T. (2018). Humor norms for 4,997 English 
words. Behavior Research Methods, 50, 1116–1124.
Ferré, P., Guasch, M., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Comesaña, M. 
(2022). Love me in L1, but hate me in L2: How native speakers 
and bilinguals rate the affectivity of words when feeling or think-
ing about them. Bilingualism, Language and Cognition,  25(5), 
786–800.
Grandy, T. H., Lindenberger, U., & Schmiedek, F. (2020). Vam-
pires and nurses are rated differently by younger and older 
adults—Age-comparative norms of imageability and emotional-
ity for about 2500 German nouns. Behavior Research Methods,  
52(3), 980–989.
Grühn, D., & Smith, J. (2008). Characteristics for 200 words rated by 
young and older adults: Age-dependent evaluations of German 
adjectives (AGE). Behavior Research Methods, 40, 1088–1097.
Hay, J., Walker, A., Sanchez, K., & Thompson, K. (2019). Abstract 
social categories facilitate access to socially skewed words. PLoS 
ONE, 14(2), e0210793.
Haspelmath, M. & Tadmor, U. (2009).  Loanwords in the World's Lan-
guages: A Comparative Handbook. Berlin, De Gruyter Mouton.
Imbault, C., Titone, D., Warriner, A. B., & Kuperman, V. (2021). How 
are words felt in a second language: Norms for 2,628 English 
words for valence and arousal by L2 speakers. Bilingualism, Lan-
guage and Cognition, 24(2), 281–292.
Jelínek, T., Křivan, J., Petkevič, V., Skoumalová, H., & Šindlerová, J. 
(2021). SYN2020: a new corpus of Czech with an innovated anno-
tation. In  Text, Speech, and Dialogue: 24th International Confer-
ence, TSD 2021, Olomouc, Czech Republic, September 6–9, 2021, 
Proceedings 24 (pp. 48–59). Springer International Publishing.
Kenny, M., & Luca, D. (2021). The urban-rural polarisation of politi-
cal disenchantment: An investigation of social and political atti-
tudes in 30 European countries. Cambridge Journal of Regions, 
Economy and Society, 14(3), 565–582.
Kim, Y., Dykema, J., Stevenson, J., Black, P., & Moberg, D. P. (2019). 
Straightlining: Overview of measurement, comparison of indica-
tors, and effects in mail–web mixed-mode surveys. Social Science 
Computer Review, 37(2), 214–233.
Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Brysbaert, M. (2012). 
Age-of-acquisition ratings for 30,000 English words. Behavior 
Research Methods, 44(4), 978–990.
Labov, W. (2011). Principles of linguistic change, volume 3: Cognitive 
and cultural factors (Vol. 3). John Wiley & Sons.
Lewis, M., & Lupyan, G. (2020). Gender stereotypes are reflected in 
the distributional structure of 25 languages. Nature Human Behav-
iour, 4(10), 1021–1028.
Lewis, M., Cooper Borkenhagen, M., Converse, E., Lupyan, G., & 
Seidenberg, M. S. (2022). What might books be teaching young 
children about gender? Psychological Science, 33(1), 33–47.
Liddell, T. M., & Kruschke, J. K. (2018). Analyzing ordinal data with 
metric models: What could possibly go wrong? Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 79, 328–348.
Lin, T., Ankudowich, E., & Ebner, N. C. (2017). Greater perceived 
similarity between self and own-age others in older than young 
adults. Psychology and Aging, 32(4), 377.
Luca, D., & Kenny, M. (2024). Drifting further apart? Europe’s trends 
of urban-rural political polarisation should not be overstated. 
Political Geography, 114, 103181.
Luca, D., Terrero-Davila, J., Stein, J., & Lee, N. (2023). Progres-
sive cities: Urban–rural polarisation of social values and eco-
nomic development around the world. Urban Studies, 60(12), 
2329–2350.
Łuniewska, M., Haman, E., Armon-Lotem, S., Etenkowski, B., South-
wood, F., Anđelković, D., & Ünal-Logacev, Ö. (2016). Ratings 
of age of acquisition of 299 words across 25 languages: Is there 
a cross-linguistic order of words? Behavior Research Methods,  
48, 1154–1177.
Łuniewska, M., Wodniecka, Z., Miller, C. A., Smolík, F., Butcher, M., 
Chondrogianni, V., & Haman, E. (2019). Age of acquisition of 
299 words in seven languages: American English, Czech, Gaelic, 
Lebanese Arabic, Malay, Persian and Western Armenian. PLoS 
ONE, 14(8), e0220611.
Lynott, D., Connell, L., Brysbaert, M., Brand, J., & Carney, J. (2020). 
The Lancaster Sensorimotor Norms: Multidimensional meas-
ures of perceptual and action strength for 40,000 English words. 
Behavior Research Methods, 52, 1271–1291.


--- Page 22 ---
 Behavior Research Methods (2025) 58:18
18 Page 22 of 22
Misersky, J., Gygax, P. M., Canal, P., Gabriel, U., Garnham, A., Braun, 
F., Chiarini, T., Englund, K., Hanulikova, A., Ottl, A., Valdrova, 
J., Von Stockhausen, L., & Sczesny, S. (2014). Norms on the gen-
der perception of role nouns in Czech, English, French, German, 
Italian, Norwegian, and Slovak. Behavior Research Methods, 46, 
841–871.
Moors, A., De Houwer, J., Hermans, D., Wanmaker, S., Van Schie, K., 
Van Harmelen, A. L., & Brysbaert, M. (2013). Norms of valence, 
arousal, dominance, and age of acquisition for 4,300 Dutch words. 
Behavior Research Methods, 45, 169–177.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The measure-
ment of meaning (No. 47). University of Illinois press.
Pexman, P. M., Muraki, E., Sidhu, D. M., Siakaluk, P. D., & Yap, 
M. J. (2019). Quantifying sensorimotor experience: Body–object 
interaction ratings for more than 9,000 English words. Behavior 
Research Methods, 51, 453–466.
Pexman, P. M., Diveica, V., & Binney, R. J. (2023). Social seman-
tics: The organization and grounding of abstract concepts. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society b: Biological Sciences, 
378(1870), 20210363.
Pospěch, P., HUbatková, B., & Klíma, O. (2024). Existuje v ČR polar-
izace mezi městy a venkovem?. Sociologický časopis / Czech 
Sociological Review.
Preininger, M. (2025). Gender Associations in the Czech Lexicon and 
Their Impact on Language Processing. [Doctoral dissertation, 
Charles University]. http:// hdl. handle. net/ 20. 500. 11956/ 199705
Roberts, D. C., & Utych, S. M. (2019). Linking gender, language, and 
partisanship: Developing a database of masculine and feminine 
words. Political Research Quarterly, 73(1), 40–50.
Rosencranz, H. A., & McNevin, T. E. (1969). A factor analysis of 
attitudes toward the aged. The Gerontologist. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1093/ geront/ 9.1. 55
R Core Team (2023). R: A Language and Environment for Statisti-
cal Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, 
Austria. <https:// www.R- proje ct. org/>.
Samuel, S., Cole, G., & Eacott, M. J. (2019). Grammatical gender and 
linguistic relativity: A systematic review. Psychonomic Bulletin 
& Review, 26(6), 1767–1786.
Scott, G. G., Keitel, A., Becirspahic, M., Yao, B., & Sereno, S. C. 
(2019). The Glasgow norms: Ratings of 5,500 words on nine 
scales. Behavior Research Methods, 51, 1258–1270.
Sehyr, Z. S., Caselli, N., Cohen-Goldberg, A. M., & Emmorey, K. 
(2021). The ASL-LEX 2.0 project: A database of lexical and pho-
nological properties for 2,723 signs in American Sign Language. 
The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 26(2), 263–277.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. The 
Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3), 379–423.
Speed, L. J., & Brysbaert, M. (2024). Ratings of valence, arousal, hap-
piness, anger, fear, sadness, disgust, and surprise for 24,000 Dutch 
words. Behavior Research Methods, 56(5), 5023–5039.
Taylor, J. E., Rousselet, G. A., Scheepers, C., & Sereno, S. C. (2023). 
Rating norms should be calculated from cumulative link mixed 
effects models. Behavior Research Methods, 55(5), 2175–2196.
Trudgill, P. (1974).  The social differentiation of English in Nor -
wich (Vol. 13). CUP archive.
Vankrunkelsven, H., Yang, Y., Brysbaert, M., De Deyne, S., & Storms, 
G. (2024). Semantic gender: Norms for 24,000 Dutch words and 
its role in word meaning. Behavior Research Methods,  56(1), 
113–125.
Van Paridon, J., & Thompson, B. (2021). subs2vec: Word embed-
dings from subtitles in 55 languages. Behavior Research Methods, 
53(2), 629–655.
Veríssimo, J. (2021). Analysis of rating scales: A pervasive problem 
in bilingualism research and a solution with Bayesian ordinal 
models. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(5), 842–848.
Venables, W. N., & Ripley, B. D. (2013). Modern applied statistics with 
S-PLUS. Springer Science & Business Media.
Walker, A., & Hay, J. (2011). Congruence between ‘word age’ and 
‘voice age’ facilitates lexical access. Laboratory Phonology, 2(1).
Wang, S., Zhang, Y., Shi, W., Zhang, G., Zhang, J., Lin, N., & Zong, C. 
(2023). A large dataset of semantic ratings and its computational 
extension. Scientific Data, 10(1), 106.
Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., & Brysbaert, M. (2013). Norms of 
valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English lemmas. 
Behavior Research Methods, 45, 1191–1207.
Wilson Black, J., Brand, J., Hay, J., & Clark, L. (2023). Using principal 
component analysis to explore co-variation of vowels. Language 
and Linguistics Compass, 17(1), e12479.
Winter, B., Lupyan, G., Perry, L. K., Dingemanse, M., & Perlman, M. 
(2024). Iconicity ratings for 14,000+ English words. Behavior 
Research Methods, 56(3), 1640–1655.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
