--- Page 1 ---
Design choices: Empirical recommendations for designing
two-dimensional finger-tracking experiments
Robert Wirth1 & Anna Foerster1 & Wilfried Kunde1 & Roland Pfister1
# The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The continuous tracking of mouse or finger movements has become an increasingly popular research method for investigating
cognitive and motivational processes such as decision-making, action-planning, and executive functions. In the present paper, we
evaluate and discuss how apparently trivial design choices of researchers may impact participants’ behavior and, consequently, a
study’s results. We first provide a thorough comparison of mouse- and finger-tracking setups on the basis of a Simon task. We
then vary a comprehensive set of design factors, including spatial layout, movement extent, time of stimulus onset, size of the
target areas, and hit detection in a finger-tracking variant of this task. We explore the impact of these variations on a broad
spectrum of movement parameters that are typically used to describe movement trajectories. Based on our findings, we suggest
several recommendations for best practice that avoid some of the pitfalls of the methodology. Keeping these recommendations in
mind will allow for informed decisions when planning and conducting future tracking experiments.
Keywords Movement tracking . Experimental design . Simon task . Measures
Introduction
The analysis of continuous-movement trajectories has become
an increasingly popular method in recent years for psycholog-
ical research. Movement tracking not only allows the analysis
of the final outcome of a decision process (i.e., in terms of
choice frequencies or response times as in common button-
press tasks), but also offers parameters that capitalize on the
decision process itself, and have often been claimed to show
how it unfolds over time (Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2011;
McKinstry, Dale, & Spivey, 2008 ; Song & Nakayama,
2009; Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich,2005). There are several
variants of this approach, for example movement tracking in a
three-dimensional space (Buetti, Juan, Rinck, & Kerzel,2012;
Erb, Moher, Sobel, & Song, 2016;E r b ,M o h e r ,S o n g ,&
Sobel, 2018; Song & Nakayama, 2008) or the projection of
a three-dimensional movement onto a two-dimensional plane
(using a Nintendo Wiimote; Duran, Dale, & McNamara,
2010). There are setups in which participants approach only
one target (Schween & Hegele, 2017), decide between multi-
ple discrete response options (e.g., Deubel & Schneider,2003;
Mahon, Bend žiūtė, Hesse, & Hunt, 2020), or make their
choice on a continuous scale (Debats & Heuer, 2018). But
the currently most prominent approach employs a movement
in the 2D plane in which participants decide between two
discrete options by moving a cursor to one of two target areas.
Cursor movements are typically performed via the comput-
er mouse, though recent studies have also used finger-tracking
on a touchscreen device in similar tasks (e.g., Wirth, Kunde, &
Pfister, 2019). In typical setups for mouse- or finger-tracking,
participants start with the mouse cursor or their finger at the
bottom center of the screen, and they choose an option by
moving the cursor to one of two target areas located in the
upper corners of the screen. Even within this apparently sim-
ple setup, there are a range of design choices that researchers
must make and that can lead to consequences for the behavior
in question (e.g., Kieslich, Schoemann, Grage, Hepp, &
Scherbaum, 2020). For example, parameters such as the size
of the target areas and the distance of the target areas from the
starting position can result in fundamentally different move-
ments, with large target areas at a short distance requiring less
spatially accurate movements than with small target areas that
are placed far away (Fitts, 1954).
Still, one might argue that as long as these design choices
are kept constant across conditions, these choices will be
* Robert Wirth
robert.wirth@uni-wuerzburg.de
1 Department of Psychology, Julius-Maximilians-University of
Würzburg, Röntgenring 11, 97070 Würzburg, Germany
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-020-01409-0
Published online: 15 May 2020
Behavior Research Methods (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 2 ---
trivial. However, with the present study, we want to sensitize
researchers to such apparently trivial design choices, which
are, as we will show here, actually not that trivial and need
careful consideration when designing a movement-tracking
experiment. Further, we believe that considering these design
choices is also important when it comes to interpreting such
tracking experiments, as well as when conducting replications
or meta-analyses.
What all tracking setups have in common is that the ensu-
ing movement trajectory is continuously logged and thereby
offers a plethora of measures that can be analyzed (Hehman,
Stolier, & Freeman, 2015). The “standard” measure of how
long it took to complete a trial (response time in classical
discrete response tasks) can now be further differentiated into
the time it took to initiate and execute the movement. This
may allow for a coarse distinction of cognitive processes that
are in charge of movement planning from those that govern
movement execution. Spatial parameters, such as the devia-
tion from an optimal movement line, can indicate attraction
towards one or the other response option, whereas directional
changes during movement execution can reflect the continu-
ous decision process as it unfolds during response execution.
Via a combination of temporal and spatial parameters, speed
and acceleration profiles of each movement can be derived
and analyzed. But again, this wide spectrum of measures pro-
vides researchers with a high degree of freedom, and depend-
ing on the research question, allows for a tailored selection of
interesting measures, in which each measure can have its own
advantages when it comes to its theoretical and/or practical
implication. With this wide spectrum, it is not surprising that
researchers use vastly different measures to operationalize the
very same theoretical concept (e.g., describing the completion
of a decision process when a movement is initiated,
Greenwood & Spivey, 2014, or alternatively only when the
peak movement velocity is reached, Barca & Pezzulo, 2015).
In addition to assessing the impact of different design choices,
t h es e c o n dg o a lo ft h i sr e s e a r c hi st h u st og i v ea no v e r v i e wo f
the most frequently used measures in movement tracking, and
to assess their effectiveness for capturing differences between
experimental conditions.
The following five experiments offer a fine-grained explor-
atory empirical contribution to a rising field of psychological
research. We manipulated several design parameters and test-
ed how they affect participants ’ movement performance
across a wide spectrum of dependent variables (DVs, see be-
low for more details). Even though not every design choice
allows for a clear prediction of whether and how it will affect
each DV that we derive from these movements, we will ana-
lyze every movement parameter in every experiment to pro-
vide a full picture of the empirical data. Unless stated other-
wise, take these analyses (especially the full results,www.osf.
io/am6yp ) as a helpful exploratory overview to support
researchers in estimating how their design choices may
affect their DVs of interest.
Experiment 1: Manipulation of input device
Introduction
In Experiment 1, we tested how the input device that is used
for movement tracking might influence movement trajectories
(Moher & Song,2019). Following recent trends, we compared
two setups that use a computer mouse to measure continuous
movements (e.g., Jusyte et al., 2017; Pfister, Wirth, Schwarz,
Steinhauser, & Kunde, 2016; Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse,
Fischer, & Goschke, 2010; Tabatabaeian, Dale, & Duran,
2015 ) as well as a setup that takes advantage of the
touchscreen of a tablet computer (e.g., Kunde, Schmidts,
Wirth, & Herbort, 2017; Wirth, Pfister, Foerster, Huestegge,
&K u n d e ,2016).
For the two mouse-operated setups, we compared the
“MouseTracker,” as a frequently used, ready-made program
(Freeman & Ambady, 2010), with a similar custom-built pro-
gram that also uses a computer mouse ( “eTracker”). Further,
we aimed to parallelize these programs with the one that uses a
touchscreen for input ( “iTracker”). We decided to test two
mouse-operated setups to gauge the impact of several limita-
tions that necessarily arise when using ready-made software.
For the MouseTracker, these limitations especially pertain to
the limited choices within the setup and options to provide
feedback to the participants, as we will describe below. 1 All
participants performed the same task on all setups in
counterbalanced order, which allowed us to compare how
the choice of input method may influence movement
trajectories.
We designed a simple Simon task (Simon, 1990) in which
one of two target areas changed color on each trial. Color
identity, not color location, indicated whether an upward left
or an upward right movement was required. As such, target
position and movement direction could be either compatible
(i.e., movement towards the stimulus color) or incompatible
(i.e., movement to the opposite side of the stimulus color).
Performance is usually worse in incompatible relative to com-
patible trials. This Simon effect is among the most robust and
most frequently observed phenomena in cognitive psychology
(e.g., Hommel, 2011). It should thus emerge with any setup,
though perhaps to varying degrees and in different dependent
1 Note that we do not intend to criticize this aspect of the MouseTracker
program, as the program is specifically designed to offer out-of-the-box appli-
cations for researchers without the necessary programming expertise to create
custom setups. This goal necessarily enforces several design choices on its
users, so that limitations are inevitable when intending to provide simple but
accessible solutions for mouse-tracking research.
2395Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 3 ---
measures, and we were interested in exactly these varying
degrees depending on the setup.
The Simon effect is further subject to a variation with
trial sequence. Typically, the Simon effect is smaller after
incongruent rather than congruent trials, which is known
as sequential adaptation effect. The reasons for this se-
quential adaptation effect are disputed (e.g. Hommel,
Proctor, & Vu, 2004;E g n e r ,2007), but the phenomenon
as such seems equally robust as the Simon effect itself.
Therefore, we also analyzed the data according to con-
gruency sequence, to get an idea of how the type of
input device influences this effect.
Regarding the quantification of movement trajectories, the
available literature offers a diverse set of dependent variables
(DVs), but there is currently no consensus on which variables
to use. Ideally, researchers determine a priori which DVs to
use (and we will come back to this point in the discussion). In
the current experiments, we specifically aimed at giving a
systematic overview of which markers best differentiate be-
tween the experimental conditions in the present setup, and we
therefore analyzed all of the most common temporal and spa-
tial DVs (full results for each individual DVare reported in the
Supplementary Material online, www.osf.io/am6yp). Even
though different research questions may require different
variables, this approach will allow for informed choices
between conceptually similar measures for different study
designs. Finally, we not only took objective and implicit
measures into account to differentiate between the setups,
but we also considered explicit, subjective assessments by
running a questionnaire after the experiment, in which
participants judged the setups on several scales.
Methods
Participants Thirty-six participan ts were recruited (mean
age = 26.8 years, SD = 5 . 3 ,9m a l e ,3l e f t - h a n d e d )a n dr e -
ceived either course credit or €5 monetary compensation.
This sample size was based on the minimum number of
participants required to counterbalance the order of exper-
imental setups and stimulus –response mappings across
subjects. All participants gave informed consent, were
naïve to the purpose of the experiment and were debriefed
after the session.
Apparatuses For a thorough comparison of the available
mouse-tracker methods, we built identical Simon tasks within
the MouseTracker (www.mousetracker.org, e.g., Freeman &
Ambady, 2010; Faulkenberry, 2014), a version built in E-
Prime 2.0 ( eTracker, www.roland-pfister.net, e.g., Pfister,
Janczyk, Wirth, Dignath, & Kunde, 2014; Wirth, Pfister,
Janczyk, & Kunde, 2015), and on an iPad 2 ( iTracker,e . g . ,
Dignath, Wirth, Kühnhausen, Gawrilow, Kunde, & Kiesel,
2020; Wirth, Dignath, Pfister, Kunde, & Eder, 2016; Wirth,
Pfister, & Kunde, 2016) in portrait mode (i.e., the shorter side
of the device is oriented horizontally). While the computer
setups were operated with a computer mouse, the iPad re-
quired input via a finger on its touchscreen. Clicking the
mouse was equated with touching the screen or lifting the
finger from the screen. Cursor acceleration on the computers
was turned off and cursor speed was turned down so that hand
and cursor moved at a comparable speed (cursor settings in
Windows were at 30% of the maximum possible speed, with
gain disabled); on the iPad, finger and cursor movements were
inherently identical. Participants worked on the same experi-
mental task on all three setups; the order of the setups was
counterbalanced between participants. The experimental com-
puters had 17 ” displays running at a display resolution of
1024 × 768 px, whereas the iPads had a screen size of 9.7 ”
running at the same display resolution but were operated at a
shorter viewing distance. All experiments were run in full
screen mode.
Stimuli and procedure Participants were confronted with a
starting area (black circle 60 px in diameter) at the bottom of
the screen against a white background. Upon clicking or
touching the screen within the starting area, the starting area
disappeared, and two target areas appeared (two circles 60 px
in diameter upwards to the left and upwards to the right of the
starting area). The MouseTracker does not allow for circular
starting and target areas, even though circular areas seem rea-
sonable especially for the starting area, because otherwise the
angle at which the movement is initiated would confound the
time at which movement initiation is determined (usually
when leaving the starting area) 2. Therefore, we used square
boxes of 60 px side length in the MouseTracker-version and
addressed this inconsistency during data preprocessing by
using virtual circular starting and target areas for the compu-
tation of our dependent variables.
The centers of the target areas were 600 px above the
center of the starting area and displaced at 300 px to either
the left or right. Consequently, straight lines from the
center of the starting area to the centers of each target
area would produce angles of 26.6° to each side relative
to a vertical midline. Crucially, either the left or the right
target area turned red or green, while the other target area
was black. For half of the parti cipants, red color prompted
a movement to the left target area, and green color
prompted a movement to the right target area. The other
half received the opposite stimulus –response mapping for
counterbalancing. Each participant had the same
stimulus –response mapping throughout all setups. With
2 Although it would be possible to display an image of a circle within the
rectangular starting and target areas to make it look like they were round, all
DVs would still be computed based on the rectangular borders. This could lead
to confusing instances for participants when they click just outside the circle,
which still registers as a response.
2396 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 4 ---
this manipulation, movements could be stimulus –re-
sponse-compatible (movement towards the colored target
area) or -incompatible (movement away from the colored
target area). If a target area was reached, either it had to
b ec l i c k e do rt h ef i n g e rh a dt ob el i f t e dw i t h i nt h et a r g e t
area to complete a trial.
From clicking/touching the starting area to clicking/lifting
the finger from the target area, X- and Y -coordinates of the
movement were sampled. The MouseTracker and iTracker
sampled movement data at 60 Hz (although the iTracker
logged the data more frequently at about 200 Hz), and the
eTracker’s sample rate depended on the current CPU load
and was therefore more variable, but overall comparable to
the other devices. Based on these coordinate data, all depen-
dent measures were computed (see preprocessing).
After correct responses, the next trial started instantly with
the presentation of the starting area. After commission errors
(“Fehler!”, German for “error!”), after response initiations
slower than 1000 ms ( “Zu langsam gestartet! ”, “started too
slowly!”), after movement executions slower than 1500 ms
(“Zu langsam!”, “too slow!”), and after omission errors, i.e.,
prematurely lifting the finger from the touchscreen ( “Nicht
getroffen!”, “missed!”; only in the iTracker version), feedback
was displayed in red font in the center of the screen for 1000
ms. The next trial could still be started immediately. With the
MouseTracker, we were not able to make all types of feedback
work; it only allowed us to show feedback for either slow
initiation or slow execution. Therefore, we decided to omit
speed-related feedback altogether with the MouseTracker
and to only present feedback on commission errors.
Nevertheless, we identified all remaining error types in our
statistical analysis.
A block consisted of 100 trials in randomized order, with
an equal number of compatible and incompatible trials, and an
equal number of required left and right responses. Participants
completed six blocks overall, two consecutive blocks per set-
up (AABBCC), with short, self-paced breaks between blocks.
Questionnaire At the end of the experiment, participants com-
pleted a paper questionnaire (German version available at
www.osf.io/am6yp). Each setup had to be rated on a nine-
point scale with semantic labels for the outermost categories
(in brackets), concerning their accessibility (i.e., the first trials,
difficult–easy), two ratings regarding their overall experience
in handling the devices (difficult–easy; unpleasant–pleasant),
estimates of the movements (stuttering –smooth; exhausting–
effortless), perceived control of the movements (little –full),
and their error robustness (little–very). The devices were rated
in the order that they were worked on during the experiment,
so participants were asked for each question to rate “Part 1”,
then “Part 2”, and then “Part 3” before proceeding to the next
question. Finally, they answered which setup they would pre-
fer if they had to do the experiment again.
Results
Overall analysis strategy In the following sections, we first
describe data selection and preprocessing, including a detailed
list of all computed statistics (see Fig. 1 for a graphical
summary). An overview of the most relevant results is provid-
ed in Fig. 2. Standardized effect sizes for paired comparisons
are computed as Cohen’s dz = tﬃﬃnp .
Data selection For the following analyses, we omitted trials in
which participants produced commission errors (5.3%) or
omissions (7.5%). Error and omission rates were analyzed
via linear mixed-effects models using the lme4 package ver-
sion 1.1-21 of the R software environment. For all analyses we
report the outcome of appropriate model comparisons for a
model including the effect of interest to the corresponding null
model. More errors were committed in the MouseTracker
(8.7%) than in the eTracker (3.6%) or in the iTracker
(3.7%), Χ2(1) ≥ 169.54, ps < .001, with no difference between
the latter setups,Χ2(1) = 0.05, p = .821, and more omissions in
the iTracker (12.4%)3 than in the MouseTracker (2.7%)4 or the
eTracker (0.0%), with significant differences between all
setups, Χ2(1) ≥ 196.44, ps < .001. To provide the most conser-
vative comparison between the setups, the remaining data
entered analyses unfiltered. Thereby, strong variations of any
measure are not artificially narrowed via outlier elimination,
but considered within the analyses.
Preprocessing a nd data analyses First, the X- and Y -
coordinate data of the MouseTracker were converted from
its native logfiles via custom R scripts and restructured to fit
the data format of the eTracker and iTracker, making it possi-
ble to run pooled analyses on all data. Further, this allowed for
the use of virtual circular starting and target areas for the
computation of our dependent variables, even though the
MouseTracker only allows for rectangular areas. For all fol-
lowing computations, we defined the origin of the coordinate
system to be located at the center of the home area. Positive
values in the X-direction indicate movements to the right, and
positive values in the Y -direction indicate upward movement.
The data from all setups was then analyzed via custom
MA TLAB scripts. Movements to the left were mirrored on
the vertical midline. Based on the raw coordinate data, the
3 The iTracker produced higher omission rates because it was the only setup
where an omission was possible by prematurely lifting the finger from the
touchscreen. These trials were terminated after the finger was prematurely
lifted and counted as an omission, as no continuous movement trajectory to
one of the target areas could be recorded. See also Experiment4 for a means to
reduce the omission rates.
4 Omission errors in the MouseTracker describe those cases where participants
clicked on the edge of the square target area that was not contained in the
virtual circular target area that we used during preprocessing. Therefore, they
do not constitute omission errors per se; still we excluded these few trials so
that the same criteria applied to all input devices.
2397Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 5 ---
following measures were computed for each movement (see
Fig. 1)5:
& Initiation time (IT, in ms): Time interval between the click/
touch of the starting area and leaving the starting area
(criterion: Euclidian distance between the center of the
starting area and the current cursor position is larger than
30 px)
& Starting angle (SA, in °): Angle of the movement when
leaving the starting area relative to the vertical midline
(with movements straight up producing an angle of 0°,
positive values indicating movement directions towards
the correct target area, and negative values indicating ini-
tial movements towards the opposite side. For reference, a
straight line from start- to endpoint of the movement—see
perfect line, Fig. 1—produced an angle of 26.6°)
& Movement time (MT, in ms): Time interval between leav-
ing the starting area and entering a target area (criterion:
Euclidian distance between center of the target area and
current cursor position is smaller than 30 px)
& Minimum X (MinX, in px): Maximum deviation in the
opposite direction of the correct target area on the X-axis
& Click time (CT, in ms): Time interval between entering the
target area and clicking/lifting the finger
& Final distance to target (FDT, in px): Distance between the
center of the target area and the final coordinate of the
movement
& X flips (xFlips, as integer): Number of instances when the
movement changes direction on the X-axis
Next, the data for the movement execution (during MT)
was time-normalized to 101 steps, and based on this data,
further parameters were extracted:6
& Entropy (Ent): Indicator of movement complexity, with
larger values for more complex movements, based on
Hehman et al. ( 2015)
& Maximum absolute deviation (MAD, in px): Maximum
movement deviation from the perfect line (deviations to-
wards the opposing target area were coded as positive
values, deviations towards the nearest edge of the screen
produced negative values)
& Area under the curve (AUC, in px 2): Area between the
actual movement and the perfect line (deviations towards
the opposing target area were coded as positive values,
deviations towards the nearest edge of the screen produced
negative values)
& Curvature (Curv, as ratio): Ratio of the length of the actual
movement and the length of the perfect line
& Time to peak velocity (TTPV , in % of movement): Time
point with maximum movement speed
& Time to peak acceleration (TTPA, in % of movement):
Time point with maximum movement acceleration
All these DVs extract a single metric from the continuous
data that can be tested by common inferential statistics
methods. They do not come with any additional prerequisites
and allow for an easy-to-grasp overview of the data, and they
should be robust against specific design choices (Scherbaum
& Kieslich, 2018). Therefore, possible modulations of the
Simon effect or its sequential adaptation by the setup should
be especially meaningful. More advanced statistical methods
have been proposed that are explicitly tailored to specific re-
search questions in the context of continuous data (e.g., Joch,
Döhring, Maurer, & Müller, 2019; Maldonado, Dunbar, &
Chemla, 2019 ; Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, Fischer, &
Goschke, 2010), and we provide the raw data online to enable
the application of these approaches (www.osf.io/am6yp).
All dependent measures were aggregated as the mean per
participant and per condition and then analyzed via 2 × 2 × 3
analyses of variance (ANOV As)7 with current compatibility
(trial N compatible vs. incompatible), preceding compatibility
(trial N-1 compatible vs. incompatible), and setup
(MouseTracker vs. eTracker vs. iTracker) as within-subject
factors. We refer to compatibility effects as the difference be-
tween currently compatible and incompatible trials (computed
as trial N incompatible minus trial N compatible, see Fig. 2),
to aftereffects as the difference between trials after compatible
and after incompatible trials (computed as trial N-1 incompat-
ible minus trial N-1 compatible) and to sequential adaptation
effects as the modulation of compatibility effects by preceding
compatibility (in the direction of smaller compatibility effects
after an incompatible trial relative to after a compatible trial;
Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1992).
Since we are not interested in the Simon effect or its se-
quential modulation per se, but how they might be modulated
by the setup, we mainly focused on any effect including the
factor setup. Main effects of current compatibility, preceding
compatibility, or their interaction serve as a manipulation
check, and descriptive means for the main effects are provided
to give an estimate of the absolute values of the individual
DVs. To keep the results frugal and accessible, we only scru-
tinized effects which include the factor setup in follow-up
5 We are aware that there are alternative names and abbreviations in the liter-
ature for some of the measures that we describe here. To keep things simple
and brief, we refrained from listing specific alternatives.
6 Most measures can also be computed on the raw trajectory data, i.e., prior to
time-normalization. Even though both variants will yield highly similar out-
comes, time-normalization is necessary to plot average trajectories. Because
such plots are routinely provided in empirical reports, we believe it to be useful
to compute all relevant statics after rather than before time-normalization.
7 We used the multivariate approach here, which we believe is preferable with
a sufficiently large sample size and a limited number of conditions, because it
does not depend on sphericity assumptions, and therefore also does not require
any corrections in the case of violations.
2398 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 6 ---
analyses via planned two-tailedt tests to compare which setup
produced the largest Simon effect. Accordingly, in case of
differences in sequential modulation, we tested for sequential
adaptation within each setup via separate ANOV As to see
which setup produced a significant adaptation pattern.
For the same reasons, we report the full analysis of all DVs
online (www.osf.io/am6yp). For the main text, we will focus
on IT, SA, MT, and AUC, as they provide an overview of both
temporal and spatial measures of both early and late stages of
the movement (for a more elaborate reasoning for these DVs,
as well as a correlation matrix of all DVs and a factor analysis
akin to Incera, 2018,a l s os e ewww.osf.io/am6yp). Temporal
measures are of interest for the current setup because
incompatibility of stimulus and response location is expected
to prolong action planning, and the incompatible location of a
stimulus should further attract the trajectory (relative to
compatible trials; Buetti & Kerzel, 2008;W i r t h ,F o e r s t e r ,
Herbort, Kunde, & Pfister, 2018).
Initiation times Data showed significantly faster response ini-
tiation for current compatible trials (249 ms) than for incom-
patible trials (254 ms), F(1, 35) = 8.36, p =. 0 0 7 ,ηp
2 =. 1 9 ,a s
well as faster response initiation after compatible trials (250
ms) than after incompatible trials (254 ms), F(1, 35) = 9.68,
p = .004, ηp
2 = .22. Response initiation was slower in the
iTracker (380 ms) relative to the eTracker (201 ms) and
MouseTracker (174 ms), F(2, 34) = 89.90, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .84, with significant differences between all setups, t-
s ≥ 4.70, ps < .001, ds ≥ 0.78. Compatibility effects differed
between setups, F(2, 34) = 5.93, p =. 0 0 6 ,ηp
2 =. 2 6 , w i t h t h e
iTracker producing significantly larger effects ( Δ = 14 ms)
Fig. 1 Overview of possible depende nt variables when analyzing
movement trajectory data. The circular area at the bottom represents the
starting area; the two on the top left and top right represent the target
areas. A trial was started by clicking or touching the starting area,
making the stimulus appear. In this case, the left target area turned red,
with red color indicating a movement to the right; therefore, this would
constitute an incompatible trial. What is depicted here is the actual data
for a single trial of the experiment, the blue dots representing the cursor/
finger position over time. This exemplary movement was initiated in the
wrong direction. The distance between the dots lets us estimate the speed
profile of the movement, with longer distances between dots indicating
faster movements. A trial was completed when a target area was clicked
or the finger was lifted from the screen within a target area
Fig. 2 Main results of Experiment 1. Standardized effect sizes dz for the
effect of current compatibility (computed as current incompatible minus
current compatible) for each of the computed DVs ( X-axis) and setups
(columns)
2399Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 7 ---
compared to the eTracker ( Δ = −1 ms) or the MouseTracker
(Δ = 2 ms), ts ≥ 3.00, ps ≤ .005, ds ≥ 0.50, but no difference
between the latter setups, t(35) = 1.19, p = .241, d =0 . 2 0 .
Overall, sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 35) =
7.41, p = .010, ηp
2 = .18, but these were further modulated
by setup, F(2, 34) = 5.71, p = .007, ηp
2 = .25, showing that
only the iTracker produced the sequential adaptation effect,
F(1, 35) = 9.75, p =. 0 0 4 ,ηp
2 = .22, and not the others, Fs ≤
2.41, ps ≥ .129. Aftereffects did not differ between setups,F <
1.
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (−1.3°) than for com-
patible trials (4.8°), F(1, 35) = 46.77, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 5 7 , a s
well as steeper response initiation after compatible trials
(1.3°) than after incompatible trials (2.2°), F(1, 35) = 4.78,
p = .036, ηp
2 = .12. Response initiation was most direct in
the iTracker (6.8°) relative to the eTracker (-3.2°) and
MouseTracker (1.7°), F(2, 34) = 41.92, p < .001, ηp
2 = .71,
with significant differences between all setups, ts ≥ 3.81, ps
≤ .001, ds ≥ 0.63. A significant three-way interaction, F(2,
34) = 8.64, p = .001, ηp
2 = .34, indicated that only the
iTracker produced the expected sequential adaptation effect,
F (1, 35) = 9.16, p = .005, η p
2 = .21, whereas the
MouseTracker did not, F < 1, and the eTracker produced a
significant interaction, but in the opposite direction, F(1,
35) = 8.55, p =. 0 0 6 ,ηp
2 = .20. No other effects were signifi-
cant, Fs<1 .
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response
execution for current compatible trials (438 ms) than for in-
compatible trials (488 ms), F(1, 35) = 111.27, p < .001,
ηp
2 =. 7 6 ,a sw e l la sf a s t e rr e s p o n s ee x e c u t i o na f t e ri n c o m p a t -
ible trials (460 ms) than after compatible trials (467 ms), F(1,
35) = 9.11,p =. 0 0 5 ,ηp
2 = .21. Response execution was fastest
in the iTracker (419 ms) relative to the eTracker (481 ms) and
MouseTracker (489 ms), F(2, 34) = 9.92, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 3 7 ,
with significant differences between the iTracker and both of
the other two, ts ≥ 4.15, ps < .001, ds ≥ 0.69, but no difference
between eTracker and MouseTracker, t(35) = 1.14, p =. 2 6 3 ,
d = 0.19. Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 35) =
69.15, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .66. No other effects were significant,
Fs ≤ 2.96, ps ≥ .066.
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly
greater spatial deviations fo r current incompatible trials
(61427 px 2) than for compatible trials (36842 px 2), F(1,
35) = 103.25, p < .001, ηp
2 = .75, as well as after compat-
ible trials (51689 px 2) relative to after incompatible trials
(46580 px2), F(1, 35) = 28.25, p < .001, ηp
2 = .45. Overall
deviation was smallest in the iTracker (23274 px 2)r e l a t i v e
to the eTracker (64271 px 2) and MouseTracker (59860
px2), F(2, 34) = 77.00, p < .001, ηp
2 = .82, with significant
differences between the iTracker and both of the other
two, ts ≥ 11.07, ps<. 0 0 1 ,ds ≥ 1.84, but no significant dif-
ference between the eTracker and MouseTracker, t(35) =
1.81, p = .079, d= 0.30. Compatibility effects differed be-
tween setups, F(2, 34) = 12.00, p < .001, ηp
2 = .41, with
the iTracker producing significantly smaller differences
(Δ = 12535 px 2) compared to the eTracker ( Δ = 33879
px2) and the MouseTracker ( Δ = 27341 px 2), again with
significant differences between the iTracker and both of
the other two, ts ≥ 3.86, ps<. 0 0 1 ,ds ≥ 0.64, but no sig-
nificant difference between the eTracker and
MouseTracker, t (35) = 1.74, p = .091, d= 0.29.
Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 35) = 32.95,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .49. No other effects were significant, Fs
≤ 3.17, ps ≥ .054.
QuestionnaireFor the analysis of the questionnaire, the data of
seven participants was excluded due to incompleteness or re-
ports of false feedback during the experiments8. The handling
of the iTracker (M = 7.48) was judged as overall easier than of
the eTracker (M = 6.76), t(28) = 2.76, p =. 0 1 0 ,d = 0.51, with
the MouseTracker (M = 7.28) in between,ts ≤ 1.47, ps ≥ .154,
ds ≤ 0.27. Ratings for overall pleasantness were led by the
iTracker (M = 7.07), which differed significantly from both
the MouseTracker (M = 6.14) and the eTracker (M = 5.72),
ts ≥ 2.71, ps ≤ .011, ds ≥ 0.50, but with no differences between
the latter setups, t(28) = 1.05, p =. 3 0 4 ,d =0 . 1 9 . S i m i l a r r e -
sults emerged from the judgment of movement fluidity, again
led by the iTracker (M = 7.55), which again differed signifi-
cantly from both the MouseTracker (M = 4.52) and the
eTracker (M = 4.52),ts ≥ 4.98, ps < .001, ds ≥ 0.92, but no dif-
ferences between the latter setups, | t| < 1. Movements on the
iTracker were perceived as more effortless (M = 6.45) than on
the eTracker (M = 4.93), t(28) = 2.22, p =. 0 3 5 ,d = 0.41, with
the MouseTracker (M = 5.28) in between,ts ≤ 1.66, ps ≥ .109,
ds ≤ 0.31. However, the eTracker was found to be less prone to
errors (M = 5.79) than the iTracker (M = 4.69), t(28) = 2.11,
p =. 0 4 3 ,d = 0.39, again with the MouseTracker (M = 5.72)
in between, ts ≤ 1.77, ps ≥ .089, ds ≤ 0.32. There were no
differences between the setups when it came to accessibility,
ts ≤ 1.71, ps ≥ .099 ds ≤ 0.32, or perceived control of the
movements, ts ≤ 1.03, ps ≥ .310 ds ≤ 0.19. More than half of
the participants chose the iTracker (62.1%) if they had to do
the experiment again, compared to the MouseTracker (20.7%)
and the eTracker (17.2%).
8 After the data recording session, some participants reported that in a small
fraction of trials, they were shown error feedback in spite of correct responses.
This error could not be replicated by the experimenters. We did not remove
these participants’ performance data, as feedback was only presented after a
movement was completed, but we removed their questionnaire data, as erro-
neous feedback might possibly taint the impression of one of the setups (e.g.,
judgment of error robustness). With the complete sample, the effect of overall
easiness did not emerge, all other effects did.
2400 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 8 ---
Discussion
In Experiment 1, we designed a Simon task and ran a version
of the same experiment with three different setups. All setups
produced main effects of compatibility, so in principle, all
setups were able to measure the small temporal and spatial
response differences between compatible and incompatible
trials, which serves as a manipulation check.
Before deriving any concrete recommendations for how to
design and analyze movement trajectory experiments in gen-
eral (and not only for Simon tasks), our approach still begs the
question of whether the results regarding the comparison of
different setups would generalize to other experimental tasks.
We believe that the Simon effect is a reasonable starting point
from which to make informed recommendations, at least for
experimental setups that aim at detecting spatial deviations
towards one of two competing response options. Whether
and how the suggestions that we describe here relate to other
tasks still has to be explored in future research, but until such
studies are available, we believe that the following can be used
to arrive at informed design choices.
Measures, measures
As a first, coarse assessment, we discuss the overall data pat-
tern to distill which measures best describe the effects of the
experimental manipulation on participants’ movement trajec-
tories, irrespective of the device these movements were per-
formed on. Overall, we found large compatibility effects for
all setups, specifically for SAs, MTs, and AUCs. As expected,
the spatial response conflict in incompatible Simon trials
slowed down responses and contorted movements towards
the colored stimulus area (Hommel, 2011). The results for
ITs are substantially weaker and suggest a moderate impact
of compatibility at best (for the iTracker). The expected se-
quential adaptation effect, indicating reduced compatibility
effects after an incompatible trial relative to after a compatible
trial, also emerged for ITs, MTs, and AUCs, whereas for SAs
this effect was (again) only found in the iTracker.9
Based on this summary, it is tempting to conclude that a
measure (as well as an experimental setup) is more useful the
more sensitive it is in detecting the almost “universal” Simon
effect studied in this experiment. Y et, this assumption is prob-
ably premature, as other experimental effects may show a
different profile. We thus do not intend to claim that, e.g., IT
has no informative value, but quite the contrary. There might
be settings in which this variable produces strong effects of
interest (e.g., when placing less emphasis on speedy initia-
tion). This again highlights that the choice of dependent var-
iables is far from trivial for mouse- and finger-tracking exper-
iments. Therefore, our Recommendation 1 is that researchers
should select their DVs according to the aim of the study
(ideally before running the study) and justify their choice ex-
plicitly. A tailored set of DVs that is derived from the partic-
ular research question will be better suited to describe the
cognitive processes that are to be studied, than applying a
standard selection in each and every study.
Mouse- vs. finger-tracking
Even though all setups were principally able to detect the
Simon effect, a closer look at the result pattern enables us to
infer some unique properties of the different setups. The
mouse-operated setups (MouseTracker and eTracker) show
very quick response initiations (that were also unaffected by
compatibility) compared to the finger-operated setup
(iTracker), suggesting that with the former setups, participants
start their responses with less planning than with the iTracker.
This impression is further corroborated by the observation of
initially “impulsive” movements (indicated by steeper SA;
also earlier TTPV and TTP A) and overall less target-directed
movement execution (indicated by higher MT and AUC; also
higher MAD and Curv, more negative MinX, and more
xFlips, see www.osf.io/am6yp) for mouse- versus finger-
operated setups.
Furthermore, a lack of planning might have led to more
biased movements to the wrong side in incompatible trials,
combined with a change in direction towards the correct target
area during response execution (indicated by higher compati-
bility effects for the mouse- versus the finger-operated setups
in AUC; also in MinX, MAD, and Curv). In basic button press
experiments, a considerable share of such insufficiently
p l a n n e dr e s p o n s e sw o u l dm o s tl i k e l yr e s u l ti ne r r o r sa n d
would be removed from further analysis, but the tracking set-
up allows for correcting responses on the fly. In turn, this
could explain the huge compatibility effects (in absolute
terms) that are obtained with the MouseTracker and
eTracker, as the trajectory for incompatible trials (and thereby
the difference between incompatible and compatible trials)
could be strongly driven by insufficiently planned and initially
incorrect movements (for a similar argument, see Spivey,
Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005; Wulff, Haslbeck, Kieslich,
Henninger, & Schulte-Mecklenbeck, 2019). Interestingly,
larger compatibility effects emerged only when assessing the
raw data of each device, in that both mouse-operated setups
produced numerically larger AUCs and also a numerically
larger absolute difference between the AUCs of the compati-
ble and the incompatible conditions. When comparing the
9 In addition to yielding the strongest compatibility effects of the three setups,
ITs of the iTracker were considerably higher overall than those for the two
mouse-operated setups. This pattern likely relates to biophysical differences
between finger movements and mouse movements. Interestingly, however,
using direct finger movements rather than transformed (mouse) movements
might thus induce response strategies that mirror findings from research on
expertise: Experts in a given domain tend to preplan more strongly than nov-
ices, so that their IT data often yields robust effects (Incera & McLennan,
2016; Jusyte et al., 2017).
2401Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 9 ---
standardized effect sizes of the compatibility effect (see Fig.
2), all three setups were surprisingly comparable, suggesting
that the larger deviations in the mouse-operated devices come
at the expense of considerable additional variance, with one
share of the trials producing very large deviations and the
remaining trials producing only a small deflection. This argu-
ment is further supported by an exemplary inspection of the
distribution of the AUC data of incompatible trials. The
MouseTracker and eTracker clearly show a broader, almost
bimodal distribution (see Fig. 3; kurtosis values of k ≤
−0.79, with negative kurtosis values suggesting bimodality,
Darlington, 1970), indicating that two distinct cognitive pro-
cesses make up this data, wh ile the iTracker produces a
unimodal ex-Gaussian distribution of AUC values ( k =1 . 7 7 ;
for similar results, see Zhang, 2019).10
In contrast, the iTracker shows relatively slower response
initiations (that are also affected by compatibility) and quicker
response execution times, indicating that responses are more
often properly selected prior to response initiation. This longer
planning seems to lead to overall more target-directed move-
ment trajectories that require less on-the-fly correction. Still,
the iTracker clearly produces the compatibility effect that we
tested for. The size of the compatibility effect is often smaller
here (only in terms of absolute values, but not dzs, see Fig. 2);
however, these differences are less driven by initiation errors.
Speculatively, this difference might suggest a purer separation
of planning and execution asp ects of the responses with
finger-movements as compared to the mouse-operated setups.
The question is now why a change of setups resulted in
such qualitative differences in responding in almost identical
tasks. Next to small design differences between the setups,
such as the lack of feedback for slow responses with the
MouseTracker, or the debatable choice of equating clicking
the mouse with touching the screen and lifting the finger from
the screen, a crucial difference between the touchscreen and
the mouse setups is that the latter setups inherently involve a
transformation of hand movements to cursor movements on
the screen. We did our best to make this translation as direct as
possible (with comparable speed and mouse acceleration
turned off). However, what cannot be assimilated is that for
the computer mouse, response location (on the table) and ef-
fect location (on the screen) are inherently different, whereas
with the touchscreen, there is a prefect translation of finger
movements to cursor changes, so that response and effect
location are inherently identical. Furthermore, this perfect
translation of finger and cursor changes also comes with a
higher risk of omission error when the finger slips from the
touchscreen, which cannot happen with the mouse.
Still, there remain differences that might have resulted in
more liberal response execution with the computer mouse,
even if that means that the cursor initially approached the
wrong target area. However, if it was their own finger that
moved on the screen, participants seemed to have been more
Fig. 3 Histogram of the AUC distribution of incompatible trials in
Experiment 1.O nt h e X-axis, bin width is 20,000 px, and the label for
each category represents the upper limit of the bin (e.g., the bin labeled
“0” contains values of −19999 px2 to 0 px 2). The Y-axis represents the
number of cases in each bin, plotted separately for each setup
10 We chose to base our assessment of the individual distributions on sample
kurtosis rather than combined measures of skewness and kurtosis such as the
bimodality coefficient, because the latter statistic can be distorted for strongly
skewed distributions such as the distribution observed for the iTracker (Knapp,
2007; Pfister, Schwarz, Janczyk, Dale, & Freeman, 2013).
2402 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 10 ---
cautious, taking care to avoid approaching the wrong target
area or traveling long distances, increasing the risk of produc-
ing an omission error. This might have to do with a special
sensitivity towards one ’s own body (Costantini & Haggard,
2007) or even enhanced attention towards the area around
one’s own hands (Reed, Grubb, & Steele, 2006;T a y l o r ,
Gozli, Chan, Huffman, & Pratt, 2015), but this qualitative
difference between the setups deserves more research.
These observations allow for a second recommendation:
Recommendation 2 is that researchers aiming at a precise
distinction of planning and execution processes are well-
advised to use setups with direct finger-tracking such as the
present touchscreen setup. By contrast, if the aim of an exper-
iment is to show a difference between two conditions of
interest—irrespective of whether this effect relates to errors
in early action decisions and movement planning, or whether
it relates to differences in how movements are executed —the
mouse-operated setups may yield larger absolute differences
between the conditions and possibly increased power.
Ready-made vs. custom-built
In addition to the pronounced differences between the two
mouse-operated setups and the touchscreen setup, the two
mouse-operated setups also differed systematically from each
other, which might be driven by those design choices that
could not be equalized between the two setups. For example,
the MouseTracker does not allow for presenting custom feed-
back except for commission errors, i.e., there was no feedback
for trials with slow response initiation or slow response exe-
cution. Another difference between the two mouse-operated
setups was the shape of the areas, which are rectangular by
design in the MouseTracker, whereas the eTracker used round
areas. These small differences again show that even seemingly
trivial design choices might influence how participants exe-
cute their movements to complete the task. This reasoning
overall favors custom-built setups over general-purpose setups
if programming skills allow for the former option to be used11.
Measurement precision
Another question pertains to measurement precision for
mouse- and finger-tracking setups (cf. Blinch, Kim, & Chua,
2018). That is: How many trials are required to properly mea-
sure the effect of interest? To approach this question empirical-
ly, we exemplarily analyzed the AUC data of each setup with
an increasing subset of trials (Trial 1-10 vs. Trial 1-20 vs. Trial
1-30 and so on, up to Trial 1-100, which would constitute the
complete first block of each setup; see Fig. 4). As the experi-
ment did not include any practice trials, it is also interesting to
see whether the smaller subsets differ from the larger ones, to
see how fast participants become familiar with the setup.
Data shows that compatibility effects were significant for
all subsets of trials, ts > 2.25, ps < .031, ds > 0.38, except for
the smallest subset of the iTracker, t(34) = 1.19, p =. 2 4 2 ,d =
0.20 (which is probably due to the high omission rate in this
setup). The size of the compatibility effect was stable after 30
trials (which comes down to about 12 trials per design cell
after errors and omissions are excluded), indicated by a lack of
interaction between the factors compatibility and subset of
trials when considering only subsets of 30 and larger for all
devices, Fs < 1.23, ps > .322. With this analysis, we do not
want to advise researchers to run decreasingly short experi-
ments with questionable trial numbers, but simply want to
demonstrate that movement tracking can produce robust re-
sults even for cases in which measurements cannot be taken
arbitrarily often or when the inclusion of a practice phase is
difficult. Assuming effect sizes of those studied here,
Recommendation 3 is thus to opt for a minimum of about
10–15 analyzable trials per design cell whenever possible.
Note, however, that this is only an exploratory analysis,
and that currently we use every participant ’s first block per
setup, irrespective of the order of setups that they worked on
(e.g., their first, third, and fifth block, with the order of setups
counterbalanced). A promising way to validate this analysis
would be a between-subject comparison of the very first trials
of an experiment, which our current experiment was not de-
signed for. Still, we believe that this analysis is informative
with regard to how fast each setup produces reliable measure-
ments (rather than how fast they become familiar with the
overall task requirements).
Subjective assessment
The questionnaire data further shows that handling of the
iTracker was rated easiest, most pleasant, most fluid, and
most effortless relative to the other setups. However, it
was also judged as more prone to errors, which might
stem from the fact that the iTracker introduced an addi-
tional type of error: response omissions via prematurely
lifting the finger from the screen (for a means to address
omission rates, see Experiment 4). Finally, the iTracker
was also the setup that more than half of participants
c h o s et ow o r ko ni ft h e yh a dt od ot h ee x p e r i m e n ta g a i n .
11 A promising intermediate solution would be the use of “mousetrap”
(Kieslich & Henninger, 2017), which offers a plugin to integrate mouse-
tracking with OpenSesame without needing to program the task manually.
This package was released after data collection had been completed for
Experiment 1 so that it could not be included in this analysis. For a thorough
guide on how to use the tool, see Kieslich, Henninger, Wulff, Haslbeck, &
Schulte-Mecklenbeck (2019).
2403Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 11 ---
Taken together, the subjective assessment clearly favored
the touchscreen device as an input method.
Interim conclusions
The results of Experiment1 suggest that, while all setups were
able to detect the Simon effect, there are differences in how
each setup captures the temporal and spatial dynamics of pro-
ducing hand and finger movements. Touchscreen setups seem
to be favored by the participants.
Based on these results, we decided to proceed with the
iTracker version for the subsequent experiments. Another rea-
son for this choice is that the iTracker is the newest of all
devices and requires further validation. In each of the subse-
quent experiments, one of the design choices of the current
iTracker setup was manipulated to see how it affects move-
ment trajectories. Therefore, the experiments do not build up-
on each other, and can consequently be read in any order.
Experiment 2: Spatial layout
Introduction
In Experiment 2, we manipulated the spatial layout of the
response locations. In Experiment 1, we chose a layout in
which movements had to be directed rather upwards (target
areas were located 600 px above and 300 px sideward of the
starting area). This arguably leaves much freedom regarding
execution, as, irrespective of the required response, move-
ments can initially be directed upwards to postpone the deci-
sion process at only a small temporal and spatial cost (Wong &
Haith, 2017). Other designs, however, employ wide layouts,
with some even placing the target areas on the same vertical
position as the starting areas (e.g., Buetti, Juan, Rinck, &
Kerzel, 2012). With a wider layout, movements to the wrong
target location are likely costlier, as the hand would have to
travel longer distances to correct for initiation errors (Burk,
Ingram, Franklin, Shadlen, & Wolpert,2014). This might lead
to a more cautious response strategy, and thus an expenditure
of more time to decide where to move before moving, rather
than to start moving early and decide on the eventual target
location on the fly. In Experiment 2, we therefore tested how
the factor layout influences movement trajectories.
Methods
Participants A set of twenty-four new participants were re-
cruited (mean age = 28.2 years, SD = 10.5, 7 male, no left-
handed) and were treated as in Experiment 1.
Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure Experiment 2 was built on
the iTracker version of Experiment 1. Stimuli, task, and in-
structions were unaltered, but the spatial layout of the exper-
imental setup was manipulated: The tall layout had the target
areas centered 400 px above and 200 px to the left and the
right of the center of the starting area, so that the perfect line
(see Fig. 1) produced an angle of 26.6° against the vertical
midline. The wide layout placed the target areas 200 px above
and 400 px left and right of the starting area, with the perfect
line producing an angle of 63.4° against the vertical midline.
That way, in both layouts, the distance between the center of
the starting area and the centers of the target areas was iden-
tical, but the tall layout required a more upward-directed
movement, while the wide layout required more sideward
movements. To fit both layouts on the iPad screen, the exper-
iment was run with the iPad in landscape mode (i.e., the longer
side of the device is oriented horizontally). Participants
worked on both layouts, layouts were manipulated between
blocks, and the order of the layouts was counterbalanced be-
tween subjects.
A block consisted of 100 trials in randomized order, with
an equal number of compatible and incompatible trials, and an
Fig. 4 Illustration of the measurement precision. Mean AUCs (Y-axis), separate for each setup, and current compatibility (gray circles for compatible
trials, black squares for incompatible trials) are plotted against each increasing subset of trials (X-axis)
2404 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 12 ---
equal number of required left and right responses. Participants
completed four blocks overall, two blocks per layout, with
short, self-paced breaks between blocks.
Results
Data selection Again we only omitted trials in which partici-
pants produced commission errors (5.8%) or omissions
(15.1%). Errors were committed equally often in both condi-
tions, Χ2(1) = 0.51, p = .475, but there were fewer omissions
in the wide layout (10.9%) than in the tall layout (19.3%),
Χ2(1) = 153.35, p < .001. The remaining data was left unfil-
tered, and preprocessing was conducted as in Experiment 1.
ITs, SAs, MTs, and AUCs were then analyzed via 2 × 2 × 2
ANOV As with current compatibility (trial N compatible vs.
incompatible), preceding compatibility (trial N-1 compatible
vs. incompatible), and layout (tall vs. wide) as within-subject
factors (see Fig. 5). Again, we only scrutinized interactions
with the factor layout in planned two-tailed t tests or separate
ANOV As. The full results with all DVs can be found in the
Supplementary Material.
Initiation times Data showed significantly faster response ini-
tiation for current compatible trials (460 ms) than for incom-
patible trials (475 ms), F(1, 23) = 10.74, p =. 0 0 3 ,ηp
2 =. 3 2 .
Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 22.51,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .50. The factor layout produced neither a main
effect nor any interaction, and no other effects were signifi-
cant, Fs ≤ 1.39, ps ≥ .250.
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (18.9°) than for com-
patible trials (27.7°), F(1, 23) = 29.27, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 5 6 .
Response initiation was steeper in the tall layout (12.3°) rela-
tive to the wide layout (34.2°), F(1, 23) = 111.29, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .83. Compatibility effects differed between layouts,
F(1, 23) = 5.36, p =. 0 3 0 ,ηp
2 = .19, with the tall layout pro-
ducing smaller differences ( Δ = 5.6°) than the wide layout
(Δ = 11.9°). Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1,
23) = 25.14, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .52. No other effects were signif-
icant, Fs ≤ 2.62, ps ≥ .119.
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response
execution for current compatible trials (311 ms) than for in-
compatible trials (331 ms), F(1, 23) = 17.78, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .44. Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) =
60.34, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .72. The factor layout produced neither
a main effect nor any interaction, and no other effects were
significant, Fs ≤ 1.98, ps ≥ .173.
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly great-
er spatial deviations for current incompatible trials (8519 px2)
than for compatible trials (4823 px 2), F(1, 23) = 17.12,
p < .001, ηp
2 = .43, as well as after compatible trials (7283
px2) relative to after incompatible trials (6059 px 2), F(1,
23) = 8.62, p =. 0 0 7 ,ηp
2 = .27. Overall deviation was smaller
in the tall layout (5245 px2) relative to the wide layout (8097
px2), F(1, 23) = 10.53, p =. 0 0 4 ,ηp
2 = .31. Sequential adapta-
tion effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 43.58, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 6 6 .N o
other effects were significant, Fs ≤ 1.55, ps ≥ .226.
Discussion
In Experiment 2, we manipulated the spatial layout of the
movement-tracking setup, with a wide layout that required
more sideward-directed movements, and a tall layout that re-
quired more upward-directed movements. First, what is sur-
prising is the high omission rate with the tall layout. Closer
inspection of the data revealed that this is mainly driven by
some participants who started with the tall layout and had
trouble understanding the instructions in the first trials.
Movements were generally executed correctly overall, but
the final landing position was just outside of the small target
area in most of the trials. Therefore, we do not want to read too
much into this difference (and address a possibility of
reducing the omission rate in Experiment 4).
Overall, results show that there are no consistent qualitative
differences for movement planning and movement execution
between these two conditions other than the obvious (SA is
steeper when the target areas are placed more upwards) and a
smaller congruency effect in SA for the tall layout.
However, data suggests that the rare initiation errors are
costlier in the wide layout than in the tall layout, indicated
Fig. 5 Main results of Experiment 2. Standardized effect sizes dz for the
effect of current compatibility (computed as current incompatible minus
current compatible) separate for each DV ( X-axis) and for each layout
(columns). For the full results, see the Supplementary Material
2405Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 13 ---
by the overall more extreme values for AUC (see also MinX
and Curv in the Supplementary Material). As there is little
room for uncertainty in the wide layout, the initial direction
of movement had better be correct, as every inch traveled in
the wrong direction must (almost) be traveled back in the case
of initiation errors. The tall layout offers more freedom regard-
ing movement execution, because participants can start their
response upwards without necessarily making a decision right
away. Still, responses do not seem to be initiated at a very low
threshold (as probably in the mouse-operated setups of
Experiment 1), so that the early phases of response planning
can still be interpreted in a meaningful way and produce a
significant compatibility effect. Hence, the increased degrees
of freedom in executing movements in a tall relative to a wide
layout encourages an online decision process, which lets us
better observe the unfolding of the decision during movement
execution (Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, Fischer, & Goschke,
2010; for an attempt to delay the decision process even further,
see Experiment 3). Somewhat surprisingly, the compatibility
effect in IT was similar for the two layouts. Based on the idea
that more processing occurs prior to movement start in the
wide layout, we would have predicted even larger compatibil-
ity effects here.
Therefore, we do not want to give a strong recommenda-
tion when it comes to layout, as this design choice seems
largely inconsequential, at least for the present experimental
design. This is especially true when comparing the effect of
the layout manipulation with the impact of different move-
ment distances (see the following between-experiment analy-
sis and Recommendation 4).
Between-experiment analysis: Influence
of movement extent
Introduction
In the iTracker setup of Experiment 1, the target areas were
600 px above and 300 px left and right of the starting area. In
the tall layout condition of Experiment2, the target areas were
400 px above and 200 px left and right of the starting area.
That way, the angle at which responses had to be initiated was
identical, only the distance between the starting area and the
target areas differed, with the short distance being two thirds
of the far distance. Therefore, we decided to compare these
two conditions to assess the i mpact of movement extent.
Unlike all other design factors that are tested in this line of
research, this is a between-participant comparison that extracts
only one condition of each experiment rather than an active
manipulation of the factor movement extent, and it neglects to
take the order of conditions in each experiment into account.
Therefore, this comparison is a post hoc test, though it may
still provide informative suggestions for how to design a
movement-tracking setup.
Results
After removing all errors and omissions, ITs, SAs, MTs, and
AUCs were analyzed via 2 × 2 × 2 ANOV As with current
compatibility (trial N compatible vs. incompatible) and pre-
ceding compatibility (trial N-1 compatible vs. incompatible)
as within-subject factors, and distance (near vs. far) as a
between-subject factor (see Fig. 6). We only scrutinized inter-
actions with the factor distance in two-tailedt tests or separate
ANOV As. The full results with all DVs can be found in the
Supplementary Material.
Initiation times Data showed significantly faster response ini-
tiation for current compatible trials (406 ms) than for incom-
patible trials (422 ms),F(1, 58) = 20.38, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 2 6 .A
main effect of distance, F(1, 58) = 9.31, p =. 0 0 3 ,ηp
2 =. 1 4 ,
indicated faster response initiation with the far distance (380
ms) than with the near distance (465 ms). Sequential adapta-
tion effects emerged, F(1, 58) = 20.20, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 2 6 .N o
other effects were significant, Fs ≤ 1.37, ps ≥ .247.
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (5.9°) than for com-
patible trials (12.2°), F(1, 58) = 57.01, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 5 0 , a s
well as after compatible trials (8.3°) compared to after
Fig. 6 Results of the between-experiment analysis targeting movement
extent. Standardized effect sizes dz for the effect of current compatibility
(computed as current incompatible minus current compatible) separate for
each DV (X-axis) and for each distance (columns). For the full results, see
the Supplementary Material
2406 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 14 ---
incompatible trials (9.7°), F(1, 58) = 7.70, p =. 0 0 7 ,ηp
2 =. 1 2 .
Response initiation was steeper in the far distance (6.8°) rela-
tive to the near distance (12.3°), F(1, 58) = 10.96, p <. 0 0 1 ,
ηp
2 = .16. Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 58) =
27.78, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .32. No other effects were significant,
Fs ≤ 1.70, ps ≥ .197.
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response
execution for current compatible trials (369 ms) than for in-
compatible trials (398 ms), F(1, 58) = 55.53, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .49, as well as after compatible trials (380 ms) compared
to after incompatible trials (387 ms),F(1, 58) = 4.19, p =. 0 4 5 ,
ηp
2 = .07. A main effect of distance, F(1, 58) = 12.53,
p =. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .18, indicated faster response execution with
the near distance (330 ms) than with the far distance (419
ms). Compatibility effects differed between distances, F(1,
58) = 8.07, p =. 0 0 6 ,ηp
2 = .12, with the near distance produc-
ing significantly smaller differences ( Δ = 17 ms) than the far
distance (Δ = 38 ms). Sequential adaptation effects emerged,
F(1, 58) = 58.39, p < .001, ηp
2 = .50. No other effects were
significant, Fs ≤ 1, ps ≥ .871.
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly great-
er spatial deviations for current incompatible trials (20393
px2) than for compatible trials (11731 px 2), F(1, 58) = 69.17,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .54, as well as after compatible trials (17344
px2) relative to after incompatible trials (14779 px 2), F(1,
58) = 14.37, p < .001, ηp
2 = .20. A main effect of distance,
F(1, 58) = 49.99, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .46, indicated larger spatial
deviations with the far distance (23274 px2) than with the near
distance (5245 px 2). Compatibility effects differed between
distances, F(1, 58) = 27.41, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .45, with the near
distance producing significantly smaller differences ( Δ =
2850 px2) than the far distance ( Δ = 12535 px2). Sequential
adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 58) = 48.17, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .45, and they were further modulated by distance, F(1,
58) = 8.79, p = .004, ηp
2 = .13, and sequential adaptation
showed up for both distances, Fs ≥ 30.24, ps<. 0 0 1 .
Aftereffects did not differ between distances, F(1, 58) =
2.66, p =. 1 0 8 ,ηp
2 =. 0 4 .
Discussion
A comparison of the movement extent conditions (near vs.
far) revealed that, next to the obvious influences (e.g., increas-
ing MTs and AUCs with longer distances), unexpectedly, the
overall time to complete a trial was almost identical between
conditions (IT + MT + CT; near: 1210 ms, far: 1172 ms, | t|<
1). With the far distance, participants initiated their move-
ments sooner, and spent more time on movement execution,
which might have allowed the decision process to leave stron-
ger traces on movement trajectories. With the near distance,
there was less room for variation or on-the-fly corrections,
which is why participants might have planned and selected
their response properly in advance, resulting in smaller com-
patibility effects of the spatial parameters for the near distance.
Therefore, as Recommendation 4, we would advise the re-
searcher to choose a longer distance, so that participants spend
most of their time on movement execution rather than plan-
ning (whilst still producing meaningful results for the param-
eters mirroring the planning process), thereby allowing for
maximum (natural) movement variation.
Compared to the influence of the factor layout (see
Experiment 2), a larger movement extent seems to have a clear
benefit over a smaller one, so that we would advise re-
searchers to maximize the distance between starting area and
target area with the hardware setup that is available rather than
to insist on a specific geometric layout that might sacrifice
valuable screen space.
Experiment 3: Stimulus onset
Introduction
Having addressed the factors setup, spatial layout, and move-
ment extent, we will next focus on the time point of the stim-
ulus onset. In the previous experiments, we displayed the
stimulus color as soon as the starting area was touched, i.e.,
before movement initiation (also called static starting proce-
dure). That gave participants time to plan their movement
prior to its execution and determine some response parameters
in advance.
Especially if one intended to use movement trajectories to
study how attractions to certain response options evolve in
time, one would ideally need to postpone the decision process
to the movement execution station. This can be achieved by
displaying the stimulus only after the movement has been
initiated, or even only after a certain distance has been traveled
(e.g., Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, Fischer, & Goschke,2010,
also called a dynamic starting procedure), which forces partic-
ipants to postpone the decision process to the movement exe-
cution stage12. As an upside, with this procedure we can be
sure that the movement can capture every facet of the decision
process. As a downside, this inherently means that the early
stages of the movement, i.e., the data points prior to stimulus
onset, cannot be analyzed in a meaningful way. In Experiment
3, we tested how the onset procedure affects participants ’
12 As an alternative to tying the stimulus onset to the spatial distance that has
been traveled, some studies employ a (variable) dwell time within the starting
area before displaying the stimulus (e.g., Bundt, Ruitenberg, Abrahamse, &
Notebaert,2018; Wirth, Dignath, Pfister, Kunde, & Eder,2016). This does not
necessarily require one to postpone the decision process to the execution stage,
but a variable dwell time circumvents an automatic movement initiation after a
fixed time period, and it further separates the motor component of clicking/
touching from the initiation of the movement.
2407Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 15 ---
movement trajectories. This experiment is similar to the work
of Scherbaum and Kieslich (2018), which also varied the on-
set condition between groups of participants, but here we used
a within-subject manipulation, and we used three rather than
two different onset conditions.
Methods
ParticipantsA set of twenty-four new participants were recruit-
ed (mean age = 24.3 years,SD = 2.7, 3 male, 2 left-handed) and
were treated as in the previous experiments. The data for one
participant was removed from the sample, as this participant
reported having difficulty in handling the iPad after testing.
Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure Experiment 3 was built on
the iTracker version of Experiment1. This time, we varied the
time point of stimulus onset. As before, the target areas (and
with them, the stimulus color) could be displayed before
movement initiation (before condition: when the starting area
was touched), but now we also designed conditions in which
the target areas and stimulus color appeared simultaneously
with movement initiation (simultaneouscondition: when leav-
ing the starting area), or after having traveled about 20% (120
px) of the distance ( subsequent condition). Participants
worked on all three stimulus onset conditions, which were
manipulated between blocks, and the order of the stimulus
onset conditions was counterbalanced between subjects.
A block consisted of 100 trials in randomized order, with
an equal number of compatible and incompatible trials, and an
equal number of required left and right responses. Participants
completed six blocks overall, two blocks per stimulus onset
condition, with short, self-paced breaks between blocks.
Results
Data selection Again we only omitted trials in which partici-
pants produced commission errors (3.9%) or omissions
(11.4%). Fewer errors were committed in the subsequent con-
dition (3.2%) than in the before (4.2%) or simultaneous con-
dition (4.3%), Χ2(1) ≥ 5.48, ps ≤ .020, whereas the latter two
did not differ from each other, Χ2(1) = 0.17, p =. 6 7 6 . T h e r e
were no differences in omission rates, Χ2(1) ≤ 0.64, ps ≥ .426.
The remaining data was left unfiltered, and preprocessing was
conducted as in the previous experiments.
ITs, SAs, MTs, and AUCs were then analyzed via 2 × 2 × 3
ANOV As with current compatibility (trial N compatible vs.
incompatible), preceding compatibility (trial N-1 compatible
vs. incompatible), and stimulus onset (before vs. simultaneous
to vs. subsequent to movement initiation) as within-subject
factors (see Fig. 7). We only scrutinized interactions with the
factor stimulus onset in planned two-tailed t tests or separate
ANOV As. The full results with all DVs can be found in the
Supplementary Material.
Initiation times Response initiation was slower with stimulus
onset before movement initiation (253 ms) relative to the si-
multaneous (134 ms) and subsequent conditions (118 ms),
F(2, 21) = 9.16, p = .001, ηp
2 = .47, with significant differ-
ences between the before condition and the others, ts ≥ 3.55,
ps ≤ .001, ds ≥ 0.59, but no significant difference between the
simultaneous and subsequent conditions, t(22) = 1.25,
p =. 2 1 9 ,d = 0.21. Sequential adaptation effects emerged,
F(1, 22) = 4.46, p =. 0 4 6 ,ηp
2 = .17. No other effects were sig-
nificant, Fs ≤ 1.08, ps ≥ .359.
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (2.4°) than for com-
patible trials (4.4°), F(1, 22) = 13.60, p = .001, ηp
2 =. 3 8 .
Compatibility effects differed between conditions, F(2,
21) = 3.58, p =. 0 4 6 ,ηp
2 = .25, with the before condition pro-
ducing significantly larger results ( Δ = 3.8°) compared to the
simultaneous condition (Δ =0 . 2 ° ) ,t(22) = 2.54, p =. 0 1 6 ,d =
0.42, and the subsequent condition (Δ = 1.7°) in between, ts ≤
1.72, ps ≥ .094, ds ≤ 0.29. Sequential adaptation effects
emerged, F(1, 22) = 11.20, p = .003, ηp
2 = .12. No other ef-
fects were significant, Fs ≤ 1.71, ps ≥ .206.
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response
execution for current compatible trials (575 ms) than for in-
compatible trials (610 ms), F(1, 22) = 33.22, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .60. Response execution was faster with stimulus onset
Fig. 7 Main results of Experiment 3. Standardized effect sizes dz for the
effect of current compatibility (computed as current incompatible minus
current compatible) separate for each DV (X-axis) and for each stimulus
onset condition (columns). For the full results, see the Supplementary
Material
2408 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 16 ---
before movement initiation (486 ms) relative to the simulta-
neous (621 ms) and subsequent conditions (671 ms), F(2,
21) = 11.90, p < .001, ηp
2 = .53, with significant differences
between the before condition and the others, ts ≥ 4.05, ps
< .001, ds ≥ 0.68, but no significant difference between the
simultaneous and subsequent conditions, t(22) = 1.54,
p =. 1 3 2 ,d = 0.26. Sequential adaptation effects emerged,
F(1, 22) = 49.70, p < .001, ηp
2 = .69. No other effects were
significant, Fs ≤ 2.76, ps ≥ .086.
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly great-
er spatial deviations for current incompatible trials (43197
px2) than for compatible trials (36139 px 2), F(1, 22) = 32.80,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .60, as well as after compatible trials (40282
px2) relative to after incompatible trials (39054 px 2), F(1,
22) = 5.47, p =. 0 2 9 ,ηp
2 = .20. Compatibility effects differed
between conditions, F(2, 21) = 7.30, p =. 0 0 4 ,ηp
2 =. 4 1 ,w i t h
the before condition producing significantly larger results
(Δ = 10006 px2) than with stimulus onset simultaneous to
(Δ =5 8 4 0p x2) or subsequent to movement initiation ( Δ =
5329 px2), ts ≥ 2.84, ps ≤ .008, ds ≥ 0.47, but no significant
difference between the simultaneous and subsequent condi-
tions, | t| < 1. Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1,
22) = 31.19, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .59, and they were further modu-
lated by stimulus onset, F(2, 21) = 4.36, p =. 0 2 6 ,ηp
2 =. 2 9 ,
and sequential adaptation showed up for all conditions, Fs ≥
9.29, ps ≤ .006. No other effects were significant, Fs ≤ 1.70,
ps ≥ .207.
Discussion
In Experiment 3,w et e s t e dh o wt h es t i m u l u so n s e tp r i o rt o ,
simultaneous to, or subsequent to movement initiation affects
movement trajectories. Data shows that with the simultaneous
and subsequent conditions, participants start their movements
more impulsively than with the before condition, as there is no
stimulus to base their response on. Therefore, the early stages
of the movement cannot be interpreted in a meaningful way.
In contrast, SAs produce a significant compatibility effect on-
ly in the before condition, and AUC effects are also strongest
in the before conditions, which might be driven by a system-
atic pull towards the alternative response option in the case of
incompatible trials during the course of the whole movement
rather than only towards the end. For the temporal markers,
the duration of the whole response does not differ between the
conditions (IT + MT + CT; before: 1025 ms, simultaneous:
1226 ms, subsequent: 1304 ms; | t|s < 1.67, ps > .105, ds<
0.34), so that there is no overall benefit from having partici-
pants initiate their movements quickly. Matters might change
when using stricter deadlines, however. In the present setup,
participants were to initiate their movement within 1000 ms
and execute it within 1500 ms. Individual response initiation
and execution times were far below these limits in most of the
trials; shortening such deadlines likely would result in a more
similar pattern of results across the three conditions.
Furthermore, overall spatial distortions as captured via
mean AUC were similar across conditions. This suggests that
the data of the before condition comprises a larger share of
effects of interest, with more curved trajectories in the incom-
patible condition and more direct trajectories in the compatible
condition, whereas the measurements of both of the other
conditions comprise more unsystematic noise, as participants
have to opt for intermediate movements at first. Because of
such intermediate movements in the early phases of the tra-
jectory, relative differences between the compatible and the
incompatible condition are also necessarily inflated by differ-
ences in decision time after target onset, so that effects on
AUC likely comprise both spatial and temporal factors when
presenting the target on the fly.
Based on these considerations, Recommendation 5 is the
following: If one intends to study spatial parameters of move-
ment trajectories such as AUCs, MAD, or Curv, the target
should ideally be presented before movement onset.
Presenting the target on the fly, by contrast, might be more
viable if one intends to study the dynamics of the movement
trajectory such as X flips or entropy, even though this is purely
speculative at this point, as even the DVs that capture move-
ment dynamics did not favor the dynamic starting procedures.
Experiment 4: Target size
Introduction
Next, we will have a look at the factor target size. The previ-
ous experiments produced rather high omission rates, which
might indicate that the target areas are quite difficult to hit,
being rather small. According to Fitts ’ law (Fitts, 1954), in-
creasing the target size should speed up movements, because
less precision is required. However, with larger target areas,
movements could become more scattered, as there is a larger
area in which they can end, which might decrease the statisti-
cal power due to a higher variance. In Experiment4,w et h e r e -
fore tested how the size of the target areas influences perfor-
mance.
Methods
Participants A set of twenty-four new participants were re-
cruited (mean age = 27.3 years, SD = 1 0 . 0 ,7m a l e ,3l e f t -
handed) and were treated as in the previous experiments.
Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure Experiment 4 again was
built on the iTracker version of Experiment 1.T h i st i m e ,w e
varied the size of the target area. As before, the target areas
2409Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 17 ---
could be 60 px in diameter ( small target size ), and now we
added target areas of 120 px ( medium target size) and 180 px
(large target size) in diameter (smaller areas were not tested
due to the considerable number of omissions with target areas
of 60 px in diameter in the previous experiments). The center
of the target areas stayed the same in all size conditions.
Participants worked on all three size conditions, which were
manipulated between blocks, and the order of the size condi-
tions was counterbalanced between subjects.
A block consisted of 100 trials in randomized order, with
an equal number of compatible and incompatible trials, and an
equal number of required left and right responses. Participants
completed six blocks overall, two blocks per size condition,
with short, self-paced breaks between blocks.
Results
Data selection Again we only omitted trials in which partici-
pants produced commission errors (5.6%) or omissions
(6.3%). More errors were committed in the large target con-
dition (6.8%) than in the small (4.9%) or medium condition
(5.1%), Χ2(1) ≥ 16.07, ps < .001, whereas the latter two did
not differ from each other, Χ2(1) = 0.17, p = .676. Omissions
were committed more often in the small target condition
(11.0%) than in the large (3.8%) or medium condition
(4.2%), Χ2(1) ≥ 172.18, ps < .001, whereas the latter two did
not differ from each other,Χ2(1) = 1.43, p =. 2 3 2 .T h er e m a i n -
ing data was left unfiltered, and preprocessing was conducted
as in the previous experiments.
ITs, SAs, MTs, and AUCs were then analyzed via 2 × 2 × 3
ANOV As with current compatibility (trial N compatible vs.
incompatible), preceding compatibility (trial N-1 compatible
vs. incompatible), and target size (small vs. medium vs. large)
as within-subject factors (see Fig. 8). We only scrutinized
interactions with the factor target size in planned two-tailed t
tests or separate ANOV As. The full results with all DVs can be
found in the Supplementary Material.
Initiation times Response initiation was faster after compati-
ble trials (396 ms) than after incompatible trials (407 ms),F(1,
23) = 14.47, p =. 0 1 2 ,ηp
2 = .25. Sequential adaptation effects
emerged, F(1, 23) = 17.43, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .43, and they were
further modulated by target size, F(2, 22) = 5.32, p = .013,
ηp
2 = .33, and sequential adaptation showed up only for the
small and large targets, Fs ≥ 8.37, ps < .008, and not with
medium-sized targets, F(1, 23) = 1.60, p = .219, ηp
2 = .07.
No other effects were significant, Fs ≤ 3.38, ps ≥ .079.
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (6.9°) than for com-
patible trials (12.0°), F(1, 23) = 42.29, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 6 5 , a s
well as after compatible trials (9.9°) relative to after incompat-
ible trials (9.0°), F(1, 23) = 5.00, p = .035, ηp
2 =. 1 8 .
Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 35.88,
p < .001, ηp
2 = .61. No other effects were significant, Fs ≤
2.29, ps ≥ .125.
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response ex-
ecution for current compatible trials (339 ms) than for incom-
patible trials (359 ms), F(1, 23) = 19.05, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .45.
Response execution was slower with small targets (412 ms)
relative to medium (332 ms) and large targets (303 ms), F(2,
22) = 38.26,p < .001, ηp
2 = .78, with significant differences be-
tween all conditions, ts ≥ 3.12, ps < .001, ds ≥ 0.52. Sequential
adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 49.04, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .68. No other effects were significant,Fs ≤ 1.18,ps ≥ .289.
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly great-
er spatial deviations for current incompatible trials (21042
px2) than for compatible trials (15089 px 2), F(1, 23) = 28.87,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .56. Sequential adaptation effects emerged,
F(1, 23) = 51.81, p < .001, ηp
2 = .69. No other effects were
significant, Fs ≤ 1.98, ps ≥ .173.
Discussion
In Experiment 4, we varied the target size in our setup. At a
first glance, this manipulation does not seem to affect move-
ment trajectories in a fundamental way other than the expected
influence on movement times and spatial precision (Fitts,
1954), with faster and more accurate movements for larger
Fig. 8 Main results of Experiment 4. Standardized effect sizes dz for the
effect of current compatibility (computed as current incompatible minus
current compatible) separate for each DV (X-axis) and for each target size
(columns). For the full results, see the Supplementary Material
2410 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 18 ---
target areas. Interestingly, even with the large target areas,
participants seemed to aim at the center rather than lifting their
finger as soon as some point within the target area had been
reached (see also the results for FDT in the Supplementary
Material, even with the large target areas, participants landed
on average within the perimeter of the small target area) 13.
Based on our results, asRecommendation 6, we would advise
the use of medium-sized target areas (with an index of
difficulty of ID=1.05 here; Fitts, 1954), as they represent a
good compromise when trading off omission rate for spatial
precision requirements. As an alternative, one might also dis-
play small target areas during the experiment (e.g., 60 px in
diameter), but when processing the data, use virtual target
areas that are somewhat larger (e.g., 100 px in diameter).
That way, all movements that fell just short of being accurate
enough for the small targets can still be included in the anal-
ysis, but because the small target areas are displayed, the ex-
periment still requires high spatial precision, increasing uni-
formity at the beginning and end of the trajectories, so that
variations during the proper execution can be best observed.
Experiment 5: Hit detection
Introduction
In the final experiment of this series, we will have a look at
how target hits are detected. In all our previous experiments,
hits were detected when the target area was clicked or the
finger was lifted from the screen, within the bounds of the
target area, which requires high spatial precision at the end
of the movement (especially with small target areas, see
Experiment 4). In contrast to this so-called click condition
(terminology taken from the MouseTracker, although the
touchscreen devices require lifting the finger from the
screen, e.g., Foerster, Wirth, Herbort, Kunde, & Pfister,
2017; Wirth, Foerster, Herbort, Kunde, & Pfister,2018), some
setups simply require participants to hit one of the target areas
during their movement, but the movement does not necessar-
ily have to end within the target area ( hover condition in the
MouseTracker, e.g., Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, Fischer, &
Goschke, 2010). That way, movements do not have to be
slowed down at the end to produce a successful response,
which might provide more direct access to the movement
dynamics of the decision process. However, allowing
participants to end their movement anywhere (as long as one
of the target areas was hit at some point during the movement)
could produce more variable movement trajectories, which
might decrease statistical power. In this experiment, we there-
fore compared the two methods for detecting target hits.
Methods
ParticipantsA set of twenty-four new participants were recruit-
ed (mean age = 29.1 years, SD = 8.9, 8 male, 3 left-handed)
and were treated as in the previous experiments.
Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure Experiment 5 again was
built on the iTracker version of Experiment 1.T h i st i m e ,w e
varied the conditions for a movement to count as a target hit.
As before, one condition could require that a movement is
finished by lifting the finger from the screen within one of
the target areas ( lift condition), whereas another condition
would just require that the correct target area is touched during
the movement, but the finger could also be lifted outside the
target area ( touch condition). In both cases, a trial would be
completed with the release of the finger, but target hits would
be detected based on different criteria. In this way, the
affordance on the spatial precision is varied, with the lift con-
dition requiring more precise movements. Participants worked
on both hit conditions, which were manipulated between
blocks, and the order of the hit conditions was
counterbalanced between subjects. As with the manipulation
of the hit condition, both lift and touch conditions looked
identical, we placed small written markers (lift vs. touch) in
the lower right corner of the screen so participants would
know how hits were detected in each block.
A block consisted of 100 trials in randomized order, with
an equal number of compatible and incompatible trials, and an
equal number of required left and right responses. Participants
completed four blocks overall, two blocks per hit condition,
with short, self-paced breaks between blocks.
Results
Data selection Again we only omitted trials in which partici-
pants produced commission errors (3.4%) or omissions
(7.1%). Errors were more prominent in the lift condition
(4.3%) than in the touch condition (2.5%), Χ2(1) = 26.24,
p < .001, and there were more omissions in the lift condition
(8.5%) than in the touch condition (5.6%), Χ2(1) = 30.13,
p < .001. The remaining data was left unfiltered, and prepro-
cessing was conducted as in the previous experiments.
ITs, SAs, MTs, and AUCs were then analyzed via 2 × 2 × 2
ANOV As with current compatibility (trial N compatible vs.
13 We hypothesized that this might be due to the fact that target size was
manipulated within participants, and might become more variable if partici-
pants had only encountered the large target areas. We tested this hypothesis
empirically by analyzing only the first condition of each participant. Still, we
found that participants on average seemed to aim for the center of the target
area, with final movement positions within the perimeter of the smallest target
area for all conditions.
2411Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 19 ---
incompatible), preceding compatibility (trial N-1 compatible
vs. incompatible), and hit condition (lift vs. touch) as within-
subject factors (see Fig. 9). Again, we only scrutinized inter-
actions with the factor hit condition in planned two-tailed t
tests or separate ANOV As. The full results with all DVs can be
found in the Supplementary Material.
Initiation times Data showed significantly faster response ini-
tiation for current compatible trials (377 ms) than for incom-
patible trials (390 ms),F(1, 23) = 20.75,p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 4 7 ,a s
well as after compatible trials (378 ms) relative to after incom-
patible trials (389 ms), F(1, 23) = 18.63, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 =. 4 5 .
Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 10.54, p =
.004, ηp
2 = .31. The factor hit condition produced neither a
main effect nor any interaction, and no other effects were
significant, Fs<1 .
Starting angles Data showed significantly steeper response
initiation for current incompatible trials (3.7°) than for com-
patible trials (9.1°), F(1, 23) = 41.60, p < .001, ηp
2 = .64.
Sequential adaptation effects emerged, F(1, 23) = 19.66,
p < .001, ηp
2 = .46. No other effects were significant, Fs ≤
1.94, ps ≥ .177.
Movement times Data showed significantly faster response
execution for current compatible trials (413 ms) than for in-
compatible trials (438 ms), F(1, 23) = 21.70, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .49, as well as after compatible trials (430 ms) relative
to after incompatible trials (420 ms),F(1, 23) = 6.72, p =. 0 1 6 ,
ηp
2 = .23. Response execution was overall faster in the touch
condition (388 ms) than in the lift condition (462 ms), F(1,
23) = 17.39, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .43. Sequential adaptation effects
emerged, F(1, 23) = 55.24, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .71. No other ef-
fects were significant, Fs<1 .
Area under the curve Movements showed significantly great-
er spatial deviations for current incompatible trials (26035
px2) than for compatible trials (18957 px 2), F(1, 23) = 34.24,
p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .60, as well as after compatible trials (23782
px2) relative to after incompatible trials (21210 px 2), F(1,
23) = 16.20, p =. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .41. Sequential adaptation effects
emerged, F(1, 23) = 42.26, p <. 0 0 1 ,ηp
2 = .64. No other ef-
fects were significant, Fs ≤ 1.04, ps ≥ .318.
Discussion
In Experiment 5, we tested different methods of how target
hits were detected. In the lift condition, participants had to end
their movement within a target area, whereas in the touch
condition, they simply had to hit one of the target areas during
their movement without necessarily ending their movement
within its confines. In the touch condition, participants were
quicker to execute their movement and release their finger
from the screen after hitting a target (see CTs in the
Supplementary Material). And obviously, when participants
are no longer required to end their movements within the
target area, the residual distance to the target center is larger
in the touch condition (see FDTs in the Supplementary
Material). Other than that, hit condition does not seem to in-
fluence participants ’ movement behavior in a fundamental
way. However, the touch condition produces fewer omissions,
due to the lower spatial precision that is required to success-
fully complete a trial. So as Recommendation 7,w es u g g e s t
that the touch condition can be a good alternative to larger
target areas (see Experiment 4) to reduce omission rates.
Contrarily, a recent study found less consistent movement
trajectories with the hover condition than with the click con-
dition (Schoemann, Lüken, Grage, Kieslich, & Scherbaum,
2019). Therefore, keep in mind that this recommendation
might be very specifically tailored to the current task and to
finger-tracking on touchscreen devices.
We allowed participants to continue their movement after a
target had been hit in the touch condition to be able to analyze
the final stages of the movement and derive DVs such as FDT.
However, that way, participants did not receive clear feedback
about whether they ultimately hit a target during their move-
ment. So, in the touch condition (or the hover condition in the
MouseTracker), one might also terminate a trial as soon as a
target is hit, to clearly signal a successful response. Of course,
this is only possible if markers such as the residual distance to
the target are not essential to the current research question.
Also, it is important to consider how and when measures are
Fig. 9 Main results of Experiment 5. Standardized effect sizes dz for the
effect of current compatibility (computed as current incompatible minus
current compatible) separate for each DV ( X-axis) and for each hit
condition (columns). For the full results, see the Supplementary Material
2412 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 20 ---
taken. Our approach here is to measure MT as soon as the
perimeter of the target area is crossed, irrespective of the hit
condition. Typically, the hover condition uses the same
criteria, neglecting anything that happens after entering the
target area. But in the click condition, MT is usually only
logged when the target area is clicked, not differentiating be-
tween MT and CT. This difference should be kept in mind not
only when designing movement-tracking experiments, but al-
so when interpreting the corresponding data.
Conclusion
The current line of research was conducted with two goals in
mind: first, to test how design choices can influence move-
ment trajectories in typical mouse- and finger-tracking tasks,
and second, to give an overview and evaluation of the most
widely used dependent measures that can be derived from the
corresponding movement trajectories. Overall, the setup that
we used produced robust Simon effects (as expected), which
is a crucial manipulation check. Based on how the Simon
effect varied across devices and based on how it was affected
by different design choices, our observations yield several
recommendations for designing and analyzing mouse- and
finger-tracking experiments:
& Measures: First, choose a set of dependent measures that
reflect your research question and the cognitive processes
that you assume to be at work. The choice of relevant
measures may even dictate some of the subsequent design
choices.
& Input device: For showing any effect between two con-
ditions, mouse-operated setups might yield higher effect
sizes than finger-tracking setups, which renders mouse-
operated setups ideal for proof-of-principle investigations.
If a researcher aims for more stringent distinction between
planning and execution processes, touchscreen devices
should be the input method of choice.
& Number of trials: Design your experiment so that each
design cell consists of at least 10–15 trials, after errors and
outliers have been removed. Errors and outliers can be
reduced by employing a practice block, providing useful
feedback, and adjusting the task affordance via the other
design parameters discussed here.
& Target distance: Place the target areas as far from the
starting area as the setup allows. With longer movements,
minute spatial differences can be observed more easily.
Choose a display layout (tall vs. wide) that allows for
maximized movement distances.
& Stimulus onset: If dynamic changes of the mind are of
central interest, displaying the stimulus only after a move-
ment has been initiated can postpone the decision process
to the movement execution stage. If the overall temporal
and spatial parameters of the movement trajectory are of
interest, displaying the stimulus before movement initia-
tion additionally allows for a meaningful analysis of the
planning and early movement phases.
& Target size: Choose a target size that does not require
overly high spatial precision, to prevent response omis-
sions. Especially with touchscreen devices, keep in mind
that the finger obscures the response location, so that the
diameter of the target area should ideally be larger than the
fingertip.
& Hit detection: As an alternative to adjusting target size to
reduce response omissions, you can also detect target hits
based on a touch instead of a lift criterion. Keep in mind
that with the variation of these detection methods, the
theoretical constructs captured by your measures might
differ as well.
When it comes to dependent measures, we consistently
observed robust effects for spatial parameters of the move-
ment as represented by summary measures such as AUC
and also in early markers such as SAs. Other measures such
as ITs or measures relating to velocity and acceleration (see
Supplementary Material online) were less affected. This
pattern mirrors the strong focus of the Simon effect on spa-
tial response conflict (Hommel, 2011). As highlighted in the
discussion of Experiment 1, this pattern should not be taken
to suggest that variables such as AUCs and SAs are gener-
ally to be preferred over other measures. Instead, the choice
of parameters should ideally reflect the aim of the research
at hand. If, for example, dynamic changes of the mind are of
central interest, one would ideally opt for measures such as
X flips or overall movement entropy. These measures ac-
count for directional changes during movement execution
and ideally capture evidence of decision uncertainty and
potential changes of mind more clearly than AUCs and
SAs. But if the overall movement behavior of participants
is of interest, (a set of) measures that reflect the temporal and
spatial characteristics of a trajectory should be chosen. To
give a short but comprehensive overview, we decided on the
measures IT, MT, SA, and AUC to report in the main text, as
we believe they capture both the temporal and spatial prop-
erties of both the early and the later movement phases. Still,
different research questions might require different mea-
sures, which is why we decided to analyze the whole range
of measures for all experiments and provide these analyses
online. This should enable informed decisions regarding
which particular measures to compute when planning a con-
ceptually similar experiment, and it allows for gauging how
these measures are affected by design choices. Further, we
also provide the raw data for more specialized approaches
(e.g., Joch et al., 2019; Scherbaum et al., 2010), as well as
the analysis scripts, so every step of the analysis can be
easily reproduced.
2413Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 21 ---
For the design choices when planning a movement-
tracking experiment, note that all recommendations are based
on a particular task (the Simon effect with two response op-
tions), and all except the first one were tested specifically for a
finger-tracking setup. Whether our conclusions generalize to
other tasks and other input devices should be evaluated in
future research (e.g., Scherbaum & Kieslich, 2018; Kieslich,
Schoemann, Grage, Hepp, & Scherbaum, 2020). Until such
studies are available, we believe that the current set of recom-
mendations can be used to arrive at informed design choices
that might make or break the detection of any given effect, so
each parameter should be selected carefully. With our recom-
mendations above, we do not wish to instate a“gold standard”
for designing any type of movement-tracking experiment, but
we acknowledge that different research methods are suitable
for different research questions. Therefore, it is also crucial to
be aware of how these design choices can influence partici-
pants’ behavior when completing their movement task, and to
be mindful of them not only when designing such experi-
ments, but also when interpreting the ensuing results. But
while a tailored set of design choices can have its advantage
for individual scientific endeavors, this approach can also
have its downside when it comes to replications or meta-
analyses (see Elson, 2019).
The Simon effect that we used is a rather basic and robust
finding, and here it serves as a proxy for other experimental
manipulations in which participants are to make a choice be-
tween two spatially separated response options. Because such
tasks are routinely used in research that capitalizes on mouse-
or finger-tracking, the above-mentioned recommendations
might provide a usable guideline when deciding on those de-
sign choices. Still, other tasks might require a slightly different
design. Also, with the current line of research, we only varied
one factor within a setup, neglecting any effects that specific
combinations of design choices might come with. We have
briefly alluded to some of these interactions in the discussions
of the individual experiments, e.g., how to prioritize target
distance over spatial layout. Similarly, we discussed how both
a hit detection based on a hover/touch criterion and the use of
larger target areas individually might be able to reduce omis-
sion rates, but a combination of large target areas and such a
hit condition could likely lead to overall less consistent move-
ments. So while we were able to derive specific recommen-
dations for each design choice, specific combinations might
come with additional pitfalls or benefits.
That said, we found that any of the tested design choices
was principally able to detect the Simon effect, so the
movement-tracking setup overall seems to be somewhat ro-
bust towards these methodological variations. Researchers
wanting to employ this methodology therefore only face a
low starting hurdle, and with the freely available software or
with basic programming skills, they can easily give it a go
without exhaustive piloting and testing of the basic paradigm.
We hope that the current overview of the methodological pa-
rameters involved can lower these starting hurdles even
further.
Acknowledgements This research was supported by a special grant of
the “Universitätsbund Würzburg e.V .” awarded to RW.
Funding Information Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Barca, L., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Tracking second thoughts: Continuous
and discrete revision processes during visual lexical decision.PLoS
One, 10(2), e0116193.
Burk, D., Ingram, J. N., Franklin, D. W., Shadlen, M. N., & Wolpert, D.
M. (2014). Motor effort alters changes of mind in sensorimotor
decision making. PloS One, 9(3), e92681.
Blinch, J., Kim, Y ., & Chua, R. (2018). Trajectory analysis of discrete
goal-directed pointing movements: How many trials are needed for
reliable data? Behavior Research Methods, 50(5), 2162-2172.
Buetti, S., Juan, E., Rinck, M., & Kerzel, D. (2012). Affective states leak
into movement execution: Automatic avoidance of threatening stim-
uli in fear of spider is visible in reach trajectories. Cognition &
Emotion, 26(7), 1176-1188.
Buetti, S., & Kerzel, D. (2008). Time course of the Simon effect in
pointing movements for horizontal, vertical, and acoustic stimuli:
Evidence for a common mechanism. Acta Psychologica, 129 (3),
420-428.
Bundt, C., Ruitenberg, M. F., Abrahamse, E. L., & Notebaert, W. (2018).
Early and late indications of item-specific control in a Stroop mouse
tracking study. PloS One, 13(5), e0197278.
Costantini, M., & Haggard, P . (2007). The rubber hand illusion: sensitiv-
ity and reference frame for body ownership. Consciousness and
Cognition, 16(2), 229-240.
Darlington, R. B. (1970). Is kurtosis really “peakedness?” The American
Statistician, 24(2), 19-22.
Debats, N. B., & Heuer, H. (2018). Optimal integration of actions and
their visual effects is based on both online and prior causality evi-
dence. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 9796.
Deubel, H., & Schneider, W. X. (2003). Delayed saccades, but not de-
layed manual aiming movements, require visual attention shifts.
Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences, 1004(1), 289-296.
Dignath, D., Wirth, R., Kühnhausen, J., Gawrilow, C., Kunde, W., &
Kiesel, A. (2020). Motivation d rives conflict adaptation.
Motivation Science, 6(1), 84–89.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). The action dynamics
of overcoming the truth. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17 (4),
486-491.
2414 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 22 ---
Egner, T. (2007). Congruency sequence effects and cognitive control.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(4), 380-390.
Elson, M. (2019). Examining Psychological Science through Systematic
Meta-Method Analysis: A Call for Research. Advances in Methods
and Practices in Psychological Science, 2(4), 350-363.
Erb, C. D., Moher, J., Sobel, D. M., & Song, J. H. (2016). Reach tracking
reveals dissociable processes underlying cognitive control.
Cognition, 152, 114-126.
Erb, C. D., Moher, J., Song, J. H., & Sobel, D. M. (2018). Reach tracking
reveals dissociable processes underlying inhibitory control in 5-to
10-year-olds and adults. Developmental Science, 21(2), e12523.
Faulkenberry, T. J. (2014). Hand movements reflect competitive process-
ing in numerical cognition. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 68(3), 147-151.
Fitts, P . M. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor system
in controlling the amplitude of movement. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 47(6), 381-391.
Foerster, A., Wirth, R., Herbort, O., Kunde, W., & Pfister, R. (2017).
Lying upside-down: Alibis reverse cognitive burdens of dishonesty.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 23(3), 301-319.
Freeman, J., Dale, R., & Farmer, T. (2011). Hand in motion reveals mind
in motion. Frontiers in Psychology, 2,5 9 .
Freeman, J.B. & Ambady, N. (2010). MouseTracker: Software for study-
ing real-time mental processing using a computer mouse-tracking
method. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 226-241.
Grage, T., Schoemann, M., Kieslich, P . J., & Scherbaum, S. (2019). Lost
to translation: How design factors of the mouse-tracking procedure
impact the inference from action to cognition.Attention, Perception,
& Psychophysics, 81(7), 2538-2557.
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G., & Donchin, E. (1992). Optimizing the use of
information: strategic control of activation of responses. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 121(4), 480-506.
Greenwood, M., & Spivey, M. (2014). Real-time Perspective Taking:
When Y our Decision is Influenced Through Visual Competition.
Proceedings of the Annual Meet ing of the Cognitive Science
Society, 36(36), 2298-2303.
Hehman, E., Stolier, R. M., & Freeman, J. B. (2015). Advanced mouse-
tracking analytic techniques for enhancing psychological science.
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 18(3), 384-401.
Hommel, B. (2011). The Simon effect as tool and heuristic. Acta
Psychologica, 136(2), 189-202.
Hommel, B., Proctor, R. W., & Vu, K. P . L. (2004). A feature-integration
account of sequential effects in the Simon task. Psychological
Research, 68(1), 1-17.
Incera, S. (2018). Measuring the Timing of the Bilingual Advantage.
Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1983.
Incera, S., & McLennan, C. T. (2016). Mouse tracking reveals that bilin-
guals behave like experts. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
19(3), 610-620.
Joch, M., Döhring, F. R., Maurer, L. K., & Müller, H. (2019). Inference
statistical analysis of continuous data based on confidence bands—
Traditional and new approaches. Behavior Research Methods,
51(3), 1244-1257.
Jusyte, A., Pfister, R., Mayer, S. V ., Schwarz, K. A., Wirth, R., Kunde,
W., & Schöneberg, M. (2017). Smooth criminal: Convicted rule-
breakers show reduced cognitive conflict during deliberate rule vi-
olations. Psychological Research, 81(5), 939-946.
Kieslich, P . J., & Henninger, F. (2017). Mousetrap: An integrated, open-
source mouse-tracking package.Behavior Research Methods, 49(5),
1652-1667.
Kieslich, P . J., Henninger, F., Wulff, D. U., Haslbeck, J. M. B., & Schulte-
Mecklenbeck, M. (2019). Mouse-tracking: A practical guide to im-
plementation and analysis. In M. Schulte-Mecklenbeck, A.
Kühberger, & J. G. Johnson (Eds.), A Handbook of Process
Tracing Methods (pp. 111-130). New Y ork, NY : Routledge.
Kieslich, P . J., Schoemann, M., Grage, T., Hepp, J., & Scherbaum, S.
(2020). Design factors in mouse-tracking: What makes a difference?
Behavior Research Methods, 52(1), 317-341.
Knapp, T. R. (2007). Bimodality revisited. J o u r n a lo fM o d e r nA p p l i e d
Statistical Methods, 6(1), 3.
Kunde, W., Schmidts, C., Wirth, R., & Herbort, O. (2017). Action effects
are coded as transitions from current to future stimulation: Evidence
from compatibility effects in tracking. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 43, 477-486.
Mahon, A., Bend žiūtė, S., Hesse, C., & Hunt, A. R. (2020). Shared
attention for action selection and action monitoring in goal-
directed reaching. Psychological Research, 84 , 313-326. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00426-018-1064-x
Maldonado, M., Dunbar, E., & Chemla, E. (2019). Mouse tracking as a
window into decision making. Behavior Research Methods, 51(3),
1085-1101.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2008). Action dynamics reveal
parallel competition in decision making.Psychological Science, 19,
22-24.
Moher, J., & Song, J. H. (2019). A comparison of simple movement
behaviors across three different devices. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 81(7), 2558-2569.
Pfister, R., Janczyk, M., Wirth, R., Dignath, D., & Kunde, W . (2014).
Thinking with portals: Revisiting kinematic cues to intention.
Cognition, 133(2), 464-473.
Pfister, R., Schwarz, K. A., Janczyk, M., Dale, R., & Freeman, J. (2013).
Good things peak in pairs: a note on the bimodality coefficient.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4,7 0 0 .
Pfister, R., Wirth, R., Schwarz, K. A., Steinhauser, M., & Kunde, W.
(2016). Burdens of non-conformity: Motor execution reveals cogni-
tive conflict during deliberate rule violations.Cognition, 147,9 3 - 9 9 .
Reed, C. L., Grubb, J. D., & Steele, C. (2006). Hands up: attentional
prioritization of space near the hand. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 32(1), 166-177.
Scherbaum, S., & Kieslich, P . J. (2018). Stuck at the starting line: How the
starting procedure influences mouse-tracking data. Behavior
Research Methods, 50(5), 2097-2110.
Scherbaum, S., Dshemuchadse, M., Fischer, R., & Goschke, T. (2010).
How decisions evolve: The temporal dynamics of action selection.
Cognition, 115(3), 407-416.
Schoemann, M., O’Hora, D., Dale, R., & Scherbaum, S. (2019). Using
mouse cursor tracking to investigate online cognition: Preserving
methodological ingenuity while moving towards reproducible sci-
ence. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/4ku26
Schoemann, M., Lüken, M., Grage, T., Kieslich, P . J., & Scherbaum, S.
(2019). V alidating mouse-tracking: How design factors influence
action dynamics in intertemporal decision making. Behavior
Research Methods, 51(5), 2356-2377.
Schween, R., & Hegele, M. (2017). Feedback delay attenuates implicit
but facilitates explicit adjustments to a visuomotor rotation.
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 140, 124-133.
Simon, J. (1990). The effects of an irrelevant directional cue on human
information processing.Advances in Psychology, 65,3 1–86.
Song, J. H., & Nakayama, K. (2008). Target selection in visual search as
revealed by movement trajectories. Vision Research, 48 (7), 853-
861.
Song, J. H., & Nakayama, K. (2009). Hidden cognitive states revealed in
choice reaching tasks.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(8), 360-366.
Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). Continuous attrac-
tion toward phonological competitors. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 102, 10393–10398.
Tabatabaeian, M., Dale, R., & Duran, N. D. (2015). Self-serving dishon-
est decisions can show facilitated cognitive dynamics. Cognitive
Processing, 16(3), 291-300.
2415Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416


--- Page 23 ---
Taylor, J.E.T., Gozli, D., Chan, D., Huffman, G., & Pratt, J. (2015). A
touchy subject: Advancing the modulated visual pathways account
of altered vision near the hands.Translational Neuroscience, 6,1 - 7 .
Wirth, R., Dignath, D., Pfister, R., Kunde, W., & Eder, A. B. (2016).
Attracted by rewards: Disentangling the motivational influence of
rewarding and punishing targets and distractors.Motivation Science,
2(3), 143-156.
Wirth, R., Foerster, A., Herbort, O., Kunde, W., & Pfister, R. (2018). This
is how to be a rule breaker. Advances in Cognitive Psychology,
14(1), 21-37.
Wirth, R., Kunde, W ., & Pfister, R. (2019). How not to fall for the white
bear: Combined frequency and recency manipulations diminish ne-
gation effects on overt behavior. Journal of Cognition 2(1), 11.
Wirth, R., Pfister, R., & Kunde, W. (2016). Asymmetric transfer effects
between cognitive and affective task disturbances. Cognition &
Emotion, 30(3), 399-416.
Wirth, R., Pfister, R., Foerster, A., Huestegge, L., & Kunde, W. (2016).
Pushing the rules: Effects and aftereffects of deliberate rule viola-
tions. Psychological Research, 80(5), 838-852.
Wirth, R., Pfister, R., Janczyk, M., & Kunde, W. (2015). Through the
portal: Effect anticipation in the central bottleneck. Acta
Psychologica, 160, 141-151.
Wulff, D. U., Haslbeck, J. M. B., Kieslich, P . J., Henninger, F., & Schulte-
Mecklenbeck, M. (2019). Mouse-tracking: Detecting types in move-
ment trajectories. In M. Schulte-Mecklenbeck, A. Kühberger, & J.
G. Johnson (Eds.), A Handbook of Process Tracing Methods
(pp. 131-145). New Y ork, NY : Routledge.
Wong, A. L., & Haith, A. M. (2017). Motor planning flexibly optimizes
performance unde r uncertainty about task goals. Nature
Communications, 8, 14624.
Zhang, C. (2019). Towards a psychological computing approach to dig-
ital lifestyle interventions. Eindhoven: Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven.
Publisher’sn o t eSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
2416 Behav Res  (2020) 52:2394–2416
