--- Page 1 ---
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-022-00135-4
ORIGINALPAPER
DisentanglingDiﬀerentAspectsofBetween-ItemSimilarityUnveils
EvidenceAgainsttheEnsembleModelofLineupMemory
ConstantinG.Meyer-Grant 1 ·KarlChristophKlauer 1
Accepted:23March2022
©TheAuthor(s)2022
Abstract
For modeling recognition decisions in a typical eyewitness identification lineup task with multiple simultaneously presented
test stimuli (also known as simultaneous detection and identification), essentially two different models based on signal
detection theory are currently under consideration. These two models mainly differ with respect to their assumptions
regarding the interplay between the memory signals of different stimuli presented in the same lineup. The independent
observations model (IOM), on the one hand, assumes that the memory signal of each simultaneously presented test stimulus
is separately assessed by the decision-maker, whereas the ensemble model (EM), on the other hand, assumes that each of
these memory signals is first compared with and then assessed relative to its respective context (i.e., the memory signals of
the other stimuli within the same lineup). Here, we discuss some reasons why comparing confidence ratings between trials
with and without a dud (i.e., a lure with no systematic resemblance to the target) in an otherwise fair lineup—results of
which have been interpreted as evidence in favor of the EM—is in fact inconclusive for differentiating between the EM and
the IOM. However, the lack of diagnostic value hinges on the fact that in these experiments two aspects of between-item
similarity (viz. old–new and within-lineup similarity) are perfectly confounded. Indeed, if separately manipulating old–new
similarity, we demonstrate that EM and IOM make distinct predictions. Following this, we show that previously published
data are inconsistent with the predictions made by the EM.
Keywords Recognition memory · Similarity · Eyewitness identification · Ensemble models · Signal detection theory ·
Simultaneous detection and identification
Introduction
In the past, basic recognition memory research largely
relied on single-item recognition paradigms (e.g., Br ¨oder
&S c h ¨utz, 2009) in which participants are asked to decide
for each individually presented test stimulus whether it is a
previously studied old item (i.e., a target) or a nonstudied
new item (i.e., a lure). Over the last few decades, memory
researchers have proposed a plethora of different cognitive
models to explore the latent processes underlying decisions
in these situations (see, e.g., Malmberg, 2008;P a r k s&
Yonelinas, 2008; Rotello, 2017;J a n ge ta l . ,2009).
A prominent assumption made by many such models
is that a continuous memory-strength signal (the so-called
/envelopebackConstantin G. Meyer-Grant
constantin.meyer-grant@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
1 Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, 79085,
Freiburg, Germany
familiarity; Morrell et al., 2002; cf. Glanzer et al., 2009)i s
elicited by each test stimulus presented in a recognition
memory task. These familiarity values are assumed to
be realizations of a random variable (RV) and are thus
stochastic in nature. The decision-maker can then compare
each familiarity value to a response criterion (λ)o nt h e
memory-strength dimension (Kellen & Klauer, 2018).
Whenever a familiarity value exceeds the response criterion,
the corresponding test stimulus will be categorized as
being old (i.e., previously encountered during study).
Otherwise, the test stimulus will be categorized as being
new (i.e., not previously encountered). Importantly, old-
item familiarities ( Xo) are assumed to be distributed
differently from new-item familiarities ( Xn), enabling
above-chance discrimination between these two types of
stimuli (Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). Models adhering to
these functional principles are usually referred to as signal
detection theory (SDT; Green & Swets, 1966; Macmillan
& Creelman, 2005;W i c k e n s ,2002; Kellen & Klauer, 2018)
models of recognition memory (Rotello, 2017; Kellen et al.,
/ Published online: 18 July 2022
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526


--- Page 2 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
2021). Often, both Xo and Xn are assumed to follow a
normal distribution (i.e., Xo ∼ N(μXo ,σXo ) and Xn ∼
N(μXn ,σXn)), leading to the so-called Gaussian SDT
model sub-class.1
In recent years, however, more complex experimental
paradigms have come into focus as they allow for novel
and more refined tests of specific model assumptions (e.g.,
Kellen et al., 2021; Kellen & Klauer, 2014; Meyer-Grant
&K l a u e r ,2021; V oormann et al., 2021). Consider, for
example, the situation in which participants are presented
with a set of m> 1 stimuli at the same time in each test
trial. Furthermore, assume that each of these sets can either
contain an old stimulus (a target trial) or not (a non-target
trial). Participants can now be asked to indicate whether they
believe a target to be present or not ( 1-out-of-m detection
sub-task), and they can also be asked to identify the stimulus
they think is most likely to be old ( m-alternative forced-
choice sub-task). Together, these two sub-tasks are referred
to as simultaneous detection and identification (SDAI;
Macmillan & Creelman, 2005).
Notably, this paradigm is of great importance for
applied memory research, especially for the investigation of
eyewitness identification. This is due to the fact that SDAI
is mostly equivalent to the widely used simultaneous lineup
procedure (see, e.g., Mickes & Gronlund, 2017). In such a
task, witnesses to a crime are presented with the suspect
along with some innocent fillers. The suspect can either
be guilty (i.e., a target-present lineup) or innocent (i.e., a
target-absent lineup). Witnesses are then asked to indicate
whether they believe the perpetrator is present in the current
lineup, and if so, to identify the perpetrator. 2 However,
this research tradition is only just beginning to explore the
potential of mathematical modeling, with Gaussian SDT
models in particular rapidly gaining popularity (e.g., Cohen
et al., 2021; Wixted & Mickes, 2014; Wixted et al., 2018;
1The normal distribution is chosen to model familiarity more for
practical than substantive reasons (but see Footnote 8)a n di s
therefore usually considered to be merely an auxiliary assumption
(see, e.g., Kellen & Klauer, 2018; Kellen et al., 2021; Rouder
et al., 2014). However, due to its almost ubiquitous use in modeling
recognition memory, we will mainly focus on Gaussian SDT models
in the following. Moreover, we will later demonstrate that—under
quite general conditions—the main argument of the present work
is not necessarily jeopardized by using alternative distributional
assumptions.
2Note that for forensic purposes, witnesses should not be asked to
always identify the person they believe is most likely to be the
perpetrator, as it is not intended to suggest that the perpetrator must
always be present in any given lineup. Instead, it is recommended that
witnesses only give an identification response (i.e., a response to the
m-alternative forced-choice sub-task) if they believe they recognize
the perpetrator (Wells et al., 2020); that is, for lineups in which they
believe the perpetrator to be present. In other words, whether or not
witnesses are asked to provide an identification response depends on
their decision in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task.
Lee & Penrod, 2019; Wixted & Mickes,2018; Colloff et al.,
2017).
Interestingly, SDAI has until recently been largely
ignored by more basic memory researchers concerned
with the evaluation and validation of such formal recog-
nition memory models (but see Meyer-Grant & Klauer,
2021). However, a critical assessment of the core concep-
tual assumptions of said models seems advisable because
applied researchers might otherwise draw erroneous con-
clusions based on improper models. This problem is further
aggravated by the fact that the classical SDT framework can
be extended in various ways to account for the responses
in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task (Wixted et al., 2018).
Two of these competing approaches—namely, the indepen-
dent observations model (IOM) and the ensemble model
(EM)—are of particular interest because both of them are
considered to be reasonably well supported by previous
empirical studies, despite proposing substantially different
cognitive mechanisms (Wixted et al., 2018;A k a ne ta l . ,
2021).3 As we will outline below, this is mostly due to the
fact that the experimental designs of past empirical inves-
tigations are inconclusive with respect to differentiating
between these two models. For the purpose of addressing
these issues, we will first briefly recapitulate and formalize
the characteristics of both modeling accounts.
IndependentObservationsModel
Arguably the simplest SDT model of SDAI is the IOM,
which has been known for quite some time in the literature
on SDT (Starr et al., 1975; Green et al., 1977; Green &
Birdsall, 1978; Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). This model
assumes that each item’s familiarity value will be separately
compared to the response criterion λ ∈ R. If at least one of
the m familiarity values exceeds λ, participants will give a
“target present” response. Therefore, the model prediction
for the probability of a hit (H) in the 1-out-of- m detection
sub-task (i.e., a “target present” response if an old item
is indeed present 4) is given by the probability that the
maximum of all familiarity values exceeds λ,t h a ti s ,
PIOM(H) = P
(
max
{
Xo, max
i∈{1,...,r}
{(Xn)i}
}
>λ
)
,
where r is the number of simultaneously presented lures.
3Wixted et al. (2018) also discuss a third variant (viz., the integration
model). However, this model could not be reconciled with their data
and was therefore decisively rejected (Wixted et al., 2018), which is
w h yw eo m i ti th e r e .
4Note that the meaning of the term “hit” in the context of SDAI refers
to a target trial being correctly detected as such, regardless of whether
that decision is followed by the selection of a target or a lure in the
m-alternative forced-choice sub-task. In other words, the term “hit”
refers exclusively to the responses in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task.
510


--- Page 3 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
The IOM further assumes that the identification response
(i.e., the response in the m-alternative forced-choice sub-
task) will be made according to which item elicited the
highest familiarity value (i.e., a maximum decision rule;
see, e.g., Norman & Wickelgren, 1969). Thus, the model
prediction for the probability of correctly identifying the old
item (I) and a hit is given by
PIOM(I, H) = P
(
Xo >λ, Xo > max
i∈{1,...,r}
{(Xn)i}
)
.
Figure 1 shows examples of probability density functions
(PDFs) of an equal-variance Gaussian SDT model (i.e.,
σXo = σXn = 1) for both target and lure familiarities
as well as the corresponding PDFs of the IOM’s decision
variables for a target (i.e., max {Xo, Xn}) and a non-target
(i.e., max{(Xn)1,( Xn)2}) trial, both withm = 2. Moreover,
Fig. 1 also depicts the respective model predictions for
the so-called receiver operating characteristic (ROC) as
well as the identification operating characteristic (IOC;
Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). By plotting the model
predictions for P (H) and P(I, H), respectively, against the
model predictions for the probability of a so-called false
alarm (FA; i.e., a “target present” response in the absence
of an old item 5), these curves show how changes in
the response criterion affect the relationship between the
predicted response behavior in target and non-target trials
(Macmillan & Creelman, 2005).
EnsembleModel
The EM likewise assumes that each simultaneously pre-
sented test stimulus elicits an individual familiarity value.
However, other than the IOM, it assumes that for each set
of test items, the decision-maker first computes the mean
familiarity of all simultaneously elicited item familiarity
values
M :=
{ Xo+∑r
i=1 (Xn)i
m , given a target trial∑m
i=1 (Xn)i
m , given a non-target trial
.
Then, the difference between M and each individual item
familiarity is computed. This difference is itself a RV with a
distribution that depends on the true status of the respective
stimulus (i.e., whether it is old or new) and on the present
context of stimuli (i.e., whether it is a target or a non-target
trial). We denote this RV as Do := Xo − M for old items
and as (Dn)i := (Xn)i − M f o rn e wi t e m s .I fa tl e a s to n e
of these decision variables exceeds the response criterion
λ≥ 0, a “target present” response will be given. The model
5Like the term “hit,” the term “false alarm” refers exclusively to the
responses in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task. That is, in the context
of SDAI, the term “false alarm” denotes incorrectly reporting the
presence of a target in a non-target trial.
predictions for the probability of a hit is consequently given
by
PEM(H) = P
(
max
{
Do, max
i∈{1,...,r}
{(Dn)i}
}
>λ
)
.
In other words, the EM assumes that the decision in the
1-out-of-m detection sub-tasks depends on how much an
individual item “stands out” from the rest of the lineup (i.e.,
a “target present” response is given if a single item appears
sufficiently more familiar than the rest of the lineup). In con-
trast, the IOM assumes that each stimulus within a lineup is
assessed separately by the decision-maker and a “target pre-
sent” response is given if at least one item appears sufficiently
familiar. From a theoretical perspective, these two mecha-
nisms therefore correspond to what are known asrelative and
absolute decision strategies (e.g., Dunning & Stern, 1994;
Charman & Wells, 2007; Clark et al., 2011), respectively.
The identification response, on the other hand, is—
analogously to the IOM—determined by which item elicited
the maximal familiarity value. Thus, the model prediction for
the probability of a correct identification and a hit is given by
PEM(I, H) = P
(
Do >λ, Xo > max
i∈{1,...,r}
{(Xn)i}
)
= P
(
Do >λ, Do > max
i∈{1,...,r}
{(Dn)i}
)
.
Figure 1 also shows the PDFs of the EM’s decision
variables for a target (i.e., max {Do, Dn}) and a non-target
(i.e., max{(Dn)1,( Dn)2}) trial, both with m = 2, as well as
the respective model predictions for the ROC and IOC.
SimilarLuresandtheDud-AlternativeEﬀect
One piece of evidence that—at first glance—seems to
favor the EM over the IOM is what Windschitl and
Chambers ( 2004; see also Wixted et al., 2018;C h a r m a n
et al., 2011)r e f e r r e dt oa st h edud-alternative effect .T h i s
effect describes the phenomenon that reported confidence
(in the target being present 6) tends to increase when an
6In the past, most experiments investigating the dud-alternative effect
have measured confidence ratings associated with the subsequent
identification response (i.e., the response regarding the m-alternative
forced-choice sub-task; Horry & Brewer, 2016; Charman et al., 2011;
Wixted et al., 2018). However, the confidence in the identification
response is—strictly speaking—not what is actually modeled, but
rather the confidence in the 1-out-of- m detection response. This is
the case because the decision variable of the 1-out-of- m detection
sub-task determines the confidence level in both models. From a
practical perspective, it seems appropriate to assume that both kinds of
confidence ratings are based on the same underlying decision variable
and hence are identical. We therefore adopt this view in the following.
Nevertheless, testing whether this assumption in fact holds might be a
worthwhile endeavor in its own right, which is, however, beyond the
scope of the present work.
511


--- Page 4 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Fig. 1 Graphical representation of different equal-variance Gaussian
SDT models for an SDAI task with m = 2. Upper panel: PDFs of lure
(μXn = 0; solid line) and target ( μXo = 1.25; dashed line) familiar-
ities, respectively. Note that Xn and Xo are uncorrelated. Middle left
panel: PDFs of the decision variables of the IOM in target (dashed
line) and non-target (solid line) trials, respectively. The dotted line
indicates the position of the response criterion λ = 0.5. Middle right
panel: The predicted ROC (upper line) and IOC (lower line) of the
IOM. Dotted gray lines represent guessing level. Black squares indi-
cate the predicted probabilities for the response criterion λ.L o w e rl e f t
panel: PDFs of the decision variable of the EM in target (dashed line)
and non-target (solid line) trials, respectively. The dotted line indicates
the position of the response criterion λ. Lower right panel: The pre-
dicted ROC (upper line) and IOC (lower line) of the EM. Dotted gray
lines represent guessing level. Black squares indicate the predicted
probabilities for the response criterion λ
512


--- Page 5 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
implausible alternative (a so-called dud, i.e., a regular lure
which exhibits no systematic similarities to the target) is
i n c l u d e di na no t h e r w i s efair lineup (i.e., a lineup comprised
of stimuli systematically resembling each other; Charman
et al., 2011; Horry & Brewer, 2016; Fitzgerald et al.,
2013). By the same token, adding a lure that resembles the
target (i.e., a similar lure) to an unfair lineup consisting of
randomly assembled stimuli (i.e., the stimuli of the lineup
do not systematically resemble each other) would tend to
reduce confidence.
In the context of eyewitness identification, for example,
similar lures are fillers whose visual characteristics match
the verbal descriptions of the perpetrator and/or the general
appearance of the suspect. The use of similar lures in real-
life lineups (i.e., constructing fair lineups) is generally recom-
mended since it has been shown to reduce the number of falsely
identified innocent suspects (Wells et al., 2020; Fitzgerald
et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2017). This is the case because
the rate of “target present” responses was f ound to increase
for unfair lineups compared to fair lineups, regardless of
whether the suspect is guilty or i nnocent (Fitzgerald et al.,
2013). Indeed, the dud-alternative effect is closely related
to this observation as it describes an increase in confidence
when the lineup becomes less fair (Horry & Brewer, 2016;
Fitzgerald et al., 2013).
Importantly, confidence is intricately tied to the magnitude of
the decision variable in SDT models of recognition memory;
that is, the larger the decision variable, the more confident
decision-makers are that a target was present (Kellen &
Klauer, 2018;D u b´e & Rotello, 2012; cf. Mickes et al.,
2017). Modeling a confidence rating (i.e., a graded response)
is then simply accomplished by assuming multiple stag-
gered response criteria that partition the memory-strength
dimension into multiple confidence regions. Furthermore,
this entails that an increase in confidence is tantamount to
an increase in hit (or false alarm) rate over different con-
fidence levels. To explain the dud-alternative and related
effects, it has thus been proposed that the more salient the
target familiarity is compared to its context (facilitated
by the inclusion of a dud in place of a similar lure), the
larger the decision variable and—as a consequence—the
higher the associated confidence. The EM is in essence an
instantiation of this idea (Wixted et al., 2018), which is
why the dud-alternative effect lends some credence to this
account.
At this point, however, it is necessary to draw attention
to one way in which between-item similarity has previously
been modeled: by introducing a positive within-lineup
correlation of memory signals while neither changing the
mean of the lure ( μXn ) nor the target ( μXo ) familiarity
distribution (see, e.g., Wixted et al., 2018). A positive
within-lineup correlation ( ρ{Xo, Xn} > 0) between target
and lure familiarity implies that if the target appears to be
relatively familiar (i.e., more familiar than an average target)
to the decision-maker, the lure tends to appear relatively
familiar (i.e., more familiar than an average lure) as well,
and vice versa. This modeling decision does address one
key aspect of between-item similarity, but overlooks another
crucial aspect that must not be ignored in this context.
In order to see why this is the case, consider a situation
in which target and lure are de facto indistinguishable by
a human observer (e.g., through only minimally changing
the color of a single pixel in a picture that was presented
during study, as discussed by Meyer-Grant & Klauer,2021).
According to the modeling approach described above, the
correlation between the target and lure familiarity values
ρ{Xo, Xn} would approach one in such a case. Thus, the
memory-strength “signals generated by the target and the
lure on any given trial fall at precisely the same point on
their respective distributions” (Wixted et al., 2018, p. 84;
see also Hintzman, 2001). If, for example, the familiarity
value elicited by the target falls one standard deviation
below μXo , then the familiarity value elicited by a lure
will fall one standard deviation below μXn .H o w e v e r ,a s
long as the means of both the target ( μXo ) and the lure
(μXn ) familiarity distributions remain unaffected by this
manipulation (and also μXo >μ Xn ), this implies that the
more similar the stimuli are, the better the identification
performance becomes, until eventually the model will
predict the identification responses to be always correct
(Wixted et al., 2018).7
Common sense, on the other hand, strongly suggest that
the opposite must be the case. That is, if a decision-maker
cannot distinguish between the stimuli, then (assuming
no additional biases) the response must be based solely
on guessing (see also Luus & Wells, 1991; Wells et al.,
2020). Thus, in addition to an increase in the within-lineup
correlation between familiarities, an increase in similarity
should be accompanied by a decrease in the mean difference
between target and lure familiarity distributions (i.e.,μXn −
μXo ). More precisely, as ρ{Xo, Xn} approaches one, μXn −
μXo must approach zero.8
7Note that this behavior does not depend on whether we adopt the IOM
or the EM framework, as both share the same mechanism for modeling
the identification response.
8Another argument that could be made here is that one rationale
for using the normal distribution to model latent memory strength is
to assume that these values are formed by summation over partial
memory information (see, e.g., Hintzman, 1984). The normality
assumption then follows from the central limit theorem under quite
general regularity conditions (Kellen & Klauer, 2018). Given that
a similar lure systematically shares a certain proportion of target
characteristics, the corresponding partial memory information will
likewise coincide. This not only results in both values being correlated,
but also in bringing the expected value of the similar lure familiarities
closer to the expected value of the target familiarities.
513


--- Page 6 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
This illustrates that in the dud-alternative paradigm we
are dealing with two different but perfectly confounded
aspects of between-item similarity: On the one hand, the
stimuli of a lineup can resemble each other (i.e., the
within-lineup similarity , as modeled by the within-lineup
correlation), and, on the other hand, a new stimulus can
resemble an old stimulus (i.e., the old–new similarity ,a s
modeled by the mean difference between target and lure
familiarity distributions).
Consider, for example, a forensic lineup of size m =
2 which contains the suspect and a filler that closely
resembles the description of the perpetrator. Since the
suspect naturally also matches this description, both within-
lineup similarity and old–new similarity are high in such a
scenario. For an illustration of how to disentangle the two
kinds of similarities, suppose that the crime was committed
by two perpetrators that are not systematically similar to
each other. This allows for the construction of a lineup that
contains a suspect that resembles one of the perpetrators and
a filler that matches the description of the other perpetrator.
In this case, within-lineup similarity will be relatively low,
whereas old–new similarity will be high.
Fortunately, SDT models of SDAI can easily be modified
to account for both aspects of similarity present in the
dud-alternative paradigm. Let us therefore only denote the
familiarity of a dud (i.e., a regular lure) as Xn and—in
distinction to this—the familiarity of a similar lure as Xs ∼
N(μXs ,σXs ). Now, we can specify that Xo and Xs are
positively correlated (denoted by the parameter ρ{Xo, Xs} >
0) while at the same time Xo and Xn are uncorrelated (i.e.,
ρ{Xo, Xn} = 0). Furthermore, we assume that μXo >μ Xs >
μXn and that the closer a similar lure resembles the target,
the larger ρ{Xo, Xs} and the closer μXs approaches μXo .
Expanding the SDT model framework in the above-
mentioned way does not compromise the conceptual appeal
of the EM in terms of predicting a dud-alternative effect.
But the presence of the dud-alternative effect is at the same
time not yet sufficient to rule out the IOM. The reasons for
this are twofold:
First, the presence or absence of a similar lure in the
dud-alternative paradigm is clearly apparent to the decision-
maker and thus not opaque to conscious understanding. 9
Thus, as was noted by Hanczakowski et al. ( 2014; see also
Wixted et al. ; 2018), participants could alter their response
criterion between both conditions; that is, they might adopt
a more conservative response criterion when a similar lure
is added to the lineup.
9The aspect of between-item similarity that is noticeable is arguably
the within-lineup similarity and not the old–new similarity (i.e., a
decision-maker likely discerns whether or not the stimuli of a single
lineup resemble each other).
Second, the IOM in fact also predicts the dud-alternative
effect to occur for many reasonable parameter specifica-
tions, even without assuming a shift in the response crite-
rion. This is due to the fact that the lower the correlation
between target and lure familiarities within the same lineup,
the higher the chance that a relatively high lure familiarity
will be elicited together with a relatively low target famil-
iarity.10 One can imagine that if a target and a lure do
not resemble each other, sometimes the decision-maker will
erroneously believe to recognize the lure while not recog-
nizing the target. If, on the other hand, target and lure are
highly similar, the decision-maker will most likely not mis-
take the lure for being old if the target already appears very
unfamiliar. In essence, the inclusion of a dud adds another
independent attempt to surpass the response criterion, which
is why this event tends to occur more often (i.e., a hit
becomes more likely; see also Fig. 2, top row of panels).11
One might object to this that the dud-alternative effect
is also present when only considering the confidence
ratings associated with a correct identification (i.e., a
target identification; e.g., Horry & Brewer, 2016). Initially,
the previous argument seems to be invalidated by this
observation; however, this is actually not the case: The
predicted probability of instances in which the lure
familiarity value surpasses the target familiarity value,
assuming no correlation between them and given their
maximum exceeds the response criterion λ (i.e., the
predicted probability of an incorrect identification given a
hit), is monotonically linked to λ itself in the IOM. That
is, the smaller λ, the more likely a lure will be identified
over a target, given a hit (see Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021,
who provided a proof of this dependency for m = 2
and different parametrizations of the IOM, including for
normally distributed familiarity values 12). In other words,
the smaller the maximum familiarity value, the more likely
it is that this value was elicited by a lure rather than a
10Note that the dud-alternative effect has sometimes been investigated
in the past by simply adding a dud to the lineup (Charman et al.,
2011). This resulted in an increase in lineup size ( m) between both
conditions. In such a situation, there is yet another mechanism of the
IOM that predicts the dud-alternative effect to occur: The maximum
of the lineup with a dud will tend to be greater than that of the lineup
without one, simply because there are more items available to generate
the maximum. However, other studies found an analogous effect even
if m is constant between both conditions (Horry & Brewer, 2016),
which is why this mechanism alone is not sufficient to account for past
observations.
11Importantly, this causal mechanism does not depend on the number
of stimuli ( m) presented in a single lineup. Thus, the IOM’s ability
to predict the dud-alternative effect does not depend on lineup size.
However, analogous to the EM, the magnitude of the effect predicted
by the IOM decreases as m increases.
12To our knowledge, there is no rigorous proof of this dependency
when m> 2, but simulations suggest that it holds for larger lineups as
well.
514


--- Page 7 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
target. Hence, these instances are selectively removed when
conditioning on a correct identification response, which
in turn results in an observable increase in confidence
in situations in which target and lure familiarities are
uncorrelated compared to situations in which they are
correlated (i.e., the dud-alternative effect). In fact, this
can lead to a stronger dud-alternative effect than if lure
identifications are also taken into account (see also Fig. 2,
bottom row of panels).
ACriticalTest
Whether or not a dud-alternative effect occurs in an SDAI
task is therefore not diagnostic for deciding between the
IOM and the EM. However, the task can be slightly mod-
ified in order to be much more informative in that regard.
While (for target trials) the within-lineup similarity cannot
be manipulated without affecting old–new similarity, sepa-
rately manipulating old–new similarity is in fact possible.
Fig. 2 Graphical representation of the equal-variance Gaussian IOM
(μXo = 1.00 , μ(Xs)1 = 0.25, μ(Xs)2 = 0.10, μXn = 0.00,
ρ{Xo,( Xs)1} = 0.90, ρ{Xo,( Xs)2} = 0.50, ρ{Xo, Xn} = 0.00) for m = 2.
Left column of panels: PDFs (top left panel) and probability densities
conditional on a target identification (bottom left panel) of the decision
variable in target trials with a similar (solid lines; black: (Xs)1,b l u e :
(Xs)2) and a regular (dashed line) lure, respectively. The dotted line
indicates the position of the response criterion λ = 0.5. Right column
of panels: The model predictions for the probability of a hit (top right
panel) in target trials with (ordinate) and without (abscissa) a similar
lure as well as the model predictions for the probability of a hit given a
target identification (bottom right panel) in target trials with (ordinate)
and without (abscissa) a similar lure (black: (Xs)1,b l u e :(Xs)2). The
dud-alternative effect corresponds to a curve below the diagonal iden-
tity line (dotted gray line). The stronger the effect, the lower the curve.
Squares indicate the predicted probabilities for the response criterionλ
515


--- Page 8 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
This simply requires that a similar lure (i.e., a new stimulus
which resembles an old one) is not paired with its similar
old-item sibling during test, but instead is presented together
with another old item (i.e., the similar lure resembles an old
stimulus, but not the target presented in the same lineup).
This raises the old–new similarity in such lineups while
leaving within-lineup similarity unaffected.
Such an experiment (with m = 213) was recently con-
ducted by Meyer-Grant and Klauer ( 2021). They first pre-
sented a sequence of several portrait pictures to the partici-
pants, who were asked to memorize them. In a subsequent
test phase, they then presented participants with lineups with
no systematic within-lineup similarity that either contained
a target and a regular lure, a target and a similar lure, a
regular lure and a similar lure, or two regular lures. 14 Par-
ticipants were then asked to provide a four-level confidence
rating as to whether or not they believed a target to be
present (i.e., the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task), and to sub-
sequently identify the stimulus they most likely believed to
be the target (i.e., them-alternative forced-choice sub-task).
Their results revealed that, first, people were more
likely to correctly identify the target when they were more
confident that a target was present; second, people were
more likely to falsely identify a similar lure (a so-called
pseudo-identification) over a regular lure when they were
more confident that a target was present; and third, people
were more likely to think a target was present in a target
trial when the target was accompanied by a similar lure than
when the target was accompanied by a regular lure instead
(Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021). They further showed that
the IOM is consistent with these observations. Here, we will
derive the respective predictions of the EM and show that,
unlike the IOM, it cannot account for this pattern of effects.
Let us therefore initially consider only the first two criti-
cal predictions identified by Meyer-Grant and Klauer (2021).
It can be shown that both predictions follow from certain rank
order probabilities (e.g., P (Do > Dn| max(Do, Dn)>λ )
in case of the EM) exhibiting monotonicity under changes
13Henceforth we will confine ourselves to an SDAI task with m = 2
as we want to focus on the data by Meyer-Grant and Klauer (2021)a n d
choosing m = 2 conforms to their experimental design. Furthermore,
it will suffice for the central research objective of the present work,
that is, to assess the tenability of the EM. An interesting side note is
that for m = 2, the so-called best vs. rest m o d e l( C l a r ke ta l . ,2011)—
a variant of the EM in which the maximum familiarity is compared
to the mean familiarity value of the remaining items (Wixted et al.,
2018)—is equivalent to the so-called best vs. next m o d e l( C l a r ke ta l . ,
2011), in which the maximum familiarity is compared to the maximum
familiarity of the remaining items. Hence, the critical test presented
here applies to these models as well.
14Note that in order to construct these different types of lineups, it was
essential to present multiple stimuli during study. Only in this way it
was possible to construct lineups with a target and a similar lure, that
is, a lure which resembles another studied stimulus other than the target
of the current lineup.
in the response criterion (Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021). As
we will demonstrate next, this property indeed also holds
for the Gaussian EM.
In order to provide a rigorous proof of this claim, we first
note that for a target trial and m = 2
Do = Xo − M = Xo − Xo + Xn
2 = Xo − Xn
2
and
Dn = Xn − M = Xn − Xo + Xn
2 = Xn − Xo
2 =− Do .
Because the normal distribution is stable under convolution,
we further find that
Do ∼ N
⎛
⎝ μXo − μXn
2 ,
√
σ2
Xo + σ2
Xn − 2Cov(Xo, Xn)
4
⎞
⎠
in the Gaussian case, where Cov(Xo, Xn)=ρ{Xo, Xn}σXo σXn .
Without loss of generality (except for the two degenerate
cases with perfect correlation of either ρ{Xo, Xn} = 1o r
ρ{Xo, Xn} =− 1) we set
σDo :=
√
σ2
Xo + σ2
Xn − 2Cov(Xo, Xn)
4 = 1
in the following and define
μDo := μXo − μXn
2 .
As previously mentioned, the EM assumes that the
decision in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task is determined
by whether or not max {Do, Dn} exceeds the response
criterion λ. We can therefore express the predicted
probability of a so-called miss (M; i.e., a “target absent”
response if an old item is present15)a s
PEM(M) = P(max{Do, Dn} <λ )= P(max{Do, − Do} <λ )
= P(|Do| <λ ).
However, in the Gaussian case this expression is equivalent
to the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a folded
normal distribution (more specifically, of a folded normal
distribution with scale parameter σDo = 1 and location
parameter μDo ). Thus, it holds that
PEM(M) =
{ /Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−λ− μDo ), if λ≥ 0
0, otherwise ,
where /Phi1is the CDF of the standard normal distribution.
15Like the terms “hit” and “false alarm,” the term “miss” refers
exclusively to the responses in the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task. That
is, in the context of SDAI, the term “miss” denotes incorrectly rejecting
the presence of a target in a target trial, regardless of whether that
decision is followed by the selection of a target or a lure in the
m-alternative forced-choice sub-task.
516


--- Page 9 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Furthermore, we can express the predicted probability of
a miss and a subsequent correct identification as
PEM(I, M) = P(Do <λ ,Do > 0)
since Do > 0 implies Xo > Xn if m = 2. Through
conditioning on Do = x we find that
P(Do <λ ,Do > 0) =
{ ∫λ
0 ϕ
(
x − μDo
)
dx, if λ≥ 0
0, otherwise ,
where ϕ is the PDF of the standard normal distribution.
Thus, it holds that
PEM(I, M) =
{ /Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo ), if λ≥ 0
0, otherwise .
The predicted probability of a correct identification given a
miss can therefore be expressed as
PEM(I|M,λ ) = PEM(I, M|λ)
PEM(M|λ) = /Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo )
/Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−λ− μDo )
=: τM(m=2)(λ)
for all λ> 0 according to the Gaussian EM.
Furthermore, one finds by means of elementary probabil-
ity theory that
PEM(H) =
{
1 − /Phi1(λ− μDo ) + /Phi1(−λ− μDo ), if λ≥ 0
1, otherwise
(1)
and
PEM(I, H)
=
{
1− /Phi1(−μDo )− /Phi1(λ− μDo )+/Phi1(−μDo )=1− /Phi1(λ− μDo ), if λ≥ 0
/Phi1(μDo ), otherwise .
Thus, it follows immediately that
PEM(I|H,λ ) = PEM(I, H|λ)
PEM(H|λ)
= 1 − /Phi1(λ− μDo )
1 − /Phi1(λ− μDo ) + /Phi1(−λ− μDo )
=: τH(m=2)(λ).( 2)
for all λ> 0.
Theorem 1 τH(m=2)(λ) and τM(m=2)(λ) are both strictly
monotonically increasing in R+ if μDo > 0 (i.e., if μXo >
μXn ).
Proof See the Appendix.
Consequently, both the increases in correct rate and—as
can be seen through exchanging Xo with Xs in the above
derivations and assuming μXs >μ Xn —in pseudo-identifi-
cation rate with confidence are consistent with the EM.
Interestingly, however, the model predictions regarding
the last critical effect discussed by Meyer-Grant and Klauer
(2021) differ between the EM and the IOM. As we
established above, if similar lures are included into the
design, we must assume that μXs >μ Xn in order for the
Gaussian EM to predict an increase of the pseudo-identifi-
cation rate with confidence—a direct consequence of
Theorem 1.16 But if this is indeed the case, one can show
that according to an equal-variance Gaussian EM (i.e.,
σXo = σXs = σXn = 1) in which the correlation between
familiarity values of a lure and a target does not depend
on whether the lure is a similar or regular lure (i.e.,
Cov(Xo, Xs) = Cov(Xo, Xn), as is to be assumed for
the experimental data under consideration here, where the
similar lure resembled an old item other than the target;
see Meyer Grant & Klauer, 2021), predicted hit rates must
be lower in target trials with a similar lure compared to
target trials with a regular lure (if m = 2). Furthermore,
this prediction is independent of the value of the response
criterion λand thus holds regardless of the confidence level.
Proposition 2 If μXo >μ Xs >μ Xn = 0, σXs = σXn , and
Cov(Xo, Xs) = Cov(Xo, Xn) it must hold that
PEM(H|λ,Similar Lure) ≤ PEM(H|λ,Regular Lure) ∀λ∈R+ .
(3)
Proof See the Appendix.
The qualitative prediction of the equal-variance Gaussian
EM that is entailed by Proposition 2 is the exact opposite
of the corresponding prediction made by any IOM with
a monotonic likelihood ratio of similar and regular lure
familiarities (see Proposition 9 in Meyer-Grant & Klauer,
2021). This can also be interpreted as an immediate
consequence of the central distinguishing aspect between
the EM and the IOM framework. That is, in the EM, it is
not the absolute familiarity values (as in the IOM) but the
relative familiarity values (i.e., how much a single stimulus’
familiarity “stands out” compared to the rest of the set) that
are relevant for the decision. In the presence of a similar
lure (instead of a regular one) the difference between target
and lure familiarity values tends to be reduced if μXs >
μXn . Thus, the predicted hit rate must decrease in such
circumstances according to the EM.
This discrepancy between the EM and the IOM can also
be visualized by depicting the two-dimensional decision
space of both models (Fig. 3), where each dimension
corresponds to one of the m = 2 test-item familiarity
values. Suppose that for a target trial, values on the ordinate
correspond to the old-item familiarity (Xo), whereas values
16Note also that this is an empirical argument for the point we made
above that assumingμXs = μXn —as done in previous modeling of the
dud-alternative effect—is untenable.
517


--- Page 10 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Fig.3 Two-dimensional decision space for a target trial (with m = 2)
of an equal-variance Gaussian IOM (left panel) and EM (right panel).
Solid lines depict contour lines (0.05) of the bivariate probability den-
sity function of the RVs {Xo, Xn} (black) and {Xo, Xs} (blue) with
μXo = 1.00, μ(Xs) = 0.50, μXn = 0.00, ρ{Xo, Xs} = 0.00, and
ρ{Xo, Xn} = 0.00. The dotted gray line indicates equality between target
and lure familiarity values. Realizations above this line correspond to
a correct identification. Left panel: For realizations above and/or to the
right of the dashed black lines at least one of the two familiarity val-
ues exceeds λ= 0.5, which corresponds to a “target present” response
in the IOM. Right panel: Above the upper dashed black line, Xo − 2λ
is larger than the lure familiarity value. Below the lower dashed black line,
the lure familiarity values is larger thanXo +2λ. Realizations between
these two lines correspond to a “target absent” response in the EM
on the abscissa correspond to the new-item familiarity (Xn).
Let us first consider the identity line Xo = Xn that passes
through the origin. Points above this line corresponds to
a correct identification for both the EM and the IOM, as
they imply that the target familiarity values exceeds the lure
familiarity value.
The key difference between between the EM and the
IOM in this representation is how both models partition
this decision space into different response categories for
the 1-out-of-m detection sub-task. The IOM assumes that
the boundary which separates “target present” from “target
absent” decisions is defined by the two line segments Xo =
λ and Xn = λ that terminate at (λ, λ), which is depicted in
the left panel of Fig. 3.A n yp a i r{Xo, Xn} such that Xo >λ
or Xn >λ is detected as a trial containing a target—the
larger the value of λ, the greater the confidence level. In
contrast, according to the EM, the relevant boundaries are
defined by the two lines Xo = Xn + 2λ and Xn = Xo + 2λ,
which is depicted in the right panel of Fig. 3.A n yp a i r
{Xo, Xn} such that Xo > Xn + 2λ or Xn > Xo + 2λ is
detected as a trial containing a target. There is thus a band
centered on the identity line Xo = Xn in which item pairs
are not detected as containing a target.
To reiterate, the effect of interest concerns changes in
the hit rate if a target is presented alongside a similar lure
(with familiarity values Xs ) instead of a regular lure (with
familiarity value Xn). As long as μs >μ n, the bivariate
distribution corresponding to target trials with a similar lure
is simply the distribution for a target trial with a regular lure
shifted by μs − μn to the right along the abscissa, which can
be easily seen in Fig. 3. This has the effect of increasing
the proportion of realizations that are detected in the
IOM, given λ remains unchanged (i.e., an increase in the
predicted hit rate; see left panel of Fig. 3). For the EM
model, on the other hand, the same rightward shift entails
that more probability mass crosses into the non-detection
band surrounding the identity line, thereby decreasing the
proportion of realizations that lead to detection (i.e., a
decrease in the predicted hit rate; see right panel of Fig. 3).
In their empirical investigation of this situation, Meyer-
Grant and Klauer ( 2021) found clear evidence for a higher
hit rate when including a similar lure instead of a regular
one, regardless of the confidence level. 17 This raises some
serious doubts regarding the validity of the central cognitive
mechanism proposed by the equal-variance Gaussian EM in
particular.
ReanalysisofPreviouslyPublishedData
However, the EM generally not being able to predict this
qualitative effect hinges on certain model assumptions. More
specifically, if the assumptions regarding variances and/or
covariances (as specified in Proposition 2) are relaxed,
the model can no longer be decisively ruled out based
on the occurrence of the critical effect alone. Moreover,
17Even if μXs = μXn is assumed, the prediction that follows in this
case (i.e., PEM(H|λ,Similar Lure) = PEM(H|λ, Regular Lure) for all
λ∈R+) is thus rejected.
518


--- Page 11 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
an unequal-variance assumption, in particular, is rather
prominent in Gaussian SDT models of recognition memory
(Jang et al., 2009; Mickes et al., 2007; Wixted, 2007; Starns
et al., 2012; Spanton & Berry, 2021; but see ; Wixted et al.,
2018) and should therefore be considered in the present
work. Hence, it seems worthwhile to complement our
argument with an additional quantitative model comparison
between the unequal-variance Gaussian IOM and the
unequal-variance Gaussian EM in order to ensure that our
criticism of the EM framework is indeed warranted. We
therefore conducted a reanalysis of the data by Meyer-Grant
and Klauer (2021) to address this particular issue, mirroring
their model comparison strategy.
Thus, we first fitted the parameters of both the unequal-
variance Gaussian IOM and the unequal-variance Gaussian
EM to the data aggregated across participants using a max-
imum likelihood approach (with σXo , σXs ,a n dσXn allowed
to differ from each other). Calculating the Pearson’s χ2 test
statistics for both models reveals that the EM ( χ2(17) =
392.71) provides a clearly inferior goodness of fit compared
to the IOM ( χ2(17) = 149.17). The top and middle row
of panels in Fig. 4 depict the respective model predictions
(for the ROC and the IOC as well as the hit probabilities
for target trials with and without a similar lure, respec-
tively) together with the corresponding experimental data
(Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021).
However, analyses of data aggregated across participants
neglect possible variability in parameters between partici-
pants and are thus susceptible to aggregation biases (Morey
et al., 2008; Juola et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2017). We there-
fore additionally conducted a Bayesian hierarchical model
analysis (Rouder & Lu, 2005; Rouder et al., 2017), in which
the parameter vector for each participant is separately drawn
from a population distribution. Again following the proce-
dure outlined by Meyer-Grant and Klauer (2021), we used a
latent-trait approach (Klauer, 2010) and assessed model fit
by means of a cross-validation index (CVI; Browne, 2000;
Gelman et al., 2013; Vehtari et al., 2017). The selection
of (hyper-)prior parameters, the cross validation proce-
dure, and the calculation of the CVI adheres exactly to
the specifications in Meyer-Grant and Klauer ( 2021). We
also provide model weights (W) calculated through stacking
of predictive distributions (Yao et al., 2018). All calcula-
tions are repeated two times with different seeds of the
random number generator (Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021).
Results clearly suggest that the IOM (MCVI =− 43 749.34,
SDCVI = 1.38, MW = 0.992, SDW = 0.011) pro-
vides a better account of the data than the EM ( MCVI =
−43 985.90, SDCVI = 1.64, MW = 0.008, SDW = 0.011).
This corroborates the preliminary conclusion drawn from
the analysis of the aggregated data.
Additionally, the bottom row of panels in Fig. 4
depicts the model predictions for the hit probabilities
given a correct identification for different confidence levels
together with the corresponding experimental data (Meyer-
Grant & Klauer, 2021). This reveals yet another critical
effect pattern that distinguishes the two model frameworks:
Including a similar lure that does not resemble the target of
the current lineup appears to increase the hit rate even when
conditioning on a correct identification response (i.e., the
confidence in a correct identification increases), as opposed
to just increasing the overall hit rate regardless of the
identification response.18 The IOM predicts such an effect
(see bottom left panel of Fig. 4) since targets selected over
similar lures should tend to be associated with a stronger
absolute memory-strength signal than targets selected over
regular lures, whereas the EM is once more unable to
adequately account for this pattern (see bottom right panel
of Fig. 4).
In order to further test this effect, we conducted three
generalized linear mixed model analyses (Singmann &
Kellen, 2019) with a logistic link function comparing the
relative frequencies for hits given a correct identification
response between target trials with and without a similar
lure. We therefore included the fixed-effect within-subject
factor “similar lure” (present vs. absent) as well as crossed
random-effect factors for participants as well as target
materials (Judd et al., 2012). The random effects structure
was determined by a backwards selection (for details, see
Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021).19 Each of the three analyses
addressed one of three different confidence levels. The first
analysis only treated responses with the highest confidence
as hits, the second one additionally treated responses with
the second highest confidence as hits, and the third one
treated all but the lowest confidence rating as hits. In all
three analyses, the hit rate was significantly larger in trials
with a similar lure (results are reported in Table 1;f o ra
pictorial representation, see Fig. 5).
Discussion
In the present work, we have demonstrated that two aspects
of between-item similarity, namely old–new similarity and
within-lineup similarity, must be treated as distinct concepts
and should therefore be separately modeled. By deriving
conflicting predictions between the equal-variance Gaussian
EM and many IOMs for situations in which old–new
similarity is selectively manipulated and m = 2, we have,
furthermore, shown that past empirical results (Meyer-Grant
18We thank Jeffrey Starns for suggesting to investigate this effect.
19The final random effects structure for all three analyses included
random intercepts for participants and targets, whereas the final
random effects structure for the two analyses described last also
included by-target random slopes for the factor “similar lure.”
519


--- Page 12 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Fig. 4 Data (dashed lines and crosses; lengths of cross lines cor-
respond to 95% bootstrap CIs) of the experiment conducted by
Meyer-Grant and Klauer (2021) and the respective model predictions
(solid lines and squares) of the best fitting unequal-variance Gaussian
IOM (UVG-IOM; left column of panels) and the best fitting unequal-
variance Gaussian EM (UVG-EM; right column of panels). Upper row
of panels depicts ROCs and IOCs for trials with (blue) and without
(black) a similar lure. Dotted gray lines represent guessing level. Mid-
dle row of panels depicts the probability of a hit in target trials with a
similar lure on the ordinate and in target trials with a regular lure on
the abscissa. Bottom row of panels depicts the probability of a hit con-
ditional on a correct identification in target trials with a similar lure
on the ordinate and in target trials with a regular lure on the abscissa.
Dotted gray line is the identity line
520


--- Page 13 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Table 1 Results of the three generalized linear mixed model analyses (accounting for different confidence levels) of the hit rate differences
between trials with and without a similar lure
Hit ˆP(H|I, Similar Lure) ˆP(H|I, Regular Lure) ln(OR) 95% CI χ2(1)p
Conservative 20.10% 17.51% 0.17 [0.05, 0.28] 8.02 .009
Medium 63.74% 60.11% 0.15 [0.04, 0.27] 7.14 .009
Liberal 92.48% 90.02% 0.31 [0.16, 0.46] 14.89 <.001
All p-values are Bonferroni–Holm corrected for three test. The log-odds ratio is denoted by ln(OR).
&K l a u e r ,2021) are irreconcilable with the equal-variance
Gaussian EM.
Although we have not elaborated on it thus far, this
critical test applies not only for a model parametrization
in terms of equal-variance normal distributions, but also to
other EMs in cases where the likelihood ratio of similar
and regular lure familiarities is a monotonically increasing
function (see the alternative proof of Proposition 2 in
the Appendix). This is arguably a quite reasonable and
defensible assumption to make as it is equivalent to a low
familiarity value being “more likely under the familiarity
distribution of regular than under the familiarity distribution
of similar lures, whereas for high familiarity values it is the
other way around” (Meyer-Grant & Klauer, 2021,p . 9 ;s e e
also Kellen et al.,2021; Rouder et al.,2021; Green & Swets,
1966).
A reanalysis of the data from Meyer-Grant and Klauer
(2021) additionally revealed that even when relaxing
the equal-variance assumption, 20 the EM is still clearly
outperformed by the IOM in terms of quantitative model fit.
It is also noteworthy that the key message of the present
work does extend beyond the class of SDT models of
recognition memory. One could, for example, imagine
a similar mechanism within so-called threshold models
(see, e.g., Kellen & Klauer, 2018; Coombs et al., 1970;
Bernbach, 1967). In contrast to SDT models, threshold
models assume that the latent memory signal is not directly
accessible by the decision-maker. Instead, these models
propose mediating mental states of discrete nature (such
as “correctly detecting a target to be old” or “correctly
detecting a lure to be new”), which can be reached with a
certain probability that depends on whether the stimulus is
old or new.
Recently, it has been shown that threshold models—in
particular the so-called two-high-threshold model (Snod-
grass & Corwin, 1988)—cannot explain certain response
patterns when manipulating memory strength and present-
ing multiple stimuli simultaneously during test (Kellen
et al., 2021; Kellen & Klauer, 2014). This is the case
20Note that an unequal-variance Gaussian SDT model withσXn ̸= σXs
does not exhibit a monotonic likelihood ratio of similar and regular
lure familiarities.
because—according to the standard interpretation of the
two-high-threshold model—a memory-strength manipula-
tion only affects the probability of correctly detecting a
target. However, the model predictions for the response fre-
quencies of interest do not depend on this very probability,
but only on the probability of correctly detecting a lure. To
avoid these problems, one could easily extend the two-high-
threshold model to operate in a similar way as the EM, that
is, by allowing detection probabilities to depend on the spe-
cific context of presented stimuli. This results in altering
the probability of a correct lure detection when the memory
strength of the target is manipulated (e.g., the stronger the
target’s memory signal, the easier it is to detect a lure).
However, this idea falls victim to the same observation
as the SDT version of the EM, since increasing the old–new
similarity would then decrease the probability of correctly
detecting a target, which in turn would tend to lower the hit
rate in such a situation. But this again directly contradicts
the observations reported by Meyer-Grant and Klauer
(2021). Therefore, our results also indirectly strengthen the
arguments by Kellen and Klauer ( 2014) and Kellen et al.
(2021).
There is, however, a caveat that concerns the applicability
of our findings to research primarily focused on eyewitness
identification: The experimental paradigm used to obtain
the data on which our argument is based (Meyer-Grant &
Klauer, 2021) differs from the paradigm commonly used
in that field. More precisely, the data under consideration
here are obtained via a multiple-trial experiment (i.e.,
testing each participants on multiple lineups), whereas most
research on eyewitnesses identification relies onsingle-trial
experiments (i.e., each participant is only tested on one
lineup; Mansour et al., 2017).
On the one hand, a multiple-trial design permits analyz-
ing the data by means of Bayesian hierarchical modeling,
which helps to avoid aggregation biases that may be present
but remain unnoticed in single-trial data. On the other hand,
in the task presented here, certain pairs of items that par-
ticipants encounter will tend to elicit two relatively high
familiarity values (i.e., target trials with a similar lure).
One could argue that in such a situation a comparative
strategy (as instantiated by the EM) is not advisable, as it
would lead to many misses in this scenario. Thus, the test
521


--- Page 14 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Fig.5 Mean relative frequencies (black dots) of a hit given a correct
identification in the absence and presence of a similar lure. In the left
panel only the highest confidence level is treated as a hit (hit conser-
vative), in the middle panel the highest and second highest confidence
levels are treated as a hit (hit medium), and in the right panel all but
the lowest confidence level are treated as a hit (hit liberal). Error bars
depict ±1SE (model based) and the violin plots depict kernel densities
of individual relative frequencies
environment may encourage an absolute strategy (as instan-
tiated by the IOM). This would imply that the results
may not generalize to single-trial situations, which might
encourage other strategies. Future research may address this
question by examining these effects in single-trial experi-
ments.
Another aspect of the experiment conducted by Meyer-
Grant and Klauer ( 2021) that differs from most lineups
used in forensic practice, is the number of simultaneously
presented items (typically, m> 2 for real-life lineups).
Although it seems at least reasonable to assume that the
basic underlying memory mechanisms do not depend on
lineup size, this conjecture may be verified in the future by
quantitative model comparisons for larger lineups.
Note also that the focus of the present work was on
SDAI, that is, on simultaneous lineup procedures. However,
the general theoretical ideas underlying the modeling
framework of the EM and the IOM can be extended to
sequential lineups as well (see, e.g., Dunn et al., 2022;
Kaesler et al., 2020).
Despite these limitations, we are inclined to conclude that
the central mechanism of the EM can be questioned on the
basis of our results, especially in light of the fact that other
pieces of evidence seemingly favoring the EM over the IOM
are inconclusive upon closer inspection (Wixted et al.,2018;
Akan et al., 2021). In fact, the IOM appears to be the only
SDAI extension of the SDT model framework which can
account for all observations discussed in the literature on
lineup memory to date.
However, this does not necessarily imply that this model
is uncontested. It has, for example, been argued that a low-
threshold model (Kellen et al., 2016; Luce, 1963;S t a r n s ,
2020) of SDAI could be a viable competitor to IOMs based
on SDT (Meyer-Grant & Klauer,2021). Moreover, unequal-
variance Gaussian SDT models are themselves known to
have certain properties that are at least controversial. For
instance, they do not possess monotone likelihood ratios,
which is—as already mentioned above—often considered
to be implausible (e.g., Green & Swets, 1966; Kellen &
Klauer, 2018; Kellen et al., 2021). Thus, while the present
work contributes to the debate on what qualifies as a
reasonable modeling approach for SDAI by questioning the
validity of one prominent candidate model (viz., the EM),
further research is clearly necessary to validate and/or refine
the models of recognition memory used to study lineup
memory.
Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1 First, we rearrange terms in Eq. 2 such
that
τH(λ):= τH(m=2)(λ)= 1
1 + /Phi1(−λ−μDo )
1−/Phi1(λ−μDo )
.
Clearly, forτH(λ)to be a monotonically increasing function,
it suffices to show that
T1(λ) := /Phi1(−λ− μDo )
1 − /Phi1(λ− μDo ) = 1 − /Phi1(λ+ μDo )
1 − /Phi1(λ− μDo )
=
∫∞
λ ϕ(z + μDo )dz∫∞
λ ϕ(z − μDo )dz
is monotonically decreasing. Taking the derivative ofT1(λ)
with respect to λ yields
T ′
1 (λ)= ϕ(λ− μDo )
∫∞
λ ϕ(z + μDo )dz− ϕ(λ+μDo )
∫∞
λ ϕ(z− μDo )dz
(∫∞
λ ϕ(z − μDo )dz
)2 .
(4)
The denominator in Eq. 4 is always positive and will
therefore be ignored in the following. Thus,T1(λ)is strictly
monotonically decreasing if and only if
ϕ(λ− μDo )
∫ ∞
λ
ϕ(z + μDo )dz − ϕ(λ+ μDo )
∫ ∞
λ
ϕ(z − μDo )dz
522


--- Page 15 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
= 1√
2π
∫ ∞
λ
exp
(
− 1
2
(
(λ− μDo )2 + (z + μDo )2
) )
− exp
(
− 1
2
(
(λ+ μDo )2 + (z − μDo )2
) )
dz
= 1√
2π
∫ ∞
λ
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 + z2 + 2(μDo )2
) )
(
exp
(
μDo (λ− z)
)
− exp
(
μDo (z − λ)
))
dz< 0( 5 )
for all λ∈ (0, ∞ ). Since it holds that
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 + z2 + 2(μDo )2
) )
≥ 0
and λ− z<z − λfor all z>λ , the inequality in Eq. 5 must
hold if μDo > 0. Thus, τH(λ)is monotonically increasing in
R+.
To show that
τM(λ):= τM(m=2)(λ)
= /Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo )
/Phi1(λ− μDo )− /Phi1(−μDo )+/Phi1(−μDo )− /Phi1(−λ− μDo )
= 1
1 + /Phi1(−μDo )−/Phi1(−λ−μDo )
/Phi1(λ−μDo )−/Phi1(−μDo )
.
is a monotonically increasing function, it suffices to show that
T2(λ):= /Phi1(−μDo ) − /Phi1(−λ− μDo )
/Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo )
= 1 − /Phi1(μDo ) −
(
1 − /Phi1(λ+ μDo )
)
/Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo )
= /Phi1(λ+ μDo ) − /Phi1(μDo )
/Phi1(λ− μDo ) − /Phi1(−μDo )
=
∫λ
0 ϕ(z + μDo )dz
∫λ
0 ϕ(z − μDo )dz
is monotonically decreasing. Taking the derivative ofT2(λ)
with respect to λ yields
T ′
2 (λ)= ϕ(λ+μDo )
∫λ
0 ϕ(z− μDo )dz− ϕ(λ− μDo )
∫λ
0 ϕ(z+μDo )dz
( ∫λ
0 ϕ(z − μDo )dz
) 2 .
(6)
The denominator in Eq. 6 is always positive and will
therefore be ignored in the following. Thus,T2(λ)is strictly
monotonically decreasing if and only if
ϕ(λ+ μDo )
∫ λ
0
ϕ(z − μDo )dz − ϕ(λ− μDo )
∫ λ
0
ϕ(z + μDo )dz
= 1√
2π
∫ ∞
λ
exp
(
− 1
2
(
(λ+ μDo )2 + (z − μDo )2
) )
− exp
(
− 1
2
(
(λ− μDo )2 + (z + μDo )2
) )
dz
= 1√
2π
∫ ∞
λ
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 + z2 + 2(μDo )2
) )
(
exp
(
μDo (z − λ)
)
− exp
(
μDo (λ− z)
))
dz< 0( 7 )
for all λ∈ (0, ∞ ). Since again
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 + z2 + 2(μDo )2
) )
≥ 0
and z− λ<λ − z for all z<λ , the inequality in Eq. 7 must
hold if μDo > 0. Therefore, τM(λ) is also monotonically
increasing inR+.
Proof of Proposition 2 First, we note that
√
σ2
Xo + σ2
Xs − 2Cov(Xo, Xs)
4
=
√
σ2
Xo + σ2
Xn − 2Cov(Xo, Xn)
4 = σDo
and that we can again setσDo = 1 without loss of generality.
It then follows from Eq. 1 that Eq. 3 is equivalent to
1 − /Phi1
(
λ− μXo − μXs
2
)
+ /Phi1
(
−λ− μXo − μXs
2
)
≤ 1 − /Phi1
(
λ− μXo − μXn
2
)
+/Phi1
(
− λ− μXo − μXn
2
)
.
Because μXo >μ Xs >μ Xn = 0, it must hold that
μXo − μXn
2 > μXo − μXs
2 > 0.
Thus, it suffices to show that
∂
∂μ (1 − /Phi1(λ− μ) + /Phi1(−λ− μ))
= 1√
2π
(
exp
(
− 1
2(λ− μ)2
)
− exp
(
− 1
2(−λ− μ)2
))
=
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 − μ2))
√
2π
(exp(λμ) − exp(−λμ)) ≥ 0 ,
which is clearly the case since λμ >−λμ and
exp
(
− 1
2
(
λ2 − μ2))
√
2π
≥ 0
if λ> 0a sw e l la sμ> 0.
Alternative proof of Proposition 2 First, let fXo , fXs ,a n d
fXn denote the PDFs of target, similar lure and regular lure
familiarities (i.e., the RVs Xo, Xs ,a n d Xn with the same
523


--- Page 16 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
support /Omega1= R), respectively. Furthermore, letFXs and FXn
denote the CDFs of Xs and Xn, respectively.
If we assume independence, then the complementary
CDF (i.e., the tail distribution function) of the difference of
two independent RVs, for instance, Xo and Xn (i.e., the RV
Xo − Xn), can be written as
(8)
where denotes the indicator function. If /Omega1⊂ R,t h e nw e
apply a strictly monotonic transformation G : /Omega1→ R to
Xo, Xs ,a n dXn (i.e., a change of variable for all familiarity
distributions, such that the support of the transformed
RVs becomes R). One immediately sees that Eq. 8 is the
probability of a hit as predicted by a nonparametric EM in
cases where m = 2, both item familiarities are independent,
and a regular lure is presented alongside the target.
By exchanging fXn and FXn with fXs and FXs , respec-
tively, in Eq. 8, we also find that
1 − F{Xo− Xs}(λ)=
∫
R
FXs (xo − λ)fXo (xo)dxo
is the predicted probability analogous to Eq. 8,w h e n
instead of a regular lure a similar lure is presented (still
assuming that its familiarity is independent from the target
familiarity).
If we further assume first order stochastic dominance of
similar and regular lure familiarities (i.e., FXs (x) ≤ FXn(x)
for all x ∈R), we easily see that
∫
R
FXs (xo− λ)fXo (xo)dxo ≤
∫
R
FXn (xo − λ)fXo (xo)dxo
⇔ PEM(H|λ,Similar Lure) ≤ PEM(H|λ,Regular Lure) (9)
indeed holds for all λ∈R+.
It is well known that a monotone likelihood ratio entails
first order stochastic dominance (Bapat & Kochar, 1994).
Consequently, all distributions exhibiting a monotone like-
lihood ratio of similar and regular lure familiarity distri-
butions (i.e., fXs (x)/fXn(x) is a monotonically increasing
function for all x ∈ R) also exhibit first order stochas-
tic dominance of the similar and regular lure familiarity
distributions (i.e., FXs (x) ≤ FXn(x) for all x ∈R).
Equal-variance Gaussian SDT models indeed exhibit
this monotone likelihood ratio and hence also first
order stochastic dominance of similar and regular lure
familiarity distributions if μXs >μ Xn . Furthermore,
for a bivariate Gaussian distribution, the absence of a
within-lineup correlation is equivalent to both RVs being
independent. Therefore, the inequality in Eq. 9 holds for the
equal-variance Gaussian EM, if there is no within-lineup
correlation.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Andrew Heathcote for
motivating the present work.
Authors Contribution Constantin G. Meyer-Grant had the idea for
the present work, conceived the line of argument, derived the
mathematical formalization of the models as well as the proofs
of Theorem 1 and Proposition 2, conducted the analyses, prepared
all the plots, and drafted the original manuscript. Karl Christoph
Klauer provided a vital step for the proof of Theorem 1, checked
all mathematical derivations, and edited the original manuscript. Both
authors read and approved to the final version of the manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Pro-
jekt DEAL. Constantin G. Meyer-Grant received support from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; German Research Founda-
tion), GRK 2277 “Statistical Modeling in Psychology.”
DataandCodeAvailability The data analyzed in the present work were
first published by Meyer-Grant and Klauer (2021) and are available in
an Open Science Framework repository (https://osf.io/3qngh/).
The R code (R Core Team, 2021) as well as the Stan models
(Carpenter et al., 2017) for the reanalyses in terms of the Bayesian
hierarchical model comparison are likewise available in an Open
Science Framework repository (https://osf.io/9tyx3/).
Declarations
EthicalApproval Not applicable as no original data from participants
were collected.
ConsenttoParticipateandPublish Not applicable as no original data
from participants were collected.
CompetingInterests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Akan, M., Robinson, M. M., Mickes, L., Wixted, J. T., & Benjamin,
A. S. (2021). The effect of lineup size on eyewitness identification.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied , 72(2), 369–392.
524


--- Page 17 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
Bapat, R., & Kochar, S. C. (1994). On likelihood-ratio ordering of
order statistics. Linear Algebra and its Applications , 199, 281–
291.
Bernbach, H. A. (1967). Decision processes in memory.Psychological
Review, 74(6), 462–480.
Br¨oder, A., & Sch¨utz, J. (2009). Recognition ROCs are curvilinear – or
are they? On premature arguments against the two-high-threshold
model of recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(3), 587–606.
Browne, M. W. (2000). Cross-validation methods. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 44(1), 108–132.
Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M. D., Lee, D., Goodrich, B.,
Betancourt, M., Brubaker, M., Guo, J., Li, P., & Riddell, A. (2017).
Stan: A probabilistic programming language.Journal of Statistical
Software, 76(1), 1–32.
Charman, S. D., & Wells, G. L. (2007). Applied lineup theory. In
R. C. L Lindsay, D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, & M. P. Toglia (Eds.)
The handbook of eyewitness psychology: Memory for people
(V ol. 2., pp. 219–254). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Charman, S. D., Wells, G. L., & Joy, S. W. (2011). The dud effect:
Adding highly dissimilar fillers increases confidence in lineup
identifications. Law and Human Behavior , 35(6), 479–500.
Clark, S. E., Erickson, M. A., & Breneman, J. (2011). Probative value
of absolute and relative judgments in eyewitness identification.
Law and Human Behavior , 35(5), 364–380.
Cohen, A. L., Starns, J. J., & Rotello, C. M. (2021). sdtlu: An R
package for the signal detection analysis of eyewitness lineup data.
Behavior Research Methods, 53(1), 278–300.
Colloff, M. F., Wade, K. A., Wixted, J. T., & Maylor, E. A. (2017).
A signal-detection analysis of eyewitness identification across the
adult lifespan. Psychology and Aging, 32(3), 243–258.
Coombs, C. H., Dawes, R. M., & Tversky, A. (1970). Mathematical
psychology: An elementary introduction. Prentice-Hall.
Dub´e, C., & Rotello, C. M. (2012). Binary ROCs in perception
and recognition memory are curved. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38(1), 130–151.
Dunn, J. C., Kaesler, M., & Semmler, C. (2022). A model of position
effects in the sequential lineup.Journal of Memory and Language,
122, 104297.
Dunning, D., & Stern, L. B. (1994). Distinguishing accurate from
inaccurate eyewitness identifications via inquiries about decision
processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67(5),
818–835.
Fitzgerald, R. J., Price, H. L., Oriet, C., & Charman, S. D. (2013).
The effect of suspect-filler similarity on eyewitness identification
decisions: A meta-analysis. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law ,
19(2), 151–164.
Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., Dunson, D. B., Vehtari, A., &
Rubin, D. B. (2013). Bayesian data analysis (3rd ed.). Chapman
& Hall/CRC Press.
Glanzer, M., Hilford, A., & Maloney, L. T. (2009). Likelihood ratio
decisions in memory: Three implied regularities. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 16(3), 431–455.
Green, D. M., & Birdsall, T. G. (1978). Detection and recognition.
Psychological Review, 85(3), 192–206.
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and
psychophysics. Wiley.
Green, D. M., Weber, D. L., & Duncan, J. E. (1977). Detection and
recognition of pure tones in noise. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 62(4), 948–954.
Hanczakowski, M., Zawadzka, K., & Higham, P. A. (2014). The dud-
alternative effect in memory for associations: Putting confidence
into local context. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 21(2), 543–
548.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERV A 2: A simulation model of human
memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
16(2), 96–101.
Hintzman, D. L. (2001). Similarity, global matching, and judgments of
frequency. Memory & Cognition, 29(4), 547–556.
Horry, R., & Brewer, N. (2016). How target–lure similarity shapes con-
fidence judgments in multiple-alternative decision tasks. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: General , 145(12), 1615–
1634.
Jang, Y ., Wixted, J. T., & Huber, D. E. (2009). Testing signal-detection
models of yes/no and two-alternative forced-choice recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 138(2),
291–306.
Judd, C. M., Westfall, J., & Kenny, D. A. (2012). Treating stimuli as
a random factor in social psychology: A new and comprehensive
solution to a pervasive but largely ignored problem. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 103(1), 54–69.
Juola, J. F., Caballero-Sanz, A., Mu ˜noz-Garc´ıa, A. R., Botella, J., &
Suero, M. (2019). Familiarity, recollection, and receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) curves in recognition memory. Memory &
Cognition, 47(4), 855–876.
Kaesler, M., Dunn, J. C., Ransom, K., & Semmler, C. (2020). Do
sequential lineups impair underlying discriminability? Cognitive
Research: Principles and Implications, 5(1), 1–21.
Kellen, D., Erdfelder, E., Malmberg, K. J., Dub ´e, C., & Criss, A. H.
(2016). The ignored alternative: An application of Luce’s low-
threshold model to recognition memory. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 75, 86–95.
Kellen, D., & Klauer, K. C. (2014). Discrete-state and continuous
models of recognition memory: Testing core properties under min-
imal assumptions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 40(6), 1795–1804.
Kellen, D., & Klauer, K. C. (2018). Elementary signal detection
and threshold theory. In E.-J.Wagenmakers, & J. T.Wixted (Eds.)
The Stevens handbook of experimental psychology and cognitive
neuroscience (4th ed., V ol. 5 pp. 161–200). Wiley.
Kellen, D., Winiger, S., Dunn, J. C., & Singmann, H. (2021). Testing
the foundations of signal detection theory in recognition memory.
Psychological Review, 128(6), 1022–1050.
Klauer, K. C. (2010). Hierarchical multinomial processing tree
models: A latent-trait approach. Psychometrika, 75(1), 70–98.
Lee, J., & Penrod, S. D. (2019). New signal detection theory-
based framework for eyewitness performance in lineups. Law and
Human Behavior, 43(5), 436.
Luce, R. D. (1963). A threshold theory for simple detection
experiments. Psychological Review, 70(1), 61–79.
Luus, C. A., & Wells, G. L. (1991). Eyewitness identification and
the selection of distracters for lineups. Law and Human Behavior ,
15(1), 43–57.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection theory: A
user’s guide (2nd ed.). Earlbaum.
Malmberg, K. J. (2008). Recognition memory: A review of the critical
findings and an integrated theory for relating them. Cognitive
Psychology, 57(4), 335–384.
Mansour, J. K., Beaudry, J. L., & Lindsay, R. C. L. (2017). Are
multiple-trial experiments appropriate for eyewitnss identification
studies? Accuracy, choosing, and confidence across trials.
Behavior Research Methods, 49(6), 2235–2254.
Meyer-Grant, C. G., & Klauer, K. C. (2021). Monotonicity of rank
order probabilities in signal detection models of simultaneous
detection and identification. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
105, 102615.
Mickes, L., & Gronlund, S. D. (2017). Eyewitness identification. In
J. H. Byrne, & J. T. Wixted (Eds.) Learning and memory: A
525


--- Page 18 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2022) 5:509–526
comprehensive reference (2nd ed., V ol. 2 pp. 529–552). Academic
Press.
Mickes, L., Seale-Carlisle, T. M., Wetmore, S. A., Gronlund, S. D.,
Clark, S. E., Carlson, C. A., Goodsell, C. A., Weatherford, D., &
Wixted, J. T. (2017). ROCs in eyewitness identification: Instruc-
tions versus confidence ratings. Applied Cognitive Psychology ,
31(5), 467–477.
Mickes, L., Wixted, J. T., & Wais, P. E. (2007). A direct test of the
unequal-variance signal detection model of recognition memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(5), 858–865.
Morey, R. D., Pratte, M. S., & Rouder, J. N. (2008). Problematic
effects of aggregation in zROC analysis and a hierarchical mod-
eling solution. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 52(6), 376–
388.
Morrell, H. E. R., Gaitan, S., & Wixted, J. T. (2002). On the nature of
the decision axis in signal-detection-based models of recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28(6), 1095–1110.
Norman, D. A., & Wickelgren, W. A. (1969). Strength theory of
decision rules and latency in retrieval from short-term memory.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 6(2), 192–208.
Parks, C. M., & Yonelinas, A. P. (2008). Theories of recognition
memory. In J. H. Byrne, & H. L. Roediger (Eds.) Learning and
memory: A comprehensive reference (1st ed., V ol. 2 pp. 389–416).
Academic Press.
R Core Team (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.
Rotello, C. M. (2017). Signal detection theories of recognition
memory. In J. H. Byrne, & J. T. Wixted (Eds.) Learning and
memory: A comprehensive reference(2nd ed., V ol. 2 pp. 529–552).
Academic Press.
Rouder, J. N., & Lu, J. (2005). An introduction to Bayesian
hierarchical models with an application in the theory of signal
detection. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(4), 573–604.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., & Pratte, M. S. (2017). Bayesian
hierarchical models of cognition. In W. H. Batchelder, H.
Colonius, E. N. Dzhafarov, & J. Myung (Eds.) New handbook
of mathematical psychology: Foundations and methodology
(pp. 504–551). Cambridge University Press.
Rouder, J. N., Province, J. M., Swagman, A. R., & Thiele, J.E. (2014).
From ROC curves to psychological theory . Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Singmann, H., & Kellen, D. (2019). An introduction to mixed models
for experimental psychology. In D. H. Spieler, & E. Schumacher
(Eds.) New methods in cognitive psychology (1st ed., pp. 4–31).
Routledge.
S m i t h ,A .M . ,W e l l s ,G .L . ,L i n d s a y ,R .C .L . ,&P e n r o d ,S .D .
(2017). Fair lineups are better than biased lineups and showups,
but not because they increase underlying discriminability.Law and
Human Behavior, 41(2), 127–145.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of measuring
recognition memory: Applications to dementia and amnesia.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 117(1), 34–50.
Spanton, R. W., & Berry, C. J. (2021). V ariability in recognition
memory scales with mean memory strength: Implications for
the encoding variability hypothesis , PsyArXiv Preprint. https://
psyarxiv.com/3sbnh.
Starns, J. J. (2020). High-and low-threshold models of the relationship
between response time and confidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 47(4), 671–684.
Starns, J. J., Rotello, C. M., & Ratcliff, R. (2012). Mixing strong and
weak targets provides no evidence against the unequal-variance
explanation of zROC slope: A comment on Koen and Yonelinas
(2010). Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 38(3), 793–801.
Starr, S. J., Metz, C. E., Lusted, L. B., & Goodenough, D. J.
(1975). Visual detection and localization of radiographic images.
Radiology, 116(3), 533–538.
Vehtari, A., Gelman, A., & Gabry, J. (2017). Practical Bayesian
model evaluation using leave-one-out cross-validation and W AIC.
Statistics and Computing, 27(5), 1413–1432.
V oormann, A., Spektor, M. S., & Klauer, K. C. (2021). The
simultaneous recognition of multiple words: A process analysis.
Memory & Cognition, 49(4), 787–802.
Wells, G. L., Kovera, M. B., Douglass, A. B., Brewer, N.,
Meissner, C. A., & Wixted, J. T. (2020). Policy and procedure
recommendations for the collection and preservation of eyewitness
identification evidence. Law and Human Behavior , 44(1), 3–36.
Wickens, T. D. (2002). Elementary signal detection theory. Oxford
University Press.
Windschitl, P. D., & Chambers, J. R. (2004). The dud-alternative effect
in likelihood judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30(1), 198–215.
Wixted, J. T. (2007). Dual-process theory and signal-detection theory
of recognition memory. Psychological Review, 114(1), 152–176.
Wixted, J. T., & Mickes, L. (2014). A signal-detection-based
diagnostic-feature-detection model of eyewitness identification.
Psychological Review, 121(2), 262–276.
Wixted, J. T., & Mickes, L. (2018). Theoretical vs. empirical
discriminability: The application of ROC methods to eyewitness
identification. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications ,
3(1), 1–22.
Wixted, J. T., Vul, E., Mickes, L., & Wilson, B. M. (2018). Models of
lineup memory. Cognitive Psychology, 105, 81–114.
Yao, Y ., Vehtari, A., Simpson, D., & Gelman, A. (2018). Using
stacking to average Bayesian predictive distributions (with
discussion). Bayesian Analysis, 13(3), 917–1007.
Publisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
526
