--- Page 1 ---
Self-reported face recognition is highly valid, but alone is not highly
discriminative of prosopagnosia-level performance
on objective assessments
Joseph M. Arizpe 1,2,3 & Elyana Saad1,2 & Ayooluwa O. Douglas1,2 & Laura Germine1,4 & Jeremy B. Wilmer 5 &
Joseph M. DeGutis 1,2
Published online: 13 February 2019
# The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2019
Abstract
Severe developmental deficits in face recognition ability (developmental prosopagnosia, or DP) have been vigorously studied
over the past decade, yet many questions remain unanswered about their origins, nature, and social consequences. A rate-limiting
factor in answering such questions is the challenge of recruiting rare DP participants. Although self-reported experiences have
long played a role in efforts to identify DPs, much remains unknown about how such self-reports can or should contribute to
screening or diagnosis. Here, in a large, population-based web sample, we investigated the effectiveness of self-report, used on its
own, as a screen to identify individuals who will ultimately fail, at a conventional cutoff, the two types of objective tests that are
most commonly used to confirm DP diagnoses: the Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT) and the famous faces memory test
(FFMT). We used a highly reliable questionnaire (alpha = .91), the Cambridge Face Memory Questionnaire (CFMQ), and
revealed strong validity via high correlations of .44 with the CFMT and .52 with the FFMT. However, cutoff analyses revealed
that no CFMQ score yielded a clinical-grade combination of sensitivity and positive predictive value in enough individuals to
support using it alone as a DP diagnostic or screening tool. This result was replicated in an analysis of data from the widely used
PI20 questionnaire, a 20-question self-assessment of facial recognition similar in form to the CFMQ. We therefore recommend
that screens for DP should, wherever possible, include objective as well as subjective assessment tools.
Keywords Self-report . Ability . Individual differences . Face recognition . Screening . Prosopagnosia . Meta-cognition
Over the last 20 years, interest has been growing in identifying
and studying individuals with poor face recognition abilities,
especially those with devel opmental prosopagnosia.
Developmental prosopagnosia (DP) is characterized as a facial
recognition impairment, believed to have been present
throughout one’s life, that is not due to some more general
deficit or organic cause (e.g., poor low-level vision or early-
life brain trauma). It has been suggested as having a preva-
lence of approximately 2.5% of the general population
(Bowles et al., 2009;K e n n e r k n e c h te ta l . , 2006;
Kennerknecht, Nga, & Wong, 2008a), though it should be
noted that this estimate is based solely on self-report data
and on a common rule of thumb for determining statistical
outliers (Barton & Corrow, 2016). Researchers have been in-
tent on developing a better understanding of the cognitive and
neural mechanisms of prosopagnosia, and correspondingly
have sought new methods to screen the population to find,
and potentially aid in the diagnosis of, research participants
with prosopagnosia. Effective screening is necessary to avoid
the cost (in time, personnel, resources, and travel) involved in
having to assess a preponderance of persons without
prosopagnosia in order to obtain only a small handful who
do have prosopagnosia. Conversely, efficiently screening out
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-01195-w) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
* Joseph M. Arizpe
Joseph.Arizpe.10@alumni.ucl.ac.uk
1 Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA
2 Boston Attention and Learning Laboratory, V A Boston Healthcare
System, Boston, MA, USA
3 Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), Fort Sam
Houston, TX, USA
4 Institute for Technology in Psychiatry, McLean Hospital,
Belmont, MA, USA
5 Department of Psychology, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA
Behavior Research Methods (2019) 51:1102–1116
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-01195-w


--- Page 2 ---
persons with prosopagnosia from studies of normal face pro-
cessing is not widely performed and would be quite useful.
Additionally, there are many real-world applications for which
efficient identification of individuals with poor facial recogni-
tion abilities would be of value. For example, employers may
want to avoid placing individuals with below-average face
recognition abilities in positions that require sensitive face-
matching tasks as part of their job (e.g., passport officers;
White, Kemp, Jenkins, Matheson, & Burton, 2014).
One potential method of screening for facial recognition
deficits is to use a self-administered questionnaire analo-
gous to that used to screen for developmental disorders such
as dyslexia. Scores on the Adult Reading Questionnaire
along with a dyslexia status question (i.e., BDo you think
you are dyslexic? ^) have been reported to enable the detec-
tion of 62.5% of those with poor reading skills (putative
dyslexia), as determined by objective testing, and the cor-
rect rejection of 95.04% of those without (Snowling,
Dawes, Nash, & Hulme, 2012). In an attempt to efficiently
identify and study individuals with poor facial recognition
abilities in a similar manner, several research groups have
developed self-reported facial recognition ability question-
naires or clinical interviews, the scores of which have been
reported to be associated with other measures of facial rec-
ognition performance (De Heering & Maurer, 2014;
Kennerknecht et al., 2006; Kennerknecht, Plümpe,
Edwards, & Raman, 2007; Palermo et al., 2017 ; Shah,
Gaule, Sowden, Bird, & Cook, 2015a;T u r a n o ,M a r z i ,&
Viggiano, 2016). Prior studies have reported moderate-to-
strong correlations between self-reported face recognition
abilities and objective performance, for typical participants
(Bindemann, Attard, & Johnston, 2014;G r a y ,B i r d ,&
Cook, 2017; Livingston & Shah, 2017;R o t s h t e i n ,G e n g ,
Driver, & Dolan, 2007; Shah, Gaule, Sowden, Bird, &
Cook, 2015a;S h a h ,S o w d e n ,G a u l e ,C a t m u r ,&B i r d ,
2015b;T u r a n oe ta l . , 2016 ;T u r a n o&V i g g i a n o ,2017 ;
Wilmer et al., 2010; though see Palermo et al., 2017)a sw e l l
as for those with developmental prosopagnosia (Livingston
& Shah, 2017; Stollhoff, Jost, Elze, & Kennerknecht, 2011).
The reported correlation magnitudes are usually in the range
of .35 to .55. This relationship is modulated somewhat by
whether the questionnaire is adm inistered before or after the
objective assessments, especially if feedback is given, thus
highlighting the importance of administering question-
naires while participants are still naive to the objective tests
(Bobak, Mileva, & Hancock, 2018). This apparent relation
between self-report and objective facial recognition ability
suggests that there may be utility in using self-report as a
tool for predicting whether one has prosopagnosia, as de-
fined by objective testing.
Though such self-report questionnaires and clinical in-
terviews for prosopagnosia seem to show promise in
terms of their validity as indices of facial recognition, it
is unclear whether a score cutoff could be defined for any
such self-report measure that would be both highly pre-
dictive of and highly sensitive to prosopagnosia, as deter-
mined by objective tests of facial recognition. Therefore,
in the present study, we sought to assess the utility of the
Cambridge Face Memory Questionnaire (CFMQ, a self-
report measure similar to those from other research
groups) to screen for prosopagnosia, using a large online
data set ( N = 1,518) containing a diverse sample of par-
ticipan
ts drawn from the general population. In accord
with the current standard of objective measurement for
face recognition ability, we also collected performance
scores on the Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT)
and a famous faces memory test (FFMT) for each partic-
ipant. Because there is also publicly available normative
data on the PI20 (Gray et al., 2017; Shah, Gaule, et al.,
2015a), another self-report questionnaire of facial recog-
nition ability similar to the CFMQ, it was possible to
likewise assess the utility of the PI20 as a screen for
prosopagnosia.
We first sought to establish that the CFMQ is reliable
and correlates with objecti ve face recognition ability.
Then, using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) anal-
yses, we attempted to determine cutoff scores on the
CFMQ that would be optimal for predicting
prosopagnosia, as defined by the combination of partici-
pants’ age- and gender-adjusted CFMT and FFMT scores
being in the lowest 2.5th percentile. For these cutoffs, we
calculated the rate (as a proportion) at which all included
participants with prosopagnosia were correctly classified
(i.e., sensitivity), the rate at which all those without
prosopagnosia were correctly classified (i.e., specificity),
and the rate at which the participants who were classified
as having prosopagnosia did actually have that condition
(i.e., positive predictive valu e), to assess the practicality
of self-report for research screening purposes (see the
Appendix). Next, to assess the utility of self-report in
the many real-world applications for which efficient iden-
tification of individuals with below-average facial recog-
nition abilities would be of value, we also sought to assess
the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value of
the CFMQ and PI20 in classifying individuals as being
below median (i.e., below the 50th percentile) at objective
face recognition. Finally, although a diagnostic cutoff has
previously been proposed for the PI20 (Shah, Gaule,
et al., 2015) no comparable published reports have exam-
ined the discriminative performance of that cutoff.
Therefore, we also conducted a novel analysis on data
made available by Gray, Bird, and Cook (2017), to simi-
larly determine the PI20 ’s sensitivity, specificity, and pos-
itive predictive value for CFMT-defined developmental
prosopagnosia and to compare the results with the cutoffs
obtained for the CFMQ.
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1103


--- Page 3 ---
Method
Participant recruitment and inclusion criteria
TestMyBrain.org hosts an online testing environment for
experimental psychology. The participants in the present
study were visitors to TestMyBrain.orgwho had freely opted
to complete our experiment, among those experiments then
available on the website, in exchange for feedback about their
performance as compared to the performance of the prior
participants. The website attracts volunteers from the general
population over a wide age range, as well as of many
nationalities, ethnicities, and education levels. Our study was
approved by the Harvard University Institutional Review
Board (protocol No. F15795-122). It conforms to the
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. In the present
study, only those between the ages of 18 and 40 years old
were included in the analysis, because of heteroscedasticity
in the assessment scores across ages outside of, as compared
to within, that age range. Th is heteroscedasticity was
controlled by this exclusion; if this had not been done, a
critical assumption of our linear regression and
residualization (performed for equating scores across ages)
would have been violated. This step excluded 3,376 of the
original 8,242 participants. Also, only those who identified
as being of European descent were included in the analyses,
so as to eliminate the potential influence of the Bother-race
effect^ (Malpass & Kravitz, 1969; Meissner & Brigham,
2001), given that our version of the CFMT exclusively
contained face stimuli depicting faces of European descent,
and prior research had suggested that the participant–stimulus
ethnic match might affect CFMT scores (Bowles et al., 2009;
DeGutis, Mercado, Wilmer, & Rosenblatt, 2013). The other-
race effect is a robust phenomenon of reduced recognition
ability for faces of races/ethnicities different from those of
one’s usual experience, so it could, theoretically, introduce
spuriously low scores in our assessments for those with low
experience with faces of European decent. This step excluded
1,951 of the participants remaining after the age exclusion
step. Those who did not report age, gender, or ethnicity were
also excluded from analysis. This step excluded 1,358 of the
remaining participants. No exclusions were made on the basis
of level of education, so as to allow generalization of our
results to all education levels and because of prior evidence
indicating that education and general intelligence are not as-
sociated with facial recognition ability (Peterson & Miller,
2012; Wilmer, Germine, & Nakayama,2014). Finally, among
the remaining participants, those in the top 2.5% for total time
to complete our version of the CFMT were excluded, to re-
move participants who may have been distracted or taken a
long break during this assessment, which could have degraded
the maintenance in memory of the faces studied during the
task. This step excluded 39 of the remaining participants.
Because the FFMT relies on long-term memory, no analogous
time-based exclusion was necessary.
Participants
A total of 1,518 participants (941 female, 577 male) were
included in our analyses (mean age = 27.09 years, standard
deviation = 6.44, age range = 18 –40). All participants gave
informed consent through the TestMyBrain.orgwebsite prior
to participation.
Assessments
Three assessments of face recognition, in the following order,
were included in the battery for each participant: (1) the
CFMQ, (2) the CFMT, version 3 (CFMT3), and (3) an
FFMT. Demographic information (age, gender, ethnicity)
was also solicited from each participant.
The CFMQ is a 17-item self-report questionnaire of face
recognition ability, with scores that range from 17 to 85, where
lower scores indicate poorer self-reported ability. The ques-
tions of the CFMQ were developed by some of the same
researchers who developed the original version of the
CFMT. Brad Duchaine, Ken Nakayama, and Laura Germine
developed the CFMQ to screen for prosopagnosia, and it has
been used for approximately the past decade by the Harvard
Vision Lab on www.faceblind.org for this purpose. The
questions were composed on the basis of their experience
with persons with prosopagnosia. The CFMQ is similar to
other self-report measures of facial recognition, including the
better known 20-item prosopagnosia index (PI20). Similar to
the PI20, each question in the CFMQ has five possible re-
sponses on a Likert scale. For the purpose of computing
scores, number values of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 were associated with
the five possible response options. These number values were
assigned such that, on one end of the scale, the option indicat-
ing highest ability had a value of 5, and, on the other end of the
scale, the option indicating the lowest ability had a value of 1.
One’s CFMQ score was, then, simply the sum of the values
corresponding to one’s responses across all the 17 questions. It
should be noted that Questions 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 13, 14, 15, and 17
were reverse-scored (on these questions, Balways^ means
worse face recognition performance). The full list of questions
in the CFMQ is given in the Supplementary Methods and can
be compared and contrasted with the list of PI20 questions
published by Shah, Gaule, Sowden, Bird, and Cook ( 2015a)
or with the list of questions in the Kennerknecht screening
questionnaire published by Kennerknecht, Plümpe, Edwards,
and Raman (2007). Though the CFMQ has not served as the
central focus of a publication before, questions from the
CFMQ have been used in previously published studies (e.g.,
DeGutis, Cohan, Mercado, Wilmer, & Nakayama, 2012;
Wilmer et al., 2010)
1104 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 4 ---
The CFMT3 is identical to the original version of the
Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT) developed by
Duchaine and Nakayama ( 2006), except that different facial
stimuli are used. Instead of photographs of faces, the CFMT3
uses novel artificial faces that were generated with the
FaceGen software (Singular Inversions, Toronto, ON). Since
our experiment was widely and publicly available online, we
refrained from using the original CFMT in our study so as to
maintain the integrity of the original CFMT for clinical or in-
lab use—for example, as part of a diagnosis of prosopagnosia.
The CFMT, version 2 (CFMT2), which also uses FaceGen
computer-generated faces similar to those in our CFMT3,
has been in use on faceblind.org as a screening tool for
several years. For this reason, we refrained from using the
CFMT2, since it is theoretically possible that our
participants could have been exposed to it before. The
present study is the first one published to use the CFMT3.
However, another study (Wilmer et al., 2010)u s i n gas i m i l a r
FaceGen-produced artificial f acial stimuli CFMT variant
showed a strong correlation with the original CFMT [ r(40) =
.76, 95% CI: .59 –.86]. This correlation was not statistically
different (p = .44, two-tailed) from the test –retest reliability
[r(387) = .70, 95% CI: .64 –.74] reported for the original
CFMT. Thus, it is likely that CFMT3 performance has a sim-
ilarly high correlation with performance on the original
CFMT. Additionally, in our data set, raw CFMT3 scores and
raw FFMT scores (see below) correlated atr(1516) = .47, 95%
CI: .43–.51, p =1 . 2 4 e– 85.
One of three possible versions of the FFMT was assigned
to each participant. In all versions, participants were shown an
image of a famous face on each trial and askedBWho is this?^
If participants typed in a response, they were then shown the
correct answer along with their response and were asked to
indicate whether they had correctly identified the person. By
design, this allowed for misspellings of the correct answer, or
even for unique descriptions of the person, such as BRolling
Stones Singer^ for BMick Jagger,^ to be scored as correct. As
had been done in a prior study (Wilmer et al., 2012), the total
score was computed as the number of faces out of the total
number of trials for which participants both (a) submitted a
response and (b) verified that their response was a correct
identification. Participants who did not respond with the cor-
rect name were additionally asked to indicate whether they
were familiar with the person, though this does not figure into
the scoring procedure. Scoring was performed automatically.
We recorded all participant responses, though, so manual val-
idation on a subsample of responses was done to verify that no
systematic issues were present. To normalize the scores across
FFMT versions, we calculated the FFMT version-specific z
score for each participant. Because the distributions of these
scores from each of the FFMT versions were comparable, we
treated the versions as equivalent in our analyses (see the
Supplementary Methods for the full list of famous faces for
each version). Thus, in this article, we refer to all three ver-
sions singularly as the FFMT.
Analyses
Identification of prosopagnosia We evaluated the discrimina-
tive utility of the CFMQ as a tool for predicting
prosopagnosia, where participants were identified as having
prosopagnosia independently on the basis of their combina-
tion of CFMT3 and FFMT scores. More specifically, to iden-
tify participants with prosopagnosia, we first regressed out age
and gender effects (such as have been reported by Bowles
et al., 2009, and Germine, Duchaine, & Nakayama, 2011)
from the raw CFMT3 and FFMT scores using a third-order
polynomial regression model, so that all participants’ data
could be compared, regardless of the participants ’ age and
gender. The resulting residualized scores were then translated
to percentile scores, so that the resulting CFMT3 and FFMT
scores could be averaged together to form a composite score.
This manner of forming a composite score meets the criteria
generally preferred by prosopagnosia researchers —namely,
that the testing involve multiple well-validated assessments
reflecting both familiar (famous) and unfamiliar facial recog-
nition ability and that the resulting score be highly interpret-
able in terms of performance relative to peers.
To reflect a commonly regarded prevalence for
prosopagnosia (i.e., ~ 2.5% of the general population;
Kennerknecht et al., 2006), the ground-truth designation of
prosopagnosia for this study was then defined as having a
composite score within the lowest-performing 2.5 percentiles
among the composite scores of all the included participants. It
should be noted that this approach does not rule out
prosopagnosia caused by poor low/midlevel vision, poor gen-
eral memory, or general social cognitive disorders (e.g., au-
tism), which are typically ruled out in laboratory-based stud-
ies. Since there is no consensus on how prosopagnosia should
be precisely defined and diagnosed, we make no strong claim
that those we identified as having prosopagnosia for the pur-
poses of our study would all have necessarily been identified
as such by other research groups if brought into their labs. The
conclusions of the present study are not contingent upon this
issue, since the phenomena that we report with respect to the
relationship of self-report to objective performance would still
hold for any reasonable set of diagnostic criteria.
Evaluation of the CFMQ as a screen for prosopagnosia We
assessed the discriminant utility of the CFMQ as a screening
test for prosopagnosia by applying receiver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) curve analyses (Fawcett,2006;G r e e n&S w e t s ,
1966; Spackman, 1989), which enabled quantification of the
sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value associated
with any given CFMQ cutoff score (see the Appendix). In the
context of our study, sensitivity corresponds to the rate (as a
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1105


--- Page 5 ---
proportion) that all included participants with prosopagnosia
were correctly classified as having prosopagnosia using a giv-
en CFMQ cutoff score. Specificity corresponds to the rate that
all those without prosopagnosia were correctly classified as
such using a given cutoff. Finally, positive predictive value
corresponds to the rate at which participants who were classi-
fied by the cutoffs as having prosopagnosia did actually have
prosopagnosia. Positive predictive value is implicitly deter-
mined by the combination of sensitivity, specificity, and the
positive class’s prevalence. Given the intended use of such
CFMQ cutoff scores as practic al screening criteria for
prosopagnosia researchers, a viable cutoff should yield ac-
ceptable levels of both sensitivity and positive predictive val-
ue. This is because low sensitivity would imply that many
persons with prosopagnosia would be missed by the criterion,
and a low positive predictive value would imply that those
meeting the criterion would be unlikely to actually have
prosopagnosia upon further testing. Therefore, we evaluated
the practical utility of the resulting cutoffs primarily via their
associated sensitivities and positive predictive values.
In particular, we first determined three optimal operating
points (i.e., the optimal CFMQ cutoff scores) for detection of
prosopagnosia, such that each operating point was optimized
according to a different criterion. The first of the three oper-
ating points was optimized on sensitivity and specificity
using Youden ’s J index (Youden, 1950), such that the cost
of loss of sensitivity was equal to the cost of loss of specificity
(i.e., the operating point at which sensitivity rate + specificity
rate – 1 was maximized). The operating point resulting from
this optimization would, in practice, be optimal in a context
in which sensitivity was more important than positive pre-
dictive value (i.e., where greater importance was attached to
not failing to include those with prosopagnosia than to being
highly confident that one meeting the cutoff indeed had
prosopagnosia). The second operating point was optimized
in a more standard manner, such that the costs were propor-
tional to the 2.5% base rate of prosopagnosia, and where the
cost of loss of specificity, therefore, greatly outweighed the
cost of loss of sensitivity. Thus, as compared to Youden’ s J
index, this optimization adjusted costs to reflect that those
without prosopagnosia greatly outnumber those with
prosopagnosia. In practice, th is second criterion attempted
a balance between sensitivity and positive predictive value,
and so returned the main CFMQ cutoff of interest. The third
operating point was the one simply yielding the maximum
positive predictive value, regardless of the associated sensi-
tivity and specificity. Thus, the three different criteria consti-
tuted different degrees of trade-off between sensitivity and
positive predictive value. We th en recorded the sensitivity,
specificity, and positive predictive value at these operating
points. The 95% confidence intervals for these three metrics
were calculated using the Wilson score interval for binomial
proportions (Wilson, 1927).
Identification of below-median face recognition performance
A low base rate for a positive class, such as for the
participants with prosopagnosia in our sample, is a dis-
advantage for achieving high classification performance
(see the Discussion section). Additionally, the application
of self-report measures of face recognition ability, such as
the CFMQ, may potentially extend beyond screening for
prosopagnosia to screening for below-average facial rec-
ognition ability levels of much higher prevalence (e.g.,
within common professions requiring daily facial recog-
nition for successful performa nce). Thus, we additionally
assessed the discriminant utility of the CFMQ as a
screening test simply for below-median facial recognition
performance. The procedure for this assessment was
identical to that for the prosopagnosia screening, except
that the prevalence of the positive class was set at 50%
rather than at 2.5%.
Assuring our ROC/cutoffs results were not due to issues with
poor performance Finally, it is theoretically possible that a
nonnegligible proportion of those in our sample who were
identified as having prosopagnosia instead yielded artifi-
cially low scores on the CFMT3 and FFMT due to causes
that were nonspecific or unrelated to their facial recogni-
tion abilities (e.g., a general visual or cognitive impair-
ment, distraction, lack of moti vation, etc.), thereby par-
tially obscuring the full potential of the CFMQ as a screen
for prosopagnosia. Under such circumstances, the dis-
criminant utility of the CFMQ as a screen for performance
in the bottom 2.5th percen tile should be lower than its
ability as a screen for performance in the top 2.5th per-
centile, since it is not possible that scores within the top
2.5th percentile could be driven by such confounding fac-
tors. Therefore, we additionally assessed the CFMQ as a
screen for those performing in the top 2.5th percentile on
their CFMT3 + FFMT composite score, to determine
whether or not there were any indications of poor data
quality for those in our sample we identified as having
prosopagnosia.
Evaluation of the PI20 as a screen for prosopagnosia Finally,
to compare the discriminative performance of the
resulting cutoffs for the CFMQ to that of another promi-
nent
self-report measure of facial recognition, we also
similarly calculated the sensitivity, specificity, and posi-
tive predictive value for the cutoff score previously pro-
posed for the PI20 (Shah, Gaule, et al., 2015) from data
made available from a study by Gray, Bird, and Cook
(2017). Because we could not compute age- and gender-
adjusted CFMT scores as we had for the CFMT3 and
FFMT scores in our own sample, we simply made use
of the raw CFMT scores in this analysis and of the given
cutoff score previously proposed.
1106 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 6 ---
Results
The CFMQ is reliable and correlates with objective
face recognition ability
We verified that the CFMQ correlates with objective face rec-
ognition ability, as independently defined by CFMT3 and
FFMT scores. In our sample, the Pearson’s correlation between
the CFMQ scores and percentile composite scores (CFMT3
and FFMT) was r(1516) = .54, 95% CI: .50 –.57, p =3 . 3 9 e–
114, indicating strong validity of the CFMQ as a measure of
face recognition ability (Supplementary Fig. 1). Also, the
Cronbach’s alpha for the CFMQ scores was .91, indicating high
internal consistency for this measure, similar to the other self-
reports of face recognition (e.g., Cronbach’s alpha for PI20 =
.93, Shah, Gaule, et al., 2015; Cronbach ’s alpha for the
Kennerknecht questionnaire = .84, Palermo et al.,2017).
Additional evidence for the strong validity of the self-report
information contained in the CFMQ is that it correlated at least as
well with each of the individual objective measures of facial rec-
ognition as the two objective measures correlated with each other.
The Pearson correlation between CFMQ scores and age- and
gender-adjusted (see the Method section) CFMT scores was
r(1516) = .44, 95% CI: .40–.48, p = 1.06e– 73 (Supplementary
Fig. 2), and the correlation between CFMQ scores and age- and
gender-adjusted FFMT scores was r(1516) = .52, 95% CI:
.48–.56, p = 2.68e– 106 (Supplementary Fig.3). These two cor-
relation values are impressive when considering that the correla-
tion between the age- and gender-adjusted CFMT and FFMT
scores was r(1516) = .47, 95% CI: .43 –.50, p =7 . 3 4 e– 83
(Supplementary Fig. 4). This means that CFMQ scores were
not significantly less correlated (p = .40, two-tailed) with CFMT
performance than FFMT performance was with CFMT perfor-
mance. This also means that CFMQ scores were significantly
more highly correlated (p = .048, two-tailed) with FFMT perfor-
mance than CFMT performance was with FFMT performance.
ROC analyses: Screening for prosopagnosia
No CFMQ cutoff score produced simultaneously adequate
rates for sensitivity and positive predictive value (see
Table 1). Optimizing the CFMQ cutoff score by equating the
c o s t so fl o s so fs e n s i t i v i t yand of specificity (i.e., with
Yo ud en’s J index) returned a CFMQ cutoff score of 62 for a
prosopagnosia screening criterion, and yielded acceptable
sensitivity and specificity rates. Sensitivity was 89.19%
(95% CI: 75.29% –95.71%), and specificity was 68.06%
(95% CI: 65.64% –70.39%). However, this cutoff would be
impractical, because the prosopagnosia prevalence of 2.5%
meant that the positive predictive value achieved was only
6.52% (95% CI: 4.68%–9.02%). Thus, using this CFMQ cut-
off score as a screening criterion would mean that the over-
whelming majority (93.48%) of those meeting this criterion
would not actually have prosopagnosia.
Optimizing the cutoff such that the costs of loss of sensi-
tivity and of specificity reflected the 2.5% base rate of
prosopagnosia yielded a CFMQ cutoff score of 34. At this
cutoff, the positive predictive value was a respectable, albeit
unreliable, 70% (95% CI: 39.68% –89.22%), and specificity
was 99.8% (95% CI: 99.41% –99.93%). However, sensitivity
was only 18.92% (95% CI: 9.48% –34.21%); thus, most of
those with prosopagnosia would be missed with this criterion.
Additionally, since a score of 34 or lower was so uncommon,
one would rarely encounter someone with such a low score in
practice. Only ten (i.e., 0.65%) out of the 1,518 included par-
ticipants had a CFMQ score this low or lower (95% CI:
0.36%–1.21%).
Finally, optimizing the cutoff by maximizing the positive
predictive value alone also returned a cutoff of 34, so the
sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value for this
optimization were identical to those immediately above.
Figure 1 plots facial recognition ability versus CFMQ score
for all included participants. The performance-level cutoff cor-
responding to prosopagnosia is indicated with a horizontal
dotted line. The two optimized cutoffs returned by the forego-
ing ROC analyses are indicated with vertical dotted lines.
From this plot, one can get an intuitive sense of the sensitivity
for a given CFMQ cutoff score by observing the proportion of
participants with prosopagnosia (i.e., those below the horizon-
tal line) that is captured by the given cutoff (i.e., those to the
left of the given vertical line). Likewise, one can get an intu-
itive sense of the specificity by observing the proportion of
Table 1 ROC analyses of CFMQ scores screening for prosopagnosia
Optimization Type Cutoff Score Sensitivity 95% CI Specificity 95% CI PPV 95% CI
Y ouden’s J 62 89.19% 75.29% –95.71% 68.06% 65.64% –70.39% 6.52% 4.68% –9.02%
Standard 34 18.92% 9.48% –34.21% 99.80% 99.41% –99.93% 70% 39.68% –89.22%
Maximum PPV 34 18.92% 9.48% –34.21% 99.80% 99.41% –99.93% 70% 39.68% –89.22%
PPV = positive predictive value. Y ouden’s J returns the operating point at which sensitivity rate + specificity rate – 1 is maximized. Thus, with this
optimization, the cost of a loss in sensitivity rate is equal to the cost of a loss in specificity rate. The standard optimization is similar to Y ouden’s J, except
that costs are adjusted to reflect that those without prosopagnosia greatly outnumber those who with prosopagnosia. The cost of loss of specificity,
therefore, greatly outweighs the cost of loss of sensitivity. In practice, this second criterion attempts a balance between sensitivity and positivep r e d i c t i v e
value, and so returns the main CFMQ cutoff of interest.
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1107


--- Page 7 ---
participants without prosopagnosia (i.e., those above the hor-
izontal line) who surpass the CFMQ cutoff score (i.e., who fall
to the right of the given vertical line). Finally, the positive
predictive value corresponds to the proportion of those below
the given CFMQ cutoff score (i.e., of those falling to the left of
the given vertical line) who actually have prosopagnosia (i.e.,
who fall below the horizontal line).
ROC analyses: Screening for the bottom 50th
percentile
As compared to the cutoffs optimized to screen for
prosopagnosics (i.e., for performers in the bottom 2.5th per-
centile), a more adequate combination of sensitivity and pos-
itive predictive value was possible for a cutoff optimized to
screen for performers in the bottom 50th percentile (see
Table 2). This provides evidence that the low base rate of
participants with prosopagnosia was a critical disadvantage
for achieving high classification performance with the
CFMQ. Optimizing the cutoff such that the costs of loss of
sensitivity and of specificity reflected the 50% base rate of
scores within the bottom 50th percentile was equivalent to
optimizing it by equating the costs of loss of sensitivity and
specificity. In this case, the optimization yielded a CFMQ
cutoff score of 66, a sensitivity of 65.35% (95% CI:
61.89% –68.65%), a specificity of 71.41% (95% CI:
68.09%–74.51%), and a positive predictive value of 69.57%
(95% CI: 66.09%–72.83%). The cutoff score was thus square-
ly above chance (i.e., 50%) in predicting whether someone
was below the 50th percentile in facial recognition perfor-
mance, though depending on the particular application, the
positive predictive value of approximately 70% might or
might not be sufficiently predictive for the purposes of a given
practical application. Regardless, that either the sensitivity or
the positive predictive value was lower in the two correspond-
ing optimizations for predicting prosopagnosia indicates that
the low base rate of prosopagnosia did, in practice, disadvan-
tage the CFMQ as a screening tool for that condition.
Optimizing the cutoff by maximizing the positive predic-
tive value alone yielded a cutoff score of 39 (the maximum
cutoff score with a positive predictive value of 100%), a per-
fect specificity of 100% (95% CI: 99.5% –100%), a perfect
positive predictive value of 100% (95% CI: 89.57% –100%),
but a sensitivity of only 4.35% (95% CI: 3.11%–6.04%). That
the overwhelming majority of the sensitivity was lost in order
to achieve maximal specificity was reflective of the fact that
Fig. 1 Facial recognition ability versus CFMQ score. The performance
level cutoff corresponding to prosopagnosia is indicated with a horizontal
dotted line, such that those participants below the line were those with
prosopagnosia. The two optimized CFMQ cutoffs are indicated with
vertical dotted lines, such that those participants to the left of each
given line were those obtaining to the given cutoff. The x-axis is in a z-
transformed space to allow for ease of viewing the participants with
prosopagnosia above or below the indicated cutoff scores. The
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and CFMQ score
prevalence rates already described can be intuited from this graph.
Sensitivity for a given CFMQ cutoff score is the proportion of
participants with prosopagnosia (i.e., of those below the horizontal line)
who are captured by the given cutoff (i.e., those to the left of the given
vertical line). Specificity is the p roportion of participants without
prosopagnosia (i.e., those above the horizontal line) who surpass the
CFMQ cutoff score (i.e., who fall to the right of the given vertical line).
Positive predictive value is the proportion of those below the given
CFMQ cutoff score (i.e., those falling to the left of the given vertical
line) who actually have prosopagnosia (i.e., who fall below the
horizontal line).
1108 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 8 ---
the distribution of CFMT3 scores for those in the bottom 50
percentiles greatly overlaps that for those in the top 50 per-
centiles (compare those above and below the 50th percentile
in facial recognition ability in the scatter plot in Fig. 1).
ROC analyses: Screening for the top 2.5th percentile
The discriminant utility of the cutoff scores optimized to
screen for performers in the top 2.5th percentile of the objec-
tive assessment was not higher than those optimized for
screening for prosopagnosia (see Table 3). This means that
there was no indication of poor data quality for those in our
sample we identified as having prosopagnosia, so poor data
quality could not explain the low discriminant utility of the
relevant cutoff scores for pro sopagnosia. Optimizing the
CFMQ cutoff score using Y ouden’s J index returns a CFMQ
cutoff score of 72 for a top 2.5th percentile performance
screening criterion, yielding a sensitivity at 76.92% (95%
CI: 61.66%–87.35%) and a specificity at 67.68% (95% CI:
65.25%–70.02%). However, this criterion was impractical be-
cause, as was the case with the screening of prosopagnosia
under this cutoff optimization method, the prevalence of our
top performers at 2.5% meant that the positive predictive val-
ue achieved here was similarly only 5.91% (95% CI: 4.17%–
8.31%). The sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive
value for this optimization are comparable with, if somewhat
numerically lower than, the corresponding optimization for
prosopagnosia screening. Thus, using this CFMQ cutoff score
as a screening criterion would likewise mean that the
overwhelming majority (94.09%) of those meeting this crite-
rion would not actually perform within the top 2.5th
percentile.
Optimizing the cutoff such that the costs of loss of sensi-
tivity and of specificity reflected the 2.5% base rate of the top
performers yielded a CFMQ cutoff at the empirical maximum
score of 85. At this cutoff, the positive predictive value was
42.86% (95% CI: 15.82% –74.95%), and the specificity was
99.73% (95% CI: 99.31%–99.89%). However, sensitivity was
only 7.69% (95% CI: 2.65% –20.32%); thus, most of the top
performers were missed with this criterion. The sensitivity,
specificity, and positive predictive value for this optimization
are again comparable with, though numerically lower than,
the corresponding optimization for prosopagnosia screening.
Additionally, since a score of 85 is likewise very uncommon,
one would rarely encounter someone with such a high score.
Only seven (i.e., 0.46%) out of the 1,518 included participants
had this CFMQ score. Finally, optimizing the cutoff by max-
imizing the positive predictive value alone also returned a
cutoff of 85, so the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predic-
tive value for this optimization were identical to those reported
immediately above.
Low performance scores on the CFMT3 and FFMT could,
theoretically, be reflective of poor data quality, though the
same is not true of high performance scores. Therefore, a
stronger discriminant utility of CFMQ scores for detecting
our highest than for our lowest Bprosopagnosia^ performers,
if it existed, could have been an indication of compromised
data quality for our lowest performers. However, since the
Table 3 ROC analyses of CFMQ scores screening for the top 2.5th percentile of facial recognition ability
Optimization Type Cutoff Score Sensitivity 95% CI Specificity 95% CI PPV 95% CI
Y ouden’s J 72 76.92% 61.66% –87.35% 67.68% 65.25% –70.02% 5.91% 4.17% –8.31%
Standard 85 7.69% 2.65% –20.32% 99.73% 99.31% –99.89% 42.86% 15.82% –74.95%
Maximum PPV 85 7.69% 2.65% –20.32% 99.73% 99.31% –99.89% 42.86% 15.82% –74.95%
PPV = positive predictive value. Y ouden’s J returns the operating point at which sensitivity rate + specificity rate – 1 is maximized. Thus, with this
optimization, the cost of a loss in sensitivity rate is equal to the cost of a loss in specificity rate. The standard optimization is similar to Y ouden’s J, except
that costs are adjusted to reflect that those without prosopagnosia greatly outnumber those who with prosopagnosia. The cost of loss of specificity,
therefore, greatly outweighs the cost of loss of sensitivity. In practice, this second criterion attempts a balance between sensitivity and positivep r e d i c t i v e
value, and so returns the main CFMQ cutoff of interest.
Table 2 ROC analyses of CFMQ scores screening for the bottom 50th percentile of facial recognition ability
Optimization Type Cutoff Score Sensitivity 95% CI Specificity 95% CI PPV 95% CI
Y ouden’s J 66 65.35% 61.89% –68.65% 71.41% 68.09% –74.51% 69.57% 66.09% –72.83%
Standard 66 65.35% 61.89% –68.65% 71.41% 68.09% –74.51% 69.57% 66.09% –72.83%
Maximum PPV 39 4.35% 3.11% – 6.04% 100% 99.5% –100% 100% 89.57% –100%
PPV = positive predictive value. Y ouden’s J returns the operating point at which sensitivity rate + specificity rate – 1 is maximized. Thus, with this
optimization, the cost of a loss in sensitivity rate is equal to the cost of a loss in specificity rate. The standard optimization is similar to Y ouden’s J, except
that costs are adjusted to reflect that those without prosopagnosia greatly outnumber those who with prosopagnosia. The cost of loss of specificity,
therefore, greatly outweighs the cost of loss of sensitivity. In practice, this second criterion attempts a balance between sensitivity and positivep r e d i c t i v e
value, and so returns the main CFMQ cutoff of interest.
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1109


--- Page 9 ---
sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value metrics
yielded by the optimizations of the screening for the top per-
formers were comparable to, and numerically even lower than,
those corresponding to the optimizations screening for
prosopagnosia, we thus found no evidence that the low met-
rics in the prosopagnosia optimizations were due to poor data
quality for the subsample of our participants who were iden-
tified as having prosopagnosia. For this reason, we can be
confident that those we identified as having prosopagnosia
do indeed have face recognition impairment and are represen-
tative of the population of those with prosopagnosia.
Item response theory analyses
It is possible that the low discriminant utility of the CFMQ we
observed at one or both of its high and/or low ends could have
been due to lack of precision for reliably identifying excep-
tionally high or low self-assessed face recognition. For exam-
ple, perhaps the CFMQ, which was originally developed to
identify poor face recognition, is more sensitive at its low than
at its high end. Another possibility is that the CFMQ ’sh i g h
correlation with objective measures results from a high capac-
ity to discriminate self-assessed face recognition within the
normal range of performance, but this discrimination capacity
breaks down at the extremes; another way of stating this is that
the CFMQ might be better at discriminating the 49th from the
50th percentile of self-assessed face recognition than at dis-
criminating the 2nd from the 3rd percentile, or the 98th from
the 97th percentile. Finally, it was worth checking to verify
that the overall precision of the CFMQ, across its full range of
values, but especially at its extremes, was reasonably compa-
rable to that of our objective measures.
To address these three questions—(1) a potential differen-
tial precision of the CFMQ at the high versus the low end, (2)
the breakdown of precision for the CFMQ at its extremes, and
(3) potentially poor precision of the CFMQ relative to the
objective measures—we conducted a standard item-response
theory analysis that would enable a direct quantification of the
precision of the instrument across its full range (Wilmer et al.,
2012). The details of these results are included as supplemen-
tal information. The conclusions of these analyses were that
(1) the CFMQ is similarly precise at both the high and low
ends; (2) the CFMQ is actually more, rather than less, sensi-
tive at its extremes than in its middle range; and (3) the CFMQ
has comparable, or even better, precision relative to our ob-
jective measures across its full range, including at the ex-
tremes. Therefore, we concluded that the CFMQ has good
precision across its whole range, that the high-end analysis
was not limited by poor CFMQ precision in this range, and
that the limited diagnostic and screening utility we observed
for self-report does not appear to be a simple artifact of the
limited precision of self-report instruments.
Our item-response theory analysis also confirmed (see the
supplemental information ) that the sensitivities of both the
CFMT3 and FFMT are similar at both extremes of perfor-
mance, thereby effectively ruling out the possibility that these
instruments, which were developed in part to identify poor
face recognition performance, are simply insensitive to high
performance, thereby limiting the comparative value of our
high-end ROC analysis.
Single question screening
The first question in the CFMQ is BCompared to my peers, I
t h i n km yf a c er e c o g n i t i o ns k i l l sa r e...,^ with possible re-
sponses from 1 = far below average to 5 = far above average,
which constitutes the most general and direct self-assessment
item for face recognition ability in the questionnaire. Use of
the Bfar below average ^ response on this item as a
prosopagnosia screening criterion yielded, arguably, the most
acceptable combination of sensitivity, positive predictive val-
ue, and prevalence yet. The sensitivity was 54.05% (95% CI:
41.27% –66.32%), the specificity was 92.1% (95% CI:
88.89%–94.44%), the positive predictive value was 14.6%
(95% CI: 9.65% –21.48%), and the cutoff contained 9.03%
(95% CI: 7.69% –10.57%) of our included participants.
Therefore, use of this single response might be relatively more
practical than use of the sum score on the entire CFMQ as a
screening criterion for prosopagnosia. Nonetheless, this crite-
rion still might not be highly useful in absolute terms, since the
positive predictive value suggests that most persons meeting
this criterion (85.4%) would not have prosopagnosia upon
further objective performance testing.
PI20 cutoff analysis on Gray, Bird, and Cook (2017)
The discriminant utility of our CFMQ cutoff scores can be
compared with the discriminant utility of the PI20 cutoff score
proposed by the authors of the PI20. Combining both of the
data sets reported in Gray, Bird, and Cook ( 2017), we con-
ducted a novel analysis of the discriminant utility of the PI20
cutoff score of 65 or greater as a screen for prosopagnosia. Our
calculations yielded a total of 425 included participants, 59 of
whom we identified as having prosopagnosia on the basis that
they obtained a score of 44 or lower on the original version of
the CFMT, which, from previously published norms (Bowles
et al., 2009; Duchaine & Nakayama, 2006; Duchaine, Yovel,
Butterworth, & Nakayama, 2006; Duchaine, Yovel, &
Nakayama, 2007; Garrido, Duchaine, & Nakayama, 2008),
corresponds to performance approximately within the bottom
2.5% (no FFMT was administered). A total of 12 participants
had been classified as having prosopagnosia with the PI20
cutoff, five of whom actually had prosopagnosia according
to their CFMT score. Thus, the positive predictive value was
5/12 = 41.67%, though the small number of participants
1110 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 10 ---
classified as having prosopagnosia with the PI20 cutoff meant
that the confidence interval on this rate was wide (95% CI:
19.33%–68.05%). The sensitivity was 5/59 = 8.47% (95% CI:
3.67%–18.35%), and the specificity was 359/366 = 98.09%
(95% CI: 96.11% –99.07%). Given that 12 out of the 425
participants met the PI20 cutoff, the prevalence of those with
such scores was thus 2.82% (95% CI: 1.62% –4.87%). Given
the wide confidence interval on the positive predictive value,
it was not possible to adequately evaluate the usefulness of the
PI20 cutoff for predicting CFMT-defined prosopagnosia.
However, it is clear that the sensitivity was low, indicating
that most (about 91.5%) of those with prosopagnosia would
not be detected.
The PI20 cutoff within the Gray, Bird, and Cook ( 2017)
data set thus yielded sensitivity, specificity, and positive pre-
dictive values comparable to those reported above for the
CMFQ cutoff of 34 within our data set (see Table 4).
Though sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value
were all numerically lower for the PI20 cutoff than for that
CMFQ cutoff, the confidence intervals for these metrics great-
ly overlapped, indicating that they did not differ significantly
between the two questionnaires. This holds true even if we
identify our participants with prosopagnosia only on the basis
of CFMT3 scores instead of on the basis of composite CFMT3
and FFMT scores (Gray et al. did not administer the FFMT to
their participants). Specifically, performing the analogous cut-
off optimization for CFMT3-defined prosopagnosia as for
composite-score-defined prosopagnosia again yielded a
CFMQ cutoff score of 34, with a sensitivity of 16.22% (95%
CI: 7.65%–31.14%), specificity of 99.73% (95% CI: 99.31%–
99.89%), and positive predictive value of 60% (95% CI:
31.27%–83.18%). The one advantage that the PI20 cutoff
has over the CFMQ cutoff, though, is that the prevalence of
those meeting the cutoff was higher (2.82% vs. 0.66%, respec-
tively), and the difference was statistically significant accord-
ing to a binomial test on the Gray, Bird, and Cook (2017)d a t a ,
for which the null hypothesis was that the prevalence was
equal to our value of 0.66% ( p = .0000070).
Figure 2 plots the data of Gray, Bird, and Cook (2017)i na
manner analogous to our Fig. 1. One difference to note in Fig.
2 as compared to Fig. 1 is that those meeting the PI20 cutoff
are those to the right of the vertical line, not to the left, as was
the case for those meeting the CFMQ cutoff in Fig. 1.A l s o ,
the y-axis is the CFMT score, not the composite (CFMT3 +
FFMT) percentile score we were able to calculate in our own
data. Finally, the y-axis space did not need to be transformed,
since CFMT scores were already normally distributed,
allowing for easy visibility of the participants with CFMT -
defined prosopagnosia who fell above and below the proposed
PI20 cutoff score.
Discussion
We investigated the utility of a self-report measure of facial
recognition ability, the Cambridge Face Memory
Questionnaire (CFMQ), as a screen for discriminating be-
tween individuals with and without prosopagnosia-level per-
formance on objective tests commonly used to confirm a di-
agnosis of developmental prosopagnosia. We found the
CFMQ to be a highly reliable and valid index of facial recog-
nition ability [Cronbach’s alpha = .91 and Pearson’s r(1516) =
.54 with objective performance]. The validity of the CFMQ as
a measure of facial recognition is impressive given that the
reported average correlation between self-evaluated memory
capability and objective recognition performance metrics in
other domains of memory is only r = .1 (Beaudoin &
Desrichard, 2011; Wilmer, 2017). Nonetheless, no CFMQ
cutoff score yielded a practically adequate combination of
sensitivity and positive predictive value for prosopagnosia,
as independently determined by performance on the objective
facial recognition tests. In other words, no CFMQ cutoff score
both (1) included most of the participants with prosopagnosia
and (2) produced a high and reliable rate at which those par-
ticipants who met the cutoff actually had prosopagnosia. That
higher simultaneous rates for sensitivity and positive predic-
tive value were possible with a CFMQ cutoff score optimized
for discriminating between those above and below median
performance on the objective tests indicates that the low base
rate of prosopagnosia is a source of the poor discrimination
between those with and without prosopagnosia. Furthermore,
that comparable rates for sensitivity and positive predictive
value were produced with a CFMQ cutoff score optimized
for discriminating the top 2.5 percentile on the objective tests
from the rest of the participants means that there was no indi-
cation that the quality of the data for those we had identified as
having prosopagnosia was poor. Finally, that comparable dis-
criminative utility was found also for the cutoff score pro-
posed for the PI20 suggests that the low discriminative utility
of the CFMQ for prosopagnosia generalizes to other self-
report measures.
Table 4 ROC analyses of PI20 scores screening for CFMT -defined prosopagnosia
Cutoff Score Sensitivity 95% CI Specificity 95% CI PPV 95% CI
65 8.47% 3.67% –18.35% 98.09% 96.11% –99.07% 41.67% 19.33% –68.05%
PPV = positive predictive value
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1111


--- Page 11 ---
The utility of any given screening cutoff score may depend
on the context of the research and the preferences of the re-
searcher. For example, a researcher may be seeking to maxi-
mize their sample of individuals with prosopagnosia and may
have the resources to perform confirmatory diagnostic tests on
many individuals even if it is expected that many of those
individuals will not ultimately be found to have
prosopagnosia. Such a researcher would likely value sensitiv-
ity over positive predictive value with their screening cutoff
score. A researcher seeking to be more confident that an indi-
vidual meeting the cutoff will actually have prosopagnosia,
even if it means failing to detect many of those with
prosopagnosia, will likely value positive predictive value over
sensitivity. For this reason, we optimized the CFMQ cutoff
according to different criteria that favored either sensitivity
or specificity, or aimed to strike a balance between the two.
Cutoff optimization favoring sensitivity yielded a cutoff score
with an associated sensitivity of 89.19%, but positive predic-
tive value of only 6.52%. Cutoff optimization to strike more of
a balance of sensitivity and positive predictive value yielded a
cutoff with an associated sensitivity of only 18.92% and pos-
itive predictive value of 70%. Though 70% is a respectable
rate for a positive predictive value, it must be noted that this
was not a highly reliable value (95% CI: 39.68% –89.22%).
Furthermore, those meeting that cutoff included only 0.65%
of all participants. Cutoff optimization favoring positive pre-
dictive value yielded the same results yielded in the attempt to
strike a balance between sensitivity and positive predictive
value. Notwithstanding differences in the value that re-
searchers may place on sensitivity versus positive predictive
value, no CFMQ cutoff is likely to be practical. The researcher
who values sensitivity can obtain good sensitivity, but will
find that more than 93% of persons meeting the cutoff opti-
mized for sensitivity will not actually have prosopagnosia.
The researcher who values positive predictive value will rare-
ly be able to find individuals meeting the cutoff optimized for
positive predictive value. Finally, the researcher seeking a
balance between sensitivity and positive predictive value is
left without a cutoff that is able to achieve it.
That the CFMQ is not apt for discriminating between those
with and without prosopagnosia may seem inconsistent with
its demonstrated reliability and validity as an index of objec-
tive facial recognition ability. However, this lack of discrimi-
native utility stems from the low base rate of prosopagnosia
(here, 2.5%), along with the fact that developmental
prosopagnosia constitutes the tail end of a roughly normal
Fig. 2 CFMT score versus PI20 score. The CFMT score corresponding to
prosopagnosia is indicated with a horizontal dotted line, such that those
participants below the line we re those with CFMT-defined
prosopagnosia. The proposed PI20 cutoff is indicated with a vertical
dotted line, such that those participants to the right of the line were those
obtaining the cutoff. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value,
and CFMQ score prevalence rates already described can be intuited from
this graph. Sensitivity for the PI20 cutoff score is the proportion of par-
ticipants with CFMT-defined prosopagnosia (i.e., of those below the
horizontal line) who are captured by the cutoff (i.e., those to the right of
the vertical line). Specificity is the proportion of participants without
prosopagnosia (i.e., those above the horizontal line) who do not obtain
the PI20 cutoff score (i.e., who fall to the left of the horizontal line).
Positive predictive value is the proportion of those obtaining the PI20
cutoff score (i.e., of those falling to the right of the vertical line) who
actually have CFMT -defined prosopagnosia (i.e., who fall below the hor-
izontal line).
1112 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 12 ---
distribution of facial recognition ability, rather than some ex-
treme cluster largely segregated from the rest of the distribu-
tion, when diagnosed on the basis of behavior alone (Barton &
Corrow, 2016). For these reasons, an exceptionally high de-
gree of precision in the prediction of objective performance
from self-report would be required for adequate discrimina-
tion of the small number of those with prosopagnosia from the
nearly 40-fold larger number of those without prosopagnosia.
Though the association between self-report and objective per-
formance is robust, it is not commensurate with the extremely
high degree of precision required, meaning that the distribu-
tion of CFMQ scores for those without prosopagnosia greatly
overlaps with and drowns out the distribution of CFMQ scores
for those with prosopagnosia. This state of affairs is plainly
evident in Fig. 1, where, despite the clearly robust linear rela-
tionship between CFMQ score and objective performance,
there is consistent overlap in CFMQ scores between those
with and without prosopagnosia. An indication that the low
base rate of prosopagnosia exacerbates the situation is our
finding that when using the CFMQ instead merely to discrim-
inate between the upper and lower 50% of facial recognition
performers, higher simultaneous rates for sensitivity (65.35%)
and positive predictive value (69.57%) can be achieved with
an optimized cutoff score.
Our participants performed all assessments remotely over
the internet, and prior evidence indicates that the quality and
reliability of data collected through the web is as good as that
of data collected in the laboratory (Germine et al., 2012).
Consistent with this finding, the magnitude of our correlation
between CFMQ scores and objective facial recognition per-
formance fell at the high end of the range of values previously
reported for associations between subjective and objective
measures in the laboratory-based studies of other research
groups (Bindemann et al., 2014 ;G r a ye ta l . , 2017;
Livingston & Shah, 2017; Rotshtein et al., 2007;S h a h ,
Gaule, et al., 2015a; Shah, Sowden, et al., 2015b; Stollhoff
et al., 2011; Turano et al., 2016; Turano & Viggiano, 2017).
Nonetheless, one could speculate that the data for the partici-
pants we identified as having prosopagnosia might be unique-
ly suspect with respect to its quality, given that this subset of
participants, by definition, constitutes the outliers, and that
such poor performance could merely be caused by factors
unrelated to facial recognition ability. If this were so, the ap-
parent utility of the CFMQ for discriminating between those
with and without prosopagnosia would be spuriously reduced
in our study. However, this possibility is highly unlikely, given
that in using the CFMQ to attempt to discriminate the top
2.5% of facial recognition performers from the rest of our
participants, we discovered comparably poor discriminative
ability as we had found for prosopagnosia. Furthermore, ad-
ditional item response theory analyses (Supplementary
Results, Supplementary Figs. 1–5) of all of our assessment
metrics verified that facial recognition ability estimate
precisions from each of the metrics we employed were suffi-
cient within the relevant score ranges. Thus, neither compro-
mised quality of our participant sample nor of our assessment
metrics were the cause for the CFMQ being poor at discrim-
inating between those with and without prosopagnosia.
However, even considering the hypothetical case in which a
significant proportion of the participants that we identified as
having prosopagnosia were due to more general vision, mem-
ory, or social cognitive deficits, the inclusion of such partici-
pants would still have negligible influence on the results and
interpretation of our study. This is because all of these condi-
tions still bear upon a person’s ability to recognize faces rela-
tive to others in the population, and whether one ’s facial rec-
ognition deficit is domain-specific or not, comparable impair-
ment should still be evident in the objective assessments and
in self-report.
Does the limited discrimination of prosopagnosia-level
performance observed here generalize broadly across self-
report instruments? As we previously mentioned, we found
the magnitude of the correlation between the CFMQ and ob-
jective performance to be higher than almost all prior pub-
lished correlations between subjective and objective measures
of facial recognition. This is perhaps merely because of the
steps we took to make our metric of objective performance
standardized and reliable (e.g., age and gender adjustments,
percentile scoring, and the composition of two tests), rather
than because the CFMQ reflects objective performance more
strongly than do other self-report measures. Nonetheless, for
the reasons mentioned above relating to the low base rate of
prosopagnosia and the overlap in self-report scores between
those with and without prosopagnosia, it seems unlikely that
any of the other self-report measures currently in existence
would be capable of achieving substantially better discrimina-
tive ability than the CFMQ. Consistent with this is our finding
from a novel analysis of data from another self-report mea-
sure, the PI20 (Shah, Gaule, et al., 2015b). Using data avail-
able from a published study (Gray et al., 2017) in which PI20
an
d CFMT scores were collected from a sample of 435 par-
ticipants, we found that the proposed PI20 score cutoff of 65
yielded rates of sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive
value comparable to, if numerically lower than, those yielded
by the cutoff score of 34 for the CFMQ, even when
prosopagnosia was analogously defined only on the basis of
CFMT3 scores, rather than composite scores, within our par-
ticipant sample. In addition to suggesting the generalizability
of our findings to other self-report measures, this finding fur-
ther argues against the possibility that our data set may in
some way be contaminated by nonconscientious participants,
since, unlike our internet-based participant sample, the Gray,
Bird, and Cook ’s participant sample were laboratory-based,
and so close supervision was possible during testing.
The poor performance of the CFMT and the PI20 in dis-
criminating between those with and without prosopagnosia
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1113


--- Page 13 ---
can be contrasted with the much better performance, for ex-
ample, of the autism-spectrum quotient (AQ; Baron-Cohen,
Wheelwright, Skinner, Martin, & Clubley, 2001)i nd i s c r i m i -
nating between those with and without autism spectrum dis-
orders, or of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in
discriminating between those with and without mild cognitive
impairment or Alzheimer’s disease. The AQ has been reported
to detect 80% of participants with high-functioning autism
spectrum disorders when a cutoff score of 32 or higher on
the AQ was used, whereas only 2% of controls had such
scores (i.e., a cutoff sensitivity of 80% and specificity of
98%; Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). Scores on the Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) have been reported to enable
a detection rate (i.e., sensitivity) of 81%, a correct rejection
rate (i.e., specificity) of 77%, and positive prediction at a rate
of 78% for mild cognitive impairment. MoCA scores also
enable a sensitivity of 88%, specificity of 98%, and positive
predictive value of 98% for Alzheimer ’s disease (Freitas,
Simões, Alves, & Santana, 2013).
Comparisons with the AQ and the MoCA may not be
appropriate, however. Critical differences between how
autism spectrum disorders and dementias are screened
and diagnosed as compared to how prosopagnosia tends
to be screened and diagnosed likely explain why the AQ
and MoCA are not susceptible to the same disadvantages
that self-reported facial recognition has for predicting
prosopagnosia. Autism spec trum disorders are diagnosed
on the basis of semistructured observation of behavior by
an examiner and the questions in the AQ are similar in
content to this diagnostic assessment. Prosopagnosia, on
the other hand, tends to be diagnosed not on the basis of
ecologically observed behaviors corresponding to those
subjectively assessed with the CFMT or PI20, but rather
on the basis of objective performance metrics of facial
recognition, (e.g., the CFMT and FFMT; though see
K e n n e r k n e c h te ta l . ,2006; Kennerknecht, Nga, & Wong,
2008a ; Kennerknecht, Pluempe, & Welling, 2008b ;
Stollhoff et al., 2011). Alzheimer ’s disease and other de-
mentias, like prosopagnosia, are diagnosed on the basis of
objective tests; however, the MoCA is itself an objective
measure, not a subjective self- report measure, and so, like
the AQ, is similar in nature to the relevant diagnostic
tests. Thus, the AQ and MoCA are not susceptible to
the reduction of discriminative performance that is likely
inevitably introduced when there is a difference in the
kind of information (i.e., subjective/observational vs. ob-
jective performance) used between screening and
diagnosis.
If all forms of self-report, by themselves, are of limited
value in screening for prosopagnosia, then what alterna-
tive screening approaches c ould be practicable for re-
searchers seeking to identify and recruit persons with
prosopagnosia? Our study may serve as a proof of
concept for an approach of remote objective performance
testing via the internet. Though the current gold-standard
assessments of facial recogn ition performance (e.g., the
CFMT original and FFMT) may be reserved for
laboratory-based confirmation of prosopagnosia,
collecting data from alternative forms of such objective
performance assessments online and then screening based
on performance scores could serve as an efficient, eco-
nomical, and reliable means of locating persons highly
likely to have prosopagnosia. Indeed, alternative forms
of the CFMT, along with norms for performance within
the general population, already exist that may be suitable
for such purposes (e.g., the CFMT3 and the norms from
the present study, or the CFMT2 and the norms from
Germine, Duchaine, & Nakayama, 2011, 2013).
Though self-report information, by itself, is of limited use
for predicting prosopagnosia as independently defined by ob-
jective tests, this does not preclude it as an integral aspect of
the very definition of prosopagnosia, and thus, as being essen-
tial in the context of diagnosis. Because self-report often re-
flects aspects of everyday functioning and disability not fully
captured by objective tests (Duchaine & Weidenfeld, 2003;
Stollhoff et al.,2011), self-report could potentially be regarded
either as the primary diagnostic information or, at least, as on
par with objective measures. This possibility of using self-
report as primary diagnostic information for prosopagnosia
is similar to how self-report, in the form of extended structured
clinical interviews, is the primary or co-primary diagnostic
information for disorders of which subjective distress and/or
functional disability are, by definition, essential characteris-
tics. Developmental disorders such as autism, dyslexia, and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as well as psychiatric
disorders such as depression, obsessive–compulsive disorder,
an
d posttraumatic stress disorder, are examples of such disor-
ders. Therefore, some prosopagnosia researchers treat subjec-
tive report as the primary information for a putative diagnosis
(e.g., Kennerknecht et al., 2006; Kennerknecht, Pluempe,
et al., 2008a;K e n n e r k n e c h te ta l . ,2007; Stollhoff et al.,
2011), though it should be noted that prosopagnosia re-
searchers using this approach are currently in the minority.
Alternatively, self-report could instead be used as a prereq-
uisite for the objective tests of facial recognition that are then
subsequently used as the primary information to confirm the
diagnosis of prosopagnosia. Such a step-wise approach has
precedent in screening for cognitive decline, for which objec-
tive measures are collected only if self- or informant-reported
complaints exist (Crooks, Buckwalter, Petitti, Brody, & Y ep,
2005; Winblad et al., 2004). In line with this approach, most
labs studying prosopagnosia have employed some form of
self-report or self-identification as a screen to select individ-
uals for further laboratory testing, where objective measures
are then collected as the ground-truth information to perform
the putative diagnosis.
1114 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116


--- Page 14 ---
Presently, no consensus exists within the research commu-
nity for how self-report infor mation should be utilized in the
diagnosis of prosopagnosia. However, our data reveal that this
unresolved detail is not without significant consequences. For
the purposes of our study, we identified persons with
prosopagnosia within our sample entirely on the basis of their
performance on objective tests typically utilized in the confir-
mation of a diagnosis of prosopagnosia. It is evident that many
of the participants that we identified as having prosopagnosia
instead subjectively perceived their facial recognition ability to
be within the normal, or even high, range, as compared to others
(see Fig. 1). To meet a Btrue^ diagnosis, should those even
without insight into their exceptionally poor facial recognition
ability be considered as having prosopagnosia, or should some
form of subjective complaint instead be required? Likewise, for
those whose performance on objective measures is within the
normal range, but who nonetheless present with complaints that
their ability is exceptionally impaired, with real-world conse-
quences, how much, if any, provision should be made for diag-
nosing such individuals with prosopagnosia? The data from the
present study cannot resolve this issue of diagnostic conven-
tion, but they do highlight some of what is at stake in any
convention that might be adopted.
Acknowledgements Research reported in this publication was supported
by the National Eye Institute of the National Institutes of Health under
award number R01EY026057
Appendix: ROC analysis definitions
in the context of detecting prosopagnosia
with the CFMQ
Sensitivity The rate at which participants with prosopagnosia
were correctly classified when using a given CFMQ cutoff
score. A low sensitivity rate would imply that a high propor-
tion of persons with prosopagnosia would not be detected on
the basis of their CFMQ score alone.
SpecificityThe rate at which participantswithout prosopagnosia
were correctly classified when using a given CFMQ cutoff
score. A low specificity rate would imply that a high proportion
of persons without prosopagnosia would be falsely labeled as
having prosopagnosia on the basis of their CFMQ score alone.
Positive predictive value The rate at which those classified as
having prosopagnosiaactually had prosopagnosia.High positive
predictive value does not imply high sensitivity, or vice versa, so
it is possible for a high proportion of persons with prosopagnosia
to fail to be detected even if a high proportion of those classified
as having prosopagnosia actually have prosopagnosia.
Publisher’sn o t eSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
References
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., & Clubley, E.
(2001). The Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ): Evidence from
Asperger syndrome/high-functioning autism, males and females,
scientists and mathematicians. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 31,5 –17. doi:https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1005653411471
Barton, J. J. S., & Corrow, S. L. (2016). The problem of being bad at
faces. Neuropsychologia, 89,1 1 9–124. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2016.06.008
Beaudoin, M., & Desrichard, O. (2011). Are memory self-efficacy and
memory performance related? A meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 137,2 1 1–241. doi:https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022106
Bindemann, M., Attard, J., & Johnston, R. A. (2014). Perceived ability
and actual recognition accuracy for unfamiliar and famous faces.
Cogent Psychology , 1, 986903. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/
23311908.2014.986903
Bobak, A. K., Mileva, V . R., & Hancock, P . J. B. (2018). Facing the facts:
Naive participants have only moderate insight into their face recog-
nition and face perception abilities. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Advance online publication. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1177/1747021818776145
Bowles, D. C., McKone, E., Dawel, A., Duchaine, B., Palermo, R.,
Schmalzl, L., . . . Y ovel, G. (2009). Diagnosing prosopagnosia:
Effects of ageing, sex, and participant-stimulus ethnic match on
the cambridge face memory test and cambridge face perception test.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26, 423– 455. doi:https://doi.org/10.
1080/02643290903343149
Crooks, V . C., Buckwalter, J. G., Petitti, D. B., Brody, K. K., & Y ep, R. L.
(2005). Self-reported severe memory problems as a screen for cog-
nitive impairment and dementia. Dementia, 4,5 3 9–551. doi:https://
doi.org/10.1177/1471301205058310
De Heering, A., & Maurer, D. (2014). Face memory deficits in patients
deprived of early visual input by bilateral congenital cataracts.
Developmental Psychobiology, 56,9 6 –108. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1002/dev.21094
DeGutis, J., Cohan, S., Mercado, R. J., Wilmer, J., & Nakayama, K.
(2012). Holistic processing of the mouth but not the eyes in devel-
opmental prosopagnosia.Cognitive Neuropsychology, 29,4 1 9–446.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2012.754745
DeGutis, J., Mercado, R. J., Wilmer, J., & Rosenblatt, A. (2013).
Individual differences in holistic processing predict the own-race
advantage in recognition memory. PLoS ONE , 8, e58253. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0058253
Duchaine, B. C., & Weidenfeld, A. (2003). An evaluation of two com-
monly used tests of unfamiliar face recognition. Neuropsychologia,
41,7 1 3–720. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(02)00222-1
Duchaine, B. C., Y ovel, G., Butterworth, E. J., & Nakayama, K. (2006).
Pros
opagnosia as an impairment to face-specific mechanisms:
Elimination of the alternative hypotheses in a developmental case.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 23, 714– 747. doi:https://doi.org/10.
1080/02643290500441296
Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2006). The Cambridge Face Memory
Test: Results for neurologically intact individuals and an investiga-
tion of its validity using inverted face stimuli and prosopagnosic
participants. Neuropsychologia, 44, 576 –585. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2005.07.001
Duchaine, B., Y ovel, G., & Nakayama, K. (2007). No global processing
deficit in the Navon task in 14 developmental prosopagnosics.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 2, 104– 113. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsm003
Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern
Recognition Letters , 27, 861 –874. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
patrec.2005.10.010
Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116 1115


--- Page 15 ---
Freitas, S., Simões, M. R., Alves, L., & Santana, I. (2013). Montreal
cognitive assessment: V alidation study for mild cognitive impair-
ment and alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Disease and Associated
Disorders , 27 ,3 7 –43. doi: https://doi.org/10.1097/W AD.
0b013e3182420bfe
Garrido, L., Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2008). Face detection in
normal and prosopagnosic individuals. Journal of
Neuropsychology , 2,1 1 9 –140. doi: https://doi.org/10.1348/
174866407X246843
Germine, L. T., Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2011). Where cognitive
development and aging meet: Face learning ability peaks after age
30. Cognition , 118,2 0 1 –210. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cognition.2010.11.002
Germine, L., Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2013). Face recognition
memory data across the lifespan N approx 60,000. Retrieved from
Figshare: doi:https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.767320.v1
Germine, L., Nakayama, K., Duchaine, B. C., Chabris, C. F., Chatterjee,
G., & Wilmer, J. B. (2012). Is the Web as good as the lab?
Comparable performance from Web and lab in cognitive/
perceptual experiments. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19,8 4 7–
857. doi:https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-012-0296-9
Gray, K. L. H., Bird, G., & Cook, R. (2017). Robust associations between
the 20-item prosopagnosia index and the Cambridge Face Memory
Test in the general population. Royal Society Open Science , 4,
160923. doi:https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160923
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psy-
chophysics. New York, NY: Wiley.
Kennerknecht, I., Grueter, T., Welling, B., Wentzek, S., Horst, J.,
Edwards, S., & Grueter, M. (2006). First report of prevalence of
non-syndromic hereditary prosopagnosia (HPA). American
Journal of Medical Genetics , 140A, 1617 –1622. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31343
Kennerknecht, I., Nga, Y . H., & Wong, V . C. N. (2008a). Prevalence of
hereditary prosopagnosia (HP A) in Hong Kong Chinese population.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part A , 146,2 8 6 3–2870.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32552
Kennerknecht, I., Pluempe, N., & Welling, B. (2008b). Congenital
prosopagnosia—A common hereditary cognitive dysfunction in
humans. Frontiers in Bioscience, 13,3 1 5 0–3158.
Kennerknecht, I., Plümpe, N., Edwards, S., & Raman, R. (2007).
Hereditary prosopagnosia (HPA): The first report outside the
Caucasian population. Journal of Human Genetics , 52,2 3 0–236.
doi:h
ttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10038-006-0101-6
Livingston, L. A., & Shah, P . (2017). People with and without
prosopagnosia have insight into th eir face recognition ability.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 71, 1260 –1262.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2017.1310911
Malpass, R. S., & Kravitz, J. (1969). Recognition for faces of own and
other race. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 13,3 3 0–
334. doi:https://doi.org/10.1037/h0028434
Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001). Thirty years of investigating
the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-analytic review.
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law , 7,3 –35. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1037/1076-8971.7.1.3
Palermo, R., Rossion, B., Rhodes, G., Laguesse, R., Tez, T., Hall, B., . . .
McKone, E. (2017). Do people have insight into their face recogni-
tion abilities? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 70,
218–233. doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1161058
Peterson, E., & Miller, S. F. (2012). The eyes test as a measure of indi-
vidual differences: How much of the variance reflects verbal IQ?
Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 220. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2012.00220
Rotshtein, P ., Geng, J. J., Driver, J., & Dolan, R. J. (2007). Role of
features and second-order spatial relations in face discrimination,
face recognition, and individual face skills: Behavioral and function-
al magnetic resonance imaging data. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19, 1435– 1452. doi: https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.
2007.19.9.1435
Shah, P ., Gaule, A., Sowden, S., Bird, G., & Cook, R. (2015a). The 20-
item prosopagnosia index (PI20): A self-report instrument for iden-
tifying developmental prosopagnosia.Royal Society Open Science,
2, 140343. doi:https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.140343
Shah, P ., Sowden, S., Gaule, A., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. (2015b). The 20
item prosopagnosia index (PI20): Relationship with the Glasgow
face-matching test. Royal Society Open Science , 2, 150305. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.150305
Snowling, M., Dawes, P ., Nash, H., & Hulme, C. (2012). V alidity of a
protocol for adult self-report of dyslexia and related difficulties.
Dyslexia, 18,1 –15. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/dys.1432
Spackman, K. A. (1989). Signal detection theory: V aluable tools for eval-
uating inductive learning. In A. M. Segre (Ed.), Proceedings of the
Sixth International Workshop on Machine Learning (pp. 160–163).
San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-1-55860-036-2.50047-3
Stollhoff, R., Jost, J., Elze, T., & Kennerknecht, I. (2011). Deficits in
long-term recognition memory reveal dissociated subtypes in con-
genital prosopagnosia.PLoS ONE, 6,
e15702. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0015702
Turano, M. T., Marzi, T., & Viggiano, M. P . (2016). Individual differences
in face processing captured by ERPs. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 101,1 –8. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.
2015.12.009
Turano, M. T., & Viggiano, M. P . (2017). The relationship between face
recognition ability and socioem otional functioning throughout
adulthood. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 24,6 1 3–630.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2016.1244247
White, D., Kemp, R. I., Jenkins, R., Matheson, M., & Burton, A. M.
(2014). Passport officers’ errors in face matching. PLoS ONE , 9,
e103510. doi:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0103510
Wilmer, J. B. (2017). Individual differences in face recognition: A decade
of discovery.Current Directions in Psychological Science, 26,2 2 5–
230. doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417710693
Wilmer, J. B., Germine, L., Chabris, C. F., Chatterjee, G., Gerbasi, M., &
Nakayama, K. (2012). Capturing specific abilities as a window into
human individuality: The example of face recognition. Cognitive
Neuropsychology , 29,3 6 0 –392. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/
02643294.2012.753433
Wilmer, J. B., Germine, L., Chabris, C. F., Chatterjee, G., Williams, M.,
L o k e n ,E . ,...D u c h a i n e ,B .( 2 0 1 0 ) .H u m a nf a c er e c o g n i t i o na b i l i t y
is specific and highly heritable. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , 107,5 2 3 8–5241. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.0913053107
Wilmer, J. B., Germine, L. T., & Nakayama, K. (2014). Face recognition:
A model specific ability. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8,7 6 9 .
doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00769
Wilson, E. B. (1927). Probable inference, the law of succession, and
statistical inference. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 22, 209– 212. doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.
1927.10502953
Winblad, B., Palmer, K., Kivipelto, M., Jelic, V ., Fratiglioni, L., Wahlund,
L.-O., . . . Petersen, R. C. (2004). Mild cognitive impairment —
Beyond controversies, towards a consensus: Report of the
International Working Group on Mild Cognitive Impairment.
Journal of Internal Medicine, 256,2 4 0–246. doi:https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01380.x
Y ouden, W. J. (1950). Index for rating diagnostic tests.Cancer, 3,3
2 –35.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(1950)3:1<32::AID-
CNCR2820030106>3.0.CO;2-3
1116 Behav Res (2019) 51:1102 –1116
