--- Page 1 ---
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-019-00031-4
Frequency-SensitivityandMagnitude-Sensitivity
inDecision-Making:PredictionsofaTheoreticalModel-BasedStudy
ThomasBose1 ·FreyaBottom2 ·AndreagiovanniReina1 ·JamesA.R.Marshall 1
©TheAuthor(s)2019
Abstract
We theoretically study decision-making behaviour in a model-based analysis related to binary choices with pulsed stimuli.
Assuming a strong coupling between external stimulus and its internal representation, we argue that the frequency of
external periodic stimuli represents an important degree of freedom in decision-making which may modulate behavioural
responses. We consider various different stimulus conditions, including varying overall magnitudes and magnitude ratios
as well as varying overall frequencies and frequency ratios, and different duty cycles of the pulsed stimuli. Decision time
distributions, mean decision times and choice probabilities are simulated and compared for two different models—a leaky
competing accumulator model and a diffusion-type model with multiplicative noise. Our results reveal an interplay between
the sensitivity of the model systems to both frequency and magnitude of the stimuli. In particular, we find that periodic
stimuli may shape the decision time distributions resulting from both models by resembling the frequencies of the pulsed
stimuli. We obtain significant frequency-sensitive effects on mean decision time and choice probability for a range of overall
frequencies and frequency ratios. Our simulation analysis makes testable predictions that frequencies comparable with
typical sensory processing and decision-making timescales may influence choice and response times in perceptual decisions.
A possible experimental implementation is proposed.
Keywords Binary decision-making · Behaviour · Computational modelling · Pulsed stimuli · Response times
Introduction
When the brain makes decisions, it accumulates evidence
to compute a decision variable that is evaluated against a
decision criterion (Gold and Shadlen 2007). This concept
has been tested and verified in binary decision-making tasks
in a variety of different settings: from perceptual decision-
making (Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001; Usher and
McClelland 2001; Ditterich et al. 2003; Bogacz et al. 2006;
Pirrone et al. 2018) to value-based decisions (Krajbich et
al. 2010, 2015; Basten etla. 2010; Hunt et al. 2012; Pirrone
et al. 2018), and choice behaviour when value and sensory
evidence are integrated together (Feng et al. 2009; Afacan-
Seref et al. 2018).
In perceptual decision-making, the computation of the
log-likelihood ratio between the probabilities of evidence
/envelopebackThomas Bose
t.bose@sheffield.ac.uk
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK
2 Department of Physics, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
(given two alternative hypotheses) to decide in favour of one
of the two available options is related to the optimal way to
trade-off between speed and accuracy, i.e. given a certain
required accuracy, the decision time is minimised (Bogacz
et al. 2006; Gold and Shadlen 2007). The sequential accu-
mulation of multiple pieces of evidence until a stop-and-
decide criterion is fulfilled can be realised by the sequential
probability ratio test (SPRT) (Wald and Wolfowitz 1948).
Making the transition from discrete to continuous time,
it has been shown that the drift-diffusion model (DDM)
(Ratcliff 1978; Ratcliff et al. 2016) resembles the SPRT,
where the decision variable in the DDM directly relates to
the sum of likelihood ratios computed consecutively over
discrete timesteps in the SPRT (Bogacz et al. 2006). Poten-
tial similarities between key factors in perceptual decisions
and value-based choices have been noted (e.g. see (Sugrue
et al. 2005; Gold and Shadlen 2007;P o l a n´ıa et al. 2014;
Tajima et al. 2016; Pirrone et al. 2018)). In particular, it has
been shown that difference-based accumulation of evidence
is fundamental not only in perceptual but also in value-based
decisions (Basten et al. 2010, but see Pirrone et al. 2014).
Magnitude-sensitivity has emerged as a key feature
in perceptual decision-making (Pins and Bonnet 1996;
Publishedonline:20 May2019
ComputationalBrain&Behavior (2020)3:66–85


--- Page 2 ---
Stafford and Gurney 2004;P a l m e re ta l .2005; Teodorescu
et al. 2016; Pirrone et al. 2018;P o l a n´ıa et al. 2014; Ratcliff
et al. 2018; van Maanen et al. 2012) and in economic
choices (Hunt et al. 2012; Pirrone et al. 2014, 2018;P o l a n´ıa
et al. 2014). This is characterised by decreasing decision
times for both increasing magnitude (value) differences and
increasing overall magnitudes (values) (Pins and Bonnet
1996; Stafford and Gurney 2004;P a l m e re ta l .2005; Hunt
et al. 2012; Teodorescu et al. 2016;P o l a n´ıa et al. 2014;
Pirrone et al. 2014, 2018; Ratcliff et al. 2018; van Maanen
et al. 2012). Furthermore, this hallmark is also proposed to
be present in collective decision-making of social insects.
For example, sensitivity to the quality values of nest-sites in
the decision-making of house-hunting honeybees has been
found in mathematical analyses (Pais et al. 2013;R e i n a
et al. 2017; Reina et al. 2018) and has been discussed
theoretically (Pirrone et al. 2014;B o s ee ta l .2017).
When external stimuli enter the brain, they undergo a
transformation into corresponding internal representations
(Gold and Shadlen 2007). In recent brightness discrimina-
tion experiments and modelling studies, it has been shown
that assuming a strong coupling between external stimu-
lus and internal model dynamics could explain empirical
data (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al. 2018). Both
studies focused on magnitude-sensitive effects where two
visual stimuli were sampled from Gaussian distributions
centred at a mean brightness (Teodorescu et al. 2016;R a t -
cliff et al. 2018). That is, the brightnesses of both stimuli
were allowed to vary randomly within a trial at a refresh
rate of 60 Hz. However, pulsed stimuli with well-defined
frequencies (i.e. clearly distinguishable low-magnitude and
high-magnitude phases) have not yet been studied in such a
scenario where external stimulus and internal variable may
be assumed to be strongly coupled. Given a strong direct
coupling of this type (see Eq. 2 below), we hypothesised
that the stimulus frequency, in addition to the stimulus mag-
nitude, could be another degree of freedom that influences
decision-making behaviour. To investigate this hypothesis
and to see what effects varying stimulus frequencies might
induce, we simulated a brightness discrimination experi-
ment similar to the ones previously studied by Teodorescu
et al. (2016) and Ratcliff et al. (2018), and analysed possible
behavioural responses employing sequential sampling mod-
els. We applied a DDM with multiplicative noise (denoted
mDDM in the following), where the input signal directly
enters the coefficient determining the noise strength (Brun-
ton et al. 2013; Teodorescu et al. 2016). Here, we included
multiplicative noise, as it has been shown that this modi-
fication of the canonical DDM gives a better account for
the magnitude-sensitive decision task we simulate in the
present paper (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al. 2018).
We compared results obtained from the mDDM variant
with those from a leaky competing accumulator (LCA)
model (Usher and McClelland 2001), which has also been
shown to account for magnitude-sensitive data (Teodorescu
et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al. 2018), and, as a new aspect,
here, we analysed how both models perform under varia-
tion of overall frequency and frequency ratio of the two
stimuli presented periodically. In particular, our analysis
of the simulated behavioural data shows that, in addition
to sensitivity to the overall magnitude and the magnitude
ratio of the two stimuli, the computation of the decision
variable also exhibits sensitivity to the stimuli’s overall fre-
quency and frequency ratio. Our results demonstrate that,
under the assumption of a strong coupling between exter-
nal and internal stimulus, the LCA model and mDDM are
both magnitude-sensitive and frequency-sensitive, and qual-
itatively show largely similar behaviour. In particular, our
analysis indicates that the stimulus frequency may shape
the simulated decision time distribution by transferring the
periodicity of the input signal to the behavioural response.
Furthermore, we identify the numerical ranges where strong
frequency-sensitive effects are observed, given our particu-
lar model assumptions and propose a possible experimental
implementation to test our predictions.
MaterialsandMethods
In this study, we assumed that the decision-making process
is described by the temporal evolution of activity levels
of a decision variable governed by the LCA model and
the mDDM, respectively. In particular, we simulated the
evolution of the decision variable for both models until a
threshold, i.e. zLCA or zmDDM, was reached. If the threshold
criterion was not met within the maximum time tmax =
15 s, we excluded the result. However, indecision was
generally a rare event and in the majority of parameter
combinations, we achieved an exclusion rate which was far
below 1% or equal to zero. Only for low signal magnitudes,
we occasionally observed slightly higher exclusion rates
which however never exceeded 2%. In all simulations, we
used a Euler method with a timestep of dt = 0.001 in
the numerical integration, which gave a good compromise
between computation time and accuracy. In what follows,
we consider the employed stimulus conditions and both
models (mDDM and LCA) in more detail.
Input Signal and Stimulus Conditions We modelled the
input signals using periodic square wave functions Sj , j =
1, 2, which have the following form
Sj (t) = mj sj (2πfj t), j =1, 2
sj =
{
1, if n
fj ≤ t ≤ n+DCj
fj
0.2
mj , otherwise ,n =0, 1, 2, 3, ... , (1)
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 67


--- Page 3 ---
where t is the time and n is a positive integer used to
discriminate between high-magnitude and low-magnitude
intervals of the stimulus. Frequencies and magnitudes of the
two stimuli are denoted, fj and mj , respectively. The DCj
represent the duty cycles of the signals Sj and are further
explained below. Here, we assume that for both S1(t) and
S2(t), there is always a baseline signal present to provide
well-defined input signals (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Pirrone
et al. 2018).
The signal in Eq. 1 is purely deterministic. To account
for a more realistic stimulus, we add a small, normally
distributed random number to the signal, i.e. ˜Sj = Sj +
N(mean = 0, SD = 0.05) at each timestep. This stochastic
signal is then transformed into an internal representation of
the input, Ij (t), according to
Ij (t) = ˜Sγ
j (t) , (2)
where γ is an exponent characterising the nonlinear rela-
tionship between ˜Sj and Ij . Again and for the same reasons
as discussed before for the stimulus signal Sj , we assume
a lower threshold for the transformed signal Ij , i.e. at each
point in time we use Ij ← max(0.1,I j ). The transforma-
t i o nr u l ei nE q .2 was considered previously by Teodorescu
et al. ( 2016) and was shown to provide reasonable fits to
data. The authors found values of γ for various models
roughly between 0.2 and 0.8 (Teodorescu et al.2016). γ val-
ues in the LCA model employed in the study by Teodorescu
et al. ( 2016) had an average close to 0.3 and the mDDM
model studied there had a mean value near 0.7 (Teodorescu
et al. 2016). In our study, we used a fixed value of γ = 0.5,
which is well within the range observed by Teodorescu et al.
(2016) and should hence be appropriate for our modelling
purposes. Another reason for choosing the same γ for both
models is that the transformation rule in Eq. 2 does not
depend on the choice of the model to compute the decision
variable and may therefore be the same for both mDDM and
LCA model.
Besides altering magnitudes and frequencies of the input
signals, we also modified the duty cycle (DC) of the input
signals in Eq. 1, which, in our terms, quantifies the time the
signal is at its maximum value in relation to a reference time
unit. Specifically, we considered the case where the duty
cycles of both signals are 50%, i.e. DC1 = 0.5 = DC2.W e
denote this stimulus condition SC1. In addition, we investi-
gate stimulus condition SC2, where DC2 = 0.5 and DC1 =
DC2 f1/f2, that is the duty cycle of signal 1 is proportional
to the ratio of the frequencies of both signals. Condition
SC2 is useful, as it allows to vary frequencies and duty
cycle simultaneously. In both stimulus conditions, pulse
widths are inversely proportional to the signal frequencies.
Duty cycles and pulse widths of both signals are equal if
f1 = f2. However, the difference between stimulus con-
ditions SC1 and SC2 is that in condition SC2, the pulse
width of S1 is smaller (bigger) than the pulse width of S2 if
f1 <f 2 (f1 >f 2). In condition SC1, the inverse applies, as
the duty cycle is kept constant at 50%. The different stimu-
lus conditions are summarised in Table 1 and illustrated in
the two upper panels in Fig. 1a and b, respectively.
Implementation of the mDDM ModelThe first model we
study is the mDDM, i.e. a diffusion-type model with
multiplicative noise (Brunton et al. 2013; Teodorescu et al.
2016), which is implemented according to
dx(t) = q( I1(t) − I2(t)) dt + /Gamma1(I1,I 2)dW( t), (3)
where x represents the decision variable. I1 and I2 are the
transformed inputs introduced in Eq.2, q is a transformation
rate, and dW is the increment of a Wiener process, which
is normally distributed, i.e. dW ∼ N(mean = 0, SD =
1). The Wiener process is included to model noise in the
decision-making process. /Gamma1(I1,I 2) is an input-dependent
coefficient of the noise term and has the form (Teodorescu
et al. 2016)
/Gamma1(I1,I 2) =
√
σ2
mDDM + /Phi1
(
I2
1 + I2
2
)
, (4)
where σmDDM characterises a constant processing noise in
the decision variable x(t) and /Phi1quantifies the strength of
the multiplicative noise originating from the transformed
input signals.
Furthermore, we assume that the internal representation
of the drift term in Eq.3,i . e .q( I1(t)−I2(t)), underlies trial-
to-trial variability. This means that we add a small, Gaussian
random number sampled from N(mean = 0, SD = 0.1) to
this term at the beginning of each trial. We also take into
account that the initial condition is not perfectly symmetric
by assuming a starting point variability (SPV) of 0.1 across
trials, and sample the starting valuex(t = 0) from a uniform
distribution U(−SPV, SPV). The inclusion of across-trial
variability in drift rate and starting point values in diffusion
models have been shown to better explain behavioural
data (e.g. see Ratcliff and Rouder ( 1998) and Ratcliff and
Tuerlinckx (2002)).
Implementation of the LCA ModelThe second model we
apply in this paper is a mutual inhibition model, originally
introduced as the leaky competing accumulator model
Table 1 Overview of stimulus conditions
Stimulus condition Input I1(t) Input I2(t)
SC1 DC 1 = 0.5 DC 2 = 0.5
SC2 DC 1 = f1/(2f2) DC2 = 0.5
DC denotes the duty cycle of the signal and is given as a ratio. A duty
cycle of 50% (i.e. DC = 0.5), for example, means in our terms that a
signal is at its maximum 50% of the time
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8568


--- Page 4 ---
Fig.1 Simulations of the two different models (mDDM and LCA) for two different stimulus conditions (cf. Table 1). The models are integrated
until the threshold is reached. We used f1 = 6H z ,f2 = 4H z ,m1 = 3, m2 = 2 in the numerical integration
(Usher and McClelland 2001). In mathematical terms, this
is expressed as
dy1(t) = (−ky 1(t) − βy 2(t) + qI 1(t)) dt
+σLCA dW1(t) ,
dy2(t) = (−ky 2(t) − βy 1(t) + qI 2(t)) dt
+σLCA dW2(t) , (5)
where y1 and y2 describe the activity levels of the evidence-
integrating units, i.e. a decision variable comprised of two
elements. If either of the two integrators crosses a given
threshold, a decision is made. Again, q is the transfer rate
that scales original stimulus and internal representation of
that input, and I1 and I2 are the transformed input signals
according to Eq. 2. The activity level of each accumulator is
independently affected by fluctuations modelled by Wiener
processes with increments dW1 and dW2 and quantified by
σLCA, where we again havedWj ∼ N(mean = 0, SD = 1).
Information loss in the accumulators is characterised by
the leak rate k. Cross-inhibition is included by the terms
∝ β,w h e r eβ denotes the inhibition strength. Models
featuring cross-inhibition have been studied frequently in
two alternative choice tasks both in nonlinear (Usher and
McClelland 2001; Brown and Holmes 2001; Brown et al.
2005; Wong and Wang 2006; Bogacz et al. 2007)a n d
linear versions (Bogacz et al. 2006; Marshall et al. 2015;
Teodorescu et al. 2016). Furthermore, it has been shown
previously that competitive models like the LCA account
better for magnitude-sensitive data compared with non-
competitive models (Teodorescu and Usher 2013). As in
the mDDM, in the LCA model in Eq. 5,w ea l s ot a k ei n t o
account starting point variability (SPV = 0.2) across trials
and sample initial conditions from uniform distributions, i.e.
yj (t = 0) ∼ U(0, SPV), j = 1, 2.
Model Parameters The following parameters are fixed
throughout the paper: k = 0.5, β = 0.25, q = 1, γ = 0.5,
/Phi1= 0.1, σLCA = 0.3, σmDDM = 0.1, zLCA = 1.2 and
|zmDDM|= 0.6. Frequencies f1,2 and magnitudes m1,2
are varied. For the following analysis, we introduce the
magnitude ratio as ρm = m1/m2, the overall magnitude as
ϒm = m1 + m2 and the magnitude difference as /Delta1m =
|m1 − m2|. In the same way, we define the frequency ratio of
the two stimuli as ρf = f1/f2, the overall frequency as
ϒf = f1 + f2 and the frequency difference according to
/Delta1f =| f1 − f2|. The relations between ρm (ρf ), ϒm (ϒf )
and /Delta1m (/Delta1f ) are summarised in Table 2. In our theoretical
study, we were particularly interested in frequencies that
are well below the stimulus refresh rate used in the
related experiment (∼ 60 Hz in Teodorescu et al. 2016)t o
Table 2 Overview of the relations between magnitude (frequency)
ratio, magnitude (frequency) difference and overall magnitude
(frequency)
Magnitude/frequency Expression
Of stimulus j: mj , fj
Overall value: ϒm = m1 + m2, ϒf = f1 + f2
Ratio: ρm = m1
m2
, ρf = f1
f2
Difference: /Delta1m = |m1 − m2| = ϒm
⏐⏐⏐ρm−1
ρm+1
⏐⏐⏐,
/Delta1f = |f1 − f2| = ϒf
⏐⏐⏐
ρf −1
ρf +1
⏐⏐⏐
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 69


--- Page 5 ---
discriminate effects of stimulus frequency from flickering
due to re-sampling of the external stimulus. Furthermore,
the frequencies used in our study ( f1,2 ∼ 0.5 − 10 Hz),
correspond to timescales in the range of 100 ms − 2s .T h i s
interval includes the typical range for sensory processing
involved in cognitive tasks such as motion discrimination
and speech recognition (∼ 100 ms) (Mauk and Buonomano
2004;K i e b e le ta l .2008) but also typical decision times
∼ 1 s obtained under laboratory conditions (e.g. see Ratcliff
et al. 2016, and references therein).
Results
PerformanceUnderStimuliwithConstant
Magnitude
To get an overview of the performance of the mDDM and
the LCA model and to enable better comparability with
periodic stimuli, we first studied both models when the
stimulus magnitude is constant and not pulsed. In Fig. 2,
we show decision time distributions for varying overall
magnitudes with constant magnitude ratios (Fig. 2a–d) and
varying magnitude ratios with constant overall magnitudes
(Fig. 2e–h). A comparison of mDDM and LCA in Fig. 2
demonstrates that both models exhibit similar qualitative
behaviour. For increasing ϒm and constant ρm, the peak
of the decision time distribution moves towards smaller
decision times and the distribution becomes narrower
(Fig. 2a–d). In contrast, for increasing ρm and constant ϒm,
decision time distributions of both models do not show
such a significant effect (Fig. 2e–h). We also note that the
shape of the distribution for both models depends on the
parameter set chosen. In fact, parameters can be altered
such that the decision time distributions of both models
appear more similar. For example, it was shown that both
models the LCA and the mDDM could be used to fit the
same set of magnitude-sensitive data (Teodorescu et al.
2016). This, however, meant that γ values obtained from
the fitting were different for mDDM and LCA (Teodorescu
et al. 2016). Here, we applied a different approach by
using the same γ value for LCA and mDDM, following
our assumption that signal pre-processing is the same for
both models. Other important model parameters are the
multiplicative noise strength, /Phi1,i nt h em D D Ma n dt h e
cross-inhibition strength, β, in the LCA. Those parameters
have fixed values in our study but we would expect some
changes in the decision time distribution when modifying
the values of these parameters, such as a shift of the peak
and a variation of the distribution width. Furthermore, in
case of /Phi1= 0, the mDDM would reduce to a model
similar to the standard DDM which could not fit related
Fig. 2 Decision time distribution for continuous constant stimuli,
keeping either ρm = 4/3 = const. a–d or ϒm = 4 = const. e–
f. a: ϒm = 1( m1 ≈ 0.57, m2 ≈ 0.43); b: ϒm = 2( m1 ≈ 1.14,
m2 ≈ 0.86); c: ϒm = 3( m1 ≈ 1.71, m2 ≈ 1.29); d: ϒm = 4( m1 ≈
2.29, m2 ≈ 1.71); e: ρm = 1( m1 ≈ 2.0, m2 ≈ 2.0); f: ρm = 6/5
(m1 ≈ 2.18, m2 ≈ 1.82); g: ρm = 4/3( m1 ≈ 2.29, m2 ≈ 1.71);
h: ρm = 3/2( m1 ≈ 2.4, m2 ≈ 1.6). Each distribution is based on
the simulation of 10 5 trials of the LCA model ( 5) and the mDDM
(Eqs. 3 and 4). Distributions shown are normalised histograms, where
the coloured area under the curve equals 1. The bin-width is narrow
(0.025 ˆ= 200 bins for the decision time interval shown). The curve
superposing the histogram goes through the centers of the bins and is
interpolated in between
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8570


--- Page 6 ---
magnitude-sensitive empirical data (Teodorescu et al.2016;
Ratcliff et al. 2018). Considering the LCA, in case of
β = 0, both accumulators would not interact in which case
the model would approximate an uncoupled race model.
In empirical studies, nonzero lateral inhibition has been
found to be a crucial model component to account for
magnitude-sensitive effects (Teodorescu et al. 2016).
In Fig. 3, we depict mean decision times, ⟨DT⟩,a n dt h e
probabilities of choosing option 1, Pr(opt1), that correspond
to the distributions in Fig. 2. This further underlines the
sensitivity of the LCA and mDDM to varying overall
magnitudes and varying magnitude ratios. In particular, we
can see that ⟨DT⟩ decreases for both increasing overall
magnitudes (Fig. 3a) as well as increasing magnitude ratios
Fig. 3b, although the effect of the latter is not as strong
as that of the former, which is in agreement with Fig. 2.
However, if we inspect the behaviour of Pr (opt1),w e
recognise that Pr (opt1) increases with increasing ϒm for
the LCA model, whereas Pr(opt1) decreases with increasing
ϒm for the mDDM (Fig. 3a). The behaviour observed for
the mDDM is a consequence of the multiplicative noise,
which may cause the decision variable meet the decision
threshold faster while at the same time the increase of noise
also reduces accuracy. This qualitatively different behaviour
of LCA and mDDM is not present in Fig.3b, where Pr(opt1)
increases with increasing ρm for both models. Furthermore,
correctly, we find that forρm = 1, i.e. in case of two stimuli
with equal magnitudes, option 1 is chosen in 50% of all
trials (Fig. 3b).
We point out that increasingϒm and keepingρm constant
as well as increasing ρm and keeping ϒm constant increase
the magnitude difference /Delta1m (see Table 2). Therefore, our
results are in qualitative agreement with findings reported
by Hunt et al. ( 2012), Polan ´ıa et al. ( 2014), Pais et al.
(2013), Reina et al. (2018), Ratcliff et al. (2018), Pirrone et
al. (2014, 2018) and van Maanen et al. ( 2012). A negative
correlation between input magnitude and decision time
is reminiscent of Pi ´eron’s law according to which higher
stimulus magnitudes lead to faster decisions (e.g. see Pins
and Bonnet 1996; Stafford and Gurney 2004; van Maanen
et al. 2012; Reina et al. 2018).
After having established that the two models under
consideration (LCA and mDDM) both show magnitude-
sensitivity for the parameter sets employed here, in the next
section, we present our detailed results on the sensitivity
to the frequency of input signals (in conjunction with
magnitude-sensitivity) the LCA and mDDM exhibit.
PerformanceUnderPeriodicSignalStimuli
MeanDecisionTimeandChoiceProbabilityforPulsed
StimulusConditionSC1
Periodic signals were applied under the two stimuli
conditions SC1 and SC2, which are summarised in Table 1.
In Fig. 4a, we show mean decision times ⟨DT⟩ and
probabilities of choosing option 1, Pr (opt1), depending on
both varying magnitude ratios and varying frequency ratios
for SC1 when ϒf and ϒm are kept constant. In condition
SC1, both stimuli are in high-magnitude mode for 50% of
the time and the stimulus frequency determines the pulse
width and the width between two high-magnitude pulses
(see Fig. 1a).
The performance of the LCA model is illustrated in the
left column in Fig. 4a. If the frequency ratio is fixed whilst
the magnitude ratio varies, we see that ⟨DT⟩ has maxima
around ρm ≈ 1( F i g .4a, top-left). For larger as well as
smaller ρm, the mean decision time decreases. The reason
for this behaviour is that evidence accumulation takes longer
if the stimuli are equal, or almost equal, compared with
the case when stimuli may be easily discriminated. This
is further underlined by the plot of Pr (opt1) for the LCA
in the bottom-left panel in Fig. 4a. For magnitude ratios
ρm ≈ 1, we find that Pr (opt1) ≈ 0.5, i.e. option 1
and option 2 are both chosen in 50% of all trials. How-
ever, if instead we look at the effect of changing frequency
ratios when the magnitude ratio is fixed, we observe that
⟨DT⟩ (Fig. 4a, top-left) and Pr (opt1) (Fig. 4a, bottom-left)
Fig.3 Mean decision time and
probability of choosing option 1
depending on the overall
magnitude (a) and depending on
the magnitude ratio (b). Results
shown relate to the distributions
in Fig. 2. LCA model (5)a n d
mDDM (Eqs. 3 and 4)a r e
compared, based on the
simulation of 105 trials for each
model and condition
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 71


--- Page 7 ---
Fig. 4 Mean decision time and probability of choosing option 1
depending on magnitude ratios, frequency ratios, total magnitudes and
total frequencies under stimulus conditions SC1 and SC2 (see Table1).
LCA model (5) and mDDM (Eqs. 3 and 4) are compared, based on the
simulation of 2000 trials for each model and data point. Colour bars for
Pr(opt1) are normalised such that 0 ≤ Pr(opt1) ≤ 1 for both models
and all conditions. Decision time plots are not normalised to improve
qualitative comparison between both models.⟨DT⟩ is given in seconds
show less variation. Nevertheless, we find a significant
frequency ratio-dependent effect which is more clearly
demonstrated in Figs. 5aa n d 6a. Here, we plotted ⟨DT⟩
and Pr(opt1) for selected magnitude ratios and a smaller
range of frequency ratios. The behaviour of both quantities
is symmetric around ρf = 1 because of the fixed overall
frequency ϒf . This means that ⟨DT⟩ in Fig. 5a increases
(decreases) monotonously if ρf < 1( ρf > 1), whereas
Pr(opt1) in Fig. 6a shows the inverse behaviour. Addition-
ally, we note that the two curves labelled ρm = 1/3a n d
ρm = 3i nF i g s .5aa n d 6a, respectively, represent equiv-
alent cases (but with opposing response probabilities) for
constant ϒm and ϒf . Furthermore, the simultaneous occur-
rence of an increase of ⟨DT⟩ and a decrease of Pr (opt1)
indicate that a decrease of performance when alternatives
are presented more often but with shorter pulse widths (i.e.
less continuous) while maintaining identical duty cycles.
If we look at the corresponding results for the mDDM
in the right column in Fig. 4a, and Figs. 5da n d 6d, we
see that the mDDM behaves similarly compared with the
results regarding the behaviour of the LCA model. Because
of this qualitative agreement, the same analysis applies to
the mDDM results.
To study the effect of varying overall frequencies and
magnitudes, ϒf and ϒm, under condition SC1 when
magnitude and frequency ratios remain constant, we refer
to Fig. 4b. Again, the results shown for LCA (Fig. 4b, left
column) and those relating to the mDDM (Fig. 4b, right
column) are qualitatively very similar. For fixed overall
frequencies in the range shown, an increase of ϒm leads to
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8572


--- Page 8 ---
Fig. 5 Mean decision time depending on frequency ratio and overall
frequency under stimulus condition SC1 (see Table 1). The behaviour
for different values of overall magnitudes and magnitude ratios is
compared. a, d: ϒm and ϒf are fixed; b–c and e–f: ρm and ρf are
fixed. LCA model ( a–c,E q . 5) and mDDM ( d–f,E q s .3 and 4)a r e
compared, based on the simulation of 2000 trials for each model and
data point
a decrease of ⟨DT⟩ which is an effect of the multiplicative
noise. Although less pronounced compared with the effect
of changing ϒm, a variation of ϒf when fixing the overall
magnitude shows a frequency-sensitive effect, which is
emphasised for LCA and mDDM in Fig. 5c, f. For both
models, we see that an increase of the overall frequencyϒf
causes an increase of the mean decision time. This effect is
stronger for smaller ϒf and becomes less pronounced for
larger ϒf . Quantitatively, we observe that the change of the
slope characterising the increase of ⟨DT⟩ with increasing
ϒf occurs at ϒf ≈ 2H z ( L C A , F i g .5c) and ϒf ≈ 5H z
(mDDM, Fig. 5f), respectively. We assume, however, that
these values most likely depend on the parameter set chosen.
T h ei n c r e a s eo f⟨DT⟩ further underpins our hypothesis that
having options presented more discontinuously (i.e. more
pulses with shorter pulse widths) whilst duty cycles are
maintained increases decision times, and therefore lowers
the decision-making performance.
In addition, Pr(opt1) shows only little variation for vary-
ing ϒf and fixed ϒm, as can been in Fig. 4b for the whole
range of absolute magnitudes used in our study, and in
Fig. 6c, f for selected ϒm. Here, Pr(opt1) seems to remain
almost constant under the variation of ϒf except for some
fluctuations due to the presence of noise. However, we can
also see that Pr (opt1) ≥ 0.52 for LCA (Fig. 4b, bottom-
left) and Pr(opt1) ≥ 0.54 for mDDM (Fig.4b, bottom-right)
for all values of the overall magnitude and the overall
frequency, which results from option 1 being the higher-
magnitude option ( ρm = 4/3 > 1). We also point out
that the magnitude-sensitive results for periodic stimuli are
in agreement with the magnitude-sensitive results obtained
for constant stimuli discussed in the “ Performance Under
Stimuli with Constant Magnitude ” section (see Fig. 3 for
comparison). Considering equal alternatives (ρm = 1, ρf =
1), we can see that results are similar to the unequal alter-
natives case, as shown in Figs. 5b, e and 6b, e. However, as
expected, we find that Pr (opt1) varies only slightly around
0.5 (Fig. 6b, e).
A comparison of LCA and mDDM for different sim-
ulated frequency and magnitude conditions under SC1 is
also presented in the quantile-probability plots in Fig. 7a, c.
Again, we see that qualitatively LCA and mDDM show sim-
ilar behaviour. In particular, for both models, there seems
to be little variation of the decision times with response
proportions under SC1. A similar behaviour in quantile-
probability plots has been observed by Ratcliff et al. (2018).
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 73


--- Page 9 ---
Fig.6 Probability of choosing option 1 depending on frequency ratio
and overall frequency under stimulus condition SC1 (see Table1). The
behaviour for different values of overall magnitudes and magnitude
ratios is compared. a, d: ϒm and ϒf are fixed; b–c and e–f: ρm and ρf
are fixed. LCA model (a–c,E q .5) and mDDM (d–f,E q s .3 and 4)a r e
compared, based on the simulation of 2000 trials for each model and
data point
MeanDecisionTimeandChoiceProbabilityforPulsed
StimulusConditionSC2
The behaviour of ⟨DT⟩ and Pr(opt1) relating to stimulus
condition SC2 is shown in Fig. 4c, d. Recall that under this
condition, the duty cycle of signal 1 is proportional to the
frequency ratio ρf = f1/f2, whereas the duty cycle of
signal 2 is held constant at 0.5 (see Table 1). In Fig. 4c,
where overall magnitudes and frequencies remain unaltered,
we see once more that the LCA model and mDDM behave
similarly. Therefore, we discuss them simultaneously. The
simulation of both models demonstrates that there is
a nonlinear relationship between magnitude ratios and
frequency ratios along which Pr (opt1) ≈ 0.5, i.e. both
alternatives are chosen equally often (Fig. 4c, bottom-left
and bottom-right). In terms of evidence accumulation, this
in turn indicates that there may be an equivalence between
varying frequencies and magnitudes of two options such
that it is hard to discriminate between them when they
are presented under stimulus condition SC2. In addition,
by inspecting the ⟨DT⟩-plots together with the Pr (opt1)-
plots (left column in Fig. 4c for LCA and right column
in Fig. 4c for mDDM), we can see that close to the area
where Pr(opt1) ≈ 0.5 the mean decision time increases, as
it becomes harder to distinguish both stimuli.
To better illustrate the behaviour of ⟨DT⟩ and Pr(opt1)
for varying frequency ratios, we depict both quantities for
selected ρm in Figs. 8a, c, and9a, c, respectively. Comparing
the curves characterised by different ρm, we observe that an
increase of ρm leads to an increase of ⟨DT⟩ for ρf < 1, and
to a decrease of⟨DT⟩ for ρf > 1, i.e. the order of the curves
for different ρm is inverted at ρf ≈ 1. Under SC2, ρf = 1
is the frequency ratio where the duty cycles of both input
signals are equal. All other frequency ratios lead to unequal
duty cycles, which explain the observed behaviour. A larger
ρf , and hence a larger duty cycle, is tantamount to increased
evidence, as is a larger magnitude ratio. Therefore, the
distinct behaviour observed below and aboveρf ≈ 1 results
from the joint effect of varying frequency and magnitude
ratios on the evidence integrated. Inspecting the shape of
⟨DT⟩ depending on ρf , we see that the mean decision time
has a maximum which is shifted towards smaller ρf when
ρm is increased. This effect applies to both models, LCA
(see Fig. 8a) and mDDM (see Fig.8c), although the mDDM
displays the maximum more clearly, which is probably
due to the specific parameter sets chosen for each model.
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8574


--- Page 10 ---
Fig.7 Plot of decision time
quantiles versus response
proportions for varying
frequency and magnitude
conditions, and different
stimulus conditions (SC1 and
SC2). LCA and mDDM
(encoded by grayscale and
linestyle) are compared based
on four different conditions
(encoded by symbol) as
indicated in the
model/conditions key (see top of
plot). For each condition,
response proportions are plotted
along the horizontal axis and
decision time quantiles (0.1, 0.3,
0.5, 0.7, 0.9) for both responses
in favour of option 1 and option
2 are plotted vertically. Choices
in favour of option 1 are shown
with response proportions
greater than 0.5. Both models
(LCA and mDDM) show similar
qualitative behaviour in each
stimulus condition. Varying the
stimulus condition changes the
shape of the decision time
quantiles plotted along response
proportions. An increase of the
overall magnitude leads to a
decrease of decision time
Furthermore, increasing either ρf or ρm, or both, increases
Pr(opt1) (see Figs. 4ca n d9a, c), as increasing either of the
two ratios increases evidence for option 1 under SC2.
Mean decision time plots and corresponding choice
probabilities depending on ϒf are illustrated for constant
ρm = 4/3 and constant ρf = 3/2i nF i g s .4d, 8b, d and
9b, d. Comparing the behaviour of ⟨DT⟩ in Figs. 4da n d8b,
d with the equivalent plots obtained under condition SC1
(Figs. 4ba n d 5c, f), it becomes obvious that both models,
LCA and mDDM, show the same qualitative behaviour
under SC1 and SC2, that is ⟨DT⟩ increases with increasing
ϒf . Quantitatively, however, we find smaller values for
⟨DT⟩ if the pulsed stimuli are presented under SC2. This
effect can be attributed to the direct proportionality between
DC1 and ρf in SC2. This proportionality is not present
in SC1. If we compare the behaviour of Pr (opt1) obtained
under SC2 (Figs. 4da n d9b, d) with the results for condition
SC1 (Fisg. 4ba n d 6c, f), it becomes obvious that under
SC2, Pr (opt1) increases for smaller ϒf and seems to
saturate for larger ϒf . This increase of Pr (opt1) for small
ϒf is not present when the models are simulated under
SC1. We also note that assuming ρf = 1 = ρm makes
conditions SC1 and SC2 equivalent. Therefore, all results
discussed for Figs. 5b, e and 6b, e also apply to stimulus
condition SC2.
An overview of how decision time quantiles computed
under SC2 compare with those simulated under SC1 for
various conditions can be obtained by a comparison of
Fig. 7a, c with b, d. Response proportions corresponding
to different conditions become more separated along the
horizontal axis under SC2 and whereas the decision time
quantiles remained almost constant across conditions under
SC1 (Fig. 7a, c), we can notice increasing decision times if
response proportions move towards 0.5 under SC2 (Fig. 7b,
d).
DecisionTimeDistributionsUnderPeriodicStimuli
Decision time distributions which relate to condition SC1
are shown in Fig. 10 for varying ρf , ρm, ϒf and ϒm.
To create the distribution plots, we divided the simulated
data into bins and then connected the bin centres with
an interpolated function. Strikingly, we observe that the
frequency of the stimuli clearly shapes the decision time
distribution functions obtained from both LCA model and
mDDM. In Fig. 10a, c, i, k, we have f1 = f2 (ρf = 1) and
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 75


--- Page 11 ---
Fig.8 Mean decision time
depending on frequency ratio
and overall frequency under
stimulus condition SC2 (see
Table 1). The behaviour for
different values of overall
magnitudes and magnitude
ratios is compared. a, c: ϒm and
ϒf are fixed; b, d: ρm and ρf
are fixed. LCA model (a, b;
Eq. 5) and mDDM (c, d;E q s .3
and 4) are compared, based on
the simulation of 2000 trials for
each model and data point
m1 = m2 (ρm = 1). In these plots, it can most clearly be
seen that the signal frequency is reproduced in the response
times. Specifically, the frequencies used are f1 = f2 =
2H z ( F i g .10a, i) and f1 = f2 = 4H z ( F i g .10c, k) The
corresponding decision time distributions show exactly 2
peaks (Fig. 10a, i) or 4 peaks (Fig. 10c, k), respectively, per
second.
In case of ρf = 3/2, we see another direct effect on the
modulation of the distribution function. For example, the
simulation of the mDDM in Fig. 10l yields an additional
frequency pattern, which recurs every 0.625 s. This is
exactly equal to 1 /|f1 − f2|= 1/1.6 s, i.e. given by the
difference of the frequency between both stimuli. Similarly,
we can also identify the signal frequency 9.6 Hz in the
decision time distribution plots for mDDM and LCA in
Fig. 10l, which is equal to 2f1. These effects are most likely
due to the nonlinearity of the decision time distribution as a
function of the periodic inputs, I1(t) and I2(t),w h i c hm a y
lead to a modulation of the original inputs such that the
modified inputs may also contain sum and difference of the
original frequency. In case of the mDDM, the multiplicative
noise term in Eq. 4 may also contribute to the modulation
of the original inputs. Furthermore, increasing the overall
magnitude leads to an effect equivalent to our observation in
the constant, nonperiodic stimuli (cf. Fig.2a–d). Higher ϒm
make the shape of the decision time distribution narrower
and shift it to lower decision times.
Equivalent decision time distributions that relate to
condition SC2 are shown in Fig.11. Generally, we can make
similar observations compared with stimulus condition SC1
depicted in Fig. 10. Employing SC2, the periodic pattern
in the distribution also derives from the periodicity in the
pulsed stimuli for all combinations of ρf , ρm, ϒf and ϒm
plotted in Fig. 11. In particular, all plots with ρf = 1i n
Fig. 11 are identical to those with ρf = 1i nF i g .10.T h i s
was expected, as stimulus conditions SC1 and SC2 coincide
for frequency ratios ρf = 1. However, as the duty cycle
of signal 1 increases with ρf in SC2, we can also see that
for ρf = 3/2 decision time distributions derived under
SC2 in Fig. 11 are a bit narrower and shifted towards lower
decision times compared with the equivalent distributions
obtained for ρf = 3/2 under condition SC1 in Fig. 10.T h i s
results from the duty cycle of signal 1 being proportional to
ρf = f1/f2 in condition SC2.
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8576


--- Page 12 ---
Fig.9 Probability of choosing
option 1 depending on frequency
ratio and overall frequency
under stimulus condition SC2
(see Table 1). The behaviour for
different values of overall
magnitudes and magnitude
ratios is compared. a, c: ϒm and
ϒf are fixed; b, d: ρm and ρf
are fixed. LCA model (a, b;
Eq. 5) and mDDM (c, d;E q s .3
and 4) are compared, based on
the simulation of 2000 trials for
each model and data point
RequirementstoObservePeriodicitiesinDecision
TimeDistributionsDuetoPeriodicStimuli
AnalysisofDecisionTimeDistributions
An important requirement to observe periodicity in decision
time distributions concerns the choice of the bin width,
which should be small enough to detect the periodic pattern.
This is equivalent to the reconstruction of periodic signals
known from signal processing theory: the highest frequency
(Nyquist frequency) that can be detected in a periodic signal
is half the sampling rate. In our terms, we therefore require
sufficiently small bin-widthswb, such that 1/wb ≥ 2 fsignal,
to find the decision time distributions corresponding to the
periodic stimuli occurring with fsignal. This is demonstrated
in Fig. 12. If bin-widths are too large, we detect the wrong
frequency (Fig. 12a). When choosing 1 /wb = fsignal
exactly, then no frequency can be detected at all, as shown
in Fig. 12b. This is a strong indication that the frequency of
the periodic stimulus directly translates into the periodicity
of the decision time distribution. We depict in Fig. 12ct h a t
only if the bin-width is chosen sufficiently small, the correct
distribution may be reconstructed.
PossibilityofLossofPeriodicInformationofExternal
Stimulus
Our theoretical study makes the prediction that periodic
decision time distributions could possibly be observed in
real decision-makers. However, it may also be possible
that stimulus oscillations are smoothed when they are
transduced into evidence that is accumulated. It might as
well be the case that the periodic oscillations of the stimuli
are partly smoothed and partly transduced. The latter is the
more general scenario and to include it in the models used
in this paper we can replace ˜S in Eq. 2 with
˜Sj (t) = κSj (t) + (1 − κ)⟨Sj (t)⟩+ ϵ(t), (6)
where κ is a smoothing factor,ϵ(t) is a normally distributed
variable sampled from N(mean = 0, SD = 0.05) at each
timestep, S(t) is the stimulus signal introduced in Eq. 1 and
⟨Sj (t)⟩= 1/Tj
∫ Tj
0 Sj (t) dt,w h e r eTj denotes the period
of stimulus signal j, is the averaged input, which can be
expressed as
⟨Sj (t)⟩= mj DCj + 0.2 (1 − DCj ), (7)
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 77


--- Page 13 ---
Fig. 10 Decision time distribution (probability density) for periodic
stimulus condition SC1 (see Table 1), depending on ρm, ρf , ϒm
and ϒf (see Table 2). LCA model ( 5) and mDDM (Eqs. 3 and 4)
are compared, based on the simulation of 10 5 trials for each model
and condition. Distributions shown are normalised histograms, where
the coloured area under the curve equals 1. The bin-width is narrow
(0.025 ˆ= 200 bins for the decision time interval shown). The curve
superposing the histogram goes through the centers of the bins and is
interpolated in between
where, as before, DC j is the duty cycle of stimulus j and
mj is its magnitude.
The introduction of the smoothing factor κ allows
describing the transition between complete transduction of
the external stimulus oscillations into the internal input sig-
nal (κ = 1) and smoothing of the input signal oscillations
(κ = 0), in which case the periodicity of the external stimu-
lus would be lost. For 0 <κ< 1, we have a superposition
of the effects of smoothing and transducing the oscillations
of the external stimulus into its internal representation.
The effect of varying κ on the shape of the decision time
distribution is shown in Fig. 13. We can see that for κ =
0( F i g .13a), the signal is smoothed and that there is no
periodicity observable in the decision time distribution.
Increasing κ introduces periodic patterns in the decision
time distribution (Fig. 13b–h). Furthermore, it seems to
be the case that, at least for the parameter configuration
studied here, rather small values of κ (e.g. see Fig. 13c,
d) are sufficient to induce periodic patterns in the decision
time distribution. How this may generalise to other param-
eter configurations, however, needs further investigation.
ProposalofanExperimentalDesign
As our study was motivated by brightness discrimination
tasks previously investigated by Teodorescu et al. ( 2016),
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8578


--- Page 14 ---
Fig. 11 Decision time distribution (probability density) for periodic
stimulus condition SC2 (see Table 1), depending on ρm, ρf , ϒm
and ϒf (see Table 2). LCA model ( 5) and mDDM (Eqs. 3 and 4)
are compared, based on the simulation of 10 5 trials for each model
and condition. Distributions shown are normalised histograms, where
the coloured area under the curve equals 1. The bin-width is narrow
(0.025 ˆ= 200 bins for the decision time interval shown). The curve
superposing the histogram goes through the centers of the bins and is
interpolated in between
Pirrone et al. ( 2018) and Ratcliff et al. ( 2018), we believe
that a similar experimental approach would be suitable to
test our predictions. In particular, we emphasise that the
presence of a strong coupling between external stimulus and
its internal representation (cf. Eq. 2) is a crucial assumption
in our modelling study and that empirical support for this
assumption was provided by Teodorescu et al. ( 2016)a n d
Ratcliff et al. (2018). For a detailed description of previous
implementations of this brightness discrimination task, we
refer to the articles by Teodorescu et al. (2016) and Ratcliff
et al. (2018); see also Pirrone et al. (2018) who implemented
a task similar to the one studied by Teodorescu et al. (2016).
In what follows, we adopt and summarise the key fea-
tures of the aforementioned brightness discrimination task,
including our assumption to present external stimuli peri-
odically with a well-defined frequency. The task comprises
the presentation of two homogeneous grey patches on a
black background (round patches with a diameter of 1.2 cm
and centre-to-centre distance of 6.2 cm in Teodorescu et al.
(2016) and Pirrone et al. ( 2018), and square patches pre-
sented at a standard viewing distance of 53 cm, each patch
being 3.24 degrees tall by 3.24 degrees wide with the two
arrays covering 8.64 degrees from edge to edge in Rat-
cliff et al. 2018). On each trial, the grey patches were
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 79


--- Page 15 ---
Fig.12 Decision time distribution (probability density) depending on
the bin-width (or number of bins, respectively) for magnitude ratio
ρm = 1 and frequency ratio ρf = 1, i.e. this figure applies to both
stimulus conditions SC1 and SC2 (see Table 1). The same distribution
is shown in Fig. 10ki nF i g .11k for distributing the data over 200 bins
(i.e. 40bins/s). The magnitudes are m1 = m2 = 2 and the frequencies
take values f1 = f2 = 4 Hz. LCA model (5) and mDDM (Eqs. 3 and
4) are compared, based on the simulation of 105 trials for each model.
Distributions shown are normalised histograms, where the coloured
area under the curve equals 1. The curve superposing the histogram
goes through the centers of the bins and is interpolated in between
fluctuating over time and individual patch grey-levels were
re-sampled from a normal distribution on each monitor
frame at a refresh rate of 60 Hz. The magnitude mean val-
ues of the corresponding distributions varied across trials
but where constant within a trial. Whereas Teodorescu et al.
(2016) and Ratcliff et al. ( 2018) studied various conditions
where the mean values of the normal distributions used
for brightness magnitude sampling were different for each
stimulus, Pirrone et al. ( 2018) also looked at several equal
alternative cases with equal mean values of the underlying
distributions. In our theoretical study, we observed fre-
quency effects in the decision time distribution in both cases
when external stimuli were presented periodically. Hence,
we think that both equal and unequal alternatives could
potentially be used to detect periodic patterns in the deci-
sion time distribution in empirical studies using periodically
pulsed stimuli. For an experimental implementation, the
choice of the brightness levels could be adopted from pre-
vious studies (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Pirrone et al. 2018;
Ratcliff et al. 2018).
Fig. 13 Effect of smoothing factor κ on the periodicity of decision
time distributions. A value of κ = 0 means that all periodicity is lost,
values in the range 0 <κ< 1 corresponds to a superposition of trans-
ducing oscillations of the external input signal and smoothing, and
κ = 1 represents the case when the periodicity of the external stimu-
lus is fully transduced into its internal representation. A small nonzero
value ofκshould be sufficient to yield periodic patterns in the decision
time distribution following the presentation of periodic stimuli as dis-
cussed in the text. The chosen overall magnitudes and frequencies and
their respective ratios are: ϒm = 4, ϒf = 8, ρm = 1 = ρf . Distribu-
tions shown are normalised histograms, where the coloured area under
the curve equals 1. The bin-width is narrow (0.025 ˆ= 200 bins for the
decision time interval shown). The curve superposing the histogram
goes through the centers of the bins and is interpolated in between
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8580


--- Page 16 ---
Regarding the choice of the frequency, we propose to
use a suitable window for which it could be possible to
observe periodicities in decision time distribution due to
the periodic presentation of external stimuli. That is, the
stimulus frequency should neither be chosen too large,
as evidence integration may not be able to recognise the
frequency pattern, nor too small, as threshold conditions
may be met already before the brightness magnitude could
fluctuate for a sufficient number of times to be transduced
into the internal decision variable. Therefore, we propose
that a suitable frequency interval to test our prediction
should be in the range of 0.5 − 10 Hz, which we also used
in the present paper. This frequency window corresponds to
timescales in the range of 100 ms − 2 s, which covers the
typical range for sensory processing involved in cognitive
tasks ( ∼ 100 ms) (Mauk and Buonomano 2004;K i e b e l
et al. 2008) but also typical decision times ∼ 1 s obtained
under laboratory conditions (e.g. see Ratcliff et al.2016,a n d
references therein). In addition, this frequency range is well
separated from stimulus refresh rate of 60 Hz, which was
used in empirical studies (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Pirrone
et al. 2018; Ratcliff et al. 2018). This separation will allow
to clearly discriminate frequency effects discussed in this
paper from those that may arise from stimulus re-sampling.
For example, stimulus presentation in the time domain could
follow the temporal profiles shown in Fig. 1,i . e .e m p l o y i n g
external stimuli with clearly recognisable deterministic
oscillations and random fluctuations added that have higher
frequency and significantly smaller magnitudes.
Based on our results discussed in the previous section,
an experimental realisation should also aim at yielding a
smoothing factor of κ> 0 in order to observe periodic
patterns in decision time distributions that result from
external periodic stimuli. A variation of the duty cycle might
help to achieve this. In other areas of neuroscience such as
the optogenetic investigation of neural circuits, for example,
the duty cycle of a stimulus has been identified as a relevant
parameter which may be varied to optimise stimulation (Tye
and Deisseroth 2012).
Discussion
EffectsofVaryingMagnitudeandFrequency
Conditions
Assuming a strong coupling between external stimulus
input and internal stimulus representation (see Eq. 2), we
have simulated and compared two decision-making models,
LCA and mDDM, under periodically oscillating stimuli.
Variants of both models are widely used to explain the
computation of a decision variable in the brain which
reflects choice behaviour in two alternative task settings
(e.g. see Shadlen and Newsome ( 1996, 2001), Usher
and McClelland ( 2001), Ditterich et al. ( 2003), Bogacz
et al. ( 2006) and Teodorescu et al. ( 2016) for perceptual
decisions, Krajbich et al. (2010, 2015), Basten et al. (2010)
and Hunt et al. ( 2012) for value-based decisions, and
Feng et al. ( 2009) and Afacan-Seref et al. ( 2018)w h e r e
perceptual decisions are based on the integration of rewards
associated with options presented). Although the stimulus
implementation in our model-based analysis is primarily
based on experimental and theoretical studies of perceptual
decision-making (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Pirrone et al.
2018; Ratcliff et al.2018), fluctuating stimuli have also been
studied in other areas, such as collective behaviour of social
insects (Franks et al. 2015;H ¨ubner and Czaczkes 2017).
Implementing the external stimulus as a periodic function
with alternating low and high amplitudes, we have shown
in our simulation analysis how the periodicity of a stimulus
may be transduced to the dynamic evolution of the decision
variable and the decision time distribution, which suggests
that periodic stimuli may be used to modulate and shape
behaviour.
The choice of the external stimuli and models applied
in our simulations is motivated by previous model fit-
ting analyses of experimental studies (Teodorescu et al.
2016; Ratcliff et al. 2018). In these studies, the bright-
ness stimuli varied from frame to frame within each trial
so that the resulting stimuli flickered (Teodorescu et al.
2016; Ratcliff et al. 2018). A corresponding model fit-
ting analysis showed that whereas mDDM and LCA fit
the data equally well in Teodorescu et al. ( 2016), Rat-
cliff et al. ( 2018) found in their study that mDDM fits
explained the data better than LCA model fits. In the latter
study, another DDM variant, which assumes that across-trial
variability in drift rate scales with stimulus strength, per-
formed equally well compared with the mDDM (Ratcliff
et al. 2018). In both studies, fits of the standard DDM to
the data were poor (Teodorescu et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al.
2018). Thus, we reasoned that the standard DDM is not
suitable for our model analysis, and that the mDDM and a
DDM where across-trial variability in drift rate varies with
input magnitude would produce very similar behaviour. The
comparison between mDDM and LCA, however, seemed
interesting to us as in a previous study, both models per-
formed equally well (Teodorescu et al. 2016) whereas in
another (but similar) investigation, the mDDM performed
better than the LCA (Ratcliff et al. 2018). Furthermore, we
preferred a comparison between these two models because
of the different properties and mechanics of mDDM (one-
dimensional model, multiplicative noise) and those of the
LCA (two-dimensional model, interacting accumulators). In
our study, we nevertheless find that magnitude-sensitivity
and frequency-sensitivity exhibited by mDDM and LCA
are largely similar. The magnitude-sensitive results are in
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 81


--- Page 17 ---
agreement with those of (Teodorescu et al. 2016). Another
influential sequential sampling model is the linear ballistic
accumulator (LBA) (Brown and Heathcote2008). However,
in a classification of decision models (Teodorescu and Usher
2013), it has been shown that models with independent accu-
mulators (such as the LBA) produce different behaviour
than models featuring competition (such as the LCA). Based
on these findings, we conjectured that the LBA model,
although applicable to a wide range of perceptual decision-
making tasks (Brown and Heathcote 2008), would not be
suitable for the particular assumptions made in our study.
Intriguingly, our analysis reveals an interplay between
the sensitivity of the model systems to frequency and
magnitude of periodically applied stimuli. With regard to
magnitude-sensitivity, our results (e.g. see Fig.3 for contin-
uous stimuli, and Figs. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 for pulsed stimuli)
are in line with previous findings (Pins and Bonnet 1996;
Stafford and Gurney 2004;P a l m e re ta l .2005; Teodorescu
et al. 2016; Pirrone et al. 2018; Hunt et al. 2012; Ratcliff
et al. 2018; van Maanen et al. 2012; Reina et al. 2018). In
particular, we observe a reduction of decision times with
increasing overall magnitudes and magnitude ratios (in our
study, the magnitude ratio was varied whilst the overall
magnitude was kept constant which simultaneously changes
the magnitude difference, cf. Table 2), as has been reported
previously for perceptual decisions (Pins and Bonnet 1996;
Stafford and Gurney 2004;P a l m e re ta l .2005; Teodorescu
et al. 2016; Pirrone et al. 2018; Ratcliff et al. 2018;P o l a n´ıa
et al. 2014) and value-based decisions (Hunt et al. 2012;
Pirrone et al. 2018;P o l a n´ıa et al. 2014; Reina et al. 2018).
Our simulations suggest that this magnitude-sensitive
behaviour may additionally be shaped by frequency-
sensitive effects which depend on frequency ratios, overall
frequencies and the choice of the stimulus condition (see
Figs. 4a, b, 5 and 6 for SC1, and 4c, d, 8 and 9 for SC2).
In particular, we obtained equivalent effects under variation
of magnitude ratios and frequency ratios when the pulsed
stimulus has been applied under stimulus condition SC2
(Fig. 4c). Increasing either of the two ratios may increase
evidence for one option, and therefore both quantities may
act as modulators of decision-making in a similar way.
EmpiricalEvidenceofPeriodicPatternsinReaction
TimeDistributions
Our finding that periodic stimuli may lead to periodicities
in the distribution of decision times (Figs. 10 and 11)
is a theoretical prediction of our model-based analysis.
We are not aware of an empirical data set that has been
obtained under conditions similar to those simulated in the
present study and tests for such periodicities in reaction
time distributions. However, in the context of rhythmic (or
cyclic) perception, which is explained in more detail below,
periodicities in reaction time distributions are observed
experimentally (e.g. see VanRullen and Dubois ( 2011)
and VanRullen ( 2016) for summaries of related empirical
observations). By making reference to empirical studies
on cyclic perception, in the following, we argue why our
predictions could possibly be also observed in suitably
designed experiments, such as the one proposed in the
“Proposal of an Experimental Design” section.
Rhythmic or cyclic perception indicates that cognition
and perception involve sampling rhythms; that is, the prob-
ability to detect perceptual stimuli is not constant over time
but rather oscillates with typical frequencies (VanRullen
2016). Regarding visual stimuli, for example, brain rhyth-
mic activity for frequencies around 7 Hz (theta-band) and
11 Hz (alpha-band) have been linked to cyclic perception
(VanRullen 2016). One possibility to think about rhythmi-
cally fluctuating perception is to consider perceptual thresh-
olds being periodically modulated over time, as suggested
by VanRullen (2016). This means that when the perceptual
threshold alternates between lower and higher values, it is
more likely that a perceptual stimulus which is integrated
sequentially meets the threshold criterion when the oscil-
lating perceptual threshold has momentary phase-dependent
lower values (VanRullen 2016). Hence, the probability of
perception will strongly depend on the phase of the stimulus
presentation relative to the phase of the internal sampling
rhythm of the brain.
Several more recent studies provide empirical evidence
that rhythmic sampling is present in perception and cog-
nition, such as the observation of theta-rhythmic reaction
times in monkeys (Kienitz et al.2018) and humans (Helfrich
et al. 2018), and periodic detection accuracies in humans
(Landau and Fries 2012; Fiebelkorn et al. 2013) under
distributed attention when multiple stimuli are presented.
Previously, periodic reaction time histograms with multi-
ple equally spaced peaks have also been observed in visual
pursuit movements (Latour 1967), in responses to acous-
tic clicks and light flashes (Harter and White 1968; White
and Harter 1969) and in visual and auditory discrimina-
tion tasks (Dehaene 1993). From a more general point of
view, although presented in the context of cyclic perception,
these empirical findings provide strong evidence for the
possibility of observing periodic patterns in reaction time
distributions. Psychological data are however scarce, prob-
ably because of the challenges regarding the design of suit-
able experiments to enable the detection these periodicities
(VanRullen and Dubois 2011).
To use the findings on rhythmic perception to interpret
and support our results, we go back to the possible
interpretation involving periodically fluctuating perceptual
thresholds as introduced above. However, in our study, it
is the perceptual stimulus that oscillates. Using periodic
stimuli, evidence is presented with alternating high and low
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8582


--- Page 18 ---
intensities. Thus, we can assume that in the high-intensity
phase, the decision variable experiences a steeper increase
compared with the low-intensity stimulus phase. As we
assumed a strong coupling between external stimulus and
internal representation via Eq. 2, this suggests that the
decision variable should increase rhythmically, i.e. a strong
increase will be followed by a weak increase or decrease
(depending on the information leak (as relevant in the LCA)
and/or presentation of alternative stimuli (as relevant in the
mDDM)) of the activity level, and so on. This should lead to
a transduction of the period of the perceptual stimulus to the
shape of the decision time distribution, which we observe
in our simulation study (Figs. 10 and 11). Hence, it is the
external frequency of the stimulus which should be obvious
in the reaction time distribution, in contrast to the example
with oscillating perceptual thresholds, where the internal
frequency describing cyclic perception should be visible in
the reaction time. However, in both cases (either oscillating
perceptual stimuli or oscillating perceptual thresholds), the
transfer of the frequency of the oscillating quantity to the
reaction time distribution could apply in a similar way.
We point out that rhythmic sampling is not a model
assumption in our study and that here the periodicity in the
reaction time distribution most likely arises from the strong
coupling of the perceptual stimulus to the decision variable
via the psychophysical transfer function in Eq. 2.T h i s
means that in our study, cyclic perception can be assumed
to be averaged out over the large number of trials, in which
case our results do not depend on the presence or absence
of rhythmic perception (i.e. the perceptual threshold may
be assumed fixed rather than oscillating). Regarding the
effects of periodic stimuli, it could also be the case
that oscillating external input signals are smoothed when
evidence is accumulated (Fig. 13), so that they are masked
and not detectable in unsuitable experimental paradigms
(or not detectable at all). Although our simulation results
indicate the possibility that decision time distributions of
real decision-makers responding to periodically oscillating
stimuli might possibly show periodicities, whether or not
our predictions hold in empirical data remains an open
question. Finding a proper experimental set-up to test
our predictions will therefore require more experimental
and theoretical work to support or falsify our predictive
theoretical study. Our proposal of a possible experimental
approach discussed in the “ Proposal of an Experimental
Design” section may be a good starting point.
SupplementaryMaterial Computer code for data generation and data
analysis is open source and available under: https://github.com/DiODe
Project/Frequency-sensitivity-and-magnitude-sensitivity-in-decision-
making.
FundingInformation This work was funded by the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research
and Innovation Programme (grant agreement number 647704). F.B.
was funded by the SURE scheme of the University of Sheffield (UK).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
Afacan-Seref, K., Steinemann, N.A., Blangero, A., Kelly, S.P. (2018).
Dynamic interplay of value and sensory information in high-
speed decision making. Current Biology , 28(5), 795–802,e6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.071.
Basten, U., Biele, G., Heekeren, H.R., Fiebach, C.J. (2010). How
the brain integrates costs and benefits during decision making.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107(50),
21767–21772. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0908104107. http://
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0908104107.
Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P., Cohen, J.D. (2006).
The physics of optimal decision making: A formal analysis of
models of performance in two-alternative forced-choice tasks.
Psychology Review , 113(4), 700–765. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.113.4.700. http://doi.apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/
0033-295X.113.4.700.
Bogacz, R., Usher, M., Zhang, J., McClelland, J.L. (2007). Extend-
ing a biologically inspired model of choice: multi-alternatives,
nonlinearity and value-based multidimensional choice.Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society B , 362(1485), 1655–1670.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2059.
Bose, T., Reina, A., Marshall, J.A. (2017). Collective decision-making.
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 16, 30–34. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.03.004.
Brown, E., & Holmes, P. (2001). Modeling a simple choice task:
stochastic dynamics of mutually inhibitory neural groups.Stochas-
tics and Dynamics , 1(02), 159–191. https://doi.org/10.1142/S021
9493701000102.
Brown, S.D., & Heathcote, A. (2008). The simplest complete
model of choice response time: linear ballistic accumulation.
Cognitive Psychology, 57(3), 153–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COGPSYCH.2007.12.002. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0010028507000722?via%3Dihub.
Brown, E., Gao, J., Holmes, P., Bogacz, R., Gilzenrat, M., Cohen,
J.D. (2005). Simple neural networks that optimize decisions.
International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos , 15(03), 803–826.
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218127405012478.
Brunton, B.W., Botvinick, M.M., Brody, C.D. (2013). Rats and
humans can optimally accumulate evidence for decision-making.
Science, 340(6128), 95–98. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1233
912.
Dehaene, S. (1993). Temporal Oscillations in Human Perception. Psy-
chological Science, 4(4), 264–270. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
9280.1993.tb00273.x. http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/j.
1467-9280.1993.tb00273.x.
Ditterich, J., Mazurek, M.E., Shadlen, M.N. (2003). Microstimulation
of visual cortex affects the speed of perceptual decisions. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(8), 891–898. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1094.
http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nn1094; http://www.
nature.com/articles/nn1094.
Feng, S., Holmes, P., Rorie, A., Newsome, W.T. (2009). Can
monkeys choose optimally when faced with noisy stimuli and
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 83


--- Page 19 ---
unequal rewards? PLoS Computational Biology , 5(2), e1000284.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000284.
Fiebelkorn, I., Saalmann, Y ., Kastner, S. (2013). Rhythmic sampling
within and between objects despite sustained attention at a cued
location. Current Biology, 23(24), 2553–2558. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.CUB.2013.10.063.
Franks, N.R., Stuttard, J.P., Doran, C., Esposito, J.C., Master, M.C.,
Sendova-Franks, A.B., Masuda, N., Britton, N.F. (2015). How ants
use quorum sensing to estimate the average quality of a fluctuating
resource. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 11890. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep11890. http://www.nature.com/articles/srep11890.
Gold, J.I., & Shadlen, M.N. (2007). The neural basis of decision
making. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 30(1), 535–574.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113038.
Harter, M.R., & White, C.T. (1968). Periodicity within reaction
time distributions and electromyograms. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology , 20(2), 157–166. https://doi.org/10.
1080/14640746808400144.
Helfrich, R.F., Fiebelkorn, I.C., Szczepanski, S.M., Lin, J.J., Parvizi,
J., Knight, R.T., Kastner, S. (2018). Neural mechanisms of
sustained attention are rhythmic. Neuron, 99(4), 854–865,e5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEURON.2018.07.032.
H¨ubner, C., & Czaczkes, T.J. (2017). Risk preference during collective
decision making: ant colonies make risk-indifferent collective
choices. Animal Behavior , 132, 21–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
anbehav.2017.08.003.
Hunt, L.T., Kolling, N., Soltani, A., Woolrich, M.W., Rushworth,
M.F.S., Behrens, T.E.J. (2012). Mechanisms underlying cortical
activity during value-guided choice. Nature Neuroscience, 15(3),
470–476. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3017.
Kiebel, S.J., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K.J. (2008). A hierarchy of
time-scales and the brain. PLoS Computational Biology , 4(11),
e1000209. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209.
Kienitz, R., Schmiedt, J.T., Shapcott, K.A., Kouroupaki, K., Saunders,
R.C., Christoph, M., Correspondence, S., Schmid, M.C. (2018).
Theta rhythmic neuronal activity and reaction times arising from
cortical receptive field interactions during distributed attention
article theta rhythmic neuronal activity and reaction times arising
from cortical receptive field interactions during distributed atten-
tion. Current Biology, 28, 2377–2387,e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2018.05.086.
Krajbich, I., Armel, C., Rangel, A. (2010). Visual fixations and the
computation and comparison of value in simple choice. Nature
Neuroscience, 13(10), 1292–1298. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.
2635. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20835253, http://www.
nature.com/articles/nn.2635.
Krajbich, I., Hare, T., Bartling, B., Morishima, Y ., Fehr, E. (2015). A
common mechanism underlying food choice and social decisions.
PLoS Computational Biology , 11(10), e1004371. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004371. http://www.econ.uzh.ch/faculty/
fehr/, http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004371.
Landau, A., & Fries, P. (2012). Attention samples stimuli rhythmically.
Current Biology , 22(11), 1000–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CUB.2012.03.054.
Latour, P. (1967). Evidence of internal clocks in the human operator.
Acta Psychologica , 27, 341–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-
6918(67)90078-9.
Marshall, J.A.R., Favreau-Peigne, A., Fromhage, L., McNamara,
J.M., Meah, L.F.S., Houston, A.I. (2015). Cross inhibition
improves activity selection when switching incurs time costs. Curr
Zool.
Mauk, M.D., & Buonomano, D.V . (2004). The neural basis of temporal
processing. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 27(1), 307–340.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144247.
Pais, D., Hogan, P.M., Schlegel, T., Franks, N.R., Leonard, N.E., Mar-
shall, J.A.R. (2013). A mechanism for value-sensitive decision-
making. PLoS ONE, 8(9), e73216. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0073216.
Palmer, J., Huk, A.C., Shadlen, M.N. (2005). The effect of stimulus
strength on the speed and accuracy of a perceptual decision.
Journal of Vision, 5(5), 1. https://doi.org/10.1167/5.5.1.
Pins, D., & Bonnet, C. (1996). On the relation between stimulus inten-
sity and processing time: Pi ´eron’s law and choice reaction time.
Perception and Psychophysics, 58(3), 390–400. https://doi.org/10.
3758/BF03206815.
Pirrone, A., Stafford, T., Marshall, J.A.R. (2014). When natural
selection should optimize speed-accuracy trade-offs. Frontiers in
Neuroscience, 8, 73. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00073.
Pirrone, A., Azab, H., Hayden, B.Y ., Stafford, T., Marshall, J.A.R.
(2018). Evidence for the speed-value trade-off: human and
monkey decision making is magnitude sensitive. Decision, 5,
129–142.
Polan´ıa, R., Krajbich, I., Grueschow, M., Ruff, C.C. (2014). Neural
oscillations and synchronization differentially support evidence
accumulation in perceptual and value-based decision making.
Neuron, 82(3), 709–720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
03.014.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychology Review,
85(2), 59–108. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.85.2.59. http://
content.apa.org/journals/rev/85/2/59.
Ratcliff, R., & Rouder, J.N. (1998). Modeling response times for deci-
sions between two choices. Psychological Science, 9, 347–356.
Ratcliff, R., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2002). Estimating parameters of
the diffusion model: approaches to dealing with contaminant
reaction times and parameter variability. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 9(3), 438–481. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196302.
Ratcliff, R., Smith, P.L., Brown, S.D., McKoon, G. (2016). Diffusion
decision model: current issues and history. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 20(4), 260–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.01.
007.
Ratcliff, R., V oskuilen, C., Teodorescu, A. (2018). Modeling 2-
alternative forced-choice tasks: accounting for both magnitude and
difference effects. Cognitive Psychology , 103, 1–22. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2018.02.002.
Reina, A., Marshall, J.A.R., Trianni, V ., Bose, T. (2017). Model
of the best-of-n nest-site selection process in honeybees. Physical
Review E , 95, 052411. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.95.
052411.
Reina, A., Bose, T., Trianni, V ., Marshall, J.A.R. (2018). Psy-
chophysical laws and the superorganism. Scientific Reports, 8(1),
4387. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22616-y. http://www.
nature.com/articles/s41598-018-22616-y .
Shadlen, M.N., & Newsome, W.T. (1996). Motion perception:
seeing and deciding. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 93(2), 628–633. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.2.628.
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.93.2.628.
Shadlen, M., & Newsome, W. (2001). Neural basis of a perceptual
decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey.
Journal of Neurophysiology , 86(4), 1916–1936. http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11600651.
Stafford, T., & Gurney, K.N. (2004). The role of response mechanisms
in determining reaction time performance: Pi ´eron’s law revisited.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(6), 975–87. https://doi.org/10.
3758/BF03196729. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15875968,
http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.3758/BF03196729.
Sugrue, L.P., Corrado, G.S., Newsome, W.T. (2005). Choosing
the greater of two goods: neural currencies for valuation and
decision making. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 6(5), 363–375.
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–8584


--- Page 20 ---
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1666. http://www.nature.com/doifinder/
10.1038/nrn1666, http://www.nature.com/articles/nrn1666.
Tajima, S., Drugowitsch, J., Pouget, A. (2016). Optimal policy
for value-based decision-making. Nature Communications , 7,
12400. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12400. http://www.nature.
com/doifinder/10.1038/ncomms12400.
Teodorescu, A.R., & Usher, M. (2013). Disentangling decision
models: from independence to competition. Psychology Review,
120(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030776. http://doi.apa.
org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/a0030776.
Teodorescu, A.R., Moran, R., Usher, M. (2016). Absolutely rel-
ative or relatively absolute: violations of value invariance
in human decision making. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review ,
23(1), 22–38. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0858-8. http://
link.springer.com/10.3758/s13423-015-0858-8, http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26022836.
Tye, K.M., & Deisseroth, K. (2012). Optogenetic investigation of
neural circuits underlying brain disease in animal models. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience , 13(4), 251–266. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn3171. http://www.nature.com/articles/nrn3171.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J.L. (2001). The time course of perceptual
choice: the leaky, competing accumulator model. Psychological
Review, 108, 550–592. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.108.3.
550.
van Maanen, L., Grasman, R.P.P.P., Forstmann, B.U., Wagenmak-
ers, E.J. (2012). Pi ´eron’s Law and optimal behavior in per-
ceptual decision-making. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 5, 143.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2011.00143.
VanRullen, R. (2016). Perceptual cycles.Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
20(10), 723–735. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.07.006.
VanRullen, R., & Dubois, J. (2011). The psychophysics of brain
rhythms. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 203. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2011.00203.
Wald, A., & Wolfowitz, J. (1948). Optimum character of the
sequential probability ratio test.Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
19(3), 326–339. https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730197. http://
projecteuclid.org/euclid.aoms/1177730197.
White, C.T., & Harter, M. (1969). Intermittency in reaction time and
perception, and evoked response correlates of image quality. Acta
Psychologica, 30, 368–377. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918
(69)90060-2.
Wong, K.F., & Wang, X.J. (2006). A recurrent network mechanism of
time integration in perceptual decisions. Journal of Neuroscience,
26(4), 1314–1328. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3733-05.
2006.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
ComputBrainBehav (2020)3:66–85 85
