--- Page 1 ---
Vol:.(1234567890)
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-024-00223-7
RESEARCH
Models of Variability in Probabilistic Causal Judgments
Ivar Kolvoort1,2  · Zachary J. Davis3 · Bob Rehder3 · Leendert van Maanen4
Accepted: 13 September 2024 / Published online: 8 October 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Most theories of causal reasoning aim to explain the central tendency of causal judgments. However, experimental 
studies show that causal judgments are quite variable. In this article, we report the results of an experiment using a 
novel repeated measures design that demonstrate the existence of meaningful (i.e., not noise-related) within-participant 
variability. Next, we introduce and assess multiple computational cognitive models that serve as potential accounts of 
the sources of variability and fit those models to the new empirical data. We find that the Bayesian Mutation Sampler  
has the best fit to the data and is able to account for a number of unusual features of the response distributions (e.g., 
bi-modality), supporting the view that the stochastic sampling mechanism it posits reflects the cognitive processes via 
which people draw causal inferences. Additionally, our findings suggest that incorporating ‘non-reasoning’ processes, 
such as rounding and guessing, can improve the ability of models of causal reasoning to account for the observed 
response distributions. Overall, the study highlights the potential of computational modeling of full response distribu-
tions to shed light on the underlying mechanisms of human causal reasoning and identifies promising directions for 
future research.
Keywords Causal reasoning · Causal judgment · Cognitive modeling · Response distributions · Sampling · Repeated-
measures
Introduction
One important way in which we understand the world is 
through the lens of causation. Our knowledge about causal-
ity in our environment has been found to affect a myriad of 
decisions and judgments (see Danks, 2014; Sloman, 2005; 
Sloman & Lagnado, 2015; M R Waldmann, 2017). Over the 
last decades a renewed interest in causal cognition has led 
to a wealth of studies investigating different facets of causal 
cognition. One of the main tools used to understand human 
causal cognition is a theoretical framework known as causal 
Bayesian networks 1 (CBNs; Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 
2000). As a normative theory CBNs have provided a decent 
approximation of human behavior and provided researchers 
with a benchmark with which to compare human behavior. 
But although CBNs provide a computational account that 
can formally describe people’s causal judgments, by them-
selves they do not provide insight into how those judgments 
are made. However, it is of great interest to cognitive scien-
tists and psychologists to understand the cognitive processes 
that lead to these sophisticated judgments.
Rather than understanding the ‘how’ question, most past 
research has focused on describing what people are doing. 
This research has led to identifying many behavioral patterns 
in people’s causal judgments, which are often described as 
systematic deviations of mean judgments from the CBN 
predictions (Rehder, 2014; Rottman & Hastie, 2014, 2016). 
The many explanations for these deviations that have been 
offered (e.g.: Mistry et al., 2018; Rehder, 2014; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016; Tešić et al., 2020; Trueblood et al., 2017), are 
mostly descriptive and, since they all target the same phe -
nomena, hard to distinguish empirically. One key reason for 
 * Ivar Kolvoort 
 ivarrenzokolvoort@gmail.com
1 Amsterdam University Medical Centre, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2 Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3 Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, 
USA
4 Department of Experimental Psychology, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 1 Also known as causal graphical models.


--- Page 2 ---
163Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
this difficulty is that by and large the field has focused on 
the central tendency of responses, that is, the mean. While 
focusing on mean responses is a principled approach and 
can be effective, it discards much of the information in par-
ticipants’ responses. With a target explanandum as rich as 
human causal cognition this has led to considerable difficulty 
in assessing the relative success of different candidate theo-
ries (Rehder, 2014, 2018; Rottman & Hastie, 2014, 2016).
One way forward is to focus efforts on analyzing not just 
the mean of causal judgments but also their distributions 
(Kolvoort et al., 2023; O’Neill et al., 2022). Indeed, other 
fields have made progress by showing that variability in 
behavior can be informative of underlying cognitive pro -
cesses. For example, in the field of judgment and decision-
making the widely used evidence accumulation models (e.g. 
Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff et al., 2016), which account for the 
joint distribution of responses and response times, have 
allowed for important theoretical developments, such as 
an explanation of the speed-accuracy trade-off in decision-
making (e.g. Bogacz et al., 2010; Katsimpokis et al., 2020; 
Van Maanen et al., 2011), or an understanding of specific 
individual differences in decision-making behavior (Ratcliff  
et al., 2006; van Ravenzwaaij et al., 2011). It has been known 
for a while that there is a substantial amount of variability in 
causal judgments with multiple authors commenting on this 
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Rehder, 2014; Rottman & Hastie, 
2016). Hence, we believe the time has come for the field of 
causal reasoning to exploit the variability in causal judg-
ments and engage in the modeling of full response distribu-
tions (Kolvoort et al., 2023).
But modeling response distributions comes with its own 
challenges. Because past studies reporting variability have 
usually presented a single type of causal judgment once, it 
is unclear whether that variability arose from between versus 
within-subject sources. Factors that contribute to between-
subjects variability (e.g., motivation, varying beliefs about 
the underlying causal structure, etc.) might be very different 
from those that might lead the same individual to respond 
differently to the same causal query when asked a second 
time. Thus, identifying the underlying cognitive mechanisms 
that generate variability requires obtaining a good estimate 
of that variability at the individual level. But this in turn 
introduces a difficult problem in experimental design, which 
is that repeatedly asking a participant the same judgment 
is likely to yield measures that are not independent. Other 
research areas that commonly elicit repeated measurements 
often have stimuli, such as random-dot motion arrays, that 
can be presented repeatedly without participants being aware 
of the repetition. In contrast, stimuli in the typical causal 
reasoning study are composed of discrete symbols (such 
as states of binary causal variables) that are susceptible to 
be memorized and later recognized. For example, if a par -
ticipant recognizes that a causal query has been presented 
previously, they may tend to respond with the same answer 
in order to minimize cognitive effort, to be consistent, and 
so forth, which would lead to a much lower estimate of 
within-subject variability as compared to if they recompute 
the answer on every trial. Due to its more deliberative and 
conscious nature, studies of higher order cognition may be 
particularly susceptible to non-independent repeated meas-
ures. Indeed, storing previous judgments for future use has 
been proposed to be an important source of computational 
savings (Dasgupta & Gershman, 2021).
This article has the following structure. We first report 
the results of an experiment using a novel repeated measures 
design that, for the first time, characterizes both between 
and within-subjects variability in causal judgments. With 
these data in hand, we then introduce several computational 
models as potential accounts of those sources of variability 
and quantitatively assess their goodness-of-fit to the new 
data set. We also perform model simulations to assess each 
model’s ability to predict qualitative patterns (i.e. behavioral 
effects) of interest (Palminteri et al., 2017).
Experiment
To elicit independent repeated judgments, we identified 
three ways to present participants with causal queries that 
are distinct from the point of view of the participant (and 
thus are less susceptible to memorization) but where the 
underlying CBN yields the same answer. First, we tested a 
symmetrical causal structure so that the same logical query 
could be asked of different variables. Second, we instantiate 
that structure in different content domains (different vari-
ables, verbal descriptions of causal mechanisms, etc.) that 
nonetheless had the same underlying parameterization (and 
so should yield the same answer). Finally, for a given query, 
we asked subject to separately judge both the presence and 
absence of a variable in the causal structure (yielding two 
judgments for the query by subtracting the latter judgment 
from 1). Together, these experimental techniques resulted in 
obtaining from each participant 20 judgments for logically 
equivalent causal judgments, providing the new data needed 
to compare different theoretical accounts of within-subject 
variability.
Materials
Probabilistic causal judgments were tested in five domains: 
biology, sociology, astronomy, meteorology, and sociology. 
Participants were first told that the causal network in the 
domain they were about to study had three binary variables. 
Next, they were presented with a verbal description of two 
causal relationships that formed a common cause network 
(Fig.  1) where two variables were effects (henceforth  X1 and 


--- Page 3 ---
164 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
 X2) and one was the cause (Y). For each causal relationship, 
a description was provided that included a discussion of the 
generative mechanism responsible for that relationship (see 
https:// osf. io/ dpwg6/ for examples of the materials used). All 
the causal variables and relationships were counterbalanced 
over participants. The domains and descriptions were all 
based on standard materials that have been used and vali-
dated by multiple other studies in the field (Rehder, 2014, 
2018; Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Rehder & Waldmann, 2017).
Procedure
Subjects first studied several screens of information about 
the overall task that established the domains being studied 
and the types of inferences that would be presented during 
the study using a trial domain about mechanics to illustrate 
all elements of the inference test. Then, for each domain, ini-
tial screens presented a cover story and a description of the 
domain’s three variables and subsequent screens presented 
the two causal links and a diagram of those links. A common 
cause network was used in every domain, and participants 
were informed that each variable’s base rate was 50% and 
that each cause produced its effect “75% of the time”.
When ready, participants were asked three multiple-
choice questions to assess their understanding of the causal 
relationships. This comprehension check established that 
they had learned which variables were causally related, the 
direction of those relationships, and that the relationships 
were probabilistic rather than deterministic. Participants 
were given three attempts to answer all questions correctly. 
Once they answered all questions correctly or after the third 
attempt, participants could continue with the experiment.
Subjects were then presented with the inference test. Each 
trial presented the values of one or two variables and asked 
the subject to predict the state of another. For example, a 
subject might be told that an economy has low interest rates 
and a normal trade deficit and be asked the probability of it 
having a high level of retirement savings. A second example 
trial is presented in Fig. 2. Subjects entered their response by 
moving a tick on a rating scale whose ends were labeled 0% 
and 100%. As an attention check, participants were asked a 
comprehension check question at the end of each block. The 
order of the five domains, and the 24 test questions within 
each domain, was randomized for each participant.
Design and Participants
Six different inference types were tested that varied on two 
factors: Information and Direction (Table  1). Direction 
referred to the direction of reasoning required, from cause 
to effect (Predictive) or from effect to cause (Diagnostic). 
Information refers to the variable values that are provided 
to the participants on each trial, which could either be Con-
sistent (two variables with the same value), Inconsistent 
(two variables with differing values), and Incomplete (one 
variable).
Within each of the five domains, participants responded 
to four different versions of each of the six inference types, 
resulting in 24 trials per domain. Because of the symme-
try inherent in the common cause network in Fig.  1, and 
because all variables were described as having the same base 
rate and all causal relations as having the same strength, 
for every query that asked a participant to predict  X1 an 
analogous query asking them to predict  X2 should yield the 
same answer (e.g., P/parenleft.s1X1 = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1= P/parenleft.s1X2 = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 ). 
In addition, each query could ask for the probability of a 
variable’s presence or its absence (e.g., P/parenleft.s1X1 = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 or 
P/parenleft.s1X1 = 0/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 ). Taken together, these methods resulted 
Fig. 1  Three-variable common cause network. Arrows denote causal 
relationships and circles denote binary causal variables
Fig. 2  Screenshot of a trial in the experiment. This screenshot is of 
the P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1 inference. Participants respond by click -
ing on the horizontal scale ranging from 0 to 100%. The bottom of 
the screen displayed the causal network on which participants were 
instructed to reduce memory load (see Rehder, 2018)


--- Page 4 ---
165Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
in (5 domains × 4 versions =) 20 repeated measurements for 
each inference type.
It is noteworthy that all the predictive inferences have 
the same normative probability of 80%, a result that reflects 
the key property of CBNs known as the Markov condition. 
Applied to the common cause network of Fig.  1, this means 
that  X1 or  X2 are independent conditioned on knowledge of 
the state of Y, a phenomenon also referred to as “screening 
off.” Specifically, according to the Markov condition
should obtain. In fact, numerous studies (e.g. Ali et al., 2011; 
Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2024; Mayrhofer 
& Waldmann, 2015; Park & Sloman, 2013, 2014; Rehder, 
2014, 2018; Rehder & Waldmann, 2017; Rottman & Hastie, 
2014, 2016; Sloman & Lagnado, 2015; Waldmann et al., 
2008) have shown that humans’ predictive judgments are 
influenced by the value of the other X, exhibiting the pattern
This response pattern has been referred to as “Markov 
violations.” The current experiment will provide another 
opportunity to assess for the presence of Markov violations, 
which provide another key data point for assessing the com-
putational models that follow.
All participants made all judgments for all five 
domains. 37 participants were recruited from Prolific 
(www. proli fic. co) and received £5.70 for on average 47 
min (SD = 20.1) of participation. 8 (22%) participants 
were removed from analyses for failing at least two atten-
tion checks, as had been established by the authors before 
the running of the study.
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY= 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1= P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY= 1/parenright.s1
= P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY= 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1> P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY= 1/parenright.s1
> P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1
Analyses
To analyze within-participant variability as a dependent 
variable, we will use Gini’s Mean Difference (GMD; David, 
1968; Yitzhaki, 2003) as an index of variability, which is 
defined as the average distance between any two obser -
vations. We use GMD instead of the parametric standard 
deviation as responses tend not to be normally distributed. 
We compute GMD for each participant separately per infer-
ence type, that is, we compute it based on 20 observations. 
Next, we analyze the effects of Direction and Information 
using repeated measures ANOVAs (using F-tests with Sat-
terthwaite’s approximation). In addition to p -values, we 
compute Bayes Factors using the BayesFactor package in 
R with default JZS priors (Morey & Rouder, 2014) using 
the same comparison for the F-tests. For post hoc compari-
sons, we use Tukey’s HSD to correct p-values for multiple 
comparisons.
As the different domains as well as time-on task effects 
such as fatigue could possibly influence the results, we con-
duct additional ANOVA analyses including domain and 
block as factor to assess their effects on within-participant 
variability. However, for these analyses, we have to compute 
GMD based on only 4 observations (as it has to be computed 
per participant, inference type, and domain or block) and so 
we also look at the effect of domains and fatigue on the mean 
response. For this, we conduct similar repeated measures 
ANOVAs. It is important to note here that we do not use 
these analyses of the mean responses to establish qualitative 
patterns as means do not provide a good characterization of 
multimodal response distributions (e.g., Davis & Rehder, 
2020; Kolvoort et al., 2023; Rottman & Hastie, 2016) Hence, 
we do not build upon these analyses and recommend, again, 
that researchers look towards modeling full response dis-
tributions and not just analyzing means. We conduct such 
modeling in later sections of this paper.
Table 1  Inference types and normative answers. Inference types var -
ied with two factors, Direction (predictive or diagnostic) and Informa-
tion (consistent, incomplete, or inconsistent) resulting in 6 inference 
types. Xs and Ys refer to variables, where the Xs are effects, and the 
Y is the cause in a three-variable common cause network (see Fig.  1). 
The 1s and 0s refer to the presence or absence of an effect or cause
Direction
Predictive Diagnostic
Information Consistent P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1 P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1
 = .80  = .94
Incomplete P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1/parenright.s1
 = .80  = .80
Inconsistent P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1 P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1
 = .80  = .50


--- Page 5 ---
166 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
Results
Recall that our experimental design utilized multiple sources 
of redundancy to maximize the number of observations of 
a single causal inference. The results were collapsed over 
these factors to yield a total of 20 judgments per inference 
types per participant.2 Figure  3 plots the individual response 
distributions per inference type. This plot shows substantial 
between-participant variability, as we see that some partici-
pants’ responses are more spread out than others, and some 
participants exhibit bimodality in some or most judgments 
whereas others do not at all.
Importantly, Fig. 3 also reveals the presence of substantial 
variability within each participant’s responses. Moreover, 
the overall spread and modality of the response distributions 
differs per inference type for many participants. To evalu-
ate this effect in greater detail, Fig.  4 presents the response 
distributions for each inference type over all participants. 
One notable aspect of these data is that the distributions vary 
by judgment type. If the only source of variability is unre-
lated to the process by which causal judgments are generated 
(such as general response noise), we would expect similar 
variability across judgments.
The bimodality of the response distributions in Fig.  4 
is also noteworthy. In particular, we observe a “spike” of 
responses at 50%, which has been reported previously (Rott-
man & Hastie, 2016). This peak at 50% seems to vary along 
the Information factor, with the largest peaks for inconsist-
ent inferences and smallest for inferences with consistent 
information. As expected, the peak is largest for inconsist-
ent diagnostic inferences for which the normative answer 
is 50%.
Figure  5 shows the means of within-participant GMD and 
mean judgments per inference type. Note in Fig. 5 that while 
variability differs by inference type, it does not track with 
the mean, suggesting that these results are not driven by an 
artifact of the scoring system. We tested whether variability 
differs over the inference types using a repeated measures 
ANOVA with the GMD of responses as the dependent vari-
able and Direction (predictive vs. diagnostic) and Informa-
tion (consistent, incomplete, vs. inconsistent) as factors. The 
Fig. 3  Per participant distributions of responses for each inference 
type. Rows correspond to participants, columns correspond to judg-
ment types, the x-axis indicates the responses in percentage points, 
and the height corresponds to kernel density estimate of partici-
pant responding at this probability. Each density plot is based on 20 
responses
Fig. 4  Overall response distributions per inference type. Vertical grey 
lines indicate mean responses. Dotted vertical black lines indicate 
normative response
2 Due to an error in the materials, three diagnostic trials were 
removed from the Economics domain for all participants, resulting in 
19 judgments for the diagnostic inferences.


--- Page 6 ---
167Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
main effect of Information was significant (F(2,140) = 8.14, 
p < 0.001, BF10 = 42.6) reflecting that variability was lower 
for inferences with incomplete information (Mean = 10.8, 
SE = 1.5), than for those with complete information (con-
sistentMean = 13.9, SE = 1.5, inconsistentMean  = 14.3, 
SE = 1.4). We found mixed evidence of an effect of Direction 
(F(1,140) = 4.32, p = 0.040, BF10 = 0.957): Variability was 
marginally higher for diagnostic inferences (Mean = 13.8, 
SE = 1.45) than for predictive inferences (Mean = 12.2, 
SE = 1.45). There was no evidence for a Direction × Informa-
tion interaction (F (2,140) = 2.08, p = 0.129, BF10 = 0.818). 
Note that the differences in variability over inference types 
suggest that variability results from the underlying cognitive 
process that generates causal judgments.
We also asked if variability was related to the content 
domain in which subjects were tested. Although the common 
cause structure in each of the five domains was parameter -
ized identically, it is conceivable that subjects viewed, for 
example, the causal relations in one domain as more plau-
sible than another, a factor that may have contributed to the 
within-participant variability in Fig.  5. To test whether the 
domain affected variability, we conducted a repeated meas-
ure ANOVA on the within-participant GMD with inference 
type and domain as factors. We found evidence against an 
effect of domain on variability (F (4,789) = 1.04, p = 0.385, 
BF10 < 0.01) and against an interaction of Domain with 
inference type (F (20,789) = 1.05, p = 0.398, BF10 < 0.01). 
We conducted a similar ANOVA to test for Domain effects 
on the mean response and found no such effect (Main effect: 
F(4,809) = 1.82, p = 0.124, BF10 = 0.019; interaction with 
inference type: F (4,809) = 0.711, p = 0.817, BF10 < 0.01). 
That content domain had negligible effects on subjects’ 
inferences indicates that our experimental strategy of pro-
ducing repeated measures by presenting logically equivalent 
queries in different domains is a reasonable one.
Finally, we asked whether the observed variability was 
related to fatigue effects, rather than the reasoning process 
itself. We conducted a repeated measures ANOVA on the 
within-participant GMD using the order of blocks as pre-
sented as a predictor. We found a significant effect of block 
order (F(4,112) = 4.04, p = 0.00424, BF10 = 7.49). Post hoc 
contrasts revealed that the first block is significantly differ-
ent from the latter blocks, which do not differ from each 
other (Mean GMDs: first block 19.9, second 17.1, third 
16.7, fourth 16.2, fifth 16.5). That variability stayed con -
stant after the first block suggests that it is unlikely to be due 
to fatigue. This result also argues against strategy changes 
over the blocks, which indicates that we largely succeeded 
in eliciting independent repeated judgments. For example, 
one would expect a decrease in variability over the latter 
blocks had subjects recognized that they were repeatedly 
being asked the same judgment type and so settled on a con-
sistent response strategy. A similar analysis testing fatigue 
effects on mean responses reveals the exact same pattern. 
There was a significant effect of block order on the mean 
response (F (4,112) = 5.74, p < 0.001, BF10 = 86), which is 
due to the first block being different from the latter blocks, 
which did not differ from each other (Mean responses: first 
block 62.6, second 67.2, third 68.4, fourth 68.5, fifth 69.1). 
Moreover, a supplementary analysis treating the first block 
as “burn-in” indicates that the change from the first block 
to the latter ones does not affect our results (see Appendix 
Fig. 5  Mean and GMDs of 
responses per inference type. 
Barplot: Mean within-partic-
ipant standard deviations per 
inference type. Floating dashes: 
Mean responses per inference 
type. Black vertical lines indi-
cate standard error. Horizontal 
dotted lines indicate normative 
probability. GMD stands for 
Gini’s Mean Difference



--- Page 7 ---
168 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
1). Lastly, it seems that possible remaining dependence in 
judgments, due to querying the absence versus presence of 
a variable, or due to switching around  X1 and  X2, does not 
affect our results (see Appendix 1).
Although the primary motive of the present study was to 
assess variability, it is also important to note that the pre-
sent data replicated two hallmark features of human causal 
reasoning data. The first one is Markov violations. As men-
tioned, Markov violations refer to the non-adherence to the 
Markov property of CBNs, which stipulates that, for the 
common cause network tested in the current experiment, all 
three predictive inferences in Table 1 should be assigned the 
same probability (normatively, 80%). It is clear that from the 
top half of Fig.  5, the current study replicated the pattern of 
Markov violations found in many previous studies, namely 
that P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1> P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1> P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1 . 
In fact, within the predictive inferences, we found a signifi-
cant main effect of Information (F(2,1575) = 29.6, p < 0.001, 
BF10 > 100), confirming the presence of Markov violations.
A second hallmark feature of causal probabilistic rea-
soning is conservatism (Kolvoort et al., 2024; Phillips & 
Edwards, 1966; Rottman & Hastie, 2014, 2016), which 
refers to the tendency of people to avoid extreme responses, 
shifting their response towards the middle of a response 
scale (50% in this study). Examination of Fig.  4 indicates 
that participants’ mean responses fell between 50% and the 
normative response, reflecting conservatism. The figure 
indicates that responses are not only conservative on aver -
age but rather that the bulk of people’s individual responses 
are conservative (Kolvoort et al., 2023, 2024; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016).
Discussion
This experiment yielded several theoretically important 
results, ones that potentially distinguish alternative com-
putational models. First, we confirmed the presence of 
substantial within-participant variability in causal reason-
ing. Although variability has been reported previously, the 
current repeated measure design allows us to conclude that 
variability is a property of the responses of a single indi-
vidual responding to multiple instances of the same causal 
inference. To our knowledge, this is the first assessment of 
the magnitude of within-participant variability in causal 
judgments.
We also found that the magnitude of within-partici-
pant variability varied with the type of causal inference: 
Variability was lower for inferences with incomplete 
versus complete information and higher for diagnostic 
versus predictive inferences. The presence of such sys-
tematic differences in variability supports the premise 
that variability in causal judgments is informative of the 
underlying cognitive processes.
We established that participants’ response distributions 
exhibited some distinctive qualitative patterns. These dis-
tributions were typically multimodal, often with one mode 
at 50%. Although this pattern has been reported previously 
(Kolvoort et al., 2024; Rehder, 2018; Rottman & Hastie, 
2016), a new finding is that the magnitude of the mode at 
50% varied with inference type. Relatively more judgments 
were at (or close to) 50% when the information provided was 
less consistent (i.e., the mode was largest for inconsistent 
trials and smallest for consistent trials). And, the tendency 
to respond at 50% seemed larger for diagnostic inferences 
than for predictive ones.
We summarize the empirical findings from this experi-
ment in Table  2. For each finding, the table includes cita-
tions to other empirical studies in which the phenomena 
were also observed. These data points are those that should 
be explained by the family of computational models we now 
consider.
Candidate Models
We now identify several computational models that can 
potentially account for the sources of variability in causal 
judgments along with the rest of the empirical phenomena 
in Table  2. Two such models—the Bayesian Mutation Sam-
pler (Kolvoort et al., 2023) and the Beta Inference Model  
(Rottman & Hastie, 2016)—already exist and below we 
briefly describe those models and how they will be applied 
to the current data. We also present four additional models 
based on general psychological mechanisms that could pos-
sibly introduce variability: the Motor Variability Model, the 
Stimulus Encoding Error model, the Parameter Uncertainty 
Model, and the Guess model.
Note that in their presentation of the Bayesian Mutation 
Sampler, Kolvoort et al. (2023) showed the potential for 
fitting the variability of causal judgments and explaining 
certain qualitative response patterns (e.g., spikes at 50%). 
However, that study had two limitations. The first was that 
the data on which the models were compared did not include 
repeated measurements (see Kolvoort et al., 2024), limiting 
the conclusions about the sources of variability that could be 
drawn. The second was that only a very limited set of models 
was considered. As now demonstrated, there are multiple 
potential sources of variability in causal judgments and a 
central goal of the present article is to ask which, if any, 
of those sources are plausible explanations of the observed 
variability.
Bayesian Mutation Sampler (BMS)
The Bayesian Mutation Sampler (BMS; Kolvoort et al., 
2023) is a generalization of the Mutation Sampler (MS; 


--- Page 8 ---
169Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
Table 2  Overview of qualitative patterns in response distributions of causal judgments
Qualitative pattern Explanation Other studies
1a. Mean conservatism Mean response tend to be between normative probability and 
50%
(Kolvoort et al., 2024; Phillips & Edwards, 1966; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2014, 2016)
1b. ‘moderate’ conservatism Bulk of responses lie between normative probability and 50% (Kolvoort et al., 2023; Rottman & Hastie, 2016)
1c. Extreme responses are rare Participants tend to avoid the extremes of the response scale, 
in probabilistic causal judgment tasks this is near 0% and 
100%
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2023; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016)
2. Markov violations Non-adherence to Markov property, which refers to the (con-
ditional) independence of causal variables. In the case of a 
common cause network, this is the independence of  Xi and 
 Xj once the state of Y is known. This phenomenon is also 
referred to as ‘failures to screen off’
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2024; Mayrhofer & 
Waldmann, 2015; Park & Sloman, 2013, 2014; Rehder, 2014, 
2018; Rehder & Waldmann, 2017; Rottman & Hastie, 2014, 
2016; Sloman & Lagnado, 2015; M R Waldmann et al., 2008)
3a. Within-participant variability is lower for incomplete infor-
mation
Responses to queries with incomplete information are less 
variable
3b. Within-participant variability is higher for diagnostic 
inferences
Judgments are more variable when participants are asked to 
reason from effect to cause (Diagnostic) as compared to 
when they reason from cause to effect (Predictive)
4. Multi-modal response distributions Response distributions often have more than one mode, even 
on the participant level
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2023; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016)
5a. Spikes at 50% Response distributions often have a mode or ‘spike’ of 
responses at 50%
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2024; Rehder, 2018; 
Rottman & Hastie, 2016)
5b. Spikes at 50% increase with inconsistency of information 
provided
Participants tend to respond at 50% less when consistent infor-
mation is provided, and more when inconsistent information 
is provided, compared to when the information is incomplete
(Rottman & Hastie, 2016)
5c. Spikes at 50% are larger for diagnostic inferences Participants tend to respond at 50% more so when they are 
asked to reason from effect to cause (Diagnostic) as com-
pared to when they reason from cause to effect (Predictive)


--- Page 9 ---
170 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
Davis & Rehder, 2017, 2020; Rehder & Davis, 2021), spe-
cially developed to understand variability in causal judg-
ments. The MS is a model of causal reasoning that assumes 
that individuals draw resource-constrained inferences based 
on a sampling process of CBNs. The model proposes that 
people think of concrete cases when asked to reason about 
a causal system. These concrete cases are states of a causal 
system where each variable is instantiated with a value (e.g. 
 [X1 = 1, Y = 1,  X2 = 0]) and they are retrieved from memory 
or generated using an internal generative model. The MS 
assumes people sample these cases using a Metropolis–Hast-
ings algorithm, which is a Markov chain Monte Carlo sam-
pling method for approximating probability distributions 
(Hastings, 1970; van Ravenzwaaij et al., 2018). This method 
converges to the true distribution when the number of sam-
ples grows large. The MS, however, assumes that people are 
restricted in the number of samples they can take as they are 
restricted in cognitive resources. This limited sampling in 
combination with two other assumptions is what makes the 
MS accurate in predicting mean responses on causal judg-
ment tasks (Davis & Rehder, 2017, 2020; Rehder & Davis, 
2021). The first assumption is that the proposal distribu-
tion for each step of sampling consists only of those states 
that differ from the current state by only one variable (i.e., 
the current state is ‘mutated’). This assumption implements 
the idea that when people think of a next case, that case is 
likely similar to the one they are thinking of currently. The 
second additional assumption is that the sampling process 
starts out at a prototypical state, which is a state in which 
all causal variables are either present or absent (in our case 
either  [X1 = 0, Y = 0,  X2 = 0] or  [X1 = 1, Y = 1,  X2 = 1]), as 
these states readily come to mind. Because the MS posits 
that people only take a limited number of samples, the pro-
posal distribution and starting point bias the sampling pro-
cess such that approximated distribution assigns more (less) 
probability weight to states with consistent (inconsistent) 
variable values than the normative distribution (see for more 
details Davis & Rehder, 2020). The size of this bias depends 
on the number of samples—the chain length—which is a 
free parameter of the model.
After generating a chain of samples, the relative fre-
quencies of the obtained samples in the chain are used to 
estimate the probability query. For example, if we obtained 
the two identical samples [A = 1, B = 1] and [A = 1, B = 1], 
we would estimate P(A = 1/uni007C.varB = 1) as 100%, since in our 
set of samples in all cases where B = 1 we have that A = 1. 
However, it can be the case that our samples do not contain 
the states needed to compute the right relative frequency. 
For example, if we would want to estimate P(A = 1/uni007C.varB = 1) , 
but all the states in our chain of samples have that B = 0. 
In such a case the MS defaults to responding with 50%.
While the MS has been shown to be able to predict 
mean responses (Davis & Rehder, 2020; Rehder & Davis, 
2021), it failed to predict the observed response distribu-
tions (Kolvoort et al., 2023). The BMS, instead of comput-
ing judgments directly from frequencies in the obtained 
samples, combines the information gained from sampling 
with generic prior information to generate a judgment. The 
integration of prior information yields a better explanation 
of response distributions (Kolvoort et al., 2023). The BMS 
has two free parameters, the chain length and the β prior 
parameter that determines the shape of the symmetric Beta 
distribution used as a prior. We implemented only the BMS 
as it generalizes the MS, i.e. when the β prior parameter of 
the BMS is 0, the model is equivalent to the MS.
Beta Inference Model (BIM)
Rottman and Hastie (2016) proposed a model of causal 
inference called the Beta Inference Model (BIM) to explain 
Markov violations and variability in judgments. The moti -
vation for the BIM was that when in an experiment, par -
ticipants are asked to learn about a causal system by expe-
rience (i.e. by viewing samples of data from the causal 
system, not reading descriptions of the causal system as in 
the repeated-measures experiment), then it is possible to 
compute judgments directly from the samples of data pro -
vided for learning. The BIM considers an inference such as 
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 , to be a problem of computing the propor-
tion of times that  Xj = 1 (“win”) versus  Xj = 0 (“failure”) 
within the set of cases where Y = 1. The posterior distribu-
tion of that proportion is then given by a Beta distribution 
which describes participant judgments (Rottman & Hastie, 
2016). In this sense, the model proposes that people infer a 
posterior distribution directly from the data they viewed to 
learn about the causal system (by regarding the “wins” and 
“failures” in the learning data), and then sample from this 
distribution when making the inference (Rottman & Hastie, 
2016). As the learning data provided to participants repre-
sents underlying joint distributions truthfully, the mode of 
the predicted distributions of responses coincides with the 
CBN point predictions. However, the skewness and concen-
tration of the predicted Beta distribution changes depending 
on the amount of learning data, which is directly related to 
the conditional statement, in our example Y = 1. Differences 
in skewness (due to differences in the conditional statement) 
can for example explain Markov violations as the mean of 
responses can shift away from the mode (which is fixed at 
the location of the normative probability).
As discussed, the BIM as originally proposed assumes 
that individuals learn about a causal structure by viewing 
data. However, the behavior it accounts for, such as Markov 
violations, have been found in experiments that do not use 
such a learning-by-experience procedure (Rehder & Wald-
mann, 2017). The BIM can be implemented without learn-
ing data by assuming that samples come from an internal 


--- Page 10 ---
171Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
generative model (cf. Rottman & Hastie, 2016), similar to 
the BMS. This generalized version of the BIM assumes that 
people generate a varying number of samples in particular 
ratios via their generative model. 3 The number of samples 
is treated as a free parameter in the model.
Note that this approach implies that the number of sam-
ples that contribute to a given inference varies with its type. 
For example, the conditional probability P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 is 
computed on the basis on samples in which Y = 1 whereas 
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1
 is computed from those in which 
Y = 1 and  Xj = 1 are true. Because the former will therefore 
usually be computed from a larger number of samples than 
the latter (because there are usually more cases in which 
Y = 1 than there are cases in which  Xj = 1 is also true), the 
Beta distribution reflecting its predictions should be more 
concentrated. In fact, the ratio of the concentration of the 
former and later inference should reflect the ratio between 
P(Y = 1) and P/parenleft.s1Y = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1
 . Table  3 summarizes the 
relative concentration of each inference types for a com-
mon cause network under the parameterization participants 
were taught. Note that the assumption that the concentration 
parameter varies with inference type can be interpreted as 
reflecting that, for a given inference, people will generate 
more/fewer samples as function of how easy/hard they are 
to generate (which in turn is determined by whether they are 
of high/low probability). This process is analogous to what 
is proposed by the (B)MS to govern sample generation (cf. 
Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2023).
Motor Variability Model (MVM)
As mentioned, we implemented four new models to account 
for variability in causal judgments. The Motor Variability 
Model (MVM) posits that people reason normatively, but 
their responses vary from trial to trial due to motor noise 
(or general task noise). In other domains, there is ample evi-
dence that motor noise introduces variability in judgments 
(e.g., Maaß et al., 2021; Müller & Sternad, 2004; Verdonck 
& Tuerlinckx, 2013 ). The idea that people reason norma -
tively to some extent but that such reasoning interacts with 
‘non-normative’ processes to result in judgments has been 
proposed before (see Rehder & Waldmann, 2017; Rottman 
& Hastie, 2016).
Like the BIM, the MVM predicts a distribution of 
responses in which the mode is centered at the normative 
response and where noise is represented with a Beta distri-
bution. But unlike the BIM, which predicts noise that varies 
with inference type, the MVM predicts the same variability 
for all inferences. It has only one free parameter, the concen-
tration parameter of the Beta distribution.
Stimulus Encoding Error Model (SEE)
The Stimulus Encoding Error (SEE) model is based on the 
idea that participants can misread part of the stimulus such 
that they encode a value for variable that differs from the 
one presented. For instance, instead of correctly encod-
ing the stimulus equivalent of P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 0, Xj = 1/parenright.s1
 , 
a participant could erroneously encode the stimulus as 
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1
 . One reason to include such a model 
in our analysis is that the current study established that indi-
vidual-level response distributions are multimodal. Misread-
ing variable values on some trials, but not others, is a simple 
mechanism which would lead to multimodal distributions.
The SEE model assumes that a participant misreads the 
state of a conditioning variable with probability m. For infer-
ences with one conditioning variable (e.g., P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 ) 
this means that the model predicts a probability of 1-m cor-
rect responses, and a probability of m  incorrect responses 
(i.e., responses to P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 0/parenright.s1 ). For inferences with two 
conditioning variables (e.g., P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1
 ) we 
still have that m is the probability of independently misread-
ing the value of each conditioning variable. This leads to the 
probability of misreading the values of both variables being 
m2. The probability of only the first variable being misread is 
Table 3  These scaling 
factors determine the relative 
concentrations of the predicted 
response distributions. These 
particular factors are derived 
from the causal network taught 
to participants in the current 
repeated-measures experiment
Concentration scaling for Beta Inference model
Inference Total samples in possible 
learning data
Probability of sampling from 
generative model
Concentration 
scaling factor
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1 N(Y = 1) P(Y = 1) = .5 5
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1N(Y = 1, Xj = 0) P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1= .1 1
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1N(Y = 1, Xj = 1) P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1= .4 4
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXj = 1/parenright.s1 N(Xj = 1) P
/parenleft.s1
Xj = 1/parenright.s1= .5 5
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1N(Xi = 1, Xj = 0) P(Xi = 1, Xj = 0)=.16 1.6
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1N(Xi = 1, Xj = 1) P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1= .34 3.4
3 If, instead, we would assume that people generate an equal number 
of samples for each inference then the model would be equivalent to 
the Motor variability model discussed below.


--- Page 11 ---
172 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
the same as the probability of only the second being misread, 
namely m − m2 . The probability of neither being misread is 
therefore 1 − 2m + m2 . As misreading a variable value can 
lead to responses very different from the normative response 
this mechanism can predict multiple modes (as can been 
seen from the number of different possible responses per 
row in Table  4). Using this implementation, the SEE model 
has only one free parameter, the probability m of misreading 
the state of a conditioning variable.
Parameter Uncertainty Model (PUM)
The Parameter Uncertainty Model (PUM) posits that 
another possible source of within-participant variability is 
uncertainty regarding the causal network’s parameters, i.e. 
the base rates4 and causal strength parameters. Such uncer -
tainty could lead a reasoner to use slightly different values 
for these parameters every time a response is computed. 
Because — according to CBN — not all causal parameters 
are necessary to compute every inference, the amount of var-
iability the PUM predicts thus varies per inference type. For 
instance, diagnostic inferences require information regarding 
the strength of background causes for both the cause and 
effect, while predictive inferences only require information 
regarding the background causes of the effect.
We model parameter uncertainty by first drawing the 
causal parameters (base rates, causal strengths) from a Beta 
distribution centered on the normative parameter value. 
Next, these noisy causal parameters are used to compute 
a judgment according to the normative CBN framework. 
While the Beta distribution has its mode at the normative 
probability of the parameter, the concentration of the distri-
bution can vary as a free parameter to model different levels 
of uncertainty. Moreover, as the causal parameters are of two 
types, base rates and causal strengths, each type has its own 
concentration parameter to model possible reasoners that are 
more uncertain about one type than the other. Consequently, 
the PUM has two free parameters, namely the concentration 
parameters for the Beta distributions from which the base 
rates and causal strengths will be sampled.
Mixture Modeling Using a Guess Component
One thing to note from the above is that, because they pre-
dict the same distribution of responses for each of the predic-
tive inference types in Table  1, the SEE, MVM, PUM mod-
els do not produce Markov violations. Given that evidence 
for Markov violations is so widespread, we also combined 
these models (and indeed the BMS and BIM as well) with a 
Guess Model, which stipulates that the participant responds 
with 50% on some proportion of trials (Rottman & Hastie, 
2016). Guessing explains Markov violations assuming the 
guessing rate varies with the type of inference. Of course, 
it can also help explain the large spike of responses at 50% 
observed in the current data and elsewhere (Kolvoort et al., 
2023; Rottman & Hastie, 2016).
There are many possible reasons why a participant would 
guess, such as a lack of task compliance, a lapse in con-
centration, or not understanding the stimulus (e.g. in case 
of inconsistent trials) and indeed the fact that participants 
report less confidence in responses near 50% (Kolvoort 
et al., 2024) suggests that guessing might not be uncommon. 
Incorporating a guessing component into BMS, BIM, MVM, 
SEE, and PUM (which we will refer to as ‘base’ models) 
makes their resultant predictions a mixture of a guessing 
and reasoning.
As previously summarized, the magnitude of spikes at 
50% varied with the type of inference. They were larger 
for inconsistent inferences, which might be interpreted as 
eliciting more guessing because of their conflicting cues. 
They were also larger for diagnostic inferences, which other 
researchers have noted that participants find more difficult 
Table 4  The free parameter m 
is the probability of misreading 
the state of a conditional 
variable. Probability of only 
misreading the first conditional 
variable state is m-m2, 
misreading second is also m-m2, 
and misreading both is  m2. 
The probability of misreading 
neither is 1 − 2m + m2
Predictions of SEE model
Inference Normative prob. 
(misreading nei-
ther)
Possible ‘erroneous’ responses Possible # of 
modes when 
m > 0Misread first Misread 
second
Misread both
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1/parenright.s1.8 .2 - - 2
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1.8 .2 .8 .2 2
P
/parenleft.s1
Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1.8 .2 .8 .2 2
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1/parenright.s1.8 .2 - - 2
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1.5 .06 .94 .5 3
P
/parenleft.s1
Y = 1/uni007C.varXi = 1, Xj = 1/parenright.s1.94 .5 .5 .06 3
4 We use the term ‘base rate’ to refer to the probability of a causal 
variable being present without its causes in the modeled causal struc-
ture being present. This is sometimes referred to as the “strength of 
alternative causes”.


--- Page 12 ---
173Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
than predictive ones (Fernbach & Darlow, 2010; Fernbach 
et al., 2011). Because guessing might thus vary with infer -
ence type, we implemented five different Guess models: one 
with 0 parameters (no guessing), 1 (fixed guessing rate for 
all inference types), 2 (one guessing rate for predictive infer-
ences, another for diagnostic inferences), 3 (one guessing 
rate each for consistent, incomplete, and inconsistent infer -
ences), and 6 (a different rate for each inference type).
Fitting and Analysis Methodology
Fitting Procedure
To fit the theoretical models described above to the data we 
use a simulation-based approach combined with an exhaus-
tive grid search. This is a form of ‘pre-paid’ estimation 
(Mestdagh et al., 2019), which falls under the umbrella of 
amortized inference methods (Radev et al., 2020 ). We use 
such a grid search as it removes possible bias in the optimi-
zation procedure. Such a bias has been found to be severe 
for fitting the Mutation Sampler and Bayesian Mutation 
Sampler models with a step-wise optimization procedure 
(Kolvoort et al., 2023). We will fit the models to each par -
ticipant separately. As we keep parameters fixed for the base 
models over the different inference types in the experiment, 
this means that we will fit each set of parameters to (6 infer-
ence types × 20 repeated measurements =) 120 responses.
In the first step of the fitting procedure, we simulate 
responses using the models and save these simulated 
responses in a grid. We choose a range of realistic param-
eters (see below) for these simulations so that the grid covers 
plausible response distributions under the different models. 
We will simulate 100,000 responses for every combination 
of parameters for each model. Next, we use Probability Den-
sity Approximation (PDA; Holmes, 2015; Turner & Sed-
erberg, 2014) to construct a ‘synthetic’ likelihood for each 
cell in the grid by way of kernel density estimation. This 
provides a likelihood of observing the data under each model 
and set of parameters, for each cell of the grid. The best 
fitting model and parameters for each participant are then 
given by the cell with the highest likelihood. One impor -
tant parameter setting for the PDA method is the kernel 
bandwidth (see Lin et al., 2019). We picked our bandwidth 
based on the dataset, so that the predicted distributions will 
match the granularity of responses. To do this, we applied 
the Sheather and Jones method for non-parametric auto -
matic bandwidth selection (Jones et al., 1996; Sheather & 
Jones, 1991) to each participant’s data and averaged those. 
This average was 2.13 (on percentage point scale), which 
we used as the standard deviation of a gaussian kernel for 
the kernel density estimation (cf. Lin et al., 2019). In the 
next step, we compute BIC values and weights (Schwarz, 
1978; Wagenmakers & Farrell, 2004) to compare the fit of 
the models for each participant.
Determining Grid Dimensions
We aimed to have 20 values5 for each free parameter of the 
main models and 7 values for the Guess model component 
(see below), to cover the range of plausible values. This 
number of parameter values is restricted due to computa-
tional resources related to the combination of the main mod-
els with the guess proportions. For the BMS, previous work 
has indicated that it is more important to have a non-biased 
optimization procedure than to have a very precise parameter 
estimate as small differences in parameter estimates only 
lead to small differences in the predictions (see Appendix 1 
in Kolvoort et al., 2023).
The BIM, MVM, and PUM make use of Beta distribu-
tions in their implementation. For these Beta distributions, 
we do not use the standard parametrization in terms of shape 
parameters, but rather use an alternative parametrization in 
terms of the concentration and mode to define the distribu-
tions (Johnson et al., 1995). For these models, the concentra-
tion is a free parameter for which we will pick grid values. 
The other parameter, the location of the mode, is fixed by 
the model specification (at the normative response for the 
BIM and MVM, and at the normative causal strength and 
base rate values for the PUM).
The BMS and PUM have two free parameters and the 
BIM, MVM and SEE have one. Additionally, the Guess 
Model has a maximum of 6 parameters (one guess pro-
portion for each of 6 inference types when it is allowed to 
vary for both Direction and Information factors). Follow -
ing this, we have for the BMS and Parameter Variability 
models a grid with at least (20 × 20 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 
=) 47,059,600 unique parameter combinations, and for the 
other models, we have grids with (20 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 =) 
2,352,980 at least parameter combinations.
Bayesian Mutation Sampler
The chain length of the BMS is estimated between 6 and 
200. This includes the range of chain lengths found for 
causal reasoning tasks before (Davis & Rehder, 2020). When 
chain lengths become large, the differences in predictions 
become negligible (Davis & Rehder, 2020). Therefore, we 
used equally spaced points between 6 and 200 in terms of 
5 For the β prior parameter of the BMS and for the probability of 
misreading a stimulus value m of the SEE model, we use 21 values 
as they naturally lend themselves to picking an odd number of values, 
see below.


--- Page 13 ---
174 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
their inverse cube root. That is, we computed the inverse 
cube root ( x− 1
3 ) of 6 and 200, then picked 18 equally spaced 
points between them (so in total, we have 20 values includ-
ing 6− 1
3 and 200− 1
3 ) and then reverted all these points back to 
the original space and rounding them, resulting in the fol-
lowing sequence of chain lengths: [6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 16, 
18, 21, 25, 30, 36, 43, 53, 66, 84, 110, 146, 200].
For the β parameter of the Beta(β, β) prior we wanted the 
grid values to be picked such that the prior distributions were 
symmetric around the uniform distribution, which occurs 
when β = 1. To do this, we first picked values for β < 1 from 
0 to 1 with a step size of 0.1. Next, to pick values for β > 1, 
we computed the total variation distance (Levin & Peres, 
2017) between the uniform distribution and each Beta(β, β) 
distribution with β < 1, and then identified a set of β > 1 that 
have the same total variation distances from the uniform 
distribution (Kolvoort et al., 2023). This symmetry about the 
uniform prior was not used for picking a value symmetric to 
β = 0, as this would lead to an infinite value, instead we use 
a value of 100. This procedure gives the following 21 values 
for β: [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 1.11, 1.26, 
1.45, 1.73, 2.14, 2.83, 4.14, 7.35, 21.54, and 100].
Beta Inference Model
The concentration of the Beta distributions predicted as 
response distributions is the only free parameter for the 
BIM. The grid values we pick will represent the con-
centration of the predicted response distribution for the 
P/parenleft.s1Xi = 1/uni007C.varY = 1, Xj = 0/parenright.s1
 inference, which is the inference 
which has the lowest concentration (see Table  3). The con-
centrations of the distributions for the other inference types 
are determined by multiplying the concentration with the 
respective concentration scaling factor. At the lower limit 
of the set of concentrations, we want the model to predict a 
uniform distribution, while at the upper limit, we want the 
model to predict no variability, which is for responses to 
all be at a single percentage point. As the lower limit, we 
use a concentration of 2, which results in a uniform distri-
bution. Moreover, since for the Beta Inference model the 
concentration is theoretically equivalent to the number of 
learning experiences or internally generated samples, 2 is a 
practical lower limit as a value of 1 would result in only 0% 
or 100% responses. To determine the upper limit, we identi-
fied 2^13 = 8192 to be the lowest power of 2 for which the 
standard deviation of the Beta distribution would be within 
half a percentage point, meaning that most of the probabil-
ity weight would be assigned to a single percentage point. 
Consequently, the grid range for the concentration parameter 
is  [21,  213]. As with the chain lengths for the BMS, the dif-
ference between the predictions becomes smaller for larger 
concentrations (Fig.  6). Therefore, we applied the same 
inverse cube root procedure as for the BMS chain lengths, 
resulting in the following set of concentration values: [2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17, 23, 30, 43, 62, 96, 158, 290, 620, 
1722, 8192].
Motor Variability Model
The MVM has concentration as the only free parameter as 
well. The same reasoning as for the Beta Inference model 
applies here, so we use the same set of concentration values 
as for the Beta Inference model.
Stimulus Encoding Error Model
For the SEE model, the probability of misreading a stimulus 
value is the single free parameter. This ranges naturally from 
0 to 1, and we picked 19 equally spaced values resulting in 
the following set of 21 values: [0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 
0.25, 0.30, 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, 0.50, 0.55, 0.60, 0.65, 0.70, 
0.75, 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95, 1].
Parameter Uncertainty Model
The PUM has two free parameters: the concentrations of the 
Beta distributions from which the causal strengths and base 
rates are sampled. The mode of these Beta distributions is 
fixed at the true value of the parameter (0.5 for the causal 
strengths, 0.5 for the base rate of the cause (Y), and 0.2 for 
Fig. 6  Beta distributions, centered on .5, with a range of concentrations used in the grid search for the Beta Inference model, the Motor Variabil-
ity model, and the Parameter Uncertainty model. The concentrations plotted here are equally spaced in the set of concentrations used in the grid


--- Page 14 ---
175Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
the base rates of the two effects  (X1 and  X2), see discus -
sion of the data above). The estimation of the concentration 
of these distributions is the same for the BIM and MVM 
models.
Guess Model
For the Guess Model, we are restricted to a coarser grid due 
to computational resource restrictions which stem from the 
fact that this model is combined with all the aforementioned 
models. However, by looking at the individual response 
distributions for each inference type (Fig.  3), we can pick 
these values in a way that covers plausible values. The first 
thing to note is that some distributions have all responses at 
50% and some have none, so we need to include 0 and 1 as 
guess proportions. Next, we can observe that in the case of 
bimodal response distributions, the mode at 50% is never 
larger than the other mode, meaning that at least half of 
responses were not at 50%. This leaves the range between 
0 and 0.5, and we picked values with step size 0.1 between 
these limits, resulting in the following set of 7 guess propor-
tions: [0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 1]. As participants provide 
20 responses to each inference type, these parameter values 
correspond to 0, 2, 4, 8, 10, or 20 guesses respectively.
Analysis
For our analysis of model predictions and parameters, we 
will make use of Bayesian Model-Averaging (BMA; Hinne 
et al., 2020; Hoeting et al., 1999). BMA allows for inference 
regarding model parameters and predictions while taking 
into account the uncertainty regarding the best model. It 
does this by assigning weights to each model based on the 
posterior model probabilities. These will be computed by 
comparing the relative Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) 
scores (Schwarz, 1978; Wagenmakers & Farrell, 2004). The 
use of BIC scores and BMA allows us to compare and ana-
lyze the generative models even though they differ in the 
number of free parameters and posterior probabilities. We 
will use BMA in two ways. First, we will use BMA for each 
base model to collapse over the guess components. This 
allows us to analyze and compare the parameters and pre-
dictions between base models taking into account the vary -
ing guess components. Second, we will use BMA for each 
possible guess component, meaning that we will collapse 
across all base models to obtain BMA-weighted estimates of 
the guess proportions. This will allow us to compare guess 
components taking into account the varying base models. To 
compare parameter estimates between groups. we will use 
the non-parametric Mann–Whitney-Wilcoxon test (Mann & 
Whitney, 1957; van Doorn et al., 2020) instead of the stand-
ard t-test, as parameter values are not normally distributed 
(see the “Experiment” section). We will again use Gini’s 
Mean Difference (GMD; David, 1968; Yitzhaki, 2003) as 
an index of the variability of the responses.
Model Fitting Results
Overall Model Fit
Our main goal is to identify the most likely theoretical 
model considering the distributions of causal judgments, 
and therefore we begin by examining the quantitative fit of 
each model. To assess relative model fit, we computed BIC 
weights of all models. We did this at the group and indi -
vidual levels.
Starting with the group level fits, we find that the BMS is 
the most likely model Table 5). Aggregating over guess com-
ponents and computing group-level posterior model weights 
(Wagenmakers & Farrell, 2004), the BMS is more than 1000 
times more likely to be the true data-generating process 
compared to any of the other models (evidence ratios BMS: 
 10293 versus BIM,  10120 versus MVM,  1057 versus PUM, 
and larger than  10300 versus SEE). This indicates that the 
stochastic sampling mechanism underlying the BMS is likely 
to be an important source of variability in causal judgments.
We also find that each base model’s group level BIC 
score is best when a guess component with 6 parameters is 
added (group BIC columns in Table 5). This result indicates 
that different guess proportions for each inference type are 
required to account for the whole dataset.
Not surprisingly, a more nuanced picture emerges when 
the models’ performance at the level of individual subject 
is considered. Considering each base model’s BIC scores 
averaged over subjects (last row of Table 5), the BMS again 
emerges as the superior model. In contrast to the group-
level results, the individual BIC columns in Table 5 indicate 
that the most complex 6-parameter guessing model did not 
always yield the best fit, suggesting that participants may 
vary in their guess proportions. To explore individual differ-
ences in greater detail—asking, for example, whether BMS 
is the most likely model for every participant—we computed 
posterior model probabilities (based on BIC weights) for 
each model separately for each participant (Fig.  7).
The percentage of participants best fit by BMS, MVM, 
PUM, BIM, and SEE was 59%, 28%, 7%, 3%, and 0%, 
respectively (Fig.  7). That the majority of participants are 
best explained by the BMS provides additional evidence sug-
gesting that the sampling scheme of the BMS is an important 
source of variability. Yet, the fact that a different model—the 
MVM—yielded the best fit for 28% of participants opens the 
door to the possibility that the dominant sources of variability 
can vary per participant. Indeed, Fig. 7 indicates that for each 
participant except one (the right most column in Fig. 7), there 
is only one base model that explains their data best.


--- Page 15 ---
176 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
To address the question why some models (in particu-
lar the BMS and MVM) yielded better fits than others, 
we asked how these models fare at reproducing the rel-
evant behavioral effects identified in the “Experiment” 
section, including the means and variability by inference 
types, as well as the more subtle aspects of the response 
distributions (bi-modal responding and spikes at 50%).
Predicted Means
We computed the model-averaged predictions for each 
base model for each participant and inference type. 
Overall, the differences between observed and pre-
dicted means was relatively small, with each model’s 
predictions being on average around 5 to 6 percent-
age points off from the observed responses (Table  6). 
Using repeated-measures ANOVAs with the differences 
between observed and predicted means as dependent 
variable and model as independent variable, we find 
that the models do not differ in terms of how well they 
predict the mean response (F (4, 837) = 0.967, p = 0.425, 
 BF10 = 0.0061). However, it is important reiterate that 
means do not provide a good description of the multi-
modal response data, and so these results should not be 
taken to indicate overall model performance (as dis-
cussed in the previous section).
Figure  8 indicates how the models fared at reproducing 
the means for each inference type. From the literature we 
know that people exhibit mean conservatism (pattern 1a 
in Table  2) and Markov violations (pattern 2). Figure  8 
shows that all models predict mean conservatism, that 
is, the predictions are between the normative response 
and 50%. We can see that the BMS most accurately pre-
dicts the pattern of Markov violations (Predictive infer -
ences, leftmost three bars in Fig.  8). In contrast, the 
BIM appears to predict a Markov violation larger than 
observed and the other models do not appear to predict 
Markov violations. Separate ANOVAs for each model on 
the predictive inferences, using Information as independ-
ent variable, identify indeed that only for the BMS and 
BIM there is clear evidence for Markov violations in their 
predictions (BMS: F(2,56) = 42.7, p < 0.001,  BF10 = 68.3; 
BIM: F(2,56) = 137.2, p < 0.001,  BF10 > 1000) with evi-
dence for an absence of Markov violations for the other 
models (MVM: F(2,56) = 3.32, p = 0.043,  BF10 = 0.11; 
PUM: F(2,56) = 3.02, p = 0.056,  BF10 = 0.13; SEE: 
F(2,56) = 2.94, p = 0.061,  BF10 = 0.12). For the Diagnos-
tic inferences (rightmost three bars in Fig.  8), we see that 
the MVM model predictions are closest to the observed 
means, but all models reproduce the effect of Information. 
Overall, Fig.  8 indicates that the BMS provides the best 
account of participants’ means responses.
Table 5  Wins, Group BICs, Mean individual BICs, and their standard errors per model. Group BIC refers to group-level BIC values computed using all data. Ind. BIC refers to individual-level 
BIC values which are averaged over participants to get the mean BIC value and the standard error (in brackets). For the ‘Overall’ row we first selected the best fitting guess component within a 
base model for each participant and then averaged the BIC values over participants. These overall values indicate the fit of the base models while letting the number of guessing parameters vary 
per participant. Lower BIC values imply a better fit. The win column refers to the number of participants for which the model is the winning model (out of 29 participants). The guess compo-
nents are listed per number of parameters, where 1 par refers to a fixed amount of guessing for all inference types, 2 par refers to different guess proportions per reasoning direction, 3 par refers 
to different guess proportions per type of information provided, and 6 par refers to a different guess proportion per inference type
 BMS  PUM  BIM  MVM SEE
Group BIC Ind. BIC Win Group BIC Ind. BIC Win Group BIC Ind. BIC Win Group BIC Ind. BIC Win Group BIC Ind. BIC Win
No guessing  − 3737  − 120.1
(12.8)
10  − 2504  − 77.53
(12.3)
1  − 1154  − 35.40
(17.2)
1  − 2403  − 78.47
(11.5)
3 47,157 1630
(170)
0
Guessing 
component
1 par  − 4097  − 128.1
(14.3)
1  − 3660  − 113.0
(14.6)
0  − 2540  − 78.78
(20.1)
1  − 3427  − 109.4
(15.0)
0 29,751 1035
(145)
0
2 par  − 4432  − 135.2
(16.9)
3  − 4049  − 122.0
(17.9)
1  − 2972  − 89.29
(23.3)
0  − 3811  − 118.2
(18.5)
3 29,361 1026
(147)
0
3 par  − 4277  − 125.5
(15.3)
1  − 3969  − 114.9
(16.0)
0  − 2831  − 80.02
(21.6)
0  − 3676  − 109.2
(16.6)
2 29,471 1034
(145)
0
6 par  − 4679  − 126.2
(17.8)
2  − 4415  − 117.0
(16.9)
0  − 3327  − 83.92
(24.4)
0  − 4127  − 111.5
(19.7)
0 29,042 1032
(147)
0
Overall  − 143.6 
(17.4)
17  − 131.2 
(18.6)
2  − 97.84 
(24.0)
2  − 127.4 
(19.3)
8 1021 (147) 0


--- Page 16 ---
177Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
Predicted Variability
We also computed the GMD predictions of each base model 
for each participant (Table 6). Repeated-measures ANOVAs 
revealed that the models differed in how well they predict 
GMD ( F(4, 837)  = 4.89, p < 0.001,  BF10 = 2.31). Using 
post hoc contrasts, we find that this is due to BIM being 
worse than the SEE (t (837) = 4.36, p < 0.001) and BMS 
(t(837) = 2.65, p = 0.063) models. The fact that the SEE 
model performs comparably to the other models here, while 
it is the worst model in terms of posterior model probabili-
ties, is an indication that the data is too complex to be cap-
tured by simple indices such as the mean or GMD.
As we did for the means, we also examined predicted 
variability (indexed by GMD) for the different inference 
types. Specifically, we asked whether the models predict that 
variability is lower for inferences with incomplete informa-
tion (pattern 3a) and that variability is higher for diagnos -
tic inferences (pattern 3b). We find that only BIM predicts 
variability to be lowest for inferences with incomplete infor-
mation (Fig.  9), but only the difference with inconsistent 
information is significant (Δ = 9.34, t(812) = 13.2, p < 0.001, 
 BF10 > 1000), while the difference with consistent informa-
tion is not (t (812) = 2.05, p = 0.102,  BF10 = 0.998). There 
is evidence that the SEE model predicts GMD for incom-
plete information to be lower than for consistent informa-
tion (Δ  = 2.12, t(812) = 2.99, p = 0.0081,  BF10 = 7.68), but 
it is not different from the incomplete information condi-
tion (t(812) = 1.03, p = 0.313,  BF10 = 0.238). For the BMS, 
MVM, and PUM models, there are no significant differences 
in predicted GMD due to a change in information.
Additionally, only PUM predicts that variability is 
higher for diagnostic inferences (Δ  = 3.90, t(812) = 6.73, 
p < 0.001,  BF10 > 1000). No difference between diagnostic 
and predictive GMD is predicted by BMS (t(812) =  − 0.89, 
p = 0.373,  BF10 = 0.119), MVM (t(812) =  − 1.30, p = 0.193, 
 BF10  = 0.267), and SEE (t (812) = 1.72, p = 0.086, 
 BF10 = 0.486), while BIM predicts that the GMD of pre-
dictive inferences is higher (t (812) = -3.08, p = 0.0021, 
 BF10 = 9.45).
Clearly, none of the models adequately captures the 
observed patterns of within-participant variability as 
indexed by GMD over inference types in this dataset. Note 
that as a summary statistic, the GMD is not well suited for 
capturing all (qualitative) aspects of participant’s response 
distributions. This is evidenced by the fact that the SEE 
model performs comparable to other models in predicting 
GMD while being clearly outperformed in terms of quantita-
tive fit (“Overall Model Fit” section). Accordingly, we now 
examine how well the models reproduced those response 
distributions.
Fig. 7  Posterior model prob-
abilities, based on BIC weights, 
for each participant. Darker 
colors mean that more guess 
parameters are estimated for 
that model. 0 parameter refers 
to no guessing, 1 parameter to 
a fixed amount of guessing for 
all inference types, 2 parameters 
refers to different guess propor-
tions per reasoning direction, 
3 parameters refers to different 
guess proportions per type of 
information provided, and 6 
parameters refers to a different 
guess proportion per infer-
ence type. The SEE model was 
excluded from this comparison 
since the posterior model prob-
ability of that particular model 
was 0 for all participants
Table 6  Overall differences between observed and predicted means 
and GMDs in percentage points. Predictions for each model are 
obtained by using BMA over the guess components. Standard errors 
are in brackets
BMS PUM BIM MVM SEE
Mean difference 5.481
(0.477)
5.128
(0.344)
6.045
(0.414)
5.344
(0.532)
5.304
(0.420)
GMD difference 5.581
(0.445)
5.880
(0.500)
6.780
(0.555)
5.851
(0.460)
4.804
(0.428)


--- Page 17 ---
178 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
Predicted Distributions
The model weighted response distributions of each base 
model together with the observed distributions are presented 
in Fig.  10. Note that because the predicted distributions are 
fitted with a single set of parameters, often only 1 or 2, for all 
6 inference types, an exact fit to the shape of the distribution 
cannot be expected. However, the successful models should 
be able to capture the qualitative patterns in responses iden-
tified in the introduction.
We now separately discuss how the predicted distribution 
of each fitted base model matches the empirical distribu-
tions. Nevertheless, note that there are some properties of the 
fitted distributions that hold for all models. First, all models 
correctly predict multimodal response distributions (pattern 
4). All predict two modes (except for the SEE model, which 
predicts three), with one mode near 50% (pattern 5a) and 
another near the normative response. Moreover, all models 
correctly predict the mode at 50% is larger for inconsistent 
versus incomplete versus consistent inferences (pattern 5b) 
and for diagnostic versus predictive inferences (pattern 5c).
SEE Model
The fit of the SEE model to the empirical distributions is 
presented in Fig.  10. Apart from the successes mentioned 
above, the SEE model fails to reproduce an important quali-
tative feature of the empirical distributions. In particular, in 
the empirical distributions the bulk of responses are con-
servative, that is, fall between the normative response and 
50% (pattern 1b), which is not predicted by the SEE model. 
Interestingly, SEE predicts a third mode of responses below 
50%, and in fact Fig. 10 reveals there are very small clusters 
of responses near 25% for some inferences (Fig.  10A, D, 
E, and F). This suggests that participants are occasionally 
misreading stimulus values, although the exact position of 
these clusters are not always where SEE predicts (Fig.  10A 
and F), this mismatch might be due to participants rounding 
their responses. We return to this observation in the “Discus-
sion” section.
PUM Model
Figure  10 reveals that, like the SEE, the PUM model fails 
to predict that the bulk of responses fall between the nor -
mative response and 50%. Instead, for predictive inferences 
(Fig.  10A, C, and E) the prediction is that the distribution 
of responses near the normative response are right-skewed. 
For the diagnostic inferences in Fig.  10B and D, the right-
most mode is greater than the normative response, unlike in 
the empirical distribution. In other words, the PUM predicts 
too many anti-conservative responses, that is, it fails to ade-
quately reproduce the lack of extreme responses (pattern 1c).
BIM Model
Figure  10 reveals that the BIM model correctly predicts 
responses between the normative response and 50%, 
although not for the predictive inconsistent inferences, where 
it predicts a distribution near the normative response that is 
Fig. 8  Predicted and observed mean responses per inference type. 
Bars represent mean responses and error bars their standard error. 
Crosses indicate mean predictions for each model, these are obtained 
by using BMA over the Guess Model predictions. Dotted horizontal 
lines indicate the normative response


--- Page 18 ---
179Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
too flat (Fig.  10E). Note that even when the BIM predicts 
conservative responses overall, it continues to overpredict 
the number of anti-conservative responses (e.g., Fig.  10C 
and D).
MVM Model
Figure  10 reveals that the MVM model correctly predicts 
conservative responses between the normative response and 
50% even for the predictive inconsistent inferences (unlike the 
BIM). Nevertheless, although it reproduces moderate conserv-
atism, it tends to, overestimate anti-conservative responses, 
similar to PUM and BIM (e.g., Fig. 10C, D, and E).
BMS Model
The fitted distributions of the BMS model (Fig. 10) are qual-
itatively very similar to those of the MVM. One difference 
is that for the predictive inconsistent inference, it correctly 
predicts that the mode near the normative response is con-
servative, but it predicts more conservative responses than 
observed (Fig.  10E). In addition, for some inferences, the 
number of extreme, anti-conservative responses incorrectly 
predicted by the BMS is larger than those predicted by the 
MVM (e.g., Fig.  10B, D, and E).
Taken together, the BMS and MVM perform best in terms 
of predicting these qualitative patterns in the distributions. 
While neither capture the distributions perfectly, the other 
models fare worse. This is in line with the posterior model 
weights (Fig.  7), which indicate that the BMS is the most 
likely model for the majority of participants, followed by 
a sizeable group best fit by the MVM. This indicates that 
the dominant source of variability is different for these 
two groups of participants, possibly due to using different 
strategies.
A question that arises from this is what differentiates 
these two participant groups in terms of their behavior. To 
investigate this, we separately plotted the distributions of 
responses of these two groups together with their best fitting 
model predictions (Fig.  11).
One property that distinguishes these groups is that par -
ticipants best fit by the MVM model are more conserva -
tive than those best fit by the BMS: the mode at 50% is 
higher, the second mode is closer to 50%, and there are fewer 
extreme responses, especially for the diagnostic consistent 
and incomplete inferences (Fig.  11B and D). However, 
although the MVM participants were more conservative and 
the BMS participants less so, we do not believe that these are 
intrinsic properties of the models, as the β prior parameter 
of the BMS can in principle yield any level of conservatism. 
That is, it is not conservatism that makes the MVM fit better 
for the MVM participants than the BMS, but rather that the 
variability of their responses is more characteristic of motor 
variability.
While we believe that the BMS and MVM provide rea-
sonable first-order approximations to the observed distri-
butions, we acknowledge the presence of some qualitative 
mispredictions. Both models overpredict the number of 
Fig. 9  Predicted and observed variability in responses (as indexed by 
Gini’s Mean Difference, GMD) per inference type. Crosses indicate 
mean GMD predictions for each model, these are obtained by using 
BMA over the Guess Model predictions. Bars represent the GMD of 
responses and error bars their standard error


--- Page 19 ---
180 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
anti-conservative responses. In particular, whereas their 
modal responses tend to be at or above the normative 
response (except for the BMS prediction for predictive 
inconsistent inferences), participants’ modal response 
tends to be below the normative response. This is especially 
apparent for the diagnostic consistent and incomplete infer-
ences (Fig.  11B and D). That is, whereas both models pre-
dict conservatism overall, they are not as conservative as 
participants. In the “Discussion” section, we will discuss 
whether participants’ rounding of responses might be one 
factor responsible for this misprediction.
Fitted Parameter Values
To validate the model fits and further investigate the differ-
ences between groups of participants, we also looked at the 
mean fitted parameter values for each model (Table  7). For 
the BMS, we find that the average chain length is within the 
range expected from the literature, albeit on the higher side 
(Davis & Rehder, 2020; Kolvoort et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 
2020). For β, we find a similar value as in a previous study 
(Kolvoort et al., 2023), suggesting that participants used a 
prior distribution of a shape close to the uniform distribution 
(β = 1), which reflects relatively weak conservatism. This 
finding is consistent with the lower rate of conservative 
responses predicted by the BMS fits (Fig.  10).
The parameters of the models that fit poorly are also of 
some interest. The SEE model estimates the probability of 
misreading stimulus values to be on average 11%, a result 
that potentially accounts for the small cluster of responses 
observed at 25%. Of course, this estimate should not be con-
sidered highly reliable given the poor fit of the SEE model. 
For the PUM, we find that the uncertainty was a lot higher 
for base rates than it was for the causal strengths. Base rates 
have a larger influence on diagnostic inferences, as CBN the-
ory stipulates that diagnostic reasoning requires the incor -
poration of the base rate probability of the cause. So, more 
uncertainty in base rates leads to more variable diagnostic 
inferences compared to predictive ones, which is what we 
observe in participants (pattern 3b) and the PUM predic-
tions (Fig.  9). This is also in line with previously argued 
claims that diagnostic inferences tend to be more difficult 
(Fernbach & Darlow, 2010; Fernbach et al., 2011). We find 
that the concentrations for the BIM model are lower than 
Fig. 10  Predicted and observed 
response distributions per infer-
ence type. The grey histograms 
represent participant responses. 
The colored lines are the 
predictions for each base model. 
These predictions are obtained 
by model averaging over the 
Guess Model predictions. Dot-
ted vertical lines indicate the 
normative response. Because 
the SEE model predicts substan-
tially more probability mass 
close to the normative response, 
the y-axis has been cut-off to 
allow for better comparison of 
the densities of the other models



--- Page 20 ---
181Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
for the MVM, which is also expected as the BIM stipulates 
the concentration to be higher for certain inferences than the 
fitted parameter (Table  3). Overall, these parameter values 
are consistent with the observed responses, which suggests 
that the models were implemented and fit correctly.
Guess Proportions
Lastly, we conducted an exploratory analysis of the Guess 
Model and the estimated guess proportions. While the Guess 
Model was not of primary interest, we provide a short analy-
sis as it can shed light on the necessity of implementing 
such a mechanism. We found that for 14 out of the 29 par -
ticipants, the best fitting model included at least one guess 
parameter (see shading in Fig.  7). This is evidence for the 
idea that the observed distributions of responses are due to 
multiple processes: a reasoning process and guessing. More-
over, multiple of the participants best fit by the BMS had 
nonzero guess parameters (Fig.  7), implying that the default 
response mechanism of the BMS cannot by itself account 
for the large spikes of responses at 50%.
To investigate whether guessing was affected by the 
type of inference, we computed model-weighted guess 
proportions for each participant (Fig.  12). We find an 
overall mean guess probability of 0.136 ( SE = 0.035) 
which is significantly above zero (t (28) = 3.94, p < 0.001, 
BF10 = 63.1) indicating that indeed participants guessed 
on a sizable number of trials. To test whether the direc-
tion of reasoning or the provided information affected the 
amount of guessing, we use a repeated measures ANOVA. 
There was a significant effect of reasoning direction (F (1, 
140) = 22.0, p < 0.001,  BF10 = 38.9), with participants 
guessing more on diagnostic trials (M  = 0.202, SE = 0.053) 
than on predictive trials ( M = 0.0703, SE = 0.029). This 
finding squares with previously reported claims that diag -
nostic inferences are experienced as more difficult (Fern-
bach & Darlow, 2010; Fernbach et al., 2011). Although 
Fig.  12 seems consistent with our prior expectation that 
more inconsistent information would lead to more guess-
ing, we observed some evidence against this effect (F (2, 
140) = 2.53, p = 0.083,  BF10 = 0.179).
Fig. 11  Predicted and observed 
response distributions per 
inference type separated for the 
participants that were best fit by 
either the BMS or MVM model 
(25 out of 29 participants). The 
red and green histograms repre-
sent the responses of partici-
pants best fit by the BMS and 
MVM models respectively. The 
red and green lines represent 
the model predictions for those 
groups of participants of the 
BMS and MVM models respec-
tively. These predictions are 
obtained by model averaging 
over the Guess Model predic-
tions. Dotted vertical lines 
indicate the normative response



--- Page 21 ---
182 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
Discussion
This study had two major aims. The first was to use a novel 
repeated-measures design that could establish the existence 
of meaningful within-participant variability, that is, variabil-
ity related to the process responsible for generating causal 
judgments. Having established such within-participant 
variability, our second goal was to disambiguate between 
theoretical accounts of causal reasoning. This was possible 
by capitalizing on our novel experimental setup and on the 
ability of relevant theoretical proposals to account for the 
within-participant variability. The following section reviews 
our new empirical findings and the implications those find-
ings have for models of causal reasoning. We close with a 
discussion of limitations of this work and suggestions for 
future research.
Empirical Findings
A main challenge for computational models that strive to 
explain variability in human performance in any task is 
to clearly distinguish between variability that arises from 
within- versus between-participant sources. Doing so is 
important because the cognitive mechanisms responsible for 
these sources can differ dramatically. Yet we also noted that 
a main experimental challenge to establishing the existence 
of meaningful within-subject variability in causal reasoning 
is obtaining independent measures, because, for example, a 
reasoner answering the same causal query repeatedly may 
feel obligated to respond with the same answer (thus yield-
ing an estimate of variability that is too low). We addressed 
this problem by presenting several variants of the same 
logically-equivalent causal inference, variants with surface 
properties that were unlikely to remind the reasoner of pre-
vious presentations. Specifically, the same logical inference 
was asked in different content domains, involving different 
variables that nevertheless played a symmetric role in the 
causal network, and asked participants to estimate either the 
presence and absence of a variable. This procedure resulted 
in each participants generating 20 estimates for the same 
inference, allowing us to study within-subject variability in 
causal reasoning.
This experiment established variability as a property of 
the responses of a single individual presented with multiple 
instances of the same causal inference. Moreover, it found 
that variability exhibits a number of important qualitative 
Table 7  Estimated mean parameters of base models for all participants. These parameter values are model-averaged using BMA over the Guess 
Model predictions. ‘Concentration’ is abbreviated as ‘Conc.’
BMS PUM MVM BIM SEE
Parameter Chain length β Conc. causal 
strengths
Conc. base rates Conc. Conc. Error 
prob.
Mean 70.30 1.218 29.74 347.5 15.07 5.711 0.1081
SD 54.8 1.32 62.6 1542 32.3 12.1 0.0854
Fig. 12  Bayesian Model-Aver-
aged estimates of the probability 
of guessing for each inference 
type. Error bars indicate the 
standard error



--- Page 22 ---
183Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
features. The magnitude of within-participant variability 
was lower for inferences with incomplete versus complete 
information and higher for diagnostic versus predictive infer-
ences. The response distributions were typically multimodal, 
often with one mode at 50%, and the tendency to respond 
at 50% seemed larger for diagnostic inferences vs. predic-
tive ones and for inconsistent inferences vs. consistent ones. 
Although variability in causal reasoning has been reported 
previously (Kolvoort et al., 2024; Rehder, 2018; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016), here we show that it can be used to distinguish 
between generative models of causal judgments.
We acknowledge that our repeated-measures methodol-
ogy may not be perfect. For example, it is conceivable that 
participants reason differently in different domains, per -
haps because they assume different causal model param-
eters (causal strengths, variable base rates) in each domain. 
Within each domain, it is also possible that participants 
would reason about one of the effect variables (in the domain 
of economics, a high level of retirement savings) differently 
than the other (small trade deficits). We attempted to elimi-
nate such differences by specifying causal model parameters 
that were the same across domain and effect variables, but of 
course we cannot be certain that all participants fully incor-
porated these parameters into their mental causal model. 
Nevertheless, post-hoc analyses revealing the absence of 
differences in participants’ causal inferences across content 
domains corroborates our assumption that inferences from 
the different domains could be treated equivalently. Overall, 
we believe that we largely succeeded in obtaining independ-
ent repeated measures and so provide a veridical estimate of 
within-participant response variability.
Model Evaluation
The BMS had by far the best quantitative fit to the data, 
being at least 1000 times more likely to account for the data 
than any of the other models. Recall that we considered 
numerous sources of within-participant response variability, 
including that participants sometimes misread the stimulus 
values (as codified by the SEE model), varied in the causal 
model parameters they used from trial to trial (PUM) or 
that variability arose from motor responses or general task 
noise (MVM). We also considered a model—the BIM—that, 
like the BMS, posits that variability emerges from stochasti-
cally sampling over the state space of the causal network. 
That the BMS emerged so decisively as the best model pro-
vides evidence that the specific stochastic sampling process 
it posits—MCMC sampling over causal states with biased 
starting points—is the dominant mechanism responsible for 
variability in causal reasoning.
This strong conclusion in favor of the BMS was some-
what moderated when the fits to individual participants were 
considered. Whereas the majority (59%) of participants were 
best fit by the BMS, a substantial minority (28%) were best 
fit by the MVM. Notably, every participant except one had 
a clear winning model, suggesting that people likely differ 
in terms of what process is the dominant source of their 
variability.
Despite the strong success of the BMS and to some extent 
the MVM, it was clear that neither they nor any of the other 
models captured all the qualitative empirical patterns. 
Table  8 summarizes which of the main empirical phenomena 
originally presented in Table  2 are accounted for by each of 
the models we tested.
One of the important features of causal reasoning we 
aimed to account for is conservatism, the tendency of peo-
ple to shift their response towards the middle of a response 
scale. Whereas all models predicted mean conservatism 
(pattern 1a) and usually the lack of extreme responses (pat-
tern 1c), only the BMS and MVM predicted the more subtle 
property that the bulk of the responses fell between the nor-
mative response and 50% (pattern 1b). Yet, comparison of 
the response distributions of these models with participants’ 
indicated that the models are not sufficiently conservative, as 
revealed, for example, by the fact that their modal responses 
were at or above the normative response whereas those of 
participants were below it (Fig.  10).
Another interesting aspect of the response distributions is 
the presence of small clusters of responses at 25%, clusters 
whose presence the SEE predicts but not always exactly at 
25%. One potential explanation for these mis-predictions 
is that participants “rounded” their responses, that is, they 
tended to funnel their responses into one of three response 
categories centered at 0.25, 0.50, or 0.75. For example, 
although the normative response to diagnostic consistent 
inferences was 0.94, examination of participants’ response 
distributions for this inference (Fig. 10B) reveals modes just 
below the normative response (perhaps reflecting conserva-
tism) and another near 0.75 (perhaps reflecting rounding). 
Previous work involving probability judgments have also 
suggested the possible involvement of rounding (e.g. Cos-
tello & Watts, 2014; Kleinjans & van Soest, 2014; Wallsten 
et al., 1993). We recommend that future research should 
aim to account for the location of modal responses, perhaps 
by incorporating rounding processes. Of course, a call for 
models to account for response means and modes as well as 
the bulk of the response distributions is another reminder 
that researchers should aim to account for entire response 
distributions.
The models were also unable to account for how within-
participant variability varied over the six inference types 
(patterns 3a and 3b). However, these patterns should perhaps 
be considered preliminary until they are replicated, because 
they emerged as a result of our novel repeated measures 
experimental design. But should they prove to be robust, we 
suspect that accounting for them will require allowing model 


--- Page 23 ---
184 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
parameters to vary over the inference types. For example, for 
the BMS one might assume that reasoners adopt a longer 
chain length (i.e. sample more) when presented with a seem-
ingly challenging inference in order to improve their accu-
racy (Zhu et al., 2020). One might consider allowing the 
parameters of the other models to vary (e.g., the probability 
of misreading the stimulus, the uncertainty regarding under-
lying causal parameters, etc.) although providing a psycho-
logical justification for why they would vary with inference 
type might be challenging.
Finally, a third important response pattern is that spikes 
of responses are present at 50%. Of all the base models, we 
considered only the BMS and the SEE models naturally pre-
dict these spikes, although all models did so when combined 
with one or more guessing parameters. When considering 
group level fits, all models—even the BMS and SEE—
yielded the best fit in the presence of guessing parameters. 
Moreover, when individual fits were considered, a substan-
tial minority of participants best fit by the two winning mod-
els—the BMS and MVM—were fit best with one or more 
guessing parameters. These results suggest that the spikes at 
50% are partly the result of guessing, a hypothesis suggested 
by multiple authors (Kolvoort et al., 2023, 2024; Rottman & 
Hastie, 2016). While the phenomenon of guessing may not 
be the primary focus of researchers investigating causal cog-
nition, it is nevertheless an important factor that needs to be 
considered. For example, our results demonstrated that par-
ticipants are more likely to guess on certain types of infer -
ences than others, which could introduce bias when analyz-
ing differences in mean responses between inference types. 
Therefore, it is important to take the effects of guessing or 
default responding into account when interpreting results 
and drawing conclusions from causal reasoning experiments.
Although they were not the main focus of this article, 
another important feature of these data were Markov viola-
tions (pattern 2). The BMS accurately predicted Markov vio-
lations, which is a significant advantage of this model over 
its competitors, given that such violations are a hallmark 
feature of human causal reasoning (Ali et al., 2011; Davis & 
Rehder, 2020; Mayrhofer & Waldmann, 2015; Park & Slo-
man, 2013, 2014; Rehder, 2014, 2018; Rehder & Waldmann, 
2017; Rottman & Hastie, 2014, 2016; Sloman & Lagnado, 
2015; M R Waldmann et al., 2008). Although the BIM also 
predicts the occurrence of Markov violations, it substantially 
overestimated their magnitude. Of course, it was expected 
that both models would predict Markov violations, given 
that both were explicitly designed to do so (Davis & Rehder, 
2020; Rottman & Hastie, 2016). However, the BIM’s sig -
nificant mis-prediction of Markov violations here provides 
additional evidence that its sampling procedure is not an 
accurate model of how humans generate causal judgments 
(and why they commit Markov violations).
In summary, taking together both the quantitative fit to 
the data and the models’ ability to predict qualitative pat-
terns of interest (Palminteri et al., 2017 ), we find that the 
BMS outperforms the other models, suggesting that the sto-
chastic sampling process it embodies is a good candidate for 
how people generate causal judgments. However, that the 
BMS alone cannot explain all facets of the data suggests that 
doing so may require combining it with other models. We 
found that a sizeable minority of participants were best fit by 
variants of BMS that incorporated guessing. It might also be 
necessary to combine the BMS with a rounding process to 
Table 8  Qualitative patterns and model predictions
Qualitative patterns Predictions
BMS MVM PUM BIM SEE
1a. Mean conservatism ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
1b. ‘moderate’ conservatism ✓ ✓ X ✓, but not for all X
1c. Extreme responses are rare (mostly just for consistent 
inferences)
✓, except for 
two infer-
ences
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
2. Markov violations ✓ X X ✓, but too strong X
3a. Within-participant variability is lower for incomplete 
information
X X X ✓ X
3b. Within-participant variability is higher for diagnostic 
inferences
X X ✓ X X
4. Multi-modal response distributions ✓ ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓, 3 modes
5a. Spikes at 50% ✓ ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓
5b. Spikes at 50% increase with inconsistency of informa-
tion provided
✓ ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses X, not strictly 
for diagnostic 
inferences
5c. spikes at 50% are larger for diagnostic inferences ✓ ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓, by guesses ✓


--- Page 24 ---
185Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
account for the cluster of responses at 75%. And, it might be 
necessary to assume both rounding and that stimulus values 
are occasionally misread to account for the small cluster of 
responses at 25%. Lastly, even though the BMS outperforms 
the MVM, it is reasonable to assume that motor noise plays 
some role even if causal judgments are generated using the 
sampling procedure posited by the BMS, and so it might be 
necessary to combine the BMS and MVM to capture the 
behavior of all participants.
Limitations and Future Research
The most obvious limitation regarding our conclusions 
regarding within-subject variability is that they are largely 
based on a single experiment, the results of our novel 
repeated measures experimental design. Although our 
findings show that it is possible to model the distribution 
of raw responses (see also Kolvoort et al., 2023), more 
repeated-measures studies are needed to validate the pat-
terns of within-participant variability we observed. This 
would also allow to determine if those patterns generalize 
to alternative experimental conditions, and how they can be 
best accounted for in terms of competing generative models. 
For example, because the current study was limited to only 
six inference types and a single causal structure (a three-
variable common cause network) with one set of causal 
strengths and base rates, future research should strive to 
characterize within-subject variability for other inference 
types and causal networks. Similarly, while the materials 
we used have been validated in previous studies (Rehder, 
2014, 2018; Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Rehder & Waldmann, 
2017), the generalizability of our findings should be tested 
using a variety of materials (e.g. using different descriptions 
of causal networks, variables, and relationships). Moreover, 
because causal cognition underpins a myriad of judgments 
in other domains, such as categorization, moral judgments, 
interventions, and learning (Sloman & Lagnado, 2015), 
efforts should be made to assess whether our conclusions 
generalize to these other judgment types as well. Indeed, the 
Mutation Sampler, the model of which the BMS is a gener-
alization, has already been shown to extend to categorization 
and intervention studies (Davis & Rehder, 2020), and we 
assume this property is inherited by the BMS.
Another type of important generalization relates to 
response scales, the format in which participants are asked 
to provide a causal judgment. We and others (e.g., O’Neill 
et al., 2022) have argued that people’s causal beliefs are 
graded (and all studies using a Likert scale, probability, or 
percentage format implicitly endorse this position), but the 
mapping of such graded causal beliefs to gradation on a 
response scale is unlikely to be one-to-one. Exactly how 
beliefs map onto a probability (or percentage) scale is still an 
open question. Some studies have partially avoided this issue 
by fitting a scaling parameter to map responses to a 100-
point probability scale (e.g. Davis & Rehder, 2020) or using 
alternative response formats such as frequency (‘the number 
of instances out of 20’, e.g. Rottman & Hastie, 2016), Likert 
scales (e.g. Icard et al., 2017), or having participants choose 
the most likely causal network state out of two states (e.g. 
Rehder, 2014). However, none of these options completely 
avoid the issue of response mapping. One way forward 
would be to test competing theories on multiple response 
formats that, while labor intensive, could provide valuable 
evidence for competing explanations that is to some degree 
independent of response format.
The aforementioned experimental extensions would 
allow the candidate theories to be tested on a richer and 
more varied set of data, allowing for stronger inferences. 
Both the current study and a previous one we conducted 
(Kolvoort et al., 2023) focused on full response distribu-
tions and we believe that the fact that those analyses were 
able to so clearly identify a winning model adds credence 
to the view that variability in causal judgments can be used 
disambiguate between theoretical accounts of causal rea-
soning. Other studies have focused on additional dependent 
variables, including response times (Kolvoort et al., 2024; 
Rehder, 2014) and confidence judgments (Kolvoort et al., 
2024; O’Neill et al., 2022). We believe that the BMS is well 
positioned to potentially account for these other measures as 
well (e.g., its chain length parameter can be directly related 
to response times, Kolvoort et al., 2023). But more generally, 
we view the use of a broader set of dependent variables as an 
important positive development for the field.
Incorporating more data, however, comes with addi-
tional modeling challenges. The simulation-based modeling 
approach we developed and used here can be extended to 
incorporate more data sources as well as more (combina -
tions of) models, including ones without a known analytic 
form. In the current study we were limited by computational 
resources, which prohibited the inclusion of more param-
eter values as well as more combinations of models. Future 
increases in computational resources will help with this and 
so will new developments in model fitting and evaluation. 
One promising technique for studying generative models is 
that of using amortized inference combined with deep neu-
ral networks (Fengler & Frank, 2020; Radev et al., 2020, 
2022). Amortized inference refers to the process of sepa-
rating inference and training such that the inference costs 
are minimized. We applied such a technique here by first 
constructing a pre-paid grid with all the model predictions 
(Mestdagh et al., 2019), after which computing maximum 
likelihoods (i.e. inference) was very fast. Amortized infer -
ence allows for re-use, i.e. other researchers can use our 
grid to fit the candidate models here to datasets from similar 
experiments. Instead of simulating a grid filled with model 
predictions, recent approaches train a neural network to learn 


--- Page 25 ---
186 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
the mapping between model parameters and predictions. 
Implementations of this method are now becoming avail-
able (e.g. the BayesFlow package for R; Radev et al., 2022) 
and will allow researchers to pool computational resources 
to fit a variety of generative models.
Conclusion
Past research into causal reasoning has shown that a variety 
of computational models can account for different patterns in 
average causal judgments (e.g. Mistry et al., 2018; Rehder, 
2014, 2018; Rottman & Hastie, 2016). There are numer -
ous combinations of these models that could account for 
all the patterns in average judgments, which puts the field 
in position from which it is hard to come to a satisfactorily 
account of causal reasoning as there are too many possible 
model combinations (Rottman & Hastie, 2016). The current 
research aimed to make progress on this problem by looking 
at whether we can use the variability in causal judgment to 
disambiguate between theoretical accounts of causal reason-
ing and identify the source of this variability. That is, we 
considered the variability in causal judgments as something 
to be explained and not to be averaged out.
Our findings suggest that the sampling procedure pro-
posed by the BMS is a substantial source of variability in 
probabilistic causal judgments. In addition, our analysis 
indicates it is important to incorporate ‘non-reasoning’ pro-
cesses into models of causal reasoning, such as guessing and 
rounding, to improve the ability to capture human response 
data.
Overall, our study highlights the potential of computa-
tional modeling to illuminate the underlying mechanisms 
of human causal reasoning, and points to new avenues 
for experimental and modeling research that could lead 
to a more comprehensive understanding of this form of 
cognition.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42113- 024- 00223-7.
Author Contribution Ivar Kolvoort: Conceptualization; Investigation; 
Software; Formal analysis; Methodology; Writing—Original draft; 
Writing—Review & editing. Zachary Davis: Conceptualization; 
Investigation; Software; Methodology Bob Rehder: Conceptualiza-
tion; Methodology; Writing—Review & editing. Leendert van Maanen: 
Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing—Review & editing.
Funding This work was supported by an Interdisciplinary Doctoral 
Agreement grant awarded to Leendert van Maanen by the University 
of Amsterdam.
Data Availability The data is publicly available at https:// osf. io/ dpwg6/
Code Availability Code is available on request to the authors.
Declarations 
Ethics Approval The study was approved by the local ethics committee 
of the University of Amsterdam (nr. 2019-PML-10019).
Consent to Participate Informed consent was obtained from all indi-
vidual participants included in the study.
Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Ali, N., Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (2011). The mental representation 
of causal conditional reasoning: Mental models or causal models. 
Cognition, 119(3), 403–418. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cogni tion. 
2011. 02. 005
Bogacz, R., Wagenmakers, E. J., Forstmann, B. U., & Nieuwenhuis, S. 
(2010). The neural basis of the speed-accuracy tradeoff. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 33(1), 10–16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tins. 2009. 
09. 002
Costello, F., & Watts, P. (2014). Surprisingly rational: Probability the-
ory plus noise explains biases in judgment. Psychological Review, 
121(3), 463–480. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ a0037 010
Danks, D. (2014). Unifying the mind: Cognitive representations as 
graphical models. MIT Press.
Dasgupta, I., & Gershman, S. J. (2021). Memory as a computational 
resource. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(3), 240–251.
David, H. A. (1968). Gini’s mean difference rediscovered. Biometrika, 
55(3), 573–575.
Davis, Z. J., & Rehder, B. (2017). The causal sampler: A sampling 
approach to causal representation, reasoning and learning. CogSci, 
2017, 1–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jgrd. 50244
Davis, Z. J., & Rehder, B. (2020). A process model of causal reason-
ing. Cognitive Science, 44(5), 1–41. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ cogs. 
12839
Fengler, A., & Frank, M. J. (2020). Encoder-decoder neural architec-
tures for fast amortized inference of cognitive process models. In 
S. Denison, M. Mack, Y. Xu, & B. Armstrong (Eds.), Proceedings 
of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 42), 
(pp. 1859–1865). Cognitive Science Society.
Fernbach, P. M., & Darlow, A. (2010). Causal conditional reasoning 
and conditional likelihood. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1, 1088–1093.
Fernbach, P. M., Darlow, A., & Sloman, S. A. (2011). Asymmetries 
in predictive and diagnostic reasoning. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 140(2), 168–185. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 
a0022 100
Hastings, W. K. (1970). Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov 
chains and their applications. Biometrika, 57(1), 97–109.


--- Page 26 ---
187Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188 
Hinne, M., Gronau, Q. F., van den Bergh, D., & Wagenmakers, E. J. 
(2020). A conceptual introduction to bayesian model averaging. 
Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science,  
3(2), 200–215. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 25152 45919 898657
Hoeting, J. A., Madigan, D., Raftery, A. E., & Volinsky, C. T. (1999). 
Bayesian model averaging: A tutorial. Statistical Science, 14(4), 
382–401. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1214/ ss/ 10092 12519
Holmes, W. R. (2015). A practical guide to the Probability Density 
Approximation (PDA) with improved implementation and error 
characterization. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 68–69, 
13–24. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jmp. 2015. 08. 006
Icard, T. F., Kominsky, J. F., & Knobe, J. (2017). Normality and 
actual causal strength. Cognition, 161, 80–93. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1016/j. cogni tion. 2017. 01. 010
Johnson, N. L., Kotz, S., & Balakrishnan, N. (1995). Continuous 
univariate distributions, (Vol. 2). John Wiley & Sons.
Jones, M. C., Marron, J. S., & Sheather, S. J. (1996). A brief survey 
of bandwidth selection for density estimation. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, 91(433), 401–407.
Katsimpokis, D., Hawkins, G. E., & van Maanen, L. (2020). Not 
all speed-accuracy trade-off manipulations have the same psy -
chological effect. Computational Brain and Behavior, 3(3), 
252–268. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42113- 020- 00074-y
Kleinjans, K. J., & van Soest, A. (2014). Rounding, focal point 
answers, and nonresponse to subjective probability questions. 
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29, 567–585. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1002/ jae
Kolvoort, I. R., Temme, N., & Van Maanen, L. (2023). The Bayes-
ian Mutation Sampler explains distributions of causal judgments. 
Open Mind, 7, 318–349. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ opmi_a_ 00080
Kolvoort, I. R., Fisher, E., Van Rooij, R., Schulz, K., & Van Maanen, 
L. (2024). Probabilistic causal reasoning under time pressure. 
PLoS ONE, 19(4), e0297011. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. 
pone. 02970 11
Levin, D. A., & Peres, Y. (2017). Markov chains and mixing times. 
American Mathematical Society.
Lin, Y.-S., Heathcote, A., & Holmes, W. R. (2019). Parallel probability 
density approximation. Behavior Research Methods,  51, 2777–
2799. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/ s13428- 018- 1153-1
Maaß, S. C., De Jong, J., Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2021). 
Conceptually plausible Bayesian inference in interval timing. 
Royal Society Open Science, 8(8), 201844. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1098/ RSOS. 201844
Mann, H. B., & Whitney, D. R. (1957). On a test of whether one of 
two random variables is stochastically larger than the other. The 
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 18(1), 50–60.
Mayrhofer, R., & Waldmann, M. R. (2015). Agents and causes: Dispo-
sitional intuitions as a guide to causal structure. Cognitive Science, 
39(1), 65–95. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ cogs. 12132
Mestdagh, M., Verdonck, S., Meers, K., Loossens, T., & Tuerlinckx, 
F. (2019). Prepaid parameter estimation without likelihoods. In 
PLoS Computational Biology, 15(9), 1007181. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1371/ journ al. pcbi. 10071 81
Mistry, P. K., Pothos, E. M., Vandekerckhove, J., & Trueblood, J. S. 
(2018). A quantum probability account of individual differences in 
causal reasoning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 87, 76–97. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jmp. 2018. 09. 003
Morey, R. D., & Rouder, J. N. (2014). BayesFactor package for R  
(0.9.12–4.3). https:// cran.r- proje ct. org/ web/ packa ges/ Bayes Fac-
tor/ index. html
Müller, H., & Sternad, D. (2004). Decomposition of Variability in the 
Execution of Goal-Oriented Tasks: Three Components of Skill 
Improvement. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Per-
ception and Performance, 30(1), 212–233. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1037/ 0096- 1523. 30.1. 212
O’Neill, K., Henne, P., Bello, P., Pearson, J., & De Brigard, F. 
(2022). Confidence and gradation in causal judgment. Cogni-
tion, 223, 105036. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/J. COGNI TION. 2022. 
105036
Palminteri, S., Wyart, V., & Koechlin, E. (2017). The importance 
of falsification in computational cognitive modeling. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 21(6), 425–433. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
tics. 2017. 03. 011
Park, J., & Sloman, S. A. (2013). Mechanistic beliefs determine 
adherence to the markov property in causal reasoning. Cogni-
tive Psychology, 67(4), 186–216. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cogps 
ych. 2013. 09. 002
Park, J., & Sloman, S. A. (2014). Causal explanation in the face of 
contradiction. Memory and Cognition, 42(5), 806–820. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 3758/ s13421- 013- 0389-3
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Phillips, L. D., & Edwards, W. (1966). Conservatism in a simple 
probability inference task. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  
72(3), 346–354. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ h0023 653
Radev, S. T., Mertens, U. K., Voss, A., Ardizzone, L., & Kothe, U. 
(2022). BayesFlow: Learning complex stochastic models with 
invertible neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works and Learning Systems, 33(4), 1452–1466. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1109/ TNNLS. 2020. 30423 95
Radev, S. T., Wieschen, E. M., & Voss, A. (2020). Amortized Bayes-
ian inference for models of cognition. ArXiv Preprint. arXiv:  
2005. 03899 v3
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological 
Review, 85(2), 59–108. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0033- 295X.  
85.2. 59
Ratcliff, R., Thapar, A., & McKoon, G. (2006). Aging and individual 
differences in rapid two-choice decisions. Psychonomic Bulletin 
& Review, 13(4), 626–635. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/ BF031 93973
Ratcliff, R., Smith, P. L., Brown, S. D., & McKoon, G. (2016). Dif-
fusion decision model: Current issues and history. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(4), 260–281. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
tics. 2016. 01. 007
Rehder, B. (2014). Independence and dependence in human causal 
reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 72, 54–107. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1016/j. cogps ych. 2014. 02. 002
Rehder, B. (2018). Beyond Markov: Accounting for independence 
violations in causal reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 103(Janu-
ary), 42–84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cogps ych. 2018. 01. 003
Rehder, B., & Davis, Z. J. (2021). Testing a process model of causal 
reasoning with inhibitory causal links. Proceedings of the 
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 43, 43.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and catego-
ries: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization, induction, 
and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,  
130(3), 323–360. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0096- 3445. 130.3. 323
Rehder, B., & Waldmann, M. R. (2017). Failures of explaining away 
and screening off in described versus experienced causal learn-
ing scenarios. Memory and Cognition,  45(2), 245–260. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 3758/ s13421- 016- 0662-3
Rottman, B. M., & Hastie, R. (2014). Reasoning about causal rela-
tionships: Inferences on causal networks. Psychological Bul-
letin, 140(1), 109–139. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ a0031 903
Rottman, B. M., & Hastie, R. (2016). Do people reason rationally 
about causally related events? Markov violations, weak infer -
ences, and failures of explaining away. Cognitive Psychology,  
87, 88–134. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cogps ych. 2016. 05. 002
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the Dimensions of a Model. The 
Annals of Statistics, 6(2), 461–464.
Sheather, S. J., & Jones, M. C. (1991). A reliable data-based band-
width selection method for kernel density estimation. Journal 
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological),  


--- Page 27 ---
188 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:162–188
53(3), 683–690. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/J. 2517- 6161. 1991.  
TB018 57.X
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think about the 
world and its alternatives. Oxford University Press.
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. (2015). Causality in thought. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 66, 223–247. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ 
annur ev- psych- 010814- 015135
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2000). Causation, Predic-
tion, and Search. MIT Press.
Tešić, M., Liefgreen, A., & Lagnado, D. (2020). The propensity 
interpretation of probability and diagnostic split in explaining 
away. Cognitive Psychology, 121, 101293. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1016/j. cogps ych. 2020. 101293
Trueblood, J. S., Yearsley, J. M., & Pothos, E. M. (2017). A quantum 
probability framework for human probabilistic inference. Jour -
nal of Experimental Psychology: General, 146(9), 1307–1341. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ xge00 00326
Turner, B. M., & Sederberg, P. B. (2014). A generalized, likeli-
hood-free method for posterior estimation. Psychonomic Bul-
letin and Review, 21(2), 227–250. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/  
s13423- 013- 0530-0
van Doorn, J., Ly, A., Marsman, M., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2020). 
Bayesian rank-based hypothesis testing for the rank sum test, 
the signed rank test, and Spearman’s ρ. Journal of Applied Sta-
tistics, 47(16), 2984–3006. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 02664 763. 
2019. 17090 53
Van Maanen, L., Brown, S. D., Eichele, T., Wagenmakers, E.-J., Ho, 
T., Serences, J., & Forstmann, B. U. (2011). Neural correlates of 
trial-to-trial fluctuations in response caution. Journal of Neuro-
science, 31(48), 17488–17495. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1523/ JNEUR 
OSCI. 2924- 11. 2011
van Ravenzwaaij, D., Brown, S. D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2011). 
An integrated perspective on the relation between response 
speed and intelligence. Cognition, 119(3), 381–393. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cogni tion. 2011. 02. 002
van Ravenzwaaij, D., Cassey, P., & Brown, S. D. (2018). A simple 
introduction to Markov Chain Monte-Carlo sampling. Psycho-
nomic Bulletin and Review, 25(1), 143–154. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3758/ s13423- 016- 1015-8
Verdonck, S., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2013). Factoring out non-decision 
time in choice RT data: Theory and implications. Psychological 
Review, 128(2), 203.
Wagenmakers, E. J., & Farrell, S. (2004). AIC model selection 
using Akaike weights. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(1), 
192–196.
Waldmann, M. R., Cheng, P. W., Hagmayer, Y., & Blaisdell, A. P. 
(2008). Causal learning in rats and humans: A minimal rational 
model. In N. Chater & M. Oaksford (Eds.), The probabilistic 
mind. Prospects for Bayesian cognitive science (pp. 453–484). 
Oxford University Press.
Waldmann, M. R. (Ed.) (2017). The Oxford handbook of causal rea-
soning. Oxford University Press.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V., & Zwick, R. (1993). Comparing the 
calibration and coherence of numerical and verbal probability 
judgments. Management Science,  39(2), 176–190. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1287/ mnsc. 39.2. 176
Yitzhaki, S. (2003). Gini’s mean difference: A superior measure of 
variability for non-normal distributions. Metron, 61(2), 285–
316. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2139/ ssrn. 301740
Zhu, J. Q., Sanborn, A. N., & Chater, N. (2020). The Bayesian sam-
pler: Generic Bayesian inference causes incoherence in human 
probability judgments. Psychological Review, 127(5), 719. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ rev00 00190
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
