--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL PAPER
Perceptual Decision-Making in Children: Age-Related Differences
and EEG Correlates
Catherine Manning1 & Eric-Jan Wagenmakers2 & Anthony M. Norcia 3 & Gaia Scerif1 & Udo Boehm 2
# The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Children make faster and more accurate decisions about perceptual information as they get older, but it is unclear how different
aspects of the decision-making process change with age. Here, we used hierarchical Bayesian diffusion models to decompose
performance in a perceptual task into separate processing components, testing age-related differences in model parameters and
links to neural data. We collected behavioural and EEG data from 96 6- to 12-year-old children and 20 adults completing a
motion discrimination task. We used a component decomposition technique to identify two response-locked EEG components
with ramping activity preceding the response in children and adults: one with activity that was maximal over centro-parietal
electrodes and one that was maximal over occipital electrodes. Younger children had lower drift rates (reduced sensitivity), wider
boundary separation (increased response caution) and longer non-decision times than older children and adults. Yet, model
comparisons suggested that the best model of children’s data included age effects only on drift rate and boundary separation (not
non-decision time). Next, we extracted the slope of ramping activity in our EEG components and covaried these with drift rate.
The slopes of both EEG components related positively to drift rate, but the best model with EEG covariates included only the
centro-parietal component. By decomposing performance into distinct components and relating them to neural markers, diffusion
models have the potential to identify the reasons why children with developmental conditions perform differently to typically
developing children and to uncover processing differences inapparent in the response time and accuracy data alone.
Keywords Diffusion model . Decision-making . Perceptual development . Motion processing . Electroencephalography
Introduction
Children make better decisions about sensory information as
they get older. They become able to detect weaker stimuli and
make more subtle discriminations between stimuli across a
range of tasks. For example, in the visual domain, sensitivity
increases during childhood for spatial contrast (Bradley and
Freeman 1982; Ellemberg et al. 1999), global motion (Gunn
et al. 2002; Hayward et al. 2011; Hadad et al. 2011; Manning
et al. 2014), biological motion (Hadad et al. 2011), speed
(Manning et al. 2012) and face information (Bruce et al.
2000;M o n d l o c he ta l .2003). Studies of perceptual develop-
ment typically focus on the accuracy of responses, by defining
sensitivity as the stimulus level or stimulus contrast required
to sustain performance at a certain level of correct responding
(e.g. an 80% correct threshold). Meanwhile, the time taken to
respond is not taken into account. This approach fails to make
use of all of the available data and means that results could be
contaminated by age-related differences in speed-accuracy
tradeoffs (Ho et al. 2012;W i c k e l g r e n1977).
Here, we analysed both accuracy and response time data
using a simplified 4-parameter version of the diffusion model
(Ratcliff and Rouder 1998; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008;S t o n e
1960), which decomposes performance into separate process-
ing components. According to this model, the time taken to
respond to sensory information consists of non-decision pro-
cesses (including sensory encoding and action generation) and
a decision process. The time taken for non-decision processes
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-020-00087-7) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
* Catherine Manning
catherine.manning@psy.ox.ac.uk
1 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
2 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-020-00087-7
Published online: 19 June 2020
Computational Brain & Behavior (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 2 ---
is combined into a single estimate of non-decision time ( τ).
The decision process is modelled as a stochastic process in
which noisy sensory information is accumulated towards one
of two decision bounds corresponding to different responses
(Fig. 1). In a direction discrimination task, the bounds could
correspond to ‘up’ and ‘down’ responses, for example. The
drift rate reflects the within-trial average rate of evidence ac-
cumulation (δ)( F i g .1), which is determined by the quality of
sensory evidence (e.g. higher drift rates will be obtained if
there is a higher signal-to-noise ratio in a stimulus) and the
observer’s sensitivity to a given stimulus. The distance be-
tween the decision bounds reflects the criterion for responding
(i.e. how much evidence is required to trigger a response).
Wider decision bounds indicate increased response caution,
whereas narrow decision bounds indicate increased urgency.
If the starting point of the decisional process ( β)( F i g .1)i s
closer to one decision bound than the other, this indicates
response bias. Individuals can differ in their drift rates, deci-
sion bounds, biases and non-decision time (as well as in the
variability of these parameters, when fitting the full model).
Therefore, diffusion modelling allows better identification of
the sources of difference between individuals or groups than
when comparing accuracy or response times alone, while also
accounting for potential speed-accuracy tradeoffs (White et al.
2010).
When applied to cross-sectional studies of visual de-
velopment, the diffusion model allows the nature of age-
related differences to be i nvestigated more carefully.
Specifically, it is possible to address whether young chil-
dren show reduced sensitivity to visual information due to
a slower rate of accumulation of sensory evidence, while
controlling for differences in criterion setting (decision
bounds) and non-decisional processes (Wagenmakers
et al. 2007; White et al. 2010). An additional benefit of
this modelling approach is that the resulting processing
components are likely to correspond more directly to neu-
ral mechanisms than accuracy or response time measures
(White et al. 2016;F o r s t m a n ne ta l .2016), thus potential-
ly facilitating links between neural and behavioural data
on visual development.
Diffusion models have not yet been routinely applied to
understanding perceptual development in children —perhaps
because these models typically require many trials. Ratcliff
et al. ( 2012) successfully fitted diffusion models to data ob-
tained in numerosity discrimination and lexical decision tasks
in children and adolescents aged 8 to 16 years, across 1200
trials. Young people were less accurate and had longer re-
sponse times than adult participants. Diffusion modelling
showed that these behavioural changes were accounted for
by age-related differences in multiple model parameters.
Young people had lower drift rates than adults, meaning that
they extracted information from the stimulus more slowly.
They also had wider response bounds and increased non-
decision time than adults, as well as increased variability in
non-decision time. This pattern of results was qualitatively
different from one related to ageing: while older adults also
showed wider decision bounds and longer non-decision times
compared to younger adults, they did not differ in their drift
rates (Ratcliff et al. 2004).
Recent methodological advances mean that diffusion
models can now be fit using fewer trials. Hierarchical
approaches make efficient use of the statistical structure
available across participants and conditions, so that infor-
mation at the group level informs estimates for individual
participants (Vandekerckhove et al. 2011;W i e c k ie ta l .
2013). When compared with models which fit parameters
for each individual separately, hierarchical diffusion
models perform well, particularly when trial numbers are
low (Ratcliff and Childers 2015). Therefore, hierarchical
models have clear advantages for assessing young chil-
dren, for whom extensive trial numbers cannot be obtain-
ed. Indeed, they have been used to assess the performance
of children as young as 3 years old in language processing
tasks, with as few as 30 trials (Nordmeyer et al. 2016
;
Schneider and Frank 2016). These findings suggest that
young children have shallower drift rates, higher bound-
ary separation and longer non-decision times than adult
participants, in line with the findings of Ratcliff et al.
(2012).
Within hierarchical models, it is also possible to investigate
relationships between model parameters and neurophysiolog-
ical measures from techniques such as electroencephalogra-
phy (EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and eye tracking (e.g. Cassey et al. 2014, 2016;T u r n e re ta l .
2013, 2015, 2017). The inclusion of such measures in the
Fig. 1 Representation of the decision-making process in the diffusion
model. Noisy diffusion process originating from a starting point and
approaching one of two decision bounds corresponding to ‘up’ and
‘down’ motion. The drift rate (δ) reflects the rate of evidence accumula-
tion towards the decision bounds. The boundary separation (α) represents
the distance between the two decision bounds, with greater separation
suggesting increased response caution. Starting point ( β) reflects bias
towards one of the two decision bounds (here, β is 0.5; i.e. the starting
point is equidistant between the two bounds)
54 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 3 ---
model helps to inform the neural correlates of parameters and
bridge brain and behavioural data (Ratcliff and McKoon
2008;T u r n e re ta l .2016). While there are a range of ways in
which neural and behavioural data can be combined (see
Turner et al. 2016 for review), in this study, we used a regres-
sion approach in which the slope of the model parameter (e.g.
drift rate) is weighted by the value of the neurophysiological
measure (Boehm et al. 2017). Establishing such links is im-
portant to ensure that the parameters of the diffusion model are
psychologically meaningful rather than merely abstract con-
cepts. EEG is a particularly useful tool in this context for two
reasons. First, it has a fine-grained temporal resolution that
allows distinct components of the decision-making process
to be disentangled (Kelly and O ’Connell 2015). Second,
EEG provides a global view of brain function which comple-
ments current understandings of decision-related activity be-
ing represented broadly across the brain (Dmochowski and
Norcia 2015;K a t ze ta l .2016;M u l d e re ta l .2014).
The current study aims to increase our understanding of
perceptual decision-making across childhood, using hierar-
chical diffusion models with both behavioural and electro-
physiological data. To our knowledge, this is the first study
to combine behavioural and electrophysiological measures
in diffusion models in children, and will enable new in-
sights into the mechanisms of perceptual development. A
motion coherence task was used, for three reasons. First,
this task is commonly used in decision-making studies, by
virtue of the ease in which the strength of dynamic sensory
evidence can be manipulated by varying coherence and the
relatively long response times elicited (Gold and Shadlen
2007; Kelly and O ’Connell 2015). Second, these tasks have
been previously used with ch ildren and have been shown to
be sensitive to developmental change throughout childhood
(Gunn et al. 2002; Hayward et al. 2011; Hadad et al. 2011;
Manning et al. 2014). Third, much research has been con-
ducted into the electrophysiol ogical correlates of diffusion
model parameters using this task (e.g. Dmochowski and
Norcia 2015;K e l l ya n dO’Connell 2013).
Initially, the motion coherence task was used to investigate
single-cell activity related to the decision process in monkeys.
The ramping up of activity in cells in lateral intraparietal cor-
tex (LIP) tracks the accumulation of sensory evidence, with
steeper ramping activity and higher levels of activity at the end
of the stimulus period being associated with higher levels of
motion coherence (Shadlen and Newsome 1996, 2001). Cells
in the medial temporal (MT) cortex are also activated during
the motion coherence task (Shadlen and Newsome 2001), but
the firing of these cells most likely reflects momentary evi-
dence, which is then integrated in LIP to reflect the drift rate
(Hanks et al. 2006). Evidence accumulation activity has also
been demonstrated in another parietal area, the medial
intraparietal (MIP) area, when monkeys are required to make
their response by reaching (de Lafuente et al. 2015).
Electrophysiological correlates of decision-making pro-
cesses have also been investigated in human observers during
motion coherence tasks, using EEG. Kelly and O ’Connell
(2013) reported that the centro-parietal positivity (CPP)
reflected evidence accumulation, with higher rates of build-
up when the motion coherence was high. Using a subtly dif-
ferent motion processing task in which the strength of sensory
evidence was manipulated by increasing the amount of vari-
ability in dot directions, Dmochowski and Norcia (2015)i d e n -
tified a CPP-like component using reliable components anal-
ysis (Dmochowski et al. 2012, 2014). Like the CPP, this com-
ponent was maximal over the medial parietal cortex and evi-
dence-dependent, with steeper ramping activity in trials with
more sensory evidence (i.e. easier trials) and with ramping
activity correlating with response time. The authors identified
two further components with ramping activity which were
relevant to the decision-making process. These adult studies
suggest candidate neural correlates of diffusion model param-
eters for our study with children.
Research Aims
The aim of the current study was to characterise age-related
changes in diffusion model parameters. We expected drift
rates to increase with age, in line with previous reports of
age-related increases in sensitivity to visual motion across
childhood measured using psychophysical thresholds.
Previous studies applying diffusion models to children’sp e r -
formance in numerosity discrimination, lexical decision and
linguistic comprehension tasks have shown that children have
higher boundary separation and longer non-decision times
than adults, in conjunction with lower drift rates (Nordmeyer
et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al. 2012; Schneider and Frank 2016).
Here, we assess whether these findings generalise to our visual
motion processing task. We also investigate age-related dif-
ferences in neural correlates using high-density EEG. Based
on adult studies, we expected to see ramping activity in
centro-parietal electrodes, reflecting the rate of evidence accu-
mulation. We aimed to directly assess this relationship by
linking model parameters to electrophysiological measures
using a Bayesian regression approach (Boehm et al. 2017).
Methods
Participants
We analysed the data from 96 children (44 females) aged 6 to
12 years ( M = 9.25 years, SD = 2.05 years) and 20 adults (9
females) aged between 19 and 35 years ( M = 27.65 years,
SD = 5.43 years), with no history of developmental conditions
and normal or corrected-to-normal vision (assessed with a
Snellen chart). Two additional child participants were
55Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 4 ---
excluded as they gave reverse responses to motion direction,
responding substantially below chance, resulting in negative
drift rates. Four further child participants were removed as
only 3.7%, 39.0%, 53.6% and 55.9% of their data survived
data cleaning using the exponential weighted moving average
method (see below), suggesting that they were making a high
proportion of fast guesses. Our analysis used the same dataset
that has been analysed previously in a study focusing on chil-
dren’s electrophysiological responses locked to the onset of
coherent motion (Manning et al.2019). The data are available
in a figshare collection (Manning et al. 2020).
Apparatus
The task was presented on a Dell Precision M3800 laptop
(2048 × 152 pixels, 60 Hz) using the Psychophysics
Toolbox for MATLAB (Brainard 1997 ; Kleiner et al.
2007;P e l l i1997). EEG signals were collected with 128-
channel HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Nets connected to Net
Amps 300 (Electrical Geodesics, Inc., OR, USA), using
NetStation 4.5 software. A photodiode attached to the mon-
itor independently verified stimulus presentation timing.
Participants responded using a Cedrus RB-540 response
box (Cedrus, CA, USA).
Stimuli
We presented random-dot stimuli comprised of 100 white dots
(diameter 0.19°) moving within a square aperture (10° × 10°)
against a black screen. The dots moved at a speed of 6°/s and
had a limited lifetime of 200 ms. A red, square-shaped fixation
point (0.24° × 0.24°) was presented throughout the trial. Each
trial consisted of a fixation period, a boil period, a stimulus
period and an offset period (see Fig. 2). The fixation period
had a randomly selected duration between 800 and 1000 ms.
The boil period presented the stimulus dots moving in ran-
dom, incoherent directions, for a randomly selected duration
between 800 and 1000 ms. The boil period ensured that
pattern-evoked and motion-onset-evoked potentials did not
overlap temporally with the onset of evidence (directional,
coherent motion) required for the perceptual decision. In the
stimulus period, we introduced coherent motion (either up-
ward or downward) in a proportion of dots, while the remain-
der of the dots continued to move in random directions. The
stimulus period was presented until a response was made, or
until 2500 ms had elapsed. Finally, the offset period continued
the stimulus presentation for a randomly selected duration
between 200 and 400 ms, which served to dissociate
response-locked EEG activity from that associated with stim-
ulus offset.
Experimental Task Procedure
The task was presented in the context of a child-friendly game
set in ‘Insectland’. Using animations, it was explained to par-
ticipants that the fireflies were escaping from their viewing
boxes, and that the zookeeper needed their help to know
whether the fireflies were escaping out through the top or
the bottom of the boxes, so that he could fix them and ‘save’
the fireflies. Participants were told that there were 10 different
viewing boxes, corresponding to 10 different ‘levels’ of the
game. Level 1 was a practice phase to familiarise participants
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of trial procedure. Afixation period was
followed by a boil period consisting of random, incoherent motion. The
stimulus appeared containing coherent motion, and the participant was
required to report the direction (up, down) using a response box. The
stimulus period lasted until a response was made, or until 2500 ms
elapsed. Coherent motion remained on the screen for an offset period.
The durations of the fixation, boil and offset periods were jittered
within a fixed range to minimise expectancy effects. N.b. arrows
(indicating movement) and dotted lines (marking the square aperture)
are presented for illustrative purposes, only (figure reproduced from
Manning et al. 2019)
56 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 5 ---
with the task demands. Initially, four demonstration trials
were presented with no boil phase and an unlimited stimulus
phase, which the experimenter used to explain the task to
participants. Participants were told to report the direction
using the ‘up’ and ‘down’ arrow keys on the response box.
Half of the participants were instructed to use their left hand
on the ‘up’ key and their right hand on the ‘down’ key, and
vice versa for the other participants. The first two demonstra-
tion trials moved with 100% coherence, and the last two
moved with 75% and 50% coherence, respectively, to explain
to participants that sometimes not all of the fireflies would
escape, so in this case, they would have to say where most
of the fireflies were going.
Following the demonstration trials, there were up to 20
criterion trials with a coherence of 95%. These trials intro-
duced the boil phase. It was explained to participants that
the fireflies would be going ‘all over the place’ at first, so that
they must wait for the fireflies to escape before responding. A
time limit was enforced at this point, with visual feedback
presented on the screen if participants did not respond within
2500 ms ( ‘Timeout! Try to be quicker next time! ’,p r e s e n t e d
in red text). When participants met a criterion of four consec-
utive correct responses, no more criterion trials were present-
ed. Next, there were eight practice trials of increasing difficul-
ty (80%, 70%, 60%, 50%, 40%, 30%, 20%, 10%).
Participants were reassured that it was fine if they got some
of these wrong and/or if they had to guess. Visual feedback
was presented after each trial throughout level 1 ( ‘That was
correct!’, presented in green text, or ‘It was the other way that
time’ or ‘Timeout! Try to be quicker next time!’, presented in
red text). For 10 children, level 1 was repeated as they did not
meet the criterion of four consecutive correct responses on the
first attempt.
Levels 2–10 each contained 36 trials, with 4 repetitions of
each of four coherence levels (10%, 30%, 50%, 75%), for
each coherent direction (upward, downward), and an addition-
al 4 catch trials presenting 100% coherent motion. Thus, the
experimental phase consisted of 324 trials in total. The order
of trials within each block was randomised. No trial-by-trial
feedback was presented during the experimental phase, apart
from a ‘timeout’ message (as before) if no response was pro-
vided within 2500 ms of the stimulus period. At the end of
each level, participants were presented with their ‘points’ for
the preceding block of trials. Participants were told that they
would get points for both going fast and getting as many right
as possible. The points reflected an efficiency score, computed
by 1 / median response time × accuracy, rounded to the nearest
integer. In the event that participants obtained an efficiency
score under 10, a score of 10 points was given to avoid
demotivation. Trials were presented automatically, although
the experimenter had controls to pause and resume trial pre-
sentation (see below). The experimental code can be found at
https://osf.io/fkjt6/.
General Procedure
The procedure was approved by the Central University
Research Ethics Committee at the University of Oxford.
Adult participants and parents of child participants provided
written informed consent, and children provided verbal or
written assent. Participants initially completed a Snellen acu-
ity test to confirm normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The
sensor net was then placed on the participant, and the exper-
imenters ensured that elect rode impedances were below
50 k Ω. EEG data were acquired at a sampling rate of
500 Hz with a vertex reference electrode. During the experi-
mental task, participants sat 80 cm away from the computer
screen in a darkened room. Children were closely monitored
by an experimenter sitting beside them. The experimenter
provided general encouragement and task reminders, pausing
before the start of a trial where necessary (e.g. to remind the
child to keep still). Children had short breaks at the end of
each block (or ‘level’) of the experimental task, and a longer
break halfway through the experimental task (i.e. at the end of
‘level 5’), at which point the EEG recording was paused and
electrode impedances were re-assessed. Note that for two chil-
dren, impedance checks were completed at the end of level 4
or level 6, as appropriate. Children marked their progress
through the levels using a stamper on a record card. The whole
session took no longer than 1.5 h. Adult participants were paid
£15, and children were given a £5 gift voucher to thank them
for their time.
Data Screening
First, we removed the catch trials (with 100% coherence),
because (a) they were fewer in number than the experimental
trials and (b) some participants performed less accurately in
these trials than the trials in the 75% coherence condition,
suggesting that they were using a different strategy in the
catch trials. We also removed trials in which no response
was made within 2500 ms. Preliminary analysis revealed that
data from the hardest (10% coherence) condition were not
well fit by a standard diffusion model (see posterior
predictive fits in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2 ), which
could be due to a series of explanations, such as deadline
effects, temporal uncertainty about the stimulus and lack of
confidence. Therefore, we decided to exclude the data from
this condition and to continue the analysis with three condi-
tions (30%, 50% and 75% coherence).
We used the exponential weighted moving average method
to filter out fast guesses (Vandekerckhove and Tuerlinckx
2007; Nunez et al. 2017). This method involved sorting each
participant’s trials (across all 3 conditions) by response time
and then determining the shortest response time at which the
participant was responding at above-chance accuracy (i.e.
when the response times deviated from a ‘control’ process
57Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 6 ---
governed by chance performance). This was achieved by
computing the EWMA statistic (c) for each sorted trial ( s)
cs ¼ λxs þ 1−λðÞ cs−1 ð1Þ
where xs was the response accuracy of trial s,a n d λ was a
weight parameter determining how many of the preceding
trials were used, which we set to 0.1. For each sorted trial,
the upper control limit (UCL) of the process was computed
UCL
s ¼ c0 þ Lσ0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
λ
2−λ 1− 1−λðÞ 2s
hir
ð2Þ
where c0 and σ0 were the mean and standard deviation of the
control process, respectively. We set c0 to 0.5 (reflecting the
50% accuracy expected in the control state) and σ0 was 0.5
(following the properties of a Bernoulli distribution). L was
the width of the control limits in standard deviations, which
we set to 1.5. We then compared UCL s with cs.W h e ncs was
greater than UCLs, it suggested that the probability of giving a
correct response was significantly above chance (> 0.5) for
trial s. Trials with response times shorter than trial s were
excluded from analysis. Participants with < 60% of data
retained were removed from the dataset (4 children). Of the
retained participants, an average of 89.7% of trials (range
71.0–95.4%) was retained for the child participants and
94.1% of trials (range 88.4–95.4%) were retained for the adult
participants.
Diffusion Modelling
We coded ‘up’ responses as hitting the upper boundary and
‘down’ responses as hitting the lower boundary (see Fig. 1),
with the match between the stimulus direction and response
reflecting response accuracy. Choice and response time data
were combined into a bivariate vector y. According to the 4-
parameter diffusion model, the data y are generated by a pro-
cess with the following parameters: drift rate (δ), starting point
bias (β), boundary separation ( α ) and non-decision time ( τ).
The diffusion coefficient was set to 1 (Wabersich and
Vandekerckhove 2014). Note that we used this 4-parameter
version of the diffusion model rather than the full diffusion
model as between-trial variability parameters are difficult to
identify, particularly with few trials (Boehm et al. 2018;
Lerche and Voss 2017;R a t c l i f fa n dC h i l d e r s2015). We sam-
pled from the joint posterior distribution using Just Another
Gibbs Sampler (JAGS; Plummer 2003) with the Wiener dif-
fusion distribution (Wabersich and Vandekerckhove 2014),
interfaced with R using the R2jags package (Su and Yajima
2015).
We first fit a hierarchical model to the behavioural data for
the children and adults separately (model 1). A graphical rep-
resentation of model 1 is provided in Fig. 3. The data y
pci for
each participant (p), each condition (c) and each trial ( i)w e r e
assumed to be distributed according to the diffusion model ’s
first passage time distribution
ypci∼Wiener α p; βp; τp; δpc
/C0/C1
ð3Þ
where boundary separation (α ), starting point (β) and non-
decision time (τ) were assumed to vary across participants but
assumed to be constant across conditions. As drift rate is
known to vary as a function of motion coherence (Kelly and
O’Connell 2013; Ratcliff and McKoon 2008), drift rate ( δ)
was allowed to vary both across participants and conditions.
We adopted the objective Bayesian regression framework
s u g g e s t e db yL i a n ge ta l .(2008 ) (see also Rouder and
Morey 2012 ) and its extension to ANOVA models by
Rouder et al. ( 2012) to account for fixed condition effects
and random participant effects. Specifically, we modelled
the fixed effect of experimental condition on drift rate by
imposing the sum-to-one constraint suggested by Rouder
et al. ( 2012) on the standardised effect sizes ( θ
(n))( n =1 , 2 ) .
That is, the drift rate for participantp in condition c was drawn
from a truncated normal distribution (constraining drift rate to
be positive) with a mean determined by the population mean
(μ
δ) and the standardised effect sizes (θ1 and θ2) and standard
deviation (σε)( s e eF i g .3). We modelled the variation between
participants as random effects on boundary separation,
starting point and non-decision time, where the model param-
eter for participant p was drawn from a truncated normal dis-
tribution with meanμ
α/β/τ and standard deviationσα/β/τ. These
group-level distributions for the model parameters were trun-
cated to ensure plausibility. The normal distribution on bound-
ary separation (α ) was truncated between 0.2 and 4, the dis-
tribution on starting point bias ( β) was truncated between
0.001 and 0.999, the distribution on non-decision time ( τ)
was truncated between 0.1 and 2 and the normal distribution
on drift rates for each experimental condition (δ
c) was truncat-
ed between 0 and 8. Priors for the group-level means (μα, μβ,
μδ, μτ) and variances ( σα
2, σβ
2, στ
2) were informative priors
based on Matzke and Wagenmakers’ (2009)s u r v e yo fp a r a m -
eter values estimated in earlier studies.
We fit further models in which we assessed the relationship
between model parameters and age and EEG covariates.
Following the Bayesian regression framework for cognitive
models suggested by Boehm et al. ( 2017 ), we used z-
standardised age and EEG covariates and specified mixture of
g-priors for the regression weights (Liang et al.2008; Consonni
et al. 2018). In each model, we added a regression term involv-
ing a covariate or set of covariates to the fixed effects model for
drift rate. Model comparisons were based on the deviance in-
formation criterion (DIC) (Spiegelhalter et al.2002), with pref-
erence given to models with lower values.
For each model, we sampled from the posterior distri-
bution using 3 parallel chains each with 54,000 samples
58 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 7 ---
and a burn-in period of 4000 samples which were later
discarded. We also thinned each chain to save memory
space, retaining only every fifth sample, which resulted
in 10,000 retained samples per chain (i.e. 30,000 samples
in total). Starting values for all parameter values were
drawn from uniform distribut ions that were adjusted to
the range of admissible parameter values. The model files
and analysis scripts can be found at https://doi.org/10.
6084/m9.figshare.c.5006684 .
EEG Data Pre-Processing
The data were pre-processed as described in Manning et al.
(2019; for pre-processing scripts, see https://osf.io/fkjt6/ ).
Briefly, the data were epoched into trials, and the data from
each trial were median-corrected for DC offsets. We plot-
ted a histogram of the absolute amplitude of each partici-
pant’s data across samples and electrodes and identified
outliers as those exceeding the 97.5th percentile. We re-
moved electrodes from a half-session (before and after the
break when impedances were checked) if they contained ≥
15% samples exceeding the 97.5th percentile and replaced
them with an average of the nearest 6 neighbouring elec-
trodes (or the nearest 4 neighbours for electrodes on the
net’s perimeter). We then regressed out horizontal and ver-
tical electrooculogram (EOG) from each electrode. We
then replotted histograms of the absolute amplitude for
each individual and recalculated the 97.5th percentile,
and we removed electrodes for each trial in which ≥ 15%
of samples exceeded this cut-off. Next, we removed tran-
sients (samples that were four or more standard deviations
away from the electrode ’s mean) and replaced these with
missing values. The data were converted to the average
reference and baselined to the average of the last 100 ms
of the boil period. In trials where data were removed from
19 or more ( ≥ 15%) electrodes, we excluded the EEG data
completely.
EEG Analysis
As in Manning et al. (2019), we used a dimensionality reduc-
tion technique —reliable components analysis (RCA)
(Dmochowski et al. 2012, 2014; Dmochowski and Norcia
2015)—to identify components that maximised spatiotempo-
ral trial-to-trial reliability. These components are sets of elec-
trode weights that can be projected through a forward-model
projection to visualise components as scalp topographies
(Haufe et al. 2014; Parra et al. 2005). Data projected through
these weights can be averaged for each timepoint to provide a
time course for the component. Unlike traditional event-
related potential analysis, this approach identifies topographic
regions of interest using the whole electrode array in a data-
driven fashion, while increasing the signal-to-noise ratio as
each component represents a weighted average of electrodes.
To extract response-locked reliable components, we first re-
epoched the trial data to select the 600 ms preceding the re-
sponse to 200 ms after the response. We then submitted these
response-locked data to RCA for the children and adults sep-
arately, to get two sets of weights. Initial analyses revealed no
lateralised components, so we analysed the data for left- and
right-handed responses together.
Extracting EEG Covariates
The first two response-locked components extracted by RCA
shared similar topographies for children and adults, with com-
ponent 1 being maximal over centro-parietal electrodes and
component 2 being maximal over occipital electrodes (Fig.4).
These components together explained 76% of the total trial-
by-trial reliability in adults (63% for component 1, alone) and
61% of the total trial-by-trial reliability in children (45% for
component 1, alone). These components were similar to the
response-locked components reported in adult participants by
Dmochowski and Norcia ( 2015), with ramping activity
Fig. 3 Graphical representation
of model 1
59Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 8 ---
preceding the response in both components. As shown in
Fig. 4, this ramping activity was shallower in children than
in adults.
The gradient of ramping activity in similar components
has been related to drift rates, with steeper slopes
reflecting higher drift rates (Dmochowski and Norcia
2015; Kelly and O ’Connell 2013). Therefore, we aimed
to extract the gradient by fitting a regression line to each
participant ’s averaged activity for each component, within
a given regression window, which could then be entered
as a covariate relating to drift rate in the model. As can be
seen in the grand average waveform (Fig. 4), the onset of
the ramping activity in component 1 was not well-defined
and the peak was relatively broad (particularly for chil-
dren), so we used a multi-stage process to select regres-
sion windows appropriate for the child and adult groups.
First, we identified the peak from the grand average
waveform for children and adults separately using the
mid-latency procedure (Picton et al. 2000 ). For each
group, we calculated the 90% peak amplitude and found
the latencies corresponding to this 90% amplitude either
side of the peak, and then averaged them to find the mid-
latency. The mid-latency was used to define the end of the
regression window. Next, we found the 30% amplitude of
this mid-latency amplitude in the grand average waveform
to define the start of the regression window. The resulting
regression windows for component 1 were between − 398
and − 52 ms for children and between − 9 4a n d3 2m sf o r
adults.
For component 2, the grand average waveforms were
characterised by a negative peak followed by a positive
peak close to the response (Fig. 4). We therefore defined
the regression window as the period between these two
peaks. To select these peaks, we identified the maximum
positive amplitudes and maximum negative amplitudes in
the grand average waveforms between − 600 and 100 ms
(as there were larger peaks from ~ 100 ms after the re-
sponse). We used the mid-latency procedure for both
peaks, averaging across the latencies corresponding to
the 90% amplitude of each peak. The mid-latency for
the negative peak was taken as the start of the regression
window, and the mid-latency for the positive peak was
taken as the end of the regression window. The resulting
regression windows for component 2 were between − 226
and − 8 ms for children and between − 132 and 30 ms for
adults. Linear regression lines were then fit to each par-
ticipant’s average waveform within the corresponding re-
gression windows for components 1 and 2, and the slope
values were entered as covariates in the diffusion model
(see Table 1).
Results
Age-Related Differences in Accuracy and Response
Time
There were age-related differences in accuracy and response
time, as shown in Fig.5, with older children and adults having
faster median response times and higher accuracies than youn-
ger children. Overall, the mean of median response times in
the child group was 0.934 s (95% CI = [0.877, 0.991]) and the
mean accuracy was 0.874 (95% CI = [0.869, 0.879]), whereas
the adults had a faster mean of median response times
(0.618 s, 95% CI = [0.609, 0.627]) and higher accuracy levels
(M = 0.963, 95% CI = [0.957, 0.968]).
Fig. 4 Scalp topographies and
component grand average
waveforms for response-locked
reliable components 1 and 2.
Topographic visualisations of the
forward-model projections of
components 1 and 2 (upper panel)
reflecting the weights given to
each electrode following RCA for
children and adult participants
(upper panels). The grand average
waveforms (lower panel) show
the data multiplied by these spa-
tial weights, for children (red) and
adults (black). Shaded error bars
represent the standard error of the
mean
60 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 9 ---
Differences in Model Parameters Between Children
and Adults
All chains for all models converged well, as indicated by
Gelman-Rubin diagnostic values (Gelman and Rubin 1992)
close to 1 (range = 0.999–1.028). Posterior predictives for the
basic model without covariates (model 1, Fig.3) are presented
in Supplementary Figures S3 and S4, and posterior predictive
plots for all other models can be found at https://doi.org/10.
6084/m9.figshare.c.5006684 . To validate our sampling
method, we also obtained converging parameter estimates
for model 1 using Stan with the RStan package (Stan
Development Team 2018; Supplementary Figures S5 and
S6). While the model fitted the data for most participants in
both groups well, the fit to the children ’s data ( Figure S3 )
shows some underestimation of the range of accuracy and
RT in some quantiles. The group mean posteriors for each
of the diffusion model parameters are presented in Fig. 6.
Figure 7 shows estimates for drift rate (for each condition),
boundary separation and non-decision time for each partici-
pant, as a function of age. These figures together show that
adults and older children tend to have higher drift rates,
narrower boundary separation and reduced non-decision time,
compared to younger children. Starting point values were
close to 0.5 (i.e. the starting point was roughly equidistant
between the two bounds; see Fig. 6), which was expected as
the direction of stimuli was counterbalanced. We expected
starting point estimates to vary slightly between individuals
(reflecting biases towards upward or downward stimuli), but
we had no reason to suspect that they would vary systemati-
cally with age. Therefore, we did not investigate age-related
differences in this parameter.
Age-related Differences in Model Parameters in
Children
To quantify age-related differences, we added age as a
covariate relating to differe nt model parameters in a series
of models for the children ’sd a t a( s e eT a b l e1). Note that
we do not present these models for adults, as no age-
related effects were expected in these participants.
However, the corresponding model results for adults can
be found at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.
5006684 . In model 2, we covaried age with drift rate,
boundary separation and non-decision time. There was a
positive standardised regression coefficient (posterior M =
0.45, posterior SD = 0.05) for drift rate, and smaller, neg-
ative coefficients for each of boundary separation (poste-
rior M = − 0.10, SD = 0.03) and non-decision time (poste-
rior M = − 0.10, SD = 0.02). This model had a lower DIC
value (13,854.3) than model 1 (13,862.0), showing that
the addition of age was justified by the gain in model fit.
However, we then compared model 2 with other
models which had age relating only to a subset of these
parameters. We did not run any models without age co-
varying onto drift rate, as drift rate had the largest regres-
sion coefficient with age in model 2. DIC favoured model
2 (13,854.3) over a model which had age covarying only
with drift rate (model 3, DIC = 13,863.8) and a model
which had age covarying with drift rate and non-
decision time (model 5, DIC = 13,861.9). Indeed, models
3 and 5 had similar DIC values to the model without
covariates (model 1), suggesting that in these cases, the
increase in model complexity associated with the addition
of age was not justified by the gain in model fit. However,
the model with the lowest DIC value was a model which
had age covarying with drift rate and boundary separation
(model 4, DIC = 13,851.1). Although model 4 was close
to model 2 in terms of DIC (a difference of 3.2), model 4
had a lower DIC value and fewer predictors compared to
model 2, suggesting that model 4 was the best model.
Table 1 Model comparison statistics
Model Covariates DIC ( Δ DIC)
Children Adults
Basic model with no covariates
Model 1 None 13,862.0 (10.9) − 3641.6 (0.9)
Models assessing age-related effects
Model 2 δ:a g e
α:a g e
τ:a g e
13,854.3 (3.2)
Model 3 δ: age 13,863.8 (12.7)
Model 4 δ:a g e
α:a g e
13,851.1 (0)
Model 5 δ:a g e
τ:a g e
13,861.9 (10.8)
Models assessing EEG correlates
Model 6 δ: EEG1 13,863.1 (12) − 3635.6 (6.9)
Model 7 δ: EEG2 13,855.9 (4.8) − 3642.5 (0)
Model 8 δ: EEG1, EEG2 13,857.3 (6.2) − 3636.8 (5.7)
Models assessing both age and EEG effects
Model 9 δ: age, EEG1, EEG2 13,875.9 (24.8)
Model 10 δ: age, EEG1, EEG2
α:a g e
13,863.5 (12.4)
Model 11 δ: age, EEG1
α:a g e
13,866.2 (15.1)
Model 12 δ: age, EEG2
α:a g e
13,857.1 (6)
Values in brackets are the difference in DIC values ( Δ DIC) from the
model with the lowest DIC value (model 4 for the children and model 7
for the adults). Models including age as a covariate are not presented for
adults as no age-related effects were expected in these participants. δ =
drift rate; α = boundary separation;τ = non-decision time; EEG1 = slope
of EEG reliable component 1; EEG2 = slope of EEG reliable component
2
DIC deviance information criterion
61Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 10 ---
Fig. 6 Group mean posteriors for
diffusion model parameters (drift
rate (δ), boundary separation (α ),
non-decision time (τ) and starting
point (β)) for children (red) and
adults (black)
Fig. 5 Accuracy and median response times for participants as a function of age
62 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 11 ---
Accordingly, our model comparisons suggested that age
has effects on drift rate and boundary separation (but not
non-decision time), with older children having higher drift
rates (coefficient posterior M = 0.45, posterior SD = 0.05)
and narrower boundary separations (coefficient posterior
M = − 0.10, posterior SD = 0.03) than younger children.
EEG Correlates of Model Parameters
To investigate links between model parameters and EEG
measures, we used each participant ’s reliable component
slope values as covariates relating to drift rate in models 6
to 8, for adults and children. In model 6, we entered the
slope values from component 1 as a covariate relating to
drift rate. In both children and adults, slope values were
positively related to drift rate values (children: coefficient
posterior M = 0.43, SD = 0.05; adults: coefficient posterior
M = 0.47, SD = 0.12). In model 7, we entered the slope
values from component 2 as a covariate relating to drift
rate. Here, there was a much smaller, positive relationship
between slope values and drift r ates (children: coefficient
posterior M = 0.06, SD = 0.06; adults: coefficient posterior
M = 0.05, SD = 0.13). For both children and adults, this
model had a lower DIC value (children: DIC = 13,855.9;
adults: − 3642.5) than model 6 (children: DIC = 13,863.1;
adults: − 3635.6), suggesting that component 2 was the
best EEG predictor in both groups. In model 8, we en-
tered slope values from both components as covariates
relating to drift rate. The DIC values for model 8 (chil-
dren: DIC = 13,857.3; adults: DIC = − 3636.8) were
higher than those for model 7, with model 7 (including
component 2 only) being the model with the lowest DIC
among the models with EEG predictors for adult
participants (DIC = − 3642.5) and child participants
(DIC = 13,855.9).
In both groups, the model with the lowest DIC value
was model 7. However, the residual variance of the regres-
sion model on drift rate was actually higher for this model
(children: σ
2
res posterior M = 0.76; adults: σ2
res posterior
M = 0.81) than for model 6 (children: σ2
res posterior M =
0.56; adults: σ2
res posterior M = 0.60) or model 8 (children:
σ2
res posterior M = 0.56; adults: σ2
res posterior M =0 . 6 0 ) .
We suggest that the relatively small differences between
these models in DIC may not be fully reliable; as the com-
putation of DIC is based on posterior samples, sampling
variation can render small DIC differences unstable.
Instead, model 6 (with EEG component 1 only) appears
to provide the best account of the data for both groups.
Model 8 (which includes both EEG components) does
not lead to clear reductions in DIC, suggesting that the
inclusion of both EEG components as predictors for drift
rates does not convey a sufficient gain in predictive perfor-
mance to offset the added model complexity.
It is notable, however, that model 6 did not perform
better in terms of DIC than model 1 (without covariates)
in either children or adults. Therefore, our model compar-
ison results suggest that the increased model complexity
associated with the addition o f EEG covariates is not jus-
tified by the increases in model fit. For children, the best
performing model still appears to be model 4 (with age
effects on drift rate and boundary separation), suggesting
that age is a better predictor than EEG alone. In adults,
t h eb e s tp e r f o r m i n gm o d e la p p e a r st ob em o d e l1( w i t hn o
covariates), again suggesting that no benefit in predictive
accuracy is conferred by adding EEG into the model. This
lack of benefit in predictive accuracy could be due to
noise in the EEG measures (Hawkins et al. 2017).
Fig. 7 Diffusion model estimates
for each participant as a function
of age. Mean ± 1 SD of the
posterior distribution for each
participant’s drift rate, boundary
separation and non-decision time
parameters
63Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 12 ---
Combining Age and EEG Correlates
Having characterised the effects of age and EEG covariates on
model parameters separately, we next sought to determine
whether adding them into a model together would lead to
improvements in DIC compare dt oe n t e r i n ge i t h e ra l o n e .
Component 1 itself showed a positive relationship with age,
as shown in Fig. 8 (component 1: r = 0.30, 95% CI = [0.11,
0.48]), with older children generally having steeper slopes
than young children. In component 2, there was a much weak-
er positive relationship ( r = 0.09, 95% CI = [ − 0.11, 0.29]).
We ran four additional models for the children ’s data which
included both age and EEG covariates (models 9 –12). In
models 9 and 10, we added age covariates into our model with
two EEG covariates (model 8). In model 9, age covaried with
drift rate, as well as with both EEG slope measures (compo-
nents 1 and 2). In model 10, we also allowed age to covary
with boundary separation, along with the other covariates in
model 9. In models 11 and 12, we took the best model with
only age covariates (model 4) and added the EEG components
individually. Thus in model 11, the component 1 slope mea-
sure and age covaried with drift rate, and age covaried with
boundary separation. In model 12, we instead entered the
component 2 slope measure. Posterior distributions of the re-
gression coefficients for the most complex model, with four
covariates (model 10), are presented in Fig. 9.
Of these four models, the lowest DIC value was obtain-
ed for model 12 (DIC = 13,857.1), which had component 2
and age covarying with drift rate, and age covarying with
boundary separation. However, the best model for children
in terms of DIC was still a model which had only age
covariates (model 4). The residual variances for models 4
and 12 were almost equal (in both models, σ
2
res posterior
M = 0.54 for drift rate and σ2
res posterior M =0 . 0 5 f o r
boundary separation), suggesting that both models fit com-
parably well. Given the additional complexity in model 12
and the lower DIC values, it seems that model 4 is indeed
the best model of the children ’s data. Therefore, the benefit
of adding age and EEG measures together is not worth the
additional model complexity from the increased number of
parameters. It is possible that the measurement variance in
our EEG data means that information is not gained once
age is taken into account.
Fig. 8 Age-related differences in
slope values of EEG components
1a n d2i nt h ec h i l dg r o u p
Fig. 9 Posterior distributions of estimated standardised regression
coefficients from model 10 fit to children ’s data. Posterior distributions
of the four standardised regression coefficients in model 10: age, EEG
component 1 (EEG1) and EEG component 2 (EEG2) covarying with
drift-rate (δ), and age covarying with boundary separation (α). The thick
lines represent the median point estimate, and the shaded regions repre-
sent the 90% probability mass
64 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 13 ---
Discussion
In this study, we applied hierarchical Bayesian diffusion
models to decompose motion coherence response time
and accuracy data from children and adults into underly-
ing psychological processe s. We investigated relation-
ships between these processes (as quantified by model
parameters) and age and EEG measures. We looked at
age effects in two ways: first , through a parameter esti-
mation approach within a single model and then through a
model comparison approach. Our parameter estimation
approach suggested age-relate d differences in drift rate,
boundary separation and non-decision time. These effects
could be seen both when compari ng the posterior distri-
butions for adults and children and when considering the
children ’s parameter estimates as a function of age.
Younger children had lower drift rates than older children
and adults, meaning that they accumulated sensory evi-
dence at a reduced rate. Younger children also had wider
response boundaries than older children and adults,
reflecting increased response caution, and they had longer
non-decision times. These age-related differences echo the
findings of other studies which have compared adults and
children in quite different tasks (e.g. numerosity discrim-
ination, lexical decision and linguistic comprehension)
(Nordmeyer et al. 2016; Ratcliff et al. 2012; Schneider
and Frank 2016), suggesting that age-related changes in
diffusion model parameters generalise across tasks to
some extent.
Our model comparison approach suggested that the
best model of children ’s data (in terms of DIC) was a
model which had age effects only on drift rate and bound-
ary separation, and not on non-decision time. The results
of the model comparison approach therefore agree with
our parameter estimation approach for two key parameters
of the model (drift rate and boundary separation), showing
that the results for these parameters are robust.
Conversely, age effects on non-decision time are less
clear. The DIC value for the model with age effects on
all three parameters (drift rate, boundary separation and
non-decision time) was only marginally higher (3.2) than
the model with age effects only on two parameters (drift
rate and boundary separation). However, by giving pref-
erence to the model with the fewest parameters and the
lowest DIC value, it seems that age-related differences
related to the decision-making process are most important
for predicting children ’s behavioural responses in this
task, rather than age-related differences in processes con-
sidered to be outside of the decision-making process, such
as sensory encoding and response generation.
Importantly, our diffusion modelling approach uncovers
age-related differences in latent psychological processes that
are not evident when just considering accuracy and response
time data alone. Reduced drift rates and increased boundary
separation have similar effects on response time (making re-
sponses slower) but have opposing effects on accuracy (with
reduced drift rates leading to reduced accuracy and increased
boundary separation leading to increased accuracy). These
opposing processes are therefore undetectable when consider-
ing accuracy alone, and only become apparent when jointly
modelling accuracy and response time. Our study therefore
provides insights into the psychological processes involved
in children’s perceptual decision-making and how these vary
as a function of age.
Using a data-driven component decomposition technique,
reliable components analysis, we identified two response-
locked components that resembled a decision-making pro-
cess, in both adults and children. These components had
ramping activity preceding the response. The most reliable
component was maximal over centro-parietal electrodes, re-
sembling the centro-parietal positivity that has previously
been linked to drift rate (O ’Connell et al. 2012; Kelly and
O’Connell 2013). The second most reliable component was
instead maximal over occipital electrodes. The topographies
of these components were similar to the stimulus-locked com-
ponents identified using the same data by Manning et al.
(2019). The slope of ramping activity in both components
became steeper as a function of age. Importantly, age-related
differences in these slope values cannot be explained solely by
differences in skull conductivity with age (Hoekema et al.
2001;W e n d e le ta l .2010; see Scerif et al. 2006, for review).
The grand average waveforms of the children took a different
shape to those of the adults, with the children ’sc o m p o n e n t s
having a more protracted increasing positivity than the adults,
particularly in component 1. Instead, age-related differences
in skull conductivity would lead to a scaling factor being ap-
plied to the amplitudes across ages (and thus slopes appearing
steeper in the child participants).
In line with our intuitions that the slope of the ramping
activity in the components was related to the decision-
making process, we found that both EEG components covar-
ied with drift rate, with steeper slopes being linked to higher
drift rates. Our finding of two components being related to
drift rate is in line with Dmochowski and Norcia ’s( 2015)
conclusion that multiple drifting processes contribute to the
decision-making process. However, component 1 had a much
larger effect than component 2, in line with previous research
in adults linking the centro-parietal positivity to the drift rate
(O’Connell et al. 2012; Kelly and O ’Connell 2013). In the
adults, a model with just component 2 covarying with drift
rate had a lower DIC value than a model in which component
1 covaried with drift rate. However, the DIC values for these
two models were relatively similar, and the residual variance
was lowest for the model with component 1 covarying with
drift rate. Similarly, in children, the model with the lowest
DIC value among the models with EEG covariates was a
65Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 14 ---
model in which component 2 only covaried with drift rates,
but the residual variance was higher than a model with just
component 1 covarying with drift rate. We suggest that small
differences in DIC may have resulted from sampling variabil-
ity and note that DIC can be biased towards more complex
models in nested model comparison (Evans2019). In terms of
minimising residual variance and model complexity, we sug-
gest that a model with just component 1 covarying with drift
rate provides the best fitting model with EEG covariates, for
both groups.
Yet, according to our model comparisons, this model did
not perform as well as a model with only age effects for the
children and did not perform as well as a model without co-
variates for the adults. Therefore, it appears that the inclusion
of the EEG covariates added model complexity that was not
justified by the increase in model fit —perhaps as a result of
measurement variance in the EEG measures (see Hawkins
et al. 2017). However, the correlation between parameters
and neural data is nonetheless of interest. Indeed, in younger,
less able participants, overt responses may be harder to com-
pute, but EEG markers are still measurable. Moreover, when
studying individuals with different developmental conditions,
the EEG data may provide additional information that may
improve model fit.
As well as investigating the effects of age and EEG sepa-
rately, we also investigated whether the model could be im-
proved by including both age and EEG measures as covari-
ates. Our model comparisons suggested that the best-fitting
model for the children ’s data was still the model with just
age effects on drift rate and boundary separation. Together,
our results suggest that there is no incremental information in
the EEG data (once age is taken into account)—perhaps due to
measurement variance in our EEG data, which might offset
the gain in information above and beyond age.
Our modelling results suggest that more focus should be
given to decisional processes when investigating children ’s
responses to perceptual information. In a similar vein,
Braddick et al. ( 2016) reported that the surface area of
brain regions involved in accumulating sensory evidence
towards a decision bound were important for explaining
individual differences in children ’s coherent motion
thresholds. As we have established that boundary separa-
tion varies with age, it is important to control for speed-
accuracy tradeoffs when quantifying children ’s perceptual
sensitivity. Diffusion models, as used here, provide a way
of assessing whether sensitivity is immature in children
once accounting for differences in decision-making style.
Our results suggest that children ’s perceptual sensitivity
changes with age in this task ,e v e nw h e nc o n t r o l l i n gf o r
speed-accuracy tradeoffs. Such age-related changes in per-
ceptual sensitivity could reflect changes in averaging abil-
ity (Manning et al. 2014) and visual attention, including
the ability to suppress noise (see Nunez et al. 2015, 2017).
An open question is whether young children differ from
adults in the extent to which they can flexibly adjust their
boundary separation settings —for example in response to
instructions to emphasise either speed or accuracy (see
Mulder et al. 2010).
We note that our 4-parameter diffusion model did not
fit all children ’s data perfectly, with the model
underestimating the range of accuracy and RT in some
quantiles. This observation suggests that the diffusion
model may be a less adequate model of decision-making
for children than it is for adults, perhaps because children
have been shown to make more attentional lapses than
adults (Manning et al. 2018). Future work could explicitly
model the proportion of observations resulting from a
contaminant process (e.g. Dmochowski et al. 2012 ;
Nunez et al. 2019). Future work could also investigate
whether children ’s responses may be captured better by
models which incorporate urgency signals or collapsing
boundaries (Cisek et al. 2009 ; Chandrasekaran and
Hawkins 2019 ; Ditterich 2006 ; Hawkins et al. 2015 ).
While the diffusion model has been shown to explain
human adult ’s data better than the urgency-gating model,
at least in tasks where the evidence is kept constant
through a trial (Hawkins et al. 2015;E v a n se ta l . 2017),
we know of no work to have investigated this issue in
child participants.
Our study of typical development provides an important
benchmark for understanding performance in atypical de-
velopment. By decomposing p erformance into distinct
components, diffusion models have the potential to identi-
fy the reasons why children with various developmental
conditions perform differently to typically developing chil-
dren and to uncover differences in processing which are
not apparent in the response time and accuracy data alone
(White et al. 2010). Moreover, we have demonstrated that
diffusion model parameters can be linked to neural corre-
lates in typically developing children —an approach which
could be extended to understand the neural underpinnings
of atypical perceptual proc essing in those with develop-
mental conditions.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to the participants and families who
took part, the schools who kindly advertised the study, Irina Lepadatu and
the Oxford Babylab for their help with the recruitment and Suzi Laws and
Petra Ward who helped with the data collection. We thank Jacek
Dmochowski and Peter Kohler for their advice on the reliable compo-
nents analysis and Blair Kaneshiro and Vladimir Vildavski for their help
with the EEG pre-processing.
Funding information This project was funded by an Experimental
Psychology Society (UK) study visit and small grant to CM, and a
James S. McDonnell Foundation Understanding Human Cognition
Scholar Award to GS. CM was supported by a Scott Family Junior
Research Fellowship at University College, Oxford, and a Sir Henry
Wellcome Postdoctoral Fellowship (grant number 204685/Z/16/Z).
66 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 15 ---
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.
Ethics Approval This project was granted ethics approval from the
University of Oxford ’s Medical Sciences Inter-divisional Research
Ethics Committee (ref: R45543/RE001).
Consent to Participate Adult participants and parents of child partici-
pants provided written informed consent, and children provided verbal or
written assent.
Data Availability The pre-processed EEG datasets and diffusion model-
ling files generated and analysed during the current study are available in
the figshare repository: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5006684.
Code Availability Experimental code and pre-processing scripts for
EEG files are available at https://osf.io/fkjt6/ . Analysis scripts are
available at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5006684.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Boehm, et al. (2018). Estimating across-trial variability parameters of the
diffusion decision model: expert advice and recommendations.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 87,4 6–75.
Boehm, U., Steingroever, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2017). Using
Bayesian regression to test hypotheses about relationships between
parameters and covariates in cognitive models. Behavior Research
Methods, 50 , 1248 –1269. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-017-
0940-4.
Braddick, O., Atkinson, J., Newman, E., Akshoomoff, N., Kuperman, J.
M., Bartsch, H., Chen, C. H., Dale, A. M., & Jernigan, T. L. (2016).
Global visual motion sensitivity: associations with parietal area and
children ’s mathematical cognition. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 28(12), 1897–1908.
Bradley, A., & Freeman, R. D. (1982). Contrast sensitivity in children.
Vision Research, 22(8), 953–959.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10,
433–436.
Bruce, V., Campbell, R. N., Doherty-Sneddon, G., Langton, S., McAuley,
S., & Wright, R. (2000). Testing face processing skills in children.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 18(3), 319–333.
Cassey, P., Heathcote, A., & Brown, S. D. (2014). Brain and behavior in
decision-making.PLoS Computational Biology, 10(7), e1003700.
Cassey, P. J., Gaut, G., Steyvers, M., & Brown, S. D. (2016). A genera-
tive joint model for spike trains and saccades during perceptual
decision-making.Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23,1 7 5 7–1778.
Chandrasekaran, C., & Hawkins, G. E. (2019). ChaRTr: an R toolbox for
modelling choices and response times in decision-making tasks.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 328, 108432.
Cisek, P., Puskas, G. A., & El-Murr, S. (2009). Decisions in changing
conditions: the urgency-gating model. Journal of Neuroscience,
29(37), 11560–11571.
Consonni, G., Fouskakis, D., Liseo, B., & Ntzoufras, I. (2018). Prior
distributions for objective Bayesian analysis. Bayesian Analysis,
13(2), 627–679.
de Lafuente, V., Jazayeri, M., & Shadlen, M. N. (2015). Representation
of accumulating evidence for a decision in two parietal areas.
Journal of Neuroscience, 35(10), 4306–4318.
Ditterich, J. (2006). Evidence for time-variant decision making.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 24(12), 3628–3641.
Dmochowski, J. P., Bezdek, M. A., Abelson, B. P., Johnson, J. S.,
Schumacher, E. H., & Parra, L. C. (2014). Audience preferences
are predicted by temporal reliability of neural processing. Nature
Communications, 5, 4567.
Dmochowski, J. P., & Norcia, A. M. (2015). Cortical components of
reaction-time during perceptual decisions in humans. PLoS One,
10(11), e0143339.
Dmochowski, J. P., Sajda, P., Dias, J., & Parra, L. C. (2012). Correlated
components of ongoing EEG point to emotionally laden attention - a
possible marker of engagement?Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
6,1 1 2 .
Ellemberg, D., Lewis, T. L., Liu, C. H., & Maurer, D. (1999).
Development of spatial and temporal vision during childhood.
Vision Research, 39(14), 2325
–2333.
Evans, N. J. (2019). Assessing the practical differences between model
selection methods in inferences about choice response time tasks.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 26,1 0 7 0–1098.
Evans, N. J., Hawkins, G. E., Boehm, U., Wagenmakers, E. J., & Brown,
S. D. (2017). The computations that support simple decision-mak-
ing: a comparison between the diffusion and urgency-gating models.
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1–13.
Forstmann, B. U., Ratcliff, R., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2016). Sequential
sampling models in cognitive neuroscience: advantages, applica-
tions, and extensions. Annual Review of Psychology, 67,6 4 1–666.
Gelman, A., & Rubin, D. B. (1992). Inference from iterative simulation
using multiple sequences. Statistical Science, 7,4 5 7–511.
Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2007). The neural basis of decision making.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 30,5 3 5–574.
Gunn, A., Cory, E., Atkinson, J., Braddick, O., Wattam-Bell, J., Guzzetta,
A., & Cioni, G. (2002). Dorsal and ventral stream sensitivity in
normal development and hemiplegia.NeuroReport, 13(6), 843–847.
Hadad, B. S., Maurer, D., & Lewis, T. L. (2011). Long trajectory for the
development of sensitivity to global and biological motion.
Developmental Science, 14(6), 1330–1339.
Hanks, T. D., Ditterich, J., & Shadlen, M. N. (2006). Microstimulation of
macaque area LIP affects decision-making in a motion discrimina-
tion task. Nature Neuroscience, 9(5), 682–689.
Haufe, S., Meinecke, F., Görgen, K., Dähne, S., Haynes, J. D., Blankertz,
B., & Bießmann, F. (2014). On the interpretation of weight vectors
of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging.Neuroimage, 87,9 6–
110.
Hawkins, G. E., Mittner, M., Forstmann, B. U., & Heathcote, A. (2017).
On the efficiency of neurally-informed cognitive models to identify
latent cognitive states. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 76 ,
142–155.
Hawkins, G. E., Wagenmakers, E. J., Ratcliff, R., & Brown, S. D. (2015).
Discriminating evidence accumulation from urgency signals in
speeded decision making.Journal of Neurophysiology, 114,4 0–47.
Hayward, J., Truong, G., Partanen, M., & Giaschi, D. (2011). Effects of
speed, age, and amblyopia on the perception of motion-defined
form. Vision Research, 51(20), 2216–2223.
67Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 16 ---
Ho, T., Brown, S., Van Maanen, L., Forstmann, B. U., Wagenmakers, E.
J., & Serences, J. T. (2012). The optimality of sensory processing
during the speed –accuracy tradeoff. Journal of Neuroscience,
32(23), 7992–8003.
Hoekema, R., Huiskamp, G. J. M., Wieneke, G. H., Leijten, F. S. S., van
Veelen, C. W. M., van Rijen, P. C., & van Huffelen, A. C. (2001).
Measurement of the conductivity of the skull, temporarily removed
during epilepsy surgery. Biomedizinische Technik, 46 (S2), 103 –
105.
Katz, L. N., Yates, J. L., Pillow, J. W., & Huk, A. C. (2016). Dissociated
functional significance of decision-related activity in the primate
dorsal stream. Nature, 535(7611), 285–288.
Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2013). Internal and external influences
on the rate of sensory evidence accumulation in the human brain.
Journal of Neuroscience, 33(50), 19434–19441.
Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2015). The neural processes underlying
perceptual decision making in humans: recent progress and future
directions. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 109(1–3), 27–37.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D. H., & Pelli, D. G. (2007). What ’s new in
Psychtoolbox-3?Perception, 36(ECVP abstract supplement).
Lerche, V., & Voss, A. (2017). Retest reliability of the parameters of the
Ratcliff diffusion model. Psychological Research, 81(3), 629–652.
Liang, F., Paulo, R., Molina, G., Clyde, M. A., & Berger, J. O. (2008).
Mixtures of g priors for Bayesian variable selection. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 103(481), 410–423.
Manning, C., Aagten-Murphy, D., & Pellicano, E. (2012). The develop-
ment of speed discrimination abilities. Vision Research, 70,2 7–33.
Manning, C., Dakin, S. C., Tibber, M. S., & Pellicano, E. (2014). Averaging,
not internal noise, limits the development of coherent motion process-
ing. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 10,4 4–56.
Manning, C., Jones, P. R., Dekker, T. M., & Pellicano, E. (2018).
Psychophysics with children: investigating the effects of attentional
lapses on threshold estimates. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 80(5), 1311–1324.
Manning, C., Kaneshiro, B., Kohler, P. J., Duta, M., Scerif, G., & Norcia, A.
M. (2019). Neural dynamics underlying coherent motion perception in
children and adults.Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 100670.
Manning, C., et al. (2020). Collection holding EEG data and modelling
files supporting the published article: Perceptual decision-making in
children: Age-related differences and EEG correlates. Figshare.
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5006684.
Matzke, D., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2009). Psychological interpretation
of the ex-Gaussian and shifted Wald parameters: A diffusion model
analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(5), 798–817.
M o n d l o c h ,C .J . ,G e l d a r t ,S . ,M a u r e r ,D . ,&L eG r a n d ,R .( 2 0 0 3 ) .
Developmental changes in face processing skills. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 86(1), 67–84.
Mulder, M. J., Bos, D., Weusten, J. M., van Belle, J., van Dijk, S. C.,
Simen, P., et al. (2010). Basic impairments in regulating the speed-
accuracy tradeoff predict symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivi-
ty disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 68(12), 1114–1119.
Mulder, M. J., Van Maanen, L., & Forstmann, B. U. (2014). Perceptual
decision neurosciences - a model-based review.Neuroscience, 277,
872–884.
Nordmeyer, A. E., Yoon, E. J., & Frank, M. C. (2016). Distinguishing pro-
cessing difficulties in inhibition,implicature, and negation.Proceedings
of the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Nunez, M. D., Srinivasan, R., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2015). Individual
differences in attention influe nce perceptual decision making.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6,1 8 .
Nunez, M. D., Gosai, A., Vandekerckhove, J., & Srinivasan, R. (2019).
The latency of a visual evoked potential tracks the onset of decision
making. Neuroimage, 197,9 3–108.
Nunez, M. D., Vandekerckhove, J., & Srinivasan, R. (2017). How atten-
tion influences perceptual decision making: single-trial EEG
correlates of drift-diffusion model parameters. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 76,1 1 7–130.
O’Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., & Kelly, S. P. (2012). A supramodal
accumulation-to-bound signal that determines perceptual decisions
in humans. Nature Neuroscience, 15(12), 1729–1737.
Parra, L. C., Spence, C. D., Gerson, A. D., & Sajda, P. (2005). Recipes for
the linear analysis of EEG. Neuroimage, 28(2), 326–341.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophys-
ics: transforming numbers into movies.Spatial Vision, 10,4 3 7–442.
Picton, T. W., Bentin, S., Berg, P., Donchin, E., Hillyard, S. A., Johnson
Jr., R., Miller, G. A., Ritter, W., Ruchkin, D. S., Rugg, M. D., &
Taylor, M. J. (2000). Guidelines for using human event-related po-
tentials to study cognition: recording standards and publication
criteria. Psychophysiology, 37,1 2 7–152.
Plummer, M. (2003). JAGS: a program for analysis of Bayesian graphical
models using Gibbs sampling.Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on Distributed Statistical Computing (DSC 2003).
Ratcliff, R., & Childers, R. (2015). Individual differences and fitting
methods for the two-choice diffusion model of decision making.
Decision, 2(4), 237–279.
Ratcliff, R., Love, J., Thompson, C. A., & Opfer, J. E. (2012). Children
are not like older adults: a diffusion model analysis of developmen-
tal changes in speeded responses. Child Development, 83(1), 367–
381.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (2008). The diffusion decision model: theory
and data for two-choice decision tasks. Neural Computation, 20(4),
873–922.
Ratcliff, R., & Rouder, J. N. (1998). Modeling response times for two-
choice decisions.
Psychological Science, 9(5), 347–356.
Ratcliff, R., Thapar, A., Gomez, P., & McKoon, G. (2004). A diffusion
model analysis of the effects of aging in the lexical-decision task.
Psychology and Aging, 19(2), 278–289.
Rouder, J. N., & Morey, R. D. (2012). Default Bayes factors for model
selection in regression.Multivariate Behavioral Research, 47, 877–903.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Speckman, P. L., & Province, J. M. (2012).
Default Bayes factors for ANOVA designs. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 56,3 5 6–374.
Scerif, G., Kotsoni, E., & Casey, B. J. (2006). Functional neuroimaging of
early cognitive development. In R. Cabeza & A. Kingstone (Eds.),
Functional neuroimaging of cognition(pp. 351–378). Cambridge: MIT.
Schneider, R. M., & Frank, M. C. (2016). A speed-accuracy trade-off in
children’s processing of scalar implicatures.Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Shadlen, M. N., & Newsome, W. T. (1996). Motion perception: seeing
and deciding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
93(2), 628–633.
Shadlen, M. N., & Newsome, W. T. (2001). Neural basis of a perceptual
decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 86(4), 1916–1936.
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Best, N. G., Carlin, B. P., & van der Linde, A. (2002).
Bayesian measures of model complexity and fit. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 64(4), 583–639.
Stan Development Team. 2018. RStan: the R interface to Stan. R package
version 2.17.3. http://mc-stan.org.
Stone, M. (1960). Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika, 25,
251–260.
Su, Y-S., & Yajima, M. (2015). R2jags: using R to run ‘JAGS’. R pack-
age version 0.5-7. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=R2jags.
Turner, B. M., Forstmann, B. U., Wagenmakers, E. J., Brown, S. D.,
Sederberg, P. B., & Steyvers, M. (2013). A Bayesian framework
for simultaneously modeling neural and behavioral data.
NeuroImage, 72,1 9 3–206.
Turner, B. M., Rodriguez, C. A., Norcia, A. M., McClure, S. M., &
Steyvers, M. (2016). Why more is better: simultaneous modeling
of EEG, fMRI, and behavioral data. Neuroimage, 128,9 6–115.
68 Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69


--- Page 17 ---
Turner, B. M., Van Maanen, L., & Forstmann, B. U. (2015). Informing
cognitive abstractions through neuroimaging: the neural drift diffu-
sion model. Psychological Review, 122,3 1 2–336.
Turner, B. M., Wang, T., & Merkle, E. C. (2017). Factor analysis linking
functions for simultaneously modeling neural and behavioral data.
NeuroImage, 153,2 8–48.
Vandekerckhove, J., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2007). Fitting the Ratcliff diffu-
sion model to experimental data. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
14(6), 1011–1026.
Vandekerckhove, J., Tuerlinckx, F., & Lee, M. D. (2011). Hierarchical
diffusion models for two-choice response times. Psychological
Methods, 16(1), 44–62.
Wabersich, D., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2014). Extending JAGS: a tutorial
on adding custom distributions to JAGS (with a diffusion model
example). Behavior Research Methods, 46,1 5–28.
Wagenmakers, E. J. (2009). Methodological and empirical developments
for the Ratcliff diffusion model of response times and accuracy.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 21(5), 641–671.
Wagenmakers, E. J., Van Der Maas, H. L., & Grasman, R. P. (2007). An
EZ-diffusion model for response time and accuracy. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14(1), 3–22.
Wendel, K., Väisänen, J., Seemann, G., Hyttinen, J., & Malmivuo, J.
(2010). The influence of age and skull conductivity on surface and
subdermal bipolar EEG leads. Computational Intelligence and
Neuroscience, 397272,1 –7.
White, C. N., Curl, R. A., & Sloane, J. F. (2016). Using decision models
to enhance investigations of individual differences in cognitive neu-
roscience. Frontiers in Psychology, 7,8 1 .
White, C. N., Ratcliff, R., Vasey, M. W., & McKoon, G. (2010). Using
diffusion models to unders tand clinical disorders. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 54(1), 39–52.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1977). Speed-accuracy tradeoff and information pro-
cessing dynamics. Acta Psychologica, 41(1), 67–85.
Wiecki, T. V., Sofer, I., & Frank, M. J. (2013). HDDM: hierarchical
Bayesian estimation of the drift-diffusion model in python.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 7,1 4 .
Publisher’sN o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
69Comput Brain Behav (2021) 4:53–69
