--- Page 1 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-024-00221-9
RESEARCH
A Retrieved Context Model of Serial Recall and Free Recall
Lynn J. Lohnas 1
Accepted: 4 September 2024 / Published online: 8 November 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
A full characterization of memory must include how participants use exogenous and endogenous cues to guide retrieval. In
free recall, in which endogenous cues play a large role, retrieved context theories have emerged as a leading explanation of
data on the dynamics of memory search (Lohnas & Healey, Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 75, 157–199, 2021).
More recently, Logan and colleagues have advanced a retrieved context model to explain data on serial recall and motor
production (Logan, Psychological Review, 125 (4), 453–485, 2018, Psychological Review, 128 (1), 1–44, 2021; Logan &
Cox, Psychological Review, 128(6), 1197–1205, 2021, Psychological Review, 130(6), 1672–1687, 2023; Osth & Hurlstone,
Psychological Review, 130(2), 213–245, 2023). Comparisons of recall transitions have further highlighted similarities among
these tasks (e.g., Bhatarah et al., Memory & Cognition , 36(1), 20–34, 2008; Golomb et al., Memory & Cognition , 36(5),
947–956, 2008). Here, I evaluate retrieved context theory’s ability to simultaneously account for data from these classic recall
procedures. I show how a serial version of the context maintenance and retrieval model (termed sCMR) can account for
dissociations between serial position curves and temporal clustering effects. I also show how sCMR can account for grouping
effects using similar assumptions across recall procedures. The sCMR model provides a common theoretical framework to
harmonize the disparate phenomena studied using these classic memory procedures, but also reveals the distinctions between
serial and free recall through their relative dependence on different model-based mechanisms.
Keywords Episodic memory · Free recall · Modeling · Retrieved context · Serial recall
Introduction
It is well established that memory performance varies with
the type of retrieval cues provided at test (e.g., Greene, 1989;
Tulving, 1985; Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966). However, in
more open-ended recall tasks, it remains debated how partic-
ipants use internally generated cues to retrieve information
from memory. In recent decades, dozens of studies have
attempted to resolve this debate with analyses in two classic
recall paradigms: free recall and serial recall. In both tasks,
participants study a sequence of individually presented items.
In free recall, participants attempt to recall the items in the
order they come to mind whereas in serial recall, participants
attempt to recall the items in their presentation order. Each
task gives rise to a characteristic serial position effect, with
free recall exhibiting marked advantages in recall of recently
B Lynn J. Lohnas
ljlohnas@syr.edu
1 Department of Psychology, Syracuse University, 765 Irving
Ave, Suite 352, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
studied items (the recency effect) and a smaller beneﬁt for
early list items (the primacy effect). Serial recall exhibits both
effects as well, but has a much larger primacy effect than free
recall and a small recency effect, often affecting only the last
one or two items.
Based on these and other dissociations, distinct classes
of theories have emerged to explain data from these two
paradigms. Recent theories of free recall have emphasized
the importance of contextual coding of memories as well
as their semantic organization (Howard & Kahana, 2002a;
Lohnas et al., 2015; Polyn et al., 2009; Sederberg et al.,
2008). In contrast, theories of serial recall have emphasized
positional coding, chunking, and the importance of tagging
the beginning of the list to facilitate recall initiation (Brown
et al., 2000; Burgess & Hitch, 2006; Farrell, 2012; Henson
et al., 1996; Ladd & Woodworth, 1911; Lewandowsky &
Farrell, 2008; Page & Norris, 1998). Although the develop-
ment of these parallel theories proceeded for several decades,
recent evidence suggests that the tasks exhibit some striking
similarities, particularly in the manner in which partici-
pants transition among items (Bhatarah et al., 2006, 2008,
123


--- Page 2 ---
2 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
2009; Golomb et al., 2008; Grenfell-Essam & Ward, 2012;
Grenfell-Essam et al., 2017; Spurgeon et al., 2014;W a r de t
al., 2010). These ﬁndings pave the way for a theoretical har-
monization of the two procedures.
As one notable example, Farrell developed a chunking
model to explain data from both free and serial recall,
emphasizing that participants endogenously group each list
into smaller groups (Farrell, 2012; Spurgeon et al., 2015).
According to this model, each item is associated with a group
context. Recall begins based on these group contexts to cue
the context of a speciﬁc group. Recall then proceeds with the
item associated with position 1 within that group, then the
item associated with position 2, and so forth. This approach
is similar to other serial recall models which use explicit
positional codes to cue retrieval, but across all serial posi-
tions rather than within a group (e.g., Brown et al., 2000;
Burgess & Hitch, 1999; Henson, 1998). The model of Far-
rell (2012) generalizes the use of groups and positional codes
to both serial and free recall. Recall proceeds identically in
the model in both recall tasks, except that the ﬁnal group
cues immediate free recall and the ﬁrst group cues immedi-
ate serial recall. This model can account for recall initiation,
recall transitions, recall accuracy, and recall errors across a
variety of standard recall manipulations.
The current set of studies present an alternative model
approach, showing how retrieved context theory can account
for several major phenomena across the two paradigms.
According to this theory, each studied item is associated
with a temporal context state, and temporal context changes
slowly with each studied item. Temporal context also serves
as the retrieval cue during recall. The present model builds
upon recent studies by Logan which show how principles of
retrieved context theory offer a parsimonious account of sev-
eral key features of data obtained in serial recall tasks (Logan,
2018, 2021; Logan & Cox,2021, 2023, see also Osth & Hurl-
stone, 2023). Logan’s Context Retrieval and Updating (CRU)
model extends principles of retrieved context theory from
free recall (Howard & Kahana, 2002a; Polyn et al., 2009;
Sederberg et al., 2008) such as the context maintenance and
retrieval (CMR) model. Y et a uniﬁed retrieved context model
across serial recall and free recall remains undeveloped.
Importantly, although CRU makes accurate predictions in
serial recall and CMR makes accurate predictions in free
recall, these predictions have thus far been conducted more
ﬂexibly, with different models and some differing assump-
tions between paradigms. It may be that a model constricted
to generally the same assumptions and parameters across
tasks would be unable to account for ﬁndings from both tasks.
In addition, to account for ﬁndings from serial recall, whole
report and copy typing, CRU uses retrieval cues differently
than retrieved context models of free recall. Thus, a more
uniﬁed model approach helps to address the similarities and
differences across tasks, especially with respect to the use of
temporal context representations which have been found to
be more critical in free recall than serial recall.
Summary of Simulations
Here I evaluate predictions of the context maintenance and
retrieval model generalized to serial recall (sCMR) in its
ability to account for several key ﬁndings emerging from
analyses of free and serial recall. In these simulations, sCMR
changes two primary mechanisms to account for the differ-
ences between these recall tasks. First, sCMR changes the
relative contributions of associations across tasks. When a
participant recalls an item in free recall (e.g., fork in Fig. 1),
this may remind them of other preceding items (e.g.,tree)o r
of other semantic associates (e.g., spoon). However, in serial
recall, the next correct recall should belamp, and other asso-
ciates would interfere with this correct recall. Thus, in serial
recall, semantic associations and backward temporal associ-
ations contribute less to the context cue. As a second change,
sCMR initiates recall differently across recall tasks. In free
recall, sCMR accords with other retrieved context models and
uses the current context to cue recall initiation. By contrast,
in serial recall sCMR assumes that recall starts with the ﬁrst
studied item with high probability, aligned to the experiment
data it is ﬁtting. Models of serial recall often employ a sim-
ilar mechanism, assuming a high probability to either recall
the ﬁrst item or to retrieve an effective cue for the ﬁrst item
(Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Brown et al., 2000; Burgess &
Hitch, 1992; Caplan et al.,2022; Farrell,2012; Henson,1998;
Lewandowsky & Farrell, 2008; Lewandowsky & Murdock,
1989; Page & Norris, 1998). With these proposed changes, I
evaluate sCMR across a series of simulations.
In Simulation Set 1 I consider how sCMR can account
for recall simultaneously in free recall and serial recall. I
examine classic ﬁndings of recall probability and recall tran-
sitions in both paradigms, using a study in which the same
set of participants performed one session of each recall task.
To foreshadow the results, sCMR makes accurate predictions
for most participants, and the distributions of model param-
eters across participants provide further insights into model
mechanisms which vary across tasks.
In Simulation Set 2 I evaluate sCMR’s ability to capture
recall transitions which have been argued as evidence against
core assumptions included in retrieved context models (Far-
rell et al., 2013; Henson, 1996; Osth & Dennis, 2015a).
Considerable prior research on free recall has highlighted
the critical role that previously recalled items play in cuing
subsequent responses (see Lohnas, in press ,f o rar e v i e w ) .
These studies have demonstrated that participants tend to
transition between items studies in neighboring serial posi-
tions (henceforth, the contiguity effect ; Healey et al., 2019;
Kahana, 1996), and these transitions have a forward bias.
Serial recall exhibits a similar pattern: following an omission,
123


--- Page 3 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 3
Fig. 1 Encoding for the serial recall version of the context maintenance
and retrieval model (sCMR). Each rounded rectangle represents a layer,
actualized as a vector. Each circle within the rectangle represents an ele-
ment of the vector. The background color of the elements, from black
to white, corresponds to values ranging from one to zero, respectively.
Left: fork was presented to the model most recently. Thus, in the fea-
ture layer, f, the element corresponding to the word fork is set to one,
and all other elements are zero. This feature layer updates the con-
text layer, c, through the association matrix M
FC . In the context layer,
the element associated with fork has the greatest strength, indicated
by the darkest shading of this element. However, previously presented
words (crown, tree ) also have nonzero strengths for their elements.
As context updates, it downweighs prior context states, such that the
context elements are a recency-weighted sum of previously presented
items (i.e., the darkness of the elements is monotonically increasing
with recently presented items). Right: The word lamp is next presented
to the model after fork. Similar to the presentation of fork,i n f,t h e
feature element for the currently studied item is set to one and all other
elements are zero. Also similar to the presentation of fork, the con-
text layer c is a recency-weighted sum of previously studied items. In
Simulation 3 only, an additional temporal disruption item is presented
between fork and lamp to indicate the start of a new group with lamp.
As a result, the ﬁrst three items are weighed more weakly in context
(i.e., have lighter shading) than in Simulations 1 and 2. See text for
further details
participants tend to make transitions to the prior or subse-
quent item, known as ﬁll-in and in-ﬁll errors, respectively
(Farrell et al., 2013; Henson, 1996; Logan, 2021;O s t h&
Dennis, 2015a; Page & Norris, 1998; Solway et al., 2012).
The nature of these transitions has recently emerged as a
touchstone, distinguishing predictions of several models.
Positional code models predict that ﬁll-in is more common
than in-ﬁll (Farrell, 2012; Henson, 1998; Henson et al., 1996;
Page & Norris, 1998). When such a model is attempting to
recall the nth item, broadly speaking the model assumes that
early list items beneﬁt from greater strength, so if the cor-
rect ( nth) item is unavailable for recall, then the next most
likely item to be recalled will be from an earlier list position
(e.g., n − 1). By contrast, retrieved context models more nat-
urally predict in-ﬁll. These models assume that recall of an
item also updates context with information from that item.
The updated context state promotes recall of items whose
associated contexts include the just-recalled item, but items
studied prior to the just-recalled item do not have that item in
their context. Thus, items studied after the just-recalled item
are more likely to be recalled next. For decades the ﬁll-in
effect has assumed to be evidence against models without
positional codes such as retrieved context models.
However, Logan and Cox ( 2023) showed that CRU can
predict the ﬁll-in effect by assuming that recalling an error
evokes retrieval of a start-of-list context. This promotes recall
of items studied earlier in the list, including items studied
before the just-recalled item. They noted however that this ﬁt
served as a qualitative proof of concept for retrieved context
models and requires further characterization. Simulation Set
2 aims to use retrieved context models with more parsimo-
nious principles from free recall, which generally do not use
list context, to account for the ﬁll-in effect. Taken together,
the goal for sCMR is to account for both the in-ﬁll effect,
based on its natural tendencies, as well as the ﬁll-in effect.
To date, no model can account for all ﬁndings related to these
transition errors.
Simulation Set 3 evaluates sCMR predictions of segment-
ing or chunking longer lists of serial recall into shorter
groups. The presence of grouping has been a longstanding
interest in serial recall (e.g., Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004;
Henson, 1999; Madigan, 1980; Maybery et al., 2002; Ryan,
1969; Wickelgren, 1967). Such a generalization is not trivial,
because models which use a single temporal representation,
like sCMR, have needed to incorporate positional codes to
make accurate predictions of grouping (Liu & Caplan, 2020;
Logan & Cox, 2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). In addition,
recently, there has been increasing interest at the intersection
of segmenting continuous experience into meaningful events
and the implications for episodic memory (for recent reviews,
see Clewett et al.,2019; Radvansky & Zacks,2017). In partic-
ular, grouping is posited to support within-group associations
at the cost of across-group associations (e.g., Heusser et al.,
2018; Lohnas et al., 2023; Radvansky & Copeland, 2006;
Swallow et al., 2009; Zwaan, 1996
). CMR could account for
properties related to event segmentation and in free recall
123


--- Page 4 ---
4 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
(Lohnas et al., 2023; Polyn et al., 2009), yet they posed more
of a challenge for CRU in serial recall (Logan & Cox, 2023;
Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). More broadly as well, the success
of this set of simulations provides a quantitative application
of assessing the role of temporal context representations in
serial recall and free recall.
OverviewofsCMR:ContextMaintenance
andRetrievalModelofEpisodicRecall
This section reviews principles of the retrieved context model
framework, beginning with principles as they apply to the
most common recall paradigm for this framework, free recall.
We then turn to a description of the minimal changes from this
free recall model in order to simulate serial recall. Retrieved
context models in other paradigms also preserve these prin-
ciples including ﬁnal free recall (Howard et al., 2008), item
recognition (Healey & Kahana, 2016; Rouhani et al., 2020)
and cued recall (Howard et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2023,s e e
also Osth & Fox, 2019). Keeping the changes as minimal as
possible serves to demonstrate the generalization of this class
of models and also reveals the critical differences in model
mechanisms across paradigms.
Principles of the Context Maintenance and Retrieval
Model
Figure 1 shows the basic structure of the model, which
includes representations of items, contexts, and associations
between them. Items are represented by the distribution of
activation across elements (nodes) of a feature vector (layer),
f. Each item is represented with a localist representation,
using a vector of unit length with a single nonzero element.
Each item has an associated context layer, represented by the
distribution of activation across elements of a context vec-
tor c. These two vectors inﬂuence each other via associative
matrices M
FC and MCF . The superscripts of these matrices
indicate the direction of associations, e.g., MFC stores the
strengths of associations from items to contexts. Each of these
matrices is a weighted sum of a pre-experimental compo-
nent and an experimental component. The pre-experimental
component is ﬁxed based on memories formed before the
simulated experiment, and the experimental component is
updated during the simulated experiment. Model parame-
ters γ
FC ,γCF scale the relative amount of experimental
and pre-experimental contributions to the respective matrices
MFC , MCF .
Figure 1 shows the state of f and c after studying the third
and fourth items in a sample list ( fork, lamp ). The associ-
ated item element is set to one in f, represented by the dark
shading of that element only. The item then creates an input
to context, cIN via the item-to-context association matrix:
cIN
i = MFC fi. (1)
This input updates context according to the equation:
ci = ρi ci− 1 + βcIN
i , (2)
where ρi is set to normalize the input to context so that
||ci|| = 1:
ρi =
√
1 + β2[(ci− 1 · cIN
i )2 − 1]− β(ci− 1 · cIN
i ). (3)
As each item updates context with Eq. 2, context becomes
a recency-weighted sum of presented items. The context
states in Fig. 1 also reﬂect this property, with the increas-
ingly dark shading for increasingly recent items. The model
parameter β controls how much each studied item updates
context, such that larger values of β cause context states to
change more with each context input. During encoding, con-
text updates with the free parameter β
enc for each studied
item.
Each presented item is also associated with the previous
state of context using a Hebbian learning rule, which updates
the experimental components of each association matrix:
(/Delta1M
CF
exp )⊤ = /Delta1MFC
exp = ci− 1f⊤
i (4)
In this way, sCMR associates an item with the tempo-
ral context in which it occurs. The associations in MCF
are further scaled by a strength parameter which decreases
with serial position, consistent with the notion that early list
items beneﬁt from increased encoding efﬁciency (Lohnas
et al., 2020; Serruya et al., 2014; Tulving & Rosenbaum,
2006). Speciﬁcally, the item in serial positioni updates M
CF
exp
according to the following:
φi = φs e−φd(i− 1) + 1, (5)
where φs scales the extra weight and φd scales the rate at
which this advantage decays with serial position.
In free recall, theMCF matrix also encodes pre-experimen
tal semantic associations among items, based on the hypoth-
esis that similar items appear often in the same temporal
contexts during one’s lifetime (Rao & Howard, 2008). The
model parameter s scales the relative contribution of seman-
tic versus experimental (episodic) associations to M
CF :
MCF = (1 − γCF )(I + sMCF
pre ) + γCF φi MCF
exp (6)
where I is an identity matrix.
123


--- Page 5 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 5
Similarly, MFC
exp is a weighted sum of its pre-experimental
and experimental components, the weighted tradeoff con-
trolled by the γ
FC parameter:
MFC = (1 − γFC )MFC
pre + γFC MFC
exp (7)
where the pre-experimental component is deﬁned as an iden-
tity matrix.
Once all items in a list have been presented, the recall
period begins but how recall proceeds depends on the task.
In free recall, the current state of context is used to cue recall
of the ﬁrst item. This context state assigns an activation for
each item according to its associative strength to the current
state of context:
a = M
CF ci. (8)
where a is a vector with each element corresponding to
the activation of a studied item associated with the current
context ci . Because MCF is a weighted sum of temporal asso-
ciations and semantic associations, with the latter scaled by
the parameter s (see Eq. 6), larger values of s lead to larger
contributions of semantic associations to the activation val-
ues. Further, the extra weighting of primacy items in MCF
also leads to greater activation values for these items as well.
The activations are used as input to a Luce choice decision
rule (Luce, 1959). By this rule, the probability that each item
is recalled is related to its activation strength:
P(retrie ve, i) = aτ
i∑l
k aτ
k
(9)
where τ is a model parameter. Larger values of τ magnify
the differences between activation values of a, increasing
larger values and decreasing smaller values. Thus, larger val-
ues of τ increase recall probability for items with greater
activations, corresponding to items with greater associations
to the current context. Regardless, items with greater acti-
vation values—whether due to stronger associations with
temporal context-to-item associations, semantic context-to-
item associations, or the increased weight due to the primacy
scaling—are more likely to be recalled.
At each output position, the model may recall an item or
may stop attempting recall for the list. The probability of
stopping increases with output position j according to the
following:
P(stop , j) = θ
s e jθr . (10)
For both θ parameters, larger values increase the proba-
bility of stopping recall. Y et whereas θs scales the overall
probability of stopping, such that larger values increase the
probability of stopping across all output positions, θr scales
the degree to which stopping increases with output position.
Incorporating the probability of stopping with the probabil-
ity of retrieval, the overall probability of retrieving item i at
output position j is as follows:
P(i, j) = P(retrie ve, i)(1 − P(stop , j)). (11)
If the stop response is selected, then the recall period ends
for the current list. The model’s memory is reset and then the
presentation of the next list begins. If an item is recalled, it
updates context using Eq.2 with the free parameterβ
rec .T h i s
updated context then leads to a new set of activations a, and
the model attempts to recall another item. However, once an
item is recalled, it cannot be recalled during the current study
period. Although other retrieved context models invoke more
realistic mechanisms for response suppression and response
times (e.g., Duncan & Lewandowsky, 2005; Lohnas et al.,
2015; Sederberg et al., 2008), the simplifying assumption of
sCMR keeps the focus on the model’s predictions of correct
recalls and order errors rather than on incorrect repetitions
or response suppression.
Model Modifications to Simulate Serial Recall
The model architecture and parameter values were identical
across simulations of free recall and serial recall, with two
exceptions described below.
Recall Initiation
In serial recall, participants are instructed to initiate recall
with the ﬁrst presented list item, and recall accuracy for this
ﬁrst item is relatively high. In many models of serial recall,
it is assumed that participants can access the ﬁrst item or its
associated cue with high accuracy, due to greater attention,
distinctiveness, and/or novelty experienced at the start of the
list (e.g., Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Brown et al., 2000;
Burgess & Hitch, 1992; Caplan et al., 2022; Farrell, 2012;
Henson, 1998; Lewandowsky & Farrell,2008; Lewandowsky
& Murdock, 1989; Page & Norris,1998). Rather than attempt
to simulate an additional attentional or retrieval process,
sCMR initiates recall based on the empirical results from
the data it is simulating. For all simulations except 3a, these
probabilities were based on the normalized distribution of
probability of ﬁrst recall.
1 For Simulation 3a, in which only
1 Currently, sCMR can only recall items studied in the list, but if a
participant begins with an error then the probabilities across all valid
serial positions will not sum to one. Thus, in the probability of ﬁrst recall
functions provided to sCMR, recall of all serial positions aside from the
ﬁrst item was normalized so that the values at all serial positions had
a sum of one. Recall of the ﬁrst item, the most likely possibility, was
consistent with the value in the behavioral data, and the normalization
was applied to the remaining serial positions. This also prevented sCMR
from (the rare empirical occurrence of) recalling an intrusion or not
recalling an item at all in the ﬁrst serial position.
123


--- Page 6 ---
6 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
the serial position curve was available, the probability of
recalling an item at the remaining serial positions was set to
a uniform value across the other serial positions such that the
overall recall probability of initiating with a correct list item
had a sum of one.
Recall of this ﬁrst item shares similar properties to all other
recalled items in sCMR. Speciﬁcally, recall of the ﬁrst item
elicits retrieval of its associated context from study, and this
retrieved context serves as the input to then update context
(Eq. 2). The updated context is used to cue recall of the second
item. Recall of this second item and subsequent items, as well
as recall termination, is identical to free recall.
Parameters Controlling Pre-experimental to Experimental
Item-Context Associations
The distinguishing difference between serial recall and free
recall, the requirement to recall items in their studied order,
led to two differences in model parameters between serial
recall and free recall. First, whereas in free recall, a just-
recalled item tends to cue recall of subsequently presented
items, in serial recall, an item should cue only the immedi-
ately subsequent item. Thus, the parameter controlling this
cuing based on experimentally formed associations varied
between free recall and serial recall ( γ
FC ; Eq. 7). Second,
whereas in free recall, participants tend to successively recall
items with shared semantic information (e.g., Cofer et al.,
1966; Healey et al., 2019; Howard & Kahana, 2002b; Pollio
et al., 1969; Polyn et al., 2009), in serial recall, such semantic
information does not beneﬁt recalling items in serial order.
Thus, the serial recall variant assumes that semantic associ-
ations do not contribute to memory retrieval processes (i.e.,
the parameter weighing the relative contribution of semantic
to episodic associations, s, is set to zero; Eq. 6). This sim-
plifying assumption is also consistent with other models of
serial recall (Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Brown et al., 2007;
Burgess & Hitch, 2006; Farrell, 2012; Henson, 1998). In the
“Discussion” section, we address the possibility that in serial
recall, semantic associations should be reduced rather than
set to zero.
Parameter-Fitting Technique
A genetic algorithm determined each best-ﬁtting parameter
set. This algorithm search minimized the sum of squared
errors between sCMR predictions and experimental data.
Generally, this includes all data plotted in the main text except
recall probability of the ﬁrst item in serial recall because the
variance of this datapoint did not rely on model parameters.
However, some other exceptions are noted in each simula-
tion.
The algorithm ﬁrst randomly selected a set of 10,000 val-
ues for each parameter, drawn from uniform distributions, for
an initial generation of 10,000 parameter sets. Next, 20 gen-
erations of 1000 parameter sets were calculated, where the
top 20% of all parameter sets from the previous generation
were used as parents for the next generation, with a muta-
tion rate of 10% of each parameter range. From these 20,000
parameter sets, the 100 parameter sets with the smallest sum
of squared errors were rerun for ten sets of the experimental
data. From these 100 parameter sets, the parameter set with
the smallest ﬁtness value was deemed the best-ﬁt parameter
set.
As described in more detail below, for Simulation Set 1,
the algorithm determined a parameter set for each participant.
All other simulations aimed to serve as a proof of concept that
sCMR could capture the mean performance across partici-
pants, and thus, the algorithm determined a single parameter
parameter set ﬁt to mean participant data. Because in Sim-
ulation Set 1 each of the data sets forming the basis of the
search was from a single participant, all simulations except
the ﬁnal 100 were rerun for three sets of the data. Similarly,
for Simulation 3b, given the sparser data per participant, all
simulations except the ﬁnal 100 were rerun for ﬁve sets of
the data. For the remaining simulations, each parameter set
was evaluated once with the data set.
SimulationSet1:SharedTemporalDynamics
BetweenSerialRecallandFreeRecall
This ﬁrst simulation aims to present a retrieved context
account of serial recall with minimal changes from free
recall. To date, retrieved context theory has been tested sep-
arately in free recall or in serial recall, but both tasks have
not been examined using a single, constrained model frame-
work. This leaves open the possibility that retrieved context
models may require more fundamental changes to mecha-
nisms or parameters between tasks. Such a possibility would
preclude a parsimonious theory of episodic memory within
the retrieved context framework and would challenge how
retrieve context models can account for the demonstrated
consistencies between serial and free recall, even when the
recall task is postcued (e.g., Bhatarah et al., 2008; Grenfell-
Essam & Ward, 2012; Ward et al., 2010). If the model can
account for ﬁndings from both tasks successfully, this would
serve as more than a sum of its parts. The model would not
only explain ﬁndings from each task, but also elucidate the
minimal set of model mechanisms which change between
tasks.
Method
I assess whether sCMR, which embeds the CMR retrieved
context model of free recall, can predict the salient fea-
tures of serial recall using a data set of younger adults from
123


--- Page 7 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 7
Golomb et al. ( 2008), available from http://memory.psych.
upenn.edu/Data_Archive#2008. In this study, each partici-
pant performed one session each of free recall and serial
recall. Session order was counterbalanced across partici-
pants, and the two sessions occurred at least 1 week apart.
Aside from the instruction of recall order, all other aspects
of the study were identical between sessions.
2 In brief, in
both sessions, lists consisting of ten words were presented
visually on a computer screen for 1 s, and participants said
the words aloud as they were presented. Across lists, words
were drawn randomly without replacement and lists were
presented in blocks with varying interstimulus intervals of
800 ms, 1200 ms, and 2400 ms. After the ﬁnal list item,
viewing three asterisks and hearing a tone indicated that
participants had up to 60 s for verbal recall. However, par-
ticipants could end the recall period sooner with a keypress.
A genetic algorithm determined a set of best-ﬁt parameters
for each participant (see previous section). Eight parame-
ters varied with the algorithm but remained constant between
the two recall tasks. Two additional free parameters varied
between tasks. Both of these variable parameters control the
relative inﬂuence of pre-experimental to experimental item-
context associations (s;γ
FC ; see Table1). TheγFC parameter
varied freely within a predetermined range for each recall
task. The s parameter also varied freely for free recall simu-
lations, but was set to zero for serial recall simulations (see
“Model Modiﬁcations to Simulate Serial Recall ”). For the
free recall simulations, semantic similarity values were deter-
mined using Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997).
Results
Free Recall
By starting with sCMR predictions of critical free recall
phenomena, this provides an intuition of retrieved context
models in their primary paradigm while ensuring that a
simultaneous ﬁt to serial recall does impair model predic-
tions. Figure 2 presents sCMR predictions and empirical data
averaged across participants (for individual participant ﬁts,
see Appendix,F i g s .9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14). Figure 2c
shows that sCMR predicts participants’ tendency to initi-
ate recall with the most recently presented items. In sCMR,
the end-of-list context used to cue recall of the ﬁrst item
2 From the original study of 36 participants, I excluded ﬁve participants
who performed free recall in their serial recall session—beginning recall
with the ﬁrst item for less than 25% of trials—and excluded one par-
ticipant who performed serial recall in the free recall session, as that
participant initiated recall with the ﬁrst two list items for over 50% of
trials. This more conservative criterion was meant to ensure that a fail-
ure of sCMR to capture serial or free recall data was not simply due to
qualitatively atypical recall patterns.
is a recency-weighted sum of presented items, and thus,
more recently presented items dominate the retrieval cue (see
Fig. 1). The stronger representation of recency items in the
context cue also leads to sCMR’s prediction that recency
items are more likely to be recalled across output positions
(Fig. 2a). In free recall, the tendency to recall early list items,
or the primacy effect, mainly reﬂects the increased context-
item associations of early list items.
sCMR also predicts the temporal contiguity effect, a
salient feature of free recall (Healey et al., 2019; Kahana,
1996). This is shown in Fig.2b, which plots the probability of
recalling an item from serial position i+lag immediately fol-
lowing recall of item i, conditional on the availability of item
i+lag as a valid recall (lag-CRP; Kahana, 1996). sCMR nat-
urally predicts the temporal contiguity effect because recall
of an item leads to retrieval of its context, and this retrieved
context is incorporated into the context used to cue recall of
the next item. This updated cue promotes recall of items with
shared temporal contexts of the just-recalled item. sCMR also
predicts the forward asymmetry effect or the increased prob-
ability of forward over backward transitions (Kahana,1996).
When sCMR retrieves an item from memory, the item cre-
ates an input to context. This input is a weighted sum of
its pre-experimental and experimental contexts (Eqs. 1, 7),
and thus, both of these contexts contribute to the context state
used to cue the next recall (Eq. 2). Importantly, an item’s pre-
experimental context is only present in a temporal context
after the item is studied. Thus, the pre-experimental con-
text promotes recall of items studied after, but not before,
the just-recalled item. Increasing the relative weight of this
pre-experimental context, with free parameterγ
FC , therefore
increases the forward asymmetry in the lag-CRP .
Taken together, sCMR accounts for classic recall dynam-
ics in free recall. On the one hand, retrieved context models
were developed for free recall, and several sets of model
simulations have predicted these results previously (e.g.,
Sederberg et al., 2008). On the other hand, because sCMR
had to make these predictions while also being constrained to
making predictions of serial recall, it was not trivial that the
model could maintain such accurate predictions. With this
foundation, that sCMR meets the bar of previous retrieved
context models of free recall, we now turn to its predictions
in the newly applied paradigm of serial recall.
Serial Recall
Because sCMR assumes high accuracy for recalling the ﬁrst
list item, this promotes recall of items with similar temporal
contexts also presented at the beginning of the list, and thus
discourages recall of recency items. Along with the primacy
gradient, these mechanisms allow for sCMR to account for
the primacy effect in the serial position curve (Fig.2d). When
recall begins with an early list item, this promotes recall of
123


--- Page 8 ---
8 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Table 1 The values for
Simulation Set 1 are the mean
across all 30 participants,
whereas the remaining values
are the single parameter set used
to ﬁt the data averaged across
participants
Parameter Sim. Set 1 Sim. 2a Sim. 2b Sim. 3a Sim. 3b
βenc 0.581 (0.030) 0.577 0.818 0.124 0.704
βrec 0.790 (0.037) 0.581 0.537 0.922 0.600
φs 2.500 (0.248) 2.086 4.159 3.420 4.453
φd 1.195 (0.096) 0.134 0.933 0.526 2.114
θs 0.035 (0.004) 0.005 0.041 0.050 0.061
θr 0.358 (0.037) 0.772 0.408 0.018 0.210
τ 4.259 (0.407) 11.389 5.194 9.466 4.378
γCF 0.852 (0.021) 0.671 0.950 0.535 0.883
γFC 0.255 (0.026) 0.520 0.344 0.921 0.240
γ fr
FC 0.304 (0.045) −−− 0.258
s 1.310 (0.136) −−− 2.104
βgroup −− − 0.826 0.919
For Simulation 2b, the value of φd is the mean across the three participant bins. For details of the use and
meaning of each parameter, see “ Overview of sCMR: Context Maintenance and Retrieval Model of Episodic
Recall”
Sim., simulation
items with similar temporal contexts, thus encouraging recall
of other early list items and discouraging recall of recency
items. As recall continues and context updates from early list
items, context serves as a weaker cue for recency items. This
contributes to reduced recall accuracy across output posi-
tions. For further contribution to this ﬁnding, with each output
position, it is increasingly likely that the model will recall
an incorrect item due to the noisiness of the retrieval pro-
cess. This noise is independent across output positions, but
increasing the number of noisy recalls increases the prob-
ability that at least one recall will be incorrect. As a ﬁnal
contributing factor to reduced recency in serial recall, the
probability that the model stops recall increases with output
position (see Eq. 10).
However, it is worth noting that many plotted serial posi-
tion curves in serial recall studies do exhibit a weak recency
effect. This recency effect may reﬂect one of two possibil-
ities. First and most intuitively, participants may be more
likely to recall items studied at the end of the list. We return
to sCMR’s explanation of such a recency effect in Simulation
3a, where the serial position curve exhibits a recency effect.
Second, the recency effect may emerge depending on the
scoring method of the serial position curve. The present arti-
cle uses an absolute scoring method, where an item studied in
2468 1 0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Data
sCMR
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2468 1 0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2468 1 0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 fed
Serial Position Serial Position Lag
Serial Position Lag Lag
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Recall Probability
Recall Probability
Recall Probability
cba
Fig. 2 sCMR predictions and experimental data of the primacy,
recency, and contiguity effects in free and serial recall. sCMR predicts
accurately the plotted recall analyses. Top row: free recall. Bottom row:
serial recall. a, d Serial position curves. Inset to d: Serial recall with
relative order scoring (Solway et al., 2012). b, e Conditional response
probability as a function of lag. c Probability of ﬁrst recall. f Condi-
tional response probability as a function of lag following the ﬁrst-order
error. Cond. Resp. Prob., conditional response probability. Data are from
Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 9 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 9
serial position i is scored as correct if it is recalled in output
position i. However, serial recall experiments often report
serial position curves using a relative order scoring metric,
where an item is scored as correct when is correct relative
to the previous item (for a comparison, see Dougherty et
al., 2023). For instance, by one such metric, if a participant
recalls successively the items studied in positions 1, 3, and
4, then item 4 would be considered correct because it fol-
lows item 3. With this more liberal scoring method, recency
items are more likely to be scored as correct. Indeed, replot-
ting the serial position curve using such a relative scoring
method reveals a recency effect (Fig. 2d, inset). By this scor-
ing metric, recall probability increases monotonically for the
last three serial positions in both the experimental data and
in sCMR’s predictions. For the main panel in that ﬁgure and
more generally in this article, strict absolute scoring ensures
that sCMR’s recall sequences align with the experimental
data, as well as help to pinpoint potential sources of recall
errors.
In the experimental data, the serial recall instruction leads
to greater asymmetry in the lag-CRP than in free recall
(Fig. 2e), which primarily reﬂects a reduction in lag =− 1
transitions from free recall to serial recall reduced asymmetry
(Ward et al., 2010, M = 0.250 versus M = 0.133, SEM =
0.0200, t(29) = 5.83, p <. 0001). In sCMR, differences
between tasks reﬂect the difference in parameters control-
ling the relative strength of pre-experimental to experimental
item-to-context associations including γ
FC (Eq. 7). This
strength contributes to the role of experimental context in
retrieval cues. When an item is recalled, its associated tem-
poral context creates an input to the retrieval cue for the
next recall (Eq. 2). As a result, stronger relative weight-
ing of the experimental item-to-context associations causes
more of an item’s experimental context to contribute to the
recall cue. This experimental context encourages recall of
items studied near the just-recalled item, whether occurring
before or after on the list. However, in serial recall, it is not
as beneﬁcial to have items studied before the just-recalled
item in the retrieval cue, because subsequent recalls should
be from items studied after the just-recalled item. In con-
trast, in free recall, items studied before the just-recalled item
can be correct recalls. Thus, the intuition is that, relative to
free recall, γ
FC values should be smaller in serial recall to
downweigh the relative contribution of experimental item-to-
context associations and reduce backward transitions. Across
participants, there is a signiﬁcant correlation between the
reductions in γ
FC values from free to serial recall with the
reduction in lag =− 1 transitions from free to serial recall
(r = .81, p <. 0001). However, examining the distribution
of γFC values across participants, the mean is numerically
but not statistically lower for serial recall than free recall
(γFC vs γ fr
FC , respectively, in Table 1; p >. 3). Nonetheless,
the signiﬁcant correlation suggests that the γFC parameter
contributes to the change in temporal transitions across tasks
even if the reduction in the parameter value is less reliable
than the reduction in lag =− 1 transitions.
As further intuition for the inﬂuence of γ
FC ,F i g .3 shows
simulations in free recall with the best-ﬁt parameter set from
a sample participant and varying levels ofγ
FC . In this ﬁgure,
darker colors indicate greater values of γFC .A st h ev a l u eo f
γFC increases, CRPs decrease at positive lags yet increase at
negative lags, and thus reduces the forward asymmetry effect.
The light gray circles correspond use the best-ﬁt parameter
values from free recall except using this participant’s best-
ﬁt γ
FC value from serial recall. This lag-CRP , plotted with
the smallest value of γFC , exhibits more forward asymmetry
than the lag-CRP of the participant’s best-ﬁt value of γFC in
free recall, plotted with dark gray circles.
In addition to changes in theγFC parameter, differences in
the s parameter also contribute to changes to temporal tran-
sitions in serial recall. In serial recall, s was set to zero, but
in free recall, the distribution of s values was set on a closed
interval containing zero, thus leading to signiﬁcantly posi-
tive values ( M = 1.31, SEM = 0.136, t(29) = 9.64, p <
.0001). Whereas the shared temporal context between stud-
ied items promotes successive recall of temporal neighbors,
the shared semantic context between items can help to sup-
port recall of items with stronger semantic associations at
all lags. Thus, an increase in s should increase reliance
on semantic associations generally in conﬂict with tempo-
ral associations and the temporal contiguity effect. In each
recall paradigm, I quantiﬁed each participant’s temporal con-
tiguity effect with a temporal clustering score (Polyn et al.,
2009). Across participants, the reduction in temporal cluster-
ing scores from serial recall to free recall correlated with their
best-ﬁt s parameters in free recall (r = .63, p = .0002), thus
.14
.34
.54
.74
FC
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Lag
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Fig. 3 An intuition of the free model parameter γFC with sCMR pre-
dictions of the lag-CRP in free recall across four values of γFC .A l l
other values use the best-ﬁt parameters from participant 26. Circles
indicate values based on the algorithm search, with darker and lighter
circles corresponding to the best-ﬁtγ
FC value from free recall and serial
recall, respectively. Squares correspond to other intermediate values of
γFC for illustrative purposes. Data are simulated from Golomb et al.
(2008)
123


--- Page 10 ---
10 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
indicating the contribution of the s parameter to reduce the
use of temporal associations. At the suggestion of a reviewer,
I also calculated the correlation between participant’s best-
ﬁt s parameter and temporal clustering in serial recall, and
the correlation was signiﬁcant ( r = 0.53, p = 0.0028). A
participant who exhibits greater temporal clustering in serial
recall may beneﬁt more from using other forms of associa-
tion when given the opportunity in free recall. By contrast,
a participant who relies less on temporal cues in serial recall
may more readily use the same cues in free recall.
As another approach to examine temporal organization
in serial recall, the lag-CRP in Fig. 2 plots transitions to all
items, and in serial recall, correct lag =+ 1 transitions dom-
inate this function. The debate among theories of recall has
centered around errors in recall transitions when the tran-
sition is an error and thus not lag =+ 1. Because items
following an error may be clouded by the original error,
recently, the convention is to calculate the lag-CRP from the
ﬁrst error on a list to another list item (Osth & Dennis,2015a;
Solway et al., 2012). Figure 2f plots this function, assuming
that the preceding recalls are correct items and both the error
and the following recall are neither repeats nor intrusions. In
this study, participants exhibited an in-ﬁll effect, with transi-
tions more likely tolag =+ 1 than tolag =− 1( M = 0.383
versus 0.152, SEM = 0.0445, t(29) = 5.20, p <. 0001).
sCMR captures this effect for the same reason that it captures
the forward asymmetry in the lag-CRP . In brief, recall of an
error still retrieves its context, and this context updates the
context cue for the next recall. The error’s pre-experimental
context, now a part of the context cue, promotes recall of
items studied after the error.
Taken together, sCMR can account for benchmark analy-
ses of serial position effects and transitions in serial recall in
the present data set. However, the in-ﬁll effect is not always
present in experimental data. Rather, sometimes participants
demonstrate the ﬁll-in effect, recalling the items prior to a
recall error (Farrell et al., 2013; Henson, 1996; Logan, 2021;
Osth & Dennis, 2015a). This effect has posed a challenge
for retrieved context models such as sCMR, which tradition-
ally in free recall predict a strong forward asymmetry. In the
next simulation, we examine sCMR predictions of the ﬁll-in
effect.
SimulationSet2:ARetrievedContext
AccountoftheFill-InEﬀect
A special type of recall error has served as a deﬁning dis-
tinction between serial recall theories. Speciﬁcally, when a
participant mistakenly recalls an item too early (e.g., recalls
item i + 1 at output position i), theories are divided whether
the participant next ﬁlls in with an earlier item such as i
or in-ﬁlls with a later item such as i + 2. Adding fuel to the
theoretical debate, some serial recall studies exhibit the in-ﬁll
effect (e.g., Dougherty et al., 2023; Golomb et al., 2008; Sol-
way et al., 2012) and some studies exhibit the ﬁll-in effect
(e.g., Farrell et al., 2013; Henson, 1996; Osth and Dennis,
2015a). Thus, although sCMR naturally explains the in-ﬁll
effect in Simulation Set 1, the aim of Simulation Set 2 is to
examine sCMR’s ability to predict the ﬁll-in effect. This aim
is achieved through two sets of simulations using data from a
study reported in Osth and Dennis ( 2015a), ﬁrst demonstrat-
ing that sCMR can predict the ﬁll-in effect and then exploring
why sCMR can produce either the ﬁll-in or the in-ﬁll effect.
Simulation 2a
This simulation aims to establish that sCMR can predict
greater recall in the backward direction following a recall
error. For this simulation, serving as a proof of concept, it
is less important for sCMR to capture individual participant
variability. Rather, it is more important for sCMR to simply
predict a greater proportion of transitions for lag =− 1 than
lag =+ 1. Thus, Simulation 2a uses a single best-ﬁt param-
eter set of sCMR which captures the pattern of transitions
consistent with the ﬁll-in effect, as well as the serial position
curve.
Method
I simulated sCMR using the list structure from a study pre-
sented in Osth and Dennis (2015a) using data available from
https://osf.io/8zycm/ . In this study, 100 participants per-
formed serial recall of 62 lists each with six words. Each
word was presented for 1 s followed by a blank interstimulus
interval for 250 ms on a computer screen. Participants then
viewed a prompt to type the studied words one at a time in
order and had 20 s to do so. I chose to simulate the condition
in which words were randomly selected without replacement
across lists both because this design more closely parallels
classic free recall studies and because sCMR’s memory resets
between lists. In this condition, if participants knew that an
item occurred at a speciﬁc position but could not remember
the item, they could not provide a “pass” response but rather
recalled the next word from the list. Again, this condition
more closely matches free recall, in which task instructions
usually do not require participants to specify if they know
other items were studied in the list but cannot remember what
they were. Further, because sCMR does not have a mecha-
nism to enable a pass response this avoids having the present
simulation obfuscate whether the model’s failure reﬂected
incorrect assumptions of a pass mechanism or of retrieved
context theory. It is worth noting that for this condition, Osth
and Dennis ( 2015a) deemed that there was “neither a ﬁll-
in nor an in-ﬁll effect” because the numerical advantage for
transitions of lag =− 1 over lag =+ 1 failed to reach
123


--- Page 11 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 11
signiﬁcance across participants. For Simulation 2a, sCMR
uses a single set of parameters to account for the mean val-
ues of this analysis without incorporating the variance. Thus,
ﬁtting sCMR the average data provides a meaningful stan-
dard for sCMR to capture an effect other than the in-ﬁll effect,
while simultaneously predicting recall probability and tran-
sitions across all output positions.
I used the same genetic algorithm procedure to determine
the best-ﬁt parameters as in Simulation Set 1. However, the
algorithm only determined serial recall parameters, and thus,
this model had nine parameters. The ﬁtness of a parameter
set incorporated all of the data plotted in Fig. 4, but to cap-
ture the qualitative pattern of the ﬁll-in effect, the search also
included the difference in the conditional response proba-
bilities following the ﬁrst order at lag = +1 and lag =- 1 .
Further, because the aim was to capture the numerical advan-
tage of backward over forward transitions as was present in
the average data, the algorithm determined a single set of
best-ﬁt parameters based on this average data, rather than by
individual participant.
Results
To lead with the critical result of this simulation, sCMR pre-
dicts the ﬁll-in effect successfully, shown in Fig.4c as greater
conditional response probability of backward transitions than
forward transitions following the ﬁrst-order error. In sCMR,
both the ﬁll-in effect and the in-ﬁll effect reﬂect the tempo-
ral contiguity effect. As explained in the previous section,
sCMR naturally accounts for the contiguity effect because
the just-recalled item reinstates its associated temporal con-
text from the study phase and this updated context cues recall
of items studied nearby in the list.
sCMR also accounts for the probability of recall by serial
position (Fig. 4a) with recall more likely for early list items.
As in Simulation Set 1, across output positions, the reduced
recall advantage for later serial positions, increased proba-
bility of recall termination, and accumulation of errors lead
to low recall of recency items. Thus, despite the similar serial
position effects and correct transitions as in Simulation Set
1, in Simulation Set 2, sCMR can account for a greater prob-
ability of producing the ﬁll-in effect.
Despite the backward asymmetry following a recall error,
across all transitions, sCMR still predicts that forward tran-
sitions are more likely (Fig. 4b). This reﬂects both sCMR’s
assumptions leading to the forward asymmetry effect and
the inclusion of transitions from correct recalls. When the
model has recalled items studied earlier in the list, these items
no longer compete for recall and cannot be recalled again.
Y et when the model skips an item and both of its neigh-
bors are available for the next recall, backward transitions
are more likely in this simulation. However, this still raises
the question of why backward transitions are favored in this
simulation, when sCMR generally favors forward transitions
and predicted the in-ﬁll effect in Simulation Set 1. The next
simulation explores why sCMR can predict the ﬁll-in effect
in this simulation yet can predict the in-ﬁll effect as well, by
leveraging the variability in transitions across participants in
this data set.
Simulation 2b
Having established sCMR’s ability to capture the in-ﬁll effect
in Simulation Set 1 and the ﬁll-in effect in Simulation 2a, we
next ask how sCMR can explain both types of effects. We
can explore this question using the same data set as Sim-
ulation 2a due to the across-participant variability in their
lag-CRPs following the ﬁrst-order error. To quantify this
variability, we can deﬁne a participant’s asymmetry score
this lag-CRP as their CRP value for lag=+1 minus their CRP
value for lag= − 1. Whereas positive asymmetry scores are
consistent with the in-ﬁll effect, negative asymmetry scores
align with the ﬁll-in effect. Participants were classiﬁed into
three approximately equal bins based on their asymmetry
scores (a positive score, a negative score, or a score close to
zero; see “Method”). sCMR was then ﬁt to these data with
all but one parameter remaining constant between participant
bins.
123456
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Recall Probability
Serial Position Lag Lag
Cond. Resp. Prob.
a b c
Data
sCMR
Fig. 4 sCMR predictions and experimental data of the primacy,
recency, and ﬁll-in effects. sCMR provides an accurate account of the
plotted serial recall analyses. a Serial position curves. b Conditional
response probability as a function of lag. c Conditional response prob-
ability as a function of lag following the ﬁrst-order error. Cond. Resp.
Prob., conditional response probability. Data are from Osth and Dennis
(2015a; 2015b)
123


--- Page 12 ---
12 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
To motivate which parameter to vary, we consider a simi-
lar assumption to some serial recall models, that participants
are more likely to make a transition of a negative lag due to
the recall advantage for early list items (Henson, 1998; Page
& Norris, 1998). In sCMR, greater recall of early list items
reﬂects their stronger context-to-item associations. The ﬁrst
list item has the greatest strength, and this strength decreases
with serial position. The free model parameterφ
d controls the
degree to which strength decreases with serial position, and
thus, this parameter serves as a natural one to vary between
participant bins. Following this logic, a greater value of φ
d
should lead to a faster decrease in recall across serial posi-
tions. Thus, recall of, and transitions to, early list items should
be less likely, causing sCMR to predict the in-ﬁll effect.
Method
I used the same data set as in Simulation 2a, but now sub-
divided the data into approximate terciles of participants
based on their asymmetry scores, with scores greater than 0.1
(N = 33), less than − 0.1 ( N = 37), or an ambiguous effect
(N = 30). The threshold choice of 0.1 was meant to keep the
same positive and negative threshold while dividing partici-
pants into approximate thirds and was made before running
model simulations. Across these three terciles, the genetic
algorithm procedure to determine the best-ﬁt parameters was
the same as Simulation 2a. However, just as in Simulation Set
1, where most parameters remained constant between serial
recall and free recall; here, all parameters remained constant
across participant terciles except φ
d .
Results
The serial position curves provide an intuition of the inﬂuence
of the φd parameter (Fig. 5b). Each line represents approx-
imately a third of the participants. The circles represent the
participants with the greatest reduction in the primacy effect,
based both on the reduced recall probability and the highest
value of φ
d (2.251). In Fig. 5f, this tercile exhibits the great-
est in-ﬁll effect. This greater value of φd reduces recall of
early list items. Combined with sCMR’s natural tendency to
predict the forward asymmetry effect, the weaker competi-
tion from early list items makes sCMR less likely to recall
such items after the ﬁrst error.
The participant tercile indicated with triangles exhibited
the highest recall probabilities at earlier serial positions
(Fig. 5a) and exhibited the ﬁll-in effect (Fig. 5c). sCMR
captures both of these effects by reducing the value of φ
d
(0.346; Fig. 5b, f). Working through the outcome of this
reduction, suppose sCMR studies the list in Fig. 1, then
recalls crown,fork. As described in more detail in the free
recall results of Simulation Set 1, the retrieved context from
recalling fork should promote recall of subsequently studied
items such as lamp. However, the strengthened context-to-
item associations of tree will increase the probability of
sCMR to recall an earlier list item like tree instead of lamp.
To summarize, among participant terciles, the highest
value of φd leads to the in-ﬁll effect and a lower value leads
to the ﬁll-in effect. It is perhaps less intuitive then that the
lowest value of φd (0.202) produces a symmetric lag-CRP ,
arguably neither the ﬁll-in nor the in-ﬁll effect (plotted with
squares in Fig. 5). As an intuition for this ﬁnding, suppose
Backward
None
Forward
Asymmetry
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Lag
Cond. Resp. Prob.123456
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Recall Probability
Serial Position
a
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8Cond. Resp. Prob.
Lag
b c
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Lag
Cond. Resp. Prob.123456
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Recall Probability
Serial Position
d f
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8Cond. Resp. Prob.
Lag
e
Data
sCMR
Backward
None
Forward
Asymmetry
Fig. 5 sCMR predictions and experimental data of the primacy,
recency, and transition effects, when dividing participants into three
bins based on their asymmetry in the conditional response probability
as a function of lag (lag-CRP) following the ﬁrst-order error. sCMR
provides an accurate account of the plotted serial recall analyses. Top
row: experimental data. Bottom row: sCMR predictions. a, d Serial
position curves. b, e Conditional response probability as a function of
lag. (Note the expanded y-axis due to sCMR’s prediction.)c, f Lag-CRP
following the ﬁrst-order error. Cond. Resp. Prob., conditional response
probability. Data are from Osth and Dennis ( 2015a; 2015b)
123


--- Page 13 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 13
once again sCMR is tasked with which item to recall after
recalling crown,fork, with both tree and lamp as possi-
bilities. From sCMR’s ability to predict the ﬁll-in effect, we
know that a stronger primacy gradient can favor recall of the
prior item tree. However, from sCMR’s ability to predict the
in-ﬁll effect, the forward asymmetric cues can favor recall of
the next item lamp. When φ
d is sufﬁciently low, then the
additional primacy strength does not decay as much from
tree to lamp, and thus extends to lamp as well. Therefore,
lamp is a stronger competitor to tree, and either item could
be recalled with approximately equal probability. As further
intuition for this point, decreasing φd further, to half of this
best-ﬁt value (0.101), leads sCMR to predict even less of a
primacy effect (Fig. 15).
It is worth noting that other CMR papers generally assume
that smaller values of φd produce a greater recall advantage
for early list items (Polyn et al.,2009). However, critically, in
those papers, CMR makes predictions of free recall. In that
recall task, if fork cues strongly both lamp and tree, then
both of these items could be recalled correctly. However, in
serial recall, accuracy is greatest only when each recalled
item promotes recall of the subsequently studied item in the
list. Therefore, if fork cues strongly multiple primacy items
for the next recall, rather than the next item alone, this can
impair recall accuracy.
sCMR still can account for the lag-CRPs across all output
positions (Fig.5e). Notably, all participant terciles exhibited a
strong tendency to make correct transitions of lag =+ 1 and
differed in their CRPs of negative lag values. These lag-CRPs
underscore the utility of examining the transition only after
the ﬁrst-order error (Solway et al.,2012), because when accu-
racy is high correct transitions tend to dominate the lag-CRP .
Instead, the lag-CRPs following the ﬁrst-order error reveal
dissociations across participants and across model parame-
ters.
SimulationSet3:TemporalGroupingEﬀects
This set of simulations examines the inﬂuence of impos-
ing a grouping structure which encourages participants to
group the longer sequence of the entire list into smaller
subsequences or groups. Under such conditions, partici-
pants organize their recalls based on the temporal grouping
structure. Notably, in serial recall, they exhibit primacy and
recency effects within each group, mirroring the primacy and
recency effect across the entire list (Farrell & Lewandowsky,
2004; Henson, 1996, 1999; Hitch et al., 1996; Madigan,
1980; Ryan, 1969). In serial recall, results from these studies
have been interpreted as evidence against models without
positional codes, and thus serve as a critical ﬁnding for
sCMR to explain. Indeed, recent simulations of the CRU
model, which shares retrieved context assumptions of sCMR,
suggest that CRU requires positional codes to account for
grouping effects in serial recall (Logan & Cox, 2023;O s t h
& Hurlstone, 2023).
Here, I examine recall grouping effects with studies using
the common serial recall manipulation of having longer inter-
stimulus intervals between groups (Farrell & Lewandowsky,
2004; Henson, 1996, 1999; Hitch et al., 1996; Madigan,
1980; Ryan, 1969; Spurgeon et al., 2015). In such exper-
iments, participants study lists of items either as a single
group or with a pause after every three items. When there is
a temporal pause in the list, sCMR assumes that this induces
a shift in temporal context, consistent with the mechanisms
used in past retrieved context models (Logan & Cox, 2023;
Lohnas et al., 2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023; Polyn et al.,
2012, 2009). Practically, this disruption item updates con-
text according to Eq. 1 with an additional free parameter
(β
group ). Otherwise, the model parameters remain constant
between the grouped lists and ungrouped lists. This assump-
tion not only constrains the model between list types, but
also assesses whether retrieved context model assumptions
of grouping in free recall generalize to serial recall. Although
sCMR’s grouping assumption aligns with that of CMR for
free recall (Lohnas et al.,2023; Polyn et al.,2012, 2009), past
CMR simulations of grouping in free recall used groups with
additional distinguishable features, such as different encod-
ing tasks. Here, I examine whether sCMR can use the same
temporal pause manipulation in serial recall to explain group-
ing effects when applied to free recall. Across tasks, sCMR
only varies with the same two parameters as in Simulation
Set 1.
This set of simulations is composed of two data sets. The
ﬁrst examines grouping effects using the same type of list
structure simulated with the model of Farrell ( 2012) and
CRU: serial recall of lists of nine items either studied as three
groups of three or as a single long group. This serves to estab-
lish sCMR’s ability to account for typical grouping effects
in serial recall. The second simulation examines sCMR’s
ability to capture grouping effects in free recall and serial
recall simultaneously with minimal changes across recall
tasks and between grouped or ungrouped lists. The detailed
recall sequences in the second simulation also provide insight
into sCMR’s ability to account for positional errors, which
have posed a challenge to retrieved context models.
Simulation 3a
This simulation provides a proof of concept and intuition for
sCMR to capture grouping effects in serial recall sing similar
principles to other retrieved context models. To ensure sCMR
captures all salient features, the data is ﬁt to a meta-analysis
which has canonical grouping effects and has been simulated
with the Farrell ( 2012) model.
123


--- Page 14 ---
14 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Method
I used the same genetic algorithm approach from Simulation
Set 2 to ﬁt sCMR to the serial position curves from Fig. 4
of Farrell ( 2012). The serial position curves present results
averaged across several experiments in which participants
studied lists of nine items as either three groups of three items,
indicated by a longer temporal pause between groups, or as a
single group (Henson,1996; Hitch et al.,1996). Figure 4 from
Farrell (2012) also presents model predictions of grouping in
serial recall, and thus serves as a good comparison for sCMR.
Aside from setting the parameterβ
group to 0 in the ungrouped
lists and letting this parameter vary in the grouped lists, all
other parameters remained constant between the grouped and
ungrouped lists. For this mixture of experiments, I simulated
an artiﬁcial data set of 50 “participants,” each of whom had
50 grouped lists and 50 ungrouped lists.
Results
Figure 6 shows that sCMR can account for the serial position
curves with and without grouping. In the latter case, sCMR
can account for the primacy and recency effects in a sim-
ilar way to Simulation Set 1. Early list items beneﬁt from
the reinstatement of context from the ﬁrst list item, and the
additional associative strengths of primacy items to tempo-
ral context. The serial position curves in the plotted data sets
(averaged from Henson, 1996; Hitch et al., 1996) exhibit a
greater recency effect than in Simulation Set 1, but sCMR can
account for this recency effect using the same mechanisms
as in free recall.
The serial position curves between the ungrouped, control
lists and the grouped lists differ at nearly all serial positions.
123456789
Serial Position
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Recall Probability
Data-Grouped
Data-Ungrouped
sCMR-Grouped
sCMR-Ungrouped
Fig. 6 sCMR predictions of probability of recall as a function of serial
position in grouped and ungrouped lists. In grouped lists, groups of
three items were separated by a longer temporal pause before items 4
and 7, whereas ungrouped lists had consistent timing between all items.
Serial position curves are extracted from Figure 4 of Farrell ( 2012),
which was averaged across data sets using lists of digits from Henson
(1996) and Hitch et al. (1996). sCMR accounts for the primary features
of these serial position curves; see text for details
If sCMR correctly recalls the ﬁrst item then when compared
to an ungrouped list, in a grouped list, the items studied after
a pause are associated more weakly with the item’s reinstated
context because the pause shifts temporal context further
away from the context at the start of the list (see Fig. 1). As
a result, the second and third items in the ﬁrst group beneﬁt
from less competition from later list items, and these items
boast greater recall probability in grouped than ungrouped
lists.
Turning to recall of the fourth item in the list, recall of this
item is more reduced from the preceding item in grouped
than ungrouped lists. sCMR predicts this ﬁnding because
recall of an item immediately prior to the pause will cue the
next item more weakly than in an ungrouped list without a
pause. This may also explain why items at the end of each
group beneﬁt from greater recall. In the ungrouped list, the
greatest competition (i.e., next most likely recall) comes from
the item studied after it, but in grouped lists, that next item
(from the next group) is represented more weakly in context
of the item which precedes it (in the current group). Thus,
this across-group item serves as a weaker competitor during
recall and increases the recall probability of end-of-group
items. The reduction in competition from neighboring items
in grouped lists may also explain why the model predicts
accurately that recall is greater at each serial position in the
grouped list compared to the ungrouped list. Further, this
also helps to explain why the best-ﬁt free parameter for the
amount of context retrieval for each recalled item, β
rec ,i s
higher for this simulation set (see Table 1); sCMR retrieves
a larger range of temporal context states to ensure that the
weakly represented item is still recalled next.
sCMR predicts a recency effect in both ungrouped and
grouped lists. Items studied in later serial positions should
be recalled in later output positions, and as output position
increases, fewer items compete for recall in sCMR. This is
due to sCMR’ assumption of absolute response suppression,
or suppressing recall responses from already-recalled items.
Thus, sCMR is less likely to confuse a recency item with
other items. This is another common assumption in serial
recall models (e.g., Brown et al., 2000; Farrell, 2012; Page
& Norris, 1998). As further support for the role of response
suppression here, CRU predicts less of a recency effect in
grouped lists than sCMR, and CRU does not have an abso-
lute suppression mechanism (Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). We
return to the assumptions of this mechanism for sCMR in
Comparisons to other models of episodic recall .
Having ensured sCMR’s ability to capture grouping
effects in serial recall, we next examine how these principles
can generalize across serial recall and free recall. Importantly,
sCMR should maintain predictions of the salient features in
these serial position curves while also capturing those of free
recall.
123


--- Page 15 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 15
Simulation 3b
This simulation assesses sCMR’s ability to capture differ-
ences and similarities across recall tasks and across grouping
conditions. Whereas in serial recall, grouping improves recall
of the last item in each group, free recall does not tend to pro-
duce this advantage. More generally, whereas usually serial
recall is greater for grouped than ungrouped lists (e.g., Sim-
ulation 3a), in free recall, the impact of grouping can be
more subtle, with only the ﬁnal group exhibiting greater recall
(Gianutsos, 1972; Tzeng & Hung, 1973). Further, free recall
of the ﬁrst group can be greater for ungrouped than grouped
lists (Gianutsos, 1972; Tzeng & Hung, 1973).
Although to date retrieved context models assume that a
new group causes a disruption to temporal context, it would
be ideal to assess this mechanism with as few sources of
variation as possible between free recall and serial recall, in
both experiment methods and sCMR mechanisms. In terms
of experiment design, in comparison to the standard serial
recall approach of temporal pauses, CMR simulations of free
recall use different encoding tasks across groups (Lohnas et
al., 2023; Polyn et al., 2012, 2009). Therefore, it is impor-
tant to ascertain sCMR can capture grouping effects in a free
recall task while more closely matching serial recall proto-
cols, with as few changes to the model across recall tasks.
In addition, this simulation investigates participants’ error
patterns in serial recall of grouped lists. In particular, partic-
ipants are more likely to confuse positions across groups,
mistakenly recalling the item studied in position p of group
g instead in the positionp but in a different group such asg+1
or g − 1( B r o w ne ta l . ,2000; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004;
Henson, 1996, 1999; Hitch et al., 1996; Hurlstone, 2019;N g
& Maybery, 2002; Ryan, 1969; Wickelgren, 1964). Impor-
tantly, this ﬁnding has been taken as evidence against models
which conventionally do not contain positional codes, such
as retrieved context models like sCMR. Instead, retrieved
context models predict serial recall errors from items stud-
ied nearby in time to the just-recalled item (e.g., Fig. 2 e, f)
or due to random noise. Indeed, CRU could capture inter-
position errors only with additional codes corresponding to
the position within each group (Logan & Cox, 2023;O s t h&
Hurlstone, 2023). Similarly, Liu and Caplan ( 2020)d e v e l -
oped a model in which, like sCMR and CRU, items are
associated with a temporal representation, and temporal rep-
resentations inform recall performance (Brown et al., 2007).
This model also needed to include positional codes in order
to capture primacy and recency effects within each group.
At the same time, not all studies report ﬁndings consistent
with interposition errors (Liu & Caplan, 2020; Shafaghat et
al., 2024; Wickelgren, 1964). Nonetheless, to the extent that
these effects are present in serial recall data, sCMR should
be able to account for them.
This simulation uses data from Spurgeon et al. ( 2015),
which manipulated recall task (free or serial) and grouping
condition (grouped or ungrouped). Like the data in Simula-
tion 3a, in the grouped condition, a temporal pause signiﬁed
a new group after every three items. To account for grouping
data across recall tasks, like Simulation Set 1, sCMR remains
as consistent as possible and changes only two parameters
(γ
FC and s). Further, sCMR assumes that grouping evokes
the same level of temporal disruption across recall tasks
(β
group ). If successful, sCMR should be able to still cap-
ture the serial position effects as in Simulation 3a, but also
capture the less striking pattern of grouping in free recall.
Method
I assess whether sCMR can account for the salient features
of a data set which manipulates both grouping and recall
task (Spurgeon et al., 2015). In this study, there were 20
participants each in four conditions: grouped lists, serial
recall; ungrouped lists, serial recall; grouped lists, free recall,
ungrouped lists, free recall. This study also manipulated list-
length within participants (ranging 1–12), and when studying
each list participants did not know the list-length in advance.
However, here, I simulate sCMR with the list-length = 8
condition, where grouping effects are more pronounced.
Although Spurgeon et al. ( 2015) reported that the effects
of grouping were not signiﬁcant across serial positions, like
Simulation Set 2, these still serve as a numerical benchmark
for sCMR.
The experiment procedure was nearly identical across
conditions. In brief, participants ﬁrst viewed and heard a
start marker, then after 1000 ms studied lists of words one at
a time, with the word both presented visually on the screen
and played auditorally. A 250-ms blank screen separated each
word within a group in the grouped lists, as well as all items
in ungrouped lists. In the grouped conditions, participants
“were instructed to try to group in three’s” and a 1250 ms
pause separated words across groups. Each word was studied
for 750 ms in the ungrouped conditions, and the total presen-
tation time of the list was matched in the grouped conditions.
After the ﬁnal list item, a grid appeared on the screen with
as many rows as studied items. Participants had unlimited
time to write their responses on a grid sheet one row at a
time. Whereas in free recall they wrote their responses in
successive grid rows, in serial recall, they could write their
responses next to the corresponding position of the item.
Although this allowed participants to skip over unknown
items, sCMR does not have a way to omit items (see “ Future
Model Developments”). Therefore, sCMR simulations were
compared to the absolute scoring of participants’ uninter-
rupted serial recall sequences. However, the general pattern
of experiment results remains the same if scored based on
grid position.
123


--- Page 16 ---
16 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
To ﬁt sCMR to the list-length = 8 condition, the genetic
algorithm searched for a single best-ﬁt parameter set to
account for the mean data across participants and conditions.
Like Simulation Set 1, all parameters remained constant
across recall tasks except s and γ
FC . Like Simulation 3a,
βgroup was set to 0 in the ungrouped conditions and had a
single nonzero value in the grouped conditions.
For the free recall simulations, semantic similarity values
of studied words were determined using the SentenceTrans-
formers Python library (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). This
library implements Sentence Bidirectional Encoder Repre-
sentations from Transformer (SBERT), which formulates
semantic similarity values based on the relationships and
predictability of sentences and their components, including
words. These values were chosen partially based on their
availability, and partially because on standard benchmarks
SBERT outperforms global vectors (GLoV e; Pennington et
al., 2014; Reimers and Gurevych,2019), a method which also
relies on prediction-based semantic models yet outperforms
LSA on semantic benchmarks including when incorporated
into CMR (Morton & Polyn, 2016; Pennington et al., 2014).
Nonetheless, the choice of semantic similarity structure is
less critical for the present free recall simulations. Semantic
similarity is not analyzed directly but rather its contributions
serve as a source of recall organization secondary to contribu-
tions of presentation order, as is standard in lists composed of
randomly selected, unrelated words (e.g., Healey & Uitvlugt,
2019; Polyn et al., 2011). Indeed, all of the major points
described below for sCMR’s free recall predictions in Simu-
lation 3b are maintained when using the parameters in Table1
but with LSA values (data not shown).
Due to the variability in the serial position curves, the
genetic algorithm search determined the best-ﬁt parameter
values based on summary statistics of the serial position curve
for items at the end of a group. In particular, these statistics
were composed of the difference in serial position pairs from
an item in group position 3 to group position 1 (averaged
across serial position pairs 3,4 and 6,7), the difference in
serial position pairs from an item in group position 2 to group
position 3 (averaged across serial position pairs 2,3 and 5,6),
and the mean recall probability across serial positions. These
differences share similarities to the lag = +1 transitions cal-
culated originally in Spurgeon et al. ( 2015), but sidestep the
issues with grid order as well as that each recall task pro-
motes transitions at different lags, and thus sCMR may still
favor within group transitions without recalling neighboring
items with lag = +1. The interposition analysis (Fig. 8)w a s
also not included as part of the algorithm search, but rather
included to demonstrate that sCMR cannot account for this
effect simultaneously with the aforementioned serial position
effects.
Results
Figure 7c shows the serial position curves across tasks. Like
Simulation 3a, serial recall of grouped lists is generally bet-
ter than ungrouped lists. Further, grouped lists boast elevated
recall for items at the start and end of each group. Figure 7a
summarizes the salient features of the serial position curves,
based on the differences in recall probability across serial
positions for items at the end of the group (3, 6). In particu-
lar, we can compare the recall probability of these items to
their preceding neighbor (within group; 2, 5, respectively)
and their following neighbor (across group; 4, 7, respec-
tively). In this ﬁgure, bars indicate the recall probability of
the later item minus the earlier item (e.g., recall probability at
serial position 3 minus serial position 2). Thus, in serial recall
negative values reﬂect the monotonically decreasing serial
position curve. In grouped lists, there is a greater decrease in
serial recall across groups versus within group, but matched
positions in ungrouped lists do not exhibit this pattern as
strikingly. sCMR predicts these effects because the retrieved
context of a recalled item is a stronger cue for items within the
same group than across groups (Fig. 7b). Thus, recall prob-
ability exhibits a greater reduction for the transitions across
groups than within groups.
In addition to these salient features of serial recall, sCMR
also accounts for critical grouping effects in free recall
(Fig. 7d). First, in grouped lists, recall increases with group
number and is particularly elevated for the ﬁnal group. Based
on sCMR’s assumption that the end of a group evokes a dis-
ruption to temporal context, items from earlier groups will be
less similar to, and more weakly cued by, the current context.
Because recall is competitive, this instead promotes recall of
items from the ﬁnal group. Following this logic, even the ﬁrst
group will suffer worse recall than the second group, because
the temporal disruption item after the ﬁrst group reduces the
context shared between the context cue and the context asso-
ciated with items from the ﬁrst group.
sCMR’s predictions of increasing recall with group num-
ber in grouped lists can also be seen when compared to
ungrouped lists. Speciﬁcally, there is reduced recall of items
from the ﬁrst group and elevated recall of items from the
last group when compared to matched serial positions in the
ungrouped lists. Although these interactions across grouping
conditions are more subtle than the experimental data used
here, other studies report signiﬁcant differences between the
ﬁrst and last group across grouping conditions (Gianutsos,
1972). Nonetheless, sCMR’s predicted recall probabilities
still align well with those from Spurgeon et al. ( 2015) and
also importantly capture the differences in recall probability
based on the preceding and following neighbors to an item
at the end of a group (Fig. 7b). These differences are positive
123


--- Page 17 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 17
Fig. 7 sCMR predictions of
recall probability as a function
of grouping (grouped lists or
ungrouped lists) and recall task
(free recall or serial recall). In
grouped lists, groups of three
items were separated by a longer
temporal pause before items 4
and 7, whereas ungrouped lists
had consistent timing between
all items. a, b Mean differences
in serial positions from the item
at the end of the group, to its
preceding temporal neighbor in
the same group (within) or its
subsequent temporal neighbor in
a different group (across). c, d
Serial position curves in serial
recall (c) and free recall ( d).
Data are from Spurgeon et al.
(2015)
a  Data b  sCMR
d  Free Recallc  Serial Recall
Data-Grouped
Data-Ungrouped
sCMR-Grouped
sCMR-Ungrouped
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2Recall Probability
Recall Probability
Serial recall Free recall
Across-Grouped
Within-Grouped
Across-Ungrouped
Within-Ungrouped
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Recall Probability
Serial Position
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Recall Probability
Serial Position
24 8 6 24 8 6
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Serial recall Free recall
in free recall, reﬂecting that recall increases for items at the
start of each group yet recall is not always elevated for the
last item in each group.
The contrasting instructions between free and serial recall
provide an intuition for sCMR’s predictions of the serial posi-
tion differences in free recall. First, consider that in serial
recall, the last item in a group (3,6) should follow recall of the
middle group item (2,5, respectively). Items in the next group
will not serve as strong competition to be recalled, and thus,
recall of the ﬁnal group item is more likely. However, in free
recall, recall of the middle group item does not require recall-
ing the next item in the sequence. Rather, sCMR may cue
the next recall more strongly based on semantic associations
(due to the increase in s from serial to free recall; see Table
1) and temporal associations other than at lag =+ 1 (due
to the increase in γ
FC ). Thus, in free recall, these additional
associations may overshadow the shared temporal contexts
of items studied in the same group.
Despite sCMR’s successes, it is also worth examining
interposition errors, a grouping effect in serial recall which
has challenged other retrieved context models (Logan & Cox,
2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). If participants use positional
codes within each group, then they may mistakenly recall an
item at the correct position but in the wrong group (Brown
et al., 2000; Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2004; Henson, 1996,
1999; Hitch et al., 1996; Hurlstone, 2019; Ng & Maybery,
2002; Ryan, 1969; Wickelgren, 1964). In the present study,
with groups of length 3, participants should make more errors
in grouped lists when the difference between an item’s serial
position and output position, or transposition distance, is also
3. Matched serial positions in ungrouped lists, as well as
transposition errors at other distances, can provide informa-
tive control conditions.
Figure 8 shows the proportion of errors as a function
of transposition distance for grouped and ungrouped lists
in serial recall. Errors at a transposition distance of 3 are
more likely in grouped lists than in ungrouped lists, or even
to the preceding distance of 2. Such results are consistent
Data-Grouped
Data-Ungrouped
sCMR-Grouped
sCMR-Ungrouped
0.0
0.2
0.4Prop. Trans. Errors
Transposition Distance
321
Fig. 8 sCMR predictions of serial recall errors in grouped lists as a
function of transposition distance. Prop. Trans., proportion of transi-
tions. Data are from Spurgeon et al. ( 2015)
123


--- Page 18 ---
18 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
with a positional coding account. By contrast, sCMR predicts
that transposition errors decrease with transposition distance.
Similar to the intuition behind the temporal contiguity effect,
each recalled item updates the context cue with its associated
temporal context from the study phase, and this promotes
recall of other items studied nearby in time.
Taken together, the temporal context representations in
sCMR can account for some effects of grouping across both
recall tasks. Importantly, sCMR assumes a temporal pause
evokes the same change to temporal context across both tasks,
and that model mechanisms are shared across tasks as in Sim-
ulation Set 1. At the same time, predictions of interposition
suggest that participants may be using positional codes as
well, a point elaborated in the “ Discussion” section.
Discussion
Theories of episodic memory aim to characterize how mem-
ories are represented as well as the mechanisms supporting
successful encoding and retrieval. Much of the computational
modeling work emerging from these theories has developed
separately in free recall and in serial recall. Retrieved con-
text models have had much success in accounting for recall
dynamics in free recall (Howard & Kahana, 2002a; Lohnas
& Healey, 2021; Lohnas et al., 2015; Polyn et al., 2009;
Sederberg et al., 2008), and principles of these models have
emerged as an important alternate account in serial recall
(Logan, 2018, 2021; Logan & Cox, 2021, 2023;O s t h&
Hurlstone, 2023). Combined with recent empirical investi-
gation (e.g., Bhatarah et al., 2008; Farrell et al., 2013;O s t h
& Dennis, 2015a, 2015b; Solway et al., 2012), these lines of
work underscore the parallels between, and the importance of
assessing a generalized retrieve context model across, recall
paradigms. Here, I examined three sets of simulations of
sCMR, a generalized retrieved context model of free and
serial recall. sCMR can account for several key ﬁndings
using its core assumptions that each item is associated with
a slowly changing temporal context state, temporal context
is the recall cue, and recall of an item evokes retrieval of its
associated context from the study phase.
Simulation Set 1 compares model predictions for partic-
ipants who performed one session each of free recall and
serial recall. sCMR makes accurate predictions of each par-
ticipant’s recall patterns with changes to only two (out of
ten) parameters, along with a difference in recall initiation,
between recall sessions. sCMR accounts for the primacy
effect in both tasks due to the stronger context-item strengths
of early list items. sCMR accounts for a weaker recency effect
in serial recall than free recall because the retrieved context of
correctly recalled early list items drifts further from recency
items, and with increasing output position recall errors and
stopping are more likely. sCMR accounts for the temporal
contiguity effect in both recall tasks because the temporal
context of the just-recalled item most strongly contributes
to the recall cue for the next item. Finally, sCMR accounts
for reduced backward transitions in serial recall due to the
two model parameters which varied between tasks; both of
these parameters inﬂuence the contribution of experimental
episodic associations to the recall cue. Thus, sCMR uses the
same core principles, mechanisms, and representations for
both recall paradigms but assumes that participants rely less
on distant or backward associations in a task requiring recall
in serial order.
Expanding on sCMR’s dissociations between recall para-
digms, across tasks, sCMR uses different tradeoffs between
pre-experimental and experimental contexts. Speciﬁcally,
semantic context-to-item associations and backward episodic
item-to-context associations contributed more strongly to the
recall cue in free recall than in serial recall. This follows the
intuition that using these two types of context information
would be detrimental in serial recall, in which recall of an
item should ideally cue the next studied item rather than a
prior item or a semantic associate. Although sCMR updates
the experimental item-context associations after studying an
item, the relative weight of these experimental associations
(versus pre-experimental associations) to the recall cue could
be determined at the start of the recall period. In the present
simulations, participants had a consistent recall task for an
entire session or study, and thus, the parameter controlling
the weights of experimental and pre-experimental associa-
tions was kept constant ( γ
FC ,γCF , s). However, if the type
of recall test were postcued, then the model could adjust the
association weights following the recall instructions.
With respect to the difference in recall initiation across
tasks, in free recall, sCMR uses context to cue the ﬁrst item,
like most retrieved context models. However, in an immediate
serial recall test, such a context cue will promote recall of
recently studied items. sCMR assumes that recall initiation
favors the ﬁrst list item, like many models of serial recall
(Anderson & Matessa, 1997; Brown et al., 2000; Burgess
& Hitch, 1992; Farrell, 2012; Henson, 1998; Lewandowsky
& Farrell, 2008; Lewandowsky & Murdock, 1989; Page &
Norris, 1998). However, sCMR does not rely on context cues
to recall this ﬁrst item, but rather assumes context retrieval
occurs automatically and consistently with participant data.
We return to this simplifying assumption in “ Future Model
Developments.”
In Simulation Set 1, sCMR makes predictions consistent
with the experimental data of Golomb et al. (2008), in which
participants were more likely to make transitions in the for-
ward direction in both free recall and serial recall. Y et in some
serial recall studies, participants are more likely to ﬁll in, or
recall the preceding item, following a recall error of skipping
an item. Simulation Set 2 thus examined sCMR’s ability to
explain this ﬁnding. Because retrieved context models more
123


--- Page 19 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 19
naturally predict a forward asymmetry in free recall, the ﬁll-
in effect has been taken as evidence against models such
as sCMR (Farrell et al., 2013; Henson, 1996; Logan, 2021;
Osth & Dennis, 2015a). However, sCMR can account for the
ﬁll-in effect as well. Like the in-ﬁll effect, sCMR predicts
that the next recalled item, even if followed by the ﬁrst-order
error, is more likely to share temporal context with the current
context state. Further, Simulation Set 2b demonstrated that
sCMR accounts for tradeoffs between the ﬁll-in versus in-ﬁll
effect based on a single parameter which controls the strength
of the primacy effect. When early list items are more strongly
associated with the context cue, this increases the probabil-
ity that sCMR will recall the item preceding, rather than the
item following, the recall error. Remarkably, some positional
models use a similar mechanism, accounting for the ﬁll-in
effect based on stronger representations of early list items
(e.g., Henson, 1998; Page & Norris, 1998). Further attesting
that sCMR can account for this effect more naturally, with
the same parameter set, the model also made accurate pre-
dictions of the serial position curve and lag-CRP including
all output positions. Taken together, sCMR can account for
both the ﬁll-in effect and the in-ﬁll effect, a ﬂexibility which
to date is less common in models of serial recall.
In Simulation Set 3, sCMR accounts for serial position
curves of grouped and ungrouped lists with the same assump-
tion as retrieved context models (Logan & Cox,2023; Lohnas
et al., 2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023; Polyn et al., 2012,
2009), that a new group induces a disruption to temporal
context. Thus, across grouped and ungrouped lists, sCMR
only needed to change the parameter controlling the degree
of this grouping ( β
group ), but all other parameters remained
constant. These disruption items lead to greater transitions
between correct items in the same group but reduced transi-
tions across groups, as well as primacy and recency effects
within groups. This parallels the assumption for CMR2, a
retrieved context model variant in which memories accumu-
late over multiple lists in a session: the model does not assume
a separate list context, but a temporal disruption item was pre-
sented in between each study-recall cycle (Healey & Kahana,
2016; Lohnas et al., 2015; Pazdera & Kahana, 2023).
At the same time, with the temporal disruption group-
ing mechanism alone, sCMR cannot account for all of the
grouping recall effects. Speciﬁcally, in Simulation 3b sCMR
failed to account for the presence of interposition errors,
the increased probability of recalling an item in the correct
within-group position but across groups. To predict these
errors, sCMR could take the same approach as CRU and
incorporate positional codes (Logan & Cox, 2021;O s t h&
Hurlstone, 2023). However, future work remains to compare
the advantages and disadvantages of positional code repre-
sentations, whether these representations depend on temporal
context (Logan & Cox, 2021) or are independent of con-
text (e.g., Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). Because in serial recall
positional intrusion errors serve as some of the strongest evi-
dence for positional codes, empirical boundary conditions of
positional errors will also inform future model development.
For instance, some studies do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant interposi-
tion effects depending on the group size and recall order (Liu
& Caplan, 2020; Shafaghat et al.,2024; Wickelgren,1964). It
will be important for future work to characterize these errors
and thus the contributions of positional codes. As another
example of the boundary conditions of positional codes, in
free recall, few models incorporate positional codes. This has
led to the success of retrieved context models without posi-
tional codes, including with grouping effects, as described
further in the next section.
Grouping and Segmentation in Retrieved Context
Models
To date, retrieved context models have had success in
accounting for grouping structures in free recall with exper-
imental manipulations of grouping (Lohnas et al., 2023;
Polyn et al., 2012, 2009). Without this grouping structure,
the model does not assume that a longer list is divided into
groups. However, there is empirical evidence that participants
may acquire consistent grouping structures in recall tasks
(e.g., Kahana & Jacobs, 2000; Madigan, 1980; Romani et al.,
2016; Ryan, 1969; Wickelgren, 1967). On a theoretical level,
Farrell’s (2012) model makes more accurate predictions in
serial recall and free recall when assuming that participants
automatically form groups from longer lists. For instance,
the model can account for the nonmonotonicities in the serial
position curve of the ungrouped lists from Fig.6 when assum-
ing that participants form groups in those lists.
Another potential approach to examine grouping, and
indeed part of the motivation for Farrell’s model, comes from
the event segmentation literature. Albeit gauged in differ-
ent terminology than groups, this literature focuses on how
people segment their continuous stream of experience into
meaningful events (Radvansky & Zacks, 2014; Zacks et al.,
2007). This literature also provides further foundation for
sCMR’s assumption that a new group leads to a disruption
to temporal context, even in situations where the new group
(or event) is not a temporal pause. For instance, participants
perceive two items (of matched temporal distance) as occur-
ring further apart in time when they are from different events
than when they are in the same event (Clewett et al., 2020;
DuBrow & Davachi, 2013; Ezzyat & Davachi, 2014; Faber
& Gennari, 2017; Lositsky et al., 2016). In addition, brain
regions implicated in temporal information exhibit salient
changes at event boundaries (e.g., Baldassano et al., 2017;
Ezzyat and Davachi, 2014; Heusser et al., 2016; Lohnas et
al., 2023; Lositsky et al., 2016).
Several computational models have been developed to
explain interactions between episodic memory and grouping,
123


--- Page 20 ---
20 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
through the lens of event segmentation. As one of the most
relevant computational models to the present work, the Struc-
tured Event Memory model makes quantitative predictions
of episodic memory and event structure based on predictabil-
ity and similarity across events (Franklin et al., 2020). This
model also makes accurate predictions of free recall and
serial recall as a function of whether items were studied in
the same or different events. Other event segmentation mod-
els, like sCMR, assume that temporal context changes slowly
over time, and each item is associated with this slowly chang-
ing temporal context representation (Horner et al., 2016;P u
et al., 2022). Notably, the model of Pu et al. ( 2022) predicts
a memory advantage for items studied earlier in an event,
which also appears to be present in the serial position curves
of the grouped data presented here. To date, these models
cannot make predictions in recall tasks, but integrating their
principles and testing their novel predictions with the sCMR
framework provides another avenue to assess interactions
between grouping and episodic recall. We next review other
computational models which serve to generalize episodic
memory across recall paradigms.
Comparison to Other Models of Episodic Recall
The present set of simulation studies aims to provide
a model of recall dynamics generalized across memory
paradigms, and several other models share this goal. The
Scale-Independent Memory, Perception, and Learning (SIM-
PLE) model (Brown et al., 2007) is one of the only other
models that has been applied extensively to, and tested rigor-
ously in, both recall tasks. Like sCMR, SIMPLE advocates
for the importance of temporal representations. Speciﬁcally,
SIMPLE assumes that each item’s memory representation is
based on a logarithmic function of how recently the item was
presented, and items with more distinctive representations
boast greater recall probability. The logarithmic function
leads to more distinct temporal representations of recency
items, leading to the prediction of a recency effect in free
recall. In serial recall, recency is reduced because more time
has passed from the start of the recall period until the items
should be recalled, not unlike the reduced recency in sCMR
due to context drifting further away from these items. SIM-
PLE accounts for the primacy effect in both tasks with a less
ad-hoc mechanism than sCMR. Items presented earlier in
the list beneﬁt from edge effects, as they have less temporal
crowding from subsequently presented items. Although SIM-
PLE can account for transposition gradients in serial recall,
to date, this model only produces recall probabilities for each
presented item rather than recall dynamics.
Also like sCMR, SIMPLE can account for the serial posi-
tion effects between grouped and ungrouped lists in serial
recall and assumes that the start of each group is more tem-
porally isolated from the prior item (Brown et al., 2007;L i u
& Caplan, 2020). However, these temporal disruptions do
not sufﬁce on their own; SIMPLE needs to assume that each
item is associated with a within-group position in order to
capture the recall advantage for items at the start and end of
each group, as well as for items studied in the ﬁrst group. This
reﬂects that this competition from items in different groups is
too strong using temporal distinctiveness alone, and within-
group positions help to reduce the competition. Using the
example given in Brown et al. ( 2007), in lists with groups
of three items, items 3 and 4 are close based on within-list
temporal representations, but the completely different group
positions promote the distinctiveness, and thus recall, of item
3. By contrast, because sCMR uses an evolving context to cue
each recall, items studied in different groups are sufﬁciently
weakly represented in this context cue. Thus, if the ﬁrst two
items were correctly recalled, the context cue would more
weakly represent items from groups after the ﬁrst group,
such as item 4. Most likely, this sufﬁces to reduce com-
petition from item 4 and other temporal neighbors to item
3, promoting its recall. Although sCMR can capture recall
probabilities of correct items without within-group represen-
tations, it currently cannot account for interposition errors
(Simulation 3b). Future explorations of these models may be
able to help capture why within-group position information
is needed and is described further in “ Future Model Devel-
opments.”
sCMR also shares conceptual similarities with models of
free recall and serial recall which represent memories with
item strength. Notably, the Adaptive Character of Thought-
Rational (ACT-R) model (Anderson et al., 1998; Anderson
& Matessa, 1997) and the Laminar Integrated Storage of
Temporal Patterns for Associative Retrieval, Sequencing and
Execution (LIST PARSE) model (Grossberg & Pearson,
2008) both assume that as each item is presented it enters
a short-term memory buffer, and that memory strengths of
presented items decay over time. Both of these models pre-
dict only recall probabilities, but share some similarities with
sCMR. Both models assume that the recency effect in free
recall reﬂects greater memory strength of recently studied
items. After beginning recall with buffer items, ACT-R uses
a set of strongly activated items to cue recall of other items.
This is similar to sCMR’s recall cue with temporal context;
both types of recall cues represent recently encountered items
more strongly to promote the temporal contiguity effect. Fur-
ther like sCMR, ACT-R can also assume a role for semantic
information (c.f. Anderson & Bower, 1972).
In serial recall, the ACT-R model assumes that participants
start at the beginning of the list and then recall proceeds in
a forward direction. ACT-R predicts that recall probability
is higher in earlier list positions because the model is more
likely to make an error with each subsequent output posi-
tion. In contrast, LIST PARSE predicts the primacy effect
because items studied earlier in the list beneﬁt from greater
123


--- Page 21 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 21
encoding strength, like sCMR’s primacy gradient. sCMR’s
assumptions also parallel those of LIST PARSE with respect
to grouping, as this latter model assumes temporal pauses
impair integration between items. As a result, items in differ-
ent groups are represented more distinctly and treated more
like mini-lists with primacy and recency effects. In contrast,
ACT-R can account for grouping effects with hierarchical
representations and cuing similar to the Farrell (2012) model.
The Farrell ( 2012) model shares other similarities to
sCMR as well. This model accounts for the primacy effect
by assuming that there is a heightened probability for par-
ticipants to initiate recall with the ﬁrst list item, not unlike
sCMR’s assumption for initiating serial recall. Similar to
the ACT-R model, the model produces the recency effect
in free recall because recall is more likely to initiate recall
with the last group. The Farrell ( 2012) model also initiates
recall with a group context, which promotes recall of other
items in that same group. Although, unlike sCMR, the Farrell
(2012) model always attempts to recall the item presented
after the just-recalled item, this nonetheless leads to accu-
rate predictions of the temporal contiguity and asymmetry
effects in both recall tasks. In some cases, the Farrell ( 2012)
model overpredicts the inﬂuence of grouping (Spurgeon et
al., 2015), but this model was ﬁt qualitatively rather than
quantitatively.
With the models described thus far, sCMR shares assump-
tions with respect to mechanistic and representational differ-
ences across recall paradigms and with grouping. However,
sCMR also helps to provide insight into the role of tempo-
ral context as a potential contribution to recall dynamics and
recall accuracy. Similarly, the CRU model relies on princi-
ples of retrieved context theory to deﬁne and associate studied
items with context states (Logan, 2018, 2021; Logan & Cox,
2021, 2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). In particular, both
models assume that each studied item is associated with a
slowly changing context representation, and in serial recall,
context serves as the retrieval cue. Both models also have had
success in accounting for effects of serial position, recall tran-
sitions, and grouping. However, CRU has four noteworthy
differences from sCMR, thus underscoring the importance
of a uniﬁed retrieved context model of serial recall and free
recall.
First, in CRU, the context retrieval cue updates with
pre-experimental context only, whereas in sCMR, both pre-
experimental and experimental contexts contribute. This
assumption would be more challenging to bridge with
retrieved contexts models of free recall or with several
notable empirical ﬁndings in free recall which are more con-
sistent speciﬁcally with the retrieval of experimental context
(e.g., Manning et al., 2011; Talmi et al., 2019).
As a second difference between sCMR and CRU which
dissociates their predictions, in the more recent version of
CRU used to account for the ﬁll-in effect (Logan & Cox,
2023), recalling an error in serial recall evokes retrieval of the
context state from the start of the list. Whereas CRU simulates
tasks requiring memory for serial order, retrieved context
models of free recall assume that each retrieved item—error
or not—evokes retrieval of its context. Thus, in contrast to
CRU, sCMR does not retrieve context any differently follow-
ing an order error in serial recall. However, because in shorter
lists the context state will be closer to context from the start
of the list after an order error, CRU and sCMR have a similar
conceptual mechanism to support the ﬁll-in effect: the con-
text retrieval cue is more similar to items from the start of
the list, thus supporting their recall over recently presented
items.
As a third difference, CRU predicts less of a recency effect
in grouped lists than sCMR (Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). Most
likely, this reﬂects that sCMR assumes absolute response
suppression: After sCMR recalls an item, the item is sup-
pressed from being recalled again, or even from contributing
to the decision rule (Equation 9; Brown et al., 2000;F a r -
rell, 2012; Page & Norris, 1998). By contrast, CRU can
recall an item more than once during a recall period (even
though such repetitions are errors). With such an assump-
tion, items in later serial positions, and thus generally later
output positions, suffer from greater competition from other
recalled items, which in turn reduces recall accuracy (Farrell
& Lewandowsky, 2012). Although some retrieved context
models have a response suppression mechanism (Lohnas et
al., 2015), this relied on a different retrieval rule and would
require further development to extend to sCMR. Empirically,
future research should investigate how suppression varies
across recall tasks as well.
As a fourth difference, sCMR assumes more idealized
encoding and retrieval mechanisms than CRU. During encod-
ing, sCMR stores the correct context and context-item
associations for each item. These simplifying assumptions
follow those of other models with idealized encoding pro-
cesses (e.g., Brown et al., 2007; Henson, 1998; Page &
Norris, 1998). By contrast, CRU can assume that there are
errors in encoding (Logan, 2021; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023).
Further, whereas sCMR always recalls the item retrieved
from the Luce choice decision rule (Eq. 9), in some variants
of CRU, each retrieved item then undergoes an output-stage
confusion step (Logan,2018; Osth & Hurlstone,2023). Thus,
CRU can have the correct item update context yet report the
incorrect item. As Osth and Hurlstone ( 2023) assess, this
is a necessary mechanism for CRU to account for patterns
of recall in lists composed of some phonologically similar
items (e.g., A, J, K) and some phonologically distinct items
(e.g., B, H, X; Henson et al., 1996). Although sCMR has
much success without assuming output-stage errors, sCMR
would most likely have the same difﬁculties as CRU in
attempting to capture phonological similarity effects without
the output-stage error mechanism. This mechanism reﬂects
123


--- Page 22 ---
22 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
another assumption typical for models of serial recall but
not free recall (e.g., Henson, 1998; Page & Norris, 1998),
and thus remains to be explored further in order to bridge
retrieved context models across serial and free recall.
Whereas sCMR helps to shed light on shared represen-
tations, associations, and processes between free recall and
serial recall, the differences between sCMR and CRU reveal
some of sCMR’s remaining developments as a model of
free recall extended to serial recall. We next review other
model mechanisms and assumptions which may serve future
advancements to sCMR.
Future Model Developments
The present set of studies aims to extend the CMR model of
free recall to serial recall, ensuring that the model as it cur-
rently stands can account for effects from both recall tasks.
Thus, model development was intentionally limited to avoid
the interpretation that the model must lean on new mecha-
nisms in order to predict ﬁndings from free recall and serial
recall simultaneously. However, this comes at the cost of
sCMR making several simplifying assumptions. We review
these below, as well as approaches to overcome these assump-
tions.
In serial recall, sCMR makes the simplifying assump-
tion to initiate recall with the ﬁrst list item on most trials.
This assumption is similar conceptually to other models that,
with high accuracy, recall begins with reinstatement of a cue
from the beginning of the list (e.g., Anderson & Matessa,
1997; Brown et al., 2000; Burgess & Hitch, 1992; Farrell,
2012; Lehman & Malmberg, 2013; Lewandowsky & Mur-
dock, 1989; Osth & Farrell, 2019). This assumption also
sidesteps adjudicating between model failures of recall initi-
ation versus model failures of retrieved context assumptions.
However, as a result, sCMR cannot explain how participants
initiate recall with the ﬁrst list item. Speciﬁcally, sCMR can-
not explain why participants can access the ﬁrst list item with
high but imperfect accuracy, nor can sCMR explain how con-
text retrieval might differ for this ﬁrst item.
sCMR may beneﬁt from the assumption of other retrieved
context models which assume an additional start item is
encoded at the start of each list and can be reinstated at the
start of the recall period (Healey & Wahlheim, 2023; Seder-
berg et al.,2011). Conceptually, this is similar to other models
which assume highly accurate retrieval of a retrieval cue for
the ﬁrst item or of the ﬁrst item itself (Anderson & Matessa,
1997; Brown et al., 2000; Burgess & Hitch, 1992; Caplan
et al., 2022; Farrell, 2012; Henson, 1998; Lewandowsky &
Farrell, 2008; Lewandowsky & Murdock,1989; Page & Nor-
ris, 1998). Recently, Healey and Wahlheim ( 2023)s h o w e d
that their model with this post-encoding pre-production rein-
statement (PEPPR) mechanism accounts for patterns of free
recall better than a variant which worked “backwards” to get
to the beginning of the list or a prior list. sCMR may beneﬁt
from such a mechanism, and comparisons to other mecha-
nisms would beneﬁt from experiment designs in which recall
initiation exhibits some variability, rather than nearly perfect
as often occurs in serial recall of short lists (e.g., Simula-
tion Set 2). However, future work remains to determine how
serial recall evokes endogenous cues, including retrieving
context, to ensure accurate recall initiation. In addition to
how context retrieval takes place, it will also be important
to discern how much context retrieval takes place. Whereas
the PEPPR mechanism assumes that the start item retrieves
context with a drift rate distinct from that of other recalled
items, sCMR assumes that all endogenously retrieved items
update context by the same amount ( β
rec ). If sCMR recalls
the start or ﬁrst item with a different context drift rate, this
may also help to account for differences in the primacy effect
across tasks. Currently, however, the simpliﬁed start mech-
anism sufﬁces, as the primacy parameters ( φ
s,φd ) did not
need to vary between serial recall and free recall in Simula-
tion Sets 1 or 3. Y et given that recall initiation differs between
serial recall and free recall, the simplistic initiation in serial
recall should not take away from conclusions of the model’s
generalization of memory processes across recall paradigms.
sCMR’s lack of positional codes also deserves further
exploration, as this led to the failure to predict increased
positional confusions in grouped lists of serial recall. Specif-
ically, a recall error in a grouped list for the n
th item from
group g is more likely from thenth item of other groups (e.g.,
g − 1,g + 1; Brown et al., 2000; Farrell & Lewandowsky,
2004; Henson, 1996, 1999; Hitch et al., 1996; Hurlstone,
2019; Ng & Maybery,2002; Ryan, 1969; Wickelgren, 1964).
sCMR predicts that serial recall errors are generally from
items with similar temporal context states, studied nearby
item n (Fig. 8). Similarly, SIMPLE and CRU—other mod-
els founded on temporal representations—require positional
codes to account for this effect (Liu & Caplan, 2020; Logan
&C o x ,2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). Thus, it seems rea-
sonable to assume that sCMR will require positional codes
as well, and remains a challenge for the present version of
sCMR (Logan & Cox, 2023; Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). At the
same time, not all studies exhibit interposition errors consis-
tent with a pure positional coding account (Liu & Caplan,
2020; Shafaghat et al., 2024; Wickelgren, 1964), and thus,
it will be important to characterize the boundary conditions
of this effect. Further, it will also be important to explore the
dependency between positional and temporal codes (Logan
&C o x ,2021).
Fully developing a variant of sCMR with positional codes
will also require the model to predict learning across lists
instead of resetting memory between lists. This model could
explore why items recalled (mistakenly) from prior lists are
123


--- Page 23 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 23
more likely to be recalled in the same serial or output posi-
tion as their original lists, termed protrusions. Using the CRU
model attempts to simulate this effect without adding posi-
tional codes have not been successful (Logan & Cox, 2023;
Osth & Hurlstone, 2023). CRU’s predictions of protrusions
were less inaccurate when it incorporated a start item, draw-
ing on principles from a model which could use this start
item and item-to-item associations to produce protrusions
(Caplan et al., 2022). However, Logan and Cox (2023) inter-
preted their ﬁndings that CRU requires further development
if only using a start item, and they instead favored a version
of CRU which incorporated positional codes. Most likely,
sCMR would face the same challenges of CRU rather than
the success of the model of Caplan et al. (2022), and thus this
remains part of the challenge of adding positional codes to
sCMR. The sCMR model might also have difﬁcult explain-
ing other effects requiring learning by lists, which go against
principles of sCMR. As one example, sCMR might also over-
predict the recall advantage of keeping the relative order of
list presentation consistent across lists while varying the posi-
tions (Ebenholtz, 1963; Kahana et al., 2010; Keppel, 1964;
Winnick & Dornbush, 1963).
In addition to positional errors, sCMR also should
be developed to explain semantic errors in serial recall.
Presently, sCMR assumes, like many models, that seman-
tic associations do not contribute to serial recall (Anderson
& Matessa, 1997; Brown et al.,2007; Burgess & Hitch,2006;
Farrell, 2012; Henson, 1998). At the same time, there is some
evidence that semantic similarity contributes to serial recall
performance (e.g., Crowder, 1979; Golomb et al., 2008;
Ishiguro & Saito, 2021; Kowialiewski et al., 2022; Poirier &
Saint-Aubin, 1995). In the present introductory development
of sCMR, I chose to prevent semantic associations from con-
tributing to serial recall in order to isolate the contributions
of temporal context. This clariﬁes sCMR’s predictive abil-
ity in relation to other models with similar assumptions. For
instance, if sCMR had this additional degree of freedom in
serial recall—to recall items based on their shared semantic
similarity—this may aid sCMR in making backward transi-
tions. Y et developing sCMR to explain semantic effects in
serial recall would enhance understanding of the contribu-
tions of semantic associations across recall tasks. Further,
if sCMR were developed to explain across-list effects, the
model could be developed to explain the contribution of
semantic similarity to recall errors from previous lists. In
free recall, participants (and retrieved context models) pro-
duce this type of error due to their shared semantic similarity
to current-list items (Healey & Kahana, 2016; Lohnas et al.,
2015). How this extends to serial recall, whether with lists of
unrelated words or contributions from other forms of long-
standing knowledge, remains for future work.
As a ﬁnal effect addressed in the present simulations but
needing further development, we turn to the ﬁll-in effect.
By changing a single parameter in Simulation 2b, sCMR
could account for either the in-ﬁll effect or the ﬁll-in effect.
However, more work remains to be done for sCMR to cap-
ture the full scope of these transition effects. Because sCMR
more naturally explains the in-ﬁll effect, sCMR may not be
able to predict studies with a very large ﬁll-in effect, or the
ﬁnding of a stable ﬁll-in to in-ﬁll ratio across output posi-
tion in reconstruction of order (e.g., Surprenant et al., 2005).
Further, sCMR, like many models of serial recall, also lacks
the meta-cognitive machinery to explain why individual par-
ticipants or different experiment conditions might produce
variability in this effect.
There are several (nonexclusive) reasons why experiment
manipulations may produce the ﬁll-in effect or the in-ﬁll
effect (Farrell et al., 2013; Osth & Dennis, 2015a). One dif-
ference in task instructions is worth noting here because it
requires a notable development to sCMR. This instruction
can inﬂate the in-ﬁll effect and occurs when a participant
knows that the item they are about to next recall is not
actually the next item in the sequence. For instance, sup-
pose after a participant studies the list in Fig. 1
, they recall
crown. Although fork, lamp comes to mind, the partic-
ipant knows that another item intervened between crown
and fork, but they do not remember that it was tree.I f
all the participant can do is recall this next item, then fork
would be recalled in output position 2. With an absolute scor-
ing metric, fork is scored as the ﬁrst-order error. This is
indistinguishable from a participant who truly thought the
sequence was crown,fork,lamp and produced an in-ﬁll.
The most straightforward way to distinguish between these
possibilities is to instruct participants to report “blank” (e.g.,
crown,blank,fork,lamp). Because sCMR is more likely
to produce the in-ﬁll effect, it would be important to simu-
late serial recall with blanks included. However, presently,
sCMR does not have a mechanism to omit items.
I propose one possible mechanism for sCMR to report
omissions, based on the notion that if the item studied at
serial position i was just recalled and its context retrieved,
then the current context should be more similar to that of
item i + 1 than of i + 2. With this assumption, we can use
a similar mechanism to variants of CMR which compare the
temporal context of a just-retrieved item to infer its location
on a temporal timeline (Healey & Kahana, 2016; Lohnas et
al., 2015). To illustrate, suppose sCMR recalls item i, and
then item j wins the decision competition. Before recalling
item j, sCMR would query the similarity between the cur-
rent context and the input to context from the retrieval of item
j. Measuring the similarity of these context vectors with a
simple dot product yields a number between 0 and 1. If the
similarity is below a threshold value, sCMR would report
an omission and then recall item j. Otherwise, sCMR would
recall item j as the next possible item. Of course, this mecha-
nism should be tested and developed further, but provides one
123


--- Page 24 ---
24 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
possible approach without introducing new model machin-
ery.
Although sCMR may be able to account for the ﬁll-in
effect, making a single backward transition in error, sCMR
may have more difﬁculty performing backward serial recall.
In that task, participants must recall the studied items in their
backward order, from the last item to the ﬁrst. By dissociating
serial position from output position, the backward recall task
serves as an important benchmark and complements ﬁndings
from standard forward serial recall (Anderson et al., 1998;
Donolato et al., 2017; Liu & Caplan, 2020; Madigan, 1971).
It may seem more challenging for sCMR to recall items in
backward order, because core model assumptions tend to pro-
mote forward recall transitions. Although sCMR can favor
backward transitions with the ﬁll-in effect (Figs. 4c, 5f), this
was for a special subset of items recalled mostly correctly in
their forward order (Figs. 4b, 5e). However, backward recall
could proceed as follows. If sCMR uses its current state of
context to initiate recall as it does in free recall (e.g., Fig.2c),
recall should be more likely with an end-of-list item. Based
on the temporal contiguity effect, recall of the nearest tem-
poral neighbor should be more likely. By encouraging recall
of temporal neighbors only, like in serial recall, then recall
of one item should promote the next recall to be its not-yet-
recalled, preceding temporal neighbor.
These potential challenges and developments do not need
to make the sCMR framework obsolete. Rather, participants
may rely on associative information in free recall and serial
recall and additionally may rely on positional information
in serial recall. However, the boundary conditions of using
positional information remain to be characterized, especially
in light of the current results. Further, Logan and Cox (2021,
2023) propose several mechanisms by which a retrieved con-
text framework could incorporate positional coding when
needed, while still maintaining associative information to
support temporal contiguity effects. Future work remains to
assess how temporal context works with or against positional
information, but the current results reveal the importance of
using model simulations for querying which effects retrieved
context models can predict. Thus, the present work provides a
piece to the puzzle by demonstrating that sCMR can account
for ﬁndings from free serial and serial recall with minimal and
informative changes between paradigms, including ﬁndings
which have been taken as evidence against retrieved context
theories.
Conclusion
Episodic memory is generally assumed to reﬂect a common
underlying set of cognitive representations and mechanisms.
Y et memory performance varies with the memory task, par-
tially due to differences in the presence and use of retrieval
cues (e.g., Greene, 1989; Tulving, 1985; Tulving & Pearl-
stone, 1966). This has led to different theories for different
memory paradigms, and in particular leaves more open ques-
tions for paradigms in which participants must generate their
own internal cues. The present work aims to bridge the gap
between two paradigms which require such internal cues,
free recall and serial recall. sCMR, building on the retrieved
context model framework in free recall, provides a quantita-
tive framework and explanation for memory representations
and retrieval mechanisms with minimal changes between
paradigms. The results serve as more than a sum of their parts,
providing a parsimonious account of these recall tasks while
also highlighting the variability within and across episodic
memory paradigms.
Appendix
Simulation Set 1 by Participant
sCMR was ﬁt to each participant individually, with a single
set of parameters for each participant (see the Method sub-
section for Simulation Set 1). Whereas Figs. 2 a, b, c, d, e, and
f provide the average experimental data and average sCMR
ﬁts across participants, the individual model ﬁts for each par-
ticipant are provided, respectively, in Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
and 14.
Influence of Primacy Decay Parameter in Serial
Recall
In sCMR, the φd parameter controls the rate of decay of the
extra strength attributed to primacy items. However, at very
low values, this can actually decrease recall of primacy items.
As a further demonstration of this intuition, Fig. 15 shows
sCMR’s predictions, once again ﬁt to the middle third of par-
ticipants using the best-ﬁt parameters for Simulation 2a in
Table 1 except φd is half of its best-ﬁt value (0.101). Overall
recall is even lower and decreases more rapidly with serial
position than the higher best-ﬁt value for this participant
group (0.202). This reﬂects the competition between items
preceding and following the ﬁrst-order error. Indeed, now
the lag-CRP following the ﬁrst-order error exhibits the in-ﬁll
effect. This suggests that, in sCMR, an increased primacy
advantage for early list items produces more competition
between which item will be recalled next. Thus, in addi-
tion to the preceding item, the following item also serves as
a strong competitor and is more likely to be recalled.
123


--- Page 25 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 25
Data
sCMR
Serial Position
Recall Probability
24 68 1 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fig. 9 sCMR predictions and experimental data of serial position curves by participant in free recall. Ascending participant numbers go from left
to right in each row, and then down each column. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 26 ---
26 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Data
sCMR
-3 -1 1 3
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Conditional Response Probability
Lag
Fig. 10 sCMR predictions and experimental data of conditional response probability as a function of lag across all valid output positions in free
recall. Ascending participant numbers go from left to right in each row, and then down each column. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 27 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 27
Data
sCMR
Serial Position
Recall Probability
24 68 1 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fig. 11 sCMR predictions and experimental data of probability of ﬁrst recall by participant in free recall. Ascending participant numbers go from
left to right in each row, and then down each column. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 28 ---
28 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Data
sCMR
Serial Position
Recall Probability
24 68 1 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fig. 12 sCMR predictions and experimental data of serial position curves by participant in serial recall. Ascending participant numbers go from
left to right in each row, and then down each column. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 29 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 29
Data
sCMR
-3 -1 1 3
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Conditional Response Probability
Lag
Fig. 13 sCMR predictions and experimental data of conditional response probability as a function of lag across all valid output positions in serial
recall. Ascending participant numbers go from left to right in each row, and then down each column. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 30 ---
30 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Data
sCMR
-3 -1 1 3 Conditional Response Probability
Lag
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fig. 14 sCMR predictions and experimental data of conditional
response probability as a function of lag following the ﬁrst-order error
in serial recall. Ascending participant numbers go from left to right in
each row, and then down each column. Note the change in the y-axis to
accommodate two participants with a conditional response probability
value of one. Data are from Golomb et al. ( 2008)
123


--- Page 31 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 31
.2
.1
d
123456
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3 -2 -1 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Cond. Resp. Prob.
Recall Probability
Serial Position gaLgaL
Cond. Resp. Prob.
ba c
Fig. 15 sCMR predictions and experimental data of the primacy,
recency, and ﬁll-in effects with a very low value of φd . In serial recall,
lower values of this parameter can produce less of a primacy effect in
the serial position curve and more forward asymmetry in the lag-CRP .
See text for details. a Serial position curves. b Conditional response
probability as a function of lag. c Conditional response probability as a
function of lag following the ﬁrst-order error. Data are simulated based
on Osth and Dennis ( 2015a; 2015b)
Acknowledgements I thank Jonathan Eskreis-Winkler, Jonathan
Schwartz, and Minqi Jang for their assistance with developing the model
code. I thank Geoffrey Ward and Michael Kahana for sharing their data
and thank Michael Kahana further for helpful discussions and feedback.
Author Contribution L.J.L. made all author contributions.
Data Availability Computer code used to generate the present simula-
tions is available at the Open Science Foundation repository:https://osf.
io/qsr7p/. This code relies on analysis software available from https://
github.com/vucml/EMBAM, as well as data sets available from http://
memory.psych.upenn.edu/DataArchive#2008 (Simulation Set 1) and
https://osf.io/8zycm/ (Simulation Set 2).
Declarations
Conﬂict of Interest The author declares no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M. (1998). An inte-
grated theory of list memory. Journal of Memory and Language,
38(4), 341–380. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1997.2553
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1972). Recognition and retrieval pro-
cesses in free recall. Psychological Review, 79(2), 97–123. https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0033773
Anderson, J. R., & Matessa, M. (1997). A production system theory
of serial memory. Psychological Review, 104(4), 728–748. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.104.4.728
Baldassano, C., Chen, J., Zadbood, A., Pillow, J. W., Hasson, U., &
Norman, K. A. (2017). Discovering event structure in continuous
narrative perception and memory.Neuron, 95(3), 709–721. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.041
Bhatarah, P ., Ward, G., & Tan, L. (2006). Examining the relationship
between free recall and immediate serial recall: The effect of con-
current task performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32 (2), 215–229. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0278-7393.32.2.215
Bhatarah, P ., Ward, G., & Tan, L. (2008). Examining the relationship
between free recall and immediate serial recall: The serial nature
of recall and the effect of test expectancy. Memory & Cognition,
36(1), 20–34. https://doi.org/10.3758/mc.36.1.20
Bhatarah, P ., Ward, G., & Tan, L. (2009). Examining the relationship
between free recall and immediate serial recall: Similar patterns of
rehearsal and similar effects of word length, presentation rate, and
articulatory suppression. Memory & Cognition, 37 (5), 689–713.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.32.2.215
Brown, G. D. A., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio model
of memory. Psychological Review, 114 (3), 539–576. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-295x.114.3.539
Brown, G. D. A., Preece, T., & Hulme, C. (2000). Oscillator-based
memory for serial order. Psychological Review, 107(1), 127–181.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.107.1.127
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1992). Toward a network model of the
articulatory loop. Journal of Memory and Language, 31 (4), 429–
460. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315784779-10
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order: A
network model of the phonological loop and its timing.Psycholog-
ical Review, 106(3), 551–581. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.
106.3.551
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (2006). A revised model of short-term
memory and long-term learning of verbal sequences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 55 (4), 627–652. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2006.08.005
Caplan, J. B., Ardebili, A. S., & Liu, Y . S. (2022). Chaining models of
serial recall can produce positional errors. Journal of Mathemati-
cal Psychology, 109, 102677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2022.
102677
Clewett, D., DuBrow, S., & Davachi, L. (2019). Transcending time in the
brain: How event memories are constructed from experience. Hip-
pocampus, 29(3), 162–183. https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.23074
Clewett, D., Gasser, C., & Davachi, L. (2020). Pupil-linked arousal
signals track the temporal organization of events in memory.
Nature Communications, 11(4007), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-17851-9
Cofer, C. N., Bruce, D. R., & Reicher, G. M. (1966). Clustering in free
recall as a function of certain methodological variations. Journal
123


--- Page 32 ---
32 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
of Experimental Psychology, 71 (6), 858–866. https://doi.org/10.
1037/h0023217
Crowder, R. G. (1979). Similarity and order in memory. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in
research and theory (V ol. 13, pp. 319–353). New Y ork: Academic
Press.
Donolato, E., Giofrè, D., & Mammarella, I. C. (2017). Differences
in verbal and visuospatial forward and backward order recall: A
review of the literature. Frontiers in Psychology, 8 , 663. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00663
Dougherty, M. R., Halpern, D., & Kahana, M. J. (2023). Forward and
backward recall dynamics. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 49(11), 1752–1772.https://doi.
org/10.1037/xlm0001254
DuBrow, S., & Davachi, L. (2013). The inﬂuence of contextual bound-
aries on memory for the sequential order of events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142 (4), 1277–1286. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0034024
Duncan, M., & Lewandowsky, S. (2005). The time course of
response suppression: No evidence for a gradual release from
inhibition. Memory, 13 (3–4), 236–246. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09658210344000233
Ebenholtz, S. M. (1963). Serial learning: position learning and sequen-
tial associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66 (4),
353–362. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0048320
Ezzyat, Y ., & Davachi, L. (2014). Similarity breeds proximity: Pattern
similarity within and across contexts is related to later mnemonic
judgments of temporal proximity. Neuron, 81 (5), 1179–1189.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.042
Faber, M., & Gennari, S. P . (2017). Effects of event structure on prospec-
tive duration judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 43(8), 1203–1214. https://doi.
org/10.3758/BF03205466
Farrell, S. (2012). Temporal clustering and sequencing in short-term
memory and episodic memory. Psychological Review, 119 (2),
223–71. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027371
Farrell, S., Hurlstone, M. J., & Lewandowsky, S. (2013). Sequential
dependencies in recall of sequences: Filling in the blanks.Memory
& Cognition, 41 , 938–952. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-013-
0310-0
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2004). Modelling transposition laten-
cies: Constraints for theories of serial order memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 51 (1), 115–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2004.03.007
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2012). Response suppression con-
tributes to recency in serial recall. Memory & Cognition, 40 ,
1070–1080. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-012-0212-6
Franklin, N. T., Norman, K. A., Ranganath, C., Zacks, J. M., & Ger-
shman, S. J. (2020). Structured event memory: A neuro-symbolic
model of event cognition.Psychological Review, 127(3), 327–361.
https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000177
Gianutsos, R. (1972). Free recall of grouped words. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology, 95 (2), 419–428. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0033639
Golomb, J. D., Peelle, J. E., Addis, K. M., Kahana, M. J., & Wing-
ﬁeld, A. (2008). Effects of adult aging on utilization of temporal
and semantic associations during free and serial recall. Memory &
Cognition, 36(5), 947–956. https://doi.org/10.3758/MC.36.5.947
Greene, R. L. (1989). Spacing effects in memory: Evidence for a two-
process account.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 15(3), 371–377. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0278-7393.15.3.371
Grenfell-Essam, R., & Ward, G. (2012). Examining the relationship
between free recall and immediate serial recall: The role of list
length, strategy use, and test expectancy. Journal of Memory and
Language, 67(1), 106–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.04.
004
Grenfell-Essam, R., Ward, G., & Tan, L. (2017). Common modality
effects in immediate free recall and immediate serial recall.Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
43(12), 1909–1933. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000430
Grossberg, S., & Pearson, L. (2008). Laminar cortical dynamics of
cognitive and motor working memory, sequence learning and per-
formance: Toward a uniﬁed theory of how the cerebral cortex
works. Psychological Review, 115(3), 677–732. https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0012618
Healey, M. K., & Wahlheim, C. N. (2023). PEPPR: A post-encoding pre-
production reinstatement model of dual-list free recall. Memory &
Cognition, 52 (1), 163–181. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-023-
01453-z
Healey, M. K., & Kahana, M. J. (2016). A four-component model of
age-related memory change.Psychological Review, 123(1), 23–69.
https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000015
Healey, M. K., Long, N. M., & Kahana, M. J. (2019). Contiguity in
episodic memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 26 (3), 699–
720. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-018-1537-3
Healey, M. K., & Uitvlugt, M. G. (2019). The role of control processes
in temporal and semantic contiguity. Memory & Cognition, 47 ,
719–737. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-019-00895-8
Henson, R. N. A. (1996). Short-term memory for serial order (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). England: University of Cambridge.
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-term memory for serial order: The start-
end model. Cognitive Psychology, 36(2), 73–137. https://doi.org/
10.1006/cogp.1998.0685
Henson, R. N. A. (1999). Positional information in short-term mem-
ory: Relative or absolute? Memory & Cognition, 27 (5), 915–927.
https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03198544
Henson, R. N. A., Norris, D. G., Page, M. P . A., & Baddeley, A.
D. (1996). Unchained memory: Error patterns rule out chaining
models of immediate serial recall.The Quarterly Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology Section A, 49 (1), 80–115. https://doi.org/10.
1080/713755612
Heusser, A. C., Ezzyat, Y ., Shiff, I., & Davachi, L. (2018). Perceptual
boundaries cause mnemonic trade-offs between local boundary
processing and across-trial associative binding. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 44 (7),
1075–1090. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000503
Heusser, A. C., Poppel, D., Ezzyat, Y ., & Davachi, L. (2016). Episodic
sequence memory is supported by a theta-gamma phase code.
Nature Neuroscience, 19, 1374–1380. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.
4374
Hitch, G. J., Burgess, N., Towse, J. N., & Culpin, V . (1996). Temporal
grouping effects in immediate recall: A working memory analy-
sis. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A,
49(1), 116–139. https://doi.org/10.1080/027249896392829
Horner, A. J., Bisby, J. A., Wang, A., Bogus, K., & Burgess, N. (2016).
The role of spatial boundaries in shaping long-term event rep-
resentations. Cognition, 154 , 151–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cognition.2016.05.013
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002a). A distributed representation
of temporal context. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46 (3),
269–99. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmps.2001.1388
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002b). When does semantic simi-
larity help episodic retrieval? Journal of Memory and Language,
46(1), 85–98. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2001.2798
Howard, M. W., Jing, B., Rao, V . A., Provyn, J. P ., & Datey, A. V .
(2009). Bridging the gap: Transitive associations between items
presented in similar temporal contexts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35 (2), 391–407.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015002
123


--- Page 33 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 33
Howard, M. W., Y ouker, T. E., & V enkatadass, V . (2008). The persis-
tence of memory: Contiguity effects across hundreds of seconds.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15 , 58–63. https://doi.org/10.
3758/PBR.15.1.58
Hurlstone, M. J. (2019). Functional similarities and differences between
the coding of positional information in verbal and spatial short-
term order memory. Memory, 27(2), 147–162. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09658211.2018.1495235
Ishiguro, S., & Saito, S. (2021). The detrimental effect of semantic sim-
ilarity in short-term memory tasks: A meta-regression approach.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28 (2), 384–408. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13423-020-01815-7
Kahana, M. J. (1996). Associative retrieval processes in free recall.
Memory & Cognition, 24 (1), 103–109. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03197276
Kahana, M. J., & Jacobs, J. (2000). Inter-response times in serial recall:
Effects of intraserial repetition. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1188–1197. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.26.5.1188
Kahana, M. J., Mollison, M. V ., & Addis, K. M. (2010). Positional cues
in serial learning: The spin list technique. Memory & Cognition,
38(1), 92–101. https://doi.org/10.3758/mc.38.1.92
Keppel, G. (1964). Retroactive inhibition of serial lists as a function
of the presence or absence of positional cues. Journal of V erbal
Learning and V erbal Behavior , 3(6), 511–517. https://doi.org/10.
1016/s0022-5371(64)80024-4
Kowialiewski, B., Krasnoff, J., Mizrak, E., & Oberauer, K. (2022).
The semantic relatedness effect in serial recall: Deconfounding
encoding and recall order. Journal of Memory and Language, 127,
104377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2022.104377
Ladd, G. T., & Woodworth, R. S. (1911). Elements of physiological
psychology: A treatise of the activities and nature of the mind
from the physical and experimental point of view .N e wY o r k ,N Y :
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem:
The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2), 211–
240. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.104.2.211
Lehman, M., & Malmberg, K. J. (2013). A buffer model of mem-
ory encoding and temporal correlations in retrieval. Psychological
Review, 120(1), 155–189. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030851
Lewandowsky, S., & Farrell, S. (2008). Short-term memory: New data
and a model. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 49 ,
1–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)00001-7
Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Memory for serial
order. Psychological Review, 96 (1), 25–57. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0033-295X.96.1.25
Liu, Y . S., & Caplan, J. B. (2020). Temporal grouping and direction
of serial recall. Memory & Cognition, 48 , 1295–1315. https://doi.
org/10.3758/s13421-020-01049-x
Logan, G. D. (2018). Automatic control: How experts act without think-
ing. Psychological Review, 125 (4), 453–485. https://doi.org/10.
1037/rev0000100
Logan, G. D. (2021). Serial order in perception, memory, and
action. Psychological Review, 128 (1), 1–44. https://doi.org/10.
1037/rev000253
Logan, G. D., & Cox, G. E. (2021). Serial memory: Putting chains and
position codes in context. Psychological Review, 128 (6), 1197–
1205.
https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000327
Logan, G. D., & Cox, G. E. (2023). Serial order depends on item-
dependent and item-independent contexts. Psychological Review,
130(6), 1672–1687. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000422
Lohnas, L. J. (in press). Free recall and memory search. A. D. Wagner &
M. J. Kahana (Eds.), Oxford handbook of human memory. Oxford
University Press.
Lohnas, L. J., Davachi, L., & Kahana, M. J. (2020). Neural fatigue inﬂu-
ences memory encoding in the human hippocampus. Neuropsy-
chologia, 143 , 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.
2020.107471
Lohnas, L. J., & Healey, M. K. (2021). The role of context in episodic
memory: Behavior and neurophysiology. Psychology of Learn-
ing and Motivation, 75 , 157–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.plm.
2021.06.003
Lohnas, L. J., Healey, M. K., & Davachi, L. (2023). Neural tempo-
ral context reinstatement of event structure during memory recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 152 (7), 1840–
1872. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.30.454370
Lohnas, L. J., Polyn, S. M., & Kahana, M. J. (2015). Expanding the
scope of memory search: Intralist and interlist effects in free recall.
Psychological Review, 122(2), 337–363. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0039036
Lositsky, O., Chen, J., Toker, D., Honey, C. J., Poppenk, J. L., Hasson,
U., & Norman, K. A. (2016). Neural Pattern Change During Encod-
ing of a Narrative Predicts Retrospective Duration Estimates.eLife,
5, e16070. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.16070
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. John Wiley.
Madigan, S. (1971). Modality and recall order interactions in short-
term memory for serial order.Journal of Experimental Psychology,
87(2), 294–296. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0030549
Madigan, S. (1980). The serial position curve in immediate serial recall.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 15 (5), 335–338. https://doi.
org/10.3758/bf03334550
Manning, J. R., Polyn, S. M., Baltuch, G., Litt, B., & Kahana, M. J.
(2011). Oscillatory patterns in temporal lobe reveal context rein-
statement during memory search. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 108 (31), 12893–12897. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1015174108
Maybery, M. T., Parmentier, F. B. R., & Jones, D. M. (2002). Grouping
of list items reﬂected in the timing of recall: implications for mod-
els of serial verbal memory. Journal of Memory and Language,
47(3), 360–385. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0749-596x(02)00014-1
Morton, N. W., & Polyn, S. M. (2016). A predictive framework for
evaluating models of semantic organization in free recall. Journal
of Memory and Language, 86 , 119–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2015.10.002
Ng, H. L. H., & Maybery, M. T. (2002). Grouping in short-term ver-
bal memory: Isposition coded temporally. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A, 55 (2), 391–424. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02724980143000343
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2015a). The ﬁll-in effect in serial recall can be
obscured by omission errors.Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition,41 (5), 1447–1455. https://doi.
org/10.1037/xlm0000113
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2015b). Prior-list intrusions in serial recall are
positional. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition,41 (6), 1893–1901. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000110
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2019). The ﬁll-in and protrusion effects in
serial recall. Open Science Framework. osf.io/8zycm
Osth, A. F., & Fox, J. (2019). Are associations formed across word pairs?
A test of learning by temporal contiguity in associative recognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1650–1656. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13423-019-01616-7
Osth, A. F., & Farrell, S. (2019). Using response time distributions and
race models to characterize primacy and recency effects in free
recall initiation. Psychological Review, 126 (4), 578–609. https://
doi.org/10.1037/rev0000149
Osth, A. F., & Hurlstone, M. (2023). Do item-dependent context rep-
resentations underlie serial order in cognition?: Commentary on
Logan (2021).Psychological Review, 130(2), 213–245. https://doi.
org/10.1037/rev0000352
123


--- Page 34 ---
34 Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35
Page, M. P . A., & Norris, D. (1998). The primacy model: A new model of
immediate serial recall. Psychological Review, 105 (4), 761–781.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.105.4.761-781
Pazdera, J. K., & Kahana, M. J. (2023). Modality effects in free recall:
A retrieved-context account.Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 49 (6), 866–888. https://doi.
org/10.1037/xlm0001140
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2014). Glove: Global vec-
tors for word reprsentations. Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing.Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Poirier, M., & Saint-Aubin, J. (1995). Memory for related and
unrelated words: Further evidence on the inﬂuence of seman-
tic factors in immediate serial recall. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 48 (2), 384–404. https://doi.org/10.
1080/14640749508401396
Pollio, H. R., Richards, S., & Lucas, R. (1969). Temporal properties of
category recall. Journal of V erbal Learning and V erbal Behavior ,
8(4), 529–536. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(69)80099-X
Polyn, S. M., Erlikhman, G., & Kahana, M. J. (2011). Semantic
cuing and the scale-insensitivity of recency and contiguity. Jour-
nal Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
37(3), 766–775. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022475
Polyn, S. M., Kragel, J. E., Morton, N. W., McCluey, J. D., &
Cohen, Z. D. (2012). The neural dynamics of task context in
free recall. Neuropsychologia, 50(4), 447–457. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.08.025
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context main-
tenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in free
recall. Psychological Review, 116 (1), 129–56. https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0014420
Pu, Y ., & Kong, X.- Z., Ranganath, C., Melloni, L. (2022). Event bound-
aries shape temporal organization of memory by resetting temporal
context. Nature Communications, 13 (1), 622. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-022-28216-9
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2006). Walking through door-
ways causes forgetting: Situation models and experienced space.
Memory & Cognition, 34(5), 1150–1156. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03193261
Radvansky, G. A., & Zacks, J. M. (2014). Event cognition (1st ed.).
New Y ork, NY: Oxford University Press.
Radvansky, G. A., & Zacks, J. M. (2017). Event boundaries in memory
and cognition. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 17 , 133–
140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.08.006
Rao, V . A., & Howard, M. W. (2008). Retrieved context and the discov-
ery of semantic structure. J. Platt, D. Koller, Y . Singer, & S. Roweis
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (pp.
1193–1200). MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Reimers, N., & Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-bert: Sentence embed-
dings using Siamese BERT-networks. Proceedings of the 2019
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics. arXiv:1908.10084
Romani, S., Katkov, M., & Tsodyks, M. (2016). Practice makes perfect
in memory recall. Learning and Memory, 23(4), 169–173. https://
doi.org/10.1101/lm.041178.115
Rouhani, N., Norman, K. A., Niv, Y ., & Bornstein, A. M. (2020). Reward
prediction errors create event boundaries in memory. Cognition,
203, 104269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104269
Ryan, J. (1969). Grouping and short-term memory: Different
means and patterns of grouping. Quarterly Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology, 21 (2), 137–147. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14640746908400206
Sederberg, P . B., Gershman, S. J., Polyn, S. M., & Norman, K. A.
(2011). Human memory reconsolidation can be explained using the
temporal context model. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18 (3),
455–468. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-011-0086-9
Sederberg, P . B., Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2008). A context-
based theory of recency and contiguity in free recall.Psychological
Review, 115(4), 893–12. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013396
Serruya, M. D., Sederberg, P . B., & Kahana, M. J. (2014). Power
shifts track serial position and modulate encoding in human
episodic memory. Cerebral Cortex, 24 (2), 403–413. https://doi.
org/10.1093/cercor/bhs318
Shafaghat, A. A., Liu, Y ., & Caplan, J. B. (2024). The emergence of
all-or-none retrieval of chunks in verbal serial recall. Memory &
Cognition, 52 (2), 352–372. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-023-
01464-w
Solway, A., Murdock, B. B., & Kahana, M. J. (2012). Positional and
temporal clustering in serial order memory. Memory & Cognition,
40(2), 177–190. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-011-0142-8
Spurgeon, J., Ward, G., & Matthews, W. J. (2014). Examining the rela-
tionship between immediate serial recall and immediate free recall:
Common effects of phonological loop variables but only limited
evidence for the phonological loop. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40 (4), 1110. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0035784
Spurgeon, J., Ward, G., Matthews, W. J., & Farrell, S. (2015). Can the
effects of temporal grouping explain the similarities and differ-
ences between free recall and serial recall? Memory & Cognition,
43(3), 469–488. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-014-0471-5
Surprenant, A. M., Kelley, M. R., Farley, L. A., & Neath, I. (2005). Fill-
in and inﬁll errors in order memory. Memory, 13(3/4), 267–273.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210344000396
Swallow, K. M., Zacks, J. M., & Abrams, R. A. (2009). Event boundaries
in perception affect memory encoding and updating. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138 (2), 236–257. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0015631
Talmi, D., Lohnas, L. J., & Daw, N. D. (2019). A retrieved context model
of the emotional modulation of memory. Psychological Review,
126(4), 455–485. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000132
Tulving, E., & Rosenbaum, R. S. (2006). What do explanations of the
distinctiveness effect need to explain? R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen
(Eds.), Distinctiveness and memory(pp. 407–423). New Y ork, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? Ameri-
can Psychologist, 40 (4), 385–398. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-
066X.40.4.385
Tulving, E., & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus accessibility of
information in memory for words. Journal of V erbal Learning and
V erbal Behavior , 5(4), 381–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
5371(66)80048-8
Tzeng, O. J., & Hung, D. L. (1973). Intralist organization and sub-
sequent free recalls. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 98 (1),
119–124. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0034310
Ward, G., Tan, L., & Grenfell-Essam, R. (2010). Examining the relation-
ship between free recall and immediate serial recall: The effects of
list length and output order. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(5), 1207–1241. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0020122
Wickelgren, W. A. (1964). Size of rehearsal group and short-term mem-
ory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(4), 413–419. https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0043584
Wickelgren, W. A. (1967). Rehearsal grouping and hierarchical orga-
nization of serial position cues in short-term memory. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 19 (2), 97–102. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14640746708400077
Winnick, W. A., & Dornbush, R. L. (1963). Role of positional cues in
serial rote learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66 (4),
419–421. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043641
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Swallow, K. M., Braver, T. S., & Reynolds,
J. R. (2007). Event perception: a mind-brain perspective. Psycho-
123


--- Page 35 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 8:1–35 35
logical Bulletin, 133 (2), 273–293. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-
2909.133.2.273
Zhou, Z., Singh, D., Tandoc, M. C., & Schapiro, A. C. (2023). Building
integrated representations through interleaved learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 152 (9), 2666–2684. https://
doi.org/10.1037/xge0001415
Zwaan, R. A. (1996). Processing narrative time shifts.Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22 (5),
1196. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.22.5.1196
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
