--- Page 1 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-025-00255-7
RESEARCH
Context Size and Set Size Effects: The Relevance of Speciﬁc Cues
When Searching Long-Term Memory
Susanne Haridi 1,2 · Eric Schulz 1 · Mirko Thalmann 1
Accepted: 17 July 2025 / Published online: 7 August 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Retrieving the relevant information from our knowledge and experiences poses a challenging problem to our memory system.
In this study, we explore how retrieval of speciﬁc pieces of information from long-term memory is affected by the number
of items to be remembered and by the characteristics of retrieval cues. Speciﬁcally, we looked at whether an increased
semantic similarity between cue and target improves recall and whether additional context cues aid retrieval depending on
their features and speciﬁcity. Using a cued-recall task, we observed across three experiments that increasing the number of
learned word pairs slowed reaction times (RTs) and reduced retrieval accuracy. This effect was modulated by context: set size
effects did not extend across multiple, unrelated lists. Semantic similarity between cues and targets consistently facilitated
retrieval, independent of set size. Experiment 2 revealed no effect of additional visual context cues on RTs, while Experiment
3 demonstrated that larger semantic contexts hindered recall, leading to slower RTs and lower accuracy compared to unrelated
lists. These ﬁndings are consistent with predictions from a model of memory portraying retrieval as a sequential search through
a semantic network.
Keywords Search · Long-term memory · Retrieval · Recall · Similarity · Set size · Complexity
Introduction
What is your mother’s name? Who is the current president of
the USA? How much do you pay for your monthly cell phone
contract? Chances are, you recalled the answers to these
questions before you even ﬁnished reading. But how does
this happen so effortlessly? If long-term memory (LTM) was
merely a box, in which all memories were thrown together
without any order, locating the right piece of information
would become a daunting and time-consuming process, espe-
cially as more and more memories accumulate over time.
This clear mismatch between a disorganized model of mem-
ory and our ability to quickly retrieve relevant information
suggests that LTM must be structured in a way that allows for
efﬁcient access. A reﬁned question, then, is as follows: how is
B Susanne Haridi
susanne.haridi@helmholtz-munich.de
1 Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Munich,
Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany
2 Max Planck School of Cognition, Stephanstr. 1A, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany
memory organized in a way that supports such rapid retrieval?
This is particularly relevant since as we grow older the num-
ber of memories we store only grows larger. In this study,
we use retrieval times in a cued-recall paradigm to investi-
gate (a) how the retrieval of speciﬁc memories from LTM is
affected by the number of memory items to be remembered,
(b) whether additional context cues help us retrieve speciﬁc
items faster, and (c) whether successful retrieval depends
on the speciﬁcity of these cues. We discuss the changes in
retrieval times tell us about the mechanisms of the search
and the organization of LTM. We use a cued-recall task to
do this, because it is a task, in which we have to search for
a speciﬁc piece of information in memory. In doing so, we
extend previous work by shifting the focus from response
accuracies to retrieval times.
Set Size Effects
We are not the ﬁrst to consider that the amount of informa-
tion stored in memory could negatively inﬂuence retrieval
processes. Set size effects (aka list-length effects) have long
been shown in experiments varying the number of items to
be learned. Here, set size effects have been demonstrated
123


--- Page 2 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
in all three typically studied LTM tasks: (1) recognition
tasks, in which participants have to distinguish between pre-
viously presented and new items (Ratcliff & Murdock,1976;
Strong Jr, 1912); (2) free recall tasks, in which all presented
items need to be recalled in any order (Gillund & Shiffrin,
1981; Grenfell-Essam et al., 2013; Mack et al., 2017;W a r d ,
2002; Ward et al., 2010); and (3) cued-recall tasks, in which
an item corresponding to a particular cue needs to be recalled
(Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966). However, with few excep-
tions (Diller et al., 2001; Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001), this effect
has rarely been studied in RTs, which are particularly help-
ful in distinguishing between a parallel and a serial search
mechanism, which is not possible with accuracy. Importantly,
there are also results that indicate that a set size effect might
not exist. Buratto and Lamberts ( 2008) for example did not
ﬁnd an effect of set size for recognition paradigms. Dennis
and Humphreys (2001) and Kinnell and Dennis ( 2011)e v e n
argued and showed that set size effects in recognition mem-
ory disappear in if you control for certain confounds such
as the retention interval, attention, displaced rehearsal, and
contextual reinstatement. Accordingly, it is not clear if set
size effects exist, particularly for the less studied RTs.
The idea that the volume of stored information can impair
retrieval has also been proposed as a mechanism underlying
age-related memory decline. Ramscar et al. ( 2014) made a
strong argument that a decline of performance in psychome-
tric tests observed in older adults can be well-explained by
the increasing search demands that come with more expe-
riences. This notion is consistent with the copious evidence
showing that with age memory performance declines (Old &
Naveh-Benjamin, 2008; Zacks et al., 2000).
However, memories relying on well-practiced experiences
are less affected by age than memories that require new con-
nections (Burke & MacKay,1997). Additionally, age deﬁcits
in associative memory are reduced if there is an existing
semantic relationship between the associated items (Naveh-
Benjamin et al.,2003). This suggests that not only the amount
of memories, but also how well they can be integrated into
an existing network matters. In other words, memory prob-
lems due to a growing number of memories can potentially
be overcome by the semantic organization of memory.
The Organization of Memory
It has been proposed that memory is a high-dimensional
semantic space (for a recent review see Kumar, 2021).
Building on the idea of a semantic organization, Shiffrin
and Atkinson ( 1969) proposed that each stored memory is
“self-addressable,” meaning that the location in which a
memory is stored depends on its content. In other words, each
memory item is given a meaningful location in this memory
space. In such a system, the content of a cue provides likely
locations in which to look for corresponding memories. In
the ﬁeld of memory research, it has long been assumed that
restricting memory retrieval to relevant information can be
achieved by focusing on memories that are in some way sim-
ilar to the cue (Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997). In other words,
knowing where you encode a memory in a semantic network
also means you know where to ﬁnd it and related memories.
If true, to ascertain if we have seen a given object before
we would just have to look in the place in memory, where
we would encode that object. If something is already there,
we know we have seen it before, enabling fast recognition.
When recalling information from LTM, the memory cue and
the target memory are not the same. In the proposed memory
system, similarity to a memory cue would determine which
items are considered.
This idea is consistent with models such as the context
maintenance and retrieval model for free recall (TMR; Polyn
et al., 2009) which builds on the temporal context model
(TCM; Howard & Kahana, 2002a). These models propose
that memory retrieval does not operate across the entire set
of stored memories, but is instead driven by internally main-
tained context representations, which guide the search to
related items. This supports the notion that it is the local com-
petition, meaning the number of memories similar to or asso-
ciated with the cue, that limits performance. In line with cue
overload theory (Watkins & Watkins, 1975), we argue that
recall becomes harder as the speciﬁcity of the cue declines.
Accordingly, the usefulness of a particular cue can reveal
a lot about how memory is organized.
Semantic Similarity as an Organizational Principle of LTM
But what makes memories similar? Previous research has
identiﬁed a few key dimensions, which are relevant for the
organization of memory: The distance between representa-
tions in a semantic network (e.g., Hills et al., 2012;H o w a r d
& Kahana, 2002b), the time since the information has been
encountered (e.g. Dosher,1981), and the context in which the
information was initially learned (e.g. Godden & Baddeley,
1975). In what follows, we review the work most relevant to
the current investigation regarding all three dimensions.
Memory research has long highlighted how semantics are
important when retrieving information from LTM. In free
recall tasks, additional category labels (Tulving & Pearlstone,
1966) and additional context or category names (Hudson &
Austin, 1970) improve recall accuracy. In cued-recall tasks,
focusing on the sematic relationship between cue and tar-
get (Epstein et al., 1975) and even just increased processing
through judgments of learning (Janes et al., 2018) result in
better recall. In addition to the semantic similarity, Cornell
et al. (2024) showed that the usefulness of a cue depends on
the semantic and temporal similarity of a cue word to the
123
2


--- Page 3 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
remaining target words, highlighting that similarity in mem-
ory is multi-dimensional.
The idea that semantic categories help retrieve information
from LTM is also supported by ﬁndings from ﬂuency tasks,
in which participants are asked to name as many members
from a category (e.g., animals) as possible in a limited amount
of time. The ﬁndings suggest that people continuously recall
words from one semantic category before moving on to a dif-
ferent category, suggesting that recalling one item activates
related items within the same semantic cluster (Hills et al.,
2012; Troyer et al., 1997). This behavior aligns with models
of memory that assume that semantic proximity facilitates
access, such that items that are semantically or associatively
close are more likely to be retrieved in succession (Collins
&L o f t u s ,1975; Howard & Kahana, 2002a).
However, while semantic similarity can aid recall, it may
also hinder it through interference when many items are
associated with the same cue. Some studies ﬁnd that larger
semantic categories reduce recall accuracy in free recall (Pat-
terson, 1972) and recognition (Shiffrin et al., 1995), and that
lists composed of related words suffer from output interfer-
ence and retrieval competition (Roediger & Schmidt, 1980;
Anderson & Neely, 1996; Anderson, 1974). According to the
encoding speciﬁcity principle (Tulving & Thomson, 1973)
and Tulving’s theory of cue-dependent retrieval (Tulving &
Thomson, 1973; Tulving & Pearlstone,1966), this is because
only cues that closely match the encoding context are effec-
tive. Therefore, when a cue is overloaded with associations,
retrieval suffers (Watkins & Watkins, 1975). These ﬁndings
underscore that retrieval is most efﬁcient when semantic cues
are speciﬁc and diagnostic of the target memory.
This extensive research on the role of semantic similarity
has led to a good understanding of many of the principles that
govern memory retrieval. In summary, we know that the more
items are associated with a cue, the harder it is to retrieve
any one of them (Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966; Watkins &
Watkins, 1975), that a cue is only useful if it matches how the
memory was encoded, that semantic proximity helps recall,
and that competition among similar memories can hurt per-
formance. However, we still do not fully understand how the
cue’s similarity to both target and non-target items affects
recall accuracy, and in particular recall speed.
Accordingly, it is important to further investigate potential
dimensions of similarity.
(Temporal) Context as an Organizational Principle of LTM
As famously illustrated by Godden and Baddeley’s diver
study (Godden & Baddeley, 1975), context seems to play
an important role in our ability to recall information from
memory (Heald et al., 2023). While individual studies may
vary in their ﬁndings, meta-analytic evidence highlights
the consistent inﬂuence of context across diverse memory
paradigms (Smith & V ela,2001). However, deﬁning context
is difﬁcult. A general deﬁnition might state that context is the
circumstances that form the setting for an event, statement,
or idea, and in terms of which it can be fully understood.
Such a deﬁnition would imply that the context is semantically
related to the memory. In psychology experiments, however,
context is often operationalized by the presence of non-task
related additional features. As such, a context might be a
background picture, an auditory cue, a virtual reality envi-
ronment (Pacheco et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2021), a video
(Steven et al., 2014), or a physical location change like in the
diver study (Godden & Baddeley, 1975).
But contexts too are not always very speciﬁc in what mem-
ories they cue to. A context feature that changes slowly over
time or has a semantic meaning might be associated with
many memory items. In such cases, providing additional con-
text cues might be detrimental.
Furthermore, different context manipulations seem to
have varying effects on their relevance for retrieval (Wickens,
1970). In fact, some researchers have argued against a general
effect of context, stating that the helpfulness of context might
be strongly modulated by what is perceived as critical con-
text features from an individual’s point of view (Fernandez &
Glenberg, 1985). But are there context features relevant for
everyone? Among the many potential features, time stands
out as a universally relevant factor (Brown et al., 2007). We
naturally tend to remember information encountered more
recently. There is also evidence that behaviorally relevant or
semantically related context features are particularly helpful
in aiding recall (Cornell et al., 2024). But non-task related
features, like additional background pictures might also aid
memory in some cases (Smith & V ela,2001; Liu et al.,2024).
Regardless of whether the context is semantically mean-
ingful or not, it can be viewed as additional cues that increase
or decrease the overall similarity between a memory cue and a
memory target. As such, distinguishing between cue and con-
text is somewhat arbitrary, but it can be helpful when trying
to delineate between what aspects of a cue facilitate retrieval.
Accordingly, when we refer to additional (context) cues, what
we are really referring to is the aspects of the context, which
we experimentally manipulated. In other words, we view con-
text as an umbrella term that includes a diverse set of features.
As such, it is not surprising that people ﬁnd varying effects
of context given its imprecise deﬁnition. Instead, we argue
for the need to explicitly examine and describe which fea-
tures of a larger context are relevant for successful memory
retrieval. Such features could be semantic relatedness, exter-
nal perceptibility (seen, felt, heard, tasted or smelled context
featured vs., e.g., internal state such as the current mood)
or task-relevancy. Based on the existing theories we outlined
above, we propose that the usefulness of the additional cues a
123
3


--- Page 4 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
context provides depends on two factors: (1) How much does
the context increase the similarity between cue and target?
(2) How distinctly is the context associated with the target?
In this study, we investigate whether the helpfulness of
additional context features depends on the size of the con-
text, or in other words, whether the speciﬁcity of the context
matters for memory performance. As mentioned, this effect
has already been described in the literature. However, here,
we are interested in whether set size effects are just due an
increased similarity which is based on the existence of a
context cues and whether these set size effects depend on
the features of the context. In doing so, we want to explicitly
address the question of whether potential set size effects arise
based on the number of items which are similar to the cue
(which includes the context).
To do so, we investigate the effect of three context features:
1. Temporal list context: This context is task-relevant, as
participants only ever need to recall items from the most
recent list, and is therefore likely to be used. More-
over, prior research suggests that temporal context elicits
robust effects, which could potentially reduce interfer-
ence from precious experiences and result in list speciﬁc
set size effects.
2. Visual context: This manipulation is designed to be inci-
dental and task-irrelevant. Here, participants are exposed
to distinct visual backgrounds during learning and recall,
which are not semantically or structurally meaningful for
the task. This allows us to test whether the mere pres-
ence of perceptual context alone can modulate recall,
especially in the absence of explicit task relevance. If
visual context produces context speciﬁc set size effects,
it would suggest that even non-diagnostic, passive cues
can serve as retrieval scaffolds, possibly through rein-
statement mechanisms or cue-dependent attention shifts.
3. Semantic context: Based on previous research, items
from the same semantic categories are likely organized
together in memory. However, unlike temporal context,
semantic associations can persist over experiences, mak-
ing them a pervasive and ﬂexible source of retrieval struc-
ture. If semantic context produces strong context speciﬁc
set size effects, it would suggest that memory search is
sensitive to the meaningful structure of information, not
just its temporal proximity. Furthermore, because seman-
tic similarity can increase competition among related
items, this manipulation allows us to explore how ﬁne-
grained semantic cues either facilitate or hinder recall
depending on how densely populated the context is.
Together, these three manipulations allow us to compare
contexts that vary in both strength and task relevance. This
helps us determine not only whether context matters, but
which kinds of context are most inﬂuential in shaping set
size effects and why.
Episodic and Semantic Memory
Before summarizing the aim of our study, we brieﬂy address
the conventional distinction between semantic and episodic
memory. Semantic memory is typically deﬁned as general
knowledge about the world, devoid of contextual information
(e.g., knowing that “dog” translates to “Hund” in German),
while episodic memory refers to the recollection of speciﬁc
events situated in time and space (e.g., remembering the
moment you learned that fact; Tulving et al., 1972; Tulving,
1983).
While this might be intuitive, this distinction can become
murky in many situations. For example, if you just learned
the word “Hund,” your ability to recall it may involve seman-
tic retrieval, episodic recall, or a blend of both. Another such
example is cherished memory. If you recalled an episode
often enough for it to become knowledge, e.g., the time
your grandma gave you a yellow plush dog, then is this still
episodic memory (the recall of the event) or is it rather a
semantic memory (the knowledge that your grandma gave
you a yellow plush dog).
Rather than this binary distinction, in many cases, it may
be more productive to view episodic and semantic memory as
interrelated processes, differing not in kind but in degree and
function (e.g., Greenberg & V erfaellie,2010). Our study also
avoids a direct classiﬁcation and instead emphasizes how the
type of retrieval cues shape what memories are recalled.
Summary
In summary, the notion that memory retrieval is cue-
dependent and shaped by the similarity structure of memory
has a long history in cognitive psychology (Tulving & Pearl-
stone, 1966; Tulving & Thomson, 1973; Watkins & Watkins,
1975). Similarly, much research has been done on the
organizational structure of memory, showing that semantic
similarity and temporal context can shape memory retrieval
(Roediger & Schmidt, 1980; Howard & Kahana, 2002a).
Building on this well-established foundation, we want to
revisit these classic questions with a focus on RTs, which, to
our knowledge, have only been analyzed in a small number
of studies (e.g. Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001; Diller et al., 2001)
to investigate set size effects in cued recall. We believe RTs
are a helpful addition to accuracy measures (Ratcliff, 1978)
when distinguishing between memory theories.
In this study, we ask the following: (1) How are reac-
tion times in cued recall from long-term memory affected by
the number of stored memory items? And (2) what features
modulate the time required to retrieve a speciﬁc memory
123
4


--- Page 5 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
item? Speciﬁcally, we examine (a) whether increased seman-
tic similarity between cue and target speeds up retrieval, (b)
whether temporal context functions as an organizing princi-
ple that may limit the effective search space and reduce set
size effects, and (c) whether additional retrieval cues facili-
tate retrieval and to what extent this beneﬁt depends on the
cue’s speciﬁcity and the size of the associated category.
Although the effects of cue speciﬁcity and category size
on recall are well-documented (e.g., Tulving & Pearlstone,
1966; Patterson,1972), our contribution lies in providing new
reaction time evidence with added controls for confounds
(Kinnell & Dennis, 2011), which was not done in previous
studies using cued recall, and comparisons to speciﬁcally
designed control conditions that help to clarify how and when
additional cues help or hinder memory search. In doing so,
we aim to better understand the mechanisms that support
the efﬁcient and selective retrieval we routinely observe in
everyday memory use.
ASequentialModelofMemoryRetrieval
To investigate set size effects in memory retrieval, we
developed a model incorporating three assumptions that
we consider essential for capturing retrieval in cued recall.
Rather than advocating for a speciﬁc theoretical framework
(e.g., an evidence accumulation process or the temporal con-
text model), our goal was to provide mechanistic insights
into memory search by adopting a minimalist approach. The
three assumptions we incorporate are as follows: (1) retrieval
is guided by similarity, (2) memory search is a sequential pro-
cess, and (3) activation or sampling probability scales with
set size. Assumption (2) (the sequential process) is particu-
larly important, as it allows us to explicitly model why RTs
increase with set size. In the following section, we introduce
the model and its predictions for the three experiments we
present in this paper.
To implement these assumptions, we created a sequen-
tial sampling model inspired by the assessment of retrieval
completion ((ARC)-REM) model for cued-recall proposed
by Diller et al. ( 2001); how this model differ from ours
will be discussed in more detail in the alternative models
section). Since our model builds on the notion of a high-
dimensional, semantically meaningful memory space, we
termed our model the similarity-based sequential sampling
model of memory retrieval or short the SimSS model.
The SimSS model is a model of cued recall. In cued recall,
a cue is associated with a target and participants have to
retrieve the correct target when later presented with a given
cue. Because the sampling is based on semantic proximity,
in our model, the cue can be seen as the start of the search
process and memory items are inspected sequentially one
by one. Which memory item is inspected is probabilistically
determined by the similarity between the item and the cue.
This means that more similar items are more likely to be
retrieved. In the case examined here, all stimuli are words.
The retrieval process proceeds as follows: When a cue is pre-
sented, the model computes the pair-wise similarity between
the cue and all other items in memory (see Fig. 1B). Based
on these similarities, it then samples a potential target word
as shown in Fig. 1A.
If the sampled item is the target, the model accepts the tar-
get and ends the search, resulting in a correct response (green
arrow in Fig.1A). We therefore make the explicit assumption
Fig. 1 Depicted is a schema of the model. A The sampling process.
The bolded words represent end states of the search. B A schematic of
the sampling probabilities given a cue (donkey). The green circled word
bar is the probability of sampling the correct word and all brown circled
bars combined are the probability of sampling an incorrect word. The
words are examples from experiment 3
123
5


--- Page 6 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
that the accuracy of recognizing the sampled item as the tar-
get is perfect. Although being an approximation, recognition
from LTM has been shown to be indeed excellent in many
cases (e.g., Brady et al., 2008).
If the sampled item is not the target, the model does one
of three things:
1. With intrusion probability i, the model accepts the sam-
pled item and ends its search, resulting in the retrieval of
an intrusion (light red arrow in Fig. 1A).
2. With omission probability o, the model rejects the item
and ends the search, resulting in an omission (dark red
arrow in Fig. 1A).
3. If none of the above actions occurred, the model contin-
ues its search by taking another sample (blue arrow in
Fig. 1A that loops back to sampling).
This implementation means that both error responses
(intrusions and omissions) are independent of the actually
sampled item and its similarity to the cue, as long as this
item is not the target. Regardless of the resulting response,
the model response time is deﬁned by the number of sample
steps the model takes until the search has ended (meaning
a correct response, an intrusion, or/and omission is made).
This time can later be transformed into RTs (e.g., by a linear
transformation). For the predictions, we forewent this step.
To obtain semantically meaningful word representations,
we used pretrained Word2V ec embeddings (Mikolov et al.,
2013), speciﬁcally those provided by the en_core_web_md
model in the spaCy Python package. The pair-wise semantic
similarity between an item k and a cue c, denoted sem(k, c),
is computed as the cosine similarity between their respective
embedding vectors. We validated this similarity measure with
human pair-wise similarity ratings in a separate study ( r =
0.81, see AppendixA). To account for the learned association
between the cue c and the target tc, we introduce an associ-
ation strength parameter a, which is added to the semantic
similarity (yellow line in Fig. 1B). This parameter has the
same value for all learned associations. The resulting total
similarity (accounting for both the semantic similarity and
if applicable the cue-target association) between item k and
cue c, denoted ( s(k, c)), is given by the following:
s(k, c) =
{
sem(k, c)β + a if k = tc,
sem(k, c)β otherwise, (1)
where β modulates the effect of semantic similarity on the
total similarity. When β = 0, the total similarity is fully
deﬁned by the association strength between cue and target. As
β> 0 increases, however, the effect of semantic similarity
on total similarity becomes relatively stronger.
The probability of each item p(k) being sampled is then
determined by the following:
p(k) = s(k, c)
∑N
j=1 s( j, c)
(2)
where N is the total number of items in memory (including
the target, but excluding the cue).
In the task we use here, participants learn several lists.
However, for the sake of simplicity, the model’s memory
only includes the current list. This implementation implicitly
assumes that list context can constrain memory search to
items from the same list. To test this assumption, we also ﬁt
a version of the model that includes words from previously
learned lists (see Model results section after the experiments).
We used our model to generate qualitative predictions for
all three experiments. The values of the independent variables
we used in the simulations were informed by experimental
considerations; while these will be discussed in more detail
in the respective experimental sections, we provide a brief
overview here.
Experiment 1 examined how RTs and accuracy are
affected by increasing set size and whether higher semantic
similarity facilitates retrieval. Accordingly, we simulated set
sizes ranging from 1 to 32, with each set size being repeated
1000 times. Since we did not use any actual words for the
simulation, the similarity between each word and the cue
was drawn from a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. The
results are shown in Fig. 2 A–C.
Experiment 2 explored the effect of visual context and
additionally attempted to replicate the set size effect from
Experiment 1. We simulated two set sizes (15 and 30) and var-
ied the context size within each set as in the actual Experiment
(from 0 to 15 or 30, respectively). Again, each combination
was simulated 1000 times. Results are shown in Fig. 2D–F.
Experiment 3 investigated the impact of semantic context,
especially in comparison to control conditions that had the
same set size but no coherent semantic context. This allowed
us to judge when the semantic context is helpful or harm-
ful. For this simulation, we used a ﬁxed set size and varied
the context size from 0 to 20. We also included two con-
trol conditions: one in which cue-target similarity was high
(sem(tc, c)> 0.7), but all word pairs where dissimilar to
each other ( sem(k, c)< 0.3i f k ̸= tc) and one where all
words (including the words within a pair) were dissimilar to
each other (sem(k, c)< 0.3). Each condition was simulated
1000 times. The results are shown in Fig. 2G–I.
Across all simulations, we used the same model param-
eters: ( a =0 . 2 ,o = 0.02, i = 0.02, β = 1). In Appendix D,
we show that the effects we predict with these parameter val-
ues are robust within a reasonable range of parameter values.
To represent an increased similarity between cue and target
123
6


--- Page 7 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
5
10
01 0 2 0 3 0
Set size
Model times
A
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Cue target similarity
Model times
B
5
10
15
0.25 0.50 0.75
Cue target similarity
Model times
C
Response Correct Intrusion Omission Set size 1 5 10 20 32
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
01 0 2 0 3 0
Context size
Model times
D
0.5
0.6
0.7
01 0 2 0 3 0
Context size
Accuracy
E
0
3
6
9
Correct Intrusion Omission
Response
Model times
F
Set size 15 30
4
6
8
10
51 0 1 5 2 0
Context size
Model times
G
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
51 0 1 5 2 0
Context size
Model times
H
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Correct Intrusion Omission
Response
Model times
I
Condition HighPairSimilarity LowSimilarityList
Fig. 2 Depicted are average predictions across all simulation runs of
the SimSS Model. The ﬁrst, second, and third rows show the predic-
tions for the ﬁrst, second, and third experiments, respectively. A The
locally weighted regression for the set size effect on RTs andB the mean
values for the similarity between the cue and the target word pair. The
similarities where binned into 10 bins for the averaging. Both plots also
show the prediction that wrong responses will produce longer RTs. C
The predicted interaction between similarity and set size, namely that
retrieval from longer lists will be affected more by a larger cue target
similarity. D and E The mean values for the context size effect on RTs
and accuracy. The dotted lines in D and E represent the average perfor-
mance for lists of the same size without an experimentally manipulated
context. G and H The same for Experiment 3. Here, the black dotted
and solid lines represent simulations of the two control conditions. F
and I The faster RT prediction for correct responses in Experiments 2
and 3, respectively
for simulations of the context (simulations for Experiments
2 and 3), we added a constant value d to the pair-wise simi-
larity of all items belonging to the same context. This means
the following update:
s(k, c) =
{
s(k, c) + d if k shares context,
s(k, c) otherwise,
(3)
d was set to 0.3 for these simulations, and s(k, c) is cal-
culated as shown in Eq. (1).
We specify our experimental hypotheses in the respective
sections, but here is a brief summary of the model’s general
predictions: Larger set sizes lead to higher RTs, particularly
for incorrect responses (see Fig. 2A). An effect of cue-target
similarity, leading to faster and more accurate responses for
more similar cue-target similarities, interacts with set size
(see Fig. 2B and C). Incorrect responses tend to be slower
than correct ones (see Fig. 2A, B, F, and I). Introducing a
context that is associated with a subset of items affects both
RTs and accuracy, with the effect depending on context size.
While we view the sampling part of the model as represent-
ing a cognitive process that people engage in, i.e., a cognitive
process in the sense of a process model (Borsboom et al.,
2003), it is important to note that because of the simpliﬁed
nature of how the model accepts and rejects samples, the
model can also be viewed as a measurement model.
Alternative Models
While our model emphasizes key components such as simi-
larity, sequential search, and the effect of other items on the
probability of retrieving the target with a strong focus on the
modeling of RT, other models offer different perspectives
on these processes. To contextualize our approach within the
broader landscape of memory models, we compare our model
with three alternative approaches, the ARC-REM model for
cued recall (Diller et al., 2001), the Source of Activation
Confusion (SAC) model (Popov & Reder, 2020), and the
Temporal Context Model (TCM) introduced by Howard and
Kahana ( 2002a). This comparison helps to clarify how our
model aligns with and deviates from other theoretical per-
spectives in the study of memory retrieval.
As mentioned, our model builds on the (ARC)-REM
model for cued-recall proposed by Diller et al. ( 2001),
which is an extension of the search of associative mem-
ory (SAM) model (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981, 1980)
123
7


--- Page 8 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
and the retrieving effectively from memory (REM) model
(Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997). In fact, it can be viewed as one
implementation of these models. For the sake of this com-
parison, we will focus on the model proposed by Diller et al.
(2001), because of its focus on RT and its use of vector-based
representations. The ARC-REM model proposes that cued
recall can be viewed as a sequential search: a memory image
is sampled based on likelihood ratios and is then accepted or
rejected. If accepted, recovery (meaning the retrieval of the
image into conscious memory) is attempted. If recovery fails
or the image is rejected, the model decides whether to abort
the search. A response is made if the image is recovered or
the process is aborted; otherwise, sampling continues. Our
implementation modiﬁes and simpliﬁes this model in a few
key ways. (1) In the ARC-REM model, the likelihood ratios
are calculated using incomplete and error prone vectors of
20 values, which represent learned words. In our model, we
ignore that encoding can be error prone (in part, because we
motivate good learning by letting participants recall a learned
pair twice in the learning phase and in part as a simpliﬁcation,
because we want to focus on modeling recall). Furthermore,
to emphasize the assumption that memory retrieval oper-
ates on a semantic network, we represent words not through
arbitrary values, but through pretrained Word2V ec embed-
dings that encode semantic information about a given word.
Consequently, where ARC-REM computes likelihood ratios
from cue-image matches, we derive sampling probabilities
from the semantic similarity between cue and target (via
Word2V ec) and an association strength reﬂecting the learned
cue-target pairing. (2) In ARC-REM, image acceptance and
sampling abortion decisions depend on likelihood ratios and
a familiarity signal. In contrast, the SimSS model uses ﬁxed
parameters, i (intrusion probability) and o (omission prob-
ability), that are independent of the sampled image, except
when the correct word is sampled, which is always accepted.
We justify this simpliﬁcation by assuming recognition is
more reliable than recall. Additionally, while ARC-REM
increases acceptance probability as a response deadline
approaches (Nobel & Shiffrin, 2001), we omit this adjust-
ment due to the unbounded recall window in our design. (3)
Since we do not use an error prone encoding process, there is
no way in which the recovery of an image/memory can fail.
(4) ARC-REM assigns different durations to each stage of a
sampling step, with the ﬁrst step taking extra time to account
for full feature activation, primarily to model RTs in recog-
nition tasks. In SimSS, we simplify this by using a constant
time increment per sample. In fact, for our predictions, we do
not convert sample steps into RTs at all. In summary, these
differences highlight that our model is a streamlined version
of ARC-REM with a key addition: semantic similarity-based
sampling, which is absent in the original. This allows us
to reduce the number of parameters from 20 to just 4 and
simplify the model ﬁtting, while preserving the core idea of
sequential sampling in cued recall (Shiffrin,1970; Raaijmak-
ers & Shiffrin, 1980, 1981; Diller et al., 2001). We take this
minimalist approach, to test if the qualitative hypotheses we
generate with just a few assumptions match the results of our
experiment. We later investigate if a quantitative ﬁt of the
model can be improved by further assumptions.
A second model, which serves as a relevant comparison,
is the SAC model. Here, we will focus on the extension intro-
duced by Popov and Reder (2020). In general, the SAC model
builds on the spreading activation theory (Collins & Loftus,
1975), in which memories are represented in local nodes and
the activation spreads through connections (edges), creating
a network. When we ﬁrst built our model, we considered
this framework as a potential alternative to the vector-based
representations we ended up using for our sequential search
process. In SAC, recall depends on the base-level strength
of a node, which in turn depends on its activation history. In
cued recall, the cue node (and the context node) gets activated
and this activation spreads to all connected nodes, depending
on three factors: (1) the base-level strength of the cue node
(which determines the nodes own activation), (2) the strength
of the connection between the cue and target node, and (3)
the total strength of all connections the cue node has. Specif-
ically, a node can only activate other nodes based on its own
activation. The degree to which a node activates connecting
nodes depends on the strength of the connection divided by
the strength of all connections the node has. That principle
is very similar to how we calculate p(k). The outcome of
the memory retrieval in the SAC model depends on whether
the activation of a node passes a retrieval threshold. Another
helpful comparison here is that if you have learned, e.g., the
word pair donkey-zebra, and you get the cue donkey, what
you retrieve/activate is not the semantic node for zebra, but
instead the episode of the word pair. In a way, SimSS rep-
resents this episode with the association strength, but each
word is still represented separately. As such, episodes do not
exist in our model, beyond the features of an episode, which
increase the similarity between items. As we mentioned, we
built our model with three key assumptions about memory
in mind: (1) similarity matters, (2) memory retrieval in cued
recall is a sequential search process, and (3) there needs to
be a mechanism that scales activation or the probability of
sampling potential target items given the number of learned
items. The ﬁrst assumption is not part of the SAC model
presented by Popov and Reder ( 2020), but could be easily
implemented in the connections between nodes (De Deyne
et al., 2019). The third assumption is indeed present in the
calculation of the activation, which is spread from one node
to the next. However, while this would result in similar accu-
racy predictions, the SAC model lacks an explicit process, by
which RTs are generated and does not propose a sequential
123
8


--- Page 9 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
search, but instead an activation process which could predict
constant RTs without further clariﬁcations or assumptions.
This was also the reason why we did not use the spreading
activation theory for our modeling approach.
While the TCM model is a computational model of
episodic memory retrieval, it has primarily been used to
model free recall. The model was ﬁrst introduced by Howard
and Kahana ( 2002a) and proposes that memory functions
around a continuously drifting internal context representa-
tion, which supports recall through associations with studied
items. As such, the model describes a set of rules by which
the context gets updated. Items are recalled by using the cur-
rent context as a cue. Recalled items then update the context,
promoting recall of temporally or semantically related items.
One striking similarity between the TCM and the SimSS
model lies in how items are sampled. The main difference
here is that we use the similarity between cue and an item
s(c, k), and the TCM uses the activation of each item (which
is driven by the similarity to the current context) to calcu-
late the sampling probability (meaning the probability of
recalling an item). In some ways (at least when it comes
to accuracy), the SimSS model can be viewed as a special
case of the TCM, where the context does not drift, but has
strict boundaries (i.e., a word is associated with a cue or it is
not, or a word is associated with a visual context or it is not),
and the currently activated context is mainly driven by the
cue word. With these simpliﬁcations, the SimSS model (in its
current form) cannot predict contiguity effects or other more
nuanced temporal dynamics, but these are also less likely to
play a role in cued-recall than free-recall. However, there are
also clear differences. The main difference is that the TCM
does not assume that a memory, once sampled, would be
rejected; a word either is recalled or not. Consequently, the
reaction times are either not modeled or need an additional
process to be estimated. Furthermore, similarity is not part
of the base TCM, but adaptations like the one by Morton
and Polyn (2016) show that similarity can be included in the
model. Interestingly, in this study, they found that while the
retrieved temporal context cues the next retrieval, when it
comes to semantic cues, not the context, the semantic asso-
ciations of the item itself serve as a cue for the next retrieval.
This result might support the idea of the item-based semantic
search we used here (meaning all similarities we use for the
search are based on pair-wise similarities to the cue).
In summary, other modeling approaches, whether similar
or different in their implementation, can produce compara-
ble predictions, particularly in terms of accuracy. In addition,
many other models could be considered candidates for mod-
eling retrieval. Our decision to use the SimSS model is
motivated by its focus on reaction times and its use of a min-
imal set of theoretically relevant assumptions. This allows
us to generate testable hypotheses without committing to a
speciﬁc underlying cognitive process.
Experiment1:SetSizeEﬀectsonMemory
Retrieval
In this experiment, we studied how retrieval times and accu-
racy of cued-recall from LTM are affected by the number
of learned word pairs. We also investigated whether partici-
pants use the semantic similarity of a word pair to improve
retrieval speed and accuracy.
Methods Experiment 1
Design
In this experiment, participants learned lists of word pairs,
which they later had to recall in a cued recall task, in which we
used one word of a word pair as the cue. The two phases were
separated by a letter span task, which ensured that working
memory was not used for the recall. For the cued-recall task,
we manipulated two factors: set size and similarity of the
words in a word pair. To ensure that we could capture the
functional form of the set size effect, we included 16 set size
levels (2–32 word pairs in steps of two). Because this resulted
in too many word pairs for a single participant to learn, but we
also wanted to look at the set size effects across blocks, we
created four combinations of four set size each, which were
varied between subjects. As a result, each participant was
exposed to four different set sizes (A, [2, 12, 22, 32]; B, [4, 14,
24, 26]; C, [6, 16, 18, 28]; D, [8, 10, 20, 30]). We predeﬁned
these set sizes to control for the total number of word pairs
each participant learned (68 word pairs). This set up ensured
that all set sizes were presented an equal number of times
and that each participant had seen the same number of word
pairs. Similarity between word pairs was manipulated within-
subject. We measured both reaction times and recall accuracy
as outcome variables. In the letter span task, we manipulated
the number of letters (3–7) within-subject to have a letter
span measure for potential follow up questions. Accuracy
was measured as an outcome variable.
Participants
Based on a pilot study with 14 participants, we estimated that
120 participants (after exclusion) would be needed to reli-
ably detect a set size effect if the effect observed in the pilot
was true. Accordingly, we collected data from 174 adults (81
female, 4 non-binary or unknown, age range 18 to 45, mean
= 32.77; SD = 6.95) via Proliﬁc (www.proliﬁc.com). We
excluded participants who did not provide at least two valid
responses (valid responses for this analysis are described
in the analysis section) for each list (58 participants) and
participants who reported that they wrote down the word
pairs as a memory aid during the task (1 participant). Both
of these exclusion criteria were preregistered and led to the
123
9


--- Page 10 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
inclusion of 115 participants. Participants were paid up to
$12.00 ($6.00 base payment plus a maximum bonus of $6.00;
Mean = 10.25; the bonus was calculated by multiplying the
maximum bonus with the average accuracy in the cued-recall
and the letter sequence tasks, i.e., if a participant got 90% of
the letter sequence task trials and 70% of the cued-recall tri-
als correct they received a bonus of (0.9 + 0.7)*0.5*$6 =
$4.8). To ensure that the task was understood correctly, all
participants had to answer three comprehension questions
before starting the experiment. Most participants ﬁnished the
experiment in under 50 min (including breaks, which could
be taken after each block). Informed consent was obtained
from all participants before the experiment started. This and
all following studies were approved by the ethics committee
of the medical faculty of the University of Tübingen (number
701/2020BO).
Materials
To control for variability in RTs or accuracy due to word
length (Katkov et al., 2014), we used words with a length of
four to six characters in the cued-recall task. All words were
taken from the labels of the THINGS dataset (Hebart et al.,
2019) and were proper nouns. To manipulate the similarity
between the words within one pair, we created word pairs that
fell into ﬁve bins of similarities (0.0–0.2, 0.2–0.4, 0.4–0.6,
0.6–0.8, and 0.8–1.0). We used the cosine similarity between
the pre-learned Word2V ec embeddings (Mikolov et al.,2013)
we introduced in the modeling section. Each list with a set
size larger than 5 contained an equal number of word pairs
from each of the bins, to ensure that all lists had a simi-
lar average similarity and that all participants saw the same
number of pairs from each similarity bin. If the list length was
not divisible by 5, the remaining word pairs were randomly
chosen. The same was done for lists of length below 5.
Procedure
Participants were instructed to recall the word pairs (for the
cued-recall task) and the letters in order of presentation (for
the letter span task) as fast and accurately as possible. We
emphasized accuracy by telling participants that their bonus
depended on the percentage of correct responses but not on
the speed at which they responded. In total, each participant
completed four blocks with different set sizes (see design
section), which were presented in random order. Each block
consisted of three phases. In all phases, each trial started with
a ﬁxation cross which was presented for 1 s. In the ﬁrst phase,
the learning phase (see Fig. 3A), participants were presented
with a sequence of word pairs in the center of the screen.
Because we wanted participants to achieve a high recall accu-
racy (Ratcliff & Murdock, 1976; Shiffrin, 1970) for our RT
analysis each pair was presented for 4 s, followed by a short
learning phase. Here, one of the words was replaced with
an empty response ﬁeld and participants had 5 s to type the
omitted word. The word pair was then presented again for 2 s
together with a happy or sad smiley indicating whether the
response was correct or not. We repeated the same procedure
for the other word pairs. This extended study procedure was
also meant to minimize reduced attention effects and dis-
placed rehearsal as a confounder in longer lists (Kinnell &
Dennis, 2011) through increased engagement with the cur-
rent word pair.
To ensure that participants recalled the words from LTM,
we implemented a letter span task, which requires working
memory, as a distractor task (Daneman & Carpenter, 1980)
in the second phase of each block (see Fig. 3B). This also
served to prevent chances for rehearsal, which would favor
shorter lists (Kinnell & Dennis, 2011). Here, participants
were sequentially presented with 3–7 letters, which they then
had to recall by typing in the letters in the presented order
into a response ﬁeld. Each letter was presented for 1 s and
Fig. 3 Illustration of the trial structure in Experiment 1.A One trial from
the learning phase. The numbers above the arrow indicate how long the
image left of the arrow was presented. B One trial from the letter span
task, which we used as a distractor task. The number of sequentially pre-
sented letters varied. C One trial from the testing phase. D A schematic
of the proactive trial structure we used in Experiment 1 to control for
lag effects
123
10


--- Page 11 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
participants had to provide their response within 10 s. If the
response was correct a happy smiley and if not a sad smiley
was presented for 1 s. Each letter span task consisted of 10
trials with each of the ﬁve lengths presented twice in ran-
dom order. To avoid the accidental formation of words, all
letters were consonants (f, h, j, k, l, n, p, q, r, s, t, y). No letter
appeared twice within the same sequence.
In the last phase, the cued-recall phase (see Fig. 3C), par-
ticipants were presented with some of the words from the
ﬁrst phase. Their task was to recall the not-presented word of
a word pair (the target) given the presented word (the cue).
As soon as they knew the word to be recalled, they were
instructed to press the space bar. The elapsed time since the
presentation of the cue was our measure of the retrieval time.
To prevent premature key-presses, participants only had 5 s
to type their response after they had pressed the space bar. To
ensure that slow typing was not an issue and to minimize the
effect of typos on the feedback, participants only had to type
the ﬁrst three letters of the target word correctly. If partici-
pants could not recall the target, they were asked to respond
by typing “0.” Each response was followed by feedback. We
included the feedback to keep up the motivation throughout
the study (Reinecke & Gajos, 2015). Which word of a word
pair was the cue was always determined randomly. To control
for lag (retention interval) as a confounder, we always cued
words from the same positions (2, 4, 5, 7 and 9) counting
from the back of the list (i.e., a proactive design Kinnell and
Dennis, 2011). This design in combination with the distractor
task also helps control for contextual reinstatement as a con-
founder for set size effects, because the list context should be
similarly strong for all conditions at the time of recall. Each
of the 5 tested words came from a different similarity bin.
To prevent the participants from learning which positions got
cued, 5 other words were randomly cued, resulting in 10 cued
words in total, which were presented in random order (see
Fig. 3D) for a schema of this). For sets smaller than ten word
pairs, participants had to recall all the word pairs they learned
in phase one in a random order.
Hypotheses
We based our hypotheses on the predictions of the similarity-
based sequential sampling (SimSS) model. The SimSS model
is a model of the recall process and only simulates the test
phase. Based on this model, we hypothesized the following:
(1) RTs in the cued-recall task increase with the length of the
list (i.e., the set size) for correct responses (see Fig.2A). (2.A)
Targets that are similar to the cue can be retrieved faster (see
Fig. 2B), (2.B) especially for longer lists (i.e., we expect a
negative interaction between set size and semantic similarity
between cue and target, meaning that similarity decreases
RTs more for longer lists (see Fig. 2C). (3) RTs are longer
for incorrect responses (see Fig. 2A and B).
All hypotheses were preregistered ( https://osf.io/uqjn3).
Analysis
We statistically tested the three hypotheses with these three
models (also preregistered):
1. RT ∼ set size + (1 + set size | participant)
2. RT ∼ set size * similarity + (1 + set size + similarity |
participant)
3. RT ∼ accuracy + (1 + accuracy | participant)
Similarity refers to the similarity between cue and target.
For the ﬁrst and second RT analysis, we only included cor-
rect responses. Furthermore, we excluded all RTs that exceed
20 s (e.g. to exclude trials during which participants left the
screen). We also only used RTs from the 5 positions that were
cued in all lists that had a minimum of 10 word pairs. Partici-
pants who did not provide us with at least 2 valid RTs that met
these inclusion criteria for each of the set sizes were excluded
from this analysis. For the accuracy analysis, we included all
responses with RTs below 20 s. For the sake of complete-
ness, we also analyzed set sizes smaller than 10, which we
could not control for lag. In this analysis, we included all RTs
for correct responses below 20 s from all set sizes (i.e., not
controlled for lag).
We implemented the models as Bayesian hierarchical
linear regressions using the brms package (Bürkner, 2017,
2018) in the R statistics environment (R Core Team, 2024).
We used a lognormal Likelihood function in these models,
because the models did not converge when using an exGaus-
sian (as preregistered). For the models that had accuracy as
the outcome, we used a Bernoulli likelihood function. All
models used default priors. To estimate whether the pre-
dictors affected the RTs as hypothesized, we used Bayes
factors (BFs) (Kass & Raftery, 1995). Speciﬁcally, we
performed model comparisons using maximally structured
mixed effects models (Barr et al., 2013). This means that
we always compared the full models speciﬁed above against
models that did not contain the target variable as a ﬁxed effect,
but did still have it as a random effect. If the full model does
not explain the data better than the model excluding the tar-
get variable, then the target variable is unlikely to have a
strong and systematic contribution to the change in RTs. We
used bridge sampling (Gronau et al., 2017) as included in the
brms package to approximate BFs for these comparisons. The
Bayes factor (BF) is deﬁned as the ratio of the marginal like-
lihoods of the two competing models: BF10= p(data |H1)
p(data |H0) .I t
quantiﬁes the relative evidence provided by the data for one
hypothesis over another, given the hypotheses are equally
likely a priori. A BF larger than 1 provides evidence for the
alternative hypothesis (H1), while a BF below 1 provides evi-
dence for the null hypothesis ( H0). For example, a BF of 2
123
11


--- Page 12 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
Fig. 4 Results Experiment 1. A, B,a n d C The mean RTs (solid lines)
and regressions (dotted lines) of the RTs. The shaded are represents
the standard error. A and C The RTs across set sizes. In A,t h ec o l o r s
represent the correctness of the response. In C, the colors represent the
different blocks. Here, only correct responses are plotted. D, E,a n d F
The same, but for accuracy. All shaded areas around the mean represent
t h es t a n d a r de r r o r( S E )o ft h em e a n
indicates that the data are twice as likely under the alterna-
tive hypothesis. Generally, BFs larger than 3 are interpreted
as providing substantial evidence for one hypothesis over the
other (Jeffreys, 1961). All BFs are reported in favor of the
alternative hypothesis ( BF10). All models we used to esti-
mate effects are linear regression models. We sampled from
the posterior distributions of the model parameters using 4
independent Markov chains (each with 5000 warm-up sam-
ples and 5000 stored samples). We tested the convergence of
the chains by means of the ˆR values and by visual inspection.
All ˆR values were equal to 1, and chains mixed well covering
the target distributions. In all analyses, set size and similarity
were mean centered and z standardized.
Results Experiment 1
As hypothesized, RTs increased with set size ( ˆβ = 0.09,
95% HDI = [0 .05, 0 .13], BF10 > 100, see Fig. 4A). On
average, increasing set size by one pair (e.g., from 2 to 4 or
8 to 10), slowed down the response by 0.06 s. Increased sim-
ilarity between the cue and the target resulted in faster RTs
( ˆβ =− 0.06, 95% HDI = [− 0.08, − 0.04], BF10 > 100). On
average, the responses were 0.68 s faster if the similarity was
above 0.8 when compared to similarities below 0.2. However,
there was no evidence for the similarity x set size interaction
( ˆβ =− 0.01, 95% HDI = [ − 0.03, 0 .01], BF10 < 0.01),
supporting hypothesis 2.A, but not 2.B (see Fig. 4B). We
observed evidence for Hypothesis 3, with RTs for wrong
responses being on average 2.8 s slower than RTs for cor-
rect responses ( ˆβ =− 0.76, 95% HDI = [ − 0.85, − 0.68],
BF10 > 100, see Fig. 4A and B). We also post hoc tested
if the RTs differed for the different responses by splitting
the wrong responses into omissions and intrusion. We found
that both omissions ( ˆβ = 0.91, 95% HDI = [0.81, 1.01]) and
intrusions ( ˆβ = 0.56, 95% HDI = [0 .43, 0.67]) have longer
RTs than correct responses ( BF10 > 100) and that omission
are on average 0.87s slower than intrusions. In addition to
RTs, Hypotheses 1 and 2 were also supported when analyz-
ing accuracies (set size: ˆβ =− 0.26, 95% HDI = [ − 0.42,
− 0.04], BF10 = 4.67, see Fig. 4D and similarity: ˆβ = 0.36,
95% HDI = [0 .18, 0 .55], BF10 > 100, see Fig. 4E). The
results remained the same in the analysis including responses
from smaller set sizes and not controlling for lag.
To investigate whether the list context can be used to
constrain the search set, we also tested the effect of block.
The idea being that after presentation of the pairs in the
4th block, all participants had observed the same number of
pairs. Accordingly, if participants could not use the list/block
context to constrain their memory search, the set size effect
should increase over blocks, or in other words, there should
not be a set size effect in the last block any more. To test this,
we ﬁrst looked at whether there was an interaction between
block and set size or a main effect of block in the lag con-
trolled RTs.1 However, there was no interaction (ˆβ =− 0.02,
95% HDI = [ − 0.07, 0.03], BF10 < 0.1) or main effect of
block ( ˆβ =− 0.01, 95% HDI = [− 0.05, 0.03], BF10 < 0.01).
To test whether there was a difference in mean reaction times
(RTs) between Blocks 1 and 4, a Bayesian paired-sample t-
test using the BayesFactor package (Morey et al., 2015)w a s
conducted. We observed evidence in favor of the null, i.e.,
that there is no difference between the RTs in Block 1 and
4( BF10 = 0.31). The same was true for accuracy ( BF10 =
0.21). Both these exploratory analyses support the conclu-
sion that the set size effect is constrained to a speciﬁc list and
1 RT ∼ set size * block + (set size + block | subject)
123
12


--- Page 13 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
that it does not accumulate over several lists presented in the
course of the experiment (see Fig. 4C).
Furthermore, to make sure that the effects we found were
not affected by word frequency, which has been shown to
strongly effect encoding and retrieval in LTM (e.g. Popov &
Reder, 2020), we added the SUBTLEX word frequency count
of the target word as a main effect both to the full RT model
and the full accuracy model. Word frequency of the target
did neither affect the recall speed ( ˆβ =− 0.02, 95% HDI =
[− 0.04, 0.01], BF10 < 0.1) nor the accuracy (ˆβ = 0.24, 95%
HDI = [− 0.01, 0.72], BF10 = 1.3). Including the frequency
did not change the effects of similarity (RT, ˆβ =− 0.06;
accuracy, ˆβ = 0.38) and set size (RT, ˆβ = 0.12; accuracy,
ˆβ =− 0.23) strongly.
Discussion Experiment 1
We observed that both RTs and accuracy were negatively
affected by set size. Semantic similarity between cue and
target made recall more accurate and faster, regardless of set
size. Furthermore, RTs were slower for incorrect responses.
These results support the idea that memory retrieval builds
on a sequential search through a semantic network. Addition-
ally, we found that the list context was relevant for the set
size effect, with the set size effect not accumulating across
lists. This strongly suggests that participants can use the list
context to constrain the items they consider. In other words,
temporal context is an important organizational dimension
in LTM (Brown et al., 2007). In Experiment 2, we tested
whether additional, task-irrelevant cues that are associated
with only a temporally dispersed subset of the word pairs
can be used similarly as a temporal context to aid memory
retrieval. Therefore, we manipulated the number of stimuli
associated with a visual context cue, which have previously
been used to successfully study context effects (e.g., Liu et
al., 2024; V erkoeijen et al.,2004; Racsmány et al., 2021).
Experiment2:EﬀectofVisualContextCues
onMemoryRetrieval
In this experiment, we studied how the number of learned
word pairs that are associated with a visual cue which was not
associated with the task beyond the fact that it was present
both during encoding and recall affects retrieval times and
accuracy of cued-recall from LTM.
Methods Experiment 2
Design
We used the same general three phase setup as in Experiment
1. For the cued-recall task, we manipulated two factors: (1)
context size, i.e., the number of word pairs associated with a
visual context cue, and (2) set size. Set size was either 15 or
30 word pairs and was manipulated between-subjects. To get
a roughly equal number of words, the set size 15 conditions
had 5 blocks and the set size 30 conditions 4 blocks. Con-
text size was manipulated within and between subjects, with
some context sizes always shown, to ensure we had enough
data for smaller context sizes (3–27 and 5–25 for the 30 and
2–13, 3–12, 4–11 for the 15 set size condition). To get a base-
line accuracy and RT measure for each set size, we also had
one block without context cues. The last block for each con-
dition was a random context size varied across participants.
We measured both retrieval times and accuracy as outcome
variables. The letter span distractor task was the same as in
Experiment 1.
Participants
We collected data from 151 adults (74 female, 2 non-binary
or unknown, age range: 18 to 45, mean = 32.88; SD = 6.83)
via Proliﬁc. To ensure that the task was understood correctly,
all participants had to answer three comprehension questions
before the start of the experimental trials. We excluded 27
participants who provided fewer than three correct responses
(with RTs below 20 s) for the smaller context sizes (i.e., con-
text sizes up to 5) and 5 participants who used memory aids
(criteria again preregistered). This left us with 119 partici-
pants (58 female, 1 non-binary or unknown, mean age = 32.7;
SD = 6.55), 59 in the set size 30 condition and 60 in the set
size 15 condition. Participants were paid up to $14.50 ($7.50
base fee plus a maximum bonus of $7.00; mean = 6.64) or
$18.00 ($9.00 base fee plus a maximum bonus of $9.00;
mean = 7.75), depending on whether they were in the set
size 15 or 30 condition. Most participants ﬁnished the exper-
iment in under 60 min and 80 min, respectively (including
breaks, which could be taken after each block). Informed con-
sent was obtained from all participants before the experiment
started. The study was approved by the ethics committee of
the medical faculty of the University of Tübingen (number
701/2020BO).
Materials
For the cued-recall task, we used words from the same source
as in Experiment 1. The 8 visual context cues that were pre-
sented with the word pairs were taken from www.freepik.
com and randomly chosen for each context size. No partici-
pant saw the same context cues twice.
Procedure
Participants were instructed to try to recall the word pairs
(for the cued-recall task) and the letters (for the letter span
123
13


--- Page 14 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
task) as fast and accurately as possible. Participants were
told that their bonus depended on the percentage of correct
trials, but not on the speed at which they responded. In total,
each participant completed ﬁve (set size 15 condition) or four
blocks (set size 30 condition). Each block consisted of the
same three phases as in Experiment 1, with two differences.
First, because the set size effect was not the main interest of
this experiment, all lists a participant experienced were of
the same length (15 or 30 word pairs, for the two groups,
respectively). We still used two set sizes to ensure that any
potential context size effect generalizes to a different set size,
and to replicate the set size effect from Experiment 1. 2. In the
recall phase, we queried all words in a random order, since
with constant set sizes, lag should on average be the same for
the different context size conditions and should therefore no
longer be a confounder.
To measure the effects of context size on retrieval times
and accuracy, we varied the number of word pairs associated
with each visual context cue as well as the position of the
word pair on the screen (each context had a ﬁxed position
associated with it). Each participant had one control block
without context cues (i.e., a white background). The remain-
ing blocks always contained two contexts, with randomly
assigned visual cues for each participant. The order of word
pairs was random within block and the order of blocks was
random for each participant. To control for similarity of the
word pairs, we only used word pairs with a similarity between
0.45 and 0.55. The rest of the procedure, i.e., the presentation
times and the three phases (learning, distraction, and recall),
were the same as in Experiment 1.
Hypotheses
Using the SimSS model, we hypothesized the following: (1)
The more word pairs associated with a context cue, the longer
it takes to retrieve the target (see Fig. 2C). In comparison to
a control condition with no context, the SimSS model pre-
dicted detrimental effects of larger contexts. To see if these
effects exist in humans, we formulated three exploitative
hypotheses: 2. Exploratory: Are the RTs for larger context
sizes slower than the RTs if no context cue is present (given
the same set size)? 2. a) Unspeciﬁc context cues are detri-
mental: RTs for larger context sizes are slower than the RTs
if no context cue is present. 2. b) Context cues are always
helpful: the smaller the context size, the larger the beneﬁt for
the RTs. If the context size is the same as the set size there
is no beneﬁt. 2. c) Hypothesis 2. a) is true, but if a context
cue starts becoming detrimental, we are able to ignoring it,
resulting in a lack of context effects for larger context sizes.
Replication from Experiment 1: 1. RTs in the cued-recall
task increase with the set size for correct responses (see
Fig. 2D). 2. RTs are slower for incorrect responses than for
correct responses (see Fig. 2F)
All hypotheses were preregistered ( https://osf.io/83khx).
Analysis
We analyzed these hypotheses with the following model
(again preregistered):
1. RT ∼ context size + set size + (1 + context size | partici-
pant)
In the original preregistration, we included set size as a ran-
dom effect, but since set size was only manipulated between
subjects, we removed that random effect from the ﬁtted
model. We again excluded incorrect responses (for the RT
analysis), responses with RTs exceeding 20 s, and addition-
ally blocks, in which participants did not achieve an accuracy
of at least 30% (all preregistered). Context size was mean
centered and z standardized. Set size was treated as a factor
with two levels.
Results Experiment 2
In contrast to hypothesis 1, RTs did not change with increas-
ing context size ( ˆβ =− 0.03, 95% HDI = [ − 0.05, − 0.01],
BF10 = 0.69, Fig.5A), and neither did accuracy (ˆβ =− 0.08,
95% HDI = [ − 0.17, 0.01],BF10 = 0.47 Fig. 5B)). Accord-
ingly, we could also not investigate whether the effect of
context size becomes detrimental when context size grows
(hypothesis 2). Accuracy, however, did not differ between set
sizes (BF10 = 0.22). Replicating the results from Experiment
1 with Bayesian independent t-tests, we found that correct
RTs were on average 0.88 s faster for a set size of 15 when
compared to correct RTs for responses with a set size of 30
(BF10 = 4.57) and RTs were on average 2.51 s faster for cor-
rect responses than for incorrect responses ( BF10 > 100).
Post hoc tests showed that this is true for both intrusions
(BF10 > 100) and omissions ( BF10 > 100) with correct
responses being 2.08 s faster than intrusions and intrusions
being 0.76 s faster than omissions (BF10 = 3.36, see Fig.5C).
Discussion Experiment 2
Additional task unrelated visual context cues did not have
an effect on memory retrieval. This contrasts strongly with
Experiment 1, in which the effect of the list context was
strong. There are several potential explanations for this dif-
ference. First, it is possible that temporal separation plays a
crucial role in context effects. As such, context features that
are associated with a subset of items that were all presented in
a mixed fashion might not have any noticeable effect on mem-
ory retrieval. Second, it is possible that the visual, non-task
123
14


--- Page 15 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
0
2
4
6
01 0 2 0 3 0
Context size
Mean RT in s +/− SE
A
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
01 0 2 0 3 0
Context size
Mean accuracy +/− SE
B
0
2
4
6
Correct Intrusion Omission
Response
Mean RT in s +/−SE
C
Set size 15 30
Fig. 5 Results Experiment 2. A The effect of visual context on RTs.
The different colors represent the two set sizes and the solid line shows
the mean RT of the control condition, in which no visual context was
presented. B The effect of visual context on accuracy. The solid lines
show the mean accuracies of the control condition, in which no visual
context was presented. C The mean RT for the different response types.
All shaded areas around the mean and the error bars represent the stan-
d a r de r r o r( S E )o ft h em e a n
related cues were not an important or attended to context fea-
ture and were not used to facilitate memory retrieval. To test
these two hypotheses, we designed a third experiment, where
instead of visual context cues, we used semantic categories
in addition to visual category cues to investigate if the addi-
tional (semantic) cues facilitate memory retrieval. By using
this stronger context manipulation, which has led to context
effects more reliably (Wickens,1970; Light & Carter-Sobell,
1970), we can test whether context features can inﬂuence
memory retrieval, even when they are not temporally sepa-
rated and we can also compare the effect of different context
manipulations (i.e., visual vs. categorical). Furthermore, we
are interested in whether the speciﬁcity of these cues (i.e.,
the number of items that are associated with each of these
categories) matters for the helpfulness of these cues.
We were, however, able to replicate the set size effect
from Experiment 1 and could also show again that retrieval of
incorrect responses takes longer. Taken together, these results
support the idea of a sequential search process, which we will
discuss further in the modeling section.
Experiment3:EﬀectofSemanticCategories
onMemoryRetrieval
In Experiment 2, we manipulated the visual context and did
not ﬁnd that smaller contexts are helpful. Here, we used
semantic properties of the cue to induce a stronger con-
text manipulation (Wickens, 1970) to study how retrieval
times and accuracy of cued-recall from LTM are affected by
the number of learned word pairs that are associated with a
semantic category.
We also included two control conditions without semantic
category cues that allowed us to meaningfully compare the
performance for the different context sizes with a baseline
without context cues. To make meaningful comparisons, we
manipulated the similarity of the words in these conditions.
Speciﬁcally, we considered the four scenarios that occur if
you fully cross the similarity between cue and target with
the similarity of the cue and target to the rest of the list.
This results in 4 distinct scenarios (see Table 1): First, a high
similarity between all (or most) words in the list, which is
the scenario we get when we have large context sizes. This
results in most word pairs being from the same category (e.g.,
they are all animals). If the speciﬁcity of a cue matters, this
should result in worse recall. The second is a scenario with
a high similarity between cue and target and a low similar-
ity between the cue and the rest of the list. If the similarity
between cue and target and the speciﬁcity of the cue matter,
this should be the scenario, in which it is easiest to retrieve
the target given the cue, and should give an upper baseline.
It also allows us to test whether these two factors matter by
testing whether performance is indeed best in this condition.
This scenario is similar to conditions with context sizes of
one, but the separate control condition allowed us to collect
a larger number of data points helpful for statistical compar-
isons. The third is a no semantic context scenario with a low
similarity between all words in the list, which is our second
Table 1 Control conditions, Experiment 3
List similarity
Pair similarity High Low
High Large context size manipulation High pair similarity control condition
Low Not implemented Low list similarity control condition
This illustrates the logic behind the control conditions in Experiment 3
123
15


--- Page 16 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
control condition, and the baseline we use to test whether
large contexts are worse for performance than the presence
of no context. The fourth scenario would have a low similar-
ity between cue and target and a high similarity between the
cue and the rest of the list. We did not use this scenario, as
it is hard to implement and does not additionally help us test
our hypotheses, since the role of speciﬁcity is already being
tested with the context size manipulation.
In this study, we focus both on RTs and accuracy. As sam-
ple size was limited in Experiment 3 due to budget constraints
and RTs in the cued-recall task generally tended to be noisier
than accuracy, we mainly focused on accuracy here.
Methods Experiment 3
Design
We used the same general three phase setup as in Experiments
1 and 2. For the cued-recall task, we manipulated two factors:
First, the number of word pairs associated with a semantic
category (context size). The category size had 6 levels (0–20
word pairs belonging to a category), which we manipulated
both within and between subjects (see procedure below for
more details on this). The second factor we manipulated was
the similarity of the words in the control condition, with one
high pair similarity conditions, in which the words in a pair
had a high similarity and each pair had a low similarity to all
other pairs, and a low similarity condition, where all words
were dissimilar and randomly paired together. The similarity
between word pairs in the control condition was manipulated
between-subjects. We measured both RT and accuracy as
outcome variables. The letter span task was the same as in
Experiments 1 and 2.
Participants
We collected data from 118 adults (59 female, 3 non-binary
or unknown, age range: 18 to 45, mean = 31.42; SD = 6.4)
via Proliﬁc. To ensure that the task was understood correctly,
all participants had to answer three comprehension questions
before the start of the experimental trials. We excluded par-
ticipants who provided no response to more than 20% of
the retrieval trials (1 participant, see details below) and who
reported that they wrote down the word pairs as a memory aid
during the task (3 participants). Both exclusion criteria were
preregistered. Furthermore, the data of 2 participants was not
transmitted. This left us with 112 participants. Participants
were paid up to $16.00 ($9.00 base fee plus a maximum
bonus of $7.00; mean = 13.77); the bonus linearly depended
on the accuracy in both the cued-recall and the letter span
task, with the cued-recall task having twice as much weight
as the letter span task. That is, if a participant had a recall
accuracy of 90% in the letter span task and of 60% in the cued-
recall task, they received a bonus of (0.6*2/3 + 0.9*1/3)*$7
= $4.9). Most participants ﬁnished the experiment in under
65 min (including breaks, which could be taken after each
block). Informed consent was obtained from all participants
before the experiment started. The study was approved by
the ethics committee of the medical faculty of the University
of Tübingen (number 701/2020BO).
Materials
To control for an effect of word length on RTs, we only used
words consisting of 4–7 letters in the cued-recall task. We
included slightly longer words than in Experiment 1 to be
able to create the high similarity pairs (see Appendix C).
For the same reason, we also included nouns that we gath-
ered from other sources (e.g., our minds, ChatGPT) besides
the THINGS dataset used in Experiment 1. All words
were proper nouns and the categories were self-created (see
Appendix C). The category cues that were presented with the
word pairs were taken from Freepik (www.freepik.com) and
edited to improve the readability of the word pairs. The lists
in the control conditions were created using similarity values
that were generated in the same way as in Experiment 1.
Procedure
Participants were instructed to try to recall the target (in the
cued-recall task) and the letters in order of presentation (in
the letter span task) as fast and accurately as possible. Partic-
ipants were told that their bonus depended on the percentage
of correct trials (but not the speed at which they responded).
Participants were also told that the semantic category cues
were meaningful and would be presented again during recall.
In total, each participant completed four blocks. Each block
consisted of the same three phases as in Experiment 2, but
all lists consisted of 20 word pairs. As in Experiment 2, we
queried all words in a random order in the recall phase.
To measure the effects of category size on retrieval times
and recall accuracy, we varied the number of word pairs
associated with each category. In total, we used seven differ-
ent categories (furniture, sports, colors, vegetables, animals,
jobs, and countries). The category cues (i.e., the background
pictures) were related to these categories. Pairs were ran-
domly created for each participant, but cue and target were
always from the same category. Each participant carried out
three blocks. Each block contained two of these categories
(unless category size was 20; then, all words in the block
were from the same category). To ensure that we had enough
data from the small category sizes, two category size com-
binations where shown for all participants (2–18 and 4–16).
To ensure that the rest of the space was also covered, the
123
16


--- Page 17 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
category size of the third block was randomly sampled from
the following options: 0–20, 1–19, 6–14, 9–11. For each par-
ticipant, we randomly assigned category labels to category
sizes without repetitions. In a fourth block, the control block,
participants received no category cues and were presented
with one of two control lists: In the high similarity pairs con-
trol condition, the similarity of each pair was at least 0.7
and the similarity of both the target and the cue to all other
words in the list was below 0.3. In the low similarity con-
trol condition, all words had a similarity below 0.3 to all
other words in the list. In this condition the word pairs were
assigned randomly. The order of the blocks was randomized
across participants. The rest of the procedure, i.e., presen-
tation times and the three phases (learning, distraction, and
recall), were the same as in Experiments 1 and 2.
Hypotheses
Building on the predictions of the SimSS model, we had the
following hypotheses:
For RTs:
1. The more word pairs associated with a context cue,
the slower the RTs for correct responses (see Fig. 2G). As
described in Experiment 2 we also wanted to explore poten-
tial detrimental effects of larger contexts. 2. Exploratory: Are
the RTs for larger context sizes slower than the RTs when
there is no context cue controlling for set size? 2. a) Unspe-
ciﬁc context cues are detrimental: RTs for larger context sizes
are slower than RTs when no context cue is present. 2. b)
Context cues are always helpful: the smaller the context size,
the larger the beneﬁt for the RTs. If the context size is the
same as the set size there is no beneﬁt or disadvantage. 2. c)
Unspeciﬁc context cues are detrimental, but we can ignore
them if they are: a) is true, but if the context size becomes
too large, people do not use it as a cue and thus the RTs in the
no-context condition represent an upper limit. 3. Retrieval is
faster in the control condition, in which cue and target are
more similar to each other (see Fig. 2G).
The hypotheses for accuracy were the same as for RTs,
but reverse coded (i.e., slower RTs relate to lower accuracy,
see Fig. 2 H).
Again, all hypotheses were preregistered ( https://osf.io/
7ejhc).
Analysis
We excluded (a) people who did not provide at least 3 cor-
rect responses below 20 s for context sizes below 5 to have
enough data per participant for the hierarchical models. And
(b) all responses given after 20 s. For the RT analysis, we
additionally excluded all incorrect responses. These exclu-
sion criteria were again preregistered.
We tested the hypotheses with regards to RTs using a
hierarchical Bayesian linear regression with a lognormal like-
lihood function implemented in the brms package. To test
hypothesis 1 for the RTs, we excluded the data from the con-
trol conditions and used the following model:
1. RT ∼ context size + (1 + context size | participant)
In addition to analyzing context size as a continuous variable,
we also categorized context size into three discrete levels
to compensate for the fact that small contexts could only
produce few responses (i.e., for context size of 2, we could
at most get two responses from each participant). We binned
as follows: small context, 1–4; medium context, 5–15; large
context, 16–20. To compare the control conditions for the
third hypothesis, we analyzed correct RTs from the control
conditions using the following model: RT ∼ Condition + (1
| participant).
For the accuracy analysis of hypothesis 1, we used the
following model:
1. Accuracy ∼ context size + (1 + context size | participant)
Same as for RT, we did this analysis with binned and
unbinned context sizes. To compare the control conditions for
the third hypothesis, we analyzed responses from the control
condition using the following model: Accuracy ∼ Condition
+ (1 | participant).
All models were preregistered.
Results Experiment 3
In line with hypothesis 1, RTs for correct responses took
longer the more word pairs were associated with a context
cue ( ˆβ = 0.03, 95% HDI = [0 .01, 0.05], BF10 = 1.22, see
Fig. 6A). However, the evidence for the effect was only weak
when analyzed unbinned, which might be due to the small
number of small context responses, or because the effect is
non-linear. The evidence for the effect was strong, however,
when binning context size into small, medium, and large con-
text bins and analyzing them as factors ( BF10 = 18.89 for
the main effect of context), with medium ( ˆβ = 0.15, 95%
HDI = [0.05, 0.24]) and large ( ˆβ = 0.11, 95% HDI = [0 .05,
0.17]) context sizes both leading to slower RTs than small
context sizes. However, the effect leveled off at larger con-
text sizes, with even a slight decrease in RTs when moving
from medium to large contexts ( BF10 = 4.11). On aver-
age, responses for small context sizes were 1.04 s faster and
responses for large context sizes where 0.25 s faster than for
medium context sizes, respectively. The same trend held for
accuracy. Larger contexts were associated with a lower accu-
racy ( ˆβ =− 0.27, 95% HDI = [− 0.35, − 0.19], BF10 > 100,
123
17


--- Page 18 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
0
2
4
6
51 0 1 5 2 0
Context size
Mean RT in s +/− SE
A
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
51 0 1 5 2 0
Context size
Mean accuracy +/− SE
B
0
2
4
6
Correct Intrusion Omission
Response
Mean RT in s +/−SE
C
Control condition High similarity pairs Low similarit y list Control Condition High similarity pairs Low similarit y list
Fig. 6 Results Experiment 3. A The effect of semantic context on RTs.
The two black lines show the mean RTs of the two control conditions.
B The effect of semantic context on accuracy. The two black lines show
the mean accuracy of the two control conditions. C The mean RT for
the different response types. All shaded areas around the mean and the
error bars represent the standard error (SE) of the mean
see Fig. 6B), and binning context size conﬁrmed this effect
(BF10 > 100), with medium ( ˆβ =− 0.68, 95% HDI =
[− 1.05, − 0.31]) and larger contexts ( ˆβ =− 0.85, 95% HDI
=[ − 1.08, − 0.6]) both having lower accuracy than small con-
text sizes, and larger context having a lower accuracy them
medium sized contexts ( BF10 = 5.09). On average, partici-
pants were 14.3% more accurate in smaller contexts than in
medium sized contexts and 1.7% more accurate in medium
sized contexts than larger contexts. Together, these results
suggest that there is a beneﬁt of small context cues. We com-
pared the experimental conditions with a semantic context
to the two control conditions without context to investigate
whether the presence of a semantic context is actually use-
ful. First, we compared the control conditions to each other
(Hypothesis 3). We found that both RTs were on average 0.8
ss l o w e r(ˆβ = 0.38, 95% HDI = [0.14, 0.62], BF10 = 36.48)
and accuracy was on average 23.2% lower ( ˆβ =− 1.47,
95% HDI = [ − 2.06, − 0.9], BF10 > 100) in the low sim-
ilarity control condition than in the high similarity control
condition. This supports the idea that an increased similarity
with the target and a decreased similarity with the distrac-
tors (i.e., all learned words that are not the target or the cue
word) is beneﬁcial for retrieval. To test the beneﬁt of the
context size when compared with these control conditions,
we compared RTs and accuracy from the binned context sizes
with the control conditions using Bayesian paired-samples
t-tests, using the mean RTs for each participant in the dif-
ferent conditions/bins. RTs were slower and accuracy was
lower for larger context sizes when compared to the low sim-
ilarity control condition. For RTs, this was already the case
for medium-sized contexts. For all context sizes, RTs were
slower and accuracy was worse when compared to the high
pair similarity control condition (see Table 2 for all results).
To see whether this decrease in performance of larger con-
texts was due to the increasing number of similar none target
items (distractors) in the larger context conditions, we used
Bayesian paired-sample t-tests to test whether the proportion
of intrusions increases in the large context condition when
compared to the low similarity control lists. We found that
there were on average 12.39% more intrusions in the larger
contexts ( BF10 > 100). The proportion of omission was
roughly the same ( BF10 = 0.038), supporting the idea, that
the decreasing performance is due to the retrieval of more
similar distractors.
To further test whether the presence of semantic context
cues was detrimental, we also compared Experiment 1 to
Table 2 Pair-wise comparisons of recall with context and without context
RT Accuracy
Comparison Mean difference (in s) Bayes factor Mean difference Bayes factor
Small and high pair similarity 0.9514 1 .46 × e2∗− 0.1540 4 .29 × e2∗
Medium and high pair similarity 2.1058 24 .6∗− 0.4056 2 .4 × e4∗
Large and high pair similarity 1.8628 1 .77 × e5∗− 0.3403 9 .98 × e8∗
Small and low list similarity 0.3049 0 .38 0.0297 0 .24
Medium and low list similarity 0.7611 11 .14∗− 0.0428 0 .37
Large and low list similarity 0.5395 3 .33∗− 0.1018 1 .49 × e2∗
This shows the results of Bayesian paired-sample t-tests using the mean values per participant for the trials with the context sizes and the control
conditions. The mean differences were calculated by subtracting the values from the control conditions from the values from the context conditions.
Asterisk (*) signiﬁes BF values above 3, i.e., substantial evidence for the alternative hypothesis
123
18


--- Page 19 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
Experiment 3 (see Appendix B). While the RTs in Experi-
ment 3 was comparable to the performance for the same set
size in Experiment 1, accuracy was worse even when only
considering the small context sizes.
Post hoc, we also wanted to test if the pair-wise semantic
similarity between cue and target still plays a role, even if the
cue and target always belong to the same semantic category.
To test this, we added a main effect of pair-wise similarity and
an interaction between context size and pair-wise similarity
for both RTs and accuracy. To check that variability in pair-
wise similarities within a category are still present, we plotted
the distribution of pair-wise similarities. This plot shows that
there is still a large variance of semantic similarities even
within a category (see Fig. 12C). For both RTs and accuracy,
we found that there was no main effect of pair-wise cue target
similarity, and this effect did not change over set sizes (see
Fig. 12A and B for a summary of the results). We excluded
the data from the control conditions from this analysis and
only used the data from correct responses for the RT analysis.
To see whether we can replicate the results from Experi-
ment 1 and 2 that correct responses are faster, we conducted
post hoc tests. We found that both intrusions ( BF10 > 100)
and omissions ( BF10 > 100) were slower than correct
responses with correct responses being 0.71 s faster than
intrusions. However, intrusions were only 0.56 s faster than
omissions (BF10 = 0.19, see Fig. 6C). Accordingly, the trend
was the same as in the previous experiments, but we could
not show a clear difference between the speed of intrusion
and omission responses.
Discussion Experiment 3
In this experiment, we tested whether semantic context cues
produce context effects in LTM retrieval. Our ﬁndings show
that as category size increased, retrieval accuracy decreased
and RTs became slower. This indicates that semantic con-
text cues affect retrieval, and this effect is modulated by the
speciﬁcity of the context. Notably, this effect was clearer
for accuracy than for RTs. And while this might be due to
increased noise in the RTs, another plausible explanation is
that there is a trade-off between accuracies and RTs. It is
imaginable that there is a maximum retrieval time that par-
ticipants are willing to spend and once this is exceeded a
response will be given, even if the correct item has not yet
been retrieved. This would result in continuously decreasing
accuracies, while RTs only increase to a certain degree.
The use of semantic categories as a context raises the ques-
tion if the context effects we ﬁnd are mainly driven by the
presence of an increased number of items with a high simi-
larity to the cue. In Experiment 1, we found that an increased
similarity between cue and target resulted in an improved
retrieval, highlighting the role of continuous semantic sim-
ilarity. In Experiment 3, despite considerable variability in
similarity even within categories, we did not ﬁnd such an
effect, suggesting that participants may have relied more on
the semantic context (i.e., the category labels) themselves,
instead of the semantic similarity between the cue and poten-
tial targets to retrieve items from memory. In other words,
the category label itself might be used as the cue (plus some
learned association between the current cue and the target).
However, given the current evidence, we cannot say for sure
if this is the case. Future studies might look at this distinction
between the similarity to the cue and the direct use of seman-
tic category labels as cues more closely. Nevertheless, in this
manipulation, any effects of context are driven by semantic
relatedness in some way.
It is also noteworthy that we did not observe similar con-
text effects in Experiment 2, which suggests that the nature
and task-relevancy of context cues are critical. Semantic
cues are arguably more directly task-relevant. Unlike visual
changes, semantic cues not only enhance cue-target similar-
ity but also provide explicit information about the target (e.g.,
the target word belongs to the category “animals”).
When comparing performance to the control conditions,
we found that these additional cues were often more detri-
mental than helpful. For medium and large category sizes,
accuracy was worse and RTs were slower compared to a list
of unrelated words. This highlights the importance of cue
speciﬁcity: the best retrieval performance occurred when the
cue was highly similar to the target while maintaining low
similarity to the other words in the list.
Furthermore, performance for larger semantic contexts
was worse than for larger set sizes in Experiment 1. This
decrease in accuracy for larger contexts was mostly due to
an increasing number of intrusions. This fact suggests that
retrieving information from larger semantic contexts is par-
ticularly challenging and good distractors (i.e., semantically
similar items) interfere with retrieval more than unrelated
information. The fact that a high density of similar items
slows retrieval, even when a cue that is similar to the target
is available, supports the idea that memory search is local
within a semantic network, meaning that only items that
would be in the close vicinity of a cue, but not items that
are dissimilar and as such far away will be considered during
retrieval. However, the comparison with Experiment 1 should
be considered carefully, as we could not control for factors
such as lag or the total number of learned items between the
two experiments.
Ultimately, these ﬁndings demonstrate that semantic con-
text manipulations are more likely to inﬂuence memory
retrieval than unrelated visual changes. This distinction
aligns with real-world scenarios, in which context is often
semantically meaningful. For example, it is more likely that
I will need to remember a recipe in the kitchen than in the
bathroom.
123
19


--- Page 20 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
ModelResults
As we showed in the introduction of the SimSS model,
a sequential sampling model can qualitatively capture the
effects of set size and semantic similarity that we observed
in Experiment 1, as well as the effects of semantic category
size observed in Experiment 3, on both accuracy and RT.
We now sought to test whether the SimSS model could also
provide a good quantitative ﬁt to the data, and whether the
mechanisms we introduced (semantic similarity and associ-
ation strength) are necessary to achieve this ﬁt. Additionally,
we examined whether further assumptions or model exten-
sions could improve its performance.
To ﬁt the model, we used maximum log-likelihood estima-
tion based on a joint measure of response type and reaction
time. For details on the ﬁtting, see Appendix C. Based on the
above results, we ﬁtted the models only using the data we
included in the analysis for Experiments 1 and 3.
To test our main assumptions, as well as some extensions,
we ﬁtted the following models:
1. SimSS: The full SimSS model as described above.
2. SimSS no Sim: To test whether similarity plays an essen-
tial role to ﬁt the data quantitatively, we implemented
a model that does not take the semantic similarity into
account. We operationalized this by setting β = 0. This
effectively means that each word has the same probabil-
ity of being sampled (with an increased probability for
the target due to the added association strength). As such
this model has only three parameters ( i, o and a).
3. SimSS no AS: To test whether the association strength,
i.e., the association between cue and target beyond the
given semantic similarity, is necessary, we implemented
a model without this association. As such this model has
only three parameters ( i, o and β).
4. SimSS no Sim/AS: The SimSS model without associ-
ation strength and similarity. This model serves as a
baseline. As such, this model has only two parameters
(i, and o).
5. SimSS with out-of-list distractors: This model includes
all words from previously encountered lists. However, the
similarity of these words is scaled by an out-of-context
devaluation parameter g. This allows us to directly test
the inﬂuence of words from other lists on the retrieval pro-
cess, both by comparing this model to the orginal SimSS
model and by looking at the value of g.I f g is close to
zero, this would indicate that out-of-context words have
little to no inﬂuence on the retrieval process. As such,
this model now has ﬁve parameters ( i, o,β, a and g).
6. SimSS with target rejection: To test whether it is a valid
assumption that if a target gets sampled, it will always be
accepted (i.e., retrieved correctly), we ﬁtted a model with
an added acceptance parameter r .I f r is close to 1, this
would justify our simpliﬁcation for the original model. As
such, this model now has 5 parameters ( i, o,β, a and r ).
7. SimSS with softmax: Here, we use the softmax function
to calculate the sampling probabilities based on s(k, c).
This allows us to investigate whether the similarity space
needs to be transformed to better reﬂect the retrieval pro-
cess we observed. Many transformations are possible. We
used the softmax as one possible example. This model
still has four parameters (i, o, a, and instead of β, it has a
λparameter for the softmax function). The largerλis, the
more likely only items with high similarity values will be
sampled.
We additionally ﬁtted the stepsize parameter of the geo-
metric distribution and an intercept parameter (i.e., a constant
intercept on RTs related to encoding the cue and executing
the response) via a rough grid search to test what values are
a good account of the empirical data (see Appendix C for
details). These parameters were not included in the BIC cal-
culation, because they were common across all models. The
parameter values of the ﬁtted versions of these models are
summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Fitted model parameters
Fitted parameters
Model o i a β gr λ Intercept Stepsize
SimSS 0.015 0.019 0.296 0.429 01 − 600 300
SimSS no Sim 0.015 0.019 0.999 001 − 600 300
SimSS no AS 0.015 0.019 0 0.518 01 − 600 300
SimSS no Sim/AS 0.015 0.019 0001 − 600 100
SimSS out-of-list distractors 0.015 0.017 0.242 0.405 0.004 1 − 400 300
SimSS target rejection 0.014 0.014 0.212 0.482 0 0.9998 − 400 300
SimSS softmax 0.015 0.019 0.377 − 01 1.309 600 300
The ﬁtted parameter values for all models. All bold parameters are not ﬁtted, but are set based on modeling assumptions. Empty parameter values
do not apply for the corresponding model. Intercept and stepsize are in milliseconds. Everything is rounded to the 3rd decimal, except for r ,t o
highlight that this value is close, but not equal to 1
123
20


--- Page 21 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
We used the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) to com-
pare the different models. The BIC is a model comparison
metric that measures the goodness of ﬁt while penalizing for
model complexity, helping to identify the most parsimonious
model that explains the data. Smaller BIC values indicate a
better ﬁt. We observed that the best model was the model with
the softmax transformation of the similarities (see Fig. 7 A).
None of the other models was able to explain the data bet-
ter than the base SimSS model. To better understand how
the predictions diverge from the actual data, we simulated
each model 10 times across the trials of Experiment 1 and 3
(only trials included in the analysis) with the ﬁtted param-
eters. The model results and these simulations indicate the
following conclusions when considering cued recall in pro-
posed sequential search framework. (1) Correlating model
predictions with trial-level data reveals substantial residual
variance (see Fig. 7B). However, the variance produced by
our experimental manipulations is relatively well-explained
(see Fig.7C, D, and E) by at least the full version of the model.
This difference highlights that the SimSS model is a very
simple minimalist model, which ignores a lot of sources as
variance, some of which would be hard to model at all (such
as random variances in the motor response), while others
might be explainable (such as variance that might be caused
by the ﬁdelity of the encoding process), but are not the focus
of this study. (2) Similarity emerges as a critical factor in
explaining recall behavior. Models excluding similarity not
only had higher BIC scores but also failed to capture key
data patterns, especially in Experiment 3 (see Fig. 7C and
E), in which differences in similarities due to the semantic
categories were central to the design. (3) The model without
the association strength can capture the RT pattern well, but
209944.5
209590.6
210522.1
210734.3
209269.6
209791.5
209908.6
0
400
800
1200
SimSS softmax
SimSS
SimSS out of list distr
actors
SimSS target rejection
SimSS no SimSimSS no AS
SimSS no Sim/AS
Model
BIC difference to base model
A
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Model
Trial by trial correlation
B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
SimSS
SimSS no ASSimSS no Sim
SimSS no Sim/AS
SimSS out of list dist
ractors
SimSS softmax
SimSS target rejection
Model
Correlation of aggregated data
Experiment Experiment 1 Experiment 3
C
Experiment 1
12345
2
4
6
Participant RT in s
Model RT in s
D
Experiment 3
3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
Participant RT in s
Model RT in s
E
Model Participant
SimSS
SimSS no AS
SimSS no Sim
SimSS no Sim/AS
SimSS out of list distractors
SimSS softmax
SimSS target rejection
Experiment 1 Experiment 3
Correct Intrusion Omission Correct Intrusion Omission
0
20
40
60
80
Response type
Percentage
F
Experiment 1 Experiment 3
SimSS
SimSS no ASSimSS no Sim
SimSS no Sim/AS
SimSS out of list distr
actors
SimSS softmax
SimSS target rejection
SimSS
SimSS no ASSimSS no Sim
SimSS no Sim/AS
SimSS out of list distractors
SimSS softmax
SimSS target rejection
0
2
4
Model
Mean RT in s
Response Correct Intrusion Omission
G
Fig. 7 Model ﬁtting results. All plotted model results are based on 10
simulations across all trails we included in the analysis of experiment 1
and 3 using the ﬁtted parameters of each model. The “Participant” model
refers to the actual data. A The BIC difference to the full SimSS model
as described in the model predictions section. Lower values represent
ab e t t e rﬁ t .B The trial by trial correlation between the RTs generated
by the models and the actual RTs that participants produced. C The
correlation of the same simulations as in B. However, here the RTs are
aggregated across the experimental conditions (set size, cue target sim-
ilarity (binned into 5 bins), context size and the control conditions of
experiment 3). D and E The aggregated data points from C and a linear
regression of these aggregated data for each model for Experiments 1
and 3, respectively. We also added the actual data (in black) as a refer-
ence. F The percentage of each response type across the 10 simulations
of each model compared to the actual percentage (in black). The model
colors are the same as in D and E. G The mean RT generated by each
model for each response type. The solid lines are the corresponding
Participant RTs
123
21


--- Page 22 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
seems to overestimate the RTs (light blue in Fig. 7D and E).
Moreover, and consistent with the role of association strength
as a proxy for the learned word-pair association, this model
failed to reach participant-level accuracy (see Fig. 7F). (4)
While most models correctly reproduce the general pattern
that correct responses are faster than errors, they systemat-
ically underestimate the RT difference. Additionally, none
of the models fully captured the observed pattern that omis-
sions tend to have longer RTs than intrusions (see Fig. 7G).
This highlights one of the shortcomings of this model and
shows that this model needs further extensions to capture
both RT and accuracy data. (5) The results also suggest that
certain simpliﬁcations may be justiﬁed. The target accep-
tance parameter r , introduced to model a recognition-like
gate for correct targets, was estimated near 1 and did not
improve model ﬁt, indicating that omitting an explicit recog-
nition stage may be a valid assumption in this context. (6)
Similarly, the devaluation parameter g for out-of-list dis-
tractors was close to zero, implying that these items do not
substantially contribute to the observed effects. This raises
an important theoretical question about the mechanisms by
which memory search can restrict itself to the relevant list or
context, an issue we return to in the general discussion.
In sum, the modeling results support the view that a
similarity-based sequential sampling process, coupled with
learned association strength, provides a useful explanatory
framework for cued recall behavior. The SimSS model,
despite its simplicity, captures key patterns in the data when
both components are present, including the effects of exper-
imental manipulations and the relative timing and accuracy
of responses. While the SimSS model does not capture all
trial-level variability or RT patterns for different error types,
improvements can likely be made with some targeted alter-
ations. Here, we presented one such alteration in the form of
the transformation of the semantic similarities via the soft-
max function. This already led to a better model ﬁt.
GeneralDiscussion
In a series of three experiments using a cued-recall task, we
investigated how retrieval from LTM is inﬂuenced by the set
size of a to be learned list and the similarity between cue
and target. We tested whether additional visual and seman-
tic context cues help us retrieve a target faster, and whether
successful retrieval depends on the speciﬁcity of these cues.
In Experiment 1, we demonstrated that increasing the num-
ber of to be learned word pairs leads to slower RTs and
lower retrieval accuracy. Furthermore, the semantic similar-
ity between the retrieval cue and the target word facilitated
retrieval, regardless of set size. The set size effects depended
on the list context. Speciﬁcally, we observed set size effects
only within, but not across lists, indicating that participants
can successfully use a list context to constrain the set they
search. In Experiment 2, we explored whether visual context
cues can similarly be used to constrain memory retrieval but
found no effect of context size on RTs. But we could show in
Experiment 3 that larger semantic contexts were associated
with slower RTs and lower accuracy and led to worse recall
when compared to lists of unrelated words. Furthermore, we
also showed that similarity measures based on vector embed-
dings learned from text corpora are a useful approximation
of human similarity ratings that can explain some behavioral
phenomena.
First, we consistently observed that recall performance
decreased when an increasing number of word pairs had to
be remembered. In doing so, we support the ﬁndings from
Nobel and Shiffrin ( 2001) who reported a similar set size
effect for cued recall. However, while these ﬁnding seem
intuitive, they and similar ﬁndings, particularly in recogni-
tion, have recently been called into question by Kinnell and
Dennis (2011), who showed that there is no set size effect in
recognition memory when controlling for confounding vari-
ables such as the retention interval (lag), attention, displaced
rehearsal and contextual reinstatement. Despite controlling
for these factors in Experiment 1, we still observed the set
size effect in a cued-recall paradigm. Furthermore, everyday
experience suggests that we somehow do cope with far larger
set sizes without unreasonably long retrieval times, which is
supported by ﬁndings in recognition memory that suggests
that even with set sizes that are two magnitudes larger then
what we used here, item recognition accuracy was still close
to ceiling (Brady et al., 2008). The fact that this does not
hold for cued-recall in our experiment to the same degree
raises the question of why this is, especially since we found
that both RTs and accuracy were affected. If this effect con-
tinued for larger set sizes, then at some point, people would
not be able to recall anything. This is especially true if we
assume a trade-off between accuracy and response times,
whereby individuals terminate their memory search after a
certain duration. Here, we argued that this divide is due to
the way memory is organized and the qualities of the cue,
meaning that we are affected by set size, but we are affected
locally. In other words, not the total number of memories but
the number of memories related to a memory cue is what neg-
atively affects memory retrieval. Strategies that allow us to
increase and decrease the similarity between target memories
and potential distractors are therefore essential.
We look at memory retrieval as a search process through
stored representations. To enable quick retrieval, despite an
increasing number of memories, we endorse the idea that
memory is organized according to the similarity between
123
22


--- Page 23 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
memory representations, such that two similar representa-
tions are stored closer in this space than two dissimilar
representations (Kumar, 2021). Accordingly, we assume that
the similarity between cue and candidate items (i.e., the dis-
tance in the organized space) guides the search.
One such organizational feature is semantic similarity. The
fact that target words were more easily recalled when the cue
was semantically similar to the target suggests that semanti-
cally similar items are more closely connected in the memory
network and can be accessed more efﬁciently, supporting
theories of memory organization based on semantic similar-
ity (Kumar, 2021; Shiffrin & Atkinson, 1969). Alternatively,
one might argue that improved RTs and accuracy for more
similar words might be caused by the relative advantage of
more similar items during encoding rather than retrieval. This
effect is also known as the list strength effect, which refers
to the observation that memory for strongly encoded items
is harmed by the presence of other strongly encoded items
and helped by the presence of other weakly encoded items
(Wixted et al.,1997). Here, it could be that more semantically
similar items are simply encoded more strongly as compared
to semantically less similar items. And the presence of these
less strongly encoded items helps the recall for the more
strongly encoded items. However, then, we should not have
observed improved performance for the high similarity pairs
condition in Experiment 3, since here all items should be
strongly encoded and according to the list strength effect that
should harm the recall of all items. This supports the lack of
a list strength effect in cued-recall (Wilson & Criss, 2017)
and the idea that semantic similarity aids memory retrieval,
independent of encoding strength.
Context too, in this view of similarity based retrieval,
could have a large inﬂuence on the similarity between the cue
and potential targets and could thus inﬂuence retrieval accu-
racy and time. Here, we looked at three types of context: tem-
poral (list membership), semantic (category membership),
and visual (background scenes), and asked whether they
exert similar or distinct effects on memory performance and
whether set size effects can be explained by the context size.
In Experiment 1, we observed that the temporal context
of a study list effectively segmented memory: increasing the
number of items within the current list impaired retrieval,
yet items from other lists, despite the close succession in
which they were studied, had no measurable impact on per-
formance. This suggests that temporal boundaries serve as
strong constraints, allowing retrieval to be constrained to
items within the current context. This idea is supported by
prior work emphasizing the crucial role of temporal context
in memory organization (Brown et al., 2007; Jang & Huber,
2008; Farrell, 2012). Temporal context can, however, also
hinder retrieval, as the increasing number of items within
a list still negatively impacted retrieval speed and accuracy.
This is consistent with past ﬁndings that show that tempo-
ral proximity leads to retrieval errors when contexts are less
distinct (e.g. Henson, 1996; Hurlstone & Hitch, 2015;L e e&
Estes, 1977;N a i r n e ,1991; Smyth et al., 2005). Thus, tem-
poral context can both aid and hinder retrieval, depending
on its speciﬁcity (i.e. how many items are associated with
a context). The modeling results further support the conclu-
sion that temporal context can constrain memory search by
showing that including out-of-list items in the search did not
further improve model ﬁt.
Semantic context, in contrast, did not provide such pre-
cise segmentation. In Experiment 3, increasing the number
of semantically related items impaired memory perfor-
mance, indicating that these items competed during retrieval.
Crucially, even small semantic contexts did not boost perfor-
mance to levels observed in smaller lists in Experiment 1.
Instead, even for just medium sized contexts, performance
was worse when compared to a list of unrelated word pairs
without context cues.
These ﬁndings suggest that semantic contexts might not
function as retrieval contexts in the same way that tempo-
ral contexts do. Indeed, unlike semantic categories in our
task, which were queried together with items from a dif-
ferent semantic context in the same list, temporal contexts
deﬁned the exclusive set of potential targets. This asymme-
try in relevance may have given temporal context a stronger
functional role in the retrieval process. Another possibility
is that semantic and temporal contexts differ only in degree,
not in kind: perhaps temporal context more strongly increases
cue-target similarity or is more tightly bound to the encod-
ing episode. Or semantic similarity might have such a strong
effect that even if the memory search is constrained to only
items from the same category, these items act as strong dis-
tractors (lures), more so than a set of unrelated items. This
could result in worse performance even for smaller contexts
(this assumption could be tested in future studies by having
lists that vary in size, but only contain words from one seman-
tic category and compare them to lists with several semantic
categories that vary in the category size, not the list size).
With our current result, we cannot deﬁnitively say which of
the two explanations is more likely.
The lack of an effect of visual context in Experiment 2 con-
trasts with the observations in Experiments 1 and 3. The null
effect is consistent with previous results on visual context,
which have been inconclusive. Some studies have demon-
strated the effectiveness of visual context cues (Liu et al.,
2024; V erkoeijen et al., 2004) while others have reported
null effects. For example, the often cited diver study (God-
den & Baddeley, 1975), which varied not only the visual,
but also the proprioceptive context, could not be replicated
123
23


--- Page 24 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
(Murre, 2021). One possibility is that visual background fea-
tures are processed differently when encoding words and are
less relevant for cueing retrieval. However, we favor a more
pragmatic explanation: visual context may fail to impact
retrieval unless it is attended to or perceived as relevant.
Participants may have suppressed the visual backgrounds
due to their irrelevance for the task, consistent with ﬁndings
that visual or environmental context effects are diminished
when attention is directed elsewhere (Smith & V ela, 2001;
Logan & Etherton, 1994). Thus, the role of visual context
may not be fundamentally different but contingent on encod-
ing depth and attentional engagement. Overall, the results
remain inconclusive, and the factors determining when visual
context is effective warrant further investigation.
If different contexts can be treated under a uniﬁed frame-
work, for example, as features along a shared similarity
dimension, then a key goal for future research will be to map
the dimensions of different context features onto this com-
mon space and determine how attentional and task-driven
factors modulate their contribution to retrieval.
In the beginning of the paper, we proposed that the use-
fulness of the additional cues a context provides depends on
two factors: (1) How much the context increases the similar-
ity between cue and target. (2) How distinctly the context
is associated with the target. Irrespective of whether dif-
ferent context features act functionally different, we show
that an increased similarity between context and cue through
contextual features improves recall. We also found that the
helpfulness of a context depends on the speciﬁcity. How-
ever, our ﬁndings also suggest that additional context cues
that are even slightly unspeciﬁc are detrimental rather than
helpful. This would mean that having any number of highly
related memories would make the recall of any of them more
difﬁcult.
Also noteworthy, we show that a similarity measure based
on Word2V ec vector embeddings can be useful to explain
human behavior. Speciﬁcally, we found that this measure is
correlated with pair-wise ratings, a common method to ask
people about the similarity between things (Rubenstein &
Goodenough, 1965). We also found that they can be used
to explain and model search times and accuracy in LTM.
Other research using a host of different models also showed
that these embeddings from models trained on text corpora
capture some of the human intuition of what it means to be
similar (Marjieh et al., 2022; Richie & Bhatia, 2021). This
highlights the usefulness of these embeddings in computa-
tional modeling of behavior, especially when considering the
easy accessibility of these embeddings, when compared to
human similarity ratings.
An alternative explanation for the observed set size and
similarity effects is that they arise from limitations, such as
divided attention or encoding interference, during encoding
rather than retrieval. Speciﬁcally, as set size increases, atten-
tional resources may be more thinly distributed across items,
leading to weaker or less distinct memory traces. Simi-
larly, higher similarity among items could result in greater
interference during encoding, increasing the likelihood of
overlapping representations. Ruling out the inﬂuence of
encoding related differences is hard; however, we tried to mit-
igate such effects by implementing a strong encoding phase
across conditions, including practice opportunities. Further-
more, the use a proactive design to control for differences in
temporal distance between study and test should rule out any
effect due to the degradation of memory traces. Addition-
ally, if encoding quality declined with set size due to divided
attention, we would expect systematic differences between
blocks as the attention decreased throughout the experiment.
The lack of such effects suggests that the attention did not
vary much throughout the experiment. In conclusion, while
we can not fully rule out encoding limitations as a contribut-
ing factor, the absence of such markers and the structure of
our design support a more parsimonious explanation in terms
of retrieval interference and sequential search.
The proposed similarity-based sequential sampling (SimSS)
model offers a framework for understanding memory retrieval
as a search process driven by (semantic) similarity. Building
on theories such as ARC-REM (Diller et al., 2001) and SAM
(Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981, 1980), SimSS posits a high-
dimensional memory space in which retrieval cues guide a
probabilistic search for target items. Our results demonstrate
that predictions by this sequential mechanism, which sam-
ples items based on their similarity to the cue and association
strength between cue and target, align with key behavioral
patterns observed in our experiments, such as the set size
effect, the improvement through cue–target similarity, the
increased RTs for incorrect responses, the context effects for
semantic categories, and the advantage of target-speciﬁc cues
in memory retrieval.
To test which features of the model are necessary to
explain the observed data, we compared several versions of
the SimSS model. This model comparison conﬁrmed that
both the semantic similarity and the association strength
are necessary to capture the observed effects. Models with-
out similarity failed, for example, to explain the patterns
observed in Experiment 3, in which semantic categories
played a crucial role. Similarly, models without an associ-
ation strength parameter did not manage to account for the
accuracy that participants manage to achieve. These results
support the notion of a search based on semantic similarity
and the necessity of strengthening the cue target association.
We implemented the SimSS model as a minimalist model,
which tries to model cued recall with as few parameters as
123
24


--- Page 25 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
possible. In doing so, we made several simpliﬁcations, such
as removing a detailed recognition process for correct items
and only including items from the current list in the model. To
test whether these simpliﬁcations are justiﬁed, we compared
the base model to versions without these simpliﬁcations.
However, adding a recognition parameter or out-of-list
distractors did not substantially improve the ﬁt, with the ﬁtted
parameters indicating that recognition was nearly perfect and
that the inclusion of out-of-list distractors does not help in
explaining our results. However, the fact that we do observe
out-of-list intrusions does indicate that this implementation
is too simplistic. Likely, the list context does not present
an absolute boundary. However, given the few intrusions we
observe, here, we have no way of investigating how and when
and out-of-list items are retrieved or considered for retrieval.
We also wanted to investigate whether semantic similari-
ties are weighted linearly. By introducing a scaling parameter
(i.e., β) for the semantic similarity values of the SimSS
model, we already tested this and showed that smaller sim-
ilarity values might be weighted more strongly. However, a
different transformation might even better capture the effect
of similarity on memory retrieval. And indeed, we found that
applying a softmax transformation to the similarity space
improved the model ﬁt, indicating that items with larger sim-
ilarities are disproportionally more likely to be sampled.
Overall, despite its minimal assumptions, the SimSS
model captures the main effects of the data well, support-
ing the ideas that (1) retrieval is guided by similarity, (2)
memory search is a sequential process, and (3) activation or
sampling probability scales with set size. As we noted in the
alternative model sections, other models of retrieval can also
account for these results. But often they are more complex or
would need additional assumptions to model RTs. By show-
ing that only few assumptions are needed to account for a
lot of the effects we observed in cued recall, we hope to pro-
vide a simple lens through which we can view the retrieval
of speciﬁc memories given a cue.
Nevertheless, some discrepancies between model predic-
tions and empirical data highlight areas for future improve-
ment. For example, while the ﬁtted SimSS model seems
to capture the aggregated data (across the effects of inter-
est here) well, a lot of variance in the raw data remains
unexplained. Furthermore, unlike the data, the SimSS model
predicts a set size effect on RTs for incorrect responses,
which was not observed. Similarly, the model fails to cap-
ture the pattern that omissions are slower than intrusions.
These limitations indicate that additional mechanisms are
needed to capture memory retrieval more fully. For exam-
ple, while SimSS assumes that correct items are immediately
recognized upon sampling, a simpliﬁcation justiﬁed by the
near-perfect recognition parameter in our ﬁts, future work
could explore more detailed models of recognition processes,
as suggested by earlier frameworks such as ARC-REM
(Diller et al., 2001). Furthermore, at the moment, the context
dimensions of time and semantic similarity are not imple-
mented in the same way. This could be improved in our model
or similar models to create a more complete understanding
of memory retrieval.
One other important limitation of the presented framework
is that the SimSS model is only a model of retrieval and we
ignored all encoding processes. Despite this, we do believe
that there were effects of encoding on the recall performance
in our study. However, we tried to minimize any system-
atic effects of encoding by emphasizing the encoding phase,
allowing us to focus on how memories are accessed without
modeling how they were formed. Nevertheless, to create a
full account of memory, encoding dynamics will have to be
incorporated.
Finally, while SimSS was developed for cued recall, future
research could test its applicability to other retrieval tasks.
For example, for free recall, SimSS would not predict any
set size effects for RTs, since the sampling time of each item
is constant and any found item is a correct item. Testing
such predictions could provide insights into the generaliz-
ability and limits of sequential sampling accounts of memory
retrieval.
Conclusion
Overall, the results support the notion of a sequential search
process in memory that is modulated by both similarity and
contextual information. Notably, we not only show the impor-
tance of the cue-target similarity, but also the importance
of target speciﬁc cues. Furthermore, we show the impor-
tance of context, but also that different dimensions of context
affect retrieval from LTM differently and that not all context
features affect retrieval. In doing so, we contribute to the
understanding of context and memory organization. Future
research should further investigate the contextual dimensions
that inﬂuence memory retrieval as well as the role of the set
size effect in more naturalistic conditions and how it is over-
come there.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-Assisted
Technologies in the Writing Process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used
ChatGPT in order to improve the readability of single para-
graphs or sentences. After using this tool/service, the authors
reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full
responsibility for the content of the publication.
123
25


--- Page 26 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
AppendixA:SimilarityValidation
In this separate pilot study, we tested whether the cosine
distance between pretrained Word2V ec embeddings is a good
account of human pair-wise similarity ratings. To do so, we
collected human pair-wise similarity ratings using the word
pairs from Experiment 1.
We collected data from 50 adults (age range, 18 to 45)
via Proliﬁc. To ensure that the task was understood cor-
rectly, all participants had to answer three comprehension
questions before the start of the experimental trials. We also
had attention checks during the experiment, which 3 par-
ticipants failed, leaving us with data from 47 individuals.
Participants were paid $3.00. Most participants ﬁnished the
experiment in under 8 min. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants before the experiment started. The study
was approved by the ethics committee of the medical faculty
of the University of Tübingen (number 701/2020BO).
People were instructed to rate 55 word pairs on their sub-
jective semantic similarity on a scale from 0 (not similar) to
100 (very similar). Five of the 55 words pairs were attention
checks, where we presented the same word twice. People that
did not rate the similarity above 95 for all of these attention
checks were excluded from our analysis. The other 50 word
pairs were randomly taken from the set of word pairs pre-
sented in Experiment 1. In total, we acquired 2350 similarity
ratings for 139 word pairs (on average 16.9 (min = 9; max =
25; SD = 3.32) ratings per word pair).
For each word pair, we calculated the average rating,
which we used as the human similarity rating. We then corre-
lated that value with the cosine similarity of the same words
calculated by the pretrained “en_core_web_md” Word2V ec
model.
Human pair-wise similarity ratings and the Word2V ec-
based similarity measure had a correlation of 0.81.
Based on these results, we felt conﬁdent in using the
Word2V ec-based similarity measure for all our analyses.
This is very relevant, since the Word2V ec-based measure
represents a readily available estimate for similarity, which
is far easier to obtain and can easily deal with changing word
stimuli. Because of this high correlation, we feel justiﬁed
in taking advantage of the beneﬁts that the Word2V ec-based
measure provides.
AppendixB:Comparisonbetween
Experiments1and3
To better understand potential beneﬁts of additional context
cues and whether these cues can overcome the set size effects
we observed in Experiment 1, we compared RT and accuracy
data from Experiments 1 and 3.
First, we compared the average RT and accuracy of each of
the conditions in Experiment 3 with the data from the 20 set
size condition in Experiment 1. Since these conditions all had
the same set size we used all data from all trials. We excluded
trials with RTs above 20 s, and for the RT analysis, we only
looked at correct responses. Using an independent Bayesian
t-test, we found that when compared to Experiment 1, there
was no difference in RTs to the context conditions (i.e., the
average RT across all context sizes) of Experiment 3 (BF10 =
0.66), and no difference to the high similarity pairs ( BF10 =
0.92) and low similarity list (BF10 = 0.25) control conditions.
However, participants in Experiment 1 were 29.7% and 21.3$
more accurate in then in the context ( BF10 > 100) and low
similarity list ( BF10 = 46.94) conditions of Experiment 3.
There was no difference when compared to the high similarity
pairs condition (BF10 = 0.26). Even when only comparing the
performance of context sizes below 5 with the performance
from Experiment 1, participants were still on average 16.1%
more accurate (BF10 = 10.05), even if there was no difference
in the RTs ( BF10 = 0.25).
This comparison has to be taken with caution, since we
have very limited data from Experiment 1 for this comparison
and the similarity manipulation differed between the two
experiments. Nevertheless, these results indicate that the
FALSE TRUE
0 1 02 03 0 0 1 02 03 0
0
2
4
6
Set size/Context size
mean RT in s +/− SE
A
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0 1 02 03 0
Set size/Context size
mean Acc in s +/− SE
B
Experiment 13 Control Condotion highSimPairs lowSimList
Fig. 8 Comparison Experiments 1 and 3. For all plots, the x-axis rep-
resents the set size for the data from Experiment 1 (blue lines) and the
context size for the data from Experiment 3 (orange lines and black
lines) to make the effects of the two more comparable. A The average
RTs for Experiment 1 and 3. The left panel shows the RTs for incor-
rect responses and the right panel the RTs for correct responses. B The
average accuracy for the two experiments
123
26


--- Page 27 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
additional semantic context cues where detrimental rather
than helpful and where not used to overcome set size effects.
Rather, the heightened similarity to distractors in the larger
contexts in Experiment 3 seems to negatively affect recall
accuracy while not reducing RTs. This indicates that either
the whole set size still effects recall and the semantic cate-
gories cannot be used to constrain the search, or the search
can be constrained by semantic category, but the effect of
even just a few good distractor items has such detrimental
effects, that they compensate for any beneﬁts a reduced con-
sidered set size might bring.
AppendixC:ModelFitting
To ﬁt the model, we used maximum log-likelihood estimation
based on a joint measure of response type and reaction time.
The probability of producing a correct response, an omis-
sion or an intrusion at any sampling step can be calculated by
following the ﬂowchart in Fig.1A. The probability of produc-
ing a correct response in a single sampling step( p(correct )),
green arrow in Fig. 1A) is as such determined by the follow-
ing:
p(correct ) = p(tc) = s(tc, c)
∑N
j=1 s( j, c)
(4)
with tc being the target item. The exact implementation ofs()
depends on the model version with the basic version being
the same as described in the introduction of the SimSS model
(Eq. 1). Given this probability, we can now determine the
probability of an intrusion (light red arrow in Fig.1A) and an
omission (dark red arrow in Fig. 1A) in every given sample
step:
p(intrusion ) = (1 − p(correct )) · i (5)
p(omission ) = (1 − p(correct )) · o (6)
However, since these responses only occur if the search
has been stopped, we also need the stopping probability to
calculate the models probability of a certain response given
the observed response. Since stopping only occurs when one
of these three responses has been given, the probability that
the process stops at every given step is as follows:
p(stop ) = p(correct ) + (1 − p(correct )) · (o + i) (7)
By using these probabilities, it is straightforward to show
that the log-likelihood for the response type given the model
parameters is as follows:
log Ltotal =
M∑
m=1
log
( f (Rm, p(correct )m, o, i)
p(stop )m
)
(8)
where the function f (Rm, p(correct )m, o, i) depends on the
observed response Rm in trial m:
f (Rm, p(corret )m, o, i)=
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
p(correct )m if Rm = “C”
(1 − p(correct )m) · o if Rm = “O”
(1 − p(correct )m) · i if Rm = “I”
(9)
with “C,” “O,” and “I” standing for correct, omission, and
intrusion responses, respectively.
We then use the number Sm of candidate words sampled
in trial m to model the reaction times. Speciﬁcally, using
Eq. (7), it is straightforward to show that Sm has a geomet-
ric distribution with parameter p(stop )m . Then, for a given
number Sm of samples, we assume that the reaction timeRTm
at trial m is sampled from a uniform distribution:
RTm ∼
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
Uniform(0, stepsize + intercept) if Sm = 1
Uniform(intercept+ (Sm − 1)· stepsize,
intercept + Sm · stepsize) otherwise
(10)
where stepsize and intercept are free parameters of the
model. The stepzise models how long each mental sampling
step takes and the intercept accounts for some initial time
needed for encoding and responding. Using these assump-
tions, we can then convert every RT to a discrete number of
sampling steps:
S = max
(
1,
⌈ rt − intercept
stepsize
⌉)
− 1 (11)
where S is the number of sample steps and ⌈ refers to the
next higher integer. Then, the total log-likelihood of reaction
times is given by the following:
log L =
N∑
m=1
[
log(Geom(Sm; p(stop ))) − adjustment_termm
]
(12)
with the adjustment term being deﬁned as follows:
adjustment_termm =
{
log(stepsize+ intercept) if Sm = 0
log(stepsize) otherwise
(13)
This adjustment term is needed to account for the fact that
there is a uniform distribution over all RTs that correspond
to one sample step (as shown in Eq. (10)). This means that
the larger a sample step is, the higher is the uncertainty of a
RT given a sample step (and thus the adjustment term).
123
27


--- Page 28 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
SimSS out of list distractors SimSS softmax SimSS target rejection
SimSS SimSS no AS SimSS no Sim SimSS no Sim/AS
100 300 500 700 1000 100 300 500 700 1000 100 300 500 700 1000
100 300 500 700 1000
0
200
400
600
800
0
200
400
600
800
Step size
Intercept
BIC
209270
224540
Fig. 9 Shown are the BIC values of the ﬁtted models across various stepsizes and intercepts. We used this coarse grid search to determine the best
stepsize and intercept for each model
We used the optim function in R with the implementation
of the optimization algorithm proposed by Nelder and Mead
(1965). Since the stepsize and the intercept can only be ﬁtted
in an outer loop, which is very computationally expensive,
we did a coarse grid search over 5 intercept and 5 stepsize
values. We present the results for the model with the best
BICs over these parameters. The results of the grid search
are shown in Fig. 9.
AppendixD:RobustnessCheckoftheModel
Predictions
To ensure that our model predictions were not overly
dependent on speciﬁc parameter choices, we conducted a
robustness analysis. We systematically varied the parame-
ters of the SimSS model within plausible ranges, reran the
simulations described above for each combination, and used
linear regression to estimate the effect sizes of the predicted
outcomes. Speciﬁcally, we varied the omissions probabil-
ity o and the intrusion probability i between 0 and 0.2. We
chose this range, as larger values are likely to result in a
large amount of errors. The association strength ( a)w a sv a r -
ied between 0 and 6, which is a relatively large range (since
semantic similarity sem(k, c) only varies between 0 and 1),
but as we did not know how strong the binding between
cue and target would be, we wanted to err on the save side
here. Finally we varied the scaling parameter for the simi-
larities (β) between 0 and 1.5. The results are summarized
in Fig. 10 for the model response times and Fig. 10 for the
accuracy. Overall, the predicted effects reported in the main
manuscript remained robust across parameter settings, with
a few notable exceptions. In Experiment 1, the interaction
between set size and cue–target similarity was only present
in the RTs for some parameter combinations. Speciﬁcally,
the more likely some type of response is given (omission,
intrusion, or correct response), the smaller the interaction
becomes. This makes sense, because the probability that the
search is ended early increases. As expected, higher values
of o and i reversed the pattern that correct responses tend to
be faster. Additionally, setting β = 0 eliminated similarity-
based effects and the inﬂuence of semantic category size in
Experiment 3, as expected. All other effects were preserved
and varied in predictable ways across the tested parameter
space.
AppendixE:WordCategoriesofExperiment
3
Country Words
chile, china, cyprus, egypt, england, ghana, india, italy, japan,
jordan, kenya, kuwait, latvia, liberia, malta, mexico, nepal,
niger, oman, qatar, russia, samoa, senegal, serbia, sierra,
spain, sudan, sweden, syria, togo, tonga, tunisia, uganda,
yemen, zambia, angola, germany, bhutan, brazil, canada,
congo, ﬁji, france, gambia, greece, guinea, israel, malawi,
norway, poland
Job Words
baker, chef, coach, coder, diver, editor, guide, judge, lawyer,
miner, model, nurse, doctor, pilot, plumber, poet, porter,
rabbi, ranger, scout, smith, priest, tailor, teller, tutor, usher,
teacher, valet, mayor, welder, writer, actor, agent, artist, bar-
ber, buyer, clerk, dancer, driver, envoy, farmer, guard, janitor,
jester, medic, monk, painter, owner, sailor, singer
123
28


--- Page 29 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 0.0 0.5 1.0
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type Correct response Cue−target similarity Set size Set size × cue−target similarity
Experiment 1 model times
A
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta Context bonus
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type Context size Correct response Set size
Experiment 2 model times
B
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 0.0 0.5 1.0
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type High pair similarity control condition Low similarity control condition Context size Correct response
Experiment 3 model times
C
Fig. 10 Each panel shows the effect size on model response times across
the relevant parameters. The different effects/predictors we looked at
are shown in different colors. Negative effects mean a reduced model
response time due to that predictor and positive effect sizes mean an
increased model response time. We did not include a measure for vari-
ance as we can arbitrarily reduce that depending on the number of
simulations we run
Animal Words
bison, camel, bear, cheetah, cobra, coyote, wolf, dolphin,
donkey, eagle, ferret, gecko, gibbon, goose, horse, jaguar,
koala, lemur, lion, lizard, llama, macaw, mole, monkey,
moose, otter, panda, parrot, pigeon, rabbit, raccoon, salmon,
seal, shark, sheep, skunk, sloth, snail, spider, squid, swan,
tiger, toad, trout, turtle, viper, frog, weasel, whale, zebra
Vegetable Words
arugula, bamboo, beet, carrot, chard, celery, chives, col-
lard, garlic, ginger, kale, kohlrabi, leek, lettuce, okra, onion,
parsnip, chili, pepper, radish, rhubarb, eggplant, shallot,
spinach, squash, tomato, turnip, wasabi, zucchini, broccoli,
cabbage, endive, chicory, fennel, celeriac, basil, potato, lentil,
daikon, oregano, cilantro, parsley, thyme, rosemary, ramp,
taro, bean, lotus
Color Words
aqua, beige, black, blue, blush, bronze, brown, coral, crim-
son, cyan, gold, gray, green, indigo, ivory, jade, khaki,
lavender, lilac, lime, magenta, maroon, mauve, mint, navy,
olive, orange, peach, pearl, pink, plum, purple, rose, ruby,
rust, sable, sand, sapphire, scarlet, silver, teal, violet, white,
yellow, sepia
Sports Words
rugby, soccer, tennis, golf, boxing, skiing, cycling, diving,
hockey, rowing, sailing, skating, sprint, surﬁng, swimming,
racing, bowling, cricket, karate, judo, biking, archery, canoe,
curling, fencing, ﬁshing, kayaking, squash, running, walking,
jogging, track, chess, lifting, darts, snooker, pool, football,
baseball, softball, handball, lacrosse, polo
123
29


--- Page 30 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta
0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0246 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0
−0.6
−0.3
0.0
0.3
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type Cue−target similarity Set size Set size × cue−target similarity
Experiment 1 acuracy
A
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta Context bonus
0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0246 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type Context size Set size
Experiment 2 accuracy
B
p(omission) p(intrusion) Association strength Beta
0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0246 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
Parameter value
Effect size
Effect Type High pair similarity control condition Low similarity control condition Context size
Experiment 3 accuracy
C
Fig. 11 Each panel shows the effect size on accuracy across the relevant
parameters. The different effects/predictors we looked at are shown in
different colors. Negative effects mean a reduced accuracy due to that
predictor and positive effect sizes mean an increased accuracy. We did
not include a measure for variance as we can arbitrarily reduce that
depending on the number of simulations we run
Furniture Words
chair, table, couch, stool, bench, shelf, desk, drawer, sofa,
mirror, chest, stand, ottoman, cabinet, dresser, chaise, futon,
buffet, armoire, loveseat, rocker, bunkbed, lamp, armchair,
recliner, bookcase, settee, vanity, pouffe, hutch, trolley,
divan, armrest, curtain, screen, cart, crate, hanger, trunk,
hammock
Low Similarity List Control Condition Words (Similarity
Between 0.0 and 0.3)
oven, player, exam, movie, army, paper, month, disk, road,
ofﬁce, dealer, message, alcohol, hair, ladder, diamond, list,
name, mouse, plan, proﬁt, couple, spot, trouble, mark, suit,
pace, make, long, mobile, split, kneepad, purse, turbine, fos-
sil, mullet, bonsai, globe
High Pair Similarity Control Condition Word Pairs (Pair-Wise
Similarity Above 0.7 and Similarity to All Other Words
Below 0.3)
“variety range„’ “town city,” “vehicle truck,” “customer
client,” “length height,” “guitar piano,” “garbage trash,”
“focus emphasis,” “shop store,” “inside outside,” “anger
fear,” “girl woman,” “welcome invite,” “state nation,” “tongue
cheek,” “incident accident,” “word phrase,” “female male,”
“quiet calm,” “snow rain,” “loan mortgage,” “push pull,” “pri-
mary main”
AppendixF:SimilarityAnalysis
ofExperiment3
123
30


--- Page 31 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
Main effect of similarity
−10
−5
0
5
10
2469 1 1 1 4 1 6 1 8 1 9 2 0
Context size
Estimated slope (with 95% CI) on RT
A
Main effect of similarity
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
2 4 6 9 1 11 41 61 81 92 0
Context size
Estimated slope (with 95% CI) on accuracy
B
0
100
200
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Cue target similarity
Frequency
correct FALSE TRUE
C
Fig. 12 Effect of cue-target similarity in Experiment 3. A The slopes
of the similarity on RTs of the mixed effects regression for the different
context sizes. The main effect of similarity and the 95% CI is plotted
in blue. B The slopes of the similarity on accuracy of the mixed effects
regression for the different context sizes. The main effect of similarity
and the 95% CI is plotted in blue. C A histogram of the cue-target sim-
ilarities of Experiment 3 for all word pairs from the conditions where
we manipulated the context size. Shown are only the values for the
condition with a context size. All error bars represent the 95% CIs
Acknowledgements We thank Klaus Oberauer, Chris Donkin, Milena
Rmus, and Alireza Modirshanechi for providing feedback on the mod-
eling and Luke Gelagin for helpful comments on the manuscript.
Author Contributions All authors developed the study concept and con-
tributed to the study design. S.H. conducted the experiment performed
the data analysis and interpretation. S.H. prepared all ﬁgures and wrote
the manuscript with substantial revision and feedback from M.T.. E.S.
provided critical revisions. All authors approved the ﬁnal version of the
manuscript for submission.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL. This work was supported by the Max Planck Society, Helmholtz
Munich, a Jacobs Research Fellowship to E.S. S.H. is supported by the
Max Planck School of Cognition.
Data Availability All code and data have been made publicly available
and can be accessed https://github.com/susanneharidi/memoryscaling.
Code Availability All code has been made publicly available and can
be accessed at https://github.com/susanneharidi/memoryscaling.
Declarations
Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Anderson, J. R. (1974). Retrieval of propositional information from
long-term memory. Cognitive Psychology, 6(4), 451–474.
Anderson, M.C., & Neely, J.H. (1996). Interference and inhibition in
memory retrieval. Memory (pp. 237–313). Elsevier.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects
structure for conﬁrmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal.
Journal of Memory and Language, 68 (3), 255–278.
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & van Heerden, J. (2003). The the-
oretical status of latent variables. Psychological Review, 110 (2),
203–219. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.2.203
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2008). Visual
long-term memory has a massive storage capacity for object
details. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(38),
14325–14329.
Bürkner, P C. (2017). brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel
models using Stan. Journal of Statistical Software , 80(1), 1–28.
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v080.i01
Brown, G. D., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio model
of memory. Psychological Review, 114(3), 539.
Buratto, L. G., & Lamberts, K. (2008). List strength effect without list
length effect in recognition memory. Quarterly Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology, 61(2), 218–226.
Burke, D. M., & MacKay, D. G. (1997). Memory, language, and ageing.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
B: Biological Sciences, 352 (1363), 1845–1856.
Bürkner, P . C. (2018).Advanced Bayesian multilevel modeling with the
R package brms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.11123.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation theory
of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82(6), 407.
Cornell, C. A., Norman, K. A., Grifﬁths, T. L., & Zhang, Q. (2024).
Improving memory search through model-based cue selection.
Psychological Science, 35(1), 55–71.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P . A. (1980). Individual differences in work-
ing memory and reading. Journal of V erbal Learning and V erbal
Behavior , 19(4), 450–466.
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., Perfors, A., Brysbaert, M., & Storms,
G. (2019). The “small world of words” english word association
123
31


--- Page 32 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
norms for over 12,000 cue words. Behavior Research Methods,
51, 987–1006.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model of
episodic word recognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 452.
Diller, D. E., Nobel, P . A., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). An arc-rem model
for accuracy and response time in recognition and recall. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27(2), 414.
Dosher, B. A. (1981). The effects of delay and interference: A speed-
accuracy study. Cognitive Psychology, 13(4), 551–582.
Epstein, M. L., Phillips, W. D., & Johnson, S. J. (1975). Recall of related
and unrelated word pairs as a function of processing level. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 1(2),
149.
Farrell, S. (2012). Temporal clustering and sequencing in short-term
memory and episodic memory.Psychological Review, 119(2), 223.
Fernandez, A., & Glenberg, A. M. (1985). Changing environmental
context does not reliably affect memory. Memory & Cognition,
13, 333–345.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Free recall of complex pictures
and abstracts words.Journal of V erbal Learning and V erbal Behav-
ior , 20(5), 575–592.
Godden, D., & Baddeley, A. (1975). Context-dependent memory in two
natural environments: On land and under water. British Journal of
Psychology, 66, 325–331.
Greenberg, D. L., & V erfaellie, M. (2010). Interdependence of episodic
and semantic memory: Evidence from neuropsychology. Journal
of the International Neuropsychological society, 16 (5), 748–753.
Grenfell-Essam, R., Ward, G., & Tan, L. (2013). The role of rehearsal
on the output order of immediate free recall of short and long
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 39(2), 317.
Gronau, Q.F., Singmann, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2017). bridge-
sampling: An r package for estimating normalizing constants .
arXiv:1710.08162
Heald, J. B., Lengyel, M., & Wolpert, D. M. (2023). Contextual infer-
ence in learning and memory.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 27(1),
43–64.
Hebart, M. N., Dickter, A. H., Kidder, A., Kwok, W. Y ., Corriveau,
A., V an Wicklin, C., & Baker, C. I. (2019). Things: A database
of 1,854 object concepts and more than 26,000 naturalistic object
images. PloS One, 14(10), e0223792.
Henson, R. N. (1996). Unchained memory: Error patterns rule out chain-
ing models of immediate serial recall. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A, 49 (1), 80–115.
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P . M. (2012). Optimal foraging in
semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119(2), 431.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed representation
of temporal context. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46 (3),
269–299.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). When does semantic similarity
help episodic retrieval? Journal of Memory and Language, 46 (1),
85–98.
Hudson, R. L., & Austin, J. B. (1970). Effect of context and category
name on the recall of categorized word lists. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 86(1), 43.
Hurlstone, M. J., & Hitch, G. J. (2015). How is the serial order of
a spatial sequence represented? insights from transposition laten-
cies. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 41(2), 295.
Janes, J. L., Rivers, M. L., & Dunlosky, J. (2018). The inﬂuence of
making judgments of learning on memory performance: Positive,
negative, or both?Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 25, 2356–2364.
Jang, Y ., & Huber, D. E. (2008). Context retrieval and context change
in free recall: recalling from long-term memory drives list isola-
tion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(1), 112.
Jeffreys, H. (1961). The theory of probability (3rd ) . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 90 (430), 773–795.
Katkov, M., Romani, S., & Tsodyks, M. (2014). Word length effect in
free recall of randomly assembled word lists. Frontiers in Compu-
tational Neuroscience, 8, 129.
Kinnell, A., & Dennis, S. (2011). The list length effect in recognition
memory: An analysis of potential confounds. Memory & Cogni-
tion, 39, 348–363.
Kumar, A. A. (2021). Semantic memory: A review of methods, models,
and current challenges. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28 (1),
40–80.
Lee, C. L., & Estes, W. K. (1977). Order and position in primary memory
for letter strings. Journal of V erbal Learning and V erbal Behavior ,
16(4), 395–418.
Light, L. L., & Carter-Sobell, L. (1970). Effects of changed semantic
context on recognition memory. Journal of V erbal Learning and
V erbal Behavior , 9(1), 1–11.
Liu, Z., Johansson, M., Johansson, R., & Bramão, I. (2024). The effects
of episodic context on memory integration. Scientiﬁc Reports,
14(1), 1–13.
Logan, G. D., & Etherton, J. L. (1994). What is learned during automa-
tization? the role of attention in constructing an instance. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20(5), 1022.
Mack, C. C., Cinel, C., Davies, N., Harding, M., & Ward, G. (2017).
Serial position, output order, and list length effects for words pre-
sented on smartphones over very long intervals.Journal of Memory
and Language, 97, 61–80.
Marjieh, R., V an Rijn, P ., Sucholutsky, I., Sumers, T.R., Lee, H.,
Grifﬁths, T.L., & Jacoby, N. (2022). Words are all you need?
Language as an approximation for human similarity judgments .
arXiv:2206.04105
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013).Efﬁcient Estima-
tion of Word Representations in V ector Space.arxiv:1301.3781.
Morey, R.D., Rouder, J.N., Jamil, T., & Morey, M.R.D. (2015).Package
‘bayesfactor’.
Morton, N. W., & Polyn, S. M. (2016). A predictive framework for
evaluating models of semantic organization in free recall. Journal
of Memory and Language, 86 , 119–140.
Murre, J. M. (2021). The godden and baddeley (1975) experiment on
context-dependent memory on land and underwater: A replication.
Royal Society Open Science, 8 (11), 200724.
Nairne, J. S. (1991). Positional uncertainty in long-term memory.Mem-
ory & Cognition, 19 , 332–340.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Hussain, Z., Guez, J., & Bar-On, M. (2003).
Adult age differences in episodic memory: further support for an
associative-deﬁcit hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29 (5), 826.
Nelder, J. A., & Mead, R. (1965). A simplex method for function min-
imization. The Computer Journal, 7 (4), 308–313.
Nobel, P . A., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). Retrieval processes in recognition
and cued recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27 (2), 384.
Old, S. R., & Naveh-Benjamin, M. (2008). Differential effects of age
on item and associative measures of memory: a meta-analysis.
Psychology and Aging, 23 (1), 104.
Pacheco, D., Sánchez-Fibla, M., Duff, A., & V erschure, P . F. (2017). A
spatial-context effect in recognition memory. Frontiers in Behav-
ioral Neuroscience, 11, 143.
Patterson, K. E. (1972). Some characteristics of retrieval limitation in
long-term memory. Journal of V erbal Learning and V erbal Behav-
ior , 11(6), 685–691.
123
32


--- Page 33 ---
Computational Brain & Behavior (2025) 9:1–33
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context main-
tenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in free
recall. Psychological Review, 116(1), 129.
Popov, V ., & Reder, L. M. (2020). Frequency effects on memory: A
resource-limited theory. Psychological Review, 127(1), 1.
R Core Team (2024). Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/
Raaijmakers, J.G., & Shiffrin, R.M. (1980). Sam: A theory of proba-
bilistic search of associative memory. Psychology of learning and
motivation (V ol. 14, pp. 207–262). Elsevier.
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of associative
memory. Psychological Review, 88(2), 93.
Racsmány, M., Bencze, D., Pajkossy, P ., Sz˝ oll˝osi, Á., & Marián, M.
(2021). Irrelevant background context decreases mnemonic dis-
crimination and increases false memory. Scientiﬁc Reports, 11(1),
6204.
Ramscar, M., Hendrix, P ., Shaoul, C., Milin, P ., & Baayen, H. (2014).
The myth of cognitive decline: Non-linear dynamics of lifelong
learning. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6 (1), 5–42.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.Psychological Review,
85(2), 59.
Ratcliff, R., & Murdock, B. B. (1976). Retrieval processes in recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 83(3), 190.
Reinecke, K., & Gajos, K.Z. (2015). Labinthewild: Conducting large-
scale online experiments with uncompensated samples. Pro-
ceedings of the 18th acm conference on computer supported
cooperative work & social computing (pp. 1364–1378).
Richie, R., & Bhatia, S. (2021). Similarity judgment within and across
categories: A comprehensive model comparison. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 45(8), e13030.
Roediger, H. L., & Schmidt, S. R. (1980). Output interference in the
recall of categorized and paired-associate lists. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6 (1), 91.
Rubenstein, H., & Goodenough, J. B. (1965). Contextual correlates of
synonymy. Communications of the ACM, 8 (10), 627–633.
Shiffrin, R.M. (1970). Memory search.Models of Human Memory, 375–
447.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Atkinson, R. C. (1969). Storage and retrieval pro-
cesses in long-term memory. Psychological Review, 76(2), 179.
Shiffrin, R. M., Huber, D. E., & Marinelli, K. (1995). Effects of cat-
egory length and strength on familiarity in recognition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
21(2), 267.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition
memory: Rem—retrieving effectively from memory.Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 4(2), 145–166.
Shin, Y . S., Masís-Obando, R., Keshavarzian, N., Dáve, R., & Norman,
K. A. (2021). Context-dependent memory effects in two immersive
virtual reality environments: On mars and underwater. Psycho-
nomic Bulletin & Review, 28 (2), 574–582.
Smith, S. M., & V ela, E. (2001). Environmental context-dependent
memory: A review and meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8(2), 203–220.
Smyth, M. M., Hay, D. C., Hitch, G. J., & Horton, N. J. (2005). Serial
position memory in the visual—spatial domain: Reconstructing
sequences of unfamiliar faces. The Quarterly Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology Section A, 58 (5), 909–930.
Smith, S. M., Handy, J. D., Angello, G., & Manzano, I. (2014). Effects of
similarity on environmental context cueing. Memory, 22(5), 493–
508.
Strong, E. K., Jr. (1912). The effect of length of series upon recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 19(6), 447.
Troyer, A. K., Moscovitch, M., & Winocur, G. (1997). Clustering and
switching as two components of verbal ﬂuency: evidence from
younger and older healthy adults. Neuropsychology, 11(1), 138.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory . Oxford University
Press.
Tulving, E., et al. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory.Organization
of Memory, 1(381–403), 1.
Tulving, E., & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus accessibility
of information in memory for words. Journal of V erbal Learning
and V erbal Behavior , 5(4), 381–391.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding speciﬁcity and
retrieval processes in episodic memory. Psychological Review,
80(5), 352.
V erkoeijen, P . P ., Rikers, R. M., & Schmidt, H. G. (2004). Detrimen-
tal inﬂuence of contextual change on spacing effects in free recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cog-
nition, 30(4), 796.
Ward, G. (2002). A recency-based account of the list length effect in
free recall. Memory & Cognition, 30 , 885–892.
Ward, G., Tan, L., & Grenfell-Essam, R. (2010). Examining the relation-
ship between free recall and immediate serial recall: the effects of
list length and output order. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36 (5), 1207.
Watkins, O. C., & Watkins, M. J. (1975). Buildup of proactive inhibi-
tion as a cue-overload effect.Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 1 (4), 442.
Wickens, D. D. (1970). Encoding categories of words: An empirical
approach to meaning. Psychological Review, 77(1), 1.
Wilson, J. H., & Criss, A. H. (2017). The list strength effect in cued
recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 95 , 78–88.
Wixted, J. T., Ghadisha, H., & V era, R. (1997). Recall latency following
pure-and mixed-strength lists: A direct test of the relative strength
model of free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 23 (3), 523.
Zacks, R., Hasher, L., & Li, K. (2000). The handbook of aging and
cognition. F.I.M.C..T.A. Salthouse (Ed.), (2nd ed., pp. 293-357).
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
33
