Cognitive Psychology 
Core Vocabulary Reveals Differences Between Human Word        
Prediction and Large Language Models      
Andrew Wang1 a
, Simon De Deyne1
, Meredith McKague1
, Andrew Perfors1
1 Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
Keywords: word prediction, core vocabulary, distributional semantic models, word frequency, word associations, large language models 
https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.160142 
Collabra: Psychology 
Vol. 12, Issue 1, 2026 
The question of which words are the most central or important to a language has been 
explored in various ways. In this study, we propose definitions of core vocabulary that are 
based on how language is learned, represented, and processed from psychological 
perspectives, and test these on a word prediction task. We aim to (1) compare core 
vocabulary based on word frequency in natural language, word association network 
centrality, and age-of-acquisition in terms of how well they are guessed in word 
prediction contexts, and (2) investigate the extent to which word prediction in large 
language models aligns with humans, and if there are systematic differences between 
them, whether these can be captured by core vocabulary measures. Across two 
experiments, 867 participants completed a task which involved guessing target words 
that were missing from sentence contexts. Word frequency-based core words were easier 
to guess overall, but when the predictability of words was taken into account, word 
association- and acquisition-based core words were easier to predict, indicating that 
people have a preference for simpler or more basic words over and above distributional 
predictability. Additionally, we show that there are systematic deviations between the 
predictions of a large language model (BERT) and humans, and that these are best 
captured by word association-based coreness. The findings suggest that distributional 
relationships between words in text is not all there is to human word prediction, but that 
people may also rely on factors like communicative usefulness and multimodal or 
extralinguistic information. Implications for core vocabulary, word prediction, and the 
relationship between large language models and human cognition are discussed. 
Introduction  
Though every language has thousands of words, speak-
ers usually have an intuition that some words are somehow 
more basic or fundamental as a whole. These central lexical 
items are drawn upon by people when engaging in tasks 
like speaking in simple terms, summarizing texts, relying 
on a limited vocabulary, or defining complex words (Carter, 
2012). But what makes some words more central or impor-
tant than others? 
This question about the nature of core vocabulary has 
been explored in a number of ways. One common approach, 
particularly in the area of language learning and teaching, 
is to base core vocabulary on natural language content like 
word frequency (Lee, 2001); the idea is that the most im-
portant words for language learners to learn initially are 
those that they will be exposed to most often during lan-
guage use. Many basic vocabulary lists, such as Ogden’s 
(1930) Basic English and the General Service List (West, 
1953), or word-family lists derived from the British Na-
tional Corpus (Nation, 2006), follow this principle. High 
frequency words have often been used in studies with sec-
ond-language learners to estimate how many core words 
are needed to enable adequate comprehension of written 
and spoken language (Nation, 2006). They are also a key 
component in pedagogical materials like learner dictionar-
ies and graded readers, where texts are intended to be com-
posed mainly from core vocabulary items (H. Bell, 2013). 
Other approaches to defining core vocabulary focus less 
on word frequency and more on semantics, conceptualizing 
coreness in terms of how words define or make up the 
meanings of other words. Wierzbicka’s (1996) work on se-
mantic primitives is an attempt to find a set of basic con-
cepts that are sufficient to define the rest of the words in 
the language. This approach consists of exhaustive para-
phrases of word meanings which are written in terms of 
semantic primitives that are, according to the theory, ir-
reducible and semantically basic elements that cannot be 
Correspondence: andrew.wang@unimelb.edu.au a 
Wang, A., De Deyne, S., McKague, M., & Perfors, A. (2026). Core Vocabulary Reveals
Differences Between Human Word Prediction and Large Language Models. Collabra:
Psychology, 12(1). https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.160142
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

further defined, and further, that are universal across hu-
man languages. In a similar vein, Vincent-Lamarre et al. 
(2016) analysed dictionary definitions using network analy-
ses to identify the defining vocabulary of dictionaries, that 
is, the set of words that, if known, could be used to under-
stand all other words in the dictionary through definition 
lookup. 
Other meaning-based proposals for a core vocabulary in-
clude sets of criteria for coreness that are based on struc-
tural-semantic relations between words in the lexicon 
(Carter, 2012; Lee, 2001; Stubbs, 1986). For example, core 
words are thought to be superordinate words like animal 
rather than the words they encompass like dog, cat, and fish, 
as well as words that can substitute easily for other words in 
sentence contexts (e.g., walk can substitute into “They went 
for a stroll on the beach”, but stroll cannot as easily substi-
tute into “They walk to work every day”). This reflects the 
generic and versatile nature that core words should have, 
which also translates to greater usefulness in communica-
tive contexts. 
Although these approaches have been foundational and 
useful in many ways, they make relatively little contact 
with psycholinguistic research on how language is learned, 
represented, and processed. For instance, lexical represen-
tations are better characterized as following family resem-
blance (Rosch & Mervis, 1975) or semantic network struc-
tures (Collins & Loftus, 1975) rather than dictionary 
definitions or strict taxonomies. And although frequency-
based measures have a clear applied motivation, theoret-
ically, it is unclear exactly why the most frequent words 
should be considered to be the core ones. As Stubbs (1986) 
argues, frequency may be best thought of a consequence 
of coreness rather than its defining feature. Is what makes 
words core the fact that they are frequent, or is it the 
fact that words are core that makes them frequent? This 
question is difficult to answer without considering what we 
know about how people represent and use language. 
In this study, we approach the study of core vocabulary 
from a psychological perspective. This has the advantage of 
providing definitions of core vocabulary that are grounded 
in well-established psychological theory. It also permits us 
to define and evaluate precise measures of coreness that 
make experimentally testable quantitative predictions. 
Core Words in Language Processing and       
Representation  
The role word frequency plays in access and retrieval 
from the mental lexicon is well documented in psycholin-
guistic and memory research. Highly frequent words are 
encountered more often in natural language; as a result, 
they generally have higher quality representations and are 
more deeply entrenched in the semantic representation, 
leading to a greater degree of availability in memory and 
quicker activation and access during processing (Johns et 
al., 2016; Monaghan et al., 2017). As a result, word fre-
quency is an extremely strong predictor of processing effi-
ciency, which means it is one of the most important lexical 
characteristics that predicts performance in tasks like lexi-
cal decision and naming (Brysbaert et al., 2018). 
Frequency is not the only way of defining coreness, how-
ever. More semantically-based approaches build on the 
central insight that a word’s meaning depends to at least 
some extent on its relationship with other words. These re-
lationships can be represented in the form of semantic net-
works. One way of measuring semantic networks is through 
word association data (i.e., how often certain words are pro-
vided as an association response when other words are used 
as cues). Word associations reflect meaning in the mental 
lexicon by capturing the strength of associations between 
pairs of words across a population of language users. Se-
mantic networks derived from word associations have been 
widely used as a model of human semantic representation 
and provide a way to analyze the structure and organization 
of the mental lexicon (De Deyne & Storms, 2008; Kenett et 
al., 2011; Kumar, 2021; Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). 
This approach yields a natural definition of coreness: 
the centrality of words within the semantic network. There 
are multiple graph-theoretic centrality measures one could 
use; for instance, the number of links a node has (degree 
centrality) reflects how well-connected a word is. Links be-
tween words can also be directed (from cue to response or 
vice-versa) or weighted to reflect the strength of associa-
tion (so that words which are commonly produced as asso-
ciates have higher weight). 
Graph-theoretic centrality measures have some overlap 
with the meaning-based approaches discussed earlier. For 
example, because word associations include “defining” re-
lations, the more central words in a semantic network will 
generally also define more other words, as theorized by 
Wierzbicka (1996) and Vincent-Lamarre et al. (2016). Se-
mantic networks also capture structural properties like su-
perordinate relations, as discussed by Carter (2012), Lee 
(2001), and Stubbs (1986). A coreness measure based on 
centrality in a semantic network therefore incorporates the 
insights of previous work, while also yielding a precise 
quantitative metric and capturing other important factors 
in semantic representation as well. 
A related possibility is to consider the developmental 
process by which these semantic networks emerge. For in-
stance, the preferential attachment hypothesis suggests 
that semantic networks grow over time by attaching new 
words to existing ones (Brysbaert et al., 2000; Hills et al., 
2009; Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). This implies that 
early-acquired words serve as an anchor for new knowledge. 
In previous work (Wang et al., 2025), we evaluated core 
words that were defined according to these three ap-
proaches. In the first, coreness was based on word fre-
quency (WF) such that more frequent words were consid-
ered more core. In the second, coreness was based on 
in-strength centrality (i.e., the weighted sum of incoming 
edges) in a semantic network built from word associations 
(INSTR), such that the more core words are more commonly 
produced as a response to other cues. And in the third, 
coreness was based on age of acquisition (AOA), such that 
early-acquired words are more core. In that study, we com-
pared these three core words types using a word-guessing 
game in which participants guessed target words based on 
hint words that were related in meaning. The hint words 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 2
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

were presented one-by-one as individual cues for the target 
word. Both hint and target words were drawn from lists cor-
responding to each of the three core word types. We inves-
tigated whether people found it easier to guess words de-
pending on what core word list the hints and targets were 
drawn from. 
Our results showed no difference in the accuracy of peo-
ple’s guesses based on the type of core words that served 
as hints, but there was a consistent advantage when the 
target word was a word-association-based core word (i.e., 
INSTR). This advantage held across different types of core-
word and non-core word hints, and even when controlling 
for part-of-speech or semantic similarity to the hint words. 
This suggests that words that are more central in a word-
association-based semantic network are more accessible or 
prominent than other kinds of words, and are readily acti-
vated by other words in the mental lexicon. That said, a ma-
jor limitation of this finding is that it may primarily reflect 
particularities about the task: guessing a word in response 
to a cue, after all, is very similar to the word associations 
that the INSTR core words were based on. It is possible that 
the result would be different on a task that reflects the sta-
tistics and context of natural language, and thus potentially 
more advantageous for core words based on frequency. 
In this study, we address that limitation by investigating 
core vocabulary using a cloze-style word prediction task, 
where missing words are to be guessed in sentence con-
texts. The cloze task is a widely used task in psycholinguis-
tics, and the predictability of words (i.e., the probability of a 
word’s occurrence in a given context) has been shown to be 
an important measure that predicts reading behaviours like 
eye movements and response times (Luke & Christianson, 
2016; Staub, 2015) and influences how words are learned 
(Bogaerts et al., 2020). Predictability – and cloze probabil-
ity in particular (the proportion of responses in context cor-
responding to a given word, aggregated over participants) 
– is thought to reflect graded pre-activation of suitable 
lexical candidates that fit the linguistic context (Luke & 
Christianson, 2016; Staub, 2015). This thus nicely parallels 
what the previous word-guessing task measured, namely 
the degree to which words are readily activated by individ-
ual words, but in the context of a task which is more com-
municative in nature and in which words are activated by 
the context. This task is therefore more likely to favour fre-
quency-based core words, since it reflects the statistics and 
content of natural language on which word frequency is 
based. 
Word prediction also links to the criterion of syntactic 
substitution that has been proposed to define core vocab-
ulary discussed above (Carter, 2012; Stubbs, 1986). If core 
words are those that can substitute more easily for other 
words, and are more versatile or useful in communicative 
contexts, they should also be better predicted in the word 
prediction task. 
Distributional Semantic Models    
The task of prediction, of course, has deep connections 
not just with word frequency but with a broad class of ap-
proaches all based on the distributional statistics of nat-
ural language. According to the distributional hypothesis 
(Firth, 1957; Harris, 1954), the meanings of words are a di-
rect function of the contexts in which they occur; there-
fore, natural language usage forms the basis for people’s 
learned mental representations of word meaning. This the-
ory forms the basis for a class of models known as Distribu-
tional Semantic Models (DSMs), which, unlike the relations 
in word associations, aim to infer vector representations 
of word meaning that reflect their relations in textual cor-
pus data. These vectors can be thought of as situating a 
word’s meaning in multi-dimensional semantic space, with 
words that are closer in meaning positioned more closely 
together. Modern versions of DSMs use neural networks 
trained to predict words from context to learn vector rep-
resentations for words. This includes vector-based models 
like word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), and even more recent 
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) like GPT 
(Achiam et al., 2023) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). 
DSMs have a reasonable degree of correspondence with 
human semantic representations. Vector-based representa-
tions of words can be used to model human representa-
tions of geographical locations, even capturing human bi-
ases (Gatti et al., 2022). They can also be used to reliably 
predict which images participants choose to represent ab-
stract words, which have no direct perceptual referent 
(Günther et al., 2022). Even older count-based DSMs predict 
people’s ratings of words on key semantic variables such 
as concreteness and affect with a high degree of accuracy 
(Mandera et al., 2015), and perform well on tasks such as 
the TOEFL and word similarity judgments (Bullinaria & 
Levy, 2007), although not as well as vector-based prediction 
models (Mandera et al., 2017). 
More recently, considerable advancements made by 
transformer-based LLMs like GPT and BERT have enabled 
them to emulate human cognition in ways not before possi-
ble. LLMs correspond closely to humans in terms of percep-
tual representations in domains as diverse as color, pitch, 
and taste (Marjieh et al., 2024). They also match or out-
perform humans on analogical reasoning problems (Webb 
et al., 2023), and demonstrate cognitive patterns that are 
similar to humans, such as priming from a semantically re-
lated word and distance effects in comparative judgments 
(De Deyne, 2024; Niu et al., 2024). Modern LLMs show vast 
improvement over previous DSMs in predicting psycholin-
guistic properties like familiarity, concreteness, and simi-
larity, so much so that they outperform the average human 
in predicting average human judgments (Brysbaert et al., 
2025; Trott 2024a, 2024b). 
As mentioned, the theory of meaning implicit in DSMs 
is a distributional one that posits that meaning originates 
from the statistics of natural language as it is used for 
communication. However, while natural language does re-
flect people’s semantic representations, it is also shaped by 
pragmatic considerations (Lenci, 2008). These include fac-
tors like the need to be informative and the need to draw on 
(and shape) the shared contextual and communicative com-
mon ground. These factors may strongly influence which 
words are actually used, depending on the nature of the im-
mediate context, the degree and nature of overlap in con-
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 3
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

ceptual knowledge between the speaker and the listener, 
and the history of the discourse (H. H. Clark, 1996). As 
such, core information about word meanings may not be as 
prevalent or obvious as one might otherwise assume; be-
cause natural language is shaped by communicative con-
straints, there may be inherent limitations to what can be 
extracted about meaning from external language alone (De 
Deyne, Verheyen, et al., 2016). 
Consistent with this, research suggests that DSMs may 
fail to capture some aspects of meaning as well as other 
models whose semantic representations are based on word 
associations. De Deyne et al. (2021) found that word associ-
ation-based models encode more non-linguistic visual and 
affective information for both concrete and abstract con-
cepts. Word association-based models have been shown to 
better predict key semantic properties like age of acquisi-
tion, concreteness, and affect (Vankrunkelsven et al., 2018), 
as well as higher level aspects of cognition like moral judge-
ments (Ramezani & Xu, 2025) and performance in a re-
mote triads task (De Deyne, Perfors, et al., 2016). Previous 
studies have also found evidence of deviations between lan-
guage statistics and human word prediction, for example, 
found systematic differences between corpus probabilities 
and human cloze probabilities, with extending this find-
ing to modern LLMs. These findings suggest that although 
the information in natural language captures many aspects 
of human experience, representations formed on distribu-
tional linguistics statistics may systematically differ from 
human semantic representations: DSMs may capture in-
formation (like pragmatic factors) that our representations 
don’t, and fail to capture information (like visual or affec-
tive experience) that our representations do. However, the 
extent to which this is still true of current state-of-the-art 
LLMs, and what we can learn from them about human cog-
nition, is unclear. 
The word prediction task in this experiment allows us 
to investigate this in greater detail: the extent to which 
word predictions based on DSMs (and thus natural lan-
guage statistics) align with word predictions people make, 
or whether there are systematic differences between them. 
Unlike the word-guessing game in our previous study, the 
cloze-style word prediction task is closely aligned with a 
distributional conception of word meaning. The task also 
matches the learning objective of language-based DSMs 
like word2vec and larger transformer-based LLMs like GPT 
and BERT, which learn in a self-supervised way to predict 
target words in sentence contexts, and is therefore a good 
test of the extent to which language models and human be-
haviour match. The predictability score we use is computed 
by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), a language model trained to 
predict words based on preceding and following context; it 
is thus a close match to the bi-directional cloze task we use 
in our experiment. If systematic differences exist between 
language model and human word prediction, they may be 
able to be captured by the coreness measures we have al-
ready discussed. This might include information related to 
perceptual and affective aspects of meaning or the avail-
ability and accessibility of words in the semantic represen-
tation, which DSMs systematically do not capture. Some 
studies have indeed shown that systematic differences be-
tween models based on language statistics and humans can 
be explained by the lexical properties of words (Smith & 
Levy, 2011; Trott 2024a). 
Aims and Research Questions     
The first aim of our study is to compare performance in 
a prediction task for three kinds of core words: those based 
on centrality in a semantic network derived from word as-
sociations (INSTR), those based on word frequency in nat-
ural language (WF), and those based on age of acquisition 
(AOA). Which core words are easiest to predict based on a 
surrounding sentence context? 
Our second aim is to investigate to what extent word 
prediction in LLMs is similar to human word prediction. 
If there are systematic differences, are they related to the 
type of information captured by our different coreness mea-
sures? 
Experiment 1   
As in Wang et al. (2025), this experiment investigates 
which three kinds of core words are easiest to guess: those 
based on frequency (WF), word-association centrality (IN-
STR), or age-of-acquisition (AOA). Unlike the previous 
study, in which people were given hint words, the current 
task asks people to fill in the missing word in a sentence. 
Another novel feature of the current study compared to is 
the inclusion of a set of target words that are not core ac-
cording to any of the three coreness measures, as a baseline 
comparison to the core-word conditions. 
Method  
Participants  
200 participants1
 (20-72 years, ; 34% female) 
were recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk, which 
predominantly comprises US participants, and paid US$4 
for a 20 minute task. Of these, 199 completed the exper-
iment. The pre-registered catch trials (described below) 
were passed by 195 participants who were included in the 
analyses. 85% reported being native English speakers, and 
all had previously passed a qualification test checking basic 
English understanding and screening bots. The research 
was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of 
The University of Melbourne (ID 20935). 
The sample size was pre-registered and was based on a target of 50 datapoints per target word on average. 1 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 4
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Figure 1. Screenshot from example trial.     
On each trial, participants were shown a series of sentences one after the other. Each 
sentence contained a black box in the location of a target word they had to guess. In this 
trial, the target word was wood and the person is guessing mortar on their third attempt. 
Procedure  
People completed the task online after giving consent, 
providing optional demographic information, reading the 
instructions, and answering check questions. It was pro-
grammed using jsPsych (Leeuw et al., 2023) and was set up 
as a game in which people were told that they were cracking 
coded messages sent between spies, and that the messages 
were ordinary sentences taken from mundane sources such 
as websites, books, and newspapers containing a blank in 
place of a missing “code word” (see Figure 1). 
On each trial, people saw up to six sentences with the 
same target word missing. The missing word was replaced 
by a standard token (5 Unicode Full Block characters, see 
Figure 1) which revealed no information about the word 
length. The sentences were presented incrementally, with 
all sentences up to the current sentence visible at a time. 
Participants made a guess at the missing word after each 
sentence was revealed. This continued until they either 
successfully guessed the word or all six attempts had been 
exhausted, at which point the correct answer was revealed. 
Performance on each trial was measured as accuracy 
(whether or not the target word was correctly guessed at 
any point) and the number of guesses to guess the target 
word if it was successfully guessed. The instructions were: 
You are a spy working for an agency, investigating a 
notorious criminal syndicate. For their latest opera-
tion, the syndicate has curated a set of top-secret code 
words, which are common English words so as to rouse 
minimal suspicion. In order to distribute these code 
words to their operatives across the globe, they get 
them to locate ordinary sentences found in books, 
newspapers, text conversations, online posts, the web, 
and other places, that contain these code words. Your 
agents have managed to obtain copies of some of these 
crucial sentences, like the ones you see below. Unfor-
tunately, all traces of the code words have been wiped 
out and are unrecoverable. Your mission is to recover 
as many of the code words as possible. You will see 
sets of 6 sentences that all contain the same code word, 
and must guess the word that fits them all. If you can-
not get the code word within 6 attempts, you will have 
failed to crack that code word. Time is a luxury we 
don’t have. It is vital that you guess each code word in 
as few attempts as possible. 
The six sentences for a target word shown to a given par-
ticipant were drawn from a larger set of 36 stimulus sen-
tences for each target word of varying predictability (de-
scribed below). This was done by dividing the 36 sentences 
for each target word into six bins based on predictability 
and randomly selecting one sentence from each bin. As a 
result, each participant saw a different random combina-
tion of sentences for any given target word but the diffi-
culty of the task was approximately similar for everyone. 
In order to make the task sufficiently challenging, the sen-
tences on each trial were presented from lowest to highest 
predictability, with the sentences in which the target words 
had the lowest predictability shown first, because the high-
est predictability sentences were easily guessable. 
Before the experiment began, participants were shown 
several example code words to illustrate the fact that they 
were simple, common English words (family, thirsty, clue-
less, table, matter, jump, want, guideline, smell, great, math, 
sickening, and tell). These examples did not constitute any 
of the experimental target words, and participants were 
told that the code words to be guessed would be different. 
They then completed a practice trial (the answer was bank) 
before proceeding to the experimental trials. As Figure 1 
shows, on each trial participants could also see their previ-
ous guesses, the number of trials remaining, and the num-
ber of correct and incorrect guesses so far. 
Each participant completed 24 experimental trials plus 
two unanalysed catch trials that were designed to be sub-
stantially easier than the experimental ones: their target 
words were age (trial 10) and head (trial 20). As pre-reg-
istered, we excluded the participants who failed to guess 
both of the words on the catch trials ( ). Target con-
dition was manipulated within-subject, with each person 
seeing a random selection of six target words from each of 
the four conditions described below (AOA, WF, INSTR, and 
NONCORE). Except for the catch trials, the target words, sen-
tences, and order of the trials were randomised for each 
person. 
Materials  
Target words.  The target words came from four target 
conditions, each containing 24 words (see Table 1). The 
words in each condition were core according to the corre-
sponding coreness measure: centrality in a word-associa-
tion-based semantic network (INSTR), high frequency (WF), 
and early age of acquisition (AOA). The NONCORE condition 
was designed as a comparison to these and contained words 
that were not on any of the three core word lists. 
As in Wang et al. (2025), each core word list was defined 
as the top 300 core words on the corresponding coreness 
measure. The WF core word list was measured using 
log10-transformed word frequency based on the SUBTLEX 
norms (Brysbaert & New, 2009), with more frequent words 
being more core. The INSTR core word list was based on 
log10-transformed InStrength computed over a semantic 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 5
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 1. Target words in each target condition.       
Condition Target words 
AoA arm, bathroom, bite, boot, bottle, breakfast, brush, butt, cookie, doll, door, grandma, hill, hug, hungry, kitchen, neck, 
pillow, plate, reindeer, rice, snack, tail, towel 
WF call, die, find, follow, go, hope, keep, know, look, make, marry, pick, ready, remember, room, send, spend, stuff, take, 
thing, trouble, use, wait, way 
InStr anger, beach, book, boring, car, clean, dirty, drink, fat, horse, light, music, pain, paper, religion, round, sea, sick, snake, 
strong, tool, warm, white, wood 
NonCore arise, athletics, atlas, backbone, bloom, cube, evergreen, fictional, floppy, frequent, gigantic, hive, maze, monopoly, 
noticeable, quiz, refusal, shallow, substitute, tablet, tighten, unwilling, vocabulary, wrestler 
network derived from the Small World of Words (SWOW) 
data, which contains word associations to over 12,000 Eng-
lish words (De Deyne et al., 2019). INSTR was calculated 
for each word as the sum of the weights of all incoming 
edges directed towards that word, where edge weights rep-
resent the strength of association between words. Common 
associates have higher INSTR and are more core. The AOA 
measure was sourced from the norms, with earlier-acquired 
words being more core. 
All words were standardised to US spelling and lemma-
tised by grouping inflectional forms of the same lemma 
(e.g., run, runs, running) using the AntBNC Lemma List 
which was created based on the BNC corpus (Anthony, 
2022). Words were lemmatised in the SWOW data by sum-
ming response counts across word forms and recalculating 
association strengths before calculating INSTR. AOA was 
lemmatised by taking the lowest age-of-acquisition of all 
the word forms for a given lemma. WF was lemmatised by 
summing over the frequencies for word forms. We excluded 
function words, including determiners, particles, nega-
tions, conjunctions, auxiliary verbs, prepositions, pro-
nouns, and interjections, along with proper nouns, taboo 
words, and non-words. 
To compare the coreness of words across the three mea-
sures, we converted each of the coreness measures into a 
normalised coreness metric. For any given word, this was 
calculated as the difference between its value and value 
of the most core word on the coreness measure (e.g., the 
earliest-acquired word or the most frequent word), and di-
viding that by the difference between the most core word 
and the last (i.e., 300th) core word. This resulted in a core-
ness metric where the core words for each measure (i.e., 
the 300 most core words) had values between 0 and 1, with 
0 representing the most core word on each list, and non-
core words (i.e., words beyond the 300 core words) had 
values greater than 1. The coreness measures are moder-
ately-to-strongly correlated in general ( ) but 
are less correlated among the core words themselves 
( ), with INSTR and WF having the strongest 
relationship. 
The AOA, WF, and INSTR target words were chosen so 
that, as much as possible, they (1) maximised coreness 
based on the measure for that condition; (2) maximised 
the difference between that measure and the coreness mea-
sures for the other two conditions; and (3) were as similar 
as possible for the coreness measures of the other two 
Figure 2. Coreness of each target word in the four         
target conditions (  AOA,  WF,  INSTR, and   NONCORE) on   
each of the three coreness measures (      AOA,  WF, and   
INSTR).  
Coreness values closer to 0 represent words that are more core. Targets were more core 
on the coreness measure corresponding to their condition and less (but equally) core on 
the other two. Targets in the NONCORE condition were comprised of words that were not 
considered core on any measure, and had generally low coreness across all three mea-
sures. 
conditions. The resulting target words were more core on 
the measure of the condition they were in, and less (but 
equally) core on the other coreness measures (see Figure 2). 
The target words in these conditions were the same as in 
Wang et al. (2025) except for one word in the AOA condition 
(reindeer instead of crayon) because crayon did not exist in 
the BERT vocabulary (i.e., as a single token, rather than be-
ing segmented into multiple tokens). 
The NONCORE target words were selected to be words 
that were not on any of the three core word lists and that 
had low (but similar) coreness across all three coreness 
measures. To ensure that these would still be familiar 
words, we only used words known by most native speakers 
as determined using those words that had the maximum 
prevalence rating (2.58, i.e., known by 100% of participants) 
on word prevalence norms (Brysbaert et al., 2019). The 
NONCORE target words were chosen to (1) minimise the av-
erage coreness across all three measures, and (2) have as 
similar as possible coreness values across the three mea-
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 6
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

sures. This condition provides a baseline for comparison 
and allows us to ask whether all core words (regardless of 
definition) are easier to guess or more accessible than non-
core words. 
Sentences. To ensure that the sentences used in the 
task were naturalistic instances of how words are used in 
language, we sourced sentence stimuli from the enTenTen 
web corpus via Sketch Engine (Jakubı́ček et al., 2013). The 
version of enTenTen used was collected between 2019 and 
2021 (36B words) and contains texts taken from the Inter-
net with content from Wikipedia, news sites, blogs, books, 
and forums. It is thus a reasonable approximation of the 
language many adult English speakers are exposed to. All 
stimulus sentences were filtered to remove ungrammatical 
or incomplete sentences, sentences with jargon or dupli-
cate instances of the target, and sensitive content. 
We used BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) to calculate the pre-
dictability of the target word in each sentence. Predictabil-
ity refers to the probability of a word occurring given a con-
text, , as predicted by the language model. 
BERT is a transformer-based LLM trained by masking words 
in the sentence input and having the model predict the 
masked words based on both the left and right context; we 
chose BERT because it matches the bi-directional cloze task 
in our experiment. We used the base, uncased version of 
BERT (110m parameters), which was trained on BookCor-
pus (Zhu et al., 2015) and English Wikipedia. The model 
was accessed through the Transformers Python package 
(Wolf et al., 2020). The predictability of a given target word 
in a given sentence was calculated by masking the target 
word within the sentence and calling BERT using the 
masked language modelling pipeline with the target word. 
The probabilities are obtained by computing hidden vectors 
for the masked token and applying a softmax function over 
the entire vocabulary (Devlin et al., 2019). The top 5 com-
pletions from BERT for the masked token were also 
recorded. 
The target words varied in terms of their predictability 
in the sentences in which they occur – some target words 
tend to be highly predictable on average, and others are less 
predictable. This variability reflects natural differences be-
tween words in their distributional profile in the linguis-
tic environment. We estimated the predictability profile of 
each target word by sampling 10,000 sentences for each tar-
get and constructing a predictability distribution over the 
sentences for each target (see Figure 3). As can be seen, 
WF target words had the highest average predictability, fol-
lowed by the INSTR and AOA target words, and all were more 
predictable than the NONCORE words. 
In Experiment 1, we opted to select stimulus sentences 
that matched the corpus predictability distributions as 
closely as possible. This allowed us to investigate task per-
formance while preserving the natural variation in pre-
dictability, and then to ascertain what factors affected per-
formance after controlling for predictability. We did this by 
repeatedly sampling 36 stimulus sentences from the full 
corpus for each target word until they matched the overall 
predictability distribution for that target (see Figure 3, as 
measured by the mean difference between the predictabil-
Figure 3. Predictability distributions of target words.      
Top panel . Distribution of predictability ((x)-axis) over the sentences for all words in 
each of the four conditions. INSTR, AOA, and NONCORE words had very low predictability 
relative to WF words, which had higher predictability. Bottom panel . Predictability dis-
tributions for individual example target words from each condition. Black lines show the 
distribution for each word as estimated from the 10,000 sentences. Bars indicate the 
predictability of the 36 stimulus sentences for each target word, which were chosen to 
match the overall predictability distributions as closely as possible. The number in the 
top-right denotes the K-S statistic measuring the difference between the overall and 
stimulus predictability distributions, which was constrained to be .15 or less. 
Figure 4. Predictability by target condition.     
Each dot is the mean predictability of the 36 stimulus sentences for one target on a 
log-10 scale. Reflecting their real-world distributions, as shown in Figure 3, conditions 
varied significantly in predictability of the sentence stimuli. WF target words had the 
highest predictability, with a mean of around (0.1). The other target conditions are an 
order of magnitude below that, at around (0.01), and the NONCORE condition is lower 
than AOA and INSTR. 
ity distribution and the stimulus distribution (less than 
0.05) and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) statistic (bounded 
between 0 and 1) comparing the predictability and stimulus 
distributions (less than .15). 
Figure 4 shows the differences between target conditions 
in predictability for the selected stimuli, which reflect the 
differences in the overall predictability distributions. The 
predictability for each target word was computed as the 
mean of the predictability (log10-transformed) of the stim-
ulus sentences for that target word, and reflects how "pre-
dictable’’ that target word is on average. All analyses use 
log-10 predictability, and predictability was also grand 
mean-centered in all analyses. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 7
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Analysis  
The main outcome variables of interest are the accuracy 
on each trial (whether or not the target word was correctly 
guessed), and for successful trials, the number of guesses 
participants made before correctly identifying the target 
word. These measures will also be aggregated at the target 
word level. ANOVAs and mixed-effect models will be con-
ducted to analyse the effect of target condition at the target 
word and individual trial level, respectively. Kaplan-Meier 
survival analyses will also be conducted to analyse accuracy 
and number of guesses simultaneously. We will also analyse 
the effect of predictability on task performance, and 
whether differences between target conditions can be ob-
served over and above this. The data collection and analysis 
approach were pre-registered (https://aspredicted.org/
FS2_DTR). 
Results  
Guessing Performance   
Figure 5 shows the mean accuracy for each target word 
across all participants and trials. Accuracy was generally 
high on the task, with the WF and INSTR target words ob-
taining around 80% accuracy, the AOA target words achiev-
ing slightly lower accuracy at 72%, and the NONCORE target 
words much lower at around 50%. A one-way ANOVA 
showed that there were significant differences between tar-
get conditions on mean accuracy, , 
, . Post-hoc pairwise tests with Holm cor-
rections showed that only the NONCORE target condition 
was significantly lower than all the others (all ps ). 
As Table 2 shows, similar results were found using a 
mixed-effects logistic regression which analysed accuracy 
at the individual trial level. Multiple versions of a model 
predicting trial accuracy from target condition, with partic-
ipant included as a random effect, were compared and the 
best-fitting model selected using BIC, which penalises un-
necessary complexity. The full model was preferred. Com-
pared to the INSTR target condition (the reference cate-
gory), accuracy was significantly lower for the NONCORE 
target condition, , 95% CI , 
, , as well as the AOA target condition, 
, 95% CI , , . 
However, the WF target condition was not significantly dif-
ferent, , 95% CI , , , 
suggesting that accuracy for INSTR and WF target words was 
higher than for AOA target words. 
Overall, these results suggest that accuracy for the AOA, 
INSTR and WF target words was higher than for the NON-
CORE target words, and that INSTR and WF target words 
were more accurate than the AOA ones. However, the target 
Figure 5. Experiment 1: Mean accuracy for target       
words.  
Top panel . Each dot represents one target word whose mean accuracy ((y) axis) is calcu-
lated by averaging over all trials and participants. WF, INSTR, and AOA words were all 
fairly easily guessed, but NONCORE words were the hardest to guess. Bottom panel . The 
relationship between target word predictability ((x) axis) and mean accuracy ((y) axis) in 
each condition. Lines show the best-fitting linear regression line for each condition. IN-
STR and AOA words had an advantage and NONCORE words a disadvantage relative to the 
others, beyond what predictability alone would suggest. 
words vary in predictability. Are these accuracy differences 
simply due to differences in predictability, or do they still 
exist even when predictability is controlled for? 
To investigate this, we analysed linear models predicting 
target word accuracy from target condition and target word 
predictability (see Figure 5).2
 Model comparisons using BIC 
showed that the model with both factors and no interaction 
was the best-fitting one (see Table 3). This mirrored the 
results of the ANOVA: target word predictability signif-
icantly predicted target word accuracy, , 95% CI 
, , meaning that more predictable words 
had higher accuracy. Only the NONCORE target words had 
significantly lower accuracy than the INSTR reference cate-
gory, , 95% CI , ; all others 
were not significantly different. 
One problem with accuracy as the outcome measure is 
that it ignores information about how quickly people were 
able to guess the target on successful trials. We therefore 
turn to Kaplan-Meier survival analyses, which consider ac-
curacy and the number of guesses together by estimating 
We did not analyse the effect of predictability on accuracy at the individual trial level because accuracy in this experiment was for sets of 
sentences, whereas predictability is a property of individual sentences. 
2 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 8
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 2. Experiment 1 model comparison: Trial accuracy.       
Model Description BIC 
mNull correct  1 5642 
mT correct  target 5273 
m1p correct  1 + (1 | participant) 5087 
mT1p correct  target + (1 | participant) 4613 
We compare a set of mixed-effects logistic regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). Target word accuracy on each trial is always the outcome variable (correct, 
which is 1 if the word was guessed and 0 if not). Models vary in the presence of a random effect for participant and target word condition (target). The best-fit model contained target 
word condition as a predictor with random effects for participant. 
Table 3. Experiment 1 model comparison: Accuracy and Predictability.        
Model Description BIC 
mNull accuracy  1 -24 
mT accuracy  target -63 
mP accuracy  pred -58 
mTP accuracy  target + pred -70 
mTxP accuracy  target * pred -66 
We compare a set of linear regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). Target word accuracy is always the outcome variable, but models vary in the target word condi-
tion (target) and target word predictability. The best-fit model contained target word condition and target word predictability, but no interaction between them. 
Figure 6. Experiment 1: Kaplan-Meier survival curves      
by target condition.    
Each line shows the survival probability of the trials in each target condition (colours) 
over successive guesses. Events were defined as successful guesses, so lower survival is 
better performance. WF target words have the best performance, being guessed more 
successfully in the early guesses relative to the other conditions (lowest curves), but WF, 
INSTR, and AOA are comparable by the end in terms of overall accuracy. The NONCORE 
condition shows comparatively worse performance across all guesses. 
the survival of target words over the course of a trial.3
 Tar-
get words that “survive” longer take longer to guess and 
hence have worse performance. 
Figure 6 shows the survival curves for each target condi-
tion. WF target words appear to be guessed quickly, sepa-
rating from the AOA and INSTR targets in the early guesses. 
However, by the end of the trial, the three core word con-
ditions are similar in overall accuracy. The NONCORE condi-
tion stands out as being far behind the others. A log-rank 
test with associated pairwise comparisons showed that all 
survival curves differed significantly from each other (all ps 
), meaning that performance was best for the WF tar-
get words, followed by INSTR, AOA, and lastly the NONCORE 
target condition. 
As before, we also wish to analyze the effect of target 
word predictability, testing whether any target condition 
differences exist over and above that effect. We therefore 
ran a Cox proportional-hazards model analyzing the effects 
of target condition and target word predictability on overall 
survival (see Table 4). This time, model-fitting results 
showed that the full model with both factors interacting 
was the best fitting, rather than the model without the in-
teraction. 
Table 5 presents the results of this model, which show 
that the predictability of the target word was a strong and 
significant predictor of survival, indicating that target 
words that were more predictable were guessed more 
quickly and accurately, regardless of target condition. 
There were also target condition differences over and above 
the effect of predictability: compared to the INSTR target 
words, the WF and NONCORE targets (but not the AOA tar-
For completeness, Appendix A reports the results of a set of linear regressions with number of guesses as an outcome measure. We do 
not focus on it in the main text because it only considers correct trials, and is therefore difficult to interpret since it is contingent on ac-
curacy. 
3 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 9
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 4. Experiment 1 model comparison: Cox regression.       
Model Description BIC 
mNull survival  1 52895 
mT survival  target 52435 
mP survival  pred 52413 
mTP survival  target + pred 52303 
mTxP survival  target * pred 52235 
We compare a set of Cox proportional-hazards models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have target word survival as an outcome variable. Models vary in the 
presence of target word condition (target) and target word predictability (pred). The best-fit model contained both target word condition and predictability interacting. 
Table 5. Experiment 1. Cox proportional-hazards model      predicting target word survival from target word        
condition and target word predictability.      
Term HR 95% CI 
AoA target 0.91 [0.83, 1.01] .067 
WF target 0.48 [0.40, 0.57] < .001 
NonCore target 0.42 [0.37, 0.49] < .001 
Predictability 1.31 [1.11, 1.55] .001 
AoA target  Predictability 1.22 [0.99, 1.50] .065 
WF target  Predictability 2.33 [1.82, 2.97] < .001 
NonCore target  Predictability 0.79 [0.63, 0.99] .039 
A hazard ratio (HR) below 1 indicates higher survival, which in this experiment indicates worse guessing. The reference category is INSTR. Higher target word predictability led to bet-
ter performance. The WF and NONCORE target conditions had worse performance than INSTR, and additionally, the effect of predictability was much stronger for WF, and weaker for 
NONCORE. 
Figure 7. Experiment 1: Survival curves by target       
condition after controlling for predictability.      
Each line shows the estimated survival probability for each target condition (colours) 
over successive guesses after controlling for target word predictability, from the predic-
tions of the Cox model shown in Table 5. Events were defined as successful guesses, so 
lower survival is better performance. The effects of target conditions are shown at the 
average value of target word predictability. When predictability is taken into account, 
INSTR and AOA have the best performance over trials, and WF and NONCORE are more on 
par with each other and lag behind the other two. 
gets) had significantly worse performance. Figure 7 visu-
alises these effects. Additionally, there was an interaction 
between target condition and predictability, with the effect 
of predictability being significantly stronger for WF targets. 
This indicated that performance was very good for highly 
predictable WF target words, but that performance for these 
words drops off sharply with predictability, relative to other 
conditions. 
Exploratory Analyses   
The results so far indicate that overall, all of the targets 
in the core word conditions were easier to guess than the 
NONCORE ones. In addition, WF target words were slightly 
easier to guess than INSTR and AOA, at least early on, but 
this was largely due to the fact that the WF target words 
had higher average predictability. When predictability was 
taken into account, performance on the INSTR and AOA tar-
get words was better for the same level of predictability. 
This suggests that INSTR and AOA words are easier to pre-
dict for reasons that go beyond predictability. 
What other key factors might affect performance on the 
word prediction task, and could these explain the differ-
ences between target conditions? The target words were se-
lected only to be optimised for a particular coreness metric, 
so differences between target words on other factors re-
flect naturalistic differences between different types of core 
words. So if certain factors do account for the differences 
between target conditions, it may provide a theoretical ex-
planation for the advantage of one type over another. How-
ever, if differences exist over and above these factors, then 
it would suggest that the target conditions differ for rea-
sons that go beyond them. 
Word length.  One factor that is known to affect how 
well a word is predicted is its length (Luke & Christianson, 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 10
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 6. Experiment 1 model comparison: Cox regressions with word length and part-of-speech            
BIC 
Model Description Word length Part-of-speech 
mTP survival  target + pred 52303 52303 
mTxP survival  target * pred 52235 52235 
mTX survival  target + X 52293 52401 
mTxX survival  target * X 52298 52431 
mTPX survival  target + pred + X 52184 52281 
mTxPX survival  target * pred + X 52153 52220 
mTPxX survival  target + pred * X 52192 52295 
mTxPxX survival  (target + pred + X)^2 (all 2-way) 52173 52251 
We compare a set of Cox proportional-hazards models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have target word survival as an outcome variable. Models vary in the 
presence of target word condition (target), target word predictability (pred), and an additional factor (either target word length or part-of-speech) denoted by X. 
Table 7. Experiment 1. Cox proportional-hazards models      predicting target word survival from target word        
condition and target word predictability, with target word length and part-of-speech as additional factors.               
Word length Part-of-speech 
Term HR 95% CI HR 95% CI 
AoA target 0.94 [0.85, 1.03] .181 0.84 [0.76, 0.92] 
WF target 0.52 [0.43, 0.62] 0.41 [0.34, 0.50] 
NonCore target 0.60 [0.51, 0.70] 0.42 [0.36, 0.48] 
Predictability 1.23 [1.04, 1.45] .017 1.25 [1.05, 1.47] .011 
Length 0.89 [0.86, 0.91] < .001 
Verb PoS 1.13 [1.00, 1.28] .041 
Adjective PoS 0.78 [0.70, 0.86] 
AoA target  Predictability 1.22 [0.99, 1.51] .058 1.30 [1.05, 1.60] .016 
WF target  Predictability 2.13 [1.67, 2.72] 2.36 [1.84, 3.02] 
NonCore target  Predictability 0.96 [0.77, 1.20] .741 0.84 [0.67, 1.06] .144 
A hazard ratio (HR) below 1 indicates higher survival, which in this experiment indicates worse guessing. The reference categories are INSTR target and Noun part-of-speech. 
2016). As Table 1 shows, the NONCORE words ( ) 
are notably longer than the other conditions, but the AOA, 
WF, and INSTR target words are more comparable ( , 
, and , respectively). We added word length 
as a factor to the Cox models in Table 4, where the advan-
tage for INSTR and AOA words over and above predictabil-
ity was observed. Model-fitting results for select models 
(Table 6) showed that including length as a predictor im-
proved model fit, and that the best-fitting model involved 
target condition and predictability interacting, as before, 
and length with no interactions. 
The results of this model (Table 7) showed that length 
had a significant effect on survival, with longer words being 
harder to guess, all other factors being equal. Target words 
with higher predictability were again easier to guess, and 
once again this effect was stronger for WF targets. Cru-
cially, the same pattern of target condition differences re-
mained after accounting for both length and predictability: 
WF and NONCORE targets, but not AOA, had significantly 
worse performance compared to INSTR. 
Part-of-speech. Another factor that affects how well 
words are predicted is their part-of-speech. These too dif-
fered between conditions, with WF targets being mostly 
verbs, AOA targets being mostly nouns, and the INSTR and 
NONCORE targets being mainly nouns and adjectives. These 
again reflect naturalistic differences between these core 
word types – for instance, nouns, denoting concrete ob-
jects, are more likely to be learned first, whereas verbs are 
more common in written text. Again, we explored adding 
target word part-of-speech as a factor to the Cox models 
with predictability and target condition. The best-fitting 
model (see Table 6) was the analogous one to that for word 
length, with target condition and predictability interacting, 
plus part-of-speech with no interactions. 
The results of that model (Table 7) revealed the same 
patterns. Part-of-speech was a significant predictor of sur-
vival, with verbs faring better than nouns, and adjectives 
faring worse. Target words with higher predictability had 
better performance, and this effect was stronger for WF tar-
gets, but this time also for AOA ones. Once again, target 
condition differences over and above these factors were ob-
served, but this time even more strongly in favour of INSTR 
targets, having significantly higher performance than the 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 11
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Figure 8. Experiment 1: Incorrect responses for target words.        
Left panel . Distribution of response probabilities for incorrect responses for target words ( -axis). Response probability is defined as the proportion of times a given response was 
produced relative to the total occurrences of the target word. Most incorrect responses occur infrequently, but there are few incorrect responses that are highly common for a given 
target. Right panel . The difference in coreness between incorrect responses and the corresponding target they were given for ( -axis) as a function of response probability bins 
( -axis), which include all responses with response probabilities between certain values (e.g., between 5% and 10%). Coreness is measured by one of the three coreness measures 
(colours). Coreness difference values above 0 indicate that the response is more core than the corresponding target word. For low probability responses, there is no systematic rela-
tionship with coreness difference: responses can be more core or less core than target words, and on average responses and targets are no different in coreness. However, for common 
incorrect responses, that is, those that occur above a 5% or 10% probability, responses are more core than target words. Additionally, the difference in coreness is largest when core-
ness is measured by INSTR. 
AOA, WF, and NONCORE targets after accounting for both 
predictability and part-of-speech. 
The results of both of these analyses show that word 
length and part-of-speech, just like predictability, were im-
portant factors that affected how people performed on the 
word prediction task, however none of these factors can 
fully explain why certain types of core words – namely IN-
STR and AOA – had higher performance, meaning that they 
were better guessed for reasons that go beyond these fac-
tors. 
Common Incorrect Responses    
What did people respond with when they did not get 
the target word? These incorrect responses can be revealing 
about how people did the word prediction task and what 
kinds of words are most accessible and salient in this kind 
of task. One might expect that there are so many different 
ways of responding that these incorrect guesses will be 
idiosyncratic across participants. Conversely, though, there 
may be discernible patterns or a tendency to respond with 
words that are more core in some way (e.g., that are more 
frequent, were learned earlier, or have more associates). 
We tested this idea by looking at the most common in-
correct responses that were given for the same target word 
across all trials and participants. As with the core words 
themselves, we lemmatized participants’ responses to 
group inflectional variants of the same word together. As 
Figure 8 shows, the distribution of response probability 
is highly skewed, with many infrequent responses and a 
handful of extremely common responses. Table 8 shows 
that these common responses are meaningfully related to 
their respective target words: often a more basic synonym 
(e.g., gigantic–big) or a more general term (e.g., athlet-
ics–sport) for the target. For example, in contexts like 
“There are 200,000-plus students in the state who partic-
ipate in ___” and “The college recognizes the importance 
of recreation and ___ for its students”, sport occurred more 
readily as a suitable completion even though athletics was 
the correct target; similarly, language was a preferred sub-
stitute for vocabulary in contexts like “remnants of Polish 
culture and ___ remain” and “Because scientists are com-
municating with other scientists, they need a common ___”. 
The distribution of common incorrect responses across 
target conditions is also telling: of the 68 responses that oc-
curred more than 5% of the time for a given target, many 
more occurred in the NONCORE ( ) and AOA ( ) 
target conditions, compared to WF ( ), and INSTR hav-
ing the fewest ( ). This indicates that suitable and reg-
ular alternative responses across participants occurred 
more often to NONCORE and AOA targets, and least often for 
INSTR ones (even though INSTR and AOA were more compa-
rable in terms of overall accuracy), which also speaks to the 
communicative usefulness of the different types of target 
words. 
Regardless of what target condition they occurred in, are 
these common incorrect responses indeed more core than 
their respective targets? And do any of the coreness mea-
sures better capture the pattern of incorrect responses peo-
ple gave? Figure 8 addresses these questions by showing – 
for each of the three coreness measures – the difference 
in coreness between responses and targets as a function of 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 12
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 8. Most common incorrect responses produced for target words.         
Target Condition Target Response Coreness difference 
AoA WF InStr 
NonCore athletics sport 0.13 1.05 1.21 1.63 
NonCore atlas book 0.12 1.70 1.53 2.44 
NonCore gigantic big 0.12 1.51 1.48 1.89 
AoA neck head 0.11 -0.17 0.56 0.69 
NonCore vocabulary language 0.11 -0.02 0.78 1.41 
NonCore quiz test 0.11 0.32 0.90 1.17 
NonCore bloom grow 0.11 0.83 0.82 0.97 
NonCore atlas map 0.11 0.93 1.00 1.67 
AoA breakfast dinner 0.10 -0.21 0.31 0.09 
AoA grandma mother 0.10 -0.02 0.66 0.56 
WF hope think 0.10 0.06 0.63 0.69 
NonCore substitute use 0.10 1.03 1.36 0.76 
NonCore wrestler player 0.10 0.24 0.85 0.56 
NonCore gigantic large 0.10 0.36 0.76 1.62 
NonCore evergreen green 0.09 2.08 1.57 2.69 
WF find see 0.09 0.84 0.27 0.37 
AoA arm hand 0.09 0.21 0.35 0.25 
NonCore wrestler athlete 0.09 0.15 0.31 0.34 
AoA grandma mom 0.09 0.40 0.79 0.29 
WF remember know 0.08 0.46 0.67 0.26 
Each row shows a response that was given across participants for a given target word in a given target condition.  indicates the proportion of times the response 
was produced out of the total occurrences of the target word. The coreness difference between the response and the target, as measured by each of AOA, WF, and INSTR individually, is 
also shown (positive values denote the repsonse being more core than the target on that coreness measure). 
response probability. It is evident that while there are in-
deed a large number of idiosyncratic uncommon responses, 
the most common ones (occurring more than 5% or 10% 
of the time for a given target) generally have greater core-
ness than their target words. Moreover, the INSTR measure 
appears to do the best job at capturing the differences be-
tween common responses and targets. Although there were 
only 10 responses occurring over 10% and 68 responses 
over 5%, one-way repeated-measures ANOVAs (with core-
ness difference between response and target as the out-
come measure) showed that the coreness measures differed 
significantly from each other, , , 
 and , , 
respectively. Post-hoc tests with Holm corrections showed 
that in both cases, the INSTR measure was associated with 
larger differences than WF, which in turn was larger than 
AOA (all ps ). 
Although these analyses are exploratory in nature, they 
indicate that even when guessing incorrectly, people often 
identified words that were meaningfully related to the tar-
get word and could substitute easily within the same con-
text. Many of these responses might be considered “more 
core” than the actual targets in the sense that they occurred 
more easily or were more readily available to people than 
the target word. Consistent with this, we found that core-
ness as measured by INSTR captured more of the difference 
between people’s responses and the targets, suggesting 
that they were relying more on INSTR core words when try-
ing to figure out what word was missing. 
Discussion  
Experiment 1 compared words that were core in WF, IN-
STR, and AOA in terms of how effectively they could be 
guessed in a word prediction task. We found that overall, 
guessing performance for WF target words was better than 
for INSTR and AOA target words, and all were more effec-
tively guessed than a set of NONCORE targets. However, 
these results were driven in large part by differences in the 
predictability of target words between conditions (which it-
self reflected their empirical distributional statistics in cor-
pus data). When predictability was taken into account, per-
formance for the WF target words was more on par with 
the NONCORE ones, and INSTR and AOA target words had the 
best performance. 
These results contrast somewhat with the findings from 
Wang et al. (2025), where overall performance on a word-
guessing game was greatest for INSTR target words, followed 
by AOA, and lastly WF. In the current study, by using a word 
prediction task which leverages communicative and contex-
tual information to a much greater extent, performance for 
WF target words was much increased. However, the perfor-
mance advantage for WF disappeared when predictability 
was taken into account, indicating that INSTR and AOA core 
words were still easier to guess for reasons that go beyond 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 13
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

their predictability. Importantly, in Wang et al. (2025), the 
advantage for INSTR remained after taking into account the 
semantic similarity between hint and target, which plays a 
roughly analogous role to predictability here as the factor 
that is expected to affect performance on the task. 
The word prediction task used in this experiment was 
designed to be as analogous as possible to the word-guess-
ing task used in Wang et al. (2025), except for using sen-
tence contexts instead of hint words. This was done so we 
could more directly compare our results, but it did intro-
duce some limitations. Most critically, since there were up 
to six sentences on each trial, it introduced dependencies 
between them: responses to each sentence (apart from the 
first) were also influenced by the sentences that came be-
fore it. This means that the effect of sentence-level pre-
dictability on guessing performance cannot be analysed. It 
also means that accuracy on the task was for sets of sen-
tences rather than individual ones. Taken together, these 
factors may have influenced the results: even though sen-
tences were presented in order from low to high pre-
dictability and WF targets ought to have higher predictabil-
ity sentences early on, there are more chances for target 
words to be guessed correctly as the trial progresses and 
predictability increases. This may have inflated the accura-
cies for the INSTR and AOA conditions. 
In order to address these issues, Experiment 2 uses a sin-
gle-sentence design in which each target word presented in 
only one sentence context for each participant. This elim-
inates dependencies between multiple sentences and also 
allows us to precisely model word prediction responses us-
ing BERT, which speaks to our second study aim: to assess 
the degree of correspondence between human responses 
and language models. 
We also modified two other features of the stimulus de-
sign. First, instead of choosing sentences whose pre-
dictability distributions matched the empirical distribu-
tions as we did in Experiment 1, this time we chose 
sentences whose predictability was identical across all tar-
get words. This provides a natural way to investigate the 
contribution of coreness above and beyond predictability, 
without needing to statistically control for it. Second, un-
like in Experiment 1 where the target words were not al-
ways the top completion according to BERT (especially for 
the low predictability sentences), we restricted ourselves 
this time to sentences in which BERT predicted the target 
word with the highest probability. By doing so, we can more 
directly analyse the extent to which BERT predictability 
tracks with human predictions. 
Experiment 2   
This experiment retains the same 96 target words as Ex-
periment 1 (this time presented with only one sentence per 
trial rather than up to six). We include two different types 
of sentences. The corpus-matched sentences consist of the 
36 original sentence stimuli, which allows us to perform 
a direct comparison with Experiment 1. We also introduce 
some new matched-predictability sentences; as described 
in more detail below, these consisted of 10 sentences for 
each target that conformed to ten different predictability 
bins ranging from low to high. Crucially, in all of these sen-
tences, the target word was also the top completion accord-
ing to BERT. 
Method  
Participants  
667 participants4
 (19-82 years, ; 53% female) 
were recruited via Prolific and paid £2.40 for the 15 minute 
task. Participants were restricted to US locations and were 
screened for English fluency, and 93% of participants re-
ported being native English speakers. Three participants 
were excluded for not passing the pre-registered catch trials 
(described below), leaving 664 participants in the full 
analyses. 
Procedure  
The task and procedure was the same as in Experiment 
1, except that instead of six sentences for each target word, 
participants were only given one sentence and one attempt 
to guess the target word, after which the correct answer was 
revealed. 
Each participant completed 96 experimental trials corre-
sponding to all 96 target words (24 for each of the four tar-
get word conditions), rather than a random selection from 
each target condition. For each target, each person saw 
a sentence that was randomly selected from the stimulus 
sentences for that target (see below). We embedded four 
catch trials in this experiment (instead of two, due to the 
larger number of trials), which were presented in the same 
position for everyone; the targets were age (trial 10), head 
(trial 40), phone (trial 65), and city (trial 90). As pre-regis-
tered, we excluded participants who failed all catch trials 
( ). The order of the trials was randomised for each 
person. 
Materials  
The target words were the same as in Experiment 1. 
There were two sets of sentence stimuli in this experiment, 
based on properties of the predictability statistics. The cor-
pus-matched sentences contained the sentences from Ex-
periment 1, which were the 36 stimulus sentences chosen 
to match the corpus predictability distributions of each tar-
get. 
The matched-predictability sentences were designed 
to control the predictability of sentences across all target 
words, rather than matching the sentences to the natural 
properties of the targets. This allowed us to investigate per-
The sample size was pre-registered and was based on a target of 14.5 datapoints per sentence on average. 4 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 14
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Figure 9. Experiment 2: Mean accuracy for target       
words.  
Each dot represents one target word whose mean accuracy ( -axis) is calculated by aver-
aging over all trials and participants. The results are shown separately for the corpus-
matched and matched-predictability sentence stimulus sets. For the corpus-matched 
stimuli, WF target words were the best-guessed, followed by INSTR and AOA. For the 
matched-predictability stimuli, AOA target words were best-guessed, followed by INSTR 
and then WF. NONCORE words were the hardest to guess across both stimulus sets. 
formance when predictability was controlled in the stimuli 
at the outset. For each target word, ten sentences were se-
lected in which the predictability was as close as possible 
to specified values ranging from  to  in increments 
of .5
 For each of the ten predictability values, the mean 
sentence predictabilities of all four target conditions were 
within  of each other. Additionally, only sentences in 
which the target word was the top BERT completion were 
chosen. 
Analysis  
Since the design of Experiment 2 includes only one guess 
per trial instead of six, the main outcome variable of inter-
est is trial and target word accuracy. As with Experiment 
1, ANOVAs and mixed-effect models will be conducted to 
analyse the effect of target condition, with predictability 
additionally included as a factor in these models. The data 
collection and analysis approach were pre-registered 
(https://aspredicted.org/SRW_R9Z). 
Results  
Accuracy  
Corpus-matched stimuli.  Figure 9 shows the mean ac-
curacy for each target word. Performance in this experi-
ment on the whole was substantially reduced compared to 
Experiment 1, which makes sense since participants had 
only one chance to guess the target word. A one-way 
ANOVA showed that there were significant differences in 
mean accuracy between the target conditions, 
, , . Post-hoc pairwise 
tests with Holm corrections showed that the WF target 
Figure 10. Experiment 2: Accuracy and predictability      
(Corpus-matched stimuli).   
The relationship between target word predictability ( -axis) and mean accuracy ( -axis) 
by target condition. Lines show the best-fitting linear regression line for each condition. 
INSTR and AOA words had an advantage relative to WF and NONCORE, beyond what pre-
dictability alone would suggest. Additionally, the relationship between predictability 
and accuracy was stronger in the WF condition. 
words had significantly higher accuracy than the INSTR 
( ) and AOA ( ) target words, and all core-
word conditions had significantly higher accuracy than the 
NONCORE condition (all ps ). 
As before, we might expect these differences between 
the target conditions since the WF target words are gener-
ally more predictable on corpus-matched sentences. What 
happens when predictability is controlled? As in Experi-
ment 1, we conducted linear models predicting target word 
accuracy from target condition and target word predictabil-
ity (see Figure 10). Table 9 shows shows that the best-fitting 
model according to BIC was the model with both factors 
and an interaction. 
The results (Table 10) reveal that after accounting for 
predictability, the pattern of performance between the tar-
get conditions is the same as what we observed in Exper-
iment 1: compared to the INSTR target condition, accuracy 
was significantly lower on the WF and NONCORE targets, 
but not on AOA targets. Although predictability itself was 
not significant, the significant interaction between the WF 
target condition and predictability indicates that accuracy 
drops off sharply for WF target words as predictability de-
creases, relative to the other conditions. 
A similar story is shown in the results for the trial-level 
analyses. As before, mixed-effects logistic regressions were 
conducted to predict accuracy on each trial from target con-
dition, with participant included as a random effect. Table 
11 shows that the best-fitting model contained target con-
dition and the random effect. Consistent with the ANOVA 
results, the WF target words had significantly higher accu-
One target word, gigantic (from the NONCORE target condition), had only five stimulus sentences, as no sentences could be found with a 
predictability of  or higher. 
5 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 15
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 9. Experiment 2 model comparison: Accuracy and Predictability (Corpus-matched stimuli)          
Model Description BIC 
mNull accuracy  1 -100 
mT accuracy  target -139 
mP accuracy  pred -167 
mTP accuracy  target + pred -163 
mTxP accuracy  target * pred -182 
We compare a set of linear regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have target word accuracy as an outcome variable. Models vary in the presence of 
target word condition (target) and target word predictability. The best-fit model contained target word condition and target word predictability interacting. 
Table 10. Experiment 2: Corpus-matched stimuli. Parameters      of the best-fitting linear regression model in        Table  
9.  
Term 95% CI 
Intercept 0.25 [0.22, 0.28] < .001 
Predictability 0.06 [-0.02, 0.14] .122 
AoA target 0.02 [-0.03, 0.07] .474 
WF target -0.15 [-0.24, -0.07] < .001 
NonCore target -0.13 [-0.19, -0.08] < .001 
Predictability  AoA target 0.08 [-0.02, 0.18] .136 
Predictability  WF target 0.25 [0.13, 0.36] < .001 
Predictability  NonCore target -0.05 [-0.15, 0.05] .311 
The best-fitting model contains target condition and target word predictability as predictors interacting. The reference category is INSTR. 
Table 11. Experiment 2 model comparison: Accuracy.      
Corpus-matched stimuli 
Model Description BIC 
mNull correct  1 45119 
mT correct  target 43244 
m1p correct  1 + (1 | participant) 44990 
mT1p correct  target + (1 | participant) 43091 
Corpus-matched stimuli: additional models with predictability 
mP correct  pred 38359 
mP1p correct  pred + (1 | participant) 38155 
mTP1p correct  target + pred + (1 | participant) 37756 
mTxP1p correct  target * pred + (1 | participant) 37635 
Matched-predictability stimuli 
mNull correct  1 31437 
mT correct  target 30344 
m1p correct  1 + (1 | participant) 31154 
mT1p correct  target + (1 | participant) 30044 
We compare a set of mixed-effects logistic regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have accuracy as an outcome variable (correct, which is 1 if the 
word was guessed and 0 if not). Models vary in the presence of a random effect for participant, target word condition (target), and the predictability of the target word in the sen-
tence on the given trial (pred). For both the corpus-matched and matched-predictability stimuli, the best-fit models before examining the effects of predictability contained target 
word condition as a predictor with random effects for participant (MT1p). When including predictability as a predictor for the corpus-matched stimuli, the best-fit model contained 
both target condition and predictability interacting, with random effects for participant (MTxP1p). 
racy than the INSTR condition, , 95% CI , 
, , while the AOA, , 95% CI 
, , , and NONCORE target 
words, , 95% CI , , 
, had significantly lower accuracy. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 16
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 12. Experiment 2: Corpus-matched stimuli. Parameters      of the best-fitting mixed-effects logistic regression       
in  Table 11 .  
Term 95% CI 
Intercept -1.37 [-1.44, -1.31] 
Predictability 0.84 [0.79, 0.89] 
AoA target 0.02 [-0.06, 0.10] .558 
WF target -0.35 [-0.45, -0.25] 
NonCore target -0.66 [-0.75, -0.58] 
Predictability  AoA target 0.05 [-0.02, 0.12] .201 
Predictability  WF target 0.28 [0.20, 0.36] 
Predictability  NonCore target -0.23 [-0.30, -0.15] 
The best-fitting model contains target condition and predictability as predictors interacting. The reference category is INSTR. 
Once again, however, when including the predictability 
of the sentence on each trial as a factor, the pattern of per-
formance changed in the same way as it did in our previ-
ous analyses. The best-fitting model had both target condi-
tion and predictability along with an interaction (see Table 
11). The results for this model, shown in Table 12, indicate 
that the relationship between predictability and accuracy 
was significant, as was the interaction. The interaction pa-
rameters suggest that the effect of predictability was sig-
nificantly stronger for WF target words and significantly 
weaker for NONCORE target words. Additionally, after con-
trolling for predictability, WF and NONCORE target words 
had significantly lower accuracy than the INSTR and AOA 
target words. 
All of these analyses are highly consistent with Experi-
ment 1: the WF target words had the highest accuracy – and 
NONCORE target words had the lowest – when predictability 
followed the natural statistics of the corpus. However, INSTR 
and AOA target words had higher accuracy – and WF and 
NONCORE target words were more on par with each other – 
when controlling for predictability statistically. This again 
suggests that the INSTR and AOA target words were easier 
to guess on the word prediction task for reasons that go be-
yond predictability alone. 
As in Experiment 1, we conducted additional analyses 
to explore whether factors such as word length or part-
of-speech could account for the differences between target 
words. Much like before, the findings for target condition 
were the same when additionally including word length and 
part-of-speech as predictors of accuracy. These analyses are 
reported in Appendix B. 
Matched-predictability stimuli.  What about when pre-
dictability is controlled experimentally, as in the matched-
predictability stimuli? The mean accuracy for the target 
words for these stimuli is shown in Figure 9. Since pre-
dictability is now controlled in the stimuli, we see an over-
all pattern of accuracy that looks like the previous pattern 
when it was controlled statistically. The AOA and INSTR tar-
get words have higher accuracy, followed by the WF target 
words, with the NONCORE words yielding the lowest accu-
racy. A one-way ANOVA showed that the target conditions 
differed significantly in mean accuracy, , 
, . Post-hoc comparisons showed that the 
AOA condition had significantly higher accuracy than the 
WF condition ( ), and additionally all of the core-
word conditions were significantly higher than the NON-
CORE condition (all ps ). 
On the individual trial level, the best-fitting mixed-ef-
fects logistic regression model (see Table 11) had target 
condition and the random effect for participant. AOA target 
words had significantly higher accuracy than INSTR target 
words, , 95% CI , , , 
which in turn had significantly higher accuracy than the WF 
target words, , 95% CI , , 
, and the NONCORE target words, , 95% 
CI , , . Thus, when pre-
dictability was controlled in the experimental stimuli from 
the outset, the pattern of results roughly matched those 
from before: INSTR and AOA target words had higher accu-
racy, and accuracy was lower for the WF and NONCORE tar-
get words. 
Modelling of Incorrect Responses     
How well does the language model predict people’s re-
sponses in the word prediction task? The single-sentence 
design of this experiment allows us to investigate this: re-
sponse probabilities can be computed over the sets of re-
sponses that people gave for the same sentence, and these 
can be compared to the BERT predictions for the same sen-
tence. We analysed this to some extent in the previous sec-
tion when we explored the relationship between accuracy 
(i.e., the response probabilities for target words) and BERT 
predictability (for the target word). Here we go beyond that 
by focusing on how well BERT explains people’s incorrect 
responses. And if there are systematic deviations between 
human responses and the predictions of language models, 
can they be captured using our coreness measures? 
To do this, we combined the responses to each sentence 
across all participants; the probability for any given re-
sponse was computed as the proportion of the total number 
of trials for that sentence on which that response was given. 
Predictability was calculated using BERT in a similar way 
as for the target words, by masking the target word in the 
sentence stimulus and calculating the predictability of the 
response word in the sentence context in place of the tar-
get word. Responses were not spell-checked or lemmatised 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 17
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Figure 11. Experiment 2: Response probability as a function of BERT predictability.           
Each dot represents one incorrect response for a given sentence (i.e., a response that was not the target word for that sentence). Response probability ( -axis) is defined as the pro-
portion of the total number of trials for a sentence on which that response was given across participants, and the predictability of the same response in the same sentence context 
( -axis) was calculated using BERT. The results are shown separately for the corpus-matched and matched-predictability stimuli. The best-fitting linear regression line for each is 
shown, along with the  value. For both sets of stimuli, there is a positive relationship between response predictability and response probability, indicating that more predictable 
responses in sentences according to BERT also tended to be given more frequently across participants. However, there were also deviations from these predictions of the language 
model, which were able to be captured systematically by coreness measures, in particular, INSTR and AOA. 
before the predictability calculation, and predictability was 
only calculated on those responses that were in the BERT 
vocabulary. In all, 20,772 unique responses to sentences 
were included in this analysis. 
Figure 11 shows the relationship between BERT pre-
dictability and response probability for the corpus-matched 
and the matched-predictability stimuli. As expected, re-
sponses that had higher predictability according to BERT 
tended to be given more often by people, but there is still 
substantial variability that was not captured by BERT pre-
dictability. 
To investigate whether this variability can be systemat-
ically captured by the coreness measures, we conducted a 
log-linear model of the form 
where  is the number of responses on which word  was 
given for context ,  is the number of trials for context 
,  is the BERT predictability of word  in context , 
and  is the coreness of word  on a given core-
ness measure (AOA, INSTR, or WF). Specifically, the counts 
for each response  for context  were directly modelled, 
and the denominator  was included as an offset term. We 
compared several versions of this model with predictability 
alone, predictability and each of the coreness measures in-
dividually, and predictability with all three coreness mea-
sures (see Table 13). 
The model-fitting results were very close for both sets of 
stimuli, but the best-fitting models were either the model 
with predictability and INSTR or the full model with pre-
dictability and all three coreness measures. The first out-
come suggests that the probability of responses is best cap-
tured by INSTR alone over and above the effect of 
predictability, while the second suggests that all three dif-
ferent types of coreness had independent effects beyond 
predictability. Table 14 shows the results of the full model 
for both sets of stimuli (see Appendix B for the models with 
predictability and INSTR alone).6 
For the corpus-matched stimuli, predictability was a sig-
nificant predictor of response probability, as expected. 
However, INSTR coreness was a significant predictor along-
side predictability. This indicated that responses that were 
more core in terms of INSTR were more likely to be given, 
over and above their predictability. A similar effect was 
found for AOA, but the effect was less strong. Interestingly, 
after taking all of the other variables into account, WF core-
ness actually predicted lower response probability, mean-
ing that responses that were higher in frequency were less 
The VIFs in both models were no higher than 2.5, indicating that multicollinearity among the coreness measures in these analyses was 
not a substantial concern. 
6 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 18
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 13. Experiment 2 model comparison: Modelling of Incorrect Responses.         
Corpus-matched stimuli 
Model Description BIC 
mP RespPr  pred 44017 
mPI RespPr  pred + InStr 43909 
mPF RespPr  pred + WF 43970 
mPA RespPr  pred + AoA 43915 
mPIFA RespPr  pred + InStr + WF + AoA 43910 
Matched-predictability stimuli 
mP RespPr  pred 16852 
mPI RespPr  pred + InStr 16783 
mPF RespPr  pred + WF 16842 
mPA RespPr  pred + AoA 16802 
mPIFA RespPr  pred + InStr + WF + AoA 16787 
We compare a set of log-linear models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have response probability as an outcome variable (RespPr), which indicates the probability 
of a given response being given for a given sentence across participants. The predictors are the BERT predictability for the same response in the same context (pred) and the coreness 
value for the response word as measured by InStr, WF, or AoA. The best-fit models contained BERT predictability and INSTR coreness alone, followed closely by BERT predictability 
alongside all three coreness measures. 
Table 14. Experiment 2: Parameters    of log-linear models predicting the probability of incorrect responses, for           
both the corpus-matched and matched-predictability stimuli.       
Corpus-matched stimuli Matched-predictability stimuli 
Term 95% CI 95% CI 
Intercept -1.34 [-1.38, -1.30] -66.71 -1.76 [-1.83, -1.69] -49.83 
Predictability 0.22 [0.21, 0.23] 43.80 0.25 [0.23, 0.27] 30.84 
InStr -0.08 [-0.11, -0.05] -4.82 -0.15 [-0.20, -0.10] -5.63 
WF 0.02 [-0.01, 0.06] 1.25 .211 0.09 [0.03, 0.15] 3.09 .002 
AoA -0.05 [-0.07, -0.03] -4.24 -0.05 [-0.08, -0.02] -2.83 .005 
Response probability is predicted by BERT predictability and the coreness of the response word as measured by AOA, WF, and INSTR. Coreness is measured such that values closer to 0 
indicate greater coreness, so negative coefficients (such as for AOA and INSTR) indicate that response probability increases with coreness. 
likely to be given, although this effect was not significant 
for this set of stimuli. Thus, we found systematic differ-
ences between the responses that were predicted by BERT 
and the responses that people gave in the word prediction 
task, and these were able to some extent to be captured by 
the INSTR and AOA (but not WF) coreness measures; people 
preferred words that were more core in INSTR and AOA, over 
and above how predictable they were. 
A very similar set of results was found for the matched-
predictability stimuli. Again, predictability was a significant 
predictor of response probability, but responses that were 
more core in INSTR (and to a lesser extent, AOA) were also 
more likely to be given by participants. Words that were 
more core in WF were less likely to be given (and the effect 
was significant). 
General Discussion   
This study had two aims. Firstly, we aimed to compare 
core words based on the content of word associations (IN-
STR), word frequency in natural language (WF), and age 
of acquisition (AOA) in terms of how easily they can be 
guessed on a word prediction task. Secondly, we aimed to 
investigate the extent to which language models align with 
humans in word prediction, and if there are systematic dif-
ferences between them, whether these could be captured by 
our coreness measures. 
Word Prediction Performance    
The results showed a consistent pattern across both ex-
periments. When predictability of words followed the em-
pirical distributions in the corpus, WF targets were guessed 
more easily than AOA or INSTR ones, largely because WF 
words had higher predictability compared to the other con-
ditions. However, when predictability was controlled for, 
AOA and INSTR words were more easily guessed than WF 
ones. This was true both when the control was statistical 
(by adding predictability as a factor in statistical models) 
and experimental (as in Experiment 2, by creating stimuli 
that were matched in predictability across conditions). 
These results also held when controlling for other key vari-
ables that affect word prediction, including word length 
and part-of-speech. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 19
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

There was also often a stronger relationship between 
predictability and accuracy for WF words, suggesting that 
performance for these words was highly influenced by pre-
dictability statistics. Performance was very good for highly 
predictable high-frequency words, but dropped off sharply 
with predictability. Conversely, AOA and INSTR words with 
low predictability were comparatively easier to guess, sug-
gesting that these words were given as responses for rea-
sons that go beyond their raw predictability. Additionally, 
performance for the INSTR and AOA words remained greater 
than the NONCORE words even after predictability was taken 
into account, however, after controlling for predictability, 
the WF words were often on par with the NONCORE ones, 
suggesting that WF words are not much better guessed than 
NONCORE words for the same level of predictability. 
On the surface, these results are somewhat different 
from the results of Wang et al. (2025), which used a word-
guessing game rather than a cloze-style prediction task. In 
that study, INSTR words were easiest to guess when other 
factors (e.g., semantic similarity) were not controlled; in 
the current study, WF words were easiest to guess when 
predictability was not controlled. This is likely due to the 
fact that the word-guessing game presented words in iso-
lation, and implicitly emphasised the interrelated nature of 
words in network-like ways. As such, it was more aligned 
with the word association-based model from which INSTR 
was derived. Conversely, the word prediction task was much 
more communicative and contextual, and implicitly em-
phasised and relied on the distributional statistics of words 
in the context of natural language, which favours highly 
frequent words. 
Importantly, in the current study, the performance ad-
vantage for WF disappeared once predictability was taken 
into account. This is in contrast with Wang et al. (2025), 
where the performance advantage for INSTR remained even 
after taking into account hint-target semantic similarity. 
WF words also had lower accuracy when taking into account 
other possible confounding factors, including word length 
and part-of-speech, whereas this also was not the case for 
INSTR in our previous work. While there are many other 
potential confounding variables that could explain perfor-
mance differences between our core words, including, but 
not limited to, concreteness, polysemy, affect, and ortho-
graphic or phonological neighbourhood, these tend to be 
highly correlated with each other and it would be infeasible 
to analyse all of these possibilities. The ones we have ex-
plored have a strong theoretical motivation in terms of 
their influence in word prediction (Luke & Christianson, 
2016). Taken together, these two studies provide com-
pelling converging evidence that INSTR (and to some extent 
AOA) core words are “more core” in the sense that they are 
easier to guess above and beyond other factors. 
Common Incorrect Responses    
Looking at the common incorrect responses sheds some 
light on possible reasons for this. The results from Ex-
periment 1 showed that the highly common incorrect re-
sponses were not only suitable fits for the sentence con-
texts, but were also meaningfully related to the target word 
and had greater coreness than their respective targets – 
they were often a more basic synonym or a more general 
term for the target word. That is, they generally conveyed 
the same idea expressed by the target word, but in a more 
simple or basic way. This is consistent with a graded pre-ac-
tivation account of word prediction (Luke & Christianson, 
2016; Staub, 2015), in which the sentence context gives rise 
to diffuse activation of many potential word candidates. In 
particular, it is consistent with the suggestion that graded 
pre-activation can also include partial predictions about 
the semantic content of the upcoming input, even if there is 
not enough information available to identify specific word 
forms (Luke & Christianson, 2016). In other words, con-
ceptual information pertaining to the target word is pre-
dictable from the sentence context, which subsequently ac-
tivates words that represent that target meaning. This 
account, however, does not specify how words are chosen 
from among the suitable lexical candidates. 
Our results point to the novel idea that simpler or more 
basic words which adequately represent the intended 
meaning in the sentence context are privileged in word pre-
diction. Such words may be perceived as being more com-
municatively useful, since they convey the same idea in a 
simpler way, or they may occur more readily or be more 
accessible in the mental lexicon in order to do so. This 
corroborates the syntactic substitution criterion for core-
ness suggested by Carter (2012) and Stubbs (1986): a core 
word that is more privileged in selection within a sentence 
context would naturally substitute for non-core words, but 
not vice versa. It is in this sense that the word prediction 
task measures coreness. In light of this, our results showed 
that the INSTR measure best accounted for the difference 
in coreness between common incorrect responses and tar-
get words, suggesting that this communicative utility or 
greater accessibility is best captured by the word associa-
tion-based INSTR coreness. 
Comparing LLM and Human Word Prediction       
This leads to the question of how well human word pre-
diction aligns with word prediction in language models, 
which was investigated in Experiment 2. Although our 
study only tested one language model, the choice of BERT 
was directly motivated by and suited for the bi-directional 
nature of our cloze task. The results showed that while 
BERT predictability was able to account for people’s re-
sponses to a significant extent, there was also substantial 
variability that BERT predictions could not capture. These 
deviations were able to be explained to some extent by 
some of the coreness measures. Responses that were more 
core in INSTR (followed closely by AOA) were more likely to 
be given than expected on the basis of predictability alone. 
Surprisingly, after taking all the other variables into ac-
count, words that were more core in WF were less likely 
to be given. This suggests that high frequency words have 
little value beyond their predictive utility. These results 
replicate previous findings showing evidence of systematic 
deviations between human word prediction and corpus sta-
tistics, which can to some extent be captured by lexical 
variables; these systematic deviations were also found in 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 20
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

online measures of processing like reading times, meaning 
that they were not just experimental artefacts of the cloze 
task (Smith & Levy, 2011). 
Theoretical Implications and Future Directions      
Implications for Core Vocabulary     
The results paint a consistent picture in which INSTR and 
AOA coreness have a clear influence over and above pre-
dictability: INSTR and AOA core words were better guessed 
when predictability was taken into account, and responses 
that were more core in INSTR and AOA were more likely to 
be given than expected based on their predictability. The 
fact that INSTR and AOA consistently pattern together sug-
gests that they are closely related and that similar mech-
anisms may be at play in both measures. The advantage 
for INSTR suggests that word-association network centrality 
plays a key role in people’s word prediction, perhaps be-
cause those words are highly prominent in the mental lex-
icon and are readily available and easily accessible, consis-
tent with the interpretations from our previous work (Wang 
et al., 2025). The role of AOA could reflect a similar mech-
anism of having a central role in semantic network growth 
(Brysbaert et al., 2000; Hills et al., 2009; Steyvers & Tenen-
baum, 2005). Early-acquired words often reflect broad con-
cepts that can be semantically differentiated into more spe-
cific meanings over time (E. V. Clark, 1973), thereby serving 
as a basis on which new word meanings can be built – they 
may therefore reflect the simple and basic nature of word 
meanings that are privileged in this task. Cumulative ex-
perience or entrenchment, which is a product of both word 
frequency and age of acquisition (Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 
2000; Ghyselinck et al., 2004), is another possible account 
which could explain the ease with which words occur, how-
ever, the relative disadvantage for word frequency in our re-
sults makes this less likely as an explanation. 
INSTR and AOA are therefore closely theoretically related, 
but probably operate on different levels: INSTR captures the 
structure and organisation of the complete mental lexicon, 
whereas AOA operates on an ontogenetic level. It is likely 
the case that not all words that are important developmen-
tally will be important in terms of word prediction; for in-
stance, early-acquired words include many words that are 
highly related to young children’s environments and needs 
(see Table 1 for some examples). This could explain why 
common incorrect responses occurred relatively often to 
AOA targets in Experiment 1, which could reflect a prefer-
ence away from words that are more relevant to young chil-
dren (e.g., grandma, breakfast, snack) towards words that 
are more relevant to adults’ communicative needs (mother, 
dinner, meal). However, it may also not be the case that all 
words that are semantically central are conceptually simple 
and basic in the way that early-acquired words are. INSTR 
and AOA therefore potentially represent independent and 
theoretically unique influences on coreness in word pre-
diction. These measures also have clear links with other 
constructs, such as concreteness and perceptual grounding, 
and specificity (the degree to which a word has a precise 
meaning; ), which could also represent potential measures 
of core vocabulary, and these measures may all influence 
each other in complex ways – teasing apart these patterns 
of causal interrelationships is an interesting question for 
future psycholinguistic research. One clear remaining im-
plication is that word frequency, the traditional measure of 
core vocabulary, was often not a sufficient measure of core-
ness and was outperformed in many ways by the coreness 
measures that were inspired by psychological theory (INSTR 
and AOA). 
One potential limitation of this work has to do with the 
fact that our word prediction task was presented as a guess-
ing game. While the sentence stimuli themselves were re-
alistic since they were sourced from real text corpora, peo-
ple may have approached them differently because they 
were embedded in this game-like context. We mitigated 
this as much as possible in the experimental setup by in-
structing participants that the stimuli were “ordinary sen-
tences found in books, newspapers, text conversations, on-
line posts, the web, and other places.” We also reinforced 
that the words to be guessed were “common English words” 
and provided some example target words. One of the in-
struction check questions also explicitly emphasised this 
point (“Where do the sentences come from?”), which par-
ticipants had to answer correctly in order to continue to 
the experiment. Moreover, since participants were given 
feedback about the correct answer after every trial, they 
should have quickly realised that they were, indeed, ordi-
nary words. The common incorrect responses in Experi-
ment 1 showed no signs that the game-style task led par-
ticipants to produce non-sensible word prediction 
completions or responses that were biased towards the 
theme of the game. There is also no immediately clear 
explanation for why a game-like task would produce re-
sponses that were more core on INSTR and AOA, and also 
that were less frequent. 
We also note that the set of target words was somewhat 
limited, with only 24 target words of each type, which were 
specifically optimised to maximise differences between 
coreness measures – this was appropriate for testing our re-
search questions, but could limit the generalisability of the 
findings. However, while the analyses involving target con-
ditions were based on a small number of stimuli, we also 
conducted analyses on people’s responses beyond the tar-
get words that are far more general, including the analysis 
of 20,772 unique responses in the LLM comparisons; these 
analyses revealed consistent results, showing an advantage 
for INSTR and AOA over and above predictability. We also 
restricted our investigation to content words and excluded 
function words – while function words may be very well 
predicted in the word prediction task, this would likely be 
because of people’s knowledge of grammatical structure 
(e.g., the fact that determiners follow verbs or prepositions) 
(A. Bell et al., 2009; Luke & Christianson, 2016), rather 
than the lexical semantic coreness that we are primarily in-
terested in. 
Implications for Word Prediction     
The findings also have implications for the task of word 
prediction and what cloze probability reflects more broadly. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 21
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Once again, our results are consistent with a graded pre-
activation account in which people also make partial pre-
dictions about semantic information (Luke & Christianson, 
2016; Staub, 2015), but further suggest that simpler or 
more basic words are privileged in selection. The coreness 
of words, therefore, is a consideration when it comes to 
the cloze task. Our results also showed that word length 
and part-of-speech exert an influence on word prediction, 
which reaffirms previous findings (Luke & Christianson, 
2016). Length had a negative effect on word prediction per-
formance, with longer words being harder to guess, even 
over and above other factors like predictability and fre-
quency. Nouns and verbs were easier to predict than ad-
jectives, but interestingly, verbs were also easier to predict 
than nouns, indicating a slight predictability advantage for 
verbs; however, we again add the caveat that these analyses 
are exploratory and based on a relatively small number of 
target words. 
Implications for Large Language Models      
The results also have interesting implications for ques-
tions about the extent to which DSMs (and their modern 
LLM counterparts) are adequate models of human cogni-
tion (Brysbaert et al., 2025; Bullinaria & Levy, 2007; Gatti 
et al., 2022; Günther et al., 2022; Mandera et al., 2015, 
2017; Marjieh et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024; Trott, 2024b, 
2024a; Webb et al., 2023). Much of the existing research has 
focused on the degree to which language models and hu-
mans are similar on different aspects of representation and 
behaviour, showcasing the explanatory capabilities of these 
models; relatively less consideration is given to the differ-
ences between humans and language models, which might 
provide valuable insight about the relation between lan-
guage and mind (though see, Eisape et al., 2020; Smith & 
Levy, 2011; Trott, 2024b). In line with that work, our re-
sults identify some systematic differences in how at least 
one language model (BERT) predicts words in context, and 
point to the psycholinguistic information encoded in word-
association networks and early-acquired words as potential 
sources of the observed differences. This may be because 
the predictions from BERT, which are based on the distrib-
utional statistics of natural language, are shaped by prag-
matic concerns (while human semantic representations are 
not). For instance, textual content may be selectively biased 
to not contain information that is too well-known (e.g., 
people may not say “yellow banana”), even though this is 
the kind of information that may well be central to our rep-
resentation of word meanings. This lack of relevant percep-
tual and affective information may be why they are outper-
formed by word association-based models when compared 
directly (De Deyne et al., 2021; De Deyne, Perfors, et al., 
2016; Ramezani & Xu, 2025; Vankrunkelsven et al., 2018, 
2021). Another possibility is that humans prefer simpler, 
more easily accessible words because they are limited by 
memory and processing constraints, which language mod-
els do not share. 
That said, it should be strongly emphasised that these 
findings are based only on one model architecture and 
training regime. While BERT was a suitable choice for our 
bi-directional cloze task, there is always a question of gen-
eralisability in research on LLMs. We have argued that the 
differences between LLMs and humans may arise because of 
the lack of non-linguistic grounding in text-based masked 
language models; it would therefore be interesting to in-
vestigate how more recent multimodal LLMs, which are 
also trained on visual or other sources of perceptual input, 
fare in this regard. LLM performance can also vary based 
on features of their training regime, such as the objective 
functions they employ or tokenization and vocabulary con-
straints. What seems to be clear at present, however, is that 
text-based language models capture and use different kinds 
of information than humans, and that this has predictable 
consequences for word prediction. 
More generally, even when LLMs are able to successfully 
capture aspects of human cognition, the mere fact that 
these models can produce behavioural data that looks sim-
ilar to that of humans does not mean that the underlying 
mechanisms are the same (Cuskley et al., 2024). As Connell 
& Lynott (2024) argue, language models exhibit several fea-
tures that make them cognitively implausible in compar-
ison to humans – these include the learning mechanism 
they employ, the quantity of text they are trained on, and 
the grounding of meaning in perceptual and experiential 
aspects of the real world. Humans, who require far less lin-
guistic data, may be doing something quite qualitatively 
different to LLMs. Relatedly, Mahowald et al. (2024) make a 
distinction between formal linguistic competence (i.e., the 
knowledge of linguistic rules and patterns alone), and func-
tional linguistic competence (i.e., real-world language un-
derstanding as reflected in things like logical or social rea-
soning). They suggest that LLMs are better at the former 
than the latter – again pointing to a qualitative difference 
in how humans and LLMs use language. Investigating the 
similarities and differences between humans and LLMs not 
just in terms of what they can do, but also how they do it, 
is an important and pressing question for cognitive science 
that goes far beyond the scope of this single paper. 
Conclusion  
Overall, this study shows that the way that humans pre-
dict words in sentence contexts goes beyond predictability 
statistics alone. Although predictability is an important 
factor, people also appear to be influenced by aspects of 
communicative or representational utility, preferring words 
that are simpler or occur more readily for expressing a given 
idea in a communicative context, and that these aspects are 
best captured by age of acquisition and centrality in word 
association-based semantic networks. Exactly how and why 
these and other factors interact is a question for future 
work. This study also reveals points of difference between 
humans and text-based LLMs in word prediction, suggest-
ing that they encode and rely on different kinds of informa-
tion. However, many open questions remain about the ca-
pabilities of language models and the relationship between 
LLMs and human cognition. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 22
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Contributions  
AW: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - Origi-
nal Draft, Writing - Review & Editing; SDD: Conceptualiza-
tion, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Visualiza-
tion, Writing - Review & Editing; MM: Conceptualization, 
Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, 
Writing - Review & Editing; AP: Conceptualization, Formal 
analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Supervision, 
Visualization, Writing - Review & Editing; 
Ethics statement   
The research was approved by the Human Research 
Ethics Committee of The University of Melbourne (ID 
20935). 
Competing interests   
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Data Accessibility   
The material, data, and analysis code for all experiments 
is available at https://osf.io/5t9kw/. 
Editors: Dermot Lynott (Associate Editor) 
Submitted: September 17, 2025 PDT. Accepted: March 13, 2026 
PDT. Published: April 27, 2026 PDT. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License 
(CCBY-4.0). View this license's legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecom-
mons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 23
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

References  
Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., 
Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, 
S., Anadkat, S., & others. (2023). GPT-4 technical 
report. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2303.08774. 
Anthony, L. (2022). AntBNC lemma list. https://
www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc/ 
Bell, A., Brenier, J. M., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & 
Jurafsky, D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations 
of content and function words in conversational 
English. Journal of Memory and Language, 60(1), 
92–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.003 
Bell, H. (2013). Core Vocabulary (C. A. Chapelle, Ed.). 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781405198431.wbeal0223 
Bogaerts, L., Frost, R., & Christiansen, M. H. (2020). 
Integrating statistical learning into cognitive science. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 115, 104167. 
Brysbaert, M., Mandera, P., & Keuleers, E. (2018). The 
Word Frequency Effect in Word Processing: An 
Updated Review. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 27(1), 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0963721417727521 
Brysbaert, M., Mandera, P., McCormick, S. F., & 
Keuleers, E. (2019). Word prevalence norms for 
62,000 English lemmas. Behavior Research Methods, 
51, 467–479. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13428-018-1077-9 
Brysbaert, M., Martı́nez, G., & Reviriego, P. (2025). 
Moving beyond word frequency based on tally 
counting: AI-generated familiarity estimates of words 
and phrases are an interesting additional index of 
language knowledge. Behavior Research Methods, 
57(1), 1–15. 
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kučera 
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word 
frequency norms and the introduction of a new and 
improved word frequency measure for American 
English. Behavior Research Methods, 41(4), 977–990. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.977 
Brysbaert, M., Van Wijnendaele, I., & De Deyne, S. 
(2000). Age-of-acquisition effects in semantic 
processing tasks. Acta Psychologica, 104(2), 215–226. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-6918(00)00021-4 
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting 
semantic representations from word co-occurrence 
statistics: A computational study. Behavior Research 
Methods, 39(3), 510–526. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03193020 
Carter, R. (2012). Vocabulary: Applied Linguistic 
Perspectives. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004 
Clark, E. V. (1973). What’s in a word? On the child’s 
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E. 
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and acquisition of 
language (pp. 65–110). Academic Press. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511620539 
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-
activation theory of semantic processing. 
Psychological Review, 82(6), 407. 
Connell, L., & Lynott, D. (2024). What can language 
models tell us about human cognition? Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 33(3), 181–189. 
Cuskley, C., Woods, R., & Flaherty, M. (2024). The 
limitations of large language models for 
understanding human language and cognition. Open 
Mind, 8, 1058–1083. 
De Deyne, S. (2024). Evaluating human-like similarity 
biases at every scale in large language models: 
Evidence from remote and basic-level triads. 
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive 
Science Society, 46. 
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., Collell, G., & Perfors, A. 
(2021). Visual and Affective Multimodal Models of 
Word Meaning in Language and Mind. Cognitive 
Science, 45(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12922 
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., Perfors, A., Brysbaert, M., 
& Storms, G. (2019). The “Small World of Words” 
English word association norms for over 12,000 cue 
words. Behavior Research Methods, 51(3), 987–1006. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-1115-7 
De Deyne, S., Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. J. (2016). 
Predicting human similarity judgments with 
distributional models: The value of word 
associations. COLING 2016 - 26th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Proceedings 
of COLING 2016: Technical Papers, 1861–1870. https:/
/doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/671 
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word associations: 
Network and semantic properties. Behavior Research 
Methods, 40(1), 213–231. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BRM.40.1.213 
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2016). 
Structure and Organization of the Mental Lexicon: A 
Network Approach Derived from Syntactic 
Dependency Relations and Word Associations. In 
Towards a theoretical framework for analyzing complex 
linguistic networks (pp. 47–79). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-662-47238-5_3 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. 
(2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding. Proceedings 
of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: 
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and 
Short Papers), 4171–4186. 
Eisape, T., Zaslavsky, N., & Levy, R. (2020). Cloze 
Distillation: Improving Neural Language Models with 
Human Next-Word Prediction. Proceedings of the 24th 
Conference on Computational Natural Language 
Learning, 609–619. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
2020.conll-1.49 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 24
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2000). Age of 
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect 
loss of plasticity in maturing systems: Insights from 
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 
1103. 
Firth, J. R. (1957). A synopsis of linguistic theory 
1930-1955. Studies in Linguistic Analysis, Special 
Volume/Blackwell. 
Gatti, D., Marelli, M., Vecchi, T., & Rinaldi, L. (2022). 
Spatial Representations Without Spatial 
Computations. Psychological Science, 33(11), 
1947–1958. https://doi.org/10.1177/
09567976221094863 
Ghyselinck, M., Lewis, M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (2004). 
Age of acquisition and the cumulative-frequency 
hypothesis: A review of the literature and a new 
multi-task investigation. Acta Psychologica, 115(1), 
43–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2003.11.002 
Günther, F., Petilli, M. A., Vergallito, A., & Marelli, M. 
(2022). Images of the unseen: extrapolating visual 
representations for abstract and concrete words in a 
data-driven computational model. Psychological 
Research, 86(8), 2512–2532. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00426-020-01429-7 
Harris, Z. S. (1954). Distributional structure. Word. 
Hills, T. T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A., & 
Smith, L. (2009). Longitudinal analysis of early 
semantic networks: Preferential attachment or 
preferential acquisition? Psychological Science, 20(6), 
729–739. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9280.2009.02365.x 
Jakubı́ček, M., Kilgarriff, A., Kovář, V., Rychlỳ, P., & 
Suchomel, V. (2013). The TenTen corpus family. 7th 
International Corpus Linguistics Conference CL, 
125–127. 
Johns, B. T., Dye, M., & Jones, M. N. (2016). The 
influence of contextual diversity on word learning. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(4), 1214–1220. 
Kenett, Y. N., Kenett, D. Y., Ben-Jacob, E., & Faust, M. 
(2011). Global and local features of semantic 
networks: Evidence from the Hebrew mental lexicon. 
PLoS ONE, 6(8), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0023912 
Kumar, A. A. (2021). Semantic memory: A review of 
methods, models, and current challenges. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28, 40–80. https://
doi.org/10.3758/s13423-020-01792-x 
Lee, D. Y. W. (2001). Defining Core Vocabulary and 
Tracking Its Distribution across Spoken and Written 
Genres. Journal of English Linguistics, 29(3), 250–278. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/00754240122005369 
Leeuw, J. R. de, Gilbert, R. A., & Luchterhandt, B. 
(2023). jsPsych: Enabling an open-source 
collaborative ecosystem of behavioral experiments. 
Journal of Open Source Software, 8(85), 5351. 
Lenci, A. (2008). Distributional semantics in linguistic 
and cognitive research. Italian Journal of Linguistics, 
20(1), 1–31. 
Luke, S. G., & Christianson, K. (2016). Limits on lexical 
prediction during reading. Cognitive Psychology, 88, 
22–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cogpsych.2016.06.002 
Mahowald, K., Ivanova, A. A., Blank, I. A., Kanwisher, 
N., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Fedorenko, E. (2024). 
Dissociating language and thought in large language 
models. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 
Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., & Brysbaert, M. (2015). How 
useful are corpus-based methods for extrapolating 
psycholinguistic variables? Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 68(8), 1623–1642. https://
doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2014.988735 
Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., & Brysbaert, M. (2017). 
Explaining human performance in psycholinguistic 
tasks with models of semantic similarity based on 
prediction and counting: A review and empirical 
validation. Journal of Memory and Language, 92, 
57–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.04.001 
Marjieh, R., Sucholutsky, I., Rijn, P. van, Jacoby, N., & 
Griffiths, T. L. (2024). Large language models predict 
human sensory judgments across six modalities. 
Scientific Reports, 14(1), 21445. 
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). 
Efficient estimation of word representations in vector 
space. 1st International Conference on Learning 
Representations, ICLR 2013 - Workshop Track 
Proceedings, 1–12. 
Monaghan, P., Chang, Y. N., Welbourne, S., & 
Brysbaert, M. (2017). Exploring the relations between 
word frequency, language exposure, and bilingualism 
in a computational model of reading. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 93, 1–21. 
Nation, P. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for 
reading and listening? Canadian Modern Language 
Review, 63(1), 59–82. https://doi.org/10.3138/
cmlr.63.1.59 
Niu, Q., Liu, J., Bi, Z., Feng, P., Peng, B., Chen, K., Li, 
M., Yan, L. K., Zhang, Y., Yin, C. H., Fei, C., Wang, T., 
Wang, Y., Chen, S., & Liu, M. (2024). Large Language 
Models and Cognitive Science: A Comprehensive Review 
of Similarities, Differences, and Challenges. https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2409.02387 
Ogden, C. K. (1930). Basic English: A General 
Introduction with Rules and Grammar (p. 95). Paul 
Treber. 
Ramezani, A., & Xu, Y. (2025). Moral association graph: 
A cognitive model for automated moral inference. 
Topics in Cognitive Science, 17(1), 120–138. 
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances: 
Studies in the internal structure of categories. 
Cognitive Psychology, 7(4), 573–605. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0010-0285(75)90024-9 
Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2011). Cloze but no cigar: The 
complex relationship between cloze, corpus, and 
subjective probabilities in language processing. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, 1637–1642. 
Staub, A. (2015). The effect of lexical predictability on 
eye movements in reading: Critical review and 
theoretical interpretation. Language and Linguistics 
Compass, 9(8), 311–327. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 25
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-
scale structure of semantic networks: Statistical 
analyses and a model of semantic growth. Cognitive 
Science, 29(1), 41–78. https://doi.org/10.1207/
s15516709cog2901_3 
Stubbs, M. (1986). Language Development, Lexical 
Competence and Nuclear Vocabulary. In Educational 
linguistics (pp. 57–76). Blackwell. 
Trott, S. (2024a). Can large language models help 
augment english psycholinguistic datasets? Behavior 
Research Methods, 56(6), 6082–6100. 
Trott, S. (2024b). Large language models and the 
wisdom of small crowds. Open Mind, 8, 723–738. 
Vankrunkelsven, H., Vankelecom, L., Storms, G., De 
Deyne, S., & Voorspoels, W. (2021). Guessing Words. 
In Cognitive sociolinguistics revisited (pp. 572–583). De 
Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110733945-046 
Vankrunkelsven, H., Verheyen, S., Storms, G., & De 
Deyne, S. (2018). Predicting Lexical Norms: A 
Comparison between a Word Association Model and 
Text-Based Word Co-occurrence Models. Journal of 
Cognition, 1(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.5334/joc.50 
Vincent-Lamarre, P., Blondin-Massé, A., Lopes, M., 
Lord, M., Marcotte, O., & Harnad, S. (2016). The 
Latent Structure of Dictionaries. Topics in Cognitive 
Science, 8(3), 625–659. https://doi.org/10.1111/
tops.12211 
Wang, A., De Deyne, S., McKague, M., & Perfors, A. 
(2025). Core vocabulary in language representation 
and processing. Cognitive Science, 49(12). https://
doi.org/10.1111/cogs.70151 
Webb, T., Holyoak, K. J., & Lu, H. (2023). Emergent 
analogical reasoning in large language models. 
Nature Human Behaviour, 7(9), 1526–1541. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01659-w 
West, M. (1953). A General Service List of English Words. 
Longman, Green and Co. 
Wierzbicka, A. (1996). Semantics: Primes and Universals. 
Oxford University Press. 
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, 
C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, 
M., Davison, J., Shleifer, S., Platen, P. von, Ma, C., 
Jernite, Y., Plu, J., Xu, C., Scao, T. L., Gugger, S., … 
Rush, A. M. (2020). Transformers: State-of-the-art 
natural language processing. Proceedings of the 2020 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing: System Demonstrations, 38–45. 
Zhu, Y., Kiros, R., Zemel, R., Salakhutdinov, R., Urtasun, 
R., Torralba, A., & Fidler, S. (2015). Aligning books 
and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations 
by watching movies and reading books. arXiv Preprint 
arXiv:1506.06724. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 26
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Appendices  
Figure 12. Experiment 1: Mean number of guesses for        
target words.   
Top panel . Each dot represents the mean number of guesses taken to get each target 
word (  axis) across all trials and participants. Number of guesses are only counted for 
correct trials. WF had the lowest mean number of guesses on average, meaning that its 
target words were guessed fastest when guessed correctly, followed by INSTR, AOA, and 
NONCORE. Bottom panel . The relationship between target word predictability (  axis) 
and mean number of guesses (  axis) in each condition. Lines show the best-fitting lin-
ear regression line for each condition. 
Appendix A: Experiment 1 Supplement      
Number of guesses    
The analysis in the main text reports what factors drove 
accuracy in Experiment 1, but we can also ask whether 
there are performance differences between conditions in 
terms of the number of guesses (or sentences) needed to 
get the target. Target words have better performance if they 
require fewer guesses, although this variable is harder to 
interpret since it is contingent on correct trials (i.e., tri-
als that were not guessed correctly do not have a value for 
number of guesses). 
Figure 12 shows the mean number of guesses needed for 
each target word, averaged across all participants and (cor-
rect) trials. A one-way ANOVA found significant differences 
between target conditions, , , 
, with post-hoc tests showing that performance 
was significantly better for the WF and INSTR target words 
compared to the NONCORE target words (  and 
, respectively), and better for the WF target words 
compared to AOA ( ). We again analysed the effect 
of adding target word predictability into this model (see 
Figure 12). Model fitting results are displayed in Table 15. 
The best-fitting model was the model with target word pre-
dictability alone, suggesting that the mean number of 
guesses to guess the target word was best captured by its 
predictability (and not differences between target condi-
tions). However, as stated, number of guesses is harder to 
interpret because it is contingent on accuracy, and the pat-
tern of performance between conditions is better under-
stood through the survival analyses, which take into ac-
count accuracy and number of guesses simultaneously (see 
the main text). 
Appendix B: Experiment 2 Supplement      
Exploratory Analyses with Word Length and Part-      
of-speech  
Once again, we can explore whether adding additional 
factors, such as word length and part-of-speech, affects the 
pattern of differences between target conditions. Table 16 
shows model-fitting results for extended mixed-effects lo-
gistic regression models predicting accuracy from target 
condition and predictability for the corpus-matched sen-
tences. For both word length and part-of-speech, the best-
fitting model has target condition, predictability, and 
length or part-of-speech, including all two-way interac-
tions between them. 
The results of those models, displayed in Table 17, show 
very similar patterns to the results from the main mixed-
effects logistic regression model (see Table 12). Predictabil-
ity was a positive predictor of accuracy, and its effect was 
stronger for WF targets, and weaker for NONCORE targets. 
Length had a significant negative effect on accuracy, and 
verbs, but not adjectives, had significantly higher accuracy 
than nouns; the interactions with predictability indicated 
that predictability had a smaller effect for longer words and 
for verbs. The key result of target condition differences over 
and above predictability, word length, and part-of-speech 
was also found – WF and NONCORE targets had significantly 
lower accuracy than INSTR, and additionally, AOA targets 
had significantly higher accuracy than INSTR in the model 
with word length. 
For the matched-predictability sentences, since pre-
dictability was equated across all target words, we extended 
the mixed-effects logistic regression models predicting ac-
curacy from target condition alone to include word length 
and part-of-speech. Table 18 shows that the best-fitting 
models included target condition interacting with length or 
part-of-speech. 
The results of these models, displayed in Table 19, also 
show similar patterns to the mixed-effects logistic regres-
sion model with target condition only reported in the main 
text. Again, length had a significant negative effect on ac-
curacy, and verbs, but not adjectives, had significantly 
higher accuracy than nouns, although the interaction ef-
fects showed that the effects of part-of-speech varied sub-
stantially across conditions. Once again, the target condi-
tions retained the same patterns over and above the effects 
of word length and part-of-speech: WF and NONCORE tar-
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 27
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 15. Experiment 1 model comparison: Number of Guesses and Predictability          
Model Description BIC 
mNull guesses  1 191 
mT guesses  target 174 
mP guesses  pred 153 
mTP guesses  target + pred 164 
mTxP guesses  target * pred 160 
We compare a set of linear regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have the mean number of guesses to get the target word on correct trials as an out-
come variable. Models vary in the presence of target word condition (target) and target word predictability. The best-fit model contained only target word predictability. 
Table 16. Experiment 2: Corpus-matched stimuli. Additional models for accuracy with word length and part-of-            
speech.  
BIC 
Model Description Word length Part-of-speech 
mTP1p correct  pred + target + (1 | p) 37756 37756 
mTxP1p correct  pred * target + (1 | p) 37635 37635 
mTPX1p correct  pred + target + X + (1 | p) 37375 37685 
mTxPX1p correct  pred * target + X + (1 | p) 37292 37565 
mTxXP1p correct  pred + target * X + (1 | p) 37312 37615 
mTxPxX1p correct  (pred + target + X)^2 + (1 | p) 37240 37510 
We compare a set of mixed-effects logistic regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have accuracy as an outcome variable (correct, which is 1 if the 
word was guessed and 0 if not). Models vary in the presence of a random effect for participant (p), target word condition (target), the predictability of the target word in the sentence 
on the given trial (pred), and an additional factor (either target word length or part-of-speech) denoted by X. The best-fitting models in both cases contained target condition, pre-
dictability, and word length or part-of-speech, including all two-way interactions between them (mTxPxX1p). 
Table 17. Experiment 2: Corpus-matched stimuli.     
Word length Part-of-speech 
Term 95% CI 95% CI 
Intercept -1.52 [-1.60, -1.45] < .001 -1.36 [-1.43, -1.28] < .001 
Predictability 0.86 [0.81, 0.91] < .001 0.86 [0.80, 0.91] < .001 
AoA target 0.15 [0.07, 0.24] < .001 -0.05 [-0.14, 0.04] .261 
WF target -0.36 [-0.47, -0.25] < .001 -0.56 [-0.72, -0.39] < .001 
NonCore target -0.11 [-0.21, -0.01] .031 -0.54 [-0.66, -0.43] < .001 
Predictability  WF target 0.27 [0.19, 0.35] < .001 0.36 [0.26, 0.47] < .001 
Predictability  NonCore target -0.22 [-0.30, -0.14] < .001 -0.21 [-0.28, -0.13] < .001 
Length -0.40 [-0.49, -0.31] < .001 
Verb part-of-speech 0.52 [0.35, 0.68] < .001 
Adjective part-of-speech -0.06 [-0.16, 0.05] .309 
Predictability  Length 0.07 [0.03, 0.10] < .001 
Predictability  Verb -0.13 [-0.21, -0.04] .004 
Length  AoA target 0.21 [0.10, 0.32] < .001 
Length  NonCore target -0.15 [-0.26, -0.04] .009 
Verb  WF target -0.28 [-0.49, -0.07] .010 
Adjective  NonCore target -0.73 [-0.93, -0.54] < .001 
Parameters of the best-fitting mixed-effects logistic regression models for word length and part-of-speech in Table 16. For simplicity, non-significant interaction effects are not dis-
played. The reference categories are INSTR target and Noun part-of-speech. 
gets had significantly lower accuracy than INSTR, and addi-
tionally, AOA targets had significantly higher accuracy than 
INSTR in the model with word length. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 28
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026

Table 18. Experiment 2: Matched-predictability stimuli. Additional models for accuracy with word length and             
part-of-speech.  
BIC 
Model Description Word length Part-of-speech 
mT1p correct  target + (1 | p) 30044 30044 
mTX1p correct  target + X + (1 | p) 29906 29946 
mTxX1p correct  target * X + (1 | p) 29705 29797 
We compare a set of mixed-effects logistic regression models using BIC (lowest is best, shown in bold). All models have accuracy as an outcome variable (correct, which is 1 if the 
word was guessed and 0 if not). Models vary in the presence of a random effect for participant (p), target word condition (target), and an additional factor (either target word length 
or part-of-speech) denoted by X. The best-fitting models in both cases contained target condition and word length or part-of-speech interacting (mTxX1p). 
Table 19. Experiment 2: Matched-predictability stimuli.     Parameters  of the best-fitting mixed-effects logistic      
regression models for word length and part-of-speech in         Table 18 .  
Word length Part-of-speech 
Term 95% CI 95% CI 
Intercept 0.07 [0.00, 0.14] .048 0.16 [0.09, 0.24] < .001 
AoA target 0.28 [0.20, 0.37] < .001 0.08 [-0.01, 0.17] .076 
WF target -0.34 [-0.43, -0.24] < .001 -0.52 [-0.65, -0.38] < .001 
NonCore target -0.57 [-0.66, -0.47] < .001 -0.91 [-1.01, -0.81] < .001 
Length -0.15 [-0.25, -0.06] .001 
Verb part-of-speech 0.47 [0.30, 0.64] < .001 
Adjective part-of-speech -0.10 [-0.21, 0.01] .070 
Length  AoA target 0.28 [0.17, 0.40] < .001 
Length  NonCore target -0.36 [-0.47, -0.25] < .001 
Verb  AoA target 0.35 [0.07, 0.62] .014 
Verb  WF target -0.26 [-0.48, -0.05] .017 
Adjective  AoA target 1.02 [0.70, 1.34] < .001 
Adjective  WF target 0.55 [0.24, 0.86] < .001 
Adjective  NonCore target -0.70 [-0.87, -0.52] < .001 
For simplicity, non-significant interaction effects are not displayed. The reference categories are INSTR target and Noun part-of-speech. 
Modelling of Incorrect Responses:     INSTR  only model   
The models with predictability and INSTR alone reveal 
similar results to the full model reported in the main text, 
which include predictability and all three coreness mea-
sures (INSTR, AOA, and WF) as predictors. Predictability sig-
nificantly predicts response probability for both the corpus-
matched, , 95% CI , , , 
and matched-predictability stimuli, , 95% CI 
, , . Over and above predictabil-
ity, responses that were more core in INSTR were signif-
icantly more likely to be given, , 95% CI 
, ,  and , 95% CI 
, , , respectively (since the 
coreness metrics are such that 0 indicates maximum core-
ness, negative coefficients indicate that response probabil-
ity decreases with decreasing coreness). This parallels the 
results reported in the main text where INSTR coreness was 
included alongside the two other coreness measures. 
Core Word Prediction
Collabra: Psychology 29
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/collabra/article-pdf/12/1/160142/933720/collabra_2026_12_1_160142.pdf by guest on 23 June 2026
