'wo.asse April 25, 1953 NATURE : 737
equipment, and to Dr. G. B. R. Deacon and the is a residue on each chain every 3-4 A. in the 2-direc-
captain and officers of R.R.S. Discovery IJ for their tion. We have assumed an angle of 36° between
part in making the observations. adjacent residues in the same chain, so that the
Boag, fH Geman H., aud Sevons, W., Pil. afer, 4, 149 structure repeats after 10 residues on each chain, that
a Bs : cae is, after 34 A. The distance of a phosphorus atom
Pree ergy NC Se Mon. Not. How, Atta, cc. Georlve. Sum from the fibre axis is 10 A. As the Bio choles are on
+ yon Ane, IY; 8., Woods Hole Papers in Phy. Ocearog. Meteor 21 the outside, cations have easy access to them.

51%) 0) ae ‘The structure is an open one, and its water content
SEaiat, Vs Wes Artie. Mat, atron. ye (Siete), 211) 0905). ig rather high. At Aeece Satnaleontan ee Weneetlal
expect the bases to tilt so that the structure could

7 become more compact.
ye ‘The novel feature of the structure is the manner

_ MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF in which the two chains are held together by the
4 purine and pyrimidine basos. ‘The planes of the bases

3 NUCLEIC ACIDS aro Papers to the fibre axis. They are joined
4 F fe Acid touether in pairs, a single base from one chain bei
“A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid — jydrogen-bonded to a single base from the other
W:. wish to suggest a structure for the salt chain, so that the two lie side by side with identical
Wor deoxyribose nucleic acid (D-N.A.). ‘This 7-60-ordinates. Ono of tho pair must bo @ purino and
“structure has novel features which are of considerable the other a pyrimidine for bonding to occur. ‘The
_piological interest. hydrogen bonds are made as follows : purine position
“A structure for nucleic acid has already been 1 to pyrimidine position 1; purine position 6 to
‘proposed by Pauling and Corey’. ‘They kindly made pyrimidine position 6.
their manuscript available to us in advance of If it is assumed that the bases only occur in the
‘publication. ‘Their model consists of three inter- structure in tho most plausible tautomeric forms
‘yvined chains, with the phosphates near the fibre (that is, with tho keto rather than the enol. con-
‘axis, and the bases on the outside. Tn our opinion, figurations) it is found that only specific pairs of
“this structure is unsatisfaetory for two reasons: bases can bond together. ‘These pairs are: adenine
(2) We believe that the material which gives the (purine) with thymine (pyrimidine), and guanine
“X-ray diagrams is the salt, not the free acid. Without (purine) with cytosine (pyrimidine).
the acidic hydrogen atoms it is not clear what forces In other words, if an adenine forms one member of
“would hold the structure together, especially as the @ pair, on either chain, then on these assumptions
‘negatively charged phosphates noar the axis will the other member must be thymine; similarly for

repel cach other. (2) Some of the van der Waals guanine and cytosine. ‘The sequence of bases on a
“distances appear to bé too small. single chain does not appear to be restricted in any
Another three-chain structure has also been sug- way. However, if only specific pairs of bases can be
gested by Fraser (in the press). Tn his model the formed, it follows that if the soquence of bases on
“phosphates are on the outside and the bases on the one chain is given, then the sequence on the other
inside, linked together by hydrogen bonds, ‘This chain is automatically determined.

‘structure as described is rather ill-defined, and for It has been found exporimentally* that the ratio
ie this reason we shall not comment of the amounts of adenine to thymino, and the ratio
ne on it. of guanino to.cytosino, are always very closo to unity
i We wish to put forward a for deoxyribose nucleic acid.
“4 radically difforont structure for Tt is probably impossible to build this structure
Zz (fe y} the sali of deoxyribose nucleic with a ribose sugar in place of the deoxyribose, as
At acid. ‘This structure has two the extra oxygen atom would make too close a van
on helical chains each coiled round der Waals contact.

SZ the same axis (see diagram). We The previously published X-ray data* on deoxy-
ge have made the usual chemical ribose nucleic acid aro insufficient: for a rigorous test
bf assumptions, namely, that each of our structure. So far as we can tell, it is roughly
Be chain consists of phosphate di- compatible with the experimental data, but it must
a ester groups joining f-p-deoxy- be regarded as unproved until it has boon checked
4 =) ribofuranose tesidues with 3/5" against moro exact results. Some of these are given
a linkages. The two chains (but in the following communications. We were not aware
B not their bases) are related by a of the details of the results presented there when we

I dyad perpendicular to the fibre dovised our structure, which rests mainly though not
— Y—_)__ axis. Both chains follow right- entirely on published experimental data and stereo-
TZ 7/ ante helices, but owing to chemical arguments,
> the dyad the Sequences of the It has not escaped our notice that the specific
d oe atoms in the two chains run pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a
1 Ae in opposite directions. Hach possible copying mechanism for the genetic material,
a chain loosely resembles Fur- Full details of the structure, including the con-
~~ berg’s? model No. 1; that is, ditions assumed in building it, togethor with a set
ok EX the bases are on the inside of of co-ordinates for the atoms, will be published
aa the helix and the phosphates on elsewhere.
“Tis zur 's purely the outside. ‘The configuration We are much indebted to Dr. Jerry Donohue for
‘agama Bete Gf the sugar and the atoms constant advice and criticism, especially on inter-
yo Phophate—suzat oar it is close to Furberg’s atomic distances. We have also been stimulated by

‘outalrods the pats of ‘standard configuration’, the a knowledgp of the general nature of the unpublished

Pumholdinetiechsine sugar being roughly perpendi- experimental results and ideas of Dr. M. H. ¥.
Tinematis the iibre axis cular to the attached base. There Wilkins, Dr. R. E. Franklin and their co-workers at

;
738 NATURE April 25, 1953 vou.17 .
King’s College, London, One of us (J.D. W,) has been =e errr
aided by a fellowship from the National Foundation pe cies
for Infantile Paralysis. “oa ae
J. D. Warsox oo es!
F. H.C. Crrox ar eee ae
Medical Research Council Unit for the a Pes ee Cd
Study of the Molecular Structure of te Facies
Biological Systems, anette (sk ie ae i
Cavendish Laboratéry, Cambridge. fhe a tee
* Furberg, S., Acta Chem. Scand., 6, 634 (1952). Se a
*Chargalf, B., for references see Zamenhof, 8., Brawerman, G.. and 3 ee 4
Chargall, E., Biochim. et Biophys, Acta, 9, 402 (1952). : , =
“yyyatt, G. Be, J. Gen, Phisiol, 38, 201 (1952), i
+ Astbury, W.'., Symp, Soc. Exp. Biol, 1, Nuclele Acid, 66 (Camb.
Univ, Press, 1987). 2 i e
Wilkins, M, 1, ¥., and Randall, J.T, Biochim. et Biophys. Acta, ee ‘
19, 192 (1953). ee ae
Molecular Structure of Deoxypentose pez. a
Nucleic Acids PehicS ae
Warr the biological properties of deoxypentose 5 . :
eral oM acid tecagedt ‘a melecular structars con. Fide 1- Fibre diagram of dcoxypentose nucle veld rom J. ct
taining groat complexity, X-ray diffraction studies
described here (ef. Astbury") show the basic molecular the innermost maxima of each Bessel fimetion and
configuration has great simplicity. The purpose of the origin. The angle this line makes with the equator
this communication is to describe, in a preliminary js roughly equal to the angle between an clement of
way, some of the experimental evidence for the poly- the helix and the helix axis. Ifa unit repeats n times
nucleotide chain configuration being helical, and along the helix there will be a meridional reflexion
cxisting in this form when in the natural state. A (J,%) on the nth layer line. The helical configuration
fuller account of the work will be published shortly, produces side-bands on this fundamental frequency,
‘The structure of deoxypentose nucleic acid is the the effect* being to reproduce the intensity distribution
same in alll species (although the nitrogen base ratios about the origin around the new origin, on the nth
alter considerably) in nucleoprotein, extracted or in layer line, corresponding to C in Fig. 2.
cells, and in purified mucleate, The same linear group _ We will now briefly analyse in physical terms somo
of polynucleotide chains may pack together parallel of the effects of the shape and size of the repeat unit
in different ways to give crystalline!-*, somi-erystalline or nucleotide on the diffraction pattern. First, if the
or paracrystalline material. In all cases the X-ray nucleotide consists of a unit having circular symmetry
diffraction photograph consists of two regions, one about an axis parallel to the helix axis, the whole
determined largely by the regular spacing of nucleo- diffraction pattern is modified by the form factor of
tides along the chain, and the other by the longer the nucleotide. Second, if the nucleotide consists of
spacings of the chain configuration. ‘The sequence of a series*of points on a radius at right-angles to the
different nitrogen bases along the chain is not made helix axis, the phases of radiation scattered by the
visible. helices of different diameter passing through each
Oriented paracrystalline deoxypentose nucleic acid point are the same. Summation of the corresponding
(‘structure B’ in’ the following communication by Bessel functions gives reinforcement for the inner-
Franklin and Gosling) gives a fibre diagram as shown
in Fig. 1 (cf. ref. 4). Astbury suggested tht the © (Wo?
strong 3-4-A. reflexion corresponded to the inter- | -——F —<
nucleotide repeat along the fibre axis, ‘The ~ 34 A. — =
Ayer lines however terol Stel wart a eres itch MENAIDiiA ae RS Becca REESE
polynucleotide composition, but to the chain con [TT
figuration repeat, which causes strong diffraction as [fl Una | eae
the nucleotide chains have higher density than the [77 ———sd
interstitial water. The absence of reflexions on or [piers eer Bia. |
near the meridian immediately suggests a helical
structure with axis parallel to fibre length.
Diffraction by Helices aS Oe
. Se a
Tt may be shown! (also Stokes,’ unpublished) that Se |
the intensity distribution in tho diffraction pattern | [fg
of a series of points equally spaced along a helix is
given by the squares of Bessel functions. A uniform yg, 9, pitration patter of sate of helices corresponding (9
continuous helix gives a series of layer lines of spacing stricture of deoxypentose nucleic acid. "The squares of Besse}
corresponding to the helix pitch, the intensity dis- SrUcHone Se UC a a Sant athe ase rie
tribution along the nth layor line being proportional at 30.4. diameter and remainder distributed along a radius, the
to the square of Ja, the nth order Bessel function. mass at a given radius being proportional to the radius. About
A straight lino may’be cieeen approximately through, © ouene tenth layer tine smi netions are lois for an otter
