--- page 1 ---
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  1 of 23
Amphibian mast cells serve as barriers to 
chytrid fungus infections
Kelsey A Hauser1, Christina N Garvey1, Ryley S Crow1, 
Muhammad RH Hossainey1, Dustin T Howard1, Netra Ranganathan1, 
Lindsey K Gentry2, Amulya Yaparla1, Namarta Kalia1, Mira Zelle1, 
Elizabeth J Jones3, Anju N Duttargi3, Louise A Rollins- Smith4,5, 
Carly R Muletz- Wolz2, Leon Grayfer1*
1Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington, 
United States; 2Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian National Zoo 
& Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, United States; 3Department of 
Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, 
Washington, United States; 4Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and 
Immunology, and of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
United States; 5Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
United States
Abstract Global amphibian declines are compounded by deadly disease outbreaks caused by 
the chytrid fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). Much has been learned about the roles of 
amphibian skin- produced antimicrobial components and microbiomes in controlling Bd, yet almost 
nothing is known about the roles of skin- resident immune cells in anti- Bd defenses. Mammalian 
mast cells reside within and serve as key immune sentinels in barrier tissues like skin. Accordingly, 
we investigated the roles of Xenopus laevis frog mast cells during Bd infections. Our findings indi-
cate that enrichment of X. laevis skin mast cells confers anti- Bd protection and ameliorates the 
inflammation- associated skin damage caused by Bd infection. This includes a significant reduction 
in infiltration of Bd- infected skin by neutrophils, promoting mucin content within cutaneous mucus 
glands, and preventing Bd- mediated changes to skin microbiomes. Mammalian mast cells are known 
for their production of the pleiotropic interleukin- 4 (IL4) cytokine and our findings suggest that the 
X. laevis IL4 plays a key role in manifesting the effects seen following cutaneous mast cell enrich-
ment. Together, this work underscores the importance of amphibian skin- resident immune cells in 
anti- Bd defenses and illuminates a novel avenue for investigating amphibian host–chytrid pathogen 
interactions.
eLife assessment
This important study reveals the role of skin- resident mast cells in amphibians in mediating antimi-
crobial responses. The data are compelling and highlight species- specific biology that can cross- 
inform human mast cell biology in a species that does not rely on IgE as a primary mechanism for 
antimicrobial skin responses.
Introduction
Catastrophic declines of hundreds of amphibian species across six continents have been causally 
linked to the chytrid fungi, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) and Batrachochytrium salaman-
drivorans (Bsal) (Martel et  al., 2014; Scheele et  al., 2019). Motile Bd zoospores readily colonize 
RESEARCH ARTICLE
*For correspondence: 
leon_grayfer@gwu.edu
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 19
Sent for Review
12 September 2023
Preprint posted
01 October 2023
Reviewed preprint posted
19 December 2023
Reviewed preprint revised
16 July 2024
Version of Record published
31 July 2024
Reviewing Editor: Brian S Kim, 
Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, United States
   Copyright Hauser et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.

--- page 2 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  2 of 23
keratinized skin of adult amphibians and keratinized mouthparts of tadpoles (Van Rooij et al., 2015). 
Bd skin infections culminate in chytridiomycosis, ultimately disrupting the function of this respira-
tory and barrier tissue (Van Rooij et al., 2015; Van Rooij et al., 2010; Voyles et al., 2009). Effec-
tively combating chytrid infections requires a holistic understanding of amphibian cutaneous immune 
defenses. Research efforts up to this point have focused on antifungal capacities of amphibian skin- 
produced antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) (Rollins- Smith, 2023; Varga et al., 2018); commensal anti-
fungal products (Varga et al., 2018; Jani et al., 2021; Woodhams et al., 2023); antifungal properties 
of mucus (Woodhams et al., 2023), alkaloids (Rodríguez et al., 2017), and lysozymes (Grogan et al., 
2018; Rollins- Smith et al., 2009); as well as the roles of antibodies (Van Rooij et al., 2010; Ramsey 
et al., 2010). Many of these studies suggest that Bd exposure can elicit some immune protection 
through these mechanisms (McMahon et  al., 2014). However, the contribution of skin- resident 
immune cells to amphibian anti- Bd defenses remains almost entirely unexplored.
Mammalian mast cells serve as sentinels of mucosal and connective tissues, including in barrier 
tissues like skin, where they maintain homeostasis and regulate immune responses (Sobiepanek et al., 
2022). Other granulocyte- lineage cells such as neutrophils are generally not found in healthy tissues 
and only extravasate into sites of inflammation (Hauser et al., 2023). Consequently, mast cells are 
among the first immune cells to recognize and respond to skin- infiltrating pathogens. When activated, 
mast cells release pre- formed and de novo- generated immunomodulatory compounds that may serve 
to elicit, exacerbate, or ameliorate inflammatory responses (Sobiepanek et al., 2022). One of these 
mast cell- produced mediators, the interleukin- 4 (IL4) cytokine dampens inflammation and promotes 
tissue repair (Allen, 2023). Cells bearing hallmark mast cell cytology have been reported across a 
range of non- mammalian species (McNeil et  al., 2007; Abraham and St John, 2010), including 
amphibians (Baccari et al., 2011). Notably, the principal mast cell growth factor, stem cell factor (SCF , 
KIT ligand), is required for mast cell differentiation and survival (Ito et al., 2012) and is expressed by 
all vertebrates examined to date.
Here, we combine comprehensive in vitro and in vivo approaches to define the roles of amphibian 
(Xenopus laevis) mast cells during Bd infections. Our results provide compelling evidence that skin- 
resident immune cells contribute to anti- Bd defenses.
Results
Frog mast cells possess archetypal mast cell cytology and 
transcriptional profiles
We produced X. laevis recombinant (r)SCF and used this reagent to generate mast cell cultures from 
bone marrow- derived myeloid precursors (Yaparla et al., 2016). Mast cells were compared to bone 
marrow- derived neutrophilic granulocytes (hereafter referred to as ‘neutrophils’), differentiated using 
a recombinant X. laevis colony- stimulating factor- 3 22 (rCSF3, i.e., granulocyte colony- stimulating 
factor [GCSF]). While the neutrophil cultures were comprised of cells with hyper- segmented nuclei 
and neutral- staining cytoplasms (Figure 1A), the mast cell cultures consisted predominantly of mono-
nuclear cells with basophilic cytoplasm (Figure 1B). We confirmed the granulocyte- lineage of X. laevis 
mast cells using specific esterase (SE) staining (Figure 1D). As expected, X. laevis neutrophils were 
also SE- positive (Figure 1C). Mast cell and neutrophil morphology was further explored with elec-
tron microscopy (Figure 1E–H). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging demonstrated that X. 
laevis mast cells possess extensive folding of their plasma membranes (Figure 1F). This mast cell- 
characteristic membrane ruffling appeared as projections resembling pseudopods via transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM), which further revealed electron- dense heterogeneous granules, few mito-
chondria, and round to elongated nuclei (Figure  1H) typical of mammalian mast cells (Espinosa- 
Riquer et al., 2020). X. laevis neutrophils also exhibited pronounced membrane ruffling (Figure 1E) 
but strikingly distinct intracellular appearance including multilobed nuclei (Figure 1G).
X. laevis mast cells and neutrophils exhibited distinct transcriptional profiles of immune- related 
genes including those encoding lineage- specific transcription factors, immune receptors, downstream 
signaling components and adhesion molecules, as well as non- immune genes (Figure 1I). Frog mast 
cells and neutrophils each expressed greater levels of lineage- specific transcription factors associated 
with mammalian mast cell (gata1, gata2, and mitf) (Cildir et al., 2021) and neutrophil (cebp family 
members) (Paudel et al., 2022) counterparts, respectively (Figure 2A). Notably, mast cells expressed 

--- page 3 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  3 of 23
greater levels of enzyme and cytokine genes associated with tissue remodeling (carboxypeptidase- 3 
[cpa3]; Atiakshin et al., 2022), immune suppression (indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase- 1 [ido1]; Baban 
et  al., 2009), and amelioration of cutaneous inflammation (leukemia inhibitory factor [lif]; Banner 
et al., 1998; Figure 2B). Conversely, neutrophils expressed predominantly proinflammatory enzymes 
and cytokine genes such as leukotriene 4 hydrolase (lta4h; Figure  2B) and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (tnfa, Figure 2B). In addition, mast cells and neutrophils each had greater expression of genes 
encoding their respective growth factor receptors, kit and csf3r (Figure 2B).
Enriching frog cutaneous mast cells confers protection against Bd
Although all granulocyte- lineage cells possess specific esterase activity, mast cells are the predom-
inant mononuclear granulocytes to reside in vertebrate tissues (Agis et  al., 1996). Therefore, we 
selectively enriched mast cells in X. laevis skin via subcutaneous rSCF administration (note SE- stained 
cells indicated by arrows in r- ctrl- injected skins, Figure 3A, versus r- SCF- injected skins, Figure 3B). 
We confirmed SE- positive cells in rSCF- treated skins also possessed round- oval nuclei (Figure 3C). 
Maximum mast cell enrichment was observed 12 hr post injection of rSCF (Figure 3D).
We next examined the consequences of enriching frog skin mast cells on Bd infection outcomes. 
To this end, X. laevis were subcutaneously administered with rSCF or a recombinant control (r- ctrl), 
infected with Bd, and the skin fungal loads assessed at 10 and 21 days post infection (dpi). At 10 
dpi, skin mast cell- enriched X. laevis possessed significantly lower Bd loads than r- ctrl- administered 
Figure 1. X. laevis bone marrow- derived mast cells possess archetypal mast cell cytology and transcriptional profiles. Neutrophils (A, C, E, G) and mast 
cells (B, D, F, H) were stained with Giemsa (A, B) and Leder to visualize specific esterase activity (SE) (C, D) or imaged with scanning and transmission 
electron microscopy (SEM: E, F and TEM: G, H). (I) Heat map of the top 30 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified with RNA sequencing 
analyses of X. laevis mast cell (N = 4) and neutrophil (N = 4) cultures. Log2fold change in expression represented as color scale.

--- page 4 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  4 of 23
animals (Figure  3E). By 21 dpi, both r- ctrl and rSCF- administered groups possessed substantially 
greater Bd loads, although the mast cell- enriched animals continued to show significantly lower skin 
fungal loads (Figure 3E).
Mammalian mast cells may be labeled in situ with avidin to visualize the heparin- containing gran-
ules (Tharp et al., 1985). Using this approach, we confirmed that frog bone marrow- derived mast 
cells likewise possess heparin- containing granules (Figure  4A and B). We next used this staining 
approach to visualize and enumerate mast cells in the skins of control, mast cell- enriched mock- and 
Bd- challenged animals (Figure 4C–I). We observed cutaneous frog mast cell enrichment progressively 
waned with time in mock- infected animals, and by 21 days post mock infection, these animals had skin 
mast cell numbers comparable to r- ctrl- injected, mock- infected animals (Figure 4C and D). Conversely, 
compared to mock- infected control animals, the rSCF- injected, Bd- challenged frogs maintained 
significantly more cutaneous mast cells numbers throughout the 21- day infection study (Figure 4C 
and E–H). Interestingly, r- ctrl- injected, Bd- infected animals exhibited significantly increased skin mast 
cell numbers at 10 and 21 days of infection compared to uninfected control frogs (Figure 4C and 
I). Most of these mast cells were observed in the epidermal layer, spreading out between the skin 
epithelial cells (Figure 4G).
Mast cells protect frogs from Bd-elicited inflammation
To explore potential mechanisms of mast cell- mediated protection against Bd, we compared the 
gene expression profiles of r- ctrl- and rSCF- administered, Bd- infected frog skins at 21 dpi. Among the 
top differentially expressed genes, we noted mast cell- enriched, Bd- infected skins possessed more 
transcripts for genes associated with cutaneous strength and integrity (lamc2) (Kiritsi et al., 2013), 
suppression of cell migration (b3gnt3.1) (Ho et al., 2013), as well as ion and nutrient flow (gjb3l) 
Figure 2. Frog mast cells and neutrophils possess gene profiles similar to their mammalian counterparts. The differentially expressed genes from 
the RNA sequencing analyses of X. laevis mast cells and neutrophil cultures were profiled for those encoding (A) transcription factors associated with 
mast cell- or neutrophil- specific lineages and (B) granulocyte antimicrobial components and growth factor receptor genes. All depicted genes were 
significantly differentially expressed between the two populations, N = 4 per group.

--- page 5 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  5 of 23
(Chang et al., 2003; Figure 5A). Moreover, mast cell- enriched Bd- challenged skin exhibited greater 
expression of genes associated with protection of the mucosa and epithelial healing (ttf3.6s) (Taupin 
and Podolsky, 2003) and mucus production (duoxa1.s [Fischer, 2009], gabrp [Wang et al., 2021]; 
Figure 5A). In striking contrast, skins from control Bd- infected frogs revealed greater expression of 
Figure 3. Enriching frog cutaneous mast cells lowers Bd loads. Representative images of specific esterase (SE) stained (A) control and (B) mast 
cell- enriched skin 12 hr post injection (hpi). (C) We confirmed the enriched population was composed of mono- morphonuclear cells. (D) Mast cell 
enrichment was optimized across several time points by quantifying SE- positive cells per field of view under ×40 magnification. Results represent 
means  ± SEM from three animals per time point (two experimental repeats). (E) Mast cell- enriched and control dorsal skins were collected from X. 
laevis 10 and 21 dpi. Bd loads are represented as the number of zoospore genomic equivalents (GE) × 105 per μL of total input DNA. Time points were 
analyzed independently. Results represent means ± SEM from seven animals per experimental group (N = 7). Asterisks indicate significance: p<0.05 by 
(D) one- way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis or (E) Student’s t- test.

--- page 6 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  6 of 23
Figure 4. Heparin content and skin localization of frog mast cells. Frogs were administered r- ctrl or rSCF subcutaneously, mock or Bd- challenged, 
and their skins examined after 1, 3, 10, and 21 days post infection (dpi). (A, B) Representative images (cultures derived from five individual frogs) 
of bone marrow- derived frog mast cells, stained with fluorescently labeled avidin to visualize heparin- containing granules (avidin: red; nuclei: blue; 
actin: green). (C–I) Skin tissue from control (r- ctrl) or mast cell- enriched (rSCF), mock- (not shown) and Bd- infected (D–I) X. laevis were stained with 
Figure 4 continued on next page

--- page 7 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  7 of 23
genes associated with leukocyte infiltration and inflammation (e.g., ccl19, cxcl16, adamts13, csf3r; 
Figure 5A). These transcriptional profiles were supported by our histological observations wherein 
control (r- ctrl), Bd- infected skins exhibited hyperkeratosis, epidermal hyperplasia, jagged stratum 
corneum, and extensive leukocyte infiltration (Figure 5B), while mast cell- enriched Bd- infected tissues 
appeared considerably less afflicted by these pathologies (Figure 5C). Quantification of Bd- infected 
skin thickness confirmed that mast cell- enriched animals possessed significantly less thickened 
epidermal skin compared to control (r- ctrl), Bd- infected animals (Figure 5D).
Because mast cell- enriched frog skins had greater expression of genes associated with mucosal 
tissue integrity and mucus production (Figure 5A), we also investigated whether the anti- Bd protec-
tion identified in mast cell- enriched skins could be due at least in part to differences in mucus produc-
tion. Interestingly, cutaneous mucus glands of mast cell- enriched, mock- and Bd- infected frogs were 
significantly more filled than those of mock- and Bd- infected control animals (Figure 5B, C, and E).
fluorescently labeled avidin to visualize mast cells therein (N = 6 animals per treatment group). Images were inverted in ImageJ for greater contrast and 
visibility. (C) Heparin- containing mast cells were enumerated and depicted as means ± SEM of heparin- positive cells per field of view, N = 6 animals 
per treatment group. Asterisks indicate statistical significance from r- ctrl: p<0.05. Representative images of heparin- containing mast cells in the skins of 
(D) r- ctrl animals 1 dpi; (E) rSCF- administered frogs 1 dpi; (F, G) rSCF- administered frogs 10 dpi; (H) rSCF- administered frogs 21 dpi; and (I) r- ctrl- treated 
animals 21 dpi with Bd.
Figure 4 continued
Figure 5. Consequences of cutaneous mast cell enrichment. (A) RNAseq analysis of skin tissue from control (r- ctrl) or mast cell- enriched (rSCF) Bd- 
infected X. laevis at 21 days post infection (dpi). Heat map of the top 30 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), numbers matched to colors represent 
log2 fold change in expression, N = 4 r- ctrl- treated, Bd- infected and 4 rSCF- treated, Bd- infected skin samples. (B, C) Representative images of control 
and mast cell- enriched, Bd- infected skins, 21 dpi, demonstrating differences in epidermal thickening and mucus gland filling. Mucin content was 
visualized in cutaneous mucus glands with Alcian Blue/PAS stain. Mucus glands are denoted by ‘m’, and epithelia are denoted by ‘Ep’. ImageJ software 
was used to determine the means ± SEM of (D) skin epithelial thickness and (E) percent mucus gland filling (N = 6). Asterisks indicate significance: 
p<0.05 by one- way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis.

--- page 8 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  8 of 23
Cutaneous neutrophil enrichment results in increased Bd fungal loads
Neutrophils are one of the first leukocytes to infiltrate infected tissues, typically amplifying inflamma-
tion (Wang, 2018). All vertebrate neutrophils depend on CSF3 for their differentiation and function 
(Roberts, 2005), and our previous work has confirmed that this is true of frog neutrophils, which intu-
itively also exhibit high expression the CSF3 receptor (csf3r) (Koubourli et al., 2017; Yaparla et al., 
2016). Because csf3r expression was markedly elevated in control over mast cell- enriched skins of 
infected frogs (Figure 5A), we examined the neutrophil content in the skins of these animals over 
the 21- day course of Bd infection (Figure 6A–E). To this end, we used in situ hybridization analysis 
of skin- myeloperoxidase (mpo), a marker of neutrophils (Buchan et al., 2019). While the skins of 
r- ctrl- and rSCF- administered, mock- infected frogs contained relatively few neutrophils (Figure 6A 
and E), the skins of r- ctrl- injected, Bd- infected animals had significantly elevated neutrophil numbers 
(Figure 6B, C, and E). Conversely, at both examined time points (10, 21 dpi), the skins of mast cell-  
enriched frogs possessed neutrophil levels similar to those seen in the uninfected animals (Figure 6D 
and E).
We next assessed the consequence of enriching frog skins for neutrophils via subcutaneous rCSF3 
administration. We confirmed neutrophil enrichment peaked 12 hp rCSF3 injection (Figure 6—figure 
supplement 1) and resulted in a thickened epidermis in comparison with r- ctrl- injected skins of other-
wise healthy animals (i.e., no Bd; Figure 6F and G). When challenged with Bd, frogs with neutrophil- 
enriched skin possessed significantly greater Bd loads than control frogs (Figure 6H), suggesting that 
neutrophil- mediated inflammation may be exacerbating Bd infections.
Enrichment of frog skin mast cells alters skin microbial composition
We observed substantial differences in skin microbiomes, including changes in bacterial composition 
and richness as well as relative abundances of Bd- inhibitory bacteria (Figure  7, Figure  7—figure 
supplement 1). A total of 1645 bacterial amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were identified from 20 
bacterial phyla, 7 of which were predominant (Figure 7A). Of these, Verrucomicrobiota were only 
present on uninfected animals, whereas Acidobacteriota was only seen after 21 dpi on both control 
and mast cell- enriched, infected animals (Figure 7A).
At 10 dpi, mast cell enrichment resulted in a nominal shift in community composition compared 
to control frogs (Figure 7B). Notably, while control, Bd- infected animals exhibited a drastic shift in 
community composition, mast cell- enriched animals possessed substantially less deviated community 
composition (Figure 7B), suggesting that these cells are somehow counteracting the adverse effects 
of Bd on the X. laevis cutaneous microbiome communities. These mast cell- mediated effects persisted 
to 21 dpi (Figure 7—figure supplement 1A).
At 10 dpi, mast cell- enriched and mock- infected frogs possessed significantly greater abun-
dance of Bd- inhibitory bacteria such as Chryseobacterium sp. (Woodhams, 2015), compared 
to control, mock- infected animals (Figure  7C). This suggests mast cells may promote skin flora 
composition that is more antifungal. Control (non- enriched) Bd- infected frogs possessed signifi-
cantly greater abundance of Bd- inhibitory bacteria than all other treatment groups (Figure 7C). 
While mast cell- enriched, Bd- infected frogs had lower abundance of Bd- inhibitory bacteria than 
control infected frogs, they possessed higher abundance of inhibitory taxa than uninfected control 
animals (Figure 7C). The Bd- inhibitory bacteria seen in greater abundance on mast cell- enriched, 
Bd- infected animals included Roseateles sp., Flavobacterium sp., and Kaistia sp. We did not see 
significant differences in Bd- inhibitory bacteria across treatment groups at 21 dpi (Figure 7—figure 
supplement 1B).
Mast cell- enriched uninfected frogs exhibited increased skin bacterial richness at 10 dpi 
(Figure 7D). While control Bd- infected animals exhibited significantly reduced skin microbial richness, 
mast cell- enriched Bd- infected frogs did not exhibit such a reduction in bacterial richness (Figure 7D), 
supporting the idea that mast cells may be counteracting the adverse effects of Bd on skin micro-
biome composition.
In addition to serving as a selective substratum for commensal microbes, amphibian skin- produced 
mucus may also offer antifungal protection (Woodhams et al., 2023). However, we found no signifi-
cant differences in direct Bd- killing capacities of mucus isolated from mock- or Bd- challenged control 
or mast cell- enriched frogs (Figure 7—figure supplement 2).

--- page 9 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  9 of 23
Figure 6. Consequences of cutaneous neutrophil enrichment. (A–E) Frogs were administered with r- ctrl or rSCF , mock- or Bd- infected, and examined 
in situ for neutrophil content via by RNAScope analyses of myeloperoxidase (mpo) transcripts. Representative images of (A) r- ctrl- injected frog skins 
10 days post mock infection; (B) r- ctrl- injected frog skins 10 days post Bd infection; (C) r- ctrl- injected frog skins 21 days post Bd infection; and (D) r- 
SCF- administered frog skins 21 days post Bd infection. (E) Means ± SEM of mpo- positive neutrophils per field of view of r- ctrl- and rSCF- administered, 
Figure 6 continued on next page

--- page 10 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  10 of 23
Frog mast cells alter skin antimicrobial peptide gene expression
Amphibians rely heavily on skin- produced AMPs for antifungal protection (Patocka et al., 2019), and 
mast cells produce antimicrobial AMPs (Di Nardo et al., 2008). We thus examined whether mast cells 
could be sources of such AMPs during Bd infections. As anticipated, Bd- challenged mast cells, but 
not Bd- challenged neutrophils, upregulated their expression of the AMP- encoding genes, PGLa (pgla) 
and magainin (mag, Figure 8A).
mock- or Bd- challenged frog skins, 10 or 21 days post infection (dpi), (N = 6). Asterisks indicate significance from control: p<0.05 by one- way ANOVA 
with Tukey post hoc analysis. Representative specific- esterase staining of skin tissues from frogs were administered with (F) r- ctrl or (G) rCSF3, N = 4. 
Arrows denote specific esterase- positive cells. Ep: epithelium. (H) Bd loads in control and neutrophil- enriched skin tissues 7 dpi, N = 6. Asterisks indicate 
significance: p<0.05 by one- way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Enrichment of neutrophils in frog skins.
Figure 6 continued
Figure 7. Cutaneous mast cells protect skin microbial communities. Control (r- ctrl- injected) or mast cell- enriched (rSCF- injected) X. laevis were 
mock- infected or challenged with Bd for 21 days. (A) Microbial phyla distribution across groups. Low- abundance phyla (<5% relative abundance are 
not shown). At 10 days post infection (dpi) (B), community composition (Jaccard distances shown with 80% confidence ellipses) differed among all 
treatments. (C) Relative abundance of Bd- inhibitory bacteria and (D) bacterial richness were examined in control and mast cell- enriched frogs, 10 days 
post Bd or mock challenge. Letters above bars indicate statistically different groups.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 7:
Figure supplement 1. Mast cell enrichment protects frogs from Bd- mediated changes to skin microbiomes.
Figure supplement 2. Mucosomes from mast cell- enriched frogs do not confer Bd killing.

--- page 11 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  11 of 23
Figure 8. The roles of IL4 in mast cell- mediated skin anti- Bd protection. (A) Mast cells (MCs) and neutrophils derived from bone marrow of six individual 
frogs (N = 6) were co- cultured with Bd (five fungal cells per granulocyte) for 6 hr prior to gene expression analyses of the antimicrobial peptide genes 
PGLa (pgla) and magainin (mag) or interleukin- 4 (il4). (B) Il4 gene expression in skins of control and mast cell- enriched, mock- and Bd- infected animals, 
N = 6. Representative images of frogs administered with (C) r- ctrl or (D) rIL4 and infected with Bd for 21 days, N = 7. Ep: epidermis; m: mucus gland. 
Figure 8 continued on next page

--- page 12 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  12 of 23
To follow up these observations in vivo, we examined pgla and mag gene expression in the skins of 
mast cell- enriched and Bd- challenged animals. Compared to control (r- ctrl) animals, mast cell- enriched 
frogs did not have elevated mRNA levels of mag or pgla after 12 hr of rSCF administration (Figure 8—
figure supplement 1A and B). Conversely, after 10 days of mock infection, mast cell- enriched animals 
possessed significantly greater skin expression of mag and pgla than control animals (Figure  8—
figure supplement 1A and B). We did not see significant differences in skin mag or pgla gene expres-
sion between control and mast cell- enriched, Bd- challenged frogs after 10 dpi (Figure  8—figure 
supplement 1). By 21 days of challenge, the rSCF- administered mock- infected frogs possessed lower 
gene expression levels of both AMPs (significantly so for pgla, Figure 8—figure supplement 1A and 
B), possibly due to some sort of compensatory effect. At 21 dpi, mast cell- enriched frog skins had 
greater pgla expression than control frogs, though these differences did not reach statistical signifi-
cance (Figure 8—figure supplement 1B).
Frog mast cell-expressed interleukin-4 confers anti-Bd protection
Mammalian mast cells are recognized as potent producers of the pleotropic anti- inflammatory cyto-
kine, interleukin- 4 (il4) (Babina et al., 2016). Notably, X. laevis mast cells challenged in vitro with Bd 
significantly upregulated their il4 gene expression, whereas almost no il4 expression was detected 
from either unstimulated or Bd- challenged neutrophils (Figure 8A).
When we examined the expression of il4 in the skin of control and mast cell- enriched animals, we 
found that 12 hr following rSCF administration (time of Bd challenge), the mast cell- enriched frog skins 
possessed significantly greater transcripts of il4 than control animals (Figure 8B). By 10 and 21 dpi, 
both control and mast cell- enriched, mock- infected animals possessed baseline skin il4 expression 
(Figure 8B). At 10 days of Bd infection, control animals possessed increased (not significantly) skin il4 
gene expression whereas mast cell- enriched frog skins had significantly elevated il4 transcript levels 
(Figure 8B). By 21 dpi, control, Bd- infected animals had baseline skin il4 expression while the mast 
cell- enriched animals had elevated, albeit not significant expression of this cytokine gene in their skins 
(Figure 8B).
To examine whether IL4 could confer the anti- Bd effects seen following frog skin mast cell enrich-
ment, we produced this X. laevis cytokine in recombinant form (rIL4) and confirmed that subcutaneous 
injection of rIL4 augmented expression of genes known to be activated by the mammalian IL4 (Bhat-
tacharjee et al., 2013) (cd36, metalloproteinase inhibitor 3- timp3, and monoamine oxidase A- maoa; 
Figure 8—figure supplement 2A).
We next administered frogs subcutaneously with rIL4 or r- ctrl, challenged them with Bd and exam-
ined the key parameters affected by skin mast cell enrichment, including skin mucus gland filling, skin 
Bd loads, and reduction in Bd- associated skin inflammation. When we examined the mucus content 
of control and rIL4- administered animals, we found that frogs treated with rIL4 possessed greater 
skin mucus gland filling than control animals, irrespective of mock- or Bd- challenge (Figure 8C–E). 
At 21 dpi (but not at 10 dpi), rIL4- administered frogs possessed significantly lower skin Bd loads 
(Figure 8F), exhibited significantly less epidermal thickening (Figure 8C, D, and G) and less neutro-
phil infiltration (Figure 8H–J) than control infected animals. Conversely, subcutaneous administra-
tion of rIL4 to animals with active Bd- infection did not alter their fungal loads (Figure 8—figure 
supplement 2B), suggesting a critical point during which IL4 may offer protection against this fungal 
pathogen.
Means ± SEM of (E) percent mucus gland filling, (F) skin Bd loads, (G) epidermal thickness, and (H) mpo- positive neutrophils, per field of view of r- ctrl- 
or rIL4- administered, mock- or Bd- challenged frog skins 21 days post infection (dpi) (N = 7). Representative images of mpo- positive neutrophils in 
(I) control and (J) rIL4- treated frog skins, 21 dpi. Ep: epidermis; arrows: mpo- positive neutrophils. Asterisks indicate significance: p<0.05 by one- way 
ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 8:
Figure supplement 1. Expression of antimicrobial peptides in mast cell- enriched, Bd- infected frog skins.
Figure supplement 2. IL4 elicits hallmark gene expression but does not protect Bd- infected frogs.
Figure 8 continued

--- page 13 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  13 of 23
Discussion
Amphibian extinction rates far outpace those of any other vertebrate class (IUCN 2022, 2022). It 
is now well established that chytrid fungi are major contributors to these declines, and strikingly, 
are considered the greatest infectious disease threat to biodiversity (Fisher and Garner, 2020). The 
development of effective mitigation strategies though is hindered by incomplete understanding of 
amphibian immune defenses and skin integrity. In this respect, while mast cells are recognized as key 
immune sentinels of tissues such as skin (St. John et al., 2023), relatively little is known about this cell 
lineage outside of mammals. Our findings provide the first in- depth functional analyses of these cells 
in amphibians and explore their protective mechanisms during chytrid infections. This work presents 
a unique perspective on the evolution of mast cell functionality and will serve as a new avenue to 
explore ways to counteract the amphibian declines.
Mammalian mast cells are potent producers of the pleotropic anti- inflammatory interleukin- 4 (IL4) 
(Babina et al., 2016) cytokine, and our findings suggest that this is also true of frog mast cells. In 
mammals, IL4 also plays roles in tissue repair (Allen, 2023) and mucus production by intestinal goblet 
cells (Redpath et  al., 2015), which aids in the ‘weep and sweep’ pathogen elimination and may 
contribute to the maintenance of commensal communities in the gut (Drago et al., 2024). This is 
consistent with our findings, which suggest that IL4 may be a central means by which frog mast cells 
confer protection against Bd by counteracting Bd- elicited inflammation, including minimizing neutro-
phil infiltration, maintaining skin integrity, and promoting mucus production by skin mucus glands. The 
outcomes of cytokine signaling are critically dependent on timing, location, and context (Redpath 
et al., 2015). This possibly explains why administering rIL4 prior to Bd challenge results in significant 
anti- Bd protection, whereas treating already infected animals with this cytokine did not reduce fungal 
loads.
We anticipate that in addition to IL4 production, frog mast cells mediate the observed antifungal 
protection through a myriad of additional mechanisms. Indeed, we observed elevated expression of 
antimicrobial peptide genes in the skins of mock- infected mast cell- enriched frogs 10 days after rSCF 
administration. The fact that we did not see the same expression patterns following Bd challenge 
could potentially reflect the highly immunomodulatory capacities of this pathogen (Rollins- Smith and 
Le Sage, 2021). Undoubtedly, frog skin- resident mast cells have evolved to contribute to and modu-
late skin antifungal antimicrobial peptide production just as Bd has more than likely coevolved to 
target this aspect of amphibian skin defenses.
Bd infections caused major reductions in bacterial taxa richness, changes in composition and 
substantial increases in the relative abundance of Bd- inhibitory bacteria early in the infection. Similar 
changes to microbiome structure occur during experimental Bd infections, such as in red- backed 
salamanders and mountain yellow- legged frogs (Jani et al., 2021; Muletz- Wolz et al., 2019). In turn, 
progressing Bd infections corresponded with a return to baseline levels of Bd- inhibitory bacteria abun-
dance and rebounding microbial richness, albeit with dissimilar communities to those seen in control 
animals. These temporal changes indicate that amphibian microbiomes are dynamic, as are the effects 
of Bd infections on them. Indeed, Bd infections may have long- lasting impacts on amphibian micro-
biomes (Jani et al., 2021), including the possible establishment of ‘ecological memory’, resulting in 
greater adaptation to subsequent pathogen exposures (Woodhams et al., 2023; Letourneau et al., 
2022). While Bd infections manifested in these considerable changes to frog skin microbiome struc-
ture, mast cell enrichment appeared to counteract these deleterious effects to skin microbial composi-
tion. It will thus be interesting to learn from future studies how frog mast cells impact skin microbiome 
ecological memory. Presumably, mast cell- mediated mucus production and preservation of skin integ-
rity stabilizes the cutaneous microenvironment during Bd infections, thereby ameliorating the Bd- 
mediated microbiome changes. While this work explored the changes in established antifungal flora, 
we anticipate the mast cell- mediated inhibition of Bd may be due to additional, yet unidentified 
bacterial, viral, and/or fungal taxa. Intriguingly, while mammalian skin mast cell functionality depends 
on microbiome elicited SCF production by keratinocytes (Wang et al., 2017), our results indicate frog 
skin mast cells in turn impact skin microbiome structure and likely their function. It will be interesting 
to further explore the interdependent nature of amphibian skin microbiomes and resident mast cells.
In contrast to the protective effects conferred by mast cell enrichment, enrichment of neutrophils 
resulted in greater Bd burdens on frog skins. This suggests neutrophils may lead to heightened inflam-
mation, which is not protective in the context of Bd infections. This is consistent with other studies 

--- page 14 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  14 of 23
indicating that robust immune responses may be counterproductive to amphibian anti- Bd defenses 
(Ellison et al., 2014; Savage et al., 2020).
Amphibian skin is much thinner and more permeable than those of mammals (Varga et al., 2018), 
and as such, arguably represents a more penetrable barrier to pathogens. Because mammalian skin 
is relatively impermeable, mast cells are absent from healthy mammalian epidermises and are instead 
found exclusively in their dermal layers (Cowen et al., 1979). However, mammalian mast cells may 
infiltrate the skin epidermal layer during diseases such as dermatitis (Imayama et  al., 1995). We 
have shown here and have observed across several classes of amphibians (Hauser et al., 2023) that 
mast cells are found in both epidermal and dermal layers. This localization has presumably evolved 
to support the more intimate contact between amphibian skin and their environments. Considering 
the importance of amphibian cutaneous integrity to their physiology (Larsen, 2021), it is likely that 
skin- resident mast cells coevolved to support skin immunity, physiology, and symbiotic microbiota. 
Ongoing research continues to reveal functional differences between mammalian connective tissue 
and mucosa- resident mast cells (West and Bulfone- Paus, 2022), and we suspect that there is similarly 
much to learn about the distinct physiological and immune roles of amphibian epidermal and dermal 
mast cells.
Mammalian mast cells are thought to arise from two distinct lineages. Fetal- derived progenitors 
seed peripheral tissues during the neonatal life (Gentek et  al., 2018) and mature into long- lived 
connective tissue mast cells (CTMCs) (Dwyer et al., 2016). Conversely, inducible mucosal mast cells 
(MMCs) arise from bone marrow- derived mast cell progenitors (MCps) and are recruited to mucosal 
tissues in response to inflammation (Bankova et al., 2015; Li et al., 2018). The connective tissue 
mast cells are thought to possess significantly greater levels of heparin than bone marrow- derived 
mast cells (Herrera- Heredia et al., 2022). Interestingly, the in vitro frog bone marrow- derived mast 
cells possessed substantially lower heparin content than what we observed in the skin- resident and 
Bd- elicited mast cells. Unlike the mammalian skin, frog skin is both a connective tissue and a mucosal 
barrier, begging the question of how the frog skin mast cells compare to the mammalian CTMCs and 
MMCs. It is intriguing to consider that frog skin mast cells observed at steady state, following rSCF- 
enrichment, and recruited/expanded in response to Bd, all had substantial heparin levels. Possibly, 
the expansion of frog skin mast cell numbers in response to both rSCF and Bd is facilitated by skin- 
resident precursors, explaining the high heparin content observed in these populations. Of course, 
it is equally possible that amphibian mast cell ontogeny and heparin content are not the same as in 
mammals. It will be invaluable to further explore the origins, fates, and immune roles of distinct frog 
skin mast cell lineages and subsets.
It has become apparent that amphibian host- Bd interactions are highly complex and multifaceted 
and susceptibilities to this devastating pathogen markedly differ across amphibian species (Scheele 
et al., 2019; Van Rooij et al., 2010). The findings described here emphasize the importance of skin- 
resident mast cells for successful anti- Bd defenses and demonstrate that these immune sentinels are 
intimately linked to many aspects of frog skin physiology. Our results indicate that when mast cells 
are enriched, the ensuing changes in the skin allow for greater resistance to Bd infection. Presumably, 
distinct amphibian species have evolved disparate interconnections between their skin mast cells and 
their cutaneous defenses, as dictated by their respective physiological and environmental pressures. 
In turn, these species- specific differences likely dictate whether and to what extent the skin- resident 
mast cells of a given amphibian species recognize and appropriately respond to Bd infections. We 
postulate that such differences may contribute to the disparate susceptibilities of distinct amphibian 
species to pathogens like chytrid fungi. Greater understanding of these relationships across distinct 
amphibian species holds promise of harnessing this knowledge toward possible development of 
preventative and therapeutic strategies against infectious diseases like chytridiomycosis.
Materials and methods
Animals
Outbred tadpoles (NF stage 56–60) and 1- year- old (1.5–2″), mixed- sex X. laevis were purchased from 
Xenopus 1 (Dexter, MI). Purchased adult frogs were used for in vitro culture studies and tadpoles 
were reared in- house through metamorphosis and used as juveniles in skin immune composition and 

--- page 15 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  15 of 23
Bd- infection studies. All animals were housed and handled under strict laboratory regulations as per 
GWU IACUC (approval number 15- 024).
Recombinant cytokines
The X. laevis rSCF , rCSF3, and rIL4 were generated as previously described for rCSF3 (Hauser et al., 
2020). The X. laevis SCF, IL4, and CSF3 sequences representing the signal peptide- cleaved transcripts 
were ligated into the pMIB/V5 His A insect expression vectors (Invitrogen). The resulting recombinant 
cytokine expression constructs or empty vectors were transfected into Sf9 insect cells (Cellfectin II, 
Invitrogen). Recombinant proteins contain a V5 epitope, and western blot with an anti- V5- HRP anti-
body (Sigma) confirmed their presence. Positive transfectants were selected using 10 μg/mL blasti-
cidin (Gibco). Expression cultures were scaled up to 500 mL liquid cultures, grown for 5 days, pelleted 
by centrifugation, and the supernatants collected. Supernatants were dialyzed overnight at 4°C 
against 150 mM sodium phosphate, concentrated against polyethylene glycol flakes (8 kDa) at 4°C, 
dialyzed overnight at 4°C against 150 mM sodium phosphate, and passed through Ni- NTA agarose 
columns (QIAGEN). Columns were washed with 2 × 10 volumes of high- stringency wash buffer (0.5% 
Tween 20, 50  mM sodium phosphate, 500  mM sodium chloride, 100  mM imidazole) and 5 × 10 
volumes of low- stringency wash buffer (as above but with 40 mM imidazole). Recombinant proteins 
were eluted with 250 mM imidazole. After recombinant protein purification, a halt protease inhibitor 
cocktail (containing AEBSF , aprotinin, bestatin, E- 64, leupeptin, and pepstatin A; Thermo Scientific) 
was added. Intact recombinant protein presence was confirmed again by western blot and the protein 
concentrations quantified by Bradford protein assays (Bio- Rad). Protein aliquots were stored at –20°C 
until use.
Bone marrow granulocyte cultures
Bone marrow isolation, culture conditions, and establishment of neutrophil cultures have been previ-
ously described (Yaparla and Grayfer, 2018). Briefly, adult X. laevis (approximately 1 year old) were 
euthanized in 5% tricaine mesylate followed by cervical dislocation. Femurs were removed and washed 
in ice- cold Amphibian- PBS (A- PBS) in sterile conditions. Each femur was flushed with 5 mL of A- PBS. 
Red blood cells were removed from culture via a differential gradient generated with 51% Percoll (Invi-
trogen). Bone marrow cell counts were generated using trypan blue exclusion and cells were seeded 
at a density of 104 cells/well for gene expression experiments, 5 × 104 cells/well for histology analyses, 
and 105 cells/well for electron microscopy analyses.
Mast cell cultures were generated according to protocols adapted from Koubourli et al., 2018 
and Meurer et al., 2016. Isolated bone marrow cells were treated with 250 ng/mL of rSCF on days 
0, 4, and 7, and collected for further analysis on day 9. Cell cultures were maintained at 27°C with 5% 
CO2 in amphibian medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 0.25% X. laevis serum. 
Neutrophil- like granulocytes were generated as above but with 250 ng/mL of rCSF3 on days 0 and 
3, and collected for further analysis on day 5. Cell cultures were maintained at 27°C with 5% CO 2 in 
amphibian serum- free medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 0.25% X. laevis serum, 
10 μg/mL gentamicin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL 
streptomycin (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Enrichment of skin granulocyte subsets
Animals were subcutaneously injected between the skin and muscle layers with 5 µg/animal of rSCF , 
rCSF3, or r- ctrl in 10 µL of saline using finely pulled glass needles. Optimal time course and dose for in 
vivo mast cell and neutrophil enrichment were determined during preliminary experiments.
Recombinant interleukin-4 treatment
The capacity of the recombinant interleukin- 4 (rIL4) to induce expression of genes associated with 
mammalian IL4 responses were assessed by injecting frogs (N = 6 per treatment group) subcutane-
ously with rIL4 (5 µg/animal) or r- ctrl in 10 µL of saline. After 6 hr, animals were sacrificed, and skins 
were isolated for gene expression analyses.
Bd stocks and fungal challenge
Bd isolate JEL 197 was grown in 1% tryptone broth or on 1% tryptone agar plates (Difco Laboratories, 
Detroit, MI) supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco) at 19°C.

--- page 16 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  16 of 23
In vitro Bd killing was evaluated by incubating live Bd (maturing zoosporangia) with mast cells 
or neutrophils at ratios of 5:1 or 1:1 Bd cells per granulocyte. Cells were incubated at 27°C for 3 
days before fungal loads were analyzed by absolute qPCR. Experimental groups were compared to 
pathogen DNA amounts derived from equal quantities of live Bd plated alone in otherwise identical 
conditions.
For in vivo infection studies, zoospores were harvested by flooding confluent tryptone agar plates 
with 2 mL sterile A- PBS for 10 min. Twelve hr post rSCF , rCSF3, rIL4, or r- ctrl injection, animals were 
infected with 10 7 zoospores or mock- infected in 100 mL of water. After 3 hr, 400 mL of water was 
added to each tank. Skins were collected for histology and gene expression analyses on 1, 10, and 
21 dpi, with 10 and 21 dpi representing intermediate and later time points of infection, respectively.
To examine the effect of rIL4 on Bd loads, frogs were infected with Bd by water bath (107 zoospores, 
as described above) and 1 day later injected subcutaneously, dorsally with rIL4 (5 µg/animal) or r- ctrl 
in 10 µL of saline. After an additional 9 days of infection, animals were sacrificed and their dorsal skin 
Bd loads examined.
Analyses of mucus Bd-killing capacities
Mucosomes were collected from mast cell- or vector- enriched X. laevis that were either mock- or Bd- 
infected for 10 or 21 days. To this end, individual X. laevis were soaked in a 5 mL water bath for 1 hr. 
Each water sample was then lyophilized, reconstituted with 500 µL of molecular grade water, and 
passed through a sterile cell strainer to remove large debris.
Bd was seeded in opaque white 96- well plates (20,000 zoospores in 50 µL of tryptone broth/well). 
Next, 50 µL of mucosome solution was added to each well (100 µL total well volume) in three replicate 
wells per individual X. laevis mucosome. Mucosomes, tryptone broth, and water were each plated 
alone as controls. Plates were sealed with parafilm and incubated at 19°C for 16 hr with gentle mixing 
(20 rpm).
Zoospore viability was determined with the CellTiter- Glo 2.0  Cell Viability assay kit (Promega) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and using a SpectraMax plate reader (Molecular Devices, 
San Jose, CA). Luminescence readings were fitted to a standard curve (descending proportions of 
heat- killed zoospores to viable zoospores) to calculate the number of viable zoospores in each well. 
Zoospores were heated- killed at 65°C for 15 min.
Histology
Leukocyte cytology and cutaneous SE staining has been described (Hauser et al., 2020). An Alcian 
Blue/PAS staining kit (Newcomer Supply, Middleton, WI) was used to quantify mucin content. Paraffin- 
embedded tissue sections (5 μm) were deparaffinized, rehydrated through A- PBS, and stained with 
Naphthol AS- D Chloroacetate (specific esterase; Sigma) or Alcian Blue/PAS (Newcomer Supply) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and optimized for Xenopus skin tissues. Cells collected 
from in vitro cultures were cytocentrifuged onto glass microscope slides (VWR). Cells were stained 
immediately with Giemsa (Sigma) for 7 min or fixed with 10% neutral- buffered formalin for 30 min and 
stained with specific esterase according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Slides stained with Alcian 
Blue/PAS (Newcomer Supply) were used to quantify mucin content from in vivo experiments. Images 
were taken using identical microscope settings under ×20 magnification. Images were converted to 
8- bit in Fiji by ImageJ and threshold adjusted such that positive staining for mucus was captured 
within the mucus glands (threshold held constant across images). The percentage of each mucus gland 
positively stained and the average percent- positive per field of view were subsequently calculated. 
Positive staining of both acidic and neutral mucins was included in analyses. ImageJ was also used 
for epidermal thickness analyses using scale bars in the images to calibrate and measure epidermal 
thickness. All slides were imaged with a Leica DMi8 Inverted Fluorescent Microscope with all mucus 
glands assessed for each respective frog skin section (Leica Microsystems, Davie, FL).
An RNAScope ISH Kit (ACD Bio) and a X. laevis myeloperoxidase (mpo)- specific probe (ACD Bio) 
were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions to visualize mpo- positive neutrophils in frog 
skin tissues.
Toward avidin staining, skin tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, washed with saline, cryo- 
protected in 15% then 30% sucrose, flash- frozen in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound 
(Fisher), and cryo- sectioned onto microscope slides (Fisher). Frozen sections were stained with Texas 

--- page 17 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  17 of 23
red- conjugated avidin (Thermo Fisher) and DAPI (Thermo Fisher) and glass cover slips mounted with 
Prolong Antifade mounting media (Thermo Fisher). Tissues were imaged using a Zeiss LSCM- 800 
confocal microscope. For each slide, 15 fields of view were enumerated at ×20 (Plan- Apochromat 
20×/0.75) objective. Images were inversed in ImageJ to improve contrast and resolution of heparin- 
positive skin mast cells.
Electron microscopy
Processing and imaging of cells for TEM and SEM was conducted at the GWU Nanofabrication and 
Imaging Center (GWNIC). For TEM, cells were fixed as monolayers on six- well plates with 2.5% glutar-
aldehyde and 1% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 hr. Cells were treated 
with 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 hr. Following washes, cells were en 
bloc stained with 1% uranyl acetate in water overnight at 4°C. Samples were dehydrated through an 
ethanol series and embedded in epoxy resin using LX112. Inverted BEEM capsules were placed into 
each tissue culture well to create on face blockfaces for sectioning. Resin was cured for 48 hr at 60°C. 
The 95 nm sections were post- stained with 1% aqueous uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate. All 
imaging was performed at 80 kV in a Talos 200X transmission electron microscope (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Hillsboro, OR).
For SEM, cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde/1% paraformaldehyde in sodium cacodylate 
buffer, followed by 1% OsO4, then dehydrated through an ethyl alcohol series. Coverslips were critical 
point dried and coated with 2 nm iridium. Cells were imaged using a Teneo Scanning Electron Micro-
scope (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Analyses of immune gene expression and Bd skin loads
These analyses have been described (Hauser et al., 2020). Cells and tissues were homogenized in 
Trizol reagent, flash- frozen on dry ice, and stored at –80°C until RNA and DNA isolation. RNA isolation 
was performed using Trizol according to the manufacturer’s directions. RNA- Seq is described in detail 
below. For qRT- PCR gene expression analysis, total RNA (500  ng/sample) was reverse- transcribed 
into cDNA using cDNA qscript supermix (Quantabio, Beverly, MA). Following RNA extraction, back 
extraction buffer (4 M guanidinethiocyanate, 50 mM sodium citrate, 1 M Tris pH 8.0) was mixed with 
the remaining Trizol layer and centrifuged to isolate the DNA- containing aqueous phase. DNA was 
precipitated overnight with isopropanol, pelleted by centrifugation, washed with 80% ethanol, and 
resuspended in TE buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA). DNA was purified by phenol:chloroform 
extraction and resuspended in molecular grade water (VWR).
Quantitative gene expression analyses for both Bd and X. laevis cells and tissues were performed 
using the CFX96 Real- Time System (Bio- Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and iTaq Universal SYBR 
Green Supermix (Bio- Rad Laboratories). The Bio- Rad CFX Manager software (SDS) was employed for 
all expression analysis. All expression analyses were conducted using the ΔΔCt method relative to the 
gapdh endogenous control gene for X. laevis. Fungal load quantification was assessed by absolute 
qPCR. Isolated Bd DNA (JEL 197 isolate) was serially diluted and used as the standard curve. Primers 
were designed and validated against the Bd ribosomal RNA internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1). The 
primers used are listed in Supplementary file 1.
RNA sequencing
For transcriptomic profiling, bone marrow- derived neutrophil and mast cell cultures were generated as 
described above and FACS- sorted according to pre- established size and internal complexity parame-
ters to isolate the respective subsets for further analyses. Sorted cells were immediately processed to 
extract and purify RNA. Flash- frozen samples were sent to Azenta Life Sciences for all library prepara-
tion, RNA sequencing, and analyses. In short, polyadenylated RNA was isolated using Oligo dT beads. 
Enriched mRNAs were then fragmented for first- and second- strand cDNA synthesis. cDNA fragments 
were end repaired, 5′ phosphorylated, and dA- tailed. Fragments were then ligated to universal adap-
tors and PCR- amplified. 150 bp paired- end sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq platform.
FastQC was used to evaluate raw data quality. Adaptors sequences and poor- quality nucleotides 
were removed from reads using Trimmomatic v.0.36. The STAR aligner v.2.55.2b was used to map 
these reads to the Xenopus_laevis_9_2 reference genome from ENSEMBL. To determine differential 

--- page 18 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  18 of 23
gene expression, featureCount (Subread package v.1.5.2) was first used to count unique gene hits, 
which were then used with DESeq2 to calculate absolute log2 fold change.
Skin microbiome analyses
Towards microbiome studies, frogs were housed individually (N = 6/treatment group). At indicated 
times, frogs were gently rinsed with sterile deionized water to remove transient microbes and gently 
swabbed 20 times, dorsally. Genomic DNA was extracted from swabs using a PowerSoil Pro kit on a 
Qiacube HT (QIAGEN, MD). One- step PCR library prep and dual- index paired- end Illumina sequencing 
was used to sequence the skin microbiome of individual frogs. An ~380 base pair region in the V3- V5 
region of the 16S rRNA gene using the universal primers 515F- Y (GTGY CAGC MGCC GCGG TAA) and 
939R ( CTTG  TGCG  GGCC  CCCG  TCAA  TTC) was used for amplification. Negative and positive controls 
(ZymoBIOMICS D6300 & D6305, Zymo, CA) were included in each round of extraction and PCR. 
Reactions were done in duplicate for each sample, pooled, cleaned with in- house Speed- beads (in 
a PEG/NaCl buffer), quantified with a Qubit4 (Invitrogen, MA) and pooled into a final library in equi-
molar proportion. The pooled library was sequenced on two Illumina MiSeq runs (v3 chemistry: 2 
× 300 bp kit) at the Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian National Zoo & Conservation 
Biology Institute.
All analyses were performed in the R environment version 4.0.3 (R Core Team, 2020). Demulti-
plexed reads were imported from Basespace into R environment for sequence processing. Package 
‘dada2’ (Callahan et  al., 2016) was used to perform quality filtering using their standard filtering 
parameters (i.e., maxEE = 2), which collapsed high- quality reads into ASV and removed chimeras. 
Bacterial taxonomy was assigned using Silva version 138.1. The R package ‘phyloseq’ (McMurdie and 
Holmes, 2013) was used to import and merge the final ASV table, taxonomy table, and metadata to 
create a phyloseq object to perform further analyses. Sequences classified as cyanobacteria/chloro-
plast and those unclassified at kingdom were removed. Singletons were filtered out (i.e., ASVs with 
only one sequence read in one individual). The R package ‘decontam’ (Davis et al., 2018) was used to 
remove potential contaminants using the method ‘combined’. The ZymoBIOMICS microbial commu-
nity standards (positive controls) were analyzed, and we found genera in similar relative abundances 
as described by Zymo.
To determine how Bd and mast cell treatments impacted skin microbiomes, the microbiome struc-
ture was examined. The components of microbiome structure were ASV richness (measured as Bd- 
inhibitory ASV richness and total ASV richness), microbial composition (measured by Jaccard and 
Bray–Curtis distances), and sequence abundance of Bd- inhibitory ASVs (measured as individual Bd- 
inhibitory ASV sequence counts and total relative abundance of Bd- inhibitory ASVs). To characterize 
variation in microbiome structure, mast cell (mast cell normal and mast cell+), Bd (Bd- and Bd+), and 
their interaction as explanatory variables at two time points days 10 and 21 post Bd infection were 
included. For this characterization, log- transformed ASV richness in ANOVAs, microbial composition 
measures in PERMANOVAs and log- transformed raw sequence counts in ANOVAs (with post hoc 
corrections for multiple comparisons) were used. For identification of Bd- inhibitory ASVs, methods as 
described in Jiménez et al., 2022 were followed.
Days 10 and 21 post Bd infection were chose for these analyses since they represent an interme-
diate and a later timepoint of infection.
Statistical analyses
Differences in transcript expression were calculated with one- way or multiway ANOVAs followed by 
Tukey post hoc tests. Student’s t- tests were used to determine differences in Bd loads between treat-
ments only. Statistical differences in mucin content and mucosome Bd- killing were assessed with the 
two- way ANOVA calculator available online through Statistics Kingdom. For RNA sequencing, p- values 
were calculated with the Wald test and were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Cynthia S Dowd and Ben England (Chemistry Department, GWU) for their help with X. 
laevis mucus lyophilization. We thank Dr. Christine Brantner (Nanofabrication and Imaging Center, 
GWU) for assistance with TEM and SEM imaging. We thank Dr. Alexander Jeremic (Biology Depart-
ment, GWU) for access to and use of his confocal microscope. We thank Dr. Gregory Cresswell (Flow 

--- page 19 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  19 of 23
Cytometry Core, GWU) for his help with flow cytometry and cell sorting. We thank Dr. Karyn Jourdeuil 
(NIH) for assistance with tissue preparation and cryo- sectioning. KAH, MRHH, NR, NK, AY , MZ, and 
LG thank the GWU Biology Department. KAH, MRHH, and AY were supported by Wilbur V Harlan 
summer graduate research fellowships. We thank the three anonymous reviewers whose insightful 
comments and suggestions helped to improve the scope and breadth of this article. This work was 
supported by National Science Foundation grant 2131061 (LG, CRMW), National Science Foundation 
grant 2147466 (LG), and National Science Foundation grant 2147467 (LAR- S)
Additional information
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
National Science 
Foundation
2131061 Carly R Muletz-Wolz
Leon Grayfer
National Science 
Foundation
2147466 Leon Grayfer
National Science 
Foundation
2147467 Louise A Rollins-Smith
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Kelsey A Hauser, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, 
Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing; Christina N Garvey, Muhammad RH Hossainey, 
Data curation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology; Ryley S Crow, Conceptualization, Data cura-
tion, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology; Dustin T Howard, Netra Ranganathan, 
Namarta Kalia, Mira Zelle, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology; Lindsey K Gentry, Data cura-
tion, Methodology; Amulya Yaparla, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology; Eliza-
beth J Jones, Anju N Duttargi, Investigation, Methodology; Louise A Rollins- Smith, Conceptualization, 
Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original 
draft, Writing – review and editing; Carly R Muletz- Wolz, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal 
analysis, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – orig-
inal draft, Writing – review and editing; Leon Grayfer, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, 
Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Method-
ology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Muhammad RH Hossainey  
   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4780-7509
Leon Grayfer  
   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1144-4884
Ethics
All animals were housed and handled under strict laboratory regulations as per GWU IACUC (Approval 
number 15- 024).
Peer review material
Reviewer #1 (Public Review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168.3.sa1
Reviewer #2 (Public Review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168.3.sa2
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168.3.sa3
Additional files
Supplementary files
•  MDAR checklist 
•  Supplementary file 1. List of primer sequences.

--- page 20 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  20 of 23
Data availability
Illumina 16S rRNA sequence data and associated metadata have been deposited in the National 
Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) 
under BioProject ID: PRJNA1061169. Microbiome files, analysis and R code are available on Github: 
https://github.com/CarlyMuletzWolz/MastCellsGuardians, copy archived at Muletz- Wolz, 2024. The 
RNAseq comparisons of bone marrow- derived mast cell and neutrophil cultures and comparisons of 
control and mast cell- enriched, Bd- infected skins have been deposited to Dryad: https://doi.org/10. 
5061/dryad.bcc2fqznc.
The following datasets were generated:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset URL Database and Identifier
Hauser KA, Garvey 
CN, Crow RS, 
Hossainey MRH, 
Howard DT, 
Ranganathan N, 
Gentry LK, Yaparla 
A, Kalia N, Zelle M, 
Jones EJ, Duttargi 
AN, Rollins- Smith 
LA, Muletz- Wolz CR, 
Grayfer L
2024 Data from: Analyses 
Xenopus laevis mast cells, 
neutrophils, and mast cell- 
enriched, chytrid infected 
skin
https:// doi. org/ 10. 
5061/ dryad. bcc2fqznc
Dryad Digital Repository, 
10.5061/dryad.bcc2fqznc
Hauser KA, Gentry 
LK, Grayfer L, Muletz- 
Wolz CR
2024 Amphibian mast cells: 
barriers to deadly chytrid 
fungus infections
https://www. ncbi. nlm. 
nih. gov/ bioproject/ 
PRJNA1061169/
NCBI BioProject, 
PRJNA1061169
References
Abraham SN, St John AL. 2010. Mast cell- orchestrated immunity to pathogens. Nature Reviews. Immunology 
10:440–452. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nri2782, PMID: 20498670
Agis H, Beil WJ, Bankl HC, Füreder W, Sperr WR, Ghannadan M, Baghestanian M, Sillaber C, Bettelheim P , 
Lechner K, Valent P . 1996. Mast cell- lineage versus basophil lineage involvement in myeloproliferative and 
myelodysplastic syndromes: Diagnostic role of cell- immunopheno typing. Leukemia & Lymphoma 22:187–204. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3109/10428199609051750
Allen JE. 2023. IL- 4 and IL- 13: regulators and effectors of wound repair. Annual Review of Immunology 41:229–
254. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-immunol-101921-041206, PMID: 36737597
Atiakshin D, Kostin A, Trotsenko I, Samoilova V, Buchwalow I, Tiemann M. 2022. Carboxypeptidase a3- a key 
component of the protease phenotype of mast cells. Cells 11:570. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11030570, 
PMID: 35159379
Baban B, Chandler PR, Sharma MD, Pihkala J, Koni PA, Munn DH, Mellor AL. 2009. IDO activates regulatory T 
cells and blocks their conversion into Th17- like T cells. Journal of Immunology 183:2475–2483. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.0900986, PMID: 19635913
Babina M, Guhl S, Artuc M, Zuberbier T. 2016. IL- 4 and human skin mast cells revisited: reinforcement of a 
pro- allergic phenotype upon prolonged exposure. Archives of Dermatological Research 308:665–670. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-016-1688-x, PMID: 27650274
Baccari GC, Pinelli C, Santillo A, Minucci S, Rastogi RK. 2011. Mast cells in nonmammalian vertebrates: an 
overview. International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology 290:1–53. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0- 12-386037-8.00006-5, PMID: 21875561
Bankova LG, Dwyer DF , Liu AY , Austen KF , Gurish MF . 2015. Maturation of mast cell progenitors to mucosal mast 
cells during allergic pulmonary inflammation in mice. Mucosal Immunology 8:596–606. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1038/mi.2014.91, PMID: 25291985
Banner LR, Patterson PH, Allchorne A, Poole S, Woolf CJ. 1998. Leukemia inhibitory factor is an anti- 
inflammatory and analgesic cytokine. The Journal of Neuroscience 18:5456–5462. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1523/JNEUROSCI.18-14-05456.1998, PMID: 9651226
Bhattacharjee A, Shukla M, Yakubenko VP , Mulya A, Kundu S, Cathcart MK. 2013. IL- 4 and IL- 13 employ discrete 
signaling pathways for target gene expression in alternatively activated monocytes/macrophages. Free Radical 
Biology & Medicine 54:1–16. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.10.553, PMID: 23124025
Buchan KD, Prajsnar TK, Ogryzko NV, de Jong NWM, van Gent M, Kolata J, Foster SJ, van Strijp JAG, 
Renshaw SA. 2019. A transgenic zebrafish line for in vivo visualisation of neutrophil myeloperoxidase. PLOS 
ONE 14:e0215592. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0215592, PMID: 31002727
Callahan BJ, McMurdie PJ, Rosen MJ, Han AW, Johnson AJA, Holmes SP . 2016. DADA2: High- resolution sample 
inference from Illumina amplicon data. Nature Methods 13:581–583. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3869, 
PMID: 27214047

--- page 21 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  21 of 23
Chang EH, Van Camp G, Smith RJH. 2003. The role of connexins in human disease. Ear and Hearing 24:314–323. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/01.AUD.0000079801.55588.13, PMID: 12923422
Cildir G, Yip KH, Pant H, Tergaonkar V, Lopez AF , Tumes DJ. 2021. Understanding mast cell heterogeneity at 
single cell resolution. Trends in Immunology 42:523–535. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2021.04.004, PMID: 
33962887
Cowen T, Trigg P , Eady RA. 1979. Distribution of mast cells in human dermis: development of a mapping 
technique. The British Journal of Dermatology 100:635–640. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.1979. 
tb08066.x, PMID: 465311
Davis NM, Proctor DM, Holmes SP , Relman DA, Callahan BJ. 2018. Simple statistical identification and removal 
of contaminant sequences in marker- gene and metagenomics data. Microbiome 6:226. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s40168-018-0605-2, PMID: 30558668
Di Nardo A, Yamasaki K, Dorschner RA, Lai Y , Gallo RL. 2008. Mast cell cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide 
prevents invasive group A Streptococcus infection of the skin. Journal of Immunology 180:7565–7573. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.180.11.7565, PMID: 18490758
Drago L, Fidanza A, Giannetti A, Ciuffoletti A, Logroscino G, Romanò CL. 2024. Bacteria living in biofilms in 
fluids: Could chemical antibiofilm pretreatment of culture represent a paradigm shift in diagnostics? 
Microorganisms 12:259. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms12020259, PMID: 38399663
Dwyer DF, Barrett NA, Austen KF , Immunological Genome Project C. 2016. Expression profiling of constitutive 
mast cells reveals a unique identity within the immune system. Nature Immunology 17:878–887. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/ni.3445, PMID: 27135604
Ellison AR, Tunstall T, DiRenzo GV, Hughey MC, Rebollar EA, Belden LK, Harris RN, Ibáñez R, Lips KR, 
Zamudio KR. 2014. More than skin deep: functional genomic basis for resistance to amphibian 
chytridiomycosis. Genome Biology and Evolution 7:286–298. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evu285, PMID: 
25539724
Espinosa- Riquer ZP, Segura- Villalobos D, Ramírez- Moreno IG, Pérez Rodríguez MJ, Lamas M, 
Gonzalez- Espinosa C. 2020. Signal transduction pathways activated by innate immunity in mast cells: 
Translating sensing of changes into specific responses. Cells 9:2411. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cells9112411, PMID: 33158024
Fischer H. 2009. Mechanisms and function of DUOX in epithelia of the lung. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 
11:2453–2465. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2009.2558, PMID: 19358684
Fisher MC, Garner TWJ. 2020. Chytrid fungi and global amphibian declines. Nature Reviews. Microbiology 
18:332–343. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-020-0335-x, PMID: 32099078
Gentek R, Ghigo C, Hoeffel G, Bulle MJ, Msallam R, Gautier G, Launay P , Chen J, Ginhoux F , Bajénoff M. 2018. 
Hemogenic endothelial fate mapping reveals dual developmental origin of mast cells. Immunity 48:1160–
1171.. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2018.04.025, PMID: 29858009
Grogan LF, Robert J, Berger L, Skerratt LF , Scheele BC, Castley JG, Newell DA, McCallum HI. 2018. Review of 
the amphibian immune response to chytridiomycosis, and future directions. Frontiers in Immunology 9:2536. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.02536, PMID: 30473694
Hauser K, Popovic M, Yaparla A, Koubourli DV, Reeves P , Batheja A, Webb R, Forzán MJ, Grayfer L. 2020. 
Discovery of granulocyte- lineage cells in the skin of the amphibian Xenopus laevis. FACETS 5:571–597. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1139/facets-2020-0010
Hauser KA, Garvey CN, Popovic M, Grayfer L. 2023. Biology of amphibian granulocytes - From evolutionary 
pressures to functional consequences. Developmental and Comparative Immunology 140:104623. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2022.104623, PMID: 36563918
Herrera- Heredia SA, Hsu H- P , Kao C- Y , Tsai Y- H, Yamaguchi Y , Roers A, Hsu C- L, Dzhagalov IL. 2022. Heparin is 
required for the formation of granules in connective tissue mast cells. Frontiers in Immunology 13:1000405. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1000405, PMID: 36439118
Ho W, Che M- I, Chou C- H, Chang H- H, Jeng Y- M, Hsu W- M, Lin K- H, Huang M- C. 2013. B3GNT3 expression 
suppresses cell migration and invasion and predicts favorable outcomes in neuroblastoma. Cancer Science 
104:1600–1608. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.12294, PMID: 24118321
Imayama S, Shibata Y , Hori Y . 1995. Epidermal mast cells in atopic dermatitis. Lancet 346:1559. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/s0140-6736(95)92089-7, PMID: 7491066
Ito T, Smrž D, Jung M- Y , Bandara G, Desai A, Smržová Š, Kuehn HS, Beaven MA, Metcalfe DD, Gilfillan AM. 
2012. Stem cell factor programs the mast cell activation phenotype. Journal of Immunology 188:5428–5437. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1103366, PMID: 22529299
IUCN 2022. 2022. The IUCN red list of threatened species. https://www.iucnredlist.org [Accessed January 1, 
2024].
Jani AJ, Bushell J, Arisdakessian CG, Belcaid M, Boiano DM, Brown C, Knapp RA. 2021. The amphibian 
microbiome exhibits poor resilience following pathogen- induced disturbance. The ISME Journal 15:1628–1640. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-020-00875-w, PMID: 33564111
Jiménez RR, Carfagno A, Linhoff L, Gratwicke B, Woodhams DC, Chafran LS, Bletz MC, Bishop B, 
Muletz- Wolz CR. 2022. Inhibitory bacterial diversity and mucosome function differentiate susceptibility of 
appalachian salamanders to chytrid fungal infection. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 88:e0181821. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.01818-21, PMID: 35348389
Kiritsi D, Has C, Bruckner- Tuderman L. 2013. Laminin 332 in junctional epidermolysis bullosa. Cell Adhesion & 
Migration 7:135–141. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4161/cam.22418, PMID: 23076207

--- page 22 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  22 of 23
Koubourli DV, Wendel ES, Yaparla A, Ghaul JR, Grayfer L. 2017. Immune roles of amphibian (Xenopus laevis) 
tadpole granulocytes during Frog Virus 3 ranavirus infections. Developmental and Comparative Immunology 
72:112–118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2017.02.016, PMID: 28238879
Koubourli DV, Yaparla A, Popovic M, Grayfer L. 2018. Amphibian (Xenopus laevis) interleukin- 8 (cxcl8): a 
perspective on the evolutionary divergence of granulocyte chemotaxis. Frontiers in Immunology 9:2058. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.02058
Larsen EH. 2021. Dual skin functions in amphibian osmoregulation. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 
Part A 253:110869. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2020.110869
Letourneau J, Holmes ZC, Dallow EP , Durand HK, Jiang S, Carrion VM, Gupta SK, Mincey AC, Muehlbauer MJ, 
Bain JR, David LA. 2022. Ecological memory of prior nutrient exposure in the human gut microbiome. The 
ISME Journal 16:2479–2490. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-022-01292-x, PMID: 35871250
Li Z, Liu S, Xu J, Zhang X, Han D, Liu J, Xia M, Yi L, Shen Q, Xu S, Lu L, Cao X. 2018. Adult connective tissue- 
resident mast cells originate from late erythro- myeloid progenitors. Immunity 49:640–653.. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.immuni.2018.09.023, PMID: 30332630
Martel A, Blooi M, Adriaensen C, Van Rooij P , Beukema W, Fisher MC, Farrer RA, Schmidt BR, Tobler U, Goka K, 
Lips KR, Muletz C, Zamudio KR, Bosch J, Lötters S, Wombwell E, Garner TWJ, Cunningham AA, 
Spitzen- van der Sluijs A, Salvidio S, et al. 2014. Wildlife disease: recent introduction of a chytrid fungus 
endangers Western Palearctic salamanders. Science 346:630–631. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
1258268, PMID: 25359973
McMahon TA, Sears BF , Venesky MD, Bessler SM, Brown JM, Deutsch K, Halstead NT, Lentz G, Tenouri N, 
Young S, Civitello DJ, Ortega N, Fites JS, Reinert LK, Rollins- Smith LA, Raffel TR, Rohr JR. 2014. Amphibians 
acquire resistance to live and dead fungus overcoming fungal immunosuppression. Nature 511:224–227. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13491, PMID: 25008531
McMurdie PJ, Holmes S. 2013. phyloseq: an R package for reproducible interactive analysis and graphics of 
microbiome census data. PLOS ONE 8:e61217. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061217, PMID: 
23630581
McNeil HP, Adachi R, Stevens RL. 2007. Mast cell- restricted tryptases: structure and function in inflammation 
and pathogen defense. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 282:20785–20789. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/ 
jbc.R700017200, PMID: 17504754
Meurer SK, Neß M, Weiskirchen S, Kim P , Tag CG, Kauffmann M, Huber M, Weiskirchen R. 2016. Isolation of 
mature (peritoneum- derived) mast cells and immature (bone marrow- derived) mast cell precursors from mice. 
PLOS ONE 11:e0158104. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0158104, PMID: 27337047
Muletz- Wolz CR, Fleischer RC, Lips KR. 2019. Fungal disease and temperature alter skin microbiome structure in 
an experimental salamander system. Molecular Ecology 28:2917–2931. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/mec. 
15122, PMID: 31066947
Muletz- WolzCR. 2024. MastCellsGuardians. swh:1:rev:0687b6911d7bfeabbbf12b180a0d5d5cc37a9a0b. 
Software Heritage. https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:5f23f560b7201dc954bbbe764cf849df 
64031500;origin=https://github.com/CarlyMuletzWolz/MastCellsGuardians;visit=swh:1:snp:1942a85266347e63 
b4c098fd1d96d95b0cde5307;anchor=swh:1:rev:0687b6911d7bfeabbbf12b180a0d5d5cc37a9a0b
Patocka J, Nepovimova E, Klimova B, Wu Q, Kuca K. 2019. Antimicrobial peptides: Amphibian host defense 
peptides. Current Medicinal Chemistry 26:5924–5946. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2174/09298673256661807131 
25314, PMID: 30009702
Paudel S, Ghimire L, Jin L, Jeansonne D, Jeyaseelan S. 2022. Regulation of emergency granulopoiesis during 
infection. Frontiers in Immunology 13:961601. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.961601, PMID: 
36148240
Ramsey JP, Reinert LK, Harper LK, Woodhams DC, Rollins- Smith LA. 2010. Immune defenses against 
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, a fungus linked to global amphibian declines, in the South African clawed 
frog, Xenopus laevis. Infection and Immunity 78:3981–3992. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00402-10, PMID: 
20584973
Redpath SA, Heieis G, Perona- Wright G. 2015. Spatial regulation of IL- 4 signalling in vivo. Cytokine 75:51–56. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cyto.2015.02.026, PMID: 25819429
Roberts AW. 2005. G- CSF: a key regulator of neutrophil production, but that’s not all! Growth Factors 23:33–41. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08977190500055836, PMID: 16019425
Rodríguez C, Rollins- Smith L, Ibáñez R, Durant- Archibold AA, Gutiérrez M. 2017. Toxins and pharmacologically 
active compounds from species of the family Bufonidae (Amphibia, Anura). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
198:235–254. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2016.12.021, PMID: 28034659
Rollins- Smith LA, Ramsey JP , Reinert LK, Woodhams DC, Livo LJ, Carey C. 2009. Immune defenses of Xenopus 
laevis against Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Frontiers in Bioscience 1:68–91. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2741/ 
S8, PMID: 19482684
Rollins- Smith LA, Le Sage EH. 2021. Batrachochytrium fungi: stealth invaders in amphibian skin. Current Opinion 
in Microbiology 61:124–132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2021.04.002, PMID: 33964650
Rollins- Smith LA. 2023. The importance of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in amphibian skin defense. 
Developmental and Comparative Immunology 142:104657. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2023.104657, 
PMID: 36754220
Savage AE, Gratwicke B, Hope K, Bronikowski E, Fleischer RC. 2020. Sustained immune activation is associated 
with susceptibility to the amphibian chytrid fungus. Molecular Ecology 29:2889–2903. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1111/mec.15533, PMID: 32700351

--- page 23 ---
 Research article      
Immunology and Inflammation
Hauser et al. eLife 2023;12:RP92168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.92168  23 of 23
Scheele BC, Pasmans F , Skerratt LF , Berger L, Martel A, Beukema W, Acevedo AA, Burrowes PA, Carvalho T, 
Catenazzi A, De la Riva I, Fisher MC, Flechas SV, Foster CN, Frías-Álvarez P , Garner TWJ, Gratwicke B, 
Guayasamin JM, Hirschfeld M, Kolby JE, et al. 2019. Amphibian fungal panzootic causes catastrophic and 
ongoing loss of biodiversity. Science 363:1459–1463. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aav0379, PMID: 
30923224
Sobiepanek A, Kuryk Ł, Garofalo M, Kumar S, Baran J, Musolf P , Siebenhaar F , Fluhr JW, Kobiela T, Plasenzotti R, 
Kuchler K, Staniszewska M. 2022. The multifaceted roles of mast cells in immune homeostasis, infections and 
cancers. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23:2249. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23042249, 
PMID: 35216365
St. John AL, Rathore APS, Ginhoux F . 2023. New perspectives on the origins and heterogeneity of mast cells. 
Nature Reviews Immunology 23:55–68. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-022-00731-2
Taupin D, Podolsky DK. 2003. Trefoil factors: initiators of mucosal healing. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell 
Biology 4:721–732. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1203, PMID: 14506475
Tharp MD, Seelig LL, Tigelaar RE, Bergstresser PR. 1985. Conjugated avidin binds to mast cell granules. The 
Journal of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry 33:27–32. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/33.1.2578142, PMID: 
2578142
Van Rooij P, Martel A, Brutyn M, Maes S, Chiers K, Van Waeyenberghe L, Croubels S, Haesebrouck F , Pasmans F . 
2010. Development of in vitro models for a better understanding of the early pathogenesis of 
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis infections in amphibians. Alternatives to Laboratory Animals 38:519–528. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1177/026119291003800614, PMID: 21275473
Van Rooij P, Martel A, Haesebrouck F , Pasmans F . 2015. Amphibian chytridiomycosis: a review with focus on 
fungus- host interactions. Veterinary Research 46:137. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13567-015-0266-0, PMID: 
26607488
Varga JFA, Bui- Marinos MP , Katzenback BA. 2018. Frog skin innate immune defences: Sensing and surviving 
pathogens. Frontiers in Immunology 9:3128. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.03128, PMID: 30692997
Voyles J, Young S, Berger L, Campbell C, Voyles WF , Dinudom A, Cook D, Webb R, Alford RA, Skerratt LF , 
Speare R. 2009. Pathogenesis of chytridiomycosis, a cause of catastrophic amphibian declines. Science 
326:582–585. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1176765, PMID: 19900897
Wang Z, Mascarenhas N, Eckmann L, Miyamoto Y , Sun X, Kawakami T, Di Nardo A. 2017. Skin microbiome 
promotes mast cell maturation by triggering stem cell factor production in keratinocytes. The Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 139:1205–1216.. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.09.019, PMID: 
27746235
Wang J. 2018. Neutrophils in tissue injury and repair. Cell and Tissue Research 371:531–539. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00441-017-2785-7, PMID: 29383445
Wang A, Zhang Q, Wang Y , Li X, Li K, Li Y , Wang J, Li L, Chen H. 2021. Inhibition of Gabrp reduces the 
differentiation of airway epithelial progenitor cells into goblet cells. Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine 
22:720. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.10152, PMID: 34007329
West PW, Bulfone- Paus S. 2022. Mast cell tissue heterogeneity and specificity of immune cell recruitment. 
Frontiers in Immunology 13:932090. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.932090, PMID: 35967445
Woodhams DC. 2015. Antifungal isolates database to centralize data on amphibian ski associated bacteria and 
their function against emerging fungal pathogens including Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. Ecology 96:595. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1890/14-1837.1
Woodhams DC, McCartney J, Walke JB, Whetstone R. 2023. The adaptive microbiome hypothesis and immune 
interactions in amphibian mucus. Developmental and Comparative Immunology 145:104690. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.dci.2023.104690, PMID: 37001710
Yaparla A, Wendel ES, Grayfer L. 2016. The unique myelopoiesis strategy of the amphibian Xenopus laevis. 
Developmental and Comparative Immunology 63:136–143. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2016.05.014, 
PMID: 27234705
Yaparla A, Grayfer L. 2018. Isolation and culture of amphibian (Xenopus laevis) sub- capsular liver and bone 
marrow cells.Xenopus: Methods and Protocols 01:275–281. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-8784-9_ 
20