--- Page 1 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 1 of 59
Computational and Systems Biology
A three filament mechanistic model of
musculotendon force and impedance
Matthew Millard , David W. Franklin, Walter Herzog
Institute for Sport and Movement Science, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, Germany •
Institute of Engineering and Computational Mechanics, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg,
Germany • Neuromuscular Diagnostics, Department of Sport and Health Sciences, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Bavaria, Germany • Munich School of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI), Technical University of
Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany • Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI), Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Bavaria, Germany • Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access
Copyright information
Abstract
The force developed by actively lengthened muscle depends on different structures across
different scales of lengthening. Across short-range perturbations the active response of
muscle is well captured by a stiff spring in parallel with a light damper, a response that
originates from crossbridges. The force response of muscle to longer stretches is better
represented by an compliant spring that can fix its end when activated. Experimental work
has made it clear that the stiffness and damping (impedance) of muscle to short-range
perturbations is of fundamental importance to motor learning and mechanical stability,
while the huge forces developed during long active stretches are critical for simulating and
predicting injury. Outside of motor learning and injury, muscle is actively lengthened as a
part of nearly all terrestrial locomotion. Despite the functional importance of impedance and
active lengthening, no single muscle model can emulate these mechanical properties. In this
work, we present the visoelastic-crossbridge active-titin (VEXAT) model that can replicate the
response of muscle to length changes great and small. To evaluate the VEXAT model, we
compare its response to biological muscle by simulating experiments that measure the
impedance of muscle, the forces developed during long active stretches, as well as the classic
force-velocity and force-length characteristics of muscle. In addition, we have also compared
the responses of the VEXAT model to a popular Hill-type muscle model. The VEXAT model
more accurately captures the impedance of biological muscle and its responses to long active
stretches than a Hill-type model while still retaining the ability to replicate the force-velocity
and force-length properties of muscle. While the comparison between the VEXAT model and
biological muscle is favorable, there are some phenomena that can be improved: the phase
response of the model to low-frequency perturbations, and a mechanism to support passive
force enhancement.
Reviewed Preprint
Published from the original
preprint after peer review
and assessment by eLife.
About eLife's process
Reviewed preprint posted
October 11, 2023 (this version)
Sent for peer review
May 5, 2023
Posted to bioRxiv
April 14, 2023


--- Page 2 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 2 of 59
eLife assessment
This is an important study that develops a new model of the way muscle responds to
perturbations, synthesizing models of how it responds to small and large
perturbations, both of which are important to predict how muscles function for
stability but also how they can be injured. The evidence presented to support the
model is solid, but the work is incomplete as it is particularly lacking a more detailed
analysis of the trade-offs associated with using the model to simulate different types
of preparations, especially single muscle fibers compared to whole muscles or whole
muscles and tendons. With a clearer discussion of the limitations of the model and
the situations in which it is best applied, the work will be of interest to those
developing realistic models of the stability and control of movement in humans or
other animals.
1 Introduction
The stiffness and damping of muscle are properties of fundamental importance for motor control,
and the accurate simulation of muscle force. The central nervous system (CNS) exploits the
activation-dependent stiffness and damping (impedance) of muscle when learning new
movements [1     ], and when moving in unstable [2     ] or noisy environments [3     ]. Reaching
experiments using haptic manipulanda show that the CNS uses co-contraction to increase the
stiffness of the arm when perturbed by an unstable force field [4     ]. With time and repetition, the
force field becomes learned and co-contraction is reduced [1     ].
The force response of muscle is not uniform, but varies with both the length and time of
perturbation. Kirsch et al. [5     ] were able to show that muscle behaves like a spring in parallel
with a damper for small perturbations: a spring-damper of best fit captured over 90% of the
observed variation in muscle force for small perturbations (1-3.8% optimal length) over a wide
range of bandwidths (4-90Hz). When active muscle is stretched appreciably, titin can develop
enormous forces [6     , 7     ], which may prevent further lengthening and injury. The stiffness that
best captures the response of muscle to the small perturbations of Kirsch et al. [5     ] is far greater
than the stiffness that best captures the response of muscle to large perturbations [6     , 7     ].
Since everyday movements are often accompanied by both large and small kinematic
perturbations, it is important to accurately capture these two processes.
However, there is likely no single muscle model that can replicate the force response of muscle to
short-range [5     ] and long-range perturbations [6     , 7     ] while also retaining the capability to
reproduce the experiments of Hill [8     ] and Gordon et al. [9     ]. Unfortunately, this means that
simulation studies that depend on an accurate representation of muscle impedance may reach
conclusions well justified in simulation but not in reality. In this work, we focus on formulating a
mechanistic muscle model1      that can replicate the force response of active muscle to length
perturbations both great and small.
There are predominantly three classes of models that are used to simulate musculoskeletal
responses: phenomenological models constructed using Hill’s famous force-velocity relationship
[8     ], mechanistic Huxley [10     , 11     ] models in which individual elastic crossbridges are
incorporated, and linearized muscle models [12     , 13     ] which are accurate for small changes in
muscle length. Kirsch et al. [5     ] demonstrated that, in the short-range, the force response of
muscle is well represented by a spring in parallel with a damper. Neither Hill nor Huxley models
are likely to replicate Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] experiments because a Hill muscle model [14     , 15     ]


--- Page 3 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 3 of 59
does not contain any active spring elements; while a Huxley model lacks an active damping
element. Although linearized muscle models can replicate Kirsch et al.’s experiment [5     ], these
models are only accurate for small changes in length and cannot replicate the Hill’s nonlinear
force-velocity relation [8     ], nor Gordon et al.’s [9     ] nonlinear force-length relation. However,
there have been significant improvements to the canonical forms of phenomenological,
mechanistic, and linearized muscle models that warrant closer inspection.
Several novel muscle models have been proposed to improve upon the accuracy of Hill-type
muscle models during large active stretches. Forcinito et al. [16     ] modelled the velocity
dependence of muscle using a rheological element2      and an elastic rack rather than embedding
the force-velocity relationship in equations directly, as is done in a typical Hill model [14     , 15     ].
This modification allows Forcinito et al.’s [16     ] model to more faithfully replicate the force
development of active muscle, as compared to a Hill-type model, during ramp length changes of ≈
10%3      of the optimal CE length, and across velocities of 4 − 11% of the maximum contraction
velocity4     . Haeufle et al. [18     ] made use of a serial-parallel network of spring-dampers to allow
their model to reproduce Hill’s force-velocity relationship [8     ] mechanistically rather than
embedding the experimental curve directly in their model. This modification allowed Haeufle et
al.’s model to simulate high speed reaching movements that agree more closely with experimental
data [19     ] than is possible with a typical Hill model. Gü nther et al. [20     ] evaluated how
accurately a variety of spring-damper models were able to reproduce the microscopic increases in
crossbridge force in response to small length changes. While each of these models improves upon
the force response of the Hill model to ramp length changes, none are likely to reproduce Kirsch et
al.’s experiment [5     ] because the linearized versions of these models lead to a serial, rather than
a parallel, connection of a spring and a damper: Kirsch et al. [5     ] specifically showed (see Figure
3      of [5     ]) that a serial connection of a spring-damper fails to reproduce the phase shift
between force and length present in their experimental data.
Titin [21     , 22     ] has been more recently investigated to explain how lengthened muscle can
develop active force when lengthened both within, and beyond, actin-myosin overlap [7     ]. Titin
is a gigantic multi-segmented protein that spans a half-sarcomere, attaching to the Z-line at one
end and the middle of the thick filament at the other end [23     ]. In skeletal muscle, the two
sections nearest to the Z-line, the proximal immunoglobulin (IgP) segment and the PEVK segment
— rich in the amino acids proline (P), glutamate (E), valine (V) and lysine (K) — are the most
compliant [24     ] since the distal immunoglobulin (IgD) segments bind strongly to the thick
filament [25     ]. Titin has proven to be a complex filament, varying in composition and geometry
between different muscle types [26     , 27     ], widely between species [28     ], and can apply
activation dependent forces to actin [29     ]. It has proven challenging to determine which
interactions dominate between the various segments of titin and the other filaments in a
sarcomere. Experimental observations have reported titin-actin interactions at myosin-actin
binding sites [30     , 31     ], between titin’s PEVK region and actin [32     , 33     ], between titin’s N2A
region and actin [34     ], and between the PEVK-IgD regions of titin and myosin [35     ]. This large
variety of experimental observations has led to a correspondingly large number of proposed
hypotheses and models, most of which involve titin interacting with actin [36     , 37     , 38     , 39     ,
40     , 41     ], and more recently with myosin [42     ].
Although the addition of a titin element to a model will result in more accurate force production
during large active length changes, a titin element alone does little to affect the stiffness and
damping of muscle in the short range because of its relatively low stiffness. A single cross bridge
has a stiffness of 0.69 ± 0.47 pN/nm [43     ], which is between 22-91 times greater than the average
stiffness of a single titin molecule [44     ] of 0.015 pN/nm from a human soleus muscle5     . Taking
into account the variability in observed stiffness of crossbridges [43     ], actin [45     ], and myosin
filaments, the actin-myosin load path between the Z and M-line will be 54-233 times stiffer than
the comparable titin load path assuming that only 25% of the crossbridges are attached [46     ]. If
the middle of titin’s PEVK region rigidly attaches to actin then the actin-myosin load path is only


--- Page 4 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 4 of 59
15-68 times stiffer than the titin load path (see Appendix A for further details). Thus it is likely that
attached cross-bridges dominate active stiffness of whole muscle in the short-range [5     ]. Since
titin-focused models have not made any changes to the modelled myosin-actin interaction beyond
a Hill [14     , 15     ] or Huxley [10     , 11     ] model, it is unlikely that these models would be able to
replicate Kirsch et al.’s experiments [5     ].
Although most motor control simulations [47     , 48     , 49     , 2     , 50     ] make use of the canonical
linearized muscle model, phenomenological muscle models have also been used and modified to
include stiffness. Sartori et al. [51     ] modeled muscle stiffness by evaluating the partial derivative
of the force developed by a Hill-type muscle model with respect to the contractile element (CE)
length. Although this approach is mathematically correct, the resulting stiffness is heavily
influenced by the shape of the force-length curve and can lead to inaccurate results: at the optimal
CE length this approach would predict an active muscle stiffness of zero since the slope of the
force-length curve is zero; on the descending limb this approach would predict a negative active
muscle stiffness since the slope of the force-length curve is negative. In contrast, CE stiffness is
large and positive near the optimal length [5     ], and there is no evidence for negative stiffness on
the descending limb of the force-length curve [6     ]. Although the stiffness of the CE can be kept
positive by shifting the passive force-length curve, which is at times used in finite-element-models
of muscle [52     ], this introduces a new problem: the resulting passive CE stiffness cannot be
lowered to match a more flexible muscle. In contrast, De Groote et al. [53     , 54     ] modeled short-
range-stiffness using a stiff spring in parallel with the active force element of a Hill-type muscle
model. While the approach of de Groote et al. [53     , 54     ] likely does improve the response of a
Hill-type muscle model for small perturbations, there are several drawbacks: the short-range-
stiffness of the muscle sharply goes to zero outside of the specified range whereas in reality the
stiffness is only reduced [5     ] (see Fig. 9A     ); the damping of the canonical Hill-model has been
left unchanged and likely differs substantially from biological muscle [5     ].
In this work, we propose a model that can capture the force development of muscle to
perturbations that vary in size and timescale, and yet is described using only a few states making
it well suited for large-scale simulations. The response of the model to all perturbations within
actin-myosin overlap is dominated by a viscoelastic crossbridge element that has different
dynamics over short and long time-scales: over short time-scales the viscoelasticity of the lumped
crossbridge dominates the response of the muscle [5     ], while over longer time-scales the
response of the crossbridges is dominated by the force-velocity [8     ] and force-length [9     ]
properties of muscle. To capture the active forces developed by muscle beyond actin-myosin
overlap we added an active titin element which, similar to existing models [36     , 38     ], features
an activation-dependent6      interaction between titin and actin. To ensure that the various parts of
the model are bounded by reality, we have estimated the physical properties of the viscoelastic
crossbridge element as well as the active titin element using data from the literature.
While our main focus is to develop a more accurate muscle model, we would like the model to be
well suited to simulating systems that contain tens to hundreds of muscles. Although Huxley
models have been used to simulate whole-body movements such as jumping [55     ], the memory
and processing requirements associated with simulating a single muscle with thousands of states
is high. Instead of modeling the force development of individual crossbridges, we lump all of the
crossbridges in a muscle together so that we have a small number of states to simulate per muscle.
To evaluate the proposed model, we compare simulations of experiments to original data. We
examine the response of active muscle to small perturbations over a wide bandwidth by
simulating the stochastic perturbation experiments of Kirsch et al. [5     ]. Herzog et al.’s [6     ]
active-lengthening experiments are used to evaluate the response of the model when it is actively
lengthened within actin-myosin overlap. Next, we use Leonard et al.’s [7     ] active lengthening
experiments to see how the model compares to reality when it is actively lengthened beyond actin-
myosin overlap. In addition, we examine how well the model can reproduce the force-velocity


--- Page 5 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 5 of 59
experiments of Hill [8     ] and force-length experiments of Gordon et al. [9     ]. Since Hill-type
models are so commonly used, we also replicate all of the simulated experiments using Millard et
al.’s [15     ] Hill-type muscle model to make the differences between these two types of models
clear.
2 Model
We begin by treating whole muscle as a scaled half-sarcomere that is pennated at an angle α with
respect to a tendon (Fig. 1A     ). The assumption that mechanical properties scale with size is
commonly used when modeling muscle [14     ] and makes it possible to model vastly different
musculotendon units (MTUs) by simply changing the architectural and contraction properties: the
maximum isometric force 
 , the optimal CE length 
  (at which the CE develops 
 ), the
pennation angle of the CE with respect to the tendon αo at a CE length of 
 , the maximum
shortening velocity 
  of the CE, and the slack length of the tendon 
 . Many properties of
sarcomeres scale with 
  and 
  scales with physiological cross-sectional area [56     ], the
force-length property scales with 
  [57     ], the maximum normalized shortening velocity of
different CE types scales with 
  across animals great and small [58     ], and that titin’s passive-
force-length properties scale from single molecules to myofibrils [59     , 60     ]
The proposed model has several additional properties that we assume to scale with 
  and
inversely with 
 : the maximum active isometric stiffness 
  and damping 
 , the passive
forces due to the extracellular matrix (ECM), and passive forces due to titin. As crossbridge
stiffness is well studied [61     ], we assume that muscle stiffness due to crossbridges scales such
that
where 
  is the maximum normalized stiffness. This scaling is just what would be expected when
many crossbridges [61     ] act in parallel across the cross-sectional area of the muscle, and act in
series along the length of the muscle. Although the intrinsic damping properties of crossbridges
are not well studied, we assume that the linear increase in damping with activation observed by
Kirsch et al. [5     ] is due to the intrinsic damping properties of individual crossbridges which will
also scale linearly with 
  and inversely with 
where 
  is the maximum normalized damping. For the remainder of the paper, we refer to the
proposed model as the VEXAT model due to the viscoelastic (VE) cross-bridge (X) and active-titin
(AT) elements of the model.
To reduce the number of states needed to simulate the VEXAT model, we lump all of the attached
crossbridges together to a single lumped crossbridge that attaches at ℓS (Fig. 1A     ) and has
intrinsic stiffness and damping properties that vary with the activation and force-length
properties of muscle. The active force developed by the XE at the attachment point to actin is
transmitted to the main myosin filament, the M-line, and ultimately to the tendon (Fig. 1B     ). In
addition, since the stiffness of actin [45     ] and myosin filaments [62     ] greatly exceeds that of
crossbridges [43     ], we treat actin and myosin filaments as rigid to reduce the number of states
needed to simulate this model. Similarly, we have lumped the six titin filaments per half-
sarcomere (Fig. 1A     ) together further reduce the number of states needed to simulate this model.


--- Page 6 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 6 of 59
Figure 1
The name of the VEXAT model comes from the viscoelastic crossbridge and active titin elements (A.) in the model. Active
tension generated by the lumped crossbridge flows through actin, myosin, and the adjacent sarcomeres to the attached
tendon (B.). Titin is modeled as two springs of length ℓ1 and ℓ2 in series with the rigid segments LT12 and LIgD. Viscous forces
act between the titin and actin in proportion to the activation of the muscle (C.), which reduces to negligible values in a purely
passive muscle (D.). The ECM is the only entirely passive element (A. & D.).


--- Page 7 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 7 of 59
The addition of a titin filament to the model introduces an additional active load-path (Fig. 1C     )
and an additional passive load-path (Fig. 1D     ). As is typical [14     , 15     ], we assume that the
passive elasticity of these structures scale linearly with 
  and inversely with 
 . Since the
VEXAT model has two passive load paths (Fig. 1D     ), we further assume that the proportion of the
passive force due to the extra-cellular-matrix (ECM) and titin does not follow a scale dependent
pattern, but varies from muscle-to-muscle as observed by Prado et al. [60     ].
As previously mentioned, there are currently several competing theories to explain how titin
interacts with the other filaments in activated muscle but no definitive data to support one theory
over another. While there is evidence for titin-actin interaction near titin’s N2A region [34     ],
there is also support for a titin-actin interaction occurring near titin’s PEVK region [32     , 33     ],
and for a titin-myosin interaction near the PEVK-IgD region [35     ]. For the purposes of our model,
we will assume a titin-actin interaction because current evidence weighs more heavily towards a
titin-actin interaction than a titin-myosin interaction. Next, we assume that the titin-actin
interaction takes place somewhere in the PEVK segment for two reasons: first, there is evidence
for a titin-actin interaction [32     , 33     ] in the PEVK segment; and second, there is evidence
supporting an interaction at the proximal end of the PEVK segment (N2A-actin interaction) [34     ].
We have left the point within the PEVK segment that attaches to actin as a free variable since there
is some uncertainty about what part of the PEVK segment interacts with actin.
The nature of the mechanical interaction between titin and the other filaments in an active
sarcomere remains uncertain. Here we assume that this interaction is not a rigid attachment, but
instead is an activation dependent damping to be consistent with Kellermayer et al.’s observations
[29     ]: adding titin filaments and calcium slowed, but did not stop, the progression of actin
filaments across an plate covered in active crossbridges (an in-vitro motility array). When
activated, we assume that the amount of damping between the titin and actin scales linearly with
 and inversely with 
 .
After lumping all of the crossbridges and titin filaments together we are left with a rigid-tendon
MTUmodel that has two generalized positions
and an elastic-tendon MTUmodel that has three generalized positions
Given these generalized positions, the path length ℓP, and a pennation model, all other lengths in
the model can be calculated. Here we use a constant thickness
pennation model to evaluate the pennation angle
of a rigid tendon model given qR, and



--- Page 8 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 8 of 59
to evaluate the pennation angle of an elastic-tendon model. We have added a small compressive
element KE (Fig. 1A      to prevent the model from reaching the numerical singularity that exists in
the pennation model when α → 90°. The tendon length
of an elastic tendon model is the difference between the path length and the CE length along the
tendon. The length of the XE
is the difference between the half-sarcomere length and the sum of the average point of
attachment ℓS and the length of the myosin filament LM. The length of ℓ2, the lumped PEVK-IgD
segment, is
the difference between the half-sarcomere length and the sum of the length from the Z-line to the
actin binding site on titin (ℓ1) and the length of the IgD segment that is bound to myosin (LIgD).
Finally, the length of the extra-cellular-matrix ℓECM is simply
half the length of the CE since we are modeling a half-sarcomere.
We have some freedom to choose the state vector of the model and the differential equations that
define how the muscle responds to length and activation changes. The experiments we hope to
replicate depend on phenomena that take place at different time-scales: Kirsch et al.’s [5     ]
stochastic perturbations evolve over short time-scales, while all of the other experiments take
place at much longer time-scales. Here we mathematically decouple phenomena that affect short
and long time-scales by making a second-order model that has states of the average point of
crossbridge attachment ℓS, and velocity vS. When the activation a state and the titin-actin
interaction model are included, the resulting rigid-tendon model that has a total of four states
and the elastic tendon model has
five states. For the purpose of comparison, a Hill-type muscle model with a rigid-tendon has a
single state (a), while an elastic-tendon model has two states (a and ℓM) [15     ].
Before proceeding, a small note on notation: throughout this work we will use a underbar to
indicate a vector, bold font to indicate a curve, a tilde for a normalized quantity, and a capital
letter to indicate a constant. Unless indicated otherwise, curves are constructed using 𝒞2
continuous7      Bézier splines so that the model is compatible with gradient-based optimization.
Normalized quantities follow a specific convention: lengths for components within the CE are


--- Page 9 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 9 of 59
normalized by the optimal CE length 
 , the tendon is normalized by 
  tendon slack length,
velocities by the maximum shortening velocity 
 , forces by the maximum active isometric
tension 
 , stiffness and damping by 
 .
To evaluate the state derivative of the model, we require equations for 
 , v1, and vM if the
tendon is elastic. For 
  we use of the first order activation dynamics model described in Millard
et al. [15     ]8      which uses a lumped first order ordinary-differential-equation (ODE) to describe
how a fused tetanus electrical excitation leads to force development in an isometric muscle. We
formulated the equation for 
  with the intention of having the model behave like a spring-
damper over short periods of time, but to converge to the tension developed by a Hill-type model
over longer periods of time, where f L(·) is the active-forcelength curve (Fig. 2A     ), f PE(·) is the
passive-force-length curve (Fig. 2A     ), and f V(·) is the force-velocity (Fig. 2B     ).
The normalized tension developed by the VEXAT model
differs from that of a Hill model, Eqn. 14     , because it has no explicit dependency on 
 ,
includes four passive terms, and a lumped viscoelastic crossbridge element. The four passive
terms come from the ECM element 
  (Fig. 3A     ), the PEVK-IgD element 
  (Fig.
3A      and B     ), the compressive term 
  (which prevents 
  from reaching a
length of 0), and a numerical damping term 
  (where 
  is small). The active force
developed by the XE’s lumped crossbridge 
  is scaled by the fraction of the XE that is
active and attached, 
 ), where f L(·) is the active-force-length relation (Fig. 2A     ). We
evaluate f L using 
  in Eqn. 15     , rather than 
  as in Eqn. 14     , since actin-myosin
overlap is independent of crossbridge strain. With 
  derived, we can proceed to model the
acceleration of the CE, 
 , so that it is driven over time by the force imbalance between the XE’s
active tension and that of a Hill model.
We set the first term of 
  so that, over time, the CE is driven to develop the same active tension
as a Hill-type model [15     ] (terms highlighted in blue)
where τS is a time constant and 
  is the force-velocity curve (Fig. 2B     ). The rate of
adaptation of the model’s tension, to the embedded Hill model, is set by the time constant τS: as τS
is decreased the VEXAT model converges more rapidly to a Hill-type model; as τS is increased the
active force produced by the model will look more like a springdamper. Our preliminary


--- Page 10 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 10 of 59
Figure 2
The model relies on Bézier curves to model the nonlinear effects of the active-force-length curve, the passive-force-length
curves (A.), and the force-velocity curve (B.). Since nearly all of the reference experiments used in Sec. 3 have used a cat
soleus, we have fit the active-force-length curve (f L(·)) and passive-force-length curves (f PE(·)) to the cat soleus data of
Herzog and Leonard 2002 [6     ]. The concentric side of the force-velocity curve (f V(·)) has been fitted to the cat soleus data of
Herzog and Leonard 1997 [63     ].
Figure 3
The passive force-length curve has been decomposed such that 56% of it comes from the ECM while 44% comes from titin to
match the average of ECM-titin passive force distribution (which ranges from 43%-76%) reported by Prado [60     ] (A.). The
elasticity of the titin segment has been further decomposed into two serially connected sections: the proximal section
consisting of the T12, proximal IgP segment and part of the PEVK segment, and the distal section consisting of the remaining
PEVK section and the distal Ig segment (B.). The stiffness of the IgP and PEVK segments has been chosen so that the model
can reproduce the movements of IgP/PEVK and PEVK/IgD boundaries that Trombitás et al. [24     ] (C.) observed in their
experiments. Note that the curves that appear in subplots A. and B. come from scaling the generic titin model, described in
Appendix B, to a cat soleus sarcomere while the curves that appear in subplot C come from scaling the generic titin model to
a human soleus sarcomere to compare it to the data of Trombitás et al.’s [24     ].


--- Page 11 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 11 of 59
simulations indicate that there is a trade-off to choosing τS: when τS is large the model will not
shorten rapidly enough to replicate Hill’s experiments, while if τS is small the low-frequency
response of the model is compromised when Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] experiments are simulated.
The remaining two terms, 
  and 
 , have been included for numerical
reasons specific to this model formulation rather than muscle physiology. We include a term that
damps the rate of actin-myosin translation, 
 , to prevent this second-order system from
unrealistically oscillating9     . The final term 
 , where G is a scalar gain and aL
is a low-activation threshold (aL is 0.05 in this work), has been included as a consequence of the
generalized positions we have chosen. When the CE is nearly deactivated (as a approaches aL) this
term forces 
  and 
  to shadow the location and velocity of the XE attachment point. This
ensures that if the XE is suddenly activated, that it attaches with little strain. We had to include
this term because we made ℓS a state variable, rather than ℓX. We chose ℓS as a state variable,
rather than ℓX, so that the states are more equally scaled for numerical integration.
The passive force developed by the CE in Eqn. 15      is the sum of the elastic forces (Fig. 3A     )
developed by the force-length curves of titin 
  and 
  and the ECM 
 .
We model titin’s elasticity as being due to two serially connected elastic segments: the first elastic
segment 
  is formed by lumping together the IgP segment and a fraction Q of the PEVK
segment, while the second elastic segment 
  is formed by lumping together the remaining (1
− Q) of the PEVK segment with the free IgD section. Our preliminary simulations of Herzog and
Leonard’s active lengthening experiment [6     ] indicate that a Q value of a half, positioning the
PEVK-actin attachment point that is near the middle of the PEVK segment, allows the model to
develop sufficient tension when actively lengthened. The large section of the IgD segment that is
bound to myosin is treated as rigid.
The curves that form 
 , and 
  have been carefully constructed to
satisfy three experimental observations: that the total passive force-length curve of titin and the
ECM match the observed passive force-length curve of the muscle (Fig. 2A      and Fig. 3A     )
[60     ]; that the proportion of the passive force developed by titin and the ECM is within
experimental observations [60     ] (Fig. 3A     ); and that the IgP and PEVK sections show the same
relative elongation as observed by Trombitás et al. [24     ] (Fig. 3C     ). Since both the passive–
force-length relation and Trombitás et al.’s [24     ] data is at modest lengths, we also consider two
different extensions to the force-length relation to simulate extreme lengths: first, a simple linear
extrapolation; second, we extend the force-length relation of each of titin’s segments to follow the
worm-like-chain (WLC) model [65     ]. For details, please see Appendix B.3.
When activated, we assume that some point of the PEVK segment bonds with actin through an
activation-dependent damper, and that this bond forms within a specific range of CE lengths.
Hisey et al. [66     ] observed that active lengthening produces no residual force enhancement
(RFE) on the ascending limb. In the VEXAT model, the distal segment of titin, ℓ2, can contribute to
RFE when the titin-actin bond is formed and CE is lengthened beyond 
 , the length at which
passive force begins to develop. To incorporate Hisey et al.’s [66     ] observed RFE length
dependence, we introduce a smooth step function
that transitions from zero to one as 
  extends beyond 
 . The sharpness of the transition of uS
between zero and one is controlled by R. At very long CE lengths, the modeled titin-actin bond can
literally slip off of the end of the actin filament (Fig. 1A     ) when the distance between the Z-line


--- Page 12 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 12 of 59
and the bond, 
 , exceeds the length of the actin filament, 
 . To break the titin-actin
bond at long CE lengths we introduce another smooth step function
The strength of the titin-actin bond also appears to vary nonlinearly with activation. Fukutani and
Herzog [67     ] observed that the absolute RFE magnitude produced by actively lengthened fibers
is similar between normal and reduced contractile force states. Since these experiments [67     ]
were performed beyond the optimal CE length, titin could be contributing to the observed RFE as
previously described. The consistent pattern of absolute RFE values observed by Fukutani and
Herzog [67     ] could be produced if the titin-actin bond saturated at its maximum strength even at
a reduced contractile force state. To saturate the titin-actin bond, we use a final smooth step
function
where A° is the threshold activation level at which the bond saturates. While we model the
strength of the titin-actin bond as being a function of activation, which is proportional Ca2+
concentration [68     ], this is a mathematical convenience. The work of Leonard et al. [7     ] makes
it clear that both Ca2+ and cross-bridge cycling are needed to allow titin to develop enhanced
forces during active lengthening: no enhanced forces are observed in the presence of Ca2+ when
cross-bridge cycling is chemically inhibited. Putting this all together, the active damping acting
between the titin and actin filaments is given by the product of 
  where 
  is
the maximum damping coefficient.
With a model of the titin-actin bond derived, we can model how the bond location moves in
response to applied forces. Since we are ignoring the mass of the titin filament, the PEVK-
attachment point is balanced by the forces applied to it and the viscous forces developed between
titin and actin
Since Eqn. 20      is linear in 
 , we can solve directly for it
We have added a small amount of numerical damping βϵ to the denominator of Eqn. 21      to
prevent a singularity when the CE is deactivated.
The assumption of whether the tendon is rigid or elastic affects how the state derivative is
evaluated and how expensive it is to compute. While all of the position dependent quantities can
be evaluated using Eqns. 6     -11      and the generalized positions, evaluating the generalized
velocities of a rigid-tendon and elastic-tendon model differ substantially. The CE velocity vM and
pennation angular velocity 
  of a rigid-tendon model can be evaluated directly given the path
length, velocity, and the time derivatives of Eqns. 6      and 8     . After v1 is evaluated using Eqn.
21     , the velocities of the remaining segments can be evaluated using the time derivatives of
Eqns. 9     -11     .


--- Page 13 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 13 of 59
Evaluating the CE rate of lengthening, vM, for an elastic tendon muscle model is more involved. As
is typical of lumped parameter muscle models [14     , 69     , 15     ], here we assume that difference
in tension, 
 , between the CE and the tendon
is negligible10     . During our preliminary simulations it became clear that treating the tendon as
an idealized spring degraded the ability of the model to replicate the experiment of Kirsch et al.
[5     ] particularly at high frequencies. Kirsch et al. [5     ] observed a linear increase in the gain
and phase profile between the output force and the input perturbation applied to the muscle. This
pattern in gain and phase shift can be accurately reproduced by a spring in parallel with a
damper. Due to the way that impedances combine in series [71     ], the models of both the CE and
the tendon need to have parallel spring and damper elements so that the entire MTU, when
linearized, appears to be a spring in parallel with a damping element. We model tendon force
using a nonlinear spring and damper model
where the damping coefficient 
 , is a linear scaling of the normalized tendon stiffness 
by U, a constant scaling coefficient. We have chosen this specific damping model because it fits the
data of Netti et al. [72     ] and captures the structural coupling between tendon stiffness and
damping (see Appendix B.1 and Fig. 15      for further details). Now that all of the terms in Eqn.
22      have been explicitly defined, we can use Eqn. 22      to solve for the remaining term, vM, in
the state derivative of the elastic-tendon model. Equation 22      becomes linear in vM after
substituting the force models described in Eqns. 23      and 15     , and the kinematic model
equations described in Eqns. 8     , 9      and 11      (along with the time derivatives of Eqns.
8     -11     ). After some simplification we arrive at
allowing us to evaluate the final state derivative in 
 . During simulation the denominator of 
will always be finite since 
 , and α < 90° due to the compressive element. The evaluation of
 in the VEXAT model is free of numerical singularities, giving it an advantage over a
conventional Hill-type muscle model [15     ]. In addition, the VEXAT’s 
  does not require iteration
to numerically sovle a root, giving it an advantage over a singularity-free formulation of the Hill
model [15     ]. As with previous models, initializing the model’s state is not trivial and required the
derivation of a model-specific method (see Appendix C for details).
The VEXAT model introduces components and parameters that do not appear in a conventional
Hill-type model model: a lumped viscoelastic XE with two parameters (
 and 
 ), a two-
segment active titin model with two curves 
  and 
  and one parameter 
 , a
tendon damping model with one parameter U (see Appendix B), and Eqn. 16      that relates the
relative acceleration between actin and myosin to a force imbalance. Equation 16      introduces a
time-constant (τS) and a damping-like term D. Fortunately, there is enough experimental data in


--- Page 14 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 14 of 59
the literature that default values for these new parameters can be evaluated and normalized using
the architectural properties of the muscle (Appendix B). These default values have been derived
from experiments on cats and rabbits: assuming that musculotendon dynamics look similar when
normalized, these default values should be reasonable first approximations for a wide variety of
mammals and muscles.
3 Biological Benchmark Simulations
In order to evaluate the model, we have selected three experiments that capture the responses of
active muscle to small, medium, and large length changes. The short-range (1-3.8% 
 ) stochastic
perturbation experiment of Kirsch et al. [5     ] demonstrates that the impedance of muscle is well
described by a stiff spring in parallel with a damper, and that the spring-damper coefficients vary
linearly with active force. The active impedance of muscle is such a fundamental part of motor
learning that the amount of impedance, as indicated by co-contraction, is used to define how much
learning has actually taken place [1     , 73     ]: co-contraction is high during initial learning, but
decreases over time as a task becomes familiar. The active lengthening experiment of Herzog and
Leonard [6     ] shows that modestly stretched (7-21% 
 ) biological muscle has positive stiffness
even on the descending limb of the active force-length curve 
 . In contrast, a
conventional Hill model [14     , 15     ] can have negative stiffness on the descending limb of the
active-force-length curve, a property that is both mechanically unstable and unrealistic. The final
active lengthening experiment of Leonard et al. [7     ] unequivocally demonstrates that the CE
continues to develop active forces during extreme lengthening 
  which exceeds actin-
myosin overlap. Active force development beyond actin-myosin overlap is made possible by titin,
and its activation dependent interaction with actin [7     ]. The biological benchmark simulations
conclude with a replication of the force-velocity experiments of Hill [8     ] and the forcelength
experiments of Gordon et al. [9     ]. Unless otherwise noted, all simulations are performed using
the same model parameters.
3.1 Stochastic Length Perturbation Experiments
In Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] in-situ experiment, the force response of a cat’s soleus muscle under
constant stimulation was measured as its length was changed by small amounts (Fig. 4     ). Kirsch
et al. [5     ] applied stochastic length perturbations (Fig. 5A     ) to elicit force responses from the
muscle (Fig. 5B     ) across a broad range of frequencies (4-90 Hz) and across a range of small
length perturbations 
 . Next, they applied system identification methods [71     ] to
extract curves that defined how the gain and phase shift (between the output force of the muscle
and the input length) varied as a function of frequency (Fig. 5C     ).
System identification methods make it possible to identify the mechanical system that best
explains the output force waveform given the input length waveform. Using this technique, Kirsch
et al. [5     ] were able to compare the frequency response of the specimen (See Appendix D for
details) to several candidate models. They found that the pattern of gain and phase shift was most
consistent with a parallel spring-damper. Next, they evaluated the stiffness and damping
coefficients that best fit the muscle’s frequency response [5     ]. Finally, Kirsch et al. evaluated how
much of the muscle’s time-domain response was captured by the spring-damper of best fit by
evaluating the variance-accounted-for between the two time-domain signals
Astonishingly, Kirsch et al. [5     ] demonstrated that a spring-damper of best fit has a VAF of
between 88-99% when compared to the experimentally measured forces fEXP. By repeating this
experiment over a variety of stimulation levels (using both electrical stimulation and the crossed-


--- Page 15 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 15 of 59
Figure 4
Kirsch et al. [5     ] performed an in-situ experiment on a cat soleus. The soleus was activated to generate a constant
submaximal tension at a fixed length. Next, the length of the musculotendon unit was forced to follow a stochastic waveform
(see Fig. 6      for an example) while the force response of the muscle was recorded.
Figure 5
Different arrangements of springs and dampers will produce different force responses when subjected to the same length
perturbation waveform in the time-domain (A.). In the time-domain it is challenging to identify the system given only the
input length change and output force signals. If the system is assumed to be linear and time invariant then system
identification methods [71     ] (see Appendix D) can be used to evaluate the gain (B.) and phase (C.) response using only the
input length change and an output force profile. Given the gain (B.) and phase (C.) response it is often possible to identify the
system due to the clearly identifiable responses of each system.


--- Page 16 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 16 of 59
extension reflex) Kirsch et al. [5     ] showed that these stiffness and damping coefficients vary
linearly with the active force developed by the muscle. Further, Kirsch et al. [5     ] repeated the
experiment using perturbations that had a variety of lengths (0.4 mm, 0.8mm, and 1.6mm) and
bandwidths (15Hz, 35Hz, and 90Hz) and observed a peculiar quality of muscle: the damping
coefficient of best fit increases as the bandwidth of the perturbation decreases (See Figures 3     
and 10      of Kirsch et al. [5     ] for details). Here we simulate Kirsch et al.’s experiment [5     ] to
determine, first, the VAF of the VEXAT model and the Hill model in comparison to a spring-damper
of best fit; second, to compare the gain and phase response of the models to biological muscle; and
finally, to see if the spring-damper coefficients of best fit for both models increase with active
force in a manner that is similar to the cat soleus that Kirsch et al. studied [5     ].
To simulate the experiments of Kirsch et al. [5     ] we begin by creating the 9 stochastic
perturbation waveforms used in the experiment that vary in perturbation amplitude (0.4mm,
0.8mm, and 1.6mm) and bandwidth (0-15 Hz, 0-35 Hz, and 0-90 Hz)11     . The waveform is created
using a vector that is composed of random numbers with a range of [−1, 1] that begins and ends
with a series of zero-valued padding points. Next, a forward pass of a 2nd order Butterworth filter
is applied to the waveform and finally the signal is scaled to the appropriate amplitude (Fig. 6     ).
The muscle model is then activated until it develops a constant tension at a length of 
 . The
musculotendon unit is then simulated as the length is varied using the previously constructed
waveforms while activation is held constant. To see how impedance varies with active force, we
repeated these simulations at ten evenly spaced tensions from 2.5N to 11.5N. Ninety simulations
are required to evaluate the nine different perturbation waveforms at each of the ten tension
levels. The time-domain length perturbations and force responses of the modelled muscles are
used to evaluate the gain and phase responses of the models in the frequency-domain (See
Appendix D for details). Note that the frequency resolution of our simulations are finer than the
Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] data since we can use all 6.15 seconds of the simulated data (2048 samples at
333 Hz), while Kirsch et al. [5     ] were restricted to analyzing smaller time windows during the
experiment (also 2048 samples at 333 Hz) in which the average output of the muscle could be
considered constant.
When coupled with an elastic tendon, the 15 Hz perturbations show that neither model can match
the VAF of Kirsch et al.’s analysis [5     ] (compare Fig. 7A      to G     ), while at 90Hz the VEXAT
model reaches a VAF of 91% (compare Fig. 7D      to J     ) which is within the range of 88-99%
reported by Kirsch et al. [5     ]. While the VEXAT model has a gain profile in the frequency-domain
that closer to Kirch et al.’s data [5     ] than the Hill model (compare Fig. 7B      to H     ), both models
have a greater phase shift than Kirch et al.’s data [5     ] (compare Fig. 7C      to I     ). The gain
response of the VEXAT model follows Kirsch et al.’s data [5     ] closely, while the gain response of
the Hill model has widely scattered coefficients due to the nonlinearity of the model’s response to
even small perturbations (compare Fig. 7E      to K     ). The phase response of the VEXAT model to
the 90 Hz perturbation (Fig. 7F     ) shows the consequences of Eqn. 16     : at low frequencies the
phase response of the VEXAT model is similar to that of the Hill model, while at higher frequencies
the model’s response becomes similar to a spring-damper. This frequency dependent response is a
consequence of the first term in Eqn. 16     : the value of τS causes the response of the model to be
similar to a Hill model at lower frequencies and mimic a spring-damper at higher frequencies.
Both models show the same perturbation-dependent phase-response, as the damping coefficient of
best fit increases as the perturbation bandwidth decreases: compare the damping coefficient of
best fit for the 15Hz and 90Hz profiles for the VEXAT model (listed on Fig. 7A     . and D     .) and the
Hill model (listed on Fig. 7E     . and H     ., respectively).
The closeness of each model’s response to the spring-damper of best fit changes when a rigid
tendon is used instead of an elastic tendon. While the VEXAT model’s response to the 15 Hz and 90
Hz perturbations improve slightly (compare to Fig. 7A-F      to Fig. 18A-F     ), the response of the
Hill model to the 15 Hz perturbation changes dramatically with the time-domain VAF rising from
51% to 81%. Although the Hill model’s VAF in response to the 15 Hz perturbation improved, the


--- Page 17 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 17 of 59
Figure 6
The perturbation waveforms are constructed by generating a series of pseudo-random numbers, padding the ends with
zeros, by filtering the signal using a 2nd order low-pass filter (wave forms with -3dB cut-off frequencies of 90 Hz, 35 Hz and 15
Hz appear in A.) and finally by scaling the range to the desired limit (1.6mm in A.). Although the power spectrum of the
resulting signals is highly variable, the filter ensures that the frequencies beyond the -3dB point have less than half their
original power (B.).


--- Page 18 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 18 of 59
Figure 7
The 15 Hz perturbations show that the VEXAT model’s performance is mixed: in the time-domain (A.) the VAF is lower than
the 88-99% analyzed by Kirsch et al. [5     ]; the gain response (B.) follows the profile in Figure 3      of Kirsch et al. [5     ], while
the phase response is too steep (C.). The response of the VEXAT model to the 90 Hz perturbations is much better: a VAF of
91% is reached in the time-domain (D.), the gain response follows the response of the cat soleus analyzed by Kirsch et al.
[5     ], while the phase-response follows biological muscle closely for frequencies higher than 30 Hz. Although the Hill’s time-
domain response to the 15 Hz signal has a higher VAF than the VEXAT model (G.), the RMSE of the Hill model’s gain response
(H.) and phase response (I.) shows it to be more in error than the VEXAT model. While the VEXAT model’s response improved
in response to the 90 Hz perturbation, the Hill model’s response does not: the VAF of the time-domain response remains low
(J.), neither the gain (K.) nor phase responses (L.) follow the data of Kirsch et al. [5     ]. Note that the frequency coefficients of
both the VEXAT model and the Hill model are scattered points (rather than continuous curves) because of the nonlinearities
present in each model.


--- Page 19 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 19 of 59
frequency response contains mixed results: the rigid-tendon Hill model’s gain response is better
(Fig. 18H     ), while the phase response is worse in comparison to the elastic-tendon Hill model.
While the rigid-tendon Hill model produces a better time-domain response to the 15 Hz
perturbation than the elastic-tendon Hill model, this improvement has been made by using
amounts of damping that exceeds that of biological muscle as indicated by Kirsch et al.’s analysis
[5     ].
The gain and phase profiles of both models contain coefficients that do not follow a clear line, but
instead are scattered. This scattering of coefficients occurs when the underlying plant being
analyzed is nonlinear, even when subject to small perturbations. Much of the VEXAT model’s
nonlinearities in this experiment come from the tendon tendon model (compare to Fig. 7A-F      to
Fig. 18A-F     ), since the response of the VEXAT model with a rigid tendon is less scattered. The Hill
model’s nonlinearities originate from the underlying expressions for stiffness and damping of the
Hill model. The stiffness of a Hill model’s CE
is heavily influenced by the partial derivative of 
  which has a region of negative stiffness.
Although 
  is well approximated as being linear for small length changes, 
  changes sign
across 
 . Similarly, the damping of a Hill model’s CE
also suffers from high degrees of nonlinearity for small perturbations about vM = 0 since the slope
of 
  is positive and large when shortening, and positive and small when lengthening (Fig.
2B     ).
By repeating the stochastic perturbation experiments across a range of isometric forces, Kirsch et
al. [5     ] were able to show that the stiffness and damping of a muscle varies linearly with the
active tension it develops (see Figure 12      of [5     ]). We have repeated our simulations of Kirsch
et al.’s [5     ] experiments at ten nominal forces (spaced evenly between 2.5N and 11.5 N) and
compared how the VEXAT model and the Hill model’s stiffness and damping coefficients compare
to Figure 12      of Kirsch et al. [5     ] (Fig. 8     ). The VEXAT model develops stiffness and damping
similar to Kirsch et al.’s data when coupled with either a viscoelastic tendon (Fig. 8A & B     ) or a
rigid tendon (Fig. 8C & D     ), and with a high VAF. In contrast, when the Hill model is coupled with
an elastic tendon, its damping is notably larger than Kirsch et al.’s data as is the model’s stiffness at
the higher tensions (Fig. 8B     ). This pattern changes when simulating a Hill model with a rigid
tendon: the model’s stiffness is now half of Kirsch et al.’s data (Fig. 8C     ), while the model’s final
damping coefficient is nearly three times the value measured by Kirsch et al. (Fig. 8D     ). The
tendon model also affects the VAF of the Hill model to a large degree: the elastic-tendon Hill model
has a low VAF 31%-44% (Fig. 8A & B     ) while the rigid-tendon Hill model has a much higher VAF
of 79%. While the VEXAT model’s stiffness and damping increases linearly with activation,
consistent with Kirsch et al.’s data [5     ], the stiffness and damping of the Hill model differs from
Kirsch et al.’s data [5     ], ranging from small amounts of error (rigid-tendon model developing low
tensions shown in Fig. 8C & D     ) to large amounts of error (elastic-tendon model under high
tension shown in Fig. 8A & B     ).


--- Page 20 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 20 of 59
Figure 8
When coupled with an elastic tendon, the stiffness (A.) and damping (B.) coefficients of best fit of both the VEXAT model and
a Hill model increase with the tension developed by the MTU. However, both the stiffness and damping of the elastic tendon
Hill model are larger than Kirsch et al.’s coefficients (from Figure 12      of [5     ]), particularly at higher tensions. When
coupled with rigid tendon the stiffness (C.) and damping (D.) coefficients of the VEXAT model remain similar, as the values for
 and 
  have been chosen to take the tendon model into account. In contrast, the stiffness and damping coefficients of
the rigid-tendon Hill model differ dramatically from the stiffness and damping coefficients of the elastic-tendon Hill model:
while the elastic tendon Hill model is too stiff and damped, the rigid tendon Hill model is not stiff enough (compare A. to C.)
and far too damped (compare B. to D.). Coupling the Hill model with a rigid tendon rather than an elastic tendon does have
an unexpected benefit: the VAF increased from the 31%-44% range shown in A. and B. to 79% shown in C. and D. Although
the Hill model’s response more closely resembles a spring-damper when coupled with a rigid tendon, the spring and damper
coefficients fail to fit Kirsch et al.’s data [5     ].


--- Page 21 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 21 of 59
When the VAF of the VEXAT and Hill model is evaluated across a range of tensions (ranging from
2.5-11.5N), frequencies (15 Hz, 35 Hz, and 90 Hz), amplitudes (0.4mm, 0.8mm, and 1.6mm), and
tendon types (rigid and elastic) two things are clear: first, that the VAF of 80-100% of the VEXAT
model is closer to the range of 88-99% reported by Kirsch et al. [5     ] than the range of 32-91% of
the Hill model (Fig. 9     ); and second, that there are systematic variations in VAF, stiffness, and
damping across the different perturbation magnitudes and frequencies as shown in Tables 4     
and 5      (Appendix E). While the VAF of the VEXAT model is similar whether a rigid or elastic
tendon is used across all frequencies (Fig. 9A, B     , and C     ), the Hill model’s VAF noticeably
varies with tendon type: in the lower frequency range (Fig. 9A      and B     ) the elastic-tendon Hill
model has a far lower VAF than a rigid-tendon Hill model; while in the highest frequency range
the VAF of the Hill model (Fig. 9C     ) is not as affected by the elasticity of the tendon. While the
VEXAT model’s lowest VAF occurs in response to the low frequency perturbations (Fig. 9A     ), the
Hill model’s lowest VAF varies with both tendon type and frequency: the rigid-tendon Hill model
has its lowest VAF in response to high frequency perturbations (Fig. 9C     ) while the elastictendon
Hill model has its lowest VAF in response to the low frequency perturbations (Fig. 9A     ). It is
unclear if biological muscle displays systematic shifts in VAF since Kirsch et al. [5     ] did not
report the VAF of each trial, instead indicating that a spring-damper of best-fit displayed a VAF of
88-99% across all trials and specimens.
3.2 Active lengthening on the descending limb
We now turn our attention to the active lengthening in-situ experiments of Herzog and Leonard
[6     ]. During these experiments a cat soleus was actively lengthened by modest amounts
 starting on the descending limb of the active-force-length curve 
  in Fig.
2A     ). This starting point was chosen specifically because the stiffness of a Hill model may
actually change sign and become negative because of the influence of the active-force-length curve
on kM as shown in Eqn. 26      as ℓM extends beyond 
 . Herzog and Leonard’s [6     ] experiment
is important for showing that biological muscle does not exhibit negative stiffness on the
descending limb of the active-force-length curve. In addition, this experiment also highlights the
slow recovery of the muscle’s force after stretching has ceased, and the phenomena of passive
force enhancement after stimulation is removed. Here we will examine the 9 mm/s ramp
experiment in detail because the simulations of the 3 mm/s and 27 mm/s ramp experiments
produces similar stereotypical patterns – see Appendix F for details.
When Herzog and Leonard’s [6     ] active ramp-lengthening (Fig. 10A     ) experiment is simulated,
both models produce a force transient initially (Fig. 10B     ), but for different reasons. The VEXAT
model’s transient is created when the lumped crossbridge spring (the 
  term in Eqn. 15     ) is
stretched. In contrast, the Hill model’s transient is produced, not by spring forces, but by damping
produced by the force-velocity curve as shown in Eqn. 26     .
After the initial force transient, the response of the two models diverges (Fig. 10B     ): the VEXAT
model continues to develop increased tension as it is lengthened, while the Hill model’s tension
drops before recovering. The VEXAT model’s continued increase in force is due to the titin model:
when activated, a section of titin’s PEVK region remains approximately fixed to the actin element
(Fig. 1C     ). As a result, the ℓ2 element (composed of part of PEVK segment and the distal Ig
segment) continues to stretch and generates higher forces than it would if the muscle were being
passively stretched. While both the elastic and rigid tendon versions of the VEXAT model produce
the same stereotypical ramp-lengthening response (Fig. 10B     ), the musculotendon unit develops
slightly more tension using a rigid tendon because the strain of the musculotendon unit is soley
borne by the CE.


--- Page 22 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 22 of 59
Figure 9
Kirsch et al. [5     ] noted that the VAF of the spring-damper model of best fit captured between 88-99% across all
experiments. We have repeated the perturbation experiments to evaluate the VAF across a range of conditions: two different
tendon models, three perturbation bandwidths (15 Hz, 35 Hz, and 90 Hz), three perturbation magnitudes (0.4 mm, 0.8 mm
and 1.6 mm), and ten nominal force values (spaced evenly between 2.5N and 11.5N). Each bar in the plot shows the mean VAF
across all ten nominal force values, with the whiskers extending to the minimum and maximum value that occurred in each
set. The VAF of the VEXAT model is affected by up to 20% depending on the condition, with the lowest VAF occurring in
response to the 15 Hz 1.6 mm perturbation (A.), with higher VAF responses occurring at 35 Hz (B.) and 90 Hz (C.). Where the
tendon model affects the VAF of the VEXAT model slightly, the tendon model causes the VAF of the Hill model to vary by
nearly 60% depending on the condition: at the 15 Hz (A.) and 35 Hz (B.) the Hill model’s response is dramatically affected by
the tendon model, while at the 90 Hz (C.) the tendon model does not exert such a large influence.


--- Page 23 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 23 of 59
Figure 10
Herzog and Leonard [6     ] actively lengthened (A.) a cat soleus on the descending limb of the force-length curve (where
 in Fig. 2A     ) and measured the force response of the MTU (B.). After the initial transient at 2.4s the Hill model’s
output force drops (B.) because of the small region of negative stiffness (C.) created by the force-length curve. In contrast,
the VEXAT model develops steadily increasing forces between 2.4 − 3.4s and has a consistent level of stiffness (C.) and
damping (D.).


--- Page 24 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 24 of 59
In contrast, the Hill model develops less force during lengthening when it enters a small region of
negative stiffness (Fig. 10B      and C     ) because the passive-force-length curve is too compliant to
compensate for the negative slope of the active force-length curve. Similarly, the damping
coefficient of the Hill model drops substantially during lengthening (Fig. 10D     ). Equation 26     
and Figure 2B      shows the reason that damping drops during lengthening: d f V/dvM, the slope of
the line in Fig. 2B     , is quite large when the muscle is isometric and becomes quite small as the
rate of lengthening increases.
After the ramp stretch is completed (at time 3.4 seconds in Fig. 10B     ), the tension developed by
the cat soleus recovers slowly, following a profile that looks strikingly like a first-order decay. The
large damping coefficient acting between the titin-actin bond slows the force recovery of the
VEXAT model. We have tuned the value of 
  to 
  for the elastic tendon
model, and 
  for the rigid tendon model, to match the rate of force decay of the cat
soleus in Herzog and Leonard’s data [6     ]. The Hill model, in contrast, recovers to its isometric
value quite rapidly. Since the Hill model’s force enhancement during lengthening is a function of
the rate of lengthening, when the lengthening ceases, so too does the force enhancement.
Once activation is allowed to return to zero, Herzog and Leonard’s data shows that the cat soleus
continues to develop a tension that is ΔfB above passive levels (Fig. 10B      for t > 8.5s). The force
ΔfB is known as passive force enhancement, and is suspected to be caused by titin binding to actin
[74     ]. Since we model titin-actin forces using an activation-dependent damper, when activation
goes to zero our titin model becomes unbound from actin. As such, both our model and a Hill
model remain ΔfB below the experimental data of Herzog and Leonard (Fig. 10B     ) after
lengthening and activation have ceased.
3.3 Active lengthening beyond actin-myosin overlap
One of the great challenges that remains is to decompose how much tension is developed by titin
(Fig. 1C     ) separately from myosin (Fig. 1B     ) in an active sarcomere. Leonard et al.’s [7     ]
active-lengthening experiment provides some insight into this force distribution problem because
they recorded active forces both within and far beyond actinmyosin overlap. Leonard et al.’s [7     ]
data shows that active force continues to develop linearly during lengthening, beyond actin-
myosin overlap, until mechanical failure. When activated and lengthened, the myofibrils failed at
a length of 
  and force of 
 , on average. In contrast, during passive lengthening
myofibrils failed at a much shorter length of 
  with a dramatically lower tension of of
. To show that the extraordinary forces beyond actin-myosin overlap can be ascribed to
titin, Leonard et al. [7     ] repeated the experiment but deleted titin using trypsin: the titin-deleted
myofibrils failed at short lengths and insignificant stresses. Using the titin model of Eqn. 20      as
an interpretive lens (Fig. 1A     ), the huge forces developed during active lengthening would be
created when titin is bound to actin leaving the distal segment of titin to take up all of the strain
(Fig. 3A     ). Conversely, our titin model would produce lower forces during passive lengthening
because the proximal Ig, PEVK, and distal Ig regions would all be lengthening together (Fig. 3A     ).
Since Leonard et al.’s experiment [7     ] was performed on skinned rabbit myofibrils and not on
whole muscle, both the VEXAT and Hill models had to be adjusted prior to simulation. To simulate
a rabbit myofibril we created a force-length curve consistent [75     ] with the actin filament
lengths of rabbit skeletal muscle (1.12µm actin, 1.63µm myosin, and 0.07µm z-line width [45     ]),
set the dimensions of titin to be consistent with Prado et al.’s [60     ] measurements (50 proximal Ig
domains, 800 PEVK residues, and 22 distal Ig domains), used a rigid tendon of zero length, and set
the pennation angle to zero. Since the evaluation of the model is done using normalized lengths
and forces, we did not scale the lengths and forces of the model to reflect length and maximum
tension of the fibrils tested by Leonard et al. [7     ].


--- Page 25 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 25 of 59
As mentioned in Sec. 2, because this experiment includes extreme lengths, we consider two
different force-length relations for each segment of titin (Fig. 11A     ): a linear extrapolation, and
an extension that follows the WLC model. While both versions of the titin model are identical up
to 
 , beyond 
  the WLC model continues to develop larger and larger forces until all of
the Ig domains and PEVK residues have been unfolded (see Appendix B.3 for details) and the
segments of titin reach a physical singularity: at this point the Ig domains and PEVK residues
cannot be elongated any further without breaking molecular bonds. Finally, our preliminary
simulations indicated that the linear titin model’s titin-actin bond was not strong enough to
support large tensions, and so we scaled the value of 
  used to simulate an entire cat soleus
by a factor of ten.
The Hill model was similarly modified, with the pennation angle set to zero and coupled with a
rigid tendon of zero length. Since the Hill model lacks an ECM element the passive-force-length
curve was instead fitted to match the passive forces produced in Leonard et al.’s data [7     ]. No
adjustments were made to the active elements of the Hill model.
When the slow active stretch (0.1µm/sarcomere/s) of Leonard et al.’s experiment is simulated [7     ]
only the VEXAT model with the linear titin element can match the experimental data of Leonard et
al. [7     ] (Fig. 11B     ). The Hill model cannot produce active force for lengths greater than 
since the active force-length curve goes to zero (Fig. 2B     ) and the model lacks any element
capable of producing force beyond this length. In contrast, the linear titin model continues to
develop active force until a length of 
  is reached, at which point the titin-actin bond is
pulled off the end of the actin filament and the active force is reduced to its passive value.
The WLC titin model is not able to reach the extreme lengths observed by Leonard et al. [7     ]. The
distal segment of the WLC titin model approaches its contour length early in the simulation and
ensures that the the titin-actin bond is dragged off the end of the actin filament at 
  (Fig.
11B     ). After 
  (Fig. 11B     ), the tension of the WLC titin model drops to its passive value
but continues to increase until the contour lengths of all of the segments of titin are reached at
. Comparing the response of the linear model to the WLC titin model two things are clear:
the linear titin model more faithfully follows the data of Leonard et al. [7     ], but does so with titin
segment lengths that exceed the maximum contour length expected for the isoform of titin in a
rabbit myofibril.
This simulation has also uncovered a surprising fact: the myofibrils in Leonard et al.’s [7     ]
experiments do not fail at 
 , as would be expected by the WLC model of titin, but instead
reach much greater lengths (Fig. 2B     ). Physically, it may be possible for a rabbit myofibril to
reach these lengths (without exceeding the contour lengths of the proximal Ig, PEVK, and distal Ig
segments) if the bond between the distal segment of titin and myosin breaks down. This would
allow the large Ig segment, that is normally bound to myosin, to uncoil and continue to develop
the forces observed by Leonard et al. [7     ]. Unfortunately the precise mechanism which allowed
the samples in Leonard et al.’s experiments to develop tension beyond titin’s contour length
remains unknown.
3.4 Force-length and force-velocity
Although the active portion of the Hill model is embedded in Eqn. 16     , it is not clear if the VEXAT
model can still replicate Hill’s force-velocity experiments [8     ] and Gordon et al.’s [9     ] force-
length experiments. Here we simulate both of these experiments using the cat soleus model that
we have used for the simulations described in Sec. 3.1 and compare the results to the force-length
and force-velocity curves that are used in the Hill model and in Eqn. 16      of the VEXAT model.


--- Page 26 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 26 of 59
Figure 11
In the VEXAT model we consider two different versions of the force-length relation for each titin segment (A): a linear
extrapolation, and a WLC model extrapolation. Leonard et al. [7     ] observed that active myofibrils continue to develop
increasing amounts of tension beyond actin-myosin overlap (B, grey lines with ±1 standard deviation shown). When this
experiment is replicated using the VEXAT model (B., blue & magenta lines) and a Hill model (C. red lines), only the VEXAT
model with the linear extrapolated titin model is able to replicate the experiment with the titin-actin bond slipping off of the
actin filament at 
 .


--- Page 27 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 27 of 59
Hill’s force-velocity experiment [8     ] is simulated by activating the model, and then by changing
its length to follow a shortening ramp and a lengthening ramp. During shortening experiments,
the CE shortens from 
  to 
  with the measurement of active muscle force is made at
. Lengthening experiments are similarly made by measuring muscle force mid-way through a
ramp stretch that begins at 
  and ends at 
 . When an elastic tendon model is used, we
carefully evaluate initial and terminal path lengths to accommodate for the stretch of the tendon
so that the CE still shortens from 
  to 
  and lengthens from 
  to 
 .
The VEXAT model produces forces that differ slightly from the f V that is embedded in Eqn. 16     
while the Hill model reproduces the curve (Fig. 12     ). The maximum shortening velocity of the
VEXAT model is slightly weaker than the embedded curve due to the series viscoelasticity of the XE
element. Although the model can be made to converge to the f V curve more rapidly by decreasing
τS this has the undesirable consequence of degrading the low-frequency response of the model
when Kirsch et al.’s experiments [5     ] (particularly Fig. 7C     ., and F     .). These small differences
can be effectively removed by scaling 
  (Fig. 12      shows that scaling 
  by 1.05 results in a
force-velocity curve that closely follows the desired curve) to accommodate for the small decrease
in force caused by the viscoelastic XE element.
Gordon et al.’s [9     ] force-length experiments were simulated by first passively lengthening the
CE, and next by measuring the active force developed by the CE at a series of fixed lengths. Prior to
activation, the passive CE was simulated for a short period of time in a passive state to reduce any
history effects due to the active titin element. To be consistent with Gordon et al.’s [9     ]
experiment, we subtracted off the passive force from the active force before producing the active-
force-length profile.
The simulation of Gordon et al.’s [9     ] experiment shows that the VEXAT model (Fig. 13A     , blue
dots) produces a force-length profile that is shifted to the right of the Hill model (Fig. 13A     , red
line) due to the series elasticity introduced by the XE. We can solve for the size of this right-wards
shift by noting that Eqn. 16      will drive the 
  to a length such that the isometric force developed
by the XE is equal to that of the embedded Hill model
allowing us to solve for
the isometric strain of the XE. Since there are two viscoelastic XE elements per CE, the VEXAT
model has an active force-length characteristic that shifted to the right of the embedded f L curve
by a constant 
 . This shift can be calibrated out of the model (Fig. 13      upper plot, magenta
squares) adjusting the f L(·) curve so that it is 
  to the left of its normal position. Note that all
simulations described in the previous sections made use of the VEXAT model with the calibrated
force-length relation and the calibrated force-velocity relation.
4 Discussion
A muscle model is defined by the experiments it can replicate and the mechanisms it embodies.
We have developed the VEXAT muscle model to replicate the force response of muscle to a wide
variety of perturbations [5     , 6     , 7     ] while also retaining the ability to reproduce Hill’s force-
velocity [8     ] experiment and Gordon et al.’s [9     ] force-length experiments. The model we have


--- Page 28 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 28 of 59
Figure 12
When Hill’s [8     ] force-velocity experiment is simulated (A.), the VEXAT model produces a force-velocity profile (blue dots)
that approaches zero more rapidly during shortening than the embedded profile f V(·) (red lines). By scaling 
 by 1.05
the VEXAT model (magenta squares) is able to closely follow the force-velocity curve of the Hill model. While the force-velocity
curves between the two models are similar, the time-domain force response of the two models differs substantially (B.). The
rigid-tendon Hill model exhibits a sharp nonlinear change in force at the beginning (0.1s) and ending (0.21s) of the ramp
stretch.


--- Page 29 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 29 of 59
Figure 13
When Gordon et al.’s [9     ] passive and active force-length experiments are simulated the VEXAT model (blue dots) and the
Hill model (red lines) produce slightly different force-length curves (A.) and force responses in the time-domain (B.). The
VEXAT model produces a right shifted active force-length curve, when compared to the Hill model due to the series elasticity
of the XE element. By shifting the underlying curve by 
  to the left the VEXAT model (magenta squares) can be made to
exactly match the force-length characteristic of the Hill model.


--- Page 30 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 30 of 59
Figure 14
To evaluate the stiffness of the actin-myosin load path, we first determine the average point of attachment. Since the actin
filament length varies across species we label it LA. Across rabbits, cats and human skeletal muscle myosin geometry is
consistent [75     ]: a half-myosin is 0.8µm in length with a 0.1µm bare patch in the middle. Thus at full overlap the average
point of attachment is 0.45µm from the M-line, or LA−0.45µm from the Z-line at 
. The lumped stiffness of the actin-myosin
load path of a half-sarcomere is the stiffness of three springs in series: a spring representing a LA − 0.45µm length of actin, a
spring representing the all attached crossbridges, and a spring representing a 0.45µm section of myosin.


--- Page 31 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 31 of 59
developed uses two mechanisms to capture the force response of muscle over a large variety of
time and length scales: first, a viscoelastic crossbridge model that over short time-scales appears
as a spring-damper, and at longer time-scales mimics a Hill-model; second, a titin element that is
capable of developing active force during large stretches.
The viscoelastic crossbridge and titin elements we have developed introduce a number of
assumptions into the model. While there is evidence that the activation-dependent stiffness of
muscle originates primarily from the stiffness of the attached crossbridges [43     ], the origins of
the activation-dependent damping observed by Kirsch et al. [5     ] have not yet been established.
We assumed that, since the damping observed by Kirsch et al. [5     ] varies linearly with activation,
the damping originates from the attached crossbridges. Whether this damping is intrinsic or is due
to some other factor remains to be established. Next, we have also assumed that the force
developed by the XE converges to a Hill model [15     ] given enough time (Eqn. 16     ). A recent
experiment of Tomalka et al. [76     ] suggests the force developed by the XE might decrease during
lengthening rather than increasing as is typical of a Hill model [15     ]. If Tomalka et al.’s [76     ]
observations can be replicated, the VEXAT model will need to be adjusted so that the the XE
element develops less force during active lengthening while the active-titin element develops
more force. Finally, we have assumed that actin-myosin sliding acceleration (due to crossbridge
cycling) occurs when there is a force imbalance between the external force applied to the XE and
the internal force developed by the XE as shown in Eqn. 16     . This assumption is a departure from
previous models: Hill-type models [14     , 15     ] assume that the tension applied to the muscle
instantaneously affects the actin-myosin sliding velocity; Huxley models [10     ] assume that the
actin-myosin sliding velocity directly affects the rate of attachment and detachment of
crossbridges.
The active titin model that we have developed assumes that some part of the PEVK segment
interacts with actin through an activation dependent damping force: the nature of this interaction
is not clear, and many different mechanisms have been proposed [36     , 37     , 38     , 42     ]. The
active damping element we have proposed is similar to Rode et al.’s [36     ] sticky-spring model,
but instead acts at a single location within the PEVK segment like the model of Schappacher-Tilp et
al. [38     ]. What distinguishes our titin model is that it requires only a single state and its curves
have been carefully constructed to satisfy three constraints: that the passive force-length curve of
the ECM and titin together can be fit to measurements, ratio of the ECM to titin is within the range
measured by Prado et al. [60     ], and the relative strains of the proximal Ig and PEVK sections are
consistent with Trombitás et al.’s measurements [24     ].
The model we have proposed can replicate phenomena that occur at a wide variety of time and
length scales: Kirsch et al.’s experiments [5     ] which occur over small time and length scales; the
active lengthening experiments of Herzog and Leonard [6     ] and Leonard et al. [7     ] which occur
over physiological to supra-physiological length scales. In contrast, we have shown in Sec. 3.1 to
3.3 that a Hill-type model compares poorly to biological muscle when the same set of experiments
are simulated. We expect that a Huxley model [10     ] is also likely to have difficulty reproducing
Kirsch et al.’s experiment [5     ] because the model lacks an active damping element. Since titin
was discovered [21     ] long after Huxley’s model was proposed [10     ], a Huxley model will be
unable to replicate any experiment that is strongly influenced by titin such as Leonard et al.’s
experiment [7     ].
Although there have been several more recent muscle model formulations proposed, none have
the properties to simultaneously reproduce the experiments of Kirsch et al. [5     ], Herzog and
Leonard [6     ], Leonard et al. [7     ], Hill [8     ], and Gordon et al. [9     ]. Linearized impedance
models [12     , 13     ] can reproduce Kirsch et al.’s experiments [5     ], these models lack the
nonlinear components needed to reproduce Gordon et al.’s force-length curve [9     ] and Hill’s
force-velocity curve [8     ]. The models of Forcinito et al. [16     ], Haeufle et al. [18     ], Gü nther et
al. [20     ], and Tahir et al. [39     ] all have a structure that places a damping element in series with


--- Page 32 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 32 of 59
a spring: Kirsch et al. [5     ] explicitly demonstrated that this type of model fails to reproduce the
gain and phase response of biological muscle. De Groote et al. [53     , 54     ] introduced a short-
range-stiffness element in parallel to a Hill model to capture the stiffness of biological muscle.
While De Groote et al.’s [53     , 54     ] formulation improves upon a Hill model it is unlikely to
reproduce Kirsch et al.’s experiment [5     ] because we have shown in Sec. 3.1 that a Hill model has
a frequency response that differs from biological muscle. Rode et al.’s [36     ] muscle model also
uses a Hill model for the CE and so we expect that this model will have the same difficulties
reproducing Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] experiment. Schappacher-Tilp et al.’s model [38     ] extends a
Huxley model [10     ] by adding a detailed titin element. Similar to a Huxley model, Schappacher-
Tilp et al.’s model [38     ] will likely have difficulty reproducing Kirsch et al.’s experiment [5     ]
because it is missing an active damping element.
While developing this model, we have come across open questions that we hope can be addressed
in the future. How do muscle stiffness and damping change across the force-length curve? Does
stiffness and damping change with velocity? What are the physical origins of the active damping
observed by Kirsch et al. [5     ]? What are the conditions that affect passive-force enhancement,
and its release? In addition to pursuing these questions, we hope that other researchers continue
to contribute experiments that are amenable to simulation, and to develop musculotendon models
that overcome the limitations of our model. To help others build upon our work, we have made
the source code of the model and all simulations presented in this paper available online12     .
Acknowledgements
Financial support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grant No. MI 2109/1-1, the Lighthouse
Initiative Geriatronics by StMWi Bayern (Project X, grant no. 5140951), and NSERC of Canada is
gratefully acknowledged.
A The stiffness of the actin-
myosin and titin load paths
A single half-myosin can connect to the surrounding six actin filaments through nearly 100
crossbridges. A 0.800 µm half-myosin has a pair crossbridges over 0.700µm of its length every 14.3
nm which amounts to 97.9 per half-myosin [77     ]. Assuming a duty cycle of 25% (values between
5-90% have been reported [46     ]), at full actin-myosin overlap there will be 24.5 attached
crossbridges with a total stiffness of 5.4 − 28.4 pN/nm (24.5 × 0.69 ± 0.47 pN/nm [43     ]).
At full overlap, the Z-line is 1 actin filament length L A (1.27 µm in human [75     ]) from the M-line
and the average point of crossbridge attachment is in the middle of the half-myosin at a distance
of 0.45 µm from the M-line (0.1µm is bare and 0.35µm is half of the remaining length), which is L A
− 0.45 µm from the Z-line. A single actin filament has a stiffness of 46-68 pN/nm [45     ]. Since
stiffness scales inversely with length, the section between the Z-line and the average attachment
point has a stiffness of 83.6-123 pN/nm. Assuming that load is evenly distributed, each actin
filament contributes a third of its stiffness to each of the three half-sarcomeres that it borders.
Since there are six actin filaments surrounding each myosin filament the total stiffness of the actin
filaments for a half-sarcomere comes to 167-246 pN/nm. Myosin has a similar stiffness as a single
actin filament [62     ], with the section between the average attachment point and the M-line
having a stiffness of 81.8-121 pN/nm. The final active stiffness of half-sarcomere comes from the
series connection of actin, 24.5 crossbridges, and myosin is 4.9-21.0 pN/nm.


--- Page 33 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 33 of 59
The stiffness of the actin-myosin load path is between 54-233 times stiffer than the average
stiffness of 0.09 nN/nm generated by the six free titin filaments from skeletal muscle (each with an
average stiffness of 0.015 pN/nm [44     ]) that span each half-sarcomere. The stiffness of titin in
skeletal muscle can change dramatically during activation. If we assume that the middle of the
PEVK segment is rigidly fixed to actin during activation, the stiffness of each titin filament is 3.4
times higher since only half the PEVK region and the distal Ig segment is free to stretch. Despite
this large increase in stiffness, the actin-myosin load path remains 15-68 times stiffer than the titin
load path.
B Model Fitting
Many of the experiments simulated in this work [5     , 6     ] have been performed using a cat
soleus muscle. While we have been able to extract some architectural parameters directly from
the experiments we simulate (
  and 
  from [6     ]), we have had to rely on the literature
mentioned in Table 1      for the remaining parameters. The remaining properties of the model can
be solved by first building a viscoelastic damping model of the tendon; next, by solving for the
intrinsic stiffness and damping properties of the CE; and finally, by fitting the passive curves
 and 
  to simultaneously fit the passive force-length curve recorded by Herzog and
Leonard [6     ], using a mixture of tension from titin and the ECM that is consistent with Prado et
al.’s data [60     ], all while maintaining the geometric relationship between f IgP and f PEVK as
measured by Trombitás et al. [24     ].
B.1 Fitting the tendon’s stiffness and damping
Similar to previous work [15     ], we model the force-length relation of the tendon using a quintic
Bézier spline (Fig. 15A     ) that begins at 
  (where 
  is tendon length
normalized by 
 , and 
  is tension normalized by 
 ), ends at 
with a normalized stiffness of 
 , and uses the constants 
  and 
(given 
  from Scott and Loeb [79     ], 
  is thus 4.58%). Using the experimental data of
Netti et al. [72     ] we have also constructed a curve to evaluate the damping coefficient of the
tendon. The normalized tendon stiffness (termed storage modulus by Netti et al. [72     ]) and
normalized tendon damping (termed loss modulus by Netti et al. [72     ]) both have a similar shape
as the tendon is stretched from slack to 
  (Fig. 15B      and C     ). The similarity in shape is likely
not a coincidence.
The nonlinear characteristics (Fig. 15     ) tendon originates from its microscopic structure. Tendon
is composed of many fiber bundles with differing resting lengths [72     ]. Initially the tendon’s
fiber bundles begin crimped, but gradually stretch as the tendon lengthens, until finally all fiber
bundles are stretched and the tendon achieves its maximum stiffness (Fig. 15B     ) and damping
(Fig. 15C     ) [72     ]. Accordingly, in Eqn. 23      we have described the normalized damping of the
tendon as being equal to the normalized stiffness of the tendon scaled by a constant U. To estimate
U we have used the measurements of Netti et al. [72     ] (Fig. 15 B      and C     ) and solved a least-
squares problem
to arrive at a value of U = 0.057. The resulting damping model (Fig. 15C     ) fits the measurements
of Netti et al. [72     ] closely.


--- Page 34 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 34 of 59
Table 1
Cat soleus MTU properties used in this work. Parameter Symbol Value Source
Figure 15
The normalized tendon force-length curve (A) has been been fit to match the cat soleus tendon stiffness measurements of
Scott and Loeb [79     ]. The data of Netti et al. [72     ] allow us to develop a model of tendon damping as a linear function of
tendon stiffness. By normalizing the measurements of Netti et al. [72     ] by the maximum storage modulus we obtain curves
that are equivalent to the normalized stiffness (B) and damping (C) of an Achilles tendon from a rabbit. Both normalized
tendon stiffness and damping follow similar curves, but at different scales, allowing us to model tendon damping as a linear
function of tendon stiffness (C).


--- Page 35 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 35 of 59
B.2 Fitting the CE’s Impedance
We can now calculate the normalized impedance of the XE using the viscoelastic tendon model we
have constructed and Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] measurements of the impedance of the entire MTU.
Since an MTUis structured with a CE in series with a tendon, the compliance of the MTUis given by
where 
  is the stiffness of the CE in the direction of the tendon. We can calculate kM directly by
fitting a line to the stiffness vs tension plot that appears in Figure 12      of Kirsch et al. [5     ]
(0.8mm, 0-35 Hz perturbation) and resulting in kM =2.47 N/mm at a nominal force of 5N. Here we
use a nominal tension of 5N so that we can later compare our model to the 5N frequency response
reported in Figure 3      of Kirsch et al. [5     ]. Since Kirsch et al. [5     ] did not report the
architectural properties of the experimental specimens, we assume that the architectural
properties of the cat used in Kirsch et al.’s experiments are similar to the properties listed in Table
1     . We evaluate the stiffness of the tendon model by stretching it until it develops the nominal
tension of Kirsch et al.’s Figure 3      data (5N), and then compute its derivative which amounts to
kT =16.9 N/mm. Finally, using Eqn. 31      we can solve for a value of 
 . Since the
inverse of damping adds for damping elements in series
we can use a similar procedure to evaluate 
 , the damping of the CE along the tendon. The
value of βM that best fits the damping vs. tension plot that appears in Figure 12      of Kirsch et al.
[5     ] at a nominal tension of 5N is 0.0198 Ns/mm. The tendon damping model we have just
constructed develops 0.697 Ns/mm at a nominal load of 5N. Using Eqn. 32     , we arrive at
. Due to the pennation model, the stiffness and damping values of the CE differ from
those along the tendon.
The stiffness of the CE along the tendon is
which can be expanded to
Since we are using a constant thickness pennation model
and thus



--- Page 36 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 36 of 59
which simplifies to
Similarly, the constant thickness pennation model means that
which leads to
Recognizing that
we can solve for kM in terms of 
  by solving Eqn. 34      for kM and substituting the values of
Eqns. 37     , and 39     . In this case, the values of kM (4.46 N/mm) and 
  (4.46 N/mm) are the
same to three significant figures.
We can use a similar process to transform 
  into 
  using the pennation model by noting
that
which expands to a much smaller expression
than Eqn. 34      since α does not depend on vM, and thus ∂α/∂vM = 0. By taking a time derivative of
Eqn. 38      we arrive at
which allows us to solve for
By recognizing that
and using Eqns. 42      and 44      we can evaluate βM in terms of 
  Similar to kM, the value of βM
(0.020 Ns/mm) is close to 
  (0.020 Ns/mm). When this same procedure is applied to the stiffness
and damping coefficients extracted from the gain and phase profiles from Figure 3      of Kirsch et


--- Page 37 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 37 of 59
al. [5     ], the values of kM and βM differ (4.46 N/mm and 0.0089 Ns/mm) from the results produced
using the data of Figure 12      (2.90 N/mm and 0.020 Ns/mm). Likely these differences arise
because we have been forced to use a fixed maximum isometric force for all specimens when, in
reality, this property varies substantially. We now turn our attention to fitting the titin and ECM
elements, since we cannot determine how much of kM and βM are due to the XE until the titin and
ECM elements have been fitted.
B.3 Fitting the force-length curves of titin’s segments
The nonlinear force-length curves used to describe titin (
  and 
  in series), and the
ECM 
  must satisfy three conditions: the total force-length curve produced by the
sum of the ECM and titin must match the observed passive-force-length relation[6     ]; the
proportion of titin’s contribution relative to the ECM must be within measured bounds [60     ]; and
finally the stiffness of the 
  must be a linear scaling of 
  to match the observations of
Trombitás et al. [24     ].
First, we fit the passive force-length curve to the data of Herzog and Leonard [6     ] to serve as a
reference. The curve f PE begins at the normalized length and force coordinates of 
with a slope of 0, ends at 
  with a slope of 
 , and is linearly
extrapolated outside of this region.
We solve for the 
  and 
  such that
the squared differences between f PE and the passive force-length data of Herzog and Leonard
[6     ] (Fig. 2A      shows both the data and the fitted f PE curve) are minimized. While f PE is not
used directly in the model, it serves as a useful reference for constructing the ECM and titin force-
length curves. We assume that the ECM force-length curve is a linear scaling of f PE
where P is a constant. In this work, we set P to 56% which is the average ECM contribution that
Prado et al. [60     ] measured across 5 different rabbit skeletal muscles13     . The remaining
fraction, 1 − P, of the force-length curve comes from titin.
In mammalian skeletal muscle, titin has three elastic segments [60     ] connected in series: the
proximal Ig segment, the PEVK segment, and the distal Ig segment that is between the PEVK region
and the myosin filament (Fig. 1A     ). Trombitás et al. [24     ] labelled the PEVK region of titin with
antibodies allowing them to measure the distance between the Z-line and the proximal Ig/PEVK
boundary (Zℓ IgP/PEVK), and the distance between the Z-line and the PEVK/distal Ig boundary (Zℓ
PEVK/IgD), while the passive sarcomere was stretched from 2.35 − 4.46µm. By fitting functions to
Trombitás et al.’s [24     ] data we can predict the length of any of titin’s segments under the
following assumptions: the T12 segment is rigid (Fig. 1A     ), the distal Ig segment that overlaps
with myosin is rigid (Fig. 1A     ), and that during passive stretching the tension throughout the
titin filament is uniform. Since the sarcomeres in Trombitás et al.’s [24     ] experiments were
passively stretched it is reasonable to assume that tension throughout the free part of the titin
filament is uniform because the bond between titin and actin depends on calcium [34     , 29     ]
and crossbridge attachment [7     ].


--- Page 38 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 38 of 59
We begin by digitizing the data of Figure 5      of Trombitás et al. [24     ] and using the least-squares
method to fit lines to Zℓ IgP/PEVK and Zℓ PEVK/IgD (where the superscripts mean fromℓ to and so Zℓ
IgP/PEVK is the distance from the Z-line to the border of the IgP/PEVK segments). From these lines of
best fit we can evaluate the normalized length of the proximal Ig segment
the normalized length of the PEVK segment
and the normalized length of the distal Ig segment
as a function of sarcomere length. Next, we extract the coefficients for linear functions that
evaluate the lengths of
given the 
 . The coefficients that best fit the data from Trom-bitás et al. [24     ] appear in Table
2     .
These functions can be scaled to fit a titin filament of a differing geometry. Many of the
experiments simulated in this work used a cat soleus. Although the lengths of the segments in a cat
soleus titin filament have not been measured, we assume that it is a scaled version of a human
soleus titin filament (68 proximal Ig domains, 2174 PEVK residues, and 22 distal Ig domains
[24     ]) since both muscles contain predominately slow-twich fibers: slow twitch fibers tend to
express longer, more compliant titin filaments [60     ]. Since the optimal sarcomere length in cat
skeletal muscle is shorter than in human skeletal muscle (2.43 µm vs. 2.73 µm, [75     ]) the
coefficients for Eqns. 51     -53      differ slightly (see the feline soleus column in Table 2     ). In
addition, by assuming that the titin filament of cat skeletal muscle is a scaled version of the titin
filament found in human skeletal muscle, we have implicitly assumed that the cat’s skeletal
muscle titin filament has 60.5 proximal Ig domains, 1934.7 PEVK residues, and 19.6 distal Ig
domains. Although a fraction of a domain does not make physical sense, we have not rounded to
the nearest domain and residue to preserve the sarcomere length-based scaling.
In contrast, the rabbit psoas fibril used in the simulation of Leonard et al. [7     ] has a known titin
geometry (50 proximal Ig domains, 800 PEVK residues, and 22 distal Ig domains [60     ]) which
differs substantially from the isoform of titin expressed in the human soleus. To create the rabbit
psoas titin length functions 
 , and 
  we begin by scaling the human
soleus PEVK length function 
  by the relative proportion of PEVK residues of 800/2174.
The length of the two Ig segments



--- Page 39 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 39 of 59
Table 2
The coefficients of the normalized lengths of 
 , and 
  from Eqns. 51     -53      under passive
lengthening. These coefficients have been extracted from data of Figure 5      of Trombitás et al. [24     ] using a least-squares
fit. Since Figure 5      of Trombitás et al. [24     ] plots the change in segment length of a single titin filament against the
change in length of the entire sarcomere, the resulting slopes are in length normalized units. The slopes sum to 0.5, by
construction, to reflect the fact that these three segments of titin stretch at half the rate of the entire sacromere (assuming
symmetry). The cat soleus titin segment coefficients have been formed using a simple scaling of the human soleus titin
segment coefficients, and so, are similar. Rabbit psoas titin geometry [60     ] differs drammatically from human soleus titin
[24     ] and produce a correspondingly large difference in the coefficients that describe the length of the segments of rabbit
psoas titin.
Table 3
Normalized titin and crossbridge parameters fit to data from the literature.


--- Page 40 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 40 of 59
is what remains from the half-sarcomere once the rigid lengths of titin (0.100 µm for LT12 and
0.8150 µm for LIgD [45     ]) and the PEVK segment length have been subtracted away. The function
that describes 
  and 
  can then be formed by scaling 
  by the proportion of
Ig domains in each segment
which produce the coefficients that appear in the rabbit psoas column in Table 2     . While we
have applied this approach to extend Trombitás et al.’s [24     ] results to a rabbit psoas, in principle
this approach can be applied to any isoform of titin provided that its geometry is known, and the
Ig domains and PEVK residues in the target titin behave similarly to those in human soleus titin.
The only detail that remains is to establish the shape of the IgP, PEVK, and IgD force-length curves.
Studies of individual titin filaments, and of its segments, make it clear that titin is mechanically
complex. For example, the tandem Ig segments (the IgD and IgP segments) are composed of many
folded domains (titin from human soleus has two Ig segments that together have nearly 100
domains [24     ]). Each domain appears to be a simple nonlinear spring until it unfolds and
elongates by nearly 25 nm in the process [80     ]. Unfolding events appear to happen individually
during lengthening experiments [80     ], with each unfolding event occurring at a slightly greater
tension than the last, giving an Ig segment a force-length curve that is saw-toothed. Although
detailed models of titin exist that can simulate the folding and unfolding of individual Ig domains,
this level of detail comes at a cost of a state for each Ig domain which can add up to nearly a
hundred extra states [38     ] in total.
Active and passive lengthening experiments at the sarcomerelevel hide the complexity that is
apparent when studying individual titin filaments. The experiments of Leonard et al. [7     ] show
that the sarcomeres in a filament (from rabbit psoas) mechanically fail when stretched passively
to an average length of 
  but can reach 
  when actively lengthened. Leonard et al.
[7     ] showed that titin was the filament bearing these large forces since the sarcomeres were
incapable of developing active or passive tension when the experiment was repeated after the
titin filaments were chemically cut. It is worth noting that the forces measured by Leonard et al.
[7     ] contain none of the complex saw-tooth pattern indicative of unfolding events even though
72 of these events would occur as each proximal and distal Ig domain fully unfolded and reached
its maximal length14     . Although we cannot be sure how many unfolding events occurred during
Leonard et al.’s experiments [7     ], due to sarcomere non-homogeneity [81     ], it is likely that
many Ig unfolding events occurred since the average sarcomere length at failure 
  was
longer than the maximum length of 
  that would be predicted from the geometry of
rabbit psoas titin15     .
Since we are interested in a computationally efficient model that is accurate at the whole muscle
level, we model titin as a multi-segmented nonlinear spring but omit the states needed to simulate
the folding and unfolding of Ig domains. Simulations of active lengthening using our titin model
will exhibit the enhanced force development that appears in experiments [6     , 7     ], but will lack
the nonlinear saw-tooth force-length profile that is measured when individual titin filaments are
lengthened [80     ]. To have the broadest possible application, we will fit titin’s force-length curves
to provide reasonable results for both moderate [6     ] and large active stretches [7     ]. Depending
on the application, it may be more appropriate to use a stiffer force-length curve for the Ig
segment if normalized sarcomere lengths stays within 
  and no unfolding events occur as


--- Page 41 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 41 of 59
was done by Trombitás et al. [65     ]. Unfortunately, we cannot accurately capture the force
development of the Ig segments at both short and long lengths without introducing many extra
states to the model so that Ig domain unfolding and folding events can be simulated.
To ensure that the serially connected force-length curves of 
  and 
  closely reproduce
, we are going to use affine transformations of f PE to describe 
  and
. The total stiffness of the half-sarcomere titin model is given by
which is formed by the series connection of 
  and 
Since each of titin’s segments is exposed to the same tension in Trombitás et al.’s experiment
[24     ] the slopes of the lines that Eqns. 51     -53      describe are directly proportional to the
relative compliance (inverse of stiffness) between of each of titin’s segments. Using this fact, we
can define the normalized stretch rates of the proximal titin segment
and the distal titin segment
which are proportional to the compliance of two titin segments in our model. When both the
 and 
  curves are beyond the toe region the stiffness is a constant and is given by
and
Dividing Eqn. 61      by 62      eliminates the unknown 
  and results in an expression that relates
the ratio of the terminal linear stiffness of 
  and 
to the relative changes in Eqns. 59      and 60     . Substituting Eqns. 63     , and 58      into Eqn. 57     
yields the expression



--- Page 42 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 42 of 59
which can be simplified to
and this expression can be evaluated using the terminal stiffness of titin 
  and the coefficients
listed in Table 2     . Substituting Eqn. 65      into Eqn. 63      yields
The curves 
  and 
  can now be formed by scaling and shifting the total force-length
curve of titin (1 − P)f PE. By construction, titin’s force-length curve develops a tension of (1 − P), and
has reached its terminal stiffness, when the CE reaches a length 
  such that 
 .
Using Eqns. 51     -53      and the appropriate coefficients in Table 2      we can evaluate the
normalized length developed by the ℓ1 segment
and ℓ2 segment
at a CE length of 
 . The 
  curve is formed by shifting and scaling the (1 − P)f PE curve so
that it develops a normalized tension of (1 − P) and a stiffness of 
  at a length of 
 . Similarly,
the 
  curve is made by shifting and scaling the (1 − P)f PE curve to develop a normalized
tension of (1 − P) and a stiffness of 
  at a length of 
 .
By construction, the spring network formed by the 
 , and 
  curves
follows the fitted f PE curve (Fig. 3A     ) such that the ECM curve makes up 56% of the contribution.
When the CE is active and 
  is effectively fixed in place, the distal segment of titin contributes
higher forces since 
  undergoes higher strains (Fig. 3A     ). Finally, when the experiment of
Trombitás et al. [24     ] are simulated the movements of the IgP/PEVK and PEVK/IgD boundaries in
the titin model closely follow the data (Fig. 3C     ).
The process we have used to fit the ECM and titin’s segments makes use of data within modest
normalized CE lengths (2.35-4.46µm, or 
  [24     ]). Scenarios in which the CE reaches
extremely long lengths, such as during injury or during Leonard et al.’s experiment [7     ], require
fitting titin’s force-length curve beyond the typical ranges observed in-vivo. The WLC model has
been used successfully to model the force-length relation of individual titin segments [65     ] at
extreme lengths. In this work, we consider two different extensions to 
  and 
 : a
linear extrapolation, and the WLC model. Since the fitted f PE curve is linearly extrapolated, so too
are the 
 , and 
  curves by default. Applying the WLC to our titin curves
requires a bit more effort.


--- Page 43 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 43 of 59
We have modified the WLC to include a slack length 
  so that the WLC model can made to be
continuous with the various force-length relations we have already derived. The normalized force
developed by our WLC model is given by
where B is a scaling factor and the normalized segment length 
  is defined as
where 
  is the slack length, and 
  is the contour length of the segment. To extend the 
curve to follow the WLC model, we first note the normalized contour length of the ℓ1 segment
by counting the number of proximal Ig domains (NIgP), the number of PEVK residues (QNPEVK)
associated with ℓ1 and by scaling each by the maximum contour length of each Ig domain (25nm
[80     ]), and each PEVK residue (between 0.32 [65     ] and 0.38 nm [82     ] see pg. 254). This contour
length defines the maximum length of the segment, when all of the Ig domains and PEVK residues
have been unfolded. Similarly, the contour length of 
  is given by
Next, we define the slack length by linearly extrapolating backwards from the final fitted force (1
− P)
and similarly
We can now solve for B in Eqn. 69      so that 
  and 
  are continuous with each
respective WLC extrapolation. However, we do not use the WLC model directly because it contains
a numerical singularity which is problematic during numerical simulation. Instead, we add an
additional Bézier segment to fit the WLC extension that spans between forces of (1 − P) and twice
the normalized failure force 
  noted by Leonard et al. [7     ]. To fit the shape of the
final Bézier segment, we adjust the locations of the internal control points to minimize the
squared differences between the modified WLC model and the final Bézier curve (Fig. 11A     ). The
final result is a set of curves 
 , and 
  which, between forces 0 and (1 −
P), will reproduce f PE, Trombitás et al.’s measurements [24     ], and do so with a reasonable titin-
ECM balance [60     ]. For forces beyond (1 − P), the curve will follow the segment-specific WLC
model up to twice the expected failure tension noted by Leonard et al. [7     ].


--- Page 44 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 44 of 59
B.4 Fitting the XE’s Impedance
With the passive curves established, we can return to the problem of identifying the normalized
maximum stiffness 
  and damping 
  of the lumped XE element. Just prior to discussing titin,
we had evaluated the impedance of the cat soleus CE in Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] Figure 12      to be kM
=2.90 N/mm and βM =0.020 Ns/mm at a nominal active tension of 5N. The normalized stiffness kM
can be found by taking the partial derivative of Eqn. 15      with respect to 
By noting that all of our chosen state variables in Eqn. 13      are independent and by making use of
the kinematic relationships in Eqns. 9      and 10      we can reduce Eqn. 75      to
and solve for 
When using to the data from Figure 12      in Kirch et al. [5     ], we end up with 
for the elastic tendon model, and 
  for the rigid tendon model. When this
procedure is repeated for Figure 3      of Kirsch et al. [5     ] (from a different specimen) we are left
with 
  for the elastic tendon model and 
  for the rigid tendon
model. The value for 
  is much larger than kM, in this case, because the a needed to generate 5N
is only 0.229. Similarly, we can form the expression for the normalized damping of the CE by
taking the partial derivative of Eqn. 15      with respect to 
As with kM, the expression for 
  can be reduced to
which evaluates to 
  for both the elastic and rigid tendon models using
Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] Figure 12      data. The damping coefficients of the elastic and rigid tendon
models is similar because the damping coefficient of the musculotendon is dominated by the
damping coefficient of CE. When the data from Kirsch et al.’s [5     ] Figure 3      is used, the
damping coefficients of the elastic and rigid tendon models are 
  and
 respectively.


--- Page 45 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 45 of 59
The dimensionless parameters 
 , and 
  can be used to approximate the properties of
other MTUs given 
  and 
 . The stiffness and damping of the lumped crossbridge element will
scale linearly with 
  and inversely with 
  provided the impedance properties of individual
crossbridges, and the maximum number of crossbridges attached per unit length is similar
between a feline’s skeletal muscle sarcomeres and those of the target MTU. The dimensionless titin
parameters can be scaled to fit other MTUs provided these values are similar: P, A IgP, A PEVK, A IgD,
and Q. The assumption that these parameters remain similar across different MTUs, even within
the same animal [60     ], is crude at best. Prado et al. [60     ] showed that P can vary between
43%-76% across different skeletal muscles of the same rabbit. In addition, Prado et al. [60     ] also
found that the overall stiffness of titin can vary by a factor of approximately 3.4 (see Fig. 5B     
[60     ]) and weakly correlates with the fiber type of the myofibril: fast twitch fibers tend to
express a shorter (stiffer) titin, while slow twitch fibers tend to express a longer more compliant
titin. As data on P is challenging to obtain, and the variation of P is large, we have chosen to use
the average value of P reported by Prado et al. [60     ]. Since most of our simulated tests are
applied to slow-twitch muscles, we have fit the stiffness of titin’s segments to the data of Trombitás
et al. [24     ] which comes from human soleus muscle, which is often dominated by slow twitch
fibers.
C Model Initialization
Solving for an initial state is challenging since we are given a, ℓP, and vP and must solve for vS, ℓS,
and ℓ1 for a rigid-tendon model, and additionally ℓM if an elastic tendon model is used.
The type of solution that we look for is one that produces no force or state transients soon after a
simulation begins in which activation and path velocity is well approximated as constant. Our
preliminary simulations found that satisfactory solutions were found by iterating over both 
and 
 using a nested bisection search that looks for values which approximately satisfies Eqn.
22     , have low values of 
  from Eqn. 16     , and begins with balanced forces between the two
segment titin model in Eqn. 20     .
In the outer loop we iterate over values of 
 . Given a, ℓP, vP, and a candidate value of 
 , we
can immediately solve for α and ℓT using the pennation model. We can numerically solve for the
value of another state, ℓ1, using the kinematic relationship between ℓM and ℓ1 and by assuming
that the two titin segments are in a force equilibrium
Next, we iterate over values of 
  between 0 and vP cos α (we ignore solutions in which the sign
of vM and vT differ) to find the value of 
  that best satisfies Eqn. 22     . Prior to evaluating Eqn.
22     , we need to set both 
  and 
 . Here we choose a value for 
  that will ensure that the
XE is not producing transient forces
and we use fixed-point iteration to solve for 
  such that Eqn. 16      evaluates to zero. Now the
value of 
  can be directly evaluated using the candidate value of 
 , the first derivative of
Eqn. 9     , and the fact that we have set 
  to zero. Finally, the error of this specific combination
of 
  and 
  is evaluated using Eqn. 22     , where the best solution leads to the lowest absolute
value for of 
  in Eqn. 22     . If a rigid tendon model is being initialized the procedure is simpler


--- Page 46 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 46 of 59
because the inner loop iterating over 
  is unnecessary: given vP and 
  are zero, the
velocities 
  and 
  can be directly solved using the first derivative of Eqn. 9     . While in
principle any root solving method can be used to solve this problem, we have chosen to use the
bisection method to avoid local minima.
D Evaluating a muscle model’s frequency response
To analyze the the frequency response of a muscle to length perturbation we begin by evaluating
the length change
and force change
with respect to the nominal length 
  and nominal force 
 . If we approximate the
muscle’s response as a linear time invariant transformation h(t) we can express
where ⋆  is the convolution operator. Each of these signals can be transformed into the frequency-
domain [83     ] by taking the Fourier transform ℱ  (·) of the time-domain signal, which produces a
complex signal. Since convolution in the time-domain corresponds to multiplication in the
frequency-domain, we have
In Eqn. 85      we are interested in solving for H(s). While it might be tempting to evaluate H(s) as
this is likely to result in numerical singularities, because Y (s) is only approximated by H(s)X(s):
although X(s) goes to zero at high frequencies by construction (because it is low-pass filtered as
described in Sec. 3.1), Y (s) may not. To evaluate H(s) in a numerically stable manner, we can
multiply both sides of Eqn. 85      by X(s)
to zero the higher frequency portions of Y (s) that are nonzero as X(s) tends to zero. The signal Gxy
= (X(s)Y (s)) = (Y (s)X(s)) and Gxx = (X(s)X(s)) can be formed by noting that
and



--- Page 47 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 47 of 59
allowing us to evaluate
The gain of H(s) is given the magnitude of H(s),
while the phase is given by
where ℝ (H(s)) and 𝕀 (H(s)) are the real and imaginary parts of H(s) respectively.


--- Page 48 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 48 of 59
E Simulation summary data of Kirsch et al
Table 4
Mean normalized stiffness coefficients (A.), damping coefficients (B.) and VAF (C.) for models with elastic tendons. Here the
proposed model has been fitted to Figure 12      of Kirsch et al. [5     ]. The impedance experiments at each combination of
perturbation amplitude and frequncy have been evaluated at 10 different nominal forces evenly spaced between 2.5N and
11.5N. The normalized results presented in the table are the mean values of these ten simulations. Finally, note that the VAF
is evaluated between the model and the spring-damper of best fit to the response of the model, rather than to the response
of biological muscle (which was not published by Kirsch et al. [5     ]).
Table 5
Mean normalized stiffness coefficients (A.), damping coefficients (B.) and VAF (C.) for models with rigid tendons. All additional
details are identical to those of Table 4      except the tendon of the model is rigid.


--- Page 49 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 49 of 59
F Simulations of active lengthening
Figure 16
Simulation results of the 3 mm/s (A.) active lengthening experiment of Herzog and Leonard [6     ] (B.). As with the 9 mm/s
trial, the Hill model’s force response drops during the ramp due to a small region of negative stiffness introduced by the
descending limb of the force-length curve (C.), and a reduction in damping (D.) due to the flattening of the force-velocity
curve. Note: neither model was fitted to this trial.


--- Page 50 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 50 of 59
Figure 17
Simulation results of the 27 mm/s (A.) active lengthening experiment of Herzog and Leonard [6     ] (B.). As with the prior
simulations the Hill model exhibits a small region of negative stiffness introduced by the descending limb of the force-length
curve (C.) and a drop in damping (D.). Note: neither model was fitted to this trial.


--- Page 51 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 51 of 59
G Supplementary Plots
Figure 18
When coupled with a rigid tendon, the VEXAT model’s VAF (A.), gain response (B.), and phase response (C.) more closely
follows the data of Kirsch et al. (Figure 3     ) [5     ] than when an elastic tendon is used. This improvement in accuracy is also
observed at the 90 Hz perturbation (D., E., and F.), though the phase response of the model departs from Kirsch et al.’s data
[5     ] for frequencies lower than 30 Hz. Parts of the Hill model’s response to the 15 Hz perturbation are better with a rigid
tendon, with a higher VAF (G.), a lower RMSE gain-response (B.). but a similarly poor phase-response (C.). In response to the
higher frequency perturbations, the Hill model’s response is poor with an elastic (see Fig. 7     ) or rigid tendon. The VAF in
the time-domain remains low (J.), neither the gain (K.) nor the phase response of the Hill model (L.) follow the data of Kirsch
et al. [5     ].


--- Page 52 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 52 of 59
References
Franklin D. W., Osu R., Burdet E., Kawato M., Milner T. E. (2003) Adaptation to stable and
unstable dynamics achieved by combined impedance control and inverse dynamics
model Journal of neurophysiology 90:3270–3282
Trumbower R. D., Krutky M. A., Yang B.-S., Perreault E. J. (2009) Use of self-selected postures
to regulate multi-joint stiffness during unconstrained tasks PloS one 4
Selen L. P., Franklin D. W., Wolpert D. M. (2009) Impedance control reduces instability that
arises from motor noise Journal of neuroscience 29:12606–12616
Burdet E., Osu R., Franklin D. W., Milner T. E., Kawato M. (2001) The central nervous system
stabilizes unstable dynamics by learning optimal impedance Nature 414:446–449
Kirsch R. F., Boskov D., Rymer W. Z. (1994) Muscle stiffness during transient and continuous
movements of cat muscle: perturbation characteristics and physiological relevance IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 41:758–770
Herzog W., Leonard T. R. (2002) Force enhancement following stretching of skeletal
muscle: a new mechanism The Journal of Experimental Biology 205:1275–1283
Leonard T. R., Joumaa V., Herzog W. (2010) An activatable molecular spring reduces muscle
tearing during extreme stretching Journal of biomechanics 43:3063–3066
Hill A. V. (1938) The heat of shortening and the dynamics constants of muscle in
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 126:136–195
Gordon A. M., Huxley A., Julian F. J. (1966) The variation in isometric tension with sarcomere
length in vertebrate muscle fibres The Journal of Physiology 184:170–192
Huxley A. F. (1957) Muscle structure and theories of contraction Progress in biophysics and
biophysical chemistry 7:255–318
Huxley A. F., Simmons R. M. (1971) Proposed mechanism of force generation in striated
muscle Nature 233:533–538
Hogan N. (1985) The mechanics of multi-joint posture and movement control Biological
Cybernetics 52:315–331
Mussa-Ivaldi F. A., Hogan N., Bizzi E. (1985) Neural, mechanical, and geometric factors
subserving arm posture in humans Journal of Neuroscience 5:2732–2743
Zajac F. E. (1989) Muscle and tendon: Properties, models, scaling, and application to
biomechanics and motor control Critical Reviews in Biomedical Engineering 17:359–411
Millard M., Uchida T., Seth A., Delp S. L. (2013) Flexing computational muscle: modeling and
simulation of musculotendon dynamics Journal of biomechanical engineering 135
Forcinito M., Epstein M., Herzog W. (1998) Can a rheological muscle model predict force
depression/enhancement? Journal of biomechanics 31:1093–1099
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]


--- Page 53 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 53 of 59
Sacks R. D., Roy R. R. (1982) Architecture of the hind limb muscles of cats: functional
significance Journal of Morphology 173:185–195
Haeufle D., Günther M., Bayer A., Schmitt S. (2014) Hilltype muscle model with serial
damping and eccentric force– velocity relation Journal of biomechanics 47:1531–1536
Kistemaker D. A., Van Soest A. K. J., Bobbert M. F. (2006) Is equilibrium point control feasible
for fast goaldirected single-joint movements? Journal of Neurophysiology 95:2898–2912
Günther M., Haeufle D. F., Schmitt S. (2018) The basic mechanical structure of the skeletal
muscle machinery: One model for linking microscopic and macroscopic scales Journal of
theoretical biology 456:137–167
Maruyama K. (1976) Connectin, an elastic protein from myofibrils The Journal of Biochemistry
80:405–407
Wang K., McClure J., Tu A. (1979) Titin: major myofibrillar components of striated muscle
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 76:3698–3702
Maruyama K., Yoshioka T., Higuchi H., Ohashi K., Kimura S., Natori R. (1985) Connectin
filaments link thick filaments and z lines in frog skeletal muscle as revealed by
immunoelectron microscopy The Journal of cell biology 101:2167–2172
Trombitás K., Greaser M., French G., Granzier H. (1998) Pevk extension of human soleus
muscle titin revealed by immunolabeling with the anti-titin antibody 9d10 Journal of
structural biology 122:188–196
Houmeida A., Holt J., Tskhovrebova L., Trinick J. (1995) Studies of the interaction between
titin and myosin Journal of Cell Biology 131:1471–1481
Tomalka A., Röhrle O., Han J.-C., Pham T., Taberner A. J., Siebert T. (2019) Extensive eccentric
contractions in intact cardiac trabeculae: revealing compelling differences in contractile
behaviour compared to skeletal muscles Proceedings of the Royal Society B 286
Boldt K., Han S.-W., Joumaa V., Herzog W. (2020) Residual and passive force enhancement in
skinned cardiac fibre bundles Journal of Biomechanics 109
Lindstedt S., Nishikawa K. (2017) Huxleys’ missing filament: form and function of titin in
vertebrate striated muscle Annual review of physiology 79:145–166
Kellermayer M. S., Granzier H. L. (1996) Calcium-dependent inhibition of in vitro thin-
filament motility by native titin FEBS letters 380:281–286
Astier C., Raynaud F., Lebart M.-C., Roustan C., Benyamin Y. (1998) Binding of a native titin
fragment to actin is regulated by pip2 FEBS letters 429:95–98
Niederländer N., Raynaud F., Astier C., Chaussepied P. (2004) Regulation of the actin–myosin
interaction by titin European journal of biochemistry 271:4572–4581
Bianco P., Nagy A., Kengyel A., Szatmári D., Mártonfalvi Z., Huber T., Kellermayer M. S. (2007)
Interaction forces between f-actin and titin pevk domain measured with optical tweezers
Biophysical Journal 93:2102–2109
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]


--- Page 54 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 54 of 59
Nagy A., Cacciafesta P., Grama L., Kengyel A., Málnási-Csizmadia A., Kellermayer M. S. (2004)
Differential actin binding along the pevk domain of skeletal muscle titin Journal of cell
science 117:5781–5789
Dutta S., Tsiros C., Sundar S. L., Athar H., Moore J., Nelson B., Gage M. J., Nishikawa K. (2018)
Calcium increases titin n2a binding to f-actin and regulated thin filaments Scientific reports
8:1–11
DuVall M. M., Jinha A., Schappacher-Tilp G., Leonard T. R., Herzog W. (2017) Differences in titin
segmental elongation between passive and active stretch in skeletal muscle Journal of
Experimental Biology 220:4418–4425
Rode C., Siebert T., Blickhan R. (2009) Titin-induced force enhancement and force
depression: a ‘stickyspring’mechanism in muscle contractions? Journal of theoretical
biology 259:350–360
Nishikawa K. C., Monroy J. A., Uyeno T. E., Yeo S. H., Pai D. K., Lindstedt S. L. (2012) Is titin a
‘winding filament’? a new twist on muscle contraction Proceedings of the royal society B:
Biological sciences 279:981–990
Schappacher-Tilp G., Leonard T., Desch G., Herzog W. (2015) A novel three-filament model of
force generation in eccentric contraction of skeletal muscles PloS one 10
Tahir U., Hessel A. L., Lockwood E. R., Tester J. T., Han Z., Rivera D. J., Covey K. L., Huck T. G., Rice
N. A., Nishikawa K. C. (2018) Case study: A bio-inspired control algorithm for a robotic foot-
ankle prosthesis provides adaptive control of level walking and stair ascent Frontiers in
Robotics and AI 5
Heidlauf T., Klotz T., Rode C., Altan E., Bleiler C., Siebert T., Röhrle O. (2016) A multi-scale
continuum model of skeletal muscle mechanics predicting force enhancement based on
actin–titin interaction Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology 15:1423–1437
Heidlauf T., Klotz T., Rode C., Siebert T., hrle O. Rö (2017) A continuum-mechanical skeletal
muscle model including actin-titin interaction predicts stable contractions on the
descending limb of the force-length relation PLoS compu-tational biology 13
DuVall M., Jinha A., Schappacher-Tilp G., Leonard T., Herzog W. (2016) I-band titin interaction
with myosin in the muscle sarcomere during eccentric contraction: The titin
entanglement hypothesis Biophysical Journal 110
Veigel C., Bartoo M. L., White D. C., Sparrow J. C., Molloy J. E. (1998) The stiffness of rabbit
skeletal actomyosin crossbridges determined with an optical tweezers transducer
Biophysical journal 75:1424–1438
Kellermayer M. S., Smith S. B., Granzier H. L., Bustamante C. (1997) Folding-unfolding
transitions in single titin molecules characterized with laser tweezers Science 276:1112–
1116
Higuchi H., Yanagida T., Goldman Y. E. (1995) Compliance of thin filaments in skinned fibers
of rabbit skeletal muscle Biophysical journal 69:1000–1010
Finer J. T., Simmons R. M., Spudich J. A. (1994) Single myosin molecule mechanics:
piconewton forces and nanometre steps Nature 368:113–119
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]


--- Page 55 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 55 of 59
Kearney R. E., Stein R. B., Parameswaran L. (1997) Identification of intrinsic and reflex
contributions to human ankle stiffness dynamics IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering
44:493–504
Perreault E. J., Kirsch R. F., Crago P. E. (2004) Multijoint dynamics and postural stability of
the human arm Experimental brain research 157:507–517
Schouten A. C., Mugge W., van der Helm F. C. (2008) Nmclab, a model to assess the
contributions of muscle viscoelasticity and afferent feedback to joint dynamics Journal of
biomechanics 41:1659–1667
Mitrovic D., Klanke S., Osu R., Kawato M., Vijayakumar S. (2010) A computational model of
limb impedance control based on principles of internal model uncertainty PloS one 5
Sartori M., Maculan M., Pizzolato C., Reggiani M., Farina D. (2015) Modeling and simulating
the neuromuscular mechanisms regulating ankle and knee joint stiffness during human
locomotion Journal of neurophysiology 114:2509–2527
hrle O. Rö, Davidson J. B., Pullan A. J. (2008) Bridging scales: a three-dimensional
electromechanical finite element model of skeletal muscle SIAM Journal on Scientific
Computing 30:2882–2904
De Groote F., Allen J. L., Ting L. H. (2017) Contribution of muscle short-range stiffness to
initial changes in joint kinetics and kinematics during perturbations to standing balance:
A simulation study Journal of biomechanics 55:71–77
De Groote F., Blum K. P., Horslen B. C., Ting L. H. (2018) Interaction between muscle tone,
short-range stiffness and increased sensory feedback gains explains key kinematic
features of the pendulum test in spastic cerebral palsy: A simulation study PloS one 13
van Soest A., Casius L., Lemaire K. (2019) Huxley-type cross-bridge models in largeish-scale
musculoskeletal models; an evaluation of computational cost Journal of biomechanics
83:43–48
Maganaris C. N., Baltzopoulos V., Ball D., Sargeant A. J. (2001) In vivo specific tension of
human skeletal muscle Journal of applied physiology 90:865–872
Winters T. M., Takahashi M., Lieber R. L., Ward S. R. (2011) Whole muscle length-tension
relationships are accurately modeled as scaled sarcomeres in rabbit hindlimb muscles
Journal of Biomechanics 44:109–115
Rome L., Sosnicki A., Goble D. (1990) Maximum velocity of shortening of three fibre types
from horse soleus muscle: implications for scaling with body size The Journal of Physiology
431:173–185
Herzog J. A., Leonard T. R., Jinha A., Herzog W. (2012) Are titin properties reflected in single
myofibrils? Journal of biomechanics 45:1893–1899
Prado L. G., Makarenko I., Andresen C., Krüger M., Opitz C. A., Linke W. A. (2005) Isoform
diversity of giant proteins in relation to passive and active contractile properties of
rabbit skeletal muscles The Journal of general physiology 126:461–480
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]


--- Page 56 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 56 of 59
Kaya M., Higuchi H. (2013) Stiffness, working stroke, and force of single-myosin molecules
in skeletal muscle: elucidation of these mechanical properties via nonlinear elasticity
evaluation Cellular and molecular life sciences 70:4275–4292
Tajima Y., Makino K., Hanyuu T., Wakabayashi K., Amemiya Y. (1994) X-ray evidence for the
elongation of thin and thick filaments during isometric contraction of a molluscan
smooth muscle Journal of Muscle Research & Cell Motility 15:659–671
Herzog W., Leonard T. (1997) Depression of cat soleus forces following isokinetic
shortening Journal of biomechanics 30:865–872
De Groote F., Kinney A. L., Rao A. V., Fregly B. J. (2016) Evaluation of direct collocation
optimal control problem formulations for solving the muscle redundancy problem Annals
of biomedical engineering 44:2922–2936
Trombitás K., Greaser M., Labeit S., Jin J.-P., Kellermayer M., Helmes M., Granzier H. (1998) Titin
extensibility in situ: entropic elasticity of permanently folded and permanently unfolded
molecular segments The Journal of cell biology 140:853–859
Hisey B., Leonard T. R., Herzog W. (2009) Does residual force enhancement increase with
increasing stretch magnitudes? Journal of biomechanics 42:1488–1492
Fukutani A., Herzog W. (2018) Residual force enhancement is preserved for conditions of
reduced contractile force Medicine and science in sports and exercise 50:1186–1191
Millar N. C., Homsher E. (1990) The effect of phosphate and calcium on force generation in
glycerinated rabbit skeletal muscle fibers. a steady-state and transient kinetic study
Journal of Biological Chemistry 265:20234–20240
Thelen D. G. (2003) Adjustment of muscle mechanics model parameters to simulate
dynamic contractions in older adults Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 125:70–77
Buchanan T. (1995) Evidence that maximum muscle stress is not a constant: differences in
specific tension in elbow flexors and extensors Medical engineering & physics 17:529–536
Bendat J. S., Piersol A. G. (2011) Random data: analysis and measurement procedures
Netti P., D’amore A., Ronca D., Ambrosio L., Nicolais L. (1996) Structure-mechanical
properties relationship of natural tendons and ligaments Journal of Materials Science:
Materials in Medicine 7:525–530
Franklin D. W., Burdet E., Tee K. P., Osu R., Chew C.-M., Milner T. E., Kawato M. (2008) Cns
learns stable, accurate, and efficient movements using a simple algorithm Journal of
neuroscience 28:11165–11173
Herzog W. (2019) Passive force enhancement in striated muscle Journal of Applied Physiology
126:1782–1789
Rassier D. E., MacIntosh B., Herzog W. (1999) Length dependence of active force production
in skeletal muscle Journal of applied physiology 86:1445–1457
Tomalka A., Weidner S., Hahn D., Seiberl W., Siebert T. (2021) Power amplification increases
with contraction velocity during stretch-shortening cycles of skinned muscle fibers
Frontiers in Physiology 12
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]


--- Page 57 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 57 of 59
Huxley A., Simmons R. (1981) Proposed mechanism of force generation in striated muscle
Nature 223:533–538
Scott S. H., Brown I. E., Loeb G. E. (1996) Mechanics of feline soleus: I. effect of fascicle
length and velocity on force output Journal of Muscle Research & Cell Motility 17:207–219
Scott S. H., Loeb G. E. (1995) Mechanical properties of aponeurosis and tendon of the cat
soleus muscle during whole-muscle isometric contractions Journal of Morphology 224:73–86
DuVall M. M., Gifford J. L., Amrein M., Herzog W. (2013) Altered mechanical properties of titin
immunoglobulin domain 27 in the presence of calcium European Biophysics Journal 42:301–
307
Johnston K., Jinha A., Herzog W. (2016) The role of sarcomere length non-uniformities in
residual force enhancement of skeletal muscle myofibrils Royal Society Open Science 3
Cantor C., Schimmel P., Macromolecules The Conformation of Biological (1980) Biophysical
Chemistry, San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company
Oppenheim A., Willsky A., Nawab S. (1996) Signals & Systems. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, New Jersey, 2nd ed
Article and author information
Matthew Millard
Institute for Sport and Movement Science, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Baden-
Württemberg, Germany, Institute of Engineering and Computational Mechanics, University of
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, Germany
For correspondence: matthew.millard@inspo.uni-stuttgart.de
ORCID iD: 0000-0001-7627-564X
David W. Franklin
Neuromuscular Diagnostics, Department of Sport and Health Sciences, Technical University of
Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany, Munich School of Robotics and Machine Intelligence
(MIRMI), Technical University of Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany, Munich Data Science
Institute (MDSI), Technical University of Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany
ORCID iD: 0000-0001-9530-0820
Walter Herzog
Human Performance Laboratory, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada
ORCID iD: 0000-0002-5341-0033
Copyright
© 2023, Millard et al.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) , which permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited.
[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]


--- Page 58 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 58 of 59
Editors
Reviewing Editor
Eric Tytell
Tufts University
Senior Editor
Aleksandra Walczak
École Normale Supérieure - PSL, France
Reviewer #1 (Public Review):
Muscle models are important tools in the fields of biomechanics and physiology. Muscle
models serve a wide variety of functions, including validating existing theories, testing new
hypotheses, and predicting forces produced by humans and animals in health and disease.
This paper attempts to provide an alternative to Hill-type muscle models that includes
contributions of titin to force enhancement over multiple time scales. Due to the significant
limitations of Hill-type models, alternative models are needed and therefore the work is
important and timely.
The effort to include a role for titin in muscle models is a major strength of the methods and
results. The results clearly demonstrate the weaknesses of Hill models and the advantages of
incorporating titin into theoretical treatments of muscle mechanics. Another strength is to
address muscle mechanics over a large range of time scales. Weaknesses include the decision
to use a MTU model to simulate experiments from single muscle fibers, and failure to
systematically address the limitations of the model, including equations for activation
dynamics with no length dependence. It would also be useful for readers if the authors
provided a discussion of the types of data that can be simulated using the model, along with
potential pitfalls and how to determine model parameters.
The authors succeed in demonstrating the need to incorporate titin in muscle models.
However, it remains unclear whether it will be practical for others to use this particular
model for different types of data. Several ad hoc modifications were described in the paper,
and the degree to which the model requires parameter optimization for different muscles,
preparations and experiment types is also unclear.
Reviewer #2 (Public Review):
This model of skeletal muscle includes springs and dampers which aim to capture the effect
of crossbridge and titin stiffness during the stretch of active muscle. While both crossbridge
and titin stiffness have previously been incorporated, in some form, into models, this model
is the first to simultaneously include both. The authors suggest that this will allow for the
prediction of muscle force in response to short-, mid- and long-range stretches. All these types
of stretch are likely to be experienced by muscle during in vivo perturbations, and are known
to elicit different muscle responses. Hence, it is valuable to have a single model which can
predict muscle force under all these physiologically relevant conditions. In addition, this
model dramatically simplifies sarcomere structure to enable this muscle model to be used in
multi-muscle simulations of whole-body movement.
In order to test this model, its force predictions are compared to 3 sets of experimental data
which focus on short-, mid- and long-range perturbations, and to the predictions of a Hill-type
muscle model. The choice of data sets is excellent and provide a robust test of the model's
ability to predict forces over a range of length perturbations. However, I find the comparison
to a Hill-type muscle model to be somewhat limiting. It is well established that Hill-type
models do not have any mechanism by which they can predict the effect of active muscle


--- Page 59 ---
Matthew Millard et al., 2023 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88344.1 59 of 59
stretch. Hence, that the model proposed here represents an improvement over such a model
is not a surprise. Many other models, some of which are also simple enough to be
incorporated into whole-body simulations, have incorporated mechanistic elements which
allow for the prediction of force responses to muscle stretch. It is not clear from the results
presented here that this model would outperform such models.
The paper begins by outlining the phenomenological vs mechanistic approaches taken to
muscle modelling, historically. It appears, although is not directly specified, that this model
combines these approaches. A somewhat mechanistic model of the response of the
crossbridges and titin to active stretch is combined with a phenomenological implementation
of force-length and force-velocity relationships. This combination of approaches may be
useful in improving the accuracy of predictions of muscle models and whole-body
simulations, which is certainly a worthy goal. However, it also may limit the insight that can
be gained. For example, it does not seem that this model could reflect any effect of active titin
properties on muscle shortening. In addition, it is not clear to me, either physiologically or in
the model, what drives the shift from the high stiffness in short-range perturbations to the
somewhat lower stiffness in mid-range perturbations.
