--- Page 1 ---
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  1 of 31
Short activation domains 
control chromatin association of 
transcription factors
Vinson B Fan1, Abrar A Abidi1, Thomas GW Graham1,2, Xavier Darzacq1, 
Max V Staller1,3,4*
1Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, United 
States; 2Thomas C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, United States; 3Biohub, San Francisco, United States; 4Center for 
Computational Biology, University of California, Berkeley, United States
Abstract Transcription factors regulate gene expression with DNA- binding domains (DBDs) and 
activation domains. Despite evidence to the contrary, DBDs are often assumed to be the primary 
mediators of transcription factor (TF) interactions with DNA and chromatin. Here, we used fast 
single- molecule tracking of transcription factors in living cells to show that short activation domains 
can control the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. Stronger activation domains have higher 
bound fractions and longer residence times on chromatin. Furthermore, mutations that increase acti-
vation domain strength also increase chromatin binding. This trend was consistent in four different 
activation domains and their mutants. This effect further held for activation domains appended to 
three different structural classes of DBDs. Stronger activation domains with high chromatin- bound 
fractions also exhibited increased binding to the p300 coactivator in proximity- assisted photoac-
tivation experiments. Genome- wide measurements indicate these activation domains primarily 
control the occupancy of binding rather than the genomic location. Taken together, these results 
demonstrate that very short activation domains play a major role in tethering transcription factors to 
chromatin.
Editor's evaluation
This useful study presents evidence that the duration and/or the frequency with which transcription 
factors interact with chromatin/DNA in living cells is influenced by the transactivation domains of 
transcription factors. The methods used are solid, combining imaging and genomics experiments. 
The work will be of interest to molecular biologists and biochemists, working in the transcriptional 
regulation field.
Introduction
Transcription factors (TFs) contain DNA- binding domains (DBDs) that bind cognate DNA motifs and 
effector domains that regulate transcription (Brent and Ptashne, 1985; Keegan et al., 1986; Ptashne, 
1988; Struhl, 1989; Struhl, 1987). DBDs are ordered, conserved, and readily predicted from protein 
sequences (El- Gebali et al., 2019; Finn et al., 2016). Decades of biochemistry have shown that DBDs 
are sufficient to bind cognate DNA motifs in vitro (Riley et al., 2014; Stormo, 2013). As a result, 
for most human TFs, only the DBD was used to define the position weight matrices that describe 
DNA- binding specificity (Badis et  al., 2009; Hume et  al., 2015; Jolma et  al., 2013; Latchman, 
2008; Noyes et al., 2008). Outside the DBD, TFs are predominantly composed of long intrinsically 
ReSeaRCH aRTICLe
*For correspondence: 
Mstaller@berkeley.edu
†Co- first author.
Competing interest: See page 
23
Funding: See page 23
Preprinted: 22 December 2024
Received: 23 December 2024
Accepted: 20 November 2025
Published: 09 January 2026
Reviewing Editor: Volker 
Dötsch, Goethe University 
Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany
 
  Copyright Fan et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.


--- Page 2 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  2 of 31
disordered regions (IDRs) that contain short repression domains, which bind corepressor complexes, 
and activation domains, which bind coactivators (Hahn and Young, 2011; Liu et al., 2006; Már et al., 
2023; Kumar et al., 2023; Soto et al., 2022). Activation domain function is separable from DBD 
function, as demonstrated by cut- and- paste experiments where activation domains retained function 
when attached to multiple DBDs (Hope et al., 1988; Hope and Struhl, 1986; Ma and Ptashne, 1987; 
Sadowski et al., 1988; Sigler, 1988; Struhl, 1993, Struhl, 1987).
Both DBDs and activation domains contribute to DNA binding and chromatin binding. DNA binding 
results from direct protein- DNA interaction is well established for DBDs in vitro and is measured in 
vivo with single- molecule footprinting (Doughty et  al., 2024; Stormo, 2013). Chromatin binding 
includes DNA binding but can also result from protein- protein interactions with histones, other TFs, 
corepressors, or coactivators that can indirectly tether a TF to DNA (Spitz and Furlong, 2012). Nearly 
all cell- based assays of TF genome localization (e.g. ChIP- seq or CUT&RUN) measure the combina-
tion of DNA binding and chromatin binding. Some activation domains interfere with DNA binding 
(Golemis and Brent, 1992). In vitro, interactions between activation domains and DBDs can increase 
DNA- binding specificity (Krois et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2008; Ning et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2021). IDRs 
can increase nonspecific binding (Baughman et al., 2022), regulate DNA binding via posttranslational 
modifications (Pufall et al., 2005), or allosterically regulate DNA binding (Li et al., 2017). There is 
long- standing evidence that the DBD does not confer all genomic targeting information because in 
ChIP- seq experiments, 30–70% of peaks lack a motif for the query TF (Harrison et al., 2011; Jana 
et al., 2021; Kvon et al., 2012; Spitz and Furlong, 2012; Teytelman et al., 2013). There is also low 
agreement between the promoters a TF binds and the genes it regulates (Mahendrawada et al., 
2025). Finally, there is extensive literature demonstrating how long IDRs—and not DBDs—control TF 
genomic localization (Brodsky et al., 2020; Gera et al., 2022; Hurieva et al., 2024; Jonas et al., 
eLife digest The human body is made up of about 200 different types of cells. Although all these 
cells contain the same genetic instructions in their DNA, each type performs specific functions. This 
is possible because different cells activate different sets of genes; for example, liver cells switch on 
genes specific to the liver, while blood cells turn on blood- specific genes.
Proteins known as transcription factors bind to DNA and activate specific genes, and they play a 
critical role in generating gene expression patterns that are unique to each cell type. Transcription 
factors are thought to be modular with two functional elements: DNA- binding domains that attach to 
genes, and activation domains that recruit the transcriptional machinery to switch on genes.
DNA- binding domains have traditionally been considered solely responsible for genome inter -
action. However, recent research indicates that short segments within the activation domain can 
also influence the transcription factors' affinity for DNA binding. To examine this, Fan et al. tracked 
individual transcription factor molecules in living cells and quantified the proportion bound to the 
genome.
The results confirmed that short activation domains play a major role in controlling the fraction of 
transcription factor molecules that bind to the genome. Strong activation domains – which interact 
robustly with coactivators or other components of the transcriptional machinery – increased the frac-
tion of transcription- factor molecules bound to the genome. This effect was also achieved experimen-
tally by strengthening otherwise regular activation domains through targeted mutation.
The study further demonstrated that activation domains tether transcription factors to the genome 
by binding to a coactivator already associated with chromatin, a protein that packages DNA into 
compact parcels. This binding may indirectly anchor the transcription factor to DNA even before its 
own DNA- binding domain engages.
Understanding how transcription factors bind the genome is essential for elucidating gene regula-
tion. Traditional models assume that transcription factors first bind DNA through their DNA- binding 
domains and then use their activation domains to recruit the transcriptional machinery. The study of 
Fan et al. supports a model in which activation domains can instead bind coactivators that are already 
bound to DNA, tethering transcription factors indirectly to chromatin. These insights may ultimately 
deepen our understanding of gene regulation in development and disease.


--- Page 3 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  3 of 31
2023; Kumar et al., 2023; Mindel et al., 2024a; Mindel et al., 2024b). These studies show that 
long IDRs are necessary and sufficient to localize TFs to target promoter genes; minimal activation 
domains were reported not to contribute (Brodsky et al., 2020). Although the original data could not 
distinguish between direct DNA binding and chromatin binding via protein- protein interactions with 
DNA- bound factors (reviewed in Staller, 2022a), recent studies suggest an IDR can bind DNA directly 
(Strugo et al., 2025). This genomic targeting by IDRs has also been seen in human cells (Goldman 
et al., 2023). These findings can explain why removing the DBD can increase the number of genomic 
binding sites detected by ChIP- seq (Chen et al., 2014), have little effect on genome binding (Cowling 
and Cole, 2007), or complement null mutants (Copeland et al., 1996). We have shown that long IDRs 
control the fraction of TF molecules bound to chromatin for factors in the HIF family (Chen et al., 
2022). Other single- molecule imaging studies reported that IDRs impact nuclear diffusion but not 
genome binding (Callegari et al., 2019; Mazzocca et al., 2023). A single- molecule footprinting assay 
found that a strong activation domain can increase TF occupancy (Doughty et al., 2024). Together, 
these studies demonstrate how long IDRs or activation domains modulate chromatin binding.
In this study, we asked whether short activation domains within an IDR are sufficient to control chro-
matin association. While both DBDs and activation domains contribute to DNA binding and chromatin 
binding, the relative magnitude of these contributions cannot be predicted and must be measured. 
Activation domains recruit remodelers, like BAF , which move nucleosomes (Kadoch and Crabtree, 
2015), coactivators, like p300/CBP , which modify chromatin (DelRosso et  al., 2024; Dyson and 
Wright, 2016), and general transcription components like the Mediator complex (Currie et al., 2017; 
Henley et al., 2020; Lauberth et al., 2013; Malik and Roeder, 2010; Tang et al., 2013) that recruits 
RNA polymerase II (Alerasool et al., 2022; Gill et al., 1994). Although mechanistic understanding of 
activation domains still lags far behind DBDs, recent screens have cataloged many activation domains 
(DelRosso et al., 2023; Erijman et al., 2020; Morffy et al., 2024; Sanborn et al., 2021) and shown 
how the strength of acidic activation domains, the oldest and largest class (Sigler, 1988), depends 
on a balance of acidic, aromatic, and leucine residues (DelRosso et al., 2023; Staller et al., 2018; 
Staller et al., 2022b; Udupa et al., 2024). For consistency, we define activation domain strength as 
the fluorescence of a GFP reporter construct driven by a heterologous promoter.
Using single- molecule tracking (SMT) in live cells, we find that activation domains as short as 39–60 
amino acids strongly affect the fraction of synthetic TF molecules bound to chromatin. TFs with a 
higher bound fraction have increased residence time on chromatin as measured by fluorescence 
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). The chromatin- bound fraction and residence time of a series 
of activation domain mutants correlated with their ability to activate transcription. This effect was 
observed with activation domains attached to three structurally diverse DBDs, indicating that activa-
tion domains can control TF association with chromatin independent of DBD identity. Using pharma-
cological perturbations and proximity- assisted photoactivation (PAPA) experiments (Graham et al., 
2022), we demonstrate this chromatin association results from activation domains binding to coact-
ivator complexes. CUT&RUN experiments revealed all the synthetic TFs bound to overlapping sets 
of ATAC- seq accessible loci, suggesting that activation domains are binding to coactivators already 
engaged with chromatin. Stronger activation domains showed more binding to the same loci. These 
results suggest a key aspect of activation domain function could derive from increasing the ability of 
a TF to interact with chromatin.
Results
SMT of a synthetic TF
To test whether short activation domains are sufficient to control chromatin binding of TFs, we 
performed SMT on a synthetic factor. This synthetic TF was developed for high- throughput reporter 
studies of activation domain function (Staller et al., 2022b) and contains an estrogen- binding domain 
for inducible activation and six synthetic C2H2 zinc fingers (Park et al., 2019) engineered to bind 
to a DNA motif that is not found in the human genome. To facilitate SMT, we added a HaloTag for 
labeling with photostable synthetic dyes (Grimm et al., 2021; Figure 1A and B). At the N- terminus 
of this synthetic TF , we fused candidate activation domains and their rationally designed mutants. This 
synthetic TF is expressed from the weak L40 promoter and has low protein stability (Staller et al., 
2022b), resulting in low steady- state expression levels. We engineered the cognate reporter into 


--- Page 4 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  4 of 31
Figure 1. A synthetic transcription factor (TF) for quantifying chromatin association and reporter activity. (A) Schematic of the synthetic TF used in this 
study: activation domains (39–60 amino acids) are fused to HaloTag, an estrogen- binding domain, six synthetic C2H2 zinc fingers (ZF1), and a V5 epitope 
tag. Black line indicates linkers between domains. (B) AlphaFold2 model of the synthetic TF . (C) Schematic of the synthetic reporter locus (not to scale) 
installed at AAVS1. Four zinc- finger binding sites are engineered upstream of a minimal promoter, minCMV . These elements are upstream of GFP , which 
is produced in response to estradiol induction. (D) Overlay of GFP and phase- contrast images of reporter- bearing cells expressing VP16- synthetic TF 
Figure 1 continued on next page


--- Page 5 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  5 of 31
the AAVS1 locus of U2OS cells and derived a monoclonal line to assay transcriptional activity by GFP 
expression (Figure 1C, Materials and methods). This reporter locus is the only perfect motif match for 
the synthetic DBD in the genome. We stably integrated each synthetic TF into this cell line and verified 
that estradiol induction robustly induces GFP expression (Figure 1D).
We performed fast SMT on these synthetic TFs using highly inclined and laminated optical sheet 
(HILO) illumination at fast (~7.5 ms) frame rates (Figure 1E, Video 1), localized and tracked single 
molecules, and a published Bayesian mixture model to infer the distribution of their diffusion coeffi-
cients (Heckert et al., 2022). We define proteins with a diffusion coefficient D<0.1 μm
2/s as immobile 
and assume immobile molecules are bound to chromatin (Chen et al., 2022; Ferrie et al., 2024). 
Importantly, this chromatin association does not necessarily indicate direct binding to DNA but could 
include interactions with factors directly bound to DNA. Molecules with higher diffusion coefficients 
are untethered and are likely freely diffusing or diffusing in complex with other factors (Ferrie et al., 
2022; Staller, 2022a). In this work, we focus on the fraction of immobile molecules bound to chromatin.
Short activation domains control the fraction of TF molecules bound to 
chromatin
Given the evidence that long IDRs can control the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin, we 
tested the hypothesis that minimal activation domains can also contribute to this phenotype. In 
previous examples, the IDRs that controlled the bound fraction were the majority of the protein (Chen 
et al., 2022). Here, our synthetic TF is ~800 AAs and the activation domain is 39–60 residues on the 
N- terminus.
Despite comprising only 5–7% of the total polypeptide sequence, these short activation domains 
dominated the chromatin- bound fraction of our synthetic TF . Three acidic activation domains 
derived from VP16, CITED2, and HIF1α each yielded different bound fractions and diffusion spectra 
(Figure 2A). These differences were also apparent in jump- length histograms and generally agreed 
with parameters modeled from Spot- On (Hansen et al., 2018; Figure 2—figure supplement 1), inde-
pendently validating this result. This bound frac-
tion was positively correlated with GFP expression 
of the reporter locus measured by flow cytometry 
(Figure 2B and C), suggesting a link between the 
strength of activation domains and their propen-
sity to associate with chromatin (Figure 2D). The 
synthetic TF without an activation domain (here-
after the empty TF) also had a low (but not the 
lowest) fraction of molecules bound to chromatin.
As previously reported (Driouchi et al., 2025; 
Walther et al., 2024), we find substantial cell- to- 
cell variability when making SMT measurements 
in these cell lines (Figure 2—figure supplement 
2), which necessitated large datasets with many 
cells and trajectories for reporting reproducible 
diffusion spectra (Materials and methods; Supple-
mentary file 2). The difference in bound fractions 
also held when these synthetic TFs were trans-
fected into cells without reporter loci (Figure 2—
figure supplement 3), implying that the majority 
of immobile molecules bound nonspecifically to 
genomic sites without a match to the cognate 
motif.
Video 1. Exemplary single- molecule tracking (SMT) 
movie of a cell expressing VP16- synthetic transcription 
factor (TF). SMT movie shown in real time of a cell 
expressing VP16- synthetic TF . Trajectories overlaid 
and colored according to their mean jump length, 
where brighter- colored spots belong to faster- moving 
trajectories. Initially, frames are dense with detections 
and are rejected for analysis. Detections outside a 
curated nuclear mask are also rejected.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/105776/figures#video1
at 0 hr (left) and 72 hr (right) after estradiol induction. Quantification of the percentage of GFP- positive cells over time from live imaging is shown in the 
right plot. (E) Left: Trajectories extracted from single- molecule tracking (SMT) movies from cells expressing two example proteins. Thousands of these 
trajectories are pooled to generate inferred diffusion spectra, right. Lower panel indicates the cumulative distribution function of the diffusion spectra. 
We consider the shaded gray region (D<0.1 µm2/s) the chromatin- associated fraction of a protein.
Figure 1 continued


--- Page 6 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  6 of 31
SMT at fast frame rates provides snapshots of the diffusive states of these factors but cannot accu-
rately determine how long a given factor remains bound. To complement this experiment, we measured 
TF residence time on chromatin with FRAP (Figure 2E, Figure 2—figure supplement 4). We fit our 
FRAP recovery curves to a double- exponential equation (Materials and methods, Supplementary 
Figure 2. Short activation domains are sufficient to control the fraction of transcription factor (TF) molecules bound to chromatin. (A) Diffusion spectra 
(top) and cumulative distributions (bottom) of synthetic TFs bearing various activation domains. Numbers indicate the fraction of molecules with 
diffusion coefficients below 0.1 µm
2/s (shaded region), which we infer to be chromatin- bound. (B) Flow cytometry measurements of cells bearing various 
activation domains after 24 hr of estradiol treatment. Distributions are shown in the top panel, where the dashed line is an arbitrary gate for GFP- 
positive cells. (C) Bar plot for mean fluorescence intensity (MFI), the geometric mean of GFP values for cells in the positive gate. (D) For each synthetic 
TF , the MFI of GFP+ cells is plotted against its bound fraction. Error bars indicate bootstrapping standard deviations of the bound fraction (Materials 
and methods). (E) HIF1α and CITED2 fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) recoveries over time plotted as rolling means (solid lines). 
Curve fits to a double- exponential equation (Materials and methods) are shown in dashed lines.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Jump length histograms and Spot- On fits for two synthetic transcription factors (TFs).
Figure supplement 2. Analysis of a single- molecule tracking (SMT) dataset for sources of variance.
Figure supplement 3. Diffusion spectra of activation domain- synthetic transcription factor (TF) constructs in WT U2OS cells.
Figure supplement 4. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) curves for histone H2B, HIF1α-synthetic transcription factor (TF), and 
CITED2- synthetic TF .


--- Page 7 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  7 of 31
file 1, Mueller et  al., 2012). We found that 
the SMT- bound fraction correlated with FRAP 
recovery times, with stronger activation domains 
conferring longer dwell times (Videos 2 and 3). 
This recovery time difference is consistent with 
another synthetic system where strong activation 
domains have longer dwell time on chromatin 
(Trojanowski et al., 2022). Together, these results 
indicate that stronger activation domains have a 
higher fraction of molecules bound to chromatin 
and that these molecules have longer residence 
times on chromatin.
Mutations in activation domains 
modulate chromatin binding
Intrigued by the apparent correlation between 
activation domain strength and bound fraction, 
we investigated multiple allelic series of muta-
tions that increased and decreased activity of our 
activation domains (Staller et  al., 2022b). We 
selected mutants that we have previously shown 
to have large effects on reporter gene activity and 
that change one to seven residues in each activa-
tion domain.
Within each allelic series, we saw a positive correlation between activation domain strength 
and bound fraction. Stronger activation domain mutants had higher bound fractions. These muta-
tions change activity by perturbing different physicochemical parameters. For CITED2 (Figure 3A), 
two alleles that decrease activity, either by mutating key hydrophobic residues (motif mutation) or 
replacing all six leucines with phenylalanines (L>F), decreased bound fraction. A CITED2 allele that 
neutralizes a single positive charge (K>A) increased activity and increased bound fraction. For VP16, 
two alleles that abrogate activation domain activity, F442A (Cress and Triezenberg, 1991) and 7As, 
both reduced the bound fraction (Figure 3B). In HIF1α, adding acidity by mutating three arginines 
to aspartates (R>D) or two glutamines and one asparagine to glutamate (QN>E) increased the frac-
tion bound (Figure 3C). In the SREBP activation 
domain, removing aromatic and/or leucine resi-
dues decreased activity and decreased the bound 
fraction (Figure  3—figure supplement 1). We 
employed a bootstrapping approach to estimate 
error in SMT diffusion spectra (Materials and 
methods, Figure  3—figure supplement 2) and 
noted that this trend held within each allelic series 
and across the full set of mutants (Figure  3D). 
In individual cells, the bound fraction was not 
correlated with TF abundance (Figure 3—figure 
supplement 3) or the charge of the activation 
domain (Figure 3—figure supplement 4). Within 
each allelic series, stronger activation domain 
mutants had higher bound fractions, and weaker 
mutants had lower bound fractions.
Furthermore, for HIF1α, the QN>E allele 
had slower FRAP recovery, indicating a longer 
residence time on chromatin (Figure  3—figure 
supplement 5D). These data support the idea 
Video 2. Exemplary fluorescence recovery after 
photobleaching (FRAP) movie of a cell expressing 
CITED2- synthetic transcription factor (TF). FRAP movie, 
nuclear mask, photobleach spot mask, and an overlay 
of the movie and spot mask are shown above the 
normalized intensity of the FRAP recovery over time. 
Movies of many cells expressing CITED2- synthetic TF 
are aggregated and fit to generate a recovery curve, 
like that in Figure 2E (green).
https://elifesciences.org/articles/105776/figures#video2
Video 3. Exemplary fluorescence recovery after 
photobleaching (FRAP) movie of a cell expressing 
HIF1α-synthetic transcription factor (TF). FRAP movie, 
nuclear mask, photobleach spot mask, and an overlay 
of the movie and spot mask are shown above the 
normalized intensity of the FRAP recovery over time. 
Movies of many cells expressing HIF1α-synthetic TF are 
aggregated and fit to generate a recovery curve, like 
that in Figure 2E (purple).
https://elifesciences.org/articles/105776/figures#video3


--- Page 8 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  8 of 31
Figure 3. Mutations in individual activation domains modulate the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. (A) The amino acid sequence of CITED2 
and its mutant constructs is shown above their diffusion spectra and the cumulative distributions. Numbers indicate the fractions bound, the probability 
density in the shaded region of the diffusion spectra. (B) As in A for VP16. (C) As in A for HIF1α. (D) Summary of activation domain activity and 
chromatin- bound fractions. Mean fluorescence intensity of GFP+ cells plotted against bound fractions. Error bars indicate standard deviations of a cell- 
wise bootstrapping scheme (Materials and methods, Figure 3—figure supplement 2).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. An additional allelic series with cholesterol transcription factor (TF) SREBP’s activation domain.
Figure supplement 2. Example outputs from a cell- wise bootstrapping scheme to estimate error in single- molecule tracking (SMT) diffusion spectra.
Figure supplement 3. Cell- wise relationships between chromatin- bound fraction, transcription factor (TF) expression, and reporter output.
Figure supplement 4. Activation domain net charge and fractions bound for constructs in Figure 3.
Figure supplement 5. Mutations in activation domains change reporter activity and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) recovery.


--- Page 9 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  9 of 31
that strong activation domains increase the fraction of TF molecules bound to chromatin and extend 
the duration of their binding.
Activation domains control chromatin binding of a second DBD
We next tested whether the observed relationship between activation domain strength and bound 
fraction depends on the DBD of our synthetic TF . We replaced the synthetic zinc fingers with the SOX2 
Figure 4. Activation domain alleles control the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin when fused to an alternative DNA- binding domain (DBD) or 
in a full- length transcription factor (TF). (A) Left: We replaced the synthetic zinc finger DBD with the human SOX2 DBD. Right: Diffusion spectra and 
cumulative distributions for three alleles of CITED2. Shaded region indicates density contributing to the bound fraction. (B) Top: Schematic of the 
HIF1α and HIF2α intrinsically disordered region (IDR) swap chimeras from Chen et al., 2022. Bottom: Diffusion spectra and cumulative distributions 
of the constructs shown. The HIF1α IDRs control the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin under hypoxic conditions. (C) Top: We introduced three 
superactivating point mutations (QN>E) into full- length HIF1α’s second activation domain. Bottom: Diffusion spectra and cumulative distributions of 
the constructs shown. These three mutations in HIF1α increase the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin, recapitulating the differences seen in 
synthetic TFs.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. AAVS1- integrated GFP reporter with synthetic ZF- binding sites is not activated by SOX2DBD- activation domain constructs.


--- Page 10 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  10 of 31
DBD, which belongs to a different structural family, the high- mobility group (HMG) DBDs (Figure 4A). 
These domains are minor- groove binders with many specific cognate sites throughout the genome. 
For this orthogonal DBD, our CITED2- K>A mutant had a dramatically higher fraction bound than 
WT, while the inactive motif mutant modestly decreased chromatin association (Figure 4A). The L>F 
mutation in this chimeric factor prevented its localization to the nucleus, precluding SMT. None of 
these constructs activated our GFP reporter (Figure 4—figure supplement 1). This last finding further 
reinforces that most of the observed chromatin binding in SMT is not at the reporter locus. With this 
second DBD, strong activation domains show more chromatin binding.
Activation domains control chromatin binding of full-length TFs
We next investigated activation domain mutations in full- length TFs. We previously showed that the 
bound fraction of the HIF1α and HIF2α paralogs is controlled by long IDRs, not their DBDs (Chen 
et al., 2022). In chimeric TFs, the IDR of HIF2α yields more chromatin binding than that of HIF1α. 
Previous studies were conducted in VHL- deficient renal carcinoma cells, which resulted in the stabiliza-
tion of HIF proteins in this cell line (Brodaczewska et al., 2016). We recapitulated these results in our 
U2OS cells using deferoxamine, a drug that prevents HIF degradation and mimics aspects of hypoxia 
(Guo et al., 2006). In this condition, we reproduced the effect of IDR swaps on the diffusion of HIF 
factors: HIF2α had a higher bound fraction than HIF1α, and the HIF2α IDR was sufficient to confer this 
higher bound fraction (Figure 4B). Conversely, the HIF1α IDR conferred a lower bound fraction when 
attached to the HIF2α DBD. For these paralogs, the IDR controls the bound fraction.
We tested if the mutations in the activation domain could control the fraction of full- length HIF1α 
bound to chromatin. Introducing the strongest of these mutations, QN>E, into AD2 (C- terminal activa-
tion domain) of full- length HIF1α increased the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin (Figure 4C). 
This result shows that the strength of minimal activation domains in endogenous factors can control 
the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. Further, this experiment demonstrated that the rela-
tionship between activation domain strength and bound fraction holds for another structurally distinct 
DBD, the basic helix- loop- helix (bHLH) family.
Together, we found that strong activation domains control the bound fraction of one synthetic and 
two natural DBDs. These DBDs are taken from three structurally distinct classes: zinc finger, HMG, 
and bHLH. We have further shown this result holds for both synthetic TFs and full- length endogenous 
TFs. We speculate that acidic activation domains may contribute to the fraction of molecules bound 
to chromatin for other full- length TFs.
Quantifying activation domain coactivator interactions in vivo
We tested the hypothesis that protein- protein interactions between activation domains and coactiva-
tors can explain the positive correlation between activation domain strength and the fraction of mole-
cules bound to chromatin. If increasing activation domain binding to known coactivator partners can 
increase TF chromatin binding, it would explain our results without invoking any new molecular mech-
anisms. In vitro, strong activation domains bind coactivators more tightly than weak ones (DelRosso 
et al., 2024; Henderson et al., 2018; Sanborn et al., 2021). In the nucleus, coactivators are limiting 
for transcriptional activity (Gillespie et al., 2020) and have long residence times on chromatin (Cho 
et al., 2018; Sanborn et al., 2021). For p300, the majority of molecules are bound to chromatin at 
steady state (Ferrie et al., 2024).
To assess more directly whether chromatin binding of synthetic TFs correlates with coactivator 
binding, we used PAPA, in which excitation of a ‘sender’ fluorophore reactivates a nearby ‘receiver’ 
fluorophore from a dark state, thereby revealing proximity between two labeled proteins (Figure 5A). 
To this end, we fused SNAP- tag2 (Kühn et al., 2025) to synthetic TFs in a U2OS cell line with HaloT -
agged endogenous p300 (Ferrie et al., 2024). After labeling SNAP- tag2 with the receiver fluorophore 
JFX650 and HaloTag- p300 with the sender fluorophore JF549, we placed JFX650 in a dark state with 
639 nm illumination and assayed proximity- dependent reactivation following excitation of JF549 with 
561 nm light. As previously described, we used direct reactivation of JFX650 with 405 nm light as an 
internal normalization standard (Dahal et al., 2025; Graham et al., 2025; Graham et al., 2022) and 
calculated a normalized PAPA ratio relative to nuclear SNAP- tag2 alone, a noninteracting negative 
control (Abidi et al., 2025) (Materials and methods, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). A very marginal 
PAPA signal was observed between p300 and the synthetic TF without an activation domain, while a 


--- Page 11 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  11 of 31
Figure 5. Proximity- assisted photoactivation (PAPA) of synthetic transcription factors (TFs) shows that stronger activation domains promote interaction 
with p300. (A) Schematic of our PAPA experiment using p300 endogenously tagged with HaloTag and an exogenous SNAP- tagged synthetic TF . First, 
red SNAP- tag2- liganded dyes are shelved (left, Materials and methods). A pulse of violet light (405 nm) indiscriminately reactivates these shelved 
dyes, while green light (561 nm) excites the sender, HaloTag- liganded dye, which reactivates nearby SNAP- tag dyes selectively. (B) Normalized PAPA 
ratio quantifying the proximity between p300- HaloTag and the constructs labeled. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals derived by bootstrapping 
(Materials and methods). (C) Diffusion spectra and cumulative distributions after segregation of green- reactivated (p300 proximal molecules) and violet- 
Figure 5 continued on next page


--- Page 12 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  12 of 31
small but significant increase was observed upon fusion to the HIF1α activation domain (Figure 5B). A 
dramatic increase in PAPA signal was observed for the superactive mutants, consistent with stronger 
binding to p300. These data support the model that activation domains increase chromatin binding 
of TFs by engaging coactivators. These results also demonstrate that PAPA can detect interactions 
between a coactivator and minimal activation domains and that this measure is commensurate with 
activation domain strength.
In addition, we can examine the diffusion spectra of the p300 proximal molecules (green- reactivated) 
and the total population (violet- reactivated). For the two superactive mutants, this analysis shows that 
the p300 proximal population has a much higher bound fraction (Figure 5D and E). Increased binding 
between synthetic TFs and p300 measured by PAPA correlated with a higher chromatin- bound frac-
tion in the SMT. Together, these results support the idea that activation domain coactivator binding 
can tether TFs to chromatin.
Disrupting coactivator function perturbs TF-chromatin associations
We further investigated if activation domain binding to coactivators can tether TFs to chromatin by 
pharmacologically perturbing coactivator function. First, we used norstictic acid to selectively disrupt 
VP16 binding to the Med25 domain of Mediator (Garlick et al., 2021). Like most coactivators, Medi-
ator has a longer dwell time on DNA than that of sequence- specific TFs (Cho et al., 2018; Whitney 
and Lionnet, 2024). If the synthetic TF with VP16 is tethered to chromatin via activation domain 
interactions with Med25, norstictic acid treatment would decrease the fraction of molecules bound 
to chromatin. In line with this prediction, norstictic acid caused a small but significant decrease in 
the bound fraction of synthetic TF with VP16 (Figure 6A). The empty TF experienced no significant 
change in binding (Figure 6B), and two alleles of VP16 also showed decreases in fraction bound 
in response to norstictic acid (Figure 6—figure supplement 1). This perturbation further supports 
the idea that synthetic TFs can be tethered to chromatin by activation domain interactions with 
coactivators.
For the second pharmacological perturbation, we selected the coactivator p300, which has a high 
bound fraction, a relatively long residence time (Ferrie et al., 2024), and is a key binding partner for 
the HIF1α, CITED2, and VP16 activation domains (Dyson and Wright, 2016). Inhibition of p300 with 
A485 inhibits catalytic activity, decreases global transcription (Lasko et al., 2017), and increases the 
fraction of p300 molecules bound to chromatin (Ferrie et al., 2024). Under A485, we predict that the 
same steady- state binding between an activation domain and p300 will result in more synthetic TF 
molecules binding to p300 on chromatin and give the appearance of more synthetic TF binding to 
chromatin. Consistent with this prediction, A485 treatment mildly but significantly increased the frac-
tion of synthetic TF with VP16 bound to chromatin relative to control (Figure 6C). The empty synthetic 
TF experienced the opposite effect, with a decrease in binding to chromatin (Figure 6D). Together, 
the A485 and norstictic acid perturbations support the idea that TFs can be tethered to chromatin 
through protein- protein interactions with coactivators.
As a third perturbation of coactivator function, we inhibited the BAF (mammalian Swi/Snf) complex 
with BAFi (BRM014). BAF inhibition leads to rapid genome- wide chromatin compaction and decreased 
global transcription (Schick et al., 2021). In single- molecule footprinting experiments, inhibiting BAF 
decreased promoter occupancy of a Tet- VP48 synthetic TF (Doughty et al., 2024). For our synthetic 
TF , inhibition of BAF significantly decreased the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin relative to 
the vehicle control (Figure 6E). The empty synthetic TF did not experience a significant change in 
binding (Figure 6F). This result suggests that a substantial portion of our immobile TFs are binding 
chromatin at open or actively transcribing loci.
reactivated (direct reactivation) trajectories for cells expressing HIF1α WT. Density in the gray shaded region is quantified as the bound fraction. Light 
green and purple shading denotes the standard deviation of bootstrapping trials. (D) As in (C) for HIF1α RK >D. (E) As in (C) for HIF1α QN >E.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Proximity- assisted photoactivation (PAPA) analysis intermediates.
Figure 5 continued


--- Page 13 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  13 of 31
Synthetic TFs bind active loci genome-wide
The increases in chromatin binding measured by SMT cannot distinguish between stronger binding to 
the same genomic loci and binding to new genomic loci. To differentiate between these two possibil-
ities, we undertook CUT&RUN experiments (Skene and Henikoff, 2017) on five of our synthetic TFs 
(Figure 7A). For full- length HIF1α and HIF1β TFs, CUT&RUN experiments indicated most genomic 
loci are bound by both TFs, implying that an increased bound fraction in SMT experiments is primarily 
due to higher occupancy at the same loci (Chen et al., 2022). This result sets the expectation that our 
activation domain mutations that increase chromatin- bound fraction in SMT are unlikely to bind new 
genomic loci and instead will have higher occupancy at the same loci across the genome.
All the TFs, including the empty TF , were bound to the cognate binding sites of the reporter 
gene at the AAVS1 locus. Normalizing between samples revealed that the HIF1α QN>E superactive 
mutant had more occupancy than the WT HIF1α TF (Figure 7C). Genome- wide, the binding profiles 
of all synthetic TFs mostly overlapped pre- existing ATAC- seq peaks (Figure 7D, Figure 7—figure 
Figure 6. Perturbing coactivator function alters transcription factor (TF) bound fraction. (A) VP16- synthetic TF diffusion spectra and cumulative 
distributions for cells treated for 2 hr with norstictic acid or vehicle (DMSO). Density in light gray is quantified as the bound fraction. Shading around 
the spectra and cumulative distributions indicates standard deviation of bootstrapping trials. (B) Diffusion spectra and cumulative distributions of cells 
expressing the synthetic TF with no activation domain treated for 2 hr with norstictic acid or vehicle (DMSO). Density in light gray is quantified as the 
bound fraction. Shading around the spectra and cumulative distributions indicates standard deviation of bootstrapping trials. (C) As in (A) for A485, a 
p300 inhibitor. (D) As in (B) for A485, a p300 inhibitor. The DMSO curve is repeated from (B). (E) As in (A) for BRM- 014, a BAF inhibitor (BAFi). (F) As in 
(B) for BRM- 014, a BAF inhibitor (BAFi). The DMSO curve is repeated from (B).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Drug perturbations on the synthetic transcription factor (TF) bearing mutants of the VP16 activation domain.


--- Page 14 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  14 of 31
Figure 7. CUT&RUN on synthetic transcription factors (TFs) with different activation domains reveals most binding occurs at open chromatin. (A) We 
performed CUT&RUN on the parental cell line bearing the GFP reporter locus and five cell lines, each expressing synthetic TFs with a variable activation 
domain. Cells for all conditions were probed with an anti- V5 antibody, which should bind specifically only to the V5 epitope of the synthetic TFs. (B) 
Genomic binding signal at the engineered AAVS1 locus, shown to scale. All the synthetic TFs, including the empty TF , bound the cognate binding sites 
in the reporter construct. (C) Mean binding signal of the various synthetic TFs between the dashed lines of (B), which include the ZF1 binding sites and 
minimal promoter. (D) Binding of synthetic TFs and ATAC- seq signal at an exemplary locus. TF binding signal is strongest at ATAC- seq peaks, with 
stronger activation domains conferring more genomic binding in some cases. Not all ATAC- seq peaks are bound by the synthetic TFs. (E) ATAC- seq 
(left) and synthetic TF factor binding (right plots) signals plotted across 80118 ATAC- seq peaks, sorted by decreasing ATAC- seq peak strength. The five 
synthetic TFs share a color scale; the ATAC- seq signal uses a separate scale. Binding patterns for the synthetic TFs generally follow the strength of the 
ATAC- seq signal.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 7:
Figure supplement 1. Synthetic transcription factors (TFs) bearing various activation domains generally bind to similar, open regions of the genome.


--- Page 15 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  15 of 31
supplement 1A). The HIF1α superactive allele bound more loci than the WT allele, but the patterns 
were highly overlapping (Figure 7—figure supplement 1B). Together, these results indicate that most 
synthetic TF binding events occur at accessible loci. We conclude that the increased bound fraction 
we observe in the SMT primarily results from more binding to the same active loci.
Discussion
How a TF binds the genome is controlled by both DBDs and IDRs, but it remains difficult to predict the 
relative contributions of these two regions. We demonstrated that very short activation domains can 
control the fraction of TF molecules bound to chromatin, sometimes accounting for more binding than 
the DBD. Mutations that increase activation domain strength in reporter assays increase the fraction 
of molecules bound to chromatin. Conversely, mutations that decrease activation domain strength 
decrease the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. This trend holds for allelic series of four acidic 
activation domains, for three structurally diverse DBDs, and for synthetic and full- length TFs.
SMT has revealed many new dimensions of TF nuclear dynamics and has been instrumental for our 
discovery. The technique has shown that TF- chromatin interactions are generally short- lived (Brouwer 
and Lenstra, 2019; Lionnet and Wu, 2021; Liu et al., 2014), that coactivator chromatin binding is 
long- lived (Ferrie et al., 2024), and that IDRs can make larger contributions to chromatin binding 
than DBDs (Chen et al., 2022). Here, we demonstrate that minimal activation domains (39–60AA) can 
control the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. Our results are consistent with an SMT study of 
an activation domain deletion in p53 showing reduced association with dense chromatin (Mazzocca 
et al., 2023).
There are three hypotheses for how increasing activation domain strength causes a higher fraction 
of TF molecules bound to chromatin: (1) activation domains could directly bind DNA, (2) activation 
domains could modulate DBD interactions with DNA, or (3) activation domains could bind to coacti-
vators that are bound to chromatin, tethering the TF to chromatin.
Our short acidic activation domains are unlikely to bind DNA directly due to electrostatic repulsion: 
both the activation domains and DNA are negatively charged and repel each other. While protein net 
charge can play a large role in nuclear diffusion (Xiang et al., 2020), we found no correlation between 
net charge and fractions bound in factors we tested (Figure 3—figure supplement 4).
It is also possible that our activation domains are interacting with the DBD to modulate DNA 
binding, an emerging theme in TF biology (Baughman et al., 2022; Bentley et al., 2023; Bjarnason 
et al., 2024; He et al., 2019; Krois et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2021). For our results, intramolecular 
interactions are not the main drivers of chromatin binding because the phenotype is consistent across 
three structurally distinct DBDs.
Figure 8. Model for how activation domains contribute to chromatin binding by interactions with coactivators. (A) A solitary transcription factor (TF) 
diffusing in the nucleoplasm, a lone wolf. (B) A TF bound to a coactivator with its activation domain diffusing through the nucleoplasm. (C) Three 
TFs bound simultaneously to a coactivator diffusing in the nucleoplasm as a complex or wolfpack. (D) A TF nonspecifically bound to random DNA. 
(E) A TF specifically bound with its DBD to a cognate DNA motif at the reporter locus. (F) TFs specifically bound to motifs at the reporter locus and 
simultaneously bound to a coactivator. (G) Proposed model for how the activation domain tethers the synthetic TF to chromatin through the coactivator. 
This situation occurs at active loci where the coactivator has been recruited by the orange and blue TFs.


--- Page 16 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  16 of 31
Our PAPA experiments support the hypothesis that protein- protein interactions between activation 
domains and coactivators explain the positive correlation between activation domain strength and the 
fraction of TF molecules bound to chromatin. The overall chromatin- bound fraction of SNAP- tagged 
synthetic TFs was higher than that of the Halo- tagged versions, perhaps reflecting differences in phys-
ical properties of the two tags, such as volume and charge (Figure 3C vs Figure 5C–E, violet curves). 
TFs reactivated by PAPA from p300 had a higher chromatin- bound fraction than those directly reacti-
vated by violet light (DR), indicating the expected correlation between p300 binding and chromatin 
binding (Figure 5). Compared to WT, the two superactive HIF1α alleles showed stronger binding to 
p300 by PAPA and a more pronounced shift toward chromatin- bound molecules when comparing 
PAPA to DR trajectories. Curiously, while the bound fraction of PAPA trajectories increased with 
activation domain strength, DR trajectories, if anything, showed the opposite trend. One possible 
explanation is that a large fraction of TF molecules bind p300, and each round of PAPA followed by 
re- bleaching depletes these complexes from subsequent rounds of direct reactivation—with more 
interaction resulting in greater depletion. This work marks the first time that PAPA has been applied to 
measure TF- coactivator interactions in vivo, which we anticipate will be a powerful new experimental 
approach to study transcription. Together with the PAPA experiments, the pharmacological pertur -
bations support our hypothesis that activation domain- coactivator interactions strongly influence TF 
binding to chromatin (Figure 8). We cannot distinguish whether the coactivator directly binds DNA, 
binds a nucleosome, or binds another TF bound to DNA, but we suspect all three binding modes are 
involved.
In the CUT&RUN data, stronger activation domains cause higher occupancy at the reporter locus, 
but the vast majority of other genomic binding occurs at other active loci. Consequently, we believe 
our activation domain- mediated chromatin binding is distinct from the ability of long IDRs to direct 
TFs to specific genomic loci (Brodsky et al., 2020; Gera et al., 2022; Goldman et al., 2023; Hurieva 
et al., 2024; Mindel et al., 2024a). Instead, we believe the SMT is observing the same underlying 
biological process that causes activation domains to enhance promoter occupancy in single- molecule 
footprinting experiments (Doughty et al., 2024) and long TF residence times on promoters (Schaepe 
et al., 2025). It is remarkable that short activation domains can have such a large effect on binding.
Genome binding is an emergent property of full- length TFs, with contributions from the DBD, 
activation domains, and their interactions. In textbook models, the DBD binds DNA first, and then the 
activation domain recruits the coactivators. We speculate that recruitment can occur in both direc-
tions: sometimes the first event will be the activation domain binding to a coactivator that is already 
engaged at an active locus, and then the DBD will bind the local DNA (Figure 8). Different activation 
domains bind distinct coactivators (Alerasool et al., 2022), but only some of these interactions, which 
can have affinities of 10 nanomolar (Berlow et al., 2017; De Guzman et al., 2004), will be strong 
enough to tether TFs to chromatin.
Our results also challenge the traditional interpretation of activation domain strength. Previously, 
we had assumed that all our synthetic TFs had similar DNA occupancy because they have the same 
DBD. Our results here show that strong activation domains increase occupancy at a reporter locus. As 
a result, the higher reporter activity is a convolution of more binding and more coactivator recruitment 
(Doughty et al., 2024). This finding motivates the need for new assays for activation domain function 
that can separate binding from reporter activity.
In this work, we focused on the fraction of molecules bound to chromatin. We also see some 
changes in the distribution of inferred diffusion constants of mobile molecules, some of which are 
bimodal. After norstictic acid treatment, the slow- moving population shrank and the fast- moving 
population grew. The slow- moving population is also prominent in the PAPA data. We speculate that 
the slow- moving population might be TFs bound to coactivators exploring the nucleus in clusters or 
‘wolf packs’ (Figure 8C), as we previously hypothesized (Staller, 2022a).
Materials and methods
U2OS cell culture
U2OS cells (osteosarcoma from a 15- year- old human female) were originally obtained from the UC 
Berkeley Cell Culture Facility. Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 
and cultured in reconstituted DMEM containing 4.5 g/L glucose (Thermo 12800082) supplemented 


--- Page 17 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  17 of 31
with 9.1% fetal bovine serum (FBS, HyClone), L- glutamine (Sigma), GlutaMax (Thermo), and 100 U/mL 
penicillin- streptomycin (Thermo). Cells were generally passaged every 3 days by splitting 1:8, using 
0.25% trypsin to facilitate detachment.
Cell lines used in this study tested negative for mycoplasma about monthly by PCR (https://bite-
sizebio.com/23682/homemade-pcr-test-for-mycoplasma-contamination/). Cells were tested to be 
U2OS cells with STR profiling at the UC Berkeley Cell Culture Facility.
For imaging experiments, cells were plated the evening prior to imaging to achieve 60–80% conflu-
ency on the day of imaging. Cells were grown on glass- bottom dishes (MatTek P35G- 1.5- 14- C) in 
phenol- red- free DMEM containing 4.5 g/L glucose and supplemented with 9% FBS and 100 U/mL 
penicillin- streptomycin (‘imaging medium’).
U2OS cell line generation
To generate the reporter cell line, U2OS cells were transfected in six- well dishes using Lipofectamine 
3000, with 3  µg of DNA and 6  µL of Lipofectamine 3000 per well. Each well received 1  µg of a 
combined Cas9 and sgRNA plasmid targeting the AAVS1 locus (Addgene plasmid #227272) and 2 µg 
of repair template containing the reporter locus, similar to that of the previously described construct 
(Staller et al., 2022b).
The reporter construct is based on a published reporter (Addgene #176294), but we replaced 
puromycin resistance with blasticidin resistance, added VKYY to the start of the GFP to boost trans-
lation (Verma et al., 2019), inserted a small t intron, and inserted a WPRE before the SV40 poly(A) 
signal.
Two days after transfection, cells were passaged onto a 10 cm dish and selected with blasticidin 
(Fisher A1113903) at 5 µg/mL. When this dish was confluent, single clones were isolated by limiting 
dilution into 96- well plates and sequence- validated to have at least one copy of the reporter locus by 
PCR and Sanger sequencing. Clones were also tested by transient transfection of a VP16 synthetic TF 
by measuring fold- induction in response to estradiol induction. We picked the most robustly induced 
clone for this study. Cells were maintained in media containing 5 µg/mL blasticidin.
All synthetic zinc- finger- and SOX2DBD- bearing constructs were cloned using Gibson Assembly 
and verified via whole- plasmid sequencing (Plasmidsaurus). Starting with a published synthetic TF 
(Addgene #176293), we moved the TF into PiggyBac backbone with a L30 promoter, replaced 
mScarlet with HaloTag, added a V5 tag, and replaced the neomycin resistance with puromycin resis-
tance. These constructs were stably integrated into the reporter clone described above. For integra-
tions, we transfected 2 µg of a synthetic construct with 1 µg of a vector expressing Super PiggyBac 
Transposase (Yusa et al., 2011) in this reporter clone. Two days after transfection, we passaged cells 
onto a 10 cm dish and selected cells with puromycin (Invivogen) at 1 µg/mL. We continued passaging 
these cells for at least 2 weeks before proceeding with experiments. Cells were maintained in media 
containing 5 µL/mL blasticidin and 1 µg/mL puromycin.
Selection of activation domain mutations
We selected mutations that strongly changed activation domain activity in our published assay (Staller 
et al., 2022b). The QN>E mutation prevents hydroxylation, a modification which normally destabilizes 
the protein and interferes with p300 binding (Hewitson et al., 2002; Lando et al., 2002a; Lando 
et al., 2002b).
Nucleofection and drug treatments
For Figure 4B and C, U2OS cells were electroporated using a homemade buffer (Danner, 2020) and 
the X- 001 protocol of the Lonza Nucleofector II. This method mitigates autofluorescence artifacts 
from lipid- based transfection reagents. One million U2OS cells were electroporated with previously 
described constructs (Chen et al., 2022) and treated with deferoxamine mesylate salt (Sigma D9533) 
at 100 µM overnight.
For Figure 5A, D, Figure 5—figure supplement 1, uninduced cells were treated for 2 hr with 
10 µM norstictic acid (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or the equivalent DMSO. These cells were stained 
with HaloTag ligand (as in ‘Sample preparation for imaging experiments’) and induced with 1  µM 
β-Estradiol (Sigma E2758; ‘estradiol’) immediately before imaging.


--- Page 18 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  18 of 31
For Figure 5B and E, uninduced cells were treated for 2 hr with 10 µM A485 (Fisher) or the equiv-
alent DMSO. These cells were stained with HaloTag ligand (as in ‘Sample preparation for imaging 
experiments’) and induced with 1 µM estradiol immediately before imaging.
For Figure 5C and F, uninduced cells were treated for 2 hr with 10 µM BRM/BRG1 ATP Inhibitor- 1 
compound 14 (MedChemExpress; ‘BAFi’) or the equivalent DMSO. These cells were stained with 
HaloTag ligand (as in ‘Sample preparation for imaging experiments’) and induced with 1 µM estradiol 
immediately before imaging.
Except for treatments noted above in this section, cells in all other conditions were treated with 
1 µM estradiol for 12–16 hr the night before they were imaged for SMT.
For all flow cytometry experiments, cells were treated with 1 µM estradiol for 24 hr.
Incucyte live-cell imaging
To assay reporter induction at fine time intervals, we used the Incucyte S3 system to acquire images 
every 2 hr post estradiol induction. The day before the experiment, cells were plated at around 25% 
confluence. The day of the experiment, cells were induced with 1 µM estradiol, and the first image was 
taken about 5 min later (as the 0 hr time point).
Images in phase and the green channel (to quantify GFP) were acquired with the 10× objec-
tive. The Incucyte S3 software was used to segment cells and quantify the amount of GFP in each 
cell. These amounts were used to draw an arbitrary gate separating GFP- positive and -negative 
cells. The percentage of GFP- positive cells was computed and plotted as a function of time using 
Python.
Flow cytometry
The day of the assay, cells were stained for 10 min with 35 nM of JFX650- HaloTag ligand and 10 µM 
Hoechst 33342 (Thermo), rinsed once with imaging medium, and incubated in imaging medium for 
25 min. Cells were lifted using 0.25% trypsin, quenched with imaging medium, and filtered through a 
cell strainer to remove clumps.
Flow cytometry was conducted on a BD Bioscience LSR Fortessa in the UC Berkeley Flow Cytom-
etry Core. Conditions presented together as panels were collected on the same day with the same 
voltages. These voltages were not always kept consistent from day to day, as daily CST calibration 
often changed cytometer baselines. 30,000 measurements were made for each condition.
Data were analyzed using FlowJo, with consistent gating applied across conditions that are 
presented together in a panel. The reporter fluorescence distributions were frequently bimodal, so 
we quantified reporter activity in two ways. First, we used the fraction of cells that were GFP positive, 
but this metric had a limited dynamic range. Second, we used the mean fluorescence intensity of GFP- 
positive (GFP+) cells, which had a larger dynamic range.
SMT movie acquisition
The day of imaging, cells were stained for 5 min with JFX650- HaloTag ligand (generously gifted by 
the Lavis lab), added to a final concentration of 5 nM and 2 µM Hoechst 33342 (Thermo), rinsed once 
with imaging medium, and incubated in imaging medium for 10 min. The dishes were rinsed one more 
time, replenished with imaging medium, and mounted on the microscope with Nikon immersion oil 
Type F .
The microscope used for SMT is as previously described (Hansen et  al., 2018). In brief, this 
imaging setup consisted of a Nikon TI microscope fitted with a 100×/NA 1.49 oil- immersion TIRF 
objective, a motorized mirror, a Perfect Focus system, an EM- CCD camera, and an incubation 
chamber maintained at 37°C with a humidified 5% CO 2 atmosphere. The laser launch includes lasers 
of the following wavelengths: 405 nm (140 mW, OBIS, Coherent), 488 nm, 561 nm, and 639 nm (all 
1 W, Genesis, Coherent). Laser intensities were regulated using an acousto- optic tunable filter (AA 
Opto- Electronic, AOTFnC- VIS- TN) and triggered via the camera’s TTL exposure output signal. Lasers 
were delivered to the microscope through an optical fiber, reflected by a quad- band dichroic mirror 
(405 nm/488 nm/561 nm/633 nm, Semrock), and focused at the back focal plane of the objective. The 
incident laser angle was adjusted to achieve HILO illumination (Tokunaga et al., 2008). Emission light 
was filtered using the appropriate Semrock single band- pass filters.


--- Page 19 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  19 of 31
For the diffusion spectra shown in each panel, all conditions were imaged on the same day to mini-
mize day- to- day variability. A second replicate was imaged on a different day, and the data from both 
days were pooled to generate the reported spectra.
All experiments except those in Figure 4B, C, Figure 2—figure supplement 3 used an automated 
imaging scheme derived from one previously described in Walther et al., 2024. Briefly, custom NIS 
Elements Macro Language and Python scripts instructed the microscope to raster over a coverslip, 
taking 81.92 µm × 81.92 µm images at each grid point. Cell presence in a field was determined using 
StarDist segmentation (Schmidt et al., 2018) in the Hoescht channel; images in additional channels of 
interest (GFP: 488 nm, JFX650: 639 nm) were also acquired. If cells were identified, one was randomly 
selected for imaging at 7.48 ms using the following protocol: 1200 frames with 2 ms stroboscopic 
illumination of the 639 nm laser (1 W, 100%), followed by 1200 frames with 2 ms stroboscopic illumina-
tion of the 639 nm laser (1 W, 100%) combined with 30% 405 nm laser power during camera transition 
intervals, and finally 1200 frames with 2 ms stroboscopic illumination of the 639 nm laser (1 W, 100%) 
combined with 60% 405 nm laser power during camera transition intervals. The 405 nm laser pulses 
during transition times were used to reactivate dark JFX650 fluorophores (Endesfelder and Heile-
mann, 2015) while minimizing background contribution by the laser pulse itself.
PAPA SMT movie acquisition
The day of imaging, cells were stained for 10 min with 50 nM JFX549- HaloTag ligand and either 5 nM 
JFX650- SNAP- tag ligand (for SNAP- tag2 control conditions) or 50 nM JFX650- SNAP- tag ligand (for 
all other conditions; all dyes were generous gifts from the Lavis lab). Dishes were rinsed once with 
imaging medium and incubated in imaging medium for 15 min. The dishes were rinsed once more, 
replenished with imaging medium, and mounted on the microscope (same as described in ‘SMT 
movie acquisition’) with Nikon immersion oil Type F .
All PAPA experiments used the microscope setup and automation scheme previously described in 
‘SMT movie acquisition’ with the following differences.
We used the 561 nm laser to measure p300- HaloTag nuclear intensities, and only cells with mean 
intensity values between 2000 and 20,000 were considered for imaging. StarDist- segmented objects 
with an area less than 3500 pixels (89.6 µm
2) or more than 7000 pixels (179.2 µm2) were rejected. We 
also acquired images using the 639 nm laser for the SNAP- tagged proteins’ expression levels and 
only considered nuclei with mean intensities above 5000. If more than one suitable cell was found for 
imaging, we selected the largest cell to image to recover the most localizations possible.
After a cell was selected by this automated scheme, the imaging macro shrank the region of 
interest to encapsulate the nucleus and applied the 639 nm laser at 100% intensity for 5 s to ‘shelve’ 
fluorescent SNAP- tagged molecules. Then, we used the following illumination sequence with eight 
phases (all 7.48 ms frames):
1. 200 frames of 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are not saved and serve to 
shelve SNAP- tagged molecules before the next reactivation pulse.
2. 30 frames of 1 ms stroboscopic 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are saved and 
are a readout for ‘spontaneous reactivation’, reactivation of molecules that is independent of a 
green or violet pulse.
3. 2 frames of 405 nm laser at 100% intensity: this pulse of violet light reactivates ‘shelved’ SNAP- 
tagged molecules regardless of whether or not they are complexed. These frames are not saved.
4. 30 frames of 1 ms stroboscopic 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are saved and 
read out the violet- reactivated molecules from the previous pulse.
5. 200 frames of 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are not saved and serve to 
shelve SNAP- tagged molecules before the next reactivation pulse.
6. 30 frames of 1 ms stroboscopic 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are saved and 
are a readout for ‘spontaneous reactivation’, reactivation of molecules that is independent of a 
green or violet pulse.
7. 50 frames of 100 mW 561 nm laser at 100% intensity: this pulse of green light reactivates SNAP- 
tagged molecules dependent on their proximity to p300- HaloTag. These frames are not saved.
8. 30 frames of 1 ms stroboscopic 1 W 639 nm laser at 100% intensity: these frames are saved and 
read out the green- reactivated molecules from the previous pulse.
This sequence is repeated five times before the cell- finding phase of the macro starts again.


--- Page 20 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  20 of 31
SMT and PAPA-SMT analysis
Spots were detected, subpixel- localized, and linked into trajectories using algorithms within the open- 
source Python package quot (https://github.com/alecheckert/quot, copy archived at Heckert and 
Fan, 2025c) using the following parameters:
'filter': {’start': 0, 'method': 'identity'}, 'detect': {'method': 'llr', 'k': 1.5, 'w': 11, 't': 18.0}, 'localize': 
{'method': 'ls_int_gaussian', 'window_size': 11, ’sigma': 1.5, 'ridge': 0.0001, 'max_iter': 10, 'damp': 
0.3, 'camera_gain': 109.0, 'camera_bg': 470.0}, 'track': {'method': 'conservative', 'pixel_size_um': 
0.16, 'search_radius': 1.0, 'max_blinks': 0, 'min_I0': 0.0}.
We segmented cell nuclei images with either StarDist (Schmidt et al., 2018) or cellpose (Stringer 
et al., 2021) as a starting point but found that manual QC and refining were necessary for accurate 
masking. This was done with a custom Python GUI (https://github.com/vinsfan368/qtpicker , copy 
archived at Fan, 2025a).
Only trajectories whose points lie entirely within one, and only one, curated mask were analyzed. 
For nuclei with more than six localizations per frame in at least one frame, we truncated frames from 
the beginning of the movie until all frames had fewer than seven localizations per frame. We then 
excluded cells with fewer than 100 displacements to ensure greater confidence in cell- wise posterior 
estimates. These three filters were post hoc choices and not pre- established exclusion criteria.
The resulting trajectories were analyzed using the open- source and previously published Python 
package saspt (https://github.com/alecheckert/saspt, copy archived at Heckert et  al., 2025a; 
Heckert et al., 2022). We used the following inference parameters: focal_depth = 0.7, sample_size 
= 1,000,000, likelihood_type='rbme', splitsize = 3, start_frame = 0 (with the sample_size parameter 
being arbitrarily large to analyze all trajectories). For Figure 4B and C, we used the above parame-
ters but replaced splitsize = 3 with splitsize = 8 to maintain consistency with our previously published 
results (Chen et al., 2022).
In figures where errors are reported, we followed a similar scheme previously described in Ferrie 
et al., 2024: for a dataset comprising n cells, we subsampled n random cells with replacement 96 
times. For each of these trials, we pooled all trajectories from the n random cells, ran inference using 
the parameters described above, and noted the fractions bound. The bootstrapping means, standard 
deviations, and 95% confidence intervals are reported and/or plotted where indicated.
Quantifying sources of variance in SMT data
To quantitatively describe sources of variance (Figure 2—figure supplement 2) within our data in a 
non- model- dependent and computationally inexpensive way, we were inspired by Driouchi et al., 
2025. Briefly, we collate trajectories, noting the day on which they were imaged and the cell from 
which they were collected. We then decompose this data into individual displacements and subsa-
mple arbitrary numbers (n) of these jumps 1000 times, noting the mean value of these 1000 trials. By 
varying both n and the sampling scheme, we can assess sources of variance. We sampled according 
to three schemes: (1, gray) n jumps from the entire pool of trajectories, which establishes the baseline 
and should follow the law of large numbers as n becomes larger; (2, blue) by picking one cell from 
the dataset and sampling n jumps from only that cell; and (3, orange) by picking an imaging day from 
the dataset and sampling n jumps imaged only on that day. When curves 2 and 3 diverge from 1, all 
variance with respect to n has been captured. We note that variability between fields of view could 
contribute to cell- to- cell variability, but given that most of our fields of view contained only one cell, 
we did not quantify this source of variability. We found in Figure 2—figure supplement 2 that cell- to- 
cell variability is about 100× higher than day- to- day variability.
Normalized PAPA ratio and confidence intervals
To calculate the normalized PAPA ratio (Figure 5B), we tallied green- and violet- reactivated mole-
cules in PAPA movies and additionally controlled for spontaneous reactivation of molecules: green- 
and violet- independent reactivations that likely depend on the expression level of the SNAP- tagged 
protein in a given nucleus. To do this, we subtracted the number of spontaneously reactivated mole-
cules from the number of molecules reactivated by a preceding green or violet pulse; e.g., molecules 
localized in phase 2 of the illumination sequence in ‘PAPA SMT movie acquisition’ were subtracted 
from those in phase 4, and molecules localized in phase 6 of this sequence were subtracted from those 
in phase 8. This yielded a corrected green- to- violet (G/V) ratio for each cell measured.


--- Page 21 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  21 of 31
Next, we divided these cell- wise corrected G/V ratios for each condition by the aggregate corrected 
G/V ratio of the SNAP- tag2 control imaged on the same day (Figure 5—figure supplement 1D–F). 
For example, if a cell expressing HIF1α AD- synthetic TF had a G/V ratio of 0.36 on a day the aggregate 
G/V ratio for SNAP- tag2 alone was 0.26, its normalized G/V ratio is 1.4.
Finally, we calculated the mean and derived error bounds for the normalized PAPA ratios by boot-
strapping. For a condition comprising n cells (imaged over multiple days, but each normalized to 
their appropriate SNAP- tag2 control), we picked n cells from that condition with replacement and 
calculated the combined normalized G/V ratio of this pool. We repeated this 96 times and used this 
to derive 95% confidence intervals.
FRAP movie acquisition
The day of imaging, cells were stained for 5 min with TMR- HaloTag ligand (Promega) added to a final 
concentration of 50 nM, rinsed once with imaging medium, and incubated in imaging medium for 
10 min. The dishes were rinsed one more time, replenished with imaging medium, and mounted on 
the microscope with Immersol 518 F (Zeiss). The dish was then left to equilibrate thermally for about 
5 min prior to imaging.
FRAP was conducted using a ZEISS LSM900 Airyscan 2 laser- scanning confocal microscope mounted 
on an inverted Axio Observer.Z1/7 platform and operated with ZEN 3.1 blue software. The system 
was equipped with a temperature- and CO
2- controlled incubation chamber (Zeiss/PeCon) maintained 
at 37°C and 5% CO2. Fluorophores were excited using a 561 nm laser with a maximally sized pinhole, 
3.5% laser power, and 800 V detector gain. Movies were acquired with a 40× oil- immersion objective 
with a numerical aperture of 1.3 using bidirectional scanning to maximize scan speed. Intentional 
photobleaching (100% 561 nm laser and 100% 405 nm laser) was applied during frame 16.
FRAP analysis
We used custom Python code (https://github.com/vinsfan368/FRAPpy, copy archived at Fan, 2025b) 
to quality- control FRAP movies and calculate normalized recoveries. FRAP movies were rejected if 
there was substantial axial drift.
Fitting FRAP models to experimental data carries model- dependent assumptions (Mueller et al., 
2008; Sprague et al., 2004). We followed the analysis scheme outlined by Mueller et al., 2012, 
subheading 3.3.2. Briefly, this involves:
1. Defining a nuclear mask for each FRAP movie. We took a sum- intensity projection across the 
FRAP movie after normalizing each frame by mean subtraction and dividing by each frame’s 
standard deviation. We applied a Gaussian blur to this image and used isodata thresholding 
followed by hole- filling to define the nucleus.
2. Background subtracting each frame of the FRAP movie. We took the median value of the pixels 
of the frame defined as non- nuclear as the ‘background’ of that frame and subtracted this value 
from all of the pixels in that frame.
3. Normalizing fluorescence values within the nuclear mask to correct for observational 
photobleaching. Images in the pre- bleach phase of the movie were normalized such that their 
nuclear intensities were equal to that of the last frame before photobleaching. Images in the 
post- bleach phase of the movie were normalized such that their nuclear intensities were equal 
to that of the first image acquired after bleaching.
4. Calculating FRAP(t), the fluorescence recovery curve over time. At each time point, this was 
defined as the mean FRAP spot intensity. (These values have been background- subtracted in 
step 2 and corrected for observational photobleaching in step 3.) We then divided these values 
by the mean of the pre- bleach frames, which normalizes the FRAP(t) curve to 1.
5. Resampling FRAP(t) using log- spaced bins to prevent overrepresentation of the long FRAP 
recovery tail. We defined 100 log- spaced bins between 0.01 s and the max time point recorded 
for any of the movies in a condition. Then, we took the arithmetic mean of both the timestamps 
and normalized recovery values falling between these bins. These were used to fit recovery 
curves below.
6. Testing if diffusion plays a role in FRAP recovery with the gradient- smoothing test. We plotted 
the radial intensity profile of the frames immediately after bleaching, normalized them to 
between 0 and 1, and checked for shape changes as recovery progressed. We did not see 
changes that would indicate diffusion is contributing to our measured FRAP recoveries for any 
condition (Figure 2—figure supplement 4D- F). We also note that for the radius of our bleach 


--- Page 22 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  22 of 31
spot (0.75 µm) and the diffusion coefficient measured by SMT (slower- diffusing population: ~2 
µm2/s), we would expect diffusive molecules on the edge of the bleach circle to reach the center 
in about 70 ms on average (mean squared displacement = 4Dt), and our imaging setup allowed 
us to capture the first post- bleach frame only ~250 ms after bleaching.
7. Fitting the FRAP(t) curves to a single- exponential recovery function:
 FRAP(∆t)= A
(
1 − e−∆t/τ
)
  
with an implicit constant term constraining A to [0, 1]. Only FRAP recovery for H2B- HaloTag 
was well fit by this equation. We instead fit FRAP recoveries for the synthetic TFs to a double- 
exponential recovery function:
 FRAP(∆t)= A1
(
1 − e−∆t/τ1
)
+ A2
(
1 − e−∆t/τ2
)
  
also with an implicit constant term constraining A1 and A2 to [0, 1] and their sum to [0, 1].
We have tabulated the values from these fits in Supplementary file 1.
Cleavage under targets and release using nuclease (CUT&RUN) 
protocol
We followed steps 1–13, 21–37, and 57–60 of a published CUT&RUN protocol (https://doi.org/ 
10.17504/protocols.io.zcpf2vn), a revised protocol from Meers et  al., 2019, with the following 
modifications.
Cells were counted prior to mixing with concanavalin A beads, and ~299,000 cells were used for 
each condition. All cell centrifugation steps were 500×g for 3 min. The digitonin concentration opti-
mized for our U2OS cell lines was 0.02%. For all experimental conditions, we used a polyclonal rabbit 
anti- V5 antibody (Abcam ab9116). The wash buffer and Dig- wash buffer were supplemented with 
1 µM estradiol. All wash steps with the Dig- wash buffer were repeated once (for a total of two washes) 
with 200 µL of Dig- wash buffer.
Following phenol- chloroform extraction, we used ferromagnetic bead cleanup to concentrate and 
purify DNA fragments:
1. Add 200 µL SPRI- like homemade magnetic beads to 200 µL eluate from the phenol- chloroform 
extraction.
2. Add 400 µL of PEG- 8000 buffer to this mixture to help precipitate the DNA fragments.
3. Rotate at room temperature for 1 hr.
4. Place the tubes on a magnet stand.
5. Pipette off supernatant.
6. Add 800 µL of freshly made 80% ethanol to the tube, being careful not to disturb the beads.
7. Pipette off supernatant.
8. Repeat steps 6 and 7.
9. Air- dry the tubes until beads appear dull brown but not dry and cracked.
10. Elute in 21 µL H
2O.
For library preparation, we used NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina and followed 
the manufacturer’s instructions with the following modifications.
The Illumina hairpin adapter was diluted 25- fold (i.e. 1 part concentrated adapter plus 24 parts 
water). Eleven PCR cycles were used for amplification. We performed a dual- sided bead selection with 
homemade SPRI- like beads with bead concentrations 0.67× (and discarding bead- bound large frag-
ments) and 1.0× (and keeping bead- bound fragments). Fragment sizes were checked by Bioanalyzer 
(Agilent). Libraries were pooled replicate- wise and sequenced on a NextSeq 2000. Two replicates for 
each condition were sequenced.
Genomics analysis
We generated a custom hg38 genome with our reporter locus engineered at the AAVS1 locus with 
bespoke bash scripts. We generated bowtie2 indices for this genome and used this as a reference for 


--- Page 23 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  23 of 31
both ATAC- seq and CUT&RUN data. We also used the blacklist from Nordin et al., 2023, for both 
ATAC- seq and CUT&RUN analyses.
We used publicly available ATAC- seq data (Oomen et al., 2019) in U2OS cells as a baseline for 
genomic accessibility in our cell line. We used the nf- core (Ewels et al., 2020) pipeline atacseq (Patel 
et al., 2023) to generate genomic accessibility signal (bigWig files) and to call peaks (BED files). We 
used the pipeline with the following non- default parameters: aligner: ‘bowtie2’, narrow_peak: true, 
min_reps_consensus: 2. This dataset had two biological replicates with four technical replicates each; 
we merged peak sets between the two biological replicates with custom bash scripts for our analyses. 
For genomic tracks, we took the mean of the two bigWig files corresponding to the two biological 
replicates.
For our CUT&RUN data, we used the cutandrun (Cheshire et  al., 2024) nf- core pipeline with 
the following non- default parameters: spikein_genome: BDGP6, trim_nextseq: 20, remove_mito-
chondrial_reads: true, mito_name: chrM, dedup_target_reads: true, use_control: false, seacr_peak_
threshold: 0.01, replicate_threshold: 2. This normalized our occupancy data to sheared Drosophila 
DNA introduced in the CUT&RUN STOP buffer. For genomic tracks and quantification of signal, we 
took the mean of the two bigWig files corresponding to two biological replicates for each of cell lines 
expressing synthetic TFs. For peak sets, we limited ourselves to peaks that were reproduced in both 
replicates. To call CUT&RUN peak overlaps with ATAC- seq peaks (Figure 7—figure supplement 1A), 
we considered a peak overlapping if at least one base pair of the CUT&RUN peak was shared with 
any ATAC- seq peak.
Materials availability
Plasmids used in this study have been deposited with Addgene (Addgene ID numbers 240165–
240174). Cell lines are available upon reasonable request.
Acknowledgements
A heartfelt thank you to all members of the Tjian+Darzacq and Staller groups for their intellectual 
input and experimental advice for this project, particularly Djem Kissiov, Claudia Cattoglio, Joseph 
McKenna, Yu Chen, Aditya Udupa, Oscar Whitney, and Alec Heckert. Thank you to Anna Mapp for 
suggesting the norstictic acid experiment. A large thanks to Sathvik Anantakrishnan for his efforts on 
microscope automation and maintenance, without which this project would not have been possible. 
We thank Djem Kissiov, Aditya Udupa, and Robert Tjian for the careful reading of the manuscript. We 
thank Anders Näär and Haribabu Arthanari for helpful discussions. We thank Luke Lavis for providing 
us with Janelia Fluor dyes. We thank James McNally for helpful correspondence and code sharing. 
We thank the Dillin lab, particularly Kimberly Tsui, for training and use of the Incucyte S3 instrument.
Additional information
Competing interests
Xavier Darzacq: is a co- founder of Eikon Therapeutics, Inc. The other authors declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
Simons Foundation 1018719 Max V Staller
National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences
R35GM150813 Max V Staller
National Science 
Foundation
2112057 Max V Staller
National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences
1RM1GM139738 Thomas GW Graham


--- Page 24 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  24 of 31
Funder Grant reference number Author
Silicon Valley Community 
Foundation
RR-8175 Xavier Darzacq
Biohub, San Francisco Max V Staller
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Vinson B Fan, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing 
– original draft, Writing – review and editing; Abrar A Abidi, Methodology; Thomas GW Graham, 
Methodology, Writing – review and editing; Xavier Darzacq, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing 
– review and editing; Max V Staller, Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Project 
administration, Writing – review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Vinson B Fan  
  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1688-7780
Xavier Darzacq  
  
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2537-8395
Max V Staller  
 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9094-5697
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776.sa2
Additional files
Supplementary files
Supplementary file 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) parameters extracted 
from a double- exponential recovery model. FRAP population fractions and recovery times for cells 
expressing various synthetic transcription factors (TFs) and H2B. Stronger activation domains have 
longer slow- recovery times, indicating longer residence times bound to chromatin. *Note that 
>95% of H2B molecules do not recover on the timescale of the FRAP experiment.
Supplementary file 2. Summary of single- molecule tracking (SMT) measurements. Fraction bound, 
number of cells imaged across all replicates, number of trajectories, number of jumps, and number 
of detections for all SMT experiments reported in this article. All tabulated values are post- filtering 
(Materials and methods: SMT and PAPA- SMT analysis). Number of trajectories and number of 
detections include singlets: detections that were not linked to any other detection and do not 
contribute any data to downstream analyses but have their own ‘trajectory’ index. * indicates 
datasets acquired without an automated nucleus- finding macro.
MDAR checklist 
Data availability
SMT trajectories (CSV files tabulating all detections surviving filtering steps) are available on Dryad 
(https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.41ns1rnqt). We were unable to deposit underlying SMT movies due 
to their large size. The raw movies are available on request for non- commercial use. Please email the 
corresponding author to make data transfer arrangements. A representative subset of the raw data 
and a processed version of the dataset have been deposited in Dryad. FRAP movies are also available 
as part of the same Dryad dataset (https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.41ns1rnqt). CUT&RUN data has 
been deposited to the Sequence Read Archive under Accession PRJNA1305492. ATAC- seq data from 
Oomen et al., 2019 is available on the GEO as Series GSE121840. Plasmids have been submitted to 
Addgene and are available under IDs 240165–240174. All essential code is available on public GitHub 
repositories. We used quot to detect, localize, and connect spots in SMT movies; commit 1b9051e of 
(https://github.com/vinsfan368/quot, copy archived at Heckert, 2025b) was used for this article. We 
used qtpicker to refine nuclear masks; commit 6bcbf12 of (https://github.com/vinsfan368/qtpicker , 
copy archived at Fan, 2025a) was used for this article. We used saspt (Heckert et  al., 2022) to 
generate posterior diffusion spectra; commit 632faad of (https://github.com/vinsfan368/saspt, copy 
archived at Fan, 2025c) was used for this article. We used FRAPpy to analyze FRAP movies from CZI 


--- Page 25 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  25 of 31
files; commit dc3687d of (https://github.com/vinsfan368/FRAPpy, copy archived at Fan, 2025b) was 
used for this article.
The following datasets were generated:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset URL Database and Identifier
Fan VB 2025 Data from: Short activation 
domains control chromatin 
association of transcription 
factors
https:// doi. org/ 10. 
5061/ dryad. 41ns1rnqt
Dryad Digital Repository, 
10.5061/dryad.41ns1rnqt
Fan VB 2025 Short activation domains 
control chromatin 
association of transcription 
factors
https://www. ncbi. nlm. 
nih. gov/ bioproject/? 
term= PRJNA1305492
NCBI BioProject, 
PRJNA1305492
The following previously published dataset was used:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset URL Database and Identifier
Oomen ME, Hansen 
AS, Liu Y, Darzacq X, 
Dekker J
2018 CTCF sites display cell 
cycle dependent dynamics 
in factor binding and 
nucleosome positioning
https://www. ncbi. 
nlm. nih. gov/ geo/ 
query/ acc. cgi? acc= 
GSE121840
NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus, GSE121840
References
Abidi AA, Dailey GM, Tjian R, Graham TGW. 2025. Collective Unstructured Interactions Drive Chromatin Binding 
of Transcription Factors. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.16.654615, PMID: 40463169
Alerasool N, Leng H, Lin ZY , Gingras AC, Taipale M. 2022. Identification and functional characterization of 
transcriptional activators in human cells. Molecular Cell 82:677–695. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel. 
2021.12.008, PMID: 35016035
Badis G, Berger MF , Philippakis AA, Talukder S, Gehrke AR, Jaeger SA, Chan ET, Metzler G, Vedenko A, Chen X, 
Kuznetsov H, Wang CF , Coburn D, Newburger DE, Morris Q, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML. 2009. Diversity and 
complexity in DNA recognition by transcription factors. Science 324:1720–1723. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1162327, PMID: 19443739
Baughman HER, Narang D, Chen W, Villagrán Suárez AC, Lee J, Bachochin MJ, Gunther TR, Wolynes PG, 
Komives EA. 2022. An intrinsically disordered transcription activation domain increases the DNA binding 
affinity and reduces the specificity of NFκB p50/RelA. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 298:102349. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102349, PMID: 35934050
Bentley EP, Scholl D, Wright PE, Deniz AA. 2023. Coupling of binding and differential subdomain folding of the 
intrinsically disordered transcription factor CREB. FEBS Letters 597:917–932. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
1873-3468.14554, PMID: 36480418
Berlow RB, Dyson HJ, Wright PE. 2017. Hypersensitive termination of the hypoxic response by a disordered 
protein switch. Nature 543:447–451. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21705, PMID: 28273070
Bjarnason S, McIvor J, Prestel A, Demeny K, Bullerjahn J, Kragelund BB, Mercadante D, Heidarsson PO. 2024. 
DNA binding redistributes activation domain ensemble and accessibility in pioneer factor Sox2. Biophysical 
Journal 123:518. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2023.11.518
Brent R, Ptashne M. 1985. A eukaryotic transcriptional activator bearing the DNA specificity of a prokaryotic 
repressor. Cell 43:729–736. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(85)90246-6
Brodaczewska KK, Szczylik C, Fiedorowicz M, Porta C, Czarnecka AM. 2016. Choosing the right cell line for 
renal cell cancer research. Molecular Cancer 15:83. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-016-0565-8, PMID: 
27993170
Brodsky S, Jana T, Mittelman K, Chapal M, Kumar DK, Carmi M, Barkai N. 2020. Intrinsically disordered regions 
direct transcription factor in vivo binding specificity. Molecular Cell 79:459–471. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
molcel.2020.05.032, PMID: 32553192
Brouwer I, Lenstra TL. 2019. Visualizing transcription: key to understanding gene expression dynamics. Current 
Opinion in Chemical Biology 51:122–129. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.05.031, PMID: 31284216
Callegari A, Sieben C, Benke A, Suter DM, Fierz B, Mazza D, Manley S. 2019. Single- molecule dynamics and 
genome- wide transcriptomics reveal that NF- kB (p65)- DNA binding times can be decoupled from 
transcriptional activation. PLOS Genetics 15:e1007891. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1007891, 
PMID: 30653501
Chen J, Zhang Z, Li L, Chen BC, Revyakin A, Hajj B, Legant W, Dahan M, Lionnet T, Betzig E, Tjian R, Liu Z. 2014. 
Single- molecule dynamics of enhanceosome assembly in embryonic stem cells. Cell 156:1274–1285. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.062, PMID: 24630727


--- Page 26 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  26 of 31
Chen Y, Cattoglio C, Dailey GM, Zhu Q, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2022. Mechanisms governing target search and 
binding dynamics of hypoxia- inducible factors. eLife 11:75064. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75064
Cheshire C, Charlotte- west R, Ronkko T, Patel H, Ladd D, Hodgetts T, Thiery A, Fields C, Deu- Pons J, Ewels P , 
Möller S, Menden K, nf- core bot. 2024. Nf- core/cutandrun: nf- core/cutandrun v3.2.2 iridium ibis. Zenodo. DOI: 
https://doi.org//10.5281/zenodo.10606804
Cho WK, Spille JH, Hecht M, Lee C, Li C, Grube V, Cisse II. 2018. Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters 
associate in transcription- dependent condensates. Science 361:412–415. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
aar4199, PMID: 29930094
Copeland JW, Nasiadka A, Dietrich BH, Krause HM. 1996. Patterning of the Drosophila embryo by a 
homeodomain- deleted Ftz polypeptide. Nature 379:162–165. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/379162a0, PMID: 
8538765
Cowling VH, Cole MD. 2007. The Myc transactivation domain promotes global phosphorylation of the RNA 
polymerase II carboxy- terminal domain independently of direct DNA binding. Molecular and Cellular Biology 
27:2059–2073. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01828-06
Cress WD, Triezenberg SJ. 1991. Critical structural elements of the VP16 transcriptional activation domain. 
Science 251:87–90. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1846049, PMID: 1846049
Currie SL, Lau DKW, Doane JJ, Whitby FG, Okon M, McIntosh LP , Graves BJ. 2017. Structured and disordered 
regions cooperatively mediate DNA- binding autoinhibition of ETS factors ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5. Nucleic Acids 
Research 45:2223–2241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx068, PMID: 28161714
Dahal L, Graham TGW, Dailey GM, Heckert A, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2025. Surprising features of nuclear receptor 
interaction networks revealed by live- cell single- molecule imaging. eLife 12:RP92979. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
7554/eLife.92979, PMID: 39792435
Danner E. 2020. Effective lonza 4D nucleofection with inexpensive homemade buffers. https://www.protocols.io/ 
view/effective-lonza-4d-nucleofection-with-inexpensive-64mhgu6 [Accessed April 17, 2020].
De Guzman RN, Martinez- Yamout MA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE. 2004. Interaction of the TAZ1 domain of the 
CREB- binding protein with the activation domain of CITED2: regulation by competition between intrinsically 
unstructured ligands for non- identical binding sites. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 279:3042–3049. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310348200, PMID: 14594809
DelRosso N, Tycko J, Suzuki P , Andrews C, Mukund A, Liongson I, Ludwig C, Spees K, Fordyce P , Bassik MC, 
Bintu L. 2023. Large- scale mapping and systematic mutagenesis of human transcriptional effector domains. 
Systems Biology 1:1–8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.26.505496
DelRosso N, Suzuki PH, Griffith D, Lotthammer JM, Novak B, Kocalar S, Sheth MU, Holehouse AS, Bintu L, 
Fordyce P . 2024. High- throughput affinity measurements of direct interactions between activation domains and 
co- activators. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.08.19.608698, PMID: 39229005
Doughty BR, Hinks MM, Schaepe JM, Marinov GK, Thurm AR, Rios- Martinez C, Parks BE, Tan Y , Marklund E, 
Dubocanin D, Bintu L, Greenleaf WJ. 2024. Single- molecule states link transcription factor binding to gene 
expression. Nature 636:745–754. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08219-w, PMID: 39567683
Driouchi A, Bretan M, Davis BJ, Heckert A, Seeger M, Silva MB, Forrest WSR, Hsiung J, Tan J, Yang H, 
McSwiggen DT, Song L, Sule A, Abaie B, Chen H, Chhun B, Conroy B, Elliott LA, Gonzalez E, Ilkov F , et al. 
2025. Oblique line scan illumination enables expansive, accurate and sensitive single- protein measurements in 
solution and in living cells. Nature Methods 22:559–568. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02594-6, 
PMID: 39966678
Dyson HJ, Wright PE. 2016. Role of intrinsic protein disorder in the function and interactions of the 
transcriptional coactivators CREB- binding Protein (CBP) and p300. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 
291:6714–6722. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.R115.692020, PMID: 26851278
El- Gebali S, Mistry J, Bateman A, Eddy SR, Luciani A, Potter SC, Qureshi M, Richardson LJ, Salazar GA, Smart A, 
Sonnhammer ELL, Hirsh L, Paladin L, Piovesan D, Tosatto SCE, Finn RD. 2019. The Pfam protein families 
database in 2019. Nucleic Acids Research 47:D427–D432. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky995, PMID: 
30357350
Endesfelder U, Heilemann M. 2015. Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM). Methods in 
Molecular Biology 1251:263–276. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-2080-8_14, PMID: 25391804
Erijman A, Kozlowski L, Sohrabi- Jahromi S, Fishburn J, Warfield L, Schreiber J, Noble WS, Söding J, Hahn S. 
2020. A high- throughput screen for transcription activation domains reveals their sequence features and 
permits prediction by deep learning. Molecular Cell 78:890–902. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2020. 
04.020, PMID: 32416068
Ewels PA, Peltzer A, Fillinger S, Patel H, Alneberg J, Wilm A, Garcia MU, Di Tommaso P , Nahnsen S. 2020. The 
nf- core framework for community- curated bioinformatics pipelines. Nature Biotechnology 38:276–278. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x, PMID: 32055031
Fan VB. 2025a. Qtpicker. swh:1:rev:6bcbf125596d4ea10941e462344d137fc527c9c0. Software Heritage. https:// 
archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:eaf0d50c51a3002f8f9af2dcc0222e30b16e4e27;origin=https://github. 
com/vinsfan368/qtpicker;visit=swh:1:snp:2deaa7de938cbb293fe0ffaf469af8d38690f771;anchor=swh:1:rev: 
6bcbf125596d4ea10941e462344d137fc527c9c0
Fan VB. 2025b. FRAPpy. swh:1:rev:dc3687d895dd733d2ac714bedb8a5278310a61fa. Software Heritage. https:// 
archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:74cb3806c95dea0fc162b020645642ffa92d20de;origin=https://github. 
com/vinsfan368/FRAPpy;visit=swh:1:snp:999f9b5b8d442cc2adc2e4b9e53d4a26396741f0;anchor=swh:1:rev: 
dc3687d895dd733d2ac714bedb8a5278310a61fa


--- Page 27 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  27 of 31
Fan VB. 2025c. Saspt. swh:1:rev:632faad61df4dc2ee90cb6adf657daf7296aa366. Software Heritage. https:// 
archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:b335aa7ca1f1ab86b6430b70b9a8824cf06116b8;origin=https://github. 
com/vinsfan368/saspt;visit=swh:1:snp:c5919bd112d75b5d1a90c9269c49a3059c75dc89;anchor=swh:1:rev:632f 
aad61df4dc2ee90cb6adf657daf7296aa366
Ferrie JJ, Karr JP , Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2022. “Structure”-function relationships in eukaryotic transcription factors: 
The role of intrinsically disordered regions in gene regulation. Molecular Cell 82:3970–3984. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022.09.021, PMID: 36265487
Ferrie JJ, Karr JP , Graham TGW, Dailey GM, Zhang G, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2024. P300 is an obligate integrator of 
combinatorial transcription factor inputs. Molecular Cell 84:234–243. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel. 
2023.12.004, PMID: 38159566
Finn RD, Coggill P , Eberhardt RY , Eddy SR, Mistry J, Mitchell AL, Potter SC, Punta M, Qureshi M, 
Sangrador- Vegas A, Salazar GA, Tate J, Bateman A. 2016. The Pfam protein families database: towards a more 
sustainable future. Nucleic Acids Research 44:D279–D285. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1344
Garlick JM, Sturlis SM, Bruno PA, Yates JA, Peiffer AL, Liu Y , Goo L, Bao L, De Salle SN, Tamayo- Castillo G, 
Brooks CL III, Merajver SD, Mapp AK. 2021. Norstictic acid is a selective allosteric transcriptional regulator. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 143:9297–9302. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c03258
Gera T, Jonas F , More R, Barkai N. 2022. Evolution of binding preferences among whole- genome duplicated 
transcription factors. eLife 11:e73225. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73225, PMID: 35404235
Gill G, Pascal E, Tseng ZH, Tjian R. 1994. A glutamine- rich hydrophobic patch in transcription factor Sp1 contacts 
the dTAFII110 component of the Drosophila TFIID complex and mediates transcriptional activation. PNAS 
91:192–196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.1.192
Gillespie MA, Palii CG, Sanchez- Taltavull D, Shannon P , Longabaugh WJR, Downes DJ, Sivaraman K, 
Espinoza HM, Hughes JR, Price ND, Perkins TJ, Ranish JA, Brand M. 2020. Absolute quantification of 
transcription factors reveals principles of gene regulation in erythropoiesis. Molecular Cell 78:960–974. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2020.03.031, PMID: 32330456
Goldman N, Chandra A, Johnson I, Sullivan MA, Patil AR, Vanderbeck A, Jay A, Zhou Y , Ferrari EK, Mayne L, 
Aguilan J, Xue HH, Faryabi RB, John Wherry E, Sidoli S, Maillard I, Vahedi G. 2023. Intrinsically disordered 
domain of transcription factor TCF- 1 is required for T cell developmental fidelity. Nature Immunology 24:1698–
1710. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-023-01599-7, PMID: 37592014
Golemis EA, Brent R. 1992. Fused protein domains inhibit DNA binding by LexA. Molecular and Cellular Biology 
12:3006–3014. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.12.7.3006-3014.1992, PMID: 1620111
Graham TGW, Ferrie JJ, Dailey GM, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2022. Detecting molecular interactions in live- cell 
single- molecule imaging with proximity- assisted photoactivation (PAPA). eLife 11:76870. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.7554/eLife.76870
Graham TGW, Dugast- Darzacq C, Dailey GM, Weng B, Anantakrishnan S, Darzacq X, Tjian R. 2025. Single- 
molecule live imaging of subunit interactions and exchange within cellular regulatory complexes. Molecular 
Cell 85:2854–2868. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2025.06.028, PMID: 40706597
Grimm JB, Xie L, Casler JC, Patel R, Tkachuk AN, Falco N, Choi H, Lippincott- Schwartz J, Brown TA, Glick BS, 
Liu Z, Lavis LD. 2021. A general method to improve fluorophores using deuterated auxochromes. JACS Au 
1:690–696. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.1c00006, PMID: 34056637
Guo M, Song LP , Jiang Y , Liu W, Yu Y , Chen GQ. 2006. Hypoxia- mimetic agents desferrioxamine and cobalt 
chloride induce leukemic cell apoptosis through different hypoxia- inducible factor- 1alpha independent 
mechanisms. Apoptosis 11:67–77. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10495-005-3085-3, PMID: 16374551
Hahn S, Young ET. 2011. Transcriptional regulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : transcription factor regulation 
and function, mechanisms of initiation, and roles of activators and coactivators . Genetics 189:705–736. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.111.127019
Hansen AS, Woringer M, Grimm JB, Lavis LD, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2018. Robust model- based analysis of 
single- particle tracking experiments with Spot- On. eLife 7:e33125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.33125, 
PMID: 29300163
Harrison MM, Li XY , Kaplan T, Botchan MR, Eisen MB. 2011. Zelda binding in the early Drosophila melanogaster 
embryo marks regions subsequently activated at the maternal- to- zygotic transition. PLOS Genetics 
7:e1002266. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002266
He F, Borcherds W, Song T, Wei X, Das M, Chen L, Daughdrill GW, Chen J. 2019. Interaction between p53 N 
terminus and core domain regulates specific and nonspecific DNA binding. PNAS 116:8859–8868. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903077116
Heckert A, Dahal L, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2022. Recovering mixtures of fast- diffusing states from short single- 
particle trajectories. eLife 11:e70169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.70169, PMID: 36066004
Heckert A, Fan VB, Hong W. 2025a. Saspt. swh:1:rev:ad0fa303d5000672ab88d16494e7587c366409d9. Software 
Heritage. https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:dfdfc8c6e63564880b098cb9edef432bc17deb37; 
origin=https://github.com/alecheckert/saspt;visit=swh:1:snp:ccfb13ebcf24cb4f3b362d6a5047e75dfe676de4; 
anchor=swh:1:rev:ad0fa303d5000672ab88d16494e7587c366409d9
Heckert A. 2025b. Quot. swh:1:rev:1b9051e277894bc65372412e641c8c01d974ae96. Software Heritage. 
https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:700dbc4d743180a9b39ce4e5fe6f2cbc235f940b;origin=https:// 
github.com/vinsfan368/quot;visit=swh:1:snp:2a0b41e540b861f419a5f02d5e6d0e431c4eca91;anchor=swh:1: 
rev:1b9051e277894bc65372412e641c8c01d974ae96
Heckert A, Fan VB. 2025c. Quot. swh:1:rev:1b9051e277894bc65372412e641c8c01d974ae96. Software Heritage. 
https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:700dbc4d743180a9b39ce4e5fe6f2cbc235f940b;origin=https:// 


--- Page 28 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  28 of 31
github.com/alecheckert/quot;visit=swh:1:snp:2e5c79512d05590680d402b117c814197e78a49d;anchor=swh:1: 
rev:1b9051e277894bc65372412e641c8c01d974ae96
Henderson AR, Henley MJ, Foster NJ, Peiffer AL, Beyersdorf MS, Stanford KD, Sturlis SM, Linhares BM, Hill ZB, 
Wells JA, Cierpicki T, Brooks CL, Fierke CA, Mapp AK. 2018. Conservation of coactivator engagement 
mechanism enables small- molecule allosteric modulators. PNAS 115:8960–8965. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1806202115
Henley MJ, Linhares BM, Morgan BS, Cierpicki T, Fierke CA, Mapp AK. 2020. Unexpected specificity within 
dynamic transcriptional protein–protein complexes. PNAS 117:27346–27353. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.2013244117
Hewitson KS, McNeill LA, Riordan MV, Tian YM, Bullock AN, Welford RW, Elkins JM, Oldham NJ, 
Bhattacharya S, Gleadle JM, Ratcliffe PJ, Pugh CW, Schofield CJ. 2002. Hypoxia- inducible Factor (HIF) 
asparagine hydroxylase is identical to factor inhibiting HIF (FIH) and is related to the cupin structural family. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry 277:26351–26355. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C200273200
Hope IA, Struhl K. 1986. Functional dissection of a eukaryotic transcriptional activator protein, GCN4 of yeast. 
Cell 46:885–894. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(86)90070-x, PMID: 3530496
Hope IA, Mahadevan S, Struhl K. 1988. Structural and functional characterization of the short acidic 
transcriptional activation region of yeast GCN4 protein. Nature 333:635–640. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
333635a0, PMID: 3287180
Hume MA, Barrera LA, Gisselbrecht SS, Bulyk ML. 2015. UniPROBE, update 2015: new tools and content for the 
online database of protein- binding microarray data on protein- DNA interactions. Nucleic Acids Research 
43:D117–D122. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1045, PMID: 25378322
Hurieva B, Kumar DK, Morag R, Lupo O, Carmi M, Barkai N, Jonas F . 2024. Disordered sequences of 
transcription factors regulate genomic binding by integrating diverse sequence grammars and interaction 
types. Nucleic Acids Research 52:8763–8777. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae521, PMID: 38908024
Jana T, Brodsky S, Barkai N. 2021. Speed- specificity trade- offs in the transcription factors search for their 
genomic binding sites. Trends in Genetics 37:421–432. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2020.12.001, PMID: 
33414013
Jolma A, Yan J, Whitington T, Toivonen J, Nitta KR, Rastas P , Morgunova E, Enge M, Taipale M, Wei G, Palin K, 
Vaquerizas JM, Vincentelli R, Luscombe NM, Hughes TR, Lemaire P , Ukkonen E, Kivioja T, Taipale J. 2013. 
DNA- binding specificities of human transcription factors. Cell 152:327–339. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 
2012.12.009, PMID: 23332764
Jonas F, Carmi M, Krupkin B, Steinberger J, Brodsky S, Jana T, Barkai N. 2023. The molecular grammar of 
protein disorder guiding genome- binding locations. Nucleic Acids Research 51:4831–4844. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1093/nar/gkad184, PMID: 36938874
Kadoch C, Crabtree GR. 2015. Mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes and cancer: Mechanistic 
insights gained from human genomics. Science Advances 1:e1500447. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. 
1500447, PMID: 26601204
Keegan L, Gill G, Ptashne M. 1986. Separation of DNA binding from the transcription- activating function of a 
eukaryotic regulatory protein. Science 231:699–704. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3080805, PMID: 
3080805
Krois AS, Dyson HJ, Wright PE. 2018. Long- range regulation of p53 DNA binding by its intrinsically disordered 
N- terminal transactivation domain. PNAS 115:E11302–E11310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 
1814051115, PMID: 30420502
Kühn S, Nasufovic V, Wilhelm J, Kompa J, de Lange EMF , Lin Y- H, Egoldt C, Fischer J, Lennoi A, Tarnawski M, 
Reinstein J, Vlijm R, Hiblot J, Johnsson K. 2025. SNAP- tag2 for faster and brighter protein labeling. Nature 
Chemical Biology 21:1754–1761. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-025-01942-z, PMID: 40610720
Kumar DK, Jonas F , Jana T, Brodsky S, Carmi M, Barkai N. 2023. Complementary strategies for directing in vivo 
transcription factor binding through DNA binding domains and intrinsically disordered regions. Molecular Cell 
83:1462–1473. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2023.04.002, PMID: 37116493
Kvon EZ, Stampfel G, Yáñez- Cuna JO, Dickson BJ, Stark A. 2012. HOT regions function as patterned 
developmental enhancers and have a distinct cis- regulatory signature. Genes & Development 26:908–913. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.188052.112, PMID: 22499593
Lando D, Peet DJ, Gorman JJ, Whelan DA, Whitelaw ML, Bruick RK. 2002a. FIH- 1 is an asparaginyl hydroxylase 
enzyme that regulates the transcriptional activity of hypoxia- inducible factor. Genes & Development 16:1466–
1471. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.991402
Lando D, Peet DJ, Whelan DA, Gorman JJ, Whitelaw ML. 2002b. Asparagine hydroxylation of the HIF 
transactivation domain a hypoxic switch. Science 295:858–861. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1068592, 
PMID: 11823643
Lasko LM, Jakob CG, Edalji RP , Qiu W, Montgomery D, Digiammarino EL, Hansen TM, Risi RM, Frey R, 
Manaves V, Shaw B, Algire M, Hessler P , Lam LT, Uziel T, Faivre E, Ferguson D, Buchanan FG, Martin RL, 
Torrent M, et al. 2017. Discovery of a selective catalytic p300/CBP inhibitor that targets lineage- specific 
tumours. Nature 550:128–132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24028, PMID: 28953875
Latchman DS. 2008. Eukaryotic Transcription Factors. (5th Edition. ed.). Elsevier Science. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1016/B978-012373983-4.50017-1
Lauberth SM, Nakayama T, Wu X, Ferris AL, Tang Z, Hughes SH, Roeder RG. 2013. H3K4me3 interactions with 
TAF3 regulate preinitiation complex assembly and selective gene activation. Cell 152:1021–1036. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.052, PMID: 23452851


--- Page 29 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  29 of 31
Li J, White JT, Saavedra H, Wrabl JO, Motlagh HN, Liu K, Sowers J, Schroer TA, Thompson EB, Hilser VJ. 2017. 
Genetically tunable frustration controls allostery in an intrinsically disordered transcription factor. eLife 
6:e30688. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.30688, PMID: 29022880
Lionnet T, Wu C. 2021. Single- molecule tracking of transcription protein dynamics in living cells: seeing is 
believing, but what are we seeing? Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 67:94–102. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.gde.2020.12.001, PMID: 33422933
Liu J, Perumal NB, Oldfield CJ, Su EW, Uversky VN, Dunker AK. 2006. Intrinsic disorder in transcription factors. 
Biochemistry 45:6873–6888. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0602718
Liu Y, Matthews KS, Bondos SE. 2008. Multiple intrinsically disordered sequences alter DNA binding by the 
homeodomain of the Drosophila hox protein ultrabithorax. Journal of Biological Chemistry 283:20874–20887. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M800375200
Liu Z, Legant WR, Chen BC, Li L, Grimm JB, Lavis LD, Betzig E, Tjian R. 2014. 3D imaging of Sox2 enhancer 
clusters in embryonic stem cells. eLife 3:e04236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04236, PMID: 
25537195
Ma J, Ptashne M. 1987. A new class of yeast transcriptional activators. Cell 51:113–119. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1016/0092-8674(87)90015-8
Mahendrawada L, Warfield L, Donczew R, Hahn S. 2025. Low overlap of transcription factor DNA binding and 
regulatory targets. Nature 642:796–804. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08916-0
Malik S, Roeder RG. 2010. The metazoan Mediator co- activator complex as an integrative hub for transcriptional 
regulation. Nature Reviews Genetics 11:761–772. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2901
Már M, Nitsenko K, Heidarsson PO. 2023. Multifunctional intrinsically disordered regions in transcription factors. 
Chemistry 29:e202203369. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.202203369, PMID: 36648282
Mazzocca M, Loffreda A, Colombo E, Fillot T, Gnani D, Falletta P , Monteleone E, Capozi S, Bertrand E, 
Legube G, Lavagnino Z, Tacchetti C, Mazza D. 2023. Chromatin organization drives the search mechanism of 
nuclear factors. Nature Communications 14:6433. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42133-5, PMID: 
37833263
Meers MP, Bryson TD, Henikoff JG, Henikoff S. 2019. Improved CUT&RUN chromatin profiling tools. eLife 
8:e46314. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.46314, PMID: 31232687
Mindel V, Brodsky S, Cohen A, Manadre W, Jonas F , Carmi M, Barkai N. 2024a. Intrinsically disordered regions of 
the Msn2 transcription factor encode multiple functions using interwoven sequence grammars. Nucleic Acids 
Research 52:2260–2272. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad1191, PMID: 38109289
Mindel V, Brodsky S, Yung H, Manadre W, Barkai N. 2024b. Revisiting the model for coactivator recruitment: 
Med15 can select its target sites independent of promoter- bound transcription factors. Nucleic Acids Research 
52:12093–12111. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae718, PMID: 39187372
Morffy N, Van den Broeck L, Miller C, Emenecker RJ, Bryant JA, Lee TM, Sageman- Furnas K, Wilkinson EG, 
Pathak S, Kotha SR, Lam A, Mahatma S, Pande V, Waoo A, Wright RC, Holehouse AS, Staller MV, Sozzani R, 
Strader LC. 2024. Identification of plant transcriptional activation domains. Nature 632:166–173. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07707-3
Mueller F, Wach P , McNally JG. 2008. Evidence for a common mode of transcription factor interaction with 
chromatin as revealed by improved quantitative fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Biophysical 
Journal 94:3323–3339. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.107.123182, PMID: 18199661
Mueller F, Karpova TS, Mazza D, McNally JG. 2012. Monitoring dynamic binding of chromatin proteins in vivo by 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Methods in Molecular Biology 833:153–176. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-1-61779-477-3_11, PMID: 22183594
Ning S, Chao HJ, Li S, Zhou R, Zou L, Zhang X, Liu J, Yan D, Duan M. 2022. The auto- inhibition mechanism of 
transcription factor Ets- 1 induced by phosphorylation on the intrinsically disordered region. Computational and 
Structural Biotechnology Journal 20:1132–1141. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2022.02.025, PMID: 
35317227
Nordin A, Zambanini G, Pagella P , Cantù C. 2023. The CUT&RUN suspect list of problematic regions of the 
genome. Genome Biology 24:185. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-023-03027-3, PMID: 37563719
Noyes MB, Meng X, Wakabayashi A, Sinha S, Brodsky MH, Wolfe SA. 2008. A systematic characterization of 
factors that regulate Drosophila segmentation via a bacterial one- hybrid system. Nucleic Acids Research 
36:2547–2560. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn048, PMID: 18332042
Oomen ME, Hansen AS, Liu Y , Darzacq X, Dekker J. 2019. CTCF sites display cell cycle–dependent dynamics in 
factor binding and nucleosome positioning. Genome Research 29:236–249. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/gr. 
241547.118
Park M, Patel N, Keung AJ, Khalil AS. 2019. Engineering epigenetic regulation using synthetic read- write 
modules. Cell 176:227–238. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.002, PMID: 30528434
Patel H, Espinosa- Carrasco J, Langer B, Ewels P , Bot NC, Garcia MU, Syme R, Peltzer A, Talbot A, Behrens D, 
Gabernet G, Jin M, Hörtenhuber M, Rodriguez JG, Menden K, An Ö. 2023. Nf- core/atacseq. 2.1.2. Zenodo. 
DOI: https://doi.org//10.5281/zenodo.8222875
Ptashne M. 1988. How eukaryotic transcriptional activators work. Nature 335:683–689. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1038/335683a0
Pufall MA, Lee GM, Nelson ML, Kang HS, Velyvis A, Kay LE, McIntosh LP , Graves BJ. 2005. Variable control of 
Ets- 1 DNA binding by multiple phosphates in an unstructured region. Science 309:142–145. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1126/science.1111915


--- Page 30 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  30 of 31
Riley TR, Slattery M, Abe N, Rastogi C, Liu D, Mann RS, Bussemaker HJ. 2014. SELEX- seq: a method for 
characterizing the complete repertoire of binding site preferences for transcription factor complexes. Methods 
in Molecular Biology 1196:255–278. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-1242-1_16, PMID: 25151169
Sadowski I, Ma J, Triezenberg S, Ptashne M. 1988. GAL4- VP16 is an unusually potent transcriptional activator. 
Nature 335:563–564. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/335563a0
Sanborn AL, Yeh BT, Feigerle JT, Hao CV, Townshend RJ, Lieberman Aiden E, Dror RO, Kornberg RD. 2021. 
Simple biochemical features underlie transcriptional activation domain diversity and dynamic, fuzzy binding to 
Mediator. eLife 10:e68068. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.68068, PMID: 33904398
Schaepe JM, Fries T, Doughty BR, Crocker OJ, Hinks MM, Marklund E, Greenleaf WJ. 2025. Thermodynamic 
Principles Link in Vitro Transcription Factor Affinities to Single- Molecule Chromatin States in Cells. bioRxiv. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.27.635162
Schick S, Grosche S, Kohl KE, Drpic D, Jaeger MG, Marella NC, Imrichova H, Lin JMG, Hofstätter G, Schuster M, 
Rendeiro AF , Koren A, Petronczki M, Bock C, Müller AC, Winter GE, Kubicek S. 2021. Acute BAF perturbation 
causes immediate changes in chromatin accessibility. Nature Genetics 53:269–278. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41588-021-00777-3
Schmidt U, Weigert M, Broaddus C, Myers G. 2018. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Medical Image 
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2018. 265–273. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 
030-00934-2_30
Sigler PB. 1988. Transcriptional activation: Acid blobs and negative noodles. Nature 333:210–212. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/333210a0, PMID: 3367995
Skene PJ, Henikoff S. 2017. An efficient targeted nuclease strategy for high- resolution mapping of DNA binding 
sites. eLife 6:e21856. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.21856, PMID: 28079019
Soto LF, Li Z, Santoso CS, Berenson A, Ho I, Shen VX, Yuan S, Fuxman Bass JI. 2022. Compendium of human 
transcription factor effector domains. Molecular Cell 82:514–526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021. 
11.007
Spitz F, Furlong EEM. 2012. Transcription factors: from enhancer binding to developmental control. Nature 
Reviews. Genetics 13:613–626. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3207, PMID: 22868264
Sprague BL, Pego RL, Stavreva DA, McNally JG. 2004. Analysis of binding reactions by fluorescence recovery 
after photobleaching. Biophysical Journal 86:3473–3495. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.103.026765, 
PMID: 15189848
Staller MV, Holehouse AS, Swain- Lenz D, Das RK, Pappu RV, Cohen BA. 2018. A high- throughput mutational 
scan of an intrinsically disordered acidic transcriptional activation domain. Cell Systems 6:444–455. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.01.015, PMID: 29525204
Staller MV. 2022a. Transcription factors perform a 2- step search of the nucleus. Genetics 222:iyac111. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac111, PMID: 35939561
Staller MV, Ramirez E, Kotha SR, Holehouse AS, Pappu RV, Cohen BA. 2022b. Directed mutational scanning 
reveals a balance between acidic and hydrophobic residues in strong human activation domains. Cell Systems 
13:334–345. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2022.01.002, PMID: 35120642
Stormo GD. 2013. Introduction to Protein- DNA Interactions: Structure, Thermodynamics, and Bioinformatics. 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Stringer C, Wang T, Michaelos M, Pachitariu M. 2021. Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular segmentation. 
Nature Methods 18:100–106. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-01018-x, PMID: 33318659
Strugo N, Burstein C, Hossain SS, Nago N, Goldsmith M, Khamis H, Kaplan A. 2025. Intrinsically Disordered 
Regions Facilitate Msn2 Target Search to Drive Promoter Selectivity. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2025.05.23.654710
Struhl K. 1987. Promoters, activator proteins, and the mechanism of transcriptional initiation in yeast. Cell 
49:295–297. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(87)90277-7, PMID: 2882858
Struhl K. 1989. Molecular mechanisms of transcriptional regulation in yeast. Annual Review of Biochemistry 
58:1051–1077. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bi.58.070189.005155, PMID: 2673007
Struhl K. 1993. Yeast transcription factors. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 5:513–520. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1016/0955-0674(93)90018-l, PMID: 8352970
Sun X, Dyson HJ, Wright PE. 2021. A phosphorylation- dependent switch in the disordered p53 transactivation 
domain regulates DNA binding. PNAS 118:e2021456118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2021456118, 
PMID: 33443163
Tang Z, Chen WY , Shimada M, Nguyen UTT, Kim J, Sun XJ, Sengoku T, McGinty RK, Fernandez JP , Muir TW, 
Roeder RG. 2013. SET1 and p300 act synergistically, through coupled histone modifications, in 
transcriptional activation by p53. Cell 154:297–310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.027, PMID: 
23870121
Teytelman L, Thurtle DM, Rine J, van Oudenaarden A. 2013. Highly expressed loci are vulnerable to misleading 
ChIP localization of multiple unrelated proteins. PNAS 110:18602–18607. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 
1316064110
Tokunaga M, Imamoto N, Sakata- Sogawa K. 2008. Highly inclined thin illumination enables clear single- molecule 
imaging in cells. Nature Methods 5:159–161. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth1171, PMID: 18176568
Trojanowski J, Frank L, Rademacher A, Mücke N, Grigaitis P , Rippe K. 2022. Transcription activation is enhanced 
by multivalent interactions independent of phase separation. Molecular Cell 82:1878–1893. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022.04.017, PMID: 35537448


--- Page 31 ---
 Research article
Chromosomes and Gene Expression | Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics
Fan et al. eLife 2026;15:e105776. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.105776  31 of 31
Udupa A, Kotha SR, Staller MV. 2024. Commonly asked questions about transcriptional activation domains. 
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 84:102732. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2023.102732, PMID: 
38056064
Verma M, Choi J, Cottrell KA, Lavagnino Z, Thomas EN, Pavlovic- Djuranovic S, Szczesny P , Piston DW, Zaher HS, 
Puglisi JD, Djuranovic S. 2019. A short translational ramp determines the efficiency of protein synthesis. Nature 
Communications 10:5774. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13810-1, PMID: 31852903
Walther N, Anantakrishnan S, Graham TGW, Dailey GM, Tjian R, Darzacq X. 2024. Automated live- cell single- 
molecule tracking in enteroid monolayers reveals transcription factor dynamics probing lineage- determining 
function. Cell Reports 43:114914. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114914, PMID: 39480809
Whitney PH, Lionnet T. 2024. The method in the madness: Transcriptional control from stochastic action at the 
single- molecule scale. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 87:102873. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi. 
2024.102873, PMID: 38954990
Xiang L, Chen K, Yan R, Li W, Xu K. 2020. Single- molecule displacement mapping unveils nanoscale 
heterogeneities in intracellular diffusivity. Nature Methods 17:524–530. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592- 
020-0793-0, PMID: 32203387
Yusa K, Zhou L, Li MA, Bradley A, Craig NL. 2011. A hyperactive piggyBac transposase for mammalian 
applications. PNAS 108:1531–1536. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1008322108, PMID: 21205896
