elifesciences.org
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 1 of 45
Sequence co-evolution gives 3D contacts 
and structures of protein complexes
Thomas A Hopf 1,2†, Charlotta P I Schärfe 1,3,4†, João P G L M Rodrigues 5†,  
Anna G Green1, Oliver Kohlbacher3,4, Chris Sander6*, Alexandre M J J Bonvin5*,  
Debora S Marks1*
1Department of Systems Biology, Harvard University, Boston, United States; 
2Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Department of Informatics, Technische 
Universität München, Garching, Germany; 3Applied Bioinformatics, Quantitative 
Biology Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; 4Department of 
Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; 5Computational 
Structural Biology Group, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, Netherlands; 6Computational Biology Center, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, United States
Abstract Protein–protein interactions are fundamental to many biological processes. Experimental 
screens have identified tens of thousands of interactions, and structural biology has provided 
detailed functional insight for select 3D protein complexes. An alternative rich source of information 
about protein interactions is the evolutionary sequence record. Building on earlier work, we show 
that analysis of correlated evolutionary sequence changes across proteins identifies residues that 
are close in space with sufficient accuracy to determine the three-dimensional structure of the protein 
complexes. We evaluate prediction performance in blinded tests on 76 complexes of known 3D 
structure, predict protein–protein contacts in 32 complexes of unknown structure, and demonstrate 
how evolutionary couplings can be used to distinguish between interacting and non-interacting 
protein pairs in a large complex. With the current growth of sequences, we expect that the method 
can be generalized to genome-wide elucidation of protein–protein interaction networks and used 
for interaction predictions at residue resolution.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.001
Introduction
A large part of biological research is concerned with the identity, dynamics, and specificity of protein 
interactions. There have been impressive advances in the three-dimensional (3D) structure determina-
tion of protein complexes which has been significantly extended by homology-inferred 3D models 
(Mosca et al., 2012; Webb et al., 2014) (Hart et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2012). However, there is still 
little, or no, 3D information for ∼80% of the currently known protein interactions in bacteria, yeast, 
or human, amounting to at least ∼30,000/∼6000 incompletely characterized interactions in human and 
Escherichia coli, respectively (Mosca et al., 2012; Rajagopala et al., 2014). With the rapid rise in our 
knowledge of genetic variation at the sequence level, there is an increased interest in linking sequence 
changes to changes in molecular interactions, but current experimental methods cannot match the 
increase in the demand for residue-level information of these interactions. One way to address the 
knowledge gap of protein interactions has been the use of hybrid, computational–experimental 
approaches that typically combine 3D structural information at varying resolutions, homology models, 
and other methods ( de Juan et al., 2013 ), with force field-based approaches such as RosettaDock, 
residue cross-linking, and data-driven approaches that incorporate various sources of biological 
information ( Kortemme and Baker, 2002 ; Dominguez et al., 2003 ; Kortemme and Baker, 2004 ; 
*For correspondence: sander@
cbio.mskcc.org  (CS); 
a.m.j.j.bonvin@uu.nl (AMJJB); 
debbie@hms.harvard.edu (DSM)
†These authors contributed 
equally to this work
Competing interests: The 
authors declare that no 
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 17
Received: 21 May 2014
Accepted: 23 September 2014
Published: 25 September 2014
Reviewing editor: John Kuriyan, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California, Berkeley, 
United States
 Copyright Hopf et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 2 of 45
Research article
Kortemme et al., 2004 ; Svensson et al., 2004 ; Chaudhury et al., 2011 ; Schneidman-Duhovny 
et al., 2012 ; Velazquez-Muriel et al., 2012 ; Karaca and Bonvin, 2013 ; Rodrigues et al., 2013 ; 
Webb et al., 2014). However, most of these approaches depend on the availability of prior knowledge 
and many biologically relevant systems remain out of reach, as additional experimental information 
is sparse (e.g., membrane proteins, transient interactions, and large complexes). One promising com-
putational approach is to use evolutionary analysis of amino acid co-variation to identify close residue 
contacts across protein interactions, which was first used 20 years ago (Gobel et al., 1994; Pazos and 
Valencia, 2001), and subsequently used also to identify protein interactions (Pazos et al., 1997; Pazos 
and Valencia, 2002). Others have used some evolutionary information to improve a machine learning 
approach to developing docking potentials (Faure et al., 2012; Andreani et al., 2013; Andreani and 
Guerois, 2014). These previous approaches relied on a local model of co-evolution that is less likely to 
disentangle indirect and therefore incorrect correlations from the direct co-evolution, as has been described 
in work on residue–residue interactions in single proteins (Marks et al., 2012). More recently, reports 
using a global model have been successful in identifying residue interactions from evolutionary co-
variation, for instance between histidine kinases and response regulators (Burger & van Nimwegen, 2008; 
Skerker et al., 2008; Weigt et al., 2009), and this approach has only recently been generalized and 
used to predict contacts between proteins in complexes of unknown structure, in an independent effort 
eLife digest DNA is often referred to as the ‘blueprint of life’, as this molecule contains the 
instructions that are required to build a living organism from a single cell. But these instructions 
largely play out through the proteins that DNA encodes; and most proteins do not work alone. 
Instead they come together in different combinations, or complexes, and a single protein may 
participate in many complexes with different activities.
Proteins are so small that it is difficult to get clear information about what they look like. 
Visualizing protein complexes is even harder. Most protein–protein interactions remain poorly 
understood, even in the best-studied organisms such as humans, yeast, and bacteria.
Proteins are made from smaller molecules, called amino acids, strung together one after the 
other. The order in which different amino acids are arranged in a protein determines the protein’s 
shape and ultimately its function. Like DNA, protein sequences can change over time. Sometimes, 
the sequence of one protein changes in a way that prevents it binding to another protein. If these 
two proteins must work together for an organism to survive, the second protein will often develop 
a compensating change that allows the protein–protein complex to reform.
Identifying pairs of changes in the sequences of pairs of proteins suggests that the two proteins 
interact and gives some information about how the proteins fit together. Different species can have 
copies of the same proteins that have slightly different sequences. Since the DNA sequences from 
many different organisms are already known, there are now many opportunities to find sites in pairs 
of proteins that have evolved together, or co-evolved, over time.
To find sites that seem to have co-evolved, Hopf et al. used a computer program based on an 
approach from statistical physics to look at pairs of proteins that were already known to form 
complexes. Co-evolving sites were found in over 300 pairs of proteins; including 76 where the 
structure of the complex was already known. When sites that were predicted to be co-evolving 
were then mapped to these known complex structures, the co-evolving sites were remarkably close 
to the true protein–protein contacts. This indicates that the information from the co-evolved 
sequences is sufficient to show how two proteins fit together.
Hopf et al. then turned their attention to 82 pairs of proteins that were thought to interact, 
but where a structure was unavailable. For 32 of these pairs, structures of the entire complex could 
be predicted, showing how the two proteins might interact. Furthermore, when other researchers 
subsequently worked out the structure of one of these complexes, the prediction was a good match 
to the solved complex structure.
The machinery of life is largely made up of proteins, which must interact in ever-changing but 
precise ways. The new methods developed by Hopf et al. provide a new way to discover and 
investigate the details of these interactions.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.002
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 3 of 45
Research article
parallel to this work (Ovchinnikov et al., 2014). In principle, just a small number of key residue–residue 
contacts across a protein interface would allow computation of 3D models and provide a powerful, 
orthogonal approach to experiments.
Since the recent demonstration of the use of evolutionary couplings (ECs) between residues to 
determine the 3D structure of individual proteins (Marks et al., 2011; Morcos et al., 2011; Aurell and 
Ekeberg, 2012; Jones et al., 2012 ; Kamisetty et al., 2013 ), including integral membrane proteins 
(Hopf et al., 2012 ; Nugent and Jones, 2012 ), we reason that an evolutionary statistical approach 
such as EVcouplings ( Marks et al., 2011 ) could be used to determine co-evolved residues between 
proteins. To assess this hypothesis, we built an evaluation set based on all known binary protein inter-
actions in E. coli that have 3D structures of the complex as recently summarized ( Rajagopala et al., 
2014). We develop a score for every predicted inter-protein residue pair based on the overall inter-
protein EC score distributions resulting in accurate predictions for the majority of top ranked inter-
protein EC pairs (inter-ECs) and sufficient to calculate accurate 3D models of the complexes in the 
docked subset ( Figure 1A ). This approach was then used to predict evolutionary couplings for 32 
complexes of unknown 3D structures that have a sufficient number of sequences. Predictions include 
Figure 1. Co-evolution of residues across protein complexes from the evolutionary sequence record. (A) Evolutionary pressure to maintain protein–protein 
interactions leads to the co-evolution of residues between interacting proteins in a complex. By analyzing patterns of amino acid co-variation in 
an alignment of putatively interacting homologous proteins (left), evolutionary couplings between co-evolving inter-protein residue pairs can be 
identified (middle). By defining distance restraints on these pairs, the 3D structure of the protein complex can be inferred using docking software (right).  
(B) Distribution of E. coli protein complexes of known and unknown 3D structure where both subunits are close on the bacterial genome (left), allowing 
sequence pair matching by genomic distance. For a subset of these complexes, sufficient sequence information is available for evolutionary couplings 
analysis (dark blue bars). As more genomic information is created through on-going sequencing efforts, larger fractions of the E. coli interactome 
become accessible for EVcomplex (right). A detailed version of the workflow used to calculate all E. coli complexes currently for which there is 
currently enough sequence information is shown in Figure1—figure supplement 1.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.003
The following figure supplement is available for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Details of the EVcomplex Pipeline. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.004
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 4 of 45
Research article
the structurally unsolved interactions between the a-, b-, and c-subunits of ATP synthase, which are 
supported by previously published experimental results.
Results
We first investigated whether co-evolving residues between proteins are close in three dimensions by 
assessing blinded predictions of residue co-evolution against experimentally determined 3D complex 
structures. We follow this evaluation by then predicting co-evolved residue pairs of interacting pro -
teins that have no known complex structure.
Extension of the evolutionary couplings method to protein complexes
To compute co-evolution across proteins, individual protein sequences must be paired up with each 
other that are presumed to interact, or being tested to see if they interact. Without this condition, 
proteins could be paired together that do not in fact interact with each other and therefore detection 
of co-evolution would be compromised. Given that the evolutionary couplings method depends on 
large numbers of diverse sequences (Hopf et al., 2012), some assumption must be made about which 
proteins interact with each other in homologous sequences in other species. Since it is challenging to 
know a priori whether particular interactions are conserved across many millions of years in thousands 
of different organisms, we use proximity of the two interacting partners on the genome as a proxy for 
this, with the goal of reducing incorrect pairings.
To assemble the broadest possible data sets to test the approach and make predictions, we take all 
known interacting proteins assembled in a published data set that contains ∼3500 high-confidence 
protein interactions in E. coli (Rajagopala et al., 2014 ). After removing redundancy and requiring 
close genome distance between the pairs of proteins this results in 326 interactions, see ‘Materials and 
methods’ (Figure 1B, Figure 1—figure supplement 1, Supplementary file 1 and 2),
The paired sequences are concatenated and statistical co-evolution analysis is performed using 
EVcouplings ( Marks et al., 2011 ; Morcos et al., 2011 ; Aurell and Ekeberg, 2012 ), that applies a 
pseudolikelihood maximization (PLM) approximation to determine the interaction parameters in the 
underlying maximum entropy probability model ( Balakrishnan et al., 2011 ; Ekeberg et al., 2013 ; 
Kamisetty et al., 2013), simultaneously generating both intra- and inter-EC scores for all pairs of resi-
dues within and across the protein pairs ( Figure 1A). Evolutionary coupling calculations in previous 
work have indicated that this global probability model approach requires a minimum number of 
sequences in the alignment with at least 1 non-redundant sequence per residue ( Marks et al., 2011; 
Morcos et al., 2011 ; Hopf et al., 2012 ; Jones et al., 2012 ; Kamisetty et al., 2013 ). Our current 
approach allows complexes with fewer available sequences to be assessed (minimum at 0.3 non-
redundant sequences per residue) by using a new quality assessment score to assess the likelihood of 
the predicted contacts to be correct. The EVcomplex score is based on the knowledge that most pairs 
of residues are not coupled and true pair couplings are outliers in the high-scoring tail of the distribu-
tion (See ‘Materials and methods’, Figure 2A,B, Figure 2—figure supplement 1 and 2 ). The score 
can intuitively be understood as the distance from the noisy background of non-significant pair scores, 
normalized by the number of non-redundant sequences and the length of the protein (‘Materials and 
methods’, equations 1 and 2). If the number of sequences per residue is not controlled for, there is a 
large bias in the results, overestimating performance with low numbers of sequences ( Figure 2B,C). 
The precise functional form of the correction for low numbers of sequences was chosen non-blindly 
after observing the dependencies in the test set.
Blinded prediction of known complexes
Evolutionary covariation reveals inter-protein contacts
Of the 329 interactions identified that are close on the E. coli genome, 76 have a sufficient number of 
alignable homologous sequences and known 3D structures either in E. coli or in other species. This set 
was used to test the inter-protein evolutionary coupling predictions (Supplementary file 1). The rela-
tionship between the EVcomplex score and the precision of the corresponding inter-protein ECs sug-
gests that on average 74% (69%) of the predicted pairs with EVcomplex score greater than 0.8 will be 
accurate to within 10 Å (8 Å) of an experimental structure of the complex (Figure 2C). Most complexes 
have at least one inter-protein predicted contact above the selected score threshold of 0.8 (53/76 
complexes). Three complexes have more than 20 predicted inter-protein residue contacts which are 
over 80% accurate, namely the histidine kinase and response regulator system (78 residue pairs), t-RNA 
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 5 of 45
Research article
Figure 2 . Evolutionary couplings capture interacting residues in protein complexes. ( A) Inter- and Intra-EC pairs with high coupling scores largely 
correspond to proximal pairs in 3D, but only if they lie above the background level of the coupling score distribution. To estimate this background noise 
a symmetric range around 0 is considered with the width being defined by the minimum inter-EC score. For the protein complexes in the evaluation set, 
this distribution is compared to the distance in the known 3D structure of the complex that is shown here for the methionine transporter complex, 
MetNI. (Plots for all complexes in the evaluation set are shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 1 and 2 .) (B) A larger distance from the background 
noise (ratio of EC score over background noise line) gives more accurate contacts. Additionally, the higher the number of sequences in the alignment 
the more reliable the inferred coupling pairs are which then reduces the required distance from noise (different shades of blue). Residue pairs with an 8 Å 
minimum atom distance between the residues are defined as true positive contacts, and precision = TP/(TP + FP). The plot is limited to range (0,3) which 
excludes the histidine kinase—response regulator complex (HK–RR)—a single outlier with extremely high number of sequences. (C) To allow the comparison 
across protein complexes and to estimate the average inter-EC precision for a given score threshold independent of sequence numbers, the raw 
couplings score is normalized for the number of sequences in the alignment, resulting in the EVcomplex score. In this work, inter-ECs with an EVcomplex 
score ≥0.8 are used. Note: the shown plot is cut off at a score of 2 in order to zoom in on the phase change region and the high sequence coverage 
outlier HK-RR is excluded. (D) For complexes in the benchmark set, inter-EC pairs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8 give predictions of interacting residue pairs 
between the complex subunits to varying accuracy (8 Å TP distance cutoff). All predicted interacting residues for complexes in the benchmark set that 
had at least one inter-EC above 0.8 are shown as contact maps in Figure 2—figure supplement 3–8.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.005
The following figure supplements are available for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Distribution and accuracy of raw EC scores for all complexes in evaluation set. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.006
Figure supplement 2. Distribution and accuracy of raw EC scores for all complexes in evaluation set (2). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.007
Figure supplement 3. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.008
Figure supplement 4. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (2). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.009
Figure 2. Continued on next page
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 6 of 45
Research article
synthetase (32 residue pairs), and the vitamin B importer complex (21 residue pairs), with precision 
over 80% (complex numbers 330, 019, 130 respectively, Figure 2D , Figure 2—figure supple -
ments 3–8, Supplementary file 1).
We suggest that users of EVcomplex consider predicted contacts that lie below the threshold of 0.8 
in the context of other biological knowledge, where available, or in comparison to other higher scoring 
contacts for the same complex. In this way additional true positive inter-residue contacts can be dis -
tinguished from false positives. For instance, the ethanolamine ammonia-lyase complex (complex 065) 
has only 3 predicted inter-protein residue pairs above the score threshold, but in fact has 5 additional 
correct pairs with EVcomplex scores slightly below the threshold of 0.8 which cluster with the 3 high-
scoring contacts on the monomers, indicating that they are also correct.
Some of the high confidence inter-protein ECs in the test set are not close in 3D space when compared 
to their known 3D structures. These false positives may be a result of assumptions in the method that are 
not always correct. This includes (1) the assumption that the interaction between paired proteins is con-
served across species and across paralogs, and (2) that truly co-evolved residues across proteins are indeed 
always close in 3D, which is not always the case. In addition, the complexes may also exist in alternative 
conformations that have not necessarily all been captured yet by crystal or NMR structures, for instance 
in the case of the large conformational changes of the BtuCDF complex (Hvorup et al., 2007).
Docking is accurate with few pairs of predicted contacts
To test whether the computed inter-protein ECs are sufficient for obtaining accurate 3D structures of 
the whole complex, we selected 15 diverse examples (with 5 or more inter-protein residue contacts) 
for docking (Table 1, Figure 3, Figure 3—figure supplement 1, Supplementary file 3) with HADDOCK 
(Dominguez et al., 2003; de Vries et al., 2007). The docking procedure is fast and generates 100 3D 
models of each complex using all residue pairs with EVcomplex scores above the selection threshold. 
We additionally dock negative controls to assess the amount of information added to the docking 
protocol by evolutionary couplings (500 models per run, no constraints other than center of mass, 
see ‘Materials and methods’). The best models for all 15 complexes docked with evolutionary 
couplings have interface RMSDs under 6 Å, 12/15 have the best scoring model under 4 Å and the top 
ranked models for 11/15 are under 5 Å backbone interface RMSD compared to a crystal or NMR struc-
ture interface. Over 70% of the generated models are close to the experimental structures of the 
complexes (<4 Å backbone iRMSD), compared to less than 0.5% in the controls (and these were not 
high–ranked) ( Figure 3—figure supplement 1 , Supplementary file 3 , ‘Supplementary data’). Not 
surprisingly complexes that have the largest numbers of true positive predicted contacts perform the 
best when docking. For example, the ribosomal proteins RS3 and RS14 have 11 true positive inter-
protein ECs and result in a top ranked model only 1.1 Å iRMSD from the reference structure. More 
surprisingly, other complexes with a lower proportion of true positive inter-protein contacts, such as 
Ubiquinol oxidase (6 out of 11) or the epsilon and gamma subunits of ATP synthase (8 out of 15) also 
produced accurate predicted complexes, with an iRMSD of 1.8 and 1.4 Å respectively. The docking 
experiments therefore demonstrate that inter-protein ECs, even in the presence of incorrect predic -
tions, can be sufficient to give accurate 3D models of protein complexes, but more work will be needed 
to quantify the likelihood of successful docking from the predicted contacts.
Conserved residue networks provide evidence of functional constraints
The top 10 inter-EC pairs between MetI and MetN are accurate to within 8 Å in the MetNI complex 
(PDB: 3tui [Johnson et al., 2012]), resulting in an average 1.4 Å iRMSD from the crystal structure for 
Figure supplement 5. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (3). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.010
Figure supplement 6. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (4). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.011
Figure supplement 7. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (5). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.012
Figure supplement 8. Contact maps of all complexes with solved 3D structure with inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (6). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.013
Figure 2. Continued
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 7 of 45
Research article
all 100 computed 3D models ( Table 1, Supplementary file 3  and ‘Supplementary data’). The top 3 
inter-EC residue pairs (K136-E108, A128-L105, and E74-R124, MetI-MetN respectively) constitute a 
residue network coupling the ATP-binding pocket of MetN to the membrane transporter MetI. This 
network calculated from the sequence alignment corresponds to residues identified experimentally 
that couple ATP hydrolysis to the open and closed conformations of the MetI dimer ( Johnson et al., 
2012) (Figure 4A). The vitamin B12 transporter (BtuC) belongs to a different structural class of ABC 
transporters, but also uses ATP hydrolysis via an interacting ATPase (BtuD). The top 5 inter-ECs co-
locate the L-loop of BtuC close to the Q-loop ATP-binding domain of the ATPase, hence coupling the 
transporter with the ATP hydrolysis state in an analogous way to MetI-MetN. The identification of 
these coupled residues across the different subunits suggests that EVcomplex identifies not only resi-
dues close in space, but also particular pairs that are constrained by the transporter function of these 
complexes (Kadaba et al., 2008; Johnson et al., 2012).
The ATP synthase ε and γ subunit complex provides a challenge to our approach, since the ε subunit 
can take different positions relative to the γ subunit, executing the auto-inhibition of the enzyme by 
dramatic conformational changes ( Cingolani and Duncan, 2011 ). In a real-world scenario, where we 
might not know this a priori, there may be conflicting constraints in the evolutionary record corre -
sponding to the different positions of the flexible portion of ε subunit. EVcomplex accurately predicts 
6 of the top 10 inter-EC pairs (within 8 Å in the crystal structure 1fs0 ( Rodgers and Wilce, 2000 ) or 
3oaa (Cingolani and Duncan, 2011)), with the top 2 inter-ECs εA45-γL215 and εA40-γL207 providing 
contact between the subunits along an inter-protein beta sheet. The location of the C-terminal helices of 
the ε subunit is significantly different across 3 crystal structures (PDB IDs: 1fs0 [Rodgers and Wilce, 2000], 
Table 1. EVcomplex predictions and docking results for 15 protein complexes
EVcomplex contacts Docking quality (iRMSD)
Complex name Subunits Seqs† ECs‡ TP rate§ Top ranked model# Best model¶
Carbamoyl-phosphate synthase CarB:CarA 2.3 17 0.88 1.9 1.9
Aminomethyltransferase/Glycine 
cleavage system H protein
GcsH:GcsT 2.9 5 0.2 5.4 5.4
Histidine kinase/response 
regulator
KdpD:CheY  
(T. maritima)
95.4 78 0.72 2.1 2.0
Ubiquinol oxidase CyoB:CyoA 1.0 11 0.55 1.8 1.2
Outer membrane usher protein/
Chaperone protein
FimD:FimC 3.6 6 0.83 3.2 3.0
Molybdopterin synthase MoaD:MoaE 3.6 8 1.0 4.4 4.1
Methionine transporter complex MetN:MetI 1.9 14 0.86 1.5 1.2
Dihydroxyacetone kinase DhaL:DhaK 1.4 12 0.42 6.7 2.4
Vitamin B12 uptake system BtuC:BtuF 3.2 5 0.6 2.8 2.8
Vitamin B12 uptake system BtuC:BtuD 9.8 21 0.88 1.1 0.9
ATP synthase γ and ε subunits AtpE:AtpG 2.9 15 0.53 1.4 1.4
IIA-IIB complex of the  
N,N'-diacetylchitobiose  
(Chb) transporter
PtqA:PtqB 3.1 5 0.2 7.2 5.5
30 S Ribosomal proteins RS3:RS14 1.4 11 0.91 1.1 1.1
Succinatequinone  
oxido-reductase flavoprotein/
iron-sulfur subunits
SdhB:SdhA 3.0 8 0.62 1.4 1.4
30 S Ribosomal proteins RS10:RS14 1.2 6 1.0 5.3 2.5
†Number of non-redundant sequences in concatenated alignment normalized by alignment length.
‡Inter-ECs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8.
§True Positive rate for inter-ECs above score threshold.
#iRMSD positional deviation of model from known structure, for docked model with best HADDOCK score.
¶Lowest iRMSD observed across all models.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.014
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 8 of 45
Research article
1aqt [Uhlin et al., 1997], 3oaa [Cingolani and Duncan, 2011]). The top ranked intra-ECs support the 
conformation seen in 1aqt, with the C-terminal helices packed in an antiparallel manner and tucked 
against the N-terminal beta barrel ( Figure 4B, green circles) and do not contain a high ranked evo -
lutionary trace for the extended helical contact to the γ subunit seen in 1fs0 or 3oaa (Figure 4B, gray 
box). Docking with the top inter-ECs results in models with 1.4 Å backbone iRMSDs to the crystal 
structure for the interface between the N-terminal domain of the ε subunit and the γ subunit (Table 1, 
Supplementary file 3 ). εD82 and γR222 connect the ε-subunit via a network of 3 high-scoring intra-
ECs between the N- and C-terminal helices to the core of the F1 ATP synthase. In summary, these 
examples suggest that inter-protein evolutionary couplings can provide residue relationships across 
the proteins that could aid identification of functional coupling pathways, in addition to obtaining 3D 
models of the complex.
De novo prediction of unknown complexes
Prediction of interactions for 32 protein pairs with high-scoring evolutionary 
couplings
A total of 82 protein complexes with unknown 3D structure of the interaction that satisfy the conditions 
for the current approach, i.e., have sufficient sequences and are close in all genomes, were predicted 
using EVcomplex (all residue–residue inter-protein evolutionary couplings scores are available in 
‘Supplementary data’). 32 of these have high EVcomplex scores with at least one predicted contact 
(Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1 and 2, and Supplementary file 4). Analysis of the inter-EC 
predictions for known 3D complex structures shows that protein pairs with more high-scoring ECs 
Figure 3. Blinded prediction of evolutionary couplings between complex subunits with known 3D structure. Inter-ECs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8 on a 
selection of benchmark complexes (monomer subunits in green and blue, inter-ECs in red, pairs closer than 8 Å by solid red lines, dashed otherwise). 
The predicted inter-ECs for these ten complexes were then used to create full 3D models of the complex using protein–protein docking. For the fifteen 
complexes for which 3D structures were predicted using docking, energy funnels are shown in Figure 3—figure supplement 1.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.015
The following figure supplement is available for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison of Interface RMSD to HADDOCK score. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.016
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 9 of 45
Research article
(EVcomplex score ≥0.8) have a higher proportion of true positives ( Figure 2D). Hence, the protein 
complexes in the set of unknown structures with more high-scoring inter-ECs are most likely to have 
predicted ECs that indicate residue pairs close in 3D (column Q, Supplementary file 2, the exact pairs 
can be found in Supplementary file 4). Three examples of predictions with multiple high-scoring inter-ECs 
include MetQ-MetI, UmuD-UmuC, and DinJ–YafQ. The top 15 inter-ECs between MetQ and MetI are 
Figure 4. Evolutionary couplings give accurate 3D structures of complexes. EVcomplex predictions and comparison to crystal structure for (A) the methionine-
importing transmembrane transporter heterocomplex MetNI from E. coli  (PDB: 3tui) and ( B) the gamma/epsilon subunit interaction of E. coli  ATP 
synthase (PDB: 1fs0). Left panels: complex contact map comparing predicted inter-ECs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8 (red dots, upper right quadrant) and 
intra-ECs (up to the last chosen inter-EC rank; green and blue dots, top left and lower right triangles) to close pairs in the complex crystal (dark/mid/light 
gray points for minimum atom distance cutoffs of 5/8/12 Å for inter-subunit contacts and dark/mid gray for 5/8 Å within the subunits). Inter-ECs with an 
EVcomplex score ≥0.8 are also displayed on the spatially separated subunits of the complex (red lines on green and blue cartoons, couplings closer than 
8 Å in solid red lines, dashed otherwise, lower left). Right panels: superimposition of the top ranked model from 3D docking (green/blue cartoon, left) 
onto the complex crystal structure (gray cartoon) and close-up of the interface region with highly coupled residues (green/blue spheres).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.017
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 10 of 45
Research article
from one interface of MetQ to the MetI periplasmic loops, or the periplasmic end of the helices, 
consistent with the known binding of MetQ to MetI in the periplasm.
The UmuD and UmuC complex is induced in the stress/SOS response facilitating the cleavage of 
UmuD to UmuD’ (between C24 and G25) to form UmuD’2 which then interacts with UmuC (DNA pol-
ymerase V) in order to copy damaged DNA (Beuning et al., 2006). The truncated dimer form (UmuD’2) 
has at least two contrasting conformations where the N-terminal arm is placed on opposite sides of 
the dimer in one conformation or in close proximity in the alternative (Figure 5—figure supplement 3). 
For 6/7 ECs above the score threshold, residues in UmuD predicted to interface with UmuC are 
co-located on one face of the dimer. Two residues (Y33, I38) are located in the N-terminal arm of 
UmuD that, after cleavage of the 24 N-terminal amino acids, may become available for binding UmuC. 
Since UmuD switches functions after this cleavage and can then bind UmuC, these inter-ECs may iden-
tify the critical residues for translesion synthesis function ( Beuning et al., 2006 ). Although the ECs 
from this UmuD arm to UmuC involve residues in two separate domains of UmuC (S 415 and Y 74), 
intra-monomer evolutionary couplings predict that these residues are close in UmuC ( Figure 5—
figure supplement 3A, black rectangles). The relative positions of the contacting residues within each 
monomer therefore support the plausibility of the accuracy of the interaction interface.
Whilst this manuscript was in review, the 3D structure of the previously unsolved biofilm toxin/antitoxin 
DinJ–YafQ complex was published (PDB: 3mlo (Liang et al., 2014)), showing the intertwining of subu-
nits in a heterotetrameric complex. 17/19 predicted EC residue pairs are within 8 Å in this 3D structure 
(Supplementary file 4  and ‘Supplementary data’). In general, the agreement between our de novo 
predicted inter-protein ECs and available experimental data serves as a measure of confidence for the 
Figure 5. Evolutionary couplings in complexes of unknown 3D structure. Inter-ECs for five de novo prediction candidates without E. coli or interaction 
homolog complex 3D structure (Subunits: blue/green cartoons; inter-ECs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8: red lines). For complex subunits which homomulti-
merize (light/dark green cartoon), inter-ECs are placed arbitrarily on either of the monomers to enable the identification of multiple interaction sites. 
Contact maps for all complexes with unsolved structures are provided in Figure 5—figure supplement 1 and 2. Left to right: (1) the membrane subunit 
of methionine-importing transporter heterocomplex MetI (PDB: 3tui) together with its periplasmic binding protein MetQ (Swissmodel: P28635); (2) the 
large and small subunits of acetolactate synthase IlvB (Swissmodel: P08142) and IlvN (PDB: 2lvw); (3) panthotenate synthase PanC (PDB: 1iho) together 
with ketopantoate hydroxymethyltransferase PanB (PDB: 1m3v); (4) subunits a and b of ATP synthase (model for a subunit a predict with EVfold-membrane, 
PDB: 1b9u for b subunit), for detailed information see Figure 6; and (5) the complex of UmuC (model created with EVfold) with one possible conforma-
tion of UmuD (PDB: 1i4v) involved in DNA repair and SOS mutagenesis. For alternative UmuD conformation, see Figure 5—figure supplement 3.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.018
The following figure supplements are available for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Contact maps of all complexes without solved 3D structure with at least one inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.019
Figure supplement 2. Contact maps of all complexes without solved 3D structure with at least one inter-ECs above EVcomplex score of 0.8 (2). 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.020
Figure supplement 3. Details of the predicted UmuCD interaction residues. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.021
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 11 of 45
Research article
predicted residue pair interactions and suggests that EVcomplex can be used to reveal 3D structural 
details of yet unsolved protein complexes given sufficient evolutionary information.
EVcomplex predicts interacting protein pairs in a large complex
To investigate whether the EVcomplex score can also distinguish between interacting and non-interacting 
pairs of proteins, we use the E. coli ATP synthase complex as a test case. The ATP synthase structure 
is of wide biological interest (reviewed in Walker, 2013) with a remarkable 3D structural arrangement, 
but completion of all aspects of the 3D structure has remained experimentally challenging (Baker et al., 
2012) (Figure 6A). As a demonstration exercise, we calculated evolutionary couplings for all 28 pos -
sible pair combinations of different ATP synthase subunits (centered around the E. coli ATP synthase) 
and transformed the ECs into EVcomplex scores for all inter-protein residue pairs (experimentally 
determined stoichiometry: α3β3γδεab2c10, Supplementary file 5 and ‘Supplementary data’). Using 
the default EVcomplex score threshold of 0.8 to discriminate between interacting and non-interacting 
pairs of subunits, 24 of the 28 possible interactions between the subunits are correctly classified 
as interacting or non-interacting. The four incorrect predictions (namely: ε and c, γ and c, ε and β, 
b and β, for which there is some experimental evidence) are not identified as interacting using the 0.8 
EVcomplex threshold. Choosing a threshold lower than 0.8 does identify 2 of these as interacting but 
also introduces new false positives. The ε and β interaction in the crystal structure 3oaa (Cingolani and 
Duncan, 2011 ) is a special case in that it involves a highly extended conformation of the last two 
helices of the ε subunit that reach up into the enzyme making contacts with the β subunit. The false 
negative EVcomplex score for this pair could be a result of the transience of their interaction or reflect 
a more general problem of lack of conservation of this interaction across the aligned proteins from 
different species. In total 80% of the interacting residue pairs in the known 3D structure parts of the 
synthase complex (7 pairs of subunits) are correctly predicted (threshold: 10 Å minimum atom distance 
between two residues). This exercise of predicting the presence or absence of interaction between any 
two proteins indicates the potential of the EVcomplex method in helping to elucidate protein–protein 
interaction networks from evolutionary sequence co-variation and identify interacting subunits of large 
macromolecular complexes.
EVcomplex predicts details of subunit interactions in ATP synthase
While much of the 3D structure of ATP synthase is known ( Walker, 2013), the details of interactions 
between the a-, b-, and c-subunits have not yet been determined by crystallography. We analyse the 
details in these interactions, as the EVcomplex scores between these subunits are substantial (Figure 6B). 
We are fortunately able to provide a missing piece for this analysis, the unknown structure of the 
membrane-integral penta-helical a-subunit, using our previously described method for de novo 3D 
structure prediction of alpha-helical transmembrane proteins (Hopf et al., 2012). To our knowledge, 
there are no experimentally determined atomic resolution structures of the a-subunit of ATP synthase. 
A 3D model of the a-subunit is from 1999 (1c17(Rastogi and Girvin, 1999)) and was computed using 
five helical–helical interactions that were inferred from second suppressor mutation experiments, and 
then imposed as distance restraints for TMH2-5, revealing a four helical bundle (with no information 
for TMH1). Later, cross-linking experiments (Schwem and Fillingame, 2006) identified contacting resi-
dues from all pairs of helical combinations of TM2-TM5 (6 pairs), supporting the earlier 4 helical bundle 
topology. 7 of the 8 cross-linked pairs are either exactly the same pair (L120-I246) or adjacent to many 
pairs in the top L intra a-subunit evolutionary couplings (ECs).
In fact, the helix packing arrangement in the predicted structure of the a-subunit is consistent with 
the topology suggested on the basis of crosslinking studies (Long et al., 2002; DeLeon-Rangel et al., 
2003; Fillingame and Steed, 2014), including the lack of contacts for transmembrane helix 1 with the 
other 4 helices (‘Supplementary data’).
The top inter-protein EC pair between subunits a and b, aK74–bE34, coincides with experimental 
crosslinking evidence of the interaction of aK74 with the b-subunit and the position of E34 of the b 
subunit emerging from the membrane on the cytoplasmic side ( Long et al., 2002 ; DeLeon-Rangel 
et al., 2003). Indeed, 6 of the 13 high score ECs are in the same region as the experimental crosslinks, 
for instance between the cytoplasmic loop between the first two helices of the a-subunit and the 
b-subunit helix as it emerges from the membrane bilayer ( DeLeon-Rangel et al., 2013 ), or between 
a239V in TM helix 5 and bL16 ( Figure 6C, Figure 6—figure supplement 1, Supplementary file 6). 
Additionally, the top EC between the a- and c-subunits (aG213 – cM65) lies close to the functionally 
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 12 of 45
Research article
critical aR210–cD61 interaction ( Dmitriev et al., 1999 ) on the same helical faces of the respective 
subunits (Figure 6C). This prediction of missing aspects of subunit interactions may help in the design 
of targeted experiments to complete the understanding of the intricate molecular mechanism of the 
ATP synthase complex.
Discussion
A primary limitation of our current approach is its dependence on the availability of a large number 
of evolutionarily related sequences. If a protein interaction is conserved across enough sequenced 
genomes, using a single pair per genome can give accurate predictions of the interacting residues. 
However, if the protein pair is present in limited taxonomic branches, there may be insufficient 
sequences at any given time to make confident predictions. A solution to this could be to include 
multiple paralogs of the interacting proteins from each genome, but this requires correct pairing of the 
interaction partners, which is in general hard to ascertain. In addition, details of interactions may have 
Figure 6. Predicted interactions between the a-, b-, and c-subunits of ATP synthase. ( A) The a- and b- subunits of E. coli ATP synthase are known to 
interact, but the monomer structure of subunits a and b and the structure of their interaction in the complex are unknown. ( B) EVcomplex prediction 
(right matrix) for ATP synthase subunit interactions compared to experimental evidence (left matrix), which is either strong (left, solid blue squares) or 
indicative (left, crosshatched squares). Interactions that have experimental evidence, but are not predicted at the 0.8 threshold are indicated as yellow 
dots. (C) Left panel: residue detail of predicted residue–residue interactions (dotted lines) between subunit a and b (residue numbers at the boundaries 
of transmembrane helices in gray). Right panel: proposed helix–helix interactions between ATP synthase subunits a (green), b (blue, homodimer), and 
the c ring (gray). The proposed structural arrangement is based on analysis of the full map of inter-subunit ECs with EVcomplex score ≥0.8 (Figure 6— 
figure supplement 1).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.022
The following figure supplement is available for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Contact map of predicted ECs in the ATPsynthase a and b subunits. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.023
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 13 of 45
Research article
diverged for paralogous pairs. Hence, in this current version of the method, we have imposed a 
genome distance requirement across all genomes for all homolog pairs in order to be less sensitive to 
these complications.
As the need to use genome proximity to pair sequences becomes less important with the increas -
ing availability of genome sequences, there will be a dramatic increase in the number of interactions 
that can be inferred from evolutionary couplings, including those unique to eukaryotes. With cur -
rently available sequences (May 2014 release of the UniProt database), EVcomplex is able to provide 
information for about 1/10 th of the known 3000 protein interactions in the E. coli  genome. Once 
there are ∼10,000 bacterial genome sequences of sufficient diversity, one would have enough informa-
tion to test each potentially interacting pair of homologs for evidence of interaction and, given 
sufficiently strong evolutionary couplings, infer the 3D structure of each protein–protein pair, as well 
as of complexes with more than two proteins. For any set of species, e.g., vertebrates or mammals, 
one can imagine guiding sequencing efforts to optimize species diversity to facilitate the extraction 
of evolutionary couplings. This can open the doors for more comprehensive and more rapid deter -
mination of approximate 3D structures of proteins and protein complexes, as well as for the elucida -
tion in molecular detail of the most strongly evolutionarily constrained interactions, pointing to 
functional interactions.
Determining the three-dimensional models of complexes from the predicted contacts was successful 
in many of the tested instances. Using minimal computing resources and a small number of inter-EC-
derived contacts, low interface positional RMSDs relative to experimental structures can be achieved. 
However, a significant number of proteins exist as homomultimers within larger complexes. To determine 
models of these complexes one must deconvolute homomultimeric inter-ECs from the intra-protein 
signal, which is an important technical challenge for future work.
The analysis of subunit interactions in ATP synthase in this work is a ‘proof of principle’ study 
showing that methods such as EVcomplex can determine which proteins interact with each other at 
the same time as specific residue pair couplings across the proteins (as also shown in the work by the 
Baker lab on ribosomal protein interactions (Ovchinnikov et al., 2014)). Understanding the networks 
of protein interactions is of critical interest in eukaryotic systems, such as networks of protein kinases, 
GPCRs, or PDZ domain proteins. An understanding of the distributions of interaction specificities is of 
high interest to many fields. Although we do not know how well our evolutionary coupling approach 
will handle less obligate interactions, results on the two-component signaling system (histidine kinase/
response regulator) both here and in other work ( Skerker et al., 2008 ; Weigt et al., 2009) suggest 
optimism.
The approximately scale-free EVcomplex score is a heuristic based on the distribution of raw EC 
scores from the statistical model, their dependence on sequence alignment depth and the length of 
the concatenated sequences. The score provides a simple way of accounting for these dependencies 
such that a uniform threshold, say 0.8, can be used for any protein pair with the expectation of reason-
ably accurate predictions. Since cutoff thresholds can be useful but overly sharp, we recommend 
investigating predicted contacts below the threshold used in this work, especially where there is inde-
pendent biological knowledge to validate the predictions.
The work presented here is in anticipation of a genome-wide exploration and, as a proof of prin -
ciple, shows the accurate prediction of inter-protein contacts in many cases and their utility for the 
computation of 3D structures across diverse complex interfaces. As with single protein (intra-EC) 
predictions, evolutionarily conserved conformational flexibility and oligomerization can result in more 
than one set of contacts that must be de-convoluted. Can evolutionary information help to predict 
the details and extent for each complex? A key challenge will be the development of algorithms that 
can disentangle evolutionary signals caused by alternative conformations of single complexes, alter -
native conformations of homologous complexes, and effectively deal with false positive signals. 
Taken together, these issues highlight fruitful areas for future development of evolutionary coupling 
methods.
Despite conditions for the successful de novo calculation of co-evolved residues, the method 
described here may accelerate the exploration of the protein–protein interaction world and  
the determination of protein complexes on a genome-wide scale at residue level resolution. The 
use of co-evolutionary analysis in computational models to determine protein specificity and 
promiscuity, co-evolutionary dynamics and functional drift will open up exciting future research 
questions.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 14 of 45
Research article
Materials and methods
Selection of interacting protein pairs for co-evolution calculation
The candidate set of complexes for testing and de novo prediction was derived starting from a data 
set of binary protein–protein interactions in E. coli including yeast two-hybrid experiments, literature-
curated interactions and 3D complex structures in the PDB ( Rajagopala et al., 2014 ). Three com -
plexes not contained in the list were added based on our analysis of other subunits in the same 
complex, namely BtuC/BtuF , MetI/MetQ, and the interaction between ATP synthase subunits a and b. 
Since our algorithm for concatenating multiple sequence pairs per species assumes the proximity of 
the interacting proteins on the respective genomes of each species (See below), we excluded any 
complex with a gene distance >20 from further analysis. The gene distance is calculated as the number 
of genes between the interacting partners based on an ordered list of genes in the E. coli genome 
obtained from the UniProt database. The resulting list of pairs ( ∼350) was then filtered for pseudo-
homomultimeric complexes based on the identification of Pfam domains in the interacting proteins 
(330). All remaining complexes with a known 3D structure (as summarized in Rajagopala et al., 2014) 
or a homologous interacting 3D structure (93) (identified by intersecting the results of HMMER 
searches against the PDB for both monomers) were used for evaluating the method, while complexes 
without known structure (236) were assigned to the de novo prediction set (Figure 1—figure supple-
ment 1). The set with protein complexes of known 3D structure was further filtered for structures that 
only cover fragments (<30 amino acids) of one or both of the monomers and structures with very 
low resolution (>5 Å), which led to the re-assignment of Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase  
1 (complex_002), Type I restriction-modification enzyme EcoKI (complex_012), RpoC/RpoB (complex_041), 
RL11/Rl7 (complex_165), the ribosome with SecY (complex_226, complex_250, and complex_255), 
and RS3/RS (complex_254) to the set of unknown complexes. Large proteins were run with the specific 
interacting domains informed by the known 3D structure, when the full sequence was too large for the 
number of retrieved sequences (for domain annotation see ‘Supplementary data’).
This set could serve as a benchmark set for future development efforts in the community.
Multiple sequence alignments
Each protein from all pairs in our data set was used to generate a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) 
using jackhmmer (Johnson et al., 2010) to search the UniProt database (UniProt Consortium, 2014) 
with 5 iterations. To obtain alignments of consistent evolutionary depths across all the proteins,  
a bit score threshold of 0.5 * monomer sequence length was chosen as homolog inclusion criterion 
(-incdomT parameter), rather than a fixed E-value threshold which selects for different degrees of 
evolutionary divergence based on the length of the input sequence.
In order to calculate co-evolved residues across different proteins, the interacting pairs of sequences 
in each species need to be matched. Here, we assume that proteins in close proximity on the genome, 
e.g., on the same operon, are more likely to interact, as in the methods used previously matching 
histidine kinase and response regulator interacting pairs ( Skerker et al., 2008 ; Weigt et al., 2009 ) 
(‘Supplementary data’). We retrieved the genomic locations of proteins in the alignments and concate-
nated pairs following 2 rules: (i) the CDS of each concatenated protein pair must be located on the same 
genomic contig (using ENA (Pakseresht et al., 2014) for mapping) and (ii) each pair must be the closest 
to one another on the genome, when compared to all other possible pairings in the same species. The 
concatenated sequence pairs were filtered based on the distribution of genomic distances to exclude 
outlier pairs with high genomic distances of more than 10k nucleotides (‘Supplementary data’). Alignment 
members were clustered together and reweighted if 80% or more of their residues were identical (thus 
implicitly removing duplicate sequences from the alignment). Supplementary file 1 and 2 report the 
total number of concatenated sequences, the lengths, and the effective number of sequences remaining 
after down-weighting in the evaluation and de novo prediction set, respectively.
Computation of evolutionary couplings
Inter- and intra-ECs were calculated on the alignment of concatenated sequences using a global prob-
ability model of sequence co-evolution, adapted from the method for single proteins ( Marks et al., 
2011; Morcos et al., 2011 ; Hopf et al., 2012 ) using a pseudo-likelihood maximization (PLM) 
(Balakrishnan et al., 2011; Ekeberg et al., 2013) rather than mean field approximation to calculate 
the coupling parameters. Columns in the alignment that contain more than 80% gaps were excluded 
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 15 of 45
Research article
and the weight of each sequence was adjusted to represent its cluster size in the alignment thus 
reducing the influence of identical or near-identical sequences in the calculation. For the evaluation 
set, we can then compare the predicted ECs for both within and between the proteins/domains to the 
crystal structures of the complexes (for contact maps and all EC scores, see ‘Supplementary data’).
Definition of a scale-free score for the assessment of interactions
In order to estimate the accuracy of the EC prediction, we evaluate the calculated inter-ECs based on 
the following observations: (1) most pairs of positions in an alignment are not coupled, i.e., have an EC 
score close to zero, and tend to be distant in the 3D structure; (2) the background distribution of EC 
scores between non-coupled positions is approximately symmetric around a zero mean; and (3) higher-
scoring positive score outliers capture 3D proximity more accurately than lower-scoring outliers (See 
also Figure 2). The width of the (symmetric) background EC score distribution can be approximated 
using the absolute value of the minimal inter-EC score. The more a positive EC score exceeds the noise 
level of background coupling, the more likely it is to reflect true co-evolution between the coupled 
sites. For each inter-protein pair of sites i and j with pair coupling strength EC inter(i, j), we therefore 
calculate a raw reliability score ('pair coupling score ratio', Figure 2B) defined by
()()
ij
EC i jQ ij
EC i j
raw inter
inter
inter
,
(, )( , )=
min ,
 (1)
Since the accuracy of evolutionary couplings critically depends both on the number and diversity of 
sequences in the input alignment and the size of the statistical inference problem (Marks et al., 2011; 
Morcos et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2012), we incorporate a normalization factor to make the raw reliability 
score comparable across different protein pairs. The normalized EVcomplex score is defined as
()
   
−
Q ijij
N
L
raw
inter
1
2eff
,EVcomplex - Score( , ) =
1+
 (2)
where Neff is the effective number of sequences in the alignment after redundancy reduction, and 
L (total number of residues) is the length of the concatenated alignment. Previous work on single 
proteins has shown that the method requires a sufficient number of sequences in the alignment to 
be statistically meaningful. We thus filter for sequence sufficiency requiring Neff/L > 0.3 ( Table 1, 
Supplementary files 1 and 2 ). Predictions of coupled residues in the evaluation set were evalu -
ated against their residue distances in known structures of protein pairs ( Rajagopala et al., 2014 ) 
(See Supplementary file 7) in order to determine the precision of the method.
To interpret the EVcomplex prediction of interaction between subunits a and b of the ATP synthase 
as well as UmuC and UmuD, individual monomer models were built de novo for the structurally 
unsolved a-subunit of ATP synthase and UmuC using the EVfold pipeline as previously published 
(Marks et al., 2011; Hopf et al., 2012). In both cases coupling parameters were calculated using PLM 
(Balakrishnan et al., 2011; Ekeberg et al., 2013) and sequences were clustered and weighted at 90% 
sequence identity (the resulting models are provided in ‘Supplementary data’).
Prediction of interactions in a set of subunits
Following this same protocol EVcomplex scores were calculated for all possible 28 combinations of 
the 8 E. coli ATP synthase F0 and F1 subunits. Since we want to compare the computational predictions 
to some ‘ground truth’, as with the complexes for the rest of the manuscript, we used known 3D 
structures of the ATP synthase complex to assign whether or not the subunits interact (PDB: 3oaa, 
1fs0, 2a7u; Supplementary file 7). Since we are also determining whether the subunits interact, not 
necessarily knowing full atomic detail residue interactions, we included subunit interactions that have 
been inferred from cryo-EM, crosslinking or other experiments, but do not necessarily have a crystal 
structure. These are represented as solid blue boxes, if the interaction is well established ( DeLeon-
Rangel et al., 2013; Schulenberg et al., 1999; Brandt et al., 2013; McLachlin and Dunn, 2000), or 
crosshatched blue if there is a lack of consensus in the community (Figure 6B, left panel).
For each possible interaction the EVcomplex score of the highest ranked inter-EC was considered 
as a proxy for the likelihood of interaction. Pairs with scores above 0.8 are considered likely to interact, 
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 16 of 45
Research article
between 0.75 and 0.8 weakly predicted, while interactions with scores below 0.75 are rejected as 
possible complexes (blue boxes, blue crosshatched, and white respectively in right panel of Figure 6B, 
and ‘Supplementary data’).
Computation of 3D structure of complexes
A diverse set of 15 complexes was chosen from the 22 in the evaluation set that had at least 5 couplings 
above a complex score of 0.8 and was subsequently docked (Supplementary file 3). Proteins that have 
been crystallized together in a complex could bias the results of the docking, as they have comple -
mentary positions of the surface side chains. Therefore, where possible we used complexes that had a 
solved 3D structure of the unbound monomer, namely GcsH/GcsT, CyoA, FimC, DhaL, AtpE, PtqA/PtqB, 
RS10, and HK/RR, and in all other cases the side chains of the monomers were randomized either by 
using SCWRL4 (Krivov et al., 2009) or restrained minimization with Schrodinger Protein Preparation 
Wizard (Sastry et al., 2013) before docking. For ubiquinol oxidase (complex_054) the unbound struc-
ture of subunit 2 (CyoA) only covers the COX2 domain. In this case docking was performed using this 
unbound structure plus an additional run using the bound complex structure with perturbed side chains.
We used HADDOCK ( Dominguez et al., 2003 ), a widely used docking program based on ARIA 
(Linge et al., 2003 ) and the CNS software ( Brunger, 2007) (Crystallography and NMR System), to 
dock the monomers for each protein pair with all inter-ECs with an EVcomplex score of 0.8 or above 
implemented as distance restraints on the α-carbon atoms of the backbone.
Each docking calculation starts with a rigid-body energy minimization, followed by semi-flexible 
refinement in torsion angle space, and ends with further refinement of the models in explicit solvent 
(water). 500/100/100 models generated for each of the 3 steps, respectively. All other parameters 
were left as the default values in the HADDOCK protocol. Each protein complex was run using predicted 
ECs as unambiguous distance restraints on the Cα atoms (deff 5 Å, upper bound 2 Å, lower bound 2 Å; 
input files available in ‘Supplementary data’). As a negative control, each protein complex was also 
docked using center of mass restraints alone (ab initio docking mode of HADDOCK) (de Vries et al., 
2007) and in this case generating 10,000/500/500 models.
Each of the generated models is scored using a weighted sum of electrostatic (E elec) and van der 
Waals (Evdw) energies complemented by an empirical desolvation energy term (E desolv) (Fernandez-
Recio et al., 2004). The distance restraint energy term was explicitly removed from the equation in the 
last iteration (Edist3 = 0.0) to enable comparison of the scores between the runs that used a different 
number of ECs as distance restraints.
Comparison of predicted to experimental structures
All computed models in the docked set were compared to the cognate crystal structures by the RMSD 
of all backbone atoms at the interface of the complex using ProFit v.3.1 ( http://www.bioinf.org.uk/
software/profit/). The interface is defined as the set of all residues that contain any atom <6 Å away from 
any atom of the complex partner. For the AtpE–AtpG complex, we excluded the 2 C-terminal helices 
of AtpE as these helices are mobile and take many different positions relative to other ATP synthase 
subunits (Cingolani and Duncan, 2011). Similarly, since the DHp domain of histidine kinases can take 
different positions relative to the CA domain, the HK-RR complex was compared over the interface 
between the DHp domain alone and the response regulator partner. In the case of the unbound ubiqui-
nol oxidase docking results, only the interface between COX2 in subunit 2 and subunit 1 was considered. 
Accuracy of the computed models with EC restraints was compared with computed models with center 
of mass restraints alone (negative controls) (Figure 3—figure supplement 1, Supplementary file 3).
Data analysis was conducted primarily using IPython notebooks (Perez and Granger, 2007). A web-
server and all data are available at EVcomplex.org and the Dryad Digital Repository (Hopf et al., 2014).
Supplementary Data
(Available at http://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.6t7b8 [Hopf et al., 2014])
Supplementary data 1: Concatenated alignments for complexes predicted in this work
Supplementary data 2: Genome distance distribution of concatenated sequences per alignment
Supplementary data 3: EVcomplex predictions for evaluation and de novo set
Supplementary data 4: Docking input files and top 10 predicted models for evaluation set
Supplementary data 5: ATP synthase predictions, ATP synthase subunit a model
Supplementary data 6: UmuC model
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 17 of 45
Research article
Additional information
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
National Institute of General  
Medical Sciences  
R01 GM106303 Thomas A Hopf,  
Debora S Marks,  
Chris Sander
Fulbright Commission  Charlotta P I 
Schärfe
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision  
to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
TAH, CPIS, DSM, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, 
Drafting or revising the article; JPGLMR, Assisted docking in Haddock; AGG, Conducted comparison 
of ATP synthase subunit interactions; OK, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data; 
CS, Conception and design, Drafting or revising the article; AMJJB, Provided expertise on Haddock 
docking protocols, Drafting or revising the article
Author ORCIDs
Thomas A Hopf,
  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7476-9539
Charlotta P I Schärfe,
  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6689-6423
Debora S Marks,
  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9388-2281
Alexandre M J J Bonvin,
  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7369-1322
Additional files
Supplementary files
• Supplementary file 1. Benchmark data set and results.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.024
• Supplementary file 2. De novo prediction data set and results.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.025
• Supplementary file 3. Docking results.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.026
• Supplementary file 4. Predicted inter-ECs for complexes in de novo prediction data set with EVcomplex 
score ≥0.8.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.027
• Supplementary file 5. ATP synthase interaction predictions.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.028
• Supplementary file 6. Comparison of ATP synthase EVcomplex predictions of a and b subunit with 
cross-linking studies.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.029
• Supplementary file 7. PDB identifiers used for comparison of predicted evolutionary couplings to 
known 3D structures.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430.030
Major datasets
The following dataset was generated
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset ID and/or URL
Database, license,  
and accessibility  
information
Hopf T, Schärfe C,  
Rodrigues J, Green A,  
Sander C, Bonvin A,  
Marks D
2014 Data from: Sequence  
co-evolution gives 3D 
contacts and structures  
of protein complexes
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/ 
dryad.6t7b8
Publicly available  
at Dryad Digital  
Repository.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 18 of 45
Research article
The following previously published datasets were used:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset ID and/or URL
Database, license,  
and accessibility  
information
Thoden JB, Huang X, 
Raushel FM, Holden HM
2004 Crystal structure of  
E. coli carbamoyl  
phosphate synthetase  
small subunit mutant  
C248D complexed with  
uridine 5'-monophosphate
1T36; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1T36/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA, Pai RD,  
Zhang W, Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex 
with gentamicin. This file 
contains the 50S subunit of 
the first 70S ribosome, with  
gentamicin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Zhao R, Collins EJ,  
Bourret RB,  
Silversmith RE
2001 Crystal Structure of an  
E.coli Chemotaxis Protein,  
Chez
1KMI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KMI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex 
with gentamicin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit of  
the second 70S ribosome,  
with gentamicin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Paz A, Vartanian AS, 
Fortgang EA,  
Abramson J,  
Dahlquist FW
2012 Crystal structure of the  
complex between the  
flagellar motor proteins  
FliG and FliM
4FHR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4FHR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schuwirth BS,  
Borovinskaya MA,  
Hau CW, Zhang W,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Holton JM, Cate JHD
2005 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli at 3.5 A  
resolution. This file contains 
the 30S subunit of the  
second 70S ribosome. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S ribosomes  
and is described in  
remark 400
2AW7; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AW7/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schuwirth BS,  
Borovinskaya MA,  
Hau CW, Zhang W,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Holton JM, Cate JHD
2005 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli at 3.5 A  
resolution. This file contains  
the 50S subunit of one 70S  
ribosome. The entire crystal 
structure contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is described  
in remark 400
2AW4; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AW4/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex 
with ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file contains 
the 30S subunit of the  
second 70S ribosome.  
The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 19 of 45
Research article
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with gentamicin  
and ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome,  
with gentamicin and RRF  
bound. The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with gentamicin  
and ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file  
contains the 30S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome,  
with gentamicin bound.  
The entire crystal structure 
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBH; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBH/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with gentamicin  
and ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the second 70S  
ribosome, with gentamicin  
and RRF bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBK; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBK/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with gentamicin  
and ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file  
contains the 30S  
subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with  
gentamicin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBJ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBJ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle JA,  
Cate JHD
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state  
of ratcheting
3I1P; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1P/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Pai RD, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with gentamicin.  
This file contains the  
50S subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with  
gentamicin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 20 of 45
Research article
Evdokimov A,  
Voznesensky I,  
Fennell K, Anderson M,  
Smith JF , Fisher DA
2009 Mercury-modified  
bacterial persistence  
regulator hipBA
2WIU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WIU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Maklashina E,  
Iverson TM, Sher Y,  
Kotlyar V , Mirza O,  
Andrell J, Hudson JM,  
Armstrong FA,  
Cecchini G
2005 E. coli Quinol fumarate  
reductase FrdA E49Q  
mutation
2B76; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2B76/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Yamada K, Miyata T,  
Tsuchiya D, Oyama T,  
Fujiwara Y, Ohnishi T,  
Iwasaki H, Shinagawa H,  
Ariyoshi M, Mayanagi K,  
Morikawa K
2002 RuvA-RuvB complex 1IXR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1IXR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Bertero MG,  
Rothery RA,  
Weiner JH,  
Strynadka NCJ
2009 Crystal structure of  
NarGHI mutant NarG-R94S
3IR7; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3IR7/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Thoden JB,  
Wesenberg G,  
Raushel FM,  
Holden HM
1998 Structure of Carbamoyl  
Phosphate Synthetase  
Complexed with the  
ATP Analog AMPPNP
1BXR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1BXR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schumacher MA 2008 MDT Protein 3DNV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3DNV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Stevens RC,  
Gouaux JE,  
Lipscomb WN
1990 Structural Consequences  
of Effector Binding to the  
T State of Aspartate  
Carbamoyltransferase.  
Crystal Structures of the  
Unligated and ATP-, and  
CTP-Complexed  
Enzymes AT 2.6-Angstroms  
Resolution
5AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb5AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schuwirth BS,  
Borovinskaya MA,  
Hau CW, Zhang W,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Holton JM, Cate JHD
2005 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli at 3.5 A  
resolution. This file  
contains the 30S  
subunit of one 70S  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes  
and is described in  
remark 400
2AVY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AVY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Saikrishnan K,  
Wigley DB
2009 Crystal structure of the  
complete initiation  
complex of RecBCD
3K70; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3K70/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Miles BW, Thoden JB,  
Holden HM, Raushel FM
2001 Inactivation of the  
Amidotransferase  
Activity of Carbamoyl  
Phosphate Synthetase  
by the Antibiotic Acivicin
1KEE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KEE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Wang S, Fleming RT,  
Westbrook EM,  
Matsumura P ,  
McKay DB
2005 Structure of the  
Escherichia coli FlhDC  
complex, a prokaryotic  
heteromeric regulator  
of transcription
2AVU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AVU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Safro M, Klipcan L,  
Moor N
2011 Crystal structure of  
Thermus thermophilus  
Phenylalanyl-tRNA  
synthetase comlexed  
with L-dopa
3TEH; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3TEH/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 21 of 45
Research article
Jin L, Stec B,  
Kantrowitz ER
2000 Crystal Structure of  
E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
P268A Mutant in the  
R-State in the Presence  
of N-Phosphonacetyl- 
L-Aspartate
1F1B; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1F1B/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham ML,  
Khare D, Quiocho FA,  
Davidson AL, Chen J
2007 The Crystal Structure  
of the E. coli Maltose  
Transporter
2R6G; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2R6G/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Wang J, Song JJ,  
Franklin MC,  
Kamtekar S, Im YJ,  
Rho SH, Seong IS,  
Lee CS, Chung CH,  
Eom SH
2000 Crystal Structures of the  
HSLVU Peptidase-Atpase  
Complex Reveal an  
ATP-Dependent  
Proteolysis Mechanism
1G4A; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1G4A/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Thoden J, Holden H 1998 Carbamoyl Phosphate  
Synthetase: Caught in the  
Act of Glutamine Hydrolysis
1A9X; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1A9X/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schuwirth BS,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Cate JHD
2006 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
escherichia coli in  
complex with the antibiotic  
kasugamyin at 3.5a  
resolution. this file  
contains the 30s subunit  
of one 70s ribosome.  
the entire crystal structure  
contains two 70s  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
1VS7; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1VS7/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Zhou J, Lancaster L,  
Trakhanov S, Noller HF
2011 Crystal Structure of  
Release Factor RF3  
Trapped in the GTP  
State on a Rotated  
Conformation of the  
Ribosome (without  
viomycin)
3UOQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3UOQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Sharma A, Bonsor DA,  
Kleanthous C
2009 Crystal structure of  
processed TolB in  
complex with Pal
2W8B; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2W8B/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Chaudhry C,  
Horwich AL,  
Brunger AT,  
Adams PD
2004 GroEL-GroES-ADP7 s1SX4; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1SX4/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Honzatko RB,  
Crawford JL, Monaco HL, 
Ladner JE, Edwards BFP , 
Evans DR, Warren SG, 
Wiley DC, Ladner RC, 
Lipscomb WN
1982 Crystal and Molecular  
Structures of Native and  
CTP-Liganded Aspartate  
Carbamoyltransferase  
from Escherichia Coli
2ATC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2ATC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Zhou J, Lancaster L, 
Trakhanov S, Noller HF
2011 Crystal Structure of  
Release Factor RF3  
Trapped in the GTP  
State on a Rotated  
Conformation of the  
Ribosome
3SFS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3SFS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Boal AK, Cotruvo JA  
Jnr, Stubbe J,  
Rosenzweig AC
2010 Ribonucleotide Reductase  
Dimanganese(II)-NrdF  
from Escherichia coli in  
Complex with NrdI
3N39; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3N39/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Heng S, Stieglitz KA,  
Eldo J, Xia J, Cardia JP ,  
Kantrowitz ER
2006 The Structure of Wild-Type  
E. Coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase in  
Complex with Novel  
T State Inhibitors at  
2.25 Resolution
2FZG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2FZG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 22 of 45
Research article
Le Trong I, Aprikian P ,  
Stenkamp RE,  
Sokurenko EV
2009 Complex of FimC,  
FimF , FimG and FimH
3JWN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3JWN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Shibata N 2010 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine  
ammonia-lyase from  
Escherichia coli  
complexed with  
CN-CBL and (S)-2- 
amino-1-propanol
3AO0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3AO0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schwieters CD,  
Suh JY, Grishaev A,  
Guirlando R,  
Takayama Y,  
Clore G.M
2010 Solution Structure of  
the Enzyme I Dimer  
Complexed with HPr  
Using Residual Dipolar  
Couplings and Small  
Angle X-Ray Scattering
2XDF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2XDF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to chloramphenicol. This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the first 70S  
ribosome
3OFA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to  
chloramphenicol. This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the second  
70S ribosome
3OFB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to chloramphenicol.  
This file contains the  
50S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome with  
chloramphenicol bound
3OFC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to 
chloramphenicol. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the second 70S ribosome
3OFD; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFD/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Hung CS, Bouckaert J 2001 FIMH adhesin-FIMC  
chaperone complex with  
D-mannose
1KLF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KLF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Shibata N 2010 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine  
ammonia-lyase from  
escherichia coli  
complexed with  
CN-CBL and (R)-2- 
amino-1-propanol
3ANY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ANY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to  
clindamycin. This file contains 
the 30S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome
3OFX; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFX/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of  
the E. coli ribosome  
bound to clindamycin.  
This file contains the  
30S subunit of the  
second 70S ribosome
3OFY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to clindamycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome  
bound to clindamycin
3OFZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 23 of 45
Research article
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of  
the E. coli ribosome  
bound to erythromycin.  
This file contains the  
30S subunit of the  
second 70S ribosome
3OFP; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFP/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Chinardet N, Welch M,  
Mourey L, Birck C,  
Samama JP
1997 Chey-binding domain  
of chea in complex  
with chey
1A0O; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1A0O/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Dunkle JA, Xiong L,  
Mankin AS, Cate JHD
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to erythromycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome  
with erthromycin bound
3OFR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Stieglitz KA,  
Dusinberre KJ,  
Cardia JP , Tsuruta H,  
Kantrowitz ER
2005 Structure of D236A  
mutant E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase in  
presence of  
Phosphonoacetamide  
at 2.90 A resolution
2A0F; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2A0F/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Xu Z, Horwich AL,  
Sigler PB
1997 Crystal structure of  
the asymmetric  
chaperonin complex  
groel/groes/(ADP)7
1AON; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1AON/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Borovinskaya MA,  
Shoji S, Holton JM,  
Fredrick K, Cate JHD
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with spectinomycin and  
neomycin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit of  
the second 70S ribosome,  
with spectinomycin and  
neomycin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes
2QP0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QP0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Clore GM, Wang G 2000 Complex of enzyme  
IIAGLC and the histidine- 
containing phosphocarrier  
protein HPR from  
Escherichia coli NMR,  
restrained regularized  
mean structure
1GGR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1GGR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Gouet P , Chinardet N,  
Welch M, Guillet V ,  
Birck C, Mourey L,  
Samama JP
2000 Chey-binding domain  
of chea in complex with  
chey from crystals soaked  
in acetyl phosphate
1FFS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FFS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Phan G, Remaut H,  
Lebedev A, Geibel S,  
Waksman G
2011 Crystal structure of the  
FimD usher bound to its  
cognate FimC: FimH  
substrate
3RFZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3RFZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Hung CS, Bouckaert J 2001 FimH adhesin Q133N  
mutant-FimC  
chaperone complex  
with methyl-alpha-D- 
mannose
1KIU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KIU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Schuwirth B.S,  
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Hau C.W, Zhang W,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Holton J.M,  
Cate J.H.D
2005 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli at 3.5 A  
resolution. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the second 70S  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes  
and is described in  
remark 400
2AWB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AWB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 24 of 45
Research article
Gouaux J.E,  
Lipscomb W.N
1989 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES OF  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE  
LIGATED T AND  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE  
AND MALONATE LIGATED  
R STATES OF ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE  
AT 2.8-ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION AND  
NEUTRAL P*H
1AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of a  
pre-translocation state  
MBP-Maltose transporter  
complex bound to AMP-PNP
3PUZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PUZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of an  
outward-facing MBP-Maltose 
transporter complex bound  
to ADP-BeF3
3PUX; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PUX/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of an  
outward-facing MBP-Maltose  
transporter complex bound  
to AMP-PNP after crystal  
soaking of the  
pretranslocation state
3PUY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PUY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of an  
outward-facing MBP-Maltose 
transporter complex bound  
to ADP-VO4
3PUV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PUV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB Protein 
Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of an 
outward-facing  
MBP-Maltose transporter  
complex bound to  
ADP-AlF4
3PUW; http://dx.doi.
org/10.2210/ 
pdb3PUW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Eldo J, Cardia J.P , O'Day 
E.M, Xia J, Tsuruta H, 
Kantrowitz E.R
2006 Structure of wild-type E. coli 
Aspartate Transcarbamoylase  
in the presence of  
N-phosphonacetyl-L- 
isoasparagine at 2.3A 
resolution
2H3E; http://dx.doi.
org/10.2210/ 
pdb2H3E/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L, 
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to clindamycin. This file  
contains the 50S  
subunit of the second  
70S ribosome
3OG0; http://dx.doi.
org/10.2210/ 
pdb3OG0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stevens R.C, Gouaux J.E,  
Lipscomb W.N
1990 STRUCTURAL  
CONSEQUENCES OF  
EFFECTOR BINDING TO  
THE T STATE OF  
ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE. 
CRYSTAL STRUCTURES  
OF THE UNLIGATED AND 
ATP-, AND CTP- 
COMPLEXED ENZYMES  
AT 2.6-ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION
4AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with paromomycin and  
ribosome recycling factor  
(RRF). This file contains the  
30S subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with paromo-
mycin bound. The entire 
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2Z4M; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2Z4M/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 25 of 45
Research article
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase (SQR) with  
carboxin bound
2WDQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WDQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B, Holden H.M, 
Wesenberg G,  
Raushel F .M, Rayment I
1997 CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE  
SYNTHETASE FROM  
ESCHERICHIA COLI
1JDB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1JDB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase ( SQR)  
SdhB His207Thr mutant
2WP9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WP9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Numata T, Fukai S,  
Ikeuchi Y, Suzuki T,  
Nureki O
2005 crystal structure of  
heterohexameric TusBCD  
proteins, which are  
crucial for the tRNA  
modification
2D1P; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2D1P/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state  
of ratcheting
3I1O; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1O/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1N; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1N/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1M; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1M/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A, Weiner J.H, 
Strynadka N.C.J
2009 Crystal structure of  
NarGHI mutant  
NarG-H49C
3IR5; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3IR5/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Khare D, Oldham M.L,  
Orelle C, Davidson A.L,  
Chen J
2008 Crystal structure of the  
resting state maltose  
transporter from E. coli
3FH6; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3FH6/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Sang Y.S, Cai M,  
Clore G.M
2009 NMR structure of the  
IIAchitobiose-IIBchitobiose  
phosphoryl transition state  
complex of the  
N,N'-diacetylchitoboise  
brance of the E. coli  
phosphotransferase system
2WY2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WY2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stieglitz K, Stec B,  
Baker D.P ,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2004 Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase Catalytic 
Chain Mutant E50A  
Complex with  
Phosphonoacetamide,  
Malonate, and Cytidine- 
5-Prime-Triphosphate (CTP)
1TUG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1TUG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in an  
intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1S; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1S/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Iverson T.M,  
Luna-Chavez C,  
Croal L.R, Cecchini G,  
Rees D.C
2002 Quinol-Fumarate  
Reductase with Menaquinol 
Molecules
1L0V; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1L0V/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in an  
intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1Q; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1Q/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ishikawa M, Tsuchiya D, 
Oyama T, Tsunaka Y, 
Morikawa K
2004 fatty acid beta-oxidation 
multienzyme complex from  
Pseudomonas fragi, form I  
(native2)
1WDK; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1WDK/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 26 of 45
Research article
Iverson T.M,  
Luna-Chavez C,  
Croal L.R, Cecchini G,  
Rees D.C
2001 E. coli Quinol-Fumarate 
Reductase with Bound 
Inhibitor HQNO
1KF6; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KF6/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of 
ratcheting
3I1Z; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1Z/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Daniels J.N, Schindelin H 2007 Crystal Structure of  
Activated MPT Synthase
3BII; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3BII/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Jormakka M,  
Richardson D, Byrne B,  
Iwata S
2003 Crystal Structure of NarGH 
complex
1R27; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1R27/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex 
with spectinomycin. This file 
contains the 30S subunit of 
the first 70S ribosome, with 
spectinomycin bound. The 
entire crystal structure 
contains two 70S ribosomes
2QOU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gouaux J.E,  
Lipscomb W.N
1989 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES OF 
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE 
LIGATED T AND  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE  
AND MALONATE LIGATED  
R STATES OF ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE  
AT 2.8-ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION AND  
NEUTRAL PH
2AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gouet P , Chinardet N, 
Welch M, Guillet V ,  
Birck C, Mourey L,  
Samama J.-P
2000 CHEY-BINDING DOMAIN  
OF CHEA IN COMPLEX  
WITH CHEY AT 2.1 A  
RESOLUTION
1FFG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FFG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Wang L, 
Feldman M.B, Pulk A,  
Chen V .B, Kapral G.J,  
Noeske J, Richardson J.S,  
Blanchard S.C,  
Cate J.H.D
2011 Structures of the bacterial  
ribosome in classical and  
hybrid states of tRNA  
binding
3R8S; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3R8S/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 E. coli succinate:quinone 
oxidoreductase (SQR) with  
an empty quinone- binding  
pocket
2WDV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WDV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Cardia J.P , Eldo J, Xia J, 
O'Day E.M, Tsuruta H, 
Kantrowitz E.R
2006 E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
complexed with  
N-phosphonacetyl- 
L-asparagine
2IPO; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2IPO/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Baradaran R,  
Berrisford J.M,  
Minhas G.S, Sazanov L.A
2012 Crystal structure of the  
entire respiratory complex I 
from Thermus thermophilus
4HEA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4HEA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bingel-Erlenmeyer R, 
Kohler R, Kramer G, 
Sandikci A, Antolic S,  
Maier T, Schaffitzel C,  
Wiedmann B, Bukau B,  
Ban N
2007 Structure of PDF binding  
helix in complex with the  
ribosome
2VHM; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2VHM/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Choudhury D,  
Thompson A,  
Stojanoff V , Langerman S, 
Pinkner J, Hultgren S.J, 
Knight S
1999 X-RAY STRUCTURE OF  
THE FIMC-FIMH  
CHAPERONE ADHESIN 
COMPLEX FROM  
UROPATHOGENIC E.COLI
1QUN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1QUN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 27 of 45
Research article
Stec B, Williams M.K, 
Stieglitz K.A,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2007 Structure of regulatory  
chain mutant H20A of  
asparate transcarbamoylase 
from E. coli
2QGF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QGF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rothery R.A, Bertero M.G,  
Cammack R, Palak M,  
Blasco F , Strynadka N.C, 
Weiner J.H
2004 Crystal structure of the 
apomolybdo-NarGHI
1SIW; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1SIW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Yankovskaya V ,  
Horsefield R, Tornroth S,  
Luna-Chavez C,  
Miyoshi H, Leger C,  
Byrne B, Cecchini G,  
Iwata S
2002 Complex II (Succinate 
Dehydrogenase) From  
E. Coli with ubiquinone  
bound
1NEK; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1NEK/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Abramson J, Riistama S, 
Larsson G, Jasaitis A, 
Svensson-Ek M,  
Puustinen A, Iwata S,  
Wikstrom M
2000 The structure of ubiquinol 
oxidase from Escherichia  
E. coli
1FFT; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FFT/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Yankovskaya V ,  
Horsefield R, Tornroth S,  
Luna-Chavez C,  
Miyoshi H, Leger C,  
Byrne B, Cecchini G,  
Iwata S
2002 Complex II (Succinate 
Dehydrogenase) From  
E. Coli with  
Dinitrophenol-17 inhibitor  
co-crystallized at the  
ubiquinone binding site
1NEN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1NEN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Xia D, Maurizi M.R,  
Guo F , Singh S.K,  
Esser L
2003 ClpNS with fragments 1R6Q; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1R6Q/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase (SQR) with  
pentachlorophenol bound
2WDR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WDR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stec B, Williams M.K, 
Stieglitz K.A,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2007 Structure of a regulatory  
subunit mutant D19A of  
ATCase from E. coli
2QG9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QG9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Schumacher M.A 2009 Structure of mdt protein 3HZI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3HZI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Johnson E, Nguyen P ,  
Rees D.C
2011 Inward facing conformations  
of the MetNI methionine  
ABC transporter: CY5 SeMet 
soak crystal form
3TUZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3TUZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Manjasetty A.B,  
Powlowski J, Vrielink A
2003 Crystal structure of a 
bifunctional  
aldolase-dehydrogenase:  
sequestering a reactive  
and volatile intermediate
1NVM; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1NVM/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Cottevieille M, Larquet E, 
Jonic S, Petoukhov M.V , 
Caprini G, Paravisi S, 
Svergun D.I, Vanoni M.A, 
Boisset N
2007 The subnanometer  
cryo-electron microscopy  
structure of the nitrogen  
assimilating enzyme  
glutamate synthase reveals  
a 1.2 MDa heterohexameric 
complex
2VDC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2VDC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Huang J, Lipscomb W.N 2003 Aspartate Transcarbamylase 
(ATCase) of  
Escherichia coli: A New  
Crystalline R State Bound  
to PALA, or to Product  
Analogues Phosphate  
and Citrate
1Q95; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Q95/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rudolph M.J,  
Wuebbens M.M,  
Turque O,  
Rajagopalan K.V ,  
Schindelin H
2003 Orthorhombic Crystal  
Form of Molybdopterin  
Synthase
1NVI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1NVI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 28 of 45
Research article
Bingel-Erlenmeyer R,  
Kohler R, Kramer G,  
Sandikci A, Antolic S,  
Maier T, Schaffitzel C,  
Wiedmann B, Bukau B,  
Ban N
2007 Structure of PDF binding  
helix in complex with the  
ribosome. (Structure 2 of 4)
2VHN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2VHN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G, 
Kaji H, Kaji A, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with gentamicin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit of 
the first 70S ribosome, with 
gentamicin bound. The entire 
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes and is 
described in remark 400
2QB9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QB9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2003 Crystal structure of Nitrate 
Reductase A NarGHI, from 
Escherichia coli
1Q16; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Q16/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Johnson E, Nguyen P ,  
Rees D.C
2011 Inward facing conformations  
of the MetNI methionine  
ABC transporter: DM  
crystal form
3TUJ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3TUJ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Berk V , Zhang W,  
Pai R.D, Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal Structure of  
Ribosome with messenger  
RNA and the Anticodon  
stem-loop of P-site tRNA.  
This file contains the 30s  
subunit of one 70s  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70s ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2I2P; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2I2P/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Wang J, Kantrowitz E.R 2006 Structure of D236A E. coli  
Aspartate Transcarbamoylase  
in the presence of  
phosphonoacetamide  
and l-Aspartate at 2.60 A  
resolution
2HSE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2HSE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Johansson T,  
Pedersen A, Leckner J, 
Karlsson B.G
2005 Complex of the domain I  
and domain III of  
Escherichia coli  
transhydrogenase
2BRU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2BRU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Berk V , Zhang W,  
Pai R.D, Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal Structure of  
Ribosome with messenger  
RNA and the Anticodon  
stem-loop of P-site tRNA.  
This file contains the 30s 
subunit of one 70s  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70s ribosomes and is 
described in remark 400
2I2U; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2I2U/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B, Huang X, 
Raushel F .M,  
Holden H.M
1999 Crystal structure of  
carbamoyl phosphate  
synthetase complexed at  
CYS269 in the small  
subunit with the tetrahedral 
mimic l-glutamate  
gamma-semialdehyde
1CS0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1CS0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Berk V , Zhang W, Pai R.D, 
Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal Structure of Ribosome 
with messenger RNA and  
the Anticodon stem-loop of 
P-site tRNA. This file contains 
the 50s subunit of one 70s  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70s ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2I2V; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2I2V/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 29 of 45
Research article
Mougous J.D, Lee D.H, 
Hubbard S.C,  
Schelle M.W,  
Vocadlo D.J, Berger J.M, 
Bertozzi C.R
2005 Crystal Structure of a 
GTP-Regulated ATP  
Sulfurylase Heterodimer  
from Pseudomonas  
syringae
1ZUN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1ZUN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Jin L, Stec B,  
Lipscomb W.N,  
Kantrowitz E.R
1999 ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
COMPLEXED WITH  
N-PHOSPHONACETYL- 
L-ASPARTATE (PALA)
1D09; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1D09/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gruswitz F , O'Connell J III, 
Stroud R.M, Center for 
Structures of  Membrane 
Proteins (CSMP)
2006 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ammonia channel  
AMTB complexed with the  
signal transduction protein  
GLNK
2NS1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2NS1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Boal A.K, Cotruvo J.A Jr, 
Stubbe J,  
Rosenzweig A.C
2010 Ribonucleotide Reductase 
Dimanganese(II)-NrdF from 
Escherichia coli in Complex 
with Reduced NrdI
3N3A; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3N3A/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Marinoni E.N,  
de Oliveira J.S, Nicolet Y, 
Raulfs E.C, Amara P ,  
Dean D.R,  
Fontecilla-Camps J.C
2012 A. fulgidus IscS-IscU  
complex structure
4EB7; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4EB7/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Zhang W,  
Cate J.H.D, Mankin A.S
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to  
CEM-101. This file contains  
the 50S subunit of the  
second 70S ribosome
1VT2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1VT2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Nishiyama M, Horst R,  
Eidam O, Herrmann T,  
Ignatov O, Vetsch M,  
Bettendorff P ,  
Jelesarov I, Grutter M.G,  
Wuthrich K,  
Glockshuber R,  
Capitani G
2005 Crystal Structure of the  
Ternary Complex of FIMD  
(N-Terminal Domain) with  
FIMC and the Pilin Domain  
of FIMH
1ZE3; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1ZE3/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Alam N, Stieglitz K.A,  
Caban M.D, Gourinath S, 
Tsuruta H, Kantrowitz E.R
2004 E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamylase 240's  
Loop Mutant (K244N)
1SKU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1SKU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Huang J, Lipscomb W.N 2005 T -state Active Site of  
Aspartate  
Transcarbamylase: Crystal  
Structure of the Carbamyl  
Phosphate and L-alanosine  
Ligated Enzyme
2AIR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2AIR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Iverson T.M,  
Luna-Chavez C,  
Croal L.R, Cecchini G,  
Rees D.C
2001 QUINOL-FUMARATE  
REDUCTASE WITH QUINOL  
INHIBITOR 2-[1-(4-CHLORO- 
PHENYL)-ETHYL]-4,6- 
DINITRO-PHENOL
1KFY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KFY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Minailiuc O.M, Ekiel I,  
Milad M, Montreal- 
Kingston Bacterial 
Structural Genomics  
Initiative (BSGI)
2007 NMR solution structure of  
NapD in complex with  
NapA1-35 signal peptide
2PQ4; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2PQ4/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Macol C.P , Tsuruta H,  
Stec B, Kantrowitz E.R
2001 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF 
MUTANT. R105A OF E. COLI 
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE
1I5O; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1I5O/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A, Weiner J.H, 
Strynadka N.C.J
2008 The crystal structure of the 
NarGHI mutant NarH C16A
3EGW; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EGW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Li G, Zhang YInouye M, 
Ikura M
2008 Structure of E. coli toxin RelE 
(R81A/R83A) mutant in  
complex with antitoxin RelBc 
(K47–L79) peptide
2KC8; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2KC8/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 30 of 45
Research article
Conroy M.J, Durand A, 
Lupo D, Li X.-D,  
Bullough P .A,  
Winkler F .K, Merrick M
2006 Regulating the Escherichia  
coli ammonia channel: the  
crystal structure of the  
AmtB-GlnK complex
2NUU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2NUU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhou J, Lancaster L, 
Trakhanov S, Noller H.F
2011 Crystal Structure of Release 
Factor RF3 Trapped in the  
GTP State on a Rotated 
Conformation of the  
Ribosome
3SGF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3SGF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Zhang W,  
Cate J.H.D, Mankin A.S
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to 
CEM-101. This file contains  
the 30S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome
3OR9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OR9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L, 
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to  
erythromycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit of  
the second 70S ribosome
3OFQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Eidam O, Grutter M.G, 
Capitani G
2008 Crystal structure of the ternary  
complex of FimD (N-Terminal  
Domain, FimDN) with FimC  
and the N-terminally truncated 
pilus subunit FimF (FimFt)
3BWU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3BWU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Cingolani G,  
Duncan T.M
2010 Structure of the E.coli F1-ATP 
synthase inhibited by  
subunit Epsilon
3OAA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OAA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Wang L, 
Feldman M.B, Pulk A,  
Chen V .B, Kapral G.J,  
Noeske J, Richardson J.S,  
Blanchard S.C,  
Cate J.H.D
2011 Structures of the bacterial 
ribosome in classical and  
hybrid states of tRNA binding
3R8T; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3R8T/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Zhang W,  
Cate J.H.D, Mankin A.S
2010 Crystal structure of the E. coli 
ribosome bound to CEM-101. 
This file contains the 50S 
subunit of the first 70S  
ribosome bound to CEM-101
3ORB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ORB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gouaux J.E,  
Stevens R.C,  
Lipscomb W.N
1989 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES  
OF ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE 
LIGATED WITH  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE,  
MALONATE, AND  
CTP OR ATP AT  
2.8-ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION AND  
NEUTRAL P*H
7AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb7AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A,  
Boroumand N,  
Palak M, Blasco F ,  
Ginet N,  
Weiner J.H,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2004 The crystal structure of  
Nitrate Reductase A,  
NarGHI, in complex with  
the Q-site inhibitor  
pentachlorophenol
1Y4Z; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Y4Z/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome  
in an intermediate  
state of ratcheting
3I22; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I22/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rudolph M.J,  
Wuebbens M.M,  
Rajagolpalan K.V ,  
Schindelin H
2000 MOLYBDOPTERIN  
SYNTHASE (MOAD/MOAE)
1FM0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FM0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Johnson E, Nguyen P .T,  
Rees D.C
2011 Inward facing conformations  
of the MetNI methionine  
ABC transporter: CY5 native  
crystal form
3TUI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3TUI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 31 of 45
Research article
Heng S, Stieglitz K.A,  
Eldo J, Xia J, Cardia J.P , 
Kantrowitz E.R
2006 The Structure of Wild-Type  
E. Coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase in  
Complex with Novel  
T State Inhibitors at  
2.50 Resolution
2FZK; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2FZK/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zeth K, Ravelli R.B,  
Paal K, Cusack S,  
Bukau B, Dougan D.A
2002 The structural basis of 
ClpS-mediated switch in  
ClpA substrate  
recognition
1MG9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1MG9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Wang L, 
Feldman M.B, Pulk A,  
Chen V .B, Kapral G.J,  
Noeske J,  
Richardson J.S,  
Blanchard S.C,  
Cate J.H.D
2012 Structures of the bacterial 
ribosome in classical and 
hybrid states of tRNA  
binding
4GD2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4GD2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Sang Y.S, Cai M,  
Clore G.M
2009 NMR structure of the 
IIAchitobiose-IIBchitobiose  
complex of the N,  
N'- diacetylchitoboise  
brance of the E. coli  
phosphotransferase  
system
2WWV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WWV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A,  
Weiner J.H,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2009 Crystal structure of NarGHI 
mutant NarG-H49S
3IR6; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3IR6/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in an  
intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I20; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I20/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I21; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I21/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M,  
Hirokawa G, Kaji H,  
Kaji A, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in  
complex with neomycin.  
This file contains the 30S  
subunit of the first 70S  
ribosome, with neomycin  
bound. The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QAL; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QAL/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G, 
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with neomycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome,  
with neomycin bound.  
The entire crystal  
structure contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QAM; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QAM/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with neomycin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit of  
the second 70S ribosome,  
with neomycin bound.  
The entire crystal  
structure contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QAN; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QAN/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 32 of 45
Research article
Stieglitz K.A, Xia J, 
Kantrowitz E.R
2008 Crystal structure of  
Wild-Type E. Coli  
Asparate Transcarbamoylase  
at pH 8.5 at 2.80 A  
Resolution
3D7S; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3D7S/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with  
paromomycin and  
ribosome recycling factor  
(RRF). This file contains  
the 50S subunit of the  
first 70S ribosome,  
with paromomycin and  
RRF bound. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes  
and is described in  
remark 400
2Z4L; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2Z4L/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ha Y, Allewell N.M 1998 ATCASE Y165F MUTANT 9ATC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb9ATC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with paromomycin and  
ribosome recycling factor  
(RRF). This file contains the  
50S subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with  
paromomycin and RRF  
bound. The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2Z4N; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2Z4N/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex 
with spectinomycin and  
neomycin. This file contains  
the 50S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome, with  
neomycin bound. The  
entire crystal structure 
contains two 70S ribosomes
2QOZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G, 
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with paromomycin and  
ribosome recycling factor  
(RRF). This file contains  
the 30S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome, with  
paromomycin bound.  
The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2Z4K; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2Z4K/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stevens R.C,  
Gouaux J.E,  
Lipscomb W.N
1990 Structural consequences  
of effector binding to the  
t state of aspartate  
carbamoyltransferase.  
Crystal structures of the  
unligated and atp-, and  
ctp-complexed enzymes at  
2.6-angstroms resolution
6AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb6AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Lovell S, Battaile K.P ,  
Park K.-T, Wu W,  
Holyoak T, Lutkenhaus J
2011 4.3A resolution structure  
of a MinD-MinE(I24N)  
protein complex
3R9J; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3R9J/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 33 of 45
Research article
Shibata N 2009 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine  
ammonia-lyase from  
Escherichia coli complexed 
with CN-Cbl (substrate-free  
form)
3ABR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ABR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Shibata N 2009 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine ammonia- 
lyase from Escherichia coli 
complexed with  
adeninylpentylcobalamin  
and ethanolamine
3ABS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ABS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Wang L,  
Feldman M.B, Pulk A,  
Chen V .B, Kapral G.J,  
Noeske J, Richardson J.S,  
Blanchard S.C,  
Cate J.H.D
2012 Structures of the bacterial  
ribosome in classical and  
hybrid states of tRNA  
binding
4GD1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb4GD1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Chaudhry C, Farr G.W,  
Todd M.J, Rye H.S,  
Brunger A.T, Adams P .D,  
Horwich A.L, Sigler P .B
2003 Crystal structure of  
groEL-groES
1PCQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1PCQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Horsefield R,  
Yankovskaya V , Sexton G,  
Whittingham W, Shiomi K,  
Omura S, Byrne B,  
Cecchini G, Iwata S
2005 Complex II (Succinate 
Dehydrogenase) From  
E. Coli with Atpenin A5  
inhibitor co-crystallized  
at the ubiquinone  
binding site
2ACZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2ACZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Mcevoy M.M,  
Hausrath A.C,  
Randolph G.B,  
Remington S.J,  
Dahlquist F .W
1998 CHEY-BINDING (P2)  
DOMAIN OF CHEA IN  
COMPLEX WITH CHEY  
FROM ESCHERICHIA COLI
1EAY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1EAY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A,  
Boroumand N, Palak M,  
Blasco F , Ginet N,  
Weiner J.H,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2004 The crystal structure of the 
NarGHI mutant NarI-H66Y
1Y5L; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Y5L/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex  
with spectinomycin. This  
file contains the 50S  
subunit of the second 70S  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes
2QOX; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOX/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rudolph M.J,  
Wuebbens M.M,  
Rajagolpalan K.V , 
 Schindelin H
2000 MOLYBDOPTERIN  
SYNTHASE (MOAD/MOAE)
1FMA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FMA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Shibata N 2009 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine ammonia- 
lyase from Escherichia coli 
complexed with CN-Cbl  
and ethanolamine
3ABO; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ABO/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stevens R.C,  
Kantrowitz E.R,  
Lipscomb W.N
1992 ARGININE 54 IN THE  
ACTIVE SITE OF  
ESCHERICHIA COLI  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
IS CRITICAL FOR CATALYSIS:  
A SITE-SPECIFIC  
MUTAGENESIS, NMR AND  
X-RAY CRYSTALLOGRAPHY  
STUDY
1ACM; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1ACM/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 34 of 45
Research article
Heng S, Stieglitz K.A,  
Eldo J, Xia J, Cardia J.P , 
Kantrowitz E.R
2006 The Structure of Wild-Type  
E. Coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase in  
Complex with Novel  
T State Inhibitors at 2.10  
Resolution
2FZC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2FZC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Boal A.K, Cotruvo J.A Jnr, 
Stubbe J,  
Rosenzweig A.C
2010 Ribonucleotide Reductase  
Dimanganese(II)-NrdF  
from Escherichia coli in  
Complex with Reduced  
NrdI with a Trapped  
Peroxide
3N3B; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3N3B/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Suh M.K, Ku B, Ha N.C, 
Woo J.S, Oh B.H
2008 Crystal Structure of the 
MukE-MukF Complex
3EUH; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EUH/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex  
with spectinomycin. This  
file contains the 50S  
subunit of the first 70S  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes
2QOV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with spectinomycin. This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with  
spectinomycin bound.  
The entire crystal structure 
contains two 70S ribosomes
2QOW; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Huang J,  
Lipscomb W.N
2003 Products in the T State  
of Aspartate  
Transcarbamylase: Crystal  
Structure of the Phosphate  
and N-carbamyl-L-aspartate  
Ligated Enzyme
1R0C; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1R0C/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Huang J,  
Lipscomb W.N
2003 Aspartate Transcarbamylase 
(ATCase) of Escherichia coli:  
A New Crystalline R State  
Bound to PALA, or to  
Product Analogues  
Phosphate and Citrate
1R0B; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1R0B/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Schuwirth B.S,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
escherichia coli in complex  
with the antibiotic  
kasugamyin at 3.5A  
resolution. this file contains  
the 30s subunit of one 70s  
ribosome. the entire crystal  
structure contains two 70s  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
1VS5; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1VS5/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Schuwirth B.S,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
escherichia coli in complex  
with the antibiotic  
kasugamyin at 3.5A  
resolution. this file contains  
the 50s subunit of one 70s  
ribosome. the entire crystal  
structure contains two 70s  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
1VS6; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1VS6/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 35 of 45
Research article
Wada K 2008 Crystal structure of  
SufC-SufD complex  
involved in the  
iron-sulfur  
cluster biosynthesis
2ZU0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2ZU0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Schuwirth B.S,  
Vila-Sanjurjo A,  
Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
escherichia coli in complex  
with the antibiotic  
kasugamyin at 3.5a  
resolution. this file  
contains the 50s subunit  
of one 70s ribosome. The 
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70s  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
1VS8; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1VS8/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Clore G.M,  
Garrett D.S,  
Gronenborn A.M
1998 COMPLEX OF THE  
AMINO TERMINAL  
DOMAIN OF ENZYME I  
AND THE HISTIDINE- 
CONTAINING  
PHOSPHOCARRIER  
PROTEIN HPR FROM  
ESCHERICHIA COLI NMR,  
RESTRAINED  
REGULARIZED MEAN 
STRUCTURE
3EZE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EZE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Clore G.M, Garrett D.S, 
Gronenborn A.M
1998 COMPLEX OF THE  
AMINO TERMINAL  
DOMAIN OF ENZYME I  
AND THE HISTIDINE- 
CONTAINING  
PHOSPHOCARRIER  
PROTEIN HPR FROM  
ESCHERICHIA COLI
3EZB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EZB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Clore G.M, Garrett D.S, 
Gronenborn A.M
1998 COMPLEX OF THE AMINO  
TERMINAL DOMAIN OF  
ENZYME I AND THE  
HISTIDINE-CONTAINING  
PHOSPHOCARRIER  
PROTEIN HPR FROM  
ESCHERICHIA COLI NMR,  
RESTRAINED  
REGULARIZED MEAN  
STRUCTURE
3EZA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EZA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rastogi V .K, Girvin M.E 1999 A1C12 SUBCOMPLEX OF  
F1FO ATP SYNTHASE
1C17; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1C17/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Su C.-C 2010 Crystal structure of the  
CusBA heavy-metal efflux  
complex from  
Escherichia E. coli
3NE5; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3NE5/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1T; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1T/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Zhang W,  
Cate J.H.D, Mankin A.S
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to CEM-101. This file  
contains the 30S subunit  
of the second 70S  
ribosome
3ORA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ORA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Grishkovskaya I,  
Bonsor D.A,  
Kleanthous C,  
Dodson E.J
2006 Crystal structure of  
TolB/Pal complex
2HQS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2HQS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 36 of 45
Research article
Shibata N 2009 Crystal structure of  
ethanolamine  
ammonia-lyase from  
Escherichia coli complexed  
with CN-Cbl and  
2-amino-1-propanol
3ABQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3ABQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Graille M,  
Heurgue-Hamard V ,  
Champ S, Mora L,  
Scrima N, Ulryck N,  
van Tilbeurgh H,  
Buckingham R.H
2005 Molecular basis for  
bacterial class 1 release  
factor methylation by PrmC
2B3T; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2B3T/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kim D.Y, Kwon E,  
Choi J.K, Hwang H.-Y,  
Kim K.K
2010 Structural basis for the  
negative regulation of  
bacterial stress response  
by RseB
3M4W; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3M4W/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhang W, Dunkle J.A,  
Cate J.H.D
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli 70S ribosome in  
an intermediate state of  
ratcheting
3I1R; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3I1R/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in  
complex with neomycin.  
This file contains the  
50S subunit of the second  
70S ribosome, with  
neomycin bound. The  
entire crystal structure  
contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QAO; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QAO/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B, Huang X, 
Raushel F .M,  
Holden H.M
1999 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF THE CARBAMOYL  
PHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE:  
SMALL SUBUNIT MUTANT  
C269S WITH BOUND  
GLUTAMINE
1C3O; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1C3O/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Tomasiak T.M,  
Maklashina E,  
Cecchini G, Iverson T.M
2008 E. coli Quinol fumarate 
reductase FrdA T234A 
mutation
3CIR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3CIR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2011 Crystal structure of the 
maltose-binding protein/ 
maltose transporter complex  
in an outward-facing  
conformation bound  
to MgAMPPNP
3RLF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3RLF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase (SQR) SdhC 
His84Met mutant
2WU2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WU2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ke H, Lipscomb W.N,  
Cho Y, Honzatko R.B
1989 COMPLEX OF  
N-PHOSPHONACETYL- 
L-ASPARTATE WITH  
ASPARTATE CARBAMOYL-
TRANSFERASE. X-RAY 
REFINEMENT, ANALYSIS  
OF CONFORMATIONAL  
CHANGES AND  
CATALYTIC AND  
ALLOSTERIC MECHANISMS
8ATC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb8ATC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A,  
Boroumand N, Palak M,  
Blasco F , Ginet N,  
Weiner J.H,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2004 The crystal structure of the 
NarGHI mutant NarI-K86A  
in complex with  
pentachlorophenol
1Y5N; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Y5N/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 37 of 45
Research article
Woo J.S, Lim J.H,  
Shin H.C, Oh B.H
2008 Crystal structure of  
MukE-MukF(residues  
292-443)-MukB(head  
domain)-ATPgammaS  
complex, asymmetric dimer
3EUK; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3EUK/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Rees D.C, Kaiser J.T,  
Kadaba N.S, Johnson E,  
Lee A.T
2008 Crystal structure of  
methionine importer  
MetNI
3DHW; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3DHW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stieglitz K, Stec B,  
Baker D.P ,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2004 Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
Catalytic Chain Mutant  
Glu50Ala Complexed with  
N-(Phosphonacetyl- 
L-Aspartate) (PALA)
1TTH; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1TTH/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stieglitz K.A, Alam N,  
Xia J, Gourinath S,  
Tsuruta H,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2004 The Structure of E. coli  
Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase Q137A  
Mutant in The R-State
1XJW; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1XJW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Guo F , Esser L,  
Singh S.K, Maurizi M.R,  
Xia D
2002 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
ANALYSIS OF ClpSN WITH  
TRANSITION METAL ION  
BOUND
1MBX; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1MBX/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Mendes K.R,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2010 Crystal structure of the  
C47A/A241C disulfide-linked  
E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
holoenzyme
3MPU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3MPU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Jin L, Stec B,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2000 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF  
E. COLI ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
P268A MUTANT IN THE  
T -STATE
1EZZ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1EZZ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L, 
Mankin A.S,  
Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound to  
telithromycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome  
with telithromycin bound
3OAT; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OAT/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Grigoriu S, Brown B.L, 
Arruda J.M, Peti W,  
Page R
2009 Structure of the N-terminal 
domain of the E. coli  
antitoxin MqsA (YgiT/b3021)  
in complex with the E. coli  
toxin MqsR (YgiU/b3022)
3HI2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3HI2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Guo F , Esser L,  
Singh S.K, Maurizi M.R,  
Xia D
2002 Crystal Structure Analysis  
of ClpSN heterodimer
1MBU; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1MBU/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Guo F , Esser L,  
Singh S.K, Maurizi M.R,  
Xia D
2002 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
ANALYSIS OF ClpSN  
HETERODIMER  
TETRAGONAL FORM
1MBV; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1MBV/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L,  
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to telithromycin. This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the first  
70S ribosome
3OAQ; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OAQ/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Okamura-Ikeda K,  
Hosaka H
2009 Crystal Structure of  
ET -EHred-5-CH3-THF  
complex
3A8I; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3A8I/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Okamura-Ikeda K,  
Hosaka H
2009 Crystal Structure of  
ET -EHred complex
3A8J; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3A8J/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Okamura-Ikeda K,  
Hosaka H
2009 Crystal Structure of  
ETD97N-EHred complex
3A8K; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3A8K/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 38 of 45
Research article
Campbell E.A, Tupy J.L,  
Gruber T.M, Wang S,  
Sharp M.M, Gross C.A,  
Darst S.A
2003 Crystal Structure of  
Escherichia coli sigmaE  
with the Cytoplasmic  
Domain of its Anti-sigma  
RseA
1OR7; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1OR7/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase ( SQR)  
SdhD Tyr83Phe mutant
2WS3; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WS3/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B,  
Raushel F .M,  
Holden H.M
1999 CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE  
SYNTHETASE FROM  
ESCHERICHIS COLI WITH  
COMPLEXED WITH THE  
ALLOSTERIC LIGAND IMP
1CE8; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1CE8/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B, Huang X,  
Raushel F .M,  
Holden H.M
2002 Crystal Structure of the  
G359F (small subunit) Point  
Mutant of Carbamoyl  
Phosphate Synthetase
1M6V; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1M6V/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Hvorup R.N, Goetz B.A,  
Niederer M,  
Hollenstein K, Perozo E,  
Locher K.P
2007 ABC-transporter BtuCD  
in complex with its  
periplasmic binding  
protein BtuF
2QI9; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QI9/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Bertero M.G,  
Rothery R.A,  
Boroumand N,  
Palak M, Blasco F ,  
Ginet N, Weiner J.H,  
Strynadka N.C.J
2004 The crystal structure of  
the NarGHI mutant  
NarI-K86A
1Y5I; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1Y5I/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L,  
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to erythromycin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit  
of the first 70S ribosome
3OFO; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OFO/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Locher K.P , Lee A.T,  
Rees D.C
2002 Bacterial ABC Transporter  
Involved in B12 Uptake
1L7V; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1L7V/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Wilce M.C.J,  
Rodgers A.J.W
2000 COMPLEX OF GAMMA/ 
EPSILON ATP SYNTHASE  
FROM E.COLI
1FS0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1FS0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Casino P , Marina A 2008 Structure of a histidine 
kinase-response regulator 
complex reveals insights  
into Two-component  
signaling and a novel  
cis-autophosphorylation  
mechanism
3DGE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3DGE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Ruprecht J,  
Yankovskaya V ,  
Maklashina E, Iwata S,  
Cecchini G
2009 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli succinate:quinone  
oxidoreductase (SQR) SdhD 
His71Met mutant
2WU5; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2WU5/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Stieglitz K, Stec B,  
Baker D.P ,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2004 Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
Catalytic Chain Mutant  
E50A Complex with  
Phosphonoacetamide
1TU0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1TU0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L,  
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to telithromycin. This file  
contains the 50S subunit  
of the second 70S  
ribosome
3OAS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OAS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Shi R, McDonald L,  
Matte A, Cygler M,  
Ekiel I, Montreal- 
Kingston Bacterial  
Structural  Genomics  
Initiative (BSGI)
2010 Crystal Structure of E.coli  
Dha kinase DhaK-DhaL  
complex
3PNL; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PNL/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 39 of 45
Research article
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M,  
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with spectinomycin and  
neomycin. This file contains  
the 50S subunit of the second 
70S ribosome, with neomycin  
bound. The entire crystal  
structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes
2QP1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QP1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Dunkle J.A, Xiong L, 
Mankin A.S, Cate J.H.D
2010 Crystal structure of the  
E. coli ribosome bound  
to telithromycin. This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the second  
70S ribosome
3OAR; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3OAR/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth B.-S,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G, 
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the  
bacterial ribosome from  
Escherichia coli in complex  
with ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file contains 
the 50S subunit of the first  
70S ribosome, with RRF  
bound. The entire crystal  
structure contains two 70S  
ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE 
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAB; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAB/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAC; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAC/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAA; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAA/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 40 of 45
Research article
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF 
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAD; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAD/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED  
T STATE ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE COOPERATIVITY
1RAE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Jormakka M, Tornroth S, 
Byrne B, Iwata S
2002 FORMATE  
DEHYDROGENASE  
N FROM E. COLI
1KQG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KQG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Jormakka M, Tornroth S, 
Byrne B, Iwata S
2002 FORMATE D 
EHYDROGENASE N  
FROM E. COLI
1KQF; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1KQF/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE  
OF CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAH; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAH/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Kosman R.P , Gouaux J.E, 
Lipscomb W.N
1992 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF  
CTP-LIGATED T STATE  
ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE  
AT 2.5 ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION:  
IMPLICATIONS FOR  
ATCASE MUTANTS AND  
THE MECHANISM OF  
NEGATIVE  
COOPERATIVITY
1RAI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1RAI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gouaux J.E, Stevens R.C, 
Lipscomb W.N
1989 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES  
OF ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE 
LIGATED WITH  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE, 
MALONATE, AND CTP OR 
ATP AT 2.8-ANGSTROMS 
RESOLUTION AND  
NEUTRAL P*H
8AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb8AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 41 of 45
Research article
Chaudhry C,  
Horwich A.L,  
Brunger A.T,  
Adams P .D
2004 Crystal structure of  
GroEL14-GroES7- 
(ADP-AlFx)7
1SVT; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1SVT/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Oldham M.L, Chen J 2010 Crystal Structure of a  
pre-translocation state  
MBP-Maltose transporter  
complex without  
nucleotide
3PV0; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3PV0/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Xia D, Maurizi M.R,  
Guo F , Singh S.K,  
Esser L
2003 ATP-dependent Clp  
protease ATP-binding  
subunit clpA/ATP- 
dependent Clp protease  
adaptor protein clpS
1R6O; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1R6O/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zhou J, Lancaster L, 
Trakhanov S, Noller H.F
2011 Crystal Structure of  
Release Factor RF3  
Trapped in the GTP  
State on a Rotated  
Conformation of the  
Ribosome (without  
viomycin)
3UOS; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3UOS/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Singleton M.R,  
Dillingham M.S,  
Gaudier M,  
Kowalczykowski S.C, 
Wigley D.B
2004 RecBCD: DNA complex 1W36; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1W36/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W, 
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton J.M, Hirokawa G,  
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in  
complex with ribosome  
recycling factor (RRF). This  
file contains the 30S  
subunit of the first 70S  
ribosome. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes  
and is described in  
remark 400
2QBD; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBD/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Gouaux J.E,  
Lipscomb W.N
1989 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES OF  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE  
LIGATED T AND  
PHOSPHONOACETAMIDE 
AND MALONATE  
LIGATED R STATES OF  
ASPARTATE  
CARBAMOYLTRANSFERASE  
AT 2.8-ANGSTROMS  
RESOLUTION AND  
NEUTRAL PH
3AT1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3AT1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Shomura Y, Higuchi Y 2012 Crystal structure of  
HypE-HypF complex
3VTI; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb3VTI/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Zeth K, Ravelli R.B,  
Paal K, Cusack S,  
Bukau B, Dougan D.A
2002 Structural basis of  
ClpS-mediated switch  
in ClpA substrate  
recognition
1LZW; http://dx.doi.
org/10.2210/pdb1LZW/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Berk V , Zhang W,  
Pai R.D, Cate J.H.D
2006 Crystal Structure of  
Ribosome with  
messenger RNA and the  
Anticodon stem-loop of  
P-site tRNA. This file  
contains the 50s subunit  
of one 70s ribosome.  
The entire crystal  
structure contains two  
70s ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2I2T; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2I2T/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 42 of 45
Research article
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Shoji S, Holton J.M, 
Fredrick K, Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex 
with spectinomycin and 
neomycin. This file  
contains the 30S subunit of  
the first 70S ribosome, with  
spectinomycin and  
neomycin bound. The  
entire crystal structure 
contains two 70S  
ribosomes
2QOY; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QOY/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Wang J, Stieglitz K.A, 
Cardia J.P ,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2005 Structure of wild-type  
E. coli Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase in the  
presence of CTP ,  
carbamoyl phosphate at  
2.50 A resolution
1ZA2; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1ZA2/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Borovinskaya M.A,  
Pai R.D, Zhang W,  
Schuwirth BS,  
Holton JM, Hirokawa G, 
Kaji H, Kaji A,  
Cate J.H.D
2007 Crystal structure of the 
bacterial ribosome from 
Escherichia coli in complex 
with ribosome recycling  
factor (RRF). This file  
contains the 50S subunit of  
the second 70S ribosome,  
with RRF bound. The entire  
crystal structure contains  
two 70S ribosomes and is  
described in remark 400
2QBG; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb2QBG/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Wang J, Stieglitz K.A, 
Cardia J.P ,  
Kantrowitz E.R
2005 Structure of wild-type E. coli 
Aspartate  
Transcarbamoylase  
in the presence of CTP  
at 2.20 A resolution
1ZA1; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1ZA1/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Thoden J.B, Huang X, 
Raushel FM,  
Holden H.M
1999 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE OF  
CARBAMOYL PHOSPHATE  
SYNTHETASE: SMALL  
SUBUNIT MUTATION C269S
1C30; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1C30/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
Williams M.K, Stec B, 
Kantrowitz E.R
1998 ASPARTATE  
TRANSCARBOMYLASE  
REGULATORY CHAIN  
MUTANT (T82A)
1NBE; http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2210/pdb1NBE/pdb
Publicly available 
at the RCSB 
Protein Data Bank.
References
Andreani J, Guerois R. 2014. Evolution of protein interactions: from interactomes to interfaces. Archives of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics 554:65–75. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.05.010.
Andreani J, Faure G, Guerois R. 2013. InterEvScore: a novel coarse-grained interface scoring function using a 
multi-body statistical potential coupled to evolution. Bioinformatics  29:1742–1749. doi: 10.1093/  
bioinformatics/btt260 .
Aurell E, Ekeberg M. 2012. Inverse Ising inference using all the data. Physical Review Letters 108:090201.  
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.090201.
Baker LA, Watt IN, Runswick MJ, Walker JE, Rubinstein JL. 2012. Arrangement of subunits in intact mammalian 
mitochondrial ATP synthase determined by cryo-EM. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 
109:11675–11680. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1204935109.
Balakrishnan S, Kamisetty H, Carbonell JG, Lee SI, Langmead CJ. 2011. Learning generative models for protein 
fold families. Proteins 79:1061–1078. doi: 10.1002/prot.22934.
Beuning PJ, Simon SM, Godoy VG, Jarosz DF , Walker GC. 2006. Characterization of Escherichia coli translesion 
synthesis polymerases and their accessory factors. Methods in Enzymology 408:318–340. doi: 10.1016/
S0076-6879(06)08020-7.
Brandt K, Maiwald S, Herkenhoff-Hesselmann B, Gnirß K, Greie JC, Dunn SD, Deckers-Hebestreit G. 2013. 
Individual interactions of the b subunits within the stator of the Escherichia coli ATP synthase. The Journal of 
Biological Chemistry 288:24465–24479. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.465633.
Brunger AT. 2007. Version 1.2 of the Crystallography and NMR system. Nature Protocols 2:2728–2733.  
doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.406.
Burger L, van Nimwegen E. 2008. Accurate prediction of protein-protein interactions from sequence alignments 
using a Bayesian method. Molecular Systems Biology 4:165. doi: 10.1038/msb4100203.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 43 of 45
Research article
Chaudhury S, Berrondo M, Weitzner BD, Muthu P , Bergman H, Gray JJ. 2011. Benchmarking and analysis of 
protein docking performance in Rosetta v3.2. PLOS ONE 6:e22477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022477.
Cingolani G, Duncan TM. 2011. Structure of the ATP synthase catalytic complex (F(1)) from Escherichia coli in an 
autoinhibited conformation. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 18:701–707. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2058.
de Juan D, Pazos F , Valencia A. 2013. Emerging methods in protein co-evolution. Nature reviews. Genetics 
14:249–261. doi: 10.1038/nrg3414.
de Vries SJ, van Dijk AD, Krzeminski M, van Dijk M, Thureau A, Hsu V, Wassenaar T, Bonvin AM. 2007. 
HADDOCK versus HADDOCK: new features and performance of HADDOCK2.0 on the CAPRI targets. Proteins 
69:726–733. doi: 10.1002/prot.21723.
DeLeon-Rangel J, Zhang D, Vik SB. 2003. The role of transmembrane span 2 in the structure and function of 
subunit a of the ATP synthase from Escherichia coli. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 418:55–62.  
doi: 10.1016/S0003-9861(03)00391-6.
DeLeon-Rangel J, Ishmukhametov RR, Jiang W, Fillingame RH, Vik SB. 2013. Interactions between subunits a and 
b in the rotary ATP synthase as determined by cross-linking. FEBS Letters 587:892–897. doi: 10.1016/j.
febslet.2013.02.012.
Dmitriev OY, Jones PC, Fillingame RH. 1999. Structure of the subunit c oligomer in the F1Fo ATP synthase: 
model derived from solution structure of the monomer and cross-linking in the native enzyme. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of USA 96:7785–7790. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.14.7785.
Dominguez C, Boelens R, Bonvin AM. 2003. HADDOCK: a protein-protein docking approach  
based on biochemical or biophysical information. Journal of the American Chemical Society 125:1731–1737.  
doi: 10.1021/ja026939x.
Ekeberg M, Lovkvist C, Lan Y , Weigt M, Aurell E. 2013. Improved contact prediction in proteins: using pseudo-
likelihoods to infer Potts models. Physical Review. E, Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics 87:012707.
Faure G, Andreani J, Guerois R. 2012. InterEvol database: exploring the structure and evolution of protein 
complex interfaces. Nucleic Acids Research 40:D847–D856. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr845.
Fernandez-Recio J, Totrov M, Abagyan R. 2004. Identification of protein-protein interaction sites from docking 
energy landscapes. Journal of Molecular Biology 335:843–865. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.10.069.
Fillingame RH, Steed PR. 2014. Half channels mediating H transport and the mechanism of gating in the F sector 
of Escherichia coli FF ATP synthase. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2014.03.005.
Gobel U, Sander C, Schneider R, Valencia A. 1994. Correlated mutations and residue contacts in proteins. 
Proteins 18:309–317. doi: 10.1002/prot.340180402.
Hart GT, Ramani AK, Marcotte EM. 2006. How complete are current yeast and human protein-interaction 
networks? Genome Biology 7:120. doi: 10.1186/gb-2006-7-11-120.
Hopf TA, Colwell LJ, Sheridan R, Rost B, Sander C, Marks DS. 2012. Three-dimensional structures of membrane 
proteins from genomic sequencing. Cell 149:1607–1621. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.012.
Hopf TA, Schärfe CPI, Rodrigues JPGLM, Green AG, Sander C, Bonvin AMJJ, Marks DS. 2014. Data from: 
Sequence co-evolution gives 3D contacts and structures of protein complexes. Dryad. doi: 10.5061/
dryad.6t7b8.
Hvorup RN, Goetz BA, Niederer M, Hollenstein K, Perozo E, Locher KP . 2007. Asymmetry in the structure of the 
ABC transporter-binding protein complex BtuCD-BtuF . Science 317:1387–1390. doi: 10.1126/science.1145950.
Johnson LS, Eddy SR, Portugaly E. 2010. Hidden Markov model speed heuristic and iterative HMM search 
procedure. BMC Bioinformatics 11:431. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-431.
Johnson E, Nguyen PT, Yeates TO, Rees DC. 2012. Inward facing conformations of the MetNI methionine ABC 
transporter: Implications for the mechanism of transinhibition. Protein Science 21:84–96. doi: 10.1002/pro.765.
Jones DT, Buchan DW, Cozzetto D, Pontil M. 2012. PSICOV: precise structural contact prediction using sparse 
inverse covariance estimation on large multiple sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 28:184–190. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btr638.
Kadaba NS, Kaiser JT, Johnson E, Lee A, Rees DC. 2008. The high-affinity E. coli methionine ABC transporter: 
structure and allosteric regulation. Science 321:250–253. doi: 10.1126/science.1157987.
Kamisetty H, Ovchinnikov S, Baker D. 2013. Assessing the utility of coevolution-based residue-residue contact 
predictions in a sequence- and structure-rich era. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 
110:15674–15679. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1314045110.
Karaca E, Bonvin AM. 2013. Advances in integrative modeling of biomolecular complexes. Methods 59:372–381. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.12.004.
Kortemme T, Baker D. 2002. A simple physical model for binding energy hot spots in protein-protein complexes. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 99:14116–14121. doi: 10.1073/pnas.202485799.
Kortemme T, Baker D. 2004. Computational design of protein-protein interactions. Current Opinion in Chemical 
Biology 8:91–97. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2003.12.008.
Kortemme T, Joachimiak LA, Bullock AN, Schuler AD, Stoddard BL, Baker D. 2004. Computational redesign of 
protein-protein interaction specificity. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 11:371–379. doi: 10.1038/nsmb749.
Krivov GG, Shapovalov MV, Dunbrack RL Jnr. 2009. Improved prediction of protein side-chain conformations 
with SCWRL4. Proteins 77:778–795. doi: 10.1002/prot.22488.
Liang Y, Gao Z, Wang F , Zhang Y , Dong Y , Liu Q. 2014. Structural and functional Characterization of Escherichia 
coli toxin-antitoxin complex DinJ-YafQ. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 289:21191–21202. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M114.559773.
Linge JP, Habeck M, Rieping W, Nilges M. 2003. ARIA:automated NOE assignment and NMR structure calcula-
tion. Bioinformatics 19:315–316. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/19.2.315.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 44 of 45
Research article
Long JC, DeLeon-Rangel J, Vik SB. 2002. Characterization of the first cytoplasmic loop of subunit a of the 
Escherichia coli ATP synthase by surface labeling, cross-linking, and mutagenesis. The Journal of Biological 
Chemistry 277:27288–27293. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202118200.
Marks DS, Colwell LJ, Sheridan R, Hopf TA, Pagnani A, Zecchina R, Sander C. 2011. Protein 3D structure 
computed from evolutionary sequence variation. PLOS ONE 6:e28766. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028766.
Marks DS, Hopf TA, Sander C. 2012. Protein structure prediction from sequence variation. Nature Biotechnology 
30:1072–1080. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2419.
McLachlin DT, Dunn SD. 2000. Disulfide linkage of the b and delta subunits does not affect the function of the 
Escherichia coli ATP synthase. Biochemistry 39:3486–3490. doi: 10.1021/bi992586b.
Morcos F , Pagnani A, Lunt B, Bertolino A, Marks DS, Sander C, Zecchina R, Onuchic JN, Hwa T, Weigt M. 
2011. Direct-coupling analysis of residue coevolution captures native contacts across many protein  
families. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA  108:E1293–E1301. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1111471108 .
Mosca R, Ceol A, Aloy P . 2012. Interactome3D: adding structural details to protein networks. Nature Methods 
10:47–53. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2289.
Nugent T, Jones DT. 2012. Accurate de novo structure prediction of large transmembrane protein domains using 
fragment-assembly and correlated mutation analysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 
109:E1540–E1547. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1120036109.
Ovchinnikov S, Kamisetty H, Baker D. 2014. Robust and accurate prediction of residue-residue interactions 
across protein interfaces using evolutionary information. eLife 3:e02030. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02030.
Pakseresht N, Alako B, Amid C, Cerdeño-Tárraga A, Cleland I, Gibson R, Goodgame N, Gur T, Jang M, Kay S, 
Leinonen R, Li W, Liu X, Lopez R, McWilliam H, Oisel A, Pallreddy S, Plaister S, Radhakrishnan R, Rivière S, 
Rossello M, Senf A, Silvester N, Smirnov D, Squizzato S, ten Hoopen P , Toribio AL, Vaughan D, Zalunin V, 
Cochrane G. 2014. Assembly information services in the European Nucleotide Archive. Nucleic Acids Research 
42:D38–D43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1082.
Pazos F, Valencia A. 2001. Similarity of phylogenetic trees as indicator of protein-protein interaction. Protein 
Engineering 14:609–614. doi: 10.1093/protein/14.9.609.
Pazos F, Valencia A. 2002. In silico two-hybrid system for the selection of physically interacting protein pairs. 
Proteins 47:219–227. doi: 10.1002/prot.10074.
Pazos F, Helmer-Citterich M, Ausiello G, Valencia A. 1997. Correlated mutations contain information about 
protein-protein interaction. Journal of Molecular Biology 271:511–523. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1198.
Perez F, Granger BE. 2007. IPython: a system for Interactive Scientific computing. Computing in Science and 
Engineering 9:21–29. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.53.
Rajagopala SV, Sikorski P , Kumar A, Mosca R, Vlasblom J, Arnold R, Franca-Koh J, Pakala SB, Phanse S, Ceol A, 
Häuser R, Siszler G, Wuchty S, Emili A, Babu M, Aloy P , Pieper R, Uetz P . 2014. The binary protein-protein 
interaction landscape of Escherichia coli. Nature Biotechnology 32:285–290. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2831.
Rastogi VK, Girvin ME. 1999. Structural changes linked to proton translocation by subunit c of the ATP synthase. 
Nature 402:263–268. doi: 10.1038/46224.
Rodgers AJ, Wilce MC. 2000. Structure of the gamma-epsilon complex of ATP synthase. Nat Struct Biol 7: 
1051–1054. doi: 10.1038/80975.
Rodrigues JP, Melquiond AS, Karaca E, Trellet M, van Dijk M, van Zundert GC, Schmitz C, de Vries SJ, Bordogna A, 
Bonati L, Kastritis PL, Bonvin AM. 2013. Defining the limits of homology modelling in information-driven protein 
docking. Proteins 81:2119–2128. doi: 10.1002/prot.24382.
Sastry GM, Adzhigirey M, Day T, Annabhimoju R, Sherman W. 2013. Protein and ligand preparation: parameters, 
protocols, and influence on virtual screening enrichments. Journal of Computer-aided Molecular Design 
27:221–234. doi: 10.1007/s10822-013-9644-8.
Schneidman-Duhovny D, Rossi A, Avila-Sakar A, Kim SJ, Velázquez-Muriel J, Strop P , Liang H, Krukenberg KA, 
Liao M, Kim HM, Sobhanifar S, Dötsch V, Rajpal A, Pons J, Agard DA, Cheng Y , Sali A. 2012. A method for 
integrative structure determination of protein-protein complexes. Bioinformatics 28:3282–3289. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bts628.
Schulenberg B, Aggeler R, Murray J, Capaldi RA. 1999. The gammaepsilon-c subunit interface in the ATP 
synthase of Escherichia coli. cross-linking of the epsilon subunit to the c subunit ring does not impair enzyme 
function, that of gamma to c subunits leads to uncoupling. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 274: 
34233–34237. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.48.34233.
Schwem BE, Fillingame RH. 2006. Cross-linking between helices within subunit a of Escherichia coli ATP synthase 
defines the transmembrane packing of a four-helix bundle. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 281: 
37861–37867. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M607453200.
Skerker JM , Perchuk BS, Siryaporn A, Lubin EA, Ashenberg O, Goulian M, Laub MT. 2008. Rewiring the 
specificity of two-component signal transduction systems. Cell 133:1043–1054. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2008.04.040 .
Svensson HG, Wedemeyer WJ, Ekstrom JL, Callender DR, Kortemme T, Kim DE, Sjöbring U, Baker D. 2004. 
Contributions of amino acid side chains to the kinetics and thermodynamics of the bivalent binding of protein L 
to Ig kappa light chain. Biochemistry 43:2445–2457. doi: 10.1021/bi034873s.
Uhlin U, Cox GB, Guss JM. 1997. Crystal structure of the epsilon subunit of the proton-translocating ATP 
synthase from Escherichia coli. Structure 5:1219–1230. doi: 10.1016/S0969-2126(97)00272-4.
UniProt Consortium. 2014. Activities at the Universal protein resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Research 42: 
D191–D198. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1140.
Genomics and evolutionary biology
Hopf et al. eLife 2014;3:e03430. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03430 45 of 45
Research article
Velazquez-Muriel J, Lasker K, Russel D, Phillips J, Webb BM, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Sali A. 2012. Assembly of 
macromolecular complexes by satisfaction of spatial restraints from electron microscopy images. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of USA 109:18821–18826. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1216549109.
Walker JE. 2013. The ATP synthase: the understood, the uncertain and the unknown. Biochemical Society 
Transactions 41:1–16. doi: 10.1042/BST20110773.
Webb B, Lasker K, Velázquez-Muriel J, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Pellarin R, Bonomi M, Greenberg C, Raveh B, 
Tjioe E, Russel D, Sali A. 2014. Modeling of proteins and their assemblies with the Integrative Modeling 
Platform. Methods in molecular biology 1091:277–295. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-691-7_20.
Weigt M, White RA, Szurmant H, Hoch JA, Hwa T. 2009. Identification of direct residue contacts in protein- 
protein interaction by message passing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 106:67–72. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0805923106.
Zhang QC, Petrey D, Deng L, Qiang L, Shi Y , Thu CA, Bisikirska B, Lefebvre C, Accili D, Hunter T, Maniatis T, 
Califano A, Honig B. 2012. Structure-based prediction of protein-protein interactions on a genome-wide scale. 
Nature 490:556–560. doi: 10.1038/nature11503.