Article
Protein synthesis inhibition and GADD 34 control
IFN-b heterogeneous expression in response
to dsRNA
Alexandre Dalet1,†, Rafael J Argüello 1,†, Alexis Combes 1, Lionel Spinelli 1, Sebastien Jaeger 1,
Mathieu Fallet1, Thien-Phong Vu Manh 1, Andreia Mendes 1, Jessica Perego 1, Marisa Reverendo 1,
Voahirana Camosseto1,2, Marc Dalod 1, Tobias Weil 3,–, Manuel A Santos 2,3, Evelina Gatti 1,2,3,*,‡ &
Philippe Pierre1,2,3,**,‡
Abstract
In innate immune responses, induction of type-I interferons (IFNs)
prevents virus spreading while viral replication is delayed by
protein synthesis inhibition. We asked how cells perform these
apparently contradictory activities. Using single fibroblast
monitoring by flow cytometry and mathematical modeling, we
demonstrate that type-I IFN production is linked to cell ’s ability to
enter dsRNA-activated PKR-dependent translational arrest and
then overcome this inhibition by decreasing eIF 2a phosphorylation
through phosphatase 1c cofactor GADD 34 (Ppp1r15a) expression.
GADD34 expression, shown here to be dependent on the IRF 3
transcription factor, is responsible for a biochemical cycle permit-
ting pulse of IFN synthesis to occur in cells undergoing protein
synthesis inhibition. Translation arrest is further demonstrated to
be key for anti-viral response by acting synergistically with MAVS
activation to amplify TBK 1 signaling and IFN- b mRNA transcrip-
tion, while GADD 34-dependent protein synthesis recovery
contributes to the heterogeneous expression of IFN observed in
dsRNA-activated cells.
Keywords cGAMP; integrated stress response; puromycin; RIG-I-like receptors;
stress granules
Subject Categories Immunology
DOI 10.15252/embj.201695000 | Received 13 June 2016 | Revised 20 December
2016 | Accepted 22 December 2016 | Published online 18 January 2017
The EMBO Journal ( 2017) 36: 761–782
Introduction
Many viruses generate double-stranded (ds)RNA replication inter-
mediates within infected host cells. These viral determinants elicit
innate immune responses and subsequent type-I IFN and pro-
inflammatory cytokine production through the triggering of nucleic
acid (NA)-sensing pathways (Kawai & Akira, 2006). Several families
of molecules are known to detect dsRNA or its synthetic mimic
polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), including endo-
somal TLR3 and the cytosolic RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA5
(RLRs) (Pichlmair & Reis e Sousa, 2007; Kawai & Akira, 2010;
Goubau et al , 2013). Signaling through RIG-I or MDA5 requires the
mitochondrial anti-viral signaling protein (MAVS), which predomi-
nantly localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane or on peroxi-
somes (Kawai et al , 2005; Belgnaoui et al , 2011). The MAVS
signaling pathway results in the activating phosphorylation of
several kinases and their downstream targets, including the tran-
scription factors IRF3 and NF- jB. IRFs are activated by TANK-
binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and by IKK e, whereas NF- jB is activated
by IKK a and IKK b (Li et al , 2011). Activation of RLR/MAVS signal-
ing in infected cells results in the production of high levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and type-I IFNs. These orchestrate anti-viral
protection in neighboring tissues and stimulate innate and adaptive
immunity against invading pathogens. Surprisingly, type-I IFN
production is detected in only a minority (15 –40%) of infected cells
(Zawatzky et al , 1985). The relatively small proportion of respond-
ing cells was attributed to cellular variability in the expression levels
or activities of key innate immunity components, leading to the
stochastic expression of the IFN- b gene (Zhao et al , 2012). Stochas-
tic production is thought to limit type-I IFN secretion levels and
protect the host organism from its inherent toxicity, while
1 CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Aix Marseille University, Marseille, France
2 International associated laboratory (LIA) CNRS “Mistra”, Marseille, France
3 Institute for Research in Biomedicine - iBiMED and Aveiro Health Sciences Program, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
*Corresponding author. Tel: + 33 4 91 26 94 79 ; Fax: + 33 4 91 26 94 30 ; E-mail: gatti@ciml.univ-mrs.fr
**Corresponding author. Tel: + 33 4 91 26 94 79 ; Fax: + 33 4 91 26 94 30 ; E-mail: pierre@ciml.univ-mrs.fr
†These authors contributed equally to this work
‡These authors contributed equally to this work
–Present address: Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, San Michele All ’Adige, Italy
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 761
maintaining anti-viral effects (Zhao et al , 2012). Different models,
mostly based on gene transcription analyses, have been proposed to
explain this phenomenon (Zhao et al , 2012; Patil et al , 2015; Zhang
et al , 2015). They involve mostly different expression levels of
innate sensors in individual cells and the existence of transcriptional
feedback loops linked to the paracrine activity of secreted IFN- b
(Hwang et al, 2013). Despite being informative, these models are
not completely satisfying, since they do not take into consideration
the protein synthesis inhibition triggered by dsRNA or virus detec-
tion, and initiated upon phosphorylation of translation initiation
factor eIF2 a by protein kinase RNA-activated (PKR or EIF2AK2),
which is likely to impact on IFN production and the translation of
type-I IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) mRNAs, such as RLRso r PKR
itself (Williams, 2001).
At least two apparently antagonist programs are initiated in
infected cells upon cytosolic dsRNA detection. One, triggered by
RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), is dedicated to innate transcriptional
responses and cytokine production that promotes systemic immu-
nity. The second program is PKR dependent and prevents viral repli-
cation by blocking mRNA translation in individual cells, promoting
stress granules (SGs) formation and apoptosis (Reineke et al , 2012).
This PKR-dependent program is likely inhibitory for the RLR-
triggered program, suggesting that a complex integration process of
protein synthesis inhibition with innate sensing is necessary for cells
to respond efficiently to viruses or dsRNA (Claudio et al , 2013).
Here, we describe how MAVS- and IRF3-dependent expression of
the GADD34 phosphatase-1 (PP1) cofactor resolves this antagonistic
situation and how, together with PKR-dependent translation inhibi-
tion, contributes to the amplification of IRF3 activation and the
apparent stochasticity of type-I IFN- b production in response to
dsRNA or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection. The coordina-
tion of these different biochemical pathways leads over time to
cycles of protein synthesis inhibition and activation leading to IFN
production in selected individual cells. Mathematical modeling
supports these observations and suggests that integration of the dif-
ferent pathways described here is sufficient to orchestrate a stochas-
tic production of type-I IFN within a population of cells responding
to dsRNA.
Results
The transcriptional response of GADD 34DC/DC MEFs to poly(I:C)
We previously showed that GADD34 activity is necessary for IFN- b
and IL-6 production upon PKR-dependent translation inhibition in
MEFs stimulated with poly(I:C) or infected with Chikungunya virus
(ChikV) (Clavarino et al , 2012). To confirm that GADD34-driven
PP1 phosphatase activity is the only critical function required to
allow cytokine production, we expressed the herpes simplex viral
effector ICP34.5, which increases eIF2 a dephosphorylation (Mohr &
Sonenberg, 2012) in dsRNA-stimulated GADD34 DC/DC MEFs. Ectopic
GADD34 or ICP34.5 expression rescued IFN- b production (Fig 1A),
confirming that eIF2 a dephosphorylation is required to sustain
cytokine production upon dsRNA-dependent protein synthesis inhi-
bition. GADD34 induction is therefore a primary event in the estab-
lishment of the cell response to dsRNA. To evaluate globally the
role of GADD34 on this response, a comparative microarray-based
mRNA transcription analysis of WT and GADD34 DC/DC MEFs, lipo-
fected with poly(I:C), was performed (Fig 1B). A total of 648 dif-
ferently upregulated genes (DEGs) in WT and 354 in GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs were found after exposure to poly(I:C) (Fig 1B and
Appendix Table S1). Among them, 257 were upregulated in both
WT and GADD34 DC/DC MEFs, 391 were only upregulated in WT and
97 only in GADD34 DC/DC MEFs. Ingenuity pathway analysis indi-
cated that most DEGs were found to be significantly associated with
canonical pathways participating in anti-viral transcription
programs (Fig 1C). Among the commonly upregulated genes were
the IRF3-dependent genes Ifnb1, Ifna4, and Il6, together with Irf7
and other type-I IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) including Oasl1, Isg15,
Ifit3, and Ifih1. Additional IPA “Upstream Regulators” searches con-
firmed that the principal transcription regulators controlling the
response to poly(I:C) in both cell types were IRF3, IFN- b, IFNAR, or
STAT1 (Fig 1D). Identification of these regulators demonstrates that
at least two different transcriptional activation programs co-exist
upon dsRNA sensing. These are governed by direct stimulation of
the RLR/MAVS/IRF3 pathway and by autocrine activation of the
interferon receptor (IFN b/IFNAR/STAT1), among other cytokine
receptors. The majority of DEGs were unique to WT MEFs. Many of
these DEGs were associated with antigen presentation and anti-viral
activities (Fig 1C and Appendix Table S1). This strongly contrasted
with the lack of any significant enrichment in known pathways for
the 97 genes uniquely upregulated in GADD34 DC/DC MEFs
(Appendix Table S1). This result confirmed the existence of an
altered transcription response to dsRNA in GADD34 DC/DC MEFs, but
also revealed that GADD34 seems to have little function in control-
ling transcription factor activation directly, but rather acts through
its protein synthesis regulatory role on cytokines and proteins (in-
cluding transcription factors) induced by dsRNA. We were surprised
by the induction of many ISGs in GADD34 DC/DC MEFs, since these
cells are severely impaired in their ability to produce type-I IFN
(Fig 1A) and should therefore display minimal paracrine triggering
of IFNAR and subsequent ISG transcription (Clavarino et al , 2012).
A subset of ISGs are known to be induced directly by IRFs
(Grandvaux et al , 2002; Daffis et al , 2007), including those coding
for Ifit1, Ifit3, Cxcl10, Isg15, Oasl1, Rsad2, Nfkbiz, Ccrl2 (Lazear
et al , 2013). These were all found to be induced in GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs, confirming their likely independence from IFNAR; however,
genes previously described as strictly IFN- b dependent, like Oas1,
Oas2, Ifna2, Ddx58, Gbp5, Mx2 ,o r Isg20 (Lazear et al , 2013), were
also expressed in these cells despite their incapacity to produce
cytokines and transcription factors like IRF7. ISG induction in
GADD34DC/DC MEFs might either reflect cell specificity and a broader
role of IRFs in their transcription than anticipated, or it might be the
result of the production of small amounts of IFN- b (Fig 1A), suffi-
cient to trigger tonic IFNAR signaling , but insufficient to induce a full
level response. In fact, many of the genes co-expressed by WT and
GADD34DC/DC have been found to be downregulated in immune
cells deficient for IFNAR at steady state and potentially exposed to
low-chronic-dose IFN (Mostafavi et al , 2016). The lack of induction
of emblematic type-I IFN-induced genes coding for MHC I, IFN a1,
PKR, or RNASEL in GADD34 DC/DC cells further suggests the
existence of ISG subgroups displaying different induction thresholds
or requirement for transcription factor combinations that are
revealed by the profound reduction in cytokine production and
protein synthesis associated with GADD34 deficiency.
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
762
A
C
DE
B
Figure 1.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
763
GADD34 activity is required for ATF 4-dependent transcription in
response to poly(I:C)
PKR triggering by dsRNA and subsequent eIF2 a phosphorylation
should trigger the ATF4/CHOP pathway (Han et al ,2 0 1 3 )a n d
promote GADD34 expression as part of the negative feedback loop
returning protein synthesis to normal levels. This process is
commonly observed during the integrated stress response (ISR) driven
by PERK activation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Novoa et al ,
2001; Ron & Walter, 2007; Clavarino et al , 2012), during which ATF4
synthesis is necessary for GADD34 transcription (Ron & Walter, 2007;
Han et al , 2013). We took advantage of available genomic data
(GSE49598) comparing mRNA expression profiles of WT vs ATF4 /C0 //C0
MEFs treated with the ER stress-inducer tunicamycin to define the
core of an ATF4-dependent gene expression signature (Appendix
Table S2). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Subramanian et al ,
2005), which allows statistical assessment of changes in the expres-
sion of a predefined set of genes in different conditions, indicated that
ATF4-dependent transcription was significantly increased (FDR< 0.1)
in WT cells stimulated with poly(I:C) compared with non-treated cells
(Fig 1E); however, this was not the case in activated GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs (FDR 0.4) (Fig 1E). Surprisingly, increased p-eIF2 a levels did
not augment ATF4 translation nor associated transcriptional signature
in these cells, and importantly, GADD34 mRNA remained strongly
induced bypoly(I:C) (Appendix Fig S1A; Clavarino et al ,2 0 1 2 ) .A s
anticipated, ATF4 was detected in nuclear extracts of WT MEFs
exposed to dsRNA or ER stress-triggering drug thapsigargin (thapsi),
but was, however, absent from GADD34 DC/DC MEF extracts, con-
firming biochemically the results of the GSEA (Appendix Fig S1B).
GADD34 expression can therefore be induced in the absence of ATF4
synthesis, thus contrasting with what is normally observed during the
ISR (Claudio et al ,2 0 1 3 ;F i g2 A ) .
IRF3 drives GADD34 expression
Intrigued by the possibility that GADD34 transcription could be
ATF4-independent, we monitored the expression of GADD34 in WT
and ATF4/C0 //C0 MEFs after poly(I:C) delivery (Fig 2A and B). GADD34
mRNA transcription was clearly augmented after 4 –8 h of poly(I:C)
stimulation in both cell types, and only appeared significantly
reduced in ATF4 /C0 //C0 MEFs stimulated with thapsigargin for 4 h
(Fig 2B). At the protein level, moderate expression of GADD34 was
detected at steady state in ATF4 /C0 //C0 cells, probably mirroring their
adaptation to in vitro culture conditions. However, despite ATF4
inactivation, GADD34 was strongly induced in response to poly(I:C)
contrasting with thapsigargin treatment during which additional
expression of the PP1 cofactor was not observed. ATF4 is therefore
not strictly required for GADD34 transcription but could still eventu-
ally contribute to the magnitude of the response to dsRNA. GADD34
transcription in WT and GADD34 DC/DC MEFs was found to match
the induction IFNB mRNA both in kinetics and intensity, suggesting
that these two genes are co-regulated (Fig 2C). This prompted us to
examine GADD34 expression in cells inactivated for critical
upstream regulators of type-I IFN transcription, including MAVS
(Kawai et al , 2005; Seth et al , 2005) and different IRFs (Honda &
Taniguchi, 2006).
Using MAVS-deficient MEFs, we observed that both IFN- b and
GADD34 expression were profoundly altered after dsRNA delivery,
along with IRF3 and STAT1 phosphorylation (Fig 2D). MAVS /C0 //C0
MEFs displayed normal levels of PKR activation, however, followed
by accentuated eIF2 a phosphorylation and translation inhibition,
reflecting the absence of GADD34 expression (Fig 2D). MAVS acti-
vation normally results in IRF3 dimerization and translocation into
the nucleus, where it drives type-I IFN transcription (Fig 2A)
(Honda & Taniguchi, 2006; Goubau et al , 2013; Ourthiague et al ,
2015). We further investigated GADD34 induction in IRF3/IRF7
double-KO (IRF3/7 /C0 //C0 ) MEFs and found that similar to MAVS-
deficient cells, GADD34 mRNA transcription and synthesis remained
undetectable upon poly(I:C) delivery, while thapsigargin treatment
induced a comparable response in control and IRF3/7 /C0 //C0 MEFs
(Fig 2E). IRF3/7 /C0 //C0 cells stimulated with dsRNA also expressed
normally ATF4 (Appendix Fig S1C), suggesting that IRF3 and maybe
IRF7 are the major transcription factors controlling GADD34 expres-
sion after detection of cytosolic dsRNA by RLRs (Fig 2F). Treatment
of these cells with recombinant IFN- b increased RIG-I levels, but did
not rescue GADD34 expression, further demonstrating its transcrip-
tional dependence on IRFs and not on IFNAR-associated STAT1/
STAT2-dependent transcription (Appendix Fig S1D).
Protein synthesis inhibition prevents the induction of negative
regulators of TBK 1 and potentiates TBK 1 and IRF3 activation
GADD34 transcription and protein expression are strongly altered in
the absence of PKR or eIF2 a phosphorylation (Clavarino et al ,
▸
Figure 1. Comparative transcriptional analysis of WT and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs responding to poly(I:C).
A Left: Graphical abstract of GADD 34 and herpes simplex viral protein ICP 34.5 effects on translation initiation. ICP 34.5 mimics PP1 cofactor GADD34 activity and
contributes to dephosphorylation of eIF 2a. As a result, the translation inhibition mediated by eIF 2a kinases such as PKR is relieved. Right: GADD 34DC/DC MEFs were
transfected with the indicated plasmid constructs 24 h before HMW poly(I:C) delivery. After 6 h of treatment, culture supernatants were collected and IFN- b
production was measured by ELISA (mean /C6 SD of three independent experiments). Representative detection of GADD 34, eIF2a, and p-eIF 2a by immunoblot in the
lysate of the same group of cells. Tubulin is used as a loading control. “nd” stands for “not detected”.
B Top: Schematic representation of WT cells treated with poly(I:C) and producing IFN- b. This cytokine triggers specific signaling via IFNAR receptor in an autocrine or
paracrine manner, whereas GADD34DC/DC MEFs do not produce IFN- b. Bottom: Venn diagram representation of statistically upregulated genes in WT and GADD 34DC/DC
MEFs after 6 h of HMW poly(I:C) treatment. The complete sets of genes are detailed in Appendix Table S 1.
C Heat maps of selected pathways found enriched by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) for the DEGs depicted in Venn diagrams. Selected genes belonging at least to
one of the IPA pathways are shown and grouped according to their expression specificity. Right: Schematic representation of poly(I:C)-treated cells showing IRF 3-
dependent induction of genes, like IFN- b, and the concomitant induction in neighboring cells of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) after IFNAR stimulation.
D Heat-map representation of selected putative upstream regulators found enriched by IPA for the different DEGs sets.
E Gene set enrichment analyses (GSEAs) of a defined ATF 4 gene expression regulated signature (Appendix Table S 2), on the pairwise comparisons of WT MEFs untreated
vs poly(I:C) (left panel) and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs untreated vs poly(I:C) (right panel). The more the ATF 4 regulated signature gene set is differentially expressed between
conditions, the more the bar code is shifted to the corresponding extremity. NES: normalized enrichment score; FDR: false discovery rate.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
764
A
C
DE
F
B
Figure 2.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
765
2012). Given the implication of IRFs in GADD34 induction, levels of
p-IRF3 and GADD34 expression were investigated in both WT
and PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs exposed to poly(I:C) (Fig 3A and B). In WT
MEFs, GADD34 was upregulated concomitantly with IRF3 phospho-
rylation, while in the absence of PKR, GADD34 synthesis was abol-
ished and a strong reduction in IRF3 phosphorylation was observed.
In coordination with diminished levels of p-IRF3, both IFN- b and
GADD34 mRNA transcription levels were decreased in PKR /C0 //C0
MEFs (Fig 3B), suggesting a potentiation role of the eIF2 a kinase on
MAVS signaling and/or IFNB mRNA stabilization (Schulz et al ,
2010). Despite lower mRNA levels however, IFN- b protein produc-
tion was augmented in the absence of PKR (Fig EV1A), confirming
that the general translation arrest normally caused by dsRNA detec-
tion can be detrimental for cytokine production and that IFN- b is
not regulated by specific regulatory sequences favoring its transla-
tion upon eIF2 a phosphorylation (Starck et al , 2016).
PKR activity has been associated with several signaling cascades
including enhanced NF- jB activity (McAllister et al , 2012) and acti-
vation of the NLRP3 inflammasome (Lu et al , 2012). However, the
importance of PKR-dependent eIF2 a phosphorylation and transla-
tion inhibition has not been evaluated in the context of IRF3 phos-
phorylation. Artificial inhibition of protein synthesis using a low
dose of cycloheximide (CHX) or harringtonine in PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs
enabled us to dissect the role of translation arrest independently of
other potential signaling functions attributed to PKR. In the absence
of PKR, treatment with CHX together with poly(I:C) delivery had a
strong potentiating effect on both p-TBK1 and p-IRF3, causing a
subsequent increase in IFNB and GADD34 mRNA transcription
(Fig 3C). Synthesis of GADD34 independently of PKR expression
and eIF2 a phosphorylation occurred in cells undergoing translation
inhibition, confirming that protein synthesis reduction itself is
capable of augmenting IRF3 signaling and associated GADD34
expression. Despite abundant GADD34 synthesis, ATF4 induction
was not observed in nuclear extracts of PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs treated with
poly(I:C) and CHX (Fig EV1B), again demonstrating the indepen-
dence of GADD34 transcription from ATF4 expression. Harring-
tonine effectively blocks translation initiation by inhibiting
elongation during the first rounds of peptide bond formation (Robert
et al , 2009) and therefore mimics the impact of p-eIF2 a and transla-
tion inhibition on IRF3 signaling (Fig 3D). IRF3 phosphorylation
was strongly increased in a dose-dependent manner following
harringtonine treatment, with higher doses of the drug causing a
quasi-complete loss of I- jBa, demonstrating both its efficiency and
the potential impact of translation inhibition on negative regulators
of IRF3 and NF- jB activation (Deng et al , 2004; McAllister et al ,
2012).
We further tested whether protein synthesis inhibition reinforces
TBK1 and IRF3 activation in a different NA-sensing context than
poly(I:C) and PKR activation by artificially activating stimulator of
interferon genes (STING) with the cyclic dinucleotide cGAMP
(Ishikawa et al , 2009). cGAMP, a dinucleotide normally produced
by the DNA-binding protein cGAS (cGAMP synthase), has no docu-
mented effect on protein synthesis and triggers strong type-I IFN
production in exposed cells (Gao et al , 2013). To refine our analysis,
we optimized the previously described puromycylation procedure
“SUNSET” to quantify protein synthesis by intracellular flow cyto-
metry (Schmidt et al , 2009) and follow the consequences of both
poly(I:C) and cGAMP detection on TBK1 phosphorylation in
individual MEFs over time. Cytometry revealed that, upon poly(I:C)
exposure, the cells showing the strongest protein synthesis inhibition
also displayed higher levels of p-TBK1 levels, which were further
potentiated by CHX treatment (Fig EV1C). As expected from the
absence of protein synthesis inhibition, the initial levels of p-TBK1
induction in cGAMP-stimulated cells were lower than after poly(I:C)
treatment (Fig EV1C). Artificial protein synthesis inhibition (CHX),
however, strongly synergized with the dinucleotide and augmented
TBK1 phosphorylation equivalently to what was observed with poly
(I:C) (Fig EV1C), thus confirming the importance of protein synthesis
regulation for the fine-tuning of the TBK1/IRF3 signaling pathway in
response to NA. Interestingly, when the situation was examined in
poly(I:C)-treated IFNAR1 /C0 //C0 MEFs, translation inhibition was not
efficiently implemented and TBK1 phosphorylation remained mini-
mal in these cells (Fig EV1E). As observed for IRF3/IRF7 /C0 //C0 cells
(Fig EV1D), chronic and induced IFNAR stimulation is therefore
presumably required to allow RLRs and PKR expression to reach
threshold levels capable of detecting dsRNA and trigger both TBK1
and PKR (Balachandran et al , 2004). Interestingly, the presence of
CHX compensated partially IFNAR deficiency by again increasing
TBK1 phosphorylation (Fig EV1E), which was now well detected by
intracellular flow and appeared proportional to the cumulated levels
of protein synthesis inhibition (poly(I:C) + CHX).
These results suggest that translation sensitive factors involved
in TBK1 activation are likely to be IFN independent. As already
shown for I jBa and the NF -jB pathway (Fig 3D), translation
▸
Figure 2. GADD34 is part of the primary innate immune response to dsRNA.
A Schematic representation of known signaling pathways involved during dsRNA response and the UPR. Two distinct pathways are triggered in the cytosol of infected
cells: RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) detect dsRNA and trigger IRF 3 activation via MAVS, while PKR stimulation leads to protein translation inhibition and ATF 4-dependent
gene transcription (e.g., GADD 34), as observed after PERK activation during thapsigargin-induced ER stress.
B WT and ATF 4/C0 //C0 MEFs were treated with HMW poly(I:C) for 4 h and 8 h, or with thapsigargin (thapsi) for 2 h and 4 h. Expression of GADD 34 was analyzed by
immunoblot and by qPCR (mean /C6 SD of five independent experiments). Tubulin is shown as a loading control for immunoblot.
C WT and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs were stimulated with LMW poly(I:C). GADD34 and IFNB mRNA expression was monitored by qPCR for 6 h after dsRNA delivery.
D WT and MAVS /C0 //C0 MEFs were analyzed by immunoblot (left) and by qPCR (right panels) after stimulation with poly(I:C) (pIC). Protein synthesis was determined using
puromycin labeling followed by immunoblot with the anti-puromycin mAb. GADD 34, p-STAT1, PKR, p-IRF 3,e I F2a, and p-eIF 2a levels were monitored by immunoblot.
Actin is shown as a loading control. Fold increase compared to non-treated cells in normalized mRNA levels. Each point represents result of one independent
experiment.
E GADD 34 expression was determined by immunoblot and by qPCR in WT and IRF 3/7/C0 //C0 MEFs after HMW poly(I:C) or thapsigargin (Th) treatment. qPCR are the
mean /C6 SD of three independent experiments ( “nt” stands for “not treated”).
F Schematic representation of predicted signaling pathways involved during dsRNA response and the UPR, according to the results shown in (B –D). GADD34 induction
belongs to the primary transcriptional response consecutive to dsRNA sensing and is dependent on IRF 3/IRF7 transcription factors, together with IFN- b.
Data information: (B, D, E) For qPCR, P-values were calculated using a Student ’s t-test, *P < 0.01 (ns: no statistical significance).
Source data are available online for this figure.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
766
A
C
D
E
B
Figure 3.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
767
inhibition could also impact inhibitors of the TBK1 signaling
pathway. We therefore turned our attention toward A20 (also
known as TNFAIP3), a potent anti-inflammatory molecule that
inhibits multiple intracellular signaling cascades and is induced by
NF-jB-dependent signals (Ma & Malynn, 2012). A20 is a de-
ubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) that restricts the duration and inten-
sity of NF -jB signaling, but has also been shown to interact with
TBK1 and IKK e to suppress IRF3 activation in a negative feedback
loop (Saitoh et al , 2005). A20 expression was measured in MEFs
after poly(I:C) stimulation in the presence or absence of CHX
(Fig 3E). Immunoblots showed that A20 accumulation induced by
poly(I:C) was prevented by CHX treatment concomitantly with
increased p-IRF3 levels (Fig 3E, right and center panels). This was
also the case for the SHIP-1 phosphatase, which is also involved in
p-TBK1 negative regulation (Gabhann et al , 2010), and whose
induction by poly(I:C) was inhibited by CHX treatment (Fig EV1C).
Protein synthesis inhibition impairs therefore the expression of
several negative feedback regulatory molecules, like I jBa, SHIP-1,
and A20, and contributes to mount a commensurate response to the
microbial threat by potentiating TBK1/IRF3 signaling.
Protein synthesis inhibition reinforces innate anti-viral responses
We next evaluated the importance of protein synthesis inhibition
and GADD34 expression in response to viral infection. We chose to
monitor vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection given it sensitivity
to type-I IFN and PKR activity (Balachandran et al , 2000). Upon
infection with a VSV strain encoding GFP as an additional transcrip-
tion unit (Obuchi et al , 2003), levels of protein synthesis and viral
GFP were monitored by flow cytometry in WT and GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs (Fig 4). Analysis of VSV-inoculated MEFs evidenced the pres-
ence after 8 h of two main populations of infected cells, one present-
ing strong translation inhibition (Puro /C0 GFP+//C0 , P2 dark gray and
P3 light green quadrants) and a second that was clearly infected but
did not undergo protein synthesis arrest (Puro +GFP+, P4 dark
green quadrant) (Fig 4A). After 12 h, all remaining live cells had
their protein synthesis inhibited (P2 and P3), with little sign of
recovery. The WT subpopulation arrested in translation contained
approximately 65% of the total cells, with a minority displaying low
GFP levels (P3), suggesting that upon VSV infection, protein synthe-
sis inhibition takes place rapidly and prevents the accumulation of
high GFP levels in infected cells, GADD34 being mostly synthetized
between 8 and 12 h of infection (Fig 4B). As expected from the lack
of IFN-b release in the culture media (Fig 4B), infected GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs, still displaying normal protein synthesis activity after 8 h
(P4), expressed higher levels of viral GFP than their WT counter-
parts (P1 + P4). GADD34DC/DC MEFs were more susceptible to infec-
tion overall with most cells being GFP positive after 8 h (Fig 4A and
B), and interestingly most translation-arrested cells (P3) expressed
slightly higher GFP levels than equivalent WT cells (Fig 4A),
suggesting that in the absence of IFN- b, reduced PKR levels (Figs 1C
and EV1D) could slow down translation arrest in GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs, allowing some early viral GFP expression to occur before
complete inhibition of protein synthesis and IFN- b induction.
Uncontrolled VSV infection in PKR /C0 //C0 and IFNAR1 /C0 //C0 MEFs, indi-
cated by a massive accumulation of viral GFP in these cells (P4,
Fig 4B), confirmed that PKR activity and type-I IFN signaling are
absolutely necessary to mediate translation inhibition and control
VSV replication. We attempted to revert these phenotypes by treat-
ing infected cells with a low dose of CHX to both reinforce TBK1
phosphorylation and limit viral replication. Translation inhibition
was extremely efficient at reducing GFP-VSV replication in suscepti-
ble MEFs (Fig 4C), while, like for poly(I:C) detection, TBK1 phos-
phorylation was strongly enhanced by CHX treatment of these
infected cells (Fig 4D).
Translation inhibition appears therefore to prevent viral replica-
tion not only by limiting viral protein synthesis, but also through a
reinforcement of innate signaling pathways leading to enhanced
IRF3 phosphorylation and type-I IFN mRNA induction. Interestingly,
in IFNAR1 /C0 //C0 MEFs treated with poly(I:C) or VSV, the levels of
p-TBK1 were strongly potentiated by CHX treatment, confirming
that this effect is IFN independent. Thus, in normal circumstances,
the intensity of the anti-viral response triggered by dsRNA sensing
will be linked to the kinetics of PKR activation and GADD34 expres-
sion, which through their antagonist actions on p-eIF2 a and transla-
tion initiation will balance the magnitude of IRF3-dependent
transcriptional responses together with the intensity of protein
synthesis arrest occurring differently in each infected cell.
GADD34 is required for stress granules disassembly
To further address the molecular details of eIF2 a phosphorylation
and translation arrest in the response to dsRNA, we examined the
formation of stress granules (SGs) with respect to GADD34 activity.
SGs form in response to a wide range of cellular stresses and contain
mRNAs and components of the translational 48S pre-initiation
▸
Figure 3. Translation inhibition amplifies the transcriptional response to dsRNA.
A, B WT and PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs were stimulated with HMW poly(I:C) for 4 h and 8 h. (A) GADD 34, p-IRF3, and p-eIF 2a/eIF2a were detected by immunoblot. (B) GADD34 and
IFNB mRNA expression were determined by qPCR in WT and PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs. Results are the mean /C6 SD of three independent experiments.
C PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs were treated or not with 5 lg/ml of cycloheximide (CHX), together with poly(I:C) for 8 h. Protein synthesis was monitored using puromycin labeling
followed by immunoblot with an anti-puromycin mAb. Expression of the indicated proteins was determined by immunoblot (left). GADD34 and IFNB mRNA levels
were quantified by qPCR (right). Data are representative of three independent experiments. Results are the mean /C6 SD of three independent experiments.
D PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs were treated or not with the indicated concentration of harringtonine, before monitoring p-IRF 3 levels and I jBa expression by immunoblot after 8 h
of dsRNA exposure. Non-treated (nt, control without poly(I:C)) and CHX treatment were used as negative and positive references. Tubulin is shown as a loading
control.
E WT MEFs were treated with LMW poly(I:C) for the indicated time before monitoring p-IRF 3 levels and A 20 level by immunoblot (left panel). P-IRF 3 (middle) and A 20
protein levels (right) were quantified by ImageJ quantification. Graphs represent data normalized to non-treated samples, n = 2. A schematic representation of the
experimental design and corresponding results is boxed at the bottom of the figure. Results are the mean /C6 SD of three independent experiments.
Data information: (B, D, E) P-values were calculated using a Student ’s t-test, *P < 0.05.
Source data are available online for this figure.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
768
A
BC
D
Figure 4.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
769
complex, as well as other RNA-binding proteins such as TIA-1 or
G3BP1, which also interacts with PKR and restricts viral infection
(Kedersha et al , 2000, 2005; Reineke et al , 2015). Given the recipro-
cal interference of SG formation with protein synthesis, WT and
GADD34DC/DC MEFs were treated with poly(I:C), which gives a more
homogenous response than viral infection, prior to confocal micro-
scopy analysis to visualize concomitantly G3BP1 localization in SG,
IFN-b production, protein synthesis using puromycin incorporation,
and IFNB mRNA localization by FISH (Figs 5A and EV2A). IFN- b
expression, always associated with puromycin incorporation, was
only observed in a small number of WT MEFs, suggesting that
active protein synthesis and stochastic IFN production could be
linked. Most WT and GADD34 DC/DC MEFs arrested for translation
displayed large G3BP1-positive SGs that contained IFNB mRNAs
(Figs 5A and EV2A), further explaining the absence of cytokine
production in these cells despite active mRNA transcription, and
associating SG formation with the storage of IFNB mRNA upon
translation inhibition. To obtain reliable measurements of the capac-
ity of both cell types to form SGs, G3BP1-positive granules were
counted using mosaic microscopy and software-assisted quan-
tification. We also evaluated whether SG induction in these cells
depended uniquely on the dominant negative role of p-eIF2 a on
guanine exchange factor (GEF) eIF2B using the pharmacological ISR
inhibitor (ISRIB) that prevents inhibition of eIF2B and promotes
translation initiation and stress granule assembly despite eIF2 a
phosphorylation (Sekine et al , 2015; Sidrauski et al , 2015; Fig 5B).
A large majority of GADD34 DC/DC cells rapidly displayed SGs when
treated with thapsigargin (Fig 5C, upper panel), with ISRIB having a
profound inhibitory effect on SG induction in these cells, thus con-
firming its capacity to prevent protein synthesis inhibition during
ER stress (Sidrauski et al , 2015). Interestingly, while thapsigargin
induced SGs in a relatively small fraction of WT cells ( < 15%), SG
induction by poly(I:C) was far more efficient (50%) and even
enhanced in GADD34-deficient cells after 1 h (Fig 5C, lower panel).
Importantly in both cell types, ISRIB had no impact on SG formation
after 1 h of poly(I:C) treatment (Fig 5C, lower panel), suggesting
that the conditions of SG formation or maintenance between thapsi-
gargin and poly(I:C) induction are critically different. When SGs
were monitored over longer periods (Fig 5D), a progressive
decrease in SG-positive WT MEFs occurred between 3 h and 6 h
after poly(I:C) treatment, strongly contrasting with GADD34-
deficient MEFs, which kept forming SGs (Fig 5D). Taken together,
these results suggest that GADD34 expression promotes SG disap-
pearance and facilitates the release of IFNB mRNAs to allow their
productive translation. Interestingly, the role of GADD34 in this
context appears to be independent of its effect on the interaction
between p-eIF2 a and eIF2B, given that ISRIB treatment is unable to
compensate for GADD34 deficiency and thereof associated lack of
eIF2a dephosphorylation. These observations are further supported
by the fact that ISRIB treatment does not rescue IFN- b production
(Fig 5E), nor protein synthesis in poly(I:C)-treated GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs (Fig EV2B and C). This insensitivity to ISRIB suggests further
that GADD34 expression is required for another function than
strictly relieving the dominant negative inhibitory activity of p-eIF2 a
over eIF2B to fully rescue protein synthesis and allow cytokine
production in response to dsRNA.
Cells exposed to dsRNA undergo protein synthesis inhibition
prior to producing type-I IFN
Given the importance of dsRNA detection kinetics to allow protein
synthesis inhibition and type-I IFN transcription, single-cell analysis
by intracellular flow cytometry was again performed to follow the
quantitative impact of translation arrest and GADD34 expression
over time on IFN- b production (Fig 6). When WT and GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs were lipofected with poly(I:C) for 3 h and 6 h, several
populations of cells could be distinguished based on their levels of
puromycin incorporation and ability to produce GADD34, p-eIF2 a,
and/or IFN- b (Figs 6 and EV3). With time, like for VSV infection,
dsRNA delivery induced translation inhibition in a large proportion
(up to 80%), but not all individual cells (Fig 6A), this despite a
rapid uptake of poly(I:C) in most cells (Fig EV3A). The proportion
of these two populations was similar in WT and in GADD34-
deficient cells 3 h after poly(I:C) delivery (Fig 6A, B and D), but
after 6 h, significant differences in the proportion of translating
(P1 + P4) and non-translating (P2 + P3) cells could be detected. A
large majority of GADD34 DC/DC cells were arrested in translation
(> 90%), whereas the equivalent population of puromycin-negative
cells (P2 + P3) in WT MEFs was reduced from 79 to 51% between
3 h and 6 h, in a manner correlated with GADD34 induction (P3)
and its capacity to restore protein synthesis (P4). GADD34 expres-
sion was monitored using an antibody raised against the N-terminal
part of the protein, enabling detection of both complete GADD34
and truncated GADD34 DC. After 3 h of poly(I:C) delivery in WT
MEFs, a majority of GADD34-expressing cells had not restored
translation (Fig 6B, P3), while after 6 h, protein synthesis recovery
was observed in 15.5% of the cells (P4), representing half of the
GADD34-positive population (P3 + P4). Translation recovery never
occurred in GADD34 DC/DC cells (Fig 6B and D), as indicated by the
accumulation of cells with the highest level of p-eIF2 a in the
▸
Figure 4. VSV infection is controlled by GADD 34 expression and translation inhibition.
A WT and Gadd 34DC/DC MEFs were inoculated with VSV-GFP for the indicated time points. As depicted in the contour plots, the level of total translation (puromycin
incorporation, Puro y-axis, gray) and viral GFP expression ( x-axis, green)) were measured using anti-puromycin staining and flow cytometry. An example of how flow
quadrants (P1–P4) are labeled is shown (right). The kinetics of VSV-GFP expression (GFP MFI) in WT and Gadd 34DC/DC MEFs is shown (lower left panel). Induction of
GADD34 measured by FACS and concentration of IFN- b in the supernatant of VSV-infected WT, and Gadd 34DC/DC MEFs are shown in the lower panel.
B WT, PKR /C0 //C0 , and IFNAR 1/C0 //C0 MEFs were inoculated with VSV-GFP (green) for 4–8 h prior to being subjected to puromycin incorporation and anti-puromycin staining
(gray) for flow cytometry analysis.
C WT, PKR /C0 //C0 , and IFNAR 1/C0 //C0 MEFs were inoculated with VSV-GFP in the presence or absence of 5 lg/ml of cycloheximide (CHX) and viral GFP levels were measured by
flow cytometry after 8 h of treatment.
D IFNAR 1/C0 //C0 MEFs were inoculated with VSV-GFP or lipofected with poly(I:C) for the indicated time in the presence or absence of CHX. Cells were collected and stained
with anti-pTBK1 and quantified by flow cytometry.
Data information: Data represent mean /C6 SD. (A, C) *, **, and *** represent P < 0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001, respectively ( n ≥ 2). t-tests with Holm –Sidak correction.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
770
A
B
C
E
D
Figure 5.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
771
puromycin-negative cell quadrant (P3, Fig EV3B). Interestingly,
after 6 h of activation, 6% of WT cells displayed both active protein
synthesis and moderate eIF2 a phosphorylation, while the popula-
tion displaying normal translation levels nearly doubled (P1, 34%)
(Fig EV3B), confirming that a majority of MEFs exposed to poly(I:C)
first undergo PKR-dependent inhibition of protein synthesis, prior to
expressing GADD34 (P3, Fig 6B), which in turn promotes eIF2 a
dephosphorylation and progressively restores translation in about
15–30% of these cells (P4, Figs 6B and D, and EV5B).
Only a fraction of WT cells displaying active protein synthesis
was found to produce IFN- b (P4, Fig 6D), while GADD34 DC/DC MEFs
were incapable of producing IFN- b (Fig 6D). Most cells producing
IFN-b expressed little GADD34 (P4, Fig 6C), suggesting that its rapid
degradation by the proteasome (half-life < 15 min, Fig EV4; Brush
& Shenolikar, 2008), together with efficient inhibition of its synthe-
sis upon eIF2 a dephosphorylation, strongly decreased its expression
at the peak of translation restoration and IFN- b production. These
results also confirm that IFN- b and cytokine production only occurs
in cells expressing sufficient GADD34 to efficiently promote eIF2 a
dephosphorylation and re-establish active translation.
IRF3/IRF7/C0 //C0 MEFs do not induce GADD34 upon dsRNA detec-
tion and should therefore be unable to overcome PKR-dependent
eIF2a phosphorylation, displaying a protein synthesis inhibition
similar to GADD34 DC/DC MEFs (Fig 6E). As anticipated, unstimu-
lated WT and IRF3/IRF7 /C0 //C0 MEFs displayed similar level of protein
synthesis, which was rapidly downregulated upon dsRNA delivery
(P2, Fig 5E). Although a higher proportion of non-responder cells
was found in the IRF3/IRF7 /C0 //C0 cells (P1), translation arrest
occurred in more than 60% of the cells (P2) without any signs of
GADD34 expression nor protein synthesis recovery (P3 and P4).
Thus, despite a slightly increased threshold of dsRNA sensing in
these IRF-deficient cells (Balachandran et al , 2004), as observed in
IFNAR1/C0 //C0 MEFs, PKR levels were still sufficient to induce protein
synthesis inhibition in response to poly(I:C). However, much as in
GADD34DC/DC cells, IRF3/IRF7 /C0 //C0 MEFs were incapable of mediat-
ing eIF2a dephosphorylation, rendering translation inhibition poorly
reversible. Interestingly, protein synthesis in the matching control
MEFs was very efficiently arrested after 2 h of stimulation (P2),
immediately followed by GADD34 expression (P3) and protein
synthesis recovery (P4 + P1) within 4 h. However, within 2 addi-
tional hours, a novel cycle of translation arrest seemed to be initi-
ated, since the puromycin-negative cell population (P2) was
doubled (17 –35%) and GADD34 expression was strongly decreased
at this time of activation (P3 + P4).
Altogether, these results indicate that translation arrest is a key
step in the response to dsRNA, since it amplifies IRF3 signaling and
augments IFN- b transcription, prior to GADD34 synthesis and
restoration of protein and cytokine synthesis. We have thus eluci-
dated a direct link between transcription regulation by IRFs and the
capacity of cells to translate proteins upon dsRNA and viral detec-
tion. This finding has many implications for the global under-
standing of innate responses to pathogens and IRF-dependent tran-
scription. As these events are dynamic over time and linked both to
transcription and translation regulation, dsRNA-stimulated cells
engage in what looks like cycles of consecutive translation arrest
and recovery (Fig 6B). Stochastic expression of IFN- b could there-
fore reflect the cycling levels of active protein synthesis in cells
responding to dsRNA asynchronously and representing around
20–30% of the total cell population at a given time point in our
experimental system.
Mathematic modeling is consistent with protein synthesis
cycling in individual cells exposed to dsRNA
Given the observation that protein synthesis inhibition and rescue
after GADD34 expression seems to cycle in cells responding to
dsRNA (Fig 6B), we used mathematical modeling to explore
whether the integration of the different unraveled biochemical path-
ways could adopt an oscillating behavior, which when extended to
a larger cell population could account for our experimental observa-
tions. We thus constructed a mathematical model (see Materials
and Methods) that describes the evolution of eIF2 a and protein
synthesis regulatory parameters for a single cell. This discrete time
model is based on the scheme depicted in Fig 7A, in which the main
relationships involved were the PKR activation by dsRNA and
subsequent eIF2 a phosphorylation leading to translation arrest,
followed by the induction of the negative regulatory feedback loop-
driven by short-lived GADD34. These experimentally characterized
interactions were put in equation taking into account their depen-
dences and time or delay of activity. The formulation models each
interaction (arrows, Fig 7A), associated with a parameter adjusting
the dependency of the downstream vertex on the upstream one.
These dependencies are mainly linear except for PKR activation by
dsRNA and protein synthesis inhibition by p-eIF2 a, which both
▸
Figure 5. Stress granules formed during response to poly(I:C) contain IFNB mRNAs and are resistant to ISRIB.
A Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) staining for IFNB mRNA, combined with immunofluorescence confocal microscopy to detect protein translation (puromycin),
stress granules (G 3BP1), and IFN- b protein in WT and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs stimulated with LMW poly(I:C) for 6 h and labeled with puromycin for 10 min.
Scale bars = 10 lm. Examples of colocalization between IFNB mRNA and G 3BP1 in stress granules are indicated by arrowheads. Schematic representation of the
different situations observed in both cell lines is shown below.
B Graphical abstract of the mechanism of action of ISR inhibitor (ISRIB). The small molecule ISRIB is able to prevent the dominant negative effects of p-eIF 2a on the
guanine exchange factor (GEF) activity of eIF 2B in cells undergoing ER stress. ISRIB facilitates therefore translation initiation even in the presence of large amounts of
p-eIF2a and is able to reverse the effects of a stress response such as translation decrease or stress granule formation.
C Percentages of SG-containing cells within the total cell population were determined using software-assisted quantification (see Appendix Supplementary Materials
and Methods for details) from immunofluorescence mosaic images of WT and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs stimulated with thapsigargin (left panel) or LMW poly(I:C) (right
panel) for 1 h. When indicated, ISRIB was added to the cells at the time of stimulation. Each plot corresponds to one replicate out of five (left) or four (right)
independent experiments. Means are represented with bars. The total number of counted cells in each replicate was comprised between 500 and 1,500. P-values
were calculated using a Student ’s t-test, *P < 0.05.
D Same as (C) except that MEFs were stimulated with LMW poly(I:C) for 3 ho r 6 h.
E Percentile of IFN- b-producing cells determined by flow cytometry. The results are the mean /C6 SD of four independent experiments. ISRIB has little impact on the
protein synthesis inhibition triggered by dsRNA stimulation of PKR.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
772
A
B
CC
D
E
Figure 6.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
773
depend on sigmoidal laws (inverted for p-eIF2 a), and thus describe
an activation/saturation behavior. These choices are supported by
our observation that PKR activation (phosphorylation) remains
constant over the time frame of the experiments (Figs 2D and EV4).
By default, each vertex-associated variable level at a time step t
depends on both its own level (negatively in the case of GADD34,
modeling its degradation rate) and those of its upstream regulators
at the previous time step t/C0 1. We also considered a delayed effect,
(i) for GADD34 levels in relation to protein synthesis given their
strict mutual dependence (e.g., GADD34( t) depends on p(t/C0 d1),
d1 > 1), and (ii) for eIF2 a dephosphorylation in response to
GADD34 expression (d2)). We did not take into consideration SGs’
impact, since their formation and destruction are linked to eIF2 a
phosphorylation and GADD34 expression, and thus obey to the
same equations.
The relative heterogeneity in the experimental estimations of the
parameters, as well as their orders of magnitude that clearly depend
on the measurement strategies, prevents this model from being
quantitatively predictive. Nevertheless, these estimations gave us
access, with good confidence, to the type (shape) of dependencies
that define the natural dynamic behavior of the system. Simulation
of eIF2 and GADD34 and global translation-level dynamics for real-
istic parameter values demonstrate that oscillations can be intrinsi-
cally present in such model (Fig 7B). Moreover, the model contains
two network motifs, (i) an incoherent type-1 feed-forward loop
(IFFL), and (ii) a repressilator, both of them described in the litera-
ture as generating oscillatory dynamics (see Materials and Meth-
ods). Given the relatively broad error margin in the measurement
of our parameters, and considering the existing heterogeneity
among individual cells, we introduced up to 30% of random vari-
ability in most parameters values with fixed time delays. Predicted
dynamics in the GADD34 translation-level plan for different
randomly perturbed values of parameters (initial condition in the
P1 quadrant, rainbow gradient) is shown for chosen representative
virtual cells (Fig 7C). Many of the simulations (cells) show an oscil-
latory behavior, with at least two passages though protein synthesis
inhibition and generally one rescue (P1 through P4, fast loops) in
the chosen simulation time. The speed of transition from one
protein synthesis status to the other was irregular in each individual
cell; however, even with levels of variability as high as 30%, the
cyclic nature of protein synthesis inhibition remained a characteris-
tic of most behaviors. Several cells did not display cyclic behavior
and adopted convergent dynamics toward a fix point. In reality,
such cell behavior could correspond to death or apoptosis and was
therefore indicated as such in the different simulations, if they
remained for 150 periods in the same quadrant. We performed
simulations of larger virtual populations by integrating the behavior
of 200 randomly perturbed single cells over 450 time steps and
gradually removing “dead” cells (red) from the counts (Fig 7D).
The progression of the virtual cell populations across the four quad-
rants representing the intensity of protein synthesis and GADD34
levels over time was strikingly consistent with what was observed
experimentally by FACS in the WT MEFs (Fig 6B). Starting from
100% of virtual cells active in protein synthesis in P1, this popula-
tion was rapidly arrested in translation (P2) after the initiation of
the simulation. This proportion fell to 34% after 180 time steps,
while GADD34 expression first and protein synthesis second
increased to reach, respectively, 17.5% (P3) and 6.5% (P4), propor-
tions similar to what is observed experimentally after 3 h of poly(I:C)
treatment (Fig 6B). From this time step on, cells displaying both
active protein synthesis and GADD34 expression increased (P4),
with a step 210 mimicking the experimental situation at 6 h,
although cells active in translation without GADD34 expression
(P1) had a relative lower representation in the model. From single-
cell tracts (Fig 7C), we observed that passage from P4 toward P2
across P1 was faster than other transitions, thus explaining the
lower proportion of cells found in P1 at step 210. From this step on,
the virtual cells population left its state of transition and entered an
asymptotic regimen in which most cells moved from one quadrant
to the other, except for an immobile fraction, which was considered
as dying (red dots). These simulations clearly suggest that protein
synthesis can adopt an oscillatory behavior in cells exposed to
dsRNA and that the molecular machinery and interdependency rela-
tionships described in Fig 6A are sufficient to explain the stochastic
behavior of protein synthesis and IFN- b production observed exper-
imentally.
▸
Figure 6. Protein synthesis cycling in response to dsRNA is revealed by intracellular flow cytometry.
Different matching control and gene-inactivated MEFs were stimulated with LMW poly(I:C) for indicated times or left untreated, followed by puromycin labeling and
intracellular detection with anti-puromycin, anti-GADD34, and anti-IFN-b antibodies and quantification by flow cytometry. Results shown in panels (B –D) are coming from a
representative experiment out of four.
A Two-dimensional plots of fluorescence intensity of individual WT (left panel, grey) and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs (right panel, red) stimulated with poly(I:C) for 3 h prior to
staining for puromycin ( y-axis) and GADD 34 (x-axis). The percentiles of translating (puro +, light color) and non-translating cells (puro /C0 , dark color) were determined
from the plots of fluorescence intensity of individual cells and are represented as cumulative bars for WT (grey) and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs (red). Mean /C6 SD of four
independent experiments is shown for not treated 0 h (nt), and 3 and 6 h poly(I:C)-treated MEFs. P-values were calculated using a Student ’s t-test, *P < 0.05.
Translation recovery at 6 h is around 50% of WT cells and hardly occurs in GADD 34DC/DC cells.
B Two-dimensional plots of fluorescence intensity of individual WT (left panels, gray and green) and GADD 34DC/DC MEFs (right panels, red and green) stimulated with
poly(I:C) for 0, 3, 6 h prior to staining for puromycin ( y-axis) and GADD 34 (x-axis). Translating cells are detected in the two upper quadrants (P 1 and P4), cells in
which protein synthesis is inhibited are in the two lower quadrants (P 2 and P3), and cells expressing GADD 34 are shifted in the two right quadrants (P 3 and P4,
green). The progression over time of the dsRNA-stimulated cells through the different quadrants suggests a cycle and potentially, an oscillation of protein synthesis
and IFN-b production.
C Same as (B) with GADD 34 staining on the y-axis and IFN- b on the x-axis. Cells that produce IFN- b rarely express the GADD 34 protein, despite a common
transcriptional regulation. This indicates that full translation recovery is necessary for IFN- b production, a situation that is likely promoting a rapid GADD 34 loss.
D Same experiment as in (B) but cells expressing IFN- b are in the two right quadrants (blue). IFN- b production only occurs in the cells that are active in protein
synthesis.
E Two-dimensional plots of fluorescence intensity of WT (left panels) and IRF 3/IRF7/C0 //C0 MEFs (right panels) stimulated with poly(I:C) for 0, 2, 4, and 6 h prior to staining
for puromycin ( y-axis) and GADD 34 (x-axis). IRFs are necessary for GADD 34 expression and their inactivation renders cell incapable of restoring protein synthesis after
dsRNA-induced inhibition. Interestingly, in this set of control MEFs, a rapid cycle of translation arrest, restoration, and again arrest can be observed during the 6 ho f
the experiment, matching the synthesis of GADD 34.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
774
A
C
D
B
Figure 7.
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
775
We tested the robustness of the model by adjusting several
parameters to reproduce the experimental situation observed in
Fig 6E, during which WT cells behave more homogeneously and
transit from one stage to the other more rapidly than the WT MEFs
used in Fig 6B. We anticipated that by reducing random variability
(/C6 10%) while increasing GADD34 stability (C2, /C0 30% degrada-
tion) and decreasing PKR activity (C3, /C0 30%), virtual cells could
tend toward a similar population dynamics (Fig EV5). Indeed,
GADD34 stability is likely to represent a central adjustment parame-
ter across cell types, since it depends on ubiquitination and protea-
some activity that are adapted in a cell-specific manner to different
growth conditions and environmental cues. Starting from 100% of
cells active in translation (P1), these new set of parameters influ-
enced the progression of the virtual population that showed more
rapid and compact undulations of protein synthesis (Fig EV5B and
C), with single-cell behaviors capable of going through two consecu-
tive cycles of protein synthesis and rescue (Fig EV5C). Upon popula-
tion simulation (Fig EV5D), the cell distribution observed at step
140 or 300 were equivalent to what is observed after 2 h of
poly(I:C) stimulation. Steps 200 or 360 displayed a cell distribution
similar to the experimental situation at 4 h, while steps 240 and 400
could be considered equivalent to 6 h of poly(I:C) exposure,
although the proportions of cells residing in P3 and P4 appeared
reduced compared with the experimental conditions. The period
required to achieve these cycles is very regular and suggests that 1
virtual time step is equivalent to 2 min of experimental time. Our
different simulation attempts also indicate that the delays (d1 and
d2) between the global translation inhibition, eiF2 a phosphorylation
status, and GADD34 synthesis or its loss, all have a strong influence
on the general progression of the virtual cells across the quadrants
and require minimal variation to reflect our experimental results.
Thus, the number of protein synthesis cycles occurring after dsRNA
detection is predicted to be highly variable and dependent on these
delays, as well as the half-life of GADD34 that defines the capacity
of individual cells to rapidly re-establish protein synthesis, while
avoiding cell death.
Discussion
We describe here how two apparently opposite signaling programs,
mediated by the kinase PKR on the one hand and RLR/MAVS IFN
triggering pathway on the other, synergize, and provide a molecular
frame to explain some stochastic aspects of type-I IFN production.
These signaling cascades, both elicited by dsRNA detection, are
tightly coordinated, allowing efficient protein synthesis inhibition
preventing viral replication, followed by abundant cytokine produc-
tion in the same cells. We propose that GADD34, the inducible
cofactor of PP1c, is the key molecule involved in resolving this
antagonistic situation. The role of ATF4 and GADD34 in eIF2 a
dephosphorylation to restore protein synthesis after ER stress has
been extensively studied (Novoa et al , 2001). We show, however,
that the GADD34 transcriptional induction by poly(I:C) strictly
requires the transcription factors IRF3 and possibly IRF7, but not
ATF4, which remains a hallmark of the UPR. This dependency on
IRFs indicates that GADD34 belongs to a group of genes induced
during the primary innate immune response to dsRNA, together with
key anti-viral mediators like IFN- b and IFN- a (Ourthiague et al ,
2015), and as suggested by ChIP-seq analysis of genome-wide occu-
pancy of IRF3 and p65/RELA, performed on a human B lymphocytic
cell line infected with Sendai virus (Freaney et al , 2013). In addition
to the lack of ATF4-associated transcriptional signatures in
GADD34DC/DC MEFs exposed to poly(I:C), our analysis reveals that
ISGs can be ranked in at least two subsets displaying different tran-
scriptional requirements. For instance, the MHC I-associated genes,
Pkr and several members of the tripartite motif-containing protein
(Trim) family ( Trim 6, 12c, 14, 25, 26, 30a, 30b, and 56) (Jefferies
et al , 2011) are only upregulated in WT MEFs, suggesting that
these genes display critical differences in timing and threshold of
activation by type-I IFN. The profoundly reduced capacity of
GADD34DC/DC MEFs to produce cytokines therefore reveals different
modes of ISG induction, potentially linked to the translation and
activation of different combinations of transcription factors
(e.g., ATF4 or IRF7) to achieve optimal and coordinated responses.
Using PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs, we showed that downregulation of global
translation initiation following dsRNA detection contributes to the
amplification of IRF3 phosphorylation and thus GADD34 and IFNB
expression. The most likely explanation for low GADD34 mRNA
induction in PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs in response to poly(I:C) would therefore
not be the absence of ATF4 induction directly, as previously
proposed (Clavarino et al , 2012), but would rather be linked to the
lack of protein synthesis inhibition and a consecutive decrease in
IRF3 activation in these cells. PKR-dependent activation of IRF3 has
been observed during mutant vaccinia virus infection of HeLa cells
(Zhang & Samuel, 2008), and PKR, GCN2, or PERK have been
proposed to promote innate responses against viral infection by
enhancing IFN production through MAVS signaling and augmented
NF-jB activation (Jiang et al , 2003; McAllister et al , 2012). Higher
NF-jB activation is promoted by the destabilization of its inhibitory
chaperone I jBa and importantly by its lack of neosynthesis upon
translation inhibition (Jiang et al , 2003). This situation can be
extrapolated to other regulatory proteins, like the deubiquitinase
A20, which was shown to regulate TBK1 and IRF3 activation. We
confirmed that a decreased rate of protein synthesis in PKR /C0 //C0
MEFs treated with poly(I:C) strongly enhances IRF3 phosphoryla-
tion, while decreasing both I jBa, A20, and SHIP-1 levels. This also
▸
Figure 7. Mathematical modeling supports the existence of protein synthesis waves of cells exposed to dsRNA.
A Schematic representation of the biochemical relationships and interdependences used to establish the mathematical model described in the Materials and Methods
section.
B Graphic representation over time of model-based levels of p-eIF 2a (red), protein synthesis (black), and GADD 34 activity (blue).
C Representative single-cell simulation showing the progression across quadrants (P 1–P4) representing protein synthesis intensity and GADD 34 levels over time
(rainbow color gradient). Cells can undergo several cycles of protein synthesis inhibition and rescue (fastloops), while some cells are unable to rescue protein
synthesis and are likely to die (death).
D Grouped simulations of 200 cells over 450 time steps. By introducing 30% of variability in most parameters with fixed delays, virtual cell behavior mimics closely the
experimental situation observed in Fig 5B. Dead cells are represented in red and subtracted from the indicated cell percentiles in each quadrant.
◀
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
776
implies that these regulators are submitted to a tight control of their
homeostasis through rapid proteasome-mediated degradation. The
concomitant implication of several of these negative regulators does
not exclude the existence of additional pathways regulating the
MAVS cascade, such as the activating dephosphorylation of RIG-I
and MDA5 by PP1 in human cells (Wies et al , 2013; Mesman et al ,
2014). Protein synthesis inhibition functions therefore as an amplifi-
cation signal, synergizing with innate signaling to favor primary
anti-viral genes transcription and GADD34 synthesis. Translation
inhibition should be considered as a “danger” signal potentiating
innate responses commensurate with the pathogenic threat
(Argu¨ ello et al , 2015) and recently suggested for legionella infection
(Pierre & Gatti, 2013). Cells use SG formation to adapt to different
stresses and therefore are likely to adopt specific features according
to the nature of the insults encountered. SGs, in addition to their
important role in controlling IFNB mRNA stability, can serve as
signaling hubs for PKR and RLRs (Reineke & Lloyd, 2015) and could
thus be important for translation inhibition-associated signaling.
Their breakdown is also directly influenced by IRF3 translocation
and GADD34 expression, thus allowing IFN production in coordina-
tion with a regulation of innate signaling and potentially its
termination.
Measuring translation intensity using intracellular flow cytome-
try was essential to dissect kinetics of anti-viral responses at the
cellular level. Even though lipofected poly(I:C) enters cells rapidly
and homogeneously, PKR does not trigger translation arrest
uniformly. This heterogeneity in the early response to dsRNA could
depend on PKR levels, as well on the physiological status of the
cells, including cell cycle stage or expression of transcription factors
like IRF3. Apart from this small number of non-responder cells,
GADD34 induction was mostly observed in cells arrested in transla-
tion and was absolutely required to recover normal levels of protein
synthesis and produce IFN- b. IRF3-dependent expression of
GADD34 is therefore a prerequisite for cytokine production by
dsRNA-activated MEFs, while the intensity its proteasome-
dependent degradation will influence the duration and intensity of
IFN-b expression both transcriptionally and translationally.
Mathematical modeling further established that protein synthesis
cycling is compatible with our experimental results. The robustness
of the model indicates that the different biochemical loops included
in the modeling (Fig 7A) are sufficient to obtain a pattern of protein
synthesis regulation equivalent over time to the one observed in
individual cells (Fig 6). This model can be simplified by removing
the transcriptional regulation of the Ppp1r15a gene and considering
the production of GADD34 as a protein only (Appendix Supplemen-
tary Materials and Methods). We feel, however, that to respect
biological principles, the transcriptional regulatory step had to be
included in the presented model. This model points toward a
dynamic dsRNA-dependent oscillation of translation, with a period-
icity directly linked to GADD34 degradation rate and intensity of
PKR signaling (Dalet et al , 2015). In support of this hypothesis, the
majority of cells that restored their protein synthesis and are thus
capable of producing IFN- b, no longer expressed GADD34. Transla-
tion oscillation would also be consistent with the dynamic behavior
of SG formation following infection with various RNA viruses
(Ruggieri et al , 2012). At least one cycle could be observed over 6 h
of poly(I:C) exposure (Fig 6E), but many factors linked to cell meta-
bolism and differentiation are likely to influence these events within
a cell population. Translation oscillation may resolve the apparent
dilemma resulting from concomitant translation inhibition and
IFN-b secretion in the same dsRNA-exposed or infected cell (Fig 7).
Cell-to-cell variability in the expression levels of some limiting
factors of the RLR signaling pathway, among them type-I IFN-indu-
cible RLRs and IRF7, has been evoked as the primary reason for
stochastic IFN production in fibroblasts (Zhao et al , 2012).
However, given the dependency of GADD34 expression on RLR
signaling through MAVS and IRFs, our results support a direct
contribution of protein synthesis inhibition and GADD34 expression
to the stochasticity of IFN- b production.
Materials and Methods
Cells, reagents, and plasmid transfection
Matched wild-type (129 SvEv) and PKR /C0 //C0 MEFs (Yang et al , 1995:
#98) were a gift from Caetano Reis e Sousa (Cancer Research UK,
London); matched wild-type (129 SvEv), ATF4 /C0 //C0 , GADD34 DC/DC
MEFs were a gift from David Ron (Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, UK). Matched wild-type and IRF3/7 /C0 //C0 MEFs were a gift
from Michael Diamond (Washington University, Saint Louis).
Matched wild-type (C57/Bl6) and IPS-1 /C0 //C0 MEFs were a gift from
Matthew Albert (Pasteur Institute, Paris). Matched wild-type (C57/
Bl6) and IFNAR1 /C0 //C0 MEFs were generated from knockout mice.
MEFs were cultured in DMEM, 5% FBS (Sigma) and 50 lM2 -
mercaptoethanol, except IPS-1 /C0 //C0 MEFs and their matched WT,
which were cultured with 15% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, MEM
non-essential and essential amino acids. MEFs were treated for the
indicated time with 100 MOI VSV-GFP (Whelan et al , 2000), or
lipofected with 2.5 lg/ml of HMW poly(I:C) or 2 lg/ml of LMW
poly(I:C) (InvivoGen) in combination with Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen). Thapsigargin (SIGMA) and ISRIB (gift from Carmela
Sidrausky and Peter Walter, UCSF, San Francisco) were used at
500 nM and 750 nM, respectively. Brefeldin A (BFA) and cyclo-
heximide (CHX) (both from SIGMA) were used at 10 lg/ml and
5 lg/ml, respectively. The plasmid GADD34 in pCMV6-XL5
mammalian expression was from OriGene (Rockville). The plasmid
coding for herpes simplex virus ICP34.5 was a gift from Ian Mohr
(New York University, NY, USA). As control plasmid, we used a
pmax-GFP vector (Amaxa).
RNA extraction
For qPCR, RNAs were isolated from cells using the RNeasy miniprep
kit (QIAGEN) combined with a DNA digestion step (RNase-free
DNase set, QIAGEN). For microarray samples, cells were lysed in a
Nonidet P-40-containing buffer (0.5%) before a short centrifugation.
Proteins from supernatants were denatured with 1% SDS, 10 mM
EDTA and 200 lg/ml proteinase K at 37 °C for 30 min. RNA was
extracted with phenol:chloroform pH 4.5 (Ambion), precipitated
with isopropanol (v/v) at /C0 20°C for 30 min, and washed with 70%
v/v ethanol. RNAs were further purified with RNeasy miniprep kit
(QIAGEN) combined with a DNA digestion step (RNase-free
DNase set, QIAGEN). RNA integrity was measured by capillary
electrophoresis using the Agilent RNA 6000 Pico Chip kit (Agilent
Technologies) in an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, according to the
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
777
manufacturer’s instructions. A RIN (RNA integrity number) score
> 7 was required for samples to be analyzed by microarray.
Microarray data
The microarray data have been deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database under accession number GSE77777.
Quantitative PCR
After RNA extraction and purification, cDNA was synthesized using
the Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and random
hexamer primers (Thermo Scientific). Quantitative PCR amplifi-
cation was carried out using complete SYBR Green PCR master mix
(Applied Biosystems) and 200 nM of each specific primer; 5 llo f
diluted cDNA template was added to 15 ll of PCR mix, and the
amplification was tracked via SYBR Green incorporation by an
Applied Biosystems thermal cycler. cDNA concentration in each
sample was normalized to GAPDH expression. The primers used for
gene amplification were the following:
GADD34 (S 5 0-GACCCCTCCAACTCTCCTTC-30,A S5 0-CTTCCTCAGC
CTCAGCATTC-30);
IFN-b (S 5 0-CCCTATGGAGATGACGGAGA-30,A S5 0-ACCCAGTGC
TGGAGAAATTG-30);
GAPDH (S 5 0-TGGAGAAACCTGCCAAGTATG-30,A S5 0-GTTGAAGT
CGCAGGAGACAAC-30).
Flow cytometry
Cells were fixed and permeabilized with cytofix/cytoperm buffer
(BD Biosciences) for 15 min at 4 °C and washed with perm/wash
buffer (BD Biosciences) before antibody staining at 4 °C. The anti-
bodies used to detect GADD34 and p-eIF2 a[Ser52] were identical to
the ones used for immunoblotting. The secondary antibody used
was conjugated to R-PE (Invitrogen). Intracellular IFN- b was
detected with a FITC-conjugated monoclonal antibody (RMMB-1,
PBL InterferonSource). Addition of brefeldin A (10 lg/ml) was
necessary to detect IFN- b after HMW poly(I:C) treatment. Data were
acquired on a Canto II (BD) and analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star).
For phospho-TBK1, phosflow cytofix and phosflow perm/wash were
used (BD) to fix and permeabilize cells as indicated by manufactur-
ers. Phospho-TBK1 (Ser172) was detected using a PE (directly)-
conjugated rabbit mAb (D52C2).
Translation intensity measurement
Puromycin labeling for measuring the intensity of translation was
performed as previously described (Schmidt et al , 2009). Puromycin
(Sigma, min 98% TLC, cell culture tested, P8833, diluted in PBS)
was added at 2.5 lg/ml in the culture medium, and the cells were
incubated for 10 min at 37 °C and 5% CO 2. Cells were washed with
PBS prior to cell lysis and immunoblotting with the anti-puromycin
12D10 antibody (Merck Millipore). For immunofluorescence, after
PBS wash, cells were fixed with 3% PFA for 15 min at room temper-
ature before permeabilization and antibody staining. For flow
cytometry, cells were fixed and permeabilized with cytofix/cytop-
erm buffer (BD Biosciences) and stained with the same antibody
diluted in perm/wash buffer (BD Biosciences) and with a secondary
antibody coupled to Alexa Fluor 647.
Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed in CytoBuster protein extraction reagent
(Novagen), supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein quantification was performed
using the BCA Protein Assay (Pierce). 20 –50 lg of soluble material
was loaded on 8% or 10% SDS-PAGE before immunoblotting and
chemiluminescence detection (SuperSignal West Pico Chemilumi-
nescent Substrate, Pierce). Nuclear extraction was performed using
the Nuclear Extract kit (Active Motif). Rabbit polyclonal antibody
recognizing ATF4 (CREB-2, C-20) and mouse monoclonal antibodies
recognizing PKR (B-10) and CHOP (GADD153, B-3) were from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology. GADD34, I jBa, p-eIF2 a[Ser52], and b-tubulin
rabbit polyclonal antibodies were purchased from Proteintech, Cell
Signaling Technologies, Invitrogen, and Abcam, respectively. Rabbit
monoclonal antibodies anti-p-STAT1[Tyr701] (56D8), p-TBK1
[Ser72] (D52C2), p-IRF3[Ser396] (4D4G), IRF3 (D83B9), eIF2 a
(D7D3), A20(D13H3), and SHIP1(D1163) were from Cell Signaling
Technologies. Mouse monoclonal antibodies for b-actin and
HDAC-1 (10E2) were purchased from Sigma and Cell Signaling
Technologies. Secondary antibodies were from Jackson Immuno-
Research Laboratories.
Immunofluorescence combined with fluorescent mRNA in situ
hybridization (FISH)
Cells on coverslips were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde for 15 min,
then permeabilized in 70% EtOH overnight and blocked with 5%
bovine serum albumin (Sigma) containing ribonucleoside vanadyl
complex (2 mM). Cells were stained for puromycin as described
above, and G3BP1 with a rabbit polyclonal antibody from Millipore.
Corresponding fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies from
Invitrogen were used. RNase inhibitor (Rnasin, Promega) was added
to the staining buffer. For FISH, cells were then washed with
10% formamide in 2 × SSC. Fluorescent probes (Quasar 570) against
IFN-b mRNA (Stellaris, Biosearch Technologies) were diluted in
hybridization buffer containing dextran sulfate 10 mg/ml and 10%
formamide in 2 × SSC, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Probes were incubated with cells for 4 h at 37 °C. After two washes
of 30 min at 37 °C, coverslips were mounted with Prolong Gold
containing DAPI (Invitrogen), and confocal microscopy images were
acquired with a LSM580 (Carl Zeiss) using a 63 × objective and
accompanying imaging software.
Stress granules detection and scoring
Stress granules detection was performed by mosaic image acquisi-
tion of 49 planes with an Axio Observer.Z1 (Carl Zeiss) equipped
with the software Zen 2 and a ORCA flash 4 camera. SGs were
detected using an antibody recognizing G3BP1 (Millipore) and
secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa 488. Nuclei were stained
with DAPI. The fluorescence of the two channels was captured
through the objective Plan Apochromat 40 ×/0.95 and the fluores-
cence filters DAPI (BP 445/50) and GFP (BP525/50). The images
were then processed individually with a homemade pipeline using
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
778
the software “Cell profiler 2.1.1” (Carpenter et al , 2006; CellProfiler:
image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell
phenotypes, www.cellprofiler.org). The pipeline uses the nucleus
DAPI staining as a primary object to perform cell segmentation and
identify and count the granules by cell.
Mathematical model
To build the single-cell model, we have established a set of equa-
tions describing the relationships shown in Fig 6A. Every relation-
ship shown in this figure has been designed as an equation to
account for its effect on the global model. The construction of these
equations has requested the establishment of several assumptions
about the shape of the relationship that could bind variables. Some
of these assumptions are supported by experimental quantitative
measurements that were conducted to observe them specifically
(data not shown). Others are from choice of representation of the
biological behavior (activation/saturation effect, linear relationship,
etc.). Note that our goal was not to implement a biologically accu-
rate model but to show that a certain type of behavior extended to a
cell population can allow obtaining phenomena like those observed
experimentally. In this, the choices imposed on equations, although
several are supported by quantitative measures, remain completely
arbitrary. We present below the equations in detail:
P(t) ¼ S1(Ds(t-1)) (1)
Tl(t) ¼ S2(E(t-1)) (2)
Tlg(t) ¼ 1 /C0 Tl(t-d1) (3)
Tcg(t) ¼ 1 /C0 Tl(t-d1) (4)
Gr(t) ¼ Gr(t-1) þ Tcg (t) /C3 C1 /C0 Tlg(t) /C3 Gr(t-1) (5)
Gp(t) ¼ Gp(t-1) þ Tlg(t) /C3 Gr(t-1) /C0 C2 (6)
E(t) ¼ C3 /C3 P(t-1) /C0 C4 /C3 Gp(t-d2) (7)
where t is the step number, representing the discretized time, Ds is
the level of double-stranded RNA, P is the level of phosphorylated
PKR, E is the level of phosphorylated eIF2, Gr is the level of
GADD34 RNA, and Gp is the level of GADD34 protein. Tl is the
level of global translation (ratio between 0 and 1), Tlg is the level
of translation of GADD34 RNA (ratio between 0 and 1), Tcg is the
level of transcription of GADD34 gene (ratio between 0 and 1), S1
is the sigmoı¨d function S1(x) = 1/(1 + exp(ax + c)), and S2 is the
decreasing sigmoid function S2(x) = 1/C0 1/(1 + exp(a0x + c0)). C1 is
the parameter representing the impact of the presence of dsRNA
on the level of produced GADD34 RNA. The chosen default value
for this parameter is 1.4. C2 is the parameter representing the
GADD34 protein degradation along the time. The default value for
this parameter is 1 and modified to 0.7 in Fig EV5. C3 is the
parameter representing the impact of the presence of phosphory-
lated PKR on the phosphorylation of eIF2. The default value for
this parameter is 10 and modified to 7 in Fig EV5. C4 is the param-
eter representing the impact of the presence of GADD34 protein on
dephosphorylation of phosphorylated eIF2. The default value for
this parameter is 2.5 and modified to 2.25 in Fig EV5. d1 is the
time delay between the evolution of global translation and the
evolution of GADD34 transcription and translation. The default
value for this parameter is 30. d2 is the time delay between the
evolution of GADD34 and the dephosphorylation of p-eIF2. The
default value for this parameter is 30. The values of the parameters
used to define the two sigmoid functions (a, a 0, c, and c 0 in func-
tions S1 and S2) were defined in order to adapt the sigmoids to the
variables ranges of values.
(1) This equation describes the level of phosphorylated/acti-
vated PKR in the presence of double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA). The level of dsRNA has been chosen constant
along the time and its relationship with phosphorylated
PKR is described as an activation/saturation model (sig-
moid function S1).
(2) This equation describes the level of global translation in
the presence of phosphorylated eIF2. Here again, an
activation/saturation model has been chosen to describe
this relationship (inverted sigmoid function S2).
(3, 4) These equations describe, respectively, the level of
translation of GADD34 RNA and the level of transcription
of GADD34 gene. Both are linked in an inverted linear
relationship with the global level of translation, implying
that when the global translation is lowered by the presence
of phosphorylated eIF2, the level of GADD34 RNA and
protein may increase. Note the delay in response (d1) used
to take into account duration of biological processes.
(5) This equation describes the level of GADD34 RNA as an
accumulation depending on a production level coming
from the transcription of the GADD34 gene and a consump-
tion level coming from the translation of the RNA into
protein.
(6) This equation describes the level of GADD34 protein as
an accumulation depending on a production level coming
from translation of the GADD34 RNA into protein and a
consumption due to the constant degradation of the
GADD34 protein.
(7) This equation describes the level of phosphorylated eIF2
as the equilibrium between a production level coming
from the presence of phosphorylated PKR (inducing phos-
phorylation of eIF2) and a consumption coming from the
phosphatase activity of GADD34 (inducing a dephosphory-
lation of p-eIF2).
These equations have several parameters (C1-C4, d1, d2) whose
value, for some, could be approximated by the results of some
experiments (data not shown) but for the most part have been
chosen so that the resulting dynamics can realize an oscillating
behavior. Note that the values of these parameters remain relatively
robust since we can observe that disruption of the order of 30% of
their initial value continue to allow the existence of oscillatory
behavior in the vast majority of cases with just variations in the
periods and amplitudes of the oscillations. The model is therefore
not strictly subject to the chosen values, and sets of relatively vari-
able parameter values can realize the same type of oscillations.
In fact, we can analyze the network of the model in order to look
at network motifs like described in Milo et al (2002). It appears that
the model network contains two main motifs: (i) An incoherent
type-1 feed-forward loop (IFFL) (Mangan et al , 2006) described by
two signal pathways starting from the same origin and arriving at
the same target but acting in opposite directions (one pathway acti-
vates the target and the other represses it). In our case, this IFFL
can be found from dsRNA to Elf2 a-p where the pathway through
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
779
Ppp1r15a RNA and GADD34 repress the production of Elf2a-p and
the pathway through PKR-p activates it. (ii) A repressilator, first
described in Elowitz and Leibler (2000), by a ring of three genes
each expressing a protein that represses the next gene in the loop.
In our case, the repressilator is composed of Elf2 a-p inhibiting
global translation, which inhibits translation of GADD34, itself
inhibiting Elf2a-p.
Each of these motifs is known to generate oscillatory dynamics,
and we may then expect that our model network generates such
kind of dynamics. This is what is observed using the range of
parameters described above.
For simulations of a population of virtual cells, we chose to run
the simulations on 200 cells. To take into account the biological
heterogeneity that may exist between the cells, we apply a random
perturbation of the parameters C1 to C4 described above in the
order of 30% of their initial value. In addition, we considered that
the cells could not begin their evolution at the same time. We
therefore allocated a random delay from each cell chosen
uniformly 1 and 200 time steps. Thus, each cell is given a set of
randomly chosen parameters, and the corresponding equations
were integrated along time for the evolution of cells. A panel of
variable trajectories is then produced, and we can observe the
behavior at the population level. In these simulations, it appears
some behaviors that are no longer cyclical but convergent, that is,
the variables converge to finite fixed values, which, depending on
the situation, can be likened to cell death or anergy. Despite the
strong perturbations applied to the model, we never observed
divergent behaviors (i.e., variables tending to infinity over time).
Statistical analysis
Data showing multiple experiments are displayed as individual dots
with mean /C6 SD. Holm–Sidak tests were used to determine P-values.
Other technical details are available from the Appendix Supple-
mentary Materials and Methods.
Expanded View for this article is available online.
Author contributions
AD, RJA, AC, EG, and PP designed research and analyzed data. AD, RJA, AC, VC,
AM, JP, and MR performed research. LS and SJ designed and ran mathematical
simulations. T-PVM, MD, and TW performed bioinformatics analysis. TW and
MAS performed microarray analysis. MF designed image analysis software. LS,
SJ, AD, RJA, EG, and PP wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Argüello RJ, Rodriguez Rodrigues C, Gatti E, Pierre P ( 2015) Protein synthesis
regulation, a pillar of strength for innate immunity? Curr Opin Immunol
32: 28 – 35
Balachandran S, Roberts PC, Brown LE, Truong H, Pattnaik AK, Archer DR,
Barber GN ( 2000) Essential role for the dsRNA-dependent protein
kinase PKR in innate immunity to viral infection. Immunity 13: 129 – 141
Balachandran S, Thomas E, Barber GN ( 2004) A FADD-dependent innate
immune mechanism in mammalian cells. Nature 432: 401 – 405
Belgnaoui SM, Paz S, Hiscott J ( 2011) Orchestrating the interferon antiviral
response through the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) adapter.
Curr Opin Immunol 23: 564 – 572
Brush MH, Shenolikar S ( 2008) Control of cellular GADD 34 levels by the 26S
proteasome. Mol Cell Biol 28: 6989 – 7000
Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang IH, Friman O, Guertin
DA, Chang JH, Lindquist RA, Moffat J, Golland P, Sabatini DM ( 2006) Cell
Profiler: image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell
phenotypes. Genome Biol 7:R 100
Claudio N, Dalet A, Gatti E, Pierre P ( 2013) Mapping the crossroads of
immune activation and cellular stress response pathways. EMBO J 32:
1214 – 1224
Clavarino G, Claudio N, Couderc T, Dalet A, Judith D, Camosseto V, Schmidt
EK, Wenger T, Lecuit M, Gatti E, Pierre P ( 2012) Induction of GADD 34 is
necessary for dsRNA-dependent interferon-beta production and
participates in the control of Chikungunya virus infection. PLoS Pathog 8:
e1002708
Daffis S, Samuel MA, Keller BC, Gale M Jr, Diamond MS ( 2007) Cell-specific
IRF-3 responses protect against West Nile virus infection by interferon-
dependent and -independent mechanisms. PLoS Pathog 3:e 106
Dalet A, Gatti E, Pierre P ( 2015) Integration of PKR-dependent translation
inhibition with innate immunity is required for a coordinated anti-viral
response. FEBS Lett 589: 1539 – 1545
Deng J, Lu PD, Zhang Y, Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ, Sonenberg N, Harding HP,
Ron D ( 2004) Translational repression mediates activation of nuclear
factor kappa B by phosphorylated translation initiation factor 2. Mol Cell
Biol 24: 10161 – 10168
Elowitz MB, Leibler S ( 2000) A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional
regulators. Nature 403: 335 – 338
Freaney JE, Kim R, Mandhana R, Horvath CM ( 2013) Extensive cooperation of
immune master regulators IRF 3 and NFkappaB in RNA Pol II recruitment
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
780
Acknowledgements
A.D. and the laboratory received financial support from the Innate Immuno-
cytes in Health and Disease (I 2HD) Collaborative Project between CIML,
AVIESAN, and SANOFI. TPVM was funded by the European Research Council
under the European Community ’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP 7/2007–
2013 Grant Agreement number 281225 to MD for the SystemsDendritic
project). AC received a MNERT and ARC PhD fellowship. The laboratory is
“Equipe de la Fondation de la Recherche Médicale ” (FRM) sponsored by the
grant DEQ20140329536. The project was supported by Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR) grants “ANR 10-BLAN-1236”, “ANR 10-BLAN-1308”, “ANR-12-
BSV2-0025-01”, “ANR-12-ISV3-0002”. This work has also been carried out with
the support of A*MIDEX-AAP-INME- 1401-140512 “CSI”, “INFORM Labex ANR-
11-LABX-0054”, “DCBIOL Labex ANR- 11-LABEX-0043” with grants from ANR-
10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* and A*MIDEX-ANR- 11-IDEX-0001-02 funded by the
“Investissements d’Avenir” French government program managed by the ANR.
The research was also supported by the Ilídio Pinho foundation and FCT ‐
Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia ‐ and Programa Operacional Competi-
tividade e Internacionalização ‐ Compete2020 (FEDER)‐references PTDC/IMI ‐
IMU/3615/2014 and POCI‐01‐0145‐FEDER‐016768. [Correction added on 13
February 2019, after first online publication: the funding information has been
updated.] We acknowledge financial support from n /C176 ANR-10-INBS-04-01
France Bio Imaging and the ImagImm CIML imaging core facility. We acknowl-
edge Drs. Lawrence and Bebien (CIML), as well as Drs. Cazaret and Grelier
(Lyon) for providing GFP –vesicular stomatitis virus.
and pause release in human innate antiviral transcription. Cell Rep 4:
959 – 973
Gabhann JN, Higgs R, Brennan K, Thomas W, Damen JE, Ben Larbi N, Krystal
G, Jefferies CA ( 2010) Absence of SHIP- 1 results in constitutive
phosphorylation of tank-binding kinase 1 and enhanced TLR 3-dependent
IFN-beta production. J Immunol 184: 2314 – 2320
Gao D, Wu J, Wu YT, Du F, Aroh C, Yan N, Sun L, Chen ZJ ( 2013) Cyclic GMP-
AMP synthase is an innate immune sensor of HIV and other retroviruses.
Science 341: 903 – 906
Goubau D, Deddouche S, Reis e Sousa C ( 2013) Cytosolic sensing of viruses.
Immunity 38: 855 – 869
Grandvaux N, Servant MJ, tenOever B, Sen GC, Balachandran S, Barber GN,
Lin R, Hiscott J ( 2002) Transcriptional profiling of interferon regulatory
factor 3 target genes: direct involvement in the regulation of interferon-
stimulated genes. J Virol 76: 5532 – 5539
Han J, Back SH, Hur J, Lin YH, Gildersleeve R, Shan J, Yuan CL, Krokowski D,
Wang S, Hatzoglou M, Kilberg MS, Sartor MA, Kaufman RJ ( 2013) ER-
stress-induced transcriptional regulation increases protein synthesis
leading to cell death. Nat Cell Biol 15: 481 – 490
Honda K, Taniguchi T ( 2006) IRFs: master regulators of signalling by Toll-like
receptors and cytosolic pattern-recognition receptors. Nat Rev Immunol 6:
644 – 658
Hwang SY, Hur KY, Kim JR, Cho KH, Kim SH, Yoo JY ( 2013) Biphasic RLR-IFN-
beta response controls the balance between antiviral immunity and cell
damage. J Immunol 190: 1192 – 1200
Ishikawa H, Ma Z, Barber GN ( 2009) STING regulates intracellular DNA-
mediated, type I interferon-dependent innate immunity. Nature 461:
788 – 792
Jefferies C, Wynne C, Higgs R ( 2011) Antiviral TRIMs: friend or foe in
autoimmune and autoinflammatory disease? Nat Rev Immunol 11:
617 – 625
Jiang HY, Wek SA, McGrath BC, Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ, Cavener DR, Wek RC
(2003) Phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor
2 is required for activation of NF-kappaB in response to diverse cellular
stresses. Mol Cell Biol 23: 5651 – 5663
Kawai T, Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O,
Akira S ( 2005) MAVS, an adaptor triggering RIG-I and Mda 5-mediated type
I interferon induction. Nat Immunol 6: 981 – 988
Kawai T, Akira S ( 2006) Innate immune recognition of viral infection. Nat
Immunol 7: 131 – 137
Kawai T, Akira S ( 2010) The role of pattern-recognition receptors in innate
immunity: update on Toll-like receptors. Nat Immunol 11: 373 – 384
Kedersha N, Cho MR, Li W, Yacono PW, Chen S, Gilks N, Golan DE,
Anderson P ( 2000) Dynamic shuttling of TIA- 1 accompanies the
recruitment of mRNA to mammalian stress granules. J Cell Biol 151:
1257 – 1268
Kedersha N, Stoecklin G, Ayodele M, Yacono P, Lykke-Andersen J, Fritzler MJ,
Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ, Golan DE, Anderson P ( 2005) Stress granules and
processing bodies are dynamically linked sites of mRNP remodeling. J Cell
Biol 169: 871 – 884
Lazear HM, Lancaster A, Wilkins C, Suthar MS, Huang A, Vick SC, Clepper L,
Thackray L, Brassil MM, Virgin HW, Nikolich-Zugich J, Moses AV, Gale M Jr,
Fruh K, Diamond MS ( 2013) IRF- 3, IRF- 5, and IRF- 7 coordinately regulate
the type I IFN response in myeloid dendritic cells downstream of MAVS
signaling. PLoS Pathog 9:e 1003118
Li S, Wang L, Berman M, Kong YY, Dorf ME ( 2011) Mapping a dynamic innate
immunity protein interaction network regulating type I interferon
production. Immunity 35: 426 – 440
Lu B, Nakamura T, Inouye K, Li J, Tang Y, Lundback P, Valdes-Ferrer SI,
Olofsson PS, Kalb T, Roth J, Zou Y, Erlandsson-Harris H, Yang H, Ting JP,
Wang H, Andersson U, Antoine DJ, Chavan SS, Hotamisligil GS, Tracey KJ
(2012) Novel role of PKR in inflammasome activation and HMGB 1 release.
Nature 488: 670 – 674
Ma A, Malynn BA ( 2012)A 20: linking a complex regulator of ubiquitylation to
immunity and human disease. Nat Rev Immunol 12: 774 – 785
Mangan S, Itzkovitz S, Zaslaver A, Alon U ( 2006) The incoherent feed-forward
loop accelerates the response-time of the gal system of Escherichia coli . J
Mol Biol 356: 1073 – 1081
McAllister CS, Taghavi N, Samuel CE ( 2012) Protein kinase PKR amplification
of interferon beta induction occurs through initiation factor eIF- 2alpha-
mediated translational control. J Biol Chem 287: 36384 – 36392
Mesman AW, Zijlstra-Willems EM, Kaptein TM, de Swart RL, Davis ME,
Ludlow M, Duprex WP, Gack MU, Gringhuis SI, Geijtenbeek TB ( 2014)
Measles virus suppresses RIG-I-like receptor activation in dendritic cells
via DC-SIGN-mediated inhibition of PP 1 phosphatases. Cell Host Microbe
16: 31 – 42
Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U ( 2002)
Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science 298:
824 – 827
Mohr I, Sonenberg N ( 2012) Host translation at the nexus of infection and
immunity. Cell Host Microbe 12: 470 – 483
Mostafavi S, Yoshida H, Moodley D, LeBoite H, Rothamel K, Raj T, Ye CJ,
Chevrier N, Zhang SY, Feng T, Lee M, Casanova JL, Clark JD, Hegen M,
Telliez JB, Hacohen N, De Jager PL, Regev A, Mathis D, Benoist C ( 2016)
Parsing the interferon transcriptional network and its disease associations.
Cell 164: 564 – 578
Novoa I, Zeng H, Harding HP, Ron D ( 2001) Feedback inhibition of the
unfolded protein response by GADD 34-mediated dephosphorylation of
eIF2alpha. J Cell Biol 153: 1011 – 1022
Obuchi M, Fernandez M, Barber GN ( 2003) Development of recombinant
vesicular stomatitis viruses that exploit defects in host defense to
augment specific oncolytic activity. J Virol 77: 8843 – 8856
Ourthiague DR, Birnbaum H, Ortenlof N, Vargas JD, Wollman R, Hoffmann
A( 2015) Limited specificity of IRF 3 and ISGF 3 in the transcriptional
innate-immune response to double-stranded RNA. J Leukoc Biol 98:
119 – 128
Patil S, Fribourg M, Ge Y, Batish M, Tyagi S, Hayot F, Sealfon SC ( 2015)
Single-cell analysis shows that paracrine signaling by first responder cells
shapes the interferon-beta response to viral infection. Sci Signal 8:r a 16
Pichlmair A, Reis e Sousa C ( 2007) Innate recognition of viruses. Immunity 27:
370 – 383
Pierre P, Gatti E ( 2013) Loss of translation: a stealth weapon against
pathogens? Nat Immunol 14: 1203 – 1205
Reineke LC, Dougherty JD, Pierre P, Lloyd RE ( 2012) Large G 3BP-induced
granules trigger eIF 2alpha phosphorylation. Mol Biol Cell 23: 3499 – 3510
Reineke LC, Kedersha N, Langereis MA, van Kuppeveld FJ, Lloyd RE ( 2015)
Stress granules regulate double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase
activation through a complex containing G 3BP1 and Caprin 1. MBio 6:
e02486
Reineke LC, Lloyd RE ( 2015) The stress granule protein G 3BP1 recruits protein
kinase R to promote multiple innate immune antiviral responses. J Virol
89: 2575 – 2589
Robert F, Carrier M, Rawe S, Chen S, Lowe S, Pelletier J ( 2009) Altering
chemosensitivity by modulating translation elongation. PLoS One 4:e 5428
Ron D, Walter P ( 2007) Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum
unfolded protein response. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8: 519 – 529
ª 2017 The Authors The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017
Alexandre Dalet et al Translation regulation and virus innate sensing The EMBO Journal
781
Ruggieri A, Dazert E, Metz P, Hofmann S, Bergeest JP, Mazur J, Bankhead P,
Hiet MS, Kallis S, Alvisi G, Samuel CE, Lohmann V, Kaderali L, Rohr K, Frese
M, Stoecklin G, Bartenschlager R ( 2012) Dynamic oscillation of translation
and stress granule formation mark the cellular response to virus infection.
Cell Host Microbe 12: 71 – 85
Saitoh T, Yamamoto M, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Nakanishi M, Fujita T, Akira S,
Yamamoto N, Yamaoka S ( 2005)A 20 is a negative regulator of IFN
regulatory factor 3 signaling. J Immunol 174: 1507 – 1512
Schmidt EK, Clavarino G, Ceppi M, Pierre P ( 2009) SUnSET, a nonradioactive
method to monitor protein synthesis. Nat Methods 6: 275 – 277
Schulz O, Pichlmair A, Rehwinkel J, Rogers NC, Scheuner D, Kato H, Takeuchi
O, Akira S, Kaufman RJ, Reis e Sousa C ( 2010) Protein kinase R contributes
to immunity against specific viruses by regulating interferon mRNA
integrity. Cell Host Microbe 7: 354 – 361
Sekine Y, Zyryanova A, Crespillo-Casado A, Fischer PM, Harding HP, Ron D
(2015) Stress responses. Mutations in a translation initiation factor
identify the target of a memory-enhancing compound. Science 348:
1027 – 1030
Seth RB, Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ ( 2005) Identification and characterization of
MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein that activates NF-
kappaB and IRF 3. Cell 122: 669 – 682
Sidrauski C, McGeachy AM, Ingolia NT, Walter P ( 2015) The small molecule
ISRIB reverses the effects of eIF 2alpha phosphorylation on translation and
stress granule assembly. Elife 4:e 05033
Starck SR, Tsai JC, Chen K, Shodiya M, Wang L, Yahiro K, Martins-Green M,
Shastri N, Walter P ( 2016) Translation from the 5’ untranslated region
shapes the integrated stress response. Science 351: aad 3867
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA,
Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP ( 2005) Gene set
enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:
15545 – 15550
Whelan SP, Barr JN, Wertz GW ( 2000) Identification of a minimal size
requirement for termination of vesicular stomatitis virus mRNA:
implications for the mechanism of transcription. J Virol 74: 8268 – 8276
Wies E, Wang MK, Maharaj NP, Chen K, Zhou S, Finberg RW, Gack MU ( 2013)
Dephosphorylation of the RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA 5 by the
phosphatase PP 1 is essential for innate immune signaling. Immunity 38:
437 – 449
Williams BR ( 2001) Signal integration via PKR. Sci STKE 2001:r e 2
Yang YL, Reis LF, Pavlovic J, Aguzzi A, Schafer R, Kumar A, Williams BR, Aguet
M, Weissmann C ( 1995) Deficient signaling in mice devoid of double
stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase. EMBO J 14: 6095 – 6106
Zawatzky R, De Maeyer E, De Maeyer-Guignard J ( 1985) Identification of
individual interferon-producing cells by in situ hybridization. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 82: 1136 – 1140
Zhang P, Samuel CE ( 2008) Induction of protein kinase PKR-dependent
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 by vaccinia virus
occurs through adapter MAVS signaling. J Biol Chem 283: 34580 – 34587
Zhang W, Tian T, Zou X ( 2015) Negative feedback contributes to the
stochastic expression of the interferon-beta gene in virus-triggered type I
interferon signaling pathways. Math Biosci 265: 12 – 27
Zhao M, Zhang J, Phatnani H, Scheu S, Maniatis T ( 2012) Stochastic
expression of the interferon-beta gene. PLoS Biol 10:e 1001249
The EMBO Journal Vol 36 |N o 6 | 2017 ª 2017 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Translation regulation and virus innate sensing Alexandre Dalet et al
782