Article
Esrrb extinction triggers dismantling of naïve
pluripotency and marks commitment
to differentiation
Nicola Festuccia1,†,* , Florian Halbritter 1,‡ , Andrea Corsinotti 1,2, Alessia Gagliardi 1,§,
Douglas Colby1, Simon R Tomlinson 1 & Ian Chambers 1,**
Abstract
Self-renewal of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) cultured in LIF/fetal calf
serum (FCS) is incomplete with some cells initiating differentiation.
While this is reflected in heterogeneous expression of naive pluripo-
tency transcription factors (TFs), the link between TF heterogeneity
and differentiation is not fully understood. Here, we purify ESCs with
distinct TF expression levels from LIF/FCS cultures to uncover early
events during commitment from naïve pluripotency. ESCs carrying
fluorescent Nanog and Esrrb reporters show Esrrb downregulation
only in Nanog
low cells. Independent Esrrb reporter lines demonstrate
that Esrrbnegative ESCs cannot effectively self-renew. Upon Esrrb loss,
pre-implantation pluripotency gene expression collapses. ChIP-Seq
identifies different regulatory element classes that bind both OCT 4
and NANOG in Esrrb
positive cells. Class I elements lose NANOG and
OCT4 binding in Esrrb negative ESCs and associate with genes
expressed preferentially in naïve ESCs. In contrast, Class II elements
retain OCT 4 but not NANOG binding in ESRRB-negative cells and
associate with more broadly expressed genes. Therefore, mechanistic
differences in TF function act cumulatively to restrict potency during
exit from naïve pluripotency.
Keywords commitment; embryonic stem cells; fluorescent reporters; self-
renewal; transcription factors
Subject Categories Development & Differentiation; Stem Cells; Transcription
DOI 10.15252/embj.201695476 | Received 14 December 2016 | Revised 24
August 2018 | Accepted 27 August 2018 | Published online 1 October 2018
The EMBO Journal ( 2018) 37:e 95476
Introduction
Naı¨ ve pluripotency is a characteristic of pre-implantation mouse
epiblast cells and their in vitro derivatives, embryonic stem cells
(ESCs). The activity of a relatively well-characterized pluripotency
gene regulatory network, centered on the triumvirate OCT4, SOX2
and NANOG, controls the dual abilities of ESCs to self-renew and
to differentiate (Jaenisch & Young, 2008; Chambers & Tomlinson,
2009; Ng & Surani, 2011). While populations of ESCs cultured in
LIF/FCS express relatively homogeneous levels of Oct4 and Sox2,
individual ESCs show varying levels of Nanog expression
(Chambers et al , 2007; Kalmar et al , 2009; Abranches et al ,
2014). Heterogeneous expression has also been reported for Esrrb
(van den Berg et al , 2008), Klf4 (Niwa et al , 2009), Tbx3 (Niwa
et al , 2009; Russell et al , 2015), Rex1 (Toyooka et al , 2008), and
Stella (Hayashi et al , 2008). This heterogeneity is a manifestation
of the simultaneous possession of differentiation and self-renewal
potential within the ESC population (reviewed in Torres-Padilla &
Chambers, 2014). Indeed, ESCs cultured in LIF/FCS have been
proposed to contain a mixture of pluripotent cells that have
progressed to different extents toward a primed state (Hackett &
Surani, 2014). Such a primed state can also be captured in vitro
as EpiSC, by explantation and culture of post-implantation
epiblast cells (Brons et al , 2007; Tesar et al , 2007). In contrast,
ESCs cultured in LIF supplemented with inhibitors of both MEK
and GSK3b (two inhibitors or 2i; Ying et al , 2008) may represent
the opposite end of the range of pluripotent states that can be
maintained in vitro (Hackett & Surani, 2014). Supporting the idea
that heterogeneity is a direct physiological consequence of the
balance between self-renewal and differentiation, TF expression
becomes uniformly high as a result of pharmacological treatment
with PD0325901 (Wray et al , 2010). This MEK inhibitor blocks
ESC differentiation by preventing the pro-differentiative action of
autocrine FGF4 (Kunath et al , 2007; Stavridis et al , 2007), a direct
target gene of OCT4 and SOX2 (Ambrosetti et al , 1997). There-
fore, fractionating ESC populations cultured in LIF/FCS on the
basis of heterogeneous TF expression has the potential to clarify
mechanisms underlying the ability of ESCs to respond to
1 MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
2 Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
*Corresponding author. Tel: + 44 20 8383 8228 ; E-mail: n.festuccia@lms.mrc.ac.uk
**Corresponding author. Tel: + 44 131 651 9562 ; Fax: + 44 131 651 9501 ; E-mail: ichambers@ed.ac.uk
† Present address: MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, U K
‡ Present address: Children ’s Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria
§Present address: Canada ’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer, Vancouver, BC, Canada
[Correction added on 9 October 2018, after first online publication: Affiliations have been corrected.]
ª 2018 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 1 of 20
autocrine signaling stimuli, dismantle the naı ¨ ve pluripotency
network, and exit self-renewal.
Previous studies have shown that NANOG controls the expres-
sion of a number of important pre-implantation pluripotency TFs
(Festuccia et al , 2012) that are expressed differentially between
ESCs and EpiLC/EpiSCs. Prominent among these is ESRRB, a TF
that can confer cytokine-independent self-renewal when overex-
pressed and that can reprogram pluripotent cells from a primed to a
naı¨ ve state (Festuccia et al , 2012). Here, we examine the effects of
transcription factor heterogeneity in LIF/FCS. Using reporter lines
for both Nanog and Esrrb expression, we FACS-purify subpopula-
tions of ESCs expressing distinct Nanog/Esrrb levels. The effects of
downregulation of these factors on pre-implantation pluripotency
gene expression and the initial steps in dismantling of the naı ¨ ve
pluripotency network are then explored.
Expression of Esrrb is lost only in Nanog
negative cells with loss of
Esrrb coinciding with commitment to differentiation. Tracking
downregulation of Esrrb expression enabled us to begin to identify
the molecular changes accompanying extinction of the naı ¨ ve
pluripotency network. Genome-wide ChIP-Seq of sorted ESC popula-
tions identified two classes of regulatory elements active in naı ¨ ve
pluripotent cells: one in which OCT4 binding is dependent upon
NANOG and ESRRB (Class I enhancers) and one in which OCT4
binding is independent of both NANOG and ESRRB (Class II enhan-
cers). Importantly, Class I enhancers are specific to naı ¨ ve pluripo-
tent cells and lose OCT4 binding, becoming inactive in committed
cells. In contrast, Class II enhancers are OCT4-bound and active in
both ESC and EpiSC. This study therefore clarifies molecular events
that drive the early stages of ESC differentiation.
Results
To investigate the co-expression of NANOG and ESRRB at the
single-cell level in LIF/FCS cultures, immunofluorescence was
performed. This showed that cells expressing high levels of NANOG
also tend to show high levels of ESRRB (Fig 1A). Quantitative analy-
sis confirmed this and showed that cells in which NANOG was
reduced below a threshold level exhibited a progressive loss of
ESRRB expression. Above this threshold, a wide range of NANOG
levels sustained high ESRRB expression. This resulted in the
preferential detection of ESRRB
positive/NANOGlow, but not
NANOGpositive/ESRRBlow cells, prior to loss of both proteins (see
curvature of the regression line, Fig 1B).
To further explore the relationship between expression of Esrrb
and Nanog upon ESC phenotype, the coding sequence of the tdTo-
mato red fluorescent protein was fused downstream of the Esrrb
ORF by homologous recombination in wild-type E14Tg2a ESCs
(Fig EV1, Appendix Fig S1A and B). Southern blot analysis identi-
fied clones carrying the correctly targeted structure at both 5
0 and 3 0
ends of Esrrb (Appendix Fig S1C and D). Examination of targeted
Esrrb-tdTomato (E-tdT) cells showed that the Esrrb-tdTomato fusion
protein had a similar half-life to that of endogenous Esrrb
(Appendix Fig S2A and B). Immunofluorescence analysis of endo-
genous ESRRB and Esrrb-tdTomato protein expression confirmed
that tdTomato was a reliable reporter of ESRRB expression
(Appendix Fig S2C). Next, lines in which Nanog and Esrrb expres-
sion can be monitored by GFP and tdTomato, respectively, were
generated by double targeting of the Esrrb-tdTomato fusion reporter
in TNG cells (Chambers et al , 2007), in which a GFP-IRES-Puro
R
cassette is knocked-in to one of the Nanog alleles. Southern analysis
(Appendix Fig S1C and D) identified correctly targeted TNG E-tdT
ESCs (Fig EV1). Plating TNG E-tdT ESCs at clonal density produced
colonies in which Nanog:GFP and Esrrb-tdTomato were expressed
in centrally localized cells surrounded by a region of non-expressing
cells (Fig 1C). Immunofluorescence and FACS analyses showed
that, at this time, cells that have downregulated Esrrb-tdTomato
continue to express OCT4, indicating that they remain pluripotent
(Appendix Fig S2D). To examine molecular changes occurring early
upon loss of Esrrb and Nanog, bulk cultures were next analysed.
After passaging ESCs in LIF/FCS at high density, which minimizes
heterogeneity, cells were replated at 2 × 10
3 cells/cm2 and cultured
for 3 days. FACS analysis of the undifferentiated SSEA-1-positive
ESC population showed that GFP and tdTomato levels in double-
positive cells were well correlated (Fig 1D). However, some cells in
the population that had lost Nanog:GFP expression retained high
Esrrb-tdTomato expression. In contrast, Esrrb-tdTomato
low cells
were not observed in the ESC populations expressing high Nanog:
GFP. Continued application of puromycin, which selects for expres-
sion of pac from the Nanog locus, eliminated Esrrb-tdTomato
low
cells (Fig 1D). These findings indicate that heterogeneous Esrrb
expression is confined to Nanog negative cells.
▸
Figure 1. NANOG acts upstream of Esrrb in ESCs.
A, B Immunofluorescent detection of NANOG and ESRRB protein in wild-type E 14Tg2a ESCs cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS. (A) Widefield images of a representative
colony. (B) Quantification of the mean NANOG and ESRRB fluorescence levels measured in nuclei identified by automatic segmentation of single optica l plane
images obtained by confocal microscopy. Values are expressed in arbitrary units (AU). OCT 4negative cells, also identified by immunostaining, were excluded from the
analysis. The red line represents the moving average of the data distribution. Representative of three independent experiments each including at le ast 1,000 nuclei.
C Colonies of TNG E-tdT ESCs showing GFP expression from Nanog and Esrrb-tdTomato fusion protein expression from Esrrb after 3 days in LIF/FCS.
D Flow cytometric analysis of Esrrb and Nanog fluorescent reporter expression in SSEA 1+ TNG E-tdT ESCs cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS with or without puromycin.
E Immunofluorescent detection and quantification (as in panel B) of total NANOG and ESRRB protein in E 14Tg2a ESCs overexpressing NANOG (left) or ESRRB (right)
cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS. Parental E 14Tg2as are shown as a reference. The red lines indicate the negative thresholds defined by staining ESCs differentiated for
3 days in the absence of LIF and the presence of retinoic acid.
F Flow cytometric analysis of Esrrb-GFP and Nanog-mCherry fusion protein expression in SSEA 1+ NER ESCs cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS.
G Histograms showing expression levels of Esrrb-GFP and Nanog-mCherry from the respective targeted endogenous alleles in SSEA 1+ NER ESCs overexpressing
NANOG (left) or ESRRB (right) cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS. Parental NER ESCs are shown as a reference, and wild-type E 14Tg2a set the negative thresholds.
H Comparative flow cytometric analysis of Esrrb-2a-tdTomato and Nanog:GFP expression in undifferentiated SSEA- 1+ TNG E-2a-tdT or Nanog-null ES DNE -2a-tdT
ESCs cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS. Data are shown as dot plots (top) and histogram (bottom).
Data information: For a schematic representation of the reporter allele configuration characteristic of each cell line, please refer to Fig EV 1.
2 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
AB
C
E
F
GH
D
Figure 1.
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 3 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
The epistatic relationship between NANOG and ESRRB
As shown by relocalization of a NANOG-ERT 2 fusion protein to
the nucleus of Nanog-null ESCs, Esrrb is a NANOG target gene
(Festuccia et al , 2012). Moreover, quantitation of pre-mRNA shows
that Esrrb transcription responds to NANOG relocalization within
minutes, indicating that Esrrb is a primary direct NANOG target.
Transient transfection assays also indicate that ESRRB can contri-
bute to luciferase reporter expression driven by the Nanog
promoter (van den Berg et al , 2008). To further investigate the
effect of ESRRB on Nanog gene expression and of NANOG on
Esrrb gene expression, immunofluorescence analysis was
performed on ESCs overexpressing NANOG or ESRRB. NANOG
overexpression resulted in homogeneously robust expression of
ESRRB protein in all cells (Fig 1E). This confirms that NANOG is a
major positive regulator of Esrrb. Upon ESRRB overexpression, the
dynamic range of NANOG expression was narrowed, but cells
displaying low NANOG protein levels remained detectable
(Fig 1E). To explore this reciprocal influence in greater detail, an
ESC line in which the endogenous NANOG and ESRRB proteins
were fused with GFP and mCherry, respectively, was generated
(Appendix Fig S2E and F). Analysis of reporter expression indi-
cated an overall correlation between Nanog and Esrrb levels, but
also confirmed the presence of Esrrb-GFP
high/Nanog-mCherrylow
and the relative absence of Esrrb-GFP low/Nanog-mCherryhigh cells
(Fig 1F, Appendix Fig S2F). This reporter line was also used to
assess the effect of transcription factor overexpression. This con-
firmed that NANOG overexpression increased Esrrb-GFP expres-
sion, and reduced Nanog-mCherry levels, consistent with
autorepression (Navarro et al , 2012). In contrast, ESRRB overex-
pression showed minimal effects (Fig 1G). These results establish
that the principal epistatic relationship between the two genes
places Nanog upstream of Esrrb.
To directly assess the effect of NANOG protein on Esrrb
expression in single cells, an Esrrb-2a-tdTomato reporter was
introduced into both Nanog
/C0//C0 ESDN and Nanog+//C0 TNG ESCs
(Chambers et al , 2007; Festuccia et al , 2012; Fig EV1,
Appendix Fig S1). Both lines have GFP knocked-in to one of the
Nanog alleles, but in ES DN ESCs, the second Nanog allele is also
inactivated (Fig EV1, Appendix Fig S2). TNG E-2a-tdT ESCs have
a similar FACS profile to TNG E-tdT ESCs. In ES DN E-2a-tdT ESCs
where NANOG protein is absent, the overall levels of Esrrb-2a-
tdTomato expression were reduced and the correlation between
GFP and tdTomato seen in GFP
+/tdTomato+ TNG E-2a-tdT cells
was less apparent (Fig 1H). Moreover, as reported by GFP activ-
ity, loss of Esrrb expression was not necessarily coupled to down-
regulation of the activity of the Nanog locus (Fig 1H). These
results further highlight the important contribution of NANOG
protein to Esrrb expression.
Our previous study has shown that Klf4 is also a direct primary
target of NANOG (Festuccia et al , 2012). Analysis of KLF4 expres-
sion by intracellular cytometry in TNG E-tdT cells suggests that
ESCs downregulate KLF4 at a similar rate to Esrrb (Fig EV2A).
Selection for Nanog expression using puromycin abolished hetero-
geneous expression of both Esrrb-tdTomato and KLF4 (Fig EV2B).
While this result is compatible with placement of Nanog upstream
of Klf4 as well as Esrrb, we note that additional positive inputs into
Klf4 exist (Niwa et al , 2009).
Loss of Esrrb expression reflects commitment out of the naïve
state
To investigate the dynamics of the transition between ESCs express-
ing differing levels of Esrrb and Nanog, TNG E-tdT cells were sorted
into two fractions of > 99.5% purity based on expression of Nanog
and Esrrb (Fig 2A). Cells were replated in LIF/FCS and the distribu-
tion of Esrrb and Nanog reporter expression determined daily
(Fig 2A). To restrict the analysis to undifferentiated cells, only
SSEA1
+ cells were examined. While Nanog:GFP high/Esrrb-tdToma-
tohigh cells restored the major starting populations, Nanog:GFP low/
Esrrb-tdTomatolow cells were unable to do so. In fact, the reduction
in SSEA1 + cell number following replating of Esrrb-tdTomato low
cells suggests that these had already initiated differentiation. These
results suggest that as Nanog and Esrrb levels decline, the self-
renewal capacity of the cells diminishes. Dynamic restoration of
heterogeneity in transcription factor expression was also assessed
upon release of wild-type ESCs from LIF/2i. An initial reduction in
ESRRB expression upon removal of GSK inhibition (Martello et al ,
2012) coincided with the previously observed expansion of the
dynamic range of NANOG expression. After this, the levels of both
TFs decreased with NANOG-negative cells appearing at day 2 and
ESRRB-negative cells later at day 3 (Fig 2B and C). This heterogene-
ity in loss of naı¨ ve pluripotency markers is in line with the heteroge-
neous loss of a Rex1 reporter expression following removal of ESCs
from culture in 2i, without LIF (Kalkan et al , 2017). To exclude
potential confounding effects due to release from LIF/2i, these
dynamic alterations were independently assessed by sorting double-
positive cells from NER cultured in LIF/FCS (Fig 2D). This con-
firmed that while the cell population progressively reduced the
NANOG levels, ESRRB levels were buffered against change for a day
following the initial decline at day 1.
To determine the biological significance of the downregulation of
transcription factor expression, quantitative colony-forming assays
were performed on sorted TNG E-tdT cells. Wholly undifferentiated
colonies were produced efficiently from Nanog:GFP
high Esrrb-tdTo-
matohigh cells. In contrast, Nanog:GFP low/Esrrb-tdTomatolow cells
produced no alkaline phosphatase-positive colonies in either LIF/
FCS or LIF/2i (Fig 2E).
Taken together, the above results reveal how loss of Nanog
expression may trigger further changes in TF expression that result
in reduced ESC self-renewal efficiency (Chambers et al , 2007). In
cells expressing low NANOG, silencing of Nanog target genes
expressed in naı¨ ve pluripotent cells, including Klf4 and Esrrb, trig-
gers commitment to exit the naı ¨ ve state resulting in loss of colony-
forming potential in LIF.
Molecular changes during loss of Esrrb expression
The above results reveal a close connection between loss of Esrrb
expression and the progressive extinction of ESC self-renewal. To
explore the molecular mechanisms underpinning loss of naı ¨ ve
pluripotency in ESC cultures, a reporter was generated to enable
Esrrb downregulation to be monitored with minimal temporal delay
by targeting a 2a-destabilized GFP cassette downstream of the ORF
at both Esrrb alleles (E-GFPd1 cells; Fig EV1, Appendix Fig S1). To
generate a heterogeneous population, ESCs were replated at
2 × 10
3/cm2 and analyzed after 3 days. FACS analysis of correctly
4 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
targeted ESCs showed that culture in LIF/FCS yielded a broad
bimodal expression profile that was resolved to a unimodal expres-
sion profile in LIF/2i (Fig 3A), matching the results obtained using
Esrrb-tdTomato cells. E-GFPd1 cells cultured in LIF/FCS were
purified by FACS into Esrrb-GFP high, Esrrb-GFP medium, and
Esrrb-GFPnegative fractions of SSEA1 + cells (Fig 3B). qRT-PCR analy-
sis showed that Esrrb mRNA levels reflected changes in the GFP
reporter levels in the sorted fractions (Fig 3C). Clonal self-renewal
assays revealed a distinction in phenotype of Esrrb-GFP negative cells.
While there was no substantial difference between Esrrb-GFP high
and Esrrb-GFP medium cells in colony-forming capacity in either LIF/
FCS or LIF/2i, Esrrb-GFP negative cells were essentially unable to form
fully undifferentiated colonies in either condition (Fig 3D). The
behavior of purified E-GFPd1 ESCs following replating in LIF/FCS
A
BD
C
E
Figure 2. Decreased Esrrb expression marks ESC commitment.
A SSEA- 1+ TNG E-tdT ESCs were cultured for 3 days in LIF/FCS and sorted into GFP +/tdThigh (Nanoghigh/Esrrbhigh) or GFP /C0/tdTlow fractions (Nanoglow/Esrrblow). The
purity of the sorted populations ( > 99.5%) is shown (day 0). After replating in LIF/FCS, SSEA- 1+ cells were analyzed daily for Esrrb-tdTomato and Nanog:GFP
expression.
B, C Immunofluorescent detection of NANOG and ESRRB protein in wild-type E 14Tg2a ESCs cultured in LIF/ 2i and released in LIF/FCS for 1, 2,o r 3 days. Quantification
of the mean Nanog and Esrrb fluorescence levels measured in nuclei identified by automatic segmentation of single optical plane images obtained by co nfocal
microscopy. OCT 4negative cells, also identified by immunostaining, were excluded from the analysis. (B) The red vertical and horizontal lines indicate the negative
thresholds defined by staining ESCs differentiated for 3 days in the absence of LIF and the presence of retinoic acid. The red trendline represents the moving
average of the data distribution at day 3. Representative of two independent experiments each including at least 1,000 nuclei. (C) Histogram plots of the data
presented in (B).
D Sorted SSEA- 1+ and Esrrb-GFPhigh/Nanog-mCherryhigh NER ESCs were replated in LIF/FCS, and SSEA- 1+ cells were analyzed daily for Esrrb-GFP and Nanog-mCherry
expression. Wild-type E 14Tg2a set the negative thresholds.
E SSEA- 1+ TNG E-tdT ESCs from the sorted populations used above (panel A, day 0) were replated at clonal density in LIF/FCS or LIF/ 2i and stained for alkaline
phosphatase activity after 6 days. Error bars: standard deviation of the number of colonies observed in two independent experiments.
Data information: For a schematic representation of the reporter allele configuration characteristic of each cell line, please refer to Fig EV 1.
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 5 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
culture also supported a distinct phenotype of the Esrrb-GFP negative
cells, with Esrrb-GFP high and Esrrb-GFP medium cells rapidly intercon-
verting and generating negative cells, and the Esrrb-GFP negative
population essentially unable to regain Esrrb expression (Fig EV3A).
Coupled with the previous observation that NANOG low cells can
express distinct ESRRB levels, this indirectly indicates that down-
regulation of Nanog does not immediately result in the loss of
self-renewal ability of ESC. NANOG low/ESRRBpositive cells can
self-renew, with loss of this ability occurring only upon further
downregulation of ESRRB.
Fractionated E-GFPd1 ESCs were next analyzed by gene expres-
sion profiling to determine the transcriptional changes accompany-
ing phenotypic dismantling of naı ¨ ve pluripotency. Quantitative
mRNA analysis showed that differences in expression between the
Esrrb-GFPhigh and Esrrb-GFP medium fractions were confined to Stella
and Nanog (Fig 3E). In contrast, Esrrb-GFP negative cells showed
AB
DE
G
H
CF
Figure 3. Naïve pluripotency gene expression is lost upon Esrrb downregulation.
A Flow cytometric analysis of GFP expression in SSEA- 1+ E-GFPd1 ESCs cultured in LIF/ 2i or LIF/FCS compared to wild-type E 14Tg2a ESCs.
B SSEA- 1+ E-GFPd1 ESCs sorted into Esrrb Hi, EsrrbMed, or Esrrb Neg subpopulations. Purity of the sorted populations, assessed by flow cytometry, is indicated above the
sorting gates.
C Quantitative Esrrb mRNA expression analysis of populations sorted in (B). Error bars: standard deviation of gene expression values measured in four independent
experiments.
D Populations sorted in (B) were replated at clonal density in LIF/FCS (top) or LIF/ 2i (bottom) and scored for alkaline phosphatase after 6 days. Error bars: standard
deviation of the number of colonies observed in two independent experiments.
E Quantitative mRNA expression analysis of populations sorted in (B). Error bars: standard deviation of gene expression values measured in four inde pendent
experiments.
F Microarray analysis of populations sorted in (B) represented as a heatmap ordered by expression change between Esrrb Hi and EsrrbNeg. Expression levels were
measured from three independent experiments and all genes expressed in at least one sample are shown ( n = 14,553). The central line plot summarizes the average
fold change per cell population compared to Esrrb Hi cells (log2 scale) with the color coding indicated below the heat map. Previously identified NANOG and ESRRB
(Festuccia et al , 2012) targets are indicated on the right.
G Pearson correlation coefficients of the gene expression profiles of Esrrb Hi (H), EsrrbMed (M), EsrrbNeg (Neg) E-GFPd1 ESCs, and embryo-derived (late bud stage) TNG
E-2a-tdT EpiSCs (EpiSC) compared to those of naïve ESC and EpiLC from Buecker et al (2014).
H Pearson correlation coefficients in gene expression obtained comparing Esrrb Hi (H), EsrrbMed (M), Esrrb/C0 (Neg) E-GFPd1 ESCs, and embryo-derived (late bud stage)
TNG E-2a-tdT EpiSCs (EpiSC) to epiblast/ectoderm cells from embryos dissected at successive developmental stages (CAV, cavity; PS, prestreak; ES, early s treak; MS,
midstreak; LMS, late midstreak; LS, late streak; OB/EB, no bud/early bud; and LB, late bud). This analysis was restricted to the top 500 differentially expressed gene
identified at successive developmental stages sorting by Hotelling T ² score, as described in Kojima et al (2014).
Data information: For a schematic representation of the reporter allele configuration characteristic of each cell line, please refer to Fig EV 1.
6 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
complete loss of expression of a range of pluripotency markers typi-
cal of the pre-implantation epiblast, but retained Oct4 and Sox2
expression, confirming that these cells remained pluripotent.
Microarray analyses further indicated that the majority of known
NANOG and ESRRB target genes (Festuccia et al , 2012) are among
the genes with the most dramatic change in expression during the
transition from Esrrb-GFP
high/medium to Esrrb-GFP negative cells
(55.6% of NANOG or ESRRB targets are in the top/bottom 400
genes ranked by the expression difference between Esrrb-GFP
high
and Esrrb-GFPnegative cells; hypergeometric P = 1.22 × 10/C035; Fig 3F,
Table EV1). Analysis of the regulatory regions in proximity of Differ-
entially Expressed Genes (DEGs) in publicly available ChIP-Seq
datasets showed enrichment for binding of NANOG, ESRRB, KLF4,
and the mediator subunit MED1 (Chen et al , 2008; Fig EV3B),
suggesting that these DEGs are stringently controlled by enhancers
through which naı¨ ve pluripotency TFs act. Taken together, these
results suggest that modulation of the entire transcriptional
programs controlled by NANOG and ESRRB accompanies commit-
ment to differentiation.
Strikingly, Esrrb-GFP
negative cells had also upregulated mRNAs
characteristic of primed pluripotent cells (Fig 3E) and globally
presented a transcriptional state closer to that of EpiSC (Fig 3F).
Moreover, Pearson’s correlation coefficient shows that Esrrb-
GFP
negative cells are transcriptionally closer to primed EpiLC than
naı¨ ve ESCs ( r[Esrrb-GFPnegative, EpiLC] = 0.70, r[Esrrb-GFPnegative,
ESCs] = 0.68) while the opposite is the case for Esrrb-GFP high
cells (Fig 3G). To further investigate this, sorted cells were
replated in N2B27/Activin/FGF and transcripts analyzed after 0,
8, and 24 h. Relative to Esrrb-GFP
high cells, Esrrb-GFP negative cells
showed faster induction of mRNAs characteristic of primed
pluripotent cells (Fig EV3C). This supports the notion that ESCs
that have lost Esrrb expression have initiated the transition from
naı¨ ve to primed pluripotency. Comparison of the gene expression
profile of sorted Esrrb-GFP populations and EpiSCs with the tran-
scriptome of epiblast cells from different stages of post-implanta-
tion development (Kojima et al , 2014) revealed that Esrrb-
GFP
negative cells are closer transcriptionally to in vivo epiblast
cells prior to gastrulation. In contrast, EpiSCs more closely
resemble epiblast cells from later gastrulating embryos (Fig 3H).
To substantiate this observation, we compared the levels of tran-
scripts expressed differentially before (CAV/PS) or after the onset
of embryonic gastrulation (LMS, LS) with sorted E-GFPd1 ESCs
and EpiSC (Fig EV3D). Genes upregulated after gastrulation have
low expression in both Esrrb-GFP
high and Esrrb-GFP negative cells,
whereas mRNAs silenced after gastrulation show high expression
in both Esrrb-GFP
high and Esrrb-GFP negative cells. In contrast,
EpiSCs express both mRNA classes at levels intermediate
between those detected in pre- and post-gastrulation embryos,
suggesting that they have progressed further in development
than ESCs fractionated on the basis of Esrrb expression. Esrrb-
GFP
negative cells therefore capture a pluripotent state characteris-
tic of early post-implantation development.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis supported the above distinctions
(Fig EV3E). Genes involved in morphogenesis, pattern specification,
and metabolic processes are upregulated in EpiSCs compared to
Esrrb-GFP
negative cells. Morphogenesis terms also characterize the
Esrrb-GFPmedium to Esrrb-GFP negative transition, with changes in
genes associated with neuronal development and cell proliferation
also apparent. However, the most dramatic changes were in the
Esrrb-GFP
high to Esrrb-GFP medium transition, which was dominated
by downregulation of genes involved in stem cell maintenance/
development, negative regulation of differentiation, and upregula-
tion of chromatin structure terms. It is notable that these GO term
changes between Esrrb-GFP
high and Esrrb-GFP medium characterize
states that are largely reversible (Fig EV3A) presaging functional dif-
ferences in self-renewal that becomes apparent only later at cellular
commitment as cell transition from an Esrrb-GFP
medium to Esrrb-
GFPnegative state.
DNA methylation changes during loss of Esrrb expression
The preceding results suggest that downregulation of Esrrb is linked
to progressive changes in the transcriptional identity of ESCs via
specific silencing of genes regulated by naı ¨ ve pluripotency TFs.
Locus-specific DNA methylation at pluripotency gene regulatory
regions characterizes loss of naı ¨ ve pluripotency (Ficz et al , 2013;
Habibi et al , 2013; Hackett et al , 2013; Leitch et al , 2013). There-
fore, to test whether CpG methylation drives the loss of pluripotency
associated with Esrrb extinction, CpG DNA methylation was
analyzed in fractionated SSEA1
+ E-GFPd1 ESCs. Digestion with
methylation-sensitive restriction nucleases showed that DNA methy-
lation at the Nanog and Esrrb promoters was indistinguishable
between Esrrb-GFP
high and Esrrb-GFP medium cells, with a modest
increase seen in Esrrb-GFP negative cells (Figs 4A and EV4A). Simi-
larly, modest increases were also observed in Esrrb-GFP negative cells
at the Stella and Rex1 promoters, although the latter was already
▸
Figure 4. Different kinetics of loss of TF binding and accumulation of CpG methylation at key regulatory elements of the pluripotency network.
A Percentage of methylated CpG dinucleotides profiled across the Esrrb and Nanog enhancer and the Nanog promoter in sorted SSEA- 1+/EsrrbHi, EsrrbMed, or Esrrb Neg E-
GFPd1 ESCs and TNG E- 2a-tdT EpiSC. CpG methylation was assessed by measuring protection from digestion of the HpaII, AciI, Hin6I, or TaqI restriction sites
(indicated by vertical lines in the gene structure maps derived from the mouse reference genome (mm 9). Location is expressed relative to the TSS in ESCs (Chambers,
2004; Festuccia et al , 2012). Values represent total CpG methylation levels ( 5mC + 5hmC). Error bars: standard deviation of the measures in four independent
experiments.
B Methylated CpG dinucleotides across the Esrrb enhancer were assessed as in (A). SSEA- 1+/EsrrbHi E-GFPd1 ESCs were sorted and placed back in culture overnight
before resorting and methylation analysis relative to Esrrb Neg E-GFPd1 ESCs. Error bars: standard deviation of the measures in three independent experiments.
C The sorted E-GFPd 1 ESCs populations used in (A) were assessed by immunoblot for ESRRB and NANOG (left) or OCT 4 (right) by fluorescence-based detection (Licor).
D Quantitative ChIP-PCR analysis of OCT 4, NANOG, and ESRRB binding and histone modifications at the Esrrb and Nanog enhancers and the Nanog promoter in the
sorted populations used in (A). Error bars: standard deviation of the measures in two (NANOG, ESRRB, H 3K27ac) or three (OCT 4,H 3K4me3, and H 3K4me1)
independent ChIP experiments, each performed on pooled chromatin from at least three independently sorted samples. The diagrams at the bottom show t he
approximate position of the regions analyzed for transcription factor binding or histone modifications (in color or black), along with the relative control genomic
locations (gray).
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 7 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
A
B
D
C
Figure 4.
8 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
partially methylated in Esrrb-GFP high and Esrrb-GFP medium cells
(Fig EV4B and C). These findings agree with the idea that promoters
are generally protected from DNA methylation accumulation
(Deaton & Bird, 2011), remaining partially unmethylated even when
inactive (e.g., Esrrb and Rex1 promoters in EpiSC; Fig EV4A and C).
Minimal DNA methylation differences were also seen at the Nanog
enhancer in ESCs and EpiSCs, where Nanog is expressed (Fig 4A).
In contrast, striking changes occur between ESC fractions at the
Esrrb enhancer, with Esrrb-GFP
negative cells and EpiSCs showing
almost complete CpG methylation (Figs 4A and EV4A). To investi-
gate DNA methylation dynamics at the Esrrb enhancer, FACS-puri-
fied Esrrb-GFP
high cells were replated in FCS/LIF. Within 24 h,
Esrrb-GFPnegative cells emerged and FACS purification at this time
showed that these cells had increased methylation at the Esrrb
enhancer from ~2t o ~20% (Fig 4B). These observations indicate
that DNA methylation is deposited at differing rates at pluripotency
loci with the Esrrb enhancer accumulating DNA methylation rapidly.
Nevertheless, the fact that not all cells that have downregulated
Esrrb at 24 h have methylated the Esrrb enhancer indicates that
DNA methylation does not drive Esrrb extinction.
Chromatin changes during transition to Esrrb
negative state
Next, TF binding in the three ESC populations was assessed in an
attempt to identify potential drivers of the differential accumulation
of methylation at the Nanog and Esrrb enhancers. First, NANOG,
OCT4, and ESRRB protein levels were examined in sorted E-GFPd1
cells. Quantitative immunoblot analysis showed that ESRRB protein
levels reflected changes in GFP fluorescence and both ESRRB and
NANOG protein levels agreed with the corresponding transcript
levels in fractionated cells (Figs 3C and E, and 4C). In line with the
immunoblot data, NANOG showed a graded ChIP profile at the
Nanog and Esrrb enhancers (Fig 4D). This was also the case for
ESRRB binding to the Nanog promoter. ESRRB was also lost from
both the Nanog and Esrrb enhancers in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells but
showed similar enrichment in Esrrb-GFP high and Esrrb-GFP medium
fractions, suggestive of a threshold level of ESRRB binding for func-
tion at these regulatory elements (Fig 4D). In contrast, OCT4, which
is present at similar levels in each fraction, showed distinct patterns
of binding in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells. Whereas OCT4 binding to the
Esrrb enhancer was completely abolished in the Esrrb-GFP negative
cells, these cells retained detectable binding of OCT4 to the Nanog
enhancer and promoter (Fig 4D). Coupled to the observation that
the Esrrb enhancer accumulated DNA methylation, whereas the
Nanog enhancer was protected, these results suggest the hypothesis
that the Nanog and Esrrb enhancers are examples of two classes of
regulatory regions that respectively remain active or are decommis-
sioned during early stages of commitment.
Histone modifications were next assessed for their ability to
distinguish between these regulatory elements. Active enhancers are
marked by H3K27ac, with a fraction also harboring low levels of
H3K4me3, a signature of active promoters. H3K4me1 also broadly
marks distal regulatory regions. In contrast, H3K27me3 has been
proposed to accumulate on silent but poised enhancers and promot-
ers of repressed genes (Heintzman et al , 2007, 2009; Rada-Iglesias
et al , 2011). Therefore, enrichment for H3K4me1, H3K4me3,
H3K27ac, and H3K27me3 at the Esrrb and Nanog enhancers/
promoters was determined in the three ESC populations. H3K27me3
was detectable at low levels at the Nanog promoter but not at either
enhancer (Appendix Fig S3). Both enhancers were instead marked
by H3K27ac in Esrrb-GFP
high cells: While reduced H3K27ac in Esrrb-
GFPnegative cells at the Nanog enhancer mirrored reduced OCT4
occupancy (Fig 4D), possibly accounting for reduced Nanog expres-
sion (Figs 3E and 4C and D), the absence of both H3K27ac and
OCT4 at the Esrrb enhancer in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells is consistent
with Esrrb enhancer decommissioning. H3K4me3 was enriched at
the Nanog and Esrrb promoters, progressively declining at both
genes to reach minimal levels in Esrrb-GFP negative cells (Fig 4D,
Appendix Fig S3), in line with gene expression (Figs 3C and E, and
4C). H3K4me3 was also detected in Esrrb-GFP
high cells at the Esrrb
and Nanog enhancers. This mark was completely lost at the Esrrb
enhancer in Esrrb-GFP negative cells, suggestive of functional inactiva-
tion. Further substantiating the decommissioning of this regulatory
element, H3K4me1 was detected at the Esrrb enhancer in the Esrrb-
GFP
high fraction and lost in Esrrb-GFP negative cells.
Genome-wide analysis of TF binding during transition to
Esrrbnegative state
To determine the degree to which these findings extended to global
changes in enhancer activity occurring during commitment from
naı¨ ve pluripotency, genome-wide profiles of OCT4 or NANOG bind-
ing were determined by ChIP-Seq in sorted fractions of E-GFPd1
cells (Table EV2). Regions bound by OCT4 or NANOG that reduced
binding to ≤ 50% of the level in the highest binding population were
identified as peaks that lost binding in the population concerned
(e.g., in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells, OCT4 binding at Tet2 is 5% of the
level in Esrrb-GFP high cells, so the peak is considered lost, Fig 5H).
In Esrrb-GFP high cells, OCT4 and NANOG each bound to ~10,000
regions (Fig 5A and C). In Esrrb-GFP negative cells, the number of
OCT4 binding sites was only reduced slightly (Fig 5A), whereas the
number of NANOG-bound regions was reduced drastically (Fig 5C),
consistent with a reduced NANOG protein level (Fig 4C). Analysis
of the average profiles of OCT4 occupancy revealed that regulatory
elements either lost or maintained OCT4 binding during the transi-
tion to Esrrb-GFP
negative: the positions for which an OCT4 peak was
called only in negative cells ( n = 3,532) already showed detectable
OCT4 binding in Esrrb-GFP high cells (Fig 5B). In contrast, NANOG
displayed a marked reduction in binding, globally, even at the 286
positions that were still identified as peaks in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells
(Fig 5D). Likewise, the number of sites co-bound by OCT4 and
NANOG was also dramatically lower in Esrrb-GFP
negative cells
relative to Esrrb-GFP high cells (Fig 5E).
To compare the functional consequences of loss or maintenance
of binding of NANOG and OCT4 at a comparable set of regulatory
elements, the chromatin regions bound by both factors in Esrrb-
GFP
high cells were further analyzed. Of the 3,675 regions bound by
both OCT4 and NANOG in Esrrb-GFP high cells, two major classes of
peaks were identified. Both classes of regulatory elements lost
NANOG in Esrrb-GFP
negative but could be distinguished by whether
OCT4 binding was lost (Class I elements, n = 2,034; exemplified
by a Tcfcp2l1 enhancer) or not (Class II elements, n = 1,565; exem-
plified by one of the Sox2 enhancers; Fig 5F). Importantly, differen-
tially expressed genes in the proximity (distance to closest gene
≤ 20 kb; Table EV3) of Class I elements showed decreased
expression in Esrrb-GFP
negative ESCs or EpiSC ( n≤ 20 kb = 947;
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 9 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
A
FG
HI
BC
E
D
Figure 5.
10 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
nDEG = 79—Fig 5G). In contrast, differentially expressed genes near
Class II elements showed a higher propensity to maintain or
increase expression ( n
≤ 20 kb = 683; nDEG = 41—Fig 5G). The 19
differentially expressed genes associated with both Class I and Class
II elements showed a decreased expression pattern suggesting a
dominant role of Class I over Class II elements in controlling gene
expression (Fig 5G). Among genes linked to sites losing binding of
NANOG and OCT4 (Class I), important regulators of the naı ¨ ve
pluripotent state were identified, for instance, Tet2, which is
silenced during the Esrrb-GFP
high to Esrrb-GFP negative transition
(Fig 5H). Other pluripotency factors, such as Sall1, which are
expressed in both Esrrb-GFP
high and Esrrb-GFPnegative ESCs or EpiSC,
maintained OCT4 binding in all populations, including EpiLC
(Buecker et al , 2014; Fig 5I).
Comparison with publicly available TF-binding datasets in ESCs
(Chen et al , 2008) revealed that Class I elements are bound by
ESRRB, KLF4, and NANOG more robustly than Class II elements
(Fig 6A). In contrast, Class I elements bind OCT4 less than Class II
elements (Fig 6A). To assess whether Class II elements are more
likely to remain active in primed pluripotent cells, available datasets
were analyzed to compare the FAIRE signal, H3K27ac, EP300, and
OCT4 enrichment in ESC and EpiLC (Buecker et al , 2014). Indeed,
in primed EpiLCs, Class II elements retain OCT4 binding, a more
open chromatin structure and histone mark signatures of active
enhancers (Fig 6B). Interestingly, in EpiLCs, Class II elements also
show higher enrichment for OTX2 (Fig 6B). This may either reflect
a specific role for OTX2 in stabilizing OCT4 binding in primed
pluripotent cells or be a consequence of the maintained chromatin
accessibility in EpiLC. Overall, these results suggest that retention of
OCT4 binding identifies regulatory elements that remain active
following early stage differentiation. Consistent with this, differen-
tial motif discovery analysis performed using RSAT (Thomas-
Chollier et al , 2011) on DNA sequences underlying Class I and Class
II peaks identified an octamer-binding motif at Class II peaks
(Fig 6C). Notably, the Oct-Sox motif was not identified in this dif-
ferential analysis suggesting that it is equally present in both peak
classes. In contrast, consensus-binding motifs for ESRRB and KLF
factors were enriched at Class I peaks (Fig 6C). These observations
suggest that binding of OCT4 to Class I elements is labile and depen-
dent on co-binding by naı ¨ ve pluripotency TFs. This may explain
their early downregulation during the process of commitment.
Discussion
TF heterogeneity and the transition between naïve and
primed pluripotency
NANOG is the pluripotency TF for which a direct quantitative corre-
lation between levels of expression and ESC self-renewal efficiency
has been most clearly demonstrated (Chambers et al , 2003, 2007;
Abranches et al , 2014). Accordingly, NANOG is considered to act as
a rheostat to tune ESC self-renewal efficiency (Mullin & Chambers,
2012). Modulation of NANOG activity in ESCs alters transcription of
a limited number of direct target genes (Festuccia et al , 2012).
Among these, Esrrb is the most strongly upregulated TF. Consistent
with this, ESRRB is able to mediate several downstream effects of
NANOG, both in pluripotent cells and primordial germ cells (Festuccia
et al , 2012; Zhang et al , 2018). NANOG protein is expressed in the
nuclei of ESCs cultured in LIF/FCS in a heterogeneous manner, a
feature shared with several other pluripotency proteins, including
ESRRB (Chambers et al , 2007; Torres-Padilla & Chambers, 2014).
To clarify the role of ESRRB on pluripotency gene regulatory
network function, subpopulations of ESCs expressing distinct ESRRB
levels were analyzed for ESC self-renewal, target gene expression,
DNA methylation, and chromatin binding by TFs. In contrast to
reduced NANOG expression, which is a reversible state (Chambers
et al , 2007; Abranches et al , 2014; Filipczyk et al , 2015), loss of
ESRRB commits cells to exit the naı¨ ve state. This can be clearly seen
in clonal self-renewal assays where Esrrb
negative cells are essentially
unable to form colonies in LIF. We therefore examined how NANOG
and ESRRB downregulation are coordinated in single ESC to trigger
▸
Figure 6. Differential TF binding and activity of Class I and Class II elements in ESC and EpiLC.
A Average binding profile of ESRRB, KLF 4, NANOG, OCT 4, and SOX 2 to Class I (green), Class II (orange), or all NANOG- and OCT 4-bound (gray dashed line) elements in
ESCs [data from Chen et al (2008)]. Read counts per base pair were normalized by library size and by subtracting the background (IgG) signal.
B Average FAIRE profile or ChIP-Seq profiles for H 3K27ac, OCT4,E p300, or OTX 2 in ESCs or EpiLC for Class I and Class II elements [data from Buecker et al (2014)].
C Results of a differential motif analysis (Thomas-Chollier et al , 2011) in Class I and Class II peaks.
◀
Figure 5. Global profiles of OCT 4 and NANOG chromatin binding during Esrrb downregulation.
A–D (A, C) Venn diagram showing overlap of (A) OCT 4- or (C) NANOG-bound regions (see main text for peak calling strategy) in sorted Esrrb Hi (EH) and Esrrb Neg (EN) E-
GFPd1 ESCs. (B, D) Average binding profile of (B) OCT 4 or (D) NANOG in binding peaks where binding in Esrrb Neg ESCs was kept, lost, or gained relative to Esrrb Hi E-
GFPd1 ESCs. Read counts per base pair were normalized by library size and by subtracting the background (IgG) signal. Esrrb Hi (EH), EsrrbMed (EM), and Esrrb Neg
(EN).
E Venn diagram showing the overlap of NANOG- and OCT 4-bound regions in sorted Esrrb Hi and EsrrbNeg E-GFPd1 ESCs.
F Pie chart showing the number of genomic regions co-bound by NANOG and OCT 4 in EsrrbHi E-GFPd1 ESCs that lose binding of NANOG and OCT 4 (Class I) or that
lose binding of NANOG but retain OCT 4 (Class II) during transition to Esrrb Neg. A few regions keep NANOG binding but lose OCT 4 (n = 16) or keep binding of both
(n = 60).
G Boxplots showing the fold change in expression levels of genes proximal to Class I elements, Class II elements, or both Class I and Class II elements in EsrrbHi (EH),
EsrrbMed (EM), or Esrrb Neg (EN) E-GFPd1 ESCs and EpiSC (Epi). Boxes span the inter-quartile range (IQR) from the first to the third quartile. The line indicates the
median. Whiskers extend up to 1.5 IQR, and outliers are plotted.
H, I Binding profiles of OCT 4 and NANOG in the proximity of two genes representative of (H) Class I ( Tet2) or (I) Class II ( Sall1) in Esrrb Hi, EsrrbMed, or Esrrb Neg E-GFPd1
ESCs. The relative occupancies of NANOG and OCT 4 at Tet2 or Sall1 (positions highlighted by hatched boxes) alongside expression levels of Tet2 and Sall1 mRNAs in
EsrrbHi (EH), EsrrbMed (EM), or Esrrb Neg (EN) GFPd1 ESCs and EpiSC (Epi) are shown at the bottom. OCT 4-binding data from EpiSC are from Buecker et al (2014).
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 11 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
A
B
C
Figure 6.
12 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
differentiation. Compared to ESRRB, NANOG has a higher dynamic
expression range, with ESCs accommodating significant downregu-
lation of NANOG without drastic changes in ESRRB: only when
NANOG levels drop below a certain threshold is Esrrb extinction
possible. Therefore, the NANOG
low compartment is composed of
two subpopulations, which differ in ESRRB expression and self-
renewal ability. Cell-tracking experiments have also identified two
distinct subpopulations of ESCs that have downregulated NANOG
but differ in cell fate and differentiation potential (Filipczyk et al ,
2015; Hastreiter et al , 2018). Our results extend these findings by
showing that ESRRB can distinguish these subpopulations. This
suggests that when unsupported by the transcriptional activity of
NANOG, the naı¨ ve pluripotency gene regulatory network is weak-
ened. While alternative positive inputs into Esrrb expression have
been documented (Martello et al , 2012), our results indicate that
such inputs ultimately fail in the absence of NANOG. ESCs may then
initiate downregulation of other naı ¨ ve pluripotency TFs including
Klf4 and Esrrb. Indeed, modulation of the entire NANOG-dependent
transcriptional program may enable the ordered dismantling of
naı¨ ve pluripotency. In this respect, heterogeneity in NANOG might
be qualitatively distinct from heterogeneity in ESRRB and other
pluripotency TFs.
A coordinated downregulation of naı ¨ ve pluripotency markers is
reminiscent of the process occurring during the transition from pre-
to post-implantation development (Boroviak et al , 2014, 2015;
Kojima et al , 2014). The period of loss of NANOG expression
occurring at peri-implantation (Chambers et al , 2003; Acampora
et al , 2013) may enable cells of the epiblast to downregulate a
number of pivotal naı ¨ ve pluripotency determinants, including
ESRRB (Adachi et al , 2013). In the post-implantation epiblast,
NANOG is re-expressed (Hart et al , 2004; Osorno et al , 2012;
Hoffman et al , 2013) but ESRRB is not (Adachi et al , 2013), likely
due to differences in signaling environments between pre- and
post-implantation epiblasts. It is noteworthy that subpopulations of
ESC cultures have been proposed to bear a similar character to
primed pluripotent cells and vice versa (Hayashi et al , 2008; Han
et al , 2010). Upon differentiation, naı¨ ve ESCs transit through a state
(named EpiLCs) with transcriptional similarity to the early post-
implantation epiblast (Buecker et al , 2010; Hayashi et al , 2011).
Esrrb-GFP
negative cells and EpiLCs have a high correlation in OCT4
chromatin binding (Pearson’s r = 0.60). Both Esrrb-GFP negative cells
and EpiLCs also have a high correlation in gene expression to
pre- or early-streak epiblasts. In contrast, EpiSCs have a higher
correlation to later gastrulation stages. Similar correlations with
embryonic expression programs have been reported in studies
investigating the molecular changes accompanying heterogeneous
downregulation of Rex1 during naı¨ ve ESC differentiation (Kalkan
et al , 2017). Therefore, TF heterogeneity represents a useful model
with which to study the transition between the regulatory configu-
rations sustaining pre-and post-implantation pluripotency.
Using Esrrb expression as a tool to study dynamic
chromatin reorganization
We applied our differentiation model to characterize how changing
TF activity re-shapes chromatin at two crucial regulatory elements
showing divergent behavior during the conversion from naive to
primed pluripotency, initially by assessing DNA methylation.
The Nanog enhancer (Blinka et al , 2016) which is active in
both naı¨ ve ESCs and EpiSC is unmethylated in both. In contrast,
the Esrrb enhancer (Festuccia et al , 2012; Moorthy et al , 2017),
which is active in ESCs but inactive in primed pluripotent cells,
becomes completely methylated as cells commit to differentiate.
Our results build on previous reports that accumulation of DNA
methylation at the regulatory regions of pluripotency genes accom-
panies loss of naı ¨ ve pluripotency (Ficz et al , 2013; Habibi et al ,
2013; Hackett et al , 2013; Leitch et al , 2013). Moreover, our
results illustrate the progressive nature by which accumulation of
DNA methylation occurs, as exemplified by the intermediate levels
of methylation detected at the Esrrb enhancer in Esrrb-GFP
medium
ESC. Furthermore, the slower kinetics of 5mCpG accumulation at
the Esrrb enhancer relative to loss of ESRRB expression favors the
view that loss of TF binding precedes DNA methylation and that
increased DNA methylation is a consequence of, rather than a
cause of, loss of TF binding. This is in line with the suggestion the
DNA methylation is not a major driver of naı ¨ ve pluripotency loss
(Kalkan et al , 2017). Moreover, the primacy of TF binding relative
to changes in DNA methylation has also been proposed during the
Esrrb-induced reprogramming of EpiSCs to a naı ¨ ve state (Adachi
et al , 2018). The ability of ESC self-renewal to withstand complete
loss of the DNA methylation machinery, with cell lethality of
DNMT triple-knockout ESCs only becoming apparent during dif-
ferentiation (Tsumura et al , 2006), suggests that the increase in
DNA methylation levels in committed cells reflects a change in the
mode of gene regulation, from a dynamic process chiefly directed
by TFs in pluripotent cells to one stabilized by DNA methylation
(Festuccia et al , 2017).
How TF binding relates to deposition of specific histone modifi-
cations was also assessed. In line with loss of TF binding and the
associated ability to recruit co-activators, H3K27ac was lost from
the enhancer of Esrrb but not Nanog. Similarly to acetylation,
H3K4me3, for which a correlation with enhancer activity is less well
established (Pekowska et al , 2011; Outchkourov et al , 2013; Shen
et al , 2016; Henriques et al , 2018), was also maintained in Esrrb-
GFP
negative cells at the enhancer of Nanog but not Esrrb. Loss of
H3K4me1 has been proposed to be a key step in enhancer decom-
missioning (preprint: Agarwal et al , 2017; Cao et al , 2018; Whyte
et al , 2012; Yan et al , 2018), though a direct function for this mark
remains controversial (Dorighi et al , 2017; Cao et al , 2018; Yan
et al , 2018). Since inactivation of various MLL family members fails
to ablate H3K4 methylation at most pluripotency enhancers or alter
pluripotency gene expression (Denissov et al , 2014; Wang et al ,
2016; Cao et al , 2017, 2018; Dorighi et al , 2017; Yan et al , 2018),
the importance of this class of histone modification in regulating the
activity of the pluripotency network remains to be stringently tested.
Our finding that H3K4me1 becomes undetectable at the Esrrb
enhancer in committed cells, coincident with loss of TF binding and
gain of DNA methylation, might provide a well-characterized model
to address these controversies.
Loss of TF binding drives the ordered dismantling of
naïve pluripotency
The process of cell type specification occurring during development
has been described as a reshaping of the activity of the enhancer
pool available in different conditions. While some enhancers are
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 13 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
conserved from pluripotent to differentiated cell types, others are
lost or created (Stergachis et al , 2013). Indeed, a noteworthy conclu-
sion from our ChIP-Seq analysis is that the early steps in differentia-
tion are dominated by a loss of regulatory elements. This suggests
that keeping a vast pool of active or poised regulatory regions might
be a defining feature of the pluripotent genome. OCT4 is present at
similar levels in all the populations we analyzed. Only a few sites
showed increased OCT4 occupancy ( n = 3,532) in Esrrb-GFP negative
cells, and these had detectable OCT4 binding in Esrrb-GFP high cells
(Fig 5B). In apparent contradiction to this, activation of new enhan-
cers has been reported to occur during the dismantling of naı ¨ ve
pluripotency (Buecker et al , 2014; Factor et al , 2014; Yang et al ,
2014; Cao et al , 2018; Yan et al , 2018). However, such regulatory
elements were not identified here, possibly because they are regu-
lated exclusively by lineage-specific TFs missing from our analysis.
Alternatively, the stages of early commitment we capture may be
primarily characterized by a loss of activity of pluripotency-specific
regulatory regions, with the activation of novel enhancers occurring
later in differentiation after transcriptional de-repression of lineage-
specific regulators allows their accumulation in the cell. Indeed,
FOXD3 has been shown to bind and open new chromatin sites to
which OCT4 and additional factors are then recruited
(Krishnakumar et al , 2016). Similarly, accumulation of OTX2 during
exit from naı ¨ ve pluripotency partially redirects OCT4 to a new
enhancer set (Buecker et al , 2014; Yang et al , 2014). Since Otx2 is a
direct target gene repressed by NANOG (Festuccia et al , 2012), a
strong increase in OTX2 levels would occur only after complete loss
of NANOG (Acampora et al , 2013, 2017). The moderate increase in
binding by OCT4 in Esrrb-GFP negative cells that we detect might
indeed be a sign of such an accumulation and occur at sites where
the effect of lineage-specific TFs is not yet fully evident, as
compared to other studies. In line with this interpretation, regions
with increased OCT4 occupancy during the Esrrb-GFP high to Esrrb-
GFPnegative transition also show marginal but detectable OTX2 bind-
ing in ESCs and become robustly bound by OTX2 only after 48 h of
EpiLC induction (Fig EV5A). In fact, OTX2 is enriched at regions
that maintain OCT4 binding in EpiLC (Figs 6B and EV5A), suggest-
ing that at these sites OTX2 and OCT4 reciprocally stabilize binding
to DNA (Buecker et al , 2014).
We identified two distinct classes of enhancers bound by OCT4
and NANOG in Esrrb-GFP High cells: Class I sites lose binding of both
NANOG and OCT4 in Esrrb-GFP negative cells, while Class II sites lose
NANOG but retain OCT4 binding. The selective loss of Class I sites
reflects a reconfiguration of protein interactions at crucial regulatory
regions and may be the earliest example of the wholesale “pruning”
of regulatory elements present in pluripotent cells responsible for
the initial canalizing steps away from naı ¨ ve pluripotency. In this
model (Fig 7), declining levels of ESRRB, NANOG, and other TFs
Figure 7. Model of TF binding to enhancer classes during commitment from naïve pluripotency.
Diagram summarizing the changes occurring at decommissioned or maintained enhancers during commitment from naïve pluripotency. Decreased NANOG l evels, although
reversible, facilitate subsequent decrease in the levels of other naïve pluripotency TFs, including Esrrb and Klf4. Downregulation of these TFs triggers irreversible changes in the
pool of active enhancers and marks commitment to differentiation. Class I enhancers are regions where OCT 4 occupancy depends on the robust binding of naïve TF. These
elements are decommissioned during commitment, losing histone acetylation and accumulating DNA methylation. Other enhancers, on average showing less pronounced
binding of naïve TFs, retain OCT4 and active histone marks in primed pluripotent cells. These elements constitute a core of “primed” regulatory elements bound by OCT4 that
may serve to nucleate the regulatory architecture through which lineage-specific TFs collaborate with Oct 4 to specify the early post-implantation epiblast identity.
14 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
would lead to loss of activity of regulatory regions in which contin-
ued OCT4 binding depends upon binding of naı ¨ ve pluripotency
factors. Such dependency, suggested by the enrichment of naı ¨ ve TF-
binding motifs, is in line with the notion of cooperative DNA bind-
ing and transcriptional regulation by TFs (Spitz & Furlong, 2012;
Morgunova & Taipale, 2017). However, no individual chromatin
modification or naı¨ ve pluripotency TF-binding pattern can predic-
tably distinguish regulatory elements that lose or maintain activity
during early differentiation. In the future, it will be important to
determine the details by which the chromatin organization at Class I
and II elements determines differential responses to a common
change in the cellular environment. Whether regulatory elements in
a class all lose TF binding simultaneously and whether specific regu-
latory elements lose individual TFs simultaneously or sequentially
are also important points for future analysis. Nevertheless, it is
likely that early loss of activity at key Class I regulatory elements
reflects the crossing of the Rubicon of commitment, triggering
further, irreversible, gene regulatory network changes.
The recent report that ESRRB acts as a mitotic bookmark of key
regulatory elements during ESC cell division (Festuccia et al , 2016)
is relevant to the above model. As mitosis is accompanied by evic-
tion of several TFs from the chromatin, bookmarking by ESRRB
may allow the rapid reassembly of the pluripotency network in early
G1 (Festuccia et al , 2016). Declining ESRRB levels may therefore
impair the reactivation of key pluripotency enhancers after mitosis.
This would imply that cell division coincides with the time of
commitment for differentiating ESCs, with the first steps of enhancer
decommissioning beginning in early G1 (Mummery et al , 1987;
Pauklin & Vallier, 2013).
Other mechanisms could potentially contribute to enhancer
decommissioning in differentiating ESCs. Recently, it has been
reported that FOXD3, a TF expressed in naı ¨ ve ESCs but upregu-
lated during the transition to EpiSC-like cells, co-occupies numer-
ous enhancers that are also bound by pluripotency TFs. However,
FOXD3 directly contributes to the inactivation of only a fraction
of these elements (Respuela et al , 2016). A similar number of
Class I and Class II enhancers are bound by FoxD3 in ESCs
(~30%; Fig EV5B) with both Class I and Class II enhancers bind-
ing FOXD3 at similar levels (Fig EV5C). As only Class I enhancers
are decommissioned upon ESRRB and NANOG loss, FOXD3 bind-
ing is not a major driver of the differential responses identified in
this study.
Taken together, the results presented here provide a possible
mechanistic explanation for the connection observed between
NANOG levels and ESC self-renewal efficiency (Chambers et al ,
2007). In LIF/FCS cultures, the NANOG
low population is not
uniform but can be fractionated into cells expressing distinct
ESRRB levels. ESRRB
positive cells self-renew efficiently, whereas
NANOGlow cells expressing the lowest ESRRB levels have lost this
ability. Declining concentrations of NANOG and ESRRB may
result in a stepwise reduction in the activity of the naive pluripo-
tency gene regulatory network, reflected in a decrease in the
number of chromatin sites bound by OCT4. This in turn
decreases the pool of active enhancers until the point of commit-
ment is reached, and ESCs are ushered out of the naı ¨ ve state.
The regulatory regions where OCT4 binding depends on naı ¨ ve TF
binding, identified here as Class I enhancers, become decommis-
sioned and accumulate DNA methylation with fast kinetics. Other
enhancers retain OCT4 and active histone marks in primed
pluripotent cells. Thus, decreased NANOG levels, although rever-
sible, facilitate subsequent decreases in the levels of other naı ¨ ve
pluripotency TFs, including ESRRB and KLF4, that may then
extinguish the entire naı ¨ ve transcriptional program while leaving
a core of “primed” regulatory elements bound by OCT4. This
would to ensure that commitment to differentiation occurs in an
orderly way that retains the functional activity of the program
encoding early post-implantation epiblast identity.
Materials and Methods
ESC culture
Embryonic stem cells were cultured in GMEM b-mercaptoethanol/
LIF/10%FCS as described (Smith, 1991) or in N2B27 supplemented
where indicated with PD0325901 (1 lM) and CHIRON99021 (3 lM)
(Ying et al , 2008). When required, ESCs were differentiated in
N2B27/Activin (10 ng/ml)/bFGF (12 ng/ml) or in GMEM b-mercap-
toethanol/10%FCS supplemented with 10
/C06 M of all-trans retinoic
acid.
Derivation of E-GFPd 1, E-tdT, TNG E-tdT, TNG E-T 2a-tdT, and DN
E-T2a-tdT reporter ESC lines
E-GFPd1 and E-tdT were derived from wild-type E14Tg2a ESCs;
TNG E-tdT and TNG E-T2a-tdT were derived from TNG cells (Cham-
bers et al , 2007). DN E-T2a-tdT were derived from ES DN-NERT
ESCs (Festuccia et al , 2012). Targeting vectors are constructed as
follows: Around 5 kb of homology to the genomic sequence
upstream of the end of the coding sequences for Esrrb [ESC main
isoform—(Festuccia et al , 2012)] is linked by a T2a peptide (for E-
GFPd1, TNG E-T2a-tdT, and DN E-T2a-tdT ESCs) or a mutated non-
cleaving T2a peptide (for TNG E-tdT ESCs) to the coding sequence
for GFP or TdTomato followed by —IRES-Hygromycin
R or—IRES-
BlasticidinR cassettes. Resistance cassettes are followed by around
5kb of homology to the genomic sequence downstream of the end
of the coding sequence for Esrrb (see Fig EV1 and Appendix Fig S1).
10
7 parental line ESCs were resuspended in 700 ll of PBS, mixed
with 25 lg of linearized targeting vectors ethanol precipitated and
resuspended in 100 ll PBS, and transfected using an electroporator
(ElectroSquarePorator, BTX Harvard Apparatus —protocol T820).
Cells were plated in ten 10-cm dishes in GMEM b/LIF/FCS. Forty-
eight hours after electroporation, relevant selection was added to
the medium (5 lg/ml Blasticidin or 200 lg/ml Hygromycin). The
resulting cell colonies were picked and expanded as clonal lines
before genomic DNA extraction (as described in the Appendix Sup-
plementary Methods). For homozygous reporter lines, positively
targeted clones underwent a second electroporation and selection
round using the same targeting vector carrying a distinct resistance
cassette.
Derivation of NER reporter lines
Esrrb-GFP and Nanog-mCherry targeting vectors are constructed as
follows: 100/50 bp homologous to the end of the coding sequences
for Nanog and Esrrb are linked by a five glycine linker to a cassette
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 15 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
encoding GFP-T2a-Puromycin R and mCherry-T2a-Blasticidin R,
respectively, and followed by 100/50 bp homologous to the begin-
ning of the endogenous 3
0 UTR of the gene. Point mutations are
introduced in the UTR sequence to ensure that the vectors are
immune to cutting by Cas9. The backbone of the vectors also
includes a U6 promoter driving expression of a gRNA matching the
targeted genomic location. One hour before transfection, 1 × 10
6
E14Tg2a ESCs were replated in a well of a six-well plate. Thirty
minutes before transfection, 3 lg of Esrrb-GFP targeting vector and
1 lg of plasmid driving expression of Cas9 (Addgene n. 44719) were
added to 250 ll of GMEM b (without FCS), and mixed with 250 llo f
GMEMb (without FCS) containing 3 ll of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invit-
rogen—cat. 11668-019), pre-incubated for 5 min. The mixture was
occasionally mixed by flicking during the 30-min incubation and
then added dropwise to the cells plated before. After 1 day, the cells
were trypsinized and replated into 10-cm dishes in GMEM b/LIF/
FCS. The following day, puromycin (1 lg/ml) was added to the
medium. The resulting cell colonies were picked and expanded as
clonal lines before genomic DNA extraction (as described in the
Appendix Supplementary Methods). Correct recombination was
verified by PCR amplification of the genomic region surrounding the
stop codon of Esrrb, with primers annealing outside of the homol-
ogy arms, and sequencing. The selected line is heterozygous for the
Esrrb-GFP reporter allele and carries a short deletion (27 bp) in the
3
0UTR of the wild-type Esrrb allele. Esrrb-GFP ESCs were transfected
as before with Nanog-mCherry targeting vectors and correct recom-
bination verified by PCR and sequencing as outlined for Esrrb. The
resulting NER lines are heterozygous for the Nanog-mCherry
reporter allele (see Fig EV1).
Flow cytometry
All cell lines were plated (2,000/cm
2) and cultured without selection
for 3 days. For TNG E-tdT ESCs, cells were trypsinized and resus-
pended at 2 × 10
6 cells/ml in 10%FCS/PBS containing anti SSEA-1
mouse monoclonal antibody from ascitic fluids (DSHB Cat # MC-
480) diluted 1:1,000. Cells were incubated (on ice, 15 min), washed
in ice-cold PBS, resuspended, and incubated in 10%FCS/PBS
containing goat anti-mouse IgM-Alexa647 secondary antibody
(Molecular Probes Cat # A-21238; on ice, 15 min), after washing in
ice-cold PBS, cells were resuspended in 10%FCS/PBS and analyzed
using a LSR II flow cytometer system (Becton, Dickinson). For NER
ESCs, cells were trypsinized, resuspended at 1 × 10
6 cells/ml in
GMEMb/LIF/FCS containing anti SSEA-1 mouse monoclonal anti-
body conjugated to Alexa405 (BD X) diluted 1:1,000, and incubated
on ice for 15 min. Cells were spun down, resuspended in GMEM b/
LIF/FCS, and analyzed using a LSR II flow cytometer system.
Sorting and replating of fluorescent reporter lines
Embryonic stem cells stained for SSEA-1 as described above were
purified using a FACSAria cell sorter (Becton, Dickinson) and post-
sort cell purity determined using a LSR II Fortessa flow cytometer
(Becton, Dickinson). For TNG E-tdT ESCs timecourse experiments,
cells were replated in GMEM b/LIF/FCS in separate wells of 24-well
plates and cultured for the indicated time. Cells were harvested
every day, stained for SSEA-1, and analyzed on a LSR II Fortessa
flow cytometer. Sorted Nanog:GFP
high/Esrrb-tdTomatohigh or
Nanog:GFPlow/Esrrb-tdTomatolow cells were trypsinized and
replated at days 1, 2, and 3 for analysis at days 4, 5, and 6, respec-
tively, to prevent overgrowth. For NER and E-GFPd1 ESCs time-
course experiments, Esrrb-GFP
high/Nanog-mCherryhigh (NER) or
Esrrb-GFPd1high, Esrrb-GFPd1 medium and Esrrb-GFPd1 negative (E-
GFPd1) cells were replated in GMEM b/LIF/FCS in separate wells of
six-well plates and cultured for the indicated time. Cells were
harvested every day, stained for SSEA-1, and analyzed on a LSR II
Fortessa flow cytometer. All data were analyzed using the FlowJo
software suite (Tree Star). For all clonal density plating experiments
in GMEM b/LIF/FCS, 600 sorted cells were replated in duplicate in
gelatinized six-well plates and cultured in the indicated conditions
for 7 days prior to colony scoring. For plating in N2B27/LIF/2i, cells
were replated as above in six-well plates that had been coated over-
night with poly-L-ornithine 0.01% (Sigma Cat # P4957), washed,
and coated 2 h with 5 lg/ml laminin (Millipore, Cat # CC095) in
PBS.
Chromatin preparation
10
7 to 5 × 107 E14Tg2a Esrrb-2a-GFPd-IBIH ESCs were resuspended
at 3.3 × 106 cells/ml in pre-warmed GMEM b/LIF/FCS and cross-
linked for 10 min at RT with 1% formaldehyde (Sigma Cat # F8775-
25ML) in the dark. Cross-linking was stopped by adding 0.125 mM
glycine (5 min, RT), cells were pelleted (5 min, 100 rcf, 4 °C),
washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and resuspended in 10%FCS/PBS
at 10
7 cells/ml. Keeping the samples refrigerated, Esrrb-GFP high
(Top 10%), Esrrb-GFP medium (15% of the distribution immediately
above negative), and Esrrb-GFP negative cells were purified using a
FACSAria cell sorter (Becton, Dickinson). Since gradual loss of
fluorescence was observed in fixed cells after prolonged incuba-
tion, multiple batches of freshly fixed cells were sorted for a
maximum of 45 min, a time when loss of fluorescence was not
yet noticeable. After sorting, cell purity was determined using the
same instrument. Cells were spun down, transferred to 1.5 ml
Eppendorf tubes, washed with cold PBS, counted, and resus-
pended at 5 × 10
6 cells/ml in swelling buffer (5 mM Pipes pH 8,
85 mM KCl) freshly supplemented with 1 × protease inhibitor
cocktail (Roche Cat # 04 693 116 001)/0.5% NP-40. After 30 min
on ice with occasional shaking, nuclei were centrifuged (600 g,
5 min, 4 °C), washed in TSE (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton, 2 mM EDTA,
20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8)/150 mM NaCl, freshly supplemented with
1× protease inhibitor cocktail, and resuspended in the same buffer
at 10
7 cells/ml. Samples were sonicated in 1.5 ml tubes using a
Bioruptor (Diagenode; 4 × 10 min cycles (each divided into 30 s
ON-30 s OFF subcycles) at maximum power in circulating ice-cold
water. Chromatin was then centrifuged (30 min, 20,000 rcf, 4 °C)
and the supernatant stored ( /C080°C) until use. 5 ll was used to
quantify chromatin concentration and check the DNA fragment
size on a 1.5% w/v 0.5 × TAE agarose gel. The typical fragment
size was 100 –250 bp.
ChIP-Seq data analysis
ChIP-Seq data were uploaded to GeneProf (Halbritter et al , 2012)
and analyzed using the typical workflows. After alignment, the
SISSRs (Jothi et al , 2008) were used to call enrichment-binding
events (“peaks”). To assess variability in ChIP-Seq peak occupancy
16 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
between cell states, the amount of ChIP-Seq binding signal was
calculated for each dataset in all peaks called for at least one dataset
(after merging overlapping peaks). A peak was called as “lost” only
if less than 50% of its maximum observed binding was retained
(normalizing differences in sequencing library depth). To identify
DNA motifs differentially enriched in different classes of peaks,
we used the “oligos_6 –8nt” algorithm of the RSAT web server
(February 2017 version) using either Class I peaks as foreground
and Class II peaks as background or vice versa (van Helden et al ,
1998; Thomas-Chollier et al , 2011, 2012).
Microarray data were uploaded to the same GeneProf experi-
ment, and array probes were mapped to the internal gene database.
Data from several other studies were also imported, all of which
were available from the GeneProf database (Halbritter et al , 2014).
These data were used primarily to examine the binding profiles of
other transcription factors and DNA-associated proteins in the prox-
imity of ChIP-Seq peaks identified in this study. An overview is
given in the Appendix Table S1.
Statistical analysis
No explicit power calculations or distribution tests were
performed, but we designed our experiments according to commu-
nity standards and using established tools and protocols. Results
are presented as mean values + or /C6standard deviations. In all
instances where results are presented as a mean value, the
number of biological replicates performed for each experiment is
stated in the figure legend. Statistical tests were used for the
identification of differentially expressed genes in the microarray
data using limma (Ritchie et al , 2015), for the identification of
binding peaks from ChIP-Seq data using SISSRs (Jothi et al , 2008),
and for the de novo DNA motif analysis based on ChIP-Seq peaks
using RSAT (van Helden et al , 1998; Thomas-Chollier et al , 2011,
2012). Please refer to the respective sections of the Materials and
Methods for details.
Data availability
High-throughput data from this study have been submitted to the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number
GSE118907 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=
GSE118907).
Expanded View for this article is available online.
Acknowledgements
We thank Kirsten Liggat and the staff of the MRC CRM flow cytometry
facility for providing technical assistance. We thank Pablo Navarro (Institut
Pasteur) for supporting NF to perform a part of the revision experiments.
Research in IC ’s laboratory is supported by the Medical Research Council of
the UK, by the Human Frontier Sciences Program, and by an MRC cente-
nary award to NF.
Author contributions
NF and IC conceived the study and designed experiments. NF performed
experiments and analyzed the data. FH performed bioinformatics analyses and
with SRT assisted in data interpretation. AC performed RNA analyses, AG
performed immunoblot analyses, and DC provided technical assistance. NF
and IC wrote the manuscript.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Abranches E, Guedes AM, Moravec M, Maamar H, Svoboda P, Raj A, Henrique
D( 2014) Stochastic NANOG fluctuations allow mouse embryonic stem
cells to explore pluripotency. Development 141: 2770 – 2779
Acampora D, Di Giovannantonio LG, Simeone A ( 2013) Otx2 is an intrinsic
determinant of the embryonic stem cell state and is required for transition
to a stable epiblast stem cell condition. Development 140: 43 – 55
Acampora D, Di Giovannantonio LG, Garofalo A, Nigro V, Omodei D, Lombardi
A, Zhang J, Chambers I, Simeone A ( 2017) Functional antagonism between
OTX2 and NANOG specifies a spectrum of heterogeneous identities in
embryonic stem cells. Stem Cell Reports 9: 1642 – 1659
Adachi K, Nikaido I, Ohta H, Ohtsuka S, Ura H, Kadota M, Wakayama T, Ueda
HR, Niwa H ( 2013) Context-dependent wiring of Sox 2 regulatory networks
for self-renewal of embryonic and trophoblast stem cells. Mol Cell 52:
380 – 392
Adachi K, Kopp W, Wu G, Heising S, Greber B, Stehling M, Arauzo-Bravo MJ,
Boerno ST, Timmermann B, Vingron M, Scholer HR ( 2018) Esrrb unlocks
silenced enhancers for reprogramming to naive pluripotency. Cell Stem
Cell 23: 266 – 275 e6
Agarwal S, Garay PM, Porter RS, Brookes E, Murata-Nakamura Y, Macfarlan
TS, Ren B, Iwase S ( 2017) LSD 1/KDM1A maintains genome-wide
homeostasis of transcriptional enhancers. BioRxiv [PREPRINT] https://doi.
org/10.1101/146357
Ambrosetti D-C, Basilico C, Dailey L ( 1997) Synergistic activation of
the fibroblast growth factor 4 enhancer by sox 2 and oct- 3 depends
on protein-protein interactions facilitated by a specific spatial
arrangement of factor binding sites. Mol Cell Biol 17:
6321 – 6329
van den Berg DL, Zhang W, Yates A, Engelen E, Takacs K, Bezstarosti K,
Demmers J, Chambers I, Poot RA ( 2008
) Estrogen-related receptor beta
interacts with Oct 4 to positively regulate Nanog gene expression. Mol Cell
Biol 28: 5986 – 5995
Blinka S, Reimer MH Jr, Pulakanti K, Rao S ( 2016) Super-enhancers at the
Nanog locus differentially regulate neighboring pluripotency-associated
genes. Cell Rep 17: 19 – 28
Boroviak T, Loos R, Bertone P, Smith A, Nichols J ( 2014) The ability of inner-
cell-mass cells to self-renew as embryonic stem cells is acquired following
epiblast specification. Nat Cell Biol 16: 516 – 528
Boroviak T, Loos R, Lombard P, Okahara J, Behr R, Sasaki E, Nichols J, Smith A,
Bertone P ( 2015) Lineage-specific profiling delineates the emergence and
progression of naive pluripotency in mammalian embryogenesis. Dev Cell
35: 366 – 382
Brons IG, Smithers LE, Trotter MW, Rugg-Gunn P, Sun B, Chuva de Sousa
Lopes SM, Howlett SK, Clarkson A, Ahrlund-Richter L, Pedersen RA, Vallier L
(2007) Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mammalian
embryos. Nature 448: 191 – 195
Buecker C, Chen HH, Polo JM, Daheron L, Bu L, Barakat TS, Okwieka P, Porter
A, Gribnau J, Hochedlinger K, Geijsen N ( 2010) A murine ESC-like state
facilitates transgenesis and homologous recombination in human
pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 6: 535 – 546
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 17 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
Buecker C, Srinivasan R, Wu Z, Calo E, Acampora D, Faial T, Simeone A, Tan
M, Swigut T, Wysocka J ( 2014) Reorganization of enhancer patterns in
transition from naive to primed pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 14: 838 – 853
Cao K, Collings CK, Marshall SA, Morgan MA, Rendleman EJ, Wang L, Sze CC,
Sun T, Bartom ET, Shilatifard A ( 2017) SET 1A/COMPASS and shadow
enhancers in the regulation of homeotic gene expression. Genes Dev 31:
787 – 801
Cao K, Collings CK, Morgan MA, Marshall SA, Rendleman EJ, Ozark PA, Smith
ER, Shilatifard A ( 2018) An Mll 4/COMPASS-Lsd1 epigenetic axis governs
enhancer function and pluripotency transition in embryonic stem cells. Sci
Adv 4: eaap 8747
Chambers I, Colby D, Robertson M, Nichols J, Lee S, Tweedie S, Smith A ( 2003)
Functional expression cloning of Nanog, a pluripotency sustaining factor
in embryonic stem cells. Cell 113: 643 – 655
Chambers I ( 2004) Mechanisms and factors in embryonic stem cell self-
renewal. Rend Fis Acc Lincei 16: 83 – 97
Chambers I, Silva J, Colby D, Nichols J, Nijmeijer B, Robertson M, Vrana J,
Jones K, Grotewold L, Smith A ( 2007) Nanog safeguards pluripotency and
mediates germline development. Nature 450: 1230 – 1234
Chambers I, Tomlinson SR ( 2009) The transcriptional foundation of
pluripotency. Development 136: 2311 – 2322
Chen X, Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W,
Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR, Leong B,
Shahab A, Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK et al (2008) Integration of
external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network in
embryonic stem cells. Cell 133: 1106 – 1117
Deaton AM, Bird A ( 2011) CpG islands and the regulation of transcription.
Genes Dev 25: 1010 – 1022
Denissov S, Hofemeister H, Marks H, Kranz A, Ciotta G, Singh S, Anastassiadis
K, Stunnenberg HG, Stewart AF ( 2014) Mll 2 is required for H 3K4
trimethylation on bivalent promoters in embryonic stem cells, whereas
Mll1 is redundant. Development 141: 526 – 537
Dorighi KM, Swigut T, Henriques T, Bhanu NV, Scruggs BS, Nady N, Still CD II,
Garcia BA, Adelman K, Wysocka J ( 2017) Mll 3 and Mll 4 facilitate enhancer
RNA synthesis and transcription from promoters independently of H 3K4
monomethylation. Mol Cell 66: 568 – 576 e4
Factor DC, Corradin O, Zentner GE, Saiakhova A, Song L, Chenoweth JG,
McKay RD, Crawford GE, Scacheri PC, Tesar PJ ( 2014) Epigenomic
comparison reveals activation of “seed” enhancers during transition from
naive to primed pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 14: 854 – 863
Festuccia N, Osorno R, Halbritter F, Karwacki-Neisius V, Navarro P, Colby D,
Wong F, Yates A, Tomlinson SR, Chambers I ( 2012) Esrrb is a direct Nanog
target gene that can substitute for Nanog function in pluripotent cells.
Cell Stem Cell 11: 477 – 490
Festuccia N, Dubois A, Vandormael-Pournin S, Gallego Tejeda E, Mouren A,
Bessonnard S, Mueller F, Proux C, Cohen-Tannoudji M, Navarro P ( 2016)
Mitotic binding of Esrrb marks key regulatory regions of the pluripotency
network. Nat Cell Biol 18: 1139 – 1148
Festuccia N, Gonzalez I, Navarro P ( 2017) The epigenetic paradox of
pluripotent ES cells. J Mol Biol 429: 1476 – 1503
Ficz G, Hore TA, Santos F, Lee HJ, Dean W, Arand J, Krueger F, Oxley D,
Paul YL, Walter J, Cook SJ, Andrews S, Branco MR, Reik W ( 2013)F G F
signaling inhibition in ESCs drives rapid genome-wide demethylation
to the epigenetic ground state of pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 13:
351 – 359
Filipczyk A, Marr C, Hastreiter S, Feigelman J, Schwarzfischer M, Hoppe PS,
Loeffler D, Kokkaliaris KD, Endele M, Schauberger B, Hilsenbeck O, Skylaki
S, Hasenauer J, Anastassiadis K, Theis FJ, Schroeder T ( 2015) Network
plasticity of pluripotency transcription factors in embryonic stem cells.
Nat Cell Biol 17: 1235 – 1246
Habibi E, Brinkman AB, Arand J, Kroeze LI, Kerstens HH, Matarese F, Lepikhov
K, Gut M, Brun-Heath I, Hubner NC, Benedetti R, Altucci L, Jansen JH,
Walter J, Gut IG, Marks H, Stunnenberg HG ( 2013) Whole-genome bisulfite
sequencing of two distinct interconvertible DNA methylomes of mouse
embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 13: 360 – 369
Hackett JA, Dietmann S, Murakami K, Down TA, Leitch HG, Surani MA ( 2013)
Synergistic mechanisms of DNA demethylation during transition to
ground-state pluripotency. Stem Cell Reports 1: 518 – 531
Hackett JA, Surani MA ( 2014) Regulatory principles of pluripotency: from the
ground state up. Cell Stem Cell 15: 416 – 430
Halbritter F, Vaidya HJ, Tomlinson SR ( 2012) GeneProf: analysis of high-
throughput sequencing experiments. Nat Methods 9: 7 – 8
Halbritter F, Kousa AI, Tomlinson SR ( 2014) GeneProf data: a resource of
curated, integrated and reusable high-throughput genomics experiments.
Nucleic Acids Res 42:D 851 – D858
Han DW, Tapia N, Joo JY, Greber B, Arauzo-Bravo MJ, Bernemann C, Ko K, Wu
G, Stehling M, Do JT, Scholer HR ( 2010) Epiblast stem cell subpopulations
represent mouse embryos of distinct pregastrulation stages. Cell 143:
617 – 627
Hart AH, Hartley L, Ibrahim M, Robb L ( 2004) Identification, cloning and
expression analysis of the pluripotency promoting Nanog genes in mouse
and human. Dev Dyn 230: 187 – 198
Hastreiter S, Skylaki S, Loeffler D, Reimann A, Hilsenbeck O, Hoppe PS, Coutu
DL, Kokkaliaris KD, Schwarzfischer M, Anastassiadis K, Theis FJ, Schroeder T
(2018) Inductive and selective effects of GSK 3 and MEK inhibition on
Nanog heterogeneity in embryonic stem cells. Stem Cell Reports 11: 58 – 69
Hayashi K, Lopes SM, Tang F, Surani MA ( 2008) Dynamic equilibrium and
heterogeneity of mouse pluripotent stem cells with distinct functional and
epigenetic states. Cell Stem Cell 3: 391 –
401
Hayashi K, Ohta H, Kurimoto K, Aramaki S, Saitou M ( 2011) Reconstitution of
the mouse germ cell specification pathway in culture by pluripotent stem
cells. Cell 146: 519 – 532
Heintzman ND, Stuart RK, Hon G, Fu Y, Ching CW, Hawkins RD, Barrera LO,
Van Calcar S, Qu C, Ching KA, Wang W, Weng Z, Green RD, Crawford GE,
Ren B ( 2007) Distinct and predictive chromatin signatures of
transcriptional promoters and enhancers in the human genome. Nat
Genet 39: 311 – 318
Heintzman ND, Hon GC, Hawkins RD, Kheradpour P, Stark A, Harp LF, Ye Z,
Lee LK, Stuart RK, Ching CW, Ching KA, Antosiewicz-Bourget JE, Liu H,
Zhang X, Green RD, Lobanenkov VV, Stewart R, Thomson JA, Crawford GE,
Kellis M et al (2009) Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect
global cell-type-specific gene expression. Nature 459: 108 – 112
van Helden J, Andre B, Collado-Vides J ( 1998) Extracting regulatory sites from
the upstream region of yeast genes by computational analysis of
oligonucleotide frequencies. J Mol Biol 281: 827 – 842
Henriques T, Scruggs BS, Inouye MO, Muse GW, Williams LH, Burkholder AB,
Lavender CA, Fargo DC, Adelman K ( 2018) Widespread transcriptional
pausing and elongation control at enhancers. Genes Dev 32: 26 – 41
Hoffman JA, Wu CI, Merrill BJ ( 2013) Tcf 7 l1 prepares epiblast cells in the
gastrulating mouse embryo for lineage specification. Development 140:
1665 – 1675
Jaenisch R, Young R ( 2008) Stem cells, the molecular circuitry of pluripotency
and nuclear reprogramming. Cell 132: 567 – 582
Jothi R, Cuddapah S, Barski A, Cui K, Zhao K ( 2008) Genome-wide
identification of in vivo protein-DNA binding sites from ChIP-Seq data.
Nucleic Acids Res 36: 5221 – 5231
18 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al
Kagey MH, Newman JJ, Bilodeau S, Zhan Y, Orlando DA, van Berkum NL,
Ebmeier CC, Goossens J, Rahl PB, Levine SS, Taatjes DJ, Dekker J, Young RA
(2010) Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin
architecture. Nature 467: 430 – 435
Kalkan T, Olova N, Roode M, Mulas C, Lee HJ, Nett I, Marks H, Walker R,
Stunnenberg HG, Lilley KS, Nichols J, Reik W, Bertone P, Smith A ( 2017)
Tracking the embryonic stem cell transition from ground state
pluripotency. Development 144: 1221 – 1234
Kalmar T, Lim C, Hayward P, Munoz-Descalzo S, Nichols J, Garcia-Ojalvo J,
Martinez Arias A ( 2009) Regulated fluctuations in nanog expression
mediate cell fate decisions in embryonic stem cells. PLoS Biol 7:
e1000149
Kojima Y, Kaufman-Francis K, Studdert JB, Steiner KA, Power MD, Loebel DA,
Jones V, Hor A, de Alencastro G, Logan GJ, Teber ET, Tam OH, Stutz MD,
Alexander IE, Pickett HA, Tam PP ( 2014) The transcriptional and functional
properties of mouse epiblast stem cells resemble the anterior primitive
streak. Cell Stem Cell 14: 107 – 120
Krishnakumar R, Chen AF, Pantovich MG, Danial M, Parchem RJ, Labosky PA,
Blelloch R ( 2016) FOXD 3 regulates pluripotent stem cell potential by
simultaneously initiating and repressing enhancer activity. Cell Stem Cell
18: 104 – 117
Kunath T, Saba-El-Leil MK, Almousailleakh M, Wray J, Meloche S, Smith A
(2007) FGF stimulation of the Erk 1/2 signalling cascade triggers transition
of pluripotent embryonic stem cells from self-renewal to lineage
commitment. Development 134: 2895 – 2902
Leitch HG, McEwen KR, Turp A, Encheva V, Carroll T, Grabole N, Mansfield W,
Nashun B, Knezovich JG, Smith A, Surani MA, Hajkova P ( 2013) Naive
pluripotency is associated with global DNA hypomethylation. Nat Struct
Mol Biol 20: 311 – 316
Martello G, Sugimoto T, Diamanti E, Joshi A, Hannah R, Ohtsuka S,
Gottgens B, Niwa H, Smith A ( 2012) Esrrb is a pivotal target of the
gsk3/tcf3 axis regulating embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Cell Stem
Cell 11: 491 – 504
Moorthy SD, Davidson S, Shchuka VM, Singh G, Malek-Gilani N, Langroudi L,
Martchenko A, So V, Macpherson NN, Mitchell JA (
2017) Enhancers and
super-enhancers have an equivalent regulatory role in embryonic stem cells
through regulation of single or multiple genes. Genome Res 27: 246 – 258
Morgunova E, Taipale J ( 2017) Structural perspective of cooperative
transcription factor binding. Curr Opin Struct Biol 47: 1 – 8
Mullin N, Chambers I ( 2012) The function of Nanog in pluripotency. In
Nuclear reprogramming and stem cells , Ainscough J, Yamanaka S, Tada T
(eds), pp 99 – 112. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press
Mummery CL, van den Brink CE, de Laat SW ( 1987) Commitment to
differentiation induced by retinoic acid in P 19 embryonal carcinoma cells
is cell cycle dependent. Dev Biol 121: 10 – 19
Navarro P, Festuccia N, Colby D, Gagliardi A, Mullin NP, Zhang W, Karwacki-
Neisius V, Osorno R, Kelly D, Robertson M, Chambers I ( 2012) OCT 4/SOX2-
independent Nanog autorepression modulates heterogeneous Nanog gene
expression in mouse ES cells. EMBO J 31: 4547 – 4562
Ng HH, Surani MA ( 2011) The transcriptional and signalling networks of
pluripotency. Nat Cell Biol 13: 490 – 496
Niwa H, Ogawa K, Shimosato D, Adachi K ( 2009) A parallel circuit of LIF
signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Nature 460:
118 – 122
Osorno R, Tsakiridis A, Wong F, Cambray N, Economou C, Wilkie R, Blin G,
Scotting PJ, Chambers I, Wilson V ( 2012) The developmental dismantling
of pluripotency is reversed by ectopic Oct 4 expression. Development 139:
2288 – 2298
Outchkourov NS, Muino JM, Kaufmann K, van Ijcken WF, Groot Koerkamp MJ,
van Leenen D, de Graaf P, Holstege FC, Grosveld FG, Timmers HT ( 2013)
Balancing of histone H 3K4 methylation states by the Kdm 5c/SMCX histone
demethylase modulates promoter and enhancer function. Cell Rep 3:
1071 – 1079
Pauklin S, Vallier L ( 2013) The cell-cycle state of stem cells determines cell
fate propensity. Cell 155: 135 – 147
Pekowska A, Benoukraf T, Zacarias-Cabeza J, Belhocine M, Koch F, Holota H,
Imbert J, Andrau JC, Ferrier P, Spicuglia S ( 2011)H 3K4 tri-methylation
provides an epigenetic signature of active enhancers. EMBO J 30:
4198 – 4210
Rada-Iglesias A, Bajpai R, Swigut T, Brugmann SA, Flynn RA, Wysocka J ( 2011)
A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in
humans. Nature 470: 279 – 283
Respuela P, Nikolic M, Tan M, Frommolt P, Zhao Y, Wysocka J, Rada-Iglesias
A( 2016) Foxd 3 promotes exit from naive pluripotency through enhancer
decommissioning and inhibits germline specification. Cell Stem Cell 18:
118 – 133
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK ( 2015) limma
powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and
microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43:e 47
Russell R, Ilg M, Lin Q, Wu G, Lechel A, Bergmann W, Eiseler T, Linta L,
Kumar PP, Klingenstein M, Adachi K, Hohwieler M, Sakk O, Raab S,
Moon A, Zenke M, Seufferlein T, Scholer HR, Illing A, Liebau S et al
(2015) A dynamic role of TBX 3 in the pluripotency circuitry. Stem Cell
Reports 5: 1155 – 1170
Shen H, Xu W, Guo R, Rong B, Gu L, Wang Z, He C, Zheng L, Hu X, Hu Z,
Shao ZM, Yang P, Wu F, Shi YG, Shi Y, Lan F ( 2016) Suppression of
enhancer overactivation by a RACK 7-histone demethylase complex. Cell
165: 331 – 342
Smith AG ( 1991) Culture and differentiation of embryonic stem cells. J Tiss
Cult Meth 13: 89 – 94
Spitz F, Furlong EE ( 2012) Transcription factors: from enhancer binding to
developmental control. Nat Rev Genet 13: 613 – 626
Stadler MB, Murr R, Burger L, Ivanek R, Lienert F, Scholer A, van Nimwegen E,
Wirbelauer C, Oakeley EJ, Gaidatzis D, Tiwari VK, Schubeler D ( 2011) DNA-
binding factors shape the mouse methylome at distal regulatory regions.
Nature 480: 490 – 495
Stavridis MP, Lunn JS, Collins BJ, Storey KG ( 2007) A discrete period of FGF-
induced Erk 1/2 signalling is required for vertebrate neural specification.
Development 134: 2889 – 2894
Stergachis AB, Neph S, Reynolds A, Humbert R, Miller B, Paige SL, Vernot B,
Cheng JB, Thurman RE, Sandstrom R, Haugen E, Heimfeld S, Murry CE,
Akey JM, Stamatoyannopoulos JA ( 2013) Developmental fate and cellular
maturity encoded in human regulatory DNA landscapes. Cell 154:
888 – 903
Tesar PJ, Chenoweth JG, Brook FA, Davies TJ, Evans EP, Mack DL, Gardner RL,
McKay RD ( 2007) New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining
features with human embryonic stem cells. Nature 448: 196 – 199
Thomas-Chollier M, Defrance M, Medina-Rivera A, Sand O, Herrmann C,
Thieffry D, van Helden J ( 2011) RSAT 2011: regulatory sequence analysis
tools. Nucleic Acids Res 39:W 86 – W91
Thomas-Chollier M, Herrmann C, Defrance M, Sand O, Thieffry D, van Helden
J( 2012) RSAT peak-motifs: motif analysis in full-size ChIP-seq datasets.
Nucleic Acids Res 40:e 31
Torres-Padilla ME, Chambers I ( 2014) Transcription factor heterogeneity in
pluripotent stem cells: a stochastic advantage. Development 141:
2173 – 2181
ª 2018 The Authors The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 19 of 20
Nicola Festuccia et al Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss The EMBO Journal
Toyooka Y, Shimosato D, Murakami K, Takahashi K, Niwa H ( 2008)
Identification and characterization of subpopulations in undifferentiated
ES cell culture. Development 135: 909 – 918
Tsumura A, Hayakawa T, Kumaki Y, Takebayashi S, Sakaue M, Matsuoka C,
Shimotohno K, Ishikawa F, Li E, Ueda HR, Nakayama J, Okano M ( 2006)
Maintenance of self-renewal ability of mouse embryonic stem cells in the
absence of DNA methyltransferases Dnmt 1, Dnmt 3a and Dnmt 3b. Genes
Cells 11: 805 – 814
Wang C, Lee JE, Lai B, Macfarlan TS, Xu S, Zhuang L, Liu C, Peng W, Ge K
(2016) Enhancer priming by H 3K4 methyltransferase MLL 4 controls cell
fate transition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113: 11871 – 11876
Whyte WA, Bilodeau S, Orlando DA, Hoke HA, Frampton GM, Foster CT,
Cowley SM, Young RA ( 2012) Enhancer decommissioning by LSD 1 during
embryonic stem cell differentiation. Nature 482: 221 – 225
Wray J, Kalkan T, Smith AG ( 2010) The ground state of pluripotency. Biochem
Soc Trans 38: 1027 – 1032
Yan J, Chen SA, Local A, Liu T, Qiu Y, Dorighi KM, Preissl S, Rivera CM, Wang
C, Ye Z, Ge K, Hu M, Wysocka J, Ren B ( 2018) Histone H 3 lysine 4
monomethylation modulates long-range chromatin interactions at
enhancers. Cell Res 28: 387
Yang SH, Kalkan T, Morissroe C, Marks H, Stunnenberg H, Smith A, Sharrocks
AD ( 2014) Otx 2 and Oct 4 drive early enhancer activation during
embryonic stem cell transition from naive pluripotency. Cell Rep 7:
1968 – 1981
Ying QL, Wray J, Nichols J, Batlle-Morera L, Doble B, Woodgett J, Cohen P,
Smith A ( 2008) The ground state of embryonic stem cell self-renewal.
Nature
453: 519 – 523
Zhang M, Leitch HG, Tang WWC, Festuccia N, Hall-Ponsele E, Nichols J,
Surani MA, Smith A, Chambers I ( 2018) Esrrb complementation rescues
development of Nanog-null germ cells. Cell Rep 22: 332 – 339
License: This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
License, which permits use, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
20 of 20 The EMBO Journal 37:e 95476 | 2018 ª 2018 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Exiting naïve pluripotency by Esrrb loss Nicola Festuccia et al