Article
E-cadherin mediates apical membrane initiation
site localisation during de novo polarisation of
epithelial cavities
Xuan Liang1 , Antonia Weberling 1 , Chun Yuan Hii 1 , Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz 1,2 &
Clare E Buckley 1,*
Abstract
Individual cells within de novo polarising tubes and cavities must
integrate their forming apical domains into a centralised apical
membrane initiation site (AMIS). This is necessary to enable organ-
ised lumen formation within multi-cellular tissue. Despite the
well-documented importance of cell division in localising the AMIS,
we have found a division-independent mechanism of AMIS locali-
sation that relies instead on Cadherin-mediated cell –cell adhesion.
Our study of de novo polarising mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs) cultured in 3D suggests that cell –cell adhesion localises
apical proteins such as PAR- 6 to a centralised AMIS. Unexpectedly,
we also found that mESC clusters lacking functional E-cadherin
still formed a lumen-like cavity in the absence of AMIS localisation
but did so at a later stage of development via a “closure” mecha-
nism, instead of via hollowing. This work suggests that there are
two, interrelated mechanisms of apical polarity localisation: cell
adhesion and cell division. Alignment of these mechanisms in
space allows for redundancy in the system and ensures the devel-
opment of a coherent epithelial structure within a growing organ.
Keywords AMIS; apical-basal polarity; cadherin; de novo polarisation;
epithelial tube
Subject Categories Cell Adhesion, Polarity & Cytoskeleton
DOI 10.15252/embj.2022111021 | Received 25 February 2022 | Revised 18 July
2022 | Accepted 21 July 2022 | Published online 22 August 2022
The EMBO Journal ( 2022) 41:e 111021
See also: G Herranz & F Martín-Belmonte (December 2022)
Introduction
Most organs in the body arise from tubes or cavities made from
polarised epithelial cells. These cells have a strict apico-basal orien-
tation; they align their apical ends along a centrally located lumen.
Some tubes, such as the anterior neural tube in amniotes, arise
via folding and closure of an already polarised epithelial tissue,
through mechanisms such as actomyosin-mediated apical constric-
tion (Nikolopoulou et al , 2017). However, many tubes and cavities,
such as the posterior neural tube, mammary acini, kidney tubules
and mammalian epiblast, arise via apical-basal polarisation within
the centre of an initially solid tissue. The mechanisms by which
such “ de novo ” polarisation is coordinated within dynamically
growing tissue have been the focus of a significant body of research
from several different models and have relevance both for under-
standing polarity-associated diseases and for directing organ bio-
engineering approaches.
Although the exact mechanisms are still under debate and may
differ in different epithelia (Buckley & Johnston, 2022), Laminin,
Integrin β1 and RAC1 signalling from the extracellular matrix
(ECM) is now well established to be necessary for directing the
overall apico-basal axis of polarisation of internally polarising
tubes (Yu et al , 2004; Akhtar & Streuli, 2013; Buckley et al , 2013;
Bedzhov & Zernicka-Goetz, 2014; Bryant et al , 2014; Mol /C18e
et al , 2021). What is less clear is how the precise localisation of
the apical membrane initiation site (AMIS) is directed at the
single-cell level and how this is coordinated between neighbouring
cells. The AMIS is a transient structure, marked by the scaffolding
protein Partitioning-defective-3 (PAR-3) and tight junctional com-
ponents such as Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), that defines where
apically targeted proteins will fuse with the membrane, therefore
determining where the lumen will arise (Bryant et al , 2010; Blasky
et al , 2015). It is important that the subcellular localisation of the
AMIS is coordinated between cells during morphogenesis to enable
organised lumen formation.
The current literature suggests that cell division plays an impor-
tant role in AMIS localisation. In particular, the post-mitotic mid-
body has been shown to anchor apically directed proteins (Schl €uter
et al , 2009;L i et al , 2014; Wang et al , 2014; Luj/C19an et al , 2016; Rath-
bun et al , 2020). However, studies within the zebrafish neural rod
showed that, whilst misorientation of cell division results in disrup-
tion of the apical plane at a tissue level, these phenotypes can be
rescued by inhibiting cell division (Ciruna et al , 2006; Tawk
et al , 2007; Quesada-Hernandez et al , 2010; ˇZigman et al , 2011).
1 Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
2 Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
*Corresponding author. Tel: +44 (0)1223 333766; E-mail: ceb 85@cam.ac.uk
/C2112022 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license. The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 1 of 17
We also previously demonstrated that individual zebrafish neuroep-
ithelial cells were able to recognise the future midline of the neural
primordium and organise their intracellular structure around this
location in advance and independently of cell division. This
resulted in the initiation of an apical surface at whichever point the
cells intersect the middle of the developing tissue, even if this is
part way along a cell length (Buckley et al , 2013). This suggests
that, whilst cell division is undoubtably a dominant mechanism,
there must be another overlying mechanism driving AMIS localisa-
tion during de novo polarisation. The earliest indication of midline
positioning in the zebrafish neural rod is the central accumulation
of the junctional scaffolding protein Pard3 (PAR-3) and the adhe-
sion protein N-cadherin (Buckley et al , 2013; Symonds & Buckley
et al , 2020). This led us to hypothesise that cell –cell adhesions
could direct the site for AMIS localisation during de novo polarisa-
tion. In line with this hypothesis, β-catenin-mediated maturation
of N-cadherin was found to be necessary for the recruitment of
the PAR apical complex protein atypical protein kinase C (aPKC)
in the chick neural tube (Herrera et al , 2021). Opposing localisa-
tions of ECM and Cadherin proteins were also found to be suffi-
cient to specify the apical-basal axis of hepatocytes in culture
(Zhang et al , 2020).
To test the role of cell –cell adhesions in AMIS localisation, we
turned to mouse embryo stem cell (mESC) culture in Matrigel,
which has been used as an in vitro model for the de novo polarisa-
tion of the mouse epiblast (Bedzhov & Zernicka-Goetz, 2014; Shah-
bazi et al , 2017; Kim et al , 2021; Mol /C18e et al , 2021). This allowed us
to study the initiation of apico-basal polarity of embryonic cells
alongside the first cell –cell contacts between isolated cells and small
cell clusters. It also allowed us to determine within a mammalian
model whether division-independent polarisation is a conserved
feature of de novo polarising structures. Unlike vertebrate epithelial
cell culture models such as Madin –Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells, which initiate lumenogenesis as early as the 2-cell stage when
cultured in Matrigel (Bryant et al , 2010; Blasky et al , 2015), mESC
cells in Matrigel only form lumens at the multi-cellular stage after
48–72 h in culture, coinciding with an exit in pluripotency
(Bedzhov & Zernicka-Goetz, 2014; Shahbazi et al , 2017). This
results in a relatively clear separation of the stages of de novo polar-
isation (Fig 1A). Previous literature suggests that the AMIS is
formed at the 2-cell stage, around 24 –36 h after culture in Matrigel,
as denoted by membrane-localised PAR-3 and ZO-1 and sub-apical
localisation of apical proteins such as Podocalyxin (PODYXL)
(Shahbazi et al
, 2017). The pre-apical patch (PAP) stage is formed
after 36 –48 h in culture, as denoted by the fusion of apical proteins
such as PODXYL, PAR-6 and aPKC to the apical membrane and
the displacement of junctional proteins PAR-3, ZO-1 and E-cadherin
to the apico-lateral junctions (Shahbazi et al , 2017; Kim et al ,
2021), following which lumenogenesis is initiated after 48 –72 h
in culture.
To determine the role of cell division and of cell adhesion in
mESC AMIS localisation, we analysed mESC cells cultured in
Matrigel at the AMIS stage with and without cell division in wild-
type and E-cadherin knockout cell lines. We then further analysed
polarisation and lumenogenesis in the absence of E-cadherin. Our
results suggest that there is a division-independent mechanism of
AMIS localisation that relies instead on E-cadherin-mediated cell –
cell adhesions.
Results
Cell division is dispensable for AMIS localisation
First, we tested whether cell division was necessary for AMIS locali-
sation in mESC rosettes. We cultured naı¨ve, unpolarised mESCs (ES-
E14 cells) in 2D on gelatin with 2i/LIF and then treated them with
mitomycin C to block cell division. We then isolated single cells and
seeded them into Matrigel without 2i/LIF, in N2B27 differentiation
medium (Fig 1B). Cell divisions were efficiently blocked during the
first 24-h post-seeding, during which time individual cells contacted
each other and formed cell clusters in the absence of cell division
(Movie EV1; Fig EV1A and B).
To assess AMIS localisation, we carried out immunofluorescence
(IF) for PAR-3 and ZO-1 at 24-h post-seeding. As previously pub-
lished (Shahbazi et al , 2017), in addition to several puncta at the
cell peripheries, both PAR-3 and ZO-1 localised to the membrane at
the centre of control cell –cell contacts, marking the AMIS in the
majority of cell clusters (Fig 1C(i) and H(i)). Interestingly, division-
blocked cells also localised PAR-3 and ZO-1 to the central mem-
brane (Fig 1C(ii) and H(ii), quantified in Fig 1D–G and I). In both
control and division-blocked cell clusters, there was a small propor-
tion that had not yet fully localised the AMIS at the 24-h stage (Fig 1
D and I), where PAR-3 was either not localised (Appendix Fig S1A)
or was only weakly present at cell –cell interfaces (Appendix
Fig S1B). E-cadherin was upregulated along the whole length of the
cell–cell interfaces in both dividing and non-dividing cell clusters,
with a higher level of E-cadherin at the cell –cell interface relative to
the cell-matrix interface (Figs 1C and EV1C). To quantify the subcel-
lular localisation of PAR-3 in each cell cluster, we carried out inten-
sity profiles across the cell –cell interface of 2-cell doublets
(Fig 1E(a) and F) and calculated the ratio between centralised and
surrounding non-centralised PAR-3 in multi-cellular clusters (Fig 1
E(b) and G). This confirmed that PAR-3 localised to a small central
area at the cell –cell interface in both control and division-blocked 2-
cell doublets and multi-cellular clusters. Golgi apparatus and centro-
somes were also localised to the centre of cell –cell contacts both in
dividing and non-dividing conditions (Fig 1H–K; Appendix Fig S1C),
confirming that mESCs were polarised in the absence of cell divi-
sion. mESC clusters also centrally localised PAR-3, ZO-1 and
polarised the Golgi apparatus when cell division was blocked using
an alternative compound, aphidicolin (Fig EV1D–H).
Together, these results demonstrate that cell division is dispens-
able for de novo AMIS localisation in polarising mESCs.
Cell–cell contact directs PAR- 6 localisation
To understand the dynamics of apical protein polarisation in the
absence of cell division, we generated a mESC stable cell line
expressing mCherry-PAR-6B and imaged cells live. In line with the
previous characterisation of PAR-6 by IF (Shahbazi et al
, 2017; Kim
et al , 2021) in control dividing cells, mCherry-PAR-6B localised to
the apical membrane by the PAP stage at 48 h and to the luminal
apical membrane from 72 h (Fig 2A; Appendix Fig S2A and B). In
addition, the transgene allowed us to better visualise PAR-6B puncta
at earlier 24-h AMIS stages of development. At this stage, mCherry-
PAR-6B was localised sub-apically, polarised towards the central
region of cell –cell contact (Fig 2A; Appendix Fig S2B). Some
2 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
A
C
HJ
KI
F
G
B
DE  
Figure 1. Cell division is dispensable for AMIS localisation in mESC 3D cultures in Matrigel.
A Stages of polarisation and lumen formation in mESCs cultured in Matrigel.
B Timeline of experiment setups to assess AMIS formation.
C Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 and E-cadherin. PAR- 3 localisation was concentrated at the centre of 2-cell mESC doublets and 3-o r 4-cell mESC clusters, whilst E-
cadherin was localised along the whole length of cell –cell interfaces in both control and mitomycin C-treated conditions.
D Quantification of the frequency of cell clusters with a strong polarised PAR- 3 centre. See the representative mESC clusters without the strong polarised PAR- 3 in
Appendix Fig S1A and B.
E Illustrations of PAR- 3 analysis in 2-cell (a) and >2-cell (b) clusters. The line-scan analysis was performed from the yellow arrow to the orange arrow at the cell –cell
interface between two cells in (a). The average pixel intensity was analysed at central (red region, inner dotted line) and surrounding non-central r egions (orange
region, between the inner and outer dotted lines) in (b).
F Line-scan profiles of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface of 2-cell mESC doublets. Line-scans were sectioned and fitted to each 5% along the cell –cell interface length.
G Ratio of PAR- 3 pixel intensity values at central and surrounding regions in >2-cell mESC clusters.
H, I Representative images of centralised ZO- 1 puncta and polarised Golgi apparatus, labelled by GM 130 (H) and quantification of the frequency of cell doublets with a
polarised ZO-1 or Golgi apparatus centre (I). Also, see the spilt channels in Appendix Fig S1C.
J, K Representative images of polarised centrosomes (J), labelled with γ-tubulin and distance between centrosomes (K) normalised to the length of the long axis of the
doublets in 2-cell clusters.
Data information: Data are presented as means /C6 SEM in (D) and (I); individual line-scans and mean-valued line-scans in (F); individual cell cluster values (small dots),
mean experimental values (large dots) and means of three experiments (bars) in (G); individual values in dots and median values in bars in (K). n = 3 experiments in (D)
and (I), 15–32 cell clusters were analysed for each column in every experiment; 15 cell doublets for each condition from one experiment in (F); 15–22 cell clusters for each
condition in every experiment in (G); 35 doublets for each condition in (K). Two-way ANOVA analysis in (D); Student ’s t-test analysis in (G), (I), (K). P-values were listed in
the graphs. All scale bars: 10 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 3 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
mCherry-PAR-6B puncta appeared to be associated with the Golgi
network. However, a large proportion of mCherry-PAR-6B was in
the cytoplasm sub-apically (Appendix Fig S2C), suggesting that
PAR-6B puncta were in the process of being delivered to the apical
membrane at 24 h. A similar polarised distribution of PAR-6B was
observed in both control and division-blocked cells (Fig 2B and C;
Appendix Fig S2C), demonstrating that cell division is dispensable
for apical protein polarisation.
We next assessed the dynamics of PAR-6B polarisation. In both
control and division-blocked cells, non-cortical mCherry-PAR-6B
puncta were visible at the single-cell stage. In control cells, these
puncta relocalised to the abscission plane, following cell division
(Fig 2D; Appendix Fig S2D; Movie EV2). In division-blocked cells,
PAR-6B puncta dynamically relocalised to newly forming cell –cell
contacts, eventually forming cell –cell clusters with centrally loca-
lised PAR-6B (Fig 2D; Appendix Fig S2E; Movie EV2).
A
B
D
C
Figure 2. Polarised PAR 6B in mESC 3D cultures.
A Representative images of mCherry-PAR- 6B mESC live cells cultured from 24–96 h in Matrigel. See the bright-field images in Appendix Fig S2A.
B, C Representative images (B) and quantification of the frequency of cell clusters with polarised mCherry-PAR- 6B (C) in control and mitomycin division-blocked mESC
live cells after 24 h in Matrigel.
D Movie stills of mCherry-PAR- 6B in control and mitomycin C-treated mESCs cultured in Matrigel (also Movie EV2). Control cells divided (i) and two mitomycin-
treated cells touched (ii) to form 2-cell doublets. Control cells divided twice (iii) and two mitomycin-treated cell clusters touched (iv) to form 4-cell clusters. (v),
Kymograph of mCherry-PAR 6B in the arrow-head cell in (ii) along the path between the arrows; each pixel is the fluorescence values averaged over 0.2 μm sections.
See more examples in Appendix Fig S2D and E.
Data information: Data in (C) are presented as means /C6 SEM. n = 3 experiments. At least 20 clusters were analysed for each column in every experiment. Two-way
ANOVA analysis; P-values were listed in the graphs. All scale bars: 10 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
4 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
These results suggest that cell –cell contact directs PAR-6B locali-
sation at the central AMIS, independent of cell division.
E-cadherin adhesions are necessary for AMIS localisation
The above results suggest that there is a division-independent mech-
anism of AMIS localisation that relies instead on cell –cell adhesions.
Since E-cadherin is the predominant adhesion molecule in non-
neural epithelia, we hypothesised that it might be important in
AMIS localisation. To achieve a full removal of E-cadherin, we
employed an E-cadherin knockout ( Cdh1 KO) mESC line
(Appendix Fig S3A; Larue et al , 1996).
To assess AMIS localisation, we again carried out IF for PAR-3
and ZO-1 at 24-h post-seeding. As seen earlier (Fig 1), both PAR-3
and ZO-1 localised to the central region of cell –cell contact within
wild-type (W4 cells) doublets/clusters with and without division.
However, PAR-3 and ZO-1 localisation was strongly inhibited in the
absence of E-cadherin (Fig 3A–D, G , and H). RNAi knock-down
(KD) of E-cadherin in ES-E14 mESCs showed similar results to the
Cdh1 KO mESCs: PAR-3 at the central region of E-cadherin KD two-
cell clusters was significantly reduced (Appendix Fig S3B and C).
To investigate AMIS localisation at a single-cell level, we co-
cultured division-blocked wild-type (ES-E14) and Cdh1 KO cells and
analysed chimeric mESC doublets, comprising one wild-type and
one Cdh1 KO cell. Whilst homogenous control doublets localised
PAR-3 to the central region of the cell –cell interface, heterogeneous
chimeric doublets did not localise PAR-3 centrally (Fig 3E and F).
The same result was seen in E-cadherin RNAi chimeric doublets
(Appendix Fig S3B(b)). Golgi and centrosome localisation towards
the cell –cell interface suggested that the overall axis of polarity was
maintained, even in the absence of both cell division and E-cadherin
(Fig 3G–I; Appendix Fig S3D). These results demonstrated that E-
cadherin is necessary for AMIS localisation.
Since E-cadherin is localised along the whole cell –cell interface
but PAR-3 and ZO-1 localise at central cell –cell interfaces, we next
used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) to compare
the stability of E-cadherin protein at central and side regions in 2-
cell mESC clusters (Fig EV2A and B, regions illustrated in Fig
EV2C). E-cadherin-eGFP (Fig EV2B) and E-cadherin immunofluores-
cence (Fig EV2C and D) levels were the same at these two regions.
However, FRAP of E-cadherin-eGFP showed that the mobile fraction
of E-cadherin-eGFP was lower in the central region than the side
regions (Fig 3J and K). Therefore, E-cadherin junctions are more
stable at the centre-most region of the cell –cell interface, which may
provide at least a partial explanation for why AMIS localisation
occurs precisely at this region.
It has previously been demonstrated that a reduction in E-
cadherin can slow pluripotency exit (Soncin et al , 2009). However,
pluripotency exit was previously shown not to alter AMIS formation
(Shahbazi et al , 2017). In support of these results, we also found
that cells maintained in the pluripotent state when cultured in
Feeder Cell medium provided with 2i/LIF still localised the AMIS,
with and without cell division (Fig EV3A–C). However, in line with
our results showing lack of AMIS localisation in Cdh1 KO cells cul-
tured in the absence of 2i/LIF (Fig 3), cells cultured in the presence
of 2i/LIF also could not localise an AMIS in the absence of E-
cadherin (Fig EV3A–C). Despite this result, we wanted to check
whether the stage of pluripotency exit differed between WT and
Cdh1 KO cells in our experiments since this might indicate a differ-
ent speed of maturation. We, therefore, carried out IF for Orthoden-
ticle Homeobox 2 (OTX2) protein, which is necessary for
pluripotency exit, and the pluripotency marker protein Nanog.
Although, as expected, the overall level of nuclear OTX2 increased
and Nanog decreased over the 24-h course of development, we
found no significant difference in post-mitotic levels of OTX2 and
Nanog between WT and Cdh1 KO cells (Fig EV3D). This result sug-
gests that there was no difference in the stage of pluripotency exit in
the cell clusters that we analysed during this study, and this is there-
fore unlikely to play a role in the lack of AMIS localisation seen in
Cdh1 KO cells.
These results demonstrate that E-cadherin adhesions between
cells are necessary for AMIS localisation but not for the overall axis
of polarity. They also demonstrate that ECM in the absence of E-
cadherin is insufficient for AMIS localisation.
▸
Figure 3. E-cadherin junctions are important for polarisation.
A, B Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 (A) and proportions of mESC clusters with a strong PAR- 3 centre (B) in wild-type (W 4) and E-cadherin knockout ( Cdh1 KO) mESCs at
24 h in Matrigel. See E-cadherin in Appendix Fig S3A.
C Line-scan profiles of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface in wild-type control, mitomycin C-treated and Cdh1 KO control, mitomycin C-treated 2-cell clusters.
D Ratio of PAR- 3 pixel intensity values at central and surrounding regions in >2-cell mESC clusters.
E, F Representative images of PAR- 3 immunofluorescence (E) and line-scan profiles of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface (F) in WT homogeneous (ES-E 14) or WT/ Cdh1 KO
chimeric mESC 2-cell doublets. *, WT mESCs.
G, H Representative images of ZO- 1 puncta and Golgi apparatus (G) and proportions of mESC doublets with central ZO- 1 puncta or polarised Golgi apparatus (H) in WT
and Cdh1 KO mESC doublets.
I Distance between centrosomes in cell doublets. The distance was normalised to the length of the long axis of the doubles. See the representative imag es in
Appendix Fig S3D.
J Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of E-cadherin-eGFP at the centre-most or side 2 μm regions of division-blocked mESC doublets ’ cell–cell inter-
faces. See methods in Fig EV2C.
K Mobile fraction of E-cadherin-eGFP calculated from the plotting of (J).
Data information: Data are presented as means /C6 SEM in (B), (H); individual and mean-valued line-scans in (C) and (F); individual cell cluster values (small dots), mean
experimental values (large dots) and means of three experiments (bars) /C6 SEM in (D); individual values in dots and median values in bars in (I); exponential association
fitting curves /C6 SD in (J); means /C6 SD in (K). n = 3 experiments in (B) and (H), 17–50 cell clusters were analysed for each column in every experiment; 15 doublets for
each condition in (C); 17–30 cell clusters were analysed for each condition in every experiment in (D); 15 doublets for each condition in (F); 35–40 doublets in each condi-
tion in (I); 15–18 doublets for each condition in (J) and (K). Two-way ANOVA analysis in (B), (D), (I) and (K); Student ’s t-test analysis in (H); P-values were listed in the
graphs. All scale bars: 10 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 5 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
A
BD
EF
CG
H
I
J
K
Figure 3.
6 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
Adhesion molecules P-cadherin, JAM-A and Nectin- 2 are not
necessary for AMIS localisation
E-cadherin is not the only form of adhesion molecule that is
expressed at cell –cell contacts. A complex network of interactions
between the PAR-complex, adhesion molecules, MAGUK scaffolding
proteins and the actin cytoskeleton is responsible for building cell –
cell junctions (Buckley & Johnston, 2022). Of relevance to this
study, PAR-3 has been found to directly bind to transmembrane
Junctional Adhesion Molecules (JAMs) and Nectin proteins in mam-
mals (Ebnet et al , 2001; Itoh et al , 2001; Takekuni et al , 2003). In
the mammalian embryo, JAM-A and Nectin-2 adhesion molecules
are expressed between inner cell mass cells in the mouse blastocyst
(Thomas et al , 2004). We found that JAM-A and Nectin-2, as well
as P-cadherin, were expressed at cell –cell contacts in 2D cultured
mESCs (Fig EV4A).
We, therefore, carried out IF of 2-cell mESC clusters cultured in
Matrigel for 24 h to determine the localisation of P-cadherin, JAM-A
and Nectin-2 at the AMIS stage. Whilst the majority of 2-cell and 4-
cell clusters formed a polarised PAR-3 centre, P-cadherin was uni-
formly expressed along cell –cell interfaces (Figs 4A and EV4B).
JAM-A was uniformly expressed along cell –cell interfaces at the 2-
cell stage (Fig 4D) and concentrated towards the centre of 4-cell
mESC clusters (Fig EV4C). At the 2-cell stage, Nectin-2 was
expressed along the whole cell –cell interface with a sight concentra-
tion towards the central regions where PAR-3 was localised (Fig
4G). At the 4-cell stage, Nectin-2 was concentrated towards the cen-
tre of the clusters (Fig EV4D). These results suggest that PAR-3 loca-
lises at the AMIS before JAM-A or Nectin-2.
Next, we used siRNA KD of protein function in dividing and
division-blocked cells to test whether P-cadherin, JAM-A or
Nectin-2 proteins were necessary for AMIS localisation. However,
following siRNA for each of these proteins, PAR-3 was still
polarised to the centre of cell –cell contacts (Figs 4A–I and EV4B–
D). Compared with the loss of PAR-3 polarisation upon E-cadherin
KO or KD (Fig 3, Appendix Fig S3), the results demonstrate that
P-cadherin, JAM-A and Nectin-2 are not necessary for AMIS locali-
sation. Indeed, when the centralised PAR-3 localisation was lost in
the E-cadherin KO mESC 2-cell clusters (Fig 3A–C), P-cadherin,
JAM-A and Nectin-2 were still expressed at the cell –cell interface
between the mESCs (Fig EV4E–G). This suggests that E-cadherin-
based adhesions might be specifically responsible for mediating
AMIS localisation.
E-cadherin adhesions are sufficient to initiate AMIS localisation,
independent of ECM signalling and cell division
As discussed, ECM-mediated signalling plays an important role in
orienting the axis of polarisation within de novo polarising systems.
Recently, the apico-basal axis of cultured mature hepatocytes was
established by a combination of ECM signalling and immobilised E-
cadherin (Zhang et al
, 2020). However, PAR-3 has also recently
been shown to polarise in mESCs lacking functional Integrin- β1o r
cultured in agarose in the absence of ECM proteins (Mol /C18e
et al , 2021). Our current study shows that the AMIS can localise in
the absence of cell division but not in the absence of E-cadherin.
We, therefore, wanted to explore the relative roles of ECM, cell divi-
sion and E-cadherin in AMIS localisation.
We first eliminated the influence of ECM by culturing division-
blocked mESCs (ES-E14) in 0.5% agarose and carried out IF for
PAR-3 after 30 h in culture. These cells were still able to polarise
PAR-3, even in the absence of both cell division and ECM proteins
(Fig 5A and B). However, in line with our earlier results (Fig 3),
PAR-3 localisation was strongly inhibited in Cdh1 KO cells (Fig 5A
and B). These results suggest that AMIS localisation occurs indepen-
dently of both ECM signalling and of cell division, relying instead
on E-cadherin.
To further test the sufficiency of E-cadherin adhesions in initiat-
ing AMIS localisation, we cultured individual division-blocked
mESCs (ES-E14) onto either E-cadherin recombinant protein or
Fibronectin precoated glass, then topped the cells with N2B27
medium, with or without 20% Matrigel and carried out IF for PAR-3
after 24 h in culture. Like results from hepatocytes (Zhang
et al , 2020), cells plated on E-cadherin and topped with Matrigel
localised PAR-3 to the centre of the cell-cadherin interface (Fig 5C–
F). However, this central PAR-3 localisation was significantly
reduced when cells were plated on fibronectin (Fig 5C–F). Interest-
ingly, cells cultured on E-cadherin but in the absence of Matrigel
still localised PAR-3 to the centre of the cell-cadherin interface
(Fig 5C–F).
These results demonstrate that E-cadherin adhesions are both
necessary and sufficient for initiating AMIS localisation, whilst ECM
is not necessary or sufficient for AMIS localisation.
E-cadherin is necessary for hollowing lumenogenesis
We next wanted to test the importance of E-cadherin-mediated
AMIS localisation in lumenogenesis. We, therefore, cultured WT
(ES-E14) and Cdh1 KO mESCs and fixed them at the AMIS 24-h
stage, PAP 48-h stage and lumen 72 and 96-h stage. We then carried
out IF for PAR-3 and ZO-1 to label AMIS/apical-lateral junctions and
PODXYL to label apical proteins. Whilst most WT cell clusters had a
centralised apical domain or small lumen after 48 h in culture, very
few Cdh1 KO cell clusters had made a centralised apical domain by
the 48-h PAP stage (Fig 6A–D). In line with our earlier findings at
the 24-h AMIS stage (Fig 3), this provides further evidence that E-
cadherin is necessary for centralised AMIS localisation. However,
we noticed that a small percentage of Cdh1 KO cell clusters at 48 h
had formed an open “cup-shape,” with apically localised PODXYL
(Fig 6B) and apico-laterally localised junctional PAR-3 (e.g. Fig 6
A(iii)) and ZO-1 (Fig EV5A). We termed these “open cavities” (Fig 6
C). Surprisingly, by the 72-h lumen stage, approximately 75% of
Cdh1 KO cell clusters had formed polarised cavities, approximately
50% of which were open cavities and 50% were closed (Fig 6D and
E). Over the course of 48 –96 h in culture, the overall percentage of
polarised cavities increased (Fig 6D) as did the proportion of these
structures that were “closed” (Fig 6E). This suggested that these
cavities might form via gradual “closure” of the tissue, rather than
via hollowing. Both “open” and “closed” cavities were surrounded
by polarised Golgi apparatus, demonstrating that the overall apico-
basal axis of cells was intact. (Fig EV5B).
To further assess the morphogenetic mechanism by which cavi-
ties form in Cdh1 KO cells, we generated WT (ES-E14) and Cdh1 KO
mESC lines labelled with LifeAct-mRuby (Appendix Fig S4). We
visualised the process of lumenogenesis within mESCs cultured in
Matrigel via live imaging (Fig 6F; Movies EV3 and EV4). This
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 7 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
A
C
B
D
F
E
G
I
H
Figure 4. Adhesion molecule P-cadherin, JAM-A and Nectin- 2 do not aid PAR- 3 in the AMIS.
A–C Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 and P-cadherin (A), proportions of mESC clusters with a positive PAR- 3 centre (B) and line-scans of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface (C)
in control, P-cadherin knock-down by RNAi, mitomycin-treated and P-cadherin knock-down mitomycin-treated W 4 mESC doublets cultured for 24 h in Matrigel.
D–F Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 and JAM-A (D), proportions of mESC clusters with a positive PAR- 3 centre (E) and line-scans of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface (F) in
control, JAM-A knock-down by RNAi, mitomycin-treated and JAM-A knock-down mitomycin-treated W 4 mESC doublets cultured for 24 h in Matrigel.
G–I Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 and Nectin-2 (G), proportions of mESC clusters with a positive PAR- 3 centre (H) and line-scans of PAR- 3 at the cell –cell interface (I) in
control, Nectin-2 knock-down by RNAi, mitomycin-treated and Nectin- 2 knock-down mitomycin-treated W 4 mESC doublets cultured for 24 h in Matrigel.
Data information: Data are presented as means /C6 SEM in (B), (E), (H); individual and mean-valued line-scans in (C), (F), (I). n = 3 experiments in (B), (E), (H), 15–21 clus-
ters were analysed for each column in every experiment; 15–21 line-scans in (C), (F), (I). Two-way ANOVA analysis in (B), (E), (H); P-values were listed in the graphs. All
scale bars: 5 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
8 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
confirmed that, whilst the WT cell clusters made a central lumen
(8/8 movies on day 2) and then expanded this already central lumen
(8/8 movies on day 3), cdh1 KO cell clusters first generated an open
cup-shape cavity (3/3 movies on day 2), which then gradually
closed, eventually generating a centralised lumen-like structure
without hollowing at a later stage of development (3/3 movies on
day 3).
These results demonstrate that, in the absence of E-cadherin-
mediated AMIS localisation, cell clusters do not hollow but instead
generate lumen-like cavities via a closure mechanism. Our results
also demonstrate that E-cadherin and centralised AMIS localisation
are not required for apical membrane formation. In the absence of
E-cadherin, an apical surface is still formed but this occurs later in
development so appears less efficient.
Discussion
Epithelial cells can polarise de novo in the absence of cell division
Both AMIS-associated proteins PAR-3/ZO-1 and apical polarity
protein PAR-6B localised similarly in WT and division-blocked
AC
D
F
B
E
Figure 5. Cell-ECM interactions in regulating AMIS seeding.
A, B Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 (A) and proportions of mESC doublets with polarised PAR- 3 (B) in wild-type (ES-E 14) and E-cadherin knockout ( Cdh1 KO) cells at 30 h
in 0.5% agarose.
C Immunofluorescence of PAR- 3 in cell division-blocked mESCs cultured on E-cadherin or Fibronectin-coated glass topped with or without Matrigel for 24 h.
D Heatmap of PAR- 3 in cells from one experiment of (C). Squared frames were fitted to the main bodies of the cells. A pixel was the average value in each 10% along
the width of the frames. The heatmaps were stacks of 15 cells in one experiment.
E PAR- 3 levels at the central 20% of the heatmaps from three experiments of (C).
F Ratios between PAR- 3 in the 2.5 μm diameter central core and whole cell surface from three experiments of (C).
Data information: Data are presented as means /C6 SEM in (B); individual cell values (small dots), mean experimental values (large dots) and means of
experiments /C6 SEM (bars) in (E) and (F). n = 3 experiments in (B), (E), (F); at least 15 clusters were analysed for each column in every experiment; 15–20 cells for each
column in every experiment of (E) and (F). Two-way ANOVA analysis in (B), (E), (F); P-values were listed in the graphs. All scale bars: 5 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 9 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
mESCs (Figs 1, 2 , and 7A). This finding supports our previously
published zebrafish neuroepithelial cell in vivo analysis, which
demonstrated the division-independent localisation of Pard3 (PAR-
3) and ZO-1 at the neural rod primordial midline (Buckley
et al , 2013). Together, this demonstrates that although division is
an important contributor to AMIS formation, a division-independent
mechanism of de novo polarisation and AMIS localisation can occur
in both in vivo and in vitro conditions. Whilst disorganised lumen
formation can also occur in the absence of division in the zebrafish
neural rod (Buckley et al , 2013), this was not possible to test within
A
B
D
F
E
C
Figure 6.
10 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
the mESC culture model since mitomycin-treated cell clusters did
not survive beyond 30 h in culture.
E-cadherin-based cell–cell contacts are necessary and sufficient
to initiate AMIS localisation
AMIS localisation in Cdh1 KO cell clusters is strongly inhibited
(Fig 3), and individual mESC cells can localise their AMIS to the
central region of the cell-cell interface independently from ECM sig-
nalling (Fig 5). Together, this demonstrates that the formation of E-
cadherin-based cell–cell contacts is both necessary and sufficient for
initiating AMIS localisation and that ECM is insufficient to direct
AMIS localisation in the absence of E-cadherin. Our results, there-
fore, suggest that Cadherin-based cell –cell adhesion provides the
spatial cue required for AMIS localisation during de novo polarisa-
tion. This in turn localises apical proteins such as PAR-6B to a cen-
tralised region of cell –cell contact (Fig 2), determining where the
lumen will arise.
Whilst we demonstrate that AMIS localisation can occur inde-
pendently from cell division, the importance of abscission and
midbody formation in apical protein targeting has been robustly
demonstrated and the molecules involved are now starting to
emerge (Schl €uter et al , 2009;L i et al , 2014; Wang et al , 2014,
2021; Klinkert et al , 2016; Luj /C19an et al , 2016; Mangan et al , 2016;
Rathbun et al , 2020). Rather than acting as the initial symmetry-
breaking step in AMIS localisation, we suggest that tethering of
apically directed proteins to the midbody might instead act to
transiently align cell division, cell adhesion and the forming api-
cal domain, therefore enabling an organised structure to be gener-
ated in the presence of dynamic cell movement and tissue growth
(Buckley & Johnston, 2022). The localisation of scaffolding and
tight junction-associated proteins such as PAR-3 and ZO-1 at the
AMIS might aid in this alignment. For example, Cingulin is a tight
junctional protein that has been shown to bind both to the mid-
body and to FIP5, which is important for the apical targeting of
vesicles containing apical proteins (Mangan et al , 2016). During
zebrafish neural rod development, cell adhesion and cell division
align to allow an organised structure to arise from dynamically
reorganising cells (Symonds & Buckley et al , 2020) and loss of N-
cadherin results in mis-oriented cell divisions and a disrupted
◀
Figure 6. Lumenogenesis in wild-type and E-cadherin knockout mESC cultures.
A PAR- 3 immunofluorescence in wild-type (ES-E 14) and E-cadherin knockout ( Cdh1 KO) mESCs cultured in Matrigel for 48 and 72 h. At 48 h, most WT cell clusters had
formed a polarised rosette or small lumen (i). However, most Cdh 1 KO cells had not formed a central AMIS (ii). A small percentage of Cdh 1 KO cells had formed an
open “cup-shape,” with apically localised PAR- 3 (iii). By 72 h, a significant proportion of Cdh 1 KO cells had formed polarised “cavity-like” structures, about half of
which were configured in an open “cup-shape” and half as closed “lumen-like” structures (iv).
B Podocalyxin immunofluorescence in WT and Cdh 1 KO mESCs cultured in Matrigel from 1–4 days. See Fig EV5A for ZO-1 staining.
C Examples of masked Cdh1 KO cell cluster surfaces from “open” and “closed” cavities. The cavities were categorised based on Podocalyxin signals.
D Percentage of cell clusters with different cavities relative to total cell clusters at different time points. The analysis was compared between the closed/rosette category
among the conditions.
E Percentage of cell clusters with closed cavities relative to total cell clusters with cavities calculated from (D).
F Movie stills of LifeAct-mRuby labelled cell clusters. The images are whole cell cluster z-projections, overlaid with 3D rendering of the cluster surfaces to show the
forming lumens. See Movie EV3 for z-stack movies and Movie EV4 for 3D rotations.
Data information: Data are presented as means /C6 SEM in (D) and (E). n = 20 (48 hW T& Cdh1 KO), 30 (72 h WT) and 32 (72 h Cdh1 KO) images in (A); 3 experiments in
(D) and (E), at least 25 clusters were analysed for each column in every experiment. Two-way ANOVA analysis in (D) and (E); P-values were listed in the graphs. All scale
bars: 25 μm.
Source data are available online for this figure.
A
B
Figure 7. Summary of findings.
A De novo polarisation and AMIS formation in dividing and division-blocked
mESCs cultured in Matrigel.
B Lumenogenesis in wide-type and E-cadherin knockout mESCs cultured in
Matrigel.
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 11 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
apical domain ( ˇZigman et al , 2011). Once apical proteins fuse
with the apical membrane, proteins associated with junctions
such as Cadherin, PAR-3 and ZO-1 are then cleared from the api-
cal surface and instead form the apical-lateral junctions, as
demonstrated in several different epithelial systems (Morais-de-Sa
et al , 2010; Symonds & Buckley et al , 2020; Kim et al , 2021).
Whilst we have demonstrated that E-cadherin directs AMIS
localisation, we do not yet have a full explanation for why AMIS
proteins localise at the central-most point of cell –cell contact in
the absence of divisions, despite E-cadherin localisation all along
the cell –cell interface. As mentioned, PAR-3 has been shown to
directly bind to the transmembrane JAMs and Nectin proteins
(Ebnet et al , 2001; Itoh et al , 2001; Takekuni et al , 2003). How-
ever, these proteins localised to the AMIS later than PAR-3 and
were not necessary for AMIS localisation (Fig 4). PAR-3 and PAR-
6 have been found to be directly recruited to Cadherin proteins
within endothelial cells (Iden et al , 2006). Recently, opposing
actin flows in migrating cells as they first encounter each other
were found to be responsible for regulating the first AJ deposition
via tension-mediated unfolding of a-catenin and further clustering
of surface E-cadherin molecules (Noordstra et al , 2021). Together,
this could provide an explanation for how the first contacts
between cells could act as an apical “seed,” therefore defining the
position of the AMIS within multi-cellular tissues. This could,
therefore, explain why we have previously seen an upregulation
of N-cadherin at the zebrafish neural rod midline, where cells
growing from either side of the organ primordium meet (Symonds
& Buckley et al , 2020). However, it is still unclear how this might
regulate the subcellular localisation of the AMIS to the centre of
cell–cell contacts. Our FRAP results demonstrate that E-cadherin
is more stable at the central-most point of contact between two
adhering cells (Fig 3J and K). This might suggest that E-cadherin
is more stably bound via its downstream partners to the internal
actin cytoskeleton at this point, which might help to stabilise or
to localise AMIS proteins. In line with this hypothesis, previous
publications have demonstrated an upregulation of phosphory-
lated MYOSIN-II (p-MLC) at the AMIS (Mol /C18e et al , 2021), which is
suggestive of higher actomyosin-mediated tension. Uncovering the
mechanisms directing adhesion-dependent AMIS localisation pre-
cisely to the midpoint of cell –cell adhesions will be an interesting
area for future studies. In addition, a recent study of chick neural
tube polarisation (where N-cadherin is the dominant Cadherin)
has demonstrated that the interaction of β-catenin with pro-N-
cadherin in the Golgi apparatus is necessary for the maturation of
N-cadherin, which is in turn important for apical-basal polarity
establishment (Herrera et al , 2021). This provides the possibility
that the polarised Golgi apparatus that we observe in the mESC
clusters might be directionally delivering mature E-cadherin to the
central-most region of cell –cell contact.
In the absence of an AMIS, lumens form via “closure” rather
than hollowing
The centralised localisation of an AMIS appears necessary to enable
lumen hollowing within multi-cellular clusters. Cdh1 KO cells lack
AMIS localisation at the 24-h AMIS stage (Fig 3). However, they still
retain their apico-basal polarity axis (as denoted by Golgi apparatus
and centrosome localisation, Fig 3G
–I) and form apico-lateral
junctions at luminal stages of development (Fig 6). Therefore, Cdh1
KO cells appear to still make an apical membrane (presumably
directed by ECM-mediated signalling) but do so more slowly than in
WT cells and without going through a centralised AMIS stage. This
suggests that the role of E-cadherin in de novo polarisation is specifi-
cally to localise the AMIS, which enables the integration of individ-
ual cell apical domains to a centralised region preceding lumen
hollowing. The lack of a centralised AMIS in E-cadherin deficient
cells could also explain the multiple-lumen (but otherwise
polarised) phenotypes previously seen in E-cadherin deficient
MDCK cells cultured on collagen (Jia et al , 2011). Although the
other adhesion molecules we have tested (P-cadherin, JAM-A and
Nectin-2) did not contribute to centralised AMIS formation, mESCs
cultured in Matrigel and mouse inner cell mass cells only become
fully epithelialised and start to generate the central cavity once they
have exited pluripotency and there are multiple cells in the struc-
tures (Shahbazi et al , 2017; Kim et al , 2021). Thus, whilst E-
cadherin appears to be essential for AMIS localisation, other adhe-
sion molecules may be important at later polarisation and lumeno-
genesis stages.
A surprising observation was the ability of Cdh1 KO mESC
clusters, in the absence of AMIS localisation, to instead form
“lumen-like” structures via a “closure” process (summarised in
Fig 7B). Our movies of Cdh1 KO cell clusters (Movies EV3 and
EV4) confirmed conclusions from fixed data (Fig 6) that Cdh1 KO
cell clusters first generate a polarised, open cup-shape cavity,
before “closing.” Due to phototoxicity, we only had limited sam-
ple size and movie lengths; thus, we were not able to fully
exclude the possibility that the hollowing lumenogenesis occurs to
some small extent in parallel, but our data are not suggestive of
hollowing lumenogenesis in the Cdh1 KO cell clusters. We do not
currently know the mechanism by which such “closure” occurs in
Cdh1 KO cell clusters. However, the presence of F-actin and p-
MLC-rich cable-like structures in “cup”-shaped open cavities is
potentially suggestive of a contractile process (Fig EV5). Under-
standing the relative roles of mechanics in localisation of the
AMIS and in “opening” vs. “closing” tubes is an important future
research goal, as is the potential role of cell geometry in mediat-
ing such differences. Additionally, collective cell migration could
play a role in this “closure” mechanism. Collective inwards
migration of cells caused lumen formation via a folding mecha-
nism when MDCK monolayers were overlaid with a soft collagen
gel (Ishida et al , 2014). A similar collective process could be
occurring in the Cdh1 KO cell clusters from our study, which
were cultured in a soft (10%) Matrigel and formed loosely con-
nected cell clusters, which then “closed” to make a centralised
lumen.
In summary, our work suggests that Cadherin-mediated cell –cell
adhesion directs AMIS localisation during de novo polarisation of
epithelial tubes and cavities. Our work also suggests that ECM is
insufficient to direct AMIS localisation in the absence of Cadherin.
In parallel with the well-described role of the midbody in tethering
apical proteins, this suggests that there are two, interrelated mecha-
nisms of AMIS localisation: cell adhesion and cell division. The
alignment of these cellular processes allows for redundancy in the
system and provides an explanation for how an organised epithelial
structure can arise within the centre of a proliferating organ pri-
mordium.
12 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
Material and Methods
Cell cultures and treatment
Cell lines used in this study are listed in Table 1. mESC carriers
were maintained in Feeder Cell medium in Corning cell culture
dishes precoated with 0.1% Gelatin (ES-006-B, Sigma-Aldrich), at
37°C suppled with 5% CO
2 at one atmospheric pressure. The culture
medium was renewed every 3 days. The cells were trypsinised
when reaching confluency to be passaged or subjected to experi-
ments. The cells were regularly checked to be mycoplasma-
contamination-free.
For 3D cultures of wild-type and Cdh1 KO mESCs, 20 μLo f
Matrigel (356231, Corning, Lot 354230, 354234, 356231) was
spread evenly to the bottom of each well in a μ-slide 8-well dish
(80821, Ibidi). The dish was left on ice for 10 min to flatten the
Matrigel surface and then was left at 37 °C for 10 min to solidify
the Matrigel. mESCs were trypsinised, pipetted thoroughly and
passed through a cell strainer (431750, Corning) to isolate cells
into single cells. Singled mESCs were suspended in the N2B27
medium and seeded onto the solidified Matrigel. The seeded
density was: control, 14 cells/mm
2; mitomycin C-treated,
227 cells/mm 2. The cells were left at 37 °C for 15 min when over
95% of the cells attached to the Matrigel, then the culture
medium was renewed to 10% Matrigel/N2B27 medium with or
without 2i/LIF.
For control and Cdh1 KO mESC chimeric cluster cultures, wild-
type and Cdh1 KO mESCs were mixed at 1:4 ratio and co-cultured in
2D in the Feeder Cell Medium. They were then treated with mito-
mycin C for 2 h, trypsinised and seeded for 3D Matrigel culture at
227 cells/mm
2.
For mESC cultured in agarose, 5,000 control or 125,000 mito-
mycin C-treated cells were suspended in a 37 °C warmed 20 μL 0.5%
low melting point agarose (16520, Invitrogen) droplet at the bottom
of the μ-slide 8-well dish. The dish was left at room temperature for
5 min to solidify and topped with the N2B27 medium. The cells
were then cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO
2 until analysis.
For cells cultured on E-cadherin and fibronectin-coated glass, the
μ-slide 8-well dish was incubated with nitrocellulose/methanal at
37°C for 3 h and left to air dry. The dish was then incubated with
40 μg/ml mouse E-cadherin recombinant protein (8875-EC-050, Bio-
Techne) or 40 μg/ml fibronectin (F1141, Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 °C over-
night. The dish was briefly washed with water. Mitomycin C pre-
treated ES-E14 cells were seeded onto the dish at 14 cells/mm
2 in
N2B27 medium. The cells were allowed to attach to the glass at
37 °C for 1 h, and then the medium was renewed to N2B27 medium
with 20% Matrigel. The cells were fixed 24-h post-Matrigel introduc-
tion.
For mitomycin C treatment, the cells were incubated with 10 μg/
ml mitomycin C (J63193, Alfa Aesar) in culture media at 37 °C for
2 h. The mitomycin C-contained media were removed, and the cells
were washed with PBS briefly. Then, the mitomycin C-treated cells
were trypsinised and subjected to further experiments.
Mouse PAR-6B coding DNA sequence (cDNA, GenBank:
BC025147.1) was assembled with mCherry by Gibson assembly,
and LifeAct-Ruby cDNA were sub-cloned from an existing pRN3P-
LifeAct-Ruby plasmid. The cDNAs were cloned into pDONR221
plasmid and introduced into the PB-Hyg-Dest plasmid using Gate-
way technology (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The PB-Hyg-Dest-
mCherry-PAR-6B or the PB-Hyg-Dest-LifeAct-Ruby plasmid was co-
transfected with the piggyBac plasmid using Lipofectamine 3,000 to
generate Hygromycin B resistant stable cell lines. The mCherry-
PAR-6B or LifeAct-Ruby expressing mESC stable cell line was cre-
ated via 10 μg/ml Hygromycin B selection and single-cell colonies
expansion. Primers used for cloning are listed in Table 2.
Compositions of cell culture media
Feeder Cell Medium: DMEM (41966, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 15%
FBS (ES-009-B, Sigma-Aldrich), penicillin –streptomycin (15140122,
Table 1. List of cell lines used in this study.
Name Description Animal strains Source RRID References
ES-E14 Wild-type mouse embryonic
stem cells
129P2/Ola mice Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute
CVCL_C320 Hooper et al (1987)
W4 Wild-type mouse embryonic
stem cells
129S6/SvEvTacArc mice Gifted from Shukry Habib at
King’s College London
CVCL_Y634 Auerbach et al (2000)
Cdh1 KO E-cadherin knockout mouse
embryonic stem cells
129S6/SvEvTacArc mice Gifted from Lionel Larue at
Institute Curie
Larue et al (1996)
mCherry-PAR-6B ES-E14 ES-E14 mouse embryonic
stem cells expressing
mCherry-PAR-6B
129P2/Ola mice Generated in this study
E-cadherin-eGFP ES-E14 ES-E14 mouse embryonic
stem cells expressing E-
cadherin-eGFP
129P2/Ola mice Published in Mol /C18e
et al (2021)
Mol/C18e et al (2021)
LifeAct-mRuby ES-E14 ES-E14 mouse embryonic
stem cells expressing LifeAct-
mRuby
129P2/Ola mice Generated in this study
LifeAct-mRuby Cdh1
KO E-cadherin knockout mouse
embryonic stem cells
expressing LifeAct-mRuby
129S6/SvEvTacArc mice Generated in this study/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 13 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
Thermo Fisher Scientific), GlutaMAX (35050061, Thermo Fisher
Scientific), MEM non-essential amino acids (11140035, Thermo
Fisher Scientific), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (11360070, Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and 100 μM β-mercaptoethanol (31350-010, Thermo
Fisher Scientific). To maintain cells in pluripotency, 2i/LIF (1 mM
MEK inhibitor PD0325901, 13034, Cayman Chemical; 3 mM GSK3
inhibitor CHIR99021, 13122, Cayman Chemical; and 10 ng/ml
leukaemia inhibitory factor, LIF, A35933, Gibco) was added to the
Feeder Cell medium to preserve naı¨ve pluripotency. N2B27 Medium:
1:1 mix of DMEM F12 (21331-020, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
neurobasal A (10888-022, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented
with 2% v/v B27 (10889-038, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.2% v/v
N2 (17502048, Gibco), 100 μM β-mercaptoethanol (31350-010,
Thermo Fisher Scientific), penicillin –streptomycin (15140122,
Thermo Fisher Scientific) and GlutaMAX (35050061, Thermo Fisher
Scientific).
siRNA transfection
To achieve protein knockdowns, siRNA was transfected using Lipo-
fectamine RNAiMAX according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
mESCs cultured in 2D on the gelatin were transfected with 100 nM
pre-designed siRNA (s63752, Silencer Select). siRNA target mRNA
sequences were as follows: E-cadherin, GAAGAUCACGUAUCGG
AUU; P-cadherin, CGAAAGAGAGAGUGGGUGA; JAM-A, GCCUUU
GAUAGUGGUGAAU; Nectin-2, GGACUACUGAAUUCUUUUA. Two
days after the first transfection (Fig EV4A), the cells were cultured
with or without mitomycin C and seeded into 10% Matrigel. The
cells were cultured in Matrigel with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX and
100 nM siRNA for another 24 h and then were subjected to further
experiments and analysis.
Immunofluorescence
Cells cultured in a μ-slide 8-well dish were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (J61899, Alfa Aesar) for 30 min at room tem-
perature and then were permeabilised with 0.5% Triton X-100 for
15 min at room temperature. The cells were blocked with the
incubation buffer (0.5% BSA, 0.1% Tween in PBS) for 2 h and
then were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in the
incubation buffer at 4 °C overnight on an orbital shaker. The pri-
mary antibodies were washed off with PBS and then were incu-
bated with secondary antibodies diluted in the incubation buffer
at room temperature for 2 h. The secondary antibodies were
washed off with PBS. Samples cultured in Matrigel were kept in
PBS; samples cultured in agarose were sealed in 200 μl 0.5%
agarose. The samples were imaged shortly after. Antibodies and
dilutions were as listed in Table 3.
Microscope imaging
Live cell imaging was carried out on the PerkinElmer UltraVIEW
spinning disc system fitted on an Olympus IX80 confocal micro-
scope with a 37 °C and 5% CO
2 chamber. Images were captured with
the 40× 1.3 NA (oil) UPLAN objective, 2 × Hamamatsu Orca-R2 CCD
camera and Volocity 3.7.1 software. The cells were imaged at 2 μm
z-step size and 30-min time intervals. Fixed samples were imaged
on the Leica SP8 confocal microscope with the 40 × 1.3 NA (oil) or
63× 1.4 NA (oil) Plan Apo objective and LAS X 3.7.4 software. The
cells were imaged at 0.3 μm z-step size and 2 × line average. FRAP
was performed on the Zeiss LSM-900 confocal microscope with 63 ×
1.40 NA (oil) Plan Apo objective and ZEN Blue 2.1 software
equipped with a 37 °C heated stage.
Image and data analysis
The central section images were projected from raw images in the
Fiji software by maximum-value projection of the whole z stacks to
produce the 3D projection images, or of the central three images of
the z stacks to produce the central section images. The whole z
stacks projections were applied to count cell cluster percentages.
The central section images were applied for line-scans or analysis of
region of interest to determine protein signals.
The mESCs with positive or negative protein centres were manu-
ally determined and counted. The percentage was calculated with
the number relative to the number of total cell clusters captured in
each condition. The mean percentages from three independent
experiments were compared with Student’s t-test or one-way
ANOVA specified in figure legends using the GraphPad Prism soft-
ware. Sample sizes are specified in figure legends.
Table 2. Primers used for cloning.
Forward: attB1-N-mCherry
5-GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCGCCACCATGGTGAGCAAGGG-3
Reverse: C-mCherry-N-PAR 6B
5-TGCCGGTGGCCGCGGTTCATCGGATCCCCCGGGCTGCAGGA-3
Forward: C-mCherry-N-PAR 6B
5-TCCTGCAGCCCGGGGGATCCGATGAACCGCGGCCACCGGCA-3
Reverse: C-PAR6B-attB2
5-GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTCTAGCAGATGATGTCGTCCTCGT-3
Forward: attB1-N-LifeAct
5-GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGGCGTGGCCGACCTGAT-3
Reverse: C-mRuby-attB 2
5-GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTGTTACCCTCCGCCCAGGCCGG-3
14 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
To quantify PAR-3 signal along the cell –cell interface, a 0.8 μm
width line was drawn along the cell –cell interface by using F-actin
(labelled by Phalloidin) or E-cadherin signal as the path. PAR-3 and
F-actin pixel values along the path were extracted. The two peaks of
F-actin signals at two ends of the path were determined as the start
and end of the cell –cell interface, and the positions in-between were
defined as 1 × cell–cell interface. The corresponding PAR-3 pixel to
the F-actin peak positions was identified, and the PAR-3 line profile
between the two positions was sectioned into 20 sections. PAR-3
pixel value in each section was averaged to be the PAR-3 signal in
5% of the cell –cell interface. The values from 10 to 20 cells were
plotted as line graphs.
To compare the level of PAR-3 at the centre and outer regions in
multi-cell mESC clusters, a 4- μm-diameter circular area was created
in the Fiji software and placed over the multi-cellular joint in a cell
cluster, and the average PAR-3 fluorescence values in the circle
were measured. The boundary of the cell cluster was drawn by the
free-hand tool in Fiji by using the correspondent F-actin signal, and
the average PAR-3 fluorescence values between the circle and the
boundary were measured. The ratio between the PAR-3 values in
the circle and outer regions was then calculated.
To generate the PAR-3 signal heatmap, based on the F-actin sig-
nal, a squared region of interest was created in the Fiji software for
every cell, which the main cell body of a cell was fitted into. The
PAR-3 image in each squared region was transformed into a
10 × 10-unit matrix by using the R-language. Each unit was created
by averaging the PAR-3 fluorescence intensity in every 10% length
along the X or Y axis of the squared region of interest extracted from
the original image. A serial of images from one condition of an
experiment was stacked, and the averaged pixel value at each posi-
tion was calculated to generate an averaged 10 × 10 matrix. The
final matrix was transformed into a heatmap in the GraphPad Prism
software.
To compare the level of PAR-3 in the core areas in the cells cul-
ture on the glass, a 6- μm-diameter circular area of interest was cre-
ated in the Fiji software to cover the PAR-3 core area in a cell, and
the average PAR-3 fluorescence values in the circle were measured.
The boundary of the cell was drawn by the free-hand tool in Fiji,
and the average PAR-3 fluorescence values in the boundary were
measured. The ratio between the PAR-3 values in the circle and
inside the boundary was then calculated.
Sample sizes and statistical analysis are detailed in the figure
legends. No blinding was done for the experiments in this study.
Instead, we included direct continuous measurements (e.g. of flu-
orescent intensity) alongside categorical analyses. To assess AMIS
localisation independently to cell division, we did not include
control cells that were undergoing mitosis (identified by chromo-
some and cell morphologies) into the quantifications. We checked
that excluding this data made no difference to the outcome of
the analyses.
Table 3. List of primary and secondary antibodies used for immunofluorescence in this study.
Primary antibodies
Protein Catalogue number Supplier Type Specie Concentrations
E-cadherin ECCD- 2 Invitrogen Monoclonal Rat 2 μg/ml
GM130 610822 BD Biosciences Monoclonal Mouse 1:300
Nanog ab 80892 Abcam Polyclonal Mouse 1:300
JAM-A sc- 52688 Santa Cruz Monoclonal Rat 1:300
Nectin-2 502 -57 HycultBiotech Monoclonal Rat 1:200
OTX2 AF1979 R&D Systems Polyclonal Goat 1:300
PAR-30 7 -330 Merck Millipore Polyclonal Rabbit 1:100
P-cadherin AF 761 R&D Systems Polyclonal Goat 1:500
Podocalyxin MAB 1556 R&D Systems Monoclonal Rat 3.3 μg/ml
Γ-Tubulin T 6557 Sigma-Aldrich Monoclonal Mouse 1:250
ZO-16 1 -7300 Invitrogen Polyclonal Rabbit 1:500
Secondary antibodies and reagents
Name Supplier Target/catalogue number Concentrations
Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen Rat 1:500
Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen Rabbit 1:500
Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen Goat 1:500
Alexa Fluor 546 Invitrogen Mouse 1:500
Alexa Fluor 555 Invitrogen Goat 1:500
DyLight 550 Invitrogen Rat 1:500
CF 633 Insight Biotech Phalloidin 6.6 pM
40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, DAPI Sigma D 8417 0 .5 μg/ml
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 15 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal
FRAP
FRAP of E-cadherin-eGFP was performed to measure E-cadherin
dynamics at the cell –cell interface. An E-cadherin-eGFP expressing
stable ES-E14 line was used to perform the experiment (Mol /C18e
et al , 2021). After 24-h culturing in Matrigel, two-cell clusters with
long axis parallel to the surface of the culture dish, hence the cell –
cell interfaces were aligned to the axis of the objective were used for
FRAP. A region of interest (ROI) of 2 × 1 μm along xy-axis was cho-
sen at the approximately centre-most region or side regions at each
cell–cell interface. The ROI in a series of z-axis stacks with 0.3- μm
intervals totalled to 2.1 μm in depth was bleached with three itera-
tions of the 488 nm laser with 100% transmission. This resulted in
a photobleaching of over 80% in a 2 × 2.1 μm( xz-axis) region at
the cell –cell interface. Time-lapse images were acquired before
(three frames) and after (30 frames) photobleaching with an interval
of 10s per frame. Average fluorescence intensity values F(t) in the
bleached area within the centre z-stack were analysed with ImageJ.
The mean values of the three frames before bleaching were used as
the pre-bleached value F(i). The value of the first frame after bleach-
ing was defined as F(0). FRAP values were then calculated and plot-
ted over time in Fig 3J as:
FRAP ¼
FtðÞ /C0 F 0ðÞ
FiðÞ /C0 F 0ðÞ
The FRAP values were fitted using a non-linear regression and the
exponential one-phase association model using Y0 = 0 and where
mobile fraction corresponds to the plateau value in the GraphPad
Prism software. For Fig 3K, the mobile fraction from each FRAP
profile was pooled and compared between conditions.
Data availability
Image data are accessible in the BioImage Archive, accession number
S-BIAD473 ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/bioimages/studies/
S-BIAD473?query=S-BIAD473). The R-language code for generating
the PAR-3 heatmap in Fig 5D is accessible at: https://github.com/
Buckley-Lab-opto/Liang-2022.
Expanded View for this article is available online.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Jon Clarke and Ben Steventon for critical reading of the
manuscript and other members of the Buckley and Zernicka-Goetz labora-
tories for scientific discussion, especially Matteo Mol /C18e and Marta Shahbazi.
Thank you to the Shukry Habib laboratory for kindly gifting the W 4 cells
and the Lionel Larue laboratory for kindly gifting the Cdh1 KO cells. Thank
you to the Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre and the Ewa Paluch labo-
ratory for help and access to confocal microscopy. This research was finan-
cially supported by: CEB — the Wellcome Trust and Royal Society (Sir Henry
Dale Fellowship grant no. 208758/Z/17/Z and Dorothy Hodgkin Fellowship
grant no. DH 160086), XL — European Union ’s Horizon 2020 programme
(Marie Sk łodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship grant no. 844330), the Issac
Newton Trust and Leverhulme Trust (Leverhulme Early Career Fellowship
grant no. ECF- 2019-175). MZG - The Wellcome Trust ( 207415/Z/17/Z) and
ERC ( 669198). For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted
Manuscript version arising.
Author contributions
Xuan Liang: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; funding acqui-
sition; investigation; visualization; methodology; writing –original draft; writ-
ing –review and editing. Antonia Weberling: Investigation; methodology.
Chun Yuan Hii: Data curation; formal analysis. Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz:
Resources; supervision; funding acquisition. Clare E Buckley: Conceptualiza-
tion; resources; data curation; supervision; funding acquisition; methodology;
writing –original draft; project administration; writing –review and editing.
Disclosure and competing interests statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Akhtar N, Streuli CH ( 2013) An integrin –ILK–microtubule network orients cell
polarity and lumen formation in glandular epithelium. Nat Cell Biol 15:
17 –27
Auerbach W, Dunmore JH, Fairchild-Huntress V, Fang Q, Auerbach AB, Huszar
D, Joyner AL ( 2000) Establishment and chimera analysis of 129/SvEv- and
C57BL/6-derived mouse embryonic stem cell lines. Biotechniques 29: 1024 –
1032
Bedzhov I, Zernicka-Goetz M ( 2014) Self-organizing properties of mouse
pluripotent cells initiate morphogenesis upon implantation. Cell 156:
1032 –1044
Blasky AJ, Mangan A, Prekeris R ( 2015) Polarized protein transport and lumen
formation during epithelial tissue morphogenesis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol
31: 575 –591
Bryant DM, Datta A, Rodriguez-Fraticelli AE, Peranen J, Martin-Belmonte F,
Mostov KE ( 2010) A molecular network for de novo generation of the
apical surface and lumen. Nat Cell Biol 12: 1035 –1045
Bryant DM, Roignot J, Datta A, Overeem AW, Kim M, Yu W, Peng X, Eastburn
DJ, Ewald AJ, Werb Z et al (2014) A molecular switch for the orientation of
epithelial cell polarization. Dev Cell 31: 171 –187
Buckley CE, Johnston DS ( 2022) Apical –basal polarity and the control of
epithelial form and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 23: 559 –577
Buckley CE, Ren X, Ward LC, Girdler GC, Araya C, Green MJ, Clark BS, Link BA, Clarke
JDW (2013) Mirror-symmetric microtubule assembly and cell interactions drive
lumen formation in the zebrafish neural rod.EMBO J 32: 30–44
Ciruna B, Jenny A, Lee D, Mlodzik M, Schier AF ( 2006) Planar cell polarity
signalling couples cell division and morphogenesis during neurulation.
Nature 439: 220 –224
Ebnet K, Suzuki A, Horikoshi Y, Hirose T, Brickwedde MKMZ, Ohno S,
Vestweber D ( 2001) The cell polarity protein ASIP/PAR- 3 directly associates
with junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). EMBO J 20: 3738 –3748
Herrera A, Menendez A, Torroba B, Ochoa A, Pons S ( 2021) Dbnl and β-
catenin promote pro-N-cadherin processing to maintain apico-basal
polarity. J Cell Biol 220:e 202007055
Hooper M, Hardy K, Handyside A, Hunter S, Monk M ( 1987) HPRT-deficient
(Lesch–Nyhan) mouse embryos derived from germline colonization by
cultured cells. Nature 326: 292 –295
Iden S, Rehder D, August B, Suzuki A, Wolburg-Buchholz K, Wolburg H, Ohno
S, Behrens J, Vestweber D, Ebnet K ( 2006) A distinct PAR complex
associates physically with VE-cadherin in vertebrate endothelial cells.
EMBO Rep 7: 1239 –1246
16 of 17 The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 /C2112022 The Authors
The EMBO Journal Xuan Liang et al
Ishida S, Tanaka R, Yamaguchi N, Ogata G, Mizutani T, Kawabata K, Haga H
(2014) Epithelial sheet folding induces lumen formation by Madin-Darby
canine kidney cells in a collagen gel. PLoS One 9:e 99655
Itoh M, Sasaki H, Furuse M, Ozaki H, Kita T, Tsukita S ( 2001) Junctional
adhesion molecule (JAM) binds to PAR- 3: A possible mechanism for the
recruitment of PAR- 3 to tight junctions. J Cell Biol 154: 491 –497
Jia L, Liu F, Hansen SH, MBA TB, Zegers MMP ( 2011) Distinct roles of
cadherin-6 and E-cadherin in tubulogenesis and lumen formation. Mol
Biol Cell 22: 2031 –2041
Kim YS, Fan R, Kremer L, Kuempel-Rink N, Mildner K, Zeuschner D, Hekking L,
Stehling M, Bedzhov I ( 2021) Deciphering epiblast lumenogenesis reveals
proamniotic cavity control of embryo growth and patterning. Sci Adv 7:
eabe1640
Klinkert K, Rocancourt M, Houdusse A, Echard A ( 2016) Rab 35 GTPase couples
cell division with initiation of epithelial apico-basal polarity and lumen
opening. Nat Commun 7: 11166
Larue L, Antos C, Butz S, Huber O, Delmas V, Dominis M, Kemler R ( 1996)A
role for cadherins in tissue formation. Development 122: 3185 –3194
Li D, Mangan A, Cicchini L, Margolis B, Prekeris R ( 2014) FIP 5 phosphorylation
during mitosis regulates apical trafficking and lumenogenesis. EMBO Rep
15: 428 –437
Luj/C19an P, Varsano G, Rubio T, Hennrich ML, Sachsenheimer T, G /C19alvez-
Santisteban M, Mart /C19 ın-Belmonte F, Gavin A-C, Br €ugger B, Köhn M ( 2016)
PRL-3 disrupts epithelial architecture by altering the post-mitotic midbody
position. J Cell Sci 129: 4130 –
4142
Mangan AJ, Sietsema DV, Li D, Moore JK, Citi S, Prekeris R ( 2016) Cingulin and
Actin mediate midbody-dependent apical lumen formation during
polarization of epithelial cells. Nat Commun 7: 12426
Mol/C18e MA, Weberling A, F €assler R, Campbell A, Fishel S, Zernicka-Goetz M
(2021) Integrin β1 coordinates survival and morphogenesis of the
embryonic lineage upon implantation and pluripotency transition. Cell Rep
34: 108834
Morais-de-Sa E, Mirouse V, Johnston DS ( 2010) aPKC phosphorylation of
bazooka defines the apical/lateral border in drosophila epithelial cells. Cell
141: 509 –523
Nikolopoulou E, Galea GL, Rolo A, Greene NDE, Copp AJ ( 2017) Neural tube
closure: Cellular, molecular and biomechanical mechanisms. Development
144: 552 –566
Noordstra I, Hermoso MD, Schimmel L, Bonfim-Melo A, Kalappurakkal JM,
Mayor S, Gordon E, Cusachs PR, Yap AS ( 2021) Cortical Actin flow
activates an α-catenin clutch to assemble adherens junctions. bioRxiv
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.28.454239 [PREPRINT]
Quesada-Hernandez E, Caneparo L, Schneider S, Winkler S, Liebling M, Fraser
SE, Heisenberg CP ( 2010) Stereotypical cell division orientation controls
neural rod midline formation in zebrafish. Curr Biol 20: 1966 –1972
Rathbun LI, Colicino EG, Manikas J, O ’Connell J, Krishnan N, Reilly NS,
Coyne S, Erdemci-Tandogan G, Garrastegui A, Freshour J et al (2020)
Cytokinetic bridge triggers de novo lumen formation in vivo . Nat Commun
11: 1269
Schl€uter MA, Pfarr CS, Pieczynski J, Whiteman EL, Hurd TW, Fan S, Liu C-J,
Margolis B ( 2009) Trafficking of Crumbs 3 during cytokinesis is crucial for
lumen formation.
Mol Biol Cell 20: 4652 –4663
Shahbazi MN, Scialdone A, Skorupska N, Weberling A, Recher G, Zhu M,
Jedrusik A, Devito LG, Noli L, Macaulay IC et al (2017) Pluripotent state
transitions coordinate morphogenesis in mouse and human embryos.
Nature 552: 239 –243
Soncin F, Mohamet L, Eckardt D, Ritson S, Eastham AM, Bobola N, Russell A,
Davies S, Kemler R, Merry CLR et al (2009) Abrogation of E-cadherin-
mediated cell –cell contact in mouse embryonic stem cells results in
reversible LIF-independent self-renewal. Stem Cells 27: 2069 –2080
Symonds AC, Buckley CE, Williams CA, Clarke JDW ( 2020) Coordinated
assembly and release of adhesions builds apical junctional belts during de
novo polarisation of an epithelial tube. Development 147: dev 191494
Takekuni K, Ikeda W, Fujito T, Morimoto K, Takeuchi M, Monden M, Takai Y
(2003) Direct binding of cell polarity protein PAR- 3 to cell-cell adhesion
molecule Nectin at neuroepithelial cells of developing mouse*. J Biol Chem
278: 5497 –5500
Tawk M, Araya C, Lyons DA, Reugels AM, Girdler GC, Bayley PR, Hyde DR,
Tada M, Clarke JD ( 2007) A mirror-symmetric cell division that
orchestrates neuroepithelial morphogenesis. Nature 446: 797 –800
Thomas FC, Sheth B, Eckert JJ, Bazzoni G, Dejana E, Fleming TP ( 2004)
Contribution of JAM- 1 to epithelial differentiation and tight-junction
biogenesis in the mouse preimplantation embryo. J Cell Sci 117: 5599 –
5608
Wang T, Yanger K, Stanger BZ, Cassio D, Bi E ( 2014) Cytokinesis defines a
spatial landmark for hepatocyte polarization and apical lumen formation.
J Cell Sci 127: 2483 –2492
Wang L-T, Rajah A, Brown CM, McCaffrey L ( 2021)C D 13 orients the apical-
basal polarity axis necessary for lumen formation. Nat Commun 12: 4697
Yu W, Datta A, Leroy P, O ’Brien LE, Mak G, Jou T-S, Matlin KS, Mostov KE,
Zegers MMP ( 2004) Beta 1-integrin orients epithelial polarity via Rac 1 and
laminin. Mol Biol Cell 16: 433 –445
Zhang Y, Mets RD, Monzel C, Acharya V, Toh P, Chin JFL, Hul NV, Ng IC, Yu H,
Ng SS et al (2020) Biomimetic niches reveal the minimal cues to trigger
apical lumen formation in single hepatocytes. Nat Mater 19: 1026 –1035
ˇZigman M, Trinh le A, Fraser SE, Moens CB ( 2011) Zebrafish neural tube
morphogenesis requires scribble-dependent oriented cell divisions. Curr
Biol 21: 79 –86
License: This is an open access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited.
/C2112022 The Authors The EMBO Journal 41:e 111021 | 2022 17 of 17
Xuan Liang et al The EMBO Journal