--- Page 1 ---
Professional Uncertainty and Disempowerment
Responding to Ethnic Diversity in Health Care:
A Qualitative Study
Joe Kai 1*, Jackie Beavan 1, Christina Faull 2, Lynne Dodson 3, Paramjit Gill 4, Angela Beighton 1
1 Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham Graduate Medical School, United Kingdom, 2 LOROS, Leicester, United Kingdom, 3 United Hospitals Birmingham
National Health Service Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4 Department of General Practice and Primary Care, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
Funding: This study was funded by
a grant from Cancer Research UK,
who played no role in study design,
data collection or analysis, decision
to publish or preparation of this
paper.
Competing Interests: The authors
have declared that no competing
interests exist.
Academic Editor: Michael S. Wilkes,
University of California Davis, United
States of America
Citation: Kai J, Beavan J, Faull C,
Dodson L, Gill P, et al. (2007)
Professional uncertainty and
disempowerment responding to
ethnic diversity in health care: A
qualitative study. PLoS Med 4(11):
e323. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.
0040323
Received: March 15, 2007
Accepted: September 25, 2007
Published: November 13, 2007
Copyright: /C2112007 Kai et al. This is
an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.
* To whom correspondence should
be addressed. E-mail: joe.kai@
nottingham.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Background
While ethnic disparities in health and health care are increasing, evidence on how to enhance
quality of care and reduce inequalities remains limited. Despite growth in the scope and
application of guidelines on ‘‘cultural competence, ’’ remarkably little is known about how
practising health professionals experience and perceive their work with patients from diverse
ethnic communities. Using cancer care as a clinical context, we aimed to explore this with a
range of health professionals to inform interventions to enhance quality of care.
Methods and Findings
We conducted a qualitative study involving 18 focus groups with a purposeful sample of 106
health professionals of differing disciplines, in primary and secondary care settings, working
with patient populations of varying ethnic diversity in the Midlands of the UK. Data were
analysed by constant comparison and we undertook processes for validation of analysis. We
found that, as they sought to offer appropriate care, health professionals wrestled with
considerable uncertainty and apprehension in responding to the needs of patients of
ethnicities different from their own. They emphasised their perceived ignorance about cultural
difference and were anxious about being culturally inappropriate, causing affront, or appearing
discriminatory or racist. Professionals’ ability to think and act flexibly or creatively faltered.
Although trying to do their best, professionals’ uncertainty was disempowering, creating a
disabling hesitancy and inertia in their practice. Most professionals sought and applied a
knowledge-based cultural expertise approach to patients, though some identified the risk of
engendering stereotypical expectations of patients. Professionals’ uncertainty and disempo-
werment had the potential to perpetuate each other, to the detriment of patient care.
Conclusions
This study suggests potential mechanisms by which health professionals may inadvertently
contribute to ethnic disparities in health care. It identifies critical opportunities to empower
health professionals to respond more effectively. Interventions should help professionals
acknowledge their uncertainty and its potential to create inertia in their practice. A shift away
from a cultural expertise model toward a greater focus on each patient as an individual may
help.
The Editors’ Summary of this article follows the references.
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231766
PLoS MEDICINE


--- Page 2 ---
Introduction
Health care occurs within contexts of increasing commun-
ity diversity. Nearly one in ten of the UK, and over one in
four of the US populations identify themselves as from an
ethnic minority [1,2]. Concerns about ethnic disparities in
health and health care have long preoccupied communities,
policy makers, and health care providers alike [3–5]. Mean-
while, evidence of ethnic inequalities in access to care, health
care received, and health care outcomes is increasingly
exposed [5–10].
Policy commitment to reducing such inequality has been
strengthened by the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 in
the UK, which requires all statutory services to not only avoid
discrimination but to actively promote and report on
equality in service deliver y [11]. In the US, goals for
improving minority health are a key part of the Healthy
People 2010 initiative [12].
Recommendations for health system interventions include
more systematic collection and use of ethnicity data;
improvements in provision of interpreting services, culturally
appropriate information, and lay community health workers;
alongside enhanced patient education and better health
professional education and training [5,13–17]. Despite policy
initiatives and legislation, robust evidence informing strat-
egies to enhance quality of care and reduce inequalities in
day-to-day health care practice remains limited [18]. Here,
the need for ‘‘cultural competence’’ has been promoted at the
system level and within the patient–health professional
encounter [16]. The latter t ypically refers to a set of
knowledge and skills in which health professionals might be
trained in order to better respond to patient diversity [19].
It has long been recognised that cultural diversity matters
in clinical practice, shaping beliefs, values, and behaviours,
and inﬂuencing care [20,21]. There are now many examples of
guidelines and models for ‘‘culturally competent’’ health care
[22–26], which generally underscore developing awareness of
personal biases, values, and assumptions. The cultural
competence model advocated in most guidelines entails
gaining knowledge of cultural differences, for example in
health beliefs and practices, religion, and communication
styles. This system sometimes incorporates approaches to
eliciting patient’s beliefs and understanding about symptoms
and illness [20].
Despite this movement to improve intercultural care,
surprisingly little is known about how practising health
professionals themselves experience and perceive their work
with patients in ethnically diverse contexts. There is a lack of
relevant qualitative data, in particular concerning hypotheses
that health professional behaviour may be inﬂuenced by
patient ethnicity in ways that may contribute to disparities
[27]. This study formed part of a wider initiative to support care
of people with cancer from ethnic minorities [28], where there
is growing evidence of inequality in care and outcomes [29].
Our enquiry focuses on ‘‘ethnic’’ diversity to embrace
ethnicity and ‘‘race’’ while recognizing other aspects of social
diversity; for example, socioeconomic status, gender, or age
may exert cultural inﬂuences on health care encounters. We
refer to ethnicity as the social concept of ethnic identity—
people may identify themselves as belonging to social
groupings because they differ culturally in ways such as
language, religions, food, lifestyle, or geographical origin or
differ in physical features as in ‘‘race.’’ Using cancer care as a
clinical context, we aimed to explore how practising health
professionals experience and perceive their work with
patients of ethnicity different from their own to inform
interventions to enhance quality of care.
Methods
Sampling and Ethical Approval
Participants were sampled purposefully from a range of
health service settings and networks in the Midlands of the
UK (primary care, hospitals, workforce confederations, and
clinical care networks) to include health professionals of
varying disciplines and experiences in working with ethni-
cally diverse patients in a variety of care settings.
The study protocol, participant information, and consent
procedures were reviewed by a UK multi-centre research
ethics committee, which had no ethical objections.
Data Generation
We used focus groups rather than one-on-one interviews to
seek insights into attitudes, opinions, and underlying
assumptions that group interactions can enable, allowing
participants to discuss each others’ perspectives [30]. Follow-
ing invitations sent via local service contacts, professionals
willing to participate were selected so that each focus group
was either generally homogenous by discipline to promote
sharing of experiences and equality of professional power (13
groups), or multidisciplinary to encourage exploration of
views from members of the same care team (ﬁve groups).
Following a pilot focus group to develop our initial topic
guide and procedures, 18 focus groups (range 5–11 partic-
ipants) involving 106 respondents were facilitated by JB, with
other authors cofacilitating some groups, mostly in partic-
ipants’ work settings. This large number of interviews enabled
generation of data, and their saturation, from a wide range of
health professionals and sett ings (Table 1). Interviews
commenced with a broad introductory question, ‘‘Could
you comment on any experiences you have had when caring
for people from an ethnic minority background? ’’. Partic-
ipants’ recall of actual cases was then used to generate
discussion of their experiences, perceptions, perceived
strengths, and concerns in health care interaction with
patients from minority ethnic communities. Group discus-
sions lasted between one and a half to two hours, and were
audiotaped and transcribed verbatim.
The characteristics of participants (74 women, 32 men) and
their range of experience of working with patients from
ethnic ‘‘minorities’’ are shown in Table 1.
Data Analysis and Validation
We used constant comparison, in which data were collected
and analysed concurrently [31], enabling emergent themes
and ideas to be incorporated and explored in subsequent
interviews, to develop categories. Coding, assisted by N-Vivo
software, was developed and discussed between JK (clinical
primary care academic), JB (research fellow with linguistics
and education background), and CF (consultant in palliative
care medicine). New data were used and deviant cases [31]
sought to assess the integrity of the categories identiﬁed, with
data generation continuing until no new categories were
emerging, suggesting saturation [31].
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231767
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 3 ---
Preliminary ﬁndings were fed back to and discussed with a
group of seven health care advocates from minority ethnic
communities working with patients, and an eight-strong
multidisciplinary advisory group with health service and
academic expertise in cultural diversity. Focus group partic-
ipants were sent, and invited to comment on, a summary of
results, and seven also attended a further focus group
facilitated by JB and JK to discuss and check validity of our
interpretation of the data [32]. These processes conﬁrmed
and helped further reﬁne analysis.
Results
While respondents sought to provide professional stand-
ards of care for patients from diverse ethnic backgrounds,
they wrestled with a range of challenges. These challenges
included communication, language, and working with pa-
tients in the context of their families. The results presented
here focus on professionals’ common experience of uncer-
tainty and the disempowering effects this uncertainty had on
professionals’ clinical practice. These experiences occurred
in the context of professionals’ emphasis on cultural differ-
ence and knowledge-based cultural expertise.
Professional Uncertainty
Professionals’ uncertainty about how to negotiate encoun-
ters involving patients with perceived cultural differences to
themselves featured across accounts and our ethnically
diverse sample. Faced with the apparently unfamiliar, health
professionals could feel apprehensive and uncomfortable.
They struggled to reconcile the desire to act appropriately
with the perception that cultural barriers between themselves
and patients could be insurm ountable. These barriers
included the practical exigencies of lacking a shared language
with some patients and mediation of communication by
others. However, uncertainty about differing cultural beliefs,
practices, and attitudes of patients in relation to illness and
care remained. Respondents emphasised how they lacked
cultural knowledge and understanding to address patients’
needs. They worried about the compromising effects this
deﬁciency might have for them or their patients were they to
‘‘make a mistake. ’’
Respondents’ uncertainty was unsettling to them emotion-
ally and personally. Their uncertainty was most often driven
by a fear of doing the wrong thing. They wanted to be
‘‘culturally appropriate’’ in their interactions with patients or
their families so as not to cause offence (Box 1).
Some professionals worried that their lack of speciﬁc
cultural knowledge may appear discriminatory or racist,
creating further uncertainty about how to act. This was
expressed in two contrasting ways, leaving some professionals
in a double bind. They felt if they enquired about ‘‘cultural’’
issues of which they were uncertain with patients or their
families, their ignorance might be perceived as discrimina-
tory by patients. Yet there was also concern that investing
greater time or effort to address needs with some patients
might be regarded as preferential treatment by other
patients, or indeed professional colleagues (Box 2).
Relating their uncertainty, professionals usually situated
perceptions of ethnic difference uppermost within the health
care interaction. Other cultural inﬂuences such as diversity of
social background, education, age or gender, or similarities
across cultures, excited little discussion. However broader
recognition of this arose on occasion (note: ‘‘P’’ designations
refer to the interviewees in excerpts with more than one
response; each excerpt is followed by the interviewees’
professional category):
P3: ... People from different cultures, I believe, have a different
disease model. Sometimes it’s very difﬁcult to tune into that. P2:
But I think it’s very difﬁcult to say that it’s to do with your
cultural, your ethnic background. ... I think I would ﬁnd it as
difﬁcult to understand and empathize with the belief systems of
the deeply religious Roman Catholic Geordie [the term ‘‘Geordie’’
refers to a person from Tyneside, UK] ... as with a not
particularly religious, middle-class Asian person who might
happen to share my belief systems. So, I don’t think you can
necessarily equate cultural differences with ethnicity. (Physi-
cians, Group 14)
Focus on Cultural Expertise
Respondents appeared to tackle their uncertainty by
seeking or applying rules to guide their behaviour in cross-
cultural encounters. They focused on their ignorance and
need for factual knowledge about cultural differences in
order to act and feel more conﬁdent. Some had been exposed
Table 1. Characteristics of Respondents ( n ¼ 106)
Category Characteristic Number
(%)
Health professional
background
Physiciana 22 (21)
Community-based nurse/nurse
specialist
21 (20)
Hospital-based nurse/nurse specialist 18 (17)
Allied health professional b 16 (15)
Link worker or advocate 21 (20)
Health service administrator or
manager
8 (7)
Reported frequency of
working with patients
from ethnic minorities
At least daily 52 (49)
At least weekly 21 (20)
At least monthly 8 (7)
Less than monthly/uncommonly 25 (24)
Age range (y) 24–35 25 (24)
36–45 34 (32)
46–55 33 (31)
56–65 14 (13)
Ethnicity White and UK born 63 (59)
South Asian
C 31 (29)
African Caribbean 3 (3)
White European 7 (7)
Chinese 2 (2)
Languages spoken
other than English
South Asian
d 27 (25)
Cantonese/Mandarin 2 (2)
Caribbean patois 2 (2)
African
e 2 (2)
Other European f 14 (13)
aHospital, primary care, or palliative care.
bPhysiotherapists, occupational therapists, or radiographers.
CBorn in or descended from those born in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, or Sri Lanka.
dUrdu, Punjabi, Hindi, Mirpuri, Sylheti, or Bengali.
eShona or Swahili.
fFrench, German, Spanish, or Italian.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040323.t001
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231768
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 4 ---
to training to approach patients from ethnic minorities in
this way. Others indicated they had little or no experience of
relevant training but had assimilated this approach as part of
received wisdom. Professionals accordingly emphasised im-
proving their cultural expertise or those of others as the
route to achieving ‘‘culturally appropriate’’ outcomes (Box 3).
Professionals’ accounts exposed a dissonance in their work.
There was incongruity between, on the one hand, their desire
for and application of cultural expertise using a largely rule-
bound, knowledge-based framework and, on the other, their
continuing experience of uncertainty with patients despite
this approach. Professionals identiﬁed where their varied
knowledge of differing cultural issues had been helpful, for
example insights into variation in cultural expectations or
attitudes:
I’ll tell you one of the problems ... tuning in to Kurdish people. If
you don’t you just ﬁnish up getting more and more frustrated
and... and just one very small piece of knowledge about people’s
expectations or the way they relate ... can actually cause the whole
penny to drop I think ... (Physician, Group 14)
P3: And attitudes. Like (X) said, they tend to come and want a
doctor right away, they are not used to an appointment system
which can come across wrong if you don’t understand that.
(Primary care nurse, Group 13)
However, uncertainty remained where professionals found
that stereotypical knowledge did not apply to a particular
patient or family. While some participants suggested that they
might best ask and explore the issue with the patient directly,
their fears of causing affront or doing the wrong thing could
stymie exploration (Box 1). Many professionals thus felt
overwhelmed by the increasing ethnic variation of their
patients. For example:
Instead of thinking this is a patient, ... treat them exactly as we
do any other patient ... you get overwhelmed with the fact that it’s
an ethnic group instead of a person. (Palliative care team,
Group 4)
Most respondents saw a need to learn about the perceived
fundamental aspects of different cultures, seeking reassur-
ance from guidelines on cultural difference. However, there
was also some recognition of people’s culture as more
dynamic and multifaceted than is reﬂected in guidelines.
Some noted variation within ethnic groups and across
generations and the danger of patients becoming stereo-
typed, and highlighted the need to respond to people as
individuals. For example:
P5: Of course, we have got mixed up cultures now, haven’t we?
We have got second and third generations of children and
grandchildren, fairly westernised in many families ... quite hard
to get our heads round isn’t it? Because we don’t quite know who
we’re dealing with... P4: Even though you might say this person
is Polish, within that there will be all sorts of different likes and
dislikes, preferences, cultural differences, everyone is different...
(Palliative care team, Group 4)
It’s not a production line you know. Every person is individual.
Miss X’s needs are different from Miss Y, whether they have the
same disease. It’s really not, you can’t just say in black and
white... It depends, person to person. Every case is different.
(Physician, Group 17)
There were few instances of professionals acknowledging
their uncertainty openly with patients or exploring the
patient’s particular perspectives, concerns, or beliefs. Sim-
ilarly, examples of positive learning or constructive outcomes
from negotiating uncertainty were rare. There were, however,
Box 1. Professional Uncertainty
P3: I think you have to be very careful because the rule that we understand might be quite different. You know, if you go and touch
somebody it could be completely inappropriate. We might feel that we are touching somebody to show them we empathize in our culture,
but if we did that to an Asian gentleman it might be quite the wrong thing so I don’t know ... P4: I think I feel less confident in knowing
what the expectations were. Like I feel fairly comfortable about breaking bad news to seriously ill people ... from a background that is more
common to me. I would actually find it much more difficult to say to an Asian family, where I’m not sure what kind of beliefs, expectations,
what the family views are ... (Physicians, Group 14)
What you learn, what you do with everybody is no different. But sometimes, it’s, it’s fear initially ... that you’re going to do something wrong.
(Palliative care multidisciplinary team, Group 9)
I’m quite ignorant of the different cultures. I’d go in to a person of ethnic minority not as relaxed, generally more uptight ... You’re on
edge... because you’re thinking I don’t want to put my foot in this, so that can make them uneasy with you. (Occupational therapist,
Group 12)
P1: My inclination is to touch people, to hold their hand ... but I wouldn’t know if I had offended them because I don’t know what culturally
is allowed... P2: In a way, that makes us defensive; ... you go into a situation thinking I’ve got to get it right. I mustn’t say or do the wrong
thing and that can affect your relationship with the person ... P1: I don’t really think we understand other cultures ... We can always very
easily put our opinions (that) we think this is what’s happening ... but we can’t do that, because other people’s cultures are different. We
only sort of see the outside of what’s actually happening within these cultures. I think that’s where patients lose out really. (Clinical nurse
specialists, Group 1)
P9: (The) Chinese don’t have a word for cancer and its absolutely considered taboo to actually talk to somebody with cancer and say
they’ve got it ... so how do you start to talk to them about giving them chemotherapy if you’re not actually allowed to use the word
cancer... P5: (He) had a leg ulcer and it took a very, very long time for him to be prepared to roll his trouser leg up so that I could get near
it. ... And I found that very awkward ... feeling terribly vulnerable because I didn’t want to insult any of their cultural beliefs and yet at the
same time I was trying to do a professional job for somebody. (Palliative care specialist team, Group 8)
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231769
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 5 ---
‘‘deviant’’ cases [31], albeit in a context of a continuing
challenge of cultural difference. For example:
P3: To think about how you speak to people and to think about
what the family and what the patient themselves most want to
know and how they want to know it. P5: It’s listening isn’t it? It’s
being aware of, you can’t just say this is a Muslim family
therefore this is how I’ll do this as a template ... You have to be
able to modify how you’re going to deal with these situations ...
(Physicians, Group 16)
I think what’s helped me, it’s very much built into counsellor
training... is a model around working with any kind of difference
rather than around checklists ... and yet I still struggle to know
how to meet people who are very, very different to me.
(Multidisciplinary hospice team, Group 9)
Professional Disempowerment
The uncertainty professionals experienced had disempow-
ering effects. Professional disempowerment was characterised
by anxiety and stress in cross-cultural interactions and inertia
in their clinical approach.
Respondents worried about asking or were unsure about
how to ask patients about their values, perspectives, or
practices. Some respondents who had experience of diversity
or cultural competence training continued to feel ill-
equipped to respond to patients’ needs. So pronounced was
the fear of ‘‘getting it wrong ’’ or affronting patients that
avoidance of issues perceived as problematic or potentially
emotive could occur. Professionals’ ability to think and act
ﬂexibly or creatively seemed to falter. A disabling hesitancy
and inertia in practice was the common consequence,
compromising satisfactory interaction with patients. This
hesitancy was further manifested in some respondents’
perceptions, or those of their colleagues, that only profes-
sionals of similar ethnic background to the patient were best
placed to offer appropriate care (Box 4).
Respondents’ self-perceived low cultural expertise and
uncertainty made them uncomfortable as professionals, and
some felt that quality of care for patients was being affected
as a result. This was further enmeshed with professionals’
concerns about the lack of rapport they felt able to achieve
with patients because of a perceived lack of shared cultural
background, language, or values. They felt less able to use, or
trust, empathy as part of their approach. Thus, for example,
professionals wondered when it was acceptable to touch
someone, what a fellow professional from the same culture as
the patient might do, or whether they might do the wrong
thing and compromise their relationship with the patient
(Boxes 1, 2, and 4).
However, there were isolated examples of professionals
feeling more empowered when cultural expertise received
less emphasis:
I attended a workshop ... (the message was) we all have basically
the same needs ... don’t get yourself tied up ... because you’re
worried... We have to try to ﬁnd a way of making sure that
people can access services. For me, that was quite freeing
really... I don’t have to know everything about every religion,
every culture...I found that very helpful and I think it could be
easy to hide behind well I don’t know and perhaps they need
something different and I can’t give it ... (Palliative care
multidisciplinary team, Group 9)
Uncertainty and Disempowerment as Self-Perpetuating
To illustrate how respondents’ experiences and percep-
tions may be linked to effects, the categories of professional
uncertainty and disempowerment that developed from our
analysis are typiﬁed in Box 5 as common health professional
perceptions and responses.
It is hypothesised that professionals’ uncertainty and
disempowerment have the potential to be self-perpetuating.
Self-perpetuation may occur within the context of profes-
sionals foregrounding cultural difference, and in particular
their desire for, and application of, a rule- bound, knowledge-
based cultural expertise. This phenomenon may preclude
opportunity for learning as the categories interact to limit
new discovery and constructive experience with patient
diversity, thus reducing learning for future encounters.
Discussion
Our ﬁndings highlight the considerable uncertainty health
professionals may experience working with patients of
differing ethnicity to their own, alongside professionals’
emphasis upon knowledge about cultural difference. This
uncertainty may disempower professionals, creating hesi-
tancy and inertia in their clinical practice to the potential
detriment of patient care.
Methodological Considerations
The ﬁndings must be interpreted with regard to the study
context and sample. Participants were likely to have been
particularly interested in ethnic diversity and health care.
Their accounts showed signiﬁcant awareness and under-
standing in this context, which may reﬂect this interest. In
addition, although use of interaction in focus groups offers
the advantages described, a recognised challenge is the
possibility of group dynamics promoting uniformity of views
[30]. We sought to address this potential limitation by
emphasising our interest in differing perspectives as equally
Box 2. Uncertainty about Equality and Equity
P5: Is it racist to ask these specific groups, is it racist to ask them because they’re Asian, about eating habits, about these sort of details
about washing or praying? (Physiotherapist, Group 2)
P1: If you want to be reflecting someone’s culture you can be seen by colleagues as being over the top and not giving them, the same as
everyone else, there is some inequality about it because you are making allowances for somebody’s culture or ethnicity or whatever, that
you are not being fair to everybody else. P2: We are doing something more for someone else than we are doing for the majority of the
patients and I think that is a very dangerous ground to tread, that we have to be seen to be trying to make everybody equal and not doing
more for someone else. I think we quite often achieve this, of bending over backwards to help other people, now I think that’s right, that we
should be doing that, but the honest answer is that some people don’t think that’s right. (Clinical nurse specialist, Group 1)
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231770
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 6 ---
important and valid within groups, and by including a range
of group compositions.
While active inclusion of those willing to articulate their
experience is key to qualitative enquiry, we recognise our
participants’ perceptions may not be typical of all health
professionals or other settings. However, a broad range of
health professionals with varying characteristics were in-
cluded, data generation continued to saturation, negative
cases were sought [31], and we undertook validation with
participants [32] and other groups. These methods increase
the qualitative rigour of the study and the likely relevance
and transferability of the ﬁndings beyond the immediate
study. Further research involving individual interviews with
health professional respondents, observation of their prac-
tice, and exploration of the perspectives of patients, would be
of value in extending the current data and understanding in
this ﬁeld. We are currently conducting a parallel study with
patients in this context.
We recognize the potential inﬂuence of our own, largely
health professional, backgrounds on data interpretation.
However, we have attempted to lay emphasis upon what
participants said and note they offered apparently candid
reﬂections on their experiences and concerns, despite the
possible sensitivity of the topic. While our ﬁndings may
possibly have been more readily exposed within the emotive
context of care relating to cancer, they seem unlikely to be
unique to this setting.
Uncertainty and Disempowerment Responding to Cultural
Diversity
Uncertainty is well recognized in a range of health
contexts, for example, in clinical decision-making in relation
to evidence [33–35] or as a central theme of complexity in
care [36]. This study is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst to identify
professionals’ more personally felt uncertainty and disem-
powerment working with patients of differing ethnicity to
their own. The study invites the question of why these
problems remain despite the promotion of ‘‘cultural com-
petence’’ [19]. Their origin, given respondents’ emphasis on
their lack of cultural expertise, may partly reﬂect the
dominance of expert knowledge as the traditionally valued
attribute of the professional, formed in their training and
culture as health professionals. Contemporary notions of
cultural ‘‘competence’’ in health care [22–26] can imply a
technical skill that can be mastered and circumscribed. Yet a
‘‘technical mastery ’’ approach is unsuited to negotiating the
uncertainty inevitable within intercultural encounters, given
the kaleidoscopic, ﬂuid nature of patients’ cultural diversity.
The focus of cultural competence in relation to others can
be contrasted with professionals’ relative lack of attention to
examining their own culture and that of biomedicine in
particular. This ﬁeld has its own set of interests, biases, and
inﬂuences on care, awareness of which might inform cross-
cultural care. Fadiman, for example, has highlighted the
cultural gulf between the illness and treatment beliefs ﬁrmly
held by parents of a gravely ill child and the equally
uncompromising medical convictions of the American
physicians who cared for her, with tragic results and no easy
resolution [37].
Becoming more comfortable with cultural difference and
the uncertainty it creates may require greater development of
self-reﬂection on one’s own cultural identities as an individ-
ual and as health professional. This process implies becoming
more aware of the degree to which one’s perceptions and
behaviours are culturally conditioned. However, health
professionals’ inclination may be to resist such efforts
because awareness is as much ‘‘emotional’’ and derived from
experience and reﬂection as it is through the more tradi-
tionally valued intellectual process of handling information
[38]. In addition, people prefer to see themselves as
autonomous rather than as subject to cultural inﬂuences;
anything that may question or challenge the nature of one’s
identity is threatening.
The consequences of professionals’ uncertainty, hesitancy,
and inertia in their practice are of serious concern. Patient
perspectives and expectations may remain unexplored or
critical issues unaddressed. This gap may leave care to be
based upon inadequate infor mation and professionals’
cultural assumptions and generalization, which may com-
pound unhelpful stereotypes and attitudes that some health
professionals may hold [39,40]. Such difﬁculties may be
further exacerbated by difﬁculties in communication as a
result of language barriers or interpreting.
Professionals’ uncertainty and disempowerment, and the
potential of these two phenomena to perpetuate each other,
may contribute to institutional racism [41] in health services.
Our results add to debate about the possible contribution of
health care providers to ethnic disparities in health care, in
Box 3. Focus on Knowledge-Based Cultural Expertise
P2: I mean if there was some kind of resource. If there was some brief thing that showed in this culture, these are important things to bear in
mind about communication and these are the kind of things you need to be aware of when you see them. I think just something as simple
as that would actually be quite helpful. (Primary care physicians and nurses, Group 15)
P8: You went away (from training) with a piece of paper that said quite specifically this religion, watch out for such and such, just be aware
of it. It’s something I still use and give to students ... P6: I’ve recently written an article on what to do at the time of death ... and the editor
wrote back to me and said ‘could I include a table on what to do for different cultures?’ P2: Sometimes a checklist stops people from feeling
anxious... We often have people who say, ‘I just don’t know what to say, what shall I call him?’ (Palliative care team, Group 9)
What was right and wrong, some guidelines as to how we should behave and what is acceptable ... we would go in much more at ease and
then obviously our attitude would be better (Occupational therapist, Group 12)
P3: They [other health professionals] should go to ... multicultural training awareness days ... P4: I think a little knowledge about religion,
background, values, tradition does help. P7: Some people are not culturally aware. My children wear topknots [of unshorn hair in males as
Sikh article of faith] ... most people call them girls. Some people don’t even know the difference between cultures...some people are not
aware at all. (Bilingual link workers, Group 5)
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231771
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 7 ---
particular the hypothesis that their behaviour may be
inﬂuenced by patient ethnicity [27]. Our results have parallels
with evidence that physicians engage in longer consultations
and volunteer more information with patients of similar
middle class backgrounds to themselves, compared to
patients from less well-educated, lower social class back-
grounds [42–44].
With greater awareness of discrimination in services [41], it
is perhaps unsurprising that professionals worried about
causing affront, being ‘‘culturally inappropriate, ’’ or being
discriminatory and that they sought certainty in guidelines to
inform their practice. At the same time professionals in this
study were uncomfortable with their uncertainty and
recognized that they may be failing patients. Given that our
sample may have been particularly interested to reﬂect on
their practice, the challenges experienced by other profes-
sionals may be even greater, or perhaps lie unconsidered.
Opportunities and Implications for Practice
The ﬁndings might inform interventions to enhance
quality of care, and also professionals’ experience of working
with diversity. First, uncertainty should be acknowledged and
legitimized as inherent to negotiating care responsive to
patient needs. Professionals might be supported to reﬂect on
their responses to uncertainty [28] and its potential to create
inertia in their practice. This process might accompany other
learning to handle uncertainty as central to other aspects of
clinical care [33–35].
Second, a shift in emphasis away from knowledge-based
cultural expertise toward a greater focus on the patient as an
individual is needed. Perhaps unsurprisingly, deﬁning ‘‘cul-
tural competence ’’ adequately for training and practice has
continued to prove elusive, with signiﬁcant evidence of its
effectiveness yet to emerge. This study suggests the promo-
tion of ‘‘cultural competence ’’ as simply reducible to a set of
technical knowledge and skills may have the paradoxical
effect of increasing professionals’ uncertainty and reducing
their conﬁdence responding to cultural diversity.
Classic ethnographies of health care demonstrate that to be
sensitive to cultural difference is more than a question of
knowledge [45,46]. Rather it requires a more human and
emotional investment to connect successfully with those
whose world differs from one’s own. Such ethnographic
methods place central importance on understanding anoth-
er’s point of view, values, and practices, by empathising with
their experience and engaging with their differences or
‘‘foreignness’’ [47,48]. In the light of the current research this
approach offers a way forward for health professional
practice because it becomes possible to actively embrace,
rather than be uncomfortable with, the uncertainty that
cultural diversity creates.
Third, it should nevertheless be recognised that, as
demonstrated here, health professionals and those in training
[17] do sense an understandable need for more content-based
information about cultural and ethnic differences, and it
remains important to address this need in training. Dis-
cussion of culturally speciﬁc issues and examples can engage
health professionals, naturally interested in ‘‘difference,’’ and
provide a practical context for learning [15,17]. However, this
engagement must be balanced with avoidance of stereotypical
assumptions and application of transferable principles
ﬂexibly for any health encounter, thus enabling learning for
new and unfamiliar situations [15,17,49].
Fundamentally, health care professionals need to be
supported to respond to patients as individuals [49], whose
cultural diversity embraces not only ethnicity, but other
inﬂuences such as gender, social background, and education.
They should be able to reﬂect on their own cultural
inﬂuences as health professionals and have the conﬁdence
to explore patient perspectives where there is uncertainty.
Following an ethnographic approach, this requires asking
individual patients about their views and what matters most
Box 4. Professional Disempowerment
P1: I suppose there are differences in the culture you are brought up with, they are mostly intuitive ... I’m not sure I have the same feeling, or
certainly in my everyday experience of dealing with patients from minority groups ... I haven’t got the same feeling of trusting my kind of
sense of what’s going on because when can you put your arm round a patient? P2: Yeah, that kind of thing. P3: Yeah. Which you do
intuitively, don’t you? P1: And therefore there’s the danger of doing it inappropriately. P3: Yeah. P1: You don’t know which way to go, so you
don’t necessarily kind of progress. (Primary care physicians and nurses, Group 15)
Everybody was so upset (Asian man dying from liver cancer) it was very difficult to ask questions about cultural things ... we did have some
diversity training but it was so broad that it wasn’t very personal to the situation really ... I just felt very inadequate. (Occupational
therapist, G12)
P1: You could frighten yourself though couldn’t you? You could stop yourself doing so much with people, being so frightened to offend or
do something wrong. P2: And that’s what builds the barrier, isn’t it? Sometimes we are a bit, too careful, because we don’t know what’s
right or wrong. (Clinical nurse specialists, Group 1)
I said ... a greeting in Muslim, but they were Hindu, but I didn’t know because from outside I really couldn’t tell. And when I went in and I
saw the pictures and I thought, ‘Oh my god’, I didn’t know, and I’d said it at the door ... and then I went in and I just shut up. (South Asian
link worker, Group 5)
... it just makes you feel so helpless, doesn’t it. You wonder ... if [another health professional] from the same culture had turned up that day,
how would she have dealt with it? Would she have, you know, have gone to the patient or would she have gone through the family? How
differently would she have acted? (Palliative care team, Group 4)
I think inherently some people really, really struggle with caring for people who are not from the same ethnic background as themselves ... I
can see it in some team members ... this assumption that black nurses will look after the black patient, it’s there. (Physiotherapists, Group 2)
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231772
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 8 ---
to them in their experience of illness and treatment, rather
than assuming cultural knowledge of the patient [50]. This
approach may empower professionals to use individuated
patient information to facilitate assessment of needs and
understanding of expectations to enhance care.
Professionals might be reassured that it is neither feasible
nor desirable to be familiar with all aspects of the different
cultural issues that may apply in an encounter. Rather they
should recognize the importance of cultural issues and that
exploring them where necessary, to understand patients’
perspectives and empathize with their experience, may
facilitate effective care. Developing this ability in the context
of cultural diversity might also facilitate health professionals’
greater engagement with the more social, emotional, and
humanist components of health care practice [51].
Fourth, facilitating greater awareness of concepts of
equity—that is, of being fair as distinct from treating people
equally—may help those professionals with dilemmas about
equality to understand the a ppropriateness of varying
responses to patients to meet similar care needs. Differing
investment in time, enquiry, and possibly greater require-
ment to negotiate care, may be needed to achieve equitable
outcomes.
Such strategies may help professionals to work construc-
tively with diversity and uncertainty. They may also reduce
the sense of professional compromise some respondents felt.
Any steps must be integrated with other efforts to support
intercultural communication and reduce misunderstandings
caused by differences in language and communication style
[52–54]. Further, the question of why previous learning in this
ﬁeld may have had only modest penetration into thinking and
practice merits reﬂection. That from the social sciences, for
example [45,46], is often neither readily available within the
biomedical literature nor accessibly presented in less esoteric
form. It might also be argued that social science’s demon-
stration of the social and cultural character of medicine
forces a questioning of the privileged status of biomedical
knowledge. More might be done to facilitate better access to
such learning. Further applied research in the ﬁeld, including
assessing the effectiveness of culturally informed practice in
health care, is also much needed.
The challenges of wrestling with diversity have been little
presented from health professional perspectives. The current
study has sought to contribute by providing empirical data
that may speak more directly to health professionals.
Identiﬁcation with the uncertainty expressed might offer a
ﬁrst step to acknowledging its existence and to its negotiation
in practice. The extent to which quality and equity of care
may be enhanced by interventions informed by this study are
hypotheses for future testing. However, failure to empower
health professionals to accept and work creatively with
uncertainty may have signiﬁcant potential to perpetuate
inequality in the experience of health and health care of our
ethnically diverse populations.
Acknowledgments
We thank study participants; community and project advisory group
members; and Jean King, Charlotte Moore, and Lesley Walker of
Cancer Research UK for their support throughout this project.
Author contributions. JK was principal investigator, designed and
supervised the study, led data analysis, and wrote this paper and its
revision following peer review. JB led data generation, contributed to
data analysis and critically drafting the paper. CF facilitated recruit-
ment, and contributed to data analysis and critically drafting the
paper. LD and PG facilitated recruitment and approved the paper as
part of the project group. AB assisted with data analysis.
References
1. Ofﬁce for National Statistics (Updated 2005). Resident population by
ethnic group 2001/2. www.statistics.gov.uk/census2001. Accessed 2 February
2007.
2. US Census Bureau (2000). Proﬁle of general demographic characteristics.
www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000. Accessed 2 February 2007.
3. Acheson D (1998) Independent inquiry into inequalities in health. London:
The Stationary Ofﬁce.
4. Davey Smith G, Chaturvedi N, Harding S, Nazroo J, Williams R (2000)
Ethnic inequalities in health: a review of UK epidemiological evidence. Crit
Public Health 10: 375–408.
5. Smedley BD, Stith AY, Nelson AR (2003) Unequal Treatment: confronting
racial and ethnic disparities in health care. Washington (D. C.): Institute of
Medicine, Committee on Understanding and Eliminating Racial and Ethnic
Disparities in Health Care.
6. Smaje C (1995) Health, ‘‘race’’ and ethnicity: making sense of the evidence.
London: Kings Fund.
Box 5. Ethnically Diverse Patients: Health Professional Perceptions and Responses
Health Professional Perception (Category of Uncertainty)
People from other cultures are different from me.
If I ask a patient about their cultural needs I might offend them or
they might think I am racist.
If I don’t ask the patient about their cultural needs they might
think I’m racist.
I am too ignorant of different cultures to be culturally
appropriate.
Even with more cultural expertise I can never give the same care
to a patient as a professional from the patient’s own cultural
background.
If I spend more time with a patient of ‘minority ethnic
background’ this may be perceived as favouritism.
Everyone else knows what to do.
Health Professional Response (Category of Disempowerment)
So I need to focus on the differences.
So I’d better not ask.
So I’d better ask, but how?
So I need more cultural expertise (or someone tell me what the
facts are and what to do).
So it would be better if another professional of the same cultural
background could step in.
So I’d better deal with everyone in the same way.
So I’d better keep my uncertainty to myself.
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231773
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 9 ---
7. Nazroo JY (1997) The health of Britain’s ethnic minorities. London: Policy
Studies Institute.
8. Trevino FM (1999) Quality of health care for ethnic/racial minority
populations. Ethn Health 4: 153–164.
9. Feder G, Crook AM, Magee P, Banerjee S, Timmis AD, et al. (2002) Ethnic
differences in invasive management of coronary disease: prospective
cohort study of patients undergoing angiography. BMJ 324: 511–516.
10. Fiscella K, Franks P, Gold MR, Clancy CM (2000) Inequality in quality:
addressing socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic disparities in health care.
JAMA 283: 2579–2584.
11. [No author listed] (2000) Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000. Available:
http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2000. Accessed 18 October 2007.
12. US Department of Health and Human Services (2000) Healthy people
2010. Washington (D. C.): Government Printing Ofﬁce. Available: http://
www.healthypeople.gov/. Accessed 18 October 2007.
13. Gill PS, Kai J, Bhopal RS, Wild S (2007) Health care needs assessment: black
and minority ethnic groups. In: Raftery J, Stevens A, Mant J, editors. Health
care needs assessment. The epidemiologically based needs assesment
reviews. 3rd series. Abingdon: Radcliffe Medical Press. Available: http://
hcna.radcliffe-oxford.com/bemgframe.htm. Accessed 2 March 2007.
14. Szczepura A, Johnson MRD, Gumber G (2004) Review of the research
evidence on ethnicity and communication. Coventry (UK): University of
Warwick Centre for Health Services Studies.
15. Kai J, Spencer J, Woodward N (2001) Wrestling with ethnic diversity:
toward empowering health educators. Med Educ 35: 262–271.
16. Brach C, Fraser I (2000) Can cultural competency reduce racial and ethnic
health disparities? A review and conceptual model. Med Care Res Rev 57:
181–217.
17. Kai J, Bridgewater R, Spencer J (2001) ‘‘‘Just think of TB and Asians’, that’s
all I ever hear ’’: medical learners’ views about training to work in an
ethnically diverse society. Med Educ 35: 250–256.
18. Beach MC, Gary TL, Price EG, Robinson K, Gozu A, et al. (2006) Improving
health care quality for racial/ethnic minorities: a systematic review of the
best evidence regarding provider and organization interventions. BMC
Public Health 6: 104.
19. Betancourt J (2004) Cultural competence—marginal or mainstream move-
ment? N Engl J Med 351: 953–954.
20. Kleinman A (1981) Patients and healers in the context of culture: an
exploration of the borderland between anthropology, medicine, and
psychiatry. Berkeley (CA): University of California Press. 427 p.
21. Helman C (2001) Culture, health an d illness. 4th Ed. Butterworth
Heinemann.
22. Like R, Steiner R, Rubel A (1996) Recommended core curriculum
guidelines on culturally sensitive and competent health care. Fam Med
27: 219–297.
23. Betancourt J (2003) Cross-cultural medical education: conceptual ap-
proaches and frameworks for evaluation. Acad Med 78: 560–569.
24. Campinha-Bacote J (2002) The process of cultural competence in the
delivery of health care services: a model of care. J Transcult Nurs 13: 181–184.
25. Bigby J (2003) Cross-cultural medicine. Philadelphia: American College of
Physicians.
26. Leininger M (1978) Transcultural nursing. Thorofare (NJ): Slack.
27. van Ryn M (2002) Research on the provider contribution to race/ethnicity
disparities in medical care. Med Care 40: 140–151.
28. Kai J (2005) Professionals responding to cancer and ethnic diversity.
London: Cancer Research UK.
29. Selby P (1996) Cancer clinical outcomes for minority ethnic groups. Br J
Cancer Suppl 29: S54–60.
30. Kitzinger J (1994) The methodology of focus groups: the importance of
interaction between research participants. Sociol Health Illn 16: 103–120.
31. Strauss A, Corbin J (1990) Basics of qualitative research: grounded theory
procedures and techniques. Newbury Park (CA): Sage Publications.
32. Bloor M (1997) Techniques of validation in qualitative research: a critical
commentary. In: Miller D, Dingwall R, editors. Context and method in
qualitative research. London: Sage.
33. McNeil BJ (2001) Hidden barriers to improvement in the quality of care. N
Engl J Med 345: 1612–1620.
34. Djulbegovic B (2004) Lifting the fog of uncertainty from the practice of
medicine. BMJ 329: 1419–1420.
35. Grifﬁths F, Green E, Tsourouﬂi M (2005) The nature of medical evidence
and its inherent uncertainty for the clinical consultation: qualitative study.
BMJ 330: 7490.
36. Innes AD, Campion PD, Grifﬁths FE (2005) Complex consultations and the
‘‘edge of chaos. ’’ Br J Gen Pract 55: 47–52.
37. Fadiman A (1998) The spirit catches you and you fall down: a Hmong child,
her American doctors, and the collision of two cultures. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.
38. Kai J (2006) Valuing diversity. 2nd Ed. London: Royal College of General
Practitioners.
39. Bowler I (1993) They’re not the same as us: midwives’ stereotypes of South
Asian descent maternity patients. Soc Sci Med 15: 157–178.
40. van Ryn M, Burke J (2000) The effect of patient race and socio-economic
status on physicians’ perceptions of patients. Soc Sci Med 50: 813–828.
41. MacPherson W (1999) Report for the Stephen Lawrence enquiry. London:
The Stationary Ofﬁce.
42. Pendleton DA, Bochner S (1980) The communication of medical
information in general practice consultations as a function of patients’
social class. Soc Sci Med [Med Psychol Med Sociol] 14A: 669–673.
43. Cartwright A (1967) Patients and their doctors. London: Routledge, Kegan
Paul.
44. Stewart M (1984) Patient characteristics which are related to the doctor-
patient interaction. Fam Pract 1: 30–36.
45. Lock M, Gordon D, editors (1988) Biomedicine examined. Boston: Kluwer.
46. Hahn R, Gaines A (1985) Physicians of Western medicine. Boston: Kluwer.
47. Geertz C (1983) Local knowledge. New York: Basic Books. 256 p.
48. Geertz C (1972) The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
480 p.
49. Kai J, Spencer J, Wilkes M, Gill P (1999) Learning to value ethnic diversity—
what, why and how? Med Educ 33: 616–623.
50. Kleinman A (1988) The illness narratives: suffering, healing and the human
condition. New York: Basic Books. 304 p.
51. Christakis N (1995) The similarity and frequency of proposals to reform
medical education: constant concerns. JAMA 274: 706–711.
52. Bischoff A, Perneger TV, Bovier PA, Loutan L, Stalder H (2003) Improving
communication between physicians and patients who speak a foreign
language. Br J Gen Pract 53: 541–546.
53. Harmsen H, Bernsen R, Meeuwesen L, Thomas S, Dorrenboom G, et al.
(2005) The effect of educational intervention on intercultural communi-
cation: results of a randomised controlled trial. Br J Gen Pract 55: 343–350.
54. Roberts C, Moss B, Wass V, Sarangi S, Jones R (2005) Misunderstandings: a
qualitative study of primary care consultations in multilingual settings, and
educational implications. Med Educ 39: 465–475.
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231774
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity


--- Page 10 ---
Editors’ Summary
Background. Communities are increasingly diverse in terms of ethnicity
(belonging to a group of people defined by social characteristics such as
cultural tradition or national origin) and race (belonging to a group
identified by inherited physical characteristics). Although health pro-
fessionals and governments are striving to ensure that everybody has
the same access to health care, there is increasing evidence of ethnic
inequalities in health-care outcomes. Some of these inequalities reflect
intrinsic differences between groups of people—Ashkenazi Jews, for
example, often carry an altered gene that increases their chance of
developing aggressive breast cancer. Often, however, these differences
reflect inequalities in the health care received by different ethnic groups.
To improve this situation, ‘‘cultural competence ’’ has been promoted
over recent years. Cultural competence is the development of skills by
individuals and organizations that allow them to work effectively with
people from different cultures. Health professionals are now taught
about ethnic differences in health beliefs and practices, religion, and
communication styles to help them provide the best service to all their
patients.
Why Was This Study Done? Numerous guidelines aim to improve
cultural competency but little is known about how health professionals
experience and perceive their work with patients from diverse ethnic
groups. Is their behavior influenced by ethnicity in ways that might
contribute to health care disparities? For example, do doctors sometimes
avoid medical examinations for fear of causing offence because of
cultural differences? If more were known about how health professionals
handle ethnic diversity (a term used here to include both ethnicity and
race) it might be possible to reduce ethnic inequalities in health care. In
this qualitative study, the researchers have explored how health
professionals involved in cancer care are affected by working with
ethnically diverse patients. A qualitative study is one that collects
nonquantitative data such as how doctors ‘‘feel’’ about treating people
of different ethnic backgrounds; a quantitative study might compare
clinical outcomes in different ethnic groups.
What Did the Researchers Do and Find? The researchers enrolled 106
doctors, nurses, and other health-related professionals from different
health-service settings in the Midlands, an ethnically diverse region of
the UK. They organized 18 focus groups in which the health
professionals described their experiences of caring for people from
ethnic minority backgrounds. The participants were encouraged to recall
actual cases and to identify what they saw as problems and strengths in
their interactions with these patients. The researchers found that the
health professionals wrestled with many challenges when providing
health care for patients from diverse ethnic backgrounds. These
challenges included problems with language and with general
communication (for example, deciding when it was acceptable to touch
a patient to show empathy). Health professionals also worried they did
not know enough about cultural differences. As a result, they said they
often felt uncertain of their ability to avoid causing affront or appearing
racist. This uncertainty, the researchers report, disempowered the health
professionals, sometimes making them hesitate or fail to do what was
best for their patient.
What Do These Findings Mean? These findings reveal that health
professionals often experience considerable uncertainty when caring for
ethnically diverse patients, even after training in cultural competency.
They also show that this uncertainty can lead to hesitancy and inertia,
which might contribute to ethnic health care inequalities. Because the
study participants were probably already interested in ethnic diversity
and health care, interviews with other health professionals (and
investigations of patient experiences) are needed to confirm these
findings. Nevertheless, the researchers suggest several interventions that
might reduce health care inequalities caused by ethnic diversity. For
example, health professionals should be encouraged to recognize their
uncertainty and should have access to more information and training
about ethnic differences. In addition, there should be a shift in emphasis
away from relying on knowledge-based cultural information towards
taking an ‘‘ethnographic’’ approach. In other words, health professionals
should be helped to feel able to ask their patients about what matters
most to them as individuals about their illness and treatment.
Additional Information. Please access these Web sites via the online
version of this summary at http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.
0040323.
/C15 Information on cultural competence and health care is available from
the US National Center for Cultural Competence (in English and
Spanish) and DiversityRx
/C15 PROCEED (Professionals Responding to Cancer in Ethnic Diversity) is a
multimedia training tool for educators within the health and allied
professions developed from the results of this study; a press release on
PROCEED is available from the University of Nottingham
/C15 Transcultural Health Care Practice: An educational resource for nurses
and health care practitioners is available on the web site of the UK
Royal College of Nursing
PLoS Medicine | www.plosmedicine.org November 2007 | Volume 4 | Issue 11 | e3231775
Uncertainty Responding to Diversity
