ReseaR ch Methods & RepoR ting
1the bmj |  BMJ 2015;350:h1139  |  d oi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139
1Children’s Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario Research Institute, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
2Faculty of Medicine and School 
of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa
3Earls Court Health and 
Wellbeing Centre, London, UK
4Department of Biomedical 
Informatics, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA
Correspondence to: K El Eman 
kelemam@ehealthinformation.ca
Cite this as: BMJ 2015;350:h1139
doi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139
Anonymising and sharing individual patient data
Khaled El Emam,1, 2 Sam Rodgers,3 Bradley Malin4
There is a strong movement to share 
individual patient data for secondary 
purposes, particularly for research. 
A major obstacle to broad data sharing 
has been the concern for patient privacy. 
One of the methods for protecting the 
privacy of patients in accordance with 
privacy laws and regulations is to 
anonymise the data before it is shared. 
This article describes the key concepts 
and principles for anonymising health 
data while ensuring it remains suitable 
for meaningful analysis.
There is increasing pressure to share individual patient 
data for secondary purposes such as research. 1–3 For 
example, research funding agencies are strongly 
encouraging recipients of funds to share data collected 
by their projects.
4–6 The expected benefits from sharing 
individual patient data for health research purposes 
include: it ensures accountability in results and that 
reported study results are valid, it allows researchers to 
build on the work of others more efficiently and to per-
form individual patient data meta-analyses to sum -
marise evidence, and it decreases the burden on 
r
esearch subjects through the reuse of existing data. 7 
In many instances, however, patient privacy concerns 
have been perceived as a key barrier for making individ-
ual patient data available.
3 8
There are two legal mechanisms that would permit 
data custodians to share patient data for secondary 
 purposes (unless ther
e is an exemption in the law): 
(a) consent and (b) anonymisation. If the data was orig-
inally collected in a medical context, then consent for 
unanticipat
ed secondary analyses is often not obtained 
in advance. It is not always practical to go back and 
obtain consent from a large number of patients, and 
there is evidence of systematic consent bias whereby 
consenters and non-consenters differ on important 
characteristics.
9–11 As a consequence, it is challenging to 
rely on consent as the primary mechanism for sharing 
data. With respect to the second option, there is evi -
dence that many research ethics boards will permit the 
sharin
g of patient data without consent for research 
purposes if it is anonymised.12 (The term “de-identifica-
tion” is more commonly used in North America while 
“
anonymisation” is more commonly used in Europe; for 
this article, we treat the terms as equivalent.)
Many jurisdictions, including those in North America 
and Europe, do not designate anonymised health data 
as personal information.
7 Therefore, such data would 
no longer be covered by privacy laws, allowing it to be 
used and disclosed for any secondary purpose. How -
ever, there is an expectation that the anonymised data 
will be used onl
y for purposes that are legitimate, in a 
manner that would not surprise the patients, and not in 
a discriminatory or stigmatising manner. This expecta-
tion has been made explicit in the EU context,
13 and 
falls under a privacy ethics framework outside the Euro-
pean Union.14
When sharing patient data for secondary purposes it 
is important to be mindful of patient trust. While 
patients are supportive of the use of their data for 
research,
7 often there is an expectation that that data 
will be adequately anonymised. Trust is important 
because there is evidence that patients adopt privacy 
protective behaviors, such as lying and not seeking 
care, when they have concerns about how their health 
information may be shared.
15
Definitions of anonymity in privacy laws and regula-
tions do not provide an operational method to follow 
for anon
ymising health information. Even the concept 
of anonymous or non-identifiable data is ambiguous. 
For example, the European Data Protection Directive 
95/46/EC states that “‘personal data’ shall mean any 
information relating to an identified or identifiable nat-
ural person (‘data subject’); an identifiable person is 
one w
ho can be identified, directly or indirectly, in par-
ticular by reference to an identification number or to 
one 
or more factors specific to his physical, physiologi-
cal, mental, economic, cultural or social identity”; and 
the H
ealth Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Privacy Rule of 1996 in the US notes that 
“Health information that does not identify an individ -
ual and with respect to which there is no reasonable 
basis t
o believe that the information can be used to 
identify an individual is not individually identifiable 
health information.” This ambiguity contributes to het-
erogeneity and inconsistency in actual anonymisation 
pr
actices for health data.
The subdiscipline of statistics known as disclosure 
control has developed a substantial body of knowledge 
around anonymisation techniques.
16 17 In this article we 
describe the key concepts and principles behind the 
anonymisation of health data in an effort to find a com-
mon language and mitigate current inconsistencies. As 
a runn
ing example, we will use the Ontario (Canada) 
birth registry dataset (known as BORN) to illustrate var-
ious points. BORN is a population registry of all births 
in the pr
ovince. The data is collected from hospitals, 
clinics, midwives, and the provincial newborn screen -
ing laboratory and stored in a data warehouse. The data 
is then used and 
disclosed for research and public 
health purposes.18
Definitions
From a technical perspective, ensuring anonymity 
equates to ensuring that the probability of assigning a 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 
Resea Rch  Methods & Repo Rting
2 doi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139  |  BMJ 2015;350:h1139  |  the  bmj
correct identity to a record in a dataset is very small. 
This probability can be conditional on other factors, 
such as the skills required and resources available to an 
adversary seeking to re-identify a record.
7 When data is 
shared, it is not possible to ensure that the probability 
of re-identification is zero, but it is possible to ensure 
that the probability is very small.
Existing standards and guidelines tend to divide 
the variables in a dataset into two groups: direct iden -
tifiers and quasi-identifiers. The direct identifiers are 
featur
es that permit direct recognition or communica -
tion with the corresponding individuals, such as per -
sonal names, email addresses, telephone numbers, 
and social insur
ance numbers. Quasi-identifiers are 
features that can indirectly identify individuals, 
such as their date of birth, death, or clinic visit, resi -
dence postal code, and ethnicity. Quasi-identifiers 
inc
lude demographics and socioeconomic informa -
tion. Both types of variables must be addressed 
d
uring anonymisation.
In the case of the BORN registry, variables such as the 
mother’s name and health insurance number are desig-
nated as direct identifiers. These variables are removed 
befor
e data arrives at the registry. Sometimes there are 
unique identifiers that need to be retained to allow link-
ing of all of the records that belong to the same mother 
(for example, t
o track multiple births) such as a medical 
record number. Because a medical record number is 
often considered a patient identifier as well, it is con -
verted to a pseudonym. The data is then called “pseud-
onymised.” Pseudonymous data is still considered 
per
sonal information under the European Data Protec-
tion Directive 95/46/EC19 and should not be treated as 
anonymous.
To date, all known successful re-identification 
attacks (excluding genetic data) were performed on 
pseudonymous data.
20 Adversaries performing such an 
attack attempt to determine the identity of individuals 
in a dataset that has been shared. Known re-identifica-
tion attacks are performed almost exclusively by 
r
esearchers and the media.20
The motives of the media are believed to be to show 
that shared data is unsafe (which makes for a good 
story) or to contact individuals and their families for a 
story. Academics perform these attacks to publish new 
computational algorithms for attacking databases and 
also to show weaknesses in available databases. In gen-
eral, such “white hats” get recognition for finding 
w
eaknesses in systems and databases. We consider two 
examples below.
An example of a media initiated re-identification 
attack is when a national Canadian broadcaster re-iden-
tified an individual in the adverse drug event database 
fr
om Health Canada. The purpose was to report on the 
adverse events associated with a drug, and they wanted 
to interview the family of the deceased individual who 
was re-identified.
21 The re-identification attack used 
publicly available obituaries to match on age, location, 
and date of death to determine the identity of the 26 
year old woman who had died while taking the drug in 
question.
A recent example of a successful re-identification 
attack by a team of a reporter and an academic was per-
formed on a hospital discharge database. The depart -
ment of health in Washington state in the United States 
w
as sharing pseudonymised data with few restrictions 
on who could access the data and what the data recipi-
ent could do with it. In this attack, the adversaries used 
information 
from newspaper articles about vehicle acci-
dents and reports involving hospitalisations of famous 
people in the media t
o re-identify individuals in the 
hospital discharge database.22 2 3  This was accomplished 
by combining the discharge data with publicly avail -
able phone number directories and voter registration 
lists
. Specifically, in this attack the adversary leveraged 
knowledge about the date of admission, the injury 
code, the age of the patient, which hospital was visited, 
the ZIP code of the patient, whether it was a weekend 
admission, as well as the gender and race of the patient. 
This amounted to 11 quasi-identifiers that were lever -
aged to attack the database.
In both of the a
bove cases the successful re-identifi-
cation attack used quasi-identifiers. It is therefore 
impor
tant to protect the quasi-identifiers as well as the 
direct identifiers.
Types of data sharing
There are three general ways to share data for second -
ary purposes: public, quasi-public, and non-public.
P
ublic data has the least amount of restrictions 
placed on it. Such public data is available, typically 
online, for anyone to download either free or for a nom-
inal fee. Many national statistical agencies release cen-
sus and national survey data as public data. Some of 
this surv
ey data includes health information. There are 
also publicly available clinical trials data from the Inter-
national Stroke Trial 24 and data posted in the Dryad 
online open access data repository.25 26
Quasi-public data has additional restrictions imposed 
on it in the form of a “terms of use.” This is a contract 
that the data recipient signs (or clicks through if it is 
online). The terms of use often includes a prohibition 
on attempting to re-identify the data, contacting any of 
the patients, linking the data with other datasets, and 
sharing the data with any third party. Also, all data 
recipients must register so that their identity is known 
to the data custodian. Data competitions serve as illus-
trative examples of the use of quasi-public data. The 
H
eritage Health Prize, for instance, was a $3
 000
 000
 
competition whereby the winner built a predictive 
model for readmissions using a quasi-public dataset 
from the Heritage Provider Network.
27 The 2013 Cajun 
Code Fest 28 was another $25  000 c ompetition where 
the  entrants built software applications that used 
 quasi-
public data to support decision making for 
patients and providers. In both competitions, all 
entrants had to register and agree to the terms of use 
contract before they were allowed to access the data.
Non-public data has the most restrictions placed on 
it. In this case the data recipient would need to sign a 
full contract that, in addition to the above specifica -
tions, includes a prescriptive set of security and privacy 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 
Resea Rch  Methods & Repo Rting
3the bmj |  BMJ 2015;350:h1139  |  d oi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139
controls that the data recipient needs to have in place, 
such as encrypting their computers and providing pri -
vacy training to the analysts who will work with the 
data. The data cust
odian may also reserve the right to 
audit recipients to ensure that they comply with all of 
the conditions.
The data needs to be anonymised in all of the three 
cases above. However, the acceptable probability of 
re-identification would vary. For a public data release 
the probability needs to be quite low because there are 
no other controls that can be put in place. However, for 
non-public data a higher probability would be accept -
able because other security, privacy, and contractual 
c
ontrols would be put in place. This balancing of con -
trols to manage the risk is illustrated in the figure.
The a
bove distinctions mean that the same data can 
be sufficiently anonymised in different ways depending 
on the context of the data release. Accounting for the 
context of the data release when deciding on how to 
anonymise is consistent with existing best practices 
and regulatory guidance.
29–31
The mechanism of data release can also vary. For 
example, individual patient data may be provided to a 
researcher for download, or the researcher may get 
access to the individual patient data through a portal 
that does not allow any data to be downloaded. In the 
latter case all of the analysis must happen on the portal 
itself. Some data custodians require the researcher to be 
physically present in a secure room in order to access 
individual patient data. Each of these mechanisms has 
a different set of controls imposed on the researcher, 
and therefore the acceptable probability of re-identifi -
cation would be set accordingly.
Measuring the probability of re-identification
The balancing described above is premised on the 
ability to measure the probability of re-identification. 
 S
everal metrics have been developed for measuring 
the probability of re-identification. 7 These can be 
applied for datasets over a large population or for sam-
ples derived from the population. The BORN registry is 
an 
example of a population dataset because it includes 
all births in Ontario. In that case, the probability of 
re-
 identification 
can be directly measured from the 
data. A sample dataset could be, for example, a clini -
cal trial with diabetic patients (because only a subset 
of all patients with 
diabetes will participate in that 
trial). In the case of the clinical trial dataset, the prob -
ability of re-identification would have to be estimated 
fr
om the data.
To start with, the probability of re-identification will 
depend on two factors: ( a) which quasi-identifiers are 
included in the shared dataset and (b ) the extent to 
which the data has been perturbed (or modified).
In the BORN registry, variables such as the baby’s 
date of birth and sex and the mother’s date of birth and 
postal code are designated quasi-identifiers. They could 
also be discovered by an adversary for various reasons: 
births are commonly announced, residence informa -
tion is available from sources such as the Whitepages 
(
Canadian and US telephone and address directories), 
and basic demographics are generally available from a 
variety of public resources.
32 We can illustrate how the 
probability of re-identification is affected by the 
selected quasi-identifiers.
Table 1 shows the probability of re-identification for 
different combinations of quasi-identifiers in BORN. 
The dataset we use has 919
 7
10 births from 2005 to 2011. 
This probability will vary depending on which quasi-  
i
dentifiers are included in the released data. In general, 
the more quasi-identifiers that are included in the 
released data, the greater the probability of re-identifi-
cation. Some quasi-identifiers have a substantial 
impact
, such as the Canadian six-digit postal code, 
 follow
ed by the mother’s date of birth, whereas other 
quasi-identifiers have little to no impact (such as the 
baby’s sex). The inclusion of all four quasi-identifiers 
leads to a high probability of re-identification because 
at that level of detail almost all births are unique.
Data transformations and data quality
If the probability of re-identification is deemed to be too 
high, then various perturbation techniques can be 
applied to reduce it.
14 For example, if all quasi-identifi-
ers in table 1 need to be shared without perturbation, it 
is 
almost certain that re-identification can happen.
One of the simplest ways to perturb the data is to reduce 
the precision of data fields through generalisation. This 
approach is used quite often in practice. As an illustra-
tion, it is natural for a date of birth to be generalised into 
Extensive
None
Higher
Lower
Probability of re-identi/f_ication
a/f_ter anonymisation
Extent of additional controls
imposed on data recipient
Non-public data
Quasi-public data
Public data
Extent of anonymisation that needs to be applied for 
different types of data releases balanced against other 
controls
Table 1 | Pr obability of re-identification of anonymised data in BORN (Ontario birth 
registry dataset) for various combinations of quasi-identifiers
Mother’s 
date of birth
Baby’s date 
of birth
Mother’s 
postal code Baby’s sex
Probability of 
re-identification*
X 0.014
X 0.005
X X 0.88
X X X 1.00
X X X X 1.00
X X X 0.91
X X 0.98
X X 0.85
X 0.19
X indicates that a variable is included in the calculation of probability.
*Probability was measured using the average re-identification risk metric defined elsewhere. 7
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 
Resea Rch  Methods & Repo Rting
4 doi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139  |  BMJ 2015;350:h1139  |  the  bmj
a month and year of birth. Generalisation is, in many 
instances, considered to be an acceptable strategy for pro-
tection because it is consistent with how the data will be 
anal
ysed. For example, if the analysis only requires the 
year of birth of the mother, then generalising the mother’s 
date of birth in BORN will reduce the probability of 
re-identification and will be consistent with the intended 
analysis.
Table 2 depicts the probability of re-identification 
after various generalisations were applied to the BORN 
quasi-identifiers. Simple changes to the data can 
result in substantial reductions in the probability of 
re-identification. Which generalisation should be cho -
sen is determined using a combination of two meth -
ods: (a ) a data anal
 yst subjectively judges whether a 
particular generalisation would affect the ability to 
analyse the data, and (b) formal metrics are applied to 
evaluate data utility, such as the entropy in the result -
ing records.
10
In table 2, scenario S1 reduces the precision of the 
mother’s date of birth to a year and the postal code to 
the first three characters, but the probability of re-iden-
tification remains quite high. By contrast, scenarios S5 
and S6 ha
ve the lowest probability of re-identification, 
but the postal code is truncated to the first character 
only. This precludes most meaningful geospatial analy-
sis. The lowest probability that maintains location 
information is r
eached with scenario S8, with the 
baby’s date of birth converted to quarter and year and 
the mother’s age is categorised as ≤19, 20–30, 30–40, or 
>40 years. However, the changes in S8 reduce the utility 
of the data because details around the exact age of the 
infant at certain time points cannot be calculated, and 
geospatial analysis is still limited by the three character 
postal code.
Better methods of perturbation can be used than sim-
ple generalisation. These computational methods can 
r
educe the amount of distortion to the data (such as 
allowing more granularity than the three character 
postal code) and produce higher data quality.
14 33
In practice, when there are many quasi-identifiers in 
a dataset, simple techniques such as generalising the 
values for all the records in the same way are unlikely 
to produce datasets that are analytically useful. With 
just the four quasi-identifiers in Table 2, the acceptable 
generalisations were already approaching the limits of 
data utility. However, as mentioned earlier, recent 
re-identification attacks leveraged as many as 11 qua -
si-identifiers.
22 23 To maintain the utility of the data, 
more sophisticated methods can be applied that retain 
details in dates and geospatial information during the 
anonymisation process.
14
When to stop
A practical question that the data custodian needs to 
answer is how much generalisation is enough? For 
instance, are all the solutions in table 2 that are below a 
probability of re-identification of 0.2 acceptable from a 
risk perspective? There are precedents (regulatory, 
legal, and practical) going back decades for what is an 
acceptable probability of re-identification for public 
and non-public data releases.
7 These precedents pro -
vide a range of possible acceptable thresholds that can 
j
ustifiably be used. In general, they vary from an accept-
able probability of 0.33 to 0.05.7
There are instances where anonymisation schemes 
do not include risk measurement nor the setting of 
thresholds to ensure that the probability of re-identifi -
cation is acceptable.
34–36 For example, these schemes 
provide a fixed list of quasi-identifiers that should be 
removed from the dataset. These approaches cannot 
ANONyM isA T i ON F AQs
•	Is it necessary to obtain patient consent to anonymise health data or to share 
anonymised data?
In most jurisdictions, including the European Union, anonymisation is considered a 
permitted use.13 This means that it is not necessary to obtain patient consent to 
anonymise the data.
•	Can data on rare diseases be anonymised?
The presence of a rare disease does not necessarily make it impossible to 
anonymise. If the dataset is a sample from the population of patients with that 
disease, then the probability of re-identification may still be small. If the rare 
disease is not visible then that reduces the likelihood that an adversary would know 
that someone has that disease.
37
•	Will advances in technology and the greater availability of data increase the risk of 
re-identification?
Anonymisation is typicaly time limited to account for changes in technology and the 
availability of other data that can be used to re-identify individuals. This time limit 
is typically 18–24 months. After that time has elapsed, the risk of re-identification 
needs to be re-evaluated to determine if circumstances make the originally 
anonymised data high risk. This is possible to achieve for non-public datasets 
where permission to use a dataset is time limited and the data use agreement 
stipulates a re-assessment of re-identification risk. For public data, the initial 
anonymisation needs to be more stringent to be applicable for a longer period since 
it is not possible to “call back” a public dataset.
Table 2 | C hanges in probability of re-identification of anonymised data in BORN (Ontario birth registry dataset) for 
different levels of generalisation of quasi-identifiers
sc enario Mother’s date of birth or age Baby’s date of birth Mother’s postal code Baby’s sex
Probability of 
re-identification*
S1 Year day, month, year 3 character Unchanged 0.973
S2 Year month, year 3 character Unchanged 0.677
S3 Age in 5-year groups month, year 3 character Unchanged 0.327
S4 Age ≤19, 20–30, 30–40, >40 month, year 3 character Unchanged 0.23
S5 Age ≤19, 20–30, 30–40, >40 month, year 1 character Unchanged 0.007
S6 Year month, year 1 character Unchanged 0.034
S7 Age in 5-year groups quarter, year 3 character Unchanged 0.152
S8 Age ≤19, 20–30, 30–40, >40 quarter, year 3 character Unchanged 0.1
*Probability was measured using the average re-identification risk metric defined elsewhere. 7
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 
Resea Rch  Methods & Repo Rting
5the bmj |  BMJ 2015;350:h1139  |  d oi: 10.1136/bmj.h1139
provide assurance that the probability of re-identifica-
tion is small for any single dataset because the actual 
quasi-idenditifer
s may differ from the list. Moreover, 
their application may result in datasets being exces -
sively perturbed. Therefore, such approaches would not 
be a
ppropriate for complex datasets. Knowing when to 
stop perturbing the data is important to balance privacy 
protection and data utility.
Conclusions
Methods for measuring the risk of re-identification can 
be used to decide how much to anonymise health data 
for different types of data release. Perturbation that 
retains sufficient data quality requires data-centric 
methods rather than simplistic rules regarding how to 
generalise fields. Anonymisation methods cannot 
ensure that the risk of re-identification is zero, but this 
is not the threshold that is expected by privacy laws and 
regulations in any jurisdiction. Strong precedents exist 
for choosing suitable probability thresholds for anony-
mising data. There is a need for anonymisation stan -
dards that can provide operational guidance to data 
c
ustodians and promote consistency in the applications 
of anonymisation.
Contributors: KEE’s research over the past 10 years has been focused 
on privacy issues related to electronic health information, particularly 
the policy and technological obstacles and solutions to data 
anonymisation and the sharing of health data for secondary purposes. 
He has published three books on this topic covering policy, legal, and 
methodology issues, as well as a series of case studies to show how 
to anonymise health data. SR was formerly the clinical chief 
information officer for NHS Central London CCG. He was the clinical 
lead on implementing a single primary care IT system for Central 
London CCG and contributed to the development of the data storage 
and analysis platform which will house patient data in the North West 
London area. BM conducts research on methods and software tools to 
anonymise health data for secondary purposes. He contributed to the 
development of the US HIPAA de-identification guidelines. 
Funding: BM’s work on this article was funded by grants 
R01LM009989 (National Library or Medicine, National Institutes of 
Health) and U01HG006385 (National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health).
Competing interests: The authors have read and understood the BMJ 
Group policy on declaration of interests and declare the following 
interests: KEE and BM have financial interests in Privacy Analytics, 
a University of Ottawa and Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario 
spin-off company which develops anonymisation software for the 
health sector.
Ethical approval: The analysis of the BORN registry data described in 
this article was approved by the Research Ethics Board of the 
Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute.
1 G øtzsche PC. Why we need easy access to all data from all clinical 
trials and how to accomplish it. Trials  2011;12:249.
2
 P
. Vallance, I. Chalmers. Secure use of individual patient data from 
clinical trials. Lancet 2013;382:1073–4.
3
 O
lson S, Downey AS. Sharing clinical research data: workshop 
summary. National Academies Press, 2013.
4
 M
edical Research Council. Research policy & ethics: Data sharing. 
2015. www.mrc.ac.uk/research/research-policy-ethics/data-sharing/.
5
 Nation
al Institutes of Health. Final NIH statement on sharing research 
data. 2003. http:/ /grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/
NOT-OD-03-032.html.
6
 Wel
lcome Trust. Sharing research data to improve public health: full 
joint statement by funders of health research. 2011. www.wellcome.
ac.uk/About-us/Policy/Spotlight-issues/Data-sharing/Public-health-
and-epidemiology/WTDV030690.htm.
7
 El
 Emam K. Guide to the de-identification of personal health 
information. CRC Press, 2013.
8
 C
astellani J. Are clinical trial data shared sufficiently today? Yes. BMJ 
2013;347:f1881.
9
 Kho M, D
uffett M, Willison D, Cook D, Brouwers M. Written informed 
consent and selection bias in observational studies using medical 
records: systematic review. BMJ 2009;338:b866.
10
 El
 Emam K, Dankar F, Issa R, Jonker E, Amyot D, Cogo E, et al. 
A globally optimal k-anonymity method for the de-identification 
of health data. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2009;16:670–82.
11
 El
 Emam K, Jonker E, Moher E, Arbuckle L. A review of evidence on 
consent bias in research. Am J Bioethics 2013;13:42–4.
12
 W
illison DJ, Emerson C, Szala-Meneok KV, Gibson E, Schwartz L, 
Weisbaum KM, et al. Access to medical records for research purposes: 
varying perceptions across research ethics boards. J Med Ethics 
2008;34:308–14.
13
 El
 Emam K, Alvarez C. A critical appraisal of the Article 29 Working 
Party Opinion 05/2014 on data anonymization techniques. Int Data 
Privacy Law 2015;5:73–87 .
14
 El
 Emam K, Arbuckle L. Anonymizing health data: case studies and 
methods to get you started. O’Reilly, 2013.
15
 M
alin BA, Emam KE, O’Keefe CM. Biomedical data privacy: problems, 
perspectives, and recent advances. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2013;20:2–6.
16
 W
illenborg L, de Waal T. Statistical disclosure control in practice. 
Springer-Verlag, 1996.
17
 D
uncan G, Elliot M, Salazar G. Statistical confidentiality: principles and 
practice. Springer, 2011.
18
 BORN Ont
ario. https:/ /www.bornontario.ca/.
19
 Ar
ticle 29 Data Protection Working Party. Opinion 05/2014 on 
anonymization techniques (WP216). 2014. http:/ /ec.europa.eu/
justice/data-protection/article-29/documentation/opinion-
recommendation/files/2014/wp216_en.pdf.
20
 El
 Emam K, Jonker E, Arbuckle L, Malin B. A systematic review of 
re-identification attacks on health data. PLoS One 2011;6:e28071.
21
 El
 Emam K, Dankar FK, Neisa A, Jonker E. Evaluating the risk of patient 
re-identification from adverse drug event reports. BMC Med Inform 
Decis Mak 2013;13:114.
22
 Sweeney
 L. Matching known patients to health records in Washington 
State data. Harvard University, Data Privacy Lab, 2013.
23
 R
obertson J. States’ hospital data for sale puts privacy in jeopardy. 
Bloomberg News 2013 Jun 5. www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-
05/states-hospital-data-for-sale-puts-privacy-in-jeopardy.html.
24
 Sand
ercock PA, Niewada M, Członkowska A, the International Stroke 
Trial Collaborative Group. The International Stroke Trial database. 
Trials 2011;12:101.
25
 Dr
yad Digital Repository. http:/ /datadryad.org/.
ANONyM isi N g Cli N i CA l T R i A ls dA TA
Regulators such as the European Medicines Agency are planning to make data from 
clinical trials more generally available.38 39 Initially, the contents of clinical study 
reports will be made available under a two-track process, with broad public access 
through a portal and the ability to download for a narrower set of identified users.
40 
In a second phase, individual patient data will be made available. However, the 
agency cannot collect individual patient data only for the purpose of sharing it and 
needs to formulate policies on how to use the individual patient data for scientific 
review as well. This has resulted in some delays in formulating a policy for sharing 
individual patient data.
In anticipation of individual patient data being made available by regulators, or the 
requirement by them to do so, manufacturers have already started putting in place 
policies and infrastructure for sharing individual patient data.
41 Recent examples 
include:
•	The GlaxoSmithKline trials repository,42 43 which now has multiple pharmaceutical 
companies using it to manage the data request process and share data (www.
clinicalstudydatarequest.com)
•	The Data Sphere project, a consortium of pharmaceutical companies, sharing data 
from the control arm of oncology trials
44 45
•	The Yale University Open Data Access project, which is initially making trial data 
from Medtronic available
46 47
•	The Immport Immunology Database and Analysis Portal48
Furthermore, some pharmaceutical companies are creating their own company-
specific portals to facilitate the sharing of their own datasets, and these are typically 
accessible through their corporate websites.
Given that trial participants are often from multiple sites across the world, 
anonymisation practices for the data must meet the regulatory requirements globally. 
This means that the burden of evidence that the probability of re-identification is 
acceptably small is not trivial because regulators in different jurisdictions do not use 
the same standards. Organisations such as the European Medicines Agency could 
help address such gaps by providing or recommending robust and scalable methods 
that can provide quantitative anonymity assurances while producing high quality data.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 
Resea Rch  Methods & Repo Rting
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
26 Hag gie E. PLOS Genetics partners with Dryad. PLOS Biologue 2013. 
http:/ /blogs.plos.org/biologue/2013/09/18/plos-genetics-partners- 
with-dryad/.
27
 El
 Emam K, Arbuckle L, Koru G, Eze B, Gaudette L, Neri E, et al. 
De-identification methods for open health data: the case of the 
Heritage Health Prize claims dataset. J Med Internet Res 2012;14:e33.
28
 C
ajun Code Fest. 2013. http:/ /cajuncodefest.org/.
29
 Anon
ymisation: managing data protection risk code of practice. 
Information Commissioner’s Office, 2012. https:/ /ico.org.uk/
media/1061/anonymisation-code.pdf.
30
 He
alth System Use Technical Advisory Committee, Data 
De-identification Working Group. ‘Best practice’ guidelines for 
managing the disclosure of de-identified health information. 
Canadian Institute for Health Information, 2010.
31
 US
 Department of Health & Human Services. Guidance regarding 
methods for de-identification of protected health information in 
accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) privacy rule. Department of Health and Human Services, 
2012.
32
 El
 Emam K, Jonker E, Sams S, Neri E, Corporation T, Neisa A, et al. 
Pan-Canadian de-identification guidelines for personal health 
information. Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada, 2007 .
33
 Gk
oulalas-Divanis A, Loukides G, Sun J. Publishing data from 
electronic health records while preserving privacy: a survey of 
algorithms. J Biomed Inform 2014;50:4–19.
34
 Hr
ynaszkiewicz I, Norton ML, Vickers AJ, Altman DG. Preparing raw 
clinical data for publication: guidance for journal editors, authors, and 
peer reviewers. Trials 2010;11:9.
35
 Sho
stak J. De-identification of clinical trials data demystified. SAS 
Users Group, 2006.
36
 Hughe
s S, Wells K, McSorley P , Freeman A. Preparing individual 
patient data from clinical trials for sharing: the GlaxoSmithKline 
approach. Pharmaceut Statist 2014;13:179–83.
37
 Egual
e T, Bartlett G, Tamblyn R. Rare visible disorders/diseases as 
individually identifiable health information. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 
2005:947 .
38
 E
uropean Medicines Agency. Release of data from clinical trials. 2013. 
www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/special_topics/
general/general_content_000555.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac0580607bfa.
39
 Eic
hler H-G, Abadie E, Breckenridge A, Leufkens H, Rasi G. Open 
clinical trial data for all? A view from regulators. PLoS Med 
2012;9:e1001202.
40
 E
uropean Medicines Agency. European Medicines Agency policy on 
publication of data for medicinal products for human use. 2014. www.
ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Other/2014/10/
WC500174796.pdf.
41
 PhRMA
, EFPIA. Principles for responsible clinical trial data sharing. 
2013. www.phrma.org/sites/default/files/pdf/
PhRMAPrinciplesForResponsibleClinicalTrialDataSharing.pdf.
42
 Ni
sen P , Rockhold F. Access to patient-level data from GlaxoSmithKline 
clinical trials. N Engl J Med 2013;369:475–8.
43
 Harri
son C. GlaxoSmithKline opens the door on clinical data sharing. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012;11:891–2.
44
 Hed
e K. Project data sphere to make cancer clinical trial data publicly 
available. J Natl Cancer Inst 2013;105:1159–60.
45
 Bh
attacharjee Y. Pharma firms push for sharing of cancer trial data. 
Science 2012;338:29.
46
 Kru
mholz HM, Ross JS. A model for dissemination and independent 
analysis of industry data. JAMA 2011;306:1593–4.
47
 Y
ale School of Medicine. Center for Outcomes Research & 
Evaluation (CORE): YODA Project. http:/ /medicine.yale.edu/core/
projects/yodap.
48
 ImmP
ort: bioinformatics for the future of immunology. https:/ /
immport.niaid.nih.gov/.
© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2015
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 20 March 2015. 10.1136/bmj.h1139 on BMJ: first published as 