assembling the data for analysis and contributed to writing the
manuscript. HJ participated in the study design and revising the
manuscript. JAK and HJ are guarantors for the paper.
Funding: No specific funding.
Competing interests: The Boston Collaborative Drug
Surveillance Program is supported in part by grants from Astra-
Zeneca, Berlex Laboratories, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma-
ceuticals, Boots Healthcare International, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, GlaxoWellcome,
Hoffmann-La Roche, Janssen Pharmaceutica Products, R W
Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute; McNeil Consumer
Products, and Novartis Farmaceutica. JAK is a John and Virginia
T aplin fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health and is
supported by a training fellowship in cancer epidemiology from
the National Cancer Institute (T32-CA 09001).
1 Wakefield AJ, Murch SH, Anthony A, Linell J, Casson DM, Malik M, et al.
Ileal-lymphoid-nodular hyperplasia, non-specific colitis, and pervasive
developmental disorder in children. Lancet 1998;351:637-41.
2 T aylor B, Miller E, Farrington CP, Petropoulos M-C, Favot-Mayaud I, Li J,
et al. Autism and measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine: no epidemiologi-
cal evidence for a causal association. Lancet 1999;353:2026-9.
3 Wakefield AJ. MMR vaccination and autism. Lancet 1999;354:949-50.
4 Jick H. A database worth saving. Lancet 1997;350:1045-6.
5 Jick H, Withers JM, Dean AD. Haemophilus influenza vaccine [letter]. Br J
Gen Pract 1995;45:107.
6 Wing L. The autistic spectrum. Lancet 1997;350:1761-6.
(Accepted 8 February 2000)
What parents are told after prenatal diagnosis of a
sex chromosome abnormality: interview and
questionnaire study
Lenore Abramsky, Sue Hall, Judith Levitan, Theresa M Marteau
Abstract
Objective T o investigate how the prenatal diagnosis of
a sex chromosome anomaly is first communicated to
parents.
Design Health professionals were interviewed by
telephone and the conversation was taped; parents
were sent questionnaires at 1 month after diagnosis
and those who responded were sent another at
6 months.
Participants 29 health professionals who had recently
informed parents that a sex chromosome anomaly
had been identified in an apparently anatomically
normal, viable fetus. 23 mothers and partners who
had been informed of such a diagnosis.
Main outcome measures Health professionals’
knowledge about sex chromosome anomalies and
parents’ responses to information provided by health
professionals.
Results Analysis of the telephone interviews
identified great variation in what different healthcare
professionals know, think, and say about the same sex
chromosome anomaly. The small numbers and the
low response rate for the questionnaire (39% for
women and 30% for men) meant that statistical
analysis was not appropriate.
Conclusions It is essential for obstetric units to have
an established protocol for giving results and for all
staff who communicate results to parents to have
accurate, up to date information about the condition
identified.
Introduction
Most fetuses and babies with an extra sex chromo-
some are not identified
1
because there are usually no
indications for karyotyping.
2–6
However, a sex chromo-
some anomaly is sometimes detected prenatally when
amniocentesis is performed to exclude Down’s
syndrome or other serious chromosomal anomalies.
Conditions in which there is an extra sex chromosome
are fundamentally different from those such as Down’s
syndrome in which affected individuals have recognis-
able characteristics that can be explained by
laboratory findings. Prenatal detection of sex chromo-
some anomalies and other karyotypes or genotypes
that may have no phenotypic consequences or only
mild ones will become more common as testing
becomes more widely available.
7
Understanding the
difficulties faced by health professionals in disclosing
the prenatal diagnosis of a sex chromosome anomaly
can highlight some of the problems that may be
encountered during the prenatal detection of other
atypical laboratory findings in fetuses with phenotypes
that are likely to fall within the normal range (table 1).
We investigated how the prenatal diagnosis of a sex
chromosome anomaly is first communicated to
parents. We did not test a hypothesis but hoped to gen-
erate discussion about this issue. The first communica-
tion to parents is important because it may affect how
information presented later is interpreted or even
whether it is sought.
8–10
Previous studies have looked at
counselling that occurred once clinical geneticists
Table 1 Fetal karyotypes and characteristics
2-6
Condition Frequency
Characteristics
TreatmentIntelligence quotient Fertility Other considerations
47XXY (Klinefelter’s syndrome) 1 in 800 males About 10-15 points lower than siblings Infertile May have gynaecomastia Testosterone from
puberty
47XYY 1 in 1000 males About 10 points lower than siblings Fertile May have behavioural problems None
47XXX (Triple X) 1 in 1000 females About 20 points lower than siblings Fertile None None
45X (Turner’s syndrome)* 1 in 2500 females Unaffected Infertile Short stature; may have
congenital malformations
Oestrogen from puberty;
growth hormone
*Turner’s syndrome is common at conception but 98% of fetuses will be miscarried.
Papers
Editorial
by Biesecker
North Thames
Perinatal Public
Health Unit,
Department of
Medical and
Community
Genetics, Imperial
College of Science,
T echnology, and
Medicine,
Northwick Park
Site, Harrow
HA1 3UJ
Lenore Abramsky
senior research officer
Judith Levitan
research assistant
Psychology and
Genetics Research
Group, Guy’s, King’s
College, and
St Thomas’s
Hospitals School of
Medicine, London
SE1 9RT
Sue Hall
research associate
Theresa M Marteau
professor
Correspondence to:
L Abramsky
l.abramsky@ic.ac.uk
BMJ 2001;322:463–6
463BMJ VOLUME 322 24 FEBRUARY 2001 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 24 February 2001. 10.1136/bmj.322.7284.463 on BMJ: first published as 
became involved,
11
but as one mother said during
counselling after terminating a pregnancy affected by
Klinefelter’s syndrome: “I didn’t really hear anything
the geneticist said to me because I had already decided
to have a termination.”
Participants and methods
The study was done over 19 months (March 1998 to
September 1999) in the North and South Thames
Health Regions in England with approval from the
local ethics committee and the multicentre regional
ethics committee. Staff from cytogenetics laboratories
in the two health regions notified us by telephone
when they detected sex chromosome aneuploidy in an
apparently anatomically normal, viable fetus. We
telephoned the health professional who had made the
initial disclosure of the diagnosis to the parents and
conducted a brief, semi-structured telephone interview
which was taped.
The interview took place within a few days of the
disclosure and included questions about the manner in
which the disclosure of the diagnosis had been made,
the information that had been given, and the health
professional’s feelings and knowledge about the condi-
tion. If the initial disclosure involved little more than
making an appointment for further discussion, we also
interviewed the health professional who saw the
parents later. The tapes were transcribed and reviewed
by two of the authors (LA and SH). A total of 29 inter-
views about 23 cases were conducted with 16 midwives,
10 obstetricians, 2 genetic counsellors, and 1 general
practitioner. The health professionals interviewed
came from 14 district general hospitals and 3 fetal
medicine units.
Laboratories failed to notify us of a few cases at the
time of diagnosis, and these cases were not included in
the study. Three doctors declined to participate. Cases
in which fetal malformations were identified by
ultrasound examination were not included in the study.
At one month after diagnosis and again at six
months women and their partners were requested by
their obstetric consultant to complete a brief postal
questionnaire that asked for information about their
general wellbeing, their feelings about the way they had
been told of the diagnosis, and the decision that they
had subsequently made about the pregnancy. Nine
women and seven partners returned the first question-
naire; six of these women and four of their partners
returned the second. The small numbers and the low
response rate (39% of women returned the first
questionnaire and 30% of men) meant that statistical
analysis was not appropriate, but the questionnaires
provided interesting and revealing comments.
Results
Most of the 23 women in the study were in their 40s,
and most had undergone prenatal karyotyping
because of their age. Seventeen of the 21 couples
whose fetus had an extra sex chromosome decided to
continue the pregnancy, but in the two cases in which
non-mosaic Turner’s syndrome was diagnosed the
pregnancy was terminated (table 2).
Typically, a woman first learnt of the diagnosis
when she received a telephone call at home from a
midwife whom she had never met or had met only
once. The initial conversation was usually less than 15
minutes long. This was followed within a few days by a
consultation in person at the hospital, usually with an
obstetrician. Nineteen of the 23 women (with or
without their partners) saw a genetic specialist before
making a decision about whether to continue the preg-
nancy. At least two thirds of the couples were given
written information about the condition before they
had any contact with the genetic service.
During the course of our study, one of the
cytogenetic laboratories began faxing an information
leaflet for patients to the health professional to whom
they had reported the results. This allowed health pro-
fessionals to familiarise themselves with the condition
before speaking to parents and to have written
information to offer parents. It was a relatively simple,
inexpensive way to ensure that those who initially gave
the result had access to accurate, up to date
information. Health professionals who received this
information said that they found it extremely helpful.
One health professional said: “I read the infor-
mation from the fax which was very helpful, and I
based my counselling around the very comprehensive
information . . . [I] basically prepared what I was going
to say on the back of that.”
Another said: “The thing that actually helped me
quite a lot was having the sheet from [the cytogenetic
lab] which I knew I could then actually give them . . . [It]
helped me enormously to feel that whilst I’m sure that
there was something I didn’t mention, at least there was
a basis to then go on and consider the options further.”
Our main finding was that there was enormous
variation between different health professionals in
what they knew, thought, and told parents about
specific sex chromosome anomalies. Health profes-
sionals from 7 of the 14 district general hospitals said
that it was a matter of chance that they had been the
one to inform parents of the result.
Klinefelter’s syndrome
Health professionals
Compare how these four health professionals told
parents about a diagnosis of Klinefelter’s syndrome.
One health professional who rated Klinefelter’s
syndrome as being of the same severity as Down’s syn-
drome said that: “It wasn’t Down syndrome but was
another chromosome abnormality.” When asked by
the parents if the baby would be mentally retarded she
told them: “It would be a bit, but I couldn’t tell you how
mentally retarded the child will be.” She reported that
the father said: “As long as it is a chromosome abnor-
mality, we can now decide whether we want to carry on
or not.” The health professional who saw them the next
day said that he “didn’t want to reassure them as from
Table 2 Fetal karyotype and parents’ decisions about pregnancy
Karyotype
No
of cases
Mean (range)
maternal age
(years) at
estimated
delivery date
Decision made about
pregnancy
Continue Terminate
47XXY (Klinefelter’s syndrome) 8 38.8 (23-45) 6 2
47XXY/46XY (Klinefelter’s mosaic) 1 37 1 0
47XYY 3 35.3 (34-37) 2 1
47XYY/45X (mosaic) 1 39 1 0
45X (Turner’s syndrome) 2 35.5 (33-38) 0 2
47XXX (Triple X syndrome) 8 40.0 (39-42) 7 1
Papers
464 BMJ VOLUME 322 24 FEBRUARY 2001 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 24 February 2001. 10.1136/bmj.322.7284.463 on BMJ: first published as 
what [he] could gather, they had made up their minds
they were going to have a termination.” The woman
had a termination the next day without having seen a
clinical geneticist.
A second health professional who had not been
told the actual karyotype informed a couple that:
“Their result had come back and it was abnormal and
they had to go and see [the obstetric consultant] in the
morning.” According to the health professional, the
mother became very tearful and the father became
angry and abusive when his demands for more
information met with no success. He asked the health
professional: “Well what does that mean? Does it mean
it’s got three heads . . . six legs?” The health professional
said: “It was awful . . . I felt quite shaken.”
A third health professional who had to call parents
to inform them that amniocentesis had identified
Klinefelter’s syndrome said: “I said, ‘The news isn’t very
good,’ and he said, ‘I gathered that from the tone of
your voice.’”
A fourth health professional said: “I’d read up all I
could before going in, and I read all the information
from the fax [of the information leaflet from the
genetic centre], which was very helpful. I based my
counselling around the information, on the details they
sent me.”
Parents
Some comments made on the questionnaires by
parents of boys with Klinefelter’s syndrome make
disturbing reading.
A father wrote: “The consultant appeared to know
little about the condition but seemed to expect us to
make a judgment based on the fact that an abnormal
result had occurred. I am glad that we insisted on find-
ing out more about the condition before we were will-
ing to make our decision, otherwise we could have
decided to terminate through ignorance alone
—
instead we now have a lovely son.”
A mother wrote: “In retrospect, I feel rather
shocked that parents in our situation should have so
routinely been offered the option of termination
—
particularly without first being offered appropriate
counselling . . . [I] felt that research papers we were
shown at the hospital were both outdated and one
sided.”
47XYY
Health professionals
Those health professionals who had disclosed a
47XYY result had more up to date knowledge and all
gave similar information to parents.
One reported telling parents: “I don’t want you to
worry about it, because it’s not a major abnormality, but
we do need to discuss it further, so can you come in
today? . . . It’s not something that is particularly likely to
cause major abnormalities and there [isn’t] any need
for major concerns, but there are associations with it in
terms of some behavioural disorders which obviously
will vary very much with individuals.”
Triple X syndrome
Health professionals
Consider the contrast between what these two health
professionals said about 47XXX.
One health professional considered 47XXX to be
“as devastating as Down syndrome” and said “that
there was a possibility of mental retardation, intelli-
gence down, stunted.”
Another health professional who considered
47XXX to be a very mild condition told parents that:
“She would be a perfectly normal baby and she would
go to a school, a normal school, and she would grow up
normally and that she had an extra chromosome . . . [I]
explained to them that the child would look just like
every other child and that she was a normal child and
that her intelligence might not be quite as great as you
would expect for her parents but that she would still
cope in a normal school.”
Parents
Compare the comments of these parents of 47XXX
girls.
A mother wrote: “The result of the amniocentesis
was given over the telephone followed by some
outdated information. I felt distraught when I first
received the result
—however the geneticist assured me
that my baby would be perfectly normal, and she is!
The initial information intimated that she could be
severely retarded. Some people may have terminated
at this stage without expert advice. This horrifies me.”
A father wrote: “The discussions we had following
the amnio result were very helpful in understanding
the condition. We have no regrets whatsoever concern-
ing the pregnancy.” The mother of the same girl said:
“Our daughter is absolutely delightful; words cannot
express how much joy she brings me!”
Discussion
It is disturbing to note the haphazard nature of how
parents were informed of the diagnosis, what
information was given, and what was implied. Some
maternity units in the study reported that they had a
set protocol for giving results whereas in others the
reporting seemed to be done on an ad hoc basis. Many
health professionals said that it was a matter of chance
that they had been the one to inform parents of the
results. What and how parents were told depended to a
large extent on where they had their pregnancy care
Suggestions for improving practice
• All units should have a protocol for giving results; it
should follow professional guidelines on the
screening, diagnosis, and management of fetal
abnormalities
18
• Women undergoing prenatal karyotyping should be
informed of the existence of sex chromosome
anomalies and of other variations from the norm
before undergoing tests
• Up to date information about the clinical
implications of the diagnosis, prepared by clinical
geneticists, should be provided by the cytogenetic
laboratory that makes the diagnosis along with the
results of the test
• All staff who are likely to speak to parents about the
results of diagnostic tests, including midwives who
telephone parents to invite them to meet with a
doctor, should be familiar with the diagnosis and read
the information provided
Papers
465BMJ VOLUME 322 24 FEBRUARY 2001 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 24 February 2001. 10.1136/bmj.322.7284.463 on BMJ: first published as 
and who informed them of the results. Although there
were some examples of excellent counselling, there
were other examples of grossly inadequate or frankly
misleading information being given. We can only
speculate about how this variation might affect parents
as our study was not designed to determine
associations between the quality of counselling and the
outcome of the pregnancy or subsequent emotional
wellbeing of the parents.
12–17
Some units providing pre-
natal testing services are not adhering to the published
guidelines concerning the provision of information
(box).
18
We would like to thank the cytogeneticists from all the laborato-
ries in the North and South Thames Health Regions for notify-
ing us of appropriate cases. We also thank all the doctors,
midwives, and counsellors who agreed to be interviewed; the
parents who answered our questionnaires; Elizabeth Winchester
and Liz Redfern for their assistance; and Christine Garrett and
Sue Holder for their helpful comments. We also thank Hazel
Showell for transcribing the tapes. This study was conducted as
part of the European Union concerted action from Biomed 2
programme.
Contributors: LA formulated the original idea for the study
and took a primary role in designing and executing it, interpret-
ing the results, writing the paper, and will act as guarantor. SH
helped design the study, interpret the results, and write the
paper. JL helped design the study and interpret the results.
TMM helped design the study, interpret the results, and write
the paper.
Funding: TMM is funded by the Wellcome Trust. LA
received an NHS Executive research and development grant.
Competing interests: None declared.
1 Abramsky L, Chapple J. 47XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and 47XYY: esti-
mated rates and indication for postnatal diagnosis with implications for
prenatal counselling. Prenat Diagn 1997;17:363-8.
2 Pennington BF, Bender B, Puck M, Salbenblatt J, Robinson A. Learning
disabilities in children with sex chromosome anomalies. Child Dev
1982;53:1182-92.
3 Ratcliffe SG, Butler GE, Jones M. Edinburgh study of growth and
development of children with sex chromosome abnormalities. In:
Ratcliffe SG, Paul N, eds. Sex chromosome aneuploidy: prospective studies on
children. New Y ork: Alan R Liss, 1991:1-44. ( Birth defects: original article
series.)
4 Robinson A, Bender B, Linden M. Prognosis of prenatally diagnosed
children with sex chromosome aneuploidy. Am J Med Genet
1992;44:365-8.
5 Garrett C, Carlton L. Difficult decisions in prenatal diagnosis. In: Abram-
sky L, Chapple J, eds . Prenatal diagnosis: the human side. London:
Chapman and Hall, 1994:86-105.
6 Gotz MJ, Johnstone EC, Ratcliffe SG. Criminality and antisocial
behaviour in unselected men with sex chromosome abnormalities.
Psychol Med 1999;29:953-62.
7 Bentley DR. The human genome project
—an overview. Med Res Rev
2000;20:189-96.
8 Tversky A, Kahneman D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science 1981;211:453-8.
9 Marteau T . Framing of information: its influence upon decisions of doc-
tors and patients. Br J Soc Psychol 1989;28:89-94.
10 Anderson G. Nondirectiveness in prenatal genetics: patients read
between the lines. Nurs Ethics 1999;6:126-36.
11 Clayton-Smith J, Andrews T, Donnai D. Genetic counselling and parental
decisions following antenatal diagnosis of sex chromosome aneuploidies.
J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;10:5-7.
12 Puck MH. Some considerations bearing on the doctrine of self-fulfilling
prophecy in sex chromosome aneuploidy.Am J Med Genet 1981;9:129-37.
13 Reif M, Baitsch H. Psychological issues in genetic counselling. Hum Genet
1985;70:193-9.
14 Robinson A, Bender BG, Linden MG. Decisions following the intrauter-
ine diagnosis of sex chromosome aneuploidy. Am J Med Genet
1989;34:552-4.
15 Edwards-Beckett J. Child development: what do parents expect? Child
Care Health Dev 1992;18:355-63.
16 Meschede D, Louwen F, Nippert I, Holzgreve W, Miny P, Horst J. Low
rates of pregnancy termination for prenatally diagnosed sex chromo-
some polysomies. Am J Med Genet 1998;480:330-4.
17 Christian SM, Koehn D, Pillay R, MacDougall A, Wilson RD. Parental
decisions following prenatal diagnosis of sex chromosome aneuploidy: a
trend over time. Prenat Diagn 2000;20:37-40.
18 Joint Working Party of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health.
Fetal abnormalities—guidelines for screening, diagnosis and management: report
of a joint working party of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. London: RCOG, 1997.
(Accepted 9 November 2000)
Mortality of third generation Irish people living in
England and W ales: longitudinal study
S Harding, R Balarajan
We previously reported high mortality and high
incidence of cancer in second generation Irish people
(children of Irish migrants) living in England and
Wales.
12
In this study we examine the mortality of third
generation Irish people (grandchildren of Irish
migrants) living in England and Wales.
Method and results
The longitudinal study by the Office for National
Statistics is a record linkage study of a 1% representa-
tive sample of the population of England and Wales.
The sample was first extracted from the 1971 census
and is updated with new births and immigrants. Infor-
mation from censuses and registrations of vital events
is linked to the records of study members.
3
First generation Irish classified by country of
birth covered those people born in Northern Ireland
and the Irish Republic. For second and third
generations, only those people with parents and
grandparents born in the Republic of Ireland could be
identified because parents born in Northern Ireland
What is already known on this topic
Sex chromosome anomalies as a group are as common as Down’s
syndrome, but most affected individuals are never identified
Affected fetuses are sometimes identified when women have prenatal
karyotyping for Down’s syndrome
The diagnosis is almost always first disclosed to parents by staff from
the obstetric unit, because there has not previously been an indication
for a clinical genetics referral
What this study adds
Some obstetric units have no established protocol for communicating
results to parents
Some health professionals working in an obstetric setting know little
about the effect of sex chromosome anomalies
Some parents are given misleading information when they are first
informed that their fetus has a sex chromosome anomaly
Papers
Centre for Public
Health Monitoring,
London School of
Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine,
London
WC1E 7HT
S Harding
senior epidemiologist
R Balarajan
professor
continued over
BMJ 2001;322:466–7
466 BMJ VOLUME 322 24 FEBRUARY 2001 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 24 February 2001. 10.1136/bmj.322.7284.463 on BMJ: first published as 