Papers
Effectiveness of targeted falls prevention programme in subacute
hospital setting: randomised controlled trial
T erry P Haines, Kim L Bennell, Richard H Osborne, Keith D Hill
Abstract
Objective T o assess the effectiveness of a targeted, multiple
intervention falls prevention programme in reducing falls and
injuries related to falls in a subacute hospital.
Design Randomised controlled trial of a targeted multiple
intervention programme implemented in addition to usual care
compared with usual care alone.
Setting Three subacute wards in a metropolitan hospital
specialising in rehabilitation and care of elderly patients.
Participants 626 men and women aged 38 to 99 years (average
80 years) were recruited from consecutive admissions to
subacute hospital wards.
Intervention Falls risk alert card with information brochure,
exercise programme, education programme, and hip
protectors.
Main outcome measures Incidence rate of falls, injuries related
to falls, and proportion of participants who experienced one or
more falls during their stay in hospital.
Results Participants in the intervention group (n = 310)
experienced 30% fewer falls than participants in the control
group (n = 316). This difference was significant (Peto log rank
test P = 0.045) and was most obvious after 45 days of
observation. In the intervention group there was a trend for a
reduction in the proportion of participants who experienced
falls (relative risk 0.78, 95% confidence interval 0.56 to 1.06)
and 28% fewer falls resulted in injury (log rank test P = 0.20).
Conclusions A targeted multiple intervention falls prevention
programme reduces the incidence of falls in the subacute
hospital setting.
Introduction
Falls are a common occurrence among elderly inpatients in sub-
acute hospitals and are generally reported to affect between 13%
and 32% of admitted patients.
12
In stroke rehabilitation units,
falls have been reported in up to 47% of patients.
3
Patients who
fall incur physical injuries (up to 70% of falls result in injuries,
1-10% result in fractures),
45
psychological effects,
6
and have
longer lengths of hospital stay.
5
Inpatient falls therefore result in
substantial morbidity and additional healthcare costs and are a
viable target for interventions.
Interventions to reduce in hospital falls have received little
attention. Only three randomised controlled trials have been
published.
7–9
T wo investigated single interventions (bed alarms
9
and alert bracelets
8
) in conjunction with usual care compared
with usual care alone. The third investigated two interventions
(additional exercise and type of flooring) in a two by two design
in conjunction with usual care.
7
None of these studies showed a
significant reduction in fall rates, though all the studies were
relatively small (between 54 and 134 participants). Previous stud-
ies based in hospitals with historical controls and randomised
controlled trials in community settings have reduced fall rates by
using targeted multiple intervention strategies.
10 11
W e evaluated
the effectiveness of a targeted multiple intervention falls preven-
tion programme in reducing the rate of falls, the proportion of
patients who fall, and the rate of injuries related to falls in a
subacute hospital.
Methods
Recruitment and randomisation
All patients who were consecutively admitted to the Peter James
Centre from March to December 2002 were eligible for
inclusion. W e approached family members or carers of patients
for consent if the patient had communication difficulties or
cognitive impairment (abbreviated mental test score on
admission < 7). There were no specific entry criteria other than
referral from an acute hospital, accepted by a geriatrician.
Patients ranged from 38 to 99 years, though most were over 70
years (average 80).
Members of the research team (physiotherapists or
occupational therapists) approached patients as soon as practical
after admission. W e randomly allocated participants by using a
random number table
12
held at the centre by one investigator
(TPH) who revealed allocation on receipt of written consent.
Setting
The Peter James Centre is a metropolitan hospital for rehabilita-
tion and the care of elderly patients with three subacute wards
(98 beds). There were no specific entry criteria other than refer-
ral from a geriatrician, most commonly from an acute hospital.
Usual care entailed weekly medical assessments, one hour
sessions of physiotherapy and occupational therapy each
weekday, 24 hour nursing assistance, and other allied health
services when required.
Intervention
Participants in the intervention group received a targeted falls
prevention programme in addition to usual care. This
programme consisted of a falls risk alert card with information
brochure, an exercise programme, an education programme,
and hip protectors (table 1). Hospital staff used their clinical
judgment to determine the need and appropriateness of each of
the interventions, after administration of the Peter James Centre
falls risk assessment tool (PJC-FRAT , fig 1). This tool has an
“admission sheet” for completion by nursing, physiotherapy,
occupational therapy, and medical staff to guide them in recom-
page 1 of 6BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 
mending various combinations of the interventions (between
none and all). The assessment tool also has an “amendment
sheet,” which staff could use to review their initial assessments on
an “as required” basis.
The assessment tool was kept with the admission medical
record of all patients, and hospital staff were asked to complete
their section on the “admission sheet” as soon as possible after
admission. Hospital staff were then asked to telephone research
staff if they had recommended an intervention. Interventions
were initiated within three days on receipt of recommendation,
informed consent, and randomisation of the participant to the
intervention group.
The PJC-FRAT was developed and refined in a prospective
cohort of 122 consecutive admissions in which only usual care
was provided. In this setting, the accuracy of the assessment tool
for predicting fallers was acceptable. For example, figures for
sensitivity and specificity for nursing staff were 73% and 75%,
respectively. These results, along with those for allied health and
medical staff, were comparable with results from other screening
instruments for risk of falls in this setting.
13
Participants in the control group received usual care and did
not receive any of the interventions from the falls prevention
programme. Though hospital staff completed the assessment
tool for these participants and generated recommendations for
Table 1 Four interventions and referring disciplines of targeted falls prevention programme
Intervention Description Referring discipline
Falls risk alert card Falls risk alert symbol on A4 size card placed above participant bed head. Information
brochure targeted at family members/carers to discuss with participant nature of hospital
falls and ways of preventing them
Nursing staff
Exercise programme* Three 45 minute sessions per week conducted by research physiotherapists in location
away from view of hospital physiotherapists. Exercises incorporated therapeutic principles
of t’ai chi
22 combined with functional activities such as transferring from chair to chair,
stepping, reaching, and weight shifting. Exercises tailored to meet individual abilities of
participants
Physiotherapy staff
Education programme† Twice weekly individual sessions of up to 30 minutes conducted by research
occupational therapist at participants’ bedside away from view of hospital occupational
therapists. Education manual that covered nature of hospital falls and how participants
can prevent them guided but did not limit content of these sessions. Programme
curriculum was covered over four sessions, though participants were allowed to receive
repetitions of education sessions as deemed appropriate
Occupational therapy staff
Hip protectors Safehip‡ (force deflection—firm shield) hip protectors aimed at reducing incidence of
fractures of neck of femur. Hospital staff could decide part way into a participant’s stay
that hip protector was no longer required
Medical, nursing, physiotherapy, and occupational therapy staff
*Further description of these exercises can be found at www.nari.unimelb.edu.au/downloads/Exercise%20manual%20for%20RCT.pdf.
†Though group education sessions were initially planned to be incorporated into this programme, there were rarely enough participants at the same stage in the education process to make this
viable.
‡Produced by Abena-Sanicare, Sydney, Australia.
PETER JAMES CENTRE
FALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL
(Admission)
Medical
Nursing
Physiotherapy
Occupational Therapy
All Disciplines
Does the patient suffer from frequent falls with no
diagnosed cause?
Is the patient suffering an established medical
condition that is currently unable to be adequately
managed, that may cause a fall during their inpatient
stay (e.g. drop attacks due to vertebro-basilar artery
insufficiency)?
If ticked, refer to Project Officer
for hip protector
If ticked, refer to Project Officer
for hip protector
Is the patient taking any medications/medication
amounts/medication combinations that you anticipate
may directly contribute to a fall (e.g. sedatives)?
Would this patient benefit from a Falls Risk Alert Card
and a Falls Prevention Information Brochure in order to
prevent falls at PJC?
Gait F.I.M. (Gait aid + distance)
Bathing F.I.M.
Dressing F.I.M.
Would this patient benefit from attending a Falls
Prevention Education Program in order to prevent falls
at PJC?
Has this patient demonstrated non-compliance or do
you strongly anticipate non-compliance with the above
prescribed level of aids / assistance / supervision such
that the patient becomes unsafe?
The Modified Functional Independence Measure (F.I.M)
(7)
(6)
(5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
(1)
Independent with nil aids
Independent with aids
Supervision / prompting
Minimal assistance required (patient performs greater than 75% of the task)
Moderate assistance required (patient performs between 50% and 75% of the task)
Maximal assistance required (patient performs between 25% and 50% of the task)
Fully dependent (patient performs less than 25% of the task)
Forms\Falls Risk AxTool2 (rg) 28/06/01
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
Transfer (bed < - > chair) F.I.M.
Would this patient benefit from attending a Balance
Exercise Class in order to prevent falls at PJC?
Toileting (day) F.I.M.
Tick, cross or number as appropriate:
Toileting (night) F.I.M.
(A Member of EASTERN HEALTH)
(AFFIX PATIENT LABEL)
UR No: .................................................................................................
Surname: .................................................................................................
Signature: .............................................................. Date: ..............................
Signature: .............................................................. Date: ..............................
Signature: .............................................................. Date: ..............................
Given Names: .................................................................................................
If ticked, refer to Project Officer
for Balance Exercise Class
(                             /                              )
If ticked, refer to Project Officer for
a Falls Risk Alert Card and a Falls
Prevention Information Brochure
Signature: .............................................................. Date: ..............................
Signature: .............................................................. Date: ..............................
If ticked, refer to Project Officer for
Falls Prevention Information Brochure
FALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOLFALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL
PETER JAMES CENTRE
FALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL
AMENDMENT SHEET
(A Member of EASTERN HEALTH)
This amendment section of the Falls Risk Assessment Tool is to be used when a patient's condition
changes such that the employment of interventions is now indicated or now no longer indicated. For
example, if a patient's confusion due to a UTI that caused them to be non-compliant is now resolved,
they may no longer require a hip protector
Has this patient's condition changed such that the
patient:
•  Does now require a hip protector:
•  Does no longer require a hip protector:
•  Would now benefit from balance exercise class:
•  Would now benefit from falls prevention education
    class
•  Would now benefit from a falls risk alert card and
    information brochure:
Date:..............................................................................
(AFFIX PATIENT LABEL)
UR No: ............................................................................................................
Surname: ........................................................................................................
Given Names: .................................................................................................
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
FALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL AMENDMENT SHEETFALLS RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL AMENDMENT SHEET
Signature:................................................................
Has this patient's condition changed such that the
patient:
•  Does now require a hip protector:
•  Does no longer require a hip protector:
•  Would now benefit from balance exercise class:
•  Would now benefit from falls prevention education
    class
•  Would now benefit from a falls risk alert card and
    information brochure:
Date:..............................................................................
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Alert Project Officer of change
Signature:................................................................
Fig 1 The Peter James Centre falls risk assessment tool (PJC-FRAT)
Papers
page 2 of 6 BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 
intervention in the same manner as for participants in the inter-
vention group, these interventions were not instituted (fig 2).
Measurement of falls and related injuries
Hospital staff generated a standardised incident report for all
participants who fell during the study. Participants were
promptly examined by hospital medical staff, who recorded any
related injuries. W e defined a fall as “any event when the partici-
pant unexpectedly came to rest on the ground, floor or another
lower level.”
14
This definition was provided in writing to all hospi-
tal staff and discussed in preparation meetings before the study
started. Participants were followed up until discharge from
hospital or death.
Data collection
Hospital staff recorded baseline and outcome measures in medi-
cal histories by following standardised procedures. One
investigator (TPH) collated these data after the participant was
discharged.
Baseline measures included age, sex, living arrangements
before admission to hospital, admission diagnostic category,
15
medical history (stroke, Parkinson’s disease, cancer, congestive
heart failure, osteoporosis, or a fracture related to a fall),
cognitive impairment (mini-mental state examination
16
on
admission), and functional dependency (modified Barthel index
on admission).
15
W e also recorded the level of compliance of
hospital staff in completing the PJC-FRAT .
Blinding
The nature of the interventions prevented complete blinding of
hospital staff and participants. In most cases, hospital staff who
completed the PJC-FRAT “admission” sheet did not know to
which group the patient had been allocated. The exception to
this was in cases where the staff member was aware that a falls
prevention programme intervention had been implemented
based on another staff member’s recommendations. Unblinding
may have introduced several sources of bias, including altered
practice in recording the incidence of falls or inconsistent provi-
sion of usual care. T o gauge the level to which these biases may
have been introduced, we conducted a survey of hospital staff
(nursing, physiotherapy, and occupational therapy) eight months
into the study period. Staff were asked to predict the group
allocation of each participant they were caring for on that day.
Statistical analysis
W e analysed primary outcomes on an intention to treat basis. W e
regarded data as recurrent events survival data, allowing all falls
and variable participant study observation periods to be
accounted for in the analysis. W e compared the cumulative
incidence of falls over time graphically using the Nelson-Aalen
cumulative hazard estimator (a “step” function).
17
Each partici-
pant’s observation time started at time = 0 (the x axis) regardless
of when they were admitted to the hospital. The height of each
“step” was determined by the number of falls within the group on
one day (for example, day 10 since entering the study) divided by
the number of participants in the group who had not yet been
discharged (censored). W e tested the equivalence of fall rates
between groups using the log rank test.
18
This test requires fall
rates between groups to maintain a proportional relation over
time. Some evidence suggests this may not have been the case
(Schoenfeld residuals test
19
P = 0.015). Thus we also used the Peto
extension of the log rank test as it adjusts for this
non-proportionality.
20
W e compared the incidence of falls with injuries between
groups using the log rank test.
20
The proportion of participants
who experienced one or more falls was compared between
groups using relative risk with 95% confidence intervals.
21
The agreement between participant group allocation and
hospital staff prediction of group allocation was analysed with
the /afii9837statistic.
12
All analyses were conducted with Stata 8.0
software (StataCorp, College Station, TX).
Sample size
W e calculated the sample size for this study by assuming that
there would be 33% fewer fallers in the intervention group com-
pared with the control group. From hospital administrative data
we projected that 30% of participants in the control group would
fall. From these figures we then calculated that we would need
626 participants for a power of 0.80, two tailed /afii9825= 0.05.
12
Results
Baseline characteristics
W e approached 1040 patients, of whom 626 (60%) consented to
participate. Figure 2 shows recruitment of participants and
recommendations of the falls prevention programme interven-
tion. No participants withdrew from the trial during the study
period, and there were no adverse events attributable to the
intervention. Baseline characteristics of participants in each
group were similar (table 2).
Analysis of falls, fallers, and injuries related to falls
Compared with the control group, the intervention group had
30% fewer falls (149 v 105) and a lower proportion of
participants who experienced one or more falls (71 v 54), relative
risk 0.78 (95% confidence interval 0.56 to 1.06). Thirty five par-
ticipants in the intervention group fell once compared with 49 in
the control group. Both groups had 10 participants who fell
twice and three who fell three times, but the intervention group
Admissions during recruitment period (n=1040)
Randomisation
Baseline and outcome measures collated from medical history by
investigator after discharge of participant from subacute hospital
Intervention group
 Participants (n=310)
 Participant days (n=9356)
Control group
 Participants (n=316)
 Participant days (n=9239)
Recommendations
 Falls risk alert card:
  Participants (n=151, 5065 days)
 Exercise programme:
  Participants (n=94, 2625 days)
  Attendances by participants
   (n=595)
 Education programme:  
  Participants (n=114, 3161 days)
  Attendances by participants
   (n=473)
 Hip protectors:  
  Participants (n=89, 2692 days)
  57% wore hip protectors ≥12
   hours/day
  25% refused to wear at all
Excluded (n=414):
 Previously enrolled in study (n=47)
 Did not provide informed consent (n=367)Recommendations (not instituted)
 Falls risk alert card:
  Participants (n=135, 4359 days)
 Exercise programme:
  Participants (n=80, 2215 days)
 Education programme:  
  Participants (n=111, 3007 days)
 Hip protectors:  
  Participants (n=84, 2396 days)
Fig 2 Recruitment, numbers allocated to control or intervention groups, and
distribution of intervention subgroups
Papers
page 3 of 6BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 
had only six participants who fell four or more times compared
with nine in the control group.
The Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard estimate for both
groups was similar until about day 45, when the fall rate in the
control group marginally increased and the rate in the interven-
tion group suddenly reduced (fig 3). Both the log rank test
(P = 0.004) and Peto extension (P = 0.045) showed significantly
fewer falls in the intervention group.
T able 3 shows the definitions and distributions of injuries
related to falls between the two groups. The incidence of falls
with injury was 28% lower in the intervention group (23 v 32, log
rank test, P = 0.20). T wo participants from each group incurred a
fracture related to a fall. One participant fractured the neck of
the femur while wearing hip protectors.
Hospital staff survey of participant group allocation
Hospital staff correctly identified the group allocation of 90 out
of 172 participants they were caring for ( /afii9837= 3% chance
corrected agreement).
Discussion
This is the first large randomised trial to show that the incidence
of falls in elderly patients in hospital can be significantly reduced.
The targeted multiple intervention programme we used led to a
30% reduction. A reduction of this magnitude is important not
only for individual patients and their families but also for hospi-
tal management in dealing with the associated costs and
additional care needed because of falls.
4–6
Falls prevention
programmes in subacute hospitals have been based on the little
evidence available from the hospital setting or by transferring
results from other settings. This study provides valuable evidence
for healthcare administrators and practitioners to reduce falls in
Table 2 Characteristics of participant and completion rates of the PJC-FRAT by hospital staff. Figures are numbers (percentages) unless stated otherwise
Baseline Control Intervention
Mean (SD) days from admission until consent 2 (2) 2 (3)
Mean (SD) age (years) 80 (9) 80 (9)
Men 105 (33) 101 (33)
Modified Barthel index on admission (/100)* 48 (18) 47 (18)
Admission mini-mental state examination (30)*† 23 (6) 23 (6)
Diagnosis on primary admission:
Stroke 40 (13) 32 (10)
Neurological 12 (4) 13 (4)
Elective joint replacement 44 (14) 33 (11)
Orthopaedic 95 (30) 104 (34)
Other disabling impairment 33 (10) 34 (11)
Other geriatric management 53 (17) 57 (18)
Medical history:
Stroke 70 (22) 65 (21)
Parkinson’s disease 18 (6) 18 (6)
Neoplasm 49 (16) 45 (15)
Congestive cardiac failure 40 (13) 49 (16)
Osteoporosis 36 (11) 43 (14)
Fall related fracture 55 (17) 68 (22)
Previous living:
Home alone 120 (38) 118 (38)
Home with family 143 (45) 144 (46)
Low level residential care facility 52 (16) 47 (15)
Other 1 (0.3) 1 (0.3)
Mean (SD) length of stay after consent (days) 29 (22) 30 (22)
Mean (SD) No of attendances at hospital physiotherapy sessions 22 (17) 23 (20)
Mean (SD) days from admission to completion of discipline specific PJC-FRAT section:
Medical 3 (5) 4 (5)
Nursing 1 (7) 1 (2)
Occupational therapy 4 (3) 4 (4)
Physiotherapy 1 (2) 1 (2)
Number of discipline specific PJC-FRAT sections not completed:
Medical 138 (43) 112 (36)
Nursing 32 (10) 27 (9)
Occupational therapy 40 (13) 44 (14)
Physiotherapy 14 (4) 6 (2)
*Higher score better.
†25 missing values (13 control, 12 intervention) imputed by using best subset regression.
Days
Falls
0 50 100 150 200
0
2
3
4
1
Intervention
Control
Fig 3 Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard estimates of the control and intervention
groups
Papers
page 4 of 6 BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 
subacute hospitals, where falls are a common and dangerous
occurrence.
In contrast to earlier studies,
7–9
we have shown that this pro-
gramme had a significant effect in reducing falls, which may be
because of the targeted multiple intervention strategy, where
each intervention intentionally addressed one or more of various
risk factors for falls. There may also have been some unintended
benefits, such as increased surveillance while participants were
taking part in the exercise or education programmes. T argeting
of interventions also meant that falls prevention strategies could
be tailored to individual participants. The observed relative
benefit of the intervention programme became pronounced
after 45 days in hospital (fig 3), indicating that the programme
may have had a cumulative effect over time and be of greatest
benefit to those who have more complex presentations that
necessitate greater lengths of stay in hospital.
Compared with the control group, 22% fewer participants in
the intervention group fell and there were 28% fewer falls with
injuries. The proportion of participants who were fallers in the
control group (22.5%, 71 fallers of 316 participants in group)
was less than the projected proportion used for the power
analysis (30%). Our study was insufficiently powered to detect a
difference in hip fractures (focus of the hip protector
intervention) because they do not occur often (fractures have
been reported to occur in less than 10% of hospital falls).
5
W e focused on falls, fallers, and injury related to falls as sepa-
rate end points. Examining falls is important as each individual
fall potentially leads to negative outcomes (physical and psycho-
logical) for participants and places additional demands on
hospital resources. Thus measuring a reduction in both falls and
falls with physical injury indicates improved safety for
participants and less drain on hospital resources due to falls. In
examining fallers, participants are the unit of analysis rather than
events (falls). A reduction in fallers indicates improved delivery
of health care through a greater proportion of patients being
treated without incurring falls and their potential consequences.
Limitations and problems
The inability to completely blind all staff and participants is a
difficulty commonly encountered by researchers in the hospital
setting. This may have influenced the recording of the incidence
of falls or altered elements of usual care such as provision of
regular physiotherapy. By randomising individual participants,
variances between hospital wards in these recording behaviours
should not have influenced the results. The staff blinding survey
also indicated that hospital staff were relatively unaware of the
allocation of participants. Lastly, attendances at the usual care
physiotherapy sessions (table 2) were similar between groups,
suggesting that the provision of usual care was unaffected.
Some ethical dilemmas were present in this study. Firstly, we
approached family members or carers of participants with
cognitive impairment to provide consent. Although this
challenges autonomy, it is important to be able to recruit partici-
pants with cognitive impairment into research that may benefit
this population. Participants were not forced to participate in any
intervention and were free to withdraw from the study at any
stage, thus preserving a large degree of participant autonomy.
Secondly, though the falls risk alert card may violate participant
privacy and cause distress to participants and their families, we
used a falls alert symbol identifiable by hospital staff rather than
a sign with words to minimise this risk. During the study no offi-
cial complaints or requests to remove falls risk alert cards were
received.
Applying results
The intervention programme could potentially be incorporated
into the usual care of acute, other subacute, and residential
facilities for elderly people. The principle underlying the
PJC-FRAT
—that hospital staff recommend falls prevention inter-
ventions based on their clinical judgment —can also be incorpo-
rated into these settings. Modifications to the exercise
programme in the acute setting may be required to cater for par-
ticipants with drips, drains, or other attachments. The description
of the nature of falls provided in the written educational material
could be modified and based on data on falls from local facilities.
Our results may be generalisable to other subacute settings.
Although we recruited only 60% of eligible patients, their
characteristics were consistent with those of the consecutive
sample of 122 patients used in the validation of the PJC-FRAT ,
which suggests our sample was reasonably representative. Many
participants in this study had diagnoses of dementia or stroke
and were recommended for the falls prevention interventions,
indicating that the programme could be implemented on wards
that deal specifically with patients with these diagnoses. However,
generalising the findings to acute hospitals may be problematic
as the reduction in falls rates occurred after 45 days, a period
after which few acute patients would still be in hospital.
In this study, usual care at the centre was compared with
usual care plus the targeted falls prevention programme.
Subsequently, we could not investigate many falls prevention
interventions, such as review of sedative medication prescription,
using this approach as such interventions were already incorpo-
rated into usual care. These interventions, along with evaluation
of the relative effectiveness of individual interventions from this
programme and the cost effectiveness of targeted multiple inter-
vention strategies, are worthy of further investigation.
W e thank the participants; Lyn W atson, for statistical consultation on
survival analysis, and the staff of the Peter James Centre; Ileanne Au and
Thuan Nguyen, research physiotherapists; Paula Anastasaglou, Lesley
Allard, and Kathleen Ballard, research occupational therapists; Amanda
Stoneham, research assistant; and the Peter James Centre falls prevention
project steering committee.
Contributors: All authors contributed to statistical analysis, and data
interpretation and wrote the paper. TPH directed the project, designed the
falls risk alert card, falls prevention information brochure, and the
education and exercise programmes, and performed duties of research
physiotherapists and occupational therapists if necessary. TPH, KLB, and
KDH contributed to the protocol design. TPH is guarantor.
Funding: Victorian Department of Human Services, Aged Care Division.
Table 3 Classification and distribution of falls that led to injury (fall rated by worst injury sustained)
Classification and description Control Intervention
Severe (fracture) 2* 2†
Moderate (laceration that required suturing, head injury requiring neurological observations to be taken, damage to
dentures, soft tissue injury requiring radiological investigations but no fracture)
18 12
Minor (laceration that did not require suturing) 12 9
Nil (no injuries were recorded) 117 82
*One neck of femur and one shaft of femur fracture.
†Two neck of femur fractures.
Papers
page 5 of 6BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 
Competing interests: None declared.
Ethical approval: Human Research Ethics Committee of the Peter James
Centre.
1 Mion L, Gregor S, Buettner M, Chwirchak D, Lee O, Paras W . Falls in the rehabilitation
setting: incidence and characteristics. Rehabil Nurs 1989;14:17-22.
2 Vlahov D, Myers A, Al-Ibrahim M. Epidemiology of falls among patients in a rehabili-
tation hospital. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1990;71:8-12.
3 Rapport LJ, W ebster JS, Flemming KL, Lindberg JW , Godlewski MC, Brees JE, et al.
Predictors of falls among right-hemisphere stroke patients in the rehabilitation setting.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1993;74:621-6.
4 Brandis S. A collaborative occupational therapy and nursing approach to falls preven-
tion in hospital inpatients. J Qual Clin Pract 1999;19:215-20.
5 Grenier-Sennelier C, Lombard I, Jeny-Loeper C, Maillet-Gouret M, Minvielle E.
Designing adverse event prevention programs using quality management methods: the
case of falls in hospital. Int J Qual Health Care 2002;14:419-26.
6 Liddle J, Gilleard C. The emotional consequences of falls for older people and their
families. Clin Rehabil 1995;9:110-4.
7 Donald I, Shuttleworth H. Preventing falls on an elderly care rehabilitation ward. Clin
Rehabil 2000;14:178-85.
8 Mayo N, Gloutney L, Levy R. A randomised trial of identification bracelets to prevent
falls among patients in a rehabilitation hospital. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1994;75:1302-8.
9 Tideiksaar R, Feiner C, Maby J. Falls prevention: The efficacy of a bed alarm system in
an acute care setting. Mount Sinai J Med 1993;60:522-7.
10 Oliver D, Hopper A, Seed P . Do hospital fall prevention programs work? A systematic
review .J Am Geriatr Soc 2000;48:1679-89.
11 Gillespie L, Gillespie W , Robertson M, Lamb S, Cumming R , Rowe B. Interventions for
preventing falls in elderly people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(4):CD000340.
12 Fleiss J. Statistical methods for rates and proportions . 2nd ed. New Y ork: John Wiley, 1981.
13 Perell K, Nelson A, Goldman R, Luther S, Prieto-Lewis N, Rubenstein L. Fall risk
assessment measures: an analytic review . J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56:M761-6.
14 W olf S, Barnhart H, Kutner N, McNeely E, Coogler C, Xu T , et al. Reducing frailty and
falls in older persons: an investigation of tai chi and computerized balance training.
J Am Geriatr Soc 1996;44:489-97.
15 Victorian Department of Human Services. Victorian admitted episode dataset. Melbourne:
Victorian Department of Human Services
—Australia, 2002.
16 Folstein M, Folstein S, McHugh P . Mini-mental state: A practical method for grading the
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975;12:189-98.
17 Nelson W . Theory and applications of hazard plotting for censored failure data.
T echnometrics1972;14:945-65.
18 Pepe M, Cai J. Some graphical displays and marginal regression analyses for recurrent
failure times and time dependent covariates. J Am Stat Assoc 1993;88:811-20.
19 Grambsch P , Therneau T . Proportional hazards tests and diagnostics based on
weighted residuals. Biometrika 1994;81:515-26.
20 Peto R, Peto J. Asymptotically efficient rank invariant test procedures (with discussion).
J R Stat Soc A 1972;135:185-206.
21 Altman D. Practical statistics for medical research . 1st ed. Melbourne: Chapman and Hall,
1993.
22 W olf S, Kutner N, Green R, McNeely E. The Atlanta FICSIT study: T wo exercise inter-
ventions to reduce frailty in elders. J Am Geriatr Soc 1993;41:329-32.
(Accepted 15 January 2004)
bmj.com 2004;328:676
University of Melbourne School of Physiotherapy, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia
T erry P Haines PhD candidate
Kim L Bennell associate professor
Centre for Rheumatic Disease, Royal Melbourne Hospital and the University of
Melbourne, Parkville
Richard H Osborne senior lecturer
National Ageing Research Institute and Melbourne Extended Care and
Rehabilitation Service, Parkville
Keith D Hill senior research fellow
Correspondence to: K Hill
k.hill@nari.unimelb.edu.au
What is already known on this topic
Although several randomised controlled trials in
community settings support the use of targeted multiple
intervention programmes in reducing falls, there is little
evidence of their effectiveness in hospitals
The three published trials that investigated falls prevention
interventions in the hospital setting were underpowered
and did not show a significant reduction in falls
What this study adds
A targeted multiple intervention falls prevention
programme in addition to usual care compared with usual
care alone reduced the incidence rate of falls by 30% in a
subacute hospital setting
There was also a trend towards a reduction in the
proportion of participants who were “fallers” and the
incidence rate of fall related injuries
A targeted programme in addition to usual care leads to
safer stays in hospitals for patients
Papers
page 6 of 6 BMJ VOLUME 328 20 MARCH 2004 bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 18 March 2004. 10.1136/bmj.328.7441.676 on BMJ: first published as 