General practice
Evaluation of total purchasing pilots in England and
Scotland and implications for primary care groups in
England: personal interviews and analysis of routine data
Nicholas Goodwin, Nicholas Mays, Hugh McLeod, Gill Malbon, James Raftery on behalf of the T otal
Purchasing National Evaluation T eam
Abstract
Objectives: T o evaluate the reported achievements of
the 52 first wave total purchasing pilot schemes in
1996-7 and the factors associated with these; and to
consider the implications of these findings for the
development of the proposed primary care groups.
Design: Face to face interviews with lead general
practitioners, project managers, and health authority
representatives responsible for each pilot; and analysis
of hospital episode statistics.
Setting: England and Scotland for evaluation of
pilots; England only for consideration of implications
for primary care groups.
Main outcome measures: The ability of total
purchasers to achieve their own objectives and their
ability specifically to achieve objectives in the service
areas beyond fundholding included in total purchasing.
Results: The level of achievement between pilots
varied widely. Achievement was more likely to be
reported in primary than in secondary care. Reported
achievements in reducing length of stay and emergency
admissions were corroborated by analysis of hospital
episode statistics. Single practice and small
multipractice pilots were more likely than large
multipractice projects to report achieving their
objectives. Achievements were also associated with
higher direct management costs per head and the
ability to undertake independent contracting. Large
multipractice pilots required considerable
organisational development before progress could be
made.
Conclusion: The ability to create effective
commissioning organisations the size of the proposed
primary care groups should not be underestimated.
T o be effective commissioners, these care groups will
need to invest heavily in their organisational
development and in the short term are likely to need
an additional development budget rather than the
reduction in spending on NHS management that is
planned by the government.
Introduction
The NHS Executive’s initiative on total purchasing
provided an opportunity for volunteer fundholding
general practices throughout Britain to receive a
delegated budget from their local health authority to
purchase potentially all the hospital and community
health services for their patients.
1
We examined the
factors contributing to the different levels of reported
achievement among the first wave of these total
purchasing pilot schemes
—that is, in England and
Scotland—in their first “live” year, 1996-7. We then
explored the implications of the findings for the devel-
opment of similar pilots proposed by the government
for England
—primary care groups.
2
The pilots varied greatly in size, organisation, and
ambition.
3
As there was no detailed blueprint for total
purchasing, the pilots interpreted the concept in
different ways and developed their scheme at different
rates. As a result, several distinct types of pilot emerged
(table 1):
x Commissioners
—the predominant type of pilot,
characterised by holding a delegated budget and
directly purchasing care;
x Copurchasers
—did not hold a budget but worked in
partnership with their health authority to influence its
commissioning;
x Primary care developers
—focused purely on pri-
mary care development;
x Developmental pilots
—used the first live year as a
further preparatory period;
x Undeveloped pilots
—did not aim to achieve any
change in services.
Methods
The diversity in approaches, combined with the fact that
many objectives of the pilots were not directly
quantifiable (for example, to improve interagency
relations), meant that evaluation of achievement was
necessarily limited to assessment of self reported
progress.
4
Two assessments were made: firstly, the
achievement of objectives in the pilot’s own terms—that
is, regardless of scope —and secondly, achievements in
service areas related to total purchasing. The latter
assessment concerned achievements exclusively in serv-
ices that total purchasers had the power to purchase for
the first time: maternity services; services for seriously
mentally ill patients; care of frail elderly patients in the
Policy and
Development
Directorate, King’s
Fund, London
W1M 0AN
Nicholas Goodwin,
research officer
Nicholas Mays,
director, health systems
programme
Gill Malbon,
research officer
Health Economics
Facility, Health
Services
Management
Centre, University
of Birmingham,
Birmingham
B15 2TT
Hugh McLeod,
project officer
James Raftery,
professor of health
economics
Correspondence to:
Dr Goodwin
ngoodwin@kehf.
org.uk
BMJ 1998;317:256–9
256 BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
community; accident and emergency services; emer-
gency medical inpatient services; and the development
of alternatives to acute hospital inpatient services.
There were 52 first wave pilots (46 in England, 6 in
Scotland). In autumn 1995 (midway through the pilots’
preparatory year) and in spring 1997 (at the end of the
first live year) we conducted face to face, semi-
structured interviews with a lead general practitioner,
project manager, and local health authority manager
responsible for liaison in each project. In 1997 we
asked each respondent whether the pilot had achieved
its four main objectives derived from purchasing
intentions documents and from the interviews in 1995.
Recognising the subjective nature of the responses,
and the need to reduce potential bias, we considered
an objective to have been achieved only if there was
agreement between all the three respondents. More-
over, where such achievements affected trusts, further
corroboration was sought from provider representa-
tives and, where relevant, hospital activity data.
Three researchers independently assigned each
pilot to one of five hierarchical groups on the basis of its
number of self reported achievements. For achieve-
ments in the pilot’s own terms, a “group 1” pilot was one
that had reported not having achieved any of its
objectives in 1996-7, whereas a “group 5” pilot had
reported achieving all four of its objectives. For achieve-
ments in services related to total purchasing, a group 1
pilot was one that had not influenced services in any
area related to total purchasing, whereas a group 5 pilot
had influenced at least three or four of these services.
The grouping of pilots also took account of achieve-
ments of objectives that had emerged after the 1995
interviews. If the researchers’ groupings differed, a
consensus decision was reached through discussion.
Results
The figure shows the distribution of achievement
reported by the total purchasing pilots in 1996-7. It
shows a wide variation in the abilities of the pilots to
meet their own objectives, suggesting that most had
overestimated what they could achieve in the first year.
For areas related to total purchasing, there was a shift
towards the lower groupings, indicating that such
objectives were more difficult to achieve and that a
proportion of achievements in the pilot’s own terms
were in service areas already included in fundholding.
T able 2 shows that about half the purchasing objec-
tives were reported to have been met (with rates varying
from 39% in mental health to 87% of objectives related
to extending the primary healthcare team). That the
lowest rate of achievement was in mental health is
scarcely surprising given the complexity of purchasing
and service development in this field. In the acute sector,
pilots found it easier to meet objectives relating to early
discharge than to reduce emergency admissions.
Moreover, objectives were more easily achieved in
primary than in secondary care. The pilots wishing to
influence mental health care, for example, found making
changes in inpatient services that were controlled by
mental health trusts more difficult than extending exist-
ing primary care services through, for example, the
development of community psychiatric nursing.
Hospital episode statistics were analysed to corrobo-
rate self reported achievements for the pilots that were
trying to reduce emergency admissions and lengths of
stay (table 3). This analysis showed a high level of
Table 1 Levels of reported achievement and selected characteristics of 52 total purchasing pilots, 1996-7. Values are numbers
(percentages) unless stated otherwise
Level of achievement and characteristics
Type of pilot*
Undeveloped (n=2)
Developmental
(n=11)
Copurchaser
(n=8)
Primary care
developer (n=8) Commissioner (n=23)
Level of reported achievement† in pilot’s own terms:
Low 2 (100) 8 (73) 3 (38) 2 (25) 4 (17)
Medium 0 2 (18) 4 (50) 5 (63) 6 (26)
High 0 1 (9) 1 (13) 1 (13) 13 (57)
Level of reported achievement† in services related to total purchasing:
Low 2 (100) 11 (100) 7 (88) 6 (75) 6 (26)
Medium 0 0 1 (13) 2 (25) 6 (26)
High 0 0 0 0 11 (48)
Size of pilot:
Median No of practices 6 4 3 2 3
Median No of practitioners 17 23 13 16 13
Median population 32 689 36 590 24 750 27 500 25 000
Organisational structure:
Complex 1 (50) 6 (55) 2 (25) 2 (25) 9 (39)
Intermediate 1 (50) 3 (27) 4 (50) 3 (38) 6 (26)
Simple 0 2 (18) 2 (25) 3 (38) 8 (35)
Median cost of direct management per patient (£) 0.91 2.86 1.61 2.80 3.10
*See Introduction for definitions of the five types. †Low achievement comprises groups 1 and 2; medium achievement, group 3; and high achievement, groups 4
and 5. See Methods for further clarification.
Low achievers Medium achievers High achievers
No of pilots in each group
Group 5Group 3 Group 4Group 2Group 1
0
4
6
8
10
12
Reported achievement
in pilots’ own terms
14
16
18
20
2
Reported achievement in services
related to total purchasing
Distribution of total purchasing pilots by level of achievement
(groups 1 to 5) in relation to objectives in pilots’ own terms and to
services related to total purchasing, 1996-7
General practice
257BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
consistency between the achievements reported by the
pilots and the activity changes seen in the hospital
episode statistics. T able 3 shows that the hospital episode
statistics corroborated the reported success in reducing
length of stay in 13 of the 16 commissioner and copur-
chaser pilots. The other three pilots had implemented
their expressed mechanism for change, but the hospital
episode statistics did not show reduced average length of
stay. Similar findings from the data analysis corroborate
the reported achievements in influencing emergency
admissions (unpublished data).
Levels of reported achievement seemed to be asso-
ciated with type of pilot (table 1). Commissioner pilots
tended to be the highest “achievers” in their own terms
and were the only type that reported achieving all of
their main objectives in services related to total
purchasing. In comparison, copurchasers and primary
care developers were most often medium achievers in
their own terms, and most had had little or no impact
on services related to total purchasing. Most develop-
mental and all undeveloped pilots were low achievers.
Two other characteristics were associated with level
of achievement
3
:
x Smaller pilots (those with fewer practitioners and
smaller populations) were more likely than larger ones
to report achieving their objectives; none of the large
multipractice pilots with six practices or more was a
high achiever (groups 4 or 5)
x Larger pilots had to establish complex organisations
before they could make progress, whereas smaller, par-
ticularly single practice pilots, achieved their objectives
with little organisational development.
The pilots with the highest direct management
costs per head were the most likely schemes to meet
their objectives. As the level of management spending
was a matter of negotiation between each pilot and its
parent health authority, the level allocated by the
health authority might have been an indication of the
confidence it placed in the ability of the pilot to bring
about beneficial change.
Discussion
The New NHS white paper sets out the government’s
intention to establish primary care groups in England
by April 1999.
2
All primary care groups will have a
budget covering general practitioner prescribing and
practice infrastructure. As the groups develop, they will
take responsibility for a greater share of hospital and
community health services resources and, in the latter
stages, the General Medical Services budget. Primary
care groups, designed to comprise “natural communi-
ties” of about 100 000 patients, should “grow out” of
the range of existing general practitioner-led commis-
sioning schemes in the NHS. Most total purchasing
pilots in England are likely, therefore, to become
integrated into these larger organisations.
It is encouraging that primary care groups will be
able to hold delegated budgets as we found a clear
relation between first year achievements in areas
related to total purchasing, and commissioner pilots. In
particular, the early success of commissioner pilots in
reducing length of stay shows that primary care based
budget holding with independent contracting has the
potential to assist in the management of demand for
expensive hospital facilities. In contrast, pilots trying to
influence service changes without holding a budget
made far less progress in the first year.
Organisational development needs
That the largest total purchasers achieved the least in
1996-7 suggests that primary care groups (which are
likely to be almost three times as large) will require
considerable time to develop organisationally before
effective progress can be made. Multipractice pilots
that reported the highest level of achievement had
developed structurally complex organisations, em-
ployed a dedicated project manager, developed
reasonable or good relations with their local health
authority, had regular discussions with local providers,
invested in information technology, encouraged the
involvement of non-lead general practitioners, and
ensured participation from all the practices within the
group.
3
The low achieving multipractice pilots were
characterised by poorly developed organisations (in
particular, lacking a project manager).
The organisational development of primary care
groups is likely to prove even more challenging
because (a) primary care groups will comprise not just
Table 2 Achievements of 52 total purchasing pilots by service area, 1996-7
Service area of four main purchasing objectives
No of pilots with
objectives
No (%) of pilots
reporting objective
achieved
Early discharge/reducing length of stay 22 14 (64)
Community and continuing care 19 10 (53)
Maternity services 27 14 (52)
Reducing emergency admissions 32 14 (44)
Mental health services 28 11 (39)
Developing the primary healthcare team 15 13 (87)
Improving information/population needs assessment 12 10 (83)
Other* 35 21 (60)
*A wide variety, including oncology, cardiology, school health, and palliative care.
Table 3 Level of agreement, by type of pilot, between total purchasing pilots’ own reporting on whether they achieved their objectives
to reduce length of stay and emergency admissions, and hospital episode statistics on activity levels*
Objective
Pilot reported “achieved” Pilot reported “not achieved”
Confirmed by hospital
episode statistics? Data not
available Total
Confirmed by hospital
episode statistics? Data not
available TotalYes No Yes No
To reduce hospital length of stay:
Commissioners 8 3 1 12 1 0 1 2
Copurchasers 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1
To reduce emergency admissions:
Commissioners 7 3 0 10 3 1 4 8
Copurchasers 1 0 1 2 2 0 0 2
*Full details of the methods and results of this analysis are available from the authors.
General practice
258 BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
volunteer fundholding practices but all practices in a
given area, including non-fundholders and some prac-
tices with little experience of commissioning services;
(b) the requirement that community nurses should be
involved in managing primary care groups is likely to
add to the complexity of the developmental task; and
(c) most total purchasers rely on a very limited number
of motivated and skilled individuals
—acquiring enough
input from general practitioners and skilled manage-
ment support to run 500 primary care groups
effectively will be demanding.
Funding primary care groups
A final implication for primary care groups relates to
the amount of funding. Most of the highest achieving
multipractice pilots were in the top quarter for direct
management costs. These pilots tended to pay for
general practitioner locums and additional hours for
general practitioners. In some cases they made a
further allowance to each practice for staff participa-
tion in project development, and they all invested
heavily in information systems.
5
Y et the government
aims to reduce the total costs of running health
authorities and primary care based commissioning by
£200m each year for five years. In the short term, how-
ever, costs are likely to rise as health authorities will
have to operate as the main purchaser until all the local
care groups are fully established. In the longer term it
is possible that management costs can be contained,
but other evidence from the current national
evaluation project indicates that it would be unwise to
assume that primary care groups are necessarily a
cheaper alternative to the status quo.
5
The experience of the total purchasing pilots
suggests that the organisational task in creating primary
care groups should not be underestimated. In particular,
engendering collective responsibility among all practi-
tioners for staying within budget or adhering to
prescribing and referral protocols, or doing both of
these, proved difficult in the pilots, in which participation
was voluntary.
3
In primary care groups —in which
participation will be compulsory—a collective approach
will take time to achieve as most groups are likely to
include practitioners antagonistic to the concept, as it
implies a reduction in individual autonomy and a
greater emphasis on rationing. Primary care groups will
also need to address the issue of sustainable manage-
ment as the evidence suggests that total purchasing was
typically run by a few individuals with high workloads.
3
The development of commissioning-style primary care
groups is therefore likely to be slow in most cases.
However, primary care groups will operate not as
pilots with a fixed life span but as the centre piece of
the “new NHS” at local level. They will thus be able to
call on the unambiguous support of their local health
authorities, and trusts will have to recognise their
standing. The concession for primary care groups to
operate at a range of different levels, at least initially, is
also appropriate and necessary as the volunteer
total purchasing pilots developed at different speeds.
Similarly, the government’s intention that all care
groups should ultimately move towards the
commissioning-style model is supported by the
experience of the pilots in relation to total purchasing.
Data are being collected on the second live year of
total purchasing (1997-8); these will show whether the
largest projects have managed to “catch up” in terms of
overall achievement. If so, the evaluation will provide
important lessons for the developmental needs of suc-
cessful, large scale commissioning groups (such as pri-
mary care groups); if not, it will question the feasibility
and desirability of primary care led commissioning at
the larger scale proposed in the white paper.
The national evaluation of total purchasing is a collective effort
by a consortium of health services researchers led from the
King’s Fund. Staff come from the National Primary Care
Research and Development Centre at Manchester, Salford, and
Y ork Universities; the Universities of Bristol, Edinburgh, and
Southampton; the Health Services Management Centre at the
University of Birmingham; and the Health Services Research
Unit at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
are not necessarily those of the two funding departments.
Contributors: NG worked as project officer on the overall
research programme; undertook some of the personal interviews;
participated in the analysis of each pilot’s achievements; and led
the drafting and revision of the paper. NG and NM led the design
of the questionnaires on the total purchasing pilots’ achievements
and will act as guarantors for the paper. NG, NM, and GM jointly
developed the analytical approach used to characterise and assess
the pilots’ achievements. NM designed and led the overall
research programme; undertook some of the personal interviews;
and participated in the drafting and revision of the paper. HMcL
participated in the design of the hospital episode statistics analy-
sis, collected and analysed these episode data, and contributed to
the content and writing of the paper. GM worked as a project
officer on the overall research programme and participated in the
analysis of each pilot’s achievements and in the drafting and revi-
sion of the paper. JR took the lead on the examination of routine
data analysis; was responsible for the analysis of the hospital epi-
sode statistics used to inform the paper; and contributed to the
content of the paper.
Funding: Department of Health and the Scottish Office
Health Department.
Conflict of interest: None.
1 Mays N, Goodwin N, Bevan G, Wyke S on behalf of the T otal Purchasing
National Evaluation T eam. What is total purchasing? BMJ
1997;315:652-5.
2 Secretary of State for Health. The new NHS. London: Stationery Office,
1997. (Cm 3807.)
3 Mays N, Goodwin N, Killoran A, Malbon G on behalf of the T otal
Purchasing National Evaluation T eam.T otal purchasing: a step towards pri-
mary care groups. London: King’s Fund, 1998.
4 Mahon A, Leese B, Baxter K, Goodwin N, Scott J. Developing success criteria
for total purchasing pilot projects. London: King’s Fund, 1998. (Working
paper on the national evaluation of total purchasing pilot projects.)
5 Posnett J, Goodwin N, Griffiths J, Killoran A, Malbon G, Mays N.
The transaction costs of total purchasing. London: King’s Fund, 1998.
(Working paper on the national evaluation of total purchasing pilot
projects.)
(Accepted 16 June 1998)
Key messages
+ The level of reported achievement between the total purchasing
pilots in 1996-7 varied widely; achievement was more likely to
occur in primary than in secondary care
+ Single practice and small multipractice pilots were more likely than
large multipractice pilots to report achieving their objectives in
1996/97; achievements were also associated with higher direct
management costs per head
+ Large multipractice pilots needed more time for organisational
development before progress could be made
+ Difficulties in creating effective commissioning organisations the
size of the proposed primary care groups should not be
underestimated
+ Primary care groups will need to invest heavily in organisational
development and are likely to need an additional development
budget in the short term
General practice
259BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
Primary care: core values
Patients’ priorities
Julia Neuberger
How to run a 24 hour system of general practice has
been a bone of contention between general practition-
ers and the public in recent years.
12
Doctors are loath
to continue doing their own on-call work at nights and
weekends.
34
Patients, however, prefer to see their own
doctor or a general practitioner from their own
practice,
56
where the service may be better,
7
rather
than a doctor from an agency that provides the on-call
service.
89
This is the nub of the difference in perception
between doctors and patients (and to some extent
between healthcare professionals and the general pub-
lic) about the quality of service they would like to see,
and that difference in perception is one which needs to
be taken seriously. When asked, patients express a wish
to be involved in planning services and their
delivery,
10 11
and practices find this process worth-
while.
11 12
And yet, radical changes in out of hours serv-
ices have occurred without overt consultation with
patients.
The starting point
General practitioner service in particular, and primary
care services in general, are the jewel in the NHS crown
for much of the British public.
13
There is no doubt that
the vast majority of the population regards the general
practitioner as the first port of call for health care, and
as the health professional who they trust to give them
advice and treatment. They recognise the need for a
guide through the maze of services that make up this
increasingly complex health service.
A simple first priority for most patients is getting
really good advice from their primary healthcare pro-
viders. That advice includes such details as the best
treatment for a particular condition and the downside
to it
14
; by whom or where that treatment would be pro-
vided; and where the highest success rates are to be
found. Indeed, there is some irritation among the gen-
eral public at the profession’s lack of openness about
success rates from procedures, although some evalua-
tions are available.
15
People point out that doctors always know where,
and to whom, they would go to be treated for particu-
lar conditions, and where they would send their
family
—and patients cannot see why that kind of infor-
mation should not be directly available to them. They
access this knowledge indirectly through the general
practitioners’ choice of referral, but objective evidence
on which to judge specific hospitals, units, and consult-
ants is still not available, although some will be
provided in the near future.
It also has to be recognised that patients may define
success differently from healthcare professionals, and
that increasingly the public expects to get its definition
of quality and benefit recognised. The emphasis on
biomedical outcomes used by healthcare professionals
or health economists has to be tempered by a recogni-
tion of patients’ definitions of outcome.
This applies to preferences concerning general
practices themselves. While partnerships get bigger
and teams more complex, patients express greater sat-
isfaction with smaller practices,
16
practices that are not
MARTIN JONES
Summary points
The conflict between the priorities of patients and
the aspirations of general practitioners and their
teams can be overcome to an extent by increased
communication and patients’ participation
Primary care services could do much more to
meet patients’ needs through offering extended
advocacy
Vulnerable and other groups will increasingly
look to primary care teams to lead community
action on housing and benefits, as well as
ensuring equal access to high quality health and
social care
General practice
This is the last
in a series of
six articles
reflecting on the
core values that
will underpin
the development
of primary care
King’s Fund,
London W1M 0AN
Julia Neuberger,
chief executive
j.neuberger@kehf.
org.uk
Series editor:
Mike Pringle
BMJ 1998;317:260–2
260 BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
involved in training,
17
and those that run personal reg-
istered lists.
18
Patients seem to be valuing different
characteristics to those given greatest priority by
general practitioners, and this will inevitably lead to
tensions.
Patients want to know what the choices are for
people with various forms of chronic conditions and
where the best alleviation can be found. These days
they expect to have access to a full primary care
team
19 20
and to be advised to use alternative forms of
health care if they seem valuable —notably osteopathy
and chiropractic, but also aromatherapy (for some end
stage cancer patients and for women who have chronic
severe mental illness) and acupuncture (for intractable
pain). That advice is now seen as part of the armoury
for living with illness and chronic conditions and
therefore as a part of healthcare advice that people
expect from the primary care team.
Accessibility
The general public puts high priority on out of hours
services. That applies to the on-call service and to the
sense of general lack of availability of primary
healthcare services over public holidays. There is an
increasingly strong feeling that primary healthcare
services should be available, at least in part, on some of
those holidays, so that the public is not kept away from
those services for up to four days over Christmas and
Easter.
This applies especially to certain groups of patients
and their families. If primary care is to mean anything
to much of the population, it has to be based on the
notion that people live with families, partners, or carers
and that part of the role of the primary care team is to
care for the rest of the family. So, for instance, the fact
that services are not available for four days over some
public holidays makes many of those who live with
severely mentally ill people angry and renders them
helpless. There is a strong feeling that primary care
services for certain groups, notably mentally ill and
elderly people, should be better in general and more
widely available in terms of hours of service.
Extending the concept of primary care
Patients often report that they express their views to
members of the primary care teams but are not
listened to. They feel that their priorities are different
from those of the practice team and that there should
be more fundamental questioning of whom the service
is for and how it can be provided more in accord with
patients’ needs.
Patients want to be listened to,
10–12
both about their
demands for health care and in general. The increasing
availability of counselling in primary care is certain
evidence of the need for listening of professional qual-
ity.
21
The problem for many patients is the variable
quality of counselling services offered, from thor-
oughly trained professionals to those who have
attended only a short course. The British Association
for Counselling’s register and gradual licensing of
counsellors is much to be welcomed, but it needs
urgent implementation. The concerns of members of
the public about quality of counselling and the amount
of counselling they are offered in primary health care
need to be addressed.
Patients also want a wider range of services to be
easily available, be it physiotherapy (always much in
demand and something that could be made available
in larger practices), podiatry, osteopathy, or consultant
sessions for common conditions that require referral.
But it is not only healthcare services that the public
wishes to see. As primary care expands its range of
interests and skills, it becomes more essential that we
should see primary care centres as one-stop shops for
services that are determinants of health. These include
housing and some social services in addition to the
current system of health care.
This is not to suggest that all housing offices for a
local area should be made available at health centres
—
rather, elderly people and people with enduring men-
tal illness or learning difficulties could receive specialist
housing advice from representatives of local authori-
ties or housing associations based within the health
centres.
That is equally true of advice on welfare benefits,
and there is good reason to think of Citizens’ Advice
Bureaux operating from within health centres along
with social services, especially those that are targeted at
people with chronic poor health. It is extraordinary
that, in Britain’s well developed primary health care
system, so little development of joint premises for
health and other services has taken place. Since
primary care is going to be increasingly the focus of
services, and the gateway to them, it is essential that
other services are to be found under the same roof.
Only that way can a primary healthcare worker be cer-
tain that adequate social services are being provided
for a very dependent patient.
It could be argued that general practitioners and
other primary care workers, such as district nurses,
should be orchestrating the services that enable people
who are severely handicapped to stay in their own
homes. That is particularly important for elderly
people, and the role of the primary healthcare team in
ensuring that elderly people stay in their own homes as
long as possible, properly supported, clearly needs fur-
ther development. Primary care teams can orchestrate
services for elderly and other patients only if their
access to other service providers is good
—one reason
at least for social services and housing to be located in
health centres.
Members of the practice team as
advocates
The public looks to health professionals, and
particularly general practitioners, to help them to
access services. However, the reality is that the advocacy
role
—so often claimed by primary healthcare
professionals—needs developing if helping obtain
access to services is to become a major role.
Just as mental health requires an integrated
approach, services for elderly people raise issues of
access, advocacy, and coordination. The range of
models
—from services managed by general practition-
ers or nurses to low key units offering outreach of spe-
cialist care from the acute section (as has been so
successfully piloted by Lambeth Community NHS
Trust)
—requires active management. As the movement
General practice
261BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 
of services out of hospitals continues, the role of the
primary healthcare team in delivering inpatient
services for less acute conditions will need to be
explored, including a possible return to provision of
local cottage hospitals. Such a choice may be valuable
for elderly people and their families.
Meanwhile, the public is worried by ownership of
nursing homes by general practitioners
—a move that
creates a conflict of interest and undermines doctors’
advocacy role. In the light of more general anxieties
about standards in nursing homes, the primary health-
care team could act as an impartial unofficial
inspection team of these and other community based
institutions, since their interest must be the patients’
welfare, rather than the profit motive of the owner.
Lastly, there is a perceived need for general practi-
tioners and primary healthcare workers to act as advo-
cates of particular groups of patients. Where the
patient group is genuinely inarticulate and these
patients have no one else to stand up for them, health
professionals may play a vital role
—a role that is limited
at present.
There is always a danger when health professionals
take on the mantle of the patient’s advocate or friend:
professional interests and concerns can differ from
personal ones, and some distance needs to be
maintained. Nevertheless, the public expects the
primary healthcare team to orchestrate services,
advise, inspect services, and educate.
Funding: None.
Conflict of interest: None.
1 O’Dowd T, Sinclair H. Open all hours: night visits in general practice. BMJ
1994;308:1386.
2 Heath I. General practice at night. BMJ 1995;311:466.
3 Lattimer V, Smith H, Hungin P, Glasper A, George S. Future provision of
out of hours primary medical care: a survey with two general practitioner
research networks. BMJ 1996;312:352-6.
4 Salisbury C. Evaluation of a general practice out of hours cooperative: a
questionnaire survey of general practitioners. BMJ 1997;314: 1598-9.
5 Salisbury C. Postal survey of patients’ satisfaction with a general practice
out of hours cooperative. BMJ 1997;314:1594-8.
6 McKinley R, Cragg D, Hastings A, French D, Manku-Scott T, Campbell S,
et al. Comparison of out of hours care provided by patients’ own general
practitioners and commercial deputising services: a randomised control-
led trial. II. The outcome of care.BMJ 1997;314:190-3.
7 Crogg D, McKinley R, Roland M, Campbell S, Van F, Hastings A, et al.
Comparison of out of hours care provided by patients’ own general prac-
titioners and commercial deputising services: a randomised controlled
trial. I. The process of care.BMJ 1997;314:187-9.
8 Salisbury C. Observational study of a general practice out of hours coop-
erative: measures of activity.BMJ 1997;314:182-6.
9 Jessopp L, Beck I, Hollins L, Shipman C, Reynolds M, Dale J. Changing
the pattern out of hours: a survey of general practice cooperatives. BMJ
1997;314:199-200.
10 Maeseneer J. Priority setting in general practice at the local level: from
patient participation to community orientation? Eur J Gen Pract
1996;2:3-4.
11 Pringle M, Wallis H, Fairbairn S. Involving practice staff and patients in
determining standards and priorities in primary care. Eur J Gen Pract
1996;2:5-8.
12 Hearnshaw H, Baker R, Cooper A, Eccles M, Soper J. The costs and ben-
efits of asking patients their opinions about general practice. Family Pract
1996;13:52-8.
13 Calnan M, Katsonyiannopoulos V, Ovcharov V, Prokhorskas R, Ramic H,
Williams S. Major determinants of consumer satisfaction with primary
care in different health systems.Family Pract 1994;11:468-78.
14 Britten N. Patients’ demands for prescriptions in primary care. BMJ
1995;310: 1084-5.
15 Brown J, Smith R, Cantor T, Chesover D, Y earsley R. General practition-
ers as providers of minor surgery
—a success story? Br J Gen Pract
1997;47:205-10.
16 Campbell J. The reported availability of general practitioners and the
influence of practice list size. Br J Gen Pract 1996,46:465-8.
17 Baker R, Streatfield J. What type of general practice do patients prefer?
Exploration of practice characteristics influencing patient satisfaction. Br
J Gen Pract 1995;45:654-9.
18 Baker R. Characteristics of practices, general practitioners and patients
related to levels of patients’ satisfaction with consultations. Br J Gen Pract
1996;46:601-5.
19 Heath I. Skill mix in primary care. BMJ 1994;308:993-4.
20 Kendrick D. Role of the primary health care team in preventing accidents
to children. Br J Gen Pract 1994;44:372-5.
21 Spiers R, Jewell J. One counsellor; two practices: report of a pilot scheme
in Cambridgeshire. Br J Gen Pract 1995;45:31-3.
A memorable patient
A death on the Rock
This is a tale of serendipity tinged with sadness and it spans some
55 years. Edwin Hutt, a 24 year old stoker in the Royal Navy,
sustained fractures of both legs and other injuries when his ship
was torpedoed in the Mediterranean in 1942. He was taken to the
military hospital in Gibraltar where I was serving in the Royal
Army Medical Corps as a graded pathologist.
After a prolonged illness complicated by lung abscesses and
septicaemia he died three months after admission. Bacterium (now
Fusobacterium) necrophorum was isolated repeatedly on anaerobic
culture of blood samples and abscess pus. This anaerobe is
responsible for, or closely associated with, a variety of diseases of
domestic animals known collectively as necrobacillosis, and its
rarity as a pathogen in humans prompted the surgical specialist,
Major J C Goligher, and me to write up the case for publication
in the Lancet.
1
The source of infection remains a mystery. The injuries were
sustained at sea and the patient was transferred directly by ship to
hospital in Gibraltar, a station which is virtually isolated from
farming activity. But the patient had spent most of his life on
farms before voluntarily enlisting in the Royal Navy two years
beforehand.
The clinical picture in our case conforms for the most part with
that described in recent studies
—namely, the occurrence in
previously healthy young adults of a severe septicaemic illness
with metastatic abscesses.
2 However, an initial sore throat, which is
a feature of most case histories, was not suffered by our patient
either before or at any stage in his illness. Treatment with
penicillin and metronidazole effect a slow recovery and cure in
the majority of cases. Unfortunately, these drugs were not
available to us in 1942.
And so to the present time. I was reading an article in a daily
newspaper which took the form of an interview with Mrs Doreen
Louie West, the author of a recently published book describing
life on an Oxfordshire farm as seen through the eyes of her
mother, Mrs Louie Hutt. In the interview she mentioned the
death of her sailor brother in Gibraltar during the war from
septicaemia following a fractured leg. This remark struck a chord
in my memory; a successful search in my attic for a reprint of the
Lancet paper and a telephone call to Mrs West confirmed that our
patient of all these years ago was, in fact, Mrs West’s brother.
There is a sad postscript to this coincidence. I felt that the
coauthor of our paper, by now a distinguished emeritus professor
of surgery at Leeds, should be told of this turn of events. I looked
up Professor Goligher’s address in the Medical Directory and was
about to write to him when I learnt from a newspaper
announcement that he had died two days previously.
G B Forbes, retired consultant pathologist, Canterbury
1 Forbes GB, Goligher JC. Necrobacillosis in man. Lancet 1944,1:399.
2 Eykyn SJ. Necrobacillosis. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases 1989;62:41-6.
This article has
been adapted
from Primary
Care: Core V alues,
edited by Mike
Pringle, which is
published by BMJ
Books.
General practice
262 BMJ VOLUME 317 25 JULY 1998 www.bmj.com
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. at MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING on 24 June 2026 https://www.bmj.com/Downloaded from 25 July 1998. 10.1136/bmj.317.7153.256 on BMJ: first published as 