Partitioning heritability by functional
annotation using genome-wide
association summary statistics
Citation
Finucane, H. K., B. Bulik-Sullivan, A. Gusev, G. Trynka, Y. Reshef, P. Loh, V. Anttila, et al.
2015. “Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-wide association
summary statistics.” Nature genetics 47 (11): 1228-1235. doi:10.1038/ng.3404.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.3404.
Published version
https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3404
Link
http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:27320456
Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material (LAA), as set
forth at
https://harvardwiki.atlassian.net/wiki/external/NGY5NDE4ZjgzNTc5NDQzMGIzZWZhMGFlOWI2M2EwYTg
Accessibility
https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/digital-accessibility-policy
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you.
Submit a story


Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-
wide association summary statistics
Hilary K. Finucane1,2,18,20, Brendan Bulik-Sullivan3,4,18,20, Alexander Gusev2, Gosia 
Trynka5,6,7,8,21, Yakir Reshef9, Po-Ru Loh2, Verneri Anttila3,4,8, Han Xu10, Chongzhi Zang10, 
Kyle Farh3,11, Stephan Ripke3,4, Felix R. Day12, ReproGen Consortium13, Schizophrenia 
Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium13, The RACI Consortium13, 
Shaun Purcell5,6,14, Eli Stahl14, Sara Lindstrom2, John R. B. Perry12, Yukinori Okada15,16, 
Soumya Raychaudhuri5,6,7,8,17, Mark Daly3,4,8, Nick Patterson8, Benjamin M. Neale3,4,8,19,20, 
and Alkes L. Price2,8,19,20
1Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
USA
2Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
20Correspondence should be addressed to H.K.F. (hilaryf@mit.edu) B.B.S. (bulik@broadinstitute.org), B.M.N. 
(bneale@broadinstitute.org) or A.L.P. (aprice@hsph.harvard.edu).13A full list of consortium members appears in the Supplementary Note.18Co-first authors.19Co-last authors.
URLs
• ldsc software: github.com/bulik/ldsc
• Baseline and cell-type group annotations: http://data.broadinstitute.org/alkesgroup/LDSCORE/
• 1000 Genomes: www.1000genomes.org
• Height [24] and BMI [25] summary statistics: www.broadinstitute.org/collaboration/giant/index.php/
GIANT_consortium_data_files
• Menarche summary statistics [26]: www.reprogen.org
• LDL, HDL, and Triglycerides summary statistics [27]: www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/pubs/lipids2010/
• Coronary artery disease summary statistics [28]: www.cardiogramplusc4d.org
• Type 2 diabetes summary statistics [29]: www.diagram-consortium.org
• Fasting glucose summary statistics [30]: www.magicinvestigators.org/downloads/
• Schizophrenia [18], Bipolar Disorder [31], Anorexia [32], and Smoking behavior [33] summary statistics: 
www.med.unc.edu/pgc/downloads
• Education attainment summary statistics [34]: www.ssgac.org
• Rheumatoid arthritis summary statistics [35]: http://plaza.umin.ac.jp/yokada/datasource/software.htm
• Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis summary statistics [ 36]: www.ibdgenetics.org/downloads.html
The authors have no competing financial interests.
Author Contributions
H.K.F., B.B.S., A.G., G.T., Y.R., P.R.L., V.A., S.R., M.D., N.P., B.M.N., and A.L.P. conceived/designed the experiments. H.K.F. and 
B.B.S. performed the experiments, performed the statistical analysis, and analyzed the data. H.X., C.Z., K.F., S.R., F.R.D., S.P., E.S., 
S.L., J.R.B.P., and Y.O. contributed reagents. H.K.F., B.B.S., B.M.N., and A.L.P. wrote the paper with feedbak from all authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2015 November ; 47(11): 1228–1235. doi:10.1038/ng.3404.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
4Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA
5Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
6Division of Rheumatology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA
7Partners Center for Personalized Genetic Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
8Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA
9Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Massachusetts, USA
10Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
11Epigenomics Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
12MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of 
Metabolic Science, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK
14The Department of Psychiatry at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA
15Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan
16Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama 
230-0045, Japan
17Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
21Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK
Abstract
Recent work has demonstrated that some functional categories of the genome contribute 
disproportionately to the heritability of complex diseases. Here, we analyze a broad set of 
functional elements, including cell-type-specific elements, to estimate their polygenic 
contributions to heritability in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of 17 complex diseases 
and traits with an average sample size of 73,599. To enable this analysis, we introduce a new 
method, stratified LD score regression, for partitioning heritability from GWAS summary 
statistics while accounting for linked markers. This new method is computationally tractable at 
very large sample sizes, and leverages genome-wide information. Our results include a large 
enrichment of heritability in conserved regions across many traits; a very large immunological 
disease-specific enrichment of heritability in FANTOM5 enhancers; and many cell-type-specific 
enrichments including significant enrichment of central nervous system cell types in body mass 
index, age at menarche, educational attainment, and smoking behavior.
Finucane et al. Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Introduction
In GWAS of complex traits, much of the heritability lies in single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) that do not reach genome-wide significance at current sample sizes 
[1, 2]. However, many current approaches that leverage functional information [3, 4] and 
GWAS data to inform disease biology use only SNPs in genome-wide significant loci [5– 8], 
assume only one causal SNP per locus [9], or do not account for linkage disequilibrium 
(LD) [10]. We aim to improve power by estimating the proportion of genome-wide SNP-
heritability [1] attributable to various functional categories, using information from all SNPs 
and explicitly modeling LD.
Previous work on partitioning SNP-heritability has used restricted maximum likelihood 
(REML) as implemented in GCTA [1, 11– 14]. REML requires individual genotypes, but 
many of the largest GWAS analyses are conducted through meta-analysis of study-specific 
results, and so typically only summary statistics, not individual genotypes, are available for 
these studies. Even when individual genotypes are available, using REML to analyze 
multiple functional categories becomes computationally intractable at sample sizes in the 
tens of thousands. Here, we introduce a method for partitioning heritability, stratified LD 
score regression, that requires only GWAS summary statistics and LD information from an 
external reference panel that matches the population studied in the GWAS.
We apply our novel approach to 17 complex diseases and traits with an average sample size 
of 73,599. We first analyze non-cell-type-specific annotations and identify heritability 
enrichment in many of these functional annotations, including a large enrichment in 
conserved regions across many traits and a very large immunological disease-specific 
enrichment in FANTOM5 enhancers. We then analyze cell-type-specific annotations and 
identify many cell-type-specific heritability enrichments, including enrichment of central 
nervous system (CNS) cell types in body mass index, age at menarche, educational 
attainment, and smoking behavior.
Results
Overview of methods
Our method for partitioning heritability from summary statistics, called stratified LD score 
regression, relies on the fact that the χ2 association statistic for a given SNP includes the 
effects of all SNPs that it tags [15,16]. Thus, for a polygenic trait, SNPs with high LD score 
will have higher χ2 statistics on average than SNPs with low LD score [16]. This might be 
driven either by the higher likelihood of these SNPs to tag an individual large effect, or their 
ability to tag multiple weak effects. If we partition SNPs into functional categories with 
different contributions to heritability, then LD to a category that is enriched for heritability 
will increase the χ2 statistic of a SNP more than LD to a category that does not contribute to 
heritability. Thus, our method determines that a category of SNPs is enriched for heritability 
if SNPs with high LD to that category have higher χ2 statistics than SNPs with low LD to 
that category.
More precisely, under a polygenic model [1], the expected χ2 statistic of SNP j is
Finucane et al. Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

(1)
where N is sample size, C indexes categories, ℓ(j, C) is the LD score of SNP j with respect to 
category C (defined as 
 ), a is a term that measures the contribution of 
confounding biases [16], and if the categories are disjoint, τC is the per-SNP heritability in 
category C; if the categories overlap, then the per-SNP heritability of SNP j is ΣC:j∈C τC 
Equation (1) allows us to estimate τC via a (computationally simple) multiple regression of 
χ2 against ℓ(j, C), for either a quantitative or case-control study. We define the enrichment of 
a category to be the proportion of SNP-heritability in the category divided by the proportion 
of SNPs. We estimate standard errors with a block jackknife [16], and use these standard 
errors to calculate z-scores, P-values, and FDRs. We have released open-source software 
implementing the method (URLs); for further details see the Online Methods and 
Supplementary Note.
To apply stratified LD score regression (or REML) we must first specify which categories 
we include in our model. We created a “full baseline model” from 24 publicly available 
main annotations that are not specific to any cell type (Supplementary Table 1; see URLS 
and Online Methods). Below, we show that including many categories in our model leads to 
more accurate estimates of enrichment. The 24 main annotations include: coding, UTR, 
promoter, and intron [14, 17]; histone marks H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K9ac [3– 5] and two 
versions of H3K27ac [18, 19]; open chromatin reflected by DNase I hypersensitivity Site 
(DHS) regions [5, 14]; combined chromHMM/Segway predictions [20], which make use of 
many ENCODE annotations to produce a single partition of the genome into seven 
underlying “chromatin states”; regions that are conserved in mammals [ 21, 22]; super-
enhancers, which are large clusters of highly active enhancers [19]; and enhancers with 
balanced bidirectional capped transcripts identified using cap analysis of gene expression in 
the FANTOM5 panel of samples, which we call FANTOM5 enhancers [23]. For the histone 
marks and other annotations that differ among cell types, we combined the different cell 
types into a single annotation for the full baseline model by taking a union (except for 
Repressed, where we took an intersection). To prevent our estimates from being biased 
upwards by enrichment in nearby regions [14], we also included 500bp windows around 
each functional category in the full baseline model, as well as 100bp windows around ChIP-
seq peaks when appropriate (see Online Methods). This yielded a total of 53 (overlapping) 
functional categories in the full baseline model, including a category containing all SNPs.
In addition to the analyses using the full baseline model, we performed analyses using cell-
type-specific annotations from the four histone marks H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K9ac, and 
H3K27ac. Each cell-type-specific annotation corresponds to a histone mark in a single cell 
type—for example, H3K27ac in liver cells—and there are 220 such annotations in total 
(Supplementary Table 2, Online Methods). When ranking these 220 cell-type-specific 
annotations, we want to control for overlap with the functional categories in the full baseline 
model, but not for overlap with the 219 other cell-type-specific annotations. Thus, we add 
these annotations individually to the baseline model, creating 220 separate models, each 
with 54 annotations. Then for a given phenotype, we run LD score regression once each on 
Finucane et al. Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

the 220 models and rank the cell-type-specific annotations by the P-value of the coefficient 
τC of the annotation in the corresponding analysis. This P-value tests whether the annotation 
contributes significantly to per-SNP heritability after controlling for the effects of the 
annotations in the full baseline model.
We also divided the 220 cell-type-specific annotations into 10 groups: adrenal/pancreas, 
CNS, cardiovascular, connective/bone, gastrointestinal, immune/hematopoietic, kidney, 
liver, skeletal muscle, and other. We took a union of cell-type-specific annotations within 
each group, resulting in 10 new cell-type group annotations (for example, SNPs with any of 
the four histone modifications in any CNS cell type). We then repeated the cell-type-specific 
analysis described above with these 10 cell-type groups instead of 220 cell-type-specific 
annotations.
Simulation results: power and lack of bias
In our first set of simulations, we assessed the power and bias of the method at a variety of 
settings of SNP-heritability (hg2), sample size (N), and proportion of causal SNPs (pcausal) 
(Online Methods). These simulations demonstrated well-calibrated type 1 error at all 
settings of hg2, N, and pcausal tested (Figure 1). At a fixed pcausal, power depends on N and 
hg2 only through N· hg2 (Supplementary Figure 1), and increases as N· hg2 increases and as 
pcausal increases (Figure 1a). We also looked at the z-score for total SNP-heritability in our 
analysis, which increases as N· hg2 and pcausal increase (Figure 1b). We found that the 
relationship of heritability z-score to power was the same for both values of pcausal (Figure 
1c), indicating that the heritability z-score is a good indicator of power at a variety of sample 
sizes, heritabilities, and values of pcausal. For this paper, we chose to analyze only traits with 
a heritability z-score above 7, which corresponds to N· hg2 of roughly 4,500 for very 
polygenic traits and 12,500 for less polygenic traits.
In each of these simulations, stratified LD score regression gave unbiased estimates of 
heritability and of the heritability of the CNS cell-type group (Supplementary Figures 2a,b, 
3a,b). While in theory the ratio of these two unbiased estimators could be a biased estimator 
of the proportion of heritability (and therefore the estimates that we report here), in practice 
we saw only negligible bias in our estimates of proportion of heritability (Supplementary 
Figures 2c, 3c). Using out-of-sample LD caused some downward attenuation bias in 
estimates of total SNP-heritability and heritability of the CNS cell-type group, but also gave 
unbiased estimates of proportion of heritability and properly calibrated type 1 error 
(Supplementary Figure 4).
Simulation results: model misspecification
In our second set of simulations, we compared stratified LD score regression to REML, a 
method that also estimates partitioned heritability but requires genotype data, in scenarios 
with and without model misspecification (Online Methods). We estimated the enrichment of 
the DHS category, i.e., (Prop. hg2)/(Prop. SNPs), using three methods: (1) REML with two 
categories (DHS/non-DHS), (2) stratified LD score regression with two categories (DHS/
non-DHS), and (3) stratified LD score regression with the full baseline model (53 categories, 
described above). Since REML with 53 categories did not converge at this sample size and 
Finucane et al. Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

would be computationally intractable at sample sizes in the tens of thousands, we did not 
include it in our comparison; an advantage of stratified LD score regression is that it is 
possible to include a large number of categories in the underlying model. We report means 
and standard errors of the mean over 100 independent simulations.
We first performed three sets of simulations without model misspecification; i.e., where the 
causal pattern of enrichment was well modeled by the two-category (DHS/non-DHS) model. 
In these simulations, enrichment of the DHS region varied from 1x (i.e., no enrichment) to 
5.5x (i.e., full enrichment, DHS SNPs explain 100% of heritability). All three methods gave 
unbiased estimates, although stratified LD score regression with the full baseline model had 
larger standard errors around the mean (Figure 2a).
Next, to explore the realistic scenario where the model used to estimate enrichment does not 
match the (unknown) causal model, we performed three sets of simulations where all causal 
SNPs were in a particular category, but the model used to estimate heritability did not 
include this causal category. The three sets of simulations were (1) all causal SNPs in coding 
regions, yielding a true 1.6x DHS enrichment due to coding/DHS overlap, (2) all causal 
SNPs in FANTOM5 enhancers, yielding a true 4.0x DHS enrichment due to FANTOM5 
enhancer/DHS overlap, and (3) all causal SNPs in 200bp DHS flanking regions, yielding a 
true 0x DHS enrichment. For the coding and FANTOM5 enhancer causal simulations, we 
transformed the full baseline model into a misspecified model by removing the causal 
category and window around the causal category; the baseline model includes a 500bp 
window around DHS but not a 200bp window, and so is misspecified also in that case. 
Results from these simulations are displayed in Figure 2b. The two-category estimators were 
not robust to model misspecification and consistently over-estimated DHS enrichment by a 
wide margin. Stratified LD score regression with the full baseline model gave more accurate 
mean estimates of enrichment.
In summary, while these simulations include exaggerated patterns of enrichment (e.g., 100% 
of heritability in DHS flanking regions), the results highlight the possibility that two-
category estimators of enrichment can yield incorrect conclusions. Although we cannot 
entirely rule out model misspecification as a source of bias for stratified LD score regression 
with the full baseline model, we have shown here that it is robust to a wide variety of 
patterns of enrichment, because including many categories gives it the flexibility to adapt to 
the unknown causal model.
Simulation results: cell-type and cell-type group analyses
We simulated realistic baseline enrichment plus enrichment in a cell-type group (see Online 
Methods), and we performed our cell-type group analysis on the resulting summary 
statistics. First, we calibrated simulated enrichment of the causal cell-type group to give us a 
realistic average top −log10(P) based on results for the real data sets analyzed below (Online 
Methods). Of the simulations in which at least one cell-type group reached significance, we 
found that the top cell-type group was the cell-type group simulated to be causal 99% of the 
time (Figure 3). Next, we simulated weaker enrichment, calibrated so that only 50% of 
replicates included a significant cell-type group. In these simulations, the cell-type group 
simulated to be causal was the top cell-type group in 95% of simulations with at least one 
Finucane et al. Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

significant cell-type group, and a cell-type group with r2 > 0.5 to the causal group was the 
top cell-type group in half of the remaining simulations with at least one significant cell type 
(Figure 3). Results separated into the ten individual cell-type groups are displayed in 
Supplementary Figure 5.
We next repeated these simulations with a cell-type-specific mark—H3K4me3 in fetal brain 
cells—instead of a cell-type group as the simulated causal category. There are many more 
pairs of cell types that are highly correlated than there are highly correlated pairs of cell-type 
groups, and we are testing all cell types every time (Supplementary Figure S6). We found 
that when the level of enrichment was calibrated to give a realistic −log10(P) (based on 
results for the real data sets analyzed below; Online Methods), the simulated causal cell type 
was the most significant cell type in 78% of simulations, a cell-type with r2 > 0.5 to the 
causal cell type was most significant in 20% of simulations, and there was no significant cell 
type in 2% of simulations. In simulations with weak enrichment—again calibrating so that 
50% of simulations have at least one significant cell type—we found that of the simulations 
with at least one significant cell type, only 4% had as the top cell type a cell type with r2 < 
0.5 to the causal cell type.
In conclusion, the cell-type group analysis reliably reports the causal annotation as the top 
annotation, if at least one cell-type group passes statistical significance. The analysis of 
individual cell types, because it is testing more cell types that are more correlated, often 
gives a highly correlated cell type as the top cell type—just as in a GWAS the top SNP in a 
locus is not always the causal SNP.
Analysis of 17 traits using the full baseline model
We applied stratified LD score regression to 17 diseases and quantitative traits: height, BMI, 
age at menarche, LDL levels, HDL levels, triglyceride levels, coronary artery disease, type 2 
diabetes, fasting glucose levels, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, anorexia, educational 
attainment, smoking behavior, rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis 
[18, 24– 36] (Supplementary Table 3, URLS). This includes all traits with publicly available 
summary statistics with sufficient sample size, SNP-heritability, and polygenicity measured 
by the z-score of total SNP-heritability; specifically, we restricted to traits for which the z-
score of total SNP-heritability was at least 7 (Supplementary Note). We removed the MHC 
region from all analyses, due to its unusual LD and genetic architecture.
We applied stratified LD score regression with the full baseline model to the 17 traits. 
Figure 4 shows results for the 24 main functional annotations, averaged across nine 
independent traits (Supplementary Note). Figure 5 shows trait-specific results for selected 
annotations and traits (Supplementary Note). Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 show meta-
analysis and trait-specific results for all traits and all 53 categories in the full baseline model.
We observed large and statistically significant enrichments for many functional categories. 
A few categories stood out in particular. First, regions conserved in mammals [21] showed 
the largest enrichment of any category, with 2.6% of SNPs explaining an estimated 35% of 
SNP-heritability on average across traits (P < 10−6 for enrichment). This is a significantly 
higher average enrichment than for coding regions, and provides evidence for the biological 
Finucane et al. Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

importance of conserved regions, despite the fact that the biochemical function of many 
conserved regions remains uncharacterized [37]. Second, FANTOM5 Enhancers [23] were 
extremely enriched in the three immunological diseases, with 0.4% of SNPs explaining an 
estimated 15% of SNP-heritability on average across these three diseases (P = 10−4, 2×10 −4, 
and 0.03 for Crohn’s disease, Ulcerative Colitis, and Rheumatoid arthritis, respectively), but 
showed no evidence of enrichment for non-immunological traits (Figure 5). The immune-
specific enrichment could be because immune cells have better coverage, altered 
degradation, and/or a higher number of enhancers. We did not see a large enrichment of 
super-enhancers vs. regular enhancers; the estimates for enrichment were 1.8x (s.e. 0.2) for 
super-enhancers vs. 1.6x (s.e. 0.1) for regular enhancers from the same paper [19] (denoted 
“H3K27ac (Hnisz)” in Figure 4). We also did not see increased cell-type-specificity in 
super-enhancers (Supplementary Note). This lack of enrichment supports the hypothesis that 
super-enhancers may not play a much more important role in regulating transcription than 
regular enhancers [38]. For many annotations, there was also enrichment in the 500bp 
flanking regions (Supplementary Table 4); this could be because the boundaries are not well 
defined, because the boundaries of the regions are different in different individuals, or 
because unknown regulatory elements often appear close to known regulatory elements. 
Analyses stratified by derived allele frequency produced broadly similar results 
(Supplementary Table 6; see Online Methods).
Cell-type-specific analysis of 17 traits
We performed two different cell-type-specific analyses: an analysis of 220 individual cell-
type-specific annotations, and an analysis of 10 cell-type groups (see Overview of Methods). 
For the analysis of single cell types, we assessed statistical significance at the 0.05 level 
after Bonferroni correction for 220×17=3,740 hypotheses tested, and for the cell-type group 
analysis, we corrected for 10×17=170 hypotheses tested. This is conservative, since the 220 
cell-type-specific annotations are not independent, and neither are the 10 cell-type group 
annotations. We also report results with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05, computed over 
220 cell types for each trait for the cell-type specific analysis, and over all cell-type groups 
and traits for the cell-type group analysis. For 15 of the 17 traits, the top cell type passed an 
FDR threshold of 0.05, while for 16 of the 17 traits (all traits except anorexia), the top cell-
type group passed an FDR threshold of 0.05. The top cell type for each trait is displayed in 
Table 1, with additional top cell types reported in Supplementary Table 7. Cell-type group 
results for the 11 traits with the most significant enrichments (after pruning closely related 
traits) are shown in Figure 6, with remaining traits in Supplementary Figure 7.
These two analyses are generally concordant, and show highly trait-specific patterns of cell-
type enrichment. They also recapitulate several well-known findings. For example, the top 
cell type for each of the three lipid traits is liver (FDR < 0.05 for all three traits). For both 
type 2 diabetes and fasting glucose, the top cell type is pancreatic islets (FDR < 0.05 for 
fasting glucose but not type 2 diabetes). For the three psychiatric traits, the top cell type is a 
brain cell type and the top cell-type group is CNS (FDR < 0.05 for schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder but not for anorexia). These results are concordant with the medical literature [39, 
40] and with previous analysis of these GWAS datasets [9, 18, 27, 31, 41, 42].
Finucane et al. Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

There are also several new insights among these results. For example, the three 
immunological disorders show patterns of enrichment that reflect biological differences 
among the three disorders. Crohn’s disease has 40 cell types with FDR < 0.05, of which 39 
are immune cell types and one (colonic mucosa) is a GI cell type. On the other hand, the 39 
cell types with FDR < 0.05 for ulcerative colitis include nine GI cell types in addition to 30 
immune cell types, whereas all 39 cell types with FDR < 0.05 for rheumatoid arthritis are 
immune cell types. The top cell type for all three traits is CD4+ CD25- IL17+ PMA 
Ionomycin simulated Th17 primary. Th17 cells are thought to act in opposition to Treg cells, 
which have been shown to suppress immune activity and whose malfunction has been 
associated with immunological disorders [43].
We also identified several non-psychiatric phenotypes with enrichments in brain cell types. 
For both BMI and age at menarche, cell types in the central nervous system (CNS) ranked 
highest among individual cell types, and the top cell-type group was CNS, all with FDR < 
0.05. These enrichments support previous human and animal studies that propose a strong 
neural basis for the regulation of energy homeostasis [44]. For educational attainment, the 
top cell-type group is CNS (FDR < 0.05) and of the ten cell types that are significant after 
multiple testing, nine are CNS cell types. This is consistent with our understanding that the 
genetic component of educational attainment, which excludes environmental factors and 
population structure, is highly correlated with IQ [45]. Finally, for smoking behavior, the 
CNS cell-type group is significant and the top cell type is again a brain cell type, likely 
reflecting CNS involvement in nicotine processing.
Discussion
We developed a new statistical method, stratified LD score regression, for identifying 
functional enrichment from GWAS summary statistics that uses genome-wide information 
from all SNPs and explicitly models LD. We applied this method to summary statistics from 
17 traits with an average sample size of 73,599. Our method identified strong enrichment for 
conserved regions across all traits, and immunological disease-specific enrichment for 
FANTOM5 enhancers. Our cell-type-specific enrichment results confirmed previously 
known enrichments, such as liver enrichment for HDL levels and pancreatic islet enrichment 
for fasting glucose. In addition, we identified enrichments that would have been challenging 
to detect using existing methods, such as CNS enrichment for smoking behavior and 
educational attainment—traits with only one and three genome-wide significant loci, 
respectively [33, 34]. Stratified LD score regression represents a significant departure from 
previous methods that require raw genotypes [11], use only SNPs in genome-wide 
significant loci [5– 8], assume only one causal SNP per locus [9], or do not account for LD 
[10] (see Online Methods and Figure 7 for a discussion of other methods and comparison on 
simulated data). Our method is also computationally efficient, despite the 53 overlapping 
functional categories analyzed.
Although our polygenic approach has enabled a powerful analysis of genome-wide summary 
statistics, it has several limitations. First, for the method to have reasonable power, the 
dataset analyzed must have a very large sample size and/or large SNP-heritability, and the 
trait analyzed must be polygenic (Figure 1). Second, the method requires an LD reference 
Finucane et al. Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

panel matched to the population studied to give accurate results; all results here are from 
European datasets and use 1000G Europeans as a reference panel (see Online Methods and 
Supplementary Figure 4). Third, our method is currently not applicable to studies using 
custom genotyping arrays (e.g., Metabochip; see Supplementary Note). Fourth, our method 
is based on an additive model and does not consider the contribution of epistatic or other 
non-additive effects, nor does it model causal contributions of SNPs not in the reference 
panel; in particular, it is possible that patterns of enrichment at extremely rare variants may 
be different from those inferred using this method (see Online Methods). Fifth, the method 
is limited by available functional data: if a trait is enriched in a cell type for which we have 
no data, we cannot detect the enrichment. Sixth, our method currently gives large standard 
errors when applied to very small categories (Supplementary Figure 8 and Supplementary 
Note). Last, though we have shown our method to be robust in a wide range of scenarios, we 
cannot rule out bias due to model misspecification caused by enrichment in an unidentified 
functional category as a possible source of bias; however our simulations show that our 
method gives nearly unbiased results even under very extreme scenarios of unmodeled 
functional categories (Figure 2).
In conclusion, the polygenic approach described here is a powerful and efficient way to 
learn about functional enrichments from summary statistics. It will likely become 
increasingly useful as functional data continues to grow and improve, and as GWAS studies 
of larger sample size are conducted.
Online Methods
Stratified LD score regression
We assume a linear model:
where yi is a quantitative phenotype in individual i, Xij is the standardized genotype of 
individual i at the j-th SNP, βj is the effect size of SNP j, and εi is mean-zero noise. We 
define heritability by
and the heritability of a category C to be
Finucane et al. Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

We model β as a mean-zero random vector with independent entries. We have C functional 
categories C1, …, CC, and we allow the variance of βj —i.e., the per-SNP heritability at SNP 
j—to depend on these functional categories that we include in our model via the equation
(2)
In the case that the Cc are disjoint, we have τc = h2(Cc)/M(Cc), where M(Cc) is the number 
of SNPs in Cc. Each SNP must be in at least one category; in practice we either have a set of 
categories that forms a disjoint partition of the genome, or we include the set of all SNPs as 
one of the categories.
In the Supplementary Note, we show that under this model,
(3)
whereχ2j is the marginal association test statistic at SNP j, N is the sample size and 
. An extension of this derivation to case-control traits is in Bulik-Sullivan 
et al. [45].
Given a vector of χ2 statistics and LD information either from the sample or from a 
reference panel, Equation (3) allows us to obtain estimates τ̂c of τc by computing ℓ(j, c) and 
regressing χ2j on ℓ(j, c). For some analyses—including the cell-type and cell-type group 
analyses in this manuscript—estimating τc is the goal. For other analyses—including the 
baseline analyses in this manuscript—the goal is to estimate 
 , or 
h2(Cc)/h2. Because the βj have mean zero, we can approximate h2(Cc) with its expectation, 
Σj∈Cc Var(βj). When the categories are disjoint, Var(βj) = τc, where SNP j is in category Cc, 
and so ĥ2(Cc) = |Cc|· τ̂c. When the categories overlap, we apply Equation (2), which gives us
In this paper, we use HapMap Project Phase 3 (HapMap3 [46]) SNPs for our regression, 
1000G SNPs [47] for our reference panel, and we only partition the heritability of SNPs 
with minor allele frequency above 5% (see Supplementary Note). The details of the 
regression, including outlier removal, out-of-bounds estimates, regression weights, and GC 
correction are in the Supplementary Note.
Significance testing
We estimate standard errors using a block jackknife over SNPs with 200 equally-sized 
blocks of adjacent SNPs [16]. This gives us an empirical covariance matrix of coefficient 
Finucane et al. Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

estimates. In the baseline analysis, to evaluate whether a category is enriched for heritability, 
we want to test whether 
 . This is the same as testing whether the per-SNP 
heritability is greater in the category than out of the category; i.e., whether 
. Because our estimates of the regression coefficients are approximately 
normally distributed, and therefore 
  is not normally distributed but 
  is, we 
use the latter expression to test for significance. Because this expression is linear in the 
coefficients, we can estimate its standard error using the covariance matrix for the 
coefficient estimates, and then we compute a z-score to test for significance. This procedure 
is well-calibrated; see Figure 1. We also report jackknife standard errors of the proportion of 
heritability even though this is not what we use to assess significance.
For the cell-type-specific analyses, we use the z-score of the coefficient directly.
Code availability
Stratified LD score regression is available as open source software at github.com/bulik/ldsc.
Full baseline model
The 53 functional categories, derived from 24 main annotations, were obtained as follows:
• Coding, 3′-UTR, 5′-UTR, promoter, and intron annotations from the RefSeq gene 
model were obtained from UCSC [17] and post-processed by Gusev et al. [14]
• Digital genomic footprint and transcription factor binding site annotations were 
obtained from ENCODE [3] and post-processed by Gusev et al. [14]
• The combined chromHMM/Segway annotations for six cell lines were obtained 
from Hoffman et al. [20]. The CTCF, promoter flanking, transcribed, transcription 
start site, strong enhancer, and weak enhancer categories are each a union over the 
six cell lines; the repressed category is an intersection over the six cell lines.
• DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs) are a combination of ENCODE and Roadmap 
data, postprocessed by Trynka et al. [5]. We combined the cell-type-specific 
annotations into two annotations for inclusion in the full baseline model: a union of 
all cell types, and a union of only fetal cell types.
• Cell-type-specific H3K4me1, H3K4me, and H3K9ac data were all obtained from 
Roadmap and postprocessed by Trynka et al. [5] For each mark, we took a union 
over cell types for the full baseline model, and used the individual cell types for our 
cell-type-specific analysis.
• Cell-type-specific H3K27ac was obtained from Roadmap and post-processed [18]. 
A second version of H3K27ac was obtained from the data of Hnisz et al. [19] For 
each mark, we took a union over cell types for the full baseline model. We also 
used the individual cell types of the Roadmap H3K27ac data for our cell-type-
specific analysis.
Finucane et al. Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

• Super-enhancers were also obtained from Hnisz et al [19], and comprise a subset of 
the H3K27ac annotation from that paper. We took a union over cell types for the 
full baseline model
• Regions conserved in mammals were obtained from Lindblad-Toh et al. [21], post-
processed by Ward and Kellis [22].
• FANTOM5 enhancers were obtained from Andersson et al. [23]
• For each of these 24 categories, we added a 500bp window around the category as 
an additional category to keep our heritability estimates from being inflated by 
heritability in flanking regions [14].
• For each of DHS, H3K4me1, H3K4me3, and H3K9ac, we added a 100bp window 
around the ChIP-seq peak as an additional category.
• We added an additional category containing all SNPs.
When we report results in Supplementary Tables 4, 5, and 6, we do not report results from 
the category containing all SNPs, as it has 100% of the heritability with standard error zero. 
(It might have a coefficient τc that is non-trivial, but in these tables we report proportions of 
heritability.)
According to our simulations (Figure 2), including these 53 categories in our baseline model 
allows us to obtain unbiased or nearly unbiased estimates of enrichment for a wide range of 
potential new categories. To estimate the enrichment of a new annotation, we perform 
analyses using a model with these 53 annoations plus the new annotation. For example, for 
the cell-type-specific analysis, we add each cell-type-specific annotation to the baseline 
model one at a time, and asses enrichment using the z-score of the cell-type-specific 
annotation.
Simulations: Figure 1
For these simulations, we used genotypes from the Wellcome Trust Case Control 
Consortium [48]. QC was performed as described in Gusev et al. [14]: we removed any 
SNPs that were below a MAF of 0.01, were above 0.002 missingness, or deviated from 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at a P < 0.01. The resulting dataset had 14,526 individuals and 
162,574 SNPs. We let heritability vary between 0.1 and 0.9, with the proportion of causal 
SNPs equal to 0.05 and 0.005 (i.e., 8,129 and 813 causal SNPs on average, respectively), 
and we simulated quantitative phenotypes from an additive model. For each simulation, 
effect sizes for causal SNPs were drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and 
variance (i.e., average per-SNP heritability) determined by functional categories. To 
simulate realistic enrichment for the 53 categories in the baseline model plus the CNS cell-
type group, we fit the model to the schizophrenia summary statistics [18] and took the 
resulting coefficients, replacing negative coefficients with 0. We then scaled these 
coefficients as needed to give the desired heritability at the desired level of polygenicity. For 
each simulation, we used stratified LD score regression to estimate total heritability, the 
heritability of the CNS cell-type group, and the proportion of heritability in the CNS cell-
type group.
Finucane et al. Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Simulations: out of sample LD
In this paper, we use LD scores computed from an out-of-sample reference panel. To 
evaluate this, we used the summary statistics simulated above, but ran stratified LD score 
regression using a 1000G reference panel rather than in-sample LD. We found that estimates 
of total hg2 and category-specific hg2 were biased downwards, but that estimates of 
proportion of hg2 were approximately unbiased and type 1 error was well calibrated 
(Supplementary Figure 4).
Simulations: Figure 2
For computational ease using REML, we decreased our sample size to the 2,680 samples in 
the NBS and 1966BC control cohorts of the WTCCC1 dataset, and we correspondingly 
restricted ourselves to only SNPs on chromosome 1. For this set of simulations, a dense set 
of SNPs was particularly important, so we used genotypes imputed to integrated phase1 v3 
1000 Genomes [47] (URLs), giving us 360,106 SNPs after quality control. We again 
simulated quantitative phenotypes using an additive model, with effect sizes of causal SNPs 
drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance determined by functional 
categories. Heritability was set to 0.5, and all SNPs were causal unless in a category 
simulated to have zero variance.
Simulations: Figure 3
We began with the simulations of realistic enrichment in the baseline categories and the 
CNS cell-type group as in Figure 1. Then for each other cell-type group, we removed the 
CNS cell-type group and added the new cell-type group to the model, scaling the coefficient 
τc of the new cell-type group to keep the total heritability constant. We then increased the 
coefficients of the cell-type groups by a multiplicative constant so that the average top z-
score over 5,000 simulations (10 cell-type groups × 500 replicates each) was close to the 
mean top z-score found in our analysis of 17 real traits. In a second set of simulations, we 
decreased the coefficients so that the top cell-type group was significant 50% of the time.
We then repeated the process with the H3K4me3 fetal brain annotation (though with just 
one annotation instead of 10 cell-type-groups). First we fit a model with this annotation plus 
the baseline model to the schizophrenia summary statistics [18]. We then scaled the 
coefficient of the cell-type-specific annotation until the mean z-score over 500 replicates 
matched the mean z-score in real data. In a second set of simulations, we decreased the 
coefficient so that that the top cell-type group was significant in 50% of 500 replicates.
Meta-analysis across traits
We chose nine phenotypes with low phenotypic correlation and sample overlap: Height, 
BMI, menarche, LDL levels, coronary artery disease, schizophrenia, educational attainment, 
smoking behavior, and rheumatoid arthritis (see Supplementary Note). We performed a 
random-effects meta-analysis of proportion of heritability over the nine phenotypes listed 
above for each functional category. The results are in Figure 4 and Supplementary Table 4. 
Results meta-analyzed over all 17 traits are in Supplementary Figure 9; however these 
Finucane et al. Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

results have artificially deflated standard errors due to correlated traits such as HDL/LDL/
Triglycerides being treated as independent.
Robustness to derived allele frequency
Stratified LD score regression is based on the assumption that the per-normalized-genotype 
effect size of a SNP is drawn i.i.d. with mean zero, conditioned on functional annotation. So 
if allele frequency bins are not included as annotations in the model, then we are assuming 
that per-allele effect sizes have variance proportional to (p(1−p)) −1 for allele frequency p.
To check that our results are not affected by an allele-frequency-dependent genetic 
architecture, we repeated the meta-analysis over traits using the full baseline model with 
seven derived allele frequency bins as extra annotations. This allowed for effect size to 
depend on derived allele frequency, independently of functional annotation. These results 
are very similar to our results without derived allele frequency bins, and are displayed in 
Supplementary Table 6.
In this paper, we do not consider heritability of very rare SNPs. If stratified LD score 
regression were to be used to analyze a dataset with rare variants, then there would be 
several issues to consider that did not come up in our analysis. For example, in the current 
analysis, we could use LD estimates from a reference panel because the LD patterns in the 
reference panel matched the LD patterns in our samples for the allele frequency range we 
were interested in; this might not hold for rare variants [49]. Also, our analysis described 
above shows that allele-frequency dependent architectures are not causing bias in our 
current analyses, but this robustness result may not extend to potential future analyses of 
datasets with rare variants.
Comparison to other methods
We are not aware of any other methods designed to estimate genome-wide components of 
heritability from summary statistics. However, there are existing methods that identify 
enriched functional categories and cell types from summary statistics. We compared our 
method to four other methods, described below; each of these methods has provided 
valuable biological insights. For each of these methods, we assessed the rejection rate over 
100 simulations for true cell-type-specific enrichment, null baseline enrichment (i.e., 
baseline enrichment with no cell-type-specific signal), and null simulations with no 
enrichment in any category. We performed this analysis for both a cell type (fetal brain in 
H3K4me3) and cell-type group (CNS), and for two proportions of causal SNPs, 0.05 and 
0.005. All simulations had a sample size of 14000 and hg2 of 0.7. Results are displayed in 
Figure 7; below, we discuss the results for each method individually.
GoShifter is a recent method of Trynka et al. [6] (see also their previous published work 
[5]). Goshifter is conservative in its identification of enrichment, comparing to a null 
obtained by local shifting rather than a genome-wide null, and it only uses statistically 
significant SNPs. It had properly calibrated type 1 error in all four situations we simulated. 
Of these four situations, stratified LD score regression had higher power than GoShifter in 
Finucane et al. Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

the more polygenic scenarios, and the two methods performed comparably in the less 
polygenic scenarios, in which there were more significant SNPs.
A paper by Pickrell [9] combines GWAS data with functional data to identify enriched and 
depleted functional categories, and leverages the resulting model to increase GWAS power. 
The method, called fgwas, is effective at increasing association mapping power and 
identifies many interesting enrichments in the published paper. In our simulations we saw 
good null calibration, but low power to detect enrichment. Of the four simulations with true 
enrichment, fgwas performed best for when identifying enrichment of the smaller category 
(fetal brain) in the more polygenic trait (pcausal = 0.05); however, stratified LD score 
regression had higher power than fgwas in all four situations. Fgwas could have an 
advantage for annotations smaller than the ones tested in this manuscript, but we do not 
explore that issue here.
Maurano et al. [10] use enrichment of SNPs passing P-value thresholds of increasing 
stringency to identify important cell types. Using this method, Maurano et al. found striking 
patterns of cell-type-specific enrichment. However, this approach implicitly assumes that the 
functional annotation at a GWAS SNP matches the functional annotation at the causal SNP, 
which could be true for functional annotations composed of very wide regions, but is not 
likely to be true for functional annotations composed of smaller regions, such as conserved 
regions. Moreover, the method does not account for total LD, and so could give biased 
results if used to compare functional annotations with different average amounts of total LD 
[1]. We implemented a “top SNPs” method analogous to the method of Maurano et al. that 
tests for enrichment of the functional category among SNPs that pass statistical significance. 
Because the method is not intended to control for any other annotations, it had a high 
rejection rate for the null baseline simulations, detecting cell-type-specific signal where 
there was none. Thus, its high rejection rate for the cell-type-specific simulations were not 
reflective of true power. It remains a powerful method for traits with many significant SNPs, 
if the goal does not include controlling for other categories.
Similarly, PICS, a recent method from Farh et al. [7] focuses on fine-mapping and considers 
only genome-wide significant loci. On real data [7], the results from this method were 
compelling and consistent with our understanding of biology. This method performed 
similarly to the top SNPs method in our simulations, with a high rejection rate in null 
simulations with baseline enrichment and also a high rejection rate for true enrichment.
In addition to stratified LD score regression as used in this manuscript for cell-type-speciifc 
analyses, we also compared to “unadjusted” stratified LD score regression; i.e., LD score 
regression used to test for enrichment in total proportion of heritability, not controlling for 
other methods, in a way analogous to the top SNPs and PICS methods. As expected, this 
unadjusted version had a high rejection rate both for null baseline enrichment as well as for 
true cell-type-specific signal, for the same reasons that the top SNPs and PICS methods did.
Of the three methods with properly calibrated rejection rates for the null simulations with 
baseline enrichment (GoShifter, fgwas, and stratified LD score regression), stratified LD 
score regression was the most powerful for the polygenic traits. For the less polygenic traits, 
Finucane et al. Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

stratified LD score regression had power similar to GoShifter for the cell-type group, and 
none of the three methods had any power for the single cell type with less polygenic genetic 
architecture.
In very recent work, Kichaev et al. [8] introduce a new method (PAINTOR) that leverages 
functional data for improved fine-mapping. The method also outputs annotations associated 
with disease. While the method is clearly effective in increasing fine-mapping resolution, it 
is unclear whether the method is effective at ranking cell types; for example, cell types 
identified as contributing the most to HDL, LDL, and Triglycerides (using data from 
Teslovich et al. [27]) are muscle, kidney, and fetal small intestine, respectively, whereas the 
top cell types for those three phenotypes identified using our method (also using data from 
Teslovich et al. [27]) are liver, liver, and liver. The uncertain effectiveness of this method in 
ranking cell types may be because it is primarily aimed at fine-mapping and thus considers 
only genome-wide significant loci.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Brad Bernstein, Mariel Finucane, Alistair Forrest, Eran Hodis, Dylan Kotliar, X. Shirley Liu, Manolis 
Kellis, Michael O’Donovan, Bogdan Pasaniuc, Albin Sandelin, Abhishek Sarkar, Patrick Sullivan, Bjarni 
Vilhjalmsson, Adrian Veres, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful discussions and comments. This research 
was funded by NIH grants R01 MH101244, R01 HG006399, R03 CA173785, R21 CA182821, F32 GM106584 and 
1U01HG0070033. H.K.F. was also supported by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation. G.T. is supported by the 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (WT098051). Y.R. was supported by award Number T32GM007753 from the 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences. S.R. is supported by funding from the Arthritis Foundation and by a 
Doris Duke Clinical Scientisit Development Award. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does 
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences or the National 
Institutes of Health. This study made use of data generated by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 
(WTCCC) and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. A full list of the investigators who contributed to the 
generation of the WTCCC data is available at www.wtccc.org.uk. Funding for the WTCCC project was provided by 
the Wellcome Trust under award 076113.
References
1. Yang J, et al. Common SNPs explain a large proportion of the heritability for human height. Nature 
Genetics. 2010; 42(7):565–569. [PubMed: 20562875] 
2. Stahl EA, et al. Bayesian inference analyses of the polygenic architecture of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Nature Genetics. 2012; 44(5):483–489. [PubMed: 22446960] 
3. ENCODE Project Consortium. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. 
Nature. 2012; 489:57–74. [PubMed: 22955616] 
4. Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium et al. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. 
Nature. 2015; 518:317–330. [PubMed: 25693563] 
5. Trynka G, et al. Chromatin marks identify critical cell types for fine mapping complex trait variants. 
Nature Genetics. 2013; 45(2)
6. Trynka G, et al. Disentangling effects of colocalizing genomic annotations to functionally prioritize 
non-coding variants within complex trait loci, 2014. American Journal of Human Genetics. 2015; 
97(1):139–152. [PubMed: 26140449] 
7. Farh KKH, et al. Genetic and epigenetic fine mapping of causal autoimmune disease variants. 
Nature. 2014
Finucane et al. Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8. Kichaev G, et al. Integrating functional data to prioritize causal variants in statistical fine-mapping 
studies. PLOS Genetics. 2014
9. Pickrell JK. Joint analysis of functional genomic data and genome-wide association studies of 18 
human traits. American Journal of Human Genetics. 2014; 94:559–573. [PubMed: 24702953] 
10. Maurano MT, et al. Systematic localization of common disease-associated variation in regulatory 
DNA. Science. 2012; 337(6099):1190–1195. [PubMed: 22955828] 
11. Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. GCTA: a tool for genome-wide complex trait 
analysis. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2011; 88(1):76–82. [PubMed: 21167468] 
12. Lee SH, et al. Estimating the proportion of variation in susceptibility to schizophrenia captured by 
common SNPs. Nature Genetics. 2012; 44(3):247–250. [PubMed: 22344220] 
13. Davis LK, et al. Partitioning the heritability of Tourette syndrome and obsessive compulsive 
disorder reveals differences in genetic architecture. PLOS Genetics. 2013
14. Gusev A, et al. Partitioning heritability of regulatory and cell-type-specific variants across 11 
common diseases. American Journal of Human Genetics. 2014; 95:535–552. [PubMed: 25439723] 
15. Yang J, et al. Genomic inflation factors under polygenic inheritance. European Journal of Human 
Genetics. 2011; 19:807–812. [PubMed: 21407268] 
16. Bulik-Sullivan B, et al. LD Score regression distinguishes confounding from polygenicity in 
genome-wide association studies. Nature Genetics. 2015; 47
17. Kent WJ, et al. The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Research. 2002; 12(6):996–1006. 
[PubMed: 12045153] 
18. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Biological insights from 
108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014; 511:421–427. [PubMed: 25056061] 
19. Hnisz D, et al. Super-enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease. Cell. 2013; 155(4):934–
947. [PubMed: 24119843] 
20. Hoffman MM, et al. Integrative annotation of chromatin elements from ENCODE data. Nucleic 
Acids Research. 2013; 41:827–841. [PubMed: 23221638] 
21. Lindblad-Toh K, et al. A high-resolution map of human evolutionary constraint using 29 
mammals. Nature. 2011; 478:476–482. [PubMed: 21993624] 
22. Ward LD, Kellis M. Evidence of abundant purifying selection in humans for recently-acquired 
regulatory functions. Science. 2012; 337(6102):1675–1678. [PubMed: 22956687] 
23. Andersson R, et al. An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues. Nature. 2014; 
507:455–461. [PubMed: 24670763] 
24. Lango Allen H, et al. Hundreds of variants clustered in genomic loci and biological pathways 
affect human height. Nature. 2010; 467:832–838. [PubMed: 20881960] 
25. Speliotes EK, et al. Association analyses of 249,796 individuals reveal 18 new loci associated with 
body mass index. Nature genetics. 2010; 42(11):937–948. [PubMed: 20935630] 
26. Perry JR, et al. Parent-of-origin-specific allelic associations among 106 genomic loci for age at 
menarche. Nature. 2014; 514:92–97. [PubMed: 25231870] 
27. Teslovich TM, et al. Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood lipids. 
Nature. 2010; 466(7307):707–713. [PubMed: 20686565] 
28. Schunkert H, et al. Large-scale association analysis identifies 13 new susceptibility loci for 
coronary artery disease. Nature genetics. 2011; 43(4):333–338. [PubMed: 21378990] 
29. Morris AP, et al. Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the genetic architecture 
and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Nature genetics. 2012; 44(9):981. [PubMed: 22885922] 
30. Manning AK, et al. A genome-wide approach accounting for body mass index identifies genetic 
variants influencing fasting glycemic traits and insulin resistance. Nature genetics. 2012; 44(6):
659–669. [PubMed: 22581228] 
31. Sklar P, et al. Large-scale genome-wide association analysis of bipolar disorder identifies a new 
susceptibility locus near odz4. Nature Genetics. 2011; 43(10):977. [PubMed: 21926972] 
32. Boraska V, et al. A genome-wide association study of anorexia nervosa. Molecular psychiatry. 
2014
33. Rietveld CA, et al. GWAS of 126,559 individuals identifies genetic variants associated with 
educational attainment. Science. 2013; 340(6139):1467–1471. [PubMed: 23722424] 
Finucane et al. Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

34. Tobacco and Genetics Consortium et al. Genome-wide meta-analyses identify multiple loci 
associated with smoking behavior. Nature Genetics. 2010; 42(5):441–447. [PubMed: 20418890] 
35. Okada K, et al. Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis contributes to biology and drug discovery. Nature. 
2014; 506:376–381. [PubMed: 24390342] 
36. Jostins L, et al. Host-microbe interactions have shaped the genetic architecture of inflammatory 
bowel disease. Nature. 2012; 491(7422):119–124. [PubMed: 23128233] 
37. Stamatoyannopoulos JA. What does our genome encode? Genome Research. 2012; 22:1602–1611. 
[PubMed: 22955972] 
38. Pott S, Lieb JD. What are super-enhancers? Nature Genetics. 2015; 47(1)
39. Lilly, LS. Pathophysiology of heart disease: a collaborative project of medical students and faculty. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012. 
40. Kettyle, WM.; Arky, RA. Endocrine pathophysiology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1998. 
41. Parker SCJ, et al. Chromatin stretch enhancer states drive cell-specific gene regulation and harbor 
human disease risk variants. PNAS. 2013; 110(44):17921–17926. [PubMed: 24127591] 
42. Pasquali L, et al. Pancreatic islet enhancer clusters enriched in type 2 diabetes risk-associated 
variants. Nature Genetics. 2014; 46(2):136–143. [PubMed: 24413736] 
43. Wang W, et al. The th17/treg imbalance and cytokine environment in peripheral blood of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology International. 2012; 32:887–893. [PubMed: 21221592] 
44. Sadaf FI. Defining the neural basis of appetite and obesity: from genes to behaviour. Clinical 
Medicine. 2014; 14(3):286–289. [PubMed: 24889574] 
45. Bulik-Sullivan B, et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits. 2015 
bioRxiv. 10.1101/004309
46. International HapMap 3 Consortium. Integrating common and rare genetic variation in diverse 
human populations. Nature. 2010; 467:52–58. [PubMed: 20811451] 
47. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. An integrated map of genetic variation from 1, 092 human 
genomes. Nature. 2012; 491:56–65. [PubMed: 23128226] 
48. Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Genome-wide association study of 14, 000 cases of 
seven common diseases 3, 000 shared controls. Nature. 2007; 446:661–678. [PubMed: 17410174] 
49. Liu DJ, et al. Meta-analysis of gene-level tests for rare variant association. Nature Genetics. 2014; 
46(2):200–204. [PubMed: 24336170] 
Finucane et al. Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
Simulation results: null calibration and power. We simulated genetic architectures with 
positive total SNP-heritability, with and without functional enrichment, for two values of 
pcausal and a range of values of N· hg2. (a) Proportion of simulations in which a null of no 
functional enrichment is rejected, as a function of N· hg2 and pcausal. (b) The z-score of total 
SNP-heritability depends on N· hg2 and pcausal, but does not depend on the presence or 
absence of functional enrichment. (c) Proportion of simulations in which a null of no 
functional enrichment is rejected, as a function of the z-score of total SNP-heritability. Here, 
Finucane et al. Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

the z-score of total SNP-heritability for pcausal = 0.005 did not exceed 7.3 even at maximum 
N· hg2.
Finucane et al. Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Simulation results: model misspecification. Enrichment is the proportion of heritability in 
DHS regions divided by the proportion of SNPs in DHS regions. Bars show 95% confidence 
intervals around the mean of 100 trials. (a) From left to right, the simulated genetic 
architectures are 1x DHS enrichment, 3x DHS enrichment, and 5.5x DHS enrichment (100% 
of heritability in DHS SNPs). (b) From left to right, the simulated genetic architectures are 
200bp flanking regions causal, coding regions causal, and FANTOM5 Enhancer regions 
causal. For simulations with coding or FANTOM5 Enhancer as the causal category, we 
removed the causal category and the 500bp window around that category from the full 
baseline model in order to simulate enrichment in an unknown functional category.
Finucane et al. Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
Simulation results for ranking cell-type groups and cell types. For each cell-type group, 500 
simulations were performed with baseline enrichment and either realistic enrichment or low 
enrichment in that cell-type group. Results for the left two columns are aggregated over the 
ten cell-type groups; results for individual groups are displayed in Supplementary Figure 5. 
The right two columns represent 500 simulations each of realistic or low enrichment of a 
single cell-type-specific annotation, H3K4me3 in fetal brain cells.
Finucane et al. Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
Enrichment estimates for the 24 main annotations, averaged over nine independent traits. 
Annotations are ordered by size. Error bars represent jackknife standard errors around the 
estimates of enrichment, and stars indicate significance at P < 0.05 after Bonferroni 
correction for 24 hypotheses tested. Negative point estimates, significance testing, and the 
choice of nine independent traits are discussed in the Online Methods and Supplementary 
Note.
Finucane et al. Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 5. 
Enrichment estimates for selected annotations and traits. Error bars represent jackknife 
standard errors around the estimates of enrichment.
Finucane et al. Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 6. 
Enrichment of cell-type groups. We report significance of enrichment for each of 10 cell-
type groups, for each of 11 traits. The black dotted line at −log10(P) = 3.5 is the cutoff for 
Bonferroni significance. The grey dotted line at −log10(P) = 2.1 is the cutoff for FDR < 
0.05. For HDL, three of the top individual cell types are adipose nuclei, which explains the 
enrichment of the “Other” category.
Finucane et al. Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 7. 
Comparison to other methods for identifying enriched cell types. In “Null” simulations, 
there is no enrichment. In “Null (baseline enrichment)” simulations, there is enrichment in 
the baseline categories, some of which overlap the cell type or cell-type group, but no 
additional enrichment in the cell type or cell-type group. In the “True enrichment” 
simulations, there is enrichment in either the CNS cell-type group (top panels) or the fetal 
brain cell type (bottom babels). In all simulations, N = 14000, hg2 = 0.7. We report the 
proportion of 100 simulations in which the null is rejected by six methods: GoShifter [6], 
fgwas [9], Top SNPs [10], PICS [7], stratified LD score (unadjusted), and LD score. LD 
score (unadj) refers to total unadjusted enrichment, i.e., (Prop. hg2)/(Prop. SNPs); LD score 
refers to the coefficient β of the category, controlling for all other categories in the model.
Finucane et al. Page 27
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Finucane et al. Page 28
Table 1
Enrichment of individual cell types. We report the cell type with the lowest P-value for each trait analyzed.
Phenotype Cell type Tissue Mark -log10(P)
Height Chondregenic dif** Bone H3K27ac 6.81
BMI Fetal brain* Fetal brain H3K4me3 4.48
Age at menarche Fetal brain** Fetal brain H3K4me3 12.25
LDL Liver* Liver H3K4me1 4.76
HDL Liver* Liver H3K4me1 4.51
Triglycerides Liver* Liver H3K4me1 3.99
Coronary artery disease Adipose nuclei* Adipose H3K4me1 4.21
Type 2 diabetes Pancreatic islets Pancreas H3K4me3 2.87
Fasting glucose Pancreatic islets* Pancreas H3K27ac 3.93
Schizophrenia Fetal brain** Fetal brain H3K4me3 18.51
Bipolar disorder Mid frontal lobe* Brain H3K27ac 4.42
Anorexia Angular gyrus Brain H3K9ac 2.61
Years of education Angular gyrus** Brain H3K4me3 6.63
Ever smoked Inferior temporal lobe* Brain H3K4me3 3.21
Rheumatoid arthritis CD4+ CD25− IL17+ stim Th17** Immune H3K4me1 6.76
Crohn’s disease CD4+ CD25− IL17+ stim Th17** Immune H3K4me1 7.59
Ulcerative colitis CD4+ CD25− IL17+ stim Th17** Immune H3K4me1 6.37
*denotes FDR < 0.05.
**denotes significant at P < 0.05 after Bonferroni correction for multiple hypotheses. Sample sizes are in Supplementary Table 3.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 01.
