--- Page 1 ---
RESEA RCH ARTICL E
Predicting regional somatic mutation rates
using DNA motifs
Cong Liu
ID
1☯
, Zengmiao Wang
2☯
, Jun Wang
1☯
, Chengyu Liu
1
, Mengchi Wang
3
, Vu Ngo
3
,
Wei Wang
ID
1,3,4
*
1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistr y, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States of America, 2 State Key Laborato ry of Remote Sensing Science, Center for Global Change and Public
Health, Faculty of Geograph ical Science, Beijing Normal University , Beijing, China, 3 Bioinformatics and
System s Biology Graduate Program, Univers ity of Californi a San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America, 4 Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Californi a San Diego, La Jolla,
Californi a, United States of America
☯ These authors contribu ted equally to this work.
* wei-wan g@ucsd.edu
Abstract
How the locus-specificity of epigenetic modificatio ns is regulated remains an unanswered
question. A contributing mechanism is that epigenetic enzymes are recruited to specific loci
by DNA binding factors recognizing particular sequence motifs (referred to as epi-motifs).
Using these motifs to predict biological outputs depending on local epigenetic state such as
somatic mutation rates would confirm their functionality. Here, we used DNA motifs includ-
ing known TF motifs and epi-motifs as a surrogate of epigenetic signals to predict somatic
mutation rates in 13 cancers at an average 23kbp resolution. We implemented an interpret-
able neural network model, called contextual regression, to successfully learn the universal
relationship between mutations and DNA motifs, and uncovered motifs that are most
impactful on the regional mutation rates such as TP53 and epi-motifs associated with
H3K9me3. Furthermore, we identified genomic regions with significantly higher mutation
rates than the expected values in each individual tumor and demonstrated that such cancer-
related regions can accurately predict cancer types. Interestingly, we found that the same
mutation signatures often have different contribution s to cancer-related and cancer-inde-
pendent regions, and we also identified the motifs with the most contribution to each muta-
tion signature.
Author summary
Locus-specific epigenetic modifications play critical roles in various biological processes.
However, it remains elusive how proteins and their binding motifs regulate such locus-
specific epigenetic patterns. A contributing mechanism is that epigenetic enzymes are
recruited to specific loci by DNA binding factors recognizing particular sequence motifs
(referred to as epi-motifs). Using these motifs to predict biological outputs depending on
local epigenetic state such as somatic mutation rates would confirm their functionality.
Here, we developed an interpretable neural network model using contextual regression
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 1 / 25
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Liu C, Wang Z, Wang J, Liu C, Wang M,
Ngo V, et al. (2023) Predicting regional somatic
mutation rates using DNA motifs. PLoS Comput
Biol 19(10): e1011536. https://do i.org/10.1371/
journal.pcb i.1011536
Editor: Li Shen, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, UNITED STATES
Received: April 2, 2023
Accepted: September 20, 2023
Published: October 2, 2023
Copyright: © 2023 Liu et al. This is an open access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attributi on License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution , and reproduction in
any medium, provide d the original author and
source are credited .
Data Availabilit y Statement: All relevant data are
within the manuscript and its Support ing
Information files. Software availabil ity: The code is
available from GitHub (https://gith ub.com/Wa ng-
lab-UCSD/S omaticMuta tion).
Funding: This work was partially supporte d by the
NIH (R01HG0 09626 to W.W.). The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.
Competing interests : The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.


--- Page 2 ---
(CR) to predict somatic mutation rates at kilobase resolution using DNA motifs in 13
diverse cancers and identified the most informative motifs particularly epi-motifs. Fur-
thermore, we showed that the genomic regions with significantly higher mutation rates
than the predicted values can be used for cancer classification, thus facilitating discovery
of the underlying mechanisms. Importantly, this study provides candidate motifs and TFs
for the investigation of new mechanisms and the trained CR model is readily applicable to
new cancers and identifying cancer-related regions. The CR model can also be applied to
other biological questions, such as predicting histone modification using DNA sequences.
Introduction
Locus-specific epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications,
play critical roles in various biological processes [1]. While epigenetic patterns are influenced
by multiple factors, including nucleosome positioning [2,3], modifying enzymes [3], transcrip-
tion factors (TFs) [4], non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) [5], signaling molecules [6] and three-
dimensional genomic organization [7,8], the epigenetic modifying enzymes generally do not
recognize specific DNA sequence or do not bind to DNA at all and they need to be recruited
to specific loci by DNA binding proteins or ncRNAs. Pioneer transcription factors are exam-
ples of such proteins that initiate chromatin remodeling and activate regulatory elements in
particular loci [9–12]. However, proteins and their binding motifs responsible for establishing
or maintaining other types of locus-specific epigenetic patterns largely remain elusive.
Accumulating evidence suggest the importance of DNA sequence features in shaping epige-
netic patterns [4,13–20]. DNA motifs associated with epigenetic modifications (referred to as
epi-motifs) have been documented [21–23]. The readout of epi-motifs is dynamic and depen-
dent upon cellular conditions (e.g. activity of the DNA binding regulator and its access to
DNA), and thus is the epigenome. This mechanism is similar to how TFs function: while the
TF motifs remain the same, the transcriptional regulation is tissue-specific and dynamic. Suc-
cessful prediction of gene expression using TF motifs supports the functionality of TF motifs
[24,25]. Utilizing epi-motifs to predict biological outputs depending on local epigenetic state,
such as somatic mutation rates, would thus help to illustrate their importance in regulating
epigenetic locus-specificity.
Somatic mutations are tightly associated with disease phenotypes and are resulted from the
interplay between mutagenic processes and DNA repair mechanisms [26–32]. The regional
mutation rates are related to various factors, including replication timing, transcriptional
activity, nucleosome positioning, chromatin accessibility, histone modifications and protein
binding [26–32]. Analysis of mutation rates has been performed at multiple scales. At the
megabase scale, high mutation rate is correlated with later replication timing, closed chroma-
tin, strong repressive (e.g. H3K9me3) and weak active (H3K4me1/2) histone marks [33–38].
At the gene scale, reduced mutation rate is associated with high transcription and high
H3K36me3 levels [39–42]. At the scale of tens to hundreds of bases, nucleosome positioning is
correlated with periodicity of mutation rates [43–49]; furthermore, while high mutation rates
are observed at the binding sites of CTCF [40,50,51], ETS family and numerous other tran-
scription factors [52–55], simultaneous analysis of DNA damage and repair suggests that the
impact of protein binding varies from no effect to inhibition or stimulation on DNA damage
depending on TF and DNA damaging agent [56]. At the smallest scale of several base pairs,
previous analyses have uncovered sequence context of somatic mutations and mutational sig-
natures [57–61].
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 2 / 25


--- Page 3 ---
These observations support that chromatin state is tightly correlated with regional mutation
rate [29–31]. Such a relationship can be quantified at the megabase scale by machine learning
models [34,37,62]. However, at finer scales (e.g. tens of bases to kilobase), no strong correlation
between individual epigenetic signals and mutation rates has been observed [34,37,62] and a
quantitative model to explain this relationship has not been established. This knowledge gap
hinders the understanding of the epigenetic mechanisms that regulate somatic mutation. As
protein binding has been suggested to influence the balance between DNA damage and DNA
repair rates around their binding sites [52–56], considering DNA motifs recognized by DNA
binding proteins may aid in establishing a prediction model for mutation rates. However, it
has to overcome the challenge that proteins can have divergent effects on mutation rate upon
binding [56].
Given that driver mutations in cancers and other diseases only account for a small portion
of all somatic mutations, we hypothesize that (1) the majority of somatic mutations are corre-
lated with the regional features, such as epigenetic state and TF motifs, and the regional muta-
tion rates can be predicted by these relevant features; in other words, somatic mutations in
these regions are disease-independent and their occurrence is only related to the local environ-
ment rather than the disease state. (2) a relatively small portion of genomic regions contain
disease-related mutations and the mutation rates in these regions significantly deviate from
the expected values; in other words, these mutations are driven by the disease state and have
higher mutation loads than expected from the local environment.
We present here an interpretable deep neural network model that predicts somatic muta-
tion rate at the kilobase scale using DNA motifs. We calculate the mutation rate in genomic
regions with distinct epigenetic states as annotated by ChromHMM [3] based on the following
rationale. As the epi-motifs are associated with the regional epigenetic state [21–23] and the
regional epigenetic state has been shown to be associated with somatic mutation rates [33–38],
it is reasonable to use epi-motifs together with other motifs to predict regional mutation rates
in the same epigenetic state. If randomly segmenting the genome, a single region likely con-
tains segments in different epigenetic states (e.g. the active enhancers are often 200-300bp long
which is only part of a kilobase-long region) and it is thus inappropriate to predict the muta-
tion rate of the entire region using epi-motifs together with other motifs. If randomly segment-
ing the genome at a high resolution such as 200bp to avoid this problem, the regions are too
short to get stable mutation rates and we are not aware of any study that can predict mutation
rates at even kilobase resolution using only sequences.
We chose DNA motifs as input features because protein binding has been shown associated
with the regional mutation rate [29–31]. By building such a predictive model, we aimed to
uncover the DNA motifs that enhance or repress somatic mutations (Fig 1). Similar to how the
identification of TF motifs important for gene regulation in promoters and enhancers has con-
tributed to our understanding of transcriptional regulation [63,64], we propose that identify-
ing mutation-associated motifs, particularly epi-motifs, will help pave the way towards
revealing the molecular mechanisms influencing the rate of regional somatic mechanisms.
Our model has several unique features. First, we not only include known motifs docu-
mented in the literature but also de novo motifs associated with DNA methylation and histone
modifications (referred to as epi-motifs) [21–23]. The inclusion of epi-motifs can approximate
the epigenomic signals and would reveal DNA motifs involved in regulating locus-specific epi-
genetic modifications. Second, our model is interpretable, utilizing a method called contextual
regression [65,66]. It can assess the contribution of each motif to the prediction accuracy and
determine whether the presence of a motif is associated with an increase or decrease in the
regional mutation rate. Third, this model can identify disease-related regions that exhibit
exceeding loads of mutations. These regions can be used for classifying disease type.
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 3 / 25


--- Page 4 ---
The objective of this study was threefold: (1) to develop an interpretable deep neural net-
work model that predicts somatic mutation rate at the kilobase scale using DNA motifs, (2) to
identify the motifs that are most impactful on the regional mutation rates and (3) to classify
cancer types using disease-related regions that contain significant higher mutation rates than
predicted values.
Fig 1. The flowchart of the analysis. Using DNA motifs, includin g known TF motifs (TF motifs), histone associated
motifs (Histone motifs) and DNA methylation associated motifs (Methyl motifs) to represent epigenetic states, we
built a contextual regression (CR) model to predict regional mutation rates. As the majority of the mutations are
related to the local epigenetic state and independen t from the disease state (grey dots), this CR model can quantify the
relations hip between DNA motifs and somatic mutation rates. Importantly , the CR model revealed the motifs most
predictiv e of somatic mutati ons (right branch) and the predicted mutation values allowed classificati on of cancer types
using the cancer-relate d regions with significant ly higher mutation rates than predicted (left branch). In the scatter
plot, each point represents a training/testi ng instance, which is the predicted/m easured mutati on rate of a genomic
region. The mutati on rate is the log2(Mu tationRate+1 ), which is consistent with Fig 2c. The rows of the heatmap are
important motifs and the columns are differe nt types of cancers.
https://d oi.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011536. g001
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 4 / 25


--- Page 5 ---
Results
Regional somatic mutation rates could be predicted using DNA motifs at
kilobase resolution
We collected somatic mutations from 1,125 donors, detected through whole-genome sequenc-
ing (WGS) from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) project [67] (see
Online Methods for selection criteria and S1 Table). These donors were associated with 13
tumor types and contained a total of 8,086,632 somatic mutations. To define the genomic seg-
mentation and epigenetic states in the normal tissues corresponding to each cancer type, we
took the genomic segmentation defined by ENCODE using ChromHMM [68]. The rationale
behind this approach is that the majority of the mutations in cancers are random, and we rea-
soned that they depend primarily on the local epigenetic state, which can be approximated
using normal cells. We observed that, on average, 80.3% of the genome shares similar
ChromHMM states between the cancer cell line and their corresponding normal cell line (S2
Table). Because the ChromHMM segments vary in length reflecting the distinct scales of dif-
ferent chromatin states, we calculated and normalized mutation rate in each region as
D
i
¼
C
i
l
i
1000
�
T
10
6
, where T is the total number of somatic mutations in the tumor dataset under con-
sideration, C
i
the number of somatic mutations in region i, l
i
is the length (bp) of this region. It
is worth noting that the size of the genomic region is much smaller, with an average 22.7kb (S3
Table), compared to the larger 1Mbp regions used in the previous studies [34,37,62]. This finer
scale is expected to better capture the regional epigenetic state and mutation rate.
To build our prediction model, we utilized a comprehensive set of DNA motifs as input fea-
tures. This set included 1,663 known human motifs from the literature, as well as 310 motifs
associated with DNA methylation and 348 motifs associated with histone modifications, as
previously identified [22,23] (Online Methods and S4 Table). We trained and tested the con-
textual regression (CR) model on 80% of all the donors to predict the regional mutation rates,
while the remaining 20% of donors were left out for evaluating the model’s capability for classi-
fying cancer types. The framework of this study is shown in S1 Fig.
Contextual regression (CR) is a framework to interpret machine learning models
[65,66,69]. It can quantify contributions of features by learning an embedding function that
maps each feature vector to a local linear model capable of predicting the target value. The val-
ues assigned to each element in the feature vector are considered as context weight and the
embedding serves as the classifier of the context. By analyzing the statistics of the context
weight, the contribution of each feature can be inferred. CR has been successfully applied to
identify important features from neural network models such as those predictive of open chro-
matin [65] and circular RNA biogenesis [66].
Here, we constructed a CR model with a fully connected neural network architecture (Fig
2A). The model consisted of one input layer and 7 hidden layers. The 1
st
, 3
rd
, and 5
th
hidden
layers contained p/2, p/10-20, p/5-30 nodes, respectively (p is the number of features). Each
hidden layer was activated using the rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function, and each
was followed by a dropout layer (2
nd
, 4
th
, 6
th
hidden layer) with a rate of 0.01, 0.01 and 0.1,
respectively. Dropout layer is a common technique used in model training to prevent overfit-
ting. Dropout rate refers to the percentage of the neurons that are randomly dropped out in
the hidden layer. Higher dropout rates mean that more neurons are deactivated. The 7
th
layer
is the Context Weight layer with p nodes and a linear activation function. The output was gen-
erated by taking the dot product between the input and Context Weight layers (Fig 2A).
We hypothesized that (1) the majority of the somatic mutations are random and indepen-
dent of cancer (the associated regions are referred to as cancer-independent regions), and (2)
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 5 / 25


--- Page 6 ---
such random mutations are associated with the local epigenetic state and can be predicted by
DNA motifs. To test this hypothesis, we trained the model to predict mutation rates in all regions.
We anticipated that an accurate prediction would confirm the dominant majority of regions to be
cancer-independent. We then identified cancer-related regions as those whose observed muta-
tion rates significantly deviate from the predicted values and the prediction model could be fur-
ther improved by removing the identified cancer-related regions (see S2 Fig).
To implement this strategy, we first performed the CR prediction with 10-fold cross validations
for each cancer type and calculated the Pearson correlation between the predicted and observed
mutation rates (see S3 Table). The average Pearson correlation was high, measuring 0.866 (Fig
2B), indicating a dominant majority of cancer-independent regions. To build a universal model
Fig 2. The contextual regress ion model successfully predicted somat ic mutation rates in 13 tumors. (a) The structure of the
contextua l regression model; (b) For each tumor type, 10-fold cross validatio n was performed and the Pearson correlation coefficient
was calculated between the predicted and measured values. "Training accuracy" and "Testing accuracy" represent the average of Pearson
correlatio n coefficients in the training, testing datasets respective ly. "Included for re-training " indicates which data set was included for
re-training the CR model after removing the cancer-relate d regions (i.e. the regions with mutation rates significantly deviating from the
predicted values). "Testing accuracy of the re-trained model" represents the correlation using the re-trained CR model obtained from the
interactive procedure (see Online Methods). Because the regions from a tumor type in the test set may overlap with the regions included
in the merged dataset for training , the overlapped regions were remove d and Pearson correlation coefficients are shown as "Testing
accuracy after removing overlapping regions"; (c) The scatter plot for one fold from the 10-fold cross validatio ns in which chr1 and
chr11 were left out as the testing set; (d) The scatter plot for prediction in Lymph-CL L testing set using the re-trained CR model.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011536. g002
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 6 / 25


--- Page 7 ---
for all cancers, we selected 5 cancers with large sample size (donors and regions) and superior pre-
diction performance (average Pearson correlation coefficients > 0.90 in the test sets in the 10-fold
cross-validations). These cancers included Bone-Osteosarc, CNS-Medullo, Kidney-RCC, Panc-
Endocrine and Stomach-AdenoCA. We merged the regions from these five cancers. To avoid the
similar regions present in both training and test sets, we held out 2 or 3 chromosomes for testing
while training the model on the other chromosomes. We performed 10 such cross-validations,
resulting in average Pearson correlations of 0.926 on the training sets and 0.907 on the test sets,
respectively (see S5 Table and Fig 2C). It is worth noting that the ChromHMM regions differ
across the 13 cancers. Few exact ChromHMM segments (with exactly the same starting and end-
ing locations in the genome) were shared across all 13 cancers, with 80% of the ChromHMM
states unique to only one cancer and a negligible portion (much smaller than 0.01%) occurring in
all 13 cancers. Therefore, the features on the regions are distinct for different cancers and their
somatic mutation rates can be predicted using the same model.
Our next focus was on improving the prediction performance for cancer-independent
regions. To achieve this, we first identified and removed regions whose observed mutation
rates significantly deviated from the predicted values (Online Methods). Subsequently, we re-
trained the CR model using the remaining regions (i.e. cancer-independent regions) that bet-
ter captured the relationship between epigenetic state and random somatic mutations (S2 Fig).
We next refined the identification of cancer-independent regions and cancer-related regions
using the re-trained CR model. Consistent with our hypothesis, the majority of regions are
cancer-independent, with the highest proportion being 90.1% in Breast-AdenoCA and the
lowest being 63.1% in Prost-AdenoCA (Fig 3A, S6 Table).
To evaluate the prediction performance using an independent data set, we applied the re-
trained CR model to the remaining 8 cancer types (Figs 2B, 2D and S3 and S3 Table,) and
achieved an average Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.857. Considering regions included in
the 5 training datasets might also appear in the other datasets, we removed all the overlapping
regions in the test set, and the average Pearson correlation was not affected and remained high
at 0.858 (Fig 2B). Taken together, the CR model successfully captured the relationship between
cancer-independent somatic mutation rates and DNA motifs in diverse tissues.
Notably, the prediction performance using DNA motifs alone is comparable to that using
Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) data of TFs and histone
modifications. For example, using 165 TF and histone ChIP-seq of data from GM12878 (down-
loaded from https://www.encodeproject.org /) as the input features to predict the somatic muta-
tion rates of Lymph-CLL (with GM12878 as the corresponding normal cell for Lymph-CLL), the
Pearson correlations on the training and testing datasets were 0.903 (compared to 0.943 using
motifs) and 0.871 (compared to 0.899 using motifs), respectively. The slightly lower correlation
using ChIP-seq data may be attributed to the smaller number of TFs measured by ChIP-seq com-
pared to the number of available motifs. Since most cancers lack extensive ChIP-seq data in the
corresponding normal tissues or cell lines, this observation indicates that using TF and epi-motifs
can be useful for approximating the regional epigenetic states in predicting mutation rates.
The analysis of the prediction results indicates that our model does not solely predict aver-
age mutation rates in different ChromHMM states. We demonstrated this by showing that the
same ChromHMM state exhibits a wide range of mutation rates (S4 Fig). This observation
holds true for all the analyzed cancers, not just breast cancer. Additionally, we observed a high
correlation between the predicted and measured mutation rates in all regions within the same
ChromHMM states (breast cancer as an example in the S5 Fig and each panel is one
ChromHMM state). These observations clearly showed that our model can indeed predict
mutation rates for individual regions and not just distinguish the mean mutation rates between
different ChromHMM states.
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 7 / 25


--- Page 8 ---
Furthermore, we merged the similar motifs to remove redundancy and the model’s perfor-
mance remained comparable with the original model (S7 Table). We chose to use the non-
merged motif set in this study because different versions of the same motifs may represent col-
laborations of the same TF with different partners.
Contextual regression identified important features in cancer-independent
regions
To identify the most important features in each cancer-independent region, we selected motifs
with both the largest contributions to the predicted value and the largest contextual weights:
(1) we first selected the top 10% of features with the largest |β
i
X
i
|, where β
i
is the contextual
Fig 3. Analysis of the cancer-i ndepende nt regions. (a) The percentage of cancer-indepe ndent regions in the 13
cancer types. Percentage is calculated as the number of cancer -independent /related or ambiguo us regions divided by
the total number of regions in a cancer; (b) Cancer-ind ependent regions clustered using the contex tual weight s of the
motifs. For each of the 13 cancer types, the identified cancer-indepe ndent regions were clustered into 10 clusters using
the Manhatta n distance between the feature contextu al weight vectors as the similarity metric. Each row is a motif with
non-zero contextual weight, each column a cluster, and each entry is the average of a motif’s contextual weights in all
the regions in a cluster. The clusters were further clustered into 10 groups; (c) The normalized mutation rate of each
group, which is the z-score of mutation density (see methods for more details), varies significan tly from the lowest in
group A to the highest in group G; (d) The numbers of regions in the 10 groups; (e) The fold change of ChromHMM
states in group A and each tumor. The fold change for each ChromHMM state is defined as the percentag e of the state
in group A divided by the percentage of the state in all the regions in a specific cancer.
https://d oi.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011536. g003
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 8 / 25


--- Page 9 ---
weight for feature X
i
. |β
i
X
i
| represents the contribution of feature X
i
to the predicted mutation
rate of this region. (2) Among the top 10% of features with the largest |β
i
X
i
|, we selected the
top 10% of features with the largest |β
i
|. In the following analyses, we only focused on the
selected motifs and each region was thus represented by a vector composed of the contextual
weight value β
i
for the selected motifs and 0 for the unselected motifs.
Using the contextual weight profile obtained for each cancer, we performed clustering of
the cancer-independent regions using K-means. The value of k, the number of clusters, was
determined as the elbow point on the elbow curve for each individual cancer. After removing
the clusters with small size (less than 10 regions), we obtained a total 163 clusters across 13
cancers. These clusters were further grouped into 10 distinct groups using hierarchical cluster-
ing. Group A had the most clusters (18), while group F had the least (6) (Fig 3B, see S6 Fig for
the full heatmap). The 10 groups show distinct characteristics. First, the mutation rate is the
lowest in group A and the highest in group E (Fig 3C). Second, the number of regions in each
group varied significantly, with group A containing the largest number of regions (657,746)
and group F having the smallest number (441) (Fig 3D). Third, two ChromHMM states,
namely the Weak Repressed PolyComb and Quiescent/Low states, were only enriched in
group A across all 13 cancers but not in any other groups (Figs 3E and S7).
To identify the important features in each group, we calculated the average of contextual
weights across clusters for each group (Fig 4A and S8 Table). This analysis led to the identifica-
tion of 336 unique motifs distributed across the 10 groups, with group J having the highest
number of motifs (130) and group A having the smallest number (41) (Fig 4B). Interestingly,
although epi-motifs (motifs associated with histone modification and DNA methylation)
accounted for only 28% of the input motifs, their percentage increased significantly to average
35% (one-proportion z-test p-value = 5.1×10
−7
) among the important motifs in the 10 groups.
This increase was particularly prominent in group A, B, F and I (Fig 4C). This finding supports
the notion that epi-motifs play a crucial role in establishing regional epigenetic states [22,23].
To gain deeper insights, we focused on group A due to its largest number of regions. In this
group, we identified 18 motifs with positive contextual weights and 22 motifs with negative
contextual weights (Fig 4A). The sign of the contextual weights indicates positive or negative
association between the input feature and the predictive value. Therefore, our analysis sug-
gested that the 18 and 22 motifs would have opposite impacts on somatic mutations. We then
examined the mutation rates around these motifs and found that motifs with positive weights
were associated with significantly higher mutation rates compared to those with negative
weights (p-value of 4.5×410
−6
from Student’s t-test) (Fig 4D). Furthermore, we performed
pairwise comparison between all the possible positive- and negative-weighted motif pairs. In
62.6% of all the pairs (248/396, using a p-value cutoff of 0.05 from Student’s t-test), the muta-
tion rates around the motif sites (upstream 50bp to downstream 50bp) for positive-weighted
motifs were higher than the paired negative motifs. One motif pair of CBX2 (positive coeffi-
cient) and TP53 (negative coefficient) is shown as an example in Fig 4E. The mutation rate is
significantly higher (p-value of 1.51×10
−4
from Student’s t-test) around the CBX2 motifs than
that around TP53 (i.e. M6403_1.02) motifs in group A. TP53 is known to play a significant
role in repairing damaged DNA [70], supporting the reasonable negative association between
TP53 motifs and mutation rate.
Among the important motifs in group A, we observed 6 positive- and 5 negative-weighted
histone-motifs (Fig 4A). The positive association of the H3K27me3 motifs and the negative
association of H3K4me3.H3K4me1 and H3K4me1.H3K36me3 motifs with the mutation rate
are not surprising and consistent with the literature. The positive association of 1 H3K4me1.
H3K27ac and 3 H3K36me3 as well as negative association of 2 H3K9me3 motifs suggest the
relationship between histone modification and somatic mutation at the kilobase scale is more
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 9 / 25


--- Page 10 ---
complex than expected from the previous megabase-scale studies. Interestingly, we also found
3 DNA methylation motifs (MM) positively associated with somatic mutation rates, indicating
the possible roles of DNA methylation on affecting DNA damage and repair.
Fig 4. Identificatio n of important motifs in cancer-i ndepende nt regions. (a) The important features in the 10
groups. Blue and orange represent the negative and positive contextual weight, respective ly; (b) The number of
important motifs in each group; (c) The percentages of motif categor ies in each group; (d) The average mutation rates
around the motifs with positive contex tual weights are higher than those around the motifs with negative contextual
weights in the group A regions; (e) Mutation rates around the motif sites (1kbp at each side of the motif) in the group
A regions. The red and blue lines represent the motifs with positive and negative contextu al weights, respective ly. The
motif site is at the center .
https://d oi.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011536. g004
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 10 / 25


--- Page 11 ---
The CR model allows identification of cancer-related genomic regions and
motifs
The analysis of the predicted mutation rates allowed us to identify cancer-related regions in
each tumor type (see Online Methods). The percentage of these regions varied across cancer
types, ranging from 0.2% in CNS-Medullo to 10.5% in Prost-AdenoCA, with an average of
4.1% (Fig 3A). The small proportion of these cancer-related regions confirms our hypothesis
that the majority of genomic regions are cancer-independent . One example for cancer-related
regions in Breast-AdenoCA is shown in Fig 5A. We analyzed the biological processes in can-
cer-related regions for each cancer type (S9 Table) and the enriched ones for Breast-AdenoCA
are shown in Fig 5B, including those relevant to breast tissue and/or breast cancer such as
"right ventricular cardiac muscle tissue morphogenesis", "negative regulation of fat cell differ-
entiation", and "negative regulation of female gonad development" as well as "telomere forma-
tion via telomerase" and "telomerase RNA localization to Cajal body". Notably, the key gene
WRAP53 is also found in the Breast-AdenoCA-related regions, which is related to the
increased risk of breast cancer [71–73].
We also found that the disruption rate of motifs by somatic mutations in cancer-related
regions was significantly higher than that in cancer-independent regions for 10 out of 13
tumor types (p-value < 0.05, Fig 5C). The disruption rate of motifs for cancer-related regions
is defined as the number of all motif binding sites overlapped with somatic mutation divided
by the number of all motifs binding sites and the number of somatic mutations (see Online
Methods). This observation supports the hypothesis that the DNA motifs play a role in shaping
the epigenetic state, and mutations that disrupt these motifs may be associated with
tumorigenesis.
To identify the most significantly disrupted motifs in the cancer-related regions for each
cancer, we selected motifs that had a disruption rate in the top 5% of all motifs with a p-
value < 0.05 (p-value calculated from the Student’s t-test for the alternative hypothesis of the
disruption rate in cancer-related regions larger than that in cancer-independent regions).
Among the 342 motifs obtained in 13 cancer types, 60.8% of them were known motifs, a
decrease from 72% in the input motifs (Fig 5E). 102 (28.9%) DNA methylation associated
motifs represented a significant increase from 13% in the input motifs. Notably, all of them are
unmethylated motifs (i.e. UM motifs), which are known to be associated with low DNA meth-
ylation level [23]. This observation is consistent with the well-established phenomenon of
hypomethylation being frequently observed in both highly and moderately repeated DNA
sequences, including heterochromatic DNA repeats, in cancer [74]. The most common motifs
found across cancer types included one known motif (E2F1, motif ID: M4536_1.02), two
unmethylation motifs (UM_235.9_3.32_0.65_1_SGCWCGCG GCGGC and
UM_326.6_2.71_0.59_6_CGCGCCCCG Y). E2F1 is known to play a crucial role in cell cycle
regulation [75] and DNA repair [76]. Somatic mutations in E2F1 binding sites could poten-
tially result in dysfunction of E2F1. Additionally, several motifs were found to be specifically
disrupted in certain cancer types (S10 Table), such as M2321_1.02 (TP63) in Bone-Osteosarc,
M6446_1.02 (RARG) in Breast-AdenoCA, and M5371_1.02 (EGR4) in Lymph-CLL.
It is interesting that the cancer-related regions in most cancer types were enriched in the
ChromHMM state of "Quiescent/Low", which typically exhibits little or low epigenetic signals.
Furthermore, each cancer type also showed its own specific epigenetic state, as reflected by the
enrichment of different ChromHMM states. For example, "Transcription at gene 5’ and 3´´´ is
the most enriched state in Lymph-CLL and Lymph-BNHL, while "ZNF genes & repeats" was
enriched in Bone-Osteosarc and Panc-Endocrine (Fig 5D).
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 11 / 25


--- Page 12 ---
The cancer-related regions are predictive of cancer types
The cancer-related regions are presumably important in cancers considering the cancer-
related regions are those having significantly higher mutation rates than the predictive muta-
tion values. Therefore, we examined whether these regions could be predictive of cancer types.
Fig 5. Analysis of the cancer-r elated regions. (a) The identified cancer-relate d regions in Breast-AdenoC A (red dots);
(b)The enriched pathways for the cancer-relate d regions in Breast-AdenoC A; (c) The fold change and p-value for the
motif disruption rates in the 13 tumors. The red line represents the p-value of 0.05; (d) The fold change of
chromHM M state (same as that in Fig 3E) for the cancer-re lated regions in each tumor; (e) The percentages of motif
types that were significant ly disrupte d in cancer-re lated regions; (f) The classificati on model performance . The
confusion matrix for the classificati on model using the 150 selected cancer-relate d regions on the testing dataset. Rows
and columns correspond to the true and predicted tumor types, respectively. Values are the number of donors
classified correctly. For example, for the Prost−AdenoC A, 31 donors were correctly classified.
https://d oi.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011536. g005
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 12 / 25


--- Page 13 ---
Twelve cancers with WGS data with >30 donors each were used for multi-class classification
of cancer types, with Stomach-AdenoCA excluded due to the small sample size. Additionally,
400 healthy donors from GTEX were included as controls. Using the mutation counts in the
67,890 cancer-related regions (which collectively spanned the entire genome, S6 Table), a Gra-
dient Boosting Decision Tree model was trained for classifying the 12 tumor types and con-
trols. The training and evaluation of the classification model were performed on 80% of the
cancer donors (the dataset used in CR model construction) and controls, while the remaining
samples (independent data not used in the CR model construction) were utilized as the testing
set. A systematic search of the hyperparameter space (27,000 combinations of 6 parameters,
S11 Table and method section) was conducted using 5-fold cross-validation on the training
data (i.e. the 80% of the 1,382 cancer donors and 320 control donors). The best parameter
combination was selected based on the minimal difference of accuracy between the training
and validation datasets to avoid overfitting. The prediction accuracy on the test data in the
5-fold cross-validations was 0.865. We re-trained the classification model using all the 80%
data with the best parameter combination and its prediction accuracy on the left-out 20% data-
set was 0.858.
The feature selection process was conducted using the feature importance metric of Gradi-
ent Boosting Decision Tree, and 150 regions (accounting for 5.8% of the whole genome) were
selected for re-training the classification model. We also performed the parameter tunings
using 5-fold cross validation on the 80% dataset. The accuracy on the testing samples was
0.813 using the best parameter combination (S12 Table). Subsequently, the classification
model was re-trained using the 80% dataset with the best parameter combination and its pre-
diction accuracy on the left-out 20% donors was 0.822 (Fig 5F). The recall for each class on the
testing dataset ranged from 0.14 in Bone-Osteosarc to 1.00 in control, with a median of 0.72.
The precision ranged from 0.62 in Breast-AdenoCA to 1.00 in Bone-Osteosarc, Lymph-BNHL
and Ovary-AdenoCA, with a median of 0.83. The F1 score, a comprehensive metric, ranged
from 0.25 in Bone-Osteosarc to 0.98 in Control, with a median of 0.75. It is not surprising that
the best performance was achieved on control samples, as distinguishing normal samples from
tumor samples is generally easier than differentiating between different types of tumors. The
performance on Bone-Osteosarc was the worst, which was likely due to small sample size (only
28 donors in training and 7 in testing). Overall, the performance of the model is satisfactory,
especially considering that it only utilized 5.8% of the genome for classification. These results
further validate the model’s robustness and demonstrate that the predicted mutation values
can serve as a reference for identifying regions with aberrantly high mutation rates, which may
be associated with specific cancer types.
Discussion
Distinct from the previous analyses, we showed for the first time that DNA motifs can be pre-
dictive of regional somatic mutation rates at the kilobase scale. The DNA motifs include
known TF motifs as well as epi-motifs that are associated with histone modifications or DNA
methylation. We showed that the prediction performance is comparable to that using histone
and TF ChIP-seq data. Considering that genome sequencing is much easier than ChIP-seq
experiments in tumor tissues, our model provides a powerful approach to quantify the rela-
tionship between somatic mutations and epigenetic state.
A remarkable aspect of the study is the revelation of the pivotal roles played by epi-motifs
in predicting regional somatic mutation rates. Despite accounting for only 28% of the input
motifs, epi-motifs constitute an average of 35% in the most predictive motifs across the 10
groups. Moreover, the significantly higher frequency of disruption of DNA methylation
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 13 / 25


--- Page 14 ---
associated motifs (28.9%) in the cancer-related regions, compared to their percentage (13%) in
the input motifs, suggests their pivotal roles in shaping the regional epigenetic state and decid-
ing the locus-specific modifications. These important epi-motifs identified from this analysis
can guide future studies to investigate the proteins that bind to these motifs and recruit epige-
netic enzymes to specific loci, thereby initiating local changes in the epigenetic state. The suc-
cess of this study also suggests that it is possible to use epi-motifs as the surrogate of local
epigenetic state for predicting other observable measurements.
We hypothesized that the majority of somatic mutations are random and only depend on
the regional epigenetic state in the normal cells/tissues. In other words, the majority of the
genomic regions containing somatic mutations are cancer-independent. This hypothesis was
supported by the high correlation between the predicted and measured mutation rates across
all the regions. This kilobase-scale relationship is general across cancers as indicated by the
successful prediction on cancers not included in the training dataset. Such a relationship was
not previously uncovered in megabase-scale analyses from previous studies.
Furthermore, the contextual regression model provides a framework to interpret the neural
network predictions and identify the most predictive features. Using the contextual weights of
the predictive motifs, we were able to cluster the genomic regions that share similar motif con-
tribution profiles on predicting mutation rates. The regions in the same cluster are presumably
regulated by similar mechanisms, akin to genes sharing similar expression profiles across cell
types. In fact, by analyzing these clusters, we observed that the impact of protein binding on
regional mutations can be positive, negative or neutral. While the previous study reported that
TF binding would block DNA repair proteins in the open chromatin regions to increase muta-
tion rates [55], we found there exist proteins/motifs whose occurrence in the open chromatin
regions is associated with lower mutation rates. This observation highlights the importance of
genetic and epigenetic context on impacting regional mutations.
Importantly, the predicted mutation rates from the contextual regression model provide a
quantitative background to identify cancer-related regions in a particular cancer. These
regions exhibit significantly higher mutation rates than expected from the regional epigenetic
states in the corresponding normal tissue. The CR model learns the relationship between
motifss and mutation rate. For each region from each cancer, it has its own background muta-
tion rate based on its own features. Therefore, if the observed mutation rate is higher than the
background, the region may be related to the mechanism of this cancer and thus called cancer-
related region. Because regions with higher mutation rates in cancer tissues compared to the
normal tissues can be resulted from various causes and might be irrelevant to cancer, using the
predicted mutation rates as the reference would allow distinction between regions within can-
cer tissues and uncover those directly related to cancer. While investigating the underlying
mechanisms in these regions is not the focus of this study, the identified known and epi-motifs
can help mechanistic analysis in the future and elucidate region-specific factors regulating
somatic mutation rates. Based on these cancer-related regions, we showed that only using 150
regions that account for only 5.8% of the human genome could predict cancer types with a sat-
isfactory performance. This result provides a potential diagnosis tool using targeted
sequencing.
Mutational signatures have been widely adopted to characterize the preference of mutation
types in cancers. Therefore, we performed mutational signature analysis on 3 types of regions,
i.e. cancer-independent regions, cancer-related regions and all the regions. The association of
cancer-independent regions with the mutational signatures is more similar to that of all
regions than cancer-related regions, which is not unexpected. The relative contribution of
mutational signatures can be quite different between these two types of regions within the
same cancer type. For example, signature 2 contributes more in cancer-related regions in
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 14 / 25


--- Page 15 ---
Bone-Osteosarc, compared to that in cancer-independent regions (S8 Fig). Motifs with signifi-
cant contributions to each mutational signature are listed in Github (https://github.com/
Wang-lab-UCSD/SomaticM utation/tree/main/results/supplem entaryTables/13_cancers_
motifs_contribution_30_SBS.xlsx) . It is obvious that the two approaches (CR model and muta-
tional signatures) provide complementary information and the motifs/their binding proteins
uncovered by the CR model can guide mechanistic study of mutational signatures in specific
regions.
During the submission of this work, Sherman et al. [77] published a deep learning method
to predict mutation rates at 10kbp resolution. Our study is different from Sherman et al. in the
following aspects and the two studies are highly complementary. First, our model only uses
DNA motifs and epigenomic data of 6 histone marks in the corresponding normal cell types
for each cancer type. In contrast, Sherman et al. used much more data, including 723 chroma-
tin marks from 111 tissues to train their model as well as replication timing in 10 cell lines and
average nucleotide and CG content in the reference genome. Our model uses much less fea-
tures but can achieve a slightly better prediction performance (a mean Pearson R
2
= 0.736, i.e.
R = 0.858, Fig 2B and S3 Table in our manuscript compared to a mean Pearson R
2
= 0.706, i.e.
R = 0.84, in Sherman et al.). Second, our model can be applied to new cancer types without
retraining and only requires the epigenetic state in the corresponding normal cells as shown in
our paper that the model trained on 5 cancer types was successfully applied to predict the
remaining 8 cancer types. In contrast, Sherman et al. has to re-train the entire model to include
new cancer types. Third, our study focuses on understanding how the DNA motifs, particu-
larly the epi-motifs, contribute to regional somatic mutation rates and the contextual regres-
sion model provides an interpretable model that directly derives the important motifs. In
contrast, Sherman et al. focused on uncovering driver mutations.
In this study we used ChromHMM to segment the genome and annotate the epigenetic
states. It is worth noting that the analysis results should be insensitive to the variability of chro-
matin states. Our model considers the mutation rates of individual regions and does not
require a distinction between different states, such as enhancer subclasses. It might be interest-
ing to compare different segmentation methods and use different numbers of ChromHMM
states to repeat our analysis in the future.
Taken together, we developed an interpretable neural network model to successfully predict
somatic mutation rates at kilobase resolution using DNA motifs in 13 diverse cancers and iden-
tified the most informative motifs particularly epi-motifs. Furthermore, we showed that the
genomic regions with significantly higher mutation rates than the predicted values can be used
for cancer classification, thus facilitating discovery of the underlying mechanisms. The availabil-
ity of additional WGS data in cancer samples and epigenomic data in the corresponding normal
samples would allow further improvement of the model performance and generality. Further-
more, this study provides candidate motifs and TFs for the investigation of new mechanisms
and the trained CR model is readily applicable to new cancers and identifying cancer-related
regions. The CR model can also be applied to other biological questions, such as predicting his-
tone modification using DNA sequences. Interestingly, we found that the same mutation signa-
tures often have different contributions to cancer-related and cancer-independent regions, and
we also identified the motifs with the most contribution to each mutation signature.
Materials and methods
Somatic mutation data
The somatic mutation data of 2,583 donors analyzed by the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole
Genomes Consortium (PCAWG) were downloaded from the International Cancer Genome
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 15 / 25


--- Page 16 ---
Consortium (ICGC) data portal [78] (https://dcc.icgc.org/). This was the largest data set when
this analysis started. The tumor types for the donors were retrieved from S1 Table in reference
[67]. We filtered the data using the following criteria: (1) donors with metastatic tumors were
removed because in this study we focused on the primary tumors; (2) outlier donors with
extremely high or low somatic mutation numbers were discarded to avoid bias. An outlier was
defined as a data point located outside 1.5 times the interquartile range above the upper quar-
tile and below the lower quartile for a tumor type; (3) tumor types with less than 5 donors or
without ChromHMM segmentation in the corresponding normal tissues were not included;
(4) only WGS data were kept if a donor had both WES and WGS data; (5) removing tumor
types if the number of the total somatic mutations in all the donors of that tumor type was less
than 30,000. As a result, 1,125 donors from 13 different tumor types remained for model train-
ing and testing (S1 Table). Somatic mutations in the blacklisted regions were removed [79].
While it is true that these 13 cancer types may or may not be fully representative of somatic
mutation rates in all tissues, it is important to note that the main objective of this study was
not to select cancer types as representatives for different tissues. Instead, our study aimed to
develop a predictive model to understand how DNA motifs contribute to regional somatic
mutation rates across a diverse set of cancers.
DNA Motifs
We included 1731 human motifs of DNA binding proteins documented in the CIS-BP database
[80] and another 55 motifs from Factorbook [63]. We also added 313 motifs associated with
DNA methylation [23] and 361 motifs associated with histone modifications [22] that were
identified in our previous studies. These motifs were used to approximate the epigenetic state.
We used FIMO [81] to scan these total 2460 motifs against hg19. With a p-value cutoff of 10
−5
,
2,321 motifs having at least one occurrence were used for the following analyses (S4 Table).
Genomic segmentation using ChromHMM
The core 15-state ChromHMM segmentations were downloaded from https://egg2.wustl.edu/
roadmap/web_portal/. For kidney and prostate gland, the ChromHMM segmentations were not
available from the website. To be consistent, we applied the core 15-state trained ChromHMM
model to these 2 tissues, which was downloaded from https://egg2.wustl.edu/r oadmap/data/
byFileType/chromhmmSegment ations/ChmmModels/coreMarks/joi ntModel/final/model_15_
coreMarks.txt. The data for these 2 tissues were downloaded from the ENCODE portal (S13 Table).
Somatic mutation density and feature calculation
We calculated the somatic mutation density in a given set of cancer patients as the following.
Let R
i
denote the segmented region i, i = 1,. . .,N, l
i
the length (bp) of R
i
, and C
i
the number of
somatic mutations in all the donors in region i. The somatic mutations were downloaded from
PCAWG. The regional somatic mutation density D
i
was computed as D
i
¼
C
i
l
i
100 0
�
T
10
6
, where T is
the total number of somatic mutations in all the donors of this dataset. We added a pseudo-
count to D
i
and defined D
ð1Þ
i
¼ log 2ðD
i
þ 1Þ. We then calculated Y
i
¼
ðD
ð1Þ
i
  Mean Þ
STD
as the response
variable in the model by z-score transformation, where Mean is the average of D
ð1Þ
i
and STD is
the standard deviation error of D
ð1Þ
i
.
Let M
j
be the motif j, j = 1,..,p. C
0
i;j
is the median p-value of all occurrences of M
j
in the
region R
i
and the p-value was calculated from FIMO [81]. We used -log10(C
0
i;j
) in each region
as the input features to predict Y
i
.
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 16 / 25


--- Page 17 ---
Construction, training and testing of the CR model
The architecture of CR model was shown in Fig 2A. We used Adam as the optimization algo-
rithm for training the CR model. Adam is a popular and efficient optimization algorithm com-
monly used in neural network training. It is well suited for problems that are large in terms of
data/parameters. The choice of Adam was based on its strong performance in similar tasks. To
ensure the optimal performance of the CR model, we conducted a grid search of hyperpara-
meters, including the dropout rate. Dropout is a regularization technique used to prevent over-
fitting in neural networks by randomly setting a fraction of the neurons’ output to zero during
training. We tested different dropout rates and evaluated the model’s performance. We
selected three cancers (Bone-Osteosarc, Breast-AdenoCA, and Liver-HCC) covering the range
of the prediction performance. We tested five different dropout rates and the test set accuracies
are very similar, which shows the robustness of the model training to dropout rates. The ratio-
nale of Contextual regression (CR) is that CR can quantify feature contributions by learning
an embedding function to map each feature vector to a linear model that can predict the target
value. The values assigned to each element in the feature vector are considered as context
weight and the embedding serves as the classifier of the context. By analyzing the statistics of
the context weight, the contribution of each feature can be inferred.
The details of the training and testing of the CR model is shown in S1 Fig. Briefly, we
divided the donors randomly into two sets: 80% for model training/testing and the rest for
independent testing. Using the 80% donors, we trained and tested CR models for individual
cancer types using 10-fold cross validations (Step 1 in S1 Fig). The best performed 5 cancers
were selected to train a universal model on all the regions in these 5 cancers (Step 2). As the
majority of the regions in the cancers could be accurately predicted using the motifs and the
ChromHMM segmentation in the corresponding normal cells, it confirmed our hypothesis
that somatic mutations in the majority of the genome are cancer-independent. To better cap-
ture the relationship between the somatic mutations and epigenetic state, we removed the
regions, i.e. cancer-related regions, whose predicted mutations rates significantly deviated
from the observed values (Step 3). We further analyzed important motifs with high CR weights
(Step 4). We then trained and tested a classification model to distinguish cancer types using
the cancer-related regions on the 20% of the donors that were not used to select these regions
as an independent test (Step 5).
Assessing the CR model performance
In each dataset, we performed cross validation to assess the model performance, in which 10%
of the segmented regions were held out for testing. Because there were overlapped
ChromHMM regions from different tumor types, we partitioned the samples from these 5
tumor types based on the chromosomes to avoid the overlapped regions presenting in training
and testing datasets. Two or three chromosomes were randomly left out for testing while the
other chromosomes were used for training CR models. We repeated such cross validation 10
times. The specific partitions of training/testing dataset and performances were listed in
S5 Table.
Identification of cancer-related and cancer-independent regions
To identify the cancer-related and cancer-independent regions, we used an iterative proce-
dure. First, we trained a CR model using all the regions from the merged dataset (the first itera-
tion). As the majority of the regions are cancer-independent regions, using all the regions to
train the model would not significantly impact the accuracy. Assuming the cancer-indepen-
dent somatic mutation counts in a specific region follow a Poisson distribution, we estimated
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 17 / 25


--- Page 18 ---
the parameter lambda (i.e. the expectation for Poisson distribution) using the predicted counts
that were converted from the predicted mutation rates. Based on this Poisson distribution, we
calculated a p-value for the observed mutation count. If a region had a p-value (upper-tail or
lower-tail) < 0.1, it was considered as either cancer-related or ambiguous and thus removed
from the training set. We retrained the CR model using the remaining regions that presumably
contained more cancer-independent ones in the second iteration. Repeating this procedure
would continue improving the model and removing regions that are cancer-related or ambigu-
ous. We found that this procedure converged fast as the average mean squared error (MSE) on
the testing dataset reached the plateau at the second iteration, indicating that the model
became stable. Therefore, we took this model trained using two iterations as the final model
for the following analyses.
We used the predicted mutation rates from the final CR model as the background and re-
calculated the p-value for each region in each tumor. A region was called cancer-independent
if its p-value (upper-tail and lower-tail) > 0.1, cancer-related if the FDR from the upper-tail for
a region was <0.01. The other regions were ambiguous regions and not included in any fur-
ther analysis.
Somatic mutation calling for the GTEX data
We downloaded the GTEX WGS data from dbGap (accession number phs000424.v8.p2) . We
aligned the sequencing reads to hg19 and called somatic mutations using the GATK best prac-
tice workflow [82]. We removed the reads that originated from duplicates of the same DNA
fragments using MarkDuplicatesSp ark function in GATK. Base (Quality Score) Recalibration
was conducted for correcting any systematic bias observed in the base quality scores. We fol-
lowed the guideline of how to call somatic mutations using GATK4 Mutect2 (https://gatk.
broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/a rticles/360035889791—How- to-Call-somatic-mutations-using-
GATK4-Mutect2-Deprecate d-). We called candidate variants using Mutect2, which is
designed specifically for somatic mutation calling by the GATK group. FilterMutectCall s was
then applied to identify variants from artifacts, such as those resulting from alignment, strand
and orientation bias, polymerase slippage, and germline variants. The tool uses the annotations
within the callset and applies preset thresholds that are tuned for human somatic analyses.
This generated a VCF file with a FILTER field. The true positives were labeled with PASS in
the FILTER field. Funcotator was used to add annotation to these variants, such as dbSNP and
gencode. Lastly, we only considered somatic mutations with a FILTER flag PASS and obtained
somatic mutations for 400 donors.
Disruption rate of the motifs
In the cancer-related regions for a given patient, the disruption rate of a motif was calculated
as C/(M*N), where C is the number of motif binding sites overlapped with somatic mutations
in the cancer-related regions in this patient, M is the total number of motif binding sites and N
is the total number of somatic mutations in the cancer-related regions for this patient. Simi-
larly, we calculated the disruption rate in the cancer-independent regions. To test whether the
disruption rate in the cancer-related regions was higher than in the cancer-independent
regions, paired-T test was used to compute the p-value for each tumor type with the patients as
samples. This way, we identified significantly disrupted motifs for each cancer type.
To evaluate whether all motifs were significantly disrupted in one type of cancer, we per-
formed the above analysis for all the motifs. Specifically, given the cancer type and a patient,
the disruption rate for all motifs was defined as C/(M*N), where C is the number of all motif
binding sites overlapped with somatic mutations in the cancer-related regions in this patient,
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 18 / 25


--- Page 19 ---
M is the total number of all motif binding sites and N is the total number of somatic mutations
in the cancer-related regions of this patient. The disruption rate in cancer-related regions is
calculated in the same way. Paired-T test was used to evaluate the significance for each tumor
type with the patients as samples. The p-value cutoff was set to 0.05.
Gradient boosting decision tree
A gradient boosting decision tree was trained to classify cancer types using the scikit-learn
package [83]. There were six parameters in the model, including (1) learning rate (denoted as
learning_rate); (2) the minimum number of samples (or observations) required in a node to
be considered for splitting (min_samples_split); (3) the minimum samples (or observations)
required in a terminal node or leaf (min_samples_leaf); (4) the maximum depth of a tree
(max_depth); (5) the fraction of observations to be selected for each tree (subsample); (6) the
number of sequential trees to be modeled (n_estimators).
We selected the optimal values of the parameters with the best classification performance:
when using all the cancer-related regions as features: learning_rate = 0.012; min_samples_s-
plit = 150; min_samples_leaf = 130; max_depth = 2; subsample = 0.6; n_estimators = 1900
(S11 Table); when using the selected 150 cancer-related regions as features, learnin-
g_rate = 0.011; min_samples_split = 190; min_samples_leaf = 60; max_depth = 3; subsam-
ple = 0.6; n_estimators = 2000 (S12 Table).
Mutational signature analysis
To identify the mutational patterns in cancer-independent and cancer-related regions respec-
tively for each cancer, we first prepared the catalog matrix C with rows as mutation types and
columns as different type of regions. In our case, the dimension of C is 96x3, where 96 corre-
sponds to the number of mutation types and 3 corresponds to the three types of regions,
which are cancer-independent regions, cancer-related regions, and all the ChromHMM
regions in this cancer as the reference. Then we used R package MutationalPatterns [84,85]
with default parameters to fit C with the 30 COSMIC mutational signatures and the relative
contributions of the 30 mutational signatures can be calculated for the three types of regions in
each cancer.
Supporting information
S1 Fig. The framework for the training and testing of the CR model.
(TIF)
S2 Fig. The toy model illustrates how to train the CR model and identification of cancer-
independent and cancer-related regions. The red dots represent the cancer-related regions
and the black dots represent the cancer-independent regions. And the black line represents the
true model. In practice, we don’t know which dots (i.e. regions/samples) are cancer-related or
cancer-independent regions. So we train a CR model using all the samples and get the trained
model indicated by the red line. Under the assumption, we know that the trained CR model is
not exactly the true model, but it is close to the true model. To identify the cancer-related
regions, we take the prediction of the current trained CR model as the background and per-
form the hypothesis testing for each region (see Online methods for details). We remove the
regions with small p-value and re-train the CR model using the rest of regions. And then a
new CR model (i.e. the blue line) is obtained. This new CR model is closer to the true model.
The blue line is treated as the true model and the hypothesis testing is done for each region
again based on the prediction of the blue model. At last, the regions with small p-value will be
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 19 / 25


--- Page 20 ---
taken as cancer-related regions and regions with large p-value will be taken as cancer-indepen-
dent regions.
(TIF)
S3 Fig. The scatter plots for the 13 tumor types using the re-trained CR model. Cor: the
Pearson correlation. MAE: mean absolute error. MSE: mean squared error. Spearman: Spear-
man correlation.
(TIF)
S4 Fig. The log2(MutationRate+1) distribution across ChromHMM states in breast cancer.
All the other cancers have similar wide distributions.
(TIF)
S5 Fig. Correlation between predicted and measured mutation rates across ChromHMM
states in breast cancer. All the other cancers have similar high correlations.
(TIF)
S6 Fig. Cancer-independen t regions clustered using the contextual weights of the motifs.
For each of the 13 cancer types, the identified cancer-independent regions were clustered into
10 clusters using the Manhattan distance between the feature contextual weight vectors as the
similarity metric. Each row is a motif, each column a cluster, and each entry is the average of a
motif’s contextual weights in all the regions in a cluster. The clusters were further clustered
into 10 groups.
(TIF)
S7 Fig. The fold change of chromHMM state in the 9 groups from group B to group J. The
color key represents the fold change between the percentage of one state in one group and the
percentage of the state in the whole dataset.
(TIF)
S8 Fig. Heatmap of normalized mutation signature contributions in 3 different regions
across 13 cancers. The color key represents the normalized contribution values.
(TIF)
S1 Table. The tumor types and donor size analyzed in this study.
(XLSX)
S2 Table. The ChromHMM state similarity between cancer and corresponding normal cell
lines. Four cancer-normal cell comparisons are shown in terms of length percentage of similar
states ("length.similar"). To be more specific, TssA and TssAFlnk are deemed as similar;
TxFlnk, Tx and TxWk are similar; ZNF/Rpts, Het, ReprPC, ReprPCWk and Quies are similar.
(XLSX)
S3 Table. The summary statistics for 13 tumor types in this study. "Correlation in Train
set": the average of Pearson correlations of CR model on the training dataset across 10-fold
cross validation. "Correlation in Test set": the average of Pearson correlations of CR model on
the testing dataset across 10-fold cross validation. "Merge data to train CR": whether or not to
use this tumor type data to train a unified CR model. "Correlation in final model": the Pearson
correlation between true value and the prediction from the final CR model applied to all
regions in a tumor. "number of regions after removing overlapped regions": the number of
regions after removing the overlapped regions with the 5 merged datasets. "Correlation with
no overlapped regions": the Pearson correlation between the true value and the prediction
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 20 / 25


--- Page 21 ---
from the unified CR model applied to regions without overlaps in a tumor.
(XLSX)
S4 Table. The motif ID and the corresponding proteins used in this study. The number of
binding sites in each chromosome is also listed. "TotalNum" represents the total number of
binding sites in the whole genome.
(XLSX)
S5 Table. The 10-fold cross validation results. "chr in test": the chromosome ID used as the
testing dataset. "MSE_test": mean squared error in the testing dataset. "Cor_test": the Pearson
correlation in the testing dataset. "MSE_train": the mean squared error in the training dataset.
"Cor_train": the Pearson correlation in the training dataset.
(XLSX)
S6 Table. The chromHMM dataset used in this study and the number of cancer-related
regions for each cancer.
(XLSX)
S7 Table. Training and testing results using merged motif as features. (The annotation of
column names can be found in Fig 2B legend).
(XLSX)
S8 Table. The important features in each group. "GroupA_beta": the coefficient of feature in
group A. 0 represents that the feature is not important in the group. "GroupA1_mean": the
average of mutation rate in the regions with the corresponding motif binding sites in group A.
(XLSX)
S9 Table. The enriched pathways for the cancer-related regions for 13 tumor types.
(XLSX)
S10 Table. The motifs significantly disrupted by the somatic mutations. For example,
UM_3582.2_3.88_0.56_57_kno wn. TEAD2 is significantly disrupted in three datasets: Lymph-
CLL, Kidney-RCC, Ovary-AdenoCA.
(XLSX)
S11 Table. The classification performance using all the cancer-related regions as features.
(XLSX)
S12 Table. The classification performance using selected the 150 most important regions.
(XLSX)
S13 Table. The accession number for the histone modification used in this study to per-
form the ChromHMM segmentation.
(XLSX)
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang, Jun Wang, Wei Wang.
Data curation: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang, Mengchi Wang, Vu Ngo.
Formal analysis: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang.
Methodology: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang, Jun Wang, Chengyu Liu.
Visualization: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang.
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 21 / 25


--- Page 22 ---
Writing – original draft: Zengmiao Wang, Wei Wang.
Writing – review & editing: Cong Liu, Zengmiao Wang, Wei Wang.
References
1. Stricker SH, Ko ¨ ferle A, Beck S. From profiles to function in epigen omics. Nature Reviews Genetic s.
2017. pp. 51–66. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nrg.2016.13 8 PMID: 278671 93
2. Struhl K, Segal E. Determinan ts of nucleosome positioni ng. Nature Structur al & Molecular Biology .
2013. pp. 267–27 3. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nsmb.2506 PMID: 234633 11
3. Ernst J, Kellis M. Discover y and character ization of chromatin states for systematic annotation of the
human genome. Nature Biotechn ology. 2010. pp. 817–825. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nbt.166 2 PMID:
20657582
4. Stadler MB, Murr R, Burger L, Ivanek R, Lienert F, Scho ¨ ler A, et al. DNA-bindi ng factors shape the
mouse methylome at distal regulatory regions . Nature. 2011. pp. 490–495. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/
nature10716 PMID: 22170606
5. Rinn JL, Chang HY. Genom e Regulatio n by Long Noncoding RNAs. Annual Review of Biochemi stry.
2012. pp. 145–16 6. https://doi.or g/10.114 6/annurev-bi ochem-05 1410-09290 2 PMID: 226630 78
6. Badeaux AI, Shi Y. Emerging roles for chromatin as a signal integration and storage platfor m. Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2013. pp. 211–224. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/nrm35 45 PMID: 23524488
7. Dixon JR, Selvaraj S, Yue F, Kim A, Li Y, Shen Y, et al. Topolog ical domains in mammalian genomes
identified by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature. 2012. pp. 376–380. https://doi.or g/10.1038/
nature11082 PMID: 22495300
8. Nora EP, Lajoie BR, Schulz EG, Giorgetti L, Okamoto I, Servant N, et al. Spatial partitioning of the regu-
latory landscape of the X-inactivation centre. Nature. 2012. pp. 381–385. https://doi.or g/10.1038/
nature11049 PMID: 22495304
9. Zaret KS, Carroll JS. Pioneer transcription factors: establishin g competenc e for gene expression .
Genes & Developm ent. 2011. pp. 2227–2241. https://doi.or g/10.110 1/gad.17682 6.111 PMID:
22056668
10. Levine M, Cattoglio C, Tjian R. Looping Back to Leap Forward: Transcrip tion Enters a New Era. Cell.
2014. pp. 13–25. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.cell.2014. 02.009 PMID: 2467952 3
11. Mayran A, Drouin J. Pioneer transcription factors shape the epigenetic landscape . Journal of Biological
Chemistry . 2018. pp. 13795– 13804. https://doi.or g/10.107 4/jbc.R117.00 1232 PMID: 29507097
12. Zaret KS. Pioneer Transcrip tion Factors Initiating Gene Network Changes. Annual Review of Genetics.
2020. pp. 367–38 5. https://doi.or g/10.114 6/annurev-ge net-030220- 015007 PMID: 32886547
13. Yuan G. Linking genome to epigenom e. WIREs System s Biology and Medicine. 2012. pp. 297–309.
https://doi.or g/10.100 2/wsbm.1 165 PMID: 22344857
14. Mendenh all EM, Koche RP, Truong T, Zhou VW, Issac B, Chi AS, et al. GC-Rich Sequence Elemen ts
Recruit PRC2 in Mamma lian ES Cells. PLoS Genetic s. 2010. p. e10012 44. https://doi.or g/10.137 1/
journal.pge n.10012 44 PMID: 21170310
15. Thomson JP, Skene PJ, Selfridge J, Clouaire T, Guy J, Webb S, et al. CpG islands influence chromatin
structure via the CpG-bin ding protein Cfp1. Nature. 2010. pp. 1082–1086. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/
nature08924 PMID: 20393567
16. Klattenhof f CA, Scheue rmann JC, Surface LE, Bradley RK, Fields PA, Steinhaus er ML, et al. Brave-
heart, a Long Noncoding RNA Required for Cardiovasc ular Lineag e Commitmen t. Cell. 2013. pp. 570–
583. https://do i.org/10.1016 /j.cell.201 3.01.003 PMID: 23352431
17. Tsai M-C, Manor O, Wan Y, Mosam maparast N, Wang JK, Lan F, et al. Long Noncoding RNA as Modu-
lar Scaffold of Histone Modification Complexes . Science. 2010. pp. 689–693. https://doi.or g/10.1126/
science.1192 002 PMID: 20616235
18. Baudat F, Buard J, Grey C, Fledel-Alo n A, Ober C, Przeworski M, et al. PRDM9 Is a Major Determ inant
of Meiotic Recomb ination Hotspots in Huma ns and Mice. Science. 2010. pp. 836–84 0. https://doi.or g/
10.1126/ science.1183 439 PMID: 200445 39
19. Bulut-Kar slioglu A, Perrera V, Scaranaro M, de la Rosa-Vel azquez IA, van de Nobelen S, Shukeir N,
et al. A transcrip tion factor–ba sed mechanism for mouse heterochrom atin formation. Nature Structural
& Molecular Biology. 2012. pp. 1023–1 030. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nsmb.2382 PMID: 229835 63
20. Costa Y, Ding J, Theunissen TW, Faiola F, Hore TA, Shliaha PV, et al. NANOG-depe ndent function of
TET1 and TET2 in establishmen t of pluripotency . Nature. 2013. pp. 370–374. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/
nature11925 PMID: 23395962
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 22 / 25


--- Page 23 ---
21. Whitaker JW, Chen Z, Wang W. Predicting the human epigenome from DNA motifs. Nature Methods.
2015. pp. 265–27 2. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nmeth.30 65 PMID: 25240437
22. Ngo V, Chen Z, Zhang K, Whitaker JW, Wang M, Wang W. Epigenomic analysis reveals DNA motifs
regulating histone modification s in human and mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019; 116: 3668–
3677. https://d oi.org/10.107 3/pnas.18 13565116 PMID: 30755522
23. Wang M, Zhang K, Ngo V, Liu C, Fan S, Whitaker JW, et al. Identificati on of DNA motifs that regulate
DNA methylation . Nucleic Acids Researc h. 2019. pp. 6753–67 68. https://doi.or g/10.1093 /nar/gkz483
PMID: 313348 13
24. Bussemak er HJ, Li H, Siggia ED. Regulatory element detection using correlation with expression .
Nature Genetics. 2001. pp. 167–171. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/8479 2 PMID: 11175784
25. Conlon EM, Shirley Liu X, Lieb JD, Liu JS. Integrating regulatory motif discovery and genome-wi de
expression analysis. Procee dings of the National Academy of Sciences . 2003. pp. 3339–3344 . https://
doi.org/10.10 73/pnas.06 30591100 PMID: 12626739
26. Lindahl T, Wood RD. Quality Control by DNA Repair. Science. 1999. pp. 1897–1 905. https://doi.or g/10.
1126/scien ce.286.54 46.1897 PMID: 10583946
27. Sancar A, Lindsey-B oltz LA, U
¨
nsal-Kac ¸ maz K, Linn S. Molecular Mechanis ms of Mamma lian DNA
Repair and the DNA Damage Checkp oints. Annual Review of Biochemi stry. 2004. pp. 39–85. https://
doi.org/10.11 46/annurev.bio chem.73 .011303.07372 3 PMID: 15189136
28. Shen H, Laird PW. Interplay between the Cancer Genome and Epigenom e. Cell. 2013. pp. 38–55.
https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.cell.20 13.03.008 PMID: 235406 89
29. Gonzalez -Perez A, Sabarinath an R, Lopez-Bigas N. Local Determinan ts of the Mutationa l Landscape
of the Huma n Genome. Cell. 2019; 177: 101–11 4. https://doi.or g/10.1016/ j.cell.2019.0 2.051 PMID:
30901533
30. Supek F, Lehner B. Scales and mechanisms of somatic mutation rate variation across the human
genome. DNA Repair. 2019; 81: 102647. https:// doi.org/10.10 16/j.dna rep.2019.102 647 PMID:
31307927
31. Mao P, Wyrick JJ. Organizatio n of DNA damage, excision repair, and mutagene sis in chromatin : A
genomic perspective . DNA Repair. 2019; 81: 102645 . https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.dnarep.20 19.1026 45
PMID: 313079 26
32. Makova KD, Hardison RC. The effects of chromatin organization on variatio n in mutation rates in the
genome. Nat Rev Genet. 2015; 16: 213–223 . https://doi.or g/10.1038/ nrg3890 PMID: 25732611
33. Hodgkinson A, Chen Y, Eyre-W alker A. The large-sc ale distribution of somatic mutations in cancer
genomes. Hum Mutat. 2012; 33: 136–143. https://doi.o rg/10.1002/hu mu.21616 PMID: 219538 57
34. Schuster- Bo ¨ ckler B, Lehner B. Chromatin organiz ation is a major influence on regional mutation rates in
human cancer cells. Nature. 2012; 488: 504–50 7. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature1127 3 PMID:
22820252
35. Woo YH, Li W-H. DNA replication timing and selection shape the landscape of nucleotide variatio n in
cancer genomes. Nat Commun. 2012; 3: 1004. https://doi.o rg/10.1038/nco mms1982 PMID: 228931 28
36. Liu L, De S, Michor F. DNA replication timing and higher-orde r nuclear organization determin e single-
nucleotid e substitution patterns in cancer genomes. Nat Commun . 2013; 4: 1502. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/nco mms2502 PMID: 23422670
37. Polak P, Karlić R, Koren A, Thurman R, Sandstrom R, Lawrence M, et al. Cell-of- origin chromatin orga-
nization shapes the mutationa l landscape of cancer. Nature. 2015; 518: 360–364. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/nat ure14221 PMID: 25693567
38. Reijns MAM, Kemp H, Ding J, de Proce ´ SM, Jackson AP, Taylor MS. Lagging -strand replication shapes
the mutationa l landscape of the genome. Nature. 2015; 518: 502–50 6. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/
nature14183 PMID: 25624100
39. Li F, Mao G, Tong D, Huang J, Gu L, Yang W, et al. The histone mark H3K36me3 regulat es human
DNA mismatch repair through its interacti on with MutSα. Cell. 2013; 153: 590–60 0.
40. Pfister SX, Ahrabi S, Zalmas L-P, Sarkar S, Aymard F, Bachrat i CZ, et al. SETD2-depen dent histone
H3K36 trimethylati on is required for homologous recombin ation repair and genome stability. Cell Rep.
2014; 7: 2006–2 018. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.celrep.201 4.05.026 PMID: 249316 10
41. Haradhval a NJ, Polak P, Stojano v P, Covington KR, Shinbrot E, Hess JM, et al. Mutationa l Strand
Asymme tries in Cancer Genomes Reveal Mechanisms of DNA Damage and Repair. Cell. 2016; 164:
538–549. https:// doi.org/10.10 16/j.cell.2 015.12.05 0 PMID: 26806129
42. Supek F, Lehner B. Clustered Mutation Signatures Reveal that Error-P rone DNA Repair Targets Muta-
tions to Active Genes. Cell. 2017; 170: 534–547.e2 3. https://doi.or g/10.1016/ j.cell.2017.0 7.003 PMID:
28753428
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 23 / 25


--- Page 24 ---
43. Sasaki S, Mello CC, Shimad a A, Nakatani Y, Hashim oto S-I, Ogawa M, et al. Chromatin- associated
periodicity in genetic variation downstream of transcrip tional start sites. Science. 2009; 323: 401–404.
https://doi.or g/10.112 6/science.116 3183 PMID: 19074313
44. Ying H, Epps J, Williams R, Huttley G. Evidence that localized variation in primate sequence divergence
arises from an influence of nucleosome placement on DNA repair. Mol Biol Evol. 2010; 27: 637–64 9.
https://doi.or g/10.109 3/molbev/m sp253 PMID: 198436 19
45. Tolstorukov MY, Volfovsky N, Stephens RM, Park PJ. Impac t of chromatin structure on sequence vari-
ability in the human genome. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011; 18: 510–515. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/nsmb.
2012 PMID: 213996 41
46. Chen X, Chen Z, Chen H, Su Z, Yang J, Lin F, et al. Nucleosome s suppress spontane ous mutations
base-spe cifically in eukaryote s. Science. 2012; 335: 1235–1 238. https://doi.or g/10.112 6/science.
1217580 PMID: 22403392
47. Morgane lla S, Alexand rov LB, Glodzik D, Zou X, Davies H, Staaf J, et al. The topography of mutationa l
processes in breast cancer genomes . Nat Commun . 2016; 7: 11383. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/
ncomms1 1383 PMID: 271363 93
48. Pich O, Muiños F, Sabarinath an R, Reyes- Salazar I, Gonzalez -Perez A, Lopez-Bigas N. Somatic and
Germline Mutation Periodicity Follow the Orientation of the DNA Minor Groove around Nucleos omes.
Cell. 2018; 175: 1074–1087 .e18. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.cell.201 8.10.004 PMID: 303884 44
49. Brown AJ, Mao P, Smerdo n MJ, Wyrick JJ, Roberts SA. Nucleosom e positions establish an extended
mutation signature in melanoma. PLoS Genet. 2018; 14: e1007823. https://doi.or g/10.1371/jou rnal.
pgen.10078 23 PMID: 30485262
50. Katainen R, Dave K, Pitka ¨ nen E, Palin K, Kivioja T, Va ¨ lima ¨ ki N, et al. CTCF/c ohesin-bindi ng sites are
frequently mutated in cancer. Nature Genetics. 2015. pp. 818–82 1. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ ng.3335
PMID: 260534 96
51. Guo YA, Chang MM, Huang W, Ooi WF, Xing M, Tan P, et al. Mutation hotspots at CTCF binding sites
coupled to chromosomal instabili ty in gastroin testinal cancers. Nat Commun . 2018; 9: 1520. https://doi.
org/10.1038/ s41467-018- 03828-2 PMID: 296701 09
52. Mao P, Brown AJ, Esaki S, Lockwoo d S, Poon GMK, Smerdon MJ, et al. ETS transcription factors
induce a unique UV damage signature that drives recurrent mutagene sis in melanoma. Nat Commun.
2018; 9: 2626. https://doi.or g/10.1038 /s41467-018- 05064-0 PMID: 299806 79
53. Elliott K, Bostro ¨ m M, Filges S, Lindberg M, Van den Eynde n J, Ståhlbe rg A, et al. Elevated pyrimidi ne
dimer formation at distinct genomic bases underlies promote r mutation hotspots in UV-exposed cancers.
PLoS Genet. 2018; 14: e1007849. https://do i.org/10.1371 /journal.pgen. 1007849 PMID: 30586386
54. Perera D, Poulos RC, Shah A, Beck D, Pimand a JE, Wong JWH. Differentia l DNA repair underlies
mutation hotspots at active promoters in cancer genomes. Nature. 2016; 532: 259–263. https:// doi.org/
10.1038/ nature17437 PMID: 27075100
55. Sabarinath an R, Mularoni L, Deu-Po ns J, Gonzalez-Pe rez A, Lo ´ pez-Bi gas N. Nucleotide excision repair
is impaire d by binding of transcrip tion factors to DNA. Nature. 2016; 532: 264–26 7. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/nat ure17661 PMID: 27075101
56. Hu J, Adebali O, Adar S, Sancar A. Dynamic maps of UV damage formation and repair for the human
genome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2017. pp. 6758–6763. https://doi. org/10.
1073/pnas .1706522114 PMID: 28607063
57. Burns MB, Temiz NA, Harris RS. Evidence for APOBE C3B mutagene sis in multiple human cancers.
Nature Genetics. 2013. pp. 977–983. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/ng.27 01 PMID: 23852168
58. Roberts SA, Lawrence MS, Klimcza k LJ, Grimm SA, Fargo D, Stojanov P, et al. An APOBE C cytidine
deamina se mutagene sis pattern is widesprea d in human cancers. Nat Genet . 2013; 45: 970–976.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/ng.2702 PMID: 23852170
59. Aggarwa la V, Voight BF. An expanded sequence context model broadly explains variability in polymor-
phism levels across the human genome. Nat Genet. 2016; 48: 349–355. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/ng.
3511 PMID: 268787 23
60. Nik-Zainal S, Davies H, Staaf J, Ramakrishna M, Glodzik D, Zou X, et al. Landscape of somatic muta-
tions in 560 breast cancer whole-genom e sequences. Nature. 2016; 534: 47–54. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/nat ure17676 PMID: 27135926
61. Polak P, Kim J, Braunste in LZ, Karlic R, Haradhava la NJ, Tiao G, et al. A mutationa l signature reveals
alterations underlying deficient homolog ous recombinat ion repair in breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2017;
49: 1476–148 6. https://doi.or g/10.1038 /ng.3934 PMID: 288257 26
62. Pleasanc e ED, Cheetham RK, Stephe ns PJ, McBride DJ, Humphray SJ, Greenman CD, et al. A com-
prehensiv e catalogue of somatic mutations from a human cancer genome. Nature. 2010; 463: 191–
196. https://do i.org/10.1038 /nature0865 8 PMID: 20016485
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 24 / 25


--- Page 25 ---
63. Wang J, Zhuang J, Iyer S, Lin X, Whitfield TW, Greven MC, et al. Sequenc e features and chromatin
structure around the genomic regions bound by 119 human transcrip tion factors. Genom e Res. 2012;
22: 1798–181 2. https://doi.or g/10.1101 /gr.139105.11 2 PMID: 229559 90
64. ENCOD E Projec t Consortium. An integrated encyclopedi a of DNA elements in the human genome.
Nature. 2012; 489: 57–74. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ nature11247 PMID: 2295561 6
65. Liu C, Wang W. Contextual Regression: An Accurate and Convenientl y Interpretable Nonlinea r Model
for Mining Discover y from Scientific Data. https:/ /doi.org/10.11 01/2109 97
66. Liu C, Liu Y-C, Huang H-D, Wang W. Biogenesis mechanisms of circular RNA can be categorize d
through feature extraction of a machine learning model. Bioinformatic s. 2019; 35: 4867–4870. https://
doi.org/10.10 93/bioinformati cs/btz70 5 PMID: 3152904 3
67. Consortium TIP-CA of WG, The ICGC/TCG A Pan-Canc er Analysis of Whole Genomes Consortium.
Pan-canc er analysis of whole genomes. Nature. 2020. pp. 82–93. https://doi.o rg/10.1038/s4 1586-020-
1969-6 PMID: 320250 07
68. Ernst J, Kellis M. ChromH MM: automatin g chromatin -state discov ery and character ization. Nature
Methods. 2012. pp. 215–216. https://doi. org/10.1038/n meth.1906 PMID: 223739 07
69. Parkinso n J, Hard R, Ainsworth RI, Li N, Wang W. Engineering a Histon e Reader Protein by Comb ining
Directed Evolution, Sequencing, and Neural Network Based Ordinal Regress ion. J Chem Inf Model.
2020; 60: 3992–4 004. https://doi.or g/10.102 1/acs.jcim .0c00441 PMID: 32786513
70. Williams AB, Schumacher B. p53 in the DNA-Da mage-Repa ir Process. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Med. 2016; 6. https://doi.o rg/10.1101/cs hperspec t.a026070 PMID: 270483 04
71. Silwal-Pand it L, Russne s H, Borgen E, Skarpeteig V, Moen Vollan HK, Schlichtin g E, et al. The Sub-
Cellular Localizatio n of WRAP53 Has Prognos tic Impact in Breast Cancer. PLoS One. 2015; 10:
e0139965. https:// doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p one.013 9965 PMID: 264609 74
72. Pouladi N, Abdolahi S, Farajzadeh D, Hosseinpou r Feizi MA. Haplotyp e and linkage disequilibriu m of
TP53-WRA P53 locus in Iranian-Aze ri women with breast cancer. PLoS One. 2019; 14: e0220727.
https://doi.or g/10.137 1/journal.po ne.02207 27 PMID: 31387111
73. Mahmoudi S, Henrikss on S, Farnebo L, Roberg K, Farnebo M. WRAP53 promotes cancer cell survival
and is a potentia l target for cancer therapy. Cell Death Dis. 2011; 2: e114. https://doi. org/10.1038/c ddis.
2010.90 PMID: 21368886
74. Ehrlich M. DNA methylation in cancer: too much, but also too little. Oncogene. 2002. pp. 5400–5413.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/sj.onc.120 5651 PMID: 12154403
75. Tsai S-Y, Opavsky R, Sharma N, Wu L, Naidu S, Nolan E, et al. Mouse develop ment with a single E2F
activator. Nature. 2008; 454: 1137–1 141. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature0706 6 PMID: 185945 13
76. Choi E-H, Kim KP. E2F1 facilitates DNA break repair by localizing to break sites and enhanci ng the
expression of homolog ous recombin ation factors. Exp Mol Med. 2019; 51: 1–12. https:// doi.org/10.
1038/s12 276-019-0 307-2 PMID: 31534120
77. Sherman MA, Yaari AU, Priebe O, Dietlein F, Loh P-R, Berger B. Genom e-wide mapping of somatic
mutation rates uncovers drivers of cancer. Nat Biotechn ol. 2022; 40: 1634–1 643. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/s41 587-022-0 1353-8 PMID: 35726091
78. Consortium TICG, The International Cancer Genome Conso rtium. Internationa l network of cancer
genome projects. Nature. 2010. pp. 993–998. https://do i.org/10.1038 /nature0898 7 PMID: 20393554
79. Amemiya HM, Kunda je A, Boyle AP. The ENCOD E Blacklist: Identificati on of Problematic Regions of
the Genom e. Sci Rep. 2019; 9: 9354. https:/ /doi.org/10.10 38/s4159 8-019-458 39-z PMID: 312493 61
80. Weirauch MT, Yang A, Albu M, Cote AG, Monteneg ro-Montero A, Drewe P, et al. Determinati on and
inference of eukaryotic transcription factor sequence specificity . Cell. 2014; 158: 1431–1443. https://
doi.org/10.10 16/j.cell.2014. 08.009 PMID: 2521549 7
81. Grant CE, Bailey TL, Noble WS. FIMO: scanning for occurrenc es of a given motif. Bioinfo rmatics.
2011. pp. 1017–1 018. https://doi.or g/10.109 3/bioinformat ics/btr064 PMID: 21330290
82. Auwera GA, Carneir o MO, Hartl C, Poplin R, del Angel G, Levy-Moonshi ne A, et al. From FastQ Data to
High-Confid ence Variant Calls: The Genome Analysis Toolkit Best Practices Pipeline. Current Proto-
cols in Bioinformatics . 2013. https://do i.org/10.1002 /0471250 953.bi1110s43 PMID: 25431634
83. Garreta R, Moncec chi G. Learning scikit-lear n: Machine Learning in Python. Packt Publishing Ltd;
2013.
84. Manders F, Brandsm a AM, de Kanter J, Verheul M, Oka R, van Roosmalen MJ, et al. Mutationa lPat-
terns: the one stop shop for the analysis of mutationa l processes . BMC Genomics. 2022; 23: 1–18.
85. Maura F, Degasperi A, Nadeu F, Leongam ornlert D, Davies H, Moore L, et al. A practical guide for
mutationa l signature analysis in hematolo gical maligna ncies. Nat Commun. 2019; 10: 1–12.
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Predicting somatic mutation rates
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011536 October 2, 2023 25 / 25
