--- Page 1 ---
Spike Correlations in a Songbird Agree
with a Simple Markov Population Model
Andrea P. Weber, Richard H. R. Hahnloser *
Institute of Neuroinformatics UZH/ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
The relationships between neural activity at the single-cell and the population levels are of central importance for
understanding neural codes. In many sensory systems, collective behaviors in large cell groups can be described by
pairwise spike correlations. Here, we test whether in a highly specialized premotor system of songbirds, pairwise spike
correlations themselves can be seen as a simple corollary of an underlying random process. We test hypotheses on
connectivity and network dynamics in the motor pathway of zebra finches using a high-level population model that is
independent of detailed single-neuron properties. We assume that neural population activity evolves along a finite set of
states during singing, and that during sleep population activity randomly switches back and forth between song states
and a single resting state. Individual spike trains are generated by associating with each of the population states a
particular firing mode, such as bursting or tonic firing. With an overall modification of one or two simple control
parameters, the Markov model is able to reproduce observed firing statistics and spike correlations in different neuron
types and behavioral states. Our results suggest that song- and sleep-related firing patterns are identical on short time
scales and result from random sampling of a unique underlying theme. The efficiency of our population model may apply
also to other neural systems in which population hypotheses can be tested on recordings from small neuron groups.
Citation: Weber AP, Hahnloser RHR (2007) Spike correlations in a songbird agree with a simple Markov population model. PLoS Comput Biol 3(12): e249. d oi:10.1371/journal.
pcbi.0030249
Introduction
Spontaneous neural activity in the absence of sensory
stimulation (e.g., during sleep) often exhibits stereotyped
sequences that can resemble sensory or motor sequences [1–
5]. A central question pertaining to such observations is the
extent to which spike sequences in single neurons reﬂect
sequential behaviors across larger populations. Sometimes
there is strong correspondence, and the spike patterns in
single neurons can be precisely predicted from a coarse
population readout [6]. However, it is largely unexplored
whether population-conditional models of spike trains can go
beyond single-neuron statistics and also explain pairwise
spike correlations.
Pairwise spike correlations can signal important informa-
tion beyond that of ﬁring rates [7,8], and in some sensory
systems no higher-order interactions seem to exist beyond
that of cell pairs [9]. Spike correlations can be interpreted as
evidence either of direct synaptic interactions or of common
synaptic inputs. To illustrate the relationship between spike
correlations and population models, let us consider neurons
that display some regular subthreshold oscillations and
occasionally ﬁre a spike at the peaks of oscillation cycles.
From single-unit data, we cannot infer the activity distribu-
tion across the population. However, given pairwise spiking
data, we can estimate the number of population states from
the conditional probability that a cell spikes given that a spike
in another cell occurs (which is a measure of spike
correlation). For example, if the conditional spike probability
(CSP) averaged over cell pairs is one, then all cells must be
linked to the same population state, and ﬁre with unit
probability when that state is visited. If, on the other hand,
CSPs average to 0.2, then the cells can be distributed among
at most ﬁve equiprobable states. For example, neurons could
each be randomly linked to one of ﬁve states and ﬁre with
unit probability when that state is visited; or they could all be
linked to the same state and ﬁre with probability 0.2 when
that state is visited. Which of these cases applies depends on
the spread of CSPs: in the one-state case, all CSPs would be
narrowly distributed around 0.2, and in the ﬁve-state case,
CSPs would be bimodally distributed around zero and one
(and average to 0.2). The point of this hypothetical example is
to illustrate that population-conditional models are con-
strained by spike correlations, and therefore such models
must be tested on experimental data.
In the robust nucleus of the arcopallium (RA) and the high
vocal center (HVC) of zebra ﬁnches, neurons exhibit precise
and stereotyped high-frequency bursts during singing. The
number of bursts produced per song motif varies strongly
between neuron types, from about one burst in RA-
projecting HVC neurons (HVC
RA neurons), to about 12
bursts in RA projection neurons, and up to more than 20
bursts in HVC interneurons (HVC I neurons) (Figure 1A)
[1,10,11]. In awake, non-singing birds, RA and HVC neurons
do not burst and are either silent or in a mode of tonic ﬁring
Editor: Karl J. Friston, University College London, United Kingdom
Received September 17, 2007; Accepted October 31, 2007; Published December
21, 2007
A previous version of this article appeared as an Early Online Release on November
1, 2007 (doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.eor).
Copyright: /C2112007 Weber and Hahnloser. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Abbreviations: CIF, conditional intensity function; CSP, conditional spike
probability; HVC, high vocal center; IFR, instantaneous firing rate; ISI, interspike
interval; NIf, nucleus interface of the nidopallium; pdf, probability density function;
RA, robust nucleus of the arcopallium; Uva, thalamic nucleus uveaformis
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: rich@ini.phys.ethz.ch
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492520



--- Page 2 ---
[12,13]. And during sleep they display incessant switching
between bursting and tonic ﬁring modes; in RA neurons, the
sleep-related burst patterns can be highly similar to song-
related patterns [4], and often the patterns are time-locked to
bursts in simultaneously re corded RA-projecting HVC
neurons (Figure 1Bi) [12].
Inspired by these data, we study a simple Markov model of
neural populations that is based on a chain network of
synaptic connections among HVC
RA neurons [14,15]. Model
spike trains depend on the sequence of population states and
are otherwise independent of each other. Formally, state–
space models allow for the a priori estimation of the state
dynamics from given spike data [16–19]. However, because
here we assume knowledge of the state–space topology (i.e., a
chain-like network among HVC
RA neurons), we are faced
with the simpler problem of estimating the transition
probabilities associated with the chain.
We explore to what fraction sleep-related bursts in HVC
and RA constitute replay of premotor bursts. We compare
our simulations to sets of song- and sleep-related spike data
in different HVC and RA neuron types [1,10–12]. These
datasets are affected by a nonnegligible variability, as
exempliﬁed by averages of sleep-related interspike interval
(ISI) distributions in RA neurons (Figure 1Bii). This variability
entails model parameters needing to be individually adjusted
for each dataset. Our main ﬁnding is that the diversity of the
data across sets and across behavioral states (waking, singing,
Figure 1. Song and Sleep-Related Firing in HVC and RA Neurons of Zebra Finches
(A) During the production of a song motif (sound spectrogram on top), RA-projecting HVC neurons (HVC RA neurons) produce at most one stereotyped
spike burst (red rasters). HVC interneurons (HVC I neurons) produce dense and less-stereotyped spike patterns (green rasters). A more elaborate version
of this figure was originally published in [1].
(B) Sleep-related firing in HVC RA and RA neurons. (i) Top: spike-raster plot of a simultaneously recorded HVC RA–RA pair during sleep. RA spikes (black
rasters) have been time aligned to HVC RA bursts (red rasters). (i) Bottom: CSP function of the same neuron pair. Also known as the cross-intensity
function, the CSP function is an estimate of the conditional RA spiking probability as a function of the time lag to HVC RA spikes (see Methods). (ii) ISI
pdfs of RA neurons vary from one dataset to another. ISI pdfs have been averaged either over 29 RA neurons recorded in isolation (full line), or over 26
RA neurons recorded simultaneously with HVC RA neurons (dashed line), or over 50 RA neurons recorded simultaneously with HVC I neurons (dotted line).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492521
Author Summary
To deal with the vast complexity of the brain and its many degrees
of freedom, many reductionist methods have been designed that
can be used to simplify neural interactions to just a few key
underlying macroscopic variables. Despite these theoretical advan-
ces, even today relatively few population models have been
subjected to stringent experimental tests. We explore whether
second-order spike correlations measured in songbirds can be
explained by single-neuron statistics and population dynamics, both
reflecting hypotheses on network connectivity. We formulate a
Markov population model with essentially two degrees of freedom
and associated with different behavioral states of birds such as
waking, singing, or sleeping. Excellent agreement between spike-
train data and model is achieved, given a few connectivity
assumptions that strengthen the view of a hierarchical organization
of songbird motor networks. This work is an important demon-
stration that a broad range of neural activity patterns can be
compatible at the population level with few underlying degrees of
freedom.
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 3 ---
and sleeping) can be essentially ascribed to two macroscopic
transition probabilities; these set the likelihood that pop-
ulation activity either evolves along the chain of motor states
imprinted in the HVC
RA network, or ﬂips back and forth
between motor states and a single resting state. Our results
strengthen the view that synaptic networks are organized to
support well-deﬁned and highly constrained population
behaviors.
Results
Model
In our model, HVC population activity is a random variable
that evolves in roughly 5 ms steps and is either in the ground
state, or in one of 100 song states. The number of song states
is chosen such that a total song-motif duration of 500 ms
results [20]. Each of the song states corresponds to activation
of a virtual group of 50–150 RA-projecting HVC neurons
(referred to as HVC
RA neuron groups, or simply HVC RA
groups). During singing, HVC RA groups are activated sequen-
tially with probability p ¼ 1 (Figure 2A). When birds are
awake, but not singing, HVC activity remains in the ground
state (state 0) with probability q ¼ 1. During sleep, HVC
RA
groups are also sequentially activated, but with reduced
probability p , 1, and, the persistence probability in the
ground state is also reduced to q , 1 (Figure 2B). By
construction, neurons remain for exponentially distributed
times in song and ground states during sleep, in agreement
with recent estimates [17].
Given a sequence of states that describes HVC population
activity, we generated spike trains in individual neurons by
random sampling of model ISI probability density functions
(pdfs). We assumed that HVC
RA neurons are each randomly
linked to exactly one HVC RA group and ﬁred a burst only
when that group was activated; otherwise they remained
silent. HVC
I and RA neurons were randomly linked to more
than one HVC RA group and ﬁred several bursts per song
motif. For each neuron type, burst ISI pdfs were ﬁxed and
were simply derived from measurements (Figure 2C). Inter-
estingly, in all neuron types, sleep-related bursts have lower
ﬁring rates than song-related bursts (see Figure S1). To
accommodate this fact, model pdfs had to be slowed down
during sleep (see Methods for details). Finally, when HVC
activity was in the ground state, HVC
RA neurons remained
silent, whereas RA and HVC I neurons generated ISIs sampled
from gamma functions (Figure 2D). Because waking-related
RA and HVC I ﬁring rates are very diverse [12], the means of
Figure 2. Markov Model of HVC Activity during Behavior and Sleep
(A) When birds are awake, but not singing, HVC activity persists in a ground state (state 0) with probability q ¼ 1. When birds sing, groups of HVC RA
neurons (numbered circles) are sequentially activated with probability p ¼ 1 (the dashed arrows indicate song onset and offset). A single HVC RA neuron
(red square) is linked with exactly one HVC RA group, and single RA and HVC I neurons (blue and green squares) are linked with random subsets of LR and
LI groups, respectively.
(B) During sleep, HVC RA groups are sequentially activated with probability p , 1; with probability 1 /C0 p, HVC activity transits into the ground state.
There, it persists with probability q , 1; with probability 1 /C0 q, it transits back into a song state.
(C) Bursts in different neuron types are modeled by the first few milliseconds of averaged song-related ISI pdfs pb(s).
(D) Tonic firing in RA and HVC I neurons is modeled by gamma functions pa(s) (black curves). The diversity of waking-related ISI pdfs in these neurons is
illustrated by the blue and green curves, each representing a different neuron.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492522
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 4 ---
gamma functions were kept as free parameters together with
p and q. Descriptions and derivations of model parameters
are summarized in Table 1.
Fits to Song-Related and Sleep-Related Data
We found that song-related ISI pdfs beyond the burst scale
could be well ﬁt over the entire ISI range (up to 100 ms) by
randomly linking RA neurons to LR ¼ 12 HVC RA groups and
HVCI neurons to LI ¼ 35 groups (Figure 3A and 3B). Note that
the larger the link counts LR and LI, the steeper were the
corresponding exponential tails of the pdfs. However, to also
account for the considerable lack of stereotypy mainly in
raster plots of HVC I neurons [11], we had to trade off high
link counts against reduced burst probabilities (the proba-
bility that a neuron bursts when an HVC RA group to which it
is linked is activated). Note that a less than unit burst
probability can be interpreted as a reduction in neural
responsiveness to excitatory synaptic drive, or as increased
inhibition. We obtained good results with burst probabilities
in RA neurons of p
R ¼ 0.92 (LR ¼ 13) and in HVC I neurons pI ¼
0.63 ( LI ¼ 50) (Figure 3C and 3D). Note that ﬁrst-order
statistics impose the following constraints on the average
number of RA and HVC I bursts per song motif: pRLR ﬃ 12
and pILI ﬃ 35.
Sleep-related ISI pdfs of RA neurons could be well-ﬁt given
a suitable tonic-ﬁring model and suitable persistence prob-
abilities p and q (Figure 4A and 4B). The peak at small ISIs
resulted from spikes produced in song states, and the peak at
large ISIs from spikes produced in the ground state. Raster
plots of simulated RA-neuron activity aligned to HVC
RA
bursts looked very realistic (compare Figure 4C and 4D to
Figure 1Bi). Autocovariance functions of sleep-related RA
spike trains could also be well-ﬁt (see Figure S2).
The parameters p and q characterized what we shall refer to
as the depth and the coherence of the sleep. By denoting the
average number of time steps spent in song states by hn
si¼ p /
(1 /C0 p) and similarly hnai¼ p /( 1 /C0 q) for the ground state (these
numbers are known as the survival times in the language of
point processes), we deﬁned the sleep depth d by their ratio
hnsi / hnai (experimentally, d could be estimated from burst-
rate measurements as d ¼ b /( b0 /C0 b), where b0 and b are
measured burst rates during song and during sleep, respec-
tively). Small ISIs prevailed during deep sleep (Figure 4B, hnsi/
hnai¼ 12%) and large ISIs during light sleep (Figure 4A, hnsi/
hnai¼ 3.6%). The coherence of sleep was deﬁned by the
product hnsihnai¼ 12%. Model ISI pdfs showed almost no
dependence on sleep coherence. For example, by doubling
both p and q, sleep-related ISI pdfs in Figure 4A and 4B
remained essentially unchanged. However, the sleep coher-
ence had a strong inﬂuence on raster plots: the larger the
sleep coherence, the longer was the time interval relative to
HVC
RA bursts over which stereotyped RA bursting could be
observed (Figure 4C and 4D; note that sleep depths were very
similar in Figure 4C and 4D: 19% versus 14%).
RA and HVC I neurons frequently display 1–2 s epochs of
increased burst density during sleep ([12]; Figure 5A, top).
From a recent experimental study, we know that these burst
epochs are shaped by input from the thalamic nucleus
uveaformis (Uva): decreased tonic ﬁring in HVC-projecting
Uva neurons leads to increased bursting in HVC and RA
neurons, whereas increased tonic ﬁring in HVC-projecting
Uva neurons suppresses HVC and RA burst rates (unpub-
lished data). Here, we modeled this Uva-mediated control of
burst epochs by random ﬂuctuations of the parameter p (we
transiently set p ¼ 1 to model a burst epoch; see Methods)
(Figure 5A, middle and bottom). By modifying p rather than
any other parameter, we satisﬁed the experimental ﬁnding
that burst shapes (burst-related ISI distributions) are un-
changed during burst epochs. By virtue of burst epochs,
raster plots of simulated HVC
RA–HVC I pairs were very
realistic and displayed characteristic horizontal bands of
long, uninterrupted bursting, coexisting with brief bands of
very few bursts (Figure 5B). Without ﬂuctuations in p, HVC
I
burst patterns would mostly be either narrow or wide, but not
both.
One of the touchstones of our model is whether it can
reproduce pairwise correlations in sleep-related spike trains
on large time scales (two orders of magnitude beyond the
burst scale). We modeled CSP functions by averaging over 50
simulated cell pairs with randomly drawn link sets. It was a
simple matter to produce excellent ﬁts of CSP functions in
RA–RA and RA–HVC
I pairs (Figure 5C and 5D). The effect of
p was to set the width of CSP functions, whereas q and average
RA and HVC I ﬁring rates set the baseline and peak values.
Table 1. Model Parameters and Their Derivation
Model Parameter a Description Derived from
Population model p, q Transition probabilities Markov process Free. Range of p: 0.18–0.67. Range of q: 0.97–0.996
hdti¼ 5 ms Time step of Markov process Typical durations of songs and HVC RA bursts
pb ¼ 0.04, Tepoch ¼ 400 ms Burst epoch parameters CSP fits in Figure 5
Neuron models Dt ¼ 0.1 ms Spike-train sample time —
VR ¼ 0.65, VI ¼ 0.9, VP ¼ 0.63 Speed of sleep bursts Average ISI pdfs in waking and sleeping states, Figure S1
DR ¼ 240 ms Average duration of RA inhibition Average RA burst-triggered IFR, Figure S1E. Range of DR: 120–240 ms
PInh ¼ 0.1 Probability of RA inhibition Figure 7B. Range of PInh: 0.06–0.16
tR ¼ 4 ms Spike propagation time from HVC to RA Antidromic stimulation, RA–HVC I CSP peaks [22]
LRpR ﬃ 12, LIpI ﬃ 35 Link counts ( L) and burst probabilities ( p) Raster plots and ISI pdfs of song data, Figure 3
pb
R ðsÞ; pb
I ðsÞ; pb
P ðsÞ Model ISI pdfs of bursts Average song-related ISI pdfs, Figure 2C
pa
R ðsÞ; pa
I ðsÞ Model ISI pdfs of waking-related firing
(gamma functions)
Free (average firing rates). Range RA: 15–27 Hz; range HVC I: 0–8 Hz
Ranges specified are not representative of overall single-neuron ranges, but represent the ranges used in simulations to fit selected single-neuro n data and population averages.
aP indicates HVC RA; I, HVC I; and R, RA.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.t001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492523
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 5 ---
However, CSP function in HVC RA–HVC I pairs and HVC I–
HVCI pairs turned out to be more problematic because it was
impossible to reproduce the high CSP peaks near zero time
lag. For HVC RA–HVC I pairs, there was a simple explanation
for this shortcoming: when we simulated only as many model
pairs as were available in the experimental dataset (26 instead
of 50), then the high CSP peak could be occasionally
reproduced due to random link sampling (Figure 5E). Thus,
from a bootstrapping point of view, the small difference
between model and real CSP functions in HVC
RA–HVC I pairs
was not statistically signiﬁcant. In contrast, the peak CSP in
HVCI–HVC I pairs was signiﬁcantly higher than its model
counterpart: even when sleep activity was restricted to song
states only ( p ¼ 1), the high peak CSP in HVC I–HVC I pairs
could not be reproduced. A good ﬁt was only possible with
substantially higher HVC I burst probability, pI ¼ 0.95. Thus,
we were faced with the paradoxical conclusion that HVC I
neurons burst more reliably during sleep than during singing
(this conclusion is paradoxical, because with our estimate of
HVCRA burst probability pP ¼ 1 during singing and pP ¼ 0.8
during sleep, the presumed HVC RA drive is smaller during
sleep, and so pI should be smaller as well). We could imagine
two reasons why the CSP peaks of HVC I pairs might be so
high during sleep. First, during sleep, HVC I neurons could be
selectively driven by X-projecting HVC (HVC X) neurons or by
neurons in the nucleus interface of the nidopallium (NIf) that
project to HVC (NIf HVC neurons), in addition to their weaker
drive from HVC RA neurons. This explanation by itself seems
somewhat implausible, because it would require that HVC RA
neurons not be driven (or only very weakly driven) by HVC X
or NIfHVC neurons, which appears not to be the case [21–23]).
Therefore, we favored a second explanation, which is that our
assumption of random and uniform links in HVC I neurons
must be wrong. In other words, there must be a special subset
of HVC RA groups to which HVC I neurons are linked with
higher probability. In fact, such an explanation agrees with
song-related data, according to which HVC I population
activity is weakly correlated with sound amplitude and
therefore not uniformly distributed over the time course of
a song motif [11]. Indeed, when we relaxed the assumption
Figure 3. Song-Related ISI pdfs of RA and HVC I Neurons
(A,B) Model-based fits of averaged ISI pdfs in RA and HVC I neurons during singing. The arrows delimit the ISI range of the burst models in Figure 2C, i.e.,
6 ms and 10 ms, respectively. The RA-neuron data (A) were taken from [10], and the HVC I data (B) were provided courtesy of A. Kozhevnikov. LR ¼ 12,
and LI ¼ 35.
(C,D) Raster plots of song-related spike trains in four RA and four HVC I model neurons for two different values of link counts LR/I and burst probabilities
pR/I. Spikes are represented as tick marks and drawn in alternating colors for different neurons.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g003
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492524
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 6 ---
that HVC I neurons can be linked to any one of the 100
HVCRA groups, but to only 56 randomly selected groups, we
obtained a good ﬁt to the CSP peak with standard HVC I
parameters pI ¼ 0.63 ( LI ¼ 50) (Figure 5F).
Note that a requirement for the excellent CSP ﬁts was the
inclusion of burst epochs. Without burst epochs, the long tails
of CSP functions could not be well ﬁt (see Figure S3). Note
also that the asymmetry in the average RA–HVC
I CSP
function in Figure 5D was largely due to RA inhibition that
decreases tonic ﬁring after bursts and due to differences
between RA and HVC I tonic ﬁring rates.
One of our model assumptions is that any HVC RA group
can be activated from within the ground state. We were
unable to stringently test this assumption: All of our results
remained unchanged when singing-like activity could be
initialized in only a random subset of ten or more song states.
However, when this number was much smaller (two to four
states), unrealistic peaks in correlation functions appeared,
thereby setting a lower bound for the number of possible
initial HVC
RA groups.
Tests of HVC Ultrasparseness and Sequential Dynamics
during Sleep
We tested the validity of our assumptions of ultrasparse-
ness and sequential dynamics of HVC RA activity. Given that
during sleep HVC RA bursts are time-locked to burst patterns
in RA neurons (Figure 1Bi), we decided to use this locking to
test whether individual HVC RA neurons are linked to a single
or, potentially, to several HVC RA groups, and whether during
sleep, HVC RA groups are activated sequentially or in more
random order.
We determined the experimental CSP distribution of all
HVCRA–RA pairs in the time interval [ /C0 60, 60] ms of HVC RA
spikes (Figure 6). With the exception of extreme (very small
and very large) CSPs, the distribution was well-approximated
by an exponential curve. The excessive occurrence of
extreme CSPs did not happen by chance: the number of
CSPs in the bin [0.99, 1] was signiﬁcantly larger than the
number of CSPs in equally sized adjacent bins ( p , 0.01,
binomial test). The same held true for the number of CSPs in
the bin [0, 0.01], which was signiﬁcantly larger than in
adjacent bins. This CSP behavior illustrates that on the
population level, RA activity tends to be highly locked to
HVC
RA bursts within at least 660 ms.
We compared the experimental CSP distributions with
model distributions for 50 simulated HVC RA–RA pairs under
various model assumptions. For the model in Figure 2, very
small and very large CSPs appeared frequently (red curve in
Figure 6), in good agreement with the data. Almost no
parameter tuning was necessary to achieve a good ﬁt. The
heights of extreme CSP peaks were positively correlated with
q. When q was small, the likelihood of repeated switching
between ground and song states within 60 ms was large,
thereby decorrelating spike trains and forcing extreme CSP
values to appear less frequently. CSPs in the intermediate
range 0.5–0.95 were positively correlated with p, because with
longer RA burst sequences, intermediate CSP values occurred
Figure 4. Modeling Sleep-Related Activity ( p,q , 1)
(A) An RA neuron producing few burst ISIs. A good fit is produced when the survival time of the ground state is long, compared to that of song states
(light sleep, q much closer to 1 than p). DR ¼ 80 ms, and VR ¼ 0.7.
(B) A different RA neuron producing many burst ISIs. A good fit was produced by a relatively long survival time of sleep states (deep sleep). DR ¼ 120 ms,
and VR ¼ 0.67.
(C,D) Spike raster plots of HVC RA and RA neurons. All HVC RA bursts (red rasters) are aligned at the center of the plots. Corresponding RA spikes (black
rasters) are shown below each HVC RA burst. When p is large (strongly coherent sleep) (C), stereotyped RA bursting is observed over larger intervals than
when p is small (D).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g004
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492525
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 7 ---
more often. For a peak at unit CSP to appear, the RA burst
probability pR had to be close to one: by decreasing pR from
one to 0.8, the peak at unit CSP completely disappeared.
Thus, to agree with the data, RA neurons must have a very
high burst probability, which is suggestive of a strong drive
from HVC.
We then assumed that HVC
RA neurons do not burst by
linkage with a single HVC RA group, but that 80% of their
bursts are locked to a ﬁrst HVC RA group, and 20% of bursts
are locked to a second group (in the simulations, the two
groups were randomly chosen for each simulated HVC
RA
neuron). We expected these double linkages to create a
washout effect in which clear RA burst pattern would no
longer be seen. Indeed, by remapping just 20% of HVC
RA
bursts in this manner, very high and very low CSPs appeared
less frequently (green curve in Figure 6), in disagreement with
the data. This phenomenon was very robust because increas-
ing p up to 99/100 and q up to 999/1000 was insufﬁcient to
reproduce the high peak at unit CSP. Thus, ultrasparseness of
HVC
RA linkage is necessary to explain the abundance of
extreme CSPs.
We also estimated the degree to which HVC RA groups are
activated in sequence as opposed to random (nonsequential)
activation. In principle, our sleep model in Figure 2B allows
for almost arbitrary state transitions by means of a brief
intermission via the ground state. However, reasonable
values for p and q imply that nonsequential HVC
RA-group
activation is rare and that such events have little impact on
Figure 5. Burst Epochs and Pairwise Correlations
(A) Instantaneous firing rates of a recorded HVC I neuron (top), a simulated HVC I neuron without burst epochs (middle), and a simulated HVC I neuron
with burst epochs (bottom). Burst epochs are indicated by arrows.
(B) A sample raster plot of a simultaneously recorded HVC RA–HVCI pair (top) and a comparable plot from model simulations (bottom). The inclusion of
burst epochs gives rise to rows with very sparse HVC I bursting (top arrow) and rows with dense HVC I bursting (bottom arrow), as is seen in real data.
(C–F) Average CSP functions in different neuron types. The functions are plotted in reference to a spike in the first pair, i.e., with respect to RA spik es in
(D) and with respect to HVC RA spikes in (E).
(C) RA–RA neuron pairs (from n ¼ 29 recorded pairs). p ¼ 6/7, and q ¼ 39/40.
(D) RA–HVC I pairs ( n ¼ 50 pairs). The arrow indicates an asymmetry that is reproduced by the model. p ¼ 9/11, and q ¼ 49/50.
(E) HVC RA–HVCI (n ¼ 26). p ¼ 7/8, and q ¼ 59/60.
(F) HVC I–HVCI pairs ( n ¼ 19). HVC I neurons randomly link to 56 of the 100 HVC RA groups. p ¼ 7/8, and q ¼ 32/33.
In (C–F) LI ¼ 50, pI ¼ 0.63, DR ¼ 240 ms, pR ¼ 0.92, and LR ¼ 13.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g005
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492526
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 8 ---
the observed CSP distribution. To test our model assumption
that ﬁxed and sequential state transitions underlie sleep-
related activity patterns, we performed simulations in which
20% of transitions between song states were nonsequential
but completely random. We found that introducing such
randomness into the model resulted in an altered CSP
distribution in which zero CSPs appeared very infrequently,
in stark disagreement with the data (blue curve in Figure 6).
The reason for this lack was that with increasing time lag to
HVC
RA spikes, stray RA bursts started to appear due to
random transitions, leading to non-zero CSPs. This phenom-
enon was very robust as it was not possible to remedy the
scarcity of zero CSPs by changing p and q. Note that the peak
at unit CSP was unchanged by the introduction of random
transitions, presumably because unit CSPs arose only at very
small time lags away from HVC
RA spikes and thus were not
signiﬁcantly affected by the random transitions. In con-
clusion, the inclusion of few nonsequential transitions leads
to severe decorrelation of RA spikes a few tens of milli-
seconds away from HVC
RA spikes and to shortage of very
small CSPs; therefore, nonsequential transitions of HVC
activity must be very rare during sleep. Note that by the same
argument, we could also exclude the possibility that two or
more HVC-activation sequences can coexist at the same
time. If this were the case, then extreme CSPs would be rare,
even more so than by relaxing sequential order or ultra-
sparseness.
Tests of RA Intrinsic Dynamics and Inhibition
In our model, RA neurons are simply driven by HVC RA
bursts. To test for the possibility that RA burst sequences
can be self-sustaining due to recurrent RA circuitry and in
the absence of HVC drive, we performed model simulations
in which after each transition into the ground state, RA
burst sequences continued to propagate for a random
duration uniformly distributed in the time interval 0–15
ms. By doing this, RA neurons produced less than 4%
additional burst spikes compared to before. Despite this
small addition of spikes, average CSP functions of RA–HVC
I
pairs became unrealistically heavy at negative time lags,
Figure 7A. This behavior w as very robust, though it
obviously depended on the estimated HVC
RA spike prop-
agation time tR ¼ 4 ms; see Methods and [24]. To assess the
relevance of RA intrinsic dynamics in a manner independ-
ent of spike-propagation estimates, we removed single
spikes in RA neurons (these are spikes forming ISI pairs of
more than 10 ms each). Thus-formed RA–HVC
I CSP
functions (with single RA spikes removed) displayed a high
peak that in fact could not be reproduced with any set of
model parameters p and q unless RA links were correlated
with HVC
I links (good agreement could be achieved when
R An e u r o n sw e r el i n k e dt o1 3a m o n gt h e5 6H V CRA groups
to which HVC I neurons were linked). Thus, rather than
ﬁnding evidence for RA intrinsic dynamics, we found the
contrary evidence that in order to explain the non-lagging
and strong RA–HVC
I correlations, RA neurons must be
preferentially linked to and driven by the same HVC RA
groups as are HVC I neurons.
We were also able to test a more subtle prediction of our
model, such as the impact of RA-intrinsic inhibition. The key
experimental observation is that right after sleep bursts, RA
neurons do not immediately reenter the tonic ﬁring mode,
but that tonic ﬁring recovers after an estimated recovery time
of D
R ¼ 240 ms (Figure S1E). We modeled this transient
suppression of tonic ﬁring by RA inhibition. This inhibition
had average duration D
R and was randomly elicited with
independent probability PInh per activated HVC RA group (see
Methods). A good ﬁt was achieved using PInh ¼ 0.1. Due to the
nonspeciﬁcity of this inhibition, tonic RA ﬁring was sup-
pressed also when the recorded RA neuron did not burst, but
some other RA neuron did. The situation was different when
we modeled the reduced tonic ﬁring by a soft refractory
period with average duration D
R ¼ 240 ms, in which case tonic
RA ﬁring was suppressed only after bursts. To distinguish
between these two models, we inspected paired RA–neuron
recordings for periods when one neuron burst, but the other
did not. We then plotted the average instantaneous ﬁring rate
(IFR) of the nonbursting neurons, time-aligned to burst
onsets. We found that in synchrony with the bursts, there was
a brief dip in the IFR. The inhibition model was able to
reproduce this phenomenon, but the adaptation model was
not, Figure 7B. These ﬁndings demonstrate that tonic RA
ﬁring during sleep is suppressed by intrinsic inhibition and
not by ﬁring adaptation alone.
Discussion
We have translated a popular diagram of songbird
premotor dynamics into a simple state-space model of
neuron populations. To produce good ﬁts of spike correla-
tions measured during sleep, we had to make use of a
nonnegligible range of parameter values. We justiﬁed this
requirement by intrinsic variability of the data that on the
Figure 6. HVC States Evolve Sequentially and Are Formed by Distinct
HVCRA Groups
Distribution of CSPs in ( n ¼ 46) HVCRA–RA pairs in the interval /C0 60 to 60
ms of HVCRA spikes (black histogram). With the exception of two peaks at
CSPs zero and one (black arrows), the distribution is well-approximated
by an exponential curve (purple line). Shown are the average CSP
functions of 50 simulated HVC RA–RA pairs for three different model
assumptions: (1) HVC RA neurons fire with probability pP ¼ 0.8 in a single
HVCRA group (red curve); (2) HVC RA neurons fire in two (randomly
selected) HVC RA groups with probabilities 0.64 and 0.16 (green curve);
and (3) activation of HVC RA groups is sequential in 80% of song-like
transitions and in 20% it is random (blue curve). The green and blue
arrows indicate inadequacies of model assumptions 2 and 3. p ¼ 6/7, q ¼
39/40, L
R ¼ 12, pR ¼ 1, DR ¼ 240 ms, and pb ¼ 0.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g006
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492527
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 9 ---
one hand is due to nonstationarities of sleep modeled by p
and q, and on the other hand is due to individual differences
in tonic ﬁring rates. The parameters p and q interpolate
between ﬁring characteristics associated with two different
behavioral states, i.e., waking and singing. We can at this point
only speculate about their biophysical interpretations.
The persistence probability p of song states could be a
neuromodulatory mechanism that affects vesicle release
probability in HVC
RA neurons, or their excitability. Such a
scenario seems plausible if sequential activation of HVC RA
groups derives from excitatory synaptic connections between
HVC
RA neurons. Current evidence indicates that HVC and
RA burst epochs are shaped by a thalamic nucleus. Accord-
ingly, the persistence probability p must depend on such
extrinsic inﬂuences as well. We are more uncertain about the
persistence probability q of the ground state. Songs of birds
are initiated somewhere in the brain with the result of
activating a particular HVC RA group. During sleep, initializ-
ing signals appear to originate in the NIf that projects to
HVC [23]. The parameter q could thus represent vesicle
release probability in syna pses of HVC-projecting NIf
neurons or of synapses (or excitability) within NIf.
An inherent assumption in our model is conditional
independence of spike trains given a sequence of population
states. This is a strong assumption, as it ignores the fact that
cells spike more reliably when their afferents spike more
reliably as well. As a consequence, we found that the model
tended to underestimate some measured correlations (Figure
5F), yet the differences could be explained by assuming
nonhomogeneity of link distributions. Possibly, by doing so,
we have overestimated the tendency by which neurons link to
preferred HVC
RA groups; part of the high CSPs could be
attributable to genuine pairwise interactions. To be able to
estimate these interactions in future work, it will be necessary
to simultaneously record from larger neuron populations.
Our prediction would be that higher-order spike correlations
must obey the regularities imposed by population-condi-
tional spike-generation mechanisms. If this prediction turns
out to be wrong and spike triplets appear more often than
predicted, then we might have to revise our model by
incorporating mutual dependencies of burst probabilities,
which in essence corresponds to introducing higher-order
spike correlations.
We were unable to characterize the HVC
RA groups to
which HVC I and RA neurons are linked with higher
probability, but we speculate that preference applies to
HVCRA groups that represent syllable onsets, in agreement
with weak predictive correlations between song patterns and
activity in HVC I and RA neurons [10,11]. These distinguished
HVCRA groups could also be leaders that are preferentially
activated in transition from the ground state. Such a scenario
seems plausible given that syllable onsets are ﬂexible song
elements optimally aligned with global song tempo [25].
Insights into these questions could emerge from applications
of our modeling approach to a set of HVC and NIf recordings
[23]: because NIf projection neurons tend to burst in time
intervals of 100 ms and more, their correlations with HVC
neurons might provide evidence of regular spacing between
leading HVC
RA groups.
One of the beneﬁts of our modeling approach compared to
other approaches is increased simulation efﬁciency, because
the time it takes to generate a model spike train is orders of
magnitude shorter than for detailed biophysical models such
as conductance-based integrate-and-ﬁre neurons. Thanks to
this efﬁciency, we were able to compare simulated data with
real data to great detail, a task that usually becomes
exhaustive in simulations of membrane biophysics. We have
not hand-picked neurons for model comparison, but tested
model predictions on data from all recorded cells and in all
relevant behavioral states. Despite the many simpliﬁcations of
our model, we believe it can be converted into the language
of membrane voltages and synaptic potentials. For example,
we have implicitly assumed that neurons are intrinsic
bursters. It is known that intrinsic bursting can stabilize the
Figure 7. RA-Intrinsic Dynamics and Inhibition
(A) When RA burst sequences extend beyond HVC I sequences by a
random time uniformly distributed in the interval 0–15 ms, then the left
flank of the average RA–HVC I CSP function gets uncharacteristically wide
(arrows).
(B) Transitive suppression of tonic firing in RA neurons is explained by RA
inhibition. Shown are average RA IFR curves in 1.2 s time windows in
which one RA neuron does not fire a burst, and time-aligned to burst
onset in a simultaneously recorded RA neuron. Conjunctively with the
bursts, there is a transient reduction in firing rate of the nonbursting
neuron (black curve, n ¼ 50 RA neuron pairs). The model in which RA
inhibition suppresses spontaneous firing (red curve) is able to reproduce
this transient reduction, but the model in which RA neurons display a
soft refractory period after bursts (blue curve) is not. p ¼ 6/7, q ¼ 39/40, L
R
¼ 12, pR ¼ 1, DR ¼ 240 ms, and pb ¼ 0.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.g007
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492528
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 10 ---
propagation of synchronized activity in conductance-based
model neurons [14]. One of the main difﬁculties would then
be to ﬁnd the appropriate conductance values that imple-
ment our estimates of burst probabilities and burst durations.
In contrast, comparatively little effort would have to be made
to compose synaptic weight matrices, as these are speciﬁed by
our estimates of link statistics.
It might also be interesting to apply our approach to other
neural systems. For example, in the insect olfactory system,
odor processing is associated with stereotyped neural
sequences in the antennal lobe [26]. Although the diversity
of these sequences is thought to have the function of
maximizing odor discriminability in downstream areas, it is
currently not clear whether odor-evoked sequences are
assembled from discrete states and constrained by a small
number of state transitions, or whether an almost inﬁnite
number of possibilities applies [27]. Our approach would be
ideally suited to explore such hypotheses.
Our ﬁndings suggest that all sleep-related bursts are in fact
replay of song-evoked bursts, as each model sleep burst is
clearly associated with one of 100 song-related activity states.
Such similarity seems not surprising given that song- and
sleep-related activity is generated by the same synaptic
circuits. However, what could be the function of such
randomized replay? We do not know the answer, but
generative probabilistic models as ours have the advantage
that they are closely related to some machine learning
algorithms [28]. With the growing notion that activity replay
during sleep may be involved in memory consolidation and
learning processes [29,30], our model provides a sound basis
for the quantitative testing of such ideas.
Methods
Markov population model of HVC activity. We model the activity
state of HVC at time t as a random variable St that can be in any one
of 101 states, where state 0 is termed the ground state and states 1–
100 are termed song states (Figure 2). When at time t the random
variable is in the ith song state ( St ¼ i . 0), we say that the ith group of
HVCRA neurons (or ith HVCRA group) is activated. Accordingly, at
time t þ dt, the ( i þ 1)th group is activated with probability p (a free
model parameter): PðStþdt ¼ i þ 1jSt ¼ iÞ¼ p; alternatively, with
probability 1 /C0 p, HVC activity transits into the ground state:
PðStþdt ¼ 0jSt ¼ iÞ¼ 1 /C0 p: The space of song states has a ring
structure such that when the 100 th state is reached, HVC activity
transits into state 1 with probability p. When at time t, HVC activity is
in the ground state, it stays there at time t þ dt with probability q
(another free model parameter): PðStþdt ¼ 0jSt ¼ 0Þ¼ q; alternatively,
with probability 1 /C0 q, HVC activity transits into any one of the song
states, PðStþdt ¼ i.0jSt ¼ 0Þ¼ð 1 /C0 qÞ=100:
The time steps dt in which HVC dynamics evolve is a random
variable that depends on the HVC RA group that is active at that time:
dt ¼ð ni /C0 mtÞdS;i. Here, ni sets the ﬁxed maximum time-step duration
of the ith group (a Gaussian random number with a mean of 9 ms
and standard deviation of 1.8 ms), mi introduces temporal ﬂuctua-
tions (a Gaussian random variable with a mean 4 ms and standard
deviation 0.4 ms), and d
St ;i is the Kronecker delta ( dSt ;i ¼ 1i f St ¼ i,
and 0 otherwise). The reason for this doubly random choice of time
steps is to avoid any periodicity which would lead to uncharacteristic
ultranarrow peaks in correlation functions. For the ground state,
time steps are not randomized, but simply set to the average
duration of song states, i.e., 5 ms. The large-time behavior of the
model output was independent of detailed time-step assumptions.
Model spike trains. Given a sequence fS
tg0,t,T of HVC activity
states, we generate spike trains in a small set of HVC RA, HVCI, and RA
neurons in the following manner. First, we randomly link each of the
neurons to a distinct subset of HVC
RA groups, where the subset size
(the link count) ranges from LI ¼ 35 to 50 for HVC I neurons, from LR
¼ 12 to 13 for RA neurons, and is set to 1 for HVC RA neurons. In the
time interval [ t, t þ dt], neuron X is (1) in the burst mode with
probability pX,i f Si ¼ i . 0 and if neuron X is linked to the ith HVCRA
group, or (2) in the tonic (ﬁring) mode otherwise (X ¼ P for HVC RA
neurons, X ¼ R for RA neurons, and X ¼ I for HVC I neurons).
For HVC RA neurons, we chose pP ¼ 1 during singing and pP ¼ 0.8
during sleep [1], though none of the results depended on the actual
value of p
P (due to our conditional assessment of spike correlations).
Spikes associated with the two ﬁring modes are generated by time
rescaling of a Poisson process [20] using conditional intensity functions
(CIFs). The CIF h(s) (also known as the stochastic intensity function) is
the instantaneous spiking probability as a function of the time lag s
since the last spike. Mathematically, the CIF is deﬁned by the
conditional probability h(s) ¼ P(one spike in [ t þ s, t þ s þ Dt]j last
spike at t), where Dt ¼ 0.1 ms is the smallest time unit in our
simulations. CIFs can be derived from ISI pdfs p(s) according to [20]:
hðsÞ¼
pðsÞ
1 /C0
Xs
k¼0
pðkÞ
: ð1Þ
The CIFs associated with burst modes are denoted by hb(s)( b,a si n
burst) and are identical for all neurons of a given type; they are
derived from averages of measured ISI pdfs (Figure 2C). During sleep,
ﬁring rates of burst spikes are typically lower than during singing (see
Figure S1 for a comparison), suggesting a weakened synaptic drive
during sleep. To account for this fact, when modeling sleep behavior
(p , 1 and q , 1), we sample burst CIFs h
b(s) at a reduced speed
deﬁned by hb(Vs), where VP ¼ 0.63 for HVC RA neurons, VR ¼ 0.65 for
RA neurons, and VI ¼ 0.9 for HVC I neurons. The CIFs associated with
tonic ﬁring modes in HVC I and RA neurons are denoted by ha(s)( a,a s
in awake) and are modeled by gamma functions (Figure 2D).
To model spike propagation times from HVC to RA [1,24], we add
a ﬁxed delay of 4 ms to all RA spikes. By construction, spike trains
restricted to time intervals [ t, t þ d
t] have renewal statistics, but
because of frequent state switching of the HVC population, renewal
statistics does not apply to large time intervals. All our simulations
are performed with a unit time step of Dt ¼ 0.1 ms. For each simulated
neuron, we generate spike trains between 2 min and 30 min duration.
The following additional assumptions about switching behavior
produce good results: when a neuron switches from the tonic mode
into the burst mode, we automatically set the ﬁrst spike of the burst.
However, if a neuron remains for two or more consecutive time steps
in the burst mode, then we continue to sample the CIF without
setting a spike at subsequent time steps (we set a spike only after a
state switch).
To model reduced tonic ﬁring in RA neurons after spike bursts
(Figure S1E), we incorporate an RA inhibitory mechanism into the
model. We assume that in each song state, there is an (independent)
probability P
Inh ¼ 0.1 that a neuron experiences inhibitory input
from RA interneurons [31]. Such inhibitory input lasts for a duration
D, where D is randomly drawn from an exponential distribution with
mean D
R. As long as an RA neuron receives inhibitory input, it does
not produce tonic spikes (in contrast, RA neurons are allowed to ﬁre
burst spikes while subjected to inhibitory input). To test the validity
of this inhibition model, we compare it to a different model in which
tonic ﬁring is reduced after bursts by means of burst-triggered spike-
rate adaptation. That is, when an RA neuron switches into the tonic
ﬁring mode, no spike is ﬁred until a random time delay D passes
since the onset of the last burst, where D is again randomly drawn
from an exponential distribution with mean D
R. Both models are
able to explain burst-triggered ﬁring adaptation in single RA
neurons (Figure S1E); however, only the inhibition model is able
to correctly reproduce transitive ﬁring suppression in RA pairs
(Figure 7).
Bursting in RA and HVC neurons is under tight control of input
from Uva (unpublished observation). We implement Uva-mediated
burst epochs as a Poisson point process: in regular time intervals of
T
epoch ¼ 400 ms and with probability pb ¼ 0.04, we increase the
persistence of song states to p ¼ 1 for a duration of Tepoch. No ﬁne-
tuning of burst epoch parameters Tepoch and pb was necessary to
produce good ﬁts in Figure 5C–5F.
Curves in Figures 2 to 5 were ﬁt by manual parameter selection
using a graphical user interface written in MATLAB (The Mathworks)
and Cþþ. The parameter values that were explored to produce ﬁts in
Figures 4 and 5 were p, q, and the average tonic ﬁring rates in RA and
HVC
I neurons (ﬁxed for each neuron type). No objective ﬁtting
criterion or systematic parameter sampling was used; satisfactory
results could be obtained by trial and error.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492529
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 11 ---
Spike-train analysis. All spike-train analysis is performed using
Matlab scripts mixed with fast C þþroutines. Methods are described
in detail in [12] and [24].
The IFR R(t) is deﬁned as the inverse of the ISI enclosing time t.
The ISI pdf p(s)( s is the ISI) is deﬁned as the histogram of ISIs
normalized to sum to one.
We estimate CSP functions PBjA(t) for simultaneously recorded or
simulated neuron pairs A and B in terms of the fraction of spikes in
neuron A that are associated with at least one spike in neuron B in
the relative time window [ t /C0 ½s, t þ ½s]:
PBjAðtÞ¼ 1
NA
XNA
i¼1
h s
2 /C0 minj jtA
i þ t /C0 tB
j j
/C18/C19
;
where NA is the total number of spikes in neuron A, ftA
i g are the spike
times of neuron A, ftB
j g a r et h es p i k et i m e so fn e u r o nB ,
hðxÞ¼ 1
2 þ 1
2
signðxÞ is the Heavyside function, and s ¼ 5 ms is the
halfwidth of the spike clipping window. For more information on
CSP functions, consult [24].
Supporting Information
Figure S1. Comparison of Song-Related and Sleep-Related Average
ISI pdfs
(A–D) Shown are ISI pdfs (normalized to the ﬁrst 10 ms) measured
during singing and during sleep. In all neuron types, sleep-related
bursts have lower ﬁring rates, indicated by the rightward shift of ISI
peaks. Matching of singing-related and sleep-related ISI pdfs can be
achieved by different stretch factors V (see Methods). V ¼ 0.65 for RA
neurons in (A), V ¼ 0.9 for HVC I neurons in (B), V ¼ 0.63 for HVC RA
neurons in (C), and V ¼ 0.77 for X-projecting HVC neurons (HVC X
neurons) in (D). ISI pdfs were produced based on data in [1,10–12].
(E) RA spike histogram for a range of time lags since the last sleep
burst, computed for all RA bursts that were followed by a burst-free
period of at least 2 s (the histogram is composed of RA single spikes
only). The red curve depicts the ﬁt 1.9 /C0 1.3exp(t/D
R), where t is the
time lag since the last burst, and DR ¼ 240 ms is our estimation of the
RA inhibition time constant.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.sg001 (94 KB PDF).
Figure S2. Autocovariance Functions of RA Spike Trains during Sleep
The autocovariance function C(t) of a spike train q(t) (modeled as a
sum of delta functions) is a measure of spike density ﬂuctuation and
is deﬁned as
CðtÞ¼ 1
T /C0j tj
ZT
0
qðt þ sÞqðsÞds /C0 /C22q2;
where /C22q is the average ﬁring rate and T is the total duration of the
spike train. The characteristic oscillatory behavior of autocovariance
functions in RA neurons is well-reproduced by the model.
(A) A short survival time of the ground state leads to fast decay of
autocovariance oscillations. D
R ¼ 240 ms and VR ¼ 0.7.
(B) A long survival time of the ground state leads to slow decay of
oscillations. DR ¼ 120 ms and VR ¼ 0.67.
In (A) and (B), LR ¼ 13 and pR ¼ 0.92.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.sg002 (85 KB PDF).
Figure S3. Average CSP Functions Fitted without Burst Epochs
(A–D) Unlike in Figure 5, no burst epochs (ﬂuctuations in p) were
included in the model. Model curves (black) represents the best ﬁts
achievable by trial and error. The arrows indicate regions where the
quality of ﬁt could not be improved. Same legend as in Figure 5.
Found at doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030249.sg003 (49 KB PDF).
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Klaus Hepp for helpful discussions about the
manuscript.
Author contributions. APW performed the model simulations, and
RHRH wrote the manuscript.
Funding. This work was supported by a Schweizerischer Natio-
nalfonds (SNF) professorship grant to RHRH.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
References
1. Hahnloser R, Kozhevnikov A, Fee MS (2002) An ultrasparse code underlies
the generation of neural sequences in a songbird. Nature 419: 65–70.
2. Luczak A, Bartho P, Marguet SL, Buzsaki G, Harris KD (2007) Sequential
structure of neocortical spontaneous activity in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 104: 347–352.
3. Kenet T, Bibitchkov D, Tsodyks M, Grinvald A, Arieli A (2003) Sponta-
neously emerging cortical representations of visual attributes. Nature 425:
954–956.
4. Dave AS, Margoliash D (2000) Song replay during sleep and computational
rules for sensorimotor vocal learning. Science 290: 812–816.
5. Louie K, Wilson MA (2001) Temporally structured replay of awake
hippocampal ensemble activity during rapid eye movement sleep. Neuron
29: 145–156.
6. Tsodyks M, Kenet T, Grinvald A, Arieli A (1999) Linking spontaneous
activity of single cortical neurons and the underlying functional archi-
tecture. Science 286: 1943–1946.
7. Dan Y, Alonso JM, Usrey WM, Reid RC (1998) Coding of visual information
by precisely correlated spikes in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Nat
Neurosci 1: 501–507.
8. Hatsopoulos NG, Paninski L, Donoghue JP (2003) Sequential movement
representations based on correlated neuronal activity. Exp Brain Res 149:
478–486.
9. Schneidman E, Berry MJ Jr, Segev R, Bialek W (2006) Weak pairwise
correlations imply strongly corre lated network states in a neural
population. Nature 440: 1007–1012.
10. Leonardo A, Fee MS (2005) Ensemble coding of vocal control in birdsong. J
Neuroscience 19: 652–661.
11. Kozhevnikov A, Fee MS (2006) Singing-related activity of identiﬁed HVC
neurons in the zebra ﬁnch. J Neurophysiol 97: 4271–4283.
12. Hahnloser HR, Kozhevnikov AA, Fee MS (2006) Sleep-related neural
activity in a premotor and a basal-ganglia pathway of the songbird. J
Neurophysiol 96: 794–812.
13. Dave AS, Yu AC, Margoliash D (1998) Behavioral state modulation of
auditory activity in a vocal motor system. Science 282: 2250–2254.
14. Jin DZ, Ramazanoglu FM, Seung HS (2007) Intrinsic bursting enhances the
robustness of a neural network model of sequence generation by avian
brain area HVC. J Comput Neurosci 23: 283–299.
15. Fee MS, Kozhevnikov AA, Hahnloser RH (2004) Neural mechanisms of
vocal sequence generation in the songbird. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1016: 153–
170.
16. Deppisch J, Pawelzik K, Geisel T (1994) Uncovering the synchronization
dynamics from correlated neuronal activity quantiﬁes assembly formation.
Biol Cybern 71: 387–399.
17. Danoczy M, Hahnloser HR (2005) Efﬁcient estimation of hidden state
dynamics from spike trains. Neural Inf Process Syst (NIPS) 18. Available:
http://books.nips.cc/papers/ﬁles/nips18/NIPS2005_0482.pdf. Accessed 16
November 2007.
18. Yu BM, Afshar A, Snathanam G, Ryu SI, Shenoy KV, et al. (2005) Extracting
dynamical structure embedded in neural activity. Neural Inf Process Syst
(NIPS) 18. Available: http://www.stanford.edu/ ;shenoy/GroupPublications/
YuEtAlNIPS2005.pdf. Accessed 19 November 2007.
19. Truccolo W, Eden UT, Fellows MR, Donoghue JP, Brown EN (2005) A point
process framework for relating neural spiking activity to spiking history,
neural ensemble, and extrinsic covariate effects. J Neurophysiol 93: 1074–
1089.
20. Brown EN, Barbieri R, Ventura V, Kass RE, Frank LM (2002) The time-
rescaling theorem and its application to neural spike train data analysis.
Neural Comput 14: 325–346.
21. Rosen MJ, Mooney R (2006) Synaptic interactions underlying song-
selectivity in the avian nucleus HVC revealed by dual intracellular
recordings. J Neurophysiol 95: 1158–1175.
22. Mooney R, Prather JF (2005) The HVC microcircuit: the synaptic basis for
interactions between song motor and vocal plasticity pathways. J Neurosci
25: 1952–1964.
23. Hahnloser RH, Fee MS (2007) Sleep-related spike bursts in HVC are driven
by the nucleus interface of the nidopallium. J Neurophysiol 97: 423–435.
24. Hahnloser RH (2007) Cross-intensity functions and the estimate of spike-
time jitter. Biol Cybern 96: 497–506.
25. Glaze CM, Troyer TW (2006) Temporal structure in zebra ﬁnch song:
implications for motor coding. J Neurosci 26: 991–1005.
26. Mazor O, Laurent G (2005) Transient dynamics versus ﬁxed points in odor
representations by locust antennal lobe projection neurons. Neuron 48:
661–673.
27. Rabinovich M, Volkovskii A, Lecanda P, Huerta R, Abarbanel HD, et al.
(2001) Dynamical encoding by networks of competing neuron groups:
winnerless competition. Phys Rev Lett 87: 068102.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492530
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data


--- Page 12 ---
28. Hinton GE, Dayan P, Frey BJ, Neal RM (1995) The ‘‘wake-sleep’’ algorithm
for unsupervised neural networks. Science 268: 1158–1161.
29. Deregnaucourt S, Mitra PP, Feher O, Pytte C, Tchernichovski O (2005)
How sleep affects the developmental learning of bird song. Nature 433:
710–716.
30. Walker MP, Stickgold R (2006) Sleep, memory, and plasticity. Annu Rev
Psychol 57: 139–166.
31. Spiro JE, Dalva MB, Mooney R (1999) Long-range inhibition within the
zebra ﬁnch song nucleus RA can coordinate the ﬁring of multiple
projection neurons. J Neurophysiol 81: 3007–3020.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org December 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 12 | e2492531
Population Model of Songbird Spike Data
