--- Page 1 ---
The Emergence of Up and Down States
in Cortical Networks
David Holcman 1¤*, Misha Tsodyks 2,3
1 Department of Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2 Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 3 Departement
d’etudes cognitives, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France
The cerebral cortex is continuously active in the absence of external stimuli. An example of this spontaneous activity is
the voltage transition between an Up and a Down state, observed simultaneously at individual neurons. Since this
phenomenon could be of critical importance for working memory and attention, its explanation could reveal some
fundamental properties of cortical organization. To identify a possible scenario for the dynamics of Up–Down states,
we analyze a reduced stochastic dynamical system that models an interconnected network of excitatory neurons with
activity-dependent synaptic depression. The model reveals that when the total synaptic connection strength exceeds a
certain threshold, the phase space of the dynamical system contains two attractors, interpreted as Up and Down states.
In that case, synaptic noise causes transitions between the states. Moreover, an external stimulation producing a
depolarization increases the time spent in the Up state, as observed experimentally. We therefore propose that the
existence of Up–Down states is a fundamental and inherent property of a noisy neural ensemble with sufficiently
strong synaptic connections.
Citation: Holcman D, Tsodyks M (2006) The emergence of Up and Down states in cortical networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2(3): e23.
Introduction
In the absence of sensory inputs, cortical neural networks
can exhibit complex patterns of intrinsic activity. The origin
of this spontaneous activity in the cortex is still unclear, but
recent studies have reported some important characteristics
of the dynamics. For example, it has been demonstrated [3]
that the spontaneous population activity in the visual cortex
is highly correlated with organized patterns, called orienta-
tion map, occurring usually during some speciﬁc visual
stimulation. In a parallel direction, the studies [1] using
two-photon calcium imaging and [2] extracellular recordings
have reported that single neuron membrane potentials in
slice preparations can spontaneously transit between two
states, called the Up and Down states. The origin of this
phenomenon, originally described in [4] and [5], is not
precisely known, but the transitions have been ascribed to the
intrinsic network property [6]. Transitions are almost
abolished by pharmacological blockers such as glutamate
receptor antagonists [1,2] and totally abolished by glutamate
and GABA receptor antagonists [1]. As a consequence, the Up
and Down state transitions are a good example of how a
connected network exhibits a complex correlated dynamic in
the absence of any external inputs.
In previous models based on [7], the Up to Down state
transition was attributed to the effect of neuronal adaptation
due the building up activity of K
þ channels. In [8], numerical
simulations are presented, where the somatic voltage of a
neural population shows an Up and Down state activity.
However, no arguments are given to explain why there is a
unique Up state and why this Up state is stable. Actually, the
authors ‘‘hypothesized that recurrent synaptic excitation
produces a network bistability with an active Up state and
an inactive Down state, ’’ where the I
K/C0 NA current is
responsible for the switching between states. Their picture
of the Up and Down state dynamics is explained by a
hysteresis loop, which requires a current injection for a
speciﬁc range of the parameters.
We propose here to investigate the role of the spontaneous
activity in the generation of the Up and Down state transitions,
using a modeling approach. We attribute the spontaneous
ﬂuctuations to the external noise at the level of neural
populations. We demonstrate that in a sufﬁciently intercon-
nected network which shows activity-dependent synaptic
depression, two nonsymmetric attractors emerge. Due to the
particular geometry of those attractors, the noise generates a
bistability regime (two-state regime) but this is achieved in a
very different way, compared with the case of symmetric
attractors. When inhibitory connections are included into the
model, the results are not changed qualitatively, thus to extract
the main ingredients of the Up–Down states phenomena, we
have decided to restrict the present analysis to a model
containing only excitatory connections. Due to the activity-
dependent synaptic depression, which was observed in neo-
cortical slices [9], the network dynamic does not reach a
saturation value. Our model is formulated with a reduced set
of two equations (Equation 1) describing the mean activity of a
Editor: Karl Friston, University College London, United Kingdom
Received August 24, 2005; Accepted February 10, 2006; Published March 24, 2006
A previous version of this article appeared as an Early Online Release on February
10, 2006 (DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.eor).
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023
Copyright: /C2112006 Holcman and Tsodyks. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Abbreviations: LTP, long-term potentiation
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: david.holcman@
weizmann.ac.il
¤ Current address: Departement de Biologie, INSERM 497, Ecole Normale
Supe´rieure, Paris, France
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230174



--- Page 2 ---
homogeneous population of neurons. The ﬁrst variable
represents the mean activity of the whole population and
can be scaled to represent locally the average membrane
potential, while the second variable is the mean rate of
synaptic depression in the network. This simpliﬁed ‘‘mean-
ﬁeld’’ description allows us to analyze the network in the low-
dimensional space of these two variables (phase space).
Our analysis reveals that for certain values of the
parameters of the model that characterize the strength of
network connectivity, the phase space of the network
contains two stable ﬁxed points (attractors) that correspond
to the stable stationary values of activity and depression of
the network. One of the attractors corresponds to the state of
zero activity, and the other one corresponds to higher
activity. The basin of attraction associated with the ﬁrst ﬁxed
point (all the initial values of the variables that dynamically
ﬂow to this ﬁxed point) corresponds to the Down state of
activity, and the basin of attraction of the second ﬁxed point
corresponds to the Up state of activity. Noise activity
produces random transition between the basins, which
generates the Up–Down state dynamics. The model predicts
in particular that transition to the Up state is always
associated with a spike generated in the network population.
Results
Dynamics of the Network
The analysis of the deterministic autonomous dynamical
system 1 described in Materials and Methods (when r ¼ 0 and
I(t) ¼ 0) reveals that for small values of wT, the phase diagram of
the system contains one stable ﬁxed point only, corresponding
to zero value of activity (P1: V ¼ 0, l ¼ 1). At some minimal
value of wT, two more ﬁxed points appear: one saddle point
(P3, see Figure 1) and another one—repulsor. If the synaptic
strength w
T becomes even larger, at a certain critical value wc
of the average synaptic weight, a Hopf bifurcation occurs, the
repulsor becomes an attractor (P2, see Figure 1), and an
unstable limit cycle appears around it (Figure 1A). This
analysis was carried out in [13,15] and is brieﬂy recapitulated
in Protocol S1. Intuitively, the Hopf bifurcation occurs when
recurrent connections are sufﬁciently strong to overcome
synaptic depression to produce enough recurrent excitation
to sustain a persistent Up state. Numerically, w
c can be
estimated as the value wT where the real part of the linearized
matrix of the system 1 crosses 0 from negative to positive, at
the critical point P
2. Since the dynamical system is smooth
Figure 1. Schematic Representation of the Phase Space ( l,V)
(A) The depression l is plotted on the x-axis, while the variable V is on the y-axis (for the schematic representation, no scale is given). The recurrent sets
are the attractor points P1 (the Down state), the saddle point P3, and the attractor P2 (the Up state), separated by an unstable limit cycle C (dashed line).
The region inside the unstable limit cycle is the basin of attraction of P2. By definition, it is the Up state. For a specific value of the parameter, an
homoclinic curve can appear. The unstable branch of the separatrix starting from P3 terminates inside the basin of attraction of the Down state. The
noise drives the dynamics beyond the separatrices (lines with arrow converging to P3) but a second transition is necessary for a stochastic trajectory to
enter inside the Up state delimited by C. However a single noise transition is enough to destabilize the dynamics from the Up to the Down state.
(B) Example of a trajectory in the phase space.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.g001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230175
Synopsis
The cerebral cortex is continuously active in the absence of sensory
stimuli. An example of this spontaneous activity is the phenomenon
of voltage transitions between two distinct levels, called Up and
Down states, observed simultaneously when recoding from many
neurons. This phenomenon could be of a critical importance for
working memory and attention. Thus, uncovering its biological
mechanism could reveal fundamental properties of the cortical
organization. In this theoretical contribution, Holcman and Tsodyks
propose a mathematical model of cortical dynamics that exhibits
spontaneous transitions between Up and Down states. The model
describes an activity of a network of interconnected neurons. A
crucial component of the model is synaptic depression of
interneuronal connections, which is a well-known effect that
characterizes many types of synaptic connections in the cortex.
Despite its simplicity, the model reproduces many properties of Up–
Down transitions that were experimentally observed, and makes
several intriguing predictions for future experiments. In particular,
the model predicts that the time that a network spends in the Up
state is highly variable, changing from a fraction of a second to more
than ten seconds, which could have some interesting implications
for the temporal characteristics of working memory.
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 3 ---
near the Up state attractor, the existence of the limit cycle C,
i.e., the periodic solution to the network equations (Equation
1) corresponding to oscillatory behavior of the network, is
guaranteed by the standard theory of Hopf’s bifurcation (see
[16]). The critical point P
1 ¼ (0,1) is always an attractor of the
system. To study the role of noise in a depressing neural
network, the equations in Equation 1 are analyzed using the
phase diagram of the system, represented in Figure 1. Figure
1B represents a trajectory in the phase space. Due to the noise
activity, the mean potential V can escape from the basin of
attraction of the point P
1. This phenomena is the well-known
exit problem for a dynamical system perturbed by random
noise in general [17,18] and for nonuniformly random noise
perturbations in a few cases [19]. When the deterministic
system has two basins of attraction, the noise (which only
appears in one variable) can lead to transitions between the
two states. When the network dynamics relax in the Down
state, it approaches closer to the separatrix, where a small
ﬂuctuation due to the noise might be enough to produce a
transition. However, this transition across the separatrix is not
sufﬁcient to produce an Up state, because this region is
characterized by an unstable l imit cycle. Consequently,
further noise ﬂuctuation is necessary to push the network
inside the Up state region (which is deﬁned as the region
inside the unstable limit cycle, see Figure 1A). In this
intermediate region, between the separatrix and the unstable
limit cycle, the dynamic is mainly driven by the deterministic
part, leading to a fast rotation around the unstable limit cycle.
This rotation generates a fast spike of the population voltage.
In the more realistic model, the population spike would
correspond to a synchronous discharge of many neurons. This
peculiar property of the network dynamics was analyzed in
detail in [14], where it was shown that the underlying reason
for the emergence of population spikes is the separation of
time scales between the voltage dynamics and synaptic
depression (t
r/C29 s). Under this condition, the population spikes
have amplitudes that are much larger than the voltage in the
Up state, and a duration that is much faster than the typical
duration of Up and Down states.
This spike generation in the network population always
occurs during a transition from a Down to an Up state, which
is a prediction of our model. When the rotation is performed
in the phase space, any noise ﬂuctuation can push the
dynamics inside the Up state region. The two consecutive
transitions are reasonably probable because compared with
the amplitude of the noise, the separatrices are located very
close to the unstable limit cycle C, as can be seen from a more
careful analysis of simulations (unpublished data).
Figure 2A shows the results of simulations in the case when
the deterministic system has two basins of attraction ( w
T .
wc). The parameters of the model are presented in Table 1
(for these values of parameters, numerical analysis outlined
above produces w
c ’ 10.3). The voltage difference between
the Up and Down state is about 15 mV. Such value is
approximated by wT
tr
, as can be seen by ﬁnding the steady-state
solutions of Equation 1. The population activity in the Down
state is much lower than in the Up state but still non-zero, as
was observed experimentally (see, e.g., [27]).
The time course of the voltage is comparable to the Up–
Down state dynamics observed experimentally [1,2], and in
particular each transition from Down to Up is associated with
a spiking event. This peak of synchrony was reported using
two-photon calcium imaging and it was associated with the
time when nearby neurons ﬁre [1], revealing a transition from
a Down to an Up state.
The transition from the Down to the Up state can be
understood as follows: the noise can lead the system to cross
the border between the basin of attractions (the separatrix),
but not necessarily the limit cycle. In that case, a fast spiking
event is generated, as can be observed in Figure 2A, when the
dynamic comes back into the Down state. When the dynamic
succeeds in getting into the Up state, by a second transition
due to noise, it stays there for a certain mean time, which can
be approximated by the mean ﬁrst passage time to the
unstable limit cycle. Once the limit cycle is crossed, the
dynamic relaxes exponentially to the Down state. This
analysis indicates that the consecutive Up state durations
are independent from each other, as conjectured in [20]. Note
also that the network undergoes oscillations during the Up
state due to the presence of the limit cycle around the
attractor P2 (see above). Similar oscillations in the Up state
have been observed in the potential trace of single neuron
recordings from the barrel cortex of anesthetized rats (I.
Lampl, personal communication). Similarly, under whole cell
recording of layer 2/3 pyramidal neuron of the barrel cortex,
large ﬂuctuations of the membrane potential in the Up state
were also reported in [21]. Since there is no limit cycle
around the attractor P1, no oscillations are observed while
the network is in the Down state.
Effects of External Inputs on Up–Down Dynamics
We study the sensitivity of the Up–Down dynamics to
changes in the average value of the external input. To this
end, we repeated the simulations of the network dynamics for
different average values of I (see Equation 1). The results of
these simulations are shown in Figure 2A in the absence of
any external input. Adding a positive input, which is the
equivalent of adding a current injection that depolarizes the
cells, increases the time spent in the Up state compared with
the control case, as seen in Figure 2B. This result is
compatible with the experimental studies, where a similar
shift was reported in the response to sensory inputs [22–24].
In contrast, adding negative input changes the dynamics in
the opposite direction, to the point where the Up state
disappears completely, as shown in Figure 2C. We also
computed the distribution of the durations of the individual
Up state epochs for these three cases (Figure 2, column 3).
Surprisingly, we observed the presence of exceptionally long
Up state epochs, as reﬂected in the long tail of the
distribution. To complete the analysis, we show the depend-
ency of the mean duration of the Up state and the frequency
of Down–Up transitions as a function of external input
(Figure 3). While the mean duration increases with the input,
as expected, the transition frequency has a unique maximum.
Effects of Changing the Total Synaptic Connections
When the total synaptic weight wT is changed, it affects the
Up and Down state dynamics: increasing wT increases the
mean time spent in the Up state and its activity level (Figure
4A), while decreasing w
T reduces the time spent in the Up
state and the activity level (Figure 4B). Increasing wT can be
interpreted as the result of long-term potentiation (LTP),
which is known to reinforce the synaptic connections.
Qualitatively similar effects were obtained when we changed
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230176
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 4 ---
the value of U (unpublished data). Since changes in wT are
usually associated with the postsynaptic mechanism of LTP,
while changes in U are associated with the presynaptic
mechanism [25,26], these results show that both mechanisms
have similar effects on the distribution of network activity
between the Up states and Down states.
Interaction between the Network State and the Stimulus
The functional signiﬁcance of the spontaneous dynamics is
revealed by considering the effect on the cortical response to
sensory stimulation. Several experimental studies [21,24,27]
reported that neurons respond more strongly if the stimulus
arrives during the Down state of activity. To check whether
our model can reproduce this effect, we applied brief
excitatory pulses with the frequency of 1 Hz and computed
the average voltage response separately for stimuli that fell on
Up and Down states of the network. The resulting responses
are shown in Figure 5. As one can see, the response is much
weaker for the Up state, because the synapses are very
depressed, making the inter actions within the network
weaker. If the amplitude of the stimulus, applied during the
Up state, is increased, it may trigger a transition to the Down
state (unpublished data). This effect was also predicted in [28]
and observed experimentally in [2].
Figure 2. Up–Down State Dynamics under Normal and Clamp Conditions
(A) A typical realization of Up–Down transition dynamics in the stochastic model with wT ¼ 12.6.
Top graph: (Up) average population voltage (mV), baseline at 0 mV; (Down) plot of the depression variable l as a function of time: when the system
arrives in the Down state, it is depressed. Then the depression recovers slowly toward 1. Usually the noise is able to produce a transition, before full
recovery is achieved.
Bottom graph: Histogram of the population voltage: fraction of the time spent in a given state. Units are in ms on the y-axis and in mV on the x-axis: the
fraction of total time spent in the Up and Down state is about the same during the 20 s of simulations. The maximum time in the Up state is about 500
ms but the mean maximum time is about 3 s.
Right column graph of (A): histogram of the duration of the Up states.
(B) Effect of an external stimulation: depolarization. When a constant external input (I ¼ 0.8) is added into the model, the neural network spends on
average more time in the Up state than in Down state. In that case, the attractor point P
1 is shifted and is now closer to the separatrix.
(C) Hyperpolarization, simulated by a current injection . A hyperpolarization (I ¼/C0 0.3) drives the ensemble of neurons at a lower mean potential, and as a
result the neural network spends on average more time in the Down state.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.g002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230177
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 5 ---
Discussion
We conclude that the Up–Down state dynamics can be
generated from a stochastic dynamical system that describes
the mean activity of a recurrent excitatory network with
synaptic depression. Depending on the average w
T strength of
connections, the dynamical system presents various recurrent
sets (Figure 1) that include two stable attractors. The two
attractors appear only when a minimal synaptic strength w
c is
reached. In the absence of synaptic depression, the Up state
could only exist at the level of saturation (i.e., at a very high
ﬁring rate). This follows easily from the equations, and can be
understood intuitively, too, since without depression nothing
would prevent the system with recurrent excitation to
increase its activity until it reaches saturation. Thus, dynamic
ﬂuctuations in the synaptic weights that are due to activity-
dependent synaptic depression counterbalance the activity
ﬂuctuations and prevent them from growing in amplitude.
The role of the intrinsic noise is to produce stochastic
transitions from one attractor to another. Thus, if the noise
amplitude is small, spontaneous transitions will be rare, but
the Up state could still be evoked by an external trigger. This
phenomenology could be relevant for working memory. We
do not know how to convert w
c into a precise measurable
quantity, such as the minimum number of synaptic con-
nections that will guarantee the existence of the two states.
The model that we presented here is the ‘‘mean-ﬁeld’’
approximation for the average activity of a large network of
spiking neurons. As shown in the literature, it usually
provides a qualitatively good description of the network
activity (see, e.g., [14]). In order to have a signiﬁcant source of
noise in the mean-ﬁeld model (after averaging), the network
should receive a spatially correlated noise, e.g., due to
common input to different neurons.
Transition from the Different States
As predicted in the model, the Up and Down state
transition of the network activity from one basin of
attraction to another is the result of the noise activity. Since
even in the Down state, the network is far from equilibrium
(the synapses are always depressed), the mean time the
network spends in the Down state is not approximated by the
mean ﬁrst passage to the separatrix, starting near the
attractor of the Down state, rather it is comparable to the
mean time it takes for the synapses to recover from a certain
depressed activity. This deterministic relaxation is not much
affected by how strong the noise is. In the Down state, the
synaptic depression ﬂuctuates much more than in the Up
state. As long as the network is in the Down state, the
depression recovers exponentially, until a transition in the
Up state is produced.
A transition from the Up to the Down state is achieved
when the noise pushes the dynamics outside the Up state
region. The mean time spent in the Up state is the mean ﬁrst
passage time from any point inside of the basin of attraction
to the unstable limit cycle and is exponentially long as a
function of the amplitude of the noise [18,29]. Thus, when the
noise amplitude is changed in the numerical simulations, the
time spent in the Up state changed (unpublished data).
When the noise amplitude is increased, the time spent in
the Up state decreases and more transition between states
occurs. As a consequence, the Up states occurring in slices
(where the noise amplitude is supposed to be less than in vivo)
should last longer than in vivo.
The present model does not include any channel activity,
which affects the dynamics of the membrane potential.
Activation of K
þ conductances in neostriatal spiny neurons
was suggested to produce a stable Up state [4], and this
conductance activity has been used in some models [8] to
explain the transition from the Up to the Down state. Other
factors, such as feedback inhibition and synaptic facilitation,
could also be involved in the Up–Down state dynamics.
However, in our case, we ﬁnd it remarkable that many of the
experimental observations about Up–Down dynamics can be
reproduced here within the reduced model, suggesting that
synaptic depression could be a dominating mechanism.
Figure 3. Frequency and Duration of the Mean Time Spent in the Up
State as a Function of I
The top graph represents the frequency of Up states as a function of
Input I. Hyperpolarizing the neurons is generated for I , 0, while
depolarization is generated for I . 0. The result suggests that there is a
unique value of I for which the frequency of the Up state is maximal. In
the bottom graph, the mean duration of the Up states is plotted as a
function of I.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.g003
Table 1. Values of Parameters Used in the Simulation
Parameter Value
s 0.05 s
tr 0.8 s
U 0.5
r 2.2 mV
wT 12.6 mV/Hz
T 2.0 mV
Adapted from [15].
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.t001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230178
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 6 ---
Steady State of the Network and Synaptic Depression
Analysis of Figure 2A (lower left) shows that synapses are
highly depressed most of the time. This suggests that even in
the absence of external stimuli, the synaptic noise is sufﬁcient
to keep the system far from equilibrium, including the Down
state. It is interesting to note that synapses are not
functioning near equilibrium, but far from the steady state.
As a consequence, the ﬁring rate driven by the noise activity
produces synaptic depression. Interestingly, the Up and
Down states do not disappear if weak inhibition is added by
simulating the extra inhibi tory population with linear
synapses from and to the excitatory one (unpublished data),
rather we found that the main role of inhibition is to decrease
the mean time that the system stays in the Up state.
The assumption that synaptic depression can be a possible
mechanism underlying the Up and Down state dynamics has
already been suggested in [21,24]. As a possible prediction of
the model, using the results shown in Figure 4, when w
T
increases to a certain value, we expect that the Up and Down
state dynamics should appear in an ensemble of neurons, as a
result of LTP induction. In the opposite direction (Figure 4B),
any decrease in the total synaptic weight should lead to an
equilibrium state where the Up and Down states completely
disappear. We predict that an intermediate stage should
appear, where the ensemble generates synchronous spikes,
but cannot sustain any Up states. It is conceivable that LTP
experiments will increase local connections among only a few
neurons, which will generate an Up and Down state activity
only for them.
Up State and Adaptation to Large Stimuli
Because in the Up state the response of the network to
external stimulus is weaker compared with the Down state
(see Figure 5), it is conceivable that a neuron makes a
transition in the Up state to decrease the amplitude of the
response to a large number of action potentials. This
transition can be seen as a possible mechanism for
adaptation: by decreasing the response in the Up state, the
Figure 4. Effect of Synaptic Plasticity on Up–Down State Dynamics
(A) Effect of increasing wT, which is equivalent to the LTP effect. The effect of LTP is obtained by increasing the total synaptic connections wT to a value
of 15. The effect is similar to a depolarization injection current.
(B) Effect of LTD on Up–Down state dynamics . The effect of LTD is obtained by decreasing the total synaptic connections wT to a value of 11. The effect
is similar to hyperpolarizing the ensemble of neurons.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.g004
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230179
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 7 ---
network ﬁlters some spikes, but it continues to generate
action potential. If the network had stayed in the Down state,
a similar spiking activity would have led to a large response,
possibly to a saturated regime. Because in the Up state, the
mean depression l is lower than in the Down state, individual
neurons become synaptically isolated from the rest of the
network. This mechanism of isolation in an Up state provides
a possible explanation for the smaller response of individual
neurons to stimulus in the Up state compared with the Down
state. This was shown theoretically in Figure 5 and described
experimentally in [21]). This mechanism is also helpful in
understanding the lack of response propagation in the
network, as reported in [21].
This transition process can be compared with the
phenomena of adaptation in cone photoreceptors, appearing
when light is increased by several orders of magnitude: cone
photoreceptors can continue to modulate light, where usually
without adaptation the photoresponse would have been
negligible. Conceivably, the dynamics associated with synap-
tic depression in the Up state is a mechanism of adaptation
and has a global effect on the voltage sensitive channels,
regulating the ﬁring rate in the Up state.
Processing Information with Up and Down States
In [1], it was reported that independent or weakly coupled
small neuronal ensembles generate Up and Down state
dynamics. Subsets of neurons are in an Up state while others
are in a Down state. Reﬁnement of the present model can be
made by considering many neuron ensembles which present
each Up and Down state dynamics, and by adding a
correlation term in the system of Equation 1 to correlate
each independent subsets of neurons. In that case, the
temporal sequence of activation of each subnetwork can
code information in a more robust manner, rather than
would be the case for a single neuron. Thus, those subsets of
neurons where Up and Down states are observed may be
considered as a second integrated structure, beyond the level
of individual neurons. As a consequence, subnetworks that
present Up and Down states might be needed to guarantee
reliable storage of information. The genesis of such subnet-
works might also be considered at an intermediate level
between synaptic and cortical plasticity.
Materials and Methods
We consider a neural network connected by excitatory connec-
tions, described by the mean ﬁring rate, which is the average of the
ﬁring rate over the population. We do not present here the equations
where inhibition connections are added to the model. The change of
the mean activity is modeled as a stochastic process. Neurons are
connected with depressing synapses, and the state of a synapse is
described by the depression parameter l [10,12]. The mean activity of
such a network can be approximated by the following dynamical
system [11]
s _V ¼/C0 V þ lUw
T RðVÞþ ﬃﬃ ﬃsp r _x þ IðtÞ
_l ¼ 1 /C0 l
tr
/C0 UlRðVÞ; ð1Þ
where V is an average synaptic input (measured in mV with a base line
at 0 mV), wT measures the average synaptic strength in the network,
I(t) is an external input, U and tc are utilization parameter and
recovery time constants of synaptic depression (see [12–14] for a
derivation of the auditory cortex). The ﬁrst term on the right-hand
side of the ﬁrst equation of Equation 1 represents the effect of the
intrinsic decay. The second term on the right side represents the
synaptic input, which is scaled by the synaptic depression parameter
l. The third term on the right side summarizes all uncorrelated
sources of noise, with amplitude r. R(V) is an average ﬁring rate (in
Hz) given by the threshold-linear dependence on the voltage:
RðVÞ¼ aðV /C0 TÞ
þ ¼ 0i f V , T
aðV /C0 TÞ if T /C20 V
/C26
ð2Þ
where T . 0 is a threshold and a ¼ 1HZ/mV is a conversion factor. The
second equation in Equation 1 describes the activity-dependent
dynamics of the synaptic depression parameter according to the
phenomenological model proposed in [12]. Brieﬂy, every incoming
spike leads to abrupt decrease in the instantaneous synaptic efﬁcacy
(by a utilization factor U) due to depletion of the neurotransmitter.
Between the spikes, synaptic efﬁcacy recovers to its original state ( l ¼
1) with the time constant t
r.
Supporting Information
Protocol S1. Fixed Points Analysis
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.sd001 (2 KB TEX).
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank R. Cossart, I. Lampl, and B. Gutkin for fruitful
discussions and for their comments on the manuscript.
Author contributions. DM and MT conceived and designed the
experiments, performed the experiments, analyzed the data, con-
tributed reagents/materials/analysis tools, and wrote the paper.
Funding. DH is the incumbent to the Haas Russell Career Chair in
Development at the Weizmann Institute of Science and is partially
supported by the French ministry program Chaire d’Excellence. MT
is the incumbent to the Gerald and Hedy Oliven Professorial Chair in
Brain Research and is partially supported by the Israeli Science
Foundation and the Irving B. Harris Foundation.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
&
Figure 5. Average Response to a Brief Excitatory Pulse Which Produces a
Small Depolarization in Each State
The average voltage response is computed. The blue curve shows the
response in the Down state. The red curve shows the response in the Up
state. The horizontal black bar indicates the duration of the stimulus
(starting at t ¼ 0 ms). The time response is different in each state, and in
agreement with the experimental results of [27].
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023.g005
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230180
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks


--- Page 8 ---
References
1. Cossart R, Aronov D, Yuste R (2003) Attractor dynamics of network UP
states in the neocortex. Nature 423: 283–288.
2. Shu Y, Hasenstaub A, McCormick DA (2003) Turning on and off recurrent
balanced cortical activity. Nature 423: 288–293.
3. Kenet T, Bibitchkov D, Tsodyks M, Grinvald A, Arieli A (2003) Sponta-
neously emerging cortical representations of visual attributes. Nature 425:
954–956.
4. Cowan RL, Wilson CJ (1994) Spontaneous ﬁring patterns and axonal
projections of single corticostriatal neurons in the rat medial agranular
cortex. J Neurophysiol 71: 17–32.
5. Steriade M, Nunez A, Amzica F (1993) Intracellular analysis of relations
between the slow ( ,1 Hz) neocortical oscillation and other sleep rhythms
of the electroencephalogram. J Neurosci 13: 3266–3283.
6. Lampl I, Reichova I, Ferster D (1999) Synchronous membrane potential
ﬂuctuations in neurons of the cat visual cortex. Neuron 22: 361–374.
7. Sanchez-Vives MV, McCormick DA (2000) Cellular and network mecha-
nisms of rhythmic recurrent activity in neocortex. Nat Neurosci 3: 1027–
1034.
8. Compte A, Sanchez-Vives MV, McCormick DA, Wang XJ (2003) Cellular
and network mechanisms of slow oscillatory activity ( ,1Hz) and wave
propagations in a cortical network model. J Neurophysiol 89: 2707–2725.
9. Thomson AM, Deuchars J (1994) Temporal and spatial properties of local
circuits in neocortex. Trends Neurosci 17: 119–126.
10. Abbott LF, Varela JA, Sen K, Nelson SB (1997) Synaptic depression and
cortical gain control. Science 275: 179–180.
11. Dayan P, Abbott LF (2005) Theoretical neuroscience: Computational and
mathematical modeling of neural systems. Cambridge (Massachusetts): The
MIT Press. 576 p.
12. Tsodyks MV, Markram H (1997) The neural code between neocortical
pyramidal neurons depends on neurotransmitter release probability. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 94: 719–723. Erratum in: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:
5495.
13. Bart E, Bao S, Holcman D (2006) Modeling the spontaneous activity of the
auditory cortex. J Comput Neurosci. In press.
14. Loebel A, Tsodyks M (2002) Computation by ensemble synchronization in
recurrent networks with synaptic depression. J Comput Neurosci 13: 111–
124.
15. Tsodyks M, Pawelzik K, Markram H (1998) Neural networks with dynamic
synapses. Neural Comput 10: 821–835.
16. Kuznetsov, Yu A (2004) Elements of applied bifurcation theory. Third
edition. New York: Springer-Verlag. 631 p.
17. Freidlin MI, Wentzell AD (1984) Random perturbations of dynamical
systems. New York: Springer-Verlag. 260 p.
18. Schuss Z (1980) Theory and applications of stochastic differential
equations. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. New York: John Wiley
& Sons. 321 p.
19. Klosek-Dygas MM, Matkowsky BJ, Schuss Z (1988) Colored noise in
dynamical systems. SIAM J Appl Math 48: 425–441.
20. Stern EA, Kincaid AE, Wilson CJ (1997) Spontaneous subthreshold
membrane potential ﬂuctuations and action potential variability of rat
corticostriatal and striatal neurons in vivo. J Neurophysiol 77: 1697–
1715.
21. Petersen CC, Hahn TT, Mehta M, Grinvald A, Sakmann B (2003)
Interaction of sensory responses with spontaneous depolarization in layer
2/3 barrel cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100: 13638–13643.
22. Anderson J, Lampl I, Reichova I, Carandini M, Ferster D (2000) Stimulus
dependence of two-state ﬂuctuations of membrane potential in cat visual
cortex. Nat Neurosci 3: 617–621.
23. Anderson JS, Lampl I, Gillespie DC, Ferster D (2000) The contribution of
noise to contrast invariance of orientation tuning in cat visual cortex.
Science 290: 1968–1972.
24. Sachdev RN, Ebner FF, Wilson CJ (2004) Effect of subthreshold up and
down states on the whisker-evoked response in somatosensory cortex. J
Neurophysiol 92: 3511–3521.
25. Markram H, Tsodyks M (1996) Redistribution of synaptic efﬁcacy between
neocortical pyramidal neurons. Nature 382: 807–810.
26. Selig DK, Nicoll RA, Malenka RC (1999) Hippocampal long-term
potentiation preserves the ﬁdelity of postsynaptic responses to presynaptic
bursts. J Neurosci 19: 1236–1246.
27. Leger JF, Stern EA, Aertsen A, Heck D (2005) Synaptic integration in rat
frontal cortex shaped by network activity. J Neurophysiol 93: 281–293.
28. Gutkin BS, Laing CR, Colby CL, Chow CC, Ermentrout GB (2001) Turning
on and off with excitation: The role of spike-timing asynchrony and
synchrony in sustained neural activity. J Comput Neurosci 11: 121–134.
29. Naeh T, Klosek MM, Matkowsky BJ, Schuss Z (1990) A direct approach to
the exit problem. SIAM J Appl Math 50: 595–627.
30. Malenka RC, Nicoll RA (1999) Long-term potentiation—A decade of
progress? Science 285: 1870–1874.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e230181
Up and Down States in Cortical Networks
