--- Page 1 ---
Perspectives
Computational Ecology: From the Complex
to the Simple and Back
Mercedes Pascual
I
n 1958, when ecology was a young science and
mathematical models for ecological systems were in their
infancy, Elton [1] wrote of the ‘‘neolithic days of animal
ecology, that is to say about twenty-ﬁve years ago. ’’
Acknowledging the inﬂuence of Lotka and Volterra, he noted,
‘‘Being mathematicians, they did not attempt to contemplate
a whole food-chain with all the complications of ﬁve stages.
They took two: a predator and its prey. ’’
Today, in the era of computational ecological modeling,
deterministic systems for two variables—and even a whole food
chain—appear like simple idealizations well removed from the
complexity of nature. We now consider predator–prey
interactions as ‘‘consumer–resource ’’ interactions embedded
within the large ecological networks that underlie biodiversity
(Figure 1) [2]. Consequently, the scale of the problems we
model has grown to reﬂect the world as we now need to observe
it. For example, the interplay between ecosystem dynamics and
the physical environment that inﬂuences global change occurs
over a tremendous range of spatial and organizational scales
(e.g., [3]). Similarly, the population dynamics of the
transmission of infectious diseases often involve spatial or
social networks with large numbers of individuals, but the
interactions of each individual involve only a subset of the
network and can span from local to global distances (e.g., [4–6]).
These examples illustrate the current view of ecological
systems as complex adaptive systems [7,8]. Complex adaptive
systems are distinguished not only by the multiplicity of
components within them, but also by interactions that can be
local or distributed among these components and whose rates
vary as nonlinear functions of the state of the system itself. One
obvious role of computation in the science of complex systems
is simply one of synthesis: to reconstruct the whole from the
parts as we learn more and more about the components and
their interactions. There are obvious limitations to this
approach, evident in the famous image of those imperial
cartographers who produced a map of the empire of the same
size as the empire itself [9]. I argue here that an alternative and
more useful role of computation is to address questions on the
relationship between dynamics at different temporal, spatial,
and organizational scales, that is, to address the importance of
variability at small, local scales to the dynamics of aggregated
quantities measured at large, global scales. If small-scale
‘‘details’’ matter, we need to ask how much complexity we need
to incorporate into large-scale models if we seek to both
understand and predict the dynamics of global quantities.
Is it possible to incorporate the effect of small-scale
variability without resorting to the ‘‘brute force ’’ approach
of using higher and higher resolution? I start with examples
from theoretical ecology that illustrate problems and
approaches related to these scaling questions; I then present
more speciﬁc examples related to global change and
ecosystem dynamics, and end with a series of related problems
on the dynamics of large food webs, the ultimate networks of
ecological interactions.
From Individuals to Populations: How Local Effects
Translate into Global Results
Lotka–Volterra equations and their many descendants
assume that individuals are well mixed and interact at mean
population abundances. They are mean-ﬁeld equations that
use the mass-action law to describe the dynamics of
interacting populations, and ignore both the scale of
individual interactions and their spatial distribution. A key
question therefore is: can the spatial variability generated at
small, individual scales inﬂuence the dynamics at larger,
population scales? If so, can the effect of smaller scales be
represented by simply modifying mean-ﬁeld models?
Stochastic models such as interacting particle systems [10]
can help us examine approaches for scaling up individual-
based dynamics [4,11–14]. One of the most useful lessons
learned from scaling up detailed models is also pertinent to
the related but opposite problem: the formulation of simple
models for global variables that still account for the effects of
local interactions but do not represent them explicitly
(Figure 2). In particular, can we formulate these systems
without having to ﬁrst simplify detailed models? The problem
with simpliﬁcation is that it assumes we know about the
components and interactions at ‘‘microscopic’’ levels, but,
unfortunately, this information is not often available. For
example, we may know that the social network underlying the
propagation of an infectious disease is important, but we may
not know all the interactions and the speciﬁc contacts that
led to transmission of the disease from one individual to
another. If we were to start with an aggregated model at the
population level (one in which the population is aggregated
into a few variables describing the total number of infected,
susceptible, and immune individuals), how would we
formulate it to incorporate variability at spatial or
organizational levels that are not explicitly represented?
Recent ﬁndings on individual-based models for predator–
prey dynamics in a spatial lattice indicate that simpler, low-
dimensional models can still be applied at the population
Citation: Pascual M (2005) Computational ecology: From the complex to the simple
and back. PLoS Comp Biol 1(2): e18.
Copyright: /C2112005 Mercedes Pascual. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Mercedes Pascual is in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
E-mail: pascual@umich.edu
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010018
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org July 2005 | Volume 1 | Issue 2 | e180101



--- Page 2 ---
level [13,14]. Speciﬁcally, the temporal dynamics of global
population abundances, aggregated over the whole lattice,
can be approximated by mean-ﬁeld-type equations in which
the functional forms specifying the rates of growth and
interaction have been modiﬁed as power functions. Similar
results hold for disease dynamics on spatial and social
networks ([15]; M. M. Maule and J. A. N. Filipe, unpublished
data; M. Roy and M. Pascual, unpublished data). The rates of
transmission of the original mean-ﬁeld equation are
modiﬁed to account for deviations from mass action by
incorporating nonlinear mixing terms between susceptible
and infected populations in which global abundances are
raised to a power. Thus, the effect of interactions at local,
individual scales can be represented implicitly by changing
the shape of the functions describing interactions at global,
population levels; that is, the modiﬁed framework is
structured as if mass action applied when in fact it does not,
yet the subtleties of nonrandom mixing are captured at the
higher scale. The generality of these ﬁndings and the reasons
why power-law functional forms yield successful
approximations remain to be determined. Another approach
based on moment closure techniques has been applied to
simplify detailed models by incorporating the effects of
variances and covariances on the dynamics of mean (global)
quantities [5,11,16–18]; here again, the utility of this
approach when the details at small scales are not known
remains to be examined, as does the development of
statistical methods to ﬁt the models when data are only
available for aggregated ‘‘mean’’ quantities.
From Physiology to Ecosystem Dynamics: Global
Change Ecology
The problem of incorporating sub-grid-scale processes into
large-scale models is found in many other scientiﬁc ﬁelds in
which nonlinearity allows variability to interact across spatial
or organizational scales. It also applies to other ecological
contexts, in particular to global change ecology and to the
spatiotemporal ecosystem models used to represent
feedbacks between the biota and the physical environment.
At large spatial and temporal scales, the question of essential
biological detail quickly becomes computationally
intractable. In a recent review on ecosystem–atmosphere
interactions, Moorcroft [3] emphasized the problem of
scaling from the level of plant physiology to ecosystem-level
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010018.g002
Figure 2. Bridging Dynamics across Organizational Scales
On the left is a detailed model in which individual interactions in a
network are described explicitly. On the right, typical ‘‘mean field ’’
models aggregate the population into compartments (here for the
three subpopulations of susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals
in the dynamics of an infectious disease with permanent immunity).
Computational approaches can help us understand the relationship
between dynamics at these two different scales, from the individual to
the population level. We can start with a stochastic individual-based
model and develop approximations that simplify it (A). From this process,
we can learn about the opposite direction of formulating simple models
directly without sufficient knowledge to first specify the detailed
interactions and components (B). These simple models represent
implicitly the effect of smaller scale variability.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010018.g001
Figure 1. The Network of Trophic Interactions for Little Rock Lake, Wisconsin
Figure shows 997 feedings links (lines) among 92 taxa (nodes) [2]. The node color indicates the trophic level of the taxon, including (from bottom
to top) algae, zooplankton, insects, and fishes; the link color corresponds to the type of feeding link, including herbivory and primary and secondar y
carnivory. This image was produced using FoodWeb3D software written by R. J. Williams and provided by the Pacific Ecoinformatics and Computational
Ecology Lab (www.foodwebs.org).
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org July 2005 | Volume 1 | Issue 2 | e180102



--- Page 3 ---
dynamics to address global climate change questions. One
limitation of existing approaches is that within the typical
grid cell of existing models, different types of plants compete
for resources that are highly homogeneous or averaged over
space, generating a tendency for monocultures in the
simulated biology [3]. This means that the ﬁne-scale
heterogeneity present in real plant communities, which is
important for buffering the systems against perturbations, is
lost [3,19,20]. Such heterogeneity is generated by small-scale
ecological interactions among individuals and their interplay
with stochastic physical disturbances, such as ﬁre and gap
formation from fallen adult trees. While models that simulate
patterns of species community composition from individual
plant interactions have been created, their application to
ecosystem–atmosphere interactions is computationally
prohibitive. To circumvent this problem, approximations to
these individual-based models have been formulated in the
form of size- and age-structured partial differential equations
[21], which are close in spirit to the ideas discussed in the
previous section (see also [22]).
Similar connections are being addressed in aquatic
environments for phytoplankton, the unicellular primary
producers of lakes and oceans estimated to contribute 45% of
global net primary production (i.e., the amount of carbon
ﬁxed by plants per unit area over time via photosynthesis;
E. A. Litchman, C. A. Klausmeier, J. R. Miller, O. Schoﬁeld,
P. G. Falkowski, unpublished data). The amount of net
primary production depends on biological heterogeneity in
the form of a taxonomically diverse group of species [23]. A
recently developed ecosystem model incorporates different
phytoplankton functional groups and their competition for
light and multiple nutrients (E. A. Litchman, C. A. Klausmeier,
J. R. Miller, O. Schoﬁeld, P. G. Falkowski, unpublished data).
Simulations of the model at speciﬁc sites to explore future
scenarios suggest that global environmental change,
including global-warming-induced changes, will alter
phytoplankton community structure and hence alter global
biogeochemical cycles (A. Litchman, C. A. Klausmeier,
J. R. Miller, O. Schoﬁeld, P. G. Falkowski, unpublished data).
The coupling of this type of ecosystem model to global
climate models raises again a series of open questions on
model complexity and relevant spatial scales of resolution.
In fact, similar questions arise not just in the context of
climate change but for the general coupling of ecosystem
models to large-scale physical models of ocean circulation
(e.g., [24]; Figure 3).
In short, the computational and conceptual challenge is to
bridge not only highly disparate temporal and spatial scales,
but also organizational ones, from individual physiology to
ecosystem biogeochemistry, via community structure and
functional diversity (Figure 3). An understanding of how the
structure of ecological communities, composed of a diverse
array of species, responds to perturbations is a critical
intermediate step, which brings me to the next section.
From Structure to Dynamics in Large Ecological
Networks
The nonlinear dynamics of large networks is a major
challenge in computational biology and complex systems in
general [25]. In ecology, the study of networks of species
interactions, particularly food webs composed of trophic
links, has a long history at the interface of theory and
empirical patterns [26–30]. Food webs are the subject of
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010018.g003
Figure 3. Phytoplankton Biomass Generated with a Coupled Biological–Physical Model Developed to Examine the Impact of Nitrogen Fixation in the
Atlantic Ocean
In this large simulation [24], the ecosystem model consists of six variables and includes two different functional groups within the phytoplankton, for
nitrogen and non-nitrogen fixers. The physical model includes 19 vertical layers but only a coarse horizontal resolution (2 83 28). In particular, it does not
resolve the mesoscale variability of the flows, at characteristic scales of 1 to 100 km, known as the ‘‘weather’’ of the ocean. The lower left panel
illustrates the variability of phytoplankton at these smaller turbulent scales, with a simulation of a coupled ecosystem–eddy model (K. Boushaba,
G. Flierl, and M. Pascual, unpublished data). We can ask how the effects of these smaller scales can be incorporated in models with a coarser resolution
for larger oceanic regions. Even more fundamentally, what are the relevant spatial scales of coupling?
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org July 2005 | Volume 1 | Issue 2 | e180103



--- Page 4 ---
renewed attention today, with improved datasets and the
explosion of research on network structure across science (see
[31] for a review in ecology). However, the relationship
between structure and dynamics in systems that are not just
nonlinear and high-dimensional, but also adaptive, remains
poorly understood. Food web structure includes the diversity
of species, the patterns of connections among them, and the
distribution of interaction strengths on these patterns;
dynamics encompasses different measures of stability that
describe the response of the system to perturbations such as
robustness and resilience, which impact the persistence of
species [32,33]. This is not a new area but many open questions
remain [34]. For example, do rare species and those that
interact weakly with others matter to overall species
persistence in ecosystems? Simple models with only a few
players suggest that rare or weakly interacting species can be
important [35]; however, whether these ﬁndings still hold true
in the bigger, more complex networks we observe in nature is
not yet clear. Recent ﬁndings suggest a more complex picture
in which not just the intensity of interactions, but also their
location in the network, matters to (linear) stability and to the
invasibility of the community by other species [36,37].
Another recent development is the consideration of other
kinds of interactions such as mutualism and parasitism, which
can play an important role in ecosystem persistence and
bioenergetics [38,39]. The adaptive character of interactions
via phenotypic plasticity and evolutionary change challenges
traditional dynamical models and our view of structure itself.
Adaptive change in the interactions between species
inﬂuences dynamics and species’ persistence, but again, this
has been shown primarily in small networks with only a few
players [40,41] (but see [42,43]). The spatial dimension has
been largely ignored in the dynamics of large ecological
networks, although it is clearly a key component of habitat loss
and habitat fragmentation (but see [44] for a static treatment).
Stochastic assembly models are perhaps the best candidates
to develop a general dynamical theory not only to address
open questions on the relationship between structure and
dynamics, but also to generate the macroscopic community
patterns that ecologists observe in nature and characterize
diversity (such as species–area curves and species-rank
abundance curves). In these models, macroscopic patterns in
diversity arise from the dynamic tension between extinction
(as the result of ecological interactions and environmental
perturbations) and innovation (as the result of evolution and
the immigration of new species from outside the system) (e.g.,
[45]). Instability at one level of organization can provide the
basis for robustness to change at higher levels. For example,
in the species assembly model of Sole ´ et al. [45], macroscopic
quantities, such as the number of species, reach a stationary
state, while at the microscopic level instability is rampant,
with recurrent species extinctions and unpredictable
population ﬂuctuations. Computational developments are
needed to tackle the large parameter space of this type of
model and to study the model’s behavior using methods that
interface mathematical analysis and numerical simulation.
Similar issues arise in complementary approaches to link
structure and dynamics in food webs, including those that
map nonlinear dynamical equations upon a static structure of
links between species [46,47]. One promising direction to
help us constrain parameter space and build more realistic
models involves another fundamental area of ecology, the
study of allometric scalings (e.g., [48]). Allometric scalings
describe how biological rates vary as a function of size and
can be used in the formulation of dynamical models for
ecological interactions [49,50]. Ultimately, a better
understanding of the critical properties of ecological
networks that sustain diverse ecosystems and their functions
is of fundamental importance, particularly at this time of
rapid environmental change, when perturbations of structure
and loss of biological diversity are unavoidable.
The topics described here only begin to illustrate some of
the many rich areas for research in computational ecology.
We have moved beyond learning more details about the
components of complex systems in order to reconstruct their
dynamics. Instead, a more fundamental role for computation
is found in exploring the relationship between dynamics
across scales, in the constant dialogue between simplicity and
complexity. Perhaps this is best expressed by what a famous
mathematician had to say about a famous macroscopic law of
physics: ‘‘If our means of investigation became more and
more incisive, we would discover the simple under the
complex, then the complex under the simple, then again the
simple under the complex, and so on, without being able to
predict which state would ultimately prevail ’’ [51].
&
Acknowledgments
I thank Simon Levin and Andy Dobson for comments on an
earlier version of this manuscript, the Paciﬁc Ecoinformatics and
Computational Ecology Lab for the food web image, and Victoria
Coles, Khalid Boushaba, and Manojit Roy for their help with the
other ﬁgures. I also thank the James S. McDonnell Foundation for
a Centennial Fellowship on Global and Complex Systems.
References
1. Elton CS (1958) The ecology of invasions by animal and plants. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 181 p.
2. Martinez ND (1991) Artifacts or attributes? Effects of resolution on the
Little Rock Lake food web. Ecol Monogr 61: 367–392.
3. Moorcroft PR (2003) Recent advances in ecosystem–atmosphere interac-
tions: An ecological perspective. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 270: 1215–
1227.
4. Eames KT, Keeling MJ (2003) Contact tracing and disease control. Proc R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 270: 2565–2571.
5. Eames KT, Keeling MJ (2002) Modeling dynamic and network hetero-
geneities in the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 99: 13330–13335.
6. Meyers LA, Pourbohloul B, Newman MEJ, Skowronski DM, Brunham RC
(2005) Network theory and SARS: Predicting outbreak diversity. J Theor
Biol 232: 71–81.
7. Levin SA (1998) Ecosystems and the biosphere as complex adaptive systems.
Ecosystems 1: 431–436.
8. Levin SA (1999) Fragile dominion: Complexity and the commons. Reading
(Massachusetts): Perseus Books Group. 250 p.
9. Borges JL (1964) Dreamtigers. Boyer M, Morland H, translators. Austin:
University of Texas Press. 95 p.
10. Durrett R, Levin SA (1994) On the importance of being discrete and
(spatial). Theor Popul Biol 46: 363–394.
11. Keeling MJ (1999) Correlation equations for endemic diseases. Proc R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 266: 953–961.
12. Iwasa Y (2000) Lattice models in ecology and pair-approximation analysis.
In: Dieckmann U, Law R, Metz JAJ, editors. The geometry of ecological
interactions: Simplifying ecological complexity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. pp. 227–251
13. Pascual M, Mazzega P, Levin S (2001) Oscillatory dynamics and spatial scale
in ecological systems: The role of noise and unresolved pattern. Ecology 82:
2357–2369.
14. Pascual M, Roy M, Franc A (2002) Simple models for ecological systems with
complex spatial patterns. Ecol Lett 5: 412–419.
15. Gubbins S, Gilligan CA (1997) A test of heterogeneous mixing as a
mechanism for ecological persistence in a disturbed environment. Proc R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 264: 227–232.
16. Bolker B, Pacala SW (1997) Using moment equations to understand
stochastically driven spatial pattern formation in ecological systems. Theor
Popul Biol 52: 179–197.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org July 2005 | Volume 1 | Issue 2 | e180104



--- Page 5 ---
17. Pacala SW, Levin SA (1997) Biologically generated spatial pattern and the
coexistence of competing species. In: Tilman D, Kareiva P, editors. Spatial
ecology: The role of space in population dynamics and interspeciﬁc
interactions. Princeton (New Jersey): Princeton University Press. pp. 185–203
18. Law R, Dieckmann U (2000) Moment approximations of individual-based
models. In: Dieckmann U, Law R, Metz JAJ, editors. The geometry of
ecological interactions: Simplifying ecological complexity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. pp. 252–269
19. Tilman D, Knops J, Wedin D, Reich P, Ritchie M, et al. (1997) The inﬂuence
of functional diversity and composition on ecosystem processes. Science
277: 1300–1302.
20. Kinzig AP, Pacala SW, Tilman Deditors (2001) The functional consequences
of biodiversity: Empirical progress and theoretical extensions. Princeton
(New Jersey): Princeton University Press. 365 p.
21. Moorcroft PR, Hurtt GC, Pacala SW (2001) A method for scaling vegetation
dynamics: The ecosystem demography model (ED). Ecol Monogr 71: 557–
586.
22. Pascual M, Levin SA (1999) Spatial scaling in a benthic population model
with density-dependent disturbance. Theor Popul Biol 56: 106–122.
23. Falkowski PG, Laws EA, Barber RT, Murray JW (2003) Phytoplankton and
their role in primary, new, and export production In: Fasham MJR, editor.
Ocean biogeochemistry: The role of the ocean carbon cycle in global
change. pp. 99–121.
24. Coles VJ, Hood RR, Pascual M, Capone DG (2004) Modeling the impact of
Trichodesmium and nitrogen ﬁxation in the Atlantic Ocean. J Geophys Res
109: C06007.
25. Strogatz SH (2001) Exploring complex networks. Nature 410: 268–275.
26. May RM (2001) Stability and complexity in model ecosystems, 1st Princeton
landmarks in biology ed. Princeton (New Jersey): Princeton University
Press. 265 p.
27. Cohen JE (1978) Food webs and niche space. Princeton (New Jersey):
Princeton University Press. 189 p.
28. Yodzis P (1981) The stability of real ecosystems. Nature 289: 674–676.
29. Pimm SL (2002) Food webs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 219 p.
30. Polis GA, Winemiller KOeditors (1996) Food webs: Integration of patterns
and dynamics. New York: Chapman and Hall. 472 p.
31. Dunne JA (2005) The network structure of food webs. In: Pascual M, Dunne
JA, editors. Ecological networks: Linking structure to dynamics in food
webs. Oxford: Oxford University Press. In press.
32. Pimm SL, Lawton JH, Cohen JE (1991) Food web patterns and their
consequences. Nature 350: 669–674.
33. Holling CS, Gunderson LH (2002) Resilience and adaptive cycles. In:
Gunderson LH, Holling CS, editors. Panarchy: Understanding trans-
formations in human and natural systems. Washington (DC): Island Press.
pp. 25–62
34. Pascual M, Dunne J, Levin SA (2005) Challenges for the future: Integrating
ecological structure and dynamics. In: Pascual M, Dunne JA, editors.
Ecological networks: Linking structure to dynamics in food webs. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. In press.
35. McCann K, Hastings A, Huxel G (1998) Weak trophic interactions and the
balance of nature. Nature 395: 794–798.
36. Kokkoris GD, Jansen VAA, Loreau M, Troumbis AY (2002) Variability in
interaction strength and implications for biodiversity. J Anim Ecol 71: 362–
371.
37. Neutel AM, Heesterbeek JAP, de Ruiter PC (2002) Stability in real food
webs: Weak links in long loops. Science 296: 1120–1123.
38. Lafferty KD, Hechinger RF, Shaw JC, Whitney KL, Kuris AM (2005) Food
webs and parasites in a salt marsh ecosystem. In: Collinge S, Ray C, editors.
Disease ecology: Community structure and pathogen dynamics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. In press.
39. Bascompte J, Jordano P, Melia ´ n CJ, Olesen JM (2003) The nested assembly
of plant–animal mutualistic networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100: 9383–
9387.
40. Hartvigsen G, Levin SA (1997) Evolution and spatial structure interact to
inﬂuence plant–herbivore population and community dynamics. Proc R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 264: 1677–1685.
41. Peacor S, Riolo RL, Pascual M (2005) Phenotypic plasticity and species
coexistence: Modeling food webs as complex adaptive systems. In: Pascual
M, Dunne JA, editors. Ecological networks: Linking structure to dynamics
in food webs. Oxford: Oxford University Press. In press.
42. McKane AJ, Drossel B (2005) Models of food web evolution. In: Pascual M,
Dunne JA, editors. Ecological networks: Linking structure to dynamics in
food webs. Oxford: Oxford University Press. In press.
43. Kondoh M (2003) Foraging adaptation and the relationship between food-
web complexity and stability. Science 299: 1388–1391.
44. Brose U, Ostling A, Harrison K, Martinez ND (2004) Uniﬁed spatial scaling
of species and their trophic interactions. Nature 428: 167–171.
45. Sole´ RV, Alonso D, McKane A (2002) Self-organized instability in complex
ecosystems. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 357: 667–671.
46. Chen X, Cohen JE (2001) Global stability, local stability and permanence in
model food webs. J Theor Biol 212: 223–235.
47. Williams RJ, Martinez ND (2004) Stabilization of chaotic and non-
permanent food-web dynamics. Eur Phys J B 38: 297–303.
48. Enquist BJ, Brown JH, West GB (1998) Allometric scaling of plant
energetics and population density. Nature 395: 163–166.
49. De Leo GA, Dobson AP (1996) Allometry and simple epidemic models for
microparasites. Nature 379: 720–722.
50. Emmerson MC, Rafaelli D (2004) Predator–prey body size, interaction
strength and the stability of a real food web. J Anim Ecol 73: 399–409.
51. Poincare´ H (1902) Science et hypothe ` se. Paris: Flammarion. 252 p.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org July 2005 | Volume 1 | Issue 2 | e180105
