--- Page 1 ---
Modeling Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis
Sabrina L. Spencer 1[*, Ryan A. Gerety 2[, Kenneth J. Pienta 3, Stephanie Forrest 2,4
1 Computational and Systems Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America, 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America, 3 Department of Medical Oncology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America, 4 Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico, United States of America
Tumorigenesis in humans is thought to be a multistep process where certain mutations confer a selective advantage,
allowing lineages derived from the mutated cell to outcompete other cells. Although molecular cell biology has
substantially advanced cancer research, our understanding of the evolutionary dynamics that govern tumorigenesis is
limited. This paper analyzes the computational implications of cancer progression presented by Hanahan and Weinberg
in The Hallmarks of Cancer . We model the complexities of tumor progression as a small set of underlying rules that
govern the transformation of normal cells to tumor cells. The rules are implemented in a stochastic multistep model.
The model predicts that (i) early-onset cancers proceed through a different sequence of mutation acquisition than late-
onset cancers; (ii) tumor heterogeneity varies with acquisition of genetic instability, mutation pathway, and selective
pressures during tumorigenesis; (iii) there exists an optimal initial telomere length which lowers cancer incidence and
raises time of cancer onset; and (iv) the ability to initiate angiogenesis is an important stage-setting mutation, which is
often exploited by other cells. The model offers insight into how the sequence of acquired mutations affects the timing
and cellular makeup of the resulting tumor and how the cellular-level population dynamics drive neoplastic evolution.
Citation: Spencer SL, Gerety RA, Pienta KJ, Forrest S (2006) Modeling somatic evolution in tumorigenesis. PLoS Comput Biol 2(8): e108. DOI: 10.1371/ journal.pcbi.0020108
Introduction
Cancer progression is a form of somatic evolution in which
certain mutations give a cell a selective proliferation advantage
[1]. Evidence strongly supports mutation as one of the
dominant factors in setting rate-limiting steps in tumor
progression, resulting in variation in the timing of progression
between tumors [2]. Tumorigenesis is thought to require four to
six stochastic rate-limiting mutation events to occur in the
lineage of one cell [3–5]. Hanahan and Weinberg suggest that six
cellular alterations, or hallmarks, collectively drive a popula-
tion of normal cells to become a cancer [6]. The six hallmarks
are (i) self-sufﬁciency in growth signals (SG), (ii) insensitivity to
antigrowth signals (IA), (iii) evasion of apoptosis (EA), (iv) limitless
replicative potential (LR), (v) sustained angiogenesis (SA), and (vi)
tissue invasion and metastasis. Genetic instability (GI) is deﬁned as an
‘‘enabling characteristic ’’ that facilitates the acquisition of
other mutations due to defects in DNA repair. These hallmarks
form a candidate set of rules that underlie the transformation
of a normal tissue to a cancerous one. The quantitative
ramiﬁcations of these rules are explored in this paper, and
lead to a number of interesting phenomena and hypotheses.
We model a simpliﬁed view of cancer progression using a
stochastic model of tumorigenesis based on the hallmarks. The
complexity of cancer cannot be understood by considering
individual mutations independent of their interactions.
Rather, the effect of a mutation often depends on other
mutations within the same cell, on other mutant cells within the
tumor, and on the tumor microenvironment. Our model allows
us to study the evolutionary dynamics of early mutations, which
generally go undetected in clinical settings, and thereby
examine the initial forces that drive neoplastic evolution.
Materials and Methods
This paper extends earlier work using the hallmarks of
cancer to study cancer progression [7,8]. Here, we model the
hallmarks phenotypically (one mutation, one hallmark) in a
three-dimensional, agent-based model that resembles a
stochastic cellular automaton [8]. The computational grid
contains a maximum of 10
6 cells (100 3 100 3 100) initialized
with a single normal cell and a single blood source. As normal
proliferation occurs, cells far from the blood supply signal for
angiogenesis. The blood supply then extends in the direction
of the requesting cell, creating a branching pattern of
vascularization, which may pass through a cube with or
without a resident cell. The nutrient available to each cell is
the sum of the contributions from all capillaries. However,
distant capillaries contribute little, as nutrient levels fall as a
power law function of the distance from their source. This
signaling and vascularization process continues until the cells
ﬁll the space established by two intersecting three-dimen-
sional parabolas that represent angiogenic and growth factor
constraints. Normal cells are able to signal for vascularization
until they reach the angiogenic boundary, beyond which they
are not able to signal for the resources needed to divide.
Similarly, normal cells are able to divide only within the
region containing growth factor. This intersection restricts
normal tissue to 8.6 3 10
4 cells.
The event cycle for each cell deﬁnes the progression of the
model. This cycle has a period deﬁned as a random number
Editor: Adam P. Arkin, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, United States of
America
Received January 4, 2006; Accepted July 10, 2006; Published August 18, 2006
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108
Copyright: /C2112006 Spencer et al. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author
and source are credited.
Abbreviations: EA, evasion of apoptosis ; GI, genetic instability ; IA, insensitivity to
antigrowth signals ; LR, limitless replicative potential ; SA, sustained angiogenesis ; SG,
self-sufficiency in growth signals
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: spencers@mit.edu
[ These authors contributed equally to this work.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080001



--- Page 2 ---
drawn from a uniform distribution between ﬁve and ten time
steps. At the beginning of this cycle, a normal cell will initiate
cell division if there is unoccupied adjacent space. The parent
cell ‘‘genome’’ is copied with a small probability of mutation
(1/m), the telomere length ( t) of both cells is decreased by a
single unit, and the new daughter cell ﬁlls the empty
neighboring space. If there is no adjacent space for a
daughter cell, a normal cell will remain quiescent until the
next cycle. During this cycle there is a small probability of
random death ( a) and a probability of death associated with
acquired mutations ( n/e, discussed below). This process
continues until either 50,000 time steps have passed or the
tissue has developed cancer. We deﬁne the onset of ‘‘cancer’’
to occur when the tissue grows beyond the normal tissue
boundary to occupy 90% of the grid, or 9 3 10
5 cells, at which
point the run terminates. As described in the ﬁrst two
sections under Results, we performed 1,000 runs of the model
with the default parameter settings described below. Of these,
986 end in cancer before 50,000 time steps.
Normal cells require mitogenic growth signals to switch
from a quiescent to a proliferative state. Cancer cells generate
many of their own growth signals and are less dependent on
exogenous stimulation. For example, activation of the Ras
oncogene allows a cell to send ongoing mitogenic signals even
without stimulation of the upstream regulators [6]. In the
model, normal cells divide only if they are within the
predeﬁned spatial boundary that represents the growth
factor concentration threshold. The acquired mutation SG
allows cells to proliferate regardless of the concentration of
growth factor. Therefore, this mutation is necessary for cells
to proliferate beyond the normal tissue boundary.
In normal tissue, antigrowth signals maintain cells in a
nondividing state. These antigrowth signals are often pro-
liferation inhibitors that force cells into a quiescent or post-
mitotic state by converging on the retinoblastoma protein,
pRb, which controls progression from G
1 into S phase.
Cancer cells can also downregulate the expression of cell
adhesion molecules that send antigrowth signals [6]. Contact
inhibition is a type of antigrowth signal that prevents cell
division if a cell is surrounded by many other cells, thus
preventing overcrowding. In the model, each cell has up to 26
neighbors (neighbors need only make contact at a corner).
Normal cells do not divide if all 26 positions are occupied by
other cells. The mutation IA allows cells to divide even when
there is no space for the daughter cell. The daughter cell
competes for survival with a randomly chosen neighbor with
a1 / g chance of success. If successful, the daughter cell
replaces the randomly chosen cell. The model could include
structural changes to the tissue, such as crowding or
expansion pressures. However, these issues and their asso-
ciated assumptions about tissue architecture go beyond the
intended scope of this model.
Cell populations are able to expand in number by
inappropriate cell division as well as by lack of appropriate
cell death (apoptosis). A cell monitors its own state and
initiates apoptosis in response to signals such as DNA
damage, oncogene overexpression, survival factor insufﬁ-
ciency, or hypoxia [6,9]. Mutations to genes involved in
apoptosis can change the balance between pro-death and
pro-survival signals. For example, upregulation of the anti-
apoptotic protein Bcl-2 can shift the signaling balance toward
survival [6]. In the model, cells are checked for the presence
of mutations each cell cycle, and if a mutation is detected, the
cell is eliminated. The probability of detecting genetic
damage in the cell is n/e, where n ¼ 0,...,6 is the number of
mutations carried by the cell, and e is the probability of death.
The mutation EA allows a cell to evade mutation detection
and the subsequent death that would usually occur.
In cell culture, telomere shortening limits normal human
cells to 25–70 doublings [6,10]. However, 80% of human
cancers show expression and activity of telomerase, an
enzyme that lengthens telomeres and confers limitless
replicative potential [11]. In the model, the initial cell is
created with telomeres of length t, where t is 50 unless
otherwise speciﬁed. At each cell division, the telomere length
is decreased by one. When telomere length reaches zero in
the model, the cell dies. The mutation LR allows the cell to
divide indeﬁnitely. The implications of this simpliﬁcation are
discussed in detail in the Results section.
Cells cannot survive at distances of more than 100 lm from
a blood supply, which limits the size of human tumors to
about 10
6 cells without angiogenesis [12]. For an incipient
tumor to grow, cells must reinstate the angiogenic ability that
was temporarily present during organogenesis. For example,
when the concentration of nutrients and oxygen is low,
cancer cells increase production of the pro-angiogenic signal,
vascular endothelial growth factor [6]. In the model, lack of
oncogenic angiogenesis limits tumorigenesis until the muta-
tion SA confers the ability to signal for growth of new blood
vessels. Once cells acquire this mutation, they are able to
signal for angiogenesis outside the previously established
vascular system. This allows cells to acquire the nutrients
necessary to expand beyond the normal tissue boundaries.
Cells maintain genomic and karyotypic integrity through a
complex set of DNA monitoring proteins, DNA repair
enzymes, and mitotic checkpoint proteins. Thus, the muta-
tion rate in human cells is relatively low, estimated to be in
the range of 10
/C0 7 to 10/C0 6 mutations/gene/cell division [13]. We
deﬁne the mutation rate to be 1/ m and choose m as the
midpoint between 10 7 and 10 6, such that m ¼ 106 þ107
2 ¼ 5.5 3
106. Loss of DNA repair signaling can increase the mutation
rate by a factor ranging from 10 1 to 10 4 [14]. In the model,
cells that gain the mutation GI have their base mutation rate
scaled up by i. We chose a midrange value, deﬁning i as 10 3.
We assume that cells experience some amount of random
death due to causes not previously speciﬁed, such as injury or
stress. In the model, every cell has a 1/ a likelihood of dying at
some point in the interval described by the uniform
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080002
Synopsis
Cancer can be viewed as an ecological system in which cells with
different mutations compete for survival. In this work, the authors
present a three-dimensional stochastic model of these complex
interactions. Each cell is represented as an autonomous agent that
follows simple rules governing its behavior, where behaviors change
as cells gain cancerous mutations. The paper explores the timing of
cancer onset, the order in which mutations are acquired, the
diversity of tumors, and the competition and cooperation between
cells in the tumor microenvironment. One key finding is that early-
onset and late-onset tumors take different mutational paths to
cancer. The paper provides insight into the early dynamics of
tumorigenesis currently inaccessible to experimental investigation.
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 3 ---
distribution discussed above. The three parameters g, e, and a
were chosen via an informal sensitivity analysis such that the
parameter plays an important role but does not dominate
tumorigenesis. We selected g to be 5, e to be 20, and a to be
1,000. Finally, we do not model tissue invasion and metastasis,
as the model represents a single tissue.
When modeling a complex biological process, it is always
necessary to make simplifying assumptions. The fundamental
concern of this paper is to study cancer at a cell population
level, modeling tumors as evolving ecosystems, and not to
incorporate every known piece of molecular cell biology
relating to cancer. The source code that implements the
model and the associated graphical user interface are
available online under the terms of the General Public
License at http://cs.unm.edu/ ;forrest/software/cancersim.
Results
Pathways to Cancer Vary with the Timing of Cancer Onset
The standard perspective on tumorigenesis suggests that
cells derived from the same lineage acquire multiple
mutations in discrete steps [6]. We deﬁne the sequence of
mutation acquisition as a ‘‘pathway’’ to cancer. With n ¼ 6
different mutations possible and a variable number of
mutations within each cell, there are R
n
i¼1 n Pi ¼ 1,956 distinct
sequences of mutation history. We are interested in the
pathways cells take to become a tumor, and how particular
pathways affect the dynamics of tumorigenesis. It is currently
believed that it is not simply the accumulation of mutations,
but also the order in which they are acquired, that determines
the timing and extent of tumorigenesis [6,15]. The model
allows us to study the sequence in which mutations are
accumulated. We ﬁnd that the pathways leading to early-
onset cancer (arising early in the life of the simulated tissue)
are different from the pathways leading to late-onset cancer.
The importance of genetic instability in cancer progression
is a controversial issue in cancer biology. Loeb and others
argue that early acquisition of a mutator phenotype is
necessary for tumorigenesis [16,17], while Tomlinson, Bod-
mer, and others believe that increased cell division provides
sufﬁcient opportunities for mutation accumulation [18–20].
Although this question must ultimately be answered empiri-
cally, our model informs this debate in a new way by
proposing a compromise between these two opposing
theoretical viewpoints.
Figure 1. The Timing of Cancer Onset Is Correlated with the Most Common First Two Mutations of a Tumor
The most common first two mutations of a tumor define the dominant tumor type. GI is the most common first mutation in the 0–5 K timeblock, as
seen by summing the populations with GI as the first mutation. The prevalence of GI IA, GI EA, GI SA, IA LR, and SG LR, decreases after 5,000 time steps,
while GI LR and LR GI remain roughly constant for several time blocks. The sequences LR IA and LR EA are distributed around 15–20 K and 30–35 K time
steps, respectively. Dominant tumor types not shown occur in less than 2% of the 986 runs ending in cancer.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g001
Figure 2. Pathways to Cancer Vary with the Timing of Cancer Onset
(A) Average position of the mutations in the pathways present in the 986
runs that terminated in cancer, for tumors acquired in the timeblocks
specified on the x-axis. A position of one indicates that it was the first
mutation of a pathway. A position of seven indicates that a given
mutation did not appear in the pathway. For cancers arising before 2,000
time steps, GI was frequently the first mutation, as it has the lowest mean
position. As time progresses and telomere length shortens, LR becomes
the first mutation in all pathways. Standard deviation and sample size
data are included in Table S2.
(B) Fraction of all cells in all tumors carrying a given mutation, in which
cancer onset occurred in the timeblocks specified on the x-axis. Cells
with mutations in LR, IA, and EA make up the majority of the tumors. The
frequency of GI drops substantially as time of cancer onset increases,
whereas the frequency of SA remains low for all timeblocks.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080003
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 4 ---
We ﬁnd that GI is often the causative mutation in earlier
onset tumors, while LR is often the causative mutation in
later onset tumors (Figure 1, Figure 2A). Figure 2A shows that
very early tumors (before 2,000 time steps) frequently result
from acquiring GI as the ﬁrst mutation. This can also be seen
by deﬁning the dominant tumor type to be the most common
ﬁrst two mutations in a given tumor. Figure 1 displays the
frequency of each dominant tumor type as a function of the
cancer onset time. As indicated in the ﬁgure, GI is the most
common ﬁrst mutation in the 0–5 K timeblock, as seen by
summing the populations with GI as the ﬁrst mutation. This is
consistent with the fact that many early-onset cancers arise
from inherited mutations in genes affecting the stability of
the genome. These include xeroderma pigmentosum, ataxia
telangiectasia, Nijmegen breakage syndrome, and Bloom
syndrome [20]. Conversely, tumors acquiring GI late in their
pathway gain little selective advantage, as the cells have
already acquired most necessary mutations. Thus, in tumors
where GI occurs late in the pathway (Figure 2A), the
frequency of this mutation is relatively low (Figure 2B).
As indicated by Figure 1, a tumor is unlikely to form early
(prior to 5,000 time steps) without either the increase in
mutation rate associated withGI or a rapid proliferation of cells.
For example, in the rare case that a cell on the tissue boundary
acquires SG, the subsequent rapid clonal expansion provides
ample opportunity for further mutations. This is illustrated by
the prevalence of SG as a ﬁrst mutation in early tumors.
Later onset tumors in the model, however, are initiated by
the acquisition of LR followed by either IA or EA (Figure 1,
see LR IA and LR EA , and Figure 2). For later onset tumors,
the many rounds of cell division offer sufﬁcient opportunity
for mutation accumulation. However, by limiting the lifespan
of the cell, telomere shortening prevents acquisition of a
sufﬁcient number of mutations. Without LR, mutations
accumulate for only a limited number of cell divisions.
Acquisition of LR immortalizes cells, allowing them to
maintain a mutational line over the lifetime of the tissue.
Clinical evidence supports our ﬁnding of LR as a relatively
early event in tumor development, demonstrated by the
presence of telomerase activity in many precancerous lesions
(reviewed in [21]).
Additionally, we ﬁnd that EA is an important mutation to
gain early in the pathway, regardless of when the tumor
arises, as it prevents detection of acquired mutations (see
Figure 2A). Indeed, it has been noted in the literature that
evasion of apoptosis is not inherently mutagenic at the
cellular level. Rather, the mutation allows for the perpetu-
ation of mutant cells that would otherwise be removed,
resulting in higher numbers of mutations at the population
level [22].
The model underscores the importance of accumulating
mutations in an individual cell. Due to the low probability of
acquiring multiple mutations in a single cell, either the
mutation rate must increase through GI, or LR must allow
cells to live long enough to acquire multiple mutations. Thus,
GI and LR were either the ﬁrst or second mutation in the
most common pathways of all but three of the 986 observed
tumors (data shown in Table S1). Thus, the model suggests the
following compromise in the mutator phenotype debate:
genetic instability plays a key role in early-onset tumors, while
for later tumors, limitless replicative potential provides
sufﬁcient opportunity to acquire an equal number of
mutations by allowing an increased number of cell divisions.
Heterogeneity Varies with the Predominance of GI,
Mutation Pathway, and Selective Pressures during
Tumorigenesis
Tumor heterogeneity has important consequences for the
progression and treatment of cancer [23]. For example, a
recent paper ﬁnds that clonal diversity is a good predictor for
progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma [24]. Our model
makes three predictions: (i) tumor heterogeneity is strongly
correlated with the predominance of GI within the tumor; (ii)
tumors with distinct causative mutation pathways exhibit
distinct levels of heterogeneity; (iii) during tumor progression
there is often a marked increase in heterogeneity followed by
a less dramatic decline.
We study heterogeneity using a diversity measure adapted
from ecology and evolutionary biology [25]. The metric
deﬁnes heterogeneity as the a verage pathway distance
between all pairs of cells of a given tumor. Pathway distance
is measured as the total number of steps backward through
the lineage tree required to reach a common mutation history
added over both lineages. For instance, a cell with pathway LR
EA GI and a cell with LR EA SG would have a pathway distance
of two, a cell with pathway LR EA GI SG and a cell with LR EA
IA SG would have a pathway distance of four, and a cell with
LR EA and a cell with LR EA GI SG would have a pathway
Figure 3. Tumor Heterogeneity
(A) The five most common tumor categories, defined by the most
common first two mutations, vary in their pathway heterogeneity.
(B) Example dynamics of heterogeneity during the development of three
tumors. Each line corresponds to the development of one tumor; the red
curve corresponds to the tumor discussed in the Sample Simulation Run
section. As the tumor begins to form, there is typically a slow increase in
the degree of tissue heterogeneity followed by a sudden increase, an
equally sudden decrease, and then often another increase as the tissue
reaches 9 3 10
5 cells.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g003
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080004
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 5 ---
distance of two. Tumor heterogeneity is deﬁned as the
average pathway distance between all pairs of cells:
H ¼ 2
nðn /C0 1Þ
Xp/C0 1
i¼1
Xp
j¼iþ1
ninj dij
where n is the total number of cells in a tumor, p is the total
number of distinct pathways, ni is the number of cells with
mutation pathway i, n j is the number of cells with mutation
pathway j, and dij is the pathway distance between the two
mutation pathways. Dividing by n(n /C0 1)/2 provides the
average of this summation. By choosing the pathway as the
level of analysis, rather than the set of mutations disregarding
order, we capture the process of mutation acquisition.
Our results suggest that tumors initiated by GI early in
their pathways are more heterogeneous than other tumors. In
other words, the position of GI in the pathway is negatively
correlated with tumor heterogeneity ( p , 0.001, R
2 ¼ .46,
ordinary least-squares regression). These results are consis-
tent with evidence that points to genetic instability as a
source of heterogeneity [24,26]. Additionally, the time of
cancer onset remains a signiﬁcant determinant of hetero-
geneity ( p , .05) even when the predominance of GI is
accounted for.
Except for the pair LR IA and SG LR, the ﬁve most common
tumor categories, as deﬁned by their most common initial
two mutations, have statistically distinct levels of hetero-
geneity in pair-wise comparisons ( p , 0.001, t-test). The
boxplot in Figure 3A shows the distributions of heterogeneity
among various tumor groups. Interestingly, GI LR and LR GI
tumors have the highest levels of heterogeneity.
A preliminary analysis of the relationship between tumori-
genesis and heterogeneity reveals an interesting phenomenon.
During tumorigenesis, there is a marked increase in intra-
tumor heterogeneity. In many tumors, the level of hetero-
geneity peaks, declines, and then rises again as the tissue
becomes a tumor. Figure 3B illustrates this pattern in three
tumors. This suggests that rapid proliferation allows for
increased diversity upon which selection can act to choose
the ﬁttest cells, leading to a subsequent decrease in hetero-
geneity. The dynamic balance between the selective advantage
of diversity and the selective pressure to homogenize may
underlie a complex relationship between heterogeneity and
tumorigenesis, which may have important clinical implications.
Initial Telomere Length Affects Cancer Onset Time and
Incidence
Limited replication protects against indeﬁnite proliferation
of mutant cell lines. A majority of human cancers show
expression and activity of telomerase [11], an enzyme that
lengthens telomeres. Expression of telomerase is not found in
most normal somatic tissues and confers unlimited replicative
potential. Lengthened telomeres are thought to facilitate
tumorigenesis by allowing cell lines to accumulate the
mutations necessary to develop a tumor [6]. However, short
telomeres can also promote tumorigenesis by creating chro-
mosomal instability [21]. For instance, there is evidence that
short telomeres are associated with an increase in malignancy
in mice due to the resulting genomic instability [27,28].
Karyotypic instability resulting from telomere shortening
represents a deviation from normal cell behavior. Typically,
normal cells with shortened telomeres stop dividing and
enter senescence. However, cells with dysfunctional pRb and
p53 tumor suppressor proteins are able to avoid senescence.
These cells continue to proliferate until the fusion of the now
naked chromosomal ends results in crisis, a state marked by
widespread cell death due to karyotypic instability. A rare
mutational event may activate telomerase, stabilizing the
chromosomal ends, and giving the cell’s lineage the selective
advantage of immortality [6].
Just as long and short telomeres can both contribute to
tumorigenesis, our model reveals a similar tradeoff between
long and short telomere lengths. However, we note that this
ﬁnding may depend on an important simpliﬁcation. To avoid
complicating the model’s simple representation of cellular
aging and to maintain the explicit focus on intercellular
rather than intracellular dynamics, senescence, crisis, and
karyotypic instability were not modeled. These processes are
not well-understood and would signiﬁcantly increase the
number of built-in assumptions. In many ways, telomere
shortening deserves a model of its own, since the sequence of
events, the contexts in which they occur, and the associated
probabilities are complex. Instead, we make a conservative
simpliﬁcation, eliminating cells once their telomere length
reaches zero. One might imagine that this approach would
neutralize the deleterious effects of shortened telomeres, as
Figure 4. Initial Telomere Length Affects Incidence and Onset of Cancer
(A) Initial telomere length affects the pattern of incidence across time.
Each point in time on the x-axis represents the cumulative incidence of
cancers that arose before that time. The initial telomere length governs
the tradeoff between the incidence of early and late cancer onset. Short
(40 units) and long (90 units) telomeres produce an earlier, higher
incidence of cancer than do telomeres of intermediate length.
(B) Mean onset time and incidence for cancers acquired before 21,900
time steps as a function of initial telomere length. This subfigure
represents a snapshot at time t ¼ 21,900, indicated by the vertical black
line in (A). Note that the gray curve corresponds to the secondary y-axis.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g004
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080005
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 6 ---
t h e s ek a r y o t y p i c a l l yu n s t a b l ec e l l sa r ep r e v e n t e df r o m
developing. However, even the conservative model produces
the same tradeoff between long and short telomere lengths as
found in cells.
In a separate set of simulations, we vary t, the initial
telomere length. We ﬁnd that both long (90–170 units) and
short (25–40 units) telomere lengths lead to higher incidence
and earlier time of cancer onset than do intermediate lengths
(Figure 4). In addition, there exists a tradeoff between low
early incidence and higher late incidence of cancer. The
initial tumorigenic effects of long telomere length are due to
the large replicative potential of the cells. As the cells
continue to divide, their telomeres reach an intermediate
length where there is lower cancer incidence. After more cell
divisions, the cells’ telomeres become very short, causing cell
death. This increases cancer incidence in the model because
additional mutations can occur during the cell divisions that
replace the exhausted cells.
The initial telomere length that minimizes cancer inci-
dence at any particular point is a function of the tissue’s age.
Figure 4B reveals that, with a lifespan of 21,900 time steps, a
telomere length of 55 corresponds to the lowest incidence of
cancer, and a length of 50 produces the latest mean onset
time. Thus, there exists in the model an optimal range of
initial telomere lengths that lowers cancer incidence and
raises time of cancer onset. This raises the possibility that
evolution has played a role in optimizing telomere length.
Angiogenesis Sets the Stage for Tumor Growth
The composition of the ﬁnal tumor does not necessarily
reﬂect the complete evolutionary dynamics by which it was
produced. SA is an example of a stage-setting mutation that is
essential for tumorigenesis but which can be exploited by
other cells. Once the blood supply is established, angiogenic
cells without other selective advantages can experience
limited clonal expansion or be driven to extinction. Clonal
expansion is limited by competition from other cells
proliferating into the newly vascularized region, often
preventing additional angiogenesis.
In some cases, the clonal expansion of cells with SA is not
only impeded, but the population also completely recedes
(Figure 5A). Here, the initial proliferation of a population of
LR SA cells facilitates the expansion of LR cells and then
declines. A second rise in this population of LR SA cells then
supports the proliferation of LR IA cells, which ‘‘free ride’’ on
the LR SA population, quickly driving the population of
angiogenic cells to extinction. The precancerous cells’ lack of
coordination results in the decline of this LR SA population
and considerably slows tumorigenesis.
Figure 5B illustrates the formation of a new evolutionary
niche by a population with LR IA EA SA, allowing neighboring
LR IA EA cells to proliferate, too. The population of LR IA EA
cells initially expands as blood supply becomes available.
However, as angiogenesis is completed within the region, the
selective advantage of the SA mutation disappears and the
angiogenic cells are constrained by other cells. In this
situation, the LR IA EA SA cells creating the blood supply
have two additional mutations, which allow them to compete
more successfully than the LR SA cells did in Figure 5A. Thus,
the angiogenic population is able to maintain itself rather
than be driven to extinction. Due to the fact that a few cells
with an SA mutation provide a collective beneﬁt to all cells
nearby, and that once a blood supply is established the
angiogenic cells lose their selective advantage, this mutation
rarely occurs in the pathways composing the ﬁnal tumor
(Figure 2). Beyond providing nutrients as a direct collective
beneﬁt, increased angiogenesis also allows for increased
clonal expansion, providing additional opportunities for
new mutations to be acquired.
Sample Simulation Run
Due to the stochastic nature of the model, each run
displays different cell population dynamics. Here, we describe
the dynamics of a representative run for the parameters
described in the Materials and Methods section, and a
random seed of three.
Several populations of cells with IA independently arise
and die out in the early stages of the run (Figure 6A). At time
step 8,888, a cell acquires LR and begins to spread (Figure
6A). This is the ﬁrst cell lineage to arise that remains in the
tissue until the end of the run, and thus can be considered a
‘‘causative’’ tumorigenic mutation. At time step 20,176,
another cell independently develops LR and begins to spread.
A snapshot of the tumor at time step 20,780 show these two
separate colonies (Figure 6E, top). Shortly after time step
23,420, four populations of cells with LR EA emerge within
the ﬁrst population of LR cells. The slight ﬁtness advantage
conferred by the mutation allows slow clonal expansion and a
decline in the parent LR population (Figure 6B). During this
expansion, a cell with LR gains IA and begins to proliferate.
Although the IA mutation alone was previously unsuccessful,
the combination of LR and IA allows these cells to proliferate
rapidly. Quickly, the population with LR IA begins to
dominate other cells. This expansion allows several LR IA
cells to independently gain EA, becoming LR IA EA cells.
Figure 5. SA Creates a Niche for Other Cell Populations
(A) A population of LR SA cells (secondary y-axis) allows the population of
LR cells to proliferate. Eventually, the LR IA cells replace the LR SA cells,
temporarily preventing the development of new vasculature.
(B) In this case, the cells creating the blood supply have additional
mutations, allowing the LR IA EA SA population to plateau rather than
decline, as occurred in the case of the LR SA cells in (A).
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g005
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080006
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 7 ---
Ultimately, this population takes over the normal tissue and
replaces the previous mutant populations (Figure 6C). Many
cells acquire additional mutations, but they remain limited in
population size.
The population of cells expands beyond the normal tissue
boundary when one of the cells gains SA and signals for
vascularization outside the tissue’s natural extent, allowing
the population to proliferate in a previously unoccupied
region. The LR IA EA cells exploit the angiogenesis,
successfully competing for the new habitable region (Figure
6E, bottom). Clonal expansion is limited until a cell near the
bounded region acquires SG. When this occurs, the popula-
tion of LR IA EA SG cells expands (Figure 6C), and once this
population gains SA, the tumor grows rapidly in size until it
reaches 9 3 10
5 cells at time step 29,272, and the run ends.
During tumorigenesis, the tissue experiences a number of
rate-limiting steps (Figure 6D). Each passage through a
bottleneck corresponds to acquisition of a mutation in the
sample run. The pathway heterogeneity within the tissue
gradually increases until time step 25,000 (red curve, Figure
3B), at which point there is a dramatic increase in hetero-
geneity corresponding to the beginning of a gradual increase
in the number of mutant cells (Figure 6D, [1]). The tumor
initially grows within the normal tissue’s natural extent after
acquisition of IA [1]. The acquisition of SA allows for rapid
expansion beyond this region [2]. This growth is limited until
a population with SG clonally expands [3], which is in turn
limited until further SA mutations occur [4].
In general, GI and LR are frequently the causative
mutations in very early-onset and later-onset cancers,
respectively, but SA and SG are key for providing transitions
through proliferation bottlenecks. Targeted therapies in
cancer treatment are based on identifying molecular bottle-
necks and exploiting them for therapeutic intervention. For
example, the vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor
bevacizumab is an antibody that binds to the growth factor
and prevents it from binding to its receptor. Bevacizumab is
approved for use in colon cancer and is a prototypical
example of a targeted therapy based on a tumorigenesis
bottleneck [29].
Discussion
The key ﬁndings from this paper are the following four. (i)
Early-onset cancers proceed through a different sequence of
mutation acquisition than late-onset cancers. Speciﬁcally, GI
Figure 6. Cell Dynamics of the Sample Run
Top row: growth dynamics of mutant cells in three graphs corresponding to three different time periods.
(A) Populations with IA rise and fall, and cells with LR emerge.
(B) Around time step 24,000, a cell with LR EA undergoes clonal expansion, resulting in a decline of the parent LR population. Near time step 25,000, cells
with LR IA begin to outcompete the LR EA population.
(C) At time step 26,000, cells with LR IA EA expand while the LR IA population declines. The emergence of a clonal population with LR IA EA SA provides
the angiogenesis for the LR IA EA population to expand rapidly. At time step 28,000, LR IA EA SG cells begin to double the size of the tumor, aided by the
LR IA EA SG SA cells.
(D) The aggregate cell proliferation pattern in mutant cells. The boxed numbers indicate clonal expansions that result from overcoming proliferati on
bottlenecks. The first expansion occurs with the acquisition of IA. The second expansion is the result of an SA mutation. The third occurs with the
acquisition of SG, and the final expansion occurs with the acquisition of SA.
(E) The tissue at time step 20,780 (top) and 26,982 (bottom). Normal cells have been removed from the image to reveal two clonal populations with LR
at time step 20,780. At time step 26,982, the tumor has grown beyond the normal tissue extent through the acquisition of SA.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.g006
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080007
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 8 ---
is the most common ﬁrst mutation in early-onset cancers
whereas LR is the most common ﬁrst mutation in later-onset
cancers. (ii) Heterogeneity varies with early acquisition of GI,
mutation pathway, and selective pressures during tumori-
genesis. (iii) There exists a range of optimal initial telomere
lengths that lowers cancer incidence and raises the time of
cancer onset. (iv) The ability to initiate angiogenesis is an
important stage-setting mutation, which is often exploited by
other cells and is therefore infrequently present in ﬁnal tumors.
This model presents a ﬁrst step toward predicting the fate
of early precancerous mutations computationally. Early
events responsible for neoplastic progression are difﬁcult to
investigate experimentally for the very reason that they have
not yet been detected. The main limitation of the model is the
difﬁculty of experimental validation. A thorough testing of
the model would require periodically examining single cells
for the presence of mutations in the hallmark categories,
beginning before an animal has developed a clinically
detectable cancer. Initiating testing for mutations once the
animal has a palpable tumor ignores early mutation dynamics
that, according to the model, are important for determining
the timing and cellular makeup of the tumor that develops. In
addition, the current technology of sequencing populations
of tumor cells for mutations at various timepoints does not
provide explicit support of the multistep model of tumori-
genesis, which requires multiple mutations to be found in a
single cell.
The work presented here relies on a number of simplifying
assumptions, the most important relating to tissue architec-
ture and molecular intracellular processes. For instance, we
assume that all mutations ﬁt into one and only one of the six
hallmarks, whereas p53, for example, is known to be involved
in cell cycle inhibition, apoptosis, genetic stability, and
inhibition of blood vessel formation [30]. However, we
simpliﬁed the mapping because disaggregating the hallmarks
allowed us to better study their interactions. Modeling
simultaneous multiple hallmark acquisition would require
knowledge of which combinations are possible and their
probabilities of occurring. For example, although p53 is
involved in several hallmarks, not every mutation to this
protein causes the complete loss of p53 functionality.
Additionally, as discussed in the Results section, a more
complex model of cellular aging would more accurately
reﬂect known biology. An advantage of our agent-based
model is that alternative approaches can be easily tested by
downloading and modifying the code that runs the model.
Future work could address the above issues, and could
implement mutations such as GI as a continuum rather than
as a binary switch. Future research could also include
extending the model to incorporate deleterious mutations
to housekeeping genes, invasion and metastasis, and cancer
stem cells.
Although simpliﬁcations are inevitable in a theoretical
model, this work nevertheless reveals important consequen-
ces of the well-established concepts proposed by Hanahan
and Weinberg. This type of model can uncover unexpected
nonlinear interactions, such as those we ﬁnd among the six
hallmarks. The model provides insight into the early
dynamics of neoplasia currently inaccessible to experimental
investigation and thus serves as a tool for hypothesis
generation.
Supporting Information
Table S1. The Number of Tumors as Categorized by the Most
Common First Two Mutations
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.st001 (22 KB PDF).
Table S2. Mean, Standard Deviation, and Sample Size for Data in
Figure 2A
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020108.st002 (15 KB PDF).
Accession Numbers
The Entrez Gene (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez) GeneID acces-
sion numbers for the genes and gene products discussed in this paper
are: BCL2 (GeneID 596), KRAS (GeneID 3845), RB1 (GeneID 5925),
TERT (GeneID 7015), TP53 (GeneID 7157), and VEGF (GeneID 7422).
Acknowledgments
We thank Robert Abbott for supplying the CancerSim computer
program.
Author contributions. SLS, RAG, KJP, and SF conceived and
designed the experiments. SLS and RAG performed the experiments.
SLS and RAG analyzed the data. RAG and SF contributed reagents/
materials/analysis tools. SLS and RAG wrote the paper.
Funding. This work was partially supported by the National
Science Foundation (CCR-0331580 and CCR-0311686), Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (F30602-02-1–0146), National
Institutes of Health (RR-1P20RR18754), and the Santa Fe Institute.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
References
1. Cahill DP, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Lengauer C (1999) Genetic instability
and Darwinian selection in tumours. Trends Cell Biol 9: M57–M60.
2. Frank S, Nowak M (2004) Problems of somatic mutation and cancer.
BioEssays 26: 291–299.
3. Nowell PC (1976) The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science
194: 23–28.
4. Armitage P, Doll R (1954) The age distribution of cancer and a multistage
theory of carcinogenesis. Br J Cancer 8: 1–12.
5. Renan MJ (1993) How many mutations are required for tumorigenesis?
Implications from human cancer data. Mol Carcinog 7: 139–146.
6. Hanahan D, Weinberg R (2000) The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100: 57–70.
7. Spencer S, Berryman M, Garcia J, Abbott D (2004) An ordinary differential
equation model for the multistep transformation to cancer. J Theor Biol
231: 515–524.
8. Abbott R, Forrest S, Pienta K (2006) Simulating the hallmarks of cancer. J
Artif Life In press.
9. Nilsson J, Cleveland J (2003) Myc pathways provoking cell suicide and
cancer. Oncogene 22: 9007–9021.
10. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, et al. (2002) Molecular
Biology of the Cell. Garland Science. 1548 p.
11. Djojosubroto M, Choi Y, Lee H, Rudolph K (2003) Telomeres and
telomerase in aging, regeneration and cancer. Mol Cells 15: 164–175.
12. Folkman J (1990) What is the evidence that tumors are angiogenesis
dependent? J Natl Cancer Inst 82: 4–6.
13. Jackson AL, Loeb LA (1998) The mutation rate and cancer. Genetics 148:
1483–1490.
14. Tomlinson IPM, Novelli MR, Bodmer WF (1996) The mutation rate and
cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93: 14800–14803.
15. Kinzler K, Vogelstein B (1996) Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer.
Cell 87: 159–170.
16. Loeb LA (1991) Mutator phenotype may be required for multistage
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 51: 3075–3079.
17. Rajagopalan H, Nowak MA, Vogelstein B, Lengauer C (2003) The
signiﬁcance of unstable chromosomes in colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
3: 695–701.
18. Tomlinson IPM, Bodmer WF (1995) Failure of programmed cell death and
differentiation as causes of tumors: Some simple mathematical models.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 11130–11134.
19. Tomlinson I, Bodmer W (1999) Selection, the mutation rate and cancer:
Ensuring that the tail does not wag the dog. Nat Med 5: 11–12.
20. Sieber OM, Heinimann K, Tomlinson IPM (2003) Genomic instability—The
engine of tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 3: 701–708.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080008
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis


--- Page 9 ---
21. Hahn WC (2003) Role of telomeres and telomerase in the pathogenesis of
human cancer. J Clin Oncol 21: 2034–2043.
22. Green DR, Evan GI (2002) A matter of life and death. Cancer Cell 1: 19–30.
23. Shah RB, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM, Shen R, Ghosh D, et al. (2004)
Androgen-independent prostate cancer is a heterogeneous group of
diseases: Lessons from a rapid autopsy program. Cancer Res 64: 9209–9216.
24. Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Finley JC, Wongsurawat JV, Li X, et al. (2006)
Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal adenocarcino-
ma. Nat Genet 38: 468–473.
25. Clarke KR, Warwick RM (1998) A taxonomic distinctness index and its
statistical properties. J Appl Ecol 35: 523–531.
26. Misra A, Chattopadhyay P, Dinda AK, Sarkar C, Mahapatra AK, et al. (2000)
Extensive intra-tumor heterogeneity in primary human glial tumors as a
result of locus non-speciﬁc genomic alterations. J Neurooncol 48: 1–12.
27. Rudolph K, Chang S, Lee H, Gottlieb G, Greider C, et al. (1999) Longevity,
stress response, and cancer in aging telomerase-deﬁcient mice. Cell 96:
701–712.
28. Artandi S, Chang S, Lee S, Alson S, Gottliev G, et al. (2000) Telomere
dysfunction promotes non-reciprocal translocations and epithelial cancers
in mice. Nature 406: 641–645.
29. Ellis LM (2005) Bevacizumab. Nat Rev Drug Discov 4(5) (Supplement): S8–
S9.
30. Vogelstein B, Lane D, Levine A (2000) Surﬁng the p53 network. Nature 408:
307–310.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org August 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 8 | e1080009
Somatic Evolution in Tumorigenesis
