--- Page 1 ---
Estimating Costs and Benefits of CTL Escape
Mutations in SIV/HIV Infection
Vitaly V. Ganusov 1,2*, Rob J. De Boer 1
1 Theoretical Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2 Institute of Biophysics, Krasnoyarsk, Russia
Mutations that allow SIV/HIV to avoid the cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response are well documented. Recently, there
have been a few attempts at estimating the costs of CTL escape mutations in terms of the reduction in viral fitness and
the killing rate at which the CTL response specific to one viral epitope clears virus-infected cells. Using a mathematical
model we show that estimation of both parameters depends critically on the underlying changes in the replication rate
of the virus and the changes in the killing rate over time (which in previous studies were assumed to be constant). We
provide a theoretical basis for estimation of these parameters using in vivo data. In particular, we show that 1) by
assuming unlimited virus growth one can obtain a minimal estimate of the fitness cost of the escape mutation, and 2)
by assuming no virus growth during the escape, one can obtain a minimal estimate of the average killing rate. We also
discuss the conditions under which better estimates of the average killing rate can be obtained.
Citation: Ganusov VV, De Boer RJ (2006) Estimating costs and benefits of CTL escape mutations in SIV/HIV infection. PLoS Comput Biol 2(3): e24.
Introduction
Several observations suggest that cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) responses play an important role in controlling virus
replication in SIV/HIV infections. First, depletion of CD8
þ T
cells during chronic SIV infection of rhesus macaques leads
to a rapid increase in viral loads [1], and depletion of CD8 þ T
cells prior to SIV infection results in rapid progression and
death of animals following infection [2]. Second, the rate of
progression of HIV-infected individuals is strongly depend-
ent on MHC heterozygosity and speciﬁc MHC class I alleles
[3–6]. Finally, HIV infection of humans and SIV infection of
monkeys often results in evolution of viral mutants that are
not recognized by the speciﬁc CTL responses [7,8]. Many such
mutants, although not all, result from point mutations in
epitopes presented by the host MHC class I molecules and
recognized by the CTL response [7,9,10]. While this evidence
suggests an important role of CTL responses in controlling
virus replication, studies quantifying the selection pressure
imposed by the CTL response on the virus population, as well
as the costs suffered by mutants evading the CTL response,
have just recently become available. Two recent studies
employ a simple way of estimating these two parameters
[11,12]. The ﬁtness cost of a CTL escape mutant is generally
investigated in ‘‘reversion’’ experiments by observing the
dynamics of the mutant in hosts lacking the MHC class I allele
presenting the wild-type, unmutated epitope. The average
rate, R, at which the logarithm of the ratio of the wild-type to
the mutant frequency increases with time, is interpreted as
the cost of the escape mutation [8, 12,13]. Previously it was
shown that this rate provides an estimate of the absolute
difference between replication rates of the wild-type virus
and the mutant, and not of the relative difference (i.e.,
relative ﬁtness). The estimated absolute rate difference
strongly depends on the viral replication rate [14], and this
makes it difﬁcult to compare how ‘‘costly’’ the different CTL
escape mutations are.
During ‘‘escape’’ experiments in which a wild-type virus is
substituted with a mutant, the average rate, E, at which the
logarithm of the ratio of the wild-type frequency to the
mutant decreases with time, is calculated. The sum of the two
rates, R þ E, provides an estimate of the CTL killing rate, or
the rate at which cells productively infected with the wild-
type virus are killed by the CTL response due to the
expression of the non-mutated epitope [11,12]. In the
derivation of these results, the authors made an implicit
assumption that the virus replicates at a constant rate, and
that the rate at which the CTL response clears virus-infected
cells is constant, or declines slowly over time. Given recent
ﬁndings on the viral dynamics during the acute phase of SIV/
HIV infection [7,15,16], both assumptions are likely to be
simpliﬁcations. In this paper we show that if these assump-
tions are violated, estimation of the cost of escape mutations
and killing rates is more complex. Using a relatively general
model for the dynamics of the wild-type and mutant viruses
in a given host (see Materials and Methods), we provide a
theoretical basis for obtaining minimal estimates for these
parameters using in vivo data.
Results
Reversion Experiments
In the reversion experiments, the dynamics of the CTL
escape mutant is observed in a host lacking the MHC class I
Editor: Eddie Holmes, Pennsylvania State University, United States of America
Received October 26, 2005; Accepted February 13, 2006; Published March 31,
2006
A previous version of this article appeared as an Early Online Release on February
13, 2006 (DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024.eor).
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024
Copyright: /C2112006 Ganusov and De Boer. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
Abbreviations: c, fitness cost; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; E(t), total response; K,
average killing rate; k(t), killing rate; m(t), mutant; r(t), virus replication rate; w(t),
wild-type
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: V.V.Ganusov@bio.uu.nl
(VVG); R.J.DeBoer@bio.uu.nl (RJDB)
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240182



--- Page 2 ---
allele presenting the wild-type epitope. In such a host, the
CTL response speciﬁc for the wild-type epitope is absent, i.e.,
k(t) ¼ 0 in Equation 8. Since the ratio of the wild-type virus to
the mutant should change exponentially (see Equation 8), it is
useful to calculate the average rate R at which the logarithm
of the ratio z(t) increases with time. If the measurements of
the ratio z(t) are available at two time points, t
s (start) and te
(end), with corresponding measured ratios zs ¼ z(ts) and ze ¼
z(te), the average replacement rate R of the mutant by the
wild-type in the time interval ( ts,t e) can be calculated from the
data and the model as follows
R ¼ lnze=zs
te /C0 ts
¼ c
te /C0 ts
Z te
ts
rðtÞdt: ð1Þ
Note that to estimate the rate R, or other parameters
below, from the data, one needs to have at least two time
points in which both viral variants are present—when more
than two time points are available and the changes in the
death rate d(t) with time are known, more sophisticated
techniques could be used for parameter estimation [17].
Importantly, Equation 1 implies that to estimate the cost of
the escape mutation c one needs to know how the virus
replication rate, r(t), changes over the time of the experiment.
Unfortunately, this replication rate is generally unknown. By
comparing the rates of replacement of various escape
mutants with the wild-type in different reversion experi-
ments, it is often concluded that the mutant with the highest
reversion rate R has the highest cost [7,8,12]. Our analysis
suggests that differences in the rates of replacement may also
arise due to differences in the virus replication rate during
the experiment. For example, acute SIV/HIV infection is
characterized by three different phases: initial expansion,
contraction, and a relatively stable level of the virus
population. It seems likely that the replication rate of the
virus differs in these three phases. The virus is likely to
replicate at the highest rate early during infection ( r(t) ’ 1.5
d
/C0 1), the rate of replication may be lower around the peak of
viremia (r(t) ’ 1d /C0 1), and is likely to approach its lowest value
during the stable phase ( r(t) ’ 0.5 d /C0 1) [18–21]. Reversions
that take place during these three different phases may
therefore have quite different replacement rates. In partic-
ular, we expect the rate of reversion during the ﬁrst phase to
be higher than that during the third phase. This prediction is
consistent with recent data of Kobayashi et al. [22] in which
the replacement of a CTL escape mutant by the wild-type
occurred at a faster rate between days 7 and 21 than between
days 35 and 63 post-infection, shown in Figure 1.
Nevertheless, even if the changes in virus replication rate
over time are not known, one can make a minimal estimate of
the ﬁtness cost of the escape mutation. By assuming that
during the experiment the virus population expands ex-
ponentially at a ﬁxed maximal rate r(t) ¼ r
max , the minimal
estimate of ﬁtness cost is found using Equation 1
cmin ¼ lnze=zs
rmaxðte /C0 tsÞ : ð2Þ
The fact that Equation 2 provides an underestimate of the
ﬁtness cost is demonstrated in Figure 2. In this example, the
cost of the escape mutation is ﬁxed at 0.1 (10% relative
reduction in the replication rate of the mutant). We assume
that during the infection, the replication rate is maximal
before the peak of the infection, and then is reduced to a
smaller value (e.g., due to decreased target cell availability).
Due to this reduction in the replication rate, the replacement
of the mutant by the wild-type virus also becomes slower
after the peak of viremia (Figure 2). However, if the
measurement of the mutant and wild-type frequencies were
done before and after the peak of viremia, one would
underestimate the cost of the mutation when assuming a
ﬁxed maximal replication rate of the virus (in Figure 2 the
estimated c
min ’ 0.065).
Two additional points needs to be stressed. It is often
concluded that the time taken for replacement of the mutant
by the wild-type in reversion experiments is related to the
Figure 1. Reversion of the Gag 206/C0 216 SIV Mutant to the Wild-Type Virus
in Cynomolgus Macaques during the Acute Phase of SIV Infection
Animals 1 and 2 were infected with both the mutant and wild-type virus
at the same time, animals 3 and 4 were infected only with the mutant,
and it took about a month before the wild-type virus appeared. Using
Equation 1, we estimated the average rate of replacement R ¼ 0.19, 0.20,
0.16, 0.10 d/C0 1 for these four cases, respectively ( ts ¼ 7 d, and te ¼ 21 d for
animals 1 and 2, and ts ¼ 35 d and te ¼ 63 d for animals 3 and 4).
Replacement occurred at a higher rate early during the acute infection,
which is readily explained by a faster rate of virus replication at these
earlier time points. Assuming exponential growth of the virus at days 7
through 21 with r
max ¼ 1.5 d/C0 1 using Equation 2, we obtain the minimal
estimate of the cost of the Gag 206/C0 215 escape mutation c ’ 13%. If there
were no changes in the cost c in animals 3 and 4 after 63 d during the
experiment, these data would suggest a reduction in the average
replication rate of the virus b etween days 7–21 and 35–63 of
approximately [(0.20 þ 0.19) ¼ (0.16 þ 0.1)] ¼ 1.5-fold, which is not
unrealistic. Note that the frequency of the CTL escape mutant in the virus
population at time t is given by 1 ¼ (1 þ z(t)).
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024.g001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240183
Synopsis
Due to their high mutation rate, RNA viruses—like SIV and HIV—can
avoid recognition by the host immune response by evolving new
variants (i.e., immune escape mutants). Avoiding the cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) immune responses is one of the major obstacles
for the development of vaccines to HIV, and this avoidance seems a
major mechanism of HIV disease progression to AIDS. Using a
relatively general mathematical model, Ganusov and De Boer
suggest a simple technique by which two main parameters
determining the likelihood of viral escape can be estimated. First
is the ‘‘cost’’ of the escape mutation, which is the relative fitness
reduction in the virus replication rate. Second is the rate at which
the CTL response specific for one epitope ‘‘clears’’ virus-infected
cells. Application of their technique to data on virus escape helps to
quantify the costs and benefits of CTL escape mutations in SIV/HIV
infection.
Costs/Benefits of CTL Escape Mutations


--- Page 3 ---
cost of the escape mutations, i.e., longer reversion times from
the start of experiment to a complete reversion correspond
to lower ﬁtness costs (e.g., [23]). Clearly, when only mutant
virus infects a new host, it will take some time before the wild-
type is generated by reverse mutation. Our analysis demon-
strates that the rate of replacement of the mutant by the wild-
type, and not the time to a complete reversion, is proportional
to the ﬁtness cost of the escape mutation. Therefore, as an
approximate measure of the ﬁtness cost of an escape mutant
one should only consider the time period during which the
actual substitution of the mutant by the wild-type took place.
In many situations, this is the period between the ﬁrst time
the wild-type replaces the mutant (i.e., 100% wild-type
sequences are observed) and the last time when only the
mutant is present (i.e., 0% wild-type sequence is observed).
We have shown that the rate of replacement is determined
by the ﬁtness cost c and the virus replication rate r(t), and that
changes in the rate of replacement are likely to occur due to
changes in the replication rate. Several studies have docu-
mented that the ﬁtness cost suffered by CTL escape mutants
can be reduced by additional compensatory mutations [24–
26]. Changes in the ﬁtness cost are likely to affect the rate of
replacement of the mutant by the wild-type during reversion
experiments. Since in acute SIV/HIV infections, these
replacements appear to occur faster than in chronic
infections [12], accumulation of compensatory mutations
during chronic infections is more likely to occur. This in turn
could lead to a reduction in the ﬁtness cost, slower replace-
ment kinetics, and consequently, to underestimation of the
initial ﬁtness cost.
Escape Experiments
During escape experiments, the wild-type virus is subjected
to additional killing rate k(t), and the mutant virus suffers a
ﬁtness cost c. To characterize the dynamics of substitution of
the wild-type by the mutant, it is useful to estimate the
‘‘escape’’ rate E at which the logarithm of the ratio of the
wild-type frequency to the mutant decreases with time. This
rate can be calculated from the data and in the model given
in Equation 8
E ¼/C0 lnze=zs
te /C0 ts
¼ K /C0 R; ð3Þ
where R ¼ c
te /C0 ts
Z te
ts
rðtÞdt is the average difference in repli-
cation rates of the wild-type and the mutant, and
K ¼ 1
te /C0 ts
Z te
ts
kðtÞdt is the average killing rate over the time
period (ts,t e) during the escape; zs and ze are the measured ratios
of the density of the wild-type to the mutant virus available
during the escape experiment at two time points ts and te,
respectively. Equation 3 has a simple biological interpretation:
the rate of replacement of the wild-type by the mutant in
escape experiments is given by the difference between the
average killing rate (at which the wild-type virus is cleared by
the CTL response) and the average difference in the
replication rate of the wild-type virus and the mutant (at
which the wild-type overgrows the mutant).
Two groups have independently proposed to use escape
experiments to estimate the rate at which the CTL response
kills cells expressing the wild-type CTL epitope [11,12]. The
average killing rate K can be calculated from Equation 3
K ¼ R þ E ¼
c
te /C0 ts
Z te
ts
rðtÞdt þ lnzs=ze
te /C0 ts
ð4Þ
Importantly, Equation 4 suggests that in order to determine
the average killing rate one not only needs to have an
estimate of the cost of the escape mutation c, but also to know
changes in the replication rate of the virus r(t) with time
during the escape experiment. The latter, again, is generally
not known. In the absence of such knowledge, two estimates
of the average killing rate are possible. First, one could
assume that during the escape experiments, there is no virus
growth. Letting r(t) ¼ R ¼ 0, one ﬁnds a minimal estimate of
the average killing rate Kmin, which is equal to the rate of
substitution of the wild-type virus by the mutant in escape
experiments, i.e., one obtains Kmin ¼ E.
Figure 2. Estimating the Cost of a CTL Escape Mutation
(A) Plots the hypothetical changes in the replication rate of the virus
during the acute phase of infection. We assume that initially (until time
Tr) the virus population expands exponentially at rate rmax, and after t ¼
Tr , the virus replication rate is reduced exponentially at rate k to a
smaller value rmin. Biologically this would correspond to the acute phase
of SIV/HIV infection when the replication rate of the virus depends on
the availability of target cells, which are depleted by the virus.
(B) Plots changes in the ratio z(t) calculated using Equation 8 with k(t) ¼ 0
for the replication rate r(t) shown by a solid line in (A). For two
measurements of the ratio z at ts ¼ 0 and te ¼ 25 d, we obtain a minimal
estimate of the cost of the escape mutation assuming exponential virus
growth with r
max ¼ 1.5 d /C0 1 (shown by dashed lines), i.e., cmin ¼ 0.065
which is 65% of the actual fitness cost. Other parameters: rmin ¼ 0.5 d/C0 1,
Tr ¼ 10 d, k ¼ 0.5 d/C0 1, z(0) ¼ 0.1, c ¼ 0.1.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024.g002
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240184
Costs/Benefits of CTL Escape Mutations


--- Page 4 ---
Second, one could assume that during both the reversion
and escape experiment, the virus replication rate is constant
and the same (i.e., r(t) ¼ r), and that the CTL response clears
virus-infected cells at a constant rate K9 (Figure 3). For these
assumptions, the difference in replication rates of the wild-
type and the mutant viruses is the same during escape and
reversion experiments, (R ¼ cr), and one can combine
Equations 1 and 4 to ﬁnd that the average killing rate K9 is
the sum of the rate of replacement of the mutant by the wild-
type virus in reversion experiments (given by Equation 1), and
the rate of replacement of the wild-type virus by the mutant
in escape experiments, i.e.,
K9¼ R þ E ¼
lnz9e=z9s
t9e /C0 t9s
þ lnzs=ze
te /C0 ts
; ð5Þ
where z9s and z9e are the ratios of the wild-type virus to the
mutant density at times t9s and t9e during the reversion
experiment. This actually represents the calculation per-
formed in [11]. While using this result, however, one should
remain careful and realize that adding parameters R and E
estimated in different hosts may be an oversimpliﬁcation
since even genetically similar individuals may differ in their
responsiveness to the same pathogen, in part due to different
T cell receptor repertoires [27].
While Equation 3 delivers the minimal estimate of the
average CTL killing rate, the rate K9 given in Equation 5 may
overestimate or underestimate the actual average killing rate
K (demonstrated in Table 1). This is due to the fact that the
rate of virus replication may be different in reversion and
escape experiments. If during the reversion experiments, the
viruses replicate at a higher rate than during the escape
experiments, Equation 5 will overestimate the average killing
rate (Table 1, second row). This is likely to happen if the
reversion occurs before the peak of viremia (when the virus
replication rate is likely to be maximal), and the escape
occurs after the peak of viremia (when the virus replication
rate is likely to be reduced). In several published studies on
CTL escape and reversion during acute SIV infection of
macaques this is indeed the case [11,22,28]. By obtaining
estimates K
min and K9 one can thus ﬁnd the minimal and
maximal estimate of the average killing rate, respectively
(Table 1, second row). In a recently published study on SHIV
escape in pigtail macaques [11], the authors found that during
the escape (which occurred after the peak of viremia) the
conservative estimate of rate of substitution of the wild-type
virus by the CTL escape mutant KP9 (SIV Gag
164/C0 172) was E ’
0.71 d /C0 1. During the reversion (which occurred before the
peak of viremia), the mutant was substituted by the wild-type
at a rate R ’ 0.38 d
/C0 1. By assuming that the rate of virus
replication is higher before the peak of viremia than that
after the peak, we obtain the following minimal and maximal
estimates of the average killing rate of the CTL response
speciﬁc for the KP9 epitope ( K
min,K 9) ¼ (0.71 d/C0 1, 1.09 d /C0 1).
If during the reversion experiments the rate of virus
replication is lower than that during the escape experiments
(Table 1, third row), Equation 5 will underestimate the
average killing rate. This is likely to happen if the reversion
occurs much later than the escape. Finally, by assuming that
the CTL killing rate is constant over time and estimating K
min
and/or K9, one always underestimates the maximal killing rate
if the killing rate k(t) changes over time (compare estimates
obtained in Table 1 and kmax given in the legend to Figure 3).
Discussion
In this paper we have provided a theoretical basis for
estimating the costs of CTL escape mutations and the average
rate at which the CTL response speciﬁc for a given epitope
clears virus-infected cells. We show that by assuming
exponential growth of the virus during the reversion experi-
ments, one can obtain a minimal estimate for the cost of
escape mutation (using Equation 2). Similarly, by assuming no
virus growth during the escape experiments, one can obtain
the minimal estimate of the average rate at which the CTL
response speciﬁc to one viral epitope clears virus-infected
cells (using Equation 3). Since our model is relatively general,
our conclusions about estimating the costs and beneﬁts of
Figure 3. Estimating the Average Killing Rate (i.e., the Rate at Which a
CTL Response Specific to One Viral Epitope Clears Virus-Infected Cells)
(A) Plots an example of the replication rate r(t) and the killing rate k(t)
occurring during the acute phase of an infection. The replication rate is
identical to that in Figure 2.
(B) Plots the changes in the ratio of the wild-type virus to the mutant
density as a function of time.
Thick solid lines denote the case where the replication rate r(t) and the
killing rate k(t) change with time in accord with continuous lines in (A).
For two measurements of the ratio z at ts ¼ 0 and te ¼ 25 d, we estimate
the average killing rate using Equation 5, assuming constant rate of virus
replication with r(t) ¼ r
max during both reversion and escape experi-
ments, shown by thin dashed lines in (A) and (B) and in Figure 2A,
estimated K9 ¼ 0.42 d/C0 1. Note that this estimate of the average killing rate
underestimates the maximum killing rate kmax. To describe the immune
response we let Ton ¼ 12 d, Tof ¼ 25 d, kmax ¼ 0.8 d/C0 1, kmin ¼ 0.3 d/C0 1. Other
parameters are the same as in Figure 2 and z(0) ¼ 102.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024.g003
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240185
Costs/Benefits of CTL Escape Mutations


--- Page 5 ---
CTL escape mutations of SIV/HIV are equally applied to acute
and chronic phases of SIV/HIV infection. However, while
during the acute phase there are likely to be substantial
changes in the rate of virus replication r(t) and the killing rate
k(t) [7,15,16], we expect much smaller changes in these
parameters with time in the chronic phase. This in turn
implies that estimates of the cost of the escape mutation and
the average CTL killing rate obtained during the chronic
phase of SIV/HIV infection may be less affected by changes in
the rate of virus replication. To understand the validity of the
estimates obtained we need to better understand the dynamics
of the virus and the effective CTL response during the chronic
phase of SIV/HIV infection in a given host. A better under-
standing of how escape mutations affect the ﬁtness of mutants
(by reducing the replication rate and/or by increasing the
death rate of virus-infected cells), and the mechanisms by
which the CTL response controls the virus replication (lytic
and/or nonlytic) will help in obtaining better estimates of the
costs and beneﬁts of escape mutations in SIV/HIV infection.
Materials and Methods
Main model. We assume the following scenario for viral escape. The
wild-type virus has a higher replication rate, and cells infected with
the wild-type virus are killed at a higher rate by the CTL response. The
mutant virus has a lower replication rate and cells infected with the
mutant virus are killed at a lower rate by the CTL response. We
formulate a mathematical model describing the dynamics of the
density of cells productively infected with the wild-type w(t) or the
mutant m(t) viruses, when both viral variants are present in an
infected host. The model is given by the following equations
_wðtÞ¼ rðtÞwðtÞ/C0½ dðtÞþ kðtÞ/C138 wðtÞ; ð6Þ
_mðtÞ¼ rðtÞð1 /C0 cÞmðtÞ/C0 dðtÞmðtÞ; ð7Þ
where r(t) and r(t)(1/C0 c) is the replication rate of the wild-type and the
mutant, respectively,c is the cost of the escape mutation deﬁned as a
selection coefﬁcient, d(t) is the per capita clearance rate of both
variants (which is typically equal to the death rate of productively
infected cells, see below), and k(t) is an extra death rate at which virus-
infected cells expressing the wild-type CTL epitope are being cleared
by the epitope-speciﬁc CTL response. Since both SIV and HIV
particles are known to be short-lived in vivo [29–31], densities of virus
particles are likely to be proportional to the densities of cells
productively infected with each virus variant given in Equations 6 and
7. Note that in this model we ignored additional mutations, and focus
on the replacement kinetics. We also analyze two additional models
on virus escape (see below). In one model, we let the escape mutant be
less ﬁt due to an increased clearance rate of the cells infected with the
mutant virus. In another model, the CTL response controls virus
growth nonlytically, by reducing the rate of virus replication.
It is useful to rewrite Equations 6 and 7 to describe the dynamics of
the ratio of the wild-type to mutant density
z(t) ¼ w(t) / m(t ):
_zðtÞ¼ _wðtÞ
mðtÞ /C0 zðtÞ _mðtÞ
mðtÞ ¼ zðtÞ½crðtÞ/C0 kðtÞ/C138 ; ð8Þ
where cr(t) is the absolute difference in the replication rates of the
wild-type and the mutant [13,14]. Thus we ﬁnd that the ratio z(t)o f
density of the wild-type virus to the mutant changes exponentially
with the time-dependent per capita rate cr(t) /C0 k(t) determined by
ﬁtness cost of the escape mutation c times the rate of replication of
the wild-type r(t), and the magnitude of the immune response
directed against the wild-type epitope k(t). Importantly, CTL
responses to other epitopes of both wild-type and mutant viruses
cancel out in Equation 8, and the dynamics of the ratio z(t)i s
dependent only on the CTL response to the wild-type epitope. This
could be different in other models, for example, where CD8
þ T cell
responses reduce the rate of virus replication by noncytolytic
mechanisms (see below). In the main text we consider how the cost
c and the killing rate k(t) can be estimated using in vivo data.
Cost of mutation results in higher death rate of the mutant. We
consider the case when the escape mutation renders the mutant less
ﬁt due to an increased death rate of virus-infected cells. The
dynamics of cells productively infected with the wild-type w(t) and the
mutant m(t) viruses is given by the following equations:
_wðtÞ¼ rðtÞwðtÞ/C0½ dðtÞþ kðtÞ/C138 wðtÞ; ð9Þ
_mðtÞ¼ rðtÞmðtÞ/C0 dðtÞð1 þ cÞmðtÞ; ð10Þ
where c is the cost of the escape mutation. Rewriting Equations 9 and
10 for the ratio of the wild-type to mutant z(t) ¼ w(t) / m(t ) for times
when both virus variants are present in the host, we obtain:
_zðtÞ¼
_wðtÞ
mðtÞ /C0 zðtÞ _mðtÞ
mðtÞ ¼ zðtÞ½cdðtÞ/C0 kðtÞ/C138 : ð11Þ
To estimate the cost of the escape mutation and the average CTL
killing rate, one needs to know the changes in the death rate of the
cells productively infected with the virus with time. Since these
changes will be dependent on the CTL responses speciﬁc to both
wild-type and mutant viruses, the death rate d(t) is likely to change
during the acute phase of SIV/HIV infection, and may be relatively
constant in the chronic phase.
Noncytolytic CD8
þ T cell response. The model describing the
dynamics of the cells infected with the wild-type w(t) and the mutant
m(t) viruses, is given by the following equations:
_wðtÞ¼ rðtÞwðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞþ kðtÞ /C0 dðtÞwðtÞ; ð12Þ
_mðtÞ¼ rðtÞð1 /C0 cÞmðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞ /C0 dðtÞmðtÞ; ð13Þ
where the assumptions on the virus growth are similar to those in the
main model. However, we assume that the CD8 þ T cell response
reduces the rate of virus replication. The reduction in the replication
rate is due to the CD8
þ T cell response speciﬁc for the wild-type
epitope k(t) and due to CD8 þ T cell responses to other viral epitopes
Table 1. Estimating the Average Killing Rate
Reversion (d) Escape (d) R Estimated (d /C0 1) Kmin Estimated (d /C0 1) K9 Estimated (d /C0 1) K Actual (d /C0 1) Percent Error
ts te ts te
0 25 0 25 0.10 0.32 0.42 0.42 0
0 12 15 30 0.14 0.58 0.72 0.63 þ14
20 30 0 15 0.05 0.03 0.08 0.16 /C0 50
We assume that the replication rate r(t) and the killing rate k(t) change with time as is shown by solid lines in Figure 3A. We estimate the rate of substitution of the mutant by the wild-type
in reversion experiments using Equation 1 in the time interval (ts, te) given in the column reversion. The minimal estimate of the average killing rate Kmin ¼ E during the escape experiment
is found using Equation 3 in the time interval (ts, te) given in the column escape. The average killing rate K9 obtained under the assumption r(t) ¼ constant is calculated using Equation 5.
The true average killing rate K is calculated in accord with Equation 4. The percent error in estimating the true average killing rate was calculated as 100 3 (K9/C0 K)/K, with positive values
indicating overestimation and negative values indicating underestimation. Parameters are the same as in Figure 3.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020024.t001
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240186
Costs/Benefits of CTL Escape Mutations


--- Page 6 ---
E(t). Note that in contrast with the main model, the parameter k(t)i s
now dimensionless. As in the main text, we write an equation for the
dynamics of the ratio of the density of the wild-type to the mutant z(t):
_ztðÞ¼ ztðÞ
rðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞþ kðtÞ /C0 ð1 /C0 cÞrðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞ
/C20/C21
: ð14Þ
During the reversion experiments, the speciﬁc CD8 þ T cell response
directed against the wild-type epitope is absent (i.e., k(t) ¼ 0), and the
change in the ratio z(t) is given by
_zðtÞ¼ crðtÞzðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞ : ð15Þ
Assuming that the virus replicates at the maximum rate rmax in the
absence of the CD8 þ T cell response ( E(t) ¼ 0), one recovers the same
equation for z(t) as is given in Equation 8 at k(t) ¼ 0. This suggests that
Equation 2 also gives the minimal estimate of the ﬁtness cost of an
escape mutant.
During the escape experiments Equation 14 holds. One can rewrite
this equation:
_zðtÞ¼ zðtÞ
crðtÞ
1 þ EðtÞ /C0 rðtÞkðtÞ
ð1 þ EðtÞþ kðtÞÞð1 þ kðtÞÞ
/C18/C19
: ð16Þ
While this expression is somewhat complex, its interpretation is
similar to that of Equation 8: the ﬁrst term on the right hand side
corresponds to increase in the frequency of the wild-type due to cost
of escape mutation, and the second term corresponds to a decrease in
the frequency of the wild-type due to the CD8
þ T cell response
speciﬁc for the wild-type epitope.
There are two differences with the equation found in the main
model, however. First, we ﬁnd that the rate of accumulation of the
mutant in the population depends on the replication rate of the virus:
a higher replication rate r(t) corresponds to a faster accumulation.
Therefore, slow accumulation of the escape mutants in some experi-
ments may reﬂect slow replication of the virus. This is in contrast to
the prediction found when the CD8þ T cell response controls the virus
by killing virus-infected cells, where the opposite trend is observed
(i.e., the faster rates of virus replication leads to slower replacement of
the wild-type by the mutant virus, see Equation 3).
Second, there is no an easy way of estimating the CD8
þ T cell
suppression efﬁcacy k(t) unless changes in the total response E(t) and
replication rate r(t) with time are known. Only by assuming that the
growth rate and the two immune responses are constant over time,
can such an estimate be made. As discussed above, this estimate,
however, will also depend on how well the assumptions of the
constancy of the immune response and of the growth rate over time
are satisﬁed.
Acknowledgments
We thank Becca Asquith and colleagues for sharing their unpublished
work with us. We also thank Can Kes xmir, Jose´ Borghans, and Becca
Asquith for their comments on the previous versions of the
manuscript.
Author contributions. VVG and RJDB conceived and designed the
models. VVG and RJDB analyzed the data. VVG and RJDB wrote the
paper.
Funding. This work was supported by HFSP grant RGP0010/2004,
NWO grant 016.048.603, and a Marie Curie Incoming International
Fellowship.
Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
&
References
1. Jin X, Bauer DE, Tuttleton SE, Lewin S, Gettie A, et al. (1999) Dramatic rise
in plasma viremia after CD8( þ) T cell depletion in simian immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus-infected macaques. J Exp Med 189: 991–998.
2. Schmitz JE, Kuroda MJ, Santra S, Sasseville VG, Simon MA, et al. (1999)
Control of viremia in simian immunodeﬁciency virus infection by CD8 þ
lymphocytes. Science 283: 857–860.
3. Carrington M, Nelson GW, Martin MP, Kissner T, Vlahov D, et al. (1999)
HLA and HIV-1: Heterozygote advantage and B*35-Cw*04 disadvantage.
Science 283: 1748–1752.
4. Trachtenberg E, Korber B, Sollars C, Kepler T, Hraber P, et al. (2003) Advantage
of rare HLA supertype in HIV disease progression. Nat Med 9: 928–935.
5. Carrington M, O’Brien S (2003) The inﬂuence of HLA genotype on AIDS.
Annu Rev Med 54: 535–551.
6. Kiepiela P, Leslie A, Honeyborne I, Ramduth D, Thobakgale C, et al. (2004)
Dominant inﬂuence of HLA-B in mediating the potential co-evolution of
HIV and HLA. Nature 432: 769–775.
7. Goulder P, Watkins D (2004) HIV and SIV CTL escape: Implications for
vaccine design. Nat Rev Immunol 4: 630–640.
8. Kent S, Fernandez C, Dale C, Davenport M (2005) Reversion of immune
escape HIV variants upon transmission: Insights into effective viral
immunity. Trends Microbiol 13: 243–246.
9. Allen T, Altfeld M, Yu X, O’Sullivan K, Lichterfeld M, et al. (2004) Selection,
transmission, and reversion of an antigen-processing cytotoxic T-lympho-
cyte escape mutation in human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 infection. J
Virol 78: 7069–7078.
10. Draenert R, Le Gall S, Pfafferott K, Leslie A, Chetty P, et al. (2004) Immune
Selection for Altered Antigen Processing Leads to Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte
Escape in Chronic HIV-1 Infection. J Exp Med 199: 905–915.
11. Fernandez C, Stratov I, De Rose R, Walsh K, Dale C, et al. (2005) Rapid viral
escape at an immunodominant simian–human immunodeﬁciency virus
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitope exacts a dramatic ﬁtness cost. J Virol 79:
5721–5731.
12. Asquith B, Edwards C, Lipsitch M, McLean A (2006) Inefﬁcient cytotoxic T
lymphocyte–mediated killing of HIV-1-infected cells in vivo. PLoS Biology.
4 (4): e90.
13. Holland J, de la Torre J, Clarke D, Duarte E (1991) Quantitation of relative
ﬁtness and great adaptability of clonal populations of RNA viruses. J Virol
65: 2960–2967.
14. Maree AF, Keulen W, Boucher CA, De Boer RJ (2000) Estimating relative
ﬁtness in viral competition experiments. J Virol 74: 11067–11072.
15. Mattapallil J, Douek D, Hill B, Nishimura Y, Martin M, et al. (2005) Massive
infection and loss of memory CD4 þ T cells in multiple tissues during acute
SIV infection. Nature 434: 1093–1097.
16. Li Q, Duan L, Estes J, Ma Z, Rourke T, et al. (2005) Peak SIV replication in
resting memory CD4 þ T cells depletes gut lamina propria CD4 þ T cells.
Nature 434: 1148–1152.
17. Bonhoerrer S, Barbour A, De Boer R (2002) Procedures for reliable
estimation of viral ﬁtness from time-series data. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
269: 1887–1893.
18. Little S, McLean A, Spina C, Richman D, Havlir D (1999) Viral dynamics of
acute HIV-1 infection. J Exp Med 190: 841–850.
19. Nowak M, Lloyd A, Vasquez G, Wiltrout T, Wahl L, et al. (1997) Viral
dynamics of primary viremia and antiretroviral therapy in simian
immunodeﬁciency virus infection. J Virol 71: 7518–7525.
20. Bonhoeffer S, Funk G, Gunthard H, Fischer M, Muller V (2003) Glancing
behind virus load variation in HIV-1 infection. Trends Microbiol 11: 499–
504.
21. Davenport M, Ribeiro R, Perelson A (2004) Kinetics of virus-speciﬁc CD8 þ
T cells and the control of human immunodeﬁciency virus infection. J Virol
78: 10096–10103.
22. Kobayashi M, Igarashi H, Takeda A, Kato M, Matano T (2005) Reversion in
vivo after inoculation of a molecular proviral DNA clone of simian
immunodeﬁciency virus with a cytotoxic–T-lymphocyte escape mutation. J
Virol 79: 11529–11532.
23. Barouch D, Powers J, Truitt D, Kishko M, Arthur J, et al. (2005) Dynamic
immune responses maintain cytotoxic T lymphocyte epitope mutations in
transmitted simian immunodeﬁciency virus variants. Nat Immunol 6: 247–252.
24. Kelleher AD, Long C, Holmes EC, Allen RL, Wilson J, et al. (2001) Clustered
mutations in HIV-1 gag are consistently required for escape from HLA-
B27–restricted cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses. J Exp Med 193: 375–386.
25. Peyerl F, Barouch D, Yeh W, Bazick H, Kunstman J, et al. (2003) Simian–
human immunodeﬁciency virus escape from cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
recognition at a structurally constrained epitope. J Virol 77: 12572–12578.
26. Friedrich T, Frye C, Yant L, O’Connor D, Kriewaldt N, et al. (2004)
Extraepitopic compensatory substitutions partially restore ﬁtness to simian
immunodeﬁciency virus variants that escape from an immunodominant
cytotoxic–T-lymphocyte response. J Virol 78: 2581–2585.
27. Yang O, Church J, Kitchen C, Kilpatrick R, Ali A, et al. (2005) Genetic and
stochastic inﬂuences on the interaction of human immunodeﬁciency virus
type 1 and cytotoxic T lymphocytes in identical twins. J Virol 79: 15368–15375.
28. Matano T, Kobayashi M, Igarashi H, Takeda A, Nakamura H, et al. (2004)
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte–based control of simian immunodeﬁciency virus
replication in a preclinical AIDS vaccine trial. J Exp Med 199: 1709–1718.
29. Perelson A, Neumann A, Markowitz M, Leonard J, Ho D (1996) HIV-1
dynamics in vivo: Virion clearance rate, infected cell lifespan, and viral
generation time. Science 271: 1582–1586.
30. Ramratnam B, Bonhoeffer S, Binley J, Hurley A, Zhang L, et al. (1999) Rapid
production and clearance of HIV-1 and hepatitis C virus assessed by large
volume plasma apheresis. Lancet 354: 1782–1785.
31. Zhang L, Dailey PJ, He T, Gettie A, Bonhoerrer S, et al. (1999) Rapid
clearance of simian immunodeﬁciency virus particles from plasma of
rhesus macaques. J Virol 73: 855–860.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org March 2006 | Volume 2 | Issue 3 | e240187
Costs/Benefits of CTL Escape Mutations
