MicroRNA Target Site Identification by Integrating Sequence and 
Binding Information
William H. Majoros1,*, Parawee Lekprasert1,2,*, Neelanjan Mukherjee1,3, Rebecca L. 
Skalsky4, David L. Corcoran1, Bryan R. Cullen4, and Uwe Ohler1,3,5,6,7
1Institute for Genome Sciences & Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
2Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
3Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Berlin, Germany
4Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
5Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
6Department of Biology, Humboldt Universität, Berlin, Germany
Abstract
High-throughput sequencing has opened numerous possibilities for the identification of regulatory 
RNA-binding events. Cross-linking and immunoprecipitation of Argonaute protein members can 
pinpoint microRNA target sites within tens of bases, but leaves the identity of the microRNA 
unresolved. A flexible computational framework that integrates sequence with cross-linking 
features reliably identifies the microRNA family involved in each binding event, considerably 
outperforms sequence-only approaches, and quantifies the prevalence of noncanonical binding 
modes.
The role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in gene regulatory pathways has been well demonstrated, 
including numerous examples in which miRNA dysregulation has been implicated in 
disease1. As part of the RNA induced silencing complex (RISC), miRNAs guide the 
complex to repress target messenger RNAs. Immunoprecipitation of Argonaute (AGO) 
protein family members followed by global profiling of bound RNA has provided an 
experimental high-throughput approach to map miRNA targets genome-wide2. In particular, 
cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) of AGO proteins provides specific regions of 
likely AGO binding and miRNA target sites3,4.
Users may view, print, copy, download and text and data- mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
7Uwe.Ohler@mdc-berlin.de*These authors contributed equally
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
W.H.M implemented the modeling framework and designed the models, P.L. and W.H.M. performed the computational experiments, 
P.L. investigated bulge sites, N.M. and D.L.C. configured and ran the PARalyzer pipeline and provided guidance on analyzing its 
outputs. P.L., W.H.M., and U.O. analyzed the data. R.L.S., B.R.C. and N.M. designed and performed wet lab experiments, and 
W.H.M., P.L., and U.O. wrote the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2013 July ; 10(7): 630–633. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2489.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The resolution of CLIP experiments has been generally insufficient to unambiguously 
identify the acting miRNA via sequence matches4. Recent protocols, including iCLIP and 
PAR-CLIP, increased resolution by providing additional signals diagnostic of cross-linked 
locations5. In particular, PAR-CLIP obtains high cross-linking efficiency due to the presence 
of the nucleoside analog 4-thiouridine, which leads to characteristic thymine-to-cytosine 
transitions in the library reads in the vicinity of protein-mRNA cross-linking4. To define a 
narrow region (typically ~30nt) most likely bound by the protein, our previously published 
PARalyzer software6 quantifies this T-to-C transition profile relative to background read 
density via a kernel density estimator (Fig. 1a).
MiRNA target sites are characterized by one of several types of seed sequence matches 
unique to each miRNA family7 (canonically, a perfect 7nt complement to positions 2–8 of 
the miRNA). In AGO-immunoprecipitated libraries, the cross-linking site indicates a radius 
for RISC-mediated miRNA heteroduplex formation on the mRNA substrate, and restricts 
the search space for functional seed matches. Furthermore, the PAR-CLIP transition signal 
is preferentially located directly 5′ of the miRNA seed match on the mRNA4,6,8, likely due 
to the biophysical properties of the heteroduplex within functional miRNP complexes7 (Fig. 
1b). mRNA conservation levels immediately 3′ of peaks indicate that many of these seed 
matches are selectively maintained (Fig. 1c).
Despite continuous improvements in de novo computational predictions of target sites, 
efforts have been fundamentally limited by the brevity of sequence motifs describing 
functional miRNA-target relationships. The quantitative information in AGO PAR-CLIP 
datasets motivated us to develop an integrative computational method to identify miRNA 
target sites at the nucleotide level with high accuracy. It combines the T-to-C transition 
signal with miRNA seed-pairing and its evolutionary conservation, as well as the spatial 
relation between binding and sequence features. We implemented the model within a 
general-purpose hidden Markov model (HMM) framework9 called MUMMIE (Multivariate 
Markov Modeling Inference Engine). We model the shape of PAR-CLIP signals with a 6-
state topology (Fig. 1d), in which state 5 expands into a 41-state submodel for detection of 
seed matches of various types (Fig. 1e). The model is parameterized to preferentially predict 
seed matches that are long, are located closely 3′ to a PAR-CLIP peak, and are highly 
conserved. Tradeoffs between these features are naturally accounted for during prediction so 
that suboptimal sites can still be detected, albeit with lower scores (posterior probabilities; 
Supplementary Fig. 1).
Most current target predictors identify candidate sites within whole transcripts, usually 
parameterized on the indirect cumulative effect on mRNA or protein steady-state levels. The 
availability of in vivo direct binding data changes the problem of target prediction into one 
of assigning the most likely miRNA(s) to each of the observed AGO binding locations. We 
applied suitable site-level target predictors to cross-linked regions from multiple datasets, 
and evaluated the improvement obtained by the explicit joint model in the new target 
predictor. Analyses were limited to regions covered by aligned PAR-CLIP reads (termed 
groups); this dramatically increases the accuracy of methods compared to their application 
without the benefit of CLIP information (Supplementary Fig. 2). Because the identity of the 
miRNA in bound AGO complexes is unknown, we assessed the relative prediction accuracy 
Majoros et al. Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
via signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) based on randomized shuffling of miRNA sequences (i.e., 
enrichment of complementary miRNA seeds over decoy sequences among the predictions; 
see Online Methods).
Specifically, we compared MUMMIE to the following alternatives: The latest release of the 
state-of-the-art de novo miRNA target site predictor, TargetScan10, utilizes conservation 
evidence as well as various sequence context scores, but makes no explicit use of CLIP 
information. MIRZA11 implements a new biophysical model of target recognition, based on 
context-specific RNA duplex formation estimated on high-quality PAR-CLIP data. We 
contrasted these model-based approaches to two baseline strategies for identifying miRNA 
target sites from PAR-CLIP data: choosing the nearest seed match to each PARalyzer peak, 
or predicting all seed matches within each PARalyzer cluster (the maximal interval in which 
T-to-C transition rate exceeds background expectation6). All approaches used the 100 most 
highly-expressed miRNAs in the cell line, which delivered the best trade-off between SNR 
and sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 3).
On a PAR-CLIP dataset from a lymphoblastoid cell line infected with Epstein-Barr virus 
(LCL-BAC)12, our model achieves higher sensitivity, specificity, and SNR than other 
approaches (Fig. 1f, g). Thus, the joint model has a greater ability to discriminate real from 
decoy target sites (higher SNR), and it does so by predicting fewer randomized decoy sites 
within those CLIP groups (higher specificity). TargetScan limits predictions to the three 
“canonical” seed matches (7mer-A1, 7mer-m8, 8mer-A1), while our model predicts seven 
types (6mer3–8, 6mer2–7, 7mer-m8, 7mer-m1, 7mer-A1, 8mer-A1, 8mer-m1; see also 
Supplementary Fig. 4). MIRZA’s energy-based model scores the whole duplex and is 
therefore agnostic to specific seed matches. While it reaches a higher sensitivity than 
MUMMIE, by far the largest contribution of “noncanonical” targets appear to involve the 
6mer seeds included in MUMMIE. The baseline models exhibited competitive sensitivity, 
but at very low SNR/specificity levels. Results on additional PAR-CLIP data sets prepared 
by MNase digestion13, in place of the double RNase T1 digestion used in the original 
protocol, confirmed all of the observed performance trends (Supplementary Fig. 5; 
Supplementary Table 1).
To make results as comparable as possible, we used TargetScan’s branch length score as 
conservation evidence10, which is unavailable for 6mer seed matches. This effectively 
biases our model against predicting 6mer sites when parameterized to weight conservation 
highly, and helps improve specificity and SNR at the low-sensitivity end of the spectrum 
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Increasing the number of miRNAs represented in our model beyond 
the 100 most highly expressed ones progressively degrades performance (Supplementary 
Fig. 3), illustrating the complementary benefit of miRNA expression measurements in 
addition to RISC binding information. Examples of several previously or newly 
experimentally validated MUMMIE predictions12 involving different seed types are given in 
Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7.
To directly address the question of whether predicted targets were due to the presence of the 
specified miRNA, we contrasted the LCL-BAC predictions with those from three additional 
Epstein-Barr infected cell lines, each of which has one viral miRNA deleted (BHRF1-1, 
Majoros et al. Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
BHRF1-2, and BHRF1-3, respectively). The PAR-CLIP signal in the deletion lines was 
nearly absent at the locations of predictions involving a BHRF miRNA in the original cell 
line (Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. 8). For two miRNAs, the loss of sites was accompanied by 
consistent upregulation in steady-state target mRNA levels as measured by Illumina 
sequencing. MUMMIE-based observations agreed with MIRZA-predicted targets 
(Supplementary Fig. 9).
As shown in previous studies, the presence of a perfect seed match cannot explain all CLIP 
groups4,6,14. In the LCL-BAC dataset, the sensitivity of MUMMIE does not exceed 80% at 
the most lenient settings; a naive scan for 6-mer seed matches to the top 100 expressed 
miRNAs does not exceed 84% (Supplementary Fig. 10). This motivated us to investigate the 
extent to which binding with an imperfect seed match might explain remaining CLIP 
groups. We focused on a recently described class of imperfect targets, namely “bulge” sites, 
which have been suggested to explain as many as 25% of all the HITS-CLIP clusters for 
miR-12414. We adapted our model to sites in which one of the mRNA residues pairs with 
the miRNA only during an initial annealing step but becomes unpaired in the final duplex, 
forming a bulge in the mRNA. In addition to the previously proposed pivot pairing between 
mRNA positions 5–6, we investigated potential bulges between positions 4–5 and positions 
3–4. Bulge site predictions showed distinctly lower SNR profiles, and when combining all 
three pivot locations, predictions covered only ~15–20% of orphan groups (~1–2% of total 
groups; Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Figs. 11, 12, and 13). Even MIRZA, which 
does not make any seed type assumptions, assigns miRNAs to only a small fraction of 
additional clusters.
Our findings illustrate the superiority of transcriptomic assays over de novo sequence 
analysis for identifying functional sites active in a specific condition, as well as of principled 
modeling techniques over ad hoc strategies. By jointly modeling multiple relevant variables 
— including evolutionary conservation, residue transition rates, spatial positioning, and 
sequence composition — MUMMIE provides for finer discrimination between true and 
decoy sites. There is room for further improvement, via incorporation of additional evidence 
including structural accessibility, and relative or absolute production or steady-state levels of 
miRNAs or mRNAs. The framework provides flexibility in the ability not only to 
incorporate additional covariates, but also to choose the desired compromise between 
sensitivity and specificity, and to define additional classes of seed matches (e.g., centered 
sites15 or compensatory 3′ binding16). However, in our comparative evaluation, genuinely 
imperfect seed sites appeared to account for a small fraction of total targets only. The 
remaining 20% of AGO clusters may reflect low-affinity transitory binding, experimental 
noise, or AGO targets that do not involve miRNAs17.
Due to the exploitation of complementary information sources, we have arrived at a 
performance level where the question of miRNA targeting is no longer a binary one, but one 
of quantitative impact of a miRNA on a transcript (cf. Supplementary Fig. 6; this idea has 
specifically been pursued in the concurrently developed MIRZA). To this aim, however, 
multiple genomic data sets have to be generated; recent sequence-only target predictors 
remain more generally applicable18, albeit at the cost of significant reductions in accuracy. 
Yet, distinct transition patterns are also observed for other post-transcriptional regulators 
Majoros et al. Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
such as Quaking and Pumilio4, suggesting the utility of such models for RNA-binding 
protein target identification in general.
Online Methods
PAR-CLIP Data Generation
Multiple Argonaute 2 PAR-CLIP libraries from two different human cell line sources (LCLs 
and HEK293) were used in this study. Established lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL-BAC, 
LCL-BAC-D1, LCL-BAC-D2, LCL-BAC-D3) from the same donor were infected with 
variations of EBV B95-8 Bacmid. LCL-BAC-D1, LCL-BAC-D2, and LCL-BAC-D3 (the 
“deletion lines”) were infected with EBV miRNA-deficient viruses lacking miR-BHRF1-1, 
miR-BHRF1-2, and miR-BHRF1-3 expression, respectively20. All LCLs were maintained in 
RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 15% FBS and 10 μg/mL gentamicin (GIBCO) and 
analyzed three to five months post-infection. PAR-CLIP data for LCL-BAC, LCL-BAC-D1 
and LCL-BAC-D3 was previously published by us12 (GEO GSE41437); PAR-CLIP data for 
LCL-BAC-D2 was newly generated following the same protocol, which involved treatment 
with double RNase T1 digestion.
LCL-BAC libraries were prepared using the original PAR-CLIP protocol4, which includes 
double RNase T1 digestion steps to fragment cross-linked RNA prior to sequencing. This 
has raised concerns that identified binding events may exhibit biases due to sequence 
preferences of the digestion enzymes13,14. We therefore additionally analyzed previously 
published PAR-CLIP data from HEK 293 cells, two biological replicates involving MNase 
digestion of isolated RNA in place of double T1 digestion (“MNase A”, GEO GSM714646; 
“MNase B”, GSM714647)11. See Supplementary Table 1 for library and annotation metrics 
for all PAR-CLIP libraries.
For miRNA target prediction we considered only genomic intervals annotated as 3′ 
untranslated regions (UTR) in Ensembl v. 5821; for genes with multiple annotated 
transcripts (isoforms), we kept the one with the longest 3′ UTR (measured in bases of 
mature transcript). For the LCL-BAC data set, the miRNA set used for prediction is based 
on small RNA deep-sequencing data of the same culture12. For the external MNase data 
sets, we used the miRNA set of the same cell line that was reported in a previous study4.
PAR-CLIP Data Processing and Significance Testing
PAR-CLIP data for all cell lines were processed by PARalyzer6 to produce sequences of 
continuous values. PARalyzer smoothes the sequence of discrete read count values via 
kernel density estimation, and the resulting continuous values represent relative frequencies 
of T-to-C transitions. This sequence is referred to as the “signal track” for use in MUMMIE. 
In practice, the PARalyzer signal track for a complete UTR will typically be sparse; i.e., 
zero everywhere except at and around an occupied binding site. These nonzero regions, 
which correspond to scaffolds of aligned PAR-CLIP reads, are termed “groups.” When 
binding sites are close together, their scaffolds may coalesce, resulting in one group for 
multiple occupied sites. PARalyzer therefore defines individual “interaction sites” by 
identifying maximal intervals in which the T-to-C transition signal is higher than the 
background; we term these intervals “clusters.” Clusters therefore occur within groups, and 
Majoros et al. Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
generally provide for a higher resolution of RBP target sites. However, their utility in 
pinpointing miRNA target sites in AGO libraries is complicated due to lack of T-to-C 
transition signal within the miRNA-mRNA duplex site: the signal “peak” generally does not 
overlap the actual miRNA seed match, and the PARalyzer software therefore provides an 
option to “pad” and increase the size of AGO clusters. Here, other than for the baseline seed 
match comparison, we do not explicitly use PARalyzer clusters; instead, we run MUMMIE 
on the complete UTR, after normalization of the signal for individual groups. Normalization 
of groups ensures that the maximum signal value for each group is 1.0, and helps to control 
for differing binding affinities, sequencing biases, and miRNA/mRNA abundance.
To validate library-specific predictions, we compared the PAR-CLIP signal at predicted 
“true” sites, for a miRNA expressed in LCL-BAC, against the signal in one of the LCL-
BAC-D1/2/3 libraries not expressing the miRNA of interest (Fig. 2a). The significance of 
the signal difference was assessed by a non-parametric test, in which we first ranked target 
sites of all top 100 expressed miRNAs by their difference in signal and quantified the 
enrichment of true targets at the top, i.e. among the most-changed sites. This implicitly 
accounts for the overall difference in signal observed across all targets, due to incomplete 
saturation of the deep sequencing libraries (Fig. 2b). Specifically, we started from the 
smoothed T-to-C transition frequencies as computed by PARalyzer, i.e. the signal track 
including normalization as described above. To represent a binding signal, we summed over 
frequencies in a local area (±3 nucleotides) around a consistent reference location, in this 
case the mRNA coordinate across from miRNA position 8, i.e. the beginning of the longest 
possible seed match. As test statistic, we used the fraction of the binding signal detected in 
the deletion line compared to the signal in the wildtype. Significance was assessed by the 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Quantification of mRNA Level Changes
Paired-end strand-specific RNA-seq was performed for all four established LCLs. Total 
RNA was collected with TRIzol (Life Technologies) and libraries were prepared using 
ScriptSeq v2 kit and Ribozero (Epicentre). Biological replicates were performed for LCL-
BAC-D1. RNA-seq data was aligned and quantified using RSEM with reference genome 
and transcript annotation23. Differential analysis was performed using EBseq within 
RSEM24. Real fold change (RealFC value from EBseq) for genes with median log2(TPM + 
1) > 5 across all samples were utilized for evaluating differential expression of MUMMIE or 
MIRZA predictions; the same sets of genes were used to assess loss of binding events in the 
deletion libraries. See Supplementary Table 3 for specific analysis parameters and quality 
assessments.
To assess the enrichment of predicted targets of a specific miRNA among the top 
differentially regulated gene sets, genes were ranked by mRNA expression fold change 
(based on the data for LCL-BAC vs the corresponding deletion line) and grouped into sets of 
increasing size. For each top differentially regulated set, an enrichment of predicted targets 
was computed as a ratio of a fraction of predicted targets in the top set and a fraction of total 
number of predictions in the full gene set. Target sets of miRNAs with a similar number of 
Majoros et al. Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
MUMMIE predictions (between roughly half to twice as many sites) were used to quantify 
background expression changes of presumably unaffected targets.
Luciferase assay
293T cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium (DMEM) 
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and antibiotics. miRNA expression 
plasmids contain ~200 nucleotides of the primary miRNA cloned from genomic DNA into 
pLCE at XhoI/XbaI. Expression of the miRNA was confirmed using indicator assays as 
previously described12. Luciferase reporter assays were carried out as previously 
described12. Briefly, 293T cells were co-transfected in 24-well plates with 1 μg miRNA 
expression vector (pLCE-miRNA), 12 ng pL-CMV-GL3-3′UTR, and 12 ng pL-CMV-
RLUC (renilla internal control) using Fugene 6 (Promega) according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. Lysates were harvested 48–72 hrs post-transfection and assayed for luciferase 
activity using the dual luciferase reporter assay kit (Promega).
Modeling Software
Binding site models were implemented within the open-source software MUMMIE 
(MUltivariate Markov Modeling Inference Engine), available online at http://
www.genome.duke.edu/labs/ohler/research/MUMMIE. This system permits user-specified 
model topologies to be designed for a wide array of potential bioinformatic applications. 
The software includes command-line routines for both parameter estimation (“training”) and 
decoding (“prediction”). The following sections describe the models and algorithms used to 
obtain predictions for this study.
Models
Prediction of target sites from binding and sequence data is achieved via hybrid continuous-
discrete multivariate hidden Markov models. A Markov model is a probabilistic generative 
model for sequential data with a fixed set of discrete states Q={q0, q1, …, qN−1}. We here 
consider discrete-time models, in which observations are available for T={0,1,…,L−1} 
positions in a biological sequence S=s0s1…sL−1, which the model is assumed to have 
emitted. Emitted sequence elements may take continuous values; for multivariate models, 
each sequence element is a vector of continuous values (each emitted by a separate 
“emission channel”). In hybrid continuous/discrete models, each emission channel is either 
discrete or continuous. Thus, for each vector in the emission sequence, each component of 
that vector will be a value that is either a symbol drawn from a discrete alphabet, or a 
numerical value. For example, an RNA emission channel would accept symbols from the set 
{A,C,G,U}, an “aligned read-count” channel would accept nonnegative integers denoting 
numbers of reads aligned at a given genomic position, and a “probability of being unpaired” 
track would accept real values between 0 and 1.
The model M emits a biological sequence S as follows. Beginning in a special silent state q0, 
at each time step t the model chooses a state to transition into, by drawing a new state 
xt+1∈Q from a transition probability distribution, P(x|xt), which is conditional on the current 
state, xt. Upon entering the new state, it draws a random vector y∈V from the emission 
distribution P(y|xt+1), where V is the set of all possible emission vectors for the model. After 
Majoros et al. Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
emitting the vector’s components into the respective emission channels, the model chooses 
the next transition according to P(x|xt). If state q0 is chosen, the machine terminates and S is 
taken to be the complete emission; otherwise, it continues its run by alternating between 
transitions and emissions, until state q0 is eventually chosen. Note that q0 never makes 
emissions.
Because the emission distribution is conditional only on the current state, each emission is 
conditionally independent of all other emissions, given the associated state. This is the case 
of 0th-order emissions. A model with higher-order emissions may condition each emission 
on events (transitions or emissions) progressively further into the past. For the present work 
we consider only higher-order discrete emissions, in which the emission of a symbol may be 
conditioned on some number of immediately preceding symbols emitted into the same 
channel; this permits us to model seed matches for many different miRNAs while using a 
relatively small number of states (see below).
For miRNA target prediction, we designed a 47-state Markov model. The model is a hybrid 
continuous/discrete multivariate hidden Markov model with three emission channels. The 
first channel is the PARalyzer signal representing the relative abundance of T-to-C 
transitions in aligned CLIP scaffolds. This channel is continuous and modeled via a four-
component Gaussian mixture. The second channel, branch length score (BLS), provides a 
continuous measure of conservation; it was computed using a script from the TargetScan 
package. The third channel comprises the genomic DNA sequence corresponding to the 
mRNA, and is modeled using a 7th-order Markov chain. Channels are pre-aligned so that for 
each position in a UTR we have one nucleotide and two continuous values.
The model topology is depicted schematically in Fig. 1d. State 1 models the background 
regions between PAR-CLIP groups. State 3 models the peak of the PAR-CLIP group, while 
states 2, 4, 5, and 6 model the flanking regions around the peak. State 5 is a metastate25 
which expands into the 41-state submodel shown in Fig. 1e; this metastate models the actual 
target site of the miRNA seed. Our default model detects seven types of miRNA binding: 
6mer3–8, 6mer2–7, 7mer-m8, 7mer-m1, 7mer-A1, 8mer-A1, and 8mer-m1.
The model in Fig. 1d preferentially visits state 5 (the miRNA binding site) a short distance 
3′ of a PAR-CLIP peak (which is generally matched by state 3); this preference reflects the 
strong enrichment of miRNA seed matches 3′ of peaks (Fig. 1b). In consequence, model 
predictions also show a strong preference for this location relative to the peak 
(Supplementary Fig. 1).
Fig. 1b suggests a small fraction of sites 5′ of the peak, and the model predicts a fraction of 
these 5′ sites. This illustrates the flexibility of this class of models: when the most promising 
site occurs 5′ of the peak, the decoding algorithm will permit state 3 to be visited earlier in 
the sequence so that state 5 can match the putative target site. Likewise, when no promising 
seed match is present, the decoding algorithm may choose to not predict any binding site for 
the PAR-CLIP group. This flexibility is a function of the model parameters, in particular the 
variance of the emission distribution for the PAR-CLIP signal: for low variances (~0.01) the 
model predicts many sites (typically one per PAR-CLIP group), while for high variances 
Majoros et al. Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(~1.0) it predicts fewer sites. The different points in Fig. 1f, g correspond to different 
settings of the PARalyzer signal variance, with a high variance parameter corresponding to 
high specificity and high SNR, and a low variance parameter corresponding to high 
sensitivity (the following variances were used for these plots: 1.5, 1.25, 0.75, 0.5, 0.375, 
0.25, 0.20, 0.15, 0.1, 0.075, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005).
To model bulge sites with bulges at specific positions complementary to the seed, we use the 
same metamodel structure shown in Fig. 1d, but simplify the submodel for state 5 to include 
only a single linear chain of seven states to match the six seed residues plus the bulge 
position embedded within the seed.
Inference Algorithms
Prediction of sites can be carried out in MUMMIE using either Viterbi decoding or posterior 
decoding, or a combination of the two.
Viterbi decoding identifies the single most probable path through the HMM states for 
emitting the multivariate sequence. Any occurrence of metastate 5 in that most probable 
path is interpreted as a predicted miRNA binding site; the exact sequence of states within the 
metastate dictates the type of binding (e.g., 6mer2–7, 7mer-m1, etc.), and the matching 
nucleotides in the emitted sequence identify the miRNA family (seed sequences may or may 
not be unique to a given miRNA within a family; when multiple miRNAs share a predicted 
seed, all are listed as the potential binding miRNA).
In contrast to Viterbi decoding, posterior decoding utilizes the well-known forward and 
backward algorithms25 to compute the posterior probability P(q,k) that state q was active at 
position k when the sequence was generated by the HMM. In addition to providing this 
standard functionality, MUMMIE also computes for each 8bp interval the posterior 
probability that a miRNA binds within that 8bp interval, via any of the modeled binding 
modes (i.e., by summing the posteriors for each binding mode for that miRNA within that 
8bp interval).
Finally, MUMMIE supports a combination of posterior and Viterbi decoding via the 
posterior Viterbi algorithm26, in which emission and transition probabilities in the Viterbi 
algorithm are replaced with posterior probabilities. This decoding algorithm was used for the 
results presented here.
Model Training
Considering all states modeling the actual miRNA binding site to be foreground states and 
all others to be background states, training of the background states was accomplished by 
applying expectation maximization (EM) to entire UTRs, with the following exceptions. For 
the peak state (state 3), the PARalyzer signal mean was set to 1.0 and its variance was 
arbitrarily set to 0.01; for the flanking states (states 2, 4, and 6) the signal mean was set to 
0.5 and the variance to 0.01; these mean values were chosen to have these states match the 
respective regions of an idealized PARalyzer signal profile at a binding site. The mean and 
variance of the conservation track were set to 0 and 0.01, respectively, for all background 
states.
Majoros et al. Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
For the foreground states, the nucleotide emission distribution was set so as to permit only 
the training miRNA seeds to be emitted; PARalyzer signal mean was set to 0.5 and variance 
to 0.01 as in the background flank states; conservation mean was set to 3.0. Nucleotide 
sequence emissions for flanking states were trained via EM on sequences within PARalyzer 
groups, and for the peak state on the collection of single nucleotides at each PARalyzer peak 
(Supplementary Table 4). Variance of the conservation track was trained on a held-out set of 
training data by observing the resulting sensitivity-vs.-SNR curves at different settings and 
selecting the value that produced the curve with the highest overall SNR. All covariances 
were set to 0. The Markov order of nucleotide emissions varied from zero to seven along the 
length of a seed, so as to enforce that only valid miRNA seeds may be emitted, as per the 
training set.
Bulge Site Analyses
We investigated different locations for the pivot nucleotide in bulge site pairing. A bulge 
seed match is a perfect seed match to miRNA position 2–7 with a bulge nucleotide insertion 
that can pair with the pivot nucleotide. Similar to the canonical perfect seed match 
prediction, we computed SNR of bulge site predictions. Here, we excluded the bulge seed 
matches that share a 6mer with any human or EBV miRNA.
Additionally, for bulge type 2 (position 4–5) evaluation and prediction, we excluded bulge 
seed matches to original miRNAs with the same nucleotide at position 5 and 6, as its pairing 
in the in the nucleation step could extend one more position and thus provide for the same 
bulge seed match as in type 1 (position 5–6). Similarly, seeds for bulge type 3 (position 3–4) 
did not include bulge seeds that extended to bulge type 2.
Prediction Accuracy Evaluation and Comparison with Other Predictors
We computed signal-to-noise (SNR) ratios by comparing numbers of non-shuffled and 
shuffled sites among a set of predictions. Shuffled miRNAs were created via a random 
process that preserves the dinucleotide frequencies observed in real miRNAs, as described 
previously27. These were then screened to ensure that their expected seed-match frequencies 
in PAR-CLIP groups did not differ by more than 15% from the same statistic for the real 
(unshuffled) miRNAs. The signal-to-noise ratio was averaged over 1,000 runs in which we 
sampled one shuffled miRNA for each original (non-shuffled) miRNA; state 5 of the model 
was then trained on the resulting set of shuffled and non-shuffled seeds, so that a single 
decoding run of the model could predict any of the seeds in the training set.
We used TargetScan release 6.110 to compute TargetScan predictions, “context+” scores, 
and branch length scores. A 23-way alignment of 3′ UTRs was used, and miRNAs were 
evaluated individually. We computed signal-to-noise ratio at varying context+ score 
thresholds for the TargetScan sensitivity-SNR plots.
MIRZA11 was executed in its default “noupdate” mode, and optionally provided with cell-
type specific expression levels of miRNAs. Mirroring the example of its developers, inputs 
to MIRZA were 51nt sequences centered on the peak T-to-C conversion site as identified by 
PARalyzer, and 21nt mature miRNA sequences. MIRZA’s “target frequency” score was 
used to rank predictions when computing sensitivity, specificity, and SNR.
Majoros et al. Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (MCB-0822033) and the National 
Institutes of Health (R01-GM104962) to U.O. and by awards from the National Institutes of Health (R01-
AI067968; R01-DA030086) to B.R.C. Contributions by R.L.S. were additionally supported by a Duke Center for 
AIDS Research (CFAR) small grant award (P30-AI064518). We thank S. Grosswendt and M. Piechotta for critical 
reading of a manuscript draft.
References
1. Jiang Q, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:D98–104. [PubMed: 18927107] 
2. Hendrickson DG, et al. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3:e2126. [PubMed: 18461144] 
3. Chi SW, Zang JB, Mele A, Darnell RB. Nature. 2009; 460:479–86. [PubMed: 19536157] 
4. Hafner M, et al. Cell. 2010; 141:129–41. [PubMed: 20371350] 
5. Sugimoto Y, et al. Genome Biol. 2012; 13:R67. [PubMed: 22863408] 
6. Corcoran DL, et al. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:8.
7. Bartel DP. Cell. 2009; 136:215–233. [PubMed: 19167326] 
8. Baltz AG, et al. Mol Cell. 2012; 46:674–90. [PubMed: 22681889] 
9. Juang BH, Rabiner LR. Technometrics. 1991; 33:251–272.
10. Friedman RC, Farh KK-H, Burge CB, Bartel DP. Genome Res. 2009; 19:92–105. [PubMed: 
18955434] 
11. Korshid M, Hausser J, Zavolan M, van Nimwegen E. Nat Methods. 2013; 10:253–255. [PubMed: 
23334102] 
12. Skalsky RL, et al. PLOS Pathog. 2012; 8:e1002484. [PubMed: 22291592] 
13. Kishore S, et al. Nat Methods. 2011; 8:559–64. [PubMed: 21572407] 
14. Chi SW, Hannon GJ, Darnell RB. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012; 19:321–7. [PubMed: 22343717] 
15. Shin C, et al. Mol Cell. 2010; 38:789–802. [PubMed: 20620952] 
16. Brennecke J, Stark A, Russell RB, Cohen SM. PLoS Biol. 2005; 3:e85. [PubMed: 15723116] 
17. Leung AK, et al. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011; 18:237–44. [PubMed: 21258322] 
18. Betel D, et al. Genome Biol. 2010; 11:R90. [PubMed: 20799968] 
19. Siepel A, et al. Genome Res. 2005; 15:1034–50. [PubMed: 16024819] 
20. Feederle R, et al. J Virology. 2011; 85:9801–10. [PubMed: 21752900] 
21. Flicek P, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 38(Suppl 1):D557–D562. [PubMed: 19906699] 
22. Subramanian A, et al. PNAS. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 16199517] 
23. Li B, Dewey C. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:323. [PubMed: 21816040] 
24. Leng N, et al. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29 Advance Access ePub. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt087
25. Majoros, WH. Methods for Computational Gene Prediction. Cambridge University Press; 
Cambridge, UK: 2007. 
26. Fariselli P, Martelli PL, Cadadio R. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005; 6(Suppl 4):S12. [PubMed: 
16351738] 
27. Lekprasert P, Mayhew M, Ohler U. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e20622. [PubMed: 21674004] 
Majoros et al. Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1. 
Identifying miRNA target sites by a joint sequence and interaction model. (a) Example of an 
AGO-interaction site identified by PARalyzer. Shown are the kernel density estimate of 
signal versus background T-to-C transitions, and the read depth of a 3′ UTR region of 
SPATS2 (ENST00000395063) profiled in the LCL-BAC library. Two 7mer seed matches 
are in close proximity, each a different distance 3′ of a signal peak; naive target prediction 
based on read depth alone would have incorrectly treated these two binding events as one. 
(b) Across all miRNA target candidates, seed matches show the strongest enrichment 
immediately 3′ of the PAR-CLIP T-to-C transition peak. (c) Conservation of sites as 
measured by PhastCons scores19 illustrate preferential conservation in the first 8nt 3′ of 
peaks. (d) State-transition diagram of the hidden Markov model. All states represent a joint 
likelihood of sequence and PAR-CLIP signal in a particular region. (e) State 5 is a metastate 
that specifically expands into a 41-state submodel for several types of miRNA seed matches. 
(f) Sensitivity-vs.-SNR tradeoff for MUMMIE, Targetscan, MIRZA, and two baselines, 
using the top 100 expressed miRNAs in LCL-BAC cell line. Explicit expression information 
was not utilized by any predictor (cf. Supplementary Fig. 2 for additional results). (g) 
Similar to (f) for sensitivity-vs.-specificity.
Majoros et al. Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. 
Validation of predicted sites and their impact on expression levels. We computed the 
aggregate PAR-CLIP signals at predicted target sites for specific miRNAs expressed in the 
LCL-BAC cell line, and compared it to the aggregate signal at the same sites in cell lines 
missing one of the corresponding miRNAs. (a) Loss of PAR-CLIP signal for LCL-BAC 
predicted target sites of BHRF1-1, BHRF1-2, and BHRF1-3 in the corresponding deletion 
line (LCL-BAC-D1, -D2, and -D3, respectively) (23 predicted target sites for BHRF1-1, 52 
for BHRF1-2, and 10 for BHRF1-3). (b) Control: Signal difference for predicted target sites 
in LCL-BAC vs. deletion lines, to all but the miRNA of interest (2,159 predicted targets for 
the D1 control, 2,082 for the D2 control, and 2,172 for the D3 control). Binding loss of 
BHRF1-1 (P = 0.0006) and BHRF1-2 (P = 0.0394) were statistically significant compared to 
the control; loss of BHRF1-3 was consistent but not significant due to the small number of 
sites (P=0.1879; Wilcoxon rank-sum test). (c) Impact of site loss on steady-state mRNA 
expression levels, based on RNA-seq data from the LCL-BAC cell lines. The enrichment of 
BHRF target sites in the top gene sets ranked by differential expression is contrasted with 
the enrichment of other expressed miRNAs with similar numbers of predicted targets. 
Predictions were obtained using the top 100 expressed miRNAs, with the MUMMIE PAR-
CLIP signal variance parameter set to 0.01. All predicted targets were aligned across the 
beginning of miRNA seed matches in the mRNAs. Vertical error bars indicate ± one 
standard deviation.
Majoros et al. Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript