Improved green and red GRAB sensors for monitoring 
dopaminergic activity in vivo
Yizhou Zhuo1,2,14, Bin Luo1,2,3,14, Xinyang Yi1,2, Hui Dong1,2,3, Xiaolei Miao1,2,4, Jinxia 
Wan1,2,3, John T. Williams5, Malcolm G. Campbell6, Ruyi Cai1,2, Tongrui Qian1,2, Fengling 
Li7, Sophia J. Weber8, Lei Wang1,2,9, Bozhi Li1,2,10, Yu Wei1,2, Guochuan Li1,2, Huan 
Wang1,2, Yu Zheng1,2, Yulin Zhao1,2, Marina E. Wolf8, Yingjie Zhu7, Mitsuko Watabe-
Uchida6, Yulong Li1,2,3,11,12,13
1State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Peking University School of Life Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
2PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China.
3Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Academy for 
Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Beijing, China.
4Department of Anesthesiology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
5Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
6Center for Brain Science, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Yulong Li. yulongli@pku.edu.cn.
Author contributions
Y .L. supervised the study. Y . Zhuo and Y .L. designed the study. Y . Zhuo, X.Y ., Y .W., G.L., H.W. and Y . Zheng performed the 
experiments related to the development, optimization and characterizing of the sensors in cultured HEK293T cells and in neurons. 
Y . Zhuo., R.C. and T.Q. performed the surgery and two-photon imaging experiments related to the validation of the sensors in acute 
brain slices. J.T.W. performed the characterization in acute brain slices containing the striatum or SNc. H.D., J.W., B. Li and X.M. 
performed the in vivo fiber photometry recoding during optogenetic stimulation. M.G.C. performed the fiber photometry recording in 
the mouse NAc for the independent validation of in vivo sensor comparison under the supervision of M.W.-U. Y . Zhuo and B. Luo 
performed the in vivo fiber photometry recording in the NAc during mating behavior. B. Luo performed the in vivo fiber photometry 
recording during foot shock and the Pavlovian conditioning task with help from H.D. Y . Zhuo performed the in vivo two-photon 
imaging of the motor cortex. L.W. performed immunohistochemistry experiments. Y . Zhuo, B. Luo and F.L. under the supervision of 
Y . Zhu and S.J.W. under the supervision of M.E.W. performed the behavioral assays. All authors contributed to the interpretation and 
analysis of the data. Y . Zhuo and Y .L. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-02100-w.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41592-023-02100-w.
Peer review information Nature Methods thanks David Sulzer and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer 
review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: Nina V ogt, in collaboration with the Nature Methods team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Code availability
The custom MATLAB codes, Arduino program and ImageJ programs are available under an MIT license from https://github.com/
yulonglilab/FiberPhotometry and https://github.com/yulonglilab/BrainSlices.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2024 April ; 21(4): 680–691. doi:10.1038/s41592-023-02100-w.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
7Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Drug Addiction, Shenzhen Neher Neural Plasticity Laboratory, the 
Brain Cognition and Brain Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
8Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.
9Peking University–Tsinghua University–National Institute of Biological Sciences Joint Graduate 
Program, Peking University, Beijing, China.
10Department of Neurology, The First Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
11Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China.
12Institute of Molecular Physiology, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
13National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University, Beijing, China.
14These authors contributed equally: Yizhou Zhuo, Bin Luo.
Abstract
Dopamine (DA) plays multiple roles in a wide range of physiological and pathological processes 
via a large network of dopaminergic projections. To dissect the spatiotemporal dynamics of DA 
release in both dense and sparsely innervated brain regions, we developed a series of green and red 
fluorescent G-protein-coupled receptor activation-based DA (GRABDA) sensors using a variety 
of DA receptor subtypes. These sensors have high sensitivity, selectivity and signal-to-noise ratio 
with subsecond response kinetics and the ability to detect a wide range of DA concentrations. We 
then used these sensors in mice to measure both optogenetically evoked and behaviorally relevant 
DA release while measuring neurochemical signaling in the nucleus accumbens, amygdala and 
cortex. Using these sensors, we also detected spatially resolved heterogeneous cortical DA release 
in mice performing various behaviors. These next-generation GRABDA sensors provide a robust 
set of tools for imaging dopaminergic activity under a variety of physiological and pathological 
conditions.
DA is a crucial monoamine neuromodulator released by dopaminergic neurons that project 
throughout the central nervous system. Remarkably, there is high spatial and functional 
heterogeneity in dopaminergic innervation across different brain regions1–9. By combining 
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) with circularly permutated fluorescent protein, we 
and others developed a series of genetically encoded green and red fluorescent DA sensors 
called GRABDA and dLight10–13. These early generation sensors expand our knowledge of 
DA transmission in reward, learning and movement14–17, in densely innervated regions 
such as striatum and nucleus accumbens (NAc). However, due to limited sensitivity 
and resolution in DA detection, the dynamics of dopaminergic transmission in the 
sparsely innervated regions, such as the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and amygdala, 
remain largely unknown. In addition, even in dense areas, better sensors with improved 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) are required for DA imaging with higher spatiotemporal 
precision. The ability to directly visualize and compare DA dynamics in both densely 
Zhuo et al. Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and sparsely innervated areas will therefore provide insights into spatiotemporal regulation 
of dopaminergic activity. Moreover, to explore how dopaminergic signaling is affected by 
neuronal activity and/or other neuromodulators requires multiplexed DA imaging combined 
with optogenetics and the simultaneous imaging of other neurochemical processes. Previous 
red-shifted DA sensors show relatively poor performance compared with green ones, 
limiting their use. To overcome these issues, we performed large-scale rational mutagenesis 
and cell-based screening to develop next-generation green and red fluorescent GRABDA 
sensors with high sensitivity, high SNR and wider concentration range for DA detection 
across the brain.
Results
Engineering and characterization of DA sensors in cells
To develop next-generation DA sensors, we utilized various DA receptor subtypes from 
several species as the sensor scaffold and replaced each receptor’s third intracellular 
loop (ICL3) with the ICL3 from existing sensors10,12,13,18. We identified several chimera 
prototypes with promising performances in the initial screening, by transplanting the ICL3 
of rGRABDA to Solenopsis invicta dopamine D2-like receptor (hereafter termed red fire 
ant D2R) and the ICL3 of GRABNE to bovine D1R. We also obtained good candidates 
when re-engineering the ICL3 of dLight1.3b (ref. 10) and RdLight1 (ref. 12) to human 
D1R (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). We then systematically optimized the 
length and composition of the linker sequences, key residues in the circularly permutated 
fluorescent protein affecting protein folding and/or fluorescence intensity19–24, and sites in 
the GPCR affecting ligand binding and/or structural coupling25–28, and screened a total 
of 5,000 variants (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). Using maximum brightness and the 
DA-induced change in fluorescence as selection criteria, our screening yielded a series of 
top-performing DA sensors with various DA receptor backbones, including green gDA3m 
(human D1R-based) and gDA3h (bovine D1R-based) sensors, red-shifted rDA2m and rDA2h 
(red fire ant D2R-based) sensors, as well as rDA3m and rDA3h (human D1R-based) sensors 
(Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary Fig. 3), with ‘m’ and ‘h’ referring to medium and high 
DA affinity, respectively. We also generated DA-insensitive versions through GPCR ligand-
binding pocket mutations as negative controls, namely gDA3mut, rDA2mut and rDA3mut 
(Extended Data Fig. 1).
All six of our generated GRABDA sensors effectively localized to the cell membrane when 
expressed in HEK293T cells. They exhibited large fluorescence increases to bath-applied 
100 μM DA (Fig. 1d), while negative mutant sensors did not respond to DA (Extended Data 
Fig. 1). The sensors’ affinities were within physiological DA levels, ranging from nanomolar 
to submicromolar concentrations (Fig. 1e and Supplementary Table 1). Comparing these 
sensors with previously reported GRABDA and dLight sensors10–13 in cultured cells, both 
gDA3m and gDA3h outperformed with a >2-fold increase in fluorescence (peak ΔF/F0
of ~1,000%) and a higher SNR compared with gDA2m and dLight1.3b (Fig. 1f–h and 
Supplementary Table 1). For red-shifted sensors, rDA2m and rDA2h had the largest dynamic 
range (peak ΔF/F0 of ~560% and ~240%, respectively) among D2R-based red-shifted 
sensors (Fig. 1f–h and Supplementary Table 1). Finally, rDA3m and rDA3h exhibited 
Zhuo et al. Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
higher brightness, fluorescence responses (peak ΔF/F0 of ~1,000%) and SNR compared 
with RdLight1 (Fig. 1f–h and Supplementary Table 1). Next, we examined the properties 
of our sensors when expressed in cultured neurons. Consistent with our results obtained 
using HEK293T cells, these sensors localized well to the neuronal membrane and responded 
strongly to DA application (Fig. 2a–d), with similar DA affinity as in HEK293T cells. In 
addition, we obtained the same rank order in terms of the peak response to DA measured in 
cultured neurons and HEK293T cells. Moreover, the next-generation GRABDA sensors had 
higher SNR values compared with previous sensors when expressed in neurons (Fig. 2c,d 
and Supplementary Table 1).
Our sensors also maintained the pharmacological specificity of their respective parent 
receptors. For example, application of the D1R-specific and D2R-specific antagonists 
SCH-23390 (SCH) and eticlopride, respectively, eliminated the corresponding sensors’ 
response to DA (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 2); both D1R-specific and D2R-specific 
antagonists inhibited rDA2m and rDA2h (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 2b–d), possibly 
due to low sequence homology with human D2R. Moreover, these sensors exhibited minimal 
response to a variety of other neurochemicals and transmitters. Importantly, despite the 
structural similarity between DA and norepinephrine (NE), our optimized sensors were 
approximately 7–80-fold more sensitive to DA than NE depending on the cell type (Fig. 2f 
and Extended Data Fig. 2).
Next, we measured the kinetics of our DA sensors using rapid line-scanning confocal 
microscopy. We locally applied DA or sensor antagonist to measure the time constant of 
both the signal rise (τon) and the signal decay (τoff), respectively. Our analysis revealed τon
values of approximately 80 ms for all DA sensors, and τoff values ranging from 0.6 s to 3 
s based on differences in each sensor’s affinity (Extended Data Fig. 3 and Supplementary 
Table 1).
We investigated whether our red-shifted DA sensors are photo-activated by blue light, 
as shown previously for the cpmApple-based red calcium indicator jRGECO1a (refs. 
22,29). Bursts of 488-nm blue light had no impact on the fluorescence of the rDA1m 
and rDA2 sensors (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 1), promising compatibility with 
blue-light-activated optogenetic actuators. However, similar to jRGECO1a, RdLight1 and 
rDA3 sensors displayed blue-light-induced photoactivation, causing a transient increase in 
fluorescence (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 1). Furthermore, the DA-induced increase in 
fluorescence remained stable for up to 2 h in the continuous presence of 100 μM DA, with 
minimal arrestin-mediated internalization or desensitization (Fig. 2h and Supplementary Fig. 
3), making these sensors suitable for long-term monitoring of dopaminergic activity.
We then used the luciferase complementation assay30 and the Tango assay31 to examine the 
sensors’ coupling to G-protein- and β-arrestin-mediated signaling, respectively. We found 
that wild-type receptors showed robust coupling in both assays, whereas all DA sensors 
failed to engage these GPCR-mediated downstream pathways (Fig. 2i,j), suggesting their 
expression likely has no impact on cellular physiology.
Zhuo et al. Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Imaging DA dynamics in acute brain slices
Using two-photon imaging, we next assessed the sensitivity of the gDA3m and rDA3m 
sensors in reporting endogenous DA release in acute brain slices. We injected adeno-
associated virus (AA V) expressing either gDA3m or rDA3m into the NAc and then prepared 
acute brain slices 2 weeks later (Fig. 3a,b). Electrical stimuli applied at NAc at 20 Hz 
induced robust transient increases in fluorescence, and the amplitude of the peak response 
increases with increasing numbers ofstimuli. Notably, application of the D1R-selective 
antagonist SCH eliminated the stimulus-evoked response, confirming the specificity of 
sensor signals. Consistent with our results in cultured cells, both gDA3m and rDA3m 
exhibited significantly improved sensitivities and responses compared with the previous-
generation sensors (P = 0.0076 between gDA3m and gDA2m, P = 0.0008 between rDA3m 
and rDA1m, two-tailed t-test; Fig. 3c–e).
Because the fluorescence of the D1R-based gDA3m sensor is not affected by D2R-specific 
compounds (Fig. 3f), we examined the effect of D2 autoreceptor activity on DA release in 
slices expressing the D1R-based gDA3m sensor. Activation of endogenous D2Rs by the D2-
specific agonist quinpirole decreased the stimulus-evoked change in gDA3m fluorescence 
(Fig. 3g,h), reflecting presynaptic inhibition via D2 autoreceptors; this decrease was 
reversed by the addition of D2R antagonist sulpiride, and adding the D1R-specific antagonist 
SCH abolished the stimulation-evoked response (Fig. 3g,h).
To measure DA release in both midbrain DA neuron cell bodies and terminals, we injected 
AA V expressing gDA3m into the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) driving expression 
in both regions, and prepared acute brain slices (Fig. 3i). Low-frequency stimulation (0.33 
Hz) elicited time-locked transient increases in fluorescence in both the striatum and SNc. 
A 40-Hz train of five pulses induced a large transient increase in fluorescence, with a 
slower signal decay in the SNc compared with the striatum (Fig. 3k). We then conducted 
line-scan microscopy (2 ms per line) to analyze the kinetics. Our results revealed that the 
fluorescence increase upon high-frequency stimulation had a half-rise time (rise t1/2) of 20 
± 10 ms (mean ± s.d.) and 22 ± 9 ms in the striatum and SNc, respectively; however, the 
fluorescence signal decayed more slowly to baseline in the SNc (decay t1/2) than the striatum, 
with decay t1/2 values of 209 ± 49 ms and 125 ± 32 ms, respectively (Fig. 3l). This temporal 
difference in DA signals may be attributed in part to differences in dopamine transporter 
(DAT) expression between the dorsal striatum and midbrain32.
Validation of next-generation DA sensors in vivo
Next, we examined whether the increased sensitivity of our DA sensors might be suitable 
for recording in vivo DA release in the sparsely innervated mPFC. We therefore virally 
expressed the optogenetic tool ChrimsonR33 in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and either 
gDA3h or dLight1.3b in the mPFC; we then optically stimulated the VTA and measured 
the signal in the mPFC through fiber photometry (Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). We found 
that activating VTA neurons elicited robust, transient increases in fluorescence in the 
gDA3h-expressing mPFC, and this increase was blocked by SCH (Extended Data Fig. 
4c–f). Besides, the gDA3h sensor had pulse-dependent responses to optogenetic stimulation, 
and a single light pulse was adequate to elicit a response; in contrast, activating VTA 
Zhuo et al. Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
neurons had virtually no effect on dLight1.3b (Extended Data Fig. 4c–i), indicating that 
this previous-generation DA sensor lacks the sensitivity to detect in vivo DA release in the 
mPFC.
To assess the in vivo performance of our red-shifted GRABDA sensors, we expressed 
either rDA3m or rDA3mut in the central amygdala, and the light-activated channel 
Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) (ref. 34) in the VTA (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). We found 
that activating VTA neurons induced robust, transient and pulse number-dependent increases 
in rDA3m fluorescence. These responses were eliminated by SCH administration and were 
absent in mice expressing the DA-insensitive rDA3mut sensor (Extended Data Fig. 5c–e). 
Additionally, rDA2m expressing in both the mPFC and the NAc of anesthetized animals also 
reported optogenetic activation-induced DA release, with larger signals in the NAc than the 
mPFC (Fig. 3m,n and Extended Data Fig. 5f,g); in contrast, no signal was detected with the 
DA-insensitive rDA2mut sensor (Fig. 3o–q and Extended Data Fig. 5h).
To further compare the performance of the next-generation DA sensors with the reported 
GRAB variants, we measured the DA dynamics in the NAc of water-restricted mice 
when receiving water rewards (Extended Data Fig. 6a–c). We found that unexpected water 
delivery induced significantly larger fluorescence increases in both gDA3m and rDA3m 
compared with gDA2m and rDA1m, respectively (P = 0.0095 between gDA3m and gDA2m, 
P = 0.0285 between rDA3m and rDA1m, two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-test; Extended Data 
Fig. 6d–i). With enhanced SNR, gDA3m and rDA3m effectively distinguish variations in 
reward size (Extended Data Fig. 6j). We also compared rDA3m and RdLight1 expressing 
in opposite sides of the NAc core with bilateral fiber photometry recordings (Extended 
Data Fig. 6k,l). The rDA3m sensor consistently showed substantially higher fluorescence 
changes than RdLight1 across all water-rewarded sessions (Extended Data Fig. 6m,n). Taken 
together, our DA probes exhibited enhanced sensitivity and precision of DA detection in 
vivo.
To examine the DA/NE selectivity of our sensors in vivo, we expressed them in the 
mPFC, a region receiving both dopaminergic and noradrenergic innervations, and used fiber 
photometry to monitor sensor fluorescence during NE elevation (Extended Data Fig. 7). 
In contrast to the NE2m sensor18, which showed significant fluorescence increases with 
the NET blocker desipramine-induced NE elevation35 (P = 0.0012, paired two-tailed t-test; 
Extended Data Fig. 7a), neither rDA3m nor gDA3h showed detectable changes during 
despramine treatment, although they robustly reported optogenetically evoked DA transients 
in the mPFC (Extended Data Fig. 7b–e). These results suggest that rDA3m and gDA3h 
exhibit good selectivity for DA at physiologically relevant concentrations, even in the 
mPFC where DA and NE coexist. Furthermore, no behavioral differences were found in 
multiple DA-related behavioral tests between rodents expressing control fluorescent protein 
or DA sensors in the NAc (Extended Data Fig. 8), suggesting no apparent impact of sensor 
expression on DA-related animal behaviors.
In vivo dual-color imaging of DA and other neurochemicals
Exploiting the spectral compatibility of our red-shifted DA sensors with green fluorescent 
sensors, we simultaneously monitored multiple signaling events in the same location. The 
Zhuo et al. Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
NAc plays a key role in reward processing. Therefore, we measured extracellular DA and 
intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP), the downstream messenger activated by DA receptors and 
a point of convergence for GPCR signaling36,37. We expressed both rDA3m and the green 
fluorescent cAMP indicator G-Flamp1 (ref. 38) in the NAc of male mice and measured both 
signals during mating (Fig. 4a,b). We found that the fluorescence of rDA3m and G-Flamp1 
measured in the NAc increased while the male was sniffing and mounting the female, and 
during intromission and ejaculation (Fig. 4c). Notably, rDA3m signals preceded G-Flamp1 
signals by around 200 ms during all mating stages (Fig. 4d,f). Moreover, cross-correlation 
analysis revealed a close correlation between DA signals and intracellular cAMP levels (Fig. 
4e,f).
As both DA and endocannabinoid (eCB) systems in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) were 
reported to participate in anxiety and fear formation39, we next expressed rDA2m and 
the green eCB indicator eCB2.0 (ref. 40) in the BLA of one hemisphere and measured 
both signals while applying mild foot shocks. As a control, we expressed and measured 
rDA1m and eCB2.0 in the other hemisphere (Fig. 4g,h). We found that rDA2m and eCB2.0 
had reproducible, time-locked transient increases in fluorescence upon foot shock; notably, 
rDA2m generated approximately twice the signal of rDA1m, whereas eCB2.0 signals were 
similar between hemispheres (Fig. 4i–l). We also examined the signal kinetics, and found 
similar τoff rates for DA and eCB (around 4–5 s) but significantly faster τon rate for DA (~0.8 
s) compared with eCB (~2.2 s), with no significant difference between rDA2m and rDA1m 
(P = 0.0087 between rDA2m and eCB2.0, P = 0.5742 between rDA3m and rDA1m, one-way 
analysis of variance (ANOV A) post hoc Dunnett’s test; Fig. 4m).
DA and acetylcholine release during a Pavlovian conditioning task
Dopaminergic signaling is vital for reinforcing learning through the mesocorticolimbic 
system41. External rewards also elicit characteristic changes in acetylcholine (ACh) levels, 
facilitating learning and motivating action42. However, the relationship between DA and 
ACh release, as well as their dynamics during reinforcement learning, remained unclear. 
We therefore coexpressed rDA3m and the green fluorescent ACh sensor ACh3.0 (ref. 43) 
in the NAc and mPFC, and measured DA and ACh release during auditory Pavlovian 
conditioning tasks (Fig. 5a,b). Initially, rDA3m primarily responded to the rewards, while 
ACh3.0 responded to both rewards and punishments, with minimal response to auditory 
cues (Fig. 5c). After 5 d of training, the rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals in the NAc increased 
in response to the water-predicting tone, but decreased for the punishment-related tone, 
whereas their responses to actual reward or punishment remained in the current paradigm 
(Fig. 5c,e,f). The development of excitatory responses to the reward cue and inhibitory 
responses to the punishment cue is consistent with the so-called reward-prediction-error 
theory41. rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals in the mPFC increased in response to both cue types 
and the outcomes of both valences in naive mice, with no signal shift after training (Fig. 
5d–f). Furthermore, DA and ACh signals were positively correlated during reward and 
punishment trials in both brain regions (Fig. 5c,d), indicating similar upstream regulation 
or local neuromodulatory effect17 in these two regions. However, signals were uncorrelated 
between two brain areas (Fig. 5g), suggesting a heterogeneity of neurotransmission in the 
mesocorticolimbic system. As a control, we found that systemic administration of SCH 
Zhuo et al. Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
effectively reduced the rDA3m signal without affecting the ACh3.0 signal (Extended Data 
Fig. 9).
Spatially resolved imaging of cortical DA release
The cortex receives distinct dopaminergic signals from the SNc and VTA3,44. To test 
whether our high-affinity gDA3h sensor enables monitoring of behavior-related changes 
in cortical DA levels with high spatiotemporal precision, we expressed gDA3h in the 
M1/M2 motor cortex (Fig. 6a) and performed head-fixed in vivo two-photon imaging (Fig. 
6b). During imaging, the mouse was placed on a treadmill and gDA3h fluorescence was 
measured in response to a 70-s bout of forced running (Fig. 6c), an electrical tail shock 
(Fig. 6d) or an auditory stimulus (Fig. 6e). We observed a robust, rapid, reproducible 
increase in gDA3h fluorescence aligned to the onset of forced running and tail shock, 
but not in response to the auditory stimulus (Fig. 6c–g). Similar results were obtained 
with gDA3m, while dLight1.3b lacked the sensitivity to capture these mild changes in DA 
(Extended Data Fig. 10). A control group expressing membrane-targeted EGFP (mEGFP) 
showed no fluorescence response (Fig. 6c,g and Extended Data Fig. 10). We then examined 
the spatial patterns of DA release during forced running and tail shock on a trial-by-trial 
basis; we observed distinct patterns during running and shock (Fig. 6c–e). Consistent with 
this observation, further hierarchical cluster analysis identified four distinct categories of 
cell-sized regions of interest (ROIs) (Fig. 6h–j), which was consistently observed in all 
tested animals (Fig. 6k–m). A small subset of regions (representing 0.7% of the entire area) 
exhibited DA increases during both running and shock, while 3.61% and 3.68% of the entire 
area were primarily associated with running or shock, respectively (Fig. 6n,o). Collectively, 
our gDA3h sensor allows the mapping of spatially and functionally diverse patterns of DA 
release in the motor cortex with subsecond resolution.
Discussion
Here we used rational design to develop a third-generation series of highly sensitive and 
selective DA sensors for in vivo multiplex imaging. Considering the current imbalance in 
availability of red versus green sensors, in combination with other recently developed optical 
sensors (for example, cAMP, eCB and ACh sensors), the improved red DA sensors expand 
the variety of signaling events that can be studied simultaneously for end users.
With combined use of DA and cAMP sensors, our data suggest a positive correlation 
between signals in the NAc of male mice during mating behaviors. However, it is 
important to note that our observation was based on photometry-recorded net signals without 
differentiating cell type specificity. To fully understand the cAMP signaling in distinct 
medium spiny neuron populations in the NAc45, further studies using fiber photometry 
recording or single-cell-resolution imaging techniques with G-Flamp1-labeled D1 or D2 
medium spiny neurons is warranted.
Although several fluorescent DA sensors have been developed using the GPCR-based 
strategy, they often lack sufficient sensitivity to monitor mild DA release. Our highly 
sensitive DA sensors overcome this limitation, enabling in vivo DA imaging in several 
brain regions such as the amygdala and cortex. Importantly, our simultaneous recordings 
Zhuo et al. Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of localized DA release in the NAc and mPFC revealed asynchronous DA release from 
distinct axonal termini. Specifically, in Pavlovian conditioning, NAc DA signals were 
consistent with the theory of prediction-error, while mPFC DA signals mirrored reported 
cortical dopaminergic activity in stimulus discrimination46, together suggesting functional 
heterogeneity within DA neurons. In addition, even within a given region such as the motor 
cortex, our two-photon imaging of gDA3h revealed behaviorally related, spatially resolved 
heterogeneity in cortical dopaminergic signaling.
As no one sensor fits all conditions, end users should first determine which sensor is 
optimally matched with their imaging conditions and experiments to maximize signals. 
Firstly, for imaging DA in brain regions with moderate to high DA levels, medium-affinity 
DA sensors such as gDA3m and rDA3m would be the first choices. These sensors offer the 
highest fluorescence changes, ensuring excellent SNR and a broad concentration range for 
DA detection. Meanwhile, higher affinity sensors such as gDA3h and rDA3h are ideal for 
sparsely innervated brain regions, as they are sensitive to subtle DA level changes. Secondly, 
one should also consider the tradeoffs concerning sensor kinetics. The medium-affinity 
sensors with faster off kinetics provide good balance between SNR and kinetics, and can 
resolve multiple signals within seconds or subseconds, thus are well-suited for monitoring 
DA dynamics during rapidly changing events. Another important factor to consider is the 
color of sensor spectra when multiplexing DA imaging with other neurochemical signals or 
optogenetics. Both green and red sensors are compatible with two-color imaging given their 
orthogonal spectra profiles. The green set is compatible with red-shifted optogenetics, and 
the D2-based red ones are insensitive to blue excitation light and therefore compatible with 
blue-light-excited opsins. Note that despite a blue-light activation of rDA3 series reported 
in vitro, they experienced minimal interference from blue excitation light in vivo. End users 
could further minimize potential crosstalk by using separate excitation steps, and validate 
the signal specificity by adding proper controls (for example, DA-insensitive sensors). To be 
noted, a potential caveat of DA imaging in the cortex is the possibility of cross-detection of 
NE, even with the improved sensors that have high DA/NE selectivity in vivo. This issue 
may vary in different behavioral contexts, and interference from NE cannot be entirely ruled 
out in cases of exceptionally high NE levels. Given the coexistence of DA and NE in many 
regions, it is crucial to develop next-generation GRABDA sensors with nonoverlapping DA 
and NE specificity.
In combination with multicolor fluorescence imaging of other signaling events, our series 
of DA sensors enable functionally mapping neurochemical activity and will contribute to a 
deeper understanding of the complexity of the dopaminergic system.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, 
extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; 
details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-02100-w.
Zhuo et al. Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Methods
Animals
All procedures for animal surgery and experimentation were performed in accordance with 
and approved by the laboratory animal care and use committees of Peking University, the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Oregon Health & Science University, 
the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and 
Harvard Animal Care and Use Committee. Both male and female postnatal day 0 (P0) 
Sprague-Dawley rats were used to prepare cultured cortical neurons; P48–P90 wild-type 
C57BL/6N mice (Beijing Vital River Laboratory), wild-type C57BL/6J mice (Beijing Vital 
River Laboratory), TH-Cre mice (The Jackson Laboratory; B6.Cg-7630 403G23RikTg(Th-
cre)1Tmd/J), DAT-Cre mice (The Jackson Laboratory; B6.SJL-Slc6a3tm1.1(cre)Bkmn/J) and 
Long Evans rats (Charles River) were used in this study. All animals were housed at 18–23 
°C in 40–60% humidity under a normal 12-h light–dark cycle with food and water available 
ad libitum.
AAV expression
AA V2/9-hSyn-gDA3m (2.8 × 1013 viral genomes (vg) per ml), AA V2/9-hSyn-gDA3h 
(8.43 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-gDA3mut (6.21 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-
gDA2m (5.72 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-dLight1.3b (6.49 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-
DIO-hSyn-gDA3m (6.2 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-EGFP-CAAX(3.5 × 1013 vg ml−1), 
AA V2/9-hSyn-ACh3.0 (8.0 × 1013 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-eCB2.0 (9.2 × 1013 vg ml−1), 
AA V2/9-hSyn-G-Flamp1 (7.29 × 1013 vg ml−1) and AA V2/9-hSyn-NE2m (1.39 × 1013 vg 
ml−1) were packaged at Vigene Biosciences. AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA1m (1.04 × 1013 vg ml−1), 
AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA2m (6.04 × 1012 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA2h (5.31 × 1012 vg ml−1), 
AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA2mut (5.09 × 1012 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA3m (3.29 × 1012 vg 
ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA3h (6.36 × 1012 vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-rDA3mut (6.16 × 1012 
vg ml−1), AA V2/9-hSyn-RdLight1 (6.12 × 1012 vg ml−1), AA V2/ 9-hSyn-hChR2(H134R)-
eYFP (5.49 × 1012 vg ml−1) and AA V2/9-hSyn-ChrimsonR-tdTomato (2.52 × 1012 vg 
ml−1) were packaged at BrainVTA. AA V9-hSyn-eGFP (≥7 × 1012 vg ml−1) was obtained 
from Addgene (no. 50465). Where indicated, the AA Vs were either used to infect cultured 
neurons or were injected in vivo into specific brain regions.
Molecular biology
Complementary DNAs encoding the various DA receptors were cloned from the respective 
human (hORFeome database 8.1, http://horfdb.dfci.harvard.edu/index.php?page=home ), 
bovine, sheep, waterbear, bat, cat, monkey, zebrafinch and red fire ant genes (Shanghai 
Generay Biotech). Plasmids were generated using Gibson assembly47, and all plasmid 
sequences were verified using Sanger sequencing. For screening and characterization in 
HEK293T cells, the green and red fluorescent DA sensors were cloned into the pDisplay 
vector (Invitrogen). The IRES-mCherry-CAAX cassette (for expressing green fluorescent 
sensors) or IRES-EGFP-CAAX cassette (for expressing red fluorescent sensors) was 
inserted downstream of the sensor gene to serve as a cell membrane marker and to 
calibrate the sensor’s fluorescence. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed using primers 
containing randomized NNB codons (48–51 codons in total, encoding all 20 amino acids; 
Zhuo et al. Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Tsingke Biological Technology) or defined codons. For characterization in cultured neurons, 
the sensor gene was cloned into a pAA V vector under the control of the human synapsin 
(SYN1) promoter (pAA V-hSyn). For luciferase complementation assay, the receptor-SmBit 
or sensor-SmBit was generated from β2AR-SmBit (ref. 30). For the Tango assay, genes 
encoding the wild-type receptors or the indicated sensors were cloned into the pTango 
vector31.
Cell culture
HEK293T cells were cultured at 37 °C in humidified air containing 5% CO2 in DMEM 
(Biological Industries) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS (Gibco) and 1% penicillin-
streptomycin (Gibco). Rat cortical neurons were prepared from P0 Sprague-Dawley rats. In 
brief, cortical neurons were dissociated from the dissected rat cerebral cortex by digestion 
in 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Biological Industries) and then plated on poly-d-lysine-coated 
(Sigma-Aldrich) 12-mm glass coverslips in 24-well plates. The neurons were cultured 
in Neurobasal medium (Gibco) containing 2% B-27 supplement (Gibco), 1% GlutaMAX 
(Gibco) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) at 37 °C in humidified air containing 5% 
CO2. The cultured neurons were transfected with AA Vs expressing the indicated sensors at 
3–5 d in vitro (DIV3–5) and imaged at DIV11–14.
Fluorescence imaging of cultured cells
Before imaging, the culture medium was replaced with Tyrode’s solutions containing (in 
mM): 150 NaCl, 4 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 10 HEPES and 10 glucose (pH adjusted to 7.35–7.45 
with NaOH). The cells then were imaged in a custom-made chamber using an inverted 
Ti-E A1 confocal microscope (Nikon) with the NIS-Element 4.51.00 software (Nikon) 
and an Opera Phenix high-content screening system (PerkinElmer) with the Harmony 4.9 
software (PerkinElmer). The confocal microscope was equipped with a ×10/0.45-numerical 
aperture (NA) objective, a ×20/0.75-NA objective, a ×40/1.35-NA oil-immersion objective, 
a 488-nm laser and a 561-nm laser. Green fluorescence was collected using a 525/50-nm 
filter, and red fluorescence was collected using a 595/50-nm filter. During imaging, the 
following compounds were applied via bath application or via a custom-made perfusion 
system at the indicated concentrations: DA (Sigma-Aldrich), SCH (Tocris), eticlopride 
(Tocris), SKF-81297 (Tocris), quinpirole (Tocris), glutamate (Sigma-Aldrich), GABA 
(γ-aminobutyric acid) (Tocris), levodopa (Abcam), ACh (Solarbio), serotonin (Tocris), 
histamine (Tocris), octopamine (Tocris), NE (Tocris) and sulpiride (MedChemExpress). 
ΔF /F 0 = F − F 0 /F 0 was computed by defining F0 (the baseline fluorescence) as the average 
fluorescence measured 0–1 min before drug application. To measure the kinetics of the 
GRABDA sensors, the confocal line-scanning mode (2,600 Hz) was used to record the 
fluorescence response when the cells were locally puffed with DA via a pipette positioned 
at the cells. Similarly, the decay kinetics were measured by locally puffing cells with the 
respective antagonist in the presence of saturating DA concentration. The Opera Phenix 
system was equipped with a ×20/1.0-NA objective, a ×40/0.6-NA objective, a ×40/1.15-NA 
water-immersion objective, a 488-nm laser and a 561-nm laser. Green fluorescence was 
collected using a 525/50-nm emission filter, and red fluorescence was collected using a 
Zhuo et al. Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
600/30-nm emission filter, and the fluorescence intensity of the red and green fluorescent 
sensors was calibrated using EGFP and mCherry, respectively.
Spectra and photoactivation measurements
Plasmids expressing the GRABDA sensors were transfected into HEK293T cells in six-well 
plates (for one-photon spectra) or on 12-mm coverslips (for two-photon spectra). For 
measuring the one-photon spectra, the cells were collected 24–30 h after transfection and 
transferred to 384-well plates in the absence or presence of 100 μM DA. The excitation 
and emission spectra were then measured at 5-nm increments using a Safire2 multi-mode 
plate reader (Tecan). The fluorescence measured in nontransfected cells was subtracted 
as background. The two-photon spectra of gDA3m were measured at 10-nm increments 
ranging from 700 to 1,050 nm using an Ultima Investigator two-photon microscope (Bruker) 
equipped with a ×20/1.00-NA water-immersion objective (Olympus), an InSight X3 tunable 
laser (Spectra-Physics) and the Prairie View 5.5 software (Bruker). The two-photon spectra 
of rDA3m were measured at 10-nm increments ranging from 820 to 1,300 nm using an 
A1R MP+ multiphoton microscope (Nikon) equipped with a ×25/1.10-NA objective (Nikon) 
and a Chameleon Discovery tunable laser (Coherent). Laser power was calibrated according 
to the output power of the tunable two-photon laser with various wavelengths. Bursts of 
488-nm laser light (1-s duration, 210 μW, ~0.4-W cm−2 intensity) were applied to induce 
blue-light-mediated photoactivation.
Luciferase complementation assay
At 50–60% confluence, HEK293T cells were cotransfected with the indicated wild-type 
receptor or sensor together with the respective LgBit-mG construct. Approximately 24–36 
h after transfection, the cells were dissociated using a cell scraper, resuspended in PBS and 
transferred to 96-well plates. DA at concentrations ranging from 0.01 nM to 100 μM and 5 
μM furimazine (NanoLuc Luciferase Assay, Promega) were then bath-applied to the cells. 
After a 10-min reaction in the dark at room temperature, luminescence was measured using 
a VICTOR X5 multi-label plate reader (PerkinElmer).
Tango assay
The Tango assay was performed using HTLA cells (a gift from Bryan L. Roth) seeded in 
six-well plates and transfected with plasmids expressing the indicated receptors or sensors. 
At 24 h after transfection, the cells were collected using trypsin digestion and plated in 
96-well plates, and DA was added to the media at concentrations ranging from 0.01 nM 
to 10 μM. The cells were then cultured for an additional 12 h for luciferase expression; 5 
μM Bright-Glo (Fluc Luciferase Assay System, Promega) was then added to the wells, and 
luminescence was measured using a VICTOR X5 multi-label plate reader (PerkinElmer).
Two-photon imaging in the NAc in acute mouse brain slices
Adult (6–8 weeks of age) C57BL/6N mice of both sexes were anesthetized with an 
intraperitoneal injection of 2,2,2-tribromoethanol (Avertin, 500 mg per kg of body weight; 
Sigma-Aldrich), and AA Vs were injected (300 nl per injection site at a rate of 40 nl 
min−1) into the NAc using the following coordinates: anterior-posterior (AP): +1.4 mm 
Zhuo et al. Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
relative to bregma; medial-lateral (ML): ±1.2 mm relative to bregma; and dorsal-ventral 
(DV): −4.0 mm from the dura. At 2 weeks after virus injection, the mice were deeply 
anesthetized, and the heart was perfused with slicing buffer containing (in mM): 110 choline 
chloride, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 7 MgCl2, 25 glucose and 0.5 CaCl2. The 
mice were then decapitated and the brains were immediately removed and placed in cold 
oxygenated slicing buffer. The brains were sectioned into 300-μm-thick coronal slices using 
a VT1200 vibratome (Leica), and the slices were incubated at 34 °C for at least 40 min 
in oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid containing (in mM): 125 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1 
NaH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 1.3 MgCl2, 25 glucose and 2 CaCl2. Two-photon imaging was 
performed using either an FV1000MPE two-photon microscope (Olympus) equipped with 
a ×25/1.05-NA water-immersion objective and a mode-locked Mai Tai Ti:Sapphire laser 
(Spectra-Physics) and the FV10-ASW v.3.1a software (Olympus) or an Ultima Investigator 
two-photon microscope (Bruker) equipped with a ×20/1.00-NA objective (Olympus) and an 
InSight X3 tunable laser (Spectra-Physics) and the Prairie View 5.5 software (Bruker). A 
920-nm laser was used to excite the gDA3m sensor, and fluorescence was collected using 
a 495–540-nm filter (for the FV1000MPE microscope) or a 490–560-nm filter (for the 
Ultima Investigator microscope); a 950-nm laser was used to excite the rDA3m sensor, and 
fluorescence was collected using a 575–630-nm filter (for the FV1000MPE microscope) or 
a 570–620-nm filter (for the Ultima Investigator microscope). For electrical stimulation, a 
bipolar electrode (model WE30031.0A3, MicroProbes) was positioned near the NAc core 
under fluorescence guidance, and imaging and stimulation were synchronized using an 
Arduino board with custom-written software. The stimulation voltage was set at 4–6 V . 
Where indicated, compounds were added by perfusion at a flow rate of 4 ml min−1.
Two-photon imaging in the striatum and SNc in acute mouse brain slices
Adult TH-Cre and wild-type mice of both sexes were anesthetized with isoflurane, and the 
indicated AA Vs were injected into the SNc region at the following coordinates: AP: −2.3 
mm relative to bregma; ML: ±1.3 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −4.5 mm from the dura. 
After 2–3 weeks, the mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and decapitated, and the brain 
was removed and placed in warm (32–35 °C) extracellular solution containing (in mM): 
126 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 MgCl2, 2.4 CaCl2, 1.4 NaH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3 and 11 dextrose; the 
solution also contained MK-801 (10 μM) to prevent NMDA-mediated excitotoxic damage. 
Horizontal slices (222-μm thickness) containing the midbrain and striatum were cut using 
a vibratome in warm extracellular solution and recovered at 30 °C for ≥30 min before 
experiments. Two-photon imaging of the striatal and SNc slices was performed using a 
custom-built two-photon microscope with ScanImage 3.8.1 software48. Full-frame images 
(128 × 128 pixels) were captured at a rate of 4 Hz. Line scans through areas of interest were 
taken at 2 ms per line. Images were analyzed using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health) 
and custom software written using MATLAB.
In vivo fiber photometry recording in mice
Adult mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, and the indicated AA Vs (300-nl total volume) 
were injected as follows. The NAc was targeted using the following coordinates: AP: +1.4 
mm relative to bregma; ML: ±1.2 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −4.0 mm from the 
dura. The mPFC was targeted using the following coordinates: AP: +1.98 mm relative to 
Zhuo et al. Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
bregma; ML: ±0.3 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −1.8 from the dura. Finally, the BLA 
was targeted using the following coordinates: AP: −1.4 mm relative to bregma; ML: ±3 
mm relative to bregma; and DV: −4.5 mm from the dura. Optical fibers (200-μm diameter, 
0.37 NA; Inper) were implanted using the AA V injection site and secured with resin cement 
(3M). At 2 weeks after injections, photometry and animal behaviors were recorded using 
an FPS-410/470/561 photometry system (Inper) with the Inper signal v.2.0.0 software 
(Inper). In brief, a 10-Hz (with 20-ms pulse duration) 470/5-nm filtered light-emitting 
diode (LED) at 20–30 μW was used to excite the green fluorescent sensors, and a 10-Hz 
(20-ms pulse duration) 561/5-nm filtered LED at 20–30 μW was used to excite the red 
fluorescent sensors. Alternating excitation wavelengths were delivered, and the fluorescence 
signals were collected using a CMOS camera during dual-color imaging. To minimize 
autofluorescence of the optical fiber, the recording fiber was photobleached using a high-
power LED before recording. The photometry data were analyzed using a custom-written 
MATLAB (MATLAB R2022a, MathWorks) program, and background autofluorescence was 
subtracted from the recorded signals.
Unpredicted water reward.
Adult female (8–9 weeks in age) C57BL/6J mice were prepared for this experiment. AA V-
hsyn-rDA3m or AA V-hsyn-RdLight1 virus (300 nl for each virus) was bilaterally injected 
into the NAc. Intraoral cheek fistula-implanted and water-restricted mice freely received 
water delivery (around 10 μl per trial; 25 trials per session; interreward interval = 20 s). To 
calculate ΔF/F0, baseline was chosen as the average fluorescence signal during 4.5–5.0 s 
ahead of water delivery.
Mating behaviors.
Adult (8–9 weeks of age) male C57BL/6N mice were used for these experiments. A mixture 
of AA V-hsyn-rDA3m (300 nl) and AA V-hsyn-G-Flamp1 (300 nl) was injected into the NAc 
as described above. Experienced adult (8–9 weeks in age) ovariectomized female C57BL/6N 
mice were also used to measure the male’s mating behaviors. At 3 d before recording, the 
ovariectomized female mice received intraperitoneal injections of estrogen (50 μl, 0.2 mg 
ml−1 on day 1; and 50 μl, 0.1 mg ml−1 on day 2) or progesterone (50 μl, 1 mg ml−1 on day 
3). To calculate ΔF/F0, the baseline was defined as the average fluorescence measured 1–5 
min before introducing the female.
Foot shock.
Adult (8–9 weeks of age) male C57BL/6N mice were used for these experiments. A mixture 
of AA V-hsyn-eCB2.0 (300 nl) and either AA V-hsyn-rDA2m or AA V-hsyn-rDA1m (300 nl 
each) was bilaterally injected into the BLA as described above. The mouse was placed in a 
shock box, and five 2-s pulses of electricity at an intensity of 0.7 mA were delivered with an 
interval of 90–120 s between trials. To calculate ΔF/F0, the baseline value was defined as the 
average fluorescence measured during a 2-s window before the first shock trial.
Zhuo et al. Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Pavlovian auditory conditioning task.
Adult (8–9 weeks of age) female C57BL/6J mice were used for these experiments. A 
mixture of AA V-hsyn-gACh3.0 (300 nl) and AA V-hsyn-rDA3m (300 nl) was injected into 
the NAc and mPFC as described above. A stainless-steel head holder was attached to the 
skull using resin cement to restrain head-fix the animal. For water delivery, an intraoral 
cheek fistula was implanted in each mouse. In brief, incisions were made in the cheek and 
the scalp at the back of the neck. A short, soft silastic tube (inner diameter: 0.3 mm; outer 
diameter: 0.46 mm) connected via an L-shaped stainless-steel tube was then inserted into 
the cheek incision site. The steel tube was inserted into the scalp incision, and the opposite 
end was inserted into the oral cavity. The head-fixed mice were habituated to the treadmill 
apparatus for 2 d (1 h per day) before the experiments to minimize potential stress. On the 
day of the experiment, the Pavlovian auditory conditioning task was performed using two 
pairs of auditory cues and outcomes, with tone A (2.5 kHz, 70 dB, 2-s duration) paired with 
delivery of 10 μl of 5% sucrose water and tone B (15 kHz, 70 dB, 2-s duration) paired with 
delivery of an air puff to the eye. These two pairs were randomly delivered with a 15–20-s 
randomized intertrial interval. The water and air puff delivery were precision-controlled 
using a stepper motor pump and a solenoid valve, respectively. A custom Arduino code was 
used to control the timing of the pump and solenoid valve and to synchronize the training 
devices with the photometry recording system. To calculate ΔF/F0, the baseline was defined 
as the average fluorescence signals measured 4.5–5.0 s before the first auditory cue.
Fiber photometry recording of optogenetically induced DA release in mice
Adult (8–9 weeks of age) male C57BL/6N mice were used for these experiments. To 
validate the green DA sensors with optogenetics, mice were anesthetized, and AA V-hsyn-
gDA3h or AA V-hsyn-dLight1.3b was injected into the mPFC (AP: +1.98 mm relative 
to bregma; ML: ±0.3 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −1.8 from the dura), AA V-hsyn-
ChrimsonR-tdTomato was injected into the VTA (AP: −2.9 mm relative to bregma; ML: 
±0.65 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −4.1 mm from the dura) and optical fibers (200-μm 
diameter, 0.37 NA; Inper) were implanted in the same injection sites. At 2 weeks after virus 
injection, photometry recording was performed using a commercially available photometry 
system (Thinker Tech) with the Multi Channel Fiber Photometry software.
A 470/25-nm bandpass-filtered (model 65–144; Edmund Optics) LED light (Cree LED) was 
used to excite the green fluorescent sensors. The emitted fluorescence was bandpass filtered 
(525/25 nm, model 86–354; Edmund Optics) and collected using a photomultiplier tube 
(model H10721–210; Hamamatsu). An amplifier (model C7319; Hamamatsu) was used to 
convert the current output from the photo-multiplier tube to a voltage signal that was passed 
through a low-pass filter. The analog voltage signals were then digitized using an acquisition 
card (National Instruments). To minimize autofluorescence of the optical fiber, the recording 
fiber was photobleached using a high-power LED before recording. The excitation light 
power at the tip of the optical fiber was 20–30 μW and was delivered at 100 Hz with 5-ms 
pulse duration. Background autofluorescence was subtracted from the recorded signals in 
the subsequent analysis. A 635-nm laser (1–300 mW; LL-Laser) was used for optogenetic 
stimulation with the light power at the tip of the fiber set at 10 mW. Optical stimulation was 
delivered at 20 Hz (20-ms pulse duration) for a total of 1–20 pulses simultaneously with 
Zhuo et al. Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
photometry recording. Where indicated, the mice received an intra-peritoneal injection of 
SCH (2 mg per kg of body weight).
When validating the red-shifted GRABDA sensors, AA V-hsyn-rDA3m or AA V-hsyn-
rDA3mut was injected into the central amygdala (AP: −1 mm relative to bregma; ML: ±2.5 
mm relative to bregma; and DV: −4.3 mm from the dura). In addition, AA V-hsyn-rDA2m 
or AA V-hsyn-rDA-2mut was injected in the mPFC and NAc, AA V-hsyn-ChR2-YFP was 
injected into the VTA and optical fibers were implanted at the same injection sites. At 
2 weeks after injection, photometry recording (FPS-410/470/561; Inper) was performed 
was described above. A 488-nm laser (1–160 mW, LL-Laser) was used for optogenetic 
stimulation, with the light power at the tip of the fiber set at 10 mW. Optical stimulation 
was delivered at 20 Hz (1, 5 or 10 s duration) simultaneously with photometry recording. 
Where indicated, the mice received an intra-peritoneal injection of SCH (6 mg per kg of 
body weight).
Behavioral assays in rodents
Adult male C57BL/6J mice (8–9 weeks of age) were used for the mouse experiments. Mice 
were anesthetized, and AA V9-hSyn-gDA3h, AA V9-hSyn-rDA3h and AA V9-hSyn-EGFP-
CAAX (or AA V9-hSyn-EGFP) were injected into the NAc bilaterally. The diverse cohort 
of mice was subjected to open-field test, cocaine-induced hyperlocomotion test and odor–
reward associative learning task49 at least 2 weeks after surgery. Mice were handled for 3 
d for 3 min each day before experiments. For cocaine self-administration, adult (>10 weeks 
at start of experiment) wild-type Long Evans rats from both sexes were used. The behavior 
assays were blindly analyzed.
Open-field test in mice.
The open-field test was performed in ENV-510 test chambers (27.3 × 27.3 × 20.3 cm3, 
Med Associates). The chamber is equipped with infrared photo beams, which were used to 
evaluate spontaneous mouse locomotor activity. At the start of the test, mice were placed 
in the center of the arena, and were allowed to freely explore the environment for 10 
min. Mouse movement was tracked and analyzed by the Activity Monitor 7 software (Med 
Associates) for the total travel distance, the number of entries to the central zone (14.29 × 
14.29 cm2) and the time spent in the central zone.
Cocaine-induced hyperlocomotion in mice.
On each day of the experiment, mice were brought into the testing room for 1 h of 
habituation. Experiments were performed during the light cycle at a consistent time of 
day. For day 1, mice received an intraperitoneal injection of 10 μl of sterile saline per gram 
of body weight and were immediately tested for locomotor activity for 30 min. On the 
subsequent day, mice received an intraperitoneal injection of 10 mg kg−1 cocaine in the 
same volume of saline. The fold change in locomotion activity was calculated as the total 
distance in 30 min after receiving cocaine divided by that after receiving saline.
Zhuo et al. Page 16
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Odor–reward associative learning task in mice.
Mice were water-deprived for 48 h and then habituated to the head-fixed setup. Delivery 
of odor and water and registration of licks were controlled by an Arduino-based system 
running on MATLAB (MathWorks). Briefly, in associative training sessions, the water 
reward was preceded by an odor (valve opening for approximately 1 s). The interval between 
odor onset and water delivery was 3 s. The intertrial interval was randomized between 6 s 
and 8 s. Mice were trained for approximately 30 reward trials per day. Daily performance 
was analyzed in MATLAB as previously described.
Cocaine self-administration in rats.
Rats had ~7 d to acclimate after arriving before undergoing any experimental procedures. 
Then, they underwent intracranial surgery to infuse virus (either eGFP or gDA3m) 
bilaterally into the NAc core. Two injections, 250 nl each, were performed in each 
hemisphere (AP: +1.3 mm; ML: ±2.4 mm; DV: −7.2 mm for the first injection and −7.0 
mm for the second injection; 6° angle). Virus was injected at a rate of 100 nl min−1, and the 
injector tip was left in place for 5 min after injection. For this surgery and the other surgery 
described below, rats were anesthetized using inhalable isoflurane (~5% for induction 
and then maintained at ~2%), and meloxicam (5 mg kg−1, subcutaneous, Covetrus) was 
administered during the surgical procedure and for 24 h following completion of the surgery. 
After 7 d of recovery from virus surgery, rats underwent a second surgery to implant a 
silastic catheter (PlasticsOne) into the right jugular vein50,51. Intravenous catheters were 
flushed with cefazolin (0.1 ml of 0.1 g ml−1 in sterile 0.9% saline) to prevent infection and 
maintain catheter patency. Following completion of the surgery, rats were monitored until 
they were awake and active, and were singly-housed for the duration of the experiment. 
After 6 d of recovery, rats were allowed to self-administer cocaine (0.5 mg kg−1 per 
infusion, 6 h d−1, during the dark cycle) for 10 d on a fixed ratio 1 schedule50,51. We used 
operant chambers (MED Associates) held within sound-attenuating cabinets and equipped 
with two nose-poke holes. Responding in the active hole resulted in an intravenous infusion 
of cocaine and the illumination of a cue light within the nose-poke hole. Responding in 
the inactive hole was recorded but had no consequences. Cocaine HCl was obtained from 
the National Institute on Drug Abuse and dissolved in 0.9% saline. After completion of self-
administration training, 13 rats (8 eGFP and 5 gDA3m) were perfused and virus expression 
in the NAc was verified. The other three gDA3m rats were killed and brain slices prepared to 
verify that virus was expressed in the NAc and that electrical stimulation of the NAc resulted 
in detection of DA release.
Fiber photometry recording of DA signals in mice receiving water rewards
AA Vs carrying GRABDA DA sensors were injected into the NAc of DAT-Cre mice (300 
nl, unilateral injection; gGRABDA2m: AA V9-hsyn-gDA2m, titer = 2.3 × 1013 vg ml−1; 
gGRABDA3m: AA V9-hsyn-gDA3m, titer = 1.3 × 1013 vg ml−1). For red GRABDA sensors, 
we injected a mixture of AA Vs carrying rGRABDA and GFP (3:1 mixture, 300-nl total 
volume; GFP: AA V8-CAG-GFP, titer = 6.7 × 1012 vg ml−1; rGRABDA1m: AA V9-hsyn-
rDA1m, titer = 2.5 × 1013 vg ml−1; rGRABDA3m: AA V9-hsyn-rDA3m, titer = 6 × 1012 vg 
ml−1). NAc coordinates were, from bregma: AP 1.5 mm, ML 1.7 mm, DV 4.0 mm, angled 
Zhuo et al. Page 17
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
4° forward. An optical fiber was implanted targeting NAc (400-μm diameter, NA = 0.48, 
Doric Lenses).
At least 2 weeks after surgery, mice were water-restricted (to 85% of initial body weight) 
and trained to receive water rewards while head-fixed. After mice consistently licked to 
water delivery (typically requiring 3 d of training), we recorded DA sensor responses to 
unpredicted delivery of water droplets of various sizes (1, 2, 4 or 8 μl; interreward interval 
= 8–20 s, uniformly distributed; 60 trials per session, 15 trials per reward size, randomly 
interleaved; in some sessions, only 2 or 8 μl of water was given). Photometry signals were 
collected with a bundle-imaging fiber photometry system (Doric Lenses). For green DA 
sensors, we used a blue LED (460–490 nm, 75 μW measured at tip of patch cord) to 
excite the sensor and the isosbestic wavelength as a control signal (410–420-nm LED, 60 
μW). For red DA sensors, we used a yellow LED (555–570 nm, 110 μW) to excite the 
sensor and GFP signals as a control (460–490-nm LED, 75 μW). Imaging was performed 
at 20 Hz. Photometry data were processed offline as follows. ΔF /F 0 = F − F 0 /F 0 was 
computed by defining F0 as the tenth percentile of each signal within a sliding 30-s window 
(excluding reward responses, defined as the 5 s following reward). Then, linear regression 
was performed between the sensor signal and the control signal (either isosbestic wavelength 
or GFP) in inter-trial intervals (5 s following reward delivery excluded). The resulting 
predicted signal was subtracted from the sensor signal to produce the final de-noised signal.
Two-photon in vivo imaging in mice
Adult (7–8 weeks of age) female C57BL/6N mice were used for these experiments. The 
mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (3% induction, followed by 1–1.5% maintenance), 
the skin and skull above the motor cortex were removed and a metal recording chamber 
was affixed to the head. AA V expressing gDA3m, gDA3h, dLight1.3b or mEGFP (200 nl 
each, full titer) was then injected into the motor cortex using the following coordinates: 
AP: +1.0 mm relative to bregma; ML: ±1.5 mm relative to bregma; and DV: −0.5 mm 
from the dura). A 4 mm × 4 mm square glass coverslip was then used to cover the 
opening in the skull. A stainless-steel head holder was attached to the skull to head-fix 
the animal and reduce motion-induced artifacts during imaging. At 2 weeks after virus 
injection, the mice were habituated for approximately 10 min on the treadmill imaging 
apparatus to minimize stress. The motor cortex was imaged at a depth of 100–200 μm 
below the pial surface using Prairie View 5.5.64.100 software with an Ultima Investigator 
two-photon microscope (Bruker) equipped with a ×16/0.80-NA water-immersion objective 
(Olympus) and an InSight X3 tunable laser (Spectra-Physics). A 920-nm laser was used 
for excitation, and a 525/70-nm emission filter was used to collect the fluorescence signal 
at a sampling rate of 1.5 Hz. For the forced running paradigm, running speed was set at 
15 cm s−1; for the tail shock paradigm, a 3-s electrical shock (0.7 mA) was delivered. For 
audio stimulation, a 1-s pulse of white noise (80 dB) was delivered. For image analysis, 
motion-related artifacts were corrected using the EZcalcium motion correction algorithm52. 
Fluorescence intensity measurements at the ROIs were collected using ImageJ software. 
The fluorescence responses were calculated as F raw − F baseline /F baseline,, in which Fbaseline was 
defined as the average fluorescence signal measured for 10 s before the behavior onset. The 
peak response during a behavior was calculated as the maximum ΔF/F0 measured for 0–5 
Zhuo et al. Page 18
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
s after the behavior onset. The brain area was deemed responsive if the average response 
in a 5-s window surrounding the peak exceeded the sum of the baseline average and the 
baseline standard deviation. Hierarchical clustering was performed on the average of the 
fluorescence signals (forced running and shock) for each ROI. Euclidean distance and the 
Ward linkage metric were used after comparing multiple linkage metrics and clustering 
algorithms. Variations among individuals were minimized by normalizing the response to 
the maximum ΔF/F0 across ROIs in a given mouse. The hierarchical method was used to 
reduce bias due to predetermining the cluster number.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were anaesthetized (using Avertin) and intracardially perfused with PBS followed by 
4% PFA in PBS buffer, and brains were dissected and fixed at 4 °C overnight by 4% PFA 
in PBS. Brains were sectioned at 40-μm thickness using a VT1200 vibratome (Leica). Slices 
were placed in blocking solution containing 5% normal goat serum, 0.1% Triton X-100 
and 2 mM MgCl2 in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Then, slices were incubated in 
AGT solution (0.5% normal goat serum, 0.1% Triton and 2 mM MgCl2 in PBS) containing 
primary antibodies, anti-GFP antibody (Abcam, catalog no. ab13970, chicken, dilution 
1:1,000) and anti-RFP antibody (Rockland, catalog no. 600–401-379, rabbit, dilution 1:500), 
overnight at 4 °C. On the following day, slices were rinsed three times in AGT and 
incubated for 2 h at room temperature with secondary antibodies: Goat anti-Chicken Alexa 
Fluor 488 (Abcam, catalog no. ab150169, dilution 1:500) and Goat anti-Rabbit iFluor 555 
(AAT Bioquest, catalog no. 16690, dilution 1:500). After three washes in AGT, slices were 
incubated in AGT containing DAPI (MedChemExpress, catalog no. HY-D0814, 5 mg ml−1, 
dilution 1:1,000) for 15 min at room temperature and then rinsed in PBS. Slices were 
mounted on slides. Slices were imaged on an Aperio Versa (Leica) under a ×10 objective.
Quantification and statistical analysis
Except where indicated otherwise, all summary data are presented as the mean ± s.e.m. 
Imaging data were processed using ImageJ (1.53c) or MATLAB software (matlab R2020a 
and R2022a) and plotted using OriginPro 2020b (OriginLab), GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 or 
Adobe Illustrator CC. The SNR was calculated as the peak response divided by the standard 
deviation of the baseline fluorescence. Group differences were analyzed using a one-way 
ANOV A with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, a one-way ANOV A with Dunnett’s 
multiple comparison test, a two-way ANOV A with Sidak’s multiple comparison test, a 
two-tailed Student’s t-test or a mixed-effects model (GraphPad Prism 8.0.2). Differences 
were considered significant at P < 0.05; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 
0.0001 and not significant (P > 0.05). For all representative images and traces, similar results 
were obtained for >3 independent experiments.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting 
Summary linked to this article.
Zhuo et al. Page 19
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Performance of DA-insensitive mutant sensors.
a, Representative images showing sensor expression (top) in HEK293T cells and 
fluorescence response to 100 μM DA (bottom) of indicated sensor variants. Scale bar, 20 
μm. b, Group summary of maximal ΔF/F0 in response to 100 μM DA (left) and titration DA 
curves (right) of indicated sensors in HEK293T cells. Left, n = 6, 6, 15, 15, 12, 3 wells for 
gDA3m, gDA3mut, rDA2m, rDA2mut, rDA3m and rDA3mut. Each well contains 400–500 
cells. Two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed. Right, n = 3 wells (with 400–500 cells per 
well) for each group. c, Representative images showing sensor expression (top) in cultured 
neurons and fluorescence response to 100 μM DA (bottom) of indicated sensor variants. 
Scale bar, 50 μm. d, Group summary of maximal ΔF/F0 of indicated sensors in response to 
Zhuo et al. Page 20
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
100 μM DA in cultured neurons. n = 60 neurons from 4 cultures for rDA2mut, n = 30/2 for 
others, mean±s.e.m. Two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed.
Extended Data Fig. 2 |. Pharmacological profiles of GRABDA sensors measured in cultured cells.
a, Titration curves of indicated sensors for the response to DA or NE in HEK293T 
cells. n = 3 cells with 400–500 cells per well, mean±s.e.m. b, The normalized ΔF/F0 in 
sensor-expressing HEK293T cells in response to the indicated compounds. Antagonists were 
applied at 10 μM, others at 1 μM. n = 4 wells for gDA3m and gDA3h, n = 3 wells for 
Zhuo et al. Page 21
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
others, mean±s.e.m. One-way Anova, post hoc Dunnett’s test: gDA3m, p = 0.0002, 8.9 
× 10−10 between DA and SFK, or DA+Etic, p = 1.3 × 10−13 between DA and others; 
gDA3h, p = 0.0020, 4.3 × 10−9 between DA and SFK, or DA+Etic, p = 1.3 × 10−13 
between DA and others; rDA2m, p = 3.3 × 10−14 between DA and others; rDA2h, p = 
0.6059, 0.9530 between DA and DA + SCH, or DA+Etic, p = 3.3 × 10−14 between DA 
and others; rDA3m, p = 0.9182, 0010 between DA and DA+Etic, or SKF, p = 3.3 × 10−14 
between DA and others; rDA3h, p = 0.0724, 0.8723 between DA and DA+Etic, or Quin, 
p = 3.3 × 10−14 between DA and others. c, The normalized ΔF/F0 in rDA2m-expressing 
HEK293T cells in response to indicated DA agonists. Bromocriptine (Bro), Rotigotine 
(RTG), D2R/ D1R agonists; Ropinirole (RPR), Quin, D2R-specific agonists; Fenodopam 
(FD), SKF, D1R-specific agonist. All chemicals were bath-applied in 100 μM. n = 3 wells, 
mean±s.e.m. One-way Anova, post hoc Dunnett’s: p = 0.1074 between DA and Bro, p = 
8.0 × 10−12 between DA and others. d, Titration curves of indicated dopamine receptor 
antagonists. The fluorescence intensity in the presence with 10 μM DA was set as F0 and 
the relative fluorescence changes under indicated compound concentration were plotted. n 
= 3 wells with 400–500 cells per well, mean±s.e.m. e, f, Pharmacological specificity (left) 
and titration curves of indicated sensors for the response to DA or NE (right) in cultured 
neurons. Left, antagonists at 10 μM, others at 1 μM. n = 3 wells, mean±s.e.m. One-way 
Anova, post hoc Dunnett’s test: rDA2h, p = 0.9998, 0.1458 between DA and DA + SCH, or 
DA+Etic, p = 1.5 × 10−7 between DA and others; rDA3h, p = 0.9591, 0.1309 between DA 
and DA+Etic, or SKF, p = 4.0 × 10−9 between DA and others.
Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Kinetics measurement of GRABDA sensors in HEK293T cells.
Zhuo et al. Page 22
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
a, Schematic illustration showing the local perfusion system using a glass pipette containing 
100 μM DA and/or receptor-specific antagonist positioned above the sensor-expressing 
cell. The yellow line indicates the area for line scanning. The dash lines indicate the 
pipette. Scale bar, 20 μm. b, Representative traces showing the response measured using 
line-scanning; when indicated, DA and receptor-specific antagonist were puffed onto the 
cell. The trace were the average of 3 different ROIs on the scanning line. Data are shown 
as mean ± SD. Each trace was fitted with a single-exponential function to determine the 
τon (left) and τoff (right). c, Group summary of τon and τoff. τon, n = 11, 8, 11, 6, 9, 8 cells 
for gDA3m, gDA3h, rDA2m, rDA2h, rDA3m, rDA3h; τoff, n = 10, 14, 9, 7, 10, 6 cells for 
gDA3m, gDA3h, rDA2m, rDA2h, rDA3m, rDA3h, mean±s.e.m.
Zhuo et al. Page 23
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 4 |. gGRABDA3h sensors report optogenetically-elicited DA release in the 
mouse mPFC.
a, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design for panel b-i. b, Histological 
verification of indicated sensor expression in mPFC and ChrimsonR expression in VTA. 
Dashed boxes indicate the location of optical tract. Scale bar, 1 mm. c, Representative 
fluorescence changes and zoom-in view (indicated by dashed box) of indicated sensors 
during optogenetic stimulations under control condition or in the presence of SCH-23390 
(SCH). d, Average traces of the change in gDA3h (top) or dLight1.3b (bottom) fluorescence 
from a mouse. Data are shown as mean±s.d. e, Group summary of ΔF/F0 for the indicated 
sensors. n = 4 mice for gDA3h and dLight1.3b, respectively, mean±s.e.m. One-way 
ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test was performed. **p = 0.0035 for gDA3h; n.s. p = 0.9122 
for dLight1.3b; *p = 0.0295 between gDA3h and dLight1.3b. f, Group summary of the rise 
and decay time constant of the gDA3h signals in response to optogenetic stimulations. n = 
4 mice, mean±s.e.m. g, h, Example fluorescence response (g) and corresponding average 
traces (e) of gDA3h (top) or dLight1.3b (bottom) to indicated optogenetic stimulation. The 
average traces are shown as mean±s.d. i, Group summary of peak ΔF/F0 of gDA3h or 
dLight1.3b in response to indicated optogenetic stimulation. n = 4 mice for gDA3h and 
dLight1.3b, mean±s.e.m.
Zhuo et al. Page 24
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5 |. rGRAB sensors report optogenetically-elicited DA release in multiple 
brain regions in vivo.
a, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design for panel b-e. b, Histological 
verification of indicated sensor expression in CeA and ChrimsonR expression in VTA. 
Dashed boxes indicate the location of optical tract. Scale bar, 1 mm. c, Representative 
traces of rDA3m or rDA3mut signals during optogenetic stimulations. rDA3m signals were 
measured before and after SCH-23390 (SCH) administration. d, Average traces of the 
change in sensor fluorescence to 1-, 5- or 10-s opto-stimulation from a mouse. Data are 
Zhuo et al. Page 25
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
shown as mean ± SD. The blue shaded area indicates the application of opto-stimulation. 
e, Group summary of peak response of rDA3m or rDA3mut to indicated optogenetic 
stimulation. n = 3 mice for rDA3m and n = 5 for rDA3mut, mean±s.e.m. Two-tailed 
Student’s t-test was performed. p = 0.0278, 0.0101, 0.0068 between control and SCH to 
1-, 5-, 10-s opto-stimulation. p = 0.0003, 0.0001, 0.00004 between rDA3m and rDA3mut 
to 1-, 5-, 10-s opto-stimulation. f, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design 
for panel g, h. g, Histological verification of rDA2mut expression in mPFC and NAc, and 
ChrimsonR expression in VTA. Dashed boxes indicate the location of optical tract. Scale 
bar, 1 mm. h, Representative traces of rDA2mut signals simultaneously recorded in the 
mPFC (top) and NAc (bottom) during optogenetic stimulations.
Zhuo et al. Page 26
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6 |. In vivo comparison of the third-generation DA sensors versus previous 
variants in water-restricted mice receiving water rewards.
a, Diagram of mouse surgical procedure. AA Vs carrying gGRABDA2m, gGRABDA3m, 
rGRABDA1m, or rGRABDA3m were injected unilaterally into NAc. An optic fiber was 
implanted above the injection site. b, Illustration of behavioral experiment. c, Histological 
verification of indicated sensor expression in NAc. White arrows indicate the location of 
fiber tips. Scale bar, 1 mm. d, Recording sessions from gDA2m mice, mean±s.e.m. Vertical 
black bars indicate water delivery. Colors indicate water volume. e, Recording sessions from 
Zhuo et al. Page 27
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
gDA3m mice, mean±s.e.m. f, Peak response to 8 μL water for the sessions shown in d 
and e. n = 4 mice for gDA2m, n = 6 for gDA3m. p = 0.0095, Two-tailed Mann-Whitney 
U test. g, Recording sessions from rDA1m mice, mean±s.e.m. h, Recording sessions from 
rDA3m mice, mean±s.e.m. i, Peak response to 8 μL water for the sessions shown in g and 
h. n = 4 for rDA1m, n = 4 for rDA3m. p = 0.0286, Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. j, 
Group summary of sensor responses to each water amount. The response of each mouse 
was relative to that to 1 μL water reward. n = 3 mice for gDA3m, n = 4 mice for rDA3m. 
Two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed between groups. For gDA3m, p = 0.032, 0.0185 
and 0.0312 between 1, 2, 4 vs 8 μL, respectively; For rDA3m, p = 0.0217, 0.017 and 0.0179 
between 1, 2, 4 vs 8 μL, and p = 0.032 and 0.0378 between 1, 2 vs 4 μL respectively. k, 
Schematic illustration depicting the mouse surgical procedure and the experimental design 
for panel l-n. l, Histological verification of rDA3m (left side) and RdLight1 (right side) in 
NAc. Dashed boxes indicate the location of optical tract. Scale bar, 1 mm. m, Recording 
sessions from 3 mice. Vertical black bars indicate water delivery. Colors indicate sensor 
version. n, Peak response of rDA3m and RdLight1 for the sessions shown in m. n = 3 mice 
for rDA3m and RdLight1. p = 0.0249, Two-tailed Student’s t-test.
Zhuo et al. Page 28
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 7 |. GRABDA sensors show minimal signal changes towards endogenous NE 
elevation.
a, Schematic illustration (left) depicting the experimental design and representative 
fluorescence changes of NE2m towards systematic administration of NET blocker (3 
mg/kg desipramine). b, Schematic illustration (left) depicting the experimental design 
and representative fluorescence changes of rDA3m towards systematic administration of 
NET blocker (middle) and upon optogenetic stimulations (right). c, Schematic illustration 
(left) depicting the experimental design and representative fluorescence changes (right) of 
gDA3h towards systematic administration of NET blocker (middle) and upon optogenetic 
stimulations (right). d, Group summary of ΔF/F0 for the indicated sensors upon opto-
stimulation of VTA neurons. n = 3 mice for rDA3m and gDA3h, mean±s.e.m. Paired 
Zhuo et al. Page 29
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed within group. *p = 0.0167 for rDA3m and *p = 
0.0463 for gDA3h. e, Group summary of ΔF/F0 for the indicated sensors towards systematic 
administration of NET blocker. n = 3 mice for NE2m, rDA3m and gDA3h, respectively, 
mean±s.e.m. Paired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed within group. p = 0.6827, 
0.2155 and 0.0012 for rDA3m, gDA3h and NE2m.
Extended Data Fig. 8 |. GRABDA expression in NAc has minimal effects on DA-related animal 
behaviors.
a, Schematic representation of viral injections in the bilateral NAc. b. Schematic illustration 
showing the open field test (OFT). c, Quantification of behavioral parameters in the OFT. 
n = 8, 8 and 10 mice for the control, gDA3h and rDA3h group, respectively, mean±s.e.m. 
One-way ANOV A was performed. p = 0.3118, 0.5870 and 0.3736. d, Schematic illustration 
depicting the experimental designs for panel e-f. e, Representative track of control, gDA3h 
Zhuo et al. Page 30
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and rDA3h animals. f, Quantification of behavioral parameters during the experiments. n 
= 8, 6 and 6 mice for the control, gDA3h and rDA3h group, respectively, mean±s.e.m. 
Two-tailed Student’s t tests were performed within groups: p = 0.0026, 0.0196 and 0.0039; 
One-way ANOV A was performed among groups: p = 0.6016. g, Schematic illustration 
showing the odor-reward associative learning task. h, Mean lick rate of Ctrl, gDA3h and 
rDA3h mice on day 1 and day 5 conditioning. n = 5 mice for each, mean±s.e.m. i, 
Quantification of anticipatory lick rate across five conditioning days. n = 5 mice for each, 
mean±s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A was performed among groups, p = 0.1076. j, Schematic 
diagram illustrating intravenous cocaine self-administration in rats. k, Timeline describing 
intravenous cocaine self-administration experiments. l, Cocaine infusions over 10 days of 
SA training did not differ between rats expressing gDA3m and eGFP virus bilaterally in the 
NAc core. n = 8 rats for each, mean±s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A mixed-effects model (Day x 
Virus): Day, F(9,126) = 4.50, p = 0.00004; Virus, F(1,14) = 0.35, p = 0.56; Day x Virus, 
F(9,126) = 0.21, p = 0.99. m, Nose-pokes in the active and inactive ports over the last 3 days 
of SA training did not differ between virus groups. Two-way ANOV A mixed-effects models 
(Day x Virus). n = 8 rats for each, mean±s.e.m. Active port: Day, F(2,28) = 3.21, p = 0.06; 
Virus, F(1,14) = 1.35, p = 0.27; Day x Virus, F(2,28) = 1.48, p = 0.24. Inactive port: Day, 
F(2, 28) = 1.97, p = 0.16; Virus, F(1,14) = 0.48, p = 0.50; Day x Virus, F(2,28) = 0.92, p = 
0.41.
Extended Data Fig. 9 |. The signals in the mouse NAc and mPFC during Pavlovian conditioning.
a, Representative fluorescence signals recorded during consecutive water trials pre (top, 
control) and post SCH-23390 (bottom, SCH-23390) treatment. The audio and water delivery 
are indicated above. b, Averaged traces of rDA3m (left) and ACh3.0 (right) fluorescence 
measured in the NAc from a mouse under control condition or in the presence of 
SCH-23390 in one mouse, mean±s.e.m. The grey shaded area indicates the application 
of audio. The dashed line indicates the delivery of water. c, Group summary of the 
peak fluorescence change of rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals in the NAc under the indicated 
condition. n = 155 trials from 3 mice for each group, mean±s.e.m. Two-tailed Student’s 
t-test was performed between control and SCH-23390 group. p = 0.2624 for ACh3.0. d, 
e. same as (b, c) with simultaneously recorded rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals in the mPFC. 
Zhuo et al. Page 31
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed between control and SCH-23390 group. p = 
0.2274 for ACh3.0.
Extended Data Fig. 10 |. In vivo two-photon imaging of cortical DA dynamics in mice.
a, b, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design for panel c-j. c–e, 
Representative expression and pseudocolored response images (c), representative traces 
measured at the indicated ROIs (d), and average traces per forced running (e) measured 
in the motor cortex expressing indicated sensors. Scale bar, 100 μm. f, Group summary 
Zhuo et al. Page 32
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of the peak response (top) and SNR (bottom) of indicated sensors measured during forced 
running. n = 14/4 (14 trials from 4 mice), 13/4, 9/3 and 12/4 for gDA3m, gDA3h, dLight1.3b 
and mEGFP, respectively, mean±s.e.m. Paired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed 
for response: p = 6 × 10−5, 0.0002, 0.0683, 0.6275 for gDA3m, gDA3h, dLight1.3b and 
mEGFP. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test was performed across groups: response, p 
= 9 × 10−5, 4 × 10−6, 0.0214, 0.0022, 0.1611 and 0.9577 between gDA3h and dLight1.3b, 
gDA3h and EGFP, gDA3m and dLight1.3b, gDA3m and mEGFP, gDA3m and gDA3h, 
and dLight1.3b and mEGFP, respectively; SNR, p = 9 × 10−6, 0.0004, 0.0016, 0.0337 and 
0.8812 between gDA3h and mEGFP, gDA3h and dLight1.3b, gDA3m and mEGFP, gDA3m 
and dLight1.3b, and dLight1.3b and mEGFP, respectively. g, Summary of the rise and 
decay t50 values of indicated sensors to forced running. n = 14/4 for gDA3m, n = 13/4 
for gDA3h, mean±s.e.m. h–j, Same as (c-e) except mice were subjected to tail shock. k, 
Group summary of the response (top) and SNR (bottom) of indicated sensors measured upon 
tail shock. n = 19/4 for gDA3m, 16/4 for gDA3h, 12/3 for dLight1.3b, 26/4 for mEGFP, 
mean±s.e.m. Paired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed for response: p = 3 × 10−5, 4 
× 10−7, 0.1774 and 0.2554 for gDA3m, gDA3h, dLight1.3b and mEGFP. One-way ANOV A, 
post hoc Tukey’s test was performed across groups: response, p = 8 × 10−5, 1 × 10−8, 
0.0.0013, 4 × 10−8, 0.7169 and 0.3714 between gDA3h and dLight1.3b, gDA3h and EGFP, 
gDA3m and dLight1.3b, gDA3m and mEGFP, gDA3m and gDA3h, and dLight1.3b and 
mEGFP, respectively; SNR, p = 1 × 10−7, 0.0104, 1 × 10−6, 0.0186 and 0.2607 between 
gDA3h and mEGFP, gDA3h and dLight1.3b, gDA3m and mEGFP, gDA3m and dLight1.3b, 
and dLight1.3b and mEGFP, respectively. l, Summary of the rise and decay t50 values of 
indicated sensors to tail shock. mEGFP data replotted from Fig. 6f. n = 18/4 for gDA3m, n = 
15/4 for gDA3h, mean±s.e.m.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 31925017) and the 
NIH BRAIN Initiative (grant nos. 1U01NS113358 and 1U01NS120824); and by grants from the Feng Foundation 
of Biomedical Research, the Clement and Xinxin Foundation, the New Cornerstone Science Foundation through the 
New Cornerstone Investigator Program and the XPLORER PRIZE, the Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, 
the State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology at Peking University School of Life Sciences and the National 
Key R&D Program of China (2022YFE0108700) to Y .L.; the NIH (grant no. R01DA004523) to J.T.W.; the NIH 
(grant no. R01MH125162) to M.W.-U.; the NIH (grant no. 5F32MH126505-02) to M.G.C.; the NIH (grant no. 
R01DA049930) to M.E.W.; the NIH (grant no. F31DA057063) to S.J.W.; the National Key R&D Program of 
China (grant no. 2022YFC-3300905) to H.D.; and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 
82171492) to Y . Zhu. We thank I. Green and I. Tsutsui-Kimura for assistance for animal surgery. We thank X. 
Lei at PKU-CLS and the National Center for Protein Sciences at Peking University in Beijing, China, for support 
and assistance with the Opera Phenix high-content screening system, imaging platform and behavioral experiments. 
Cartoon illustrations, including Figs. 1a, 3m, 4a (top), 4g (left), 5a, 6a, 6b, 6c(i), 6d(i), 6e(i), Extended Data Figs. 4, 
5, 6, 8a, 8d, and 10, were created with BioRender.com.
Data availability
The plasmids and sequences used to express the sensors in this study are available from 
Addgene (catalog nos. 208692–208708; https://www.addgene.org/Yulong_Li/). Source data 
are provided with this paper.
Zhuo et al. Page 33
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
References
1. Aransay A, Rodríguez-López C, García-Amado M, Clascá F. & Prensa L. Long-range projection 
neurons of the mouse ventral tegmental area: a single-cell axon tracing analysis. Front. Neuroanat 9, 
59 (2015). [PubMed: 26042000] 
2. Slaney TR, Mabrouk OS, Porter-Stransky KA, Aragona BJ & Kennedy RT Chemical gradients 
within brain extracellular space measured using low flow push-pull perfusion sampling in vivo. 
ACS Chem. Neurosci 4, 321–329 (2013). [PubMed: 23421683] 
3. Björklund A. & Dunnett SB Dopamine neuron systems in the brain: an update. Trends Neurosci. 30, 
194–202 (2007). [PubMed: 17408759] 
4. Klaus A, Alves da Silva J. & Costa RM What, if, and when to move: basal ganglia circuits and 
self-paced action initiation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 42, 459–483 (2019). [PubMed: 31018098] 
5. Wise RA Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 5, 483–494 (2004). [PubMed: 
15152198] 
6. Goldman-Rakic PS The cortical dopamine system: role in memory and cognition. Adv. Pharmacol 
42, 707–711 (1998). [PubMed: 9327997] 
7. Ott T. & Nieder A. Dopamine and cognitive control in prefrontal cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci 23, 
213–234 (2019). [PubMed: 30711326] 
8. Matthews GA et al. Dorsal raphe dopamine neurons represent the experience of social isolation. Cell 
164, 617–631 (2016). [PubMed: 26871628] 
9. Vander Weele CM et al. Dopamine enhances signal-to-noise ratio in cortical-brainstem encoding of 
aversive stimuli. Nature 563, 397–401 (2018). [PubMed: 30405240] 
10. Patriarchi T. et al. Ultrafast neuronal imaging of dopamine dynamics with designed genetically 
encoded sensors. Science 360, eaat4422 (2018).
11. Sun F. et al. A genetically encoded fluorescent sensor enables rapid and specific detection of 
dopamine in flies, fish, and mice. Cell 174, 481–496 (2018). [PubMed: 30007419] 
12. Patriarchi T. et al. An expanded palette of dopamine sensors for multiplex imaging in vivo. Nat. 
Methods 17, 1147–1155 (2020). [PubMed: 32895537] 
13. Sun F. et al. Next-generation GRAB sensors for monitoring dopaminergic activity in vivo. Nat. 
Methods 17, 1156–1166 (2020). [PubMed: 33087905] 
14. Hamid AA, Frank MJ & Moore CI Wave-like dopamine dynamics as a mechanism for 
spatiotemporal credit assignment. Cell 184, 2733–2749 (2021). [PubMed: 33861952] 
15. Lee SJ et al. Cell-type-specific asynchronous modulation of PKA by dopamine in learning. Nature 
590, 451–456 (2021). [PubMed: 33361810] 
16. Kim HR et al. A unified framework for dopamine signals across timescales. Cell 183, 1600–1616 
(2020). [PubMed: 33248024] 
17. Liu C. et al. An action potential initiation mechanism in distal axons for the control of dopamine 
release. Science 375, 1378–1385 (2022). [PubMed: 35324301] 
18. Feng J. et al. Monitoring norepinephrine release in vivo using next-generation GRABNE sensors. 
Preprint at bioRxiv 10.1101/2023.06.22.546075 (2023).
19. Baird GS, Zacharias DA & Tsien RY Circular permutation and receptor insertion within green 
fluorescent proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 11241–11246 (1999). [PubMed: 10500161] 
20. Pédelacq J-D, Cabantous S, Tran T, Terwilliger TC & Waldo GS Engineering and characterization 
of a superfolder green fluorescent protein. Nat. Biotechnol 24, 79–88 (2006). [PubMed: 16369541] 
21. Zhao Y . et al. An expanded palette of genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators. Science 333, 1888–
1891 (2011). [PubMed: 21903779] 
22. Dana H. et al. Sensitive red protein calcium indicators for imaging neural activity. eLife 5, e12727 
(2016).
23. Bindels DS et al. mScarlet: a bright monomeric red fluorescent protein for cellular imaging. Nat. 
Methods 14, 53–56 (2017). [PubMed: 27869816] 
24. Feng S. et al. Improved split fluorescent proteins for endogenous protein labeling. Nat. Commun 8, 
370 (2017). [PubMed: 28851864] 
Zhuo et al. Page 34
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
25. Chien EYT et al. Structure of the human dopamine D3 receptor in complex with a D2/D3 selective 
antagonist. Science 330, 1091–1095 (2010). [PubMed: 21097933] 
26. Yin J. et al. Structure of a D2 dopamine receptor–G-protein complex in a lipid membrane. Nature 
584, 125–129 (2020). [PubMed: 32528175] 
27. Sun B. et al. Crystal structure of dopamine D1 receptor in complex with G protein and a non-
catechol agonist. Nat. Commun 12, 3305 (2021). [PubMed: 34083522] 
28. Zhuang Y . et al. Structural insights into the human D1 and D2 dopamine receptor signaling 
complexes. Cell 184, 931–942 (2021). [PubMed: 33571431] 
29. Wu J. et al. Improved orange and red Ca2+ indicators and photophysical considerations for 
optogenetic applications. ACS Chem. Neurosci 4, 963–972 (2013). [PubMed: 23452507] 
30. Wan Q. et al. Mini G protein probes for active G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) in live cells. J. 
Biol. Chem 293, 7466–7473 (2018). [PubMed: 29523687] 
31. Kroeze WK et al. PRESTO-Tango as an open-source resource for interrogation of the druggable 
human GPCRome. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol 22, 362–369 (2015). [PubMed: 25895059] 
32. Li S. et al. Multiregional profiling of the brain transmembrane proteome uncovers novel regulators 
of depression. Sci. Adv 7, eabf0634 (2021).
33. Klapoetke NC et al. Independent optical excitation of distinct neural populations. Nat. Methods 11, 
338–346 (2014). [PubMed: 24509633] 
34. Nagel G. et al. Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated cation-selective membrane channel. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 13940–13945 (2003). [PubMed: 14615590] 
35. Beyer CE, Boikess S, Luo B. & Dawson LA Comparison of the effects of antidepressants on 
norepinephrine and serotonin concentrations in the rat frontal cortex: an in-vivo microdialysis 
study. J. Psychopharmacol 16, 297–304 (2002). [PubMed: 12503828] 
36. Greengard P. The neurobiology of slow synaptic transmission. Science 294, 1024–1030 (2001). 
[PubMed: 11691979] 
37. Chen Y . et al. Endogenous Gαq-coupled neuromodulator receptors activate protein kinase A. 
Neuron 96, 1070–1083 (2017). [PubMed: 29154125] 
38. Wang L. et al. A high-performance genetically encoded fluorescent indicator for in vivo cAMP 
imaging. Nat. Commun 13, 5363 (2022). [PubMed: 36097007] 
39. Ney LJ et al. Dopamine, endocannabinoids and their interaction in fear extinction and negative 
affect in PTSD. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 105, 110118 (2021).
40. Dong A. et al. A fluorescent sensor for spatiotemporally resolved imaging of endocannabinoid 
dynamics in vivo. Nat. Biotechnol40, 787–798 (2021). [PubMed: 34764491] 
41. Schultz W, Dayan P. & Montague PR A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science 275, 
1593–1599 (1997). [PubMed: 9054347] 
42. Hasselmo ME The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 16, 710–
715 (2006). [PubMed: 17011181] 
43. Jing M. et al. An optimized acetylcholine sensor for monitoring in vivo cholinergic activity. Nat. 
Methods 17, 1139–1146 (2020). [PubMed: 32989318] 
44. Howe MW & Dombeck DA Rapid signalling in distinct dopaminergic axons during locomotion 
and reward. Nature 535, 505–510 (2016). [PubMed: 27398617] 
45. Calipari ES et al. In vivo imaging identifies temporal signature of D1 and D2 medium spiny 
neurons in cocaine reward. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 2726–2731 (2016). [PubMed: 
26831103] 
46. Popescu AT, Zhou MR & Poo M. Phasic dopamine release in the medial prefrontal cortex enhances 
stimulus discrimination. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E3169–E3176 (2016). [PubMed: 
27185946] 
47. Gibson DG et al. Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases. Nat. 
Methods 6, 343–345 (2009). [PubMed: 19363495] 
48. Pologruto TA, Sabatini BL & Svoboda K. ScanImage: flexible software for operating laser 
scanning microscopes. Biomed. Eng. Online 2, 13 (2003). [PubMed: 12801419] 
49. Zhu Y . et al. Dynamic salience processing in paraventricular thalamus gates associative learning. 
Science 362, 423–429 (2018). [PubMed: 30361366] 
Zhuo et al. Page 35
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
50. Loweth JA et al. Synaptic depression via mGluR1 positive allosteric modulation suppresses 
cue-induced cocaine craving. Nat. Neurosci 17, 73–80 (2014). [PubMed: 24270186] 
51. Conrad KL et al. Formation of accumbens GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors mediates incubation of 
cocaine craving. Nature 454, 118–121 (2008). [PubMed: 18500330] 
52. Cantu DA et al. EZcalcium: open-source toolbox for analysis of calcium imaging data. Front. 
Neural Circuits 14, 25 (2020). [PubMed: 32499682] 
Zhuo et al. Page 36
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1 |. Development and performance of improved dual-color GRABDA sensors.
a, Schematic illustration showing the principle of next-generation DA sensors. b, Schematics 
of improved GRABDA sensors. Mutations are indicated with respect to wild-type receptors 
and fluorescent proteins. Immunoglobulin κ-chain (Igk) leader sequenceor histamine (HA), 
N terminus leader sequence. c, Spectral profiles of GRABDA sensors. One-photon excitation 
(top-left), emission (top-right) and two-photon excitation (bottom) spectra of indicated 
sensors with (dashed lines) or without (continuous lines) DA are shown. d, Representative 
images showing sensor expression (top) and fluorescence response to 100 μM DA (bottom) 
Zhuo et al. Page 37
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of indicated sensors. Scale bar, 20 μm. e, Titration DA curves of indicated sensors on 
HEK293T cells. Apparent EC50 values are defined as the concentration of half-maximal 
fluorescence changes (maxΔF/F0), mean ± s.e.m. n = 4, 7, 10, 8, 7, 6, 6, 12, 12 and 12 
wells for gDA3m, gDA3h, gDA2m, dLight1.3b, rDA2m, rDA2h, rDA1m, rDA3m, rDA3h 
and rDA3m, respectively, with an average of 400 cells per well. f, Group summary of 
brightness (relative to gDA2m and rDA1m, respectively) of indicated sensors before and 
after 100 μM DA addition. n = 90/5 (90 cells from 5 separate experiments), 81/5, 88/5, 36/3, 
45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3 and 38/3 for gDA3m, gDA3h, gDA2m, dLight1.3b, rDA2m, 
rDA2h, rDA1m, rDA3m, rDA3h and RdLight1, respectively. g, Group summary of maximal 
ΔF/F0 of indicated sensors in response to 100 μM DA. n = 61/7, 102/10, 91/9, 35/3, 45/3, 
45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 38/3 for gDA3m, gDA3h, gDA2m, dLight1.3b, rDA2m, rDA2h, 
rDA1m, rDA3m, rDA3h and RdLight1, respectively, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A with 
post hoc Tukey’s test was performed. P = 1 × 10−8 between gDA3m and gDA2m, or 
dLight1.3b; P = 1 × 10−8 between gDA3h and gDA2m, or dLight1.3b; P = 1 × 10−9 
between rDA2m and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−9 between RdLight1 and rDA3m, or rDA3h. 
h, Group summary of SNR (relative to gDA2m and rDA1m, respectively) of indicated 
sensors. n = 95/5, 40/3, 96/5, 31/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 45/3, 38/3 for gDA3m, gDA3h, 
gDA2m, dLight1.3b, rDA2m, rDA2h, rDA1m, rDA3m, rDA3h and RdLight1, respectively, 
mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A with post hoc Tukey’s test was performed. P = 1 × 10−8 
between gDA3m and gDA2m, or dLight1.3b; P = 1 × 10−8 between gDA3h and gDA2m, 
or dLight1.3b; P = 0.0016 between rDA2h and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−9 between rDA2m 
and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−9 between RdLight1 and rDA3m, or rDA3h. EC50, half-maximum 
effective concentration; FI, fluorescence intensity.
Zhuo et al. Page 38
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2 |. Characterization of GRABDA sensors in cultured cells.
a, Representative images of gDA3m- or rDA3m-expressing neurons. Scale bars, 100 μm 
(left) and 20 μm (right). b, Representative images showing expression and fluorescence 
response of indicated sensors in neurons. Scale bar, 50 μm. Similar results were observed 
in more than 30 cells. c, Titration DA curves (left) and group summary of peak response 
(top-right) and relative SNR (bottom-right) of indicated green sensors in neurons. Left, n = 
60, 60, 120, 60 neurons for gDA2m, gDA3m, gDA3h and dLight1.3b, respectively; right, 
n = 130, 175, 200, 80 neurons, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test: 
Zhuo et al. Page 39
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
for both response and SNR, P = 5 × 10−10 between gDA3m and gDA2m, or dLight1.3b; 
P = 5 × 10−10 between gDA3h and gDA2m, or dLight1.3b. d, Similar to c except for red 
sensors. Left, n = 30 neurons for each sensor; right, n = 60 neurons for each, mean ± 
s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test: response, P = 1 × 10−9 between rDA2h 
and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−11 between rDA2m and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−11 between RdLight1 
and rDA3m, or rDA3h; SNR, P = 0.0006 between rDA2h and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−11 
between rDA2m and rDA1m; P = 1 × 10−11 between RdLight1 and rDA3m, or rDA3h. 
e, Pharmacological specificity of indicated sensors in neurons. SCH, D1R antagonist; 
eticlopride (Etic), D2R antagonist; SKF-81297 (SKF), D1R agonist; quinpirole (Quin), D2R 
agonist; Glu, glutamate; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; L-Dopa, levodopa; 5-HT, serotonin; 
OA, octopamine; TA, tyramine. Antagonists were applied at 10 μM, others at 1 μM. n = 4, 
5, 3 and 3 wells for gDA3m, gDA3h, rDA2m and rDA3m, respectively, with an average of 
100 neurons per well, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Dunnett’s test: gDA3m, 
P = 0.0831 between DA and DA + Etic; P = 1.3 × 10−13 between DA and others; gDA3h, 
P = 0.2744, 0.0008 between DA and DA + Etic, or SKF; P = 1.0 × 10−15 between DA 
and others; rDA2m, P = 1.0 × 10−13 between DA and others; rDA3m, P = 0.8251, 0.9993 
between DA and DA + Etic, or SKF; P = 4.0 × 10−14 between DA and others. f, Titration 
curves of indicated sensors for the response to DA or NE in neurons. DA, n = 45, 80, 60 
and 90 neurons from 3 experiments for gDA3m, gDA3h, rDA2m and rDA3m; NE, n = 45, 
120, 30 and 60 neurons from 3 experiments for gDA3m, gDA3h, rDA2m and rDA3m, mean 
± s.e.m. g, Representative traces (left) and group summary of ΔF/F0 (right) of indicated 
sensors upon blue-light illumination. n = 71, 13, 17, 18, 14, 8, 8, 18, 16 cells for jRGECO1a, 
rDA1m, rDA2m, rDA2h, rDA2mut, RdLight1, rDA3m, rDA3h and rDA3mut, respectively, 
mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Dunnett’s test: P = 0.2726 between jRGECO1a 
and D1R-based red sensors; P = 1 × 10−15 between jRGECO1a and D2R-based red sensors. 
h, Representative images (left) and quantification (right) of sensor fluorescence in response 
to 2-h application of 100 μM DA. Scale bar, 20 μm. n = 3 and 9 cultures for gDA3m and 
rDA3m, respectively, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A test was performed for each sensor 
among DA-containing groups: P = 0.4375, 0.1895 for gDA3m and rDA3m. i, Luciferase 
complementation assay for assessing G-protein coupling. Cells expressing mGs/i alone serve 
as the control. n = 3 cultures each, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test: 
P = 2 × 10−8 between bD1R and gDA3h; P = 1 × 10−8 between hD1R and gDA3m; P = 3 × 
10−7 between aD2R and rDA2m, or rDA2h; P = 0.92, 0.95 between Gi-LgBit and rDA2m, 
or rDA2h; P = 9 × 10−7, 5 × 10−7 between hD1R and rDA3m, or rDA3h; P = 0.77, 0.99 
between Gs-LgBit and rDA3m, or rDA3h. j, Tango assay for assessing β-arrestin coupling. 
n = 3 cultures each, mean ± s.e.m. NA, not applicable. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s 
test: P = 6 × 10−6 between bD1R and gDA3h; P = 1 × 10−8 between hD1R and gDA3m; P = 
2 × 10−7, 3 × 10−7 between aD2R and rDA2m, or rDA2h; P = 0.0002, 0.0002 between hD1R 
and rDA3m, or rDA3h. NS, not significant.
Zhuo et al. Page 40
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3 |. Ex vivo and in vivo validation of GRABDA sensors. a, Schematic
illustration depicting the experimental design for panels b–e. b, Representative images 
showing gDA3m or rDA3m expression in the NAc. Scale bar, 100 μm. Similar results were 
observed from more than four mice. c, Example fluorescence response to indicated electrical 
stimulation in the sensor-expressing brain slices. Dashed circles, ROIs used to analyze the 
responses. Scale bar, 100 μm. d, Representative traces (left) and group summary (right) of 
the change in gDA3m sensor fluorescence to electrical stimulation. Left, mean ± s.d. Right, 
mean ± s.e.m. n = 8 slices from 5 mice (8/5) for gDA3m. The inset shows quantification 
Zhuo et al. Page 41
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of the ΔF/F0 of indicated sensors to 1-pulse stimulation. Data were replotted from previous 
results of gDA2m (ref. 13). Two-tailed Student’s t-test: P = 0.0429 for gDA3m, P = 0.0076 
between gDA3m and gDA2m. e, Representative traces (left) and group summary (right) 
of the change in rDA3m sensor fluorescence to electrical stimulation. Left, mean ± s.d. 
Right, mean ± s.e.m. n = 5/4 for rDA3m. The inset shows quantification of the ΔF/F0 of 
indicated sensors to 1-pulse stimulation. Two-tailed Student’s t-test: P = 0.0138 for rDA3m, 
P = 0.0008 between rDA3m and rDA1m. Data were replotted from previous results of 
rDA1m (ref. 13). f, Normalized fluorescence change in gDA3m to indicated compounds 
(1 μM). Sulpiride (Sulp), D2R antagonist. n = 3 wells with 500–600 cells per well, mean 
± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Dunnett’s test: P = 0.9813, 0.8848 between DA and 
DA+Quin, or DA+Sulp. g, Representative pseudocolored images (top) and fluorescence 
response traces (bottom, mean ± s.d.) of gDA3m to electrical stimuli in indicated conditions 
(drugs in 1 μM). Yellow dashed line, electrode placement; dashed circles, ROIs. Scale bar, 
100 μm. h, Group summary of fluorescence response of gDA3m to electrical stimulation 
either in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) or with indicated drugs. n = 6 slices from 5 
mice, mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test: P = 0.0023, P = 0.9999, P 
= 0.0008 between ACSF and Quin, Sulp or SCH; P = 0.00231 between Quin and Sulp. 
i, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design of panels j–l. j, Representative 
images showing gDA3m expression in the striatum (top) and SNc (bottom) in the control 
condition (left) and upon stimulation (right). Scale bar, 5 μm. Yellow lines, line-scanning 
regions. Similar results were observed from more than five slices. k, Full-frame fluorescence 
response (relative to the peak of the first stimulation) to indicated electrical stimulations. n 
= 6 slices for striatum, n = 9 slices for SNc, mean ± s.e.m. l, Representative line-scan image 
in the striatum (top) and the SNc (bottom) and averaged normalized traces to multi-pulse 
stimulus. n = 6 areas for striatum and SNc, respectively, mean ± s.e.m. m, Schematic 
illustration depicting the experimental design for panels n–q. n, Histological verification of 
rDA2m expression in mPFC and NAc, and ChrimsonR expression in VTA. Dashed boxes, 
optical tracts. Scale bar, 1 mm. o, Representative traces of rDA2m signals in the mPFC (top) 
and NAc (bottom) during optogenetic stimulations. p, Average traces of sensor response in 
the mPFC (left) and NAc (right) to indicated optogenetic stimulation from a mouse, mean ± 
s.d. The length of blue lines indicates the duration of opto-stimulation. q, Group summary 
of peak response of indicated sensors to indicated optogenetic stimulation. n = 3 mice for 
rDA2m and rDA2mut, mean ± s.e.m. Two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed between 
groups for 10-s opto-induced response. mPFC, P = 0.0007; NAc, P = 0.0364. 1m, rDA1m; 
2m, gDA2m; 3m in d, gDA3m; 3m in e, rDA3m; 2PM, two-photon microscope.
Zhuo et al. Page 42
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4 |. Multiplexed measurements of DA and other neurochemical signals during natural 
behaviors.
a, Schematic illustration depicting the experimental design for panels b–f. b, Histological 
verification of rDA3m and G-Flamp1 expression in NAc. DAPI, 4,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole. Scale bar, 1 mm. c, Example traces (top) and magnified traces of rDA3m 
(red) and G-Flamp1 (green) signals simultaneously measured during the indicated mating 
stages. d, Group-averaged rDA3m and G-Flamp1 fluorescence aligned to event onset for all 
mice. The signals were normalized to respective maxima and minimum. n = 4 mice, mean ± 
s.e.m. e, Cross-correlation between simultaneously recorded rDA3m and G-Flamp1 signals 
Zhuo et al. Page 43
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
during indicated stages and of shuffle group. n = 4 mice, mean ± s.e.m. f, Group summary 
of peak correlation coefficient (top) and time lag of cross-correlation peak (bottom) between 
rDA3m and G-Flamp1 signals across mating stages. n = 4 mice, mean ± s.e.m. One-way 
ANOV A with post hoc Tukey’s test was performed. g, Schematic illustration depicting the 
experimental design for panels g–k. h, Histological verification of rDA2m and eCB2.0 
expression (left) and rDA1m and eCB2.0 expression (right) in BLA. Scale bar, 1 mm. 
i, Pseudocolored fluorescence responses of rDA2m and eCB2.0 measured in the BLA to 
ten consecutive foot shocks. j, Average traces of the change in rDA2m (top) and eCB2.0 
(bottom) fluorescence from a mouse. The gray-shaded area indicates the application of 
electrical foot shock, mean ± s.d. k, Same as h with simultaneously recorded contralateral 
rDA1m and eCB2.0 signals. l, Group summary of the peak change in fluorescence of 
indicated sensors to foot shock. n = 4 mice, mean ± s.e.m. Paired two-tailed Student’s 
t-test was performed. P = 0.0390 between rDA2m and rDA1m; P = 0.7019 between eCB2.0 
groups. m, Summary of rise and decay time constants measured for the fluorescence change 
of indicated sensors to foot shock. The inset shows the example average trace of rDA2m 
and eCB2.0 signals that were normalized to respective maxima and minimum. n = 4 mice, 
mean ± s.e.m. One-way ANOV A with post hoc Dunnett’s test was performed. Rise time, P = 
0.5742 and 0.0087 between rDA2m and rDA1m, or eCB2.0. Decay time, P = 0.2180 for all 
groups.
Zhuo et al. Page 44
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 5 |. DA and ACh signals in mouse NAc and mPFC during an auditory Pavlovian 
conditioning task.
a, Schematic illustration depicting experimental design for panels b–g. b, Example traces of 
rDA3m (red) and ACh3.0 (green) signals (ΔF/F0) simultaneously measured in the NAc (top) 
and mPFC (bottom) from a trained mouse during four consecutive trials. The audio, water 
and puff delivery are indicated above. c, Representative time-aligned pseudocolored images 
and averaged traces (mean ± s.e.m.) of rDA3m and ACh3.0 fluorescence from a mouse in 
naive (top) and trained (bottom) state (c(i)). The gray-shaded area indicates the application 
of audio. The dashed line indicates the delivery of water or puff. Session-wide correlation 
between rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals across naive (top) and trained sessions (bottom) (c(ii)). 
n = 3 mice. d, The same as c with simultaneously recorded rDA3m and ACh3.0 signals in 
Zhuo et al. Page 45
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the mPFC. e, Group-averaged rDA3m (top) and ACh3.0 (bottom) fluorescence in the NAc 
(left) and mPFC (right) for all mice under naive and trained states. Water or puff sessions 
are indicated above. n = 3 mice. f, Group analysis of the normalized average change of 
rDA3m (top) and ACh3.0 (bottom) signals to US (left) and CS (right) in different sessions. 
The average response was calculated as the average ΔF/F0 in the 1 s after the behavior 
onset. The gray points indicate data from individual animals; average and s.e.m. are shown 
by data points with state-represented color. n = 3 mice. Two-way ANOV A with post hoc 
Sidak’s test was performed between water and puff sessions and between naive and trained 
states. Responses in the trained mice NAc, P = 0.0145 (rDA3m-US), 0.0287 (rDA3m-CS), 
0.0371 (ACh3.0-US), 0.0356 (ACh3.0-CS) between water and puff trials; rDA3m water 
trial CS response in the NAc, P = 0.0290 between naive and trained. g, Session-wide 
cross-correlation between rDA3m (top) or ACh (bottom) signals recorded in the NAc and 
mPFC. n = 3 mice. CS, conditional stimulus; ITI, inter-trial interval; US, unconditional 
stimulus.
Zhuo et al. Page 46
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 6 |. Spatially resolved heterogenous cortical DA dynamics in mice.
a,b, Schematic illustration depicting virus injection and head-fixed two-photon imaging in 
the mouse motor cortex. a, Example image showing gDA3h expression in the M1/M2 in a 
coronal brain slice. Scale bar, 500 μm. b, Representative in vivo two-photon image of layer 
2/3 in the M1/M2 showing gDA3h fluorescence. Scale bar, 100 μm. c, Schematic cartoon 
illustrating forced running experiments (c(i)), representative pseudocolored response images 
(c(ii)) and traces measured at indicated ROIs (white squares) during three trials (c(iii)) in 
mice expressing gDA3h (top) or mEGFP (bottom). Scale bar, 50 μm. d,e, Similar to c except 
Zhuo et al. Page 47
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
mice were subjected to tail shock (d) or audio (e). Two-photon imaging was performed 
in the same region across behaviors. f, Group summary of the peak fluorescence changes 
of gDA3h and mEGFP to indicated stimulus. n = 5 and 4 mice for gDA3h and mEGFP, 
mean ± s.e.m. Two-tailed Student’s t-test: running, P = 4 × 10−5; shock, P = 0.0017. g, 
Group summary of the rise and decay time constant of gDA3h signals to forced running 
and tail shock. n = 5 mice, mean ± s.e.m. h, Example image showing the spatial responding 
pattern to forced running, tail shock, merge and ROI selection. i, Hierarchical clustering 
of ROI-specific responses to running and shock from a mouse. ROIs are indicated in h. 
j, Same to h with data from another two mice. k, Population data showing hierarchical 
clustering of ROI-specific response. n = 91 ROIs from 5 mice. l,m, Average (bold lines) and 
individual (thin lines) traces (l) and quantifications of response amplitudes (m) from ROIs 
within each cluster in k during different behaviors. The black lines indicate the application 
of indicated stimulus. n = 26, 24, 21 and 20 ROIs from 5 mice for each cluster, mean ± 
s.e.m. One-way ANOV A, post hoc Tukey’s test: forced running, P = 0.0128, 0.0585 between 
none and shock, or between running and both; tail shock, P = 0.9989, 0.6474 between none 
and running, or between shock and both; audio, P = 0.0766 among clusters. n, Percentage 
of area that was responsive to the indicated stimulus as in h. o, Venn diagram of the imaged 
motor cortex area that was responsive to the indicated stimulus. n = 5 mice. A, anterior; L, 
lateral; M, medial; P, posterior.
Zhuo et al. Page 48
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 October 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript