Data Denoising with transfer learning in single-cell 
transcriptomics
Jingshu Wang1, Divyansh Agarwal2, Mo Huang1, Gang Hu3, Zilu Zhou2, Chengzhong Ye4, 
Nancy R. Zhang1,*
1)Department of Statistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
2)Graduate Group in Genomics and Computational Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA
3)School of Mathematical Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
4)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Abstract
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data is noisy and sparse. Here, we show that transfer 
learning across datasets remarkably improves data quality. By coupling a deep autoencoder with a 
Bayesian model, SA VER-X extracts transferable gene-gene relationships across data from 
different labs, varying conditions, and divergent species to denoise target new datasets.
In scRNA-seq studies, technical noise blurs precise distinctions between cell states, and 
genes with low expression cannot be accurately quantified. Existing methods1–6 to denoise 
scRNA-seq data often underperform when sequencing depth is low or when the cell type of 
interest is rare, and also ignore datasets in public domain, which may contain relevant 
information to aid denoising. Ensuing the mouse cell atlases7,8, we will soon have detailed 
atlases for each anatomic organ in the human body9. Publicly available scRNA-seq datasets 
contain information about cell types and gene signatures that is relevant to newly generated 
data. Yet, it is unclear how to borrow information across platforms, subjects and tissues. 
Moreover, such transfer learning must not introduce bias or force the new data to lose its 
distinctive features.
Here, we describe a denoising method, Single-cell Analysis via Expression Recovery 
harnessing eXternal data (SA VER-X), which couples a Bayesian hierarchical model to a 
pretrainable deep autoencoder10. Although neural networks have formed the basis of other 
*Correspondence: Nancy R. Zhang, nzh@wharton.upenn.edu, (215) 898-8007, Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, 
University of Pennsylvania.
Author Contributions
J.W. and N.R.Z. conceptualized the study, designed the model and planned the case studies. J.W. developed the algorithm, 
implemented the SA VER-X software and led the data analysis. D.A. constructed the SA VER-X website and helped with data analysis. 
M.H. performed benchmarking with other methods and helped with algorithm development. G.H. helped with algorithm development 
and model design. Z.Z. tested SA VER-X website and software, and helped with data analysis. C.Y . conducted the analysis of CITE-
seq data. J.W., D.A. and N.R.Z. wrote the paper with feedback from M.H. and Z.Z.
Competing Financial Interests Statement
The authors declare no competing interests
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2019 September ; 16(9): 875–878. doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0537-1.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
single cell methods4,6, existing tools act solely on the data at hand. Moreover, extensive 
benchmarking11 and examples herein (Figure S1) highlight that most methods except 
SA VER1, the precursor to SA VER-X, produce biased estimates of the true gene expression 
and introduce spurious gene-gene correlations. SA VER-X builds upon the core model from 
SA VER, combining it with the autoencoder backend with a two-stage training regime to 
utilize public data resources.
The statistical framework underlying SA VER-X is explicated in Methods. Briefly, let Y 
denote the new scRNA-seq count matrix to be denoised (“target data”). SA VER-X 
decomposes the variation in Y into: (i) a predictable structured component (Λ) which 
explains the shared variation across genes, (ii) unpredictable cell-level fluctuations that are 
independent across genes, and (iii) technical noise12. SA VER-X estimates the unobserved 
true gene expression, X, centered at Λ with independent gene-specific dispersions:
Λ unpredictable biological variation X technical noise Y
Λ is learned through an autoencoder (Figure 1b, item A), whose weights are first pretrained 
on cells from the same tissue or of similar type, extracted from public repositories 
(“pretraining data”; Figure 1a). The weights are then updated to fit the target data. This two-
stage training regime allows adaptive retention of transferable features. Many core cell types 
and essential pathways are shared between human and mouse9,13. To allow cross-species 
learning, the autoencoder in SA VER-X includes a shared network between human and 
mouse (Figure S2). Additionally, SA VER-X employs cross-validation-based gene filtering 
and Bayesian shrinkage to preserve expression patterns that are unique to the target dataset 
(Figure 1b, items B and C). Cross-validation identifies genes poorly fit by the autoencoder, 
whose predictions are replaced by their target data mean. Bayesian shrinkage computes a 
weighted average of the predicted values (Λ) and the observed data (Y) to get the final 
denoised value (X).
We first explored the benefits and limits of transfer learning via SA VER-X on a diverse 
testbed of cells that constitute the immune system. Despite being implicated in virtually 
every disease, tissue-infiltrating immune cells in scRNA-seq data are scarce in the absence 
of flow sorting. In such cases, denoising becomes especially challenging without the aid of 
external data14. We examined whether SA VER-X pretrained on data from the Human Cell 
Atlas (HCA) project9 (500,000 immunocytes from umbilical cord blood and bone marrow) 
and 10X Genomics15 (200,000 Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells; PBMCs) could 
meaningfully improve the data quality of immune cells from healthy and disease tissue. 
Concomitantly, we benchmarked SA VER-X against existing denoising methods on a set of 
purified cells from 9 non-overlapping immune cell types15.
Reliable identification of T-cell subtypes is crucial in characterizing a tissue’s immune 
environment, yet T-cell subtypes are often conflated in the raw scRNA-seq data (Figure 2a). 
We created a test dataset by randomly selecting 100 cells for each cell type, and found that 
SA VER-X pretrained on HCA not only markedly heightens the segregation among T-cell 
subtypes, but also improves the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) over other methods (Figure S3). 
Wang et al. Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Encouraged by the transference of cell type-specific transcriptional signatures between 
datasets that contain similar cell types, we observed that the benefits of transfer learning 
manifest more clearly with decrease in cell number or sequencing depth in the target data 
(Figure S3). In the extreme case, even cells with a coverage of merely 60 total UMIs, 
typically discarded in current pipelines, can be rescued by transfer learning to reveal useful 
information.
To appreciate the limits of transfer learning, we evaluated the relationship between denoising 
accuracy and cell type similarity between the pretraining and target datasets. Can transfer 
learning effectively denoise cellular states absent in the pretraining data? Consider the 
purified T-cells analyzed above. When SA VER-X is pretrained on all T-cell subtypes, 
clustering and expression quantification of marker genes improve substantially (Figure 2b). 
However, even when a cell type (CD4+ regulatory T-cells, Tregs) is completely absent in 
pretraining, SA VER-X improves identification and marker gene quantification for this “new” 
cell type. Relatedly, to determine whether enrichment of a cell type in the pretraining data 
improves denoising accuracy in the target data, we pretrained SA VER-X on T-cells enriched 
for Tregs, which did not produce any appreciable difference (Figure S4), Thus, SA VER-X 
does not require a perfect match in cell type composition between the pretraining and target 
data, and, importantly, can improve the quantification of new cell types that are absent in the 
pretraining data.
As an auxiliary measure, we also used CITE-seq16 to examine the gene-protein correlations 
of key immune markers. Correlations between protein abundances and RNA expression of 
their cognate genes were found to be strikingly low in CITE-seq16. We discovered that for 
PBMC/CBMC CITE-seq data, the denoised expression estimates from SA VER-X 
(pretrained on HCA and PBMC 10X Genomics) have patently higher correlations with their 
protein product. Compared with other methods, SA VER-X consistently improved 
correlations across all markers when the target dataset contained 100 and 1000 cells (Figure 
2c, S5). For larger data with 8000 cells, however, pretraining did not provide an apparent 
benefit (Figure S5).
Next, we probed whether SA VER-X can effectively learn from healthy immune cells to 
denoise immune cells sequenced from primary breast carcinoma samples17. Compared with 
the no-pretraining model, pretraining on immune cells from healthy tissue (HCA and PBMC 
10X Genomics) allowed us to better characterize the tumor-infiltrating immune cell types in 
multiple subjects (Figure 2d, Figure S6). Meanwhile, a tumor-associated immune cell 
subpopulation remained identifiable after transfer learning. In particular, SA VER-X 
preserved the elevated immunoglobulin production signature in this disease-specific cell 
state (Figure 2e, Figure S7). This population was absent in the normal tissue, and we 
validated its immunophenotype by the presence of markers such as LYZ. Cell-type specific 
gene expression differences between paired tumor and normal tissues were also preserved in 
all patients with paired tissues and for both two cell-types vital in immune-surveillance 
(Figure 2f). These results highlight that SA VER-X can effectively harness public immune 
cell data from healthy conditions to denoise immune cells from disease conditions, while 
preserving disease-specific signatures.
Wang et al. Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Finally, we considered cross-species transfer learning using scRNA-seq data from cells in 
the developing ventral midbrain of both mouse and human13. We sampled 10% of the reads 
in the human data13, reducing it to a median-per-cell coverage of 452 UMIs, and utilized the 
original data as reference to gauge denoising accuracy. We split the human cells randomly 
into two groups, down-sampled the reads of one group and reserved the other group for 
pretraining (Figure S8a). SA VER-X pretrained on the matched mouse brain cells led to a 
noticeable improvement, compared to no-pretraining, in for human cell classification (Figure 
3b). Pretraining on both human and mouse cells further improved the denoising accuracy 
compared to pretraining on human cells alone (Figure S8bd). Moreover, pretraining SA VER-
X on cells from regions other than the ventral midbrain7 was beneficial, and so was 
pretraining on three human non-UMI datasets18–20 together with mouse cells (Figure S8b). 
These experiments demonstrate the merit of transfer learning across species in general and 
practical settings where the anatomical regions and experimental protocols might differ 
between the pretraining and target data.
We then scrutinized whether a model pretrained on mouse data biases the estimates for 
genes with human-specific expression. We computed the log fold-change in cell type-
specific average expression between human and mouse, and identified genes differentially 
expressed between the two species for four cell types. Denoising the down-sampled human 
data with SA VER-X pretrained on mouse cells preserved the log fold-changes (Figure 3b). 
In contrast, simply relying on the autoencoder, without cross-validation and shrinkage, 
reduced the fold-change for some genes (Figure S8c). Unlike other methods, SA VER-X also 
preserved the variance of genes across cells (Figure 3c).
Taken together, our results demonstrate that SA VER-X’s framework can leverage existing 
data to improve the quality of new scRNA-seq datasets. At its core, SA VER-X trains a deep 
neural network across a range of study designs, and applies this model to new data to 
strengthen shared biological patterns. Transfer learning changes the approach to scRNA-seq 
data analysis from a process of study-specific statistical modeling to an automated process 
of cross-study data integration and information sharing.
Online Methods
Statistical model of SAVER-X
As stated in the main text, SA VER-X uses a statistical hierarchical model to decompose the 
randomness of observed UMI counts into three parts. Assume that the observed data is Y = 
(Ygc)G×C where g represents a gene and c represents a cell. Also, assume that the true 
relative gene expression is X = (Xgc)G×C where Xgc is the proportion of RNA copies of gene 
g in cell c. First, for the technical noise of UMI counts, it was shown12,21 that a Poisson 
model,
Y gc  Poisson  lcXgc
where lc = ∑g Ygc is the library size of cell c, has substantial empirical and logical support. 
Thus, both SA VER and SA VER-X have adopted this model for the technical noise and only 
Wang et al. Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
support denoising scRNA-seq data with UMI. Next, to quantify the biological variation, we 
assume that the true gene expression Xgc is derived by adding independent fluctuations for 
each gene to an underlying gene-gene correlated component Λgc, as follows:
Xgc ∣ Λgc Gamma Λgc, θgΛgc2
which is a Gamma distribution with mean Λgc and variance θgΛgc2. Λgc can be interpreted as 
the portion of gene g’s expression that is predictable by other genes. Since, at the level of 
single cells, gene expression can be idiosyncratic and unpredictable, at least given our 
current knowledge, we let the true expression Xgc to deviate from the correlated component 
Λgc to better recover single-cell level expression stochasticity. This is a critical difference 
between our framework and other denoising frameworks.
Pretraining and prediction with autoencoder
The autoencoder in SA VER-X is used to estimate Λ = (Λgc)G×C. It can be trained 
exclusively on the target data set, or first pretrained on existing data sets and then on the 
target data set. To allow transfer learning across species, the autoencoder used by SA VER-X 
has three subnetworks, as shown in Figure S1, with one subnetwork taking human genes as 
input, one subnetwork taking mouse genes as input, and one subnetwork taking shared 
human-mouse homologous genes as input. 21183 and 21122 genes are used for human and 
mouse (Supplementary Note 1), respectively, as input and output nodes of the autoencoder. 
By current annotations using the getLDS() function in the bioMaRt R package, 15494 genes 
out of these nodes have homologs shared between the two species (Supplementary Note 1). 
For each sub-network, the number of nodes in the encoding and decoding layers are, 
successively, 128, 64, 32, 64, and 128. We find in practice that the results are relatively 
robust to the chosen number of layers and nodes.
For a given tissue or cell-type, and for a given (set of) specie(s), publicly available scRNA-
seq data of the given category are mixed and fed into the autoencoder to pretrain a model. If 
only human data is available, only the human and shared sub-network weights are updated. 
Similarly, if only mouse data are available, only the mouse and shared sub-network weights 
are updated. Although SA VER-X can only denoise UMI counts, it can use both UMI and 
non-UMI datasets for pretraining. To adjust for the differences between data generated using 
non-UMI- and UMI-based technologies, an indicator node at the input layer feeds into each 
sub-network. For UMI datasets, the input expression levels are normalized by library size, 
re-scaled and log-transformed using formula: Y gc = log Y gc/lc × 10000 + 1) with  lc = ∑ g Y gc. 
For non-UMI datasets, TPM for each cell c and gene g are denoted as Ycg, and then the Ycg 
are transformed using the same formula as that for UMI. We use the negative log-likelihood 
function of the data as the loss function of our autoencoder. For UMI counts, based on our 
hierarchical model, Y|Λ follows a Negative Binomial distribution. Thus, for each cell c in 
one dataset, the loss function is:
L Y ⋅ c, Λ ⋅ c = ∑
autoencoder node g measured in the dataset
log NB Y gc; lcΛgc, θgU .
Wang et al. Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
On the other hand, for the non-UMI TPM data, Y|Λ is assumed to approximately follow a 
zero inflated Negative Binomial distribution (although TPM is not integer-valued, the 
likelihood function can still be computed) and the loss is:
L Y ⋅ c, Λ ⋅ c = ∑
autoencoder node g measured in the dataset
log ZINB Y gc; lcΛgc, θgNU , πgc
Here NB(x; μ, θ) and ZINB(x; μ, θ, π) are the densities of Negative Binomial and zero-
inflated Negative Binomial distribution (see Supplementary Note 3). A separate gene-
specific dispersion parameter θgU and θgNU is dedicated for UMI and non-UMI input, 
respectively. For non-UMI data, the gene- and cell-specific zero inflation parameter is 
defined as
πgc
1 − πgc
= wglogΛgc + bg
Where wg and bg are gene-specific unknown coefficients. SA VER-X only transfers the gene-
gene relationship weights, and does not transfer the over-dispersion nor zero inflation 
parameters. Our implementation of the autoencoder utilizes the library functions of DCA4.
Cross-validation and filtering for unpredictable genes
When training the autoencoder on a target UMI dataset to get the prediction matrix Λ, cross-
validation is applied to filter out genes that cannot be predicted accurately by the 
autoencoder. Specifically, the target data is randomly split into held-in and held-out cell sets, 
the autoencoder is trained on the held-in set and then used to make predictions on the held-
out set. We compare the performance of the autoencoder with a completely null model 
where the gene expression in every cell is predicted by their means across cells. For a 
specific gene g, let the held-in sample mean for the library-size normalized counts be μg. 
Then a gene is unpredictable if the Poisson deviance of the autoencoder is larger than that of 
the null model, equivalently:
− ∑
c is a held  −  out cell 
Y gclog lcΛgc + ε − lcΛgc > − ∑
c is a held  −  out cell 
Y gclog lcμg + ε − lcμg
where ε = 10−10 to avoid taking the log of zeros. For the unpredictable genes that are 
identified by cross-validation, their predictions are replaced with the null model prediction, 
which are the sample means of library size normalized UMI counts for every gene.
Empirical Bayes Shrinkage
After estimating Λ, the final denoised matrix X of SA VER-X is obtained by empirical Bayes 
shrinkage based on the hierarchical model:
Y gc Poisson lcXgc ,    Xgc ∣ Λgc Gamma Λgc, θgΛgc2
Wang et al. Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
We replace the unknown Λgc with the estimated Λgc and estimate θg for each gene by 
maximum likelihood. The final denoised value Xgc is the posterior mean of Xgc, which is an 
inverse-variance weighted average:
Xgc =
σ2g
2
σ1g
2 + σ2g
2
Y gc
lc
+
σ1g
2
σ1g
2 + σ2g
2 Λgc
where σ1g
2 = Var Y gc/lc = Λgc/lc and σ2g
2 = Var Xgc ∣ Λgc = θ gΛgc
2 . SA VER-X also outputs the 
posterior variance of each Xgc.
Data denoising using other bench-marking methods
MAGIC3 was performed using the R version 1.3.0 on the square root transformed mean 
library-size normalized expression. scImpute2 version 0.0.9 was performed on the 
unnormalized expression values. The tuning parameter Kcluster is set to 9 for the PBMC 
data15, set to 11 for the CITE-seq data, and set to 13 for the human midbrain data. DCA4 
version 0.2.2 was performed on the unnormalized expression values and the library-size 
normalized expression output was used for downstream analysis. scVI6 version 0.2.4 was 
performed with n_epochs = 400, traing_size = 0.9, frequency = 5 and lr = 1e-3 and all genes 
being used.
Generating down-sampled datasets
For an observed UMI count data matrix, we down-sample the reads to obtain a data set of 
the same gene and cell numbers but with lower quality. For cell c and gene g, we treat the 
original count as the true expression Xgc and the down-sampled value Ygc is generated 
following the Poisson-alpha technical noise model in Wang et. al.12 by independently 
drawing from a Poisson distribution with Ygc~Poisson(lcXgc where lc is a cell-specific 
efficiency loss. To mimic variation in efficiency across cells, we sampled lc as follows:
1. 10% efficiency: lc~Gamma(10, 100), used on the mouse midbrain data13
2. 5% efficiency: lc~Gamma(5,100), used on the 10X PBMC data15
t-SNE visualization and cell clustering
We used Seurat version 2.0 to perform cell clustering and t-SNE visualization according to 
the preprocessing workflow detailed at (https://satijalab.org/seurat/pbmc3k_tutorial.html). 
For all analyses, we set the number of principal components (PC) to 15, though we find our 
comparison results robust to a range of PC from 10 to 20. For cell clustering using Seurat, 
resolution is set to be 1.6, 1.2, 0.8 and 0.8 for each of the four experiments (90 cells, 900 
cells, 9000 cells and 9000 cells with down-sampled reads) of the PBMC data (Figure 2ab, 
Figure S2) and kept the same on all the methods compared. The resolution is set to 1 for the 
cell clustering of the PBMC T cells (Figure 2c, Figure S4) and the midbrain data13. The 
adjusted Rand Index (ARI) is computed using R package mclust to evaluate the clustering 
performance compared with the known cell type labels. We exclude human midbrain cells 
Wang et al. Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
that are labeled as either “unknown” or three rare types (“hMgl”, “hOPC”, “hSert”) in the 
original paper for both the t-SNE plot and ARI calculation.
Each t-SNE plot is generated after going through a fresh preprocessing workflow of the cells 
in the plot using Seurat. For some t-SNE plots, companion feature plots are shown for 
selected marker genes (Figure S7, Figure S7) using Seurat 2.0 function FeaturePlot().
Analysis of the CITE-seq data16 and Breast Cancer data17
The CITE-seq data were pre-processed as described in the original paper. Cells with more 
than 90% UMI counts from human genes were retained. The mouse genes and zero 
expression genes were removed. To study the situation where the information available from 
the target data is limited, we created two subsampled data with 1,000 and 100 cells from the 
PBMC and CBMC data, respectively, along with the original datasets (~8,000 cells for 
each). The mRNA data were then denoised using SA VER-X without pretraining, SA VER-X 
pretrained with immune cells (HCA + PBMC) and other benchmarking methods. mRNA 
data before and after denoising were log-normalized using Seurat 2.0. The ADT (antibody-
derived tag) protein measurements were normalized by the authors using centered-log-ratio 
(CLR) transformation. Pearson correlation were then calculated between the transformed 
and normalized proteins and mRNA.
The breast cancer data is denoised using SA VER-X pretrained immune cell model for each 
patient and each tissue separately. Cell type labels of the original paper are used as reference 
cell types subjecting to estimation inaccuracies of the original paper.
Differential expression analysis
There are two sets of differential expression (DE) analyses, DE between the tumor and 
normal tissue for each patient where both tissues are measured (Figure 2f), and DE between 
human and mouse of the developmental midbrain (Figure 3c, Figure S8c). For both, the DE 
analysis is done for each cell type separately using the original UMI counts and cell types 
provided by the original paper. The datasets are preprocessed in Seurat 2.0 following 
standard workflow and the DE genes are also obtained using Seurat 2.0, where the Wilcoxon 
rank sum test is used. P-value adjustment is performed using Bonferroni correction based on 
the total number of genes in the dataset. A gene is selected as differentially expressed if its 
adjusted p-value is ≤ 0.05 and the absolute log fold change is ≥ 0.25.
Variance calculation and comparison
For the human developmental midbrain data, we compared the variances of each gene 
estimated using different denoising methods with the sample variances directly calculated 
from the reference data, which are considered as true values in our down-sampling 
experiment. Different denoising methods are applied to the down-sampled human midbrain 
dataset. Specifically, we calculate and compared the variances of the relative gene 
expression across cells. For other denoising methods, the variances are estimated as the 
sample variance of the denoised and normalized data. Since SA VER-X outputs a posterior 
distribution:
Wang et al. Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Xgc ˙ Gamma Xgc, σgc2
where σgc is the estimated posterior standard deviation, we estimate the variance of Xgc 
across cells as the sample variance of Xgc plus the average of σgc2 across cells. The 
differences between the estimated variances of each gene and the true variances calculated 
from the reference data are shown in Figure 3d. The down-sampled raw data has variances 
biased upwards because of the technical noise while DCA and MAGIC have variances 
biased downwards due to over-smoothing.
Data Availability
The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) dataset was downloaded from the HCA data portal (https://
preview.data.humancellatlas.org/) and the PBMC data15 was downloaded from the 10X 
website (https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets, Table S2). 
The breast cancer data17 was downloaded from GEO (GSE114725). The developing 
midbrain data13 was downloaded from GEO (GSE76381). For the other mouse developing 
brain datasets in Figure 3, we include cells from neonatal and fetal brain tissues in the 
Mouse Cell Atlas7 data (GSE108097). For the non-UMI human developing brain datasets in 
Figure S8, we include three: GSE7514019, GSE10427620 and SRP04173618. No gene or cell 
filtering is done on the original dataset.
A complete list of the pretraining datasets used for pretraining the models on the SA VER-X 
website is provided in Table S2.
Software Availability
SA VER-X is publicly available at http://singlecell.wharton.upenn.edu/saver-x/, where users 
can currently upload their data for cloud computing and choose from models pre-trained on 
31 mouse tissues and human immune cells. Models jointly pretrained on cells from both 
species are also available for brain and pancreatic tissues. The R package and source code of 
SA VER-X is also released at https://github.com/jingshuw/SA VERX.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Hugh MacMullan IV , Vincent Conley and Shawn Zamechek from Wharton Computing’s 
Research & Analytics Team (https://research-it.wharton.upenn.edu/) for their valuable assistance in implementing 
the code in a scalable fashion, and integrating the scalable code solution into a backend service for our website. We 
would also like to thank the National Institute of Health for the award 5R01-HG006137 (for D.A., Z.Z., and 
N.R.Z.), the National Science Foundation for the award DMS-1562665 (to J.W., N.R.Z.), the Blavatnik Family 
Foundation’s Graduate Student Fellowship awarded to D.A., NSF Graduate Fellowship DGE-1321851 awarded to 
M.H., and the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin for grant 18JCYBJC24900 to G.H.. This work used the 
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by National Science 
Foundation grant number ACI-1548562. Specifically, it used the Bridges system, which is supported by NSF award 
number ACI-1445606, at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC).
Wang et al. Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
References
1. Huang M et al. Nat. Methods 15, 539–542 (2018). [PubMed: 29941873] 
2. Li WV & Li JJ Nat. Commun 9, 1–9 (2018). [PubMed: 29317637] 
3. van Dijk D et al. Cell 174, 716–729.e27 (2018). [PubMed: 29961576] 
4. Eraslan G, Simon LM, Mircea M, Mueller NS & Theis FJ Nat. Commun 10, 390 (2019). [PubMed: 
30674886] 
5. Gong W, Kwak I, Pota P, Koyano-nakagawa N & Garry DJ BMC Bioinformatics 19, 1–10 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29291722] 
6. Lopez R, Regier J, Cole MB, Jordan MI & Yosef N Nat. Methods 15, 1053–1058 (2018). [PubMed: 
30504886] 
7. Han X et al. Cell 172, 1091–1097.e17 (2018). [PubMed: 29474909] 
8. Tabula T & Consortium M Nature 562, 367–372 (2018). [PubMed: 30283141] 
9. Regev A et al. Elife 6, 1–30 (2017).
10. Hinton GE. & Salakhutdinov RR Science (80-.). 313, 504–507 (2006).
11. Andrews TS, Hemberg M & Hicks S F1000Research 7, 1–24 (2018).
12. Wang J et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 115, E6437–E6446 (2018). [PubMed: 29946020] 
13. La Manno G et al. Cell 167, 566–580.e19 (2016). [PubMed: 27716510] 
14. Nguyen A, Khoo WH, Moran I, Croucher PI & Phan TG Front. Immunol 9, (2018).
15. Zheng GXY et al. Nat. Commun 8, 1–12 (2017). [PubMed: 28232747] 
16. Stoeckius M et al. Nat. Methods 14, 865–868 (2017). [PubMed: 28759029] 
17. Azizi E et al. Cell 174, 1293–1308.e36 (2018). [PubMed: 29961579] 
18. Pollen AA et al. Nat. Biotechnol 32, 1053–1058 (2014). [PubMed: 25086649] 
19. Camp JG et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 112, 201520760 (2015).
20. Zhong S et al. Nature 555, 524–528 (2018). [PubMed: 29539641] 
21. Kim JK, Kolodziejczyk AA, Illicic T, Teichmann SA & Marioni JC Nat. Commun 6, (2015).
Wang et al. Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1. 
Outline of the SA VER-X transfer learning framework.
a) The autoencoder pretraining step: for each species/organ/cell-type, public datasets are 
collected and combined to generate pretrained weights. b) Workflow of SA VER-X. Users 
can use SA VER-X web portal or run SA VER-X offline. For a target data with an UMI count 
matrix, SA VER-X trains the target data with autoencoder w/o. a chosen pretraining model 
(item A), then Filters unpredictable genes using cross-validation (item B) and estimates the 
final denoised values with empirical Bayes shrinkage (item C).
Wang et al. Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. 
SA VER-X denoising of human immune cells.
a) t-SNE plots of 900 immune cells, colored by known cell-type labels. The number at the 
right-bottom corner of each plot is the adjusted rand index (ARI). b) t-SNE plots of the T 
cells with different models (top) and the heatmap of the denoised gene log-scaled relative 
expressions for a set of known marker genes (bottom). c) Pearson correlations calculated 
between proteins and corresponding mRNA levels in the CITE-seq sub-sampled 100 PBMC 
cells after the RNA expressions are denoised using different methods. (d) T-SNE plots of the 
NK and T cells (1080 cells) for the BC5 tumor and (e) myeloid cells (1046 cells) for the 
BC8 tumor using SA VER-X with and without pretraining. Cells are colored with the cell 
types provided by the original paper. f) Log fold-change between paired tumor and normal 
tissues in 2 cell types and 4 patients. Patients BC1, BC2, BC3 and BC7 have 378, 53, 586 
and 80 cells monocytes, and 4215, 1510, 58 and 401 CD8+ T cells respectively. The X-axis 
shows the log fold-change computed using the original data, and the Y-axis denotes that 
computed from the denoised data with normal immune cells pretraining. Each dot 
corresponds to a cell-type specific differentially expressed gene identified using the original 
data of each patient.
Wang et al. Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3: 
Mouse to human transfer learning within the developing ventral midbrain.
a) t-SNE plots for the down-sampled data (n=1000 cells) and SA VER-X with different 
pretraining models. Reference cell labels are obtained from the original paper. The ARI 
displayed at the bottom-right corner of each plot is computed against the original labels. b) 
Log fold-change between human and mouse data in 4 major cell types. The X-axis shows 
the log fold-change computed using the original human data, and the Y-axis denotes the 
changes computed using the denoised down-sampled human data, wherein the denoising is 
done by SA VER-X pretrained with mouse cells. Each dot corresponds to a differentially 
expressed gene between human and mouse in that cell type. c) Box plots across all 20560 
Wang et al. Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
genes (showing the median, two hinges and two whiskers, outliers omitted) of the log ratios 
of the estimated variances compared with the reference data variances.
Wang et al. Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 January 04.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript