Detecting and correcting false transients in calcium imaging
Jeffrey L. Gauthier1, Sue Ann Koay2, Edward H. Nieh2, David W. Tank2,3,4, Jonathan W. 
Pillow2,5, Adam S. Charles6,7,8,9
1Department of Biology, Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, PA, USA.
2Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
3Bezos Center for Neural Circuit Dynamics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
4Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
5Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
7Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
8Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
9Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Abstract
Population recordings of calcium activity are a major source of insight into neural function. 
Large datasets require automated processing, but this can introduce errors that are difficult to 
detect. Here we show that popular time course-estimation algorithms often contain substantial 
misattribution errors affecting 10–20% of transients. Misattribution, in which fluorescence is 
ascribed to the wrong cell, arises when overlapping cells and processes are imperfectly defined 
or not identified. To diagnose misattribution, we develop metrics and visualization tools for 
evaluating large datasets. To correct time courses, we introduce a robust estimator that explicitly 
accounts for contaminating signals. In one hippocampal dataset, removing contamination reduced 
the number of place cells by 15%, and 19% of place fields shifted by over 10 cm. Our methods 
are compatible with other cell-finding techniques, empowering users to diagnose and correct a 
potentially widespread problem that could alter scientific conclusions.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to David W. Tank or Adam S. Charles. dwtank@princeton.edu; 
adamsc@jhu.edu.
Author contributions
J.L.G. and A.S.C. developed and applied analysis methods; J.L.G., S.A.K. and E.H.N. performed imaging experiments; all authors 
wrote the paper.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01422-5.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41592-022-01422-5.
Peer review information Nature Methods thanks Philipp Berens and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the 
peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: Nina V ogt, in collaboration with the Nature Methods team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2022 April ; 19(4): 470–478. doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01422-5.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Advances in understanding nervous system function have relied on large-scale optical 
imaging of activity at cellular resolution. As improvements in calcium imaging technology 
have allowed for larger, longer and more numerous recording sessions 1–8, it has become 
difficult to manually identify every active cell in every movie frame, making automated cell 
finding an indispensable tool. Automation, however, separates users from raw data, and thus 
it has the potential to mask errors.
The principal goal of calcium imaging analysis is to assign a fluorescence time course 
to each source of activity6 (for example, cell bodies, dendrites, axons, and neuropil), 
and scientific conclusions often hinge on the accuracy of these time courses. Typically, 
the spatial extent or ‘profile’ of each source is first identified, either manually or 
automatically3,9–12 (for naming conventions, see glossary in Supplementary Table 1). 
Inferring time courses from raw fluorescence, however, is automated, for example, by 
averaging pixels within regions of interest9,10 or using more complex algorithms3,11.
When source profiles overlap, they can cause mutual time course contamination, and 
therefore most methods aim to tease apart activity in overlapping sources13–16. In this work, 
we focus on contamination from non-neuropil sources, such as overlapping dendrites or cell 
bodies. Although evaluation metrics have been developed to check for contamination10,11,17, 
they tend to be global rather than individual, and thus are unable to assess individual 
transients. Here we investigate the origin and effects of time course-estimation errors 
in two-photon imaging and develop tools to quantify and remedy such errors. We first 
examine a brain region where errors are particularly likely to occur: the CA1 region of the 
hippocampus, where cell bodies are densely packed with thick apical dendrites13. We closely 
examine source data to motivate quantitative metrics to identify contamination and then 
introduce a time course-estimation algorithm to explicitly model and filter out contaminating 
signals. We show that our method eliminates over 90% of contaminating activity while 
preserving over 90% of true activity.
Results
False transients occur and can impact scientific conclusions.
We first considered how accurately time courses capture fluorescence in an example dataset 
from the dorsal CA1 (ref. 18). We identified source profiles using constrained non-negative 
matrix factorization (CNMF)19 and estimated time courses by fitting source profiles to each 
frame independently with least squares19.
In one patch containing 52 identified sources (Fig. 1a), the profiles resembled cells in the 
average image, which suggests that the algorithm accurately identified real cells. Similarly, 
the source time courses matched the expected statistics of calcium dynamics in CA1: a 
baseline punctuated by transient increases (Fig. 1b). To evaluate whether these transients 
correctly correspond to activity, we examined the original movie in the spatial and temporal 
vicinity of each transient. Specifically, we computed the ‘transient profile’ (a weighted 
average of the transient frames) to show which movie pixels gave rise to the transient. 
Transient profiles often resembled the source profile (Fig. 1b, transients 1–4), confirming 
Gauthier et al. Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
correct attribution (‘true transients’), but some transient profiles bore no resemblance to the 
source profile (Fig. 1b, transients 5–8), indicating misattribution (‘false transients’).
For a more complete assessment, a human expert examined all 33,090 transients across 
1,325 sources using a custom graphical interface (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2 and 
Supplementary Figs. 1–3). Most transients were confidently classified as true (67%) or 
false (13%). Others (20%) fell into more complex categories to be considered later. Many 
identified sources (66%) contained at least one false transient, and, for some sources 
(9%), the majority of transients were false (Fig. 1c). We also observed contamination in 
inferred spikes (Fig. 1c). The amplitude distributions of true and false transients were 
largely overlapping across all sources (Fig. 1d) and within each source (Fig. 1e). Manual 
classification was comparable between different graders (Extended Data Fig. 3).
To understand the extent of misattribution, we examined transients found by several 
algorithms: CNMF with different parameter settings (Supplementary Fig. 10), Suite2P3 
(Supplementary Fig. 11), in-house source localization from the Allen Institute run on 
data from the Mouse Brain Observatory (Supplementary Table 3 and https://help.brain-
map.org/display/observatory/Documentation) and semi-automated source localization20 
(Supplementary Table 3). Contamination levels varied with labeling density, source shapes 
and optical properties, with greater contamination generally occurring when labeled cells 
were densely packed and near major crossing dendrites. Despite this trend, contamination 
was consistently 15–20% across all methods and datasets that we tested, with the exception 
of the sparsely labeled cortex. Thus contamination is likely to be widely prevalent, including 
in published studies of large-scale calcium imaging.
False transients can affect scientific conclusions in several ways. First, cross-talk can 
produce spurious correlations in activity, creating a misleading picture of network 
organization (Fig. 1f). Second, contamination can change apparent coding properties. For 
example, place cells are typically active in a small part of the environment location21, such 
as a virtual linear track18. An important question in place coding is how many discrete fields 
each cell maintains22, but false transients can create additional firing fields (Fig. 1g). To 
help mitigate the effects of false transients, we turn next to developing tools to identify and 
remove contamination.
Quantifying contamination.
We first developed summary measures to approximate the level of contamination within a 
dataset. Distinguishing true and false transients is based on the assumption that the pattern 
of bright pixels in a movie frame should look similar to the source profile during a true 
transient but not during a false transient. We measured similarity by taking the Pearson 
correlation between the source profile and the transient profile (Fig. 2a,b). As expected, true 
transients have a higher correlation than false transients, and a single threshold generally 
provides accurate separation, even across different sources within the same movie (Fig. 2c).
Although this measure can distinguish transients that are clearly true or false, more complex 
activity patterns also occur. For example, true and false activity can occur simultaneously 
in ‘mixed’ transients (Fig. 2d). In addition, some source profiles identified by cell finding 
Gauthier et al. Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
are artifacts that do not correspond to any source in the movie. These can arise from motion 
or the merging of multiple sources (Fig. 2d, bottom). Our measures aim to classify both 
kinds of errors as false transients, although it should be noted that some true activity is 
consequently rejected. The correlations of mixed and artifact transients are generally similar 
to those of false transients (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Fig 4); therefore, the correlation 
threshold is reasonably accurate for these categories. Additional metrics, for example, two-
dimensional (2D) Ljung–Box quantile (LBQ) tests of residual spatial independence, can 
trade off better artifact rejection for lower overall performance (Extended Data Fig. 4).
To overcome these limitations, we also developed a secondary quantification. If the 
‘contamination rate’ is the fraction of transients classified as false, we define the 
‘contamination severity’ as the ratio of unexplained fluorescence to total fluorescence. 
Contamination severity allows us to distinguish the various causes of false classification 
(Fig. 2a,b,e). Plotting contamination rate versus severity visually summarizes misattribution 
across sources (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 5). Each plot region supports a particular 
conclusion about the quality of source estimation. The lower–left quadrant contains sources 
that are largely accurate. The lower–right quadrant indicates a subtle mismatch in estimating 
the source profile, implying low contamination. Sources located in the upper sections suffer 
more severe contamination, and the horizontal axis indicates whether contamination is 
rare (left) or frequent (right). This visualization, the frequency and level of contamination 
(FaLCon) plot, thus provides a bird’s eye view of contamination in a dataset or across 
datasets (Methods).
Geometric intuition for contamination filtering.
While the metrics developed thus far can give an overall sense of contamination and 
the software tools allow detailed manual inspection and classification, these alone are 
incomplete solutions. Both require parsing activity into discrete transients, which is not 
always appropriate or possible, and manual inspection is not entirely reproducible and often 
prohibitively time consuming. Moreover, any keep-or-reject scheme cannot untangle the true 
and false activity within mixed transients. To address these shortcomings, we introduce an 
automated time course estimator that models contamination explicitly to remove it on a 
frame-by-frame basis. Before fully describing this model, we briefly explore a geometric 
intuition for how false transients can be removed.
Consider a two-pixel movie (Fig. 3a). Each frame is a point in 2D, and each source profile 
shape is a line through the origin. A true transient would be a point near the line (Fig. 
3b), while a false transient would be far away (Fig. 3c). Assuming independent, identically 
distributed Gaussian noise, the optimal activity estimator finds the profile scaling (that is, 
point on the line) that minimizes the summed squared error (Fig. 3d). For a true transient, 
least squares produce a good fit. For a false transient, however, the added fluorescence 
erroneously pushes the fit away from zero.
This error can be avoided by reducing the cost of positive residuals23, creating a skewed 
least-squares cost function (Fig. 3e). This skewed cost function reproduces the least squares 
fit to a true transient, while not registering the false transient. Having illustrated the 
Gauthier et al. Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
fundamental principle underlying our approach, we now construct an explicit model of 
contamination and develop an estimator to prevent it from affecting source time courses.
Sparse emulation of unknown dictionary objects model and algorithm.
Beginning with the standard model, we add a term for fluorescence that does not 
arise from known cell shapes (Fig. 4a). This unexplained fluorescence is modeled as a 
sum of narrow Gaussian kernels with independent, exponentially distributed amplitudes. 
Linear superpositions of these kernels can capture the shape of almost any contaminating 
fluorescence. This procedure, which we name sparse emulation of unknown dictionary 
objects (SEUDO), removes contamination by absorbing unexplained fluorescence into 
‘SEUDO cells’ built of Gaussian kernels.
Mathematically, we denote the observed fluorescence image y(t) in frame t restricted to the 
spatial location of neuron n as
yn(t) = Φ a(t) + b(t) + ϵ(t), (1)
where a(t) ≥ 0 is the vector of activation levels for known sources, Φ denotes their spatial 
profiles, b(t) ≥ 0 is the image of structured contamination and ϵ(t) is the unstructured noise 
vector. We consider each frame t and neuron n independently, and so omit these indices for 
clarity. The contamination b is assumed to be non-negative, spatially correlated and spatially 
sparse and to be non-zero with probability P. Thus we model b=W c, where c≥ 0 is sparse 
(that is, mostly zeros) and W represents a dictionary of positive 2D Gaussian kernels that 
induce spatial correlations.
Our model motivates the estimator
a = arg min
a
min f(a), g(a) , (2)
where f(a) is the least-squares estimator for a and g(a) minimizes the partial least absolute 
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO)
g(a) = min
c ≥ 0
y − Φa − W c 2
2
+ α c 1 + β , (3)
for constants α = 2σ2λ and β = − 2 σ2 log 1
P − 1 + N log(1/ λ)  and where N is the number 
of pixels, λ is the mean parameter for the exponential distribution of c and σ2 is the noise 
variance. The estimate minimizes f(a) and g(a) separately and then takes the value of a at the 
smaller of the two. SEUDO thus resembles a likelihood test on the presence of unexplained 
fluorescence. Visualizing the SEUDO estimator in the case of a two-pixel movie (Fig. 4b–e) 
shows that it matches the skewed cost function described earlier (Fig. 3e), providing an 
intuition for how SEUDO is able to remove contamination while preserving true activity.
As with many algorithms, SEUDO is strongly affected by parameter choice. The parameters 
are the Gaussian kernel radius, the probability of contamination P, the exponential 
Gauthier et al. Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
parameter λ and the noise variance σ2. The kernel radius, which determines the spatial scale 
of contamination, can be estimated directly from the movie frames. The three remaining 
parameters appear as only two coefficients: α and β (equation (3)). Effectively, α is the 
per-kernel cost and β is a constant cost whenever kernels are used. If the overall cost of 
kernels is sufficiently high, they are not used and SEUDO reverts to least squares (Extended 
Data Fig. 5a, right). If the cost is sufficiently low, kernels are always used, diminishing or 
eliminating all transients (Extended Data Fig. 5a, left). In an optimal regime, true transients 
are retained, while false transients are removed (Extended Data Fig. 5a, center). Because 
SEUDO is relatively insensitive to P, we sweep λ and σ2 for a pair of example transients 
to reveal the optimal regime (Extended Data Fig. 5b). To facilitate this process in other 
datasets, we have developed several tools for manual or automatic parameter selection 
(Methods).
Application to CA1 data.
We next applied SEUDO to CA1 data to observe its effects on neural coding properties 
(Fig. 1). Running SEUDO on one source (Fig. 5a) almost completely eliminated false 
transients, while true activity remained largely intact. Generally there is a trade-off between 
removing false transients and preserving true transients. We illustrate SEUDO’s trade-off 
for this source by varying λ while holding σ2 constant, sweeping out a receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC)-like curve (Fig. 5b). Because some applications are insensitive to 
transient amplitude, we also considered transient detection, finding that SEUDO achieved 
100% accurate discrimination for this source (Fig. 5b).
To evaluate SEUDO more generally, we applied the same parameters to the entire movie, 
in which we classified 26,327 transients from 1,149 sources as true or false with high 
confidence. For the best λ value, >90% of false transients were rejected, while >90% of 
true transients were retained, demonstrating that parameters generalize well across sources. 
Varying σ2 produced nearly identical discrimination, albeit with different optimal λ values 
(Extended Data Fig. 6). We observed similar results for profiles and time traces from 
Suite2p3 (Supplementary Fig. 9; 96.6% of false transients were removed, and 91.8% of true 
transients were retained).
As a baseline for comparison, we also performed decontamination using framewise Pearson 
correlations. For transient detection, SEUDO provided superior separation of true and false 
activity (Fig. 5c). When measuring preserved transient area, however, performances of 
the two algorithms were more similar (Supplementary Fig. 8), which can be reconciled 
by observing that transient area can be reduced while still preserving transient shape and 
duration (for example, Fig. 5a). Importantly, the correlation criterion cannot distinguish 
mixed transients, a limitation of any accept-or-reject classification.
An advantage of SEUDO is the ability to model mixed transients. In one example (Fig. 
5d), the source was initially active (frame 20), but before its activity completely decayed, 
two other overlapping cell bodies became active (frames 30–50). The least-squares time 
course includes activity of both the source and the contamination. The SEUDO time course, 
Gauthier et al. Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
however, more accurately estimates the source activity, as verified by manual inspection of 
source-only (cyan) and contamination-only (magenta) pixels.
Finally, we revisited the effect of contamination on scientific conclusions (Fig. 1f,g). 
For the case of spuriously high correlation (r = 0.333 ± 0.09, 95% confidence interval; 
P < 1 × 10 −36, two-sided test for non-zero correlation, comparing all 41,756 frames), 
SEUDO removed all but a minimal trace of residual correlation (r = 0.018 ± 0.1, 95% 
confidence interval; P < 0.0005, two-sided test for non-zero correlation; Fig. 6a). Removing 
false correlations also had global effects, qualitatively altering standard characterizations of 
neural populations, including the clustering alignment and the spectral decay of the data 
matrix (Extended Data Fig. 7).
For the place cell with the additional false spatial field (Fig. 1g), SEUDO removed the false 
field almost completely (Fig. 6b) while maintaining the true field. When considering all 
cells with significant place fields (P < 0.05, test for significant spatial modulation, Methods) 
before and after SEUDO (Fig. 6c and Supplementary Fig. 13), 17.5% were no longer place 
cells after decontamination and 18 place cells were not found until false transients were 
removed. Moreover, an additional 18.7% of place cells had their fields shift substantially 
(>10 cm), further changing the characterization of the neural population.
Discussion
Automated cell finding has enabled researchers to access the rich information available in 
two-photon calcium imaging. Here, we introduce algorithms and software to verify and 
correct the time courses extracted from large movies. To obtain a global impression based on 
discretized transients, summary plots and coarse classification can be used to approximate 
the extent of contamination. In cases in which contamination is present, we provide several 
avenues for addressing it. When only a few cells need to be corrected or checked, a software 
interface allows for rapid manual classification. For correction of a large dataset or to ensure 
reproducibility, we further developed a robust time course-estimation technique, SEUDO. 
Because SEUDO operates on individual frames, it does not require discretizing activity into 
transients, and, by modeling contamination, it can tease apart mixtures of true and false 
activity.
Importantly, SEUDO is a post hoc analysis and thus can be combined with other cell-finding 
procedures (for example, refs. 3,10–12,24). In cases in which time courses and source shapes 
are identified together3,19, future development might allow SEUDO to be embedded directly 
into the algorithm.
To make SEUDO easier to adopt, we aimed to minimize the need for parameter tuning 
and to optimize code execution. For FaLCon plots, users only specify one parameter, the 
correlation threshold, which can be estimated from a small test set. Similarly, SEUDO 
requires only two parameters beyond typical preprocessing. We further provide parameter-
selection tools via receiver operating characteristic curve visualization and BayesOpt25. 
Because SEUDO can be performed on each cell and frame independently, our software 
Gauthier et al. Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
defaults to analyzing small spatiotemporal segments in parallel, resulting in, for example, a 
runtime of <5 min for a block of 52 cells over 41,756 frames (23 min at 30 Hz).
We have also characterized the limitations of SEUDO. Although SEUDO cannot generate 
false transients, it can err in two ways: reducing true activity or failing to remove false 
activity. The latter occurs when there is a mismatch in the contamination statistics assumed 
by SEUDO, as in the case of neuropil, although other algorithms have been developed 
to address neuropil contamination. Alternatively, SEUDO may reduce true activity when 
source profiles do not match observed activity. This can occur at low-light levels or 
when profile shapes change over time, for example, due to axial drift. Thus, for extended 
recordings, SEUDO should be applied separately per session to ensure source profiles are 
stationary.
SEUDO differs from past methods in two important ways. First, the interference model 
b=W c is high dimensional (dim(c) = dim( b) = N) and flexible, as the elements of W
are smaller than neurons and can thus adapt to any shape. The dimensionality and 
flexibility requires the regularizing sparsity penalty over c in g(a) to constrain the solution. 
Similar additive terms (for example, Suite2p, CNMF–CaImAn) are low dimensional 
(dim(c) ≪ dim( b)) and lack the flexibility to adapt to false transient shapes. The second 
difference is the additive parameter β. While a constant in the optimization, β does help to 
preserve the true transient shapes. Setting β to 0 lowered the rates of false transient rejection 
(maximum decrease of ~0.06 in false transient rate) and of transient area preservation 
(maximum decrease of ~0.15; Supplementary Fig. 18). β has this effect by ensuring that 
SEUDO cells are not used if the noisy data shape is similar enough to the profile shape, 
thereby preventing unnecessary explanation of variance via a nonexistant W c.
These considerations point to what might seem like a paradox: because kernels can construct 
any shape, what is to stop them from explaining known source profiles? Compressive 
sensing has explored sparse estimation using over-complete dictionaries and provides 
theoretical accuracy guarantees on the LASSO estimator26. Essentially, two structures can 
be demixed (profiles and kernels) if they are oriented in sufficiently different directions in 
fluorescence space. Because kernels are highly localized, they can be distinguished from 
source profiles when the latter are sufficiently large.
Errors in annotating large datasets are not limited to calcium imaging. Electrophysiologists 
have long faced similar challenges in spike sorting27–31, and it has become standard practice 
to include metrics for contamination. Two-photon imaging studies might also benefit from 
similar practices.
SEUDO could likely be improved or extended in several ways. For example, framewise 
SEUDO does not include priors over the spatial and temporal properties of contamination, 
nor does it account for neuropil23,32. To better distinguish neural activity from noise, 
temporal smoothing or additional spatial structure in W c could be introduced by modifying 
f(x) and g(x) in equation (2). More broadly, there might be applications in other domains for 
modeling contamination as non-negative structured interference (for example, one-photon 
calcium imaging23, spike sorting31 or hyperspectral imagery33).
Gauthier et al. Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, 
extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; 
details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01422-5.
Methods
Experimental procedures and data acquisition.
All experiments were performed in compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use 
of Laboratory Animals (https://www.aaalac.org/resources/theguide.cfm). Specific protocols 
were approved by the Princeton University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
To obtain large-scale population recordings of activity, transgenic mice expressing 
genetically encoded calcium indicators were surgically implanted with a chronic window 
that allowed optical access to the region under study. To image in CA1, the implant was 
designed as described previously13. At the time of surgery, mice were 7–15 weeks of age, 
and all mice were male. Mice were maintained on a reverse light cycle, and imaging was 
performed during the dark phase. In holding rooms, ambient temperatures were 69–72 
°F with 30–70% humidity. GCaMP3 expression in CA1 was obtained with the mouse 
line C57BL/6J-Tg (Thy1-GCaMP3) GP2.11Dkim/J (Jackson Laboratory strain 028277)34, 
and expression of the calcium indicator GCaMP6f in CA1 was obtained by crossing two 
mouse lines: Ai93-D;CaMKII α-tTA (Igs7tm93.1(tetO-GCaMP6f)Hze Tg(Camk2a-tTA)1Mmay/J, 
Jackson Laboratory stock 024108) and Emx1-Cre (B6.129S2-Emx1tm1(cre)Krj/J, Jackson 
Laboratory stock 005628). To image in the cortex, we obtained expression of GCaMP6f by 
crossing three strains: Emx1-Cre (B6.129S2-Emx1tm1(cre)Krj/J, Jackson Laboratory stock 
005628), CaMK2-tTA (B6.Cg-Tg(Camk2a-tTA)1Mmay/DboJ, Jackson Laboratory stock 
007004) and TITL-GCaMP6f (Ai93;B6.Cg-Igs7tm93.1(tetOGCaMP6f)Hze/J, Jackson Laboratory 
stock 024103).
Activity was measured using two-photon laser scanning microscopy employing resonant 
galvanometer scan mirrors at a frame rate of 30 Hz. Raw data were processed and collected 
using ScanImage version 5 (Invidrio). To measure spatially modulated activity in CA1 
neurons, mice were trained to run on a virtual linear track18.
Identifying source profiles and transient times.
CA1 dataset labeled with GCaMP3.—Motion correction and source profile 
identification were performed as described previously18. Briefly, the movie was spatially 
divided into a grid of 36 submovies, and each was analyzed separately. Source profiles were 
identified using CNMF19 (MATLAB, 2016 version) or Suite2p3 (MATLAB, downloaded 2 
April 2019, version 1.0.0.0), and source time courses were computed using least squares (see 
below).
Because of small axial deflections18, a motion artifact time course was subtracted from each 
source time course before filtering (median length, 10) and thresholding (zeroing points less 
Gauthier et al. Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
than four times the robust standard deviation). Any contiguous period of above-threshold 
activity lasting at least six frames (0.2 s) was considered a transient. These same steps were 
applied to identify transients across all algorithms.
Datasets labeled with GCaMP6f.—Subpixel motion correction was performed via 
either local (CA1 dataset) or global (MMA dataset) correlation-based shifts11. Source 
profiles and time courses were identified using CNMF19. For each source time course, two 
candidate thresholds were computed: the 95th percentile of time course values, and 11 times 
the robust standard deviation. Of these two values, the larger was used. Any contiguous 
period of above-threshold activity lasting at least 15 frames (0.5 s) was considered a 
transient.
Least-squares time course estimation.
Most automated calcium segmentation methods estimate time courses via a regularized 
least-squares method3,10,19,24. If Y ∈ ℝN × T is the fluorescence movie with N pixels and 
T frames and Φ ∈ ℝ N × M is the matrix containing the spatial profiles for all M isolated 
sources, we compute the M×T matrix of per-source fluorescences A as
A = arg min
A
Y − Φ F
2
+ R(A) , (4)
where R(A) is the regularization that imparts additional information about the expected time 
course structure. We seek to bypass the idiosyncrasies of each algorithm by focusing on time 
course estimation based purely on the Gaussian noise model without regularization, that is, 
least-squares fitting:
A = arg min
A
Y − ΦA F
2
. (5)
Transient profiles.
To calculate the transient profile, consider the fluorescence movie data Y cropped to the 
spatial extent of the source profile and to the temporal extent of the transient. We then seek 
the best representation of Y that has the same time course as the source’s transient activity 
over the duration of the event, which we denote as ℎ. This is accomplished by solving the 
optimization program
xtp = arg min
x
Y − xℎT
F
2
, (6)
that is, we are looking for the spatial pattern that best projects the time course into the data. 
The solution to this optimization program xtp is the transient profile. The solution to this 
optimization is xtp = Y ℎ/ ℎ 2
2
, that is, the weighted sum of frames where the ith frame is 
weighted by the ith element of the transient time course, normalized by the total magnitude 
of the transient event.
Gauthier et al. Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Manual classification.
Manual classification was performed by human experts (A.S.C. and J.L.G.) visually 
comparing the shapes of source profiles and transient profiles. Transient profiles that 
contained the same shape as the source profile but not other sources were classified as 
true. Those containing only sources different from the source profile were classified as false. 
Transients with a mixture of true and false transients were classified as mixed. Transients 
in which no spatial structure was visible or that appeared ambiguous were left unclassified. 
Sources for which the profile shape did not match any transient profiles (for example, 
fused sources) or sources that appeared to arise from a motion artifact were labeled as 
artifacts. To better resolve edge cases, small spatial blurring was applied at times to highlight 
low-amplitude structures.
For the CA1 dataset labeled with GCaMP3 as well as the dataset recorded in the visual 
cortical area MMA, all sources were manually classified. For the CA1 dataset labeled with 
GCaMP6f, 10% of sources were randomly selected for manual classification.
Contamination severity.
The contamination-severity metric seeks to quantify the fraction of fluorescence not 
explained by the source profile. We thus define two residuals for every transient. The first 
is the full residual, which is the result of subtracting the contributions of all source profiles 
(columns of the pixels-by-sources matrix Φ) from the pixels-by-frames fluorescence movie 
Yik during the ith transient of source k:
rik = vec Y ik − ΦAi , (7)
where Ai is the sources-by-frames matrix of estimated temporal activity for each source and 
each transient frame. The second is the residual subtracting off the contributions of all the 
sources except the source profile in question, that is, removing the column of Φ and the row 
of Ai corresponding to the source that the transient was assigned to:
rik = vec Y ik − ΦAik = vec rik + ϕkaik
T
, (8)
where Φk = ϕ1, …, ϕk − 1, ϕk + 1, …, ϕM  and Aik = ai1, …, ai(k − 1), ai(k + 1), …, aiM  are the sets of all 
other sources and all other time courses, respectively, ϕk is the profile for the kth source and 
aik is the time course for the kth source during the ith transient. The contamination severity 
computes the amount of residual energy in all suspect transients (that is, those that fail the 
correlation or the LBQ test) as a fraction of the residual discounting the source:
RRk =
∑i ∈ Γ rik 2
2
∑i ∈ Γ rik 2
2 =
∑i ∈ Γ rik 2
2
∑i ∈ Γ rik 2
2
+ ∑i ∈ Γ ϕkai
T
F
2 . (9)
When the residual is small and the source is active, the contamination severity is low; 
however, when the source is not active with respect to the residual size (that is, significant 
activity remains), then the contamination severity is high. To make the contamination 
Gauthier et al. Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
severity more resistant to noise, a low-pass Gaussian filter with one-pixel standard deviation 
is applied.
Spatial Ljung–Box quantile test.
The LBQ test is a statistical test of whether a model with d degrees of freedom captures 
the autocorrelation structure of a time series, if x(t) is the time series and r(t) is the model 
residual. If x(t), r(t) have length N, and c(l) = corr( r(t), r(t − l)) is the autocorrelation at lag l, 
then the LBQ test calculates the quantile statistic
Q = N(N + 2) ∑
l = 1
L c(l)
N − l . (10)
If r(t) values are not correlated, then Q should have a χ2 distribution with L degrees of 
freedom. Consequently, a simple quantile test can be used to determine whether we can 
significantly rule out this null hypothesis. Specifically, we test whether Q > q(1 − ζ, d) for a 
given significance level ζ, which, if true, rules out the null hypothesis. For spatial data, that 
is, xi,j, ri,j of size M×N, we can expand the test statistic to be
Q = MN(MN + 2) ∑
(l, k) ∈ Γ
ck, l
(M − k)(N − l) , (11)
where ck,l is the spatial autocorrelation function at lags k and l, and Γ ⊆ [1, M] × [1, N] are the 
set of lags to be tested. With this change, the quantile test above remains the same, aside 
from adjusting the degrees of freedom to account for the increased dimensionality. For all 
plots in this work, we set d to be the number of active pixels in the profile and test the set of 
lags between three and seven lags inclusively. This latter choice ensures that blurring from 
the motion-correction process (which can blur neighboring pixels together) will not bias the 
results. Finally, we run all the tests at a significance level of ζ= 0.01.
Frequency and level of contamination plots across datasets.
The rate-versus-severity plot can also provide comparisons across datasets, for example, 
comparing to densely labeled CA1 data with GCaMP6f (Supplementary Fig. 6) and sparsely 
labeled cortical neurons (Supplementary Fig. 7). Compared to Fig. 2f, it is obvious that 
the second CA1 dataset suffers from even more extreme contamination, while the cortical 
dataset suffers little contamination (Supplementary Table 2).
SEUDO algorithm motivation.
We seek to use the observed movie frame y and source profiles Φ to identify the source 
activity a (that is, the time course value in this frame). Accounting only for the known 
source profiles, the least-squares estimate of a is
aprofiles = arg min
a
y − Φa 2
2 .
Gauthier et al. Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The SEUDO algorithm also considers an alternative case, one in which the movie frame 
contains fluorescence from unknown sources in addition to the known profiles. To prevent 
unknown sources from contaminating the estimate of a, SEUDO fits a set of 2D Gaussian 
kernels, W, multiplied by a vector comprising each kernel’s activation level c. The fit also 
incorporates cost terms α and β to impose sparseness, as unknown sources are expected to 
be spatially compact shapes such as cell bodies or neurites. Thus the estimate of a given by 
fitting both profiles and kernels is as follows:
aprofiles and kernels, c = arg min
a, c ≥ 0
y − Φa − W c 2
2 + α c 1 + β .
SEUDO then uses the estimate with the lowest cost:
aSEUDO = aprofiles if f aprofiles ≤ g aprofiles and kernels
aprofiles and kernels if f aprofiles > g aprofiles and kernels
where f( ⋅ ) and g( ⋅ ) are the least-squares cost and the LASSO cost, respectively. We note 
that this procedure can be written as
aSEUDO = arg min
a
min f(a), g(a) .
We now expand these terms to provide a more detailed optimization. In the first case, we 
assume that no contamination occurs; therefore, the maximum-likelihood estimator can be 
written as
aprofiles = argmax
a
1
2πσ2
N
2
exp − y − Φa 2
2
2σ2 (12)
= arg min
a
y − Φa 2
2
+ 2σ2 N
2 log 2πσ2 . (13)
In the latter case, we must estimate both the known profiles’ activity a, along with the 
unknown and structured contamination W c. To model this unknown term, we assume that 
W is a dictionary of 2D Gaussian kernels and c is a set of weights, one for each kernel. 
To achieve sparseness and non-negativity, we model the multivariate exponential c with 
parameter λ. For simplicity, we will also make W square, so that the dimensionality of b and 
c are the same (that is, one kernel per movie pixel). We can consider an estimator in this case 
as a mixed maximum a posteriori and the maximum-likelihood estimator (or a maximum a 
posteriori estimator with an improper uniform prior over a) as
Gauthier et al. Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
aprofiles and kernels, c
= arg max
a, c ≥ 0
λN
2πσ2
N
2
exp − y − Φa − W 2
2
2σ2 e−λ c 1 (14)
= arg min
a
y − Φa − W 2
2
+ 2σ2λ c 1
+2σ2 N
2 log 2πσ2 − 2σ2Nlog(λ) .
(15)
These two sub-estimators motivate the form of the SEUDO algorithm, where we fit each 
model and then compare the cost functions of each estimator to find the ‘better fit’. 
In this way, because the term 2σ2 N
2 log 2πσ2  appears in both cost functions, it drops 
out of the final SEUDO cost. We further penalize the use of using the estimator that 
includes both a and c that can be interpreted as a log probability of contamination. 
Combining all these terms results in the SEUDO estimator, with constants α = 2σ2λ and 
β = − 2 σ2 log 1
P − 1 + Nlog(λ) . This interpretation allows the SEUDO parameters to be 
approximately expressed as model parameters that can be estimated more readily from data 
(for example, the noise variance).
SEUDO is closely related to log-likelihood ratio tests. In essence, the likelihoods of the 
model with and without SEUDO cells are compared (Gaussian likelihoods that result in 
least-squares losses), and the L1 norm over the SEUDO coefficients c stand in place of, for 
example, the number of coefficients used as a penalizing term in information criteria such as 
the AIC or the BIC.
SEUDO implementation.
As SEUDO is a convex optimization very similar to a constrained LASSO, we can 
implement SEUDO using well-studied first-order optimization methods35,36. To incorporate 
the specifics of this optimization, namely the non-negativity of c and the fact that a is 
unregularized, we leverage the fast and flexible Templates for First Order Conic Solvers 
package (version 1.4.1)36. To compensate for the high-dimensional model in the inference, 
SEUDO can be run locally for each profile independently. This reduces both the overall 
dimension of the vector c to infer and enables parallelization over profiles.
Performing SEUDO.
To evaluate SEUDO, we applied it to the CA1 dataset labeled with GCaMP3. SEUDO was 
performed separately on each of the 36 blocks. Each source was analyzed separately, and 
only for movie frames in which a substantial transient was identified using least squares. 
Pixels were only included for analysis if they fell within a rectangular region centered on 
the source profile; the rectangle was defined as the minimum bounding rectangle plus a 
radius of three pixels in all directions. Except when otherwise indicated, parameters for 
SEUDO were λ= 10, σ2 = 0.002 and P = 0.00001, and the Gaussian kernel radius was equal 
Gauthier et al. Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to 3. Before performing the SEUDO procedure, the movie was slightly denoised by taking a 
rolling average of three frames. To run SEUDO on the binary profiles returned by Suite2p, 
we first used the binary profiles and time traces to infer the non-binary spatial profile maps 
for each component.
SEUDO parameter optimization.
To facilitate parameter selection, we provide several tools, both supervised and 
unsupervised, to help identify the optimal parameter regime for a given dataset. First, 
we provide software that enables rapid manual classification of transients, building up an 
example set that can be used to automatically identify optimal parameters, either through an 
exhaustive parameter search or using BayesOpt25.
Estimating the Gaussian spatial kernel width.
We have implemented estimation of the Gaussian spatial kernel in two ways: a simple 
heuristic and via optimization. For the heuristic, we take Fourier transforms of individual 
movie patches and estimate the width of the resulting frequency transform’s diameter. Under 
the sum-of-Gaussian kernel model, the frequency transform should contain a Gaussian shape 
with a width the inverse of the Gaussian kernel width. Thus we fit a mixture of two Gaussian 
shapes to the data to account for the small spatial frequency and the more uniform noise 
(wide in frequency). The narrow diameter represents the inverse of the Gaussian kernel 
diameter in space. The second method used BayesOpt25, which jointly optimizes over all 
parameters. Both methods resulted in comparable estimates, and so we opted for the simple, 
computationally efficient heuristic.
Framewise correlation decontamination algorithm.
As a baseline, time courses were decontaminated using the profile correlations. For each 
source, a small spatial subset of the movie was considered. In each frame, the Pearson 
correlation was computed between the movie and the source profile. If this correlation fell 
below threshold, the time course was set to 0. The threshold was varied from −1 to 1, and 
transient detection was applied to the time course.
Transient metrics.
Two quality measures were used to evaluate the various time course estimates (least squares, 
SEUDO, least squares decontaminated with framewise correlation and regularized least 
squares). The only frames considered were ones in which a substantial transient was 
observed in the least-squares estimate. Results were averaged over all true transients and 
all false transients separately (as per expert classification).
The first measure was the fraction of transient area preserved in comparison to that of least 
squares. If 
∑t atest
+ (t)
∑t alsq
+ (t)  is the rectified time course estimated by the technique being tested, and 
alsq+(t) is the rectified least-squares time course, the fraction of transient area preserved is
Gauthier et al. Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
∑t atest
+ (t)
∑t alsq
+ (t) .
The second measure simply evaluated whether the transient was still present. In this case, 
transient detection was applied to the entire time course. If at least one transient occurred in 
the period of the least-squares transient, then that transient was considered kept. Otherwise 
the transient was considered rejected.
Place cell statistics.
Whether a cell exhibited a spatially modulated field was defined by how much information 
its activity provided about the animal’s location in the environment18. Briefly, the observed 
activity was randomly shuffled many times. The amount of spatial information from each 
shuffle was accumulated into a null distribution, and, if the observed activity had sufficiently 
high spatial information (within the top 5% of shuffles), it was considered to be a place cell.
Reporting Summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting 
Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study, including the CA1 raw imaging data, 
identified source profiles and time traces from automated cell-finding algorithms and manual 
annotations of transients, are available on the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/
zt54q/.
Code availability
All algorithms described are available in a MATLAB-based software suite. The software 
also includes several graphical user interfaces (GUIs) to facilitate visualization and 
parameter optimization. For example, one GUI displays transients for manual classification 
(Extended Data Fig. 2). Users can also interact with this GUI to specify which transients are 
true, false or mixed or identify artifact sources. Other GUIs (not shown) facilitate comparing 
different sets of parameters to optimize performance. All software is available under the 
MIT license and can be downloaded from https://github.com/adamshch/SEUDO.
Gauthier et al. Page 16
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Example classified transient profiles for a single source from mouse CA1 
found using CNMF.
Each panel is titled with the Pearson correlation between the source profile and transient 
profile.
Gauthier et al. Page 17
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 2 |. user interface for manual classification of transients.
For detailed description, see software documentation in the GIT repository https://
github.com/adamshch/SEUDO.
Gauthier et al. Page 18
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Comparison of manual annotation for two graders on the same 1,834 
transients.
Confusion matrices showing the number of transients graded in different ways by each 
reviewer (left) and the total percentage of transients in each bin (right).
Gauthier et al. Page 19
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 4 |. Algorithm to classify transients as true or false using the spatial Ljung-
Box quartile test instead of the correlation metric.
A: Schematic for how the transient profile residual autocorrelation is computed. B: Two 
example transients, shown to illustrate difference in residual for true and false transients. 
C: Classification of four example transients using the LBQ test. D: results of the LBQ test 
on transients classified by human expert. Left: results of the test applied to true and false 
transients for various values of α. right: results of the test applied to all four transient types.
Gauthier et al. Page 20
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5 |. Effect of SEUDO parameters.
A: Activity estimated by SEUDO and least squares for one true transient (top row) and one 
false transient (bottom row) using several types of estimation (column labels). Images and 
traces show estimated amplitude of the source profile (green) and sum of fitted Gaussian 
kernels (magenta). B: Sum of activity ascribed to the source profile (green) and Gaussian 
kernels (magenta) for the true transient (left) and the false transient (right). Each subplot 
shows results for one set of parameters. roman numerals indicate parameter regimes shown 
in A.
Gauthier et al. Page 21
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6 |. Performance of SEUDO as σ2 was varied over three orders of 
magnitude, for the same sources and quantified in the same way as in Fig. 5c.
Each subplot shows performance for the value of σ2 indicated in the title and the shown 
values of λ (green points). Also plotted for comparison are the collection of points taken 
from all subplots (gray points).
Gauthier et al. Page 22
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 7 |. Removing false transients can impact global summaries of activity.
Here, time courses were sorted into 5 clusters using K-means (best clustering over 50 
random seeds). A-B: SEUDO time courses were more highly consolidated (that is, fewer 
clusters contained more of the neurons) as compared to the time-traces with contamination. 
C: A confusion matrix depicts that a small number of cluster relabelings accounted for much 
of the changes in SEUDO time courses.
Gauthier et al. Page 23
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank L. Meshulam, P.D. Rich, A. Giovannucci and E. Pnevmatikakis for helpful comments on the manuscript 
and M. Lewis for developing the SEUDO acronym. J.L.G. was funded by NIH NRSA 1F32NS077840-01A1. 
A.S.C. was supported by the NIH BRAIN Initiative (R01 MH115750). J.W.P. was supported by grants from the 
Simons Collaboration on the Global Brain (SCGB AWD543027), the NIH BRAIN Initiative (R01 MH115750) 
and a U19 NIH-NINDS BRAIN Initiative award (5U19NS104648). D.W.T. was supported by grants from the 
Simons Collaboration on the Global Brain (SCGB 328057) and a U19 NIH-NINDS BRAIN Initiative award 
(5U19NS104648).
References
1. Denk W, Strickler JH & Webb WW Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence microscopy. Science 
248, 73–76 (1990). [PubMed: 2321027] 
2. Dombeck DA, Khabbaz AN, Collman F, Adelman TL & Tank DW Imaging large-scale neural 
activity with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron 56, 43–57 (2007). [PubMed: 
17920014] 
3. Pachitariu M. et al. Suite2p: beyond 10,000 neurons with standard two-photon microscopy. Preprint 
at bioRxiv 10.1101/061507 (2016).
4. Dana H. et al. Thy1-GCaMP6 transgenic mice for neuronal population imaging in vivo. PLoS ONE 
9, e108697 (2014). [PubMed: 25250714] 
5. Madisen L. et al. Transgenic mice for intersectional targeting of neural sensors and effectors with 
high specificity and performance. Neuron 85, 942–958 (2015). [PubMed: 25741722] 
6. Chen T-W et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature 499, 295–
300 (2013). [PubMed: 23868258] 
7. Badura A, Sun XR, Giovannucci A, Lynch LA & Wang SSH Fast calcium sensor proteins for 
monitoring neural activity. Neurophotonics 1, 025008 (2014). [PubMed: 25558464] 
8. Song A. et al. V olumetric two-photon imaging of neurons using stereoscopy (vTwINS). Nat. 
Methods 14, 420–426 (2017). [PubMed: 28319111] 
9. Dombeck DA, Graziano MS & Tank DW Functional clustering of neurons in motor cortex 
determined by cellular resolution imaging in awake behaving mice. J. Neurosci 29, 13751–13760 
(2009). [PubMed: 19889987] 
10. Mukamel EA, Nimmerjahn A. & Schnitzer MJ Automated analysis of cellular signals from 
large-scale calcium imaging data. Neuron 63, 747–760 (2009). [PubMed: 19778505] 
11. Giovannucci A. et al. CaImAn: an open source tool for scalable calcium imaging data analysis. 
eLife 8, e38173 (2019). [PubMed: 30652683] 
12. Mishne G, Coifman RR, Lavzin M. & Schiller J. Automated cellular structure extraction in 
biological images with applications to calcium imaging data. Preprint at bioRxiv 10.1101/313981 
(2018).
13. Dombeck DA, Harvey CD, Tian L, Looger LL & Tank DW Functional imaging of hippocampal 
place cells at cellular resolution during virtual navigation. Nat. Neurosci 13, 1433–1440 (2010). 
[PubMed: 20890294] 
14. Lecoq J. et al. Visualizing mammalian brain area interactions by dual-axis two-photon calcium 
imaging. Nat. Neurosci 17, 1825–1829 (2014). [PubMed: 25402858] 
15. Kerr JN, Greenberg D. & Helmchen F. Imaging input and output of neocortical networks in vivo. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 14063–14068 (2005). [PubMed: 16157876] 
16. Harris KD, Quiroga RQ, Freeman J. & Smith SL Improving data quality in neuronal population 
recordings. Nat. Neurosci 19, 1165–1174 (2016). [PubMed: 27571195] 
17. Malik WQ, Schummers J, Sur M. & Brown EN Denoising two-photon calcium imaging data. PloS 
ONE 6, e20490 (2011). [PubMed: 21687727] 
Gauthier et al. Page 24
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
18. Gauthier JL & Tank DW A dedicated population for reward coding in the hippocampus. Neuron 
99, 179–193 (2018). [PubMed: 30008297] 
19. Pnevmatikakis EA et al. Simultaneous denoising, deconvolution, and demixing of calcium imaging 
data. Neuron 89, 285–299 (2016). [PubMed: 26774160] 
20. Peron SP, Freeman J, Iyer V , Guo C. & Svoboda K. A cellular resolution map of barrel cortex 
activity during tactile behavior. Neuron 86, 783–799 (2015). [PubMed: 25913859] 
21. O’Keefe J. Place units in the hippocampus of the freely moving rat. Exp. Neurol 51, 78–109 
(1976). [PubMed: 1261644] 
22. Henriksen EJ et al. Spatial representation along the proximodistal axis of CA1. Neuron 68, 127–
137 (2010). [PubMed: 20920796] 
23. Inan H, Erdogdu MA & Schnitzer M. Robust estimation of neural signals in calcium imaging. 
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (eds Guyon I, et al.) 2905–2914 (NIPS, 
2017).
24. Petersen A, Simon N. & Witten D. SCALPEL: extracting neurons from calcium imaging data. 
Ann. Appl. Stat 12, 2430–2456 (2018). [PubMed: 30510612] 
25. Martinez-Cantin R. BayesOpt: a Bayesian optimization library for nonlinear optimization, 
experimental design and bandits. J. Mach. Learn. Res 15, 3735–3739 (2014).
26. McCoy MB & Tropp JA Sharp recovery bounds for convex demixing, with applications. Found. 
Comput. Math 14, 503–567 (2014).
27. Hill DN, Mehta SB & Kleinfeld D. Quality metrics to accompany spike sorting of extracellular 
signals. J. Neurosci 31, 8699–8705 (2011). [PubMed: 21677152] 
28. Won DS, Chong DY & Wolf PD Effects of spike sorting error on information content in multi-
neuron recordings. In First International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering 618–621 
(IEEE, 2003).
29. Ecker AS et al. Decorrelated neuronal firing in cortical microcircuits. Science 327, 584–587 
(2010). [PubMed: 20110506] 
30. Cohen MR & Kohn A. Measuring and interpreting neuronal correlations. Nat. Neurosci 14, 811–
819 (2011). [PubMed: 21709677] 
31. Pillow JW, Shlens J, Chichilnisky E. & Simoncelli EP A model-based spike sorting algorithm for 
removing correlation artifacts in multi-neuron recordings. PloS ONE 8, e62123 (2013). [PubMed: 
23671583] 
32. Keemink SW et al. FISSA: a neuropil decontamination toolbox for calcium imaging signals. Sci. 
Rep 8, 3493 (2018). [PubMed: 29472547] 
33. Bioucas-Dias JM et al. Hyperspectral unmixing overview: geometrical, statistical, and sparse 
regression-based approaches. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens 5, 354–379 (2012).
34. Rickgauer JP, Deisseroth K. & Tank DW Simultaneous cellular-resolution optical perturbation and 
imaging of place cell firing fields. Nat. Neurosci 17, 1816–1824 (2014). [PubMed: 25402854] 
35. Tibshirani R. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. JR Stat. Soc. Series B Methodol 58, 
267–288 (1996).
36. Becker SR, Candès EJ & Grant MC Templates for convex cone problems with applications to 
sparse signal recovery. Math. Program. Comput 3, 165 (2011).
Gauthier et al. Page 25
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1 |. False transients occur and can interfere with scientific conclusions.
a, Left, mean fluorescence image from a subset of an in vivo two-photon imaging movie 
showing mouse CA1 pyramidal cells genetically expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP3. 
right, spatial profiles of the 52 sources identified by CNMF in this movie, each in a different 
color. b, Time courses (top) of eight transients assigned to one source (top inset image) 
and their respective transient profiles (bottom). Classification as true or false was performed 
manually by a human expert. c, Occurrence of true activity in a set of 1,325 simultaneously 
recorded sources. Top, the fraction of transients that were classified as true (only for sources 
with at least one classified transient). Bottom, equivalent data for spikes that were inferred 
from classified transients as returned by CNMF (only for sources with at least 1,000 spikes 
inferred from classified transients). d, Peak amplitudes of true and false transients for the 
Gauthier et al. Page 26
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
same sources as in c. e, Median peak amplitude of true and false transients for each source, 
only shown for sources with at least five true and five false transients. The purple ‘X’ 
indicates the mean over sources. f, Top and middle, two source profiles and their respective 
time courses during a brief period of the movie. Bottom, transient profile for source 2 (left) 
and the same image shown with increased contrast and overlaid outlines of source profiles 
(right). The arrowhead indicates part of source 2 fluorescence that was not captured by its 
profile. g, Top, six transient profiles (right) assigned to the same source (left). Outlines show 
profiles from this source and an adjacent source. Bottom, spatially averaged activity of this 
source while the mouse traversed a virtual linear track. Arrowheads indicate the transients 
shown above.
Gauthier et al. Page 27
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2 |. Quantitative metrics for evaluating transients.
a, Schematic of how the transient profile and transient profile residual are computed. b, 
Three transients (rows) for one source; the source profile is at the far left. Shown for 
each transient are the human classification (true, false or mixed), the transient profile with 
Gaussian blurring to highlight structure (radius 1 pixel), the correlation (corr.) metric value, 
the transient residual (shown with two color maps) and the contamination (contam.)-severity 
metric. AU, arbitrary units. c, Performance of automatic classification using the correlation 
metric. d, Top, example of a transient with mixed activity (movie frames are shown as 
three-frame averages). Bottom, example of an artifact profile arising from the fusion of 
two cell bodies. Left images show source profile with and without contour, and right 
images show two representative transient profiles with contour overlaid. e, Distribution of 
correlation values (top) and contamination severity (bottom) for transient categories defined 
by human classification. f, Center, FaLCon plot for 1,325 sources identified in one movie of 
Gauthier et al. Page 28
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
CA1 (same dataset as shown in Fig. 1a) at a correlation threshold of 0.5. For axis definitions, 
see text and the Methods. Each point is one source; color shows human classification. Left 
and right, for each of four example sources, images show the source profile (single panel) 
and all transient profiles (grouped panels). Inset dot colors reveal human classification of 
each transient (gray indicates transients that could not be confidently classified).
Gauthier et al. Page 29
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3 |. Geometric intuition for the proposed solution.
a, Visualization of a simulated source profile in a two-pixel movie. Left, dashed line 
shows points corresponding to possible scalings of this profile. right, brightness versus pixel 
number for one scaling of this profile. b, A true transient represented as a point (left) and 
a plot of brightness (right). c, Equivalent plots for a false transient. d, Left, contour lines of 
the least-squares (LSQ) cost function. Middle and right, best fit of the source profile (gold 
point and gold outline) using least squares. e, Left, contour lines of a hypothetical robust 
cost function. Middle and right, best fit of the source profile (green point and green outline) 
using the robust cost function.
Gauthier et al. Page 30
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4 |. Explicit model of unexplained fluorescence.
a, Schematic of two models for calcium imaging data. In a typical model, source time course 
weights (gold) are estimated using only known profile shapes. In our model, time course 
weights (green) are estimated using a procedure that accounts for unexplained fluorescence 
(magenta). b, Probability distribution of the SEUDO residual computed via numerical 
integration (unexplained fluorescence plus noise) in the case of a two-pixel movie. Left 
and center, individual components. Right, full residual. Max, maximum. c, Gaussian kernel 
spatial profiles (top) and amplitude distribution (bottom). d, Calculated cost for the objective 
function defined by SEUDO. Left and center, individual terms. Right, full cost; the boundary 
between the ℓ2 term and the LASSO term (f and g in equation (2)) is the lower cost. e, The 
full cost in d displays LASSO-like behavior for large positive residuals and least-squares-
type behavior for small and negative residuals.
Gauthier et al. Page 31
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 5 |. SEuDo performance on a full population of sources.
a, Comparison of 36 transient time courses estimated by least squares (gold) or SEUDO 
(green, λ= 30, σ2 = 0.002). Within each category (human-classified true or false), transients 
are sorted by duration. b, Summary of SEUDO performance for five λ values when applied 
to the transients shown in a. c, Performance of SEUDO (green), a simple framewise 
correlation metric (gray) and regularized least-squares time course estimation (brown). 
SEUDO was performed using the same parameter sets as in b. The correlation metric was 
applied using 101 correlation thresholds ranging from −1 to 1 (Methods). The regularized 
least-squares method was CNMF. d, Detailed analysis of one transient with overlapping true 
Gauthier et al. Page 32
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and false activity. Shown movie frames are downsampled tenfold to highlight when different 
cells become active. Cyan and magenta traces are the mean pixel value in the respective 
rectangular regions shown at the left. The SEUDO time course was computed using the 
same parameter set as in a.
Gauthier et al. Page 33
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 6 |. SEuDo can correct errors affecting scientific results.
a, Top and middle, time courses for two simultaneously recorded cells with mutual 
contamination as estimated by least squares and SEUDO. Bottom, scatterplot comparing 
time courses of the same two cells over all 41,756 frames, shown separately for each 
estimation technique. b, Top, spatially averaged activity for the source depicted in Fig. 1g, 
shown separately when the time course was estimated by least squares or SEUDO. Bottom, 
the difference between least squares and SEUDO. c, Histogram, changes in place cell 
location after applying SEUDO. Inset, number of cells characterized as place cells (P < 0.05, 
test for significant spatial modulation, Methods) using time traces obtained by least squares 
or SEUDO.
Gauthier et al. Page 34
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 12.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript