SCITO-seq: single-cell combinatorial indexed cytometry 
sequencing
Byungjin Hwang1,2,3,4,5,17, David S. Lee1,2,17, Whitney Tamaki6, Yang Sun1,2, Anton 
Ogorodnikov1,2, George C. Hartoularos1,2,7, Aidan Winters7, Bertrand Z. Yeung8, 
Kristopher L. Nazor8, Yun S. Song9,10,15, Eric D. Chow11, Matthew H. Spitzer12,13,14,15, Chun 
Jimmie Ye1,2,3,4,5,14,15,16,*
1Institute for Human Genetics (IHG), University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California, USA
2Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA
3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA
4Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, USA
5Institute for Computational Health Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA
6Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences and Pharmacogenomics, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
7Graduate Program in Biological and Medical Informatics, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, USA
8BioLegend Inc, San Diego, CA, USA
9Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
10Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
11Center for Advanced Technology, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
12Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA
*Correspondence should be addressed to C.J.Y (jimmie.ye@ucsf.edu).17these authors contributed equally to this work
Author contributions
C.J.Y ., B.H and D.S.L conceived the experiments, B.H. and D.S.L. designed and conducted the experiment(s), B.Y . and K.L.N. kindly 
provided antibodies for commercial compatibility experiments. C.J.Y ., B.H., D.S.L., W.T., A.O., G.H., A.W., Y .S.S., Y .S., E.D.C., and 
M.H.S. analyzed the results. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Code availability
All code used to perform simulations and generate figures can be found at the following websites (https://github.com/yelabucsf/
SCITO-seq, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4988182). Useful project related cost calculation website can be found also at (https://
yelabtools.herokuapp.com/scSeqCostCalc/scito.html).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2021 August ; 18(8): 903–911. doi:10.1038/s41592-021-01222-3.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
13Departments of Otolaryngology and Microbiology and Immunology, Helen Diller Family 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA
14Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
15Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
16J. David Gladstone-UCSF Institute of Genomic Immunology, San Francisco, CA, USA
Abstract
The development of DNA-barcoded antibodies to tag cell-surface molecules has enabled the use 
of droplet-based single cell sequencing (dsc-seq) to profile protein abundances from thousands 
of cells simultaneously. Compared to flow and mass cytometry, high per cell cost of current dsc-
seq-based workflows precludes their use in clinical applications and large-scale pooled screens. 
Here, we introduce SCITO-seq, a workflow that uses splint oligonucleotides (oligos) to enable 
combinatorially indexed dsc-seq of DNA-barcoded antibodies from greater than 105 cells per 
reaction using commercial microfluidics. By encoding sample barcodes into splint oligos, we 
demonstrate that multiplexed SCITO-seq produces reproducible estimates of cellular composition 
and surface protein expression comparable to mass cytometry. We further demonstrate two 
modified splint oligo designs that extend SCITO-seq to achieve compatibility with commercial 
DNA-barcoded antibodies and simultaneous expression profiling of the transcriptome and surface 
proteins from the same cell. These results demonstrate SCITO-seq as a flexible and ultra high-
throughput platform for sequencing-based single-cell protein and multimodal profiling.
Introduction
The use of DNA to barcode physical compartments and tag intracellular and cell-
surface molecules has enabled the use of sequencing to efficiently profile the molecular 
characteristics of thousands of cells simultaneously. While initially applied to measuring 
the abundances of mRNAs1,2 and identifying regions of accessible chromatin3, recent 
developments in DNA-tagged antibodies have created new opportunities to use sequencing 
to measure the abundances of surface4,5 and intracellular proteins6.
Sequencing-based protein profiling of single cells has several advantages over flow and 
mass cytometry. First, the number of surface proteins that can be measured by DNA-tagged 
antibodies is exponential in the number of bases in the tag. In theory, the entire cell 
surfaceome can be targeted and is only limited by the availability of antibodies. In practice, 
panels targeting hundreds of proteins are already commercially available4,7. This contrasts 
with other cytometry methods where the number of proteins targeted is limited by the 
overlap in the emission spectrums of fluorophores (flow: 4–48) or the number of unique 
masses of metal isotopes that can be chelated by commercial polymers (CyTOF: ~50)8,9. 
Second, sequencing-based protein profiling can readily read out all antibody-derived tags 
(ADTs) with one sequencing experiment instead of multiple rounds of signal separation and 
detection, significantly reducing the time and sample input for profiling large panels. Third, 
additional molecules can be profiled from the same cell enabling multimodal profiling 
Hwang et al. Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of cells4,10,11. Finally, sequencing is amenable to encoding orthogonal information using 
additional DNA barcodes creating opportunities for clinical applications and pooled screens 
that barcode cells using natural variation12, synthetic sequences13,14, or sgRNAs15,16.
Despite the opportunities, the major limitation in sequencing-based single-cell protein 
profiling4,7 is the high cost associated with profiling each cell, thus precluding its use 
for phenotyping population cohorts or in large-scale screens where millions of cells per 
experiment would be desirable. Like other single-cell sequencing assays, the total cost 
per cell for protein profiling is divided between costs associated with library construction 
and library sequencing. Because the number of protein molecules per cell is 2–6 orders 
of magnitude higher than mRNA molecules for the same gene17 and the use of targeting 
antibodies limits the number of proteins profiled, sequencing ADTs generally requires fewer 
number of reads and thus has a lower sequencing cost per cell compared to sequencing 
the transcriptome. However, library construction costs for commercial microfluidics-based 
single-cell sequencing platforms18 are high regardless of the modality. Furthermore, 
conjugation of modified DNA sequences to antibodies can incur a high one time cost4,5. 
Thus, for sequencing-based protein profiling to be a compelling strategy for ultra high-
throughput cellular phenotyping, there is a need to develop workflows that minimize library 
preparation costs without incurring significant antibody conjugation costs.
Single-cell combinatorially indexed (SCI) sequencing is an alternative approach to 
commercial microfluidics for massively parallel single-cell sequencing by labeling 
sequential rounds of physical compartmentalization with DNA barcodes. While initially 
applied to mRNA and chromatin accessibility sequencing, a recent study19 demonstrated 
surface protein profiling using SCI-sequencing. However, standard SCI-sequencing requires 
more than two rounds of combinatorial indexing to profile 105 – 106 cells19–23. Coordinating 
multiple rounds of chemical and enzymatic reactions to ensure DNA-barcoded antibodies 
remain bound to surface proteins during each round is experimentally challenging. 
Furthermore, profiling both mRNA and protein using SCI-sequencing would require 
compatibility of multiple cycling conditions which may be highly inefficient. Indeed, the 
published approach19 only measured 14 mRNA transcripts and 1 protein simultaneously for 
5 × 104 cells with 4 rounds of indexing and 60 wells per round.
Here, we introduce single-cell combinatorial indexed cytometry sequencing (SCITO-seq), a 
simple and cost-effective procedure for single-cell protein profiling that combines split-pool 
indexing and droplet-based single cell sequencing. Our approach is based on the key insight 
that the large number of droplets produced by commercial microfluidic devices (e.g. up 
to 105 for 10X Genomics18) can be used as a second round of physical compartments 
for two-step combinatorial indexing. While two-step SCI workflows have been recently 
described for ATAC-seq24 and RNA-seq25, they have not been implemented for protein 
and multimodal profiling to the best of our knowledge. For SCITO-seq, we introduce a 
strategy using universal conjugation of antibodies followed by pooled hybridization of splint 
oligos to minimize the cost of generating multiple pools of DNA-tagged antibodies. Tagged 
antibodies are then used to stain cells in respective pools prior to high-concentration loading 
and library construction utilizing commercial microfluidics. After sequencing, protein 
expression profiles for cells simultaneously encapsulated in a single droplet can be resolved 
Hwang et al. Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
with pool barcodes. In mixed species and mixed individual experiments, we demonstrate that 
SCITO-seq achieves a throughput on the order of 105 cells per microfluidic reaction with 
low collision rates tunable by the number of antibody pools. Then, we applied SCITO-seq 
to profile peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) using panels of 28 and 60 antibodies 
generating reproducible estimates of cellular composition and surface protein expression 
comparable to mass cytometry (CyTOF). We further demonstrate the flexibility of SCITO-
seq by modifying the splint oligo design to achieve compatibility with commercial DNA-
barcoded antibody panels and an existing workflow25 to enable combinatorially indexed 
multimodal profiling of the whole transcriptome and surface proteins.
Results
Theory and design of SCITO-seq
Because cell loading in microfluidic devices is governed by a Poisson process, all dsc-seq 
workflows recommend low loading concentrations to maintain a low collision rate, defined 
as the frequency of droplets containing multiple cells. For the 10X Genomics single-cell 
sequencing platform, Poisson loading at the recommended 2 × 103 – 2 × 104 cells per 
channel result in cell recovery rates of 50–60%18,25 and collision rates of 1–10% (Extended 
Data Fig. 1a). At these recommended loading concentrations, 97–82% of droplets do 
not contain a cell, resulting in suboptimal usage of reagents (Extended Data Figures 1b 
and c). One approach to decrease the library preparation cost of dsc-seq is to “barcode” 
samples using either natural genetic variants12,26 or synthetic DNA molecules13,14,27 prior 
to pooled loading at higher numbers of cells per channel (e.g. loading 5 × 104 – 8 
× 104 cells), thus reducing the proportion of droplets without a cell (e.g. 65–45%). 
Because simultaneous encapsulation of some cells within a droplet can be detected by the 
co-occurrence of different sample barcodes (e.g., genetic profiles or synthetic DNA tags), 
sample multiplexing increases the number of cells recovered per channel while maintaining 
a low effective collision rate that is tunable by the number of sample barcodes. However, 
as collision events can only be detected but not resolved into usable single-cell data, 
the maximum loading concentration that minimizes total cost is ultimately limited by the 
overhead incurred for sequencing collided droplets.
Here we propose a simple two round single-cell combinatorially indexed (SCI) experimental 
workflow, SCITO-seq, which combinatorially indexes single cells using DNA-tagged 
antibodies and microfluidic droplets to enable cost-effective profiling of cell-surface 
proteins that is scalable to 105 – 106 cells per microfluidic channel (Fig. 1a). First, each 
antibody is conjugated with an antibody-specific amine-modified oligo that also serves as 
a hybridization sequence (Ab Handle, 20bp). Second, titrated antibodies are mixed and 
aliquoted into pools before the addition of splint oligos, each containing a compound 
barcode consisting of an antibody barcode and a pool barcode (Ab+PBC). Each splint 
oligo also contains complementary sequences to the Ab Handle and to the gelbead-bound 
sequences (Fig. 1b). The design of the antibody and gelbead hybridization sequences can 
be customized for compatibility with commercial antibody conjugation chemistries and 
droplet-based chemistries, respectively. Third, cells are aliquoted into pools and stained with 
antibodies hybridized with pool-specific barcodes. Fourth, the stained cells are pooled and 
Hwang et al. Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
loaded using a commercial dsc-seq platform at loading concentrations tunable to the targeted 
collision rate followed by library construction incorporating unique molecular identifiers 
(UMI) and droplet barcodes (DBC). Finally, after sequencing the antibody derived tags 
(ADTs), the surface protein expression profiles of simultaneously encapsulated cells within 
a droplet (multiplets) can be resolved using the combinatorial index of Ab+PBC and DBC.
Key to the scalability of SCITO-seq is the recognition that Poisson loading naturally limits 
the number of cells within a droplet even at very high loading concentrations. Thus, 
indexing cells using a small number of antibody pools will be sufficient to ensure that 
the combinatorial index (Ab+PBC and DBC) will resolve cells at low collision rates. 
Theoretically, given P pools, C cells loaded, D droplets formed, the collision rate is 
given as ℙ Collision = 1 − e− C
D 1 + C
P D
P
 while the rate of empty droplets is given by 
ℙ Empty = e− C
D (see Methods for derivation). Our derivation of the collision rate differs 
from previous estimates derived from the classical birthday problem25, which did not 
account for encapsulation of more than two cells within the same droplet. These closed form 
derivations of the collision and empty droplet rates are nearly identical to those obtained 
from simulations (Extended Data Fig. 1d). For example, assuming 6 × 104 droplets are 
formed and 1.82 × 105 cells are loaded, 84% of droplets contain at least one cell but only 
4.4% of droplets contain greater than four cells. To yield 105 resolved cells at a collision 
rate of 5%, only 10 antibody pools would be needed. Given current costs, this corresponds 
to a total cost of 3.1 ¢/cell. Note that as the library preparation cost quickly diminishes for 
SCITO-seq with increasing number of pools, the total cost per cell is dominated by antibody 
costs. Therefore, while 384 pools achieve the maximal 12-fold reduction in cost compared to 
standard sequencing-based single-cell protein profiling (2.2 vs 26 ¢/cell), 10 antibody pools 
can already achieve an 8-fold reduction in cost (3.1 vs 26 ¢/cell) with minimal additional 
experimental complexity (Extended Data Fig. 1e).
Dynamic range and validation of SCITO-seq
We first assessed the sensitivity and dynamic range of SCITO-seq by profiling two pools 
of PBMCs from a single donor stained with equal proportions of a fluorescently labeled 
CD8A antibody and one of two pool-barcoded SCITO-seq CD8A antibodies. After washing 
unbound antibodies, the stained pools were equally mixed and FACS sorted into four 
bins based on CD8A expression. Each sorted bin was reanalyzed by flow cytometry or 
tagged with a unique hashtag. The hashtagged cells were pooled and 30,000 cells were 
loaded and processed using the 10X Chromium 3’ V3 kit for ADT library construction and 
sequenced to a depth of 3,647 reads/cell (Fig. 1d, See Methods). The distribution of CD8A 
ADT counts was highly similar between the two SCITO-seq pools (Pool 1: 2.8+/−1.2, 4.6+/
−0.4, 6.5+/−0.6, 7.3+/−0.5; Pool2: 2.3+/−1.1, 4.3+/−0.5, 6.4+/−0.5, 7.2+/−0.2). Compared to 
flow cytometry, SCITO-seq produced similar coefficients of variation across the four bins 
(SCITO-seq: 0.42, 0.11, 0.08, 0.05; flow: 0.30, 0.15, 0.07, 0.04) at a slightly lower dynamic 
range (SCITO-seq: 0–9660 UMIs, flow: 0–22610 intensity units) likely due to limited 
sequencing. These results suggest SCITO-seq has similar noise profiles to flow cytometry 
across a dynamic range of four orders of magnitude with little pool-to-pool variation.
Hwang et al. Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
To assess the feasibility of SCITO-seq, we performed a mixed species experiment with 
human (HeLa) and mouse (4T1) cell lines in five pools, each stained with anti-human CD29 
(hCD29) and anti-mouse CD29 (mCD29) antibodies hybridized with pool-specific barcodes 
(Fig. 1e). After mixing the stained pools at equal proportions, 105 cells were loaded and 
processed using the 10X Chromium 3’ V3 kit for ADT and mRNA library construction. 
The resulting libraries were sequenced to recover 38,504 cell-containing droplets (CCDs) 
at a depth of 2,909 reads per CCD for ADT and 25,844 reads per CCD for mRNA. 
We merged and analyzed ADT counts for each antibody across pools to mimic standard 
sequencing-based protein profiling (e.g., CITE-seq4). Of the 38,504 CCDs, 40.6% contained 
only mCD29 ADTs, 35.7% contained only hCD29 ADTs, and 21.9% contained ADTs from 
both species, which we labeled as between-species multiplets (Fig. 1f). These estimates 
were consistent with results from analyzing the transcriptomic data: 42.7% CCDs contained 
mouse transcripts, 33.9% contained human transcripts, and 23.3% contained transcripts 
from both species (Extended Data Fig. 2a). ADT counts from both between- and within-
species multiplets could be resolved by utilizing the DBC and Ab+PBCs, reducing the 
collision rate from an estimated 51% to 8.8% (expected 6.3%) (Fig. 1f, Extended Data 
Fig. 2b) without significant pool-to-pool variation (Extended Data Fig. 2c). After resolving 
multiplets, protein expression profiles were obtained for 46,295 cells, a 3.7-fold throughput 
increase over the expected ~12,500 cells from standard workflows at the same collision 
rate (Fig. 1g). Further, a two-pool SCITO-seq experiment produced similar results to direct 
conjugation of four different Ab+PBC barcodes suggesting that both within and between 
pool splint oligo contamination rates are low (Extended Data Fig. 2d and e).
We next tested the cellular throughput of SCITO-seq and its applicability to resolve 
quantitative differences in cellular composition based on surface protein expression. We 
isolated and mixed primary CD4+ T and CD20+ B cells from two donors at a ratio of 
5:1 (T:B) for donor 1 and 1:3 (T:B) for donor 2. The mixed cells were aliquoted into 
five pools and each stained with pool-barcoded anti-CD4 and anti-CD20 antibodies (Fig. 
1h). Stained pools were mixed at equal ratios, 2 × 105 cells were loaded and processed 
using the 10X Chromium 3’ V3 kit, and the resulting ADT and mRNA libraries sequenced 
to recover 58,769 post-processing CCDs. Merging the ADT data across the five pools, 
anti-CD4 and anti-CD20 antibodies stained the expected cell populations as defined by 
the transcriptomic data. Based on the ADTs, 40% of CCDs were estimated to be between 
cell-type multiplets, which was consistent with estimates from the transcriptomic analysis 
(49.6%; Fig. 1i, Extended Data Fig. 3a). Based on genetic demultiplexing that leverages 
genetic variants captured in the transcriptomic data, an additional 30% of CCDs were 
estimated to be within cell-type multiplets for a total multiplet rate of 70%. After resolving 
both between and within cell-type multiplets using the combinatorial index of Ab+PBC and 
DBC (Fig. 1j, Extended Data Fig. 3b), a total of 116,827 cells were obtained at a collision 
rate of 25%, effectively increasing the throughput by 4.0-fold over standard workflows at 
the same collision rate. Note that both the multiplet rates (R = 0.97, P < 0.01) and the 
co-occurrence rates of SCITO-seq antibodies from different pools (R = 0.93, P < 0.01) 
were highly correlated between the expected and observed values (Extended Data Fig. 3c) 
suggesting that the encapsulation of multiple cells within a CCD is not biased for specific 
pools or cell types. We next assessed if SCITO-seq can capture unequal distributions of B 
Hwang et al. Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and T cells from the two donors, especially from CCDs that encapsulated multiple cells. 
For this analysis, we focused only on the 45,240 CCDs predicted to contain cells from 
only one donor based on genetic demultiplexing (donor 1: 25,630, donor 2: 19,610). Within 
CCDs with only one SCITO-seq pool barcode detected (singlets), the estimated proportions 
of T and B cells (T: B200K: 5.0:1 for donor 1 and 1:2.8 for donor 2) were consistent 
with the expected proportions for each of the two donors and estimates obtained from the 
transcriptomic data (Extended Data Fig. 3d). Approximately the same proportions were 
estimated in CCDs with multiple pool barcodes (multiplets) (T: B200K 4.0:1 for donor 1 and 
1:2.9 for donor 2).
Ultra high-throughput phenotyping of PBMCs with SCITO-seq
To demonstrate the applicability of SCITO-seq for ultra high-throughput multidimensional 
cellular phenotyping using surface proteins, we profiled peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) from two healthy donors using a panel of 28 monoclonal antibodies across 10 
pools. After staining, pooling, and processing 2 × 105 cells in a single channel using the 10X 
Chromium 3’ V3 kit, the resulting ADT and mRNA libraries were sequenced and analyzed 
to obtain 49,510 post-filtering CCDs (Fig. 2a). Each of the 10 SCITO-seq pool barcodes 
was detected in a subset of CCDs at levels significantly higher than other pool barcodes 
suggesting a high signal-to-noise ratio to resolve multiplets (Extended Data Fig. 4a). A 
total of 93,127 cells were resolved at a collision rate of 8.5%, increasing the throughput 
by 10-fold over standard workflows at the same collision rate consistent with simulations 
(Extended Data Fig. 1d).
We separately analyzed the mRNA, merged ADT, and resolved ADT data by normalizing 
the raw counts, performing dimensionality reduction, constructing a k-nearest neighbor 
graph, and clustering using the Leiden algorithm (see Methods). Leiden clusters based on 
either merged ADT or RNA counts (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 4b and 5a) were poorly 
differentiated in Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) space due to the 
high loading concentrations as 69% of CCDs are expected to contain more than one cell. 
Strikingly, Leiden clusters based on resolved ADT data resulted in 17 distinct clusters in 
UMAP space which could each be annotated based on the expression of lineage-specific 
surface markers including: eight clusters of the myeloid lineage, naïve and memory CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, B cells and gamma delta T cells (gdT) (Fig. 
2b, Extended Data Fig. 5b). Notably, naive (CD45RA+) and memory (CD45RO+) CD4+ 
and CD8+ T cells emerged as separate clusters which can be difficult to distinguish based 
on transcriptomic data due to low mRNA abundances of lineage markers (e.g. CD4) and 
inability to infer isoforms (e.g. CD45RO) directly from 3’ sequencing data18. Indeed, 
analyzing the transcriptomes of CCDs likely containing only a single cell showed limited 
separation of naive and memory cells (Extended Data Fig. 5c and d).
We next assessed the accuracy of SCITO-seq for quantitative immune phenotyping by 
comparing the compositional estimates obtained from CCDs containing a single SCITO-seq 
pool barcode (singlets) versus those containing multiple pool barcodes (multiplets). We 
focused the analysis on CCDs containing cells from one donor predicted based on genetic 
demultiplexing. UMAP projections for resolved cells originating from singlets or multiplets 
Hwang et al. Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
were qualitatively similar (Fig. 2c), suggesting that higher rates of encapsulation do not 
generate technical artifacts. The frequency estimates of the 16 immune populations detected 
from singlets and multiplets were more similar from the same donor (average cosine 
similarity: 0.98 [donor 1], 0.97 [donor 2]; Fig. 2d) than between different donors (average 
cosine similarity: 0.83). We further compared the SCITO-seq data to mass cytometry 
(CyTOF) data generated using the same antibodies conjugated to metal isotopes (Extended 
Data Fig. 6a). Joint clustering of the CyTOF and SCITO-seq data produced qualitatively 
similar UMAP projections (Fig. 2c) and the frequency estimates of jointly annotated cell 
types were highly similar between assays for each donor (average cosine similarity: 0.95 
[donor 1], 0.93 [donor 2]) (Fig. 2d and Extended Data Fig. 6b).
Expanding SCITO-seq to custom and commercial antibody panels
To further demonstrate the flexibility and scalability of SCITO-seq beyond the number 
of markers detectable by flow and mass cytometry9,28, we evaluated the performance of 
SCITO-seq using a 60-plex custom antibody panel and a commercial Totalseq-C (TSC) 165-
plex antibody panel (Extended Data Fig. 7a). To achieve compatibility with the commercial 
TSC panel which utilizes 5’ conjugation, we redesigned splint oligos that would hybridize to 
each antibody-specific 15bp barcode. For each panel, we stained 10 donors in separate pools 
utilizing the pool barcode as a sample label, mixed the pools, and processed 4 × 105 cells 
using the 10X Chromium 3’ V3 kit targeting the recovery of 2 × 105 cells per experiment. 
In the 60-plex experiment, we recovered 69,733 CCDs and resolved 219,063 cells (Fig. 3a, 
3b, Extended Data Fig. 7b, and c) at a collision rate of 18.7%. In the TSC experiment, we 
recovered 66,774 CCDs and resolved 203,838 cells (Fig. 3c and 3d) at a collision rate of 
14.1%. Further, the counts of isotype control antibodies were consistently low (Extended 
Data Fig. 7d) suggesting non-specific background staining is not an appreciable factor 
(Extended Data Fig. 7e and f). Note that even when loading 4 × 105 cells, 20-fold higher 
than recommended, we did not observe a decrease in the number of UMIs recovered per cell 
versus the number of cells per CCD suggesting that reagents are not yet a limiting factor 
at high loading concentrations (Fig. 3e). Further, the observed multiplet rates were highly 
correlated (60-plex; R=0.99, P-value < 0.001, TSC; R=0.92, P-value < 0.001) with those 
obtained from simulation (Fig. 3f).
After additional removal of collided barcodes that could be detected based on co-occurrence 
of lineage markers (See Methods), 175,930 and 175,000 cells were obtained in the 60-plex 
and 165-plex experiments respectively. After count normalization, dimension reduction, and 
k-nearest neighbor graph construction, the cells were clustered using the Leiden algorithm 
into 26 and 19 clusters respectively and visualized in UMAP space (Fig. 3a, c). The 
expected lymphoid and myeloid cell types were annotated with lineage markers (Fig. 3b, d). 
Compared to the 28-plex dataset, higher dimensional phenotyping enabled the identification 
of low frequency cell types such as two populations of conventional dendritic cells (cDC1s 
and cDC2s) distinguished by the expression of CD141, CD370, CD1C and plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells (pDCs) by the expression of CD123, CD303 and CD30429 (Fig. 3b, d and 
Extended Data Fig. 8a).
Hwang et al. Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
SCITO-seq creates new opportunities for multiplexed profiling as pool barcodes can be used 
to directly label samples obviating the need for orthogonal barcoding (Extended Data Fig. 
8b). Encouragingly, similar to previous observations (Extended Data Fig. 3b and 5b), a 
pairwise analysis across all antibodies demonstrated no significant correlation across pools 
(Extended Data Fig. 8c and d) suggesting minimal pool-specific effects that may confound 
quantitative comparisons of multiple samples. We assessed the performance of multiplexed 
SCITO-seq by comparing the compositional and surface expression variation between the 
60-plex and 165-plex experiments since the same 10 individuals were processed. The 
frequency estimates of T, NK, B, and myeloid cell populations were highly correlated 
between experiments (R=0.98–0.99, P-value < 0.001; Fig. 3g). Further, the expression levels 
of 43 surface proteins profiled in both experiments were highly correlated when all PBMCs 
(Fig. 3h) and when only individual cell types (Fig. 3i) were analyzed. These results suggest 
that SCITO-seq can capture both interindividual variability in composition estimated from 
the entire marker panel and expression of individual surface proteins that do not generally 
emerge as distinct UMAP clusters.
Combinatorial-indexed transcriptomic and proteomic profiling
Finally, we sought to enable ultra high-throughput multimodal profiling of the transcriptome 
and surface proteins by integrating SCITO-seq with the recently published scifi-RNA-seq 
workflow25. Scifi-RNA-seq combinatorially indexes mRNAs by in-situ reverse transcription 
utilizing pool-specific RT-primers followed by ligation of pool-barcoded cDNA molecules 
with a DBC utilizing the 10X single-cell ATAC-seq kit (scATAC-seq). To first enable 
compatibility of SCITO-seq with the scATAC-seq chemistry, we modified the gelbead 
hybridization sequence of the splint oligo to be complementary to the scATAC-seq gelbead 
sequence. As a proof of principle, we applied SCITO-seq utilizing the modified splint oligo 
and the scATAC-seq kit to profile PBMCs from one donor in five pools with 12 broad 
phenotyping surface markers (See Methods). A total of 5 × 104 cells were loaded and 
sequenced to recover 21,460 cells. Analysis of the data identified the expected clusters of 
T, B, myeloid, and NK cells expressing the canonical surface proteins demonstrating the 
compatibility of SCITO-seq with scATAC-seq chemistry (Extended Data Fig. 9a).
Scifi-RNA-seq utilizes a bridge oligo to facilitate the ligation of DBCs and requires a 
number of cycling conditions that is not directly compatible with SCITO-seq. To enable 
multimodal profiling, we modified the orientation of the SCITO-seq splint oligo and 
designed an orthogonal bridge oligo to assist capture and ligation of SCITO-seq ADTs 
to the 10X scATAC-seq gelbead capture sequence (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 9b). This 
modification allowed for the addition of a DBC to ADTs while minimizing the competition 
between bridge oligo capture of cDNA and ADT molecules utilizing the existing scifi-RNA-
seq protocol. As a proof of principle, we stained a mixture of four human cell lines (LCL, 
NK-92, HeLa, Jurkat) and one mouse cell line (4T1) with antibodies hybridized with the 
modified SCITO-seq oligos targeting six surface proteins in five pools (Fig. 4a). 3 × 104 
stained cells were processed using the scifi-RNA-seq workflow including both ADT and 
mRNA bridge oligos resulting in 10,439 cells sequenced based on the ADT data. After 
pre-processing, we obtained an average of 310 UMIs per cell for the mRNA library (average 
146 genes/cell) and an average of 550 UMIs per cell for the ADT library. Each mRNA and 
Hwang et al. Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ADT pool barcode was detected in a subset of CCDs that minimally contained barcodes 
from other pools suggesting high signal to noise ratio in resolving both modalities (Fig. 
4b and c). This is confirmed by the near equal distribution of resolved cells expressing 
either human or mouse CD29 ADTs (Gini index of 0.12) (Fig. 4d). After normalization 
of the ADT counts, dimensionality reduction, and k-nearest neighbor graph construction, 5 
clusters were identified using Leiden clustering and visualized in UMAP space (Fig. 4e). 
Cells with the highest average expression of cell line-specific transcript markers generally 
corresponded to the clusters defined using surface protein markers (Fig. 4f). NK-92 specific 
transcripts were notably less prominently expressed in the the NK-92 cluster defined by 
ADT likely due to the lower mRNA capture efficiency within these cells (168 UMIs per 
cell). To further assess the consistency of transcriptomic and ADT data, we constructed 
a UMAP using the mRNA data and overlaid the ADT clusters annotations. This analysis 
produced qualitative enrichment (Extended Data Fig. 9c and d) which was quantitatively 
confirmed including the overlap between NK-92 cells defined using the mRNA and ADT 
data (Fig. 4g, See Methods). These results demonstrate a provisional integration of SCITO-
seq with scifi-RNA-seq that has the potential for ultra high-throughput multimodal profiling 
of RNA and proteins from the same cells.
Discussion
Current cost for sequencing-based protein profiling using commercial microfluidics is three 
to four orders of magnitude higher than conventional cytometry methods. While antibody 
conjugation costs remain similar across platforms, this high cost can be attributed to costs 
associated with sequencing library construction due in part to the low cell throughput using 
commercial microfluidic instruments. To reduce the cost of library construction and to 
maximize cell yields, we developed SCITO-seq, a simple two-step combinatorial indexing 
approach that enables scalable profiling of > 150 surface proteins from > 105 cells in a 
single microfluidic reaction.
While an approach using standard SCI has been reported for single-cell sequencing-based 
protein profiling19, combinatorial indexing using multiple 96/384 well plates is both 
experimentally laborious and susceptible to noise introduced in each round from free oligos 
non-specifically binding to cells. By leveraging commercial microfluidics for combinatorial 
indexing, SCITO-seq presents two distinct advantages due to the natural limited dilution 
using microfluidic cell loading. First, a two-round split-pool indexing workflow is amenable 
to the removal of unbound oligos after splint oligo hybridization to minimize background 
noise. Second, the large number of droplets produced allows for more cells to be sequenced 
using fewer initial pooling reactions. Indeed, SCITO-seq using ten pool barcodes can profile 
105 cells, while a conventional SCI method would require four rounds of 60 wells of 
ligation19 to profile 5 × 104 cells. To further increase throughput while maintaining its 
ease of use, SCITO-seq can be combined with sample hashtags13,14 to enable detection and 
removal of multiple encapsulated cells with the same pool barcode.
In addition to throughput, we demonstrate the flexibility and scalability of the splint 
oligo design of SCITO-seq in several applications. First, by leveraging pool-specific splint 
oligos for sample multiplexing, we demonstrate the feasibility of SCITO-seq to be used 
Hwang et al. Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
for population-scale phenotyping by minimizing per sample costs and experimental batch 
effects. Second, we show the scalability of SCITO-seq by profiling 175,000 cells using a 
commercial panel of 165 antibodies in a single microfluidic channel. This enables extensive 
phenotyping of cells and identification of low frequency cell types. Third, the splint oligo 
can be modified to be compatible with a number of chemistries to enable extensions of 
SCITO-seq for multimodal profiling.
As a proof of principle, we designed a splint oligo compatible with the 10X scATAC-seq 
chemistry which is also used for scifi-RNA-seq, a novel droplet-based SCI method for 
profiling mRNA. We further designed an orthogonal bridge oligo for ligation to maximize 
the efficiency of capture for both mRNA and ADT molecules, enabling simultaneous 
profiling of the whole transcriptome and surface proteins. As new highly efficient and 
easy to implement SCI methods begin to emerge24,25, we envision that SCITO-seq could be 
further integrated with these methods for new multimodal profiling opportunities. However, 
as the number of cells profiled increases, a major limitation of any co-assay will be 
sequencing costs associated primarily with profiling the transcriptome or epigenome. The 
scalability delivered by SCITO-seq allows for emerging large-scale analyses of millions of 
cells such as pooled perturbation screens with barcoded perturbations, single-cell cytometry 
across large population and disease cohorts, and immune repertoire and phenotyping studies 
of clonal evolution.
Methods
Closed from derivation of collision and empty droplet rates
Suppose there are P pools of cells. For pool p, cells arrive according to a Poisson point 
process with rate λp > 0 (abbreviated PPP(λp)), where the unit of time corresponds to 
the inter-arrival time of droplets. In the most general formulation, we assume that the 
point processes for different pools are independent. Further, we assume that a gelbead 
(respectively, a cell) has probability ρpb (respectively, ρpc) of successfully being encapsulated 
into a droplet. Therefore, by Poisson thinning, the arrival of cells follows PPP ρpc λp .
We are interested in the probability of the event (called collision) that a droplet 
contains two or more cells from the same pool. Let Np denote the number of 
cells from pool p successfully loaded into a droplet. Then, N1, N2, … , Np where 
Np Poisson ρpc λp , are independent random variables, and ℙ Droplet Collision  can be 
computed as 1 − ℙ No Droplet Collision . Here ℙ No Droplet Collision  represents a probability 
that every droplet contains ≤ 1 pool barcode. Therefore, we derive:
ℙ Droplet Collision = 1 − ℙ No Droplet Collision
= 1 − ℙ N1 ≤ 1 ∩ N2 ≤ 1 ∩ ⋯ ∩ Np ≤ 1
= 1 − ℙ N1 ≤ 1 ℙ N2 ≤ 1 ⋯ℙ Np ≤ 1
= 1 − ∏
p = 1
P
e−ρpcλp 1 + ρpcλp
where the third equality follows from independence.
Hwang et al. Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Next we wish to compute the conditional probability of “Droplet Collision” given “Non-
empty Droplet”. First, note that the probability that a droplet contains a cell at a given 
observation is ℙ Non‐empty Droplet = 1 − ℙ Empty Droplet , where
ℙ Empty Droplet = ℙ N1 = 0 ∩ N2 = 0 ∩ ⋯ ∩ Np = 0
= ∏
p = 1
P
e−ρpcλp
If there are D droplets formed and a total of C cells loaded evenly across the P pools (i.e., 
there are CP cells per pool), then λp = C
P Dρpb for all pools p = 1, 2, … , P. If we further assume 
that ρpc = ρc = 1 for all p = 1, 2, … , P, then ℙ Droplet Collision  and ℙ Empty Droplet  simplify 
as:
ℙ Droplet Collision = 1 − e− C
D [1 + C
P D]
P
ℙ Empty Droplet = e− C
D
Finally, the conditional probability of barcode collision in a droplet given that the droplet is 
non-empty can be found as
ℙ Droplet Collision Non‐empty Droplet = ℙ Droplet Collision
1 − ℙ Empty Droplet
=
1 − e− C
D 1 + C
P D
P
1 − e− C
D
.
A second collision rate we can calculate is the cell barcoding (droplet barcode + pool 
barcode) collision rate which can be computed as the conditional probability that a particular 
pool p ∈ {1, 2, … , P} has a collision in a given droplet, given that the droplet contains at 
least one cell from that pool. If we assume that there are D droplets formed and a total of C 
cells are distributed evenly across P pools, then we obtain:
ℙ Collision in pool p Droplet contains at least one cell from pool p =
1 − e− C
P D 1 + C
P D
1 − e− C
P D
,
for all p ∈ {1, 2, … , P}.
The above conditional probability is related to the proportion of pools with a collision in a 
given droplet, relative to the total number of pools each with at least one cell represented in 
the droplet. More precisely,
Hwang et al. Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
E[Number of pools with a collision in a droplet]
E[Number of pools represented at least once in a droplet] =
P ⋅ 1 − e− C
P D 1 + C
P D
P ⋅ 1 − e− C
P D
=
1 − e− C
P D 1 + C
P D
1 − e− C
P D
.
Simulations of collision and empty droplet rates
For simulating the collision rates and empty droplet rates, we assumed a cell recovery rate 
of 60% and 105 droplets are formed per microfluidic reaction resulting in D = 6 × 104. For 
C cells loaded, cell containing droplets are simulated using a Poisson process where λ=CD. 
Assuming each simulated droplet i contains γi cells, we then compute the number of pool 
barcodes not tagging a cell in each droplet as:
BC0i = P 1 − 1
p
γi
the number of pool barcodes tagging exactly one cell as:
BC1i = Ci 1 − 1
p
γi − 1
and the number of pool barcodes tagging greater than one cell as:
BCNi = P − BC0i − BC1i
The conditional collision rate is estimated as:
ℙ Collision in pool p Droplet contains at least one cell from pool p =
∑ic BCNi
∑ic BNi + ∑ic BC1i
Primary antibody oligonucleotide conjugation
For the species mixing experiment, anti-human CD29 and anti-mouse CD29 antibodies 
were purchased from Biolegend (cat. 303021, 102235) and conjugated per antibody 
using a ThunderLink kit (Expedeon cat. 425–0000) to distinct 20 bp 3’ amine-modified 
HPLC-purified oligonucleotides (IDT) to serve as hybridization handles. Antibodies were 
conjugated at a ratio of 1 antibody to 3 oligonucleotides (oligos). In parallel, oligos 
similar to current antibody sequencing tags were directly conjugated at the same ratio 
for comparison. Sequences for the hybridization oligonucleotides and directly conjugated 
oligos were designed to be compatible with the 10x feature barcoding system by introducing 
a reverse complementary sequence to the bead capture sequence, alongside a pool and 
antibody specific barcode for resolution. Conjugates were quantified using Protein Qubit 
Hwang et al. Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(Fisher cat. Q33211) for antibody titration and flow validation. In addition, we orthogonally 
quantified the antibodies using protein BCA (Fisher cat. 23225). For the human donor 
mixing experiment, CD4 and CD20 antibodies (Biolegend cat. 300541, 302343) were 
conjugated as described above. Antibodies used in PBMC and comodality experiments are 
listed in Supplementary Table 1 and 2.
Antibody-specific hybridization design
After conjugation of primary handle oligos, antibodies were combined and pools of oligos 
(IDT) were used to hybridize the primary handle sequences prior to staining. Of note, only 
one conjugation was done per antibody with the previously mentioned 20 bp oligonucleotide 
(e.g. all CD4 conjugates have the same 20 bp oligonucleotide). To avoid non-specific 
transfer of oligonucleotides between the different antibody clones and the same antibody 
clone from different wells, each clone received a unique 20 bp handle (Antibody handle). To 
sequence with antibody and pool specificity, a 10 bp barcode was added to the secondary 
oligo. The total oligonucleotide sequence consisted of a reverse complementary sequence to 
the antibody specific primary handle sequence (20 bp), TruSeq Read2 (34 bp), pool barcode 
(10 bp), and capture sequence (22 bp) (Fig. 1b). Prior to cell staining, 1 μg of each antibody 
was pooled and hybridized with 1 ul of respective secondary oligonucleotides at 1 μM at 
room temperature for 15 minutes. The hybridized antibody-oligonucleotide conjugates were 
purified using an Amicon 50K MWCO column (Millipore cat. UFC505096) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions to remove excess free oligonucleotides.
Determination of non-specific transfer of oligonucleotides between antibodies
To determine the optimal concentration of hybridizing oligonucleotides for cell staining, 
we performed a mixed cell line experiment to determine the level of background staining 
of free oligonucleotides. A mixture of lymphoblastoid cells and primary monocytes were 
stained with CD14 and CD20 antibodies and hybridized with oligonucleotides with different 
fluorophores (FAM and Cy5 respectively) per antibody for 15 minutes at room temperature. 
Concentrations of hybridizing oligonucleotides with different concentrations (1μM and 100 
μM) were tested (Extended Data Fig. 10a). Antibodies directly conjugated to fluorophores 
served as a positive control antibodies (CD13-BV421, Biolegend cat. 562596) to gate 
respective populations.
Validation of saturation of hybridization oligonucleotides using flow cytometry
To determine the saturation of available primary oligo handles, 1 μg of conjugated 
CD3 antibody (Biolegend cat. 300443) was hybridized with 1 μl of 1 μM of a reverse 
complementary oligo with a Cy5 modification (IDT modification /5Cy5/). After incubating 
at room temperature for 15 minutes, 1 μl of 1 μM of the same reverse complementary oligo 
but with a FAM modification (IDT modification /56-FAM/) was added to the reaction and 
additionally incubated for 15 minutes. The cocktail was then added to 1 × 106 PBMCs 
pre-stained with Trustain FcX (Biolegend cat. 422302) (Extended Data Fig. 10b).
Hwang et al. Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
10x Genomics run for SCITO-seq
Washed and filtered cells were loaded into 10x Genomics V3 Single-Cell 3’ Feature 
Barcoding technology for Cell Surface Proteins workflow and processed according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. After index PCR and final elution, all samples were run on the 
Agilent TapeStation High Sensitivity DNA chip (D5000, Agilent Technologies) to confirm 
the desired product size. Qubit 3.0 dsDNA HS assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used 
to quantify the final library for sequencing. Libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 
(Read1 28 cycles, index 8 cycles and Read2 98 cycles). R2 cycle can be reduced further for 
cost reduction (depending on the number of pool+antibody barcode length).
Dynamic range assessment of SCITO-seq compared to flow cytometry
PBMCs were collected from anonymized healthy donors and were isolated from apheresis 
residuals by Ficoll gradient. Cells were frozen in 10% DMSO in FBS and stored in a 
freezing container (Fisher cat. 5100–0001) at −80°C for one day prior to long term storage 
in liquid nitrogen. PBMCs from one donor was quickly thawed in a 37°C water bath 
before being slowly diluted with complete RPMI1640 (Fisher cat.61870-036, supplemented 
with 10% FBS and 1% pen-strep). Cells were then centrifuged at 300xg for 5 minutes 
at room temperature. After aspiration, cells were resuspended in Biolegend cell staining 
buffer (Biolegend, cat. 420201) to a concentration of 1.1 × 107 cells/ml and 900 μl of cell 
suspension (1 × 107 cells) was transferred to two 5 ml staining tubes and blocked with 
50 μl of Human TruStain FcX(Biolegend cat. 422301) for 10 minutes on ice. Ten μg of 
SCITO-seq CD8a antibody conjugates as well as an isotype control SCITO-seq conjugate 
were hybridized with 10 μl of 1 μM respective secondary oligos and were cleaned up 
as described. Cleaned and hybridized SCITO-seq antibodies were mixed with an equal 
amount of CD8a-APC antibody (Biolegend, cat. 301049) and mouse IgG1-AF488 control 
(Biolegend, cat. 400129) and added to the cells for 45 minutes on ice in the dark. Cells were 
washed three times with 3.5 ml cell staining buffer prior to final resuspension at 1 × 107 
cells/ml prior to pooling. Samples were stained with 1 μg/ml PI immediately prior to FACS 
to discriminate live/dead cells (Extended Data Fig. 10c).
Single live cells based on gating were sorted into four bins based on CD8a expression on 
a BD FACSAriaII. The resulting cells were reanalyzed on the same sorter to determine 
fluorescent intensities of sorted populations. The remaining cells from each bin were stained 
with a respective Totalseq-A hashtag (Biolegend, cat. 394601, 394603, 394605, 394607) for 
30 minutes on ice washed three times with 3.5 ml cell staining buffer prior to equal pooling 
and loading 30,000 cells onto a 10× 3’v3 chip.
After libraries were sequenced as mentioned, the resulting fastq files were alligned with 
Cell Ranger 3.0 Feature Barcoding Analysis with SCITO-seq antibody and hash antibodies 
specified as an features.csv input. CCDs were filtered manually inspecting the knee plot. 
Cells from each expression bins were determined based on hashtag counts assigning 
the maximum count as the corresponding bin. The raw UMI counts for SCITO-seq and 
scaled fluorescent values for FACS data (from FlowJo (v10)) were log1p transformed for 
comparison.
Hwang et al. Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Mixed species experiment
HeLa and 4T1 cells were ordered from ATCC (ATCC cat. CCL-2, CRL-2539) and cultured 
in complete DMEM (Fisher cat. 10566016,10% FBS (Fisher cat. 10083147) and 1% 
penicillin-streptomycin (Fisher cat. 15140122)) in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 on 
10 cm culture dishes (Corning). Prior to staining, cells were trypsinized at 37°C for 5 
minutes using 1 ml Trypsin-EDTA (Fisher cat. 25200056) and were quenched with 10 
ml complete DMEM. Cells were harvested and centrifuged at 300xg for 5 minutes. Cells 
were resuspended in staining buffer (0.01% Tween-20, 2% BSA in PBS) and counted for 
concentration and viability using a Countess II (Fisher cat. AMQAX1000). HeLa and 4T1 
cells were then mixed at equally and 106 cells were aliquoted into two 5 ml FACS tubes 
(Falcon cat. 352052) and volume normalized to 85 μl. Cells were stained with 5 μl of 
Trustain FcX for 10 minutes on ice. Cell mixtures were stained with a pool of human and 
mouse CD29 antibodies, either with the direct or universal design, in a total of 100 μl for 
45 minutes on ice. Cells were then washed 3 times with 2 ml staining buffer and centrifuged 
at 300xg for 5 minutes to aspirate supernatant. Cells were then resuspended in 200 μl of 
staining buffer and counted for concentration and viability as before. Cells from each stained 
pooled were mixed and 2 × 104 or 105 cells were loaded into the 10x chromium controller 
using 3’v3 chemistry.
Human donor mixing experiment
PBMCs were prepared as above and resuspended in EasySep Buffer (STEMCELL cat. 
20144) at a concentration of 5 × 107 cells/ml before being subject to CD4 and CD20 
negative isolation (STEMCELL cat. 17952, 17954). Isolated cells were counted and mixed 
at a ratio of 3 CD4:1 CD20 for donor 1 and a ratio of 1 CD4:3 CD20 for donor 2 for a 
total of 1.2 × 106 cells per donor. The cells were centrifuged at 300xg for 5 minutes at room 
temperature and resuspended in 85 μl of staining buffer and incubated with 5 μl of Human 
TruStain FcX for 10 minutes on ice in 5 ml FACS tubes. Cells from each donor were either 
mixed prior or stained with pool specific barcode hybridized antibody oligo conjugates for 
30 minutes on ice. Staining was quenched with the addition of 2 ml staining buffer and 
washed as previously mentioned. Cells were resuspended in 0.04% BSA in PBS and cells 
from each well were counted, pooled equally, and then passed through a 40 μm strainer 
(Scienceware cat. H13680–0040). The final strained pool was counted once more prior to 
loading into a 10x chip B with 2 × 105 cells.
Mass cytometry of healthy controls
PBMCs were isolated, cryopreserved, and thawed from the same donors as previously 
described. Once thawed, the cells were counted and 2 × 106 cells from each donor were 
aliquoted into cluster tubes (Corning cat. CLS4401–960EA). Cells were live/dead stained 
with cisplatin (Sigma cat. P4394) at a final concentration of 5 μM for 5 minutes at room 
temperature. The live/dead stain was quenched and washed with autoMACS Running Buffer 
(Miltenyi Biotec cat. 130-091-221). Cells were then stained with 5 μl of TruStain FcX for 10 
minutes on ice before surface staining. Mass cytometry antibodies were previously titrated 
using biological controls to achieve optimal signal to noise ratios. The antibodies in the 
panel were combined into a master cocktail and incubated with cells from the two donors 
Hwang et al. Page 16
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and stained for 30 minutes at 4°C. After washing twice with 1 ml autoMACS Running 
Buffer, the cells were resuspended and fixed in 1.6% PFA (EMS cat. 15710) in MaxPar 
PBS (Fluidigm cat. 201058) for 10 minutes at room temperature with gentle agitation on 
an orbital shaker. Samples were then washed twice in autoMACs Running Buffer, and then 
three times with 1X MaxPar Barcode Perm Buffer (Fluidigm cat. 201057). Each sample was 
then stained with a unique combination of three purified Palladium isotopes obtained from 
Matthew Spitzer and the UCSF Flow Cytometry Core for 20 minutes at room temperature 
with agitation as previously described1. After three washes with autoMACS Running Buffer, 
samples were combined into one tube and stained with a dilution of 500 μM Cell-ID 
Intercalator (Fluidigm cat. 201057), to a final concentration of 300 nM in 1.6% PFA in 
MaxPar PBS at 4°C until data collection on the CyTOF three days later. Immediately 
before running on the CyTOF machine, the sample tube was washed once with each 15 
ml autoMACS Running Buffer, MaxPar PBS, and MilliQ H2O. Once all excess proteins 
and salts were washed out, the sample was diluted in Four Element EQ Calibration Beads 
(Fluidigm cat. 201078) and MilliQ H2O to a concentration of 106 cells/mL and run on a 
CyTOF Helios at the UCSF Flow Cytometry Core.
Comparing Mass cytometry (CyTOF) and SCITO-seq
Data was normalized and de-barcoded using the premessa package (https://github.com/
ParkerICI/premessa). Normalized and demultiplexed files were uploaded to Cytobank 
(https://www.ucsf.cytobank.org/) for gating and manual identification of immune 
cell subsets. Files containing only singlet events were exported from Cytobank 
and analyzed with CyTOFKit2 package (https://github.com/JinmiaoChenLab/cytofkit2). 
Through CyTOFkit2, events were clustered using Rphenograph with k=150 and visualized 
via UMAP to calculate cell type proportions. The cost breakdown of SCITO-seq and 
comparison with CyTOF is in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4.
Pre-processing and initial filtering
Both the species mixing experiments and human donor mixing experiments were processed 
using Cell Ranger 3.0 Feature Barcoding Analysis with default parameters. For cDNA and 
ADT alignment, we specified the input library type as ‘Gene Expression’ and ‘Antibody 
Capture’ respectively. For ADT alignment, specific barcode sequences (Ab+pool) were 
specified as a reference. Reads were aligned to the hg19 and mm10 concatenation reference 
the species mixing experiments. For human experiments, the reads were aligned to the 
human reference genome (GRCh38/hg20).
Normalization for species mixing and T/B cell human donor mixing experiment
For transcriptomic counts, data was normalized by dividing each cell’s UMI counts to 
the total UMI counts and multiplied by 10,000. Then, the data was log1p transformed 
(numpy.log1p). Finally, the data was scaled to have mean = 0 and standard deviation = 1. 
Clustering was done using the Leiden algorithm2 using 10 nearest neighbors at a resolution 
of 0.2 for mixed species experiments and two-donor experiments with two cell types (T and 
B cells).
Hwang et al. Page 17
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
To normalize ADT counts in species mixing experiment, the data was log transformed and 
standardized to have mean = 0 and standard deviation = 1. For ADT counts in two human 
donor mixing experiment with two cell types, after log transformation of the raw data, we 
used a Gaussian Mixture Model in scikit-learn package in python to normalize the data with 
the following parameters (convergence threshold 1e-3 and max iteration to 100, number of 
components 2). The data was normalized by a z-score like transformation (log transformed 
raw value - mean of the posterior means of two components / mean of the posterior standard 
deviations).
Implementation of an algorithm for multiplet resolution
Considering all antibodies in each pool, we normalized each value by dividing mean 
expression value of CD45 counts across all pool (considered as a universal expression 
marker on PBMCs) for each droplet barcode yielding a p×m matrix (where p is the number 
of pool and m is the number of droplet barcodes). Then, the matrix was CLR normalized 
and resolved using HTODemux from Seurat (v3.0) (http://satijalab.org/seurat/) to classify 
the droplet barcode to a pool or unassigned (we discretized the value of 0 or 1). Using 
this binary matrix, we iterated over p times (where discretized value equals 1) to get final 
resolved matrix of (n×r) where n is the number of antibodies used and r is the resolved 
number of cells. For each iteration, we selected the columns that were positive for the above-
mentioned discretized matrix. An additional round of HTODemux was used to re-classify 
the ‘Negative’ cells from initial classification because most of the initial classification which 
deemed the cells negative had a UMAP distributions which were contained in the original 
clusters.
Analysis of PBMC experiment
Normalization and resolution of multiplets—To normalize transcriptomic data for 
our PBMC experiments, we used the same normalization method as described above. To 
generate the UMAP based on ADT counts for the PBMC experiment, we performed pool 
demultiplexing using the algorithm described previously. Then, the resolved matrix (n×r) 
was normalized as in the cDNA processing. Raw values were normalized to total counts 
of 10,000 per cell and log1p transformed. Then, the values were standardized (mean 0, 
standard deviation 1) per pool. Using these normalized values, PCA was performed to 
reduce dimensionality. Leiden clustering was done with 10 neighbors and 15 PCs from the 
previous step. A resolution value of 1.0 was used to assign clusters for the whole PBMC 
experiments. Finally, UMAP was utilized to visualize the resolved total cells. To remove 
collided cells in 60-plex and 165-plex experiment, we computed the average number of 
UMIs expressed per cell and thresholded cells based on the quantile distribution (>80% in 
the UMI distribution is filtered out) to remove cells and also manually inspect expression 
across all Leiden clusters to exclude the cluster that expresses multiple markers.
Demultiplexing donor identity—For demultiplexing donors, a VCF file containing 
donor genotype information and the bam file output from the Cell Ranger pipeline were 
used as inputs for demuxlet (Freemuxlet) with default parameters. For donors without 
genotypic information, we used Freemuxlet (https://github.com/statgen/popscle/) to assign 
droplet barcodes to a corresponding donor.
Hwang et al. Page 18
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
SCITO-seq with the 10x ATAC-seq kit—We initially designed a secondary oligo 
compatible with the 10x ATAC-seq kit by changing the hybridizing end of the splint oligo to 
the reverse complement of the Read 1 Nextera sequence) from the feature barcode capture 
sequence (10x 3’v3). We modified the microfluidic cell and enzyme mixture to the following 
mastermix; 4 μl of 10mM dNTP, 16 μl of RT buffer (5x), 4 μl of Maxima H minus, and cells 
and RNAse free water up to 80 μl. After running the solution through a 10x chip E reaction 
as in the 10x user guide, the GEMs were thermocycled at 53C for 45 min and 85C for 5 
min. The emulsion was broken as in the 10x user guide and ADT fragments were eluted 
in 40 μl. We performed an index PCR with the following conditions: 40 μl of sample, 50 
μl of 2x KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix, 1 μl each of P5 primer (100 uM) and universal 
read 2 Nextera primer, and 8 μl of RNAse-free water. The sample was cycled as follows: 
initial denaturation at 98C for 45s, cycled 12x at 98C for 20s, 54C for 30s, and 72C for 20s, 
followed by a final extension at 72C for 1 min.
SCITO-seq with a commercial antibody panel—To scale SCITO-seq to a commerical 
platform, we modified our secondary oligo to be compatible with Biolegend’s TS-C 
platform (normally used for the 10× 5’ kits) for the 10× 3’V3 kit. To do this, we changed 
the antibody hybridization region in our original 3’v3 design to the reverse complement of 
antibody specific TS-C barcode (15bp) sequences (Extended Data Fig. 7a). After emulsion 
breakage, we followed the index PCR protocol as per manufacturer’s recommendations (10x 
Genomics, CG000185 Rev D, page 52).
Comodality experiment—To generate compatible secondary oligos with scifi-RNA-seq, 
we conjugated unique 20 bp 5’ amine modified oligos to each of our six antibodies, varying 
from our previous 3’ amine conjugation to present a favorable orientation of the secondary 
oligonucleotide for capture in a similar fashion to transcripts in the scifi-RNA-seq workflow. 
In addition, we spiked-in an additional orthogonal bridge oligo for the in-emulsion ligation 
to reduce competition of transcripts and ADT molecules for the bridge oligo (Extended 
Data Fig. 9b). We stained 5 pools of a mixture of 5 cell lines (cat #; NK92: CRL-2407™, 
HeLa: CCL-2™, Jurkat, Clone E6–1: TIB-152™, 4T1: CRL-2539™, LCL: CRL-1855™) for 
30 min prior to washing and executing the scifi-RNA-seq protocol. After the scifi-RNA-seq 
workflow, we loaded 3 × 104 into the 10x chromium controller using the 10x ATAC-seq 
kit. After emulsion breakage as in the 10x user guide, we saved 4 μl of the 24 μl silane 
bead elution for ADT library construction. The ADT sample index PCR reaction was set up 
with 4 μl of sample, 5 μl of P5 primer (10 μM), 5 μl of i7 index primer (10 μM), 50 μl of 
KAPA HiFi mastermix, and 36 μl of RNAse-free water. Cycling conditions were as follows: 
98C for 45s, followed by 12 cycles of 98C for 20s, 54C for 30s, 72C for 20s, and ending 
with a final extension of 72C for 1 min. We cleaned up and selected the fragments using 
AMPure XP beads at a ratio of 1.2X, prior to a final elution in 20 μl. To construct the gene 
expression library, we used a plexWell 96 Library Preparation kit (Seqwell ref PW096–1) 
to tagment 10 ng of DNA per reaction. This pre-loaded Tn5 was used to ease the number 
of tagmentations in the scifi-RNA-seq workflow and increase the reproducibility with a 
commerical product over custom-loaded Tn5s. The final gene expression library sample 
index PCR was performed as-is in the scifi-RNA-seq workflow. The resulting libraries were 
Hwang et al. Page 19
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
sequenced on a Novaseq 6000 S1 v1.0 flow cell with the following read configuration: 
21:8:16:78 (Read1:i7:i5:Read2)
Comodality data processing—To process the transcriptomic data, the generated fastqs 
(R1:21bp, R2:16bp, R3:78bp) were stitched to make a final R1 file containing a droplet 
barcode (16bp) + well barcode (11bp) + UMI (8bp) per read. We used kallisto version 
0.46.1 and specified the cell barcode as 27 bp (16+11; droplet and well barcode bp lengths) 
and ran bustools to produce count matrices (https://www.kallistobus.tools/getting_started). 
To process the ADT fastqs (same read configuration as RNA) were stitched to produce a 
final R1 file (35bp), R3 data was trimmed to 10bp (encoding antibody barcode) for barcode 
alignment. These reads were then processed using a modified dropseq pipeline (v2.4.0; 
aligner swapped to bowtie (v2.4.2)) (https://github.com/broadinstitute/Drop-seq/releases). 
Counts were then normalized as done in the PBMC experiment above for both ADT and 
RNA. RNA genes were determined based on manual curation after running the Wilcoxon’s 
test for determining highly variable marker genes. For overlap analysis in Fig 4g, gene 
scores (using scanpy’s function) for each cell lines are calculated and standardized (mean:0, 
variance:1, z-score to represent the classification accuracy) to be used as an input for the 
heatmap generation (Seaborn package’s (v0.11.1) heatmap function).
Hwang et al. Page 20
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1. Simulation and cost analysis of SCITO-seq
a, Collision rate (y-axis, denoted as CRS) as a function of the number of cells loaded and the 
number of pools (denoted by different colors). Here, number of simulations were performed 
as follows: maxSim = 1000 for cells_loaded <= 1e4, maxSim = 100 for 1e4 < cells_loaded 
<= 1e5, and maxSim = 10 for 1e5 < cells_loaded. Expected (solid lines) and simulated 
(dotted lines) collision rates are based on the Poisson statistics for 100,000 droplets and the 
number of droplets containing cells is modeled as 0.6 × 100,000 in simulation. When the 
number of cells loaded is not large (e.g., less than 10,000), there is noticeable variance in the 
number of collisions, so multiple simulation runs were used to estimate the collision rates 
shown in dotted lines. b, Number of droplets (y-axis) containing no cells (blue), exactly 
one cell (green) or greater than one cell (red) as a function of the number of cells loaded 
(x-axis). Singlets refer droplets that contain one cells, multiplets contain more than one 
cell (>2) and empties meaning no cells in the droplet. c, Distribution (Y-axis, counts) of 
number of cells per droplet (X-axis) for different cell loading numbers (cells_loaded) based 
on Poisson distribution. d, (Left) Droplet collision rate, depicting proportion of droplets 
with at least one barcode collision. (right) Barcode collision rate, estimating proportion of 
batches (pools) with a collision in a given droplet. Collision rates were calculated using 
simulations of a Poisson Point Process (solid lines) or a closed form solution (dashed 
Hwang et al. Page 21
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
lines; see Methods). Estimates from a closed form solution robustly and almost identically 
recapitulate simulations and can be used to calculate collision rates for an experiment. 
e, Total cost estimates (purple) including library prep (green), antibody prep (red) and 
sequencing cost (blue) assuming 40 reads/Ab/cell and a panel of 30 antibodies for different 
number of SCITO-seq pools.
Extended Data Fig. 2. Species mixing QC analysis (Human/Mouse)
a, (Upper) Transcriptomic UMAP of human and mouse cells, distinguished by transcript 
alignment. (Lower) ADT staining of mouse and human cells overlaid on the transcriptomic 
UMAP for 100k loading experiment. Pool barcodes per antibody were merged (i.e. 
CD29_h_merged-1 = CD29_h_barcode-1+….+CD29_h_barcode-5, where the latter number 
represents the pool number). Species classification was transcriptomically determined by 
a >95% cutoff based on normalized counts specific to either species. Cells which did 
not meet the threshold were classified as Multiplets. Overlaid normalized ADT counts 
shows human and mouse antibody staining. b, Scatterplot showing within species multiplets 
Hwang et al. Page 22
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(shown on double-positive axes) across batches when loading 100k cells. Resolution of 
cell types with a single batch barcode and annotation of Multiplets (positive for both pool 
barcodes, such as CD29h_barcode1 and CD29h_barcode2 positive or CD29m_barcode1 and 
CD29m_barcode2). c, Scatterplots for species mixing 20k (left) and 100k (right) loading 
experiments colored by pool showing pool specific staining level. Resolved hCD29 or 
mCD29 on the axes refers to normalized antibody counts after resolution into single cells. If 
a droplet contained a mixture of hCD29 from pool 1 and pool 2, the droplet was resolved as 
two cells with the pool-normalized counts. d, Scatter plots of SCITO-seq normalized counts 
from 2×104 loading of species mixing to determine cross pool or within pool background 
level. e, Scatter plots of directly-conjugated hCD29 and mCD29 antibody-based normalized 
counts from 2×104 loading of species mixing to show cross pool or within pool background 
level using direct conjugation. Hg19, mm10, and Multiplet define cell populations based on 
respective transcriptomic alignment. Direct conjugates provide a baseline for noise in the 
SCITO-seq system.
Extended Data Fig. 3. Species mixing QC analysis (Human B/T cells)
a, UMAP projection (left) of T/B cell experiments with 2×105 loading colored by cell 
types as determined transcriptomically (cutoff value of 0.9 for differences in highly variable 
genes). Doublets (multiplets) represent a mixture of T and B and are colored in green. The 
other two panels demonstrate specific staining of merged (merging all 5 pool barcodes) 
and normalized SCITO-seq counts. b, Scatterplot for 200k T/B experiments loading colored 
by pool. Resolved hCD4 or hCD20 on the axes refers the normalized antibody count after 
resolution into single cells. For example, if droplet is a mixture of hCD20 from pool 1 to 
5, the resolved count should be either of the normalized counts from specific pool only 
(for Pool1 legend, the Resolved axes are represented by the normalized pool 1 counts). 
c, Estimated (x-axis) versus expected (y-axis) frequencies of Multiplets (frequencies of 
droplets that contain 1 cell to 5 cells) between estimated (observed) vs expected (simulated) 
for 2×105 loading experiment (left). The five dots represent the number of the cells in the 
droplets (from single to five cells). Expected (x-axis) versus observed (y-axis) frequencies 
(right) of co-occurrences between antibody pool barcodes for loading concentrations of 
Hwang et al. Page 23
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
2×105 cells. Expected frequencies were calculated based on the frequencies of barcodes in 
singlets. Correlation value and p-value are also shown. Observed co-occurrence of antibody 
pool barcodes is calculated using R package mixtools (v1.0.4) implementing normalmixEM 
function with default parameters (epsilon = 1e-08, maxit = 1000). d, Distribution of the 
normalized UMI counts for each antibody in cells resolved from droplet containing single 
pool barcodes (S) and multiple pool barcodes (M) per donor for 200k loading experiment. 
Distribution of the antibodies in pool multiplets shows expected prior mixture proportions 
(5:1 for donor1 (D1) and 1:3 for donor2 (D2)) and overlaps with the corresponding 
distribution in pool singlets
Extended Data Fig. 4. Human donor PBMC QC analysis (28plex)
a, Ridgeplots of 28-plex experiment of the pool specific antibodies. The normalized 
expression values of 60 antibodies within each pool was summed for thresholding. An 
individual plot contains the batch specific normalized expression values for demonstrating 
the signal to noise distribution of the expected specificity. b, UMAP projections for 
100k PBMC loading experiment for representative markers. UMAP projection comparison 
using RNA expression (left), merged antibody counts before resolution (middle) and after 
resolution (right). The scale represents the normalized merged ADT counts (left and the 
middle) and resolved ADT counts (right).
Hwang et al. Page 24
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5. Human donor PBMC QC analysis 2
a, RNA expression based UMAP projections for representative markers of 200k PBMC 
loading. Since the RNA molecules are not combinatorially indexed, these UMAPs show 
stark contrast with the resolved UMAP based on normalized ADT counts where we see clear 
distinction of all clusters. b, UMAP ADT projection of 200k loading PBMC data colored by 
different pools (color numbers 0 through 9). Two pooled donors prior to aliquoting into 10 
different pools to investigate batch effects across all stained wells and found no significant 
batch effects. c, ADT UMAP clusters overlaid on ADT UMAP (left) and ADT UMAP 
clusters overlaid on transcriptomic UMAP. d, (top) Protein expression on ADT UMAP of 
CD4/8 and CD45RA/RO. (down) Protein expression on transcriptomic UMAP of CD4/8 and 
CD45RA/RO.
Hwang et al. Page 25
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6. Human donor PBMC QC analysis 3
a, UMAP (x-, y- axis with UMAP1 and UMAP2 dimensions) with representative PBMC 
markers based on CyTOF experiment using the same donor and antibody panel as in 
SCITO-seq. The scale shows arcsinh (hyperbolic inverse sine) transformed normalized 
values. b, Comparisons of SCITO-seq with CyTOF per donor (D1: top, D2: middle) for 
100k loading data (SNG:singlet, DBL:doublet, TRI:triplet). Pairwise correlation heatmap 
plot (bottom) is also shown (similar to Fig 2d and e in the main figure). Within donors, the 
proportion each Leiden cluster was highly correlated (Cosine similarity within donor1:0.95, 
donor2:0.94).
Hwang et al. Page 26
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 7. Scalability experiment and QC analysis (60- and 165-plex)
a, Design of splint oligo with Totalseq-C compatible system. The splint oligos (FBC 
RC (reverse complement) + Well + Ab BC (5+5,10bp) + Read2 + Totalseq-C Barcode 
RC) are hybridized to the barcode region of the Totalseq-C oligo conjugated antibodies 
(right dotted lines around the blue region). 1uM splint oligo is also used and incubated 
15min of hybridization (same workflow as conventional SCITO-seq). The well and the 
antibody barcode sequences are encoded in orange and blue above. b, Ridgeplots of 60-
plex experiment showing the specificity of the pool specific antibodies. The normalized 
expression values of 60 antibodies with 10 pool result is shown above. Individual plot 
contains the batch specific normalized expression values to show signal to noise distribution 
of the expected specificity (first Batch1 plot is expected show a shift of Batch1 only (all 
batch1 60 normalized anitbody counts are aggregated). c, Ridgeplots of 165-plex experiment 
showing the specificity of the pool specific antibodies. The normalized expression values of 
60 antibodies with 10 pool result is shown above. Individual plot contains the batch specific 
normalized expression values to show signal to noise distribution of the expected specificity 
(first Batch1 plot is expected show a shift of Batch1 only (all batch1 165 normalized 
anitbody counts are aggregated). d, Barplots of 165-plex experiment showing low UMI 
counts of an example Isotype control ADT counts (Rat IgG) for all 10 pools (top 1–5 
Hwang et al. Page 27
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
batches, bottom 6–10 batches). The percentage of cells (y-axis) that express the ADT less 
than 2 UMI or over is calculated. Background noise across batches shows less than 2 UMI 
counts in ~92% of the cells. e, Overlay density histograms of the example CD8 vs Isotype 
control Ab (Rat IgG) to assess the ‘noise’ level for all 10 pools (top 1–5 batches, bottom 
6–10 batches) in 165-plex data. X-axis for log1p(raw counts) transformed values and y-axis 
for density. f, Overlay density histograms of the example antibodies aggregated over all 10 
pools (CD3, CD11c, CD45, CD127, CD8, CD4, CD19) vs Isotype control Ab (Rat IgG) to 
assess the ‘noise’ level in 165-plex data. X-axis for log1p(raw counts) transformed values 
and y-axis for density.
Extended Data Fig. 8. Scalability experiment and QC analysis 2 (60- and 165-plex)
a, UMAPs of 60-plex (upper) and 165-plex (lower) experiment showing normalized 
expression of cDC1, cDC2 and pDC markers. CD141 and CD370 for cDC1 and CD1c 
for cDC2 and CD123 and CD303 for pDC markers. b, Schematic of sample multiplexed 
SCITO-seq where different samples are hashed with different pool barcodes (Red, Blue, 
Purple). Droplets containing cells from different individuals (two different colors) can be 
resolved into separate cells. c, The example of pairwise correlation plots (using the ggpair R 
package) of normalized expression values of all 45 combinations (combinations of choosing 
2 pairs from 10 pools) for CD4 antibody in 60-plex experiment. If spillover is present (if 
secondary oligo that encodes pool1 is not washed sufficiently, this could hybridize to other 
conjugated handle (same antibody) from different well), you would expect have staining on 
the double positive axis, which we do not see in this experiment. d, Another example of 
Hwang et al. Page 28
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
pairwise correlation plots (using the ggpair R package) of normalized expression values of 
all 45 combinations (combinations of choosing 2 pairs from 10 pools) for CD4 antibody 
in TSC 165-plex experiment. If spillover is present (if secondary oligo that encodes pool1 
is not washed sufficiently, this could hybridize to other conjugated handle (same antibody) 
from different well), you would expect have staining on the double positive axis, which we 
do not see in this experiment.
Extended Data Fig. 9. Development of comodality experiment and QC analysis
a, Proof-of-concept experiment to analyze SCITO-seq using ATAC-kit. Representative 
PBMC with 12 surface markers (CD4, 8, 14, 16, 45, 45RA, 45RO, 19, 20, 56, 11c, 
HLA-DR) are stained in 5 separate pools loading 50k cells in this experiment showing 
specific staining profiles above (nCM: non-conventional monocytes, cMono: conventional 
monocytes). B, Schematic of the comodality experiment during the GEM ligation step using 
10x Genomics ATAC kit. Detailed sequence structure of the RNA and ADT capture during 
the GEM reaction using the scifi-RNA-seq workflow. A more detailed workflow for the 
RNA can be found in the Supplementary Figure 2 in the scifi-RNA-seq paper. 10x_round2 
refers to the 16bp droplet barcode, round1 barcode refers to the well barcode (11bp) used in 
the in-situ reverse transcription reaction. Untemplated ‘CCC’ is add at the end of the reverse 
transcription reaction. Antibody barcode (Ab BC fixed 10bp) and antibody handle (Ab 
handle fixed 20bp, conjugated directly to the blue antibody) sequences are specific to the 
antibody. Read2n stands for Read2 Nextera sequence. Compared to the bridge oligo 1 (used 
to capture in-situ RT mRNA molecules), bridge oligo 2 has extra 10bp (AACGTATCGA 
between red and blue colored sequences). ddC (dideoxy C) and InvdT (inverted dT) 
for preventing extension. Arrow indicates the ligation site during the GEM reaction. c, 
Dimensional reduction using UMAP with normalized RNA counts and corresponding cell 
line specific ADT marker expressions on the UMAP space. d, Dimensional reduction using 
UMAP with normalized RNA counts and corresponding single RNA marker expressions on 
the UMAP space.
Hwang et al. Page 29
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 10. Flow validation experiment of SCITO-seq
a, To reduce the non-specific staining of secondary oligonucleotides, we titrated 
oligonucleotides at 1uM (right) and 100uM (left). After hybridization of oligonucleotide 
conjugated antibodies with a Cy5 conjugated reverse complementary oligonucleotide 
for 15 minutes, a mixture of LCLs and primary monocytes were stained with the 
hybridized material an CD13-BV421 for 30 minutes, washed twice and analyzed on a 
LSRII. CD13 BV421 antibody was captured by the Violet-F channel (x-axis) and Cy5 
tagged secondary oligonucleotides was captured on the Red-C channel to check the 
level of background staining (Q6 gated population refers to the spillover of non-cognate 
secondary oligonucleotides in the primary monocyte population). b, To determine if 1 
ul of 1 uM reverse complementary oligonucleotide would saturate 1 ug antibody, we 
first hybridized 1 ug of oligonucleotide conjugated CD3 with 1 ul of 1 uM reverse 
complementary oligonucleotide conjugated to Cy5. Following this, another 1 ul of 1 uM 
reverse complementary oligonucleotide was added, but with a FAM conjugated instead. 
This was incubated for 15 minutes before being added to the whole PBMC and washed 
twice before running on an LSRII. Left figure shows the positive shift (red) when first 
hybridization occurs, and second histograms shows there is essentially no significant shift 
because of the near saturation of the first handle sequence. c, Lymphocytes were gated for 
singlets and live cells (Live/dead gate, YG C-A is the PI dye channel) prior to binning 
Hwang et al. Page 30
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
samples across CD8a expression for sorting. Red-C represents CD8a-APC and Blue-B 
represents isotype control-AF488.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
C.J.Y .,Y .S.S. and M.H.S. are Chan Zuckerberg Biohub Intercampus Research Award Investigators and C.J.Y . and 
M.H.S. are members of the PICI. C.J.Y . is further supported by the NIH grants R01AR071522, R01AI136972, 
R01HG011239. E.D.C is supported by UCSF PBBR grant for Center for Advanced Technology. This work 
was supported by NIH grant DP5 OD023056 and funding from the UCSF PBBR to M.H.S. and NIH grant 
S10 1S10OD018040, which enabled the procurement of the Helios mass cytometer used in this study. We 
acknowledge the PFCC (RRID:SCR018206) supported in part by Grant NIH P30 DK063720 and by the NIH 
S10 Instrumentation Grant S10 1S10OD021822-01. This study was also supported by NIH grant R35-GM134922.
Competing interests
C.J.Y . is a SAB member for and hold equity in Related Sciences and ImmunAI, a consultant for and hold equity 
in Maze Therapeutics, and a consultant for Trex Bio. C.J.Y . has received research support from Chan Zuckerberg 
Initiative, Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, and Genentech.
Data availability
Single cell sequencing data generated in this project have been deposited to the Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) with the accession code GSE147808. Processed data is also 
available at the website (https://github.com/yelabucsf/SCITO-seq) with tutorials.
MAIN REFERENCES
1. Macosko EZ et al. Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using 
Nanoliter Droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015). [PubMed: 26000488] 
2. Klein AM et al. Droplet barcoding for single-cell transcriptomics applied to embryonic stem cells. 
Cell 161, 1187–1201 (2015). [PubMed: 26000487] 
3. Buenrostro JD et al. Single-cell chromatin accessibility reveals principles of regulatory variation. 
Nature 523, 486–490 (2015). [PubMed: 26083756] 
4. Stoeckius M et al. Simultaneous epitope and transcriptome measurement in single cells. Nat. 
Methods 14, 865–868 (2017). [PubMed: 28759029] 
5. Shahi P, Kim SC, Haliburton JR, Gartner ZJ & Abate AR Abseq: Ultrahigh-throughput single 
cell protein profiling with droplet microfluidic barcoding. Sci. Rep 7, 44447 (2017). [PubMed: 
28290550] 
6. Gerlach JP et al. Combined quantification of intracellular (phospho-)proteins and transcriptomics 
from fixed single cells. Sci. Rep 9, 1469 (2019). [PubMed: 30728416] 
7. Peterson VM et al. Multiplexed quantification of proteins and transcripts in single cells. Nat. 
Biotechnol 35, 936–939 (2017). [PubMed: 28854175] 
8. Bandura DR et al. Mass cytometry: technique for real time single cell multitarget immunoassay 
based on inductively coupled plasma time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem 81, 6813–6822 
(2009). [PubMed: 19601617] 
9. Spitzer MH & Nolan GP Mass Cytometry: Single Cells, Many Features. Cell 165, 780–791 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27153492] 
10. Swanson E et al. Simultaneous trimodal single-cell measurement of transcripts, epitopes, and 
chromatin accessibility using TEA-seq. eLife vol. 10 (2021).
Hwang et al. Page 31
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
11. Mimitou EP et al. Scalable, multimodal profiling of chromatin accessibility and protein levels in 
single cells. doi:10.1101/2020.09.08.286914.
12. Kang HM et al. Multiplexed droplet single-cell RNA-sequencing using natural genetic variation. 
Nat. Biotechnol 36, 89–94 (2018). [PubMed: 29227470] 
13. McGinnis CS et al. MULTI-seq: sample multiplexing for single-cell RNA sequencing using 
lipid-tagged indices. Nature Methods vol. 16 619–626 (2019). [PubMed: 31209384] 
14. Stoeckius M et al. Cell Hashing with barcoded antibodies enables multiplexing and doublet 
detection for single cell genomics. Genome Biol. 19, 224 (2018). [PubMed: 30567574] 
15. Datlinger P et al. Pooled CRISPR screening with single-cell transcriptome readout. Nat. Methods 
14, 297–301 (2017). [PubMed: 28099430] 
16. Mimitou EP et al. Multiplexed detection of proteins, transcriptomes, clonotypes and CRISPR 
perturbations in single cells. Nat. Methods 16, 409–412 (2019). [PubMed: 31011186] 
17. Marguerat S et al. Quantitative analysis of fission yeast transcriptomes and proteomes in 
proliferating and quiescent cells. Cell 151, 671–683 (2012). [PubMed: 23101633] 
18. Zheng GXY et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat. Commun 
8, 14049 (2017). [PubMed: 28091601] 
19. O’Huallachain M et al. Ultra-high throughput single-cell analysis of proteins and RNAs by 
split-pool synthesis. Commun Biol 3, 213 (2020). [PubMed: 32382044] 
20. Cao J et al. Comprehensive single-cell transcriptional profiling of a multicellular organism. Science 
vol. 357 661–667 (2017). [PubMed: 28818938] 
21. Cao J et al. Joint profiling of chromatin accessibility and gene expression in thousands of single 
cells. Science 361, 1380–1385 (2018). [PubMed: 30166440] 
22. Cao J et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566, 
496–502 (2019). [PubMed: 30787437] 
23. Rosenberg AB et al. Single-cell profiling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with 
split-pool barcoding. Science 360, 176–182 (2018). [PubMed: 29545511] 
24. Lareau CA et al. Droplet-based combinatorial indexing for massive-scale single-cell chromatin 
accessibility. Nature Biotechnology vol. 37 916–924 (2019).
25. Datlinger P, Rendeiro AF, Boenke T & Krausgruber T Ultra-high throughput single-cell RNA 
sequencing by combinatorial fluidic indexing. bioRxiv (2019).
26. Heaton H et al. Souporcell: robust clustering of single-cell RNA-seq data by genotype without 
reference genotypes. Nat. Methods 17, 615–620 (2020). [PubMed: 32366989] 
27. Gehring J, Hwee Park J, Chen S, Thomson M & Pachter L Highly multiplexed single-cell 
RNA-seq by DNA oligonucleotide tagging of cellular proteins. Nat. Biotechnol 38, 35–38 (2020). 
[PubMed: 31873215] 
28. Ferrer-Font L et al. Panel design and optimization for high-dimensional immunophenotyping 
assays using spectral flow cytometry. Curr. Protoc. Cytom 92, e70 (2020). [PubMed: 32150355] 
29. Collin M & Bigley V Human dendritic cell subsets: an update. Immunology 154, 3–20 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29313948] 
METHOD REFERENCES
1. Zunder ER et al. Palladium-based mass tag cell barcoding with a doublet-filtering scheme and 
single-cell deconvolution algorithm. Nat. Protoc 10, 316–333 (2015). [PubMed: 25612231] 
2. Traag V A, Waltman L & van Eck NJ From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected 
communities. Sci. Rep 9, 5233 (2019) [PubMed: 30914743] 
Hwang et al. Page 32
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1 |. Design of SCITO-seq and mixed-species proof-of-concept.
(a) SCITO-seq workflow. Each antibody is conjugated with a unique antibody barcode (red, 
green and blue) and hybridized with a splint oligo containing antibody and pool barcodes 
(Ab+PBC (Pool barcode): [red, blue, green] × [purple, orange, brown]). Cells are split into 
pools and stained and then mixed and loaded for dsc-seq at high loading concentrations. 
Cells are resolved from the resulting data using the combinatorial index of Ab+PBC 
and droplet barcodes. (b) A detailed structure of the SCITO-seq fragment produced. The 
primary antibody-specific universal oligo is also a hybridization handle. The splint oligo 
consists of the reverse complement sequence to the handle followed by a TruSeq adaptor 
(black), the compound Ab+PBC (blue+orange), and a gelbead bound sequence (i.e., the 10× 
3’v3 feature barcode capture sequence 1 (brown)). The Ab+PBC and the droplet barcode 
Hwang et al. Page 33
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(DBC) form a combinatorial index unique to each cell. (c) Cell recovery and collision rate 
analysis. Number of cells recovered as a function of the number of pools at three commonly 
accepted collision rates (1%, 5% and 10%). (d) Density histograms of SCITO-seq vs FACS 
showing 4 different bins of CD8A expression. Log1p transformed SCITO-seq counts for 
two pools are compared with the log1p fluorescence intensity per cell from FlowJo (v10). 
(e) Mixed species (HeLa and 4T1) proof-of-concept experiment. HeLa and 4T1 cells are 
mixed and stained in five separate pools at a ratio of 1:1 with pool-barcoded human and 
mouse anti-CD29 antibodies. Scatter (left) and density (right) plots of (f) 38,504 unresolved 
cell-containing droplets (CCD) and (g) 46,295 resolved cells while loading 105 cells. (h) 
Schematic of human mixing experiment where different ratios of T and B cells (5:1 and 
1:3) were mixed prior to splitting and staining with five pools of CD4 and CD20 antibodies. 
Cell types are indicated by color (T: blue, B: red) while shapes indicate donors. Side-by-side 
scatter plot and density plots of (i) unresolved and (j) resolved cells for loading 2 × 105 cells. 
Merged ADT counts are generated by summing all counts for each antibody across pools. 
Resolved data obtained after assigning cells based on Ab+PBC and DBC barcodes.
Hwang et al. Page 34
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2 |. Ultra high-throughput PBMC profiling of healthy controls using SCITO-seq.
(a) UMAP projection of 49,510 CCDs using merged ADT counts of a 28-plex antibody 
panel showing key lineage markers. (b) UMAP projection of 93,127 PBMCs resolved using 
Ab+PBCs show the canonical myeloid and lymphoid cell types defined by known markers. 
(c) UMAP projections of PBMCs resolved from singlets (left), resolved from multiplets 
(middle), and profiled using CyTOF (right). Principle Component Analysis (PCA)-based 
integration of data (Ingest function from Scanpy) was used to determine overlapping cell 
populations between SCITO-seq and CyTOF. (d) Heatmap of pairwise cosine similarity 
(scaled colors) between estimated cell type proportions for cells originating from singlets 
(SNG), doublets (DBL), triplets (TRI), quadruplets (QUAD), and CyTOF per donor.
Hwang et al. Page 35
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3 |. Extending SCITO-seq for compatibility with 60-plex custom and 165-plex commerical 
antibody panels.
(a) UMAP projection of 175,930 resolved PBMCs using a panel of 60-plex antibodies 
colored by Leiden clusters and (b) key lineage markers. Subscripts/prefixes stands for: 
c:conventional, nc:non-conventional, act:activated, gd:gamma-delta. (c) UMAP projection of 
175,000 resolved PBMCs using a panel of 165-plex TotalSeq-C antibodies (TSC 165-plex) 
colored by Leiden clusters and (d) key lineage markers. (e) Distributions of UMIs per 
cell (y-axis) for CCDs with different numbers of cells (1–10) encapsulated for 60-plex 
(up, n=6,831, 24,031, 42,274, 44,251, 31,805, 16,094, 6,600, 2,437, 1,068, 538) and TSC 
165-plex (down, n=7,779, 25,573, 40,949, 42,036, 28,954, 15,411, 6,957, 3,178, 1,859, 
2,304) experiments. Lines are medians, box extends from 25% to 75%, dots are outliers 
beyond 1.5× interquartile range. (f) Correlation plots for 60-plex (up) and TSC 165-plex 
(down) experiments comparing estimated (x-axis) and expected multiplet rates (y-axis). Ten 
Hwang et al. Page 36
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
points are shown from 1 to 10 cells encapsulated per CCD and colors are matched to panel 
(e). (g) Correlations of the cell composition estimates using the 60-plex (x-axis) versus TSC 
165-plex (y-axis) experiments for major cell lineages (T and NK cell (left), B cell (middle), 
myeloid cells (right)) across the same 10 donors represented in each pooled experiment. 
(h) Row-clustered heatmap of pairwise correlation of 43 overlapping markers between the 
60-plex (row) and 165-plex (column) experiments. (i) Correlations of representative marker 
expressions within specific cell types between the 60-plex (x-axis) and 165-plex (y-axis) 
experiments (CD19 in B cell, CD4 in CD4 T cells, CD8A in CD8 T cells). The p-values for 
(f), (g) and (i) is calculated as the corresponding two-sided p-value for the t-distribution with 
n-2 degrees of freedom. The same 10 donors in 10 pools (1 donor stained in each well) were 
used for both 60- and 165-plex data.
Hwang et al. Page 37
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4 |. Integrating SCITO-seq and scifi-RNA-seq for simultaneous profiling of transcripts and 
surface proteins.
(a) Schematic of the SCITO-seq and scifi-RNA-seq coassay. Hybridized SCITO-seq 
antibodies are used to stain cells in different pools. Cells are washed with buffer then fixed 
and permeabilized with methanol. Transcripts undergo in-situ reverse transcription (RT) with 
pool-barcoded RT primers (well barcode denoted as WBC). cDNA and ADT molecules are 
then captured with RNA- and ADT-specific bridge oligos (orange and red hybridized to 
PBS and PBS’) and ligated to DBCs in droplet (See Extended Data Fig. 9b for details). 
Ridgeplots of distribution of cells with specific pool barcodes for the (b) RNA library and 
(c) ADT library. (d) Barnyard plot showing expected staining of human anti-CD29 (x-axis) 
and mouse anti-CD29 (y-axis) antibodies on HeLa cells and 4T1 cells respectively. Other 
cell lines are negative for both antibodies as expected. (e) UMAP projection generated from 
Hwang et al. Page 38
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ADT data colored by Leiden clusters. (f) UMAP projection colored by ADT markers (top) 
and corresponding cell-line-specific transcriptomic signatures scored using the Scanpy’s 
score genes function (bottom). (g) Heatmap of the overlap analysis of mRNA (y-axis) 
and ADT markers (x axis), mRNA marker genes are mapped onto cell-type specific ADT 
clusters (Gene scores are calculated on cells corresponding to ADT based clusters) for all 5 
cell lines. The color-scaled values are standardized z–score scale.
Hwang et al. Page 39
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript