 10.1101/gr.997703Access the most recent version at doi:
2003 13: 1754-1764 Genome Res. 
  
Qinghong Yang, Alla Lishanski, Wendy Yang, et al. 
  
Allelic Discrimination for SNP Scoring
Allele-Specific Holliday Junction Formation: A New Mechanism of
  
References
  
 http://genome.cshlp.org/content/13/7/1754.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 4 articles, 1 of which can be accessed free at:
  
License
Service
Email Alerting
  
 click here.top right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
 https://genome.cshlp.org/subscriptions
go to: Genome Research To subscribe to 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from  Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Allele-SpecificHollidayJunctionFormation:
ANewMechanismofAllelicDiscrimination
forSNPScoring
Qinghong Yang,1,3 Alla Lishanski,1 Wendy Yang,1 Sandra Hatcher,2 Henrietta Seet,2
and Jeffrey P. Gregg2
1FreshGene,Inc.,Concord,California94520,USA; 2DepartmentofPathology,MolecularPathology,UCDavisMedical
Center,Sacramento,California95817,USA
We report here a new mechanism for allelic discrimination—allele-specific Holliday Junction formation. The
Holliday Junction (HJ) is a unique DNA structure that can be formed in a sequence-nonspecific manner by
routinePCR.TocausethePCR-basedHJformationtooccurinanallele-specificmanner,thePCRprimersare
manipulated such that an extra mismatch next to a SNP of interest is introduced between a target and a
referenceampliconandaGC-clampisadded.Basedonthisnewmechanism,novelSNPgenotypingmethods
weredeveloped,includingahomogeneousfluorescencepolarization(FP)competitionassaythatrequiresneither
labeled primers/probes nor expensive enzymes/substrates. Using this novel genotyping technology, we were
abletoconvert>95%ofSNPsequencesintogenotypingassaysthatworkwellunderauniversalsetofassay
conditionsandachieved100%accuracyinclinicalsamples.
SNPs can be detected in either a sequence-specific or se-
quence-nonspecific way (Kowk 2001). Sequence-specific de-
tection relies on four general mechanisms for allelic discrimi-
nation: allele-specific hybridization, allele-specific nucleotide
incorporation, allele-specific oligonucleotide ligation, and al-
lele-specific invasive cleavage (Kowk 2001). We describe here
a fifth mechanism for allelic discrimination: allele-specific
Holliday Junction (HJ) formation.
It has been shown by Panyutin and Hsieh (1993) that
two partial duplexes will quickly form a four-stranded cruci-
form Holliday Junction if their tails are complementary
enough to anneal to each other (Fig. 1A). The two partial
duplexes that form the Holliday Junction will then undergo
strandexchangethroughspontaneousbranchmigration,dur-
ingwhich the energ y loss due to the breakingof a base pair is
coupled with the energy gain from the formation of a new
base pair (Panyutin and Hsieh 1993). The strand exchange
will go to completion and the Holliday Junction will quickly
resolve into two duplexes when the sequences of the duplex
portions of the two partial duplexes are the same (Panyutin
andHsieh1993).However,whenthereisadifferencebetween
the duplex portions of the two partial duplexes, in the pres-
enceofMg
2+,thespontaneousbranchmigrationwillencoun-
ter an energy barrier at the mismatch position, leading to the
formation of stable Holliday Junctions (Panyutin and Hsieh
1993). Based on Panyutin’s discovery, Lishanski and cowork-
ers developed a method for sequence-nonspecific mutation
detection using PCR-amplified DNA fragments (Fig. 1B; Li-
shanski 2000; Lishanski et al. 2000). Like hybridization or
heteroduplex formation, Holliday Junction formation is itself
sequence-nonspecific.TomakeHollidayJunctionsforminan
allele-specific manner, it is necessary to make the target am-
plicons and the reference amplicons short enough so that the
possibility for the existence of an additional SNP is negligibly
small.However,whentheforwardandthereverseprimersare
separated only by one or a few bases, a single-base mismatch
can no longer impede branch migration and cause the forma-
tion of detectable Holliday Junctions in the resultingshort
amplicons. To overcome this problem, an extra single-base
mismatch was introduced between the target and the refer-
ence amplicons at the vicinity of the SNP of interest. The
introduced extra single-base mismatch is itself too weak to
impede branch migration in short amplicons (<80 bp). How-
ever, when it is coupled with the SNP of interest, the com-
bined double mismatch becomes strongenoug h to impede
branch migration and cause the formation of stable Holliday
Junctions. The introduction of an extra mismatch alone is
enough to produce allele-specific Holliday Junction forma-
tion for short amplicons that are highly GC-rich. However,
for average or AT-rich short amplicons, the addition of a 2–8-
bp GC-clamp at the 5/H11032end of the amplicons is required for
allele-specific Holliday structure formation. The extra single-
base mismatch and the 5/H11032-GC-clamp are introduced through
primer design.
The Holliday Junction has physical and biochemical
propertiesthatareverydifferentfromthoseofduplexDNAor
single-stranded DNA. These differences can be exploited in
various ways for the detection of Holliday Junctions and the
developmentofnovelSNP-scoringmethods.Wedemonstrate
here two ways of detectingHolliday Junctions (HJ): a homo-
geneous,FP(fluorescencepolarization)competitionassayand
a heterogeneous, gel electrophoresis assay. Through the suc-
cessful development of genotyping assays for 108 SNPs ran-
domly selected from the NCBI SNP database and 11 clinically
relevant SNPs, we show that Holliday Junction-based geno-
typingprovides a robust, very inexpensive technolog y for the
scoringof a diverse set of SNPs or mutations with a hig h
degree of accuracy.
3Corresponding author.
E-MAIL qinghong@freshgene.com; FAX (925) 681-4012.
Article and publication are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/
gr.997703.
Methods
1754 Genome Research 13:1754–1764©2003byColdSpringHarborLaboratoryPressISSN1088-9051 /03$5.00;www.genome.org
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
RESULTS
Mismatch-InducedHollidayJunctionFormationofPCR
AmpliconsCanBeDetectedbyGelElectrophoresis
When a forward primer and two tailed reverse primers are
used to amplify DNA samples,∼50% of the amplicons will be
partial duplexes (Fig. 1B). These partial duplexes will form
Holliday Junctions and undergo spontaneous branch migra-
tion (Fig. 1B). When such PCR amplicons of one genotype are
mixed with the amplicons of a dif-
ferent genotype at 1:1 ratio, it can
be calculated that ∼6% of the total
amplicons should form stable Holli-
day Junctions. On the other hand,
when the amplicons of one geno-
type are mixed with the amplicons
ofthesamegenotype,nostableHol-
liday Junctions will form. In theory,
the presence or absence of Holliday
Junctions should be detectable on
gels because Holliday Junctions
have much lower mobility than du-
plex amplicons. However, such
PCR-generated Holliday Junction
bands were never detected on gels
before when ethidium bromide was
used to visualize the DNA bands.
When more sensitive DNA dyes
such as SybreGold and SybreGreen
were used, we were able to detect
them directly on gels (Fig. 2).
PCR-generated Holliday Junc-
tion bands were first detected in our
early studies when PCR amplicons
were relatively long(>120 bp). De-
rivingPCRampliconsfromahetero-
zygote is essentially the same as
mixingthe PCR amplicons of one
genotype with the amplicons of a
different genotype at 1:1 ratio. For
each SNP tested, we detected a DNA
band that was only present in PCR
assays from heterozygotes. Figure 2A
shows that this heterozygote-specific
bandmovedmoreslowlythanitsre-
spective duplex amplicons and only
this band was up-shifted by RuvA
and RuvC, two proteins that specifi-
cally bind to Holliday Junctions.
These data strongly imply that the
heterozygote-specific bands are, in-
deed, Holliday Junction bands. This
was confirmed later by usingsyn-
thetic Holliday Junctions that mimic
the PCR-generated HJ in very short
amplicons (Fig. 2B). Figure 2B shows
that a DNA band of much lower mo-
bility was present when the target
ampliconsfromaC/Chomozygoteof
SNPrs#1551570weremixedwiththe
T/T reference amplicons (r-T) but ab-
sent when mixed with the C/C refer-
ence amplicons (r-C; Fig. 2B, lanes
2–9). Moreover, this band was the
only band up-shifted by RuvA (Fig. 2B, lane 10), and it had the
same mobility as the synthetic HJ on gel (Fig. 2B, lane 11).
Allele-SpecificHollidayJunctionFormationRequires
anIntroducedExtraMismatchandinMostCases,
theAdditionofaGC-Clamp
When we tried to score SNPs through the detection of HJ
formation in PCR amplicons that are 120 bp or longer, we
Figure1 Mismatch-induced Holliday Junction formation. (A) A single-base mismatch between two
partial duplexes impedes branch migration and causes the stabilization of the Holliday Junction
formed between the two partial duplexes through the annealing of their complementary tails. (B)
Illustration of partial duplex and Holliday Junction formation by using PCR.
MechanismofAllelicDiscriminationforSNPScoring
Genome Research 1755
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
found a preponderance of false-positive results that were sub-
sequently proved to be caused by the presence of a second
SNP in the PCR amplicons. To achieve allele-specific HJ for-
mation, we designed PCR primers that were very close to the
SNPtobeinterrogated,andtheresultingampliconswerevery
short (<70 bp).
To find out if all types of SNPs (A/T, A/G, C/T, G/T, A/C,
and G/C) can induce HJ formation in short amplicons, we
generated all possible mismatches by using forward primers
(Table1A,SEQIDNO3–7)thatcontaindifferent“wobbles”at
theSNPss#4129(NCBISNPdatabase)anda6-bpoverlapwith
the reverse-tailed primers (Table 1B, T1-2 and T2-2, SEQ ID
NO 31 and 32.) As a result, the wobbles overwrite the natu-
rally occurringC in the g enomic DNA template used (a C/C
homozygote) and thus generate a series of short amplicons
containingall possible SNPs at the same distance from both
amplicon ends and in the same sequence environment. Each
wobble-containingforward primer was used in combination
withthe(T1-2/T2-2,1:1)reverse-tailedprimermixtogenerate
a 67-bp amplicon. The extent to which various mismatches
impede branch migration in these amplicons was judged by
the intensity of respective HJ bands on 6% PAGE gels (Fig.
3A).
Figure 3A shows that for the 67-bp amplicons, a single
A/T,A/G,orA/CmismatchdidnotproduceanydetectableHJ
at all—judging by the lack of HJ bands on gels and, later, by
the lack of inhibition in FP competition assays (data not
shown).AnoticeablebutweakHJbandwasproducedonlyby
a single G/C mismatch, and the HJ band produced by a single
T/G or C/T mismatch is barely visible.
Therefore,asingle-basemismatch,A/T,A/G,orA/C,can-
not induce detectable HJ formation in these short amplicons.
Figure 2 PCR-generated Holliday Junctions can be detected on gels. (A) A heterozygote-specific, lower-mobility band was the only band that
was up-shifted by RuvA and RuvC. DNA sample #4 is a homozygote, and DNA sample #1 is a heterozygote. (B) After 10 min of branch migration
(BM), the target amplicons of a C/C homozygote of SNP rs#1551570 formed a lower-mobility band with the T/T reference amplicons (r-T) but
notwiththeC/Creferenceamplicons(r-C).Thislower-mobilitybandwastheonlybandthatwasup-shiftedbyRuvA,andithadthesamemobility
asthesyntheticHJdesignedtomimictheHJformedbetweentheC/Ctargetampliconsandther-Treferenceamplicons.( C)APAGEgelshowing
the correlation between the number of Holliday Junctions and the allele frequency of SNP ss#3997 allele A (percent of SNP ss#3997-A).
Yangetal.
1756 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
One possible way to solve this problem is to introduce an
extrasingle-basemismatch(e.g.,A/T,A/G,orA/C)nexttothe
SNP of interest. This extra mismatch would be, by itself, too
weaktoblockbranchmigrationbut,incombinationwiththe
SNP, might be strong enough to block branch migration and
cause detectable HJ formation. To test this, four target PCR
amplicons, each with a predetermined genotype (A, T, C, or
G) at SNP ss#4129, were produced by usingthe four forward
primers (SEQ ID 13–16) that have a 4-bp overlap with the
tailed reverse primers (T1-2 and T2-2, SEQ ID NO 31 and 32.)
At the same time, four reference PCR amplicons, each with a
predeterminedgenotype(A,T,C,orG)atSNPss#4129andan
extra T→ A mutation (mm1) introduced at the base immedi-
atelybeforetheSNP,wereproducedbyusingthefourforward
primers (SEQ ID 17–20) that all have a 4-bp overlap with the
tailed reverse primers (T1-2 and T2-2, SEQ ID NO 31 and 32.)
Each of the 4 target amplicons was then mixed at a 1:1 ratio
with each of the four reference amplicons. All 16 possible
mixtures were subjected to denaturation and branch migra-
tion. The formation of HJ in these 16 mixtures was then vi-
Table 1A. Forward Primers and SNP Sequences
SNPs are in red, introduced mismatches are in purple, and GC clamps are in yellow.
Table 1B. Reverse-Tailed Primers
SNPs are in red, and tail sequences are in blue.
MechanismofAllelicDiscriminationforSNPScoring
Genome Research 1757
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
sualized on 6% PAGE gels (Fig. 3B.) Figure 3B shows that a
single-base mismatch such as A/G, A/C, or A/T caused HJ for-
mation in the 67-bp amplicons of SNP ss#4129 only after an
extra mismatch mm1 (an A/T mismatch) was introduced be-
fore it.
To test whether the introduction of an extra mismatch
can be used widely to achieve allele-specific HJ formation, we
randomly selected ∼100 SNPs from the NCBI SNP database
and tried to develop genotyping assays for them. We found
that only a small fraction of SNPs was able to achieve allele-
specific HJ formation after the introduction of an extra mis-
match. Careful analysis and comparison of the sequences of
these SNPs revealed that all the SNPs that had achieved allele-
specific HJ formation after the introduction of an extra
mismatch were either extremely GC-rich or had an overall
average GC content with long stretches of GC (>5 bp of con-
tinuousGorC).Incontrast,thosethatfailedtoachieveallele-
specific HJ formation were either AT-rich or had an overall
average GC content with long stretches of AT (>5 bp of con-
tinuous A or T). To mimic the sequence content of the SNPs
that had achieved allele-specific HJ formation, a GC-clamp
was added to each of the SNPs that had failed to do so. With
this GC-clamp permutation, all of the SNPs were able to
achieve allele-specific HJ formation after the introduction of
an extra mismatch.
Figure4illustratesthedevelopmentofanHJ-basedgeno-
typingassay for SNP ss#4130, an SNP with an A/T-rich se-
quence context. When target amplicons were amplified from
genomic DNA sample #1 of the M08PDR panel using primer
sets4130F/(4130T1 + 4130T2)(Table1A,B,SEQID19,37,and
38) and then mixed with each of the two reference amplicons
amplified usingprimer sets 4130ref-C/(4130T1 + 4130T2)
(Table 1A,B, SEQ ID 22, 37, and 38) and 4130ref-T/
(4130T1 + 4130T2) (Table 1A,B, SEQ ID 23, 37, and 38), the
introduced extra mismatch alone was not enough to achieve
allele-specific Holliday Junction formation (Fig. 5, lanes 1,2)
However, when an 8-bp or 7-bp GC-clamp was added to the
two redesigned target forward primers 4130F2 and 4130F3,
respectively, allele-specific Holliday Junction formation was
achieved (Fig. 5, lanes 3–6).
Wesucceededindevelopinggel-basedgenotypingassays
foralltheSNPsselected,including108SNPsrandomlypicked
from the NCBI SNP database and 11 clinically relevant SNPs.
Figure 6A shows the data of a typical PAGE gel-based geno-
typingassay,whereasFigure6Bshowsthatofatypicalagarose
gel-based assay. The genotype of the genomic DNA sample
wasdeterminedbydetectingtheformationofHJbetweenthe
target amplicons and the two reference amplicons. If the ge-
nomic DNA was a homozygote of one allele, it only formed
Holliday Junctions with the reference amplicon of the other
allele (Fig. 6A, samples 1, 3, 6, 7; Fig. 6B, samples 76–80). In
contrast, if the genomic DNA was a heterozygote, it formed
HollidayJunctionswithbothreferenceamplicons,andtheHJ
bands were about half of the intensity of those formed in
homozygotes(Fig.6A,samples2,4,5;Fig.6B,samples70–75).
HollidayJunctionsCanBeDetectedHomogeneously
byanFPCompetitionAssay
The Holliday Junction is an intermediate product duringho-
mologous recombination. Several proteins that specifically
bind to Holliday Junctions have been cloned, expressed, and
purified from several organisms (West 1997). One of them is
RuvA, which has very high specificity for binding to Holliday
Junctions. Its specificity for bindingto Holliday Junctions is
>1 /H1150310
4 higher than for binding to duplex DNA (West
Figure 3 An extra mismatch is required to achieve allele-specific Holliday Junction formation. (A) Various mismatches inhibit branch migration
toadifferentextentin67-bpampliconsasjudgedbyrelativeintensityof theirHJbands.( B)Effectofanextramismatch(mm1)onHollidayJunction
formation by various types of mismatches in very short (67-bp) amplicons.
Yangetal.
1758 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
1997). By usingRuvA and a universal fluorescent tracer mol-
ecule, we were able to develop a homogeneous, FP competi-
tion assay for SNP scoring. In the assay, the presence and the
number of Holliday Junctions can be determined through
their competition with the fluorescent tracer molecules for
bindingto RuvA. The tracer is a small fluorescence-labeled
synthetic Holliday Junction formed via the annealingof four
18-bp oligonucleotides with one of the 4 oligonucleotides la-
beled with fluorescein. Because of its small size and special
shape, the free tracer has a low FP of∼80 millipolarization
units (MP). After bindingto RuvA, its FP jumps to∼400 MP.
The bigFP difference (>300 MP) between the free and bound
tracer allows the development of a robust FP-based competi-
tion assay. As illustrated in Figure 7A, the more unlabeled HJs
coexistingwith the tracer, the fewer tracers will bind to RuvA
and the lower the FP value. In this way, the amount of unla-
beled HJs can be determined through the monitoring of the
FP value of the tracers.
Figure 7B shows the data of a typical FP genotyping as-
say: an HJ-based genotyping assay developed for a G/A SNP
ss#4188 was tested against the 90 genomic DNA samples of
the Corriel Human Diversity Panel. For each sample, the
number of Holliday Junctions formed between the target am-
plicons and each of the two reference amplicons was deter-
mined by the two FP values of the tracer: FP(+refA) and
FP(+refG). The difference between the two FP values was then
calculated: /H9004FP= FP(+refA)/H11502FP(+refG). For an A/A homozy-
gote such as sample #76, FP(+refA) is much higher than
FP(+refG) and/H9004FP= FP(+refA)/H11502FP(+refG) = 190 mP. On the
contrary,foraG/Ghomozygotesuchassample#77,FP(+refA)
is much lower than FP(+refG) and /H9004FP = FP(+refA) /H11502
FP(+refG) =/H11502175 mP. For a G/A heterozygote such as sample
#70, the difference between FP(+refA) and FP(+refG) is much
smaller and /H9004FP= FP(+refA)/H11502FP(+refG) = 41 mP. In our as-
say analysis, /H9004FPis normalized by dividingby∑ FP, and the
ratioof /H9004FP/∑FPisusedasthefinalparameterforgenotyping
callingin our assays. The statistical analysis of the FP data
(Fig. 7B) shows that our FP-based genotyping assay for SNP
ss#4188 is a robust assay because the/H9004FP/∑FP ratios of the
three genotypes in the 90 samples are at least 3 standard de-
viations apart.
RuvA binds to all Holliday Junctions, includingthose
that formed in an allele-specific manner or those that formed
nonspecifically. One source for nonspecific Holliday Junction
formation is the genomic DNA template used in PCR. The
second source is truncated primers that exist in low-quality
(salt-free) tailed reverse primers. These nonspecific Holliday
JunctionsdonotinterferewiththedetectionofthespecificHJ
bandongel,probablybecausetheyareaheterogeneouspopu-
lation with randomly distributed lengths. However, these
nonspecific Holliday Junctions do bind to RuvA and interfere
with the FP-based HJ detection. Therefore, the homogeneous
FP competition assay has stricter requirements than the gel-
based heterogeneous assay: First, the genomic DNA concen-
tration used in the PCR should be 0.2 ng/µL or less. Second,
the two tailed reverse primers usually need to be PAGE-
purified, although desalted primers are always satisfactory for
the three forward primers.
The only labeled oligonucleotide for the FP homoge-
neous assay is the 18-bp fluorescein-labeled oligonucleotide
usedtomakethetracer.Becausethetracerusedintheassayis
universal for all SNPs and the workingconcentration for the
tracer is only 300–500 pM, the cost for the tracer is negligible.
RuvA protein can be easily and inexpensively manufactured
in large scale and can be stored in a refrigerator for more than
6 mo without detectable loss of activity.
We succeeded in developingg enotypingassays for 108
SNPs randomly selected from the NCBI SNP database. These
SNPs cover all possible mismatches (G/C, A/T, A/G, A/C, C/T,
G/T) in various sequence contents (from extremely AT-rich to
extremely GC-rich). Amongthe 108 SNP assays, 95% of them
use the universal PCR/assay conditions outlined in Methods
and ∼90% of them were designed with little optimization.
Each assay was tested against the 24 genomic DNA samples of
the Corriel M24RDP panel. Then 10 of the 108 SNPs were
selected and tested against the 90 genomic DNA samples of
the Corriel Human Diversity Panel. In both cases, the gel-
based and the FP-based assay formats were used in parallel
and the g enotypingcalling s from usingthe two formats were
found to have 100% correlation (one example can be seen by
comparing Figs. 6B and 7A). To test the accuracy of our geno-
typingassays,10ofthe108SNPswererandomlyselected,and
the genotypes at these 10 SNP positions for each of the 24
genomic DNA samples of the Corriel M24RDP panel were de-
termined by sequencing(Sequetech, Inc.) and compared with
those determined by the Holliday Junction-based genotyping
assays. There was 100% concordance between the Holliday
Junction-based g enotypingassay and the sequencingresults.
To determine the sensitivity of the technology and its
potential application to diagnostics, we developed genotyp-
ingassays for 11 clinically relevant mutations. All 11 SNP
assays performed well under a set of universal PCR/assay con-
ditions. Moreover, the genotyping assays for Factor V Leiden,
the prothrombin G20210 mutation, and the two MTHFR
polymorphisms were each tested blindly on 50 clinical
samples (the samples were made anonymous and received an
exemption from the Institutional Review Board) obtained
from UC Davis Medical Center that had previously been
testedusingstandardgenotypingtechnologies.TheDNAcon-
centrations of these 150 clinical samples were unknown, and
a 1000/H11503dilution was applied universally for all of them for
PCR for the FP-based assays. The allele-specific Holliday struc-
ture formation genotyping was found to have 100% accuracy
in these samples as compared with the clinical results.
DISCUSSION
We describe here a new allelic discrimination mechanism—
allele-specific Holliday Junction formation. Based on this
mechanism, two SNP genotyping methods were developed: a
gel-basedheterogeneousassayandanFP-basedhomogeneous
assay. Although the two methods rely on different detection
modalities, the assay development for them proved to be in-
terchangeable. In addition to the two detection methods il-
lustratedhere,itisforeseeablethatavarietyofothermethods
andinstrumentssuchascapillaryelectrophoresis,liquidchro-
matography, or FRET-based assays can also be used for the
same purpose.
MechanismofAllelicDiscriminationforSNPScoring
Genome Research 1759
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
Like other SNP genotyping methods, the key to
successfulassaydesignforHollidayJunction-basedSNP
genotyping is the design of PCR primers. On average,
by followingthe primer desig n rules outlined in Meth-
ods and illustrated in Figure 4, successful genotyping
assays performed under a universal set of PCR/assay
conditions can be developed for ∼90% of SNPs with
little optimization. Successful genotyping assays can be
developed for the remaining10% of SNPs by redesig n-
ingprimers or chang ingthe PCR or branch mig ration
conditions.
There are already many SNP genotyping methods
available today, each equipped with its unique set of
desirable attributes. For an example, some heterog-
eneous assays (such as RFLP) do not require expensive
labeled primers but are labor-intensive and time-
consuming. In contrast, homogeneous assays (such as
the TaqMan or the READIT assay) are fast and can be
easilyautomatedbutallrequireexpensivelabeledprim-
ers/probes or expensive enzymes/substrate. We devel-
opedhereanFP-based,homogeneousgenotypingassay
that is fast, easily automatable, and, at the same time,
does not require expensive labeled primers/probes or
enzymes/substrates.Infact,itistheonlyhomogeneous
assay available today that uses universal assay condi-
tions and requires neither labeled primers/probes nor
expensive enzymes/substrates. However, our FP-based
assayisnotyetaclose-tubeassayliketheTaqmanassay.
We are workingon the development of a thermostable
tracer and RuvA to make our assay a close-tube assay.
Not only can Holliday Junction-based genotyping
assays be used for scoringSNPs on individual DNA
samples,theycanalsobeusedtodetectallelefrequency
directly in pooled DNA samples. As shown in Figure 6,
the number of HJs formed in heterozygotes is about
half of those formed in homozygotes. This is compat-
ible with the fact that, in heterozygotes, only 50% of
the target DNA amplicons can form HJs with each of
the two reference amplicons. Therefore, the number of
HJs formed between the target DNA amplicons and the
reference DNA amplicons seems to reflect the allele fre-
quency in the target DNA sample. Using DNA samples
with known allele frequency at 10% increments (0%,
10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50%), we were able to show
a clear correlation between allele frequency and the
relative amount of HJ formation (Fig. 2C).
Besides various single-plex genotyping assays that
have already been or can be developed based on this
new allelic discrimination mechanism, allele-specific
Holliday Junction formation also has the potential to
be used for the development of genotyping technolo-
gies capable of performing multiplex assays in parallel.
For example, because the length of the amplicons and
thus the size of the HJs formed between them can be
arbitrarily determined through primer design, multiple
SNPs can be genotyped in a single lane on PAGE gels or
capillary electrophoresis if the Holliday Junctions
formedfordifferentSNPsareofdifferentsizeandthere-
fore have different mobility. A more drastic approach,
however, will involve performingthe allelic discrimi-
nationformultipleSNPsinparalleldirectlyongenomic
DNA followed by the isolation/purification of the alle-
lic discrimination products—Holliday Junctions using
RuvA. The identities of individual Holliday Junctions
Figure4 General rules of primer design for the SNP genotyping assays based
on allele-specific Holliday structure formation. (A) The primer designs for those
GC-rich SNPs that do not require the addition of a GC-clamp. (B,C) Two alter-
nativewaystodesignprimersfortheSNPsthatrequiretheadditionofaGC-clamp.
Yangetal.
1760 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
purified can then be elucidated, for an example, on a micro-
array after amplification by PCR. Certainly, many technical
obstacles need to be overcome before this potential can be
applied to practice.
Finally, our FP-based competition assay also has the po-
tential to be used as a homogeneous yet inexpensive method
forthedetectionofgeneexpressionorthedetectionofpatho-
gens. As long as two partial duplexes have tails that are
complementary to each other, a Holliday Junction will form
between them regardless of the sequence homology between
the duplex portions of the two partial duplexes (Fig. 1A). In
fact, the less homology shared between the sequences of the
duplex parts of the two partial duplexes, the more stable the
Holliday Junction. When two tailed reverse primers are used
to amplify a target DNA, part of the target amplicons will be
partial duplexes (Fig. 1B). The partial duplex portion of the
target amplicons can be easily transformed into Holliday
Junctions by annealingwith partial duplexes that have
complementary tails but heterologous sequence at their du-
plex part. The resultingHJs can then be detected homog e-
neously usingour FP-based competition assay. The targ et am-
plicons, in these cases, can derive from host RNA/genomic
DNAorfromtheRNA/DNAofvariouspathogenssuchasHIV,
HBV, or HCV.
METHODS
SNPAssayDesign
We selected 91 SNPs from the batch of SHGC/
AffymetrixChip/Seq-Genomic (from ss#4117 to ss#4210 ex-
cept ss#4131, ss#4178, and ss#4208) and 17 SNPs from the
batch of SHGC/Affymetrix Chip-Genomic (from ss#3985 to
ss#4003exceptss#3989)fromtheNCBISNPdatabase.Among
the four SNPs that were omitted for assay development,
ss#4131 does not have the sequence information about its
allele position, ss#4178 and ss#4208 have longrepetitive se-
quences, and ss#3989 was skipped because it had been exten-
sively used before for PCR in our lab and might cause some
contamination problem. Of the total SNPs, 11 were clinically
relevant:7 /H9252-thalassemiamutations(-28,cd17,cd70/72,IVS-2
nt 654, cd27/28, cd41/42 and +40/+43), the Factor V Leiden
mutation,theProthrombingeneG20210Amutation,andtwo
common MTHFR polymorphisms (MTHFR677 and
MTHFR1298).
ForeachSNP,atotaloffiveprimersweredesignedforthe
development of a genotyping assay: three short (18–36 bp)
forward primers and two long(40–50 bp) tailed reverse prim-
ers(Fig.4.)Forthethreeforwardprimers,onewasdesignedto
produce the target amplicons with the pair of the tailed re-
verse primers, whereas each of the other two forward primers
was designed to produce reference amplicons with the same
pair of tailed reverse primers. The two reference amplicons
have known genotypes at the SNP of interest as well as an
introducedextramismatchnexttotheSNPofinterest(Fig.4.)
In particular, each reference primer has at least a 4-bp-long,
perfectly matched overlap with the tailed reverse primers so
that the reference amplicons have a predetermined sequence
(Fig. 4).
Dependingonwhethertheextramismatchisintroduced
atthebaseimmediatelybeforeoraftertheSNPofinterest,the
tailedreverseprimersbeginat(orinotherwords,their3 /H11032ends
terminate at) the base that is 1 base or 2 bases after the SNP of
interest, respectively (Fig. 4). This rule for designing tailed
reverse primers holds true unless it causes 3/H11032-dimer or hairpin
formation. The hairpin and 3/H11032-dimer problems can be solved
by the introduction of permutations of the primer at appro-
priate positions or by movingthe 3/H11032ends of tailed primers
farther away from the SNP of interest.
For the SNPs that are in a very GC-rich sequence envi-
ronment, no GC-clamp is needed (Fig. 4A). For the SNPs that
are in an AT-rich or average GC content environment, a 2–8-
bp GC-clamp must be added to both the target and the refer-
ence amplicons to achieve allele-specific Holliday Junction
formation. The GC-clamp can be added to the target and the
reference amplicons by attachingit to all of the three forward
primers (Fig. 4B.) In both cases, the target forward primers
used to amplify the target DNA ends just before the SNP of
interest (Fig. 4A,B).
Alternatively,theGC-clampsareaddedonlytothetarget
forward primer duringprimer desig n to avoid longreference
forward primers (Fig. 4C.) In these cases, the GC-clamp is
added to the reference amplicons in a second round PCR us-
ingthe targ et forward primer as the forward primer and the
amplicons produced by the reference forward primers as the
template.
AllprimersweredesignedusingthesoftwareOligo6pur-
chasedfromMolecularBiologyInsights,Inc.Thegeneralrules
for primer design are as follows: (1) the priming part of each
primer—the part that actually hybridizes with the template—
should have aT
m above 66°C. (2) The finalTm for each target
forward primer after the addition of a 0–8-bp GC-clamp
should be above 78°C. (3) If the base next to the SNP is G or
C ,aG → Ao rC → A mutation should be introduced there in
the reference forward primers to introduce an A/G or A/C
mismatch between the target and the reference amplicons. If
Figure 5 A GC-clampis required to achieve allele-sp ecific Holliday
Junction formation. In addition to an introduced extra mismatch, a
GC-clampis required to achieve allele-sp ecific Holliday Junction for-
mation for a C/T SNP ss#4130 in sample #1 (a C/C homozygote) of
the M24PDR panel from the Corriel Cell Repository.
MechanismofAllelicDiscriminationforSNPScoring
Genome Research 1761
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
the base next to the SNP is T, a T→ A mutation should be
introduced there in the reference forward primers to intro-
duce an A/T mismatch between the target and the reference
amplicons.IfthebasenexttotheSNPisA,anA → Tmutation
should be introduced there in the reference forward primers
to introduce an A/T mismatch between the target and the
reference amplicons.
Oligonucleotides
The oligonucleotides were purchased either from Operon
Technologies or from Genset Corp.
PCRAmplification
PCR amplifications were carried out usinga PTC-200 DNA
Engine thermocycler (MJ Research Inc.). For genomic PCR, 45
PCR cycles were performed with 10 sec of denaturation at
94°C,15secofreannealingat58°C,and45secofextensionat
72°C. The cyclingwas preceded by a 10-min incubation at
95°C to activate AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase (Applied
Biosystems). The reaction mixtures contained 0.2 ng/µL or
lessgenomicDNA,0.025U/µLAmpliTaqGoldDNApolymer-
ase, 200 µM each dNTP, 1 µM the salt-free forward primer,
250 nM each of the two reverse tailed primers if PAGE-
purified, and 500 nM each of the two reverse tailed primers if
salt-free,10mMTris-HCl,(pH8.3),50mMKCl,2mMMgCl
2,
and 200 µg/mL BSA.
The target amplicons and each of the reference ampli-
cons were either amplified separately or amplified together in
a single PCR reaction. When amplified together, the forward
primerofthePCRreactionwasamixtureofthetargetforward
primer and one of the reference forward primers at a ratio
of 4:1.
BranchMigration
Branch migration was carried out in the same PCR buffer us-
ingaPTC-200DNAEnginethermocycler(MJResearchInc.)at
65°C for 30 min followinga 2-min denaturation step at 95°C.
When the target and the reference amplicons were amplified
together in a single PCR reaction (see above), branch migra-
tion was simply linked to the PCR in a single program. When
the target and the reference amplicons were amplified sepa-
rately, the target amplicons were mixed with each of the ref-
erence amplicons at a 1:1 ratio before branch migration was
performed.
RuvAandRuvCProteins
The190µMwild-type Escherichiacoli RuvAand35.5µMwild-
typeE.coli RuvC in storage buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5,
0.1 mM EDTA, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 200 mM Nacl, 50%
glycerol)werepurchasedfromH.ShinagawaattheUniversity
ofOsakainJapanandkeptat /H1150280°C.Aliquotsof50µMRuvA
diluted in PCR buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl,
4mMMgCl
2,and200µg/mLBSA)weremadeandkeptat4°C
for at least 24 h before beingused as the RuvA stock solution
in experiments.
Band-ShiftAnalysis
For band-shift analysis, 5 µL of PCR/branch migration prod-
ucts was mixed with 1 µL of 0.25 µM freshly diluted RuvA or
Figure6 SNPgenotypingbygelelectrophoresis.( A)APAGEgelshowingProthrombin(FII)G20210Agenotypingof7ofthe150clinicalsamples
obtainedfromtheUCDavisMedicalCenter.( B)AnagarosegelshowingthegenotypingofSNPss#4181for11DNAsamples(#70–#80)fromthe
Corriel Human Diversity Panel.
Yangetal.
1762 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
1 µL of 0.5 µM freshly diluted RuvC before beingmixed with
1µLof6 /H11503TBELoadingBuffer(InvitrogenInc.)andloadedin
a well of a 6% 12-well precast TBE gel (Invitrogen Inc.).
Tracer
A fluorescein-labeled synthetic Holliday Junction formed by
the annealingof four 25 µM 18-bp olig onucleotides (HJ18-1,
HJ18-2, HJ18-3, and HJ18-4) in PCR buffer at room tempera-
ture for 1 h. The fluorescein is attached to one of the four
nucleotides at the center of the Holliday Junction. HJ18-1:
GCGCATAGQCCGAATGGC (Q = fluorescein-dT); HJ18-2:
GCCATTCGGTGAGCAGCG; HJ18-3: CGCTGCTCAGGATT
GACG; HJ18-4: CGTCAATCCACTATGCGC.
FPCompetitionAssayUsingAnalystAD
All the FP-based genotyping assays for the∼120 SNPs were
performed usingboth 96-well (LJL HE-96B) and 384-well (LJL
HE-384B) plates on an Analyst AD fluorescence plate reader
(Molecular Devices Inc.).
WhenLJLHE-96Bplateswereused,10µLofPCR/branch
migration products was mixed, in each well, with 10 µL of
0.67nMtracerbeforeadding4µLofa1:400dilutionofthe50
µM RuvA stock solution. After incubation at room tempera-
ture for 10 min, the fluorescence polarization of the samples
was measured usingan Analyst AD fluorescence plate reader
(Molecular Devices Inc.).
WhenLJLHE-384Bplateswereused,5µLofPCR/branch
migration products was mixed, in each well, with 3 µL of 1
nM tracer before adding2 µL of a 1:400 dilution of the 50 µM
RuvA stock solution. After incubation at room temperature
for 10 min, the fluorescence polarization of the samples was
measured usingan Analyst AD fluorescence plate reader (Mo-
lecular Devices Inc.).
PAGEGelAnalysis
ForPAGEgelanalysis,5µLofPCR/branchmigrationproducts
w a sm i x e dw i t h1µ Lo f6/H11503High Density Loading Buffer
(InvitrogenInc.)beforebeingloadedinawellofa6%12-well
precast TBE PAGE gel (Invitrogen Inc.). The gels were run in a
matchingSureLock Minicell (Invitrog en Inc.) at 160 V for 30
min before beingstained with SybreGold (Molecular Probes)
and photographed with 667 films.
AgaroseGelAnalysis
For agarose gel analysis, 5 µL of PCR/branch migration prod-
ucts was mixed with 1 µL of 6/H11503High Density Loading Buffer
(Invitrogen Inc.). Then 2.5 µL of the mixture was loaded in a
well of a 3% 400-well agarose gel that was run in a 20/H1150340-
cm SubMarine gel apparatus (CBS Scientific) purchased from
VWR. The gels were run at 190 V for 55 min before being
stainedwithSybreGold(MolecularProbes)andphotographed
with 667 films.
SyntheticHollidayJunctions
The synthetic Holliday Junctions that mimic the HJ formed
between C/C target amplicons and T/T reference amplicons
(r-T) of SNP rs#1551570 were made by the sequential anneal-
ingoffourPAGE-purified78-bpoligonucleotides(1551570#1,
1551570#2, 1551570#5, and 1551570#6). First, two partial
duplexes were made by annealing1551570#1 to 1551570#2
and 1551570#5 to 1551570#6, respectively, in PCR buffer at
room temperature for 30 min. The two partial duplexes were
then mixed at a 1:1 ratio and underwent branch migration at
65°C for 30 min. 1551570#1: 5/H11032-CTCACTGGCATCTCAGCTA
Figure7 SNPgenotypingbythehomogeneousFPcompetitionassay.(A)IllustrationofHollidayJunctiondetectionbytheFPcompetitionassay.
(B)FPDataandstatisticalanalysisforgenotypingSNPss#4188inthe90genomicDNAsamplesoftheHumanDiversityPanelfromtheCorrielCell
Repository.
MechanismofAllelicDiscriminationforSNPScoring
Genome Research 1763
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
TAGCAACAGGATCTTAGCCTTTAGAGTCTGTCGGACG
CAGATTTGAGTTCTAACGGCCC-3 /H110321551570#2: 5/H11032-GGGCC
GTTAGAACTCAAATCTGCGTCCGACAGACTCTAAAGGCT
AAGATCCTGTTGCTCTGCTAGATCTCACAGTGGT-3/H11032
1551570#5: 5/H11032-GGGCCGTTAGAACTCAAATCTGCGTCCGAT
TGACTCTAAAGGCTAAGATCCTGTTGCTATAGCTGAGA
TGCCAGTGAG-3/H110321551570#6: 5/H11032-ACCACTGTGAGATCTAGC
AGAGCAACAGGATCTTAGCCTTTAGAGTCAATCGGAC
GCAGATTTGAGTTCTAACGGCCC-3/H11032.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be
hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
REFERENCES
Kowk, P.-Y. 2001. Methods for genotyping single nucleotide
polymorphisms. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet.2: 235–258.
Lishanski, A. 2000. Screeningfor sing le-nucleotide polymorphisms
usingbranch mig ration inhibition in PCR-amplified DNA.Clin.
Chem. 46: 1464–1470.
Lishanski, A., Kurn, N., and Ullman, E.F. 2000. Branch migration
inhibition in PCR-amplified DNA: Homogeneous mutation
detection. Nucleic Acids Res.28: E42.
Panyutin, I.G. and Hsieh, P. 1993. Formation of a single base
mismatch impedes spontaneous branch migration.J. Mol. Biol.
230: 413–424.
West, S.C. 1997. Processingof recombination intermediates by the
RuvABC proteins.Annu. Rev. Genet.31: 213–244.
Received November 15, 2002; accepted in revised form April 18, 2003.
Yangetal.
1764 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 