 10.1101/gr.171401Access the most recent version at doi:
2001 11: 614-625 Genome Res. 
  
David Gordon, Cindy Desmarais and Phil Green
  
Automated Finishing with Autofinish
  
References
  
 http://genome.cshlp.org/content/11/4/614.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 6 articles, 3 of which can be accessed free at:
  
License
Service
Email Alerting
  
 click here.top right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
 https://genome.cshlp.org/subscriptions
go to: Genome Research To subscribe to 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from  Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
AutomatedFinishingwithAutofinish
David Gordon,1,3 Cindy Desmarais,1 and Phil Green,1,2
1Department of Molecular Biotechnology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA;2Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA
Currently, the genome sequencing community is producing shotgun sequence data at a very high rate, but
finishing(collectingadditionaldirectedsequencedatatoclosegapsandimprovethequalityofthedata)isnot
matchingthatrate.Onereasonforthedifferenceisthatshotgunsequencingishighlyautomatedbutfinishingis
not: Most finishing decisions, such as which directed reads to obtain and which specialized sequencing
techniquestouse,aremadebypeople.Iffinishingratesaretoincreasetomatchshotgunsequencingrates,most
finishingdecisionsalsomustbeautomated.The Autofinishcomputerprogram(whichispartofthe Consed
computersoftwarepackage)doesthisbyautomaticallychoosingfinishingreads. Autofinishisabletosuggest
mostfinishingreadsrequiredforcompletionofeachsequencingproject,greatlyreducingtheamountofhuman
attentionneeded. Autofinishsometimescompletelyfinishestheproject,withnohumandecisionsrequired.It
cannotsolvethemostcomplexproblems,sowerecommendthat Autofinishbeallowedtosuggestreadsfor
thefirstthreeroundsoffinishing,andiftheprojectstillisnotfinishedcompletely,ahumanfinishercomplete
thework.Wecomparedthis Autofinish-Hybridmethodoffinishingagainstahumanfinisherinfivedifferent
projects with a variety of shotgun depths by finishing each project twice—once with each method. This
comparisonshowsthatthe Autofinish-Hybridmethodsavesmanyhoursoverahumanfinisheralone,while
using roughly the same number and type of reads and closing gaps at roughly the same rate.Autofinish
currentlyisinproductionuseatseverallargesequencingcenters.Itisdesignedtobeadaptabletothefinishing
strategyofthelab—itcanfinishusingsomeorallofthefollowing:resequencingreads,reverses,customprimer
walksoneithersubclonetemplatesorwholeclonetemplates,PCR,orminilibraries. Autofinishhasbeenused
forfinishingcDNA,genomicclones,andwholebacterialgenomes(seehttp://www.phrap.org).
When the shotgun phase of a sequencing project has
been completed, the assembly typically consists of a
number of contigs (groups of overlapping reads). The
contigsareseparatedbygaps,forwhichthesequenceis
unknown. Within each contig, there are regions of
high error rate in which the correct sequence is uncer-
tain. The goal of the finishing phase is then to get a
single contiguous contig with low error rate. Prior to
the availability of consensus error probabilities, finish-
ers invented various ad hoc rules (such as requiring
that each consensus base agree with at least one read
on each strand) to determine whether additional data
were needed. With the availability of consensus error
probabilities, there is an objective way to decide when
a finisher is done: He or she decides what error rate is
acceptableandacquiresadditionaldatauntilthaterror
rate is achieved. Because the error probabilities do not
takeintoaccountthepossibilityofsubclonerearrange-
ments, a reasonable additional requirement is that
there should be no single subclone regions (regions
supported by aligned reads from only one template).
Autofinish is designed to achieve these objec-
tives, suggesting reads to close gaps (using a variety of
methods),improvesequencequalityinregionsofhigh
error rate, and eliminate any single subclone regions.
The user can configureAutofinish to perform all or
any combination of these tasks.
Autofinish will suggest the following types of
experiments: Universal primer reads (reads primed
from the subclone vector at one side of the insert will
be referred to as “forward universal primer reads” and
those primed from the vector at the other side of the
insert“reverseuniversalprimerreads”);customprimer
reads with subclone templates (e.g., plasmid or M13);
customprimerreadswithawholeclonetemplate[e.g.,
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC), cosmid, or bac-
terial genome]; minilibraries (shotgun libraries pre-
pared from a subclone insert) (McMurray et al. 1998);
PCRtoclosegaps.Theusercanconfigure Autofinish
tosuggestanycombinationofthesetypesofreads.For
example, by default custom primer reads with a whole
clonetemplateareturnedoffbecausemostlabsdonot
wish to create such reads.
Autofinish has been used in production since
mid-1998.Labsthatcurrentlyuse Autofinishinclude
the Genome Center at the University of Washington
(Seattle), the Genome Sequencing Center at Washing-
ton University (St. Louis), the Department of Energy
Joint Genome Microbial Project, the Berkeley Dro-
sophila Genome Project at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory,theLitaAnnenbergHazenGenomeCenter
at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, and other private
and public labs.
3Corresponding author.
E-MAIL gordon@genome.washington.edu.
Article and publication are at www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/
gr.171401.
Methods
614 Genome Research 11:614–625 ©2001 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 1088-9051/01 $5.00; www.genome.org
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
RESULTS
Autofinishis sometimes unable to completely finish
a project. Thus it typically is used immediately after
shotgun and then, if there are still remaining prob-
lems, a human finisher takes over (what we refer to as
Autofinish-Hybrid finishing). Table 1 shows a list of
BACs, along with one complete bacterial genome,
(Pseudomonasaeruginosa)thatwerefinishedattheUni-
versity of Washington Genome Center from 1998–
1999using Autofinishfollowedbyahumanfinisher.
Notice that Autofinish suggests a substantial frac-
tion,rangingfrom60%to100%,ofthefinishingreads.
For example, the finisher who completed PA01, the
6Mb bacterial genome, was spared having to pick all
but 342 of the 1637 finishing reads. For five of the
BACs, Autofinish completely finished the projects
with no human decisions. For more recently finished
BACs (Table 2) Autofinish suggested all finishing
reads for nearly all of the projects, reflecting improve-
ments in Autofinish such as the ability to specify
PCR reactions and minilibraries for closing gaps, the
abilitytochooseredundantreadsincasesomefail,and
improvedpositioningofgap-closingreads.Thepresent
paperincludesbothtables,toshowthat Autofinish–
unlike Athena–did not spring into the world fully
armedanddeveloped,butbenefitedfromyearsofpro-
duction use.
One might, however, question these results: Were
theseprojectsparticularlyeasytofinish?Inthecasesin
which Autofinish did not completely finish the
project and a human finisher needed to suggest reads,
did Autofinish help very much or were most of its
suggested reads superfluous, and the reads suggested
bythehumanfinisherthereadsthatreallyhelped?Did
Autofinish suggest an excessive number of reads to
finish the project? Could a human finisher have com-
pleted the project much more cheaply?
To address these questions we held a competition
between Autofinish-Hybrid finishing and Human-
onlyfinishing.ThehumanfinisherwasC.D.,whohad
overtwoyearsexperienceinfinishing.Weselectedfive
BACsforthiscompetition,eachwithadifferentdegree
of shotgun coverage (Table 3). For each BAC, the fin-
isher started with an assembly of just the shotgun
reads, and finished this Human-only project without
Autofinish.Simultaneously,thefinisherstartedwith
an identical but separate assembly of just the shotgun
reads and did threerounds of Autofinish finishing
(Fig. 1). If theAutofinish copy of the project wasn’t
completely finished at this point, she finished the
project manually using a combination of resequenc-
Table 1. Use of Autofinish on University of
Washington Projects during 1998 and 1999
Project
No. of
finishing reads
No. of
Autofinish reads
(% Autofinish reads)
djs201 267 161 (60%)
rg391h05 390 236 (61%)
djs104 140 90 (64%)
djs259 148 103 (70%)
PAO1 1637 1195 (73%)
djs333 141 112 (79%)
djs119 82 66 (80%)
djs228 128 104 (81%)
djs362 99 82 (83%)
djs146 141 121 (86%)
djs94 127 111 (87%)
djs327 173 156 (90%)
djs77 113 107 (95%)
djs306 192 183 (95%)
djs124 149 145 (97%)
djs301 224 219 (98%)
djs14 91 91 (100%)
djs40 11 11 (100%)
djs45 66 66 (100%)
djs58 72 72 (100%)
djs292 86 86 (100%)
Autofinish (versions 5.0to 9.0 ) was used on these projects at
the University of Washington during 1998 and 1999. All are
150-kb to 200-kb BACs except for PA01, the six-megabase
Pseudomonas aeruginosabacterial genome. Immediately after
shotgun,Autofinishwasrunforthreeroundsoneachproject:
Each time, the lab made the reads suggested by Autofinish
(without adding or removing any suggested reads) and reas-
sembled the project. After this, if the project was still not
finished,ahumanfinishermanuallycompletedtheproject.All
oftheseprojectshavebeensubmittedtoGenBankasPhase3
Complete sequence. (No. of finishing reads) The sum of Au-
tofinish-selectedreadsandhuman-selectedreads.(No.ofAu-
tofinish reads [% Autofinish Reads] The number and percent-
age of finishing reads that were suggested by Autofinish.
Table 2. Use of Autofinish on University of
Washington Projects During 2000
Project
No. of
finishing reads
No. of
Autofinish reads
(% Autofinish reads)
djs13 237 237 (100%)
djs267 267 267 (100%)
djs510350 326 (93%)
djs696 294 294 (100%)
djs702 206 206 (100%)
djs712 265 265 (100%)
djs701 234 234 (100%)
djs718 381 381 (100%)
djs713 170 170 (100%)
djs714 243 243 (100%)
djs715 428 428 (100%)
djs721 76 76 (100%)
djs513 128 128 (100%)
djs704 500 500 (100%)
djs709 421 421 (100%)
BACs that the University of Washington started and com-
pleted finishing between August and December 2000, using
Autofinishversion10.0andbetter.SevenadditionalBACs,not
listed, were started but not completed during this period.
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 615
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
ing, subclone and BAC template walking, PCR product
sequencing, and minilibraries, just as she did with the
Human-only copy of the project.
Figure 2 compares how quickly the two methods
close gaps. Rounds 1–3 in each panel are particularly
relevantbecausetheyrepresentaracebetweenthefin-
isher andAutofinish (without any human help). As
is evident in Figure 2, by the third round, the finisher
andAutofinishhaveclosedthesamenumberofgaps
in the 7x and 14x projects,Autofinish is ahead by
one gap in the 5x project, and is behind by one gap in
the 4x and 11x projects. This shows thatAutofinish
is effective at closing gaps. The reasonAutofinish-
Hybridtookanextraroundtoclosethefinalgapinthe
11x project was the laboratory failure of a single gap-
closing Autofinish read. The finisher had in fact in-
dependently chosen precisely the same read to close
the corresponding gap in the Human-only version of
theproject,butinthatcasethereadwassuccessfuland
closed the gap.
The Autofinish-Hybrid method required the
samenumberofroundstocloseallgapsastheHuman-
onlymethod,exceptintwocases:the5xprojectwhere
the Autofinish-Hybrid method took two fewer
rounds, and the 11x project where it took one more
round. In the 14x project,Phrap (P. Green, unpubl.)
assembledtheHuman-onlyversionintoasinglecontig
after round 1, while theAutofinish-Hybrid version
initially consisted of two contigs as a result of a simple
misassembly,notagap.Thismisassemblywasresolved
byPhrapafterround2 Autofinishreadswereadded.
For the 4x project, notice that in round 4 theAu-
tofinish-Hybrid method pulls ahead of the Human-
only method. How can this occur when round 4 is
human versus human, because the finisher has taken
overafterthethreeroundsof Autofinish?Thereason
is thatAutofinishhas reduced the size of a gap more
than the finisher did in the Human-only project, and
thusitiseasierforthefinisherinround4toclosegaps
in theAutofinish project.
Also notice that the 4x project was initially in 24
contigs,whichisahighernumberthanwhatmostcen-
Figure 1 Finishing procedures withAutofinish and with a human finisher.
Table 3. Shotgun Statistics of the Five BACs Selected for the Autofinish-Hybrid versus Human-Only Competition
Project
GenBank
accession no.
Q20
coverage
Size
in kB
#Shotgun
reads
# Contigs after
shotgun phase
Avg. # Q20
bases per read
BAC218 AC009362 4 /H11503155 1934 24 325
BAC383 AC010656 5 /H11503139 1979 12 353
BAC270 AC009517 7 /H11503141 2766 7 359
BAC366 AC009358 11 /H11503185 5455 5 377
BAC422 AC009332 14 /H11503148 5379 8 380
Q20Coverage = RDs × Q20length /H11408BAClength where RDs is the number of shotgun reads, Q20length is the average number of
bases in a read which are PHRED quality 20or greater, and BAClength is the size of the BAC in base pairs.
Gordonetal.
616 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
ters would consider desirable to finish.Autofinish
and the finisher each closed half of those gaps after a
single round, indicating that Autofinish’s gap-
closing capabilities match those of a human finisher
even for projects where shotgun coverage is very low.
At this writing, the 4x project still is not completed.
Both the Autofinish-Hybrid and Human-only
projects have the same two stubborn gaps. However,
finishing them would have no bearing on this compe-
tition because a human finisher has taken over.
But how many reads isAutofinish using? Could
Autofinishbecompetingsosuccessfullywiththehu-
manfinisherbysuggestingmanymorereads?No.Asis
evidentfromFigure3,thenumberofreadsusedbythe
Autofinish-hybrid method of finishing and the Hu-
Figure 2 Gap Closing:Autofinish-Hybrid vs. Human-only for five different BACs.
Figure3 Finishingreadsrequired: Autofinish-Hybridvs.Hu-
man-only.
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 617
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
man-onlymethodareverysimilar.Noris Autofinish
using more expensive reads. Figure 4 shows that the
Autofinish-Hybrid method used slightly fewer PCR
reads overall than the Human-only method. Figure 5
showsthatthenumberofcustomprimersrequiredwas
slightly larger for theAutofinish-Hybrid method. As
discussedbelow,amorerecentversionof Autofinish
(10.0) uses fewer custom primers.
After finishing theAutofinish-Hybrid and Hu-
man-onlyversionsofaBAC,wecomparedtheconsen-
sus sequences and examined discrepancies to identify
thenumberoferrorsineachversion,asshowninTable
4.Althoughallprojectsattainedthetargeterrorrateof
one error per 10,000 bases or better, the Human-only
consensus was more accurate than theAutofinish-
Hybridconsensusinthreeoutoffourprojects,indicat-
ingthatthehumanfinisher“overshot”thetargeterror
ratebyagreateramount.Thisindicatesthatforacom-
parable number of finishing reads, the human finisher
was able to attain a somewhat lower error rate (albeit
lower than the competition specified). By performing
additional Autofinish runs and examining the loca-
tion of suggested reads, we attempted to estimate how
manyadditionalreads Autofinishwouldhavehadto
call to attain the same final error rate as the human
finisher. For the four projects combined, we estimate
an additional 64 reads would have been required, for a
total of 608 reads, about 12% more than in the Hu-
man-only projects. Because of improvements inAu-
tofinish and Phred (Ewing et al. 1998) since this
competition, we believeAutofinish now would use
fewer reads to reach the same level of accuracy (see
Discussion).
ItalsoisapparentfromTable4thatthereare ∼70%
more errors than predicted. We believe this excess is
partly because of errors introduced by PCR amplifica-
tion of the subclones, which are not reflected in the
Phred quality values, and partly to a slight overesti-
mation of the Phred quality values on MegaBACE
data.
The main difference between the two methods is
shown in Figure 6: The Human-only method required
two- to six-fold as much time picking reads as theAu-
tofinish-Hybrid method. There can be a large differ-
enceinthelengthoftimeittakesdifferentfinishersto
finish a project. If we had used a less-experienced fin-
isherthanC.D.,thisfigurelikelywouldhaveshownan
even more dramatic difference.
Autofinish’s ability to discern which contigs in
an assembly to finish is an important and useful fea-
ture, because most assemblies contain small “junk”
contigs that normally would be ignored by a human
finisher. In our experiment, usuallyAutofinish and
thehumanfinisheragreedonwhichcontigswerewor-
thy of additional finishing and which should not be
pursued further. Every contig thatAutofinish chose
to finish eventually integrated into the final assembly.
DISCUSSION
Thecompetitiondescribedaboveshowsthe Autofin-
ish-Hybrid method saves a finisher a substantial
amount of time sitting in front of a computer picking
reads, which should enable finishing at a greater rate.
Autofinishalsorelievesfinishersofmuchoftherou-
tine, tedious work and allows them to concentrate
their time on the most interesting and challenging
problems.
According to the traditional finishing model,
when a clone has completed the shotgun stage the
clone is assigned to a particular person to finish. That
person could choose finishing reads manually, or use
Autofinish. The competition above shows the ad-
vantages of using Autofinish for the first three
rounds. However, a lab may gain efficiency bynot as-
signing the clone to a finisher until afterAutofinish
has been run. Instead, all clones that have completed
the shotgun stage can be assigned to a production
grouphavingtheskillstodothereactionssuggestedby
Autofinish, but not necessarily the skills to choose
finishingreadsoredittheassembly.Thisgrouphasno
need to even view the assembly becauseAutofinish
Figure4 PCRreadsrequired: Autofinish-Hybridvs.Human-
only.
Figure 5 Custom primers required: Autofinish-Hybrid vs.
Human-only.
Gordonetal.
618 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
can be run automatically; they would instead focus on
processing multiple finishing reactions at high
throughput, just as the shotgun production group
does.ThisisthemodelusedbytheUniversityofWash-
ington Genome Center where it has yielded an in-
crease in finishing rate (R. Kaul, pers. comm.) We be-
lieve this model is more scaleable than the Human-
onlyfinishingmodel.Eachtimemorepeoplearehired,
there are training costs, the new hires are initially not
as productive as existing employees, and the manage-
ment burden increases in degree and complexity. In-
creasingAutofinish’s workload does not create these
problems, and may even have decreasing marginal
cost.
Autofinish does not yet completely automate
the finishing process: There is a need before submis-
sionforahumanfinishertocorrectanymisassemblies
and misplaced reads.Consed (Gordon et al. 1998) has
the tools to detect these by locating high-quality dis-
crepant bases and reads with unaligned, high-quality
regions, and to correct them.
The competition shows that the Autofinish-
Hybridmethodrequiresroughlythesamenumberand
type of reads and closes gaps at roughly the same rate
as a human finisher alone. Because laboratory costs
depend on number and type of reads, these results
show thatAutofinishprobably does not increase lab
costs. The project with the greatest difference between
thetwomethodsinnumberofreadsisthe7xcoverage
project, BAC270, in which the Autofinish-Hybrid
method used 155 reads to the Human-only method’s
198 reads. We found that there were very few reads in
common and thus we could not identify any reads as
being “extra”. Instead there were three sources of this
discrepancy:(1)TheHuman-onlymethodhad22more
laboratory failures that had to be redone than theAu-
tofinish-Hybrid method; (2) the Human-only
methodsuggestedalargerportionofuniversalprimers
than the Autofinish-Hybrid method did, and this
also may have increased the number of reads required;
and (3) there were seven cases in which the human
finisher suggested reads that would not fix more than
the0.05minimumnumberoferrorsthresholdthatthe
finisher set for Autofinish and thus do not help
much in reducing the error rate. There also were four
regions that the human finisher missed entirely that
exceeded this threshold; Autofinish correctly sug-
gested reads for these regions.
In the case of the 14x project,Autofinish sug-
gested 14 more reads, or 28% more reads than the hu-
manfinisher.Here,the Autofinish-Hybridprojectre-
quired redoing 10 more reads than the Human-only
method, which accounts for much of the difference.
In the four finished BACs, the human finisher at-
tained higher accuracy with the identical number of
reads; we estimate thatAutofinish would have re-
quired 12% more reads to reach the same level of ac-
curacy.However,improvementshavebeenmadesince
Table 4. Predicted and Observed Errors in the Completed Autofinish-Hybrid and Human-Only Projects
Project
Autofinish-Hybrid Human-Only
predicted errors
(errors/10kb)
observed errors
(errors/10kb)
predicted errors
(errors/10kb)
observed errors
(errors/10kb)
BAC383 (5/H11503) 8.7 (0.68) 12 (0.93) 5.9 (0.46) 2 (0.16)
BAC270(7 /H11503) 5.7 (0.41) 12 (0.85) 4.9 (0.35) 15 (1.07)
BAC366 (11/H11503) 8.9 (0.48) 19 (1.03) 2.2 (0.12) 3 (0.16)
BAC422 (14/H11503) 1.5 (0.10) 3 (0.20) 1.0 (0.07) 1 (0.07)
Total 24.8 (0.41) 46 (0.76) 14.0 (0.23) 21 (0.35)
Observed errors/predicted errors 1.85 1.5
Total predicted errors 38.8
Total observed errors 67
Observed errors/Predicted errors 1.72
The true number of errors is probably higher than the observed counts, because some errors may be the same in both versions and
wouldnotbedetectedbythecomparison.ForthisanalysisweusedthemorerecentPHREDversion0.000925.cbecauseitgivesmore
accurate quality values for MegaBACE data than the older versions of PHRED available during the competition. Parts of the BACs
containing misassembled or misplaced reads were excluded.
Figure6 Humanhoursrequiredforchoosingreads: Autofin-
ish-Hybrid vs. Human-only.
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 619
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
the competition was held that should reduce Au-
tofinish’s number of reads. These include fixing a
bug that occasionally caused it to resuggest a read that
failed in a previous round, identifying particular prob-
lems (e.g., stops and low complexity regions) that re-
quire alternate chemistry, and a newer version of
Phred (0.000925.c) which, for MegaBACE data, gives
more accurate (and lower) quality values in locations
that likely contain errors.
Differentlabsandevendifferentfinisherswithina
lab have different finishing styles. In particular, Wash-
ington University Genome Sequencing Center (Wash-
U) finishers routinely choose more reads than C.D. for
eachproblemregion.Acomparisonofresultsfrom Au-
tofinish version 9.66 (the version used in this com-
petition)withtheirfinishers’resultswouldlikelyresult
in the Autofinish -Hybrid method finishing the
project with far fewer total reads, although possibly
more rounds and more custom primer reads. Wash-U
requestedthat Autofinishsuggestredundantuniver-
sal primer reads, in the event that some reads failed.
The Baylor Human Genome Sequencing Center re-
quested that Autofinish suggest all reverses that
might help in closing gaps. Many users requested that
Autofinish prefer multiple universal primers to a
singlecustomprimerbecausetheuniversalprimersare
cheaper and this method would save calendar time
waitingforprimers.Thesechangesallhavebeenincor-
poratedin Autofinishversion10.0,whichbydefault
calls more universal primer reads than version 9.66.
The user can makeAutofinish 10.0 suggest reads in
the parsimonious manner ofAutofinish 9.66 by set-
ting the parameters appropriately.
Forthisexperiment,wechoseprojectswithawide
range of shotgun depths of coverage to see whether
Autofinish’s effectiveness is restricted to a particular
shotgun depth. Anecdotally, we observed that the 5x
project had 787 fewer shotgun reads than the 7x
project,butrequiredonly111morefinishingreadsfor
the hybrid method and 43 more using the Human-
onlymethod.Thissuggeststhatusingalowershotgun
depthmaybemoreefficient.(Albeitthesearedifferent
projects.) So what is the optimal shotgun coverage?
This question could be addressed by the following ex-
periment: Several high-depth-of-coverage (e.g., 14x)
shotgun projects could have reads randomly removed,
to create projects of successively lower depths of cov-
erage. Then each of these projects could be finished
independently, including making the reads in the lab,
and one could compare the total (shotgun + finishing)
cost of sequencing each of these projects. BecauseAu-
tofinish decreases the cost of finishing reads by sav-
ing human labor,Autofinish should lower the opti-
mal shotgun coverage.
In our experience, when a lab is considering the
use ofAutofinish, one of its skilled finishers looks at
theAutofinishoutputandsometimesdisagreeswith
some of the suggestions and dismissesAutofinish.
We think that the above-described controlled compe-
titionisabetterwayofevaluating Autofinish,andit
indicates thatAutofinish is roughly as good as a hu-
manfinisherforthefirstthreeroundsoffinishingafter
shotgun.
METHODS
CompetitionBetweenAutofinish-Hybridand
Human-Only
C.D.didthelabworkforbothhermanuallychosenreadsand
for the Autofinish reads using the same techniques and
equipment, to attempt to eliminate any potential laboratory
bias.
TemplateDNAforshotgunreadswaspreparedmainlyby
PCRalthoughasmallnumberwerepreparedusinganalkaline
lysis method. Finishing reads template DNA consisted of sub-
clones prepared with a Qiagen prep robot, or BAC DNA pre-
pared using an alkaline lysis method. ABI dye terminator
chemistry and an ABI 3700 capillary sequencer were used for
all finishing reads, and Amersham dye terminator chemistry
andaMegaBACEcapillarysequencerwereusedformostshot-
gun reads (with a small number run on an ABI 373 or 377).
Bases were called withPhred version 0.980904.a for shotgun
reads and version 0.990722.g for finishing reads.
If a read failed (meaning that when viewed by the eye,
the chromatogram was blank or had fewer than 100 discern-
ablebases),thefinisherwouldattemptasecondreactionfrom
the same DNA template stock and would count both reads.
We counted all samples run, whether successes or failures,
with one exception: There were three 96-well plates that
failed to produce data because of a clogged pipette tip on an
overnight run on the 3700. The finisher simply restarted the
sequencerthenextdayafteruncloggingthetipandreranthe
threeplateswithoutredoingthesequencingreactions.Wedid
not count the failed batch in the total number of reads be-
cause such a machine failure has no bearing on howAu-
tofinish compares to a human finisher.
During the first three rounds of manual finishing for
eachproject,thefinisheronlypicked resequencing reads(reads
redone using dye terminator chemistry) and custom primer
walks on subclone or clone (BAC) templates. The finisher did
not use PCR or minilibraries until after the first three rounds.
(Inretrospect,shethinksitwouldhavebeenmoreefficientto
use some PCR in the third round in areas of low subclone
coverage, but she thinks this would have made little differ-
enceinthecompetitionresultsbecausesheeventuallydidthe
PCR in a subsequent round.) The finisher did not viewAu-
tofinish’s read choices prior to manually selecting reads, in
order to preventAutofinish from influencing her choices.
Shemeasuredthetimespentsittingatthecomputerchoosing
reads and preparing primer orders.
During the first three rounds usingAutofinish on the
Autofinish-Hybrid projects, the finisher made all readsAu-
tofinish suggested. There was one partial exception: She
initially ran Autofinish on a very low-coverage project
(BAC218) with Autofinish’s redundancy parameter (a pa-
rameterthatdetermineshowfewormanyreads Autofinish
suggests) set high, but after seeing the huge number of prim-
ers suggested, she decided that redundancy 1 was more ap-
Gordonetal.
620 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
propriatefortheinitialstagesofaprojectshotgunnedtosuch
a low depth of coverage. She reranAutofinish with redun-
dancy 1 and used all ofAutofinish’s suggested reads with-
out change.
The finisher did not use data from overlapping BACs,
GenBank, or any other outside sources in either the Au-
tofinish-HybridmethodorintheHuman-onlymethod.To
dosowouldbetoeffectivelydecreasethesizeoftheregionto
be finished but otherwise be irrelevant to the competition.
HowtoUseAutofinish
To useAutofinish, begin by running the phredPhrap script
that, among other things, runsPhred and thenPhrap. Au-
tofinishrequirespreciselythesameinputfilesthat Consed
needs: the ace file (output fromPhrap) and the PHD files
(output fromPhred).
To start Autofinish, from the command line type:
consed -ace (ace filename) -autofinish
(This is the same way one startsConsed, except for the
“-autofinish”.)
Autofinish will create the following files:
1. A file of forward universal primer reads to make
2. A file of reverse universal primer reads to make
3. A file of custom primer reads to make
4. A custom navigation file that allows one to useConsed to
easily and quickly examine each read suggested byAu-
tofinish by successively clicking “Next”
5. A combination of files 1, 2, and 3 sorted by contig and
contig position so one can see at a glance whatAutofin-
ish has suggested for a particular region of the assembly
6. A verbose “.out” file in whichAutofinish explains its
reasons for the decisions it makes
7. A file of minilibraries to make
8. autofinish.fof which contains the names of the files listed
above
Files 1, 2, 3, and 7 (above) are in a delimited text file
format, making it easy to integrateAutofinishinto existing
work-flow setups incorporating robotics or LIMS systems.
CustomizingAutofinish
Theusercancustomize Autofinishbycreatingafilenamed
.consedrc containing some parameters and their customized
values. A complete list of the customizable parameters is in
thebeginningofthe Autofinish“.out”file.Thislistisquite
long and the user must understand a parameter in order to
correctly modify it, as this is the price ofAutofinish’s flex-
ibility.
HowAutofinishWorks
Autofinish has the following phases:
1. Evaluates the success of previous rounds ofAutofinish
on this project
2. Evaluates the error rate of all the existing reads in the
projectandcreates“modelreads”,whichincludeestimates
of the length and position-specific quality values of each
finishing read
3. Determines the location of subclone templates that are ac-
ceptable for creating additional reads
4. Decides which contigs to try to finish
5. For each contig:
a. checks if either end of the contig is the clone end
b. orders and orients the contig with respect to other contigs
c. suggests minilibraries for closing gaps
d. suggests universal primer reads for closing gaps and im-
proving the error rate in regions of high error rate
e. chooses redundant universal primer reads
f. chooses custom primer walking reads for any region left
unfixed by universal primer reads
g. suggests custom primer reads to eliminate single subclone
regions
6. Suggests PCR for closing gaps
7. Prints output files and, ifAutofinish was run with the
option -doExperiments, adds tags to the ace file recording
which reads and primersAutofinish suggested
Let us examine these phases in detail:
Evaluates the Success of Previous Runs of Autofinish on ThisProject
If Autofinish was previously run with the -doExperiments
parameter, as in consed -ace (acefilename) -autofinish -doEx-
periments, Autofinish will have a record in the ace file of
reads it suggested for this project in the past. For informa-
tionalpurposesonly, Autofinishreports,foreachsuggested
read, whether there now exists a corresponding actual read
and how well the actual read achieved its objective—whether
thereadisalignedwhere Autofinishintendedandhowwell
the read improved the predicted error rate of the region.
Creates Model FinishingReads
Autofinish assumes that any read it suggests (except for
fixing single subclone regions) will have a particular length
and its bases particular qualities.Autofinish creates this
imaginary“modelread”byexaminingallexistingreadsinthe
project and compiling a histogram indicating at each base
position what fraction of reads have quality 0, what fraction
of reads have quality 1 or less, what fraction of reads have
quality 2 or less, etc.Phred and Phrap quality values are
defined by
Quality =/H1150210/H11503log10 (ErrorProbability)
Because Phred quality values are not valid in the unaligned
part of a read, only bases that align against the consensus or
vector are counted in this histogram.
Autofinishthenconstructsamodelreadwhosequality
value at a particular base position is the median quality value
of the histogram at that base position. The length of the
model read is the 90th percentile length (customizable) of
existing reads.
Autofinish examines all existing reads and calculates
the probability that a read is alignable against the consensus
at any particular base position in the read.Autofinishfinds
the read positions at which 90% or more (customizable) of
existing reads are aligned against the consensus and con-
structs a second model read, which is aligned at these posi-
tions. This model read (which does not utilize quality infor-
mation) is used for fixing single subclone regions.
The user can view inConsed these model reads for a
particular project by clicking on Info/Show Model Read on
the Main Consed Window.
Determines the Location of Subclone Templates that are Acceptable to
Use for AdditionalReads
Autofinish does not use a template if it has any of the fol-
lowing properties: the template has a chimeric read detected
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 621
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
by Phrap; the template is listed in the badTemplates.txt file,
a file created by the lab specifically to exclude particular tem-
plates from finishing; the library of the template is listed in
thebadLibraries.txtfile,afilecreatedbythelabspecificallyto
exclude particular libraries from finishing, e.g., libraries used
in the shotgun that are unavailable for finishing; the tem-
plate’s insert is shorter than 300 bases (customizable); the
existingreadsfromthetemplatehaveanyindicationofbeing
misassembled. In such a case,Autofinish cannot be sure of
the location of the template. Indications of a read being mis-
assembled include high-quality discrepancies with the con-
sensus, high-quality regions that are unaligned with the con-
sensus,andinconsistenciesbetweenexistingreadsmadefrom
the template. Such inconsistencies may take the following
forms:(1)Thereadsarefurtherapartthanthemaximumsub-
clone size; (2) The reads are in different contigs and not both
close enough to the ends of the contigs to be consistent with
the maximum subclone size even if the contigs were joined;
(3) The reads are in different contigs, there are 0 (customiz-
able)otherforward-reversepairsbetweenthesametwocontig
ends, and these reads are inconsistent with the contig order
and orientation as deduced from a majority of linking for-
ward-reverse pairs; and (4) The reads are in the same contig,
but the orientations of forward/reverse pair universal primer
reads are inconsistent, e.g., they are pointing away from each
other( ←→ )orinthesamedirection( →→ )insteadoftowards
each other (→← ).
It is vital thatAutofinish determine the location of
each template’s insert with respect to a contig in the assem-
bly,bothforchoosingwhichtemplatesareavailableformak-
ing a particular read with a particular custom primer and also
for determining the location of each “de novo universal
primer read” (a forward universal primer read in the case in
which the template has an existing reverse but no forward,
and a reverse universal primer read in the case in which the
template has an existing forward but no reverse).
Tofindthelocationoftheinsertofaparticulartemplate,
Autofinish examines each existing universal primer read
from that template and finds the vector/insert junction. Ide-
ally, the template would have an existing forward universal
primer read and a reverse universal primer read, which to-
gether would determine the precise location of the insert of
the template. Frequently, however, there is only a single uni-
versal primer read from a subclone template, soAutofinish
can determine precisely one end of the template insert, but
must guess at the other end. It makes this guess in two ways:
(1) If there are at least 100 (customizable) existing forward/
reverse pairs from the same library as this subclone template,
Autofinish calculates the mean and standard deviation of
the insert sizes of templates of these forward/reverse pairs,
andguessesthattheinsertsizeofthisparticulartemplatewill
be the mean minus 0.2 standard deviations (customizable).
(2) If there are not enough forward/reverse pairs, thenAu-
tofinish will assume the insert size is 1500 bases (custom-
izable). If there are several subclone libraries in the same
project, Autofinish can make these estimates in a library-
specific manner.Autofinish gets the library name and sub-
clone template name of a read from the PHD file. Similarly,
Autofinish reads from the PHD file whether a read is a uni-
versal primer read (and thus delineates the end of a subclone
template) or a walk. It is the lab’s responsibility to put this
information into the PHD file by customizing the perl script
determineReadTypes.perl. Typically, labs have the library
name, template name, and template type as part of the read
name, but different labs have different naming conventions.
Hence the need for this script.
Decides Which Contigs to Try toFinish
Autofinish tries to distinguish real contigs from spurious
contigs (such as those deriving from contaminant reads), and
does not finish the latter. If a contig has <10 reads in it (cus-
tomizable) or is shorter than 1 kb (customizable),Autofin-
ish does not try to finish it. If any contig has a depth of
coverage (sum of aligned read lengths divided by the consen-
sus length) exceeding six times (customizable) the depth of
coverage of the longest contig,Autofinish does not finish
the shorter contig, because it is likely to be contaminant or
misassembled.
Checks if Either End of the Contig is the CloneEnd
Autofinish checks each contig end to see if it contains the
clone end. The user can specify thatAutofinish do this in
either of two ways: one applying when the clone vector is
includedintheshotgun(seeFig.7),andtheotherwhenthere
are two reads that are known to lie at the ends of the clone.
The latter case has been used for finishing cDNA clones.
Orders and Orients theContig
Autofinish tries to order and orient contigs by using for-
ward/reverse pair information. If it finds two (customizable)
forward/reverse pairs linking the same two ends of contigs,
thenAutofinishconsiderstheorientationtobecertainand
printsittothe“.out”file.Iftherearenottwoforward/reverse
pairs linking the end of one contig to an end of another con-
tig, thenAutofinish will try to suggest additional reads so
there will be at least two such pairs.
Optionally, Autofinish will suggest all reverse univer-
sal primer reads that have a chance of either extending the
contigorclosingthegap;thesemustbewithinthemaximum
insert size of the library from the contig end.
Suggests Minilibraries For ClosingGaps
If a subclone spans a gap,Autofinish can suggest a minili-
brary be made from that subclone in order to close the gap.
Autofinish can optionally suggest minilibraries for all such
gaps, or just for such gaps that are predicted to be larger than
a user-settable size.Autofinish estimates the size of the gap
and the insert size of each template spanning the gap by as-
Figure 7 Autofinish checks each contig to see if either end
is the clone end. Masked clone vector and subclone vector both
appear as Xs, and Bs are high quality bases that do not match
subclone or clone vector. Notice that vector-insert junctions of
reads 1–4 are aligned. If read 5 were not present, this figure
would suggest a typical clone end with the Xs clone vector. If
only read 1 and read 2 were present, the Xs could instead be
subclonevector,whichjusthappenstoalign;butthepresenceof
two additional reads (read 3 and read 4), or additional vector
bases in one read, would make this less likely. However, if read 5
were present (all high quality bases surrounding the putative
vector/insert junction), it would be unlikely that this is the clone
end.
Gordonetal.
622 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
sumingthatthemeanoftheinsertsizesofthetemplatesthat
spanthegapequalsthemeaninsertsizeofthelibraryofthese
templates. When choosing a subclone for the minilibrary,
Autofinish will prefer subclone templates whose size is
within two (customizable) standard deviations of the mean
sizeofsubclonesinthelibraryovertemplatesthatarefurther
from the mean. Within each of these two groups,Autofin-
ish will prefer templates that will fix more errors, i.e., which
cover more of the low quality bases near the ends of the con-
tigs.
Suggests Universal Primer Reads for Closing Gaps and Improving the
Error Rate in Regions of High ErrorRate
This and the subsequent steps are the heart ofAutofinish,
in which it chooses reads based on error probabilities.
Autofinish calculates the Phrap error probability of
each consensus base from the Phrap-generated consensus
quality values using the formula:
Error_Probability =10/H20873
−Quality
10 /H20874
An error probability of .01 means that out of 100 different
bases each having an error probability of .01, roughly 99 of
themwillbecorrectand1willbeincorrect,sothe“expected”
(or “predicted”) number of errors of each base is .01. The
expected number of errors in a region, E, is the sum of the
errorprobabilitiesofthebasesintheregion.When Autofin-
ishisconsideringhowmanyerrorsaparticularfinishingread
will fix, it uses this method to estimate the expected number
of errors in the region of the consensus covered by the read.
Because a finishing read is never perfect, it will on average fix
fewer errors than the expected number in the consensus. We
explainbelowhowweestimatethenumberoferrorsafinish-
ing read will fix.
Consensus error probabilities are stored in the elements
ofanarray,withoneelementofthearrayforeachbaseinthe
consensus. Autofinish extends this array to the left and to
the right with elements representing the gap bases between
contigs, and assigns error probability 1.0 to these bases since
they are unknown. If either contig end is a clone end,Au-
tofinish assigns 0.0 instead of 1.0 to those gap bases so it
willnottrytoextendthecontiginthatdirection.Similarly,if
any base has a doNotFinish tag covering it,Autofinish as-
signs an error probability of 0.0 to that base. This is particu-
larly useful if the clone being finished is overlapped by an-
other finished clone and the lab does not want to finish the
overlapping region again. (The user can optionally specify
thatAutofinishnotfinishregionscoveredbyothertypesof
tags, such as repeat tags.)
Autofinishnowcreatesalistofpossiblecandidateuni-
versalprimerreads(bothresequencinguniversalprimerreads
and de novo universal primer reads) for this contig.
Autofinishcalculatestheexpectednumberoferrorsin
the consensus fixed by each candidate read (described later).
Each such read has to fix at least 0.02 expected errors (cus-
tomizable) in order to be added to the list. This preventsAu-
tofinishfromsuggestingreadsthatwillnotreducetheerror
rate significantly. Labs frequently customize this parameter
because it allows them to control whetherAutofinish tries
to fix more or fewer minor problems: consed.AutofinishMin-
NumberOfErrorsFixedByAnExp: 0.02
For each read candidate, Autofinish divides the ex-
pected number of errors fixed by the (user-estimated) cost of
the read to yield the number of errors fixed per dollar.Au-
tofinishlooksthroughthislistofcandidatereadsandpicks
thesinglereadthatfixesthemosterrorsperdollar.(Ifaprob-
lem can be fixed either by a resequencing read or a de novo
universal primer read, the user can determine which oneAu-
tofinishwill choose by varying the costs of these two types
of reads.)
Autofinishwillrejectareadifitalreadyhadbeencho-
sen in a previous round, in order to keep from suggesting the
same failing read over and over again. If a read passes this
check, it is transferred to a list of chosen reads. If the chosen
read crosses a “stop” (a region that dye terminator chemistry
has been unable to sequence through) or low complexity re-
gion, Autofinish suggests that special chemistry (e.g.,
dGTP) be used. Otherwise it suggests dye terminator chemis-
try.
Autofinish then recalculates the error probabilities of
consensus bases predicted to be overlapped by the chosen
read. Autofinish scans its list of candidate reads for those
that overlap the chosen read, and recalculates how many er-
rorseachsuchcandidatereadwouldnowfix(anderrorsfixed
perdollar),becausesomeoftheerrorsareexpectedtobefixed
by the chosen read.
Autofinishrepeatsthisprocessofpickingthereadthat
fixes the most errors per dollar until there are no more can-
didate reads left that fix at least 0.02 errors (see above).
Chooses Redundant Universal PrimerReads
Autofinish optionally suggests redundant universal primer
reads so that if one fails, the problem may still be fixed by
another read. To do this,Autofinish restores the consensus
error probabilities to what they originally were (with all the
expected errors unfixed). It then chooses universal primer
reads again using the same criteria as in the first pass, but
excluding the reads chosen in the first pass.
Chooses Custom Primer WalkingReads
Ifproblemsstillremainafterchoosinguniversalprimerreads,
Autofinish tries to choose custom primer walking reads.
Autofinishconsiderseverypossiblecustomprimerthatcan
prime within this contig and screens these primers using the
same criteria asConsed’s primer picker. (The number of pos-
sibleprimersisthesameorderofmagnitudeasthenumberof
basesinthecontig.)Foreachprimer, Autofinishpicksthree
templates (a customizable number) that are located such that
the primer is within the template and the vector-insert junc-
tion is at least 500 bases away (customizable). If more than
three templates are acceptable for a particular primer,Au-
tofinishpicksthreetemplatesbasedeitheronwhicharethe
“bestquality”orwhichareinthe“bestposition”(thedefault,
but customizable).
Best quality:Thequalityofthetemplateisdeterminedby
finding the read from the template that has the highest pre-
dictederrorratefrombase80tobase300(customizable).The
best quality template has the lowest such value.
Best position: Autofinish prefers templates that have a
forward/reverse pair (because the beginning and end of such
templates are known with relative certainty). Next best are
templates that have either a forward universal primer read or
a reverse universal primer read. In each caseAutofinish
chooses among templates based on which template extends
furthestinthedirectionofthecandidateread,wheresizeand
location of the insert are determined as described previously.
For each custom primer and its templates,Autofinish
calculatesthenumberoferrorsfixedandthenumberoferrors
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 623
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
fixed per dollar. Just as with universal primer reads, the cus-
tomprimerreadsmustexceedthe0.02expectederrorthresh-
old to be considered.
Autofinish looks through this list of candidate reads
and picks the single read (or primer and its templates) that
fixes the most errors per dollar.
This read must pass these additional checks:
1. A previous run ofAutofinish must not have suggested
this primer or any other primer within 50 bases on the
same strand (customizable).
2. Autofinish must not have already suggested a custom
primerreadonthesamestrandwithin200bases(customi-
zable) in the same run ofAutofinish.
3. Ifthepotentialreadextendsintothegap,itstillmustover-
lapthe“highqualitysegment”oftheconsensusbyatleast
70 (customizable) bases. (The high quality segment is cal-
culated as follows: Each base is assigned a score by sub-
tracting thePhrap error probability from 0.05. The high
qualitysegmentistheregionofcontiguousbasesforwhich
the sum of the corresponding scores is a maximum. Usu-
ally this corresponds to nearly all of the consensus except
at the extreme left and right ends where the quality drops
below 13.) This is to preventAutofinish from picking a
read that overlaps the contig so little that the read fails to
assemble with the contig, and thus does not extend it.
Thecustomprimerpassendspreciselythesamewaythatthe
universal primer passes end.
Fixes Single SubcloneRegions
Autofinish determines all existing single subclone regions.
ThenAutofinishexamineswhetheranyexistingsinglesub-
clone regions will be fixed by reads thatAutofinish has
suggested in this round for other purposes, assuming that
each suggested read will succeed, assemble where it is ex-
pected to, and be aligned as specified by the second model
read (described earlier).
If there are still any single subclone regions remaining,
Autofinish will try to suggest custom primer reads to fix
these regions.Autofinish chooses templates for these cus-
tom primers based on which reads fix the most single sub-
clone bases.Autofinish divides the number of single sub-
clone bases fixed by a read by the user-estimated cost of the
read and selects the read that fixes the greatest number of
single subclone bases per dollar. If this custom primer read is
tooclose(within50basesbydefault)toacustomprimerread
thatAutofinishchoseinapreviousrun,ortooclose(within
200 bases by default) to a custom primer read thatAutofin-
ish chose in this same run,Autofinish rejects this primer.
Otherwise Autofinish chooses it. Autofinish then must
adjust which templates cover which bases and also adjust the
number of single subclone bases improved by any candidate
read that overlaps the candidate read just picked.Autofin-
ish stops choosing reads to improve single subclone bases
when it can find no more reads that will fix any single sub-
clone bases.
Suggests PCR for ClosingGaps
PCR is considered a last resort: IfAutofinish can suggest a
single non-PCR read to extend any contig in the assembly,
Autofinish will not suggest PCR. If there is no such read,
Autofinish will choose one PCR primer for the end of each
contig (except for clone ends). Autofinish PCR primers
must pass all of theConsed primer picking checks, although
with modified settings for melting temperatures, primer size,
and matchElsewhere score (a measure of the possibility of
primingtothewronglocation).Inaddition,eachPCRprimer
must be at least 100 (customizable) bases within the high
quality segment of the contig so that there is enough overlap
to ensure thatPhrap will assemble the resulting reads with
thecontig. AutofinishwillchoosethissetofPCRprimersso
that they all have melting temperatures within two degrees
(customizable) of each other and that no two of them anneal
to each other.Autofinish will print a list of pairs of PCR
primers to use.
HowManyErrorsWillAReadFix?
Each suggested read is represented by a model read that has a
quality histogram indicating, for each position and quality
level Q, the probability that a read will have quality/H11349Qa t
that position.
At a particular base, ifAutofinish is suggesting several
reads from different subclone templates but the same strand,
Autofinish assumes errors in these reads are independent.
Autofinish combines the reads’ histograms at that base to
get a histogram indicating the probability that all reads have
quality /H11349Q. It does this by multiplying the values at each
quality level, because the probability that two reads will both
haveaqualityvalue /H11349Qequalstheproductoftheprobability
that the first read will have quality value/H11349Q times the prob-
ability that the second read will have quality value/H11349Q.
At a particular base, ifAutofinish is suggesting several
reads from the same subclone template and the same strand,
Autofinishassumes errors in these reads are completely de-
pendent.Thequalityhistogramsofthesereadsatthisbaseare
combined by taking the minimum of the values at each qual-
ity level.
After combining histograms in this way,Autofinish
ends up with at most two histograms at each consensus base,
onefortop-strandsuggestedreadsandoneforbottom-strand
suggested reads. If there are any top-strand suggested reads at
this position,Autofinish creates a single-top strand “com-
bined quality” equal to the median quality at this position of
this histogram (i.e., the value Q such that there is a 50%
probability that the reads will have quality/H11349Q). Similarly, if
there are any bottom-strand reads, Autofinish creates a
single bottom strand combined quality.
At each base,Autofinish applies a heuristic formula
(see below) to combine the top strand combined quality with
the consensus quality, and then, with the resulting value,
applies the formula again with the bottom strand combined
quality to obtain a new predicted consensus quality. The dif-
ference between the original consensus error probability and
theerrorprobabilitycorrespondingtothenewpredictedcon-
sensus quality is the predicted number of errors fixed by all
suggested reads at that base position. The errors fixed by a
singlereadissimplythedifferencebetweentheerrorsfixedby
this group of reads with and without the single read.
The formula for the number of errors fixed at a base is
derived as follows:
Letrbetheerrorprobabilityofthecombinedmodelread
baseattheparticularbasepositionandletcbetheerrorprob-
ability of the existing consensus base. Let e = MIN( r, c),
f = MAX( r, c), and A and B be the base calls for the predicted
more accurate of the two sequences and the predicted less
accurate sequence, respectively.
Case 1: The probability, a
1, that A and B agree and are
correct = (1-e)(1-f) if the errors in the sequences are indepen-
Gordonetal.
624 Genome Research
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 
dent and (1-e)1 if the errors are completely dependent. It is
likely that the sequencing errors will be somewhere in the
continuum between independence and complete depen-
dence. If 0 < = t < = 1 represents this continuum with com-
plete dependence at t = 0 and independence at t = 1, then a
1
istakentobe(1 /H11502e)(t(1/H11502f )+( 1/H11502t)1),aconvexcombination
of the independent and dependent cases.
Case 2: The probability, d1, that A is correct and B is
incorrect (hence A and B disagree) is (1/H11502e)f under indepen-
denceand0undercompletedependence,henced 1 istakento
be t(1/H11502e ) f+( 1/H11502t)0
Case 3: The probability, d2, that A is incorrect and B is
correct (hence A and B disagree) is e(1/H11502f) under indepen-
denceand0undercompletedependencehenced 2 istakento
be te(1/H11502f)
Case 4: The probability, a2, that A is incorrect and B is
incorrect and they agree is ef under independence and e un-
dercompletedependencehencea
2 istakentobetef + (1 /H11502t)e.
[Weareassuming(conservatively)thatiftheyarebothincor-
rect, they always agree.]
The probability the bases agree is p
a =a1 +a2. The prob-
ability the bases disagree is pd =d1 +d2. If they agree, the
probability there is an error (given that they agree) is ea =a2/
(a1 +a2 ). If they disagree, and base A is chosen because it has
thelowesterrorprobability,theprobabilityofanerror(given
that they disagree) is e
d =d 2/( d 1 +d 2 ). Let
QA = /H1150210*log10(ea) and QD = /H1150210*log10(ed). Then the pre-
dicted quality of the resulting new consensus base is taken to
be QC = p
a*QA +pd*QD.
We experimented with values of t and chose t = 1 when
thereisnoexistingalignedreadwiththesamechemistryand
strand for which the combined quality was computed, and
t = 0.8 otherwise. Table 5 shows the result of using this for-
mula in the simple case in which a particular base is covered
by a singleAutofinish read. In the case in which theAu-
tofinish read is the same strand and chemistry as an exist-
ing read, the new consensus quality is not much better than
the maximum of the old consensus quality and the new read
quality. However, if the new read is a different strand or
chemistry than any existing read, the new consensus quality
is close to the sum of the old consensus quality and the new
read quality.
New ConsedFeatures
Someprojectscannotbecompletelyfinishedusing Autofin-
ish and human finishers must finish the job. To make this
interactive process easier usingConsed, we have added the
following features: tear a contig in two; remove a single read
from a contig; join two contigs together; add new reads to an
assembly without reassembling withPhrap; pick PCR prim-
ers; search for string with differences (Wu and Manber 1992);
translate to amino acids and detect open reading frames; rap-
idly review putative polymorphic sites by integration with
Polyphred (Nickerson et al. 1997); and many user-friendly
improvements.
Wecontinuetoimproveboth ConsedandAutofinish.
HowtoGet Consedand Autofinish
Autofinish and Consed are available on most UNIX plat-
forms (Compaq, HP, SGI, Sun) and on Intel Linux. Ex-
ecutables are available at no charge to academic users and by
commercial license from the University of Washington for
otherusers.Currentlythereare ∼900licensedsitesin36coun-
tries, at least 230 of which are actively using the software. See
http://www.phrap.org for more information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank P. Minx for numerous suggestions and hard work
over a long period of time. R. Maupin put in many hours
testingAutofinish. In addition, the following people found
problemsorsuggestedimprovements:D.Grafham,P.Havlak,
B. Kronmiller, D. Hutchison, Y. Zhou, S. Dugan, B. Tubby,
D.Johnson,andC.Nusbaum.E.Simshelpedwithlabwork.L.
Rowen inspired this competition by her friendly skepticism.
Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, Silicon Graphics, and Sun Micro-
systems provided computers used in the development of
Consed and Autofinish. Work partially supported by NIH
Grant R01 HG 00774, and the Howard Hughes Medical Insti-
tute.
Thepublicationcostsofthisarticleweredefrayedinpart
by payment of page charges. This article must therefore be
hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
REFERENCES
Ewing, B., Hillier, L., Wendl, M., and Green, P. 1998. Basecalling of
automated sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment.
Genome Res. 8:175–185.
Ewing, B. and Green, P. 1998. Basecalling of automated sequencer
traces using phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res. 8:186–
194.
Gordon, D., Abajian, C., and Green, P. 1998. Consed: A graphical
tool for sequence finishing.Genome Res. 8:195–202.
McMurray, A., Sulston, J., and Quail, M. 1998. Short-Insert Libraries
as a Method of Problem Solving in Genome Sequencing.Genome
Res. 8:562–566.
Nickerson, D., Tobe, V., and Taylor, S. 1997. PolyPhred: automating
the detection and genotyping of single nucleotide substitutions
using fluorescence-based resequencing.Nucleic Acids Res.
25:2745–2751.
Wu, S. and Manber, U. 1992. Fast text searching allowing errors.
Communications of the ACM35:83–91.
Received November 16, 2000; accepted in revised form February 5, 2001.
Table 5. Example Values of the Errors Fixed Formula
Old
cons
New
read
New
unique
New
redundant
5 1011.0 10 .6
5 2021.2 20 .8
1010 16.2 13.1
1020 27.5 23.9
2010 27.5 23.9
2020 39.2 26.4
3010 37.6 34.0
3020 49.5 36.5
4010 47.6 44.0
4020 59.6 46.6
Oldcons:Qualityoftheconsensusbase.Newread:Qualityof
thecorrespondingbaseoftheAutofinishcandidateread.New
unique:Theresultingconsensusqualityvalueifthecandidate
readhasadifferentchemistryorstrandfromanyexistingread
aligned at that base position. New redundant: the resulting
consensus quality value if the candidate read has the same
strand and chemistry as some existing read aligned at that
base position.
AutomatedFinishingwith Autofinish
Genome Research 625
www.genome.org
 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on June 24, 2026 . Published by genome.cshlp.orgDownloaded from 