Cell, Vol. 61, 61 l-620, May 19, 1995, Copyright 0 1995 by Cell Press 
par-$ a Gene Required for Establishing Polarity 
in C. elegans Embryos, Encodes a Putative Ser/Thr 
Kinase That Is Asymmetrically Distributed 
Su Guo and Kenneth J. Kemphues 
Section of Genetics and Development 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York 14853 
Summary 
The first cleavage of C. elegans is asymmetric, gener- 
ating daughter cells with different sizes, cytoplasmic 
components, and fates. Mutations in the par-7 gene 
disrupt this asymmetry. We report here that par-7 en- 
codes a putative Ser/Thr kinase with similarity to ki- 
nases from yeasts and mammals. Two strong alleles 
have mutations in the kinase domain, suggesting that 
kinase activity is essential for par-l function. PAR-1 
protein is localized to the posterior periphery of the 
zygote and is distributed in a polar fashion preceding 
the asymmetric divisions of the germline lineage. Be- 
cause PAR-1 distribution in the germline correlates 
with the distribution of germline-specific P granules, 
it is possible that PAR-1 functions in germline develop- 
ment as well as in establishing embryonic polarity. 
Introduction 
Asymmetric cell division, by which the two daughter cells 
adopt different fates, plays an important role in the genera- 
tion of cellular diversity during development. Daughter 
cells with different fates can arise via extrinsic cell-cell 
signaling or by intrinsically asymmetric divisions (Horvitz 
and Herskowitz, 1992). Intrinsically determined asymmet- 
ric divisions occur in a number of invertebrates and appear 
to play crucial roles in establishing embryonic axes or 
specifying particular differentiated cell fates (Davidson, 
1986; Slack, 1991). Most evidence supports the model of 
cytoplasmic localization as the basis for such intrinsically 
patterned asymmetric divisions. In cytoplasmic localiza- 
tion, maternally provided “determinants” are unequally 
partitioned to particular cells through aseriesof reproduci- 
bly oriented cleavage divisions (Davidson, 1986). 
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans provides an op- 
portunity to study the mechanisms responsible for intrinsi- 
cally asymmetric divisions. C. elegans embryos have a 
fixed cell lineage, and a precise cell fate map has been 
established (Sulston et al., 1983). The asymmetric divi- 
sions leading to the formation of the germline play an im- 
portant role in establishing embryonic organization. Each 
of these divisions is asymmetric, producing daughter cells 
with differences in size, cell division timing, cleavage pat- 
tern, and ultimate fate (see Figure 1A for a summary of 
the cell lineage). In addition, germline-specific P granules 
are localized to one pole of the cell prior to each division 
and partitioned into the smaller daughter cell (Strome and 
Wood, 1982, 1983). 
Although the mechanisms underlying this series of 
asymmetric divisions are largely unknown, microfilaments 
appear to play a role in at least the first division. Brief 
pulses of the microfilament-disrupting drug cytochalasin 
during a critical period of the first cell cycle prevent the 
posterior localization of the P granules (Strome and Wood, 
1983; Hill and Strome, 1988). Cytochalasin pulses during 
this same period sometimes also lead to symmetric divi- 
sions producing daughter cells of equal sizes, similar cell 
cycle rates, and variable spindle orientations (Hill and 
Strome, 1988, 1990). 
Maternal-effect lethal mutations in the par genes pro- 
duce phenotypes similar to the effects of cytochalasin 
treatments (Kemphues et al., 1988). In par mutant em- 
bryos, normally unequal divisions are equal, cleavage 
spindlesare misoriented, Pgranules are mislocalized, and 
the blastomere fates are altered. This implies that the par 
genes function in both spindle placement and cytoplasmic 
localization (Kemphues et al., 1988; Kirby et al., 1990; 
Morton et al., 1992; Cheng et al., 1995). 
The par-7 gene is required for several aspects of early 
embryonic polarity (Kemphues et al., 1988). As schemati- 
cally diagrammed in Figure 1 B, par-7 mutant embryos ex- 
hibit equal first cleavage and fail to localize P granules. 
The 2-cell stage blastomeres divide synchronously, and 
the cleavage patterns are aberrant for all subsequent 
stages. The par-7 embryos arrest as amorphous masses 
with large numbers of differentiated cells. Most embryos 
contain excess body wall and pharyngeal muscle cells 
(normally produced by the MS lineage) and are completely 
lacking intestine. The putative MS cell fate determinant, 
SKN-1, normally distributed asymmetrically among early 
blastomeres, is found in equal amounts in all the cells at 
the 2- and 4-cell stages in par-7 mutant embryos (see Fig- 
ure 1 B). The excessive pharyngeal and body wall muscle 
cells observed in par-7 mutant embryos may arise as a 
consequence of the abnormal distribution of SKN-1 (Bow- 
erman et al., 1993). 
We demonstrate here that par-7 encodes a conserved 
putative Ser/Thr kinase that is asymmetrically localized to 
the posterior periphery of the l-cell embryo and differen- 
tially distributed, preceding all the asymmetric divisions 
of the germline lineage. Mutations in the kinase domain 
eliminate PAR-1 function, suggesting PAR-1 kinase activ- 
ity is essential for its role in establishing asymmetry. 
Results 
Molecular Cloning of the par-f Gene 
Identification of the par-l Region 
As summarized in Figure 2A, par-7 maps to chromosome 
V between genetic markers rol-4 and uric-76, an interval 
of -3 m.u. Telfer (1991) had placed the par-7 gene on 
the C. elegans physical map within or near the region cov- 
ered by the yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) Y39Hl. We 
further mapped par-7 relative to two closely linked genes, 
ogr-7 and him-5 The mappingdataputpar-7 -0.075 m.u. 
(- 60 kb) to the right of him-5 in a region only partially 
covered by cosmid clones (described in Experimental Pro- 

Cell 
612 
0 0 zygote 
AB($h & heI1 
+ 
ABo 
EMS 
Figure 1. Cell Lineages and Early Divisions in C. elegans 
(A) Diagram showing a simplified cell lineage and major cell types 
produced by the founder cells (Sulston et al., 1963). PO is the zygote. 
Posterior is to the right. The blastomeres of the P lineage, namely, PO 
to 22 and 23, are outlined. Those P lineage blastomeres that undergo 
asymmetric divisions are marked with asterisks. Note that asymmetric 
division of EMS segregates the ability to produce intestine to the E 
daughter and the ability to produce pharyngeal and body wall muscles 
to the MS daughter. 
(B) Schematic drawing of I-, 2-, and 4-cell wild-type (left) and par-l 
mutant (right) embryos, showing the divisions and the distribution of 
P granules (represented by dots in the cytoplasm) and transcription 
factor SKN-1 (represented by wavy lines in the nucleus; the extent 
of shading represents the relative concentration of SKN-1 protein). 
Posterior is to the right. In wild-type embryos, first and second divisions 
produce daughter cells differing in size, division timing, cleavage pat- 
tern, and cell fates. P granules are localized to the posterior end before 
the first division; they are segregated into the Pl blastomere by first 
asymmetric cleavage and further localized to the P2 blastomere 
(Strome and Wood, 1963). SKN-1 protein is highly concentrated in the 
Pl nucleus and remains concentrated in the sister blastomeres EMS 
and P2 derived from Pi (Bowerman et al., 1993). In par-l mutant 
embryos (from homozygous par-l mothers), asymmetry in size, divi- 
sion timing, and cleavage pattern is disrupted, and cell fates are dra- 
matically altered. P granules fail to localize. Since the P granules are 
undetectable in the late l-cell par-7 embryos and in the 2-cell par-l 
embryos, they are only shown in the 4-cell embryo. SKN-1 protein is 
found in equal concentration in all blastomeres at 2-, 4-, and &cell 
stages. 
cedures). We were able partially to rescue par-7 mutants 
by transformation with the YAC, Y51 F3 (see Experimental 
Procedures). Rescued par-7 homozygous animals pro- 
duced about five hatching progeny per worm, but all of 
these progeny were agametic. This agametic phenotype 
is a maternal effect, since par-7 homozygous hermaphro- 
dites derived from par-l/+ mothers produced gametes. 
We interpret this result to mean that the expression of 
A 
LGV 
genetic ““p:, 
- - “I, /,fl 
, ofFI im-5 py-I 
\ ,,2!lc - 
camids Md YACS: 
‘E2sEu \ 
D.1t 
0 \ 
0 
0 Y-0 khl m 
\ 
\ 
, YyF3 (-2Sa kb) 
YFA1.4 Ad YFAlsa 
- 
cDNA clone: ZC22 
(4 W 
I3 100 kb probe 
N2 bn2 
c ZC22 probe 
Bcl I 
A 
lw39 N2 ~., 
Figure 2. Identification of par-7 
(A) Placement of par-7 on the physical map. The diagram shows the 
genetic map and physical map in the par-l region. Genetic mapping 
puts par-7 -0.075 mu. (estimated - 60 kb) to the right of him-5 (see 
Experimental Procedures). The YAC Y5lF3 rescued par-7 mutant em- 
bryos in a germline transformation assay. Y51F3 was cut with the 
restriction enzyme Ascl, and two fragments, YFAlOO and YFA150, 
were generated. 
(B) Northern blot analysis of maternally enriched transcripts present 
in the 100 kb fragment of Y5lF3. Poly(A)t RNA was isolated from 
wild-type (N2) and the temperature-sensitive germline-deficient strain 
g/p-4(bn2), resolved by electrophoresis, blotted, and probed with the 
100 kb fragments. A single maternally enriched transcript is detected 
and indicated with an arrowhead. It is -4.4 kb in length. 
(C) Genomic Southern blot analysis of par-l(lw39) and wild type (N2). 
Genomic DNA was isolated from wild-type (N2) and par-l(lw39) hetero- 
zygous animals, digested with Bell, resolved by electrophoresis, blot- 
ted onto nylon filter, and probed with the cDNA clone ZC22. Three 
bands, 1.6 kb, 7.5 kb, and 10 kb, were detected in N2; in par-l(lw39) 
heterozygous animals, 7.5 kb and 10 kb bands were found to be at 
decreased intensity; in addition, a novel band of - 12 kb was detected. 
par-l’ in the extrachromosomal array is sufficient to res- 
cue some embryos from maternal-effect lethality but not 
sufficient to prevent a maternal-effect sterility. Consistent 
with this interpretation, escapers from the maternal-effect 
lethality of the leaky par-7 allele lw7 are also agametic 
(unpublished data). 
Our attempts to identify smaller segments of chromo- 
somal DNA that could rescuepar- failed because we were 
unable to recover clones of DNA that contiguously covered 


Kinase Involvement in Asymmetric Divisions 
613 
Table 1. Scoring for Embryonic Lethality in RNA Injections 
Molecules Injected 
Number of Worms Percent 
Injected Embryonic Lethality 
X.22 @r-I) antisense 16 52 
ZC22 @af-7) sense 12 54 
Clone 7S antisense 8 0 
Clone pZ1 antisense 8 0 
DEPC-dHz0 4 0 
ZC22is the nearly full-length cDNAclone (4 kb)forpar-7; TSis twinstar, 
a Drosophila gene encoding cofilin (K. Gunsalus and M. Goldberg, 
personal communication); clone pZ1 is a zygotic cDNA clone identified 
by J. Wans (personal communication). The number of hatched versus 
unhatched embryos was counted for the first 2 days following the 
injections (a minimum of 100 embryos from each injected worm were 
counted). 
this region. Therefore, we took an alternative approach to 
clone the par-7 gene. 
Isolation of a Candidate cDNA and Detection 
of an Allele-Associated Polymorphism 
We cut Y5lF3 into 100 kb and 150 kb fragments with 
the restriction endonuclease Ascl. Southern blot analysis 
using the end of the cosmid D1086 as a probe showed 
that the 100 kb fragment is proximal to him-5 (data not 
shown) and thus likely tocontainpar-7. Aspar- mutations 
are strictly maternal (Kemphues et al., 1988) we searched 
this 100 kb region for the presence of maternally enriched 
mRNAs that would be candidates for the par-7 gene. We 
detected one message of -4.4 kb that was greatly en- 
riched in wild type relative to the germline-deficient strain, 
g/p-4(bn2) (Figure 28). We isolated cDNAs corresponding 
to this transcript (see Experimental Procedures). By using 
the longest cDNA (X22) as a probe, we detected an allele- 
associated restriction fragment length polymorphism (Fig- 
ure 2C) in the y-irradiation-induced par-7 allele, lw39 (a 
gift from J. Shaw). Further Southern blot analyses using 
fragments of the cDNA clone as probes suggest that the 
lesion in the lw39 allele is a deletion of - 5 kb in the tran- 
scription unit (data not shown). This result indicates that 
the ZC22 cDNA may be derived from par-7. 
Phenocopying par-l in Wild Type via Antisense 
RNA Injection 
Germline transformation rescue with agenomic clone con- 
taining only the gene of interest has been routinely used 
to confirm cloning of genes in C. elegans. However, when 
we searched for the corresponding genomic clone in a 
genomic DNA library (provided by H. Browning) or in the 
YAC Y51 F3 subclone libraries we previously constructed, 
we failed to identify clones that would represent the ZC22 
genomic region. Therefore, we decided to determine 
whether the cDNA we identified corresponds to the par-7 
gene using antisense inhibition. Antisense inhibition has 
been previously accomplished in transgenic worms car- 
rying antisense DNA constructs (Fire et al., 1991). Be- 
causepar- wasexpected to beexpressed in thegermline, 
we carried out a more direct inhibition assay by injecting 
antisense RNA into gonads of wild-type worms (see Exper- 
imental Procedures). 
The results of these injections are summarized in Table 
1. An average of 50% of the embryos from the ZC22 anti- 
sense RNA-injected wild-type animals arrested develop- 
ment with par-7 terminal phenotypes: no morphogenesis, 
no intestinal cells, and excess of pharynx. Furthermore, 
most of the 50 or so early embryos we dissected from 
injected worms exhibited cell division patterns characteris- 
tic of par-7 loss-of-function mutations. For example, many 
embryosexhibitedpar-l-specific pseudocleavage defects 
(Kirby et al., 1990) equal first cleavage, and synchronous 
early divisions (data not shown). Also, consistent with our 
results from germline transformation, some of the surviv- 
ing progeny from injected worms were agametic. In control 
experiments, in which Hz0 and antisense RNA made from 
two unrelated cDNA clones were injected, no effects were 
observed. 
Surprisingly, injection of in vitro synthesized sense RNA 
from the cDNA ZC22 also induced par-7 phenotypes at a 
high frequency among the progeny of injected worms. It 
is not clear what accounts for this effect. Moreover, the 
sense effect appears to be restricted to the putative trans- 
lated region of the RNA while the antisense effect is not. 
Injection of both sense and antisense RNA from the 5’ 
region (lacking the 3’ untranslated region) also gave par-7 
phenocopies, while only the antisense RNA from the 3’ 
untranslated region gave an effect (data not shown). Thus, 
the antisense and sense effects appear to be separable 
and probably involve different mechanisms. The basis for 
the sense effect is under investigation and will not be dis- 
cussed further. Overall, the specificity of the antisense 
and sense phenocopies provides strong evidence that the 
ZC22cDNA represents thepar- transcript. Additional evi- 
dence is provided below. 
The par-l Gene Encodes a Conserved Putative 
SerlThr Kinase 
We sequenced the partial cDNA ZC22 and used the rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends-polymerase chain reaction 
(RACE-PCR) to identify the 5’ end of the transcript (see 
Experimental Procedures). Four different 5’ends were de- 
tected, all of which were frans-spliced to the SLl leader 
(Krause and Hirsh, 1987; Bektesh et al., 1988). The nucle- 
otide sequence of the longest mRNA derived from the 
RACE-PCR results has been submitted to GenBank and 
is not reproduced here. A single long open reading frame 
is detected in the message; the putative start codon is 
preceded by stop codons, and a C. elegans translation 
initiation consensus sequence, AACA (M. Perry, personal 
communication), is found just upstream of this ATG. The 
predicted PAR-l protein consists of 1192 amino acids with 
a molecular mass of - 126 kDa. Protein data base 
searches reveal that PAR-1 is a putative Serflhr kinase 
highly conserved among different organisms (Figure 3A). 
PAR-l shows striking similarity to its mammalian homo- 
logs. In the kinase domain, PAR-1 shares -80% identity 
withthe human Kp78(217of260)(Parsa, 1988)and mouse 
Emk (220 of 260) (Inglis et al., 1993) and - 46% identity 
(70% similarity) with yeast SNFl (128 of 260) (Celenza 
and Carlson, 1986) the rat AMP-dependent kinase (122 
of 260) (Carling et al., 1994) and yeast KINlIKIN2 (113 
of 260) (Levin et al., 1987; Levin and Bishop, 1990). Intrigu- 
ingly, besides strong homologies in the kinase domain, 

Cell 
614 
Figure 3. Sequence Alignment of PAR-I with Members of the SNFl 
Protein Kinase Subfamily 
(A) Amino acid sequence comparison of the kinase domain from PAR-1 
with homologous kinases identified in mammals and yeast: human 
N2 lw39 
- 205 
PAR-1 w - 123 
89 
67 
50 
Figure 4. Detection of Endogenous PAR-1 Protein on Western Blots 
Extracts from wild-type (N2) and par-l(lw39) homozygotes were re- 
solved by SDS-PAGE, blotted onto nitrocellulose filters, and probed 
with the affinity-purified anti-PAR-l antibody (see Experimental Proce- 
dures). A major band of - 126 kDa (the expected size of the PAR-1 
protein) was detected in N2, but not in paf-7(/w39) homozygotes. The 
same blot was reprobed with a monoclonal anti-a-tubulin antibody as 
a loading control. Positions of molecular mass markers are indicated 
on the right. 
an additional conserved domain at the C-termini of the 
proteins is present in PAR-l, Kp78, Emk, and KINl/KIN2 
(Figure 3B). This domain is highly conserved among 
PAR-1 and the mammalian kinases, but much diverged 
in the yeast kinases. 
To verify that this gene is indeed par-l, we sequenced 
the kinase domain in 10 mutant alleles and found alter- 
ations of invariant kinase residues (Hanks and Quinn, 
1991) in twopaf-7 mutants. In allele it90, an invariant resi- 
due Gly of the putative ATP-binding site in the kinase sub- 
domain I is changed to Glu (Figure 3A). In allele ir57, an 
invariant residue Arg in subdomain Xl is changed to Lys 
(Figure 3A). Although Arg and Lys are both positively 
charged, the invariance of this position in all protein ki- 
nases that have been sequenced to date suggests that this 
Arg residue can not be substituted. A similar conserved 
substitution (Asp to Glu) in an invariant kinase residue has 
also been reported in a mutant allele of the cfrl gene in 
Arabidopsis (Kieber et al., 1993). 
PAR-l Protein Is First Detected in Newly 
Forming Oocytes 
To examine the distribution of PAR-1 in adult hermaphro- 
dites and early embryos, we raised polyclonal antibodies 
against a portion of the PAR-1 protein (see Experimental 
Procedures). The antibody specificity was examined on 
Kp76 (sequence unpublished but found in GenBank), mouse Emk (ln- 
gliset al., 1993) rat AMP-activated protein kinase(Carling etal., 1994) 
SNFl (Celenza and Carlson, 1966) and KIN1 in S. pombe (Levin 
and Bishop, 1990). The alignment was generated using the CLUSTAL 
method (Higgins and Sharp, 1969) with DNASTAR software. Identical 
amino acids are boxed. The kinase subdomains as defined by Hanks 
et al. (1966) are shown. The invariant kinase residues are indicated 
by asterisks. The percentage of amino acid identity between PAR-I 
and other kinases is indicated. The amino acid alterations of invariant 
residues observed in if57 and it90 are indicated by arrowheads. 
(6) Alignment of the C-terminal domains in PAR-l, Kp76, Emk, and 
KINIIKINP. Identical residues are boxed, and the percentage of iden- 
tity is indicated. 

Kinase Involvement in Asymmetric Divisions 
615 
Figure 5. Distribution of PAR-1 in the Gonad and Early Embryo 
lmmunofluorescence imageof gonads and embryos showing the distri- 
bution of the anti-PAR-l antibody (green) and nuclei (blue). 
(A) lmmunofluorescence image of a wild-type gonad showing strong 
fluorescence at the periphery of newly forming oocytes. Although we 
detect signal around the periphery of these young oocytes, the outer 
membrane signal is faint and is not apparent in this reproduction. 
Abbreviations: MN, meiotic nuclei; NFO, newly forming oocytes; MO, 
mature oocytes. 
(6) Double exposure of the same gonad shown in (A), showing the 
localization of anti-PAR-l relative to nuclei. 
(C) Double exposure showing absence of peripheral staining in par- 
l(it86) mutant gonad. 
(D-E) Wild-type l- and 2-cell embryos, respectively, showing strong 
peripheral fluorescence in the posterior. 
(F-G)Mutant l-and2-cellpar-l(lw39)embryosshowingtheabsenceof 
posterior peripheral staining and the reduction of cytoplasmic staining. 
The scale bar in (A)-(C) is 32 pm; in (D)-(G), 6 pm. 
Western blots (Figure 4). Using this antibody, we have 
stained worms and isolated gonads and early embryos of 
wild-type and par-7 mutants (see Experimental Proce- 
dures). The patterns we describe below were seen in all 
samples of a given genotype, were observed to exhibit 
little variability, and were eliminated if PAR-l fusion protein 
was added to the antibody binding reaction. 
Antibody staining is first detected at the bend of the 
reflexed hermaphrodite gonad. The section of the gonad 
distal to the bend contains mitotic and meiotic nuclei in a 
syncytium. Individual meiotic nuclei at the bend are en- 
closed by cell membranes forming oocytes. Staining is 
seen associated with the cell membranes of the newly 
forming oocytes (Figures 5A and 58). Since we have not 
determined whether this staining is at the cortex or in the 
membrane, we will refer to this pattern as peripheral stain- 
ing. Although we see staining around the entire cell periph- 
ery, only the strong staining where oocytes abut is visible 
in Figure 5. As the oocytes mature, the staining at the 
periphery becomes fainter. Peripheral staining of oocytes 
is not detected in par-7 mutants (Figure 5C), and thus it 
is due to the PAR-1 protein. 
PAR-1 Protein Is Distributed Unequally 
before the First Asymmetric Cleavage 
Localized antibody staining is not detectable in unfertilized 
mature oocytes, nor in newly fertilized zygotes that are still 
undergoing meiotic divisions. We start to detect staining at 
the posterior periphery of the zygote, when both pronuclei 
are decondensed and the female pronucleus is just start- 
ing to migrate toward the posterior. Thisvery early staining 
is faint and extends from the posterior pole to - 50% egg 
length (data not shown). As the cell cycle proceeds toward 
metaphase, the posterior peripheral staining gets stronger 
and becomes restricted to the posterior third of the embryo 
(Figure 5D). The staining becomes fainter when the first 
cell cycle passes metaphase and approaches telophase 
(data not shown). 
In addition to the posterior peripheral signal, staining is 
also found in the internal cytoplasm of the blastomeres 
(Figures 5D and 5E). Using the same conditions as for 
wild type, we stained par-7 mutant embryos. In nine par-7 
alleles examined, the posterior peripheral staining is ab- 
sent (Figures 5F and 5G). Thus, this posterior peripheral 
staining is due to the PAR-l protein. In allele lw39, which 
contains a deletion of -5 kb in the par-7 gene and lacks 
detectable PAR-l protein (see Figure 4) the cytoplasmic 
staining is reduced, suggesting some staining in wild-type 
cytoplasm is due to unlocalized PAR-1 protein. 
PAR-1 Protein Distribution Is Asymmetric in Cells 
of the Germline Lineage 
As described above, PAR-1 is asymmetrically localized 
to the posterior periphery of the zygote. In addition, we 
observe PAR-l staining in the cells of the germline lineage. 
PAR-1 protein is faintly detectable around the periphery 
of the newly formed Pl cell (data not shown). As the Pl 
cell cycle progresses, PAR-1 protein becomes localized to 
the posterior periphery of Pl (Figure 5E), and this localized 
PAR-1 is segregated into P2 at the division. Because this 
pattern of localization is similar to the localization of germ- 
line-specific P granules (Strome and Wood, 1983) we 
examined PAR-l and P granule localization in the same 
embryos. As shown in Figure 6, we observe a striking 
correlation between PAR-1 and P granule localization. In 
late stage l-cell and 2-cell embryos, both PAR-1 and P 
granules are localized to the posterior, and the anterior 
extent of the peripheral PAR-1 distribution is correlated 
with the anterior extent of the P granule distribution (Fig- 
ures 6A and 6B). 
The asymmetric PAR-1 localization at the periphery is 
again detected in the P2 and P3 cells. In P2 and P3, the 
constraints of the eggshell combine with a polarity reversal 
(Schierenberg, 1987) to position the two divisions along 
the dorsal-ventral rather than the anterior-posterior axis, 
with the P granules being segregated to the ventral side. 
In these two cells, PAR-1 becomes localized to the ventral 


Cell 
616 
/ 
A 
- 
*BP 
- 
EMS 
Figure 6. Correlation between PAR-l Peripheral Distribution and P 
Granule Localization 
(Left column) Confocal images showing PAR-l (green) and P granule 
(red) distribution in wild-type embryos at different stages. Posterior is 
to the right. 
(A-B) PAR-1 is localized at the posterior periphery in l- and 2-cell 
embryos. The peripheral PAR-1 staining is correlated with the extent 
of P granule distribution. 
(C) An early 4-cell embryo (ABa and ABp at prophase; EMS and P2 
at interphase) showing the distribution of PAR-l not only at the periph- 
ery of P2 (the posterior cell), but also at the boundaries between all 
four cells. EMS is ventral. 
periphery (Figures 6D and 6E). Again, at the late stages 
of the P2 and P3 cell cycle, the P granule distribution 
correlates with the PAR-l localization. Interestingly, in P4, 
which divides symmetrically, PAR-1 is always found to be 
around the entire periphery(Figure 6F). As a result, PAR-l, 
like P granules, is found in both daughter cells, 22 and 
23. PAR-1 is detected around the entire periphery of both 
cells (data not shown). This PAR-1 staining gradually be- 
comes fainter and is no longer detectable by the onset of 
morphogenesis. 
Some PAR-l staining is seen in cells outside the germ- 
line lineage. In the newly formed 4cell embryo, PAR-l is 
faintly detectable only around the periphery of P2 (data 
not shown). As the cell cycle progresses, PAR-1 is not 
only found at the periphery of P2, but is also found along 
the boundaries between the three somatic blastomeres 
(Figure 6C). By the late 4-cell stage, PAR-l is barelydetect- 
able in the somatic cells, and the protein is mainly concen- 
trated at the periphery on the ventral half of the P2 cell 
(Figure 6D). Although all of the Par-l phenotypes can be 
explained by defects in intracellular localization, the tran- 
sient appearance of strong PAR-l staining along the 
boundaries between cells at the 4-cell stage could reflect 
an additional role for PAR-1 in the cell-cell interactions 
that are believed to be occurring at this time (Priess and 
Thomson, 1987; Goldstein, 1992, 1993; Schnabel, 1994; 
Mello et al., 1994). Some weak and variable PAR-1 stain- 
ing is also seen along the boundaries between some so- 
matic cells at later embryonic stages (Figures 6E and 6F). 
PAR-1 Klnase Activity Is Required for the 
Localization of P Granules and SKN-1 
Two par-7 alleles, it57 and it90, carry mutations in the 
kinase domain. We examined PAR-l, P granule, and 
SKN-1 localization in these mutants. As shown in Figure 
7A, the peripheral localization of PAR-1 in the it57 zygote 
is indistinguishable from that of wild type (compare with 
Figures 5D and 6A). In 2- and 4cell embryos, peripheral 
staining at the early stages of the cell cycle is similar to wild 
type (compare Figures 7C and 6C), but the asymmetric 
localization to the posterior in Pl and ventral periphery in 
P2 is incomplete (data not shown). In later stage embryos, 
the mutant PAR-1 protein is present at the periphery of a 
subset of blastomeres, but is not asymmetrically localized 
in those cells. 
The P granule distribution in if57 and if90 embryos is 
abnormal and is indistinguishable from the distributions 
of P granules in other strong par-7 alleles. P granules are 
present in the wild-type pattern in gonads and early zy- 
(D) In the late 4-cell embryo (ABa and ABp at telophase; EMS at ana- 
phase; P2 at prophase), PAR-l is mainly concentrated at the periphery 
on the ventral half of P2. EMS is ventral. 
(E) PAR-l and P granules are asymmetrically localized to the ventral 
periphery.of P3 (- 15-cell stage). Scale bar, 6 urn. 
(F) PAR-1 is detected around the periphery of P4 (-50-cell embryo), 
which no longer divides asymmetrically. 
(Right column) Diagramsof embryos shown in the left column (reduced 
in size). The blastomeres of the germline lineage, Pi -P4, are hatched. 


Kinase Involvement in Asymmetric Divisions 
617 
Figure 7. PAR-l, SKN-1, and P Granule Distribution in par-l(it57) 
(A) A l-cell it57 embryo showing normal PAR-1 distribution. 
(B) A Z-cell it57 embryo showing SKN-1 present in equal concentration 
in both blastomeres, in contrast with its asymmetric localization in wild 
type (see Figure 16). 
(C) A 4-cell it57 embryo showing normal PAR-1 distribution. Nuclei 
are stained with DAPI. 
(D) The same embryo as in (C), showing abnormal P granule distribu- 
tion. Scale bar, 10 pm. 
gotes before pronuclear migration (data not shown), but 
are undetectable in late zygotes (such as the embryo 
shown in Figure 7A) and in 2-cell embryos. This absence 
of detectable P granules in l- and 2-cell embryos is not 
specific to it57 or ifgO, but is characteristic of par-7 muta- 
tions (unpublished data). At the 4-cell stage, P granules are 
easily detected, but are not localized (Figure 7D). SKN-1 
protein distributions in if57 and it90 are also abnormal 
(Figure 78). By Western blot analysis, the amount of 
PAR-l protein in it57 and it90 is the same as wild type 
(data not shown). 
These results suggest that the kinase activity of PAR-1 
is essential for its normal function. The asymmetric local- 
ization of PAR-1 itself, at least in the zygote, does not 
require its own kinase activity. 
We have described the molecular cloning of par-l, a gene 
necessary for establishing asymmetry in early C. elegans 
embryos. We have shown that par-7 encodes a conserved 
putative Ser/Thr kinase. The PAR-1 protein is found to be 
asymmetrically localized to the posterior periphery of the 
zygote before its mitotic division. It is then differentially 
distributed in the germline precursor cells, and its periph- 
eral distribution correlates with P granule localization. 
The Role of Kinase Activity in par-l Function 
The finding of sequence similarity to Ser/Thr protein ki- 
nases suggests that PAR-1 is a protein kinase. The identifi- 
cation of mutations in the kinase domain in two par-7 al- 
leles argues strongly that the kinase activity is important 
for par-7 function. Because the phenotypes caused by 
both alleles are indistinguishable from other strong par-7 
mutations, we conclude that the kinase domain is essential 
forpar- function. In addition, the fact that the PAR-1 pro- 
tein in these two alleles is localized properly in the zygote 
suggests that the kinase function is not required for PAR-1 
localization. 
PAR-l and Anterior-Posterior Polarity 
The initial cue that sets the anterior-posterior polarity in C. 
elegans embryos is not well understood. Mature oocytes 
show polarity in the acentric placement of the nucleus, 
but have no other obvious polarity with respect to cytoskel- 
eton, distribution of cytoplasmicorganelles, orvarious sur- 
face markers (Strome, 1986a). In most embryos, the polar 
bodies mark the future anterior and the sperm marks the 
future posterior. It is not clear whether the sperm entry 
point is restricted by preexisting oocyte polarity or whether 
the sperm entry point provides the cue for embryonic po- 
larity. 
Whatever the initial cue, additional events that occur 
during the first embryonic cell cycle appear to transduce 
that cue into a functional polarity in the embryo. By late 
prophase of the first cell cycle, the zygote is discernably 
polar. Cortical actin is concentrated at the anterior (Strome, 
1986b), the posterior cytoplasm has acquired the ability 
to direct unequal cleavages (Schierenberg, 1985, 1988) 
and P granules are localized to the posterior (Strome and 
Wood, 1982, 1983). Furthermore, transient treatment of 
embryos with cytochalasin during the first cell cycle affects 
these visible polarities and alters the fates of the 2-cell 
stage blastomeres (Hill and Strome, 1988, 1990). 
Previous work indicates that par-7 plays a crucial role 
in establishing asymmetry during the first cell cycle. The 
par-7 function is required for unequal first cleavage, asym- 
metric P granule localization, and generation of daughter 
cells with different fates (Kemphues et al., 1988). par-7 
is also required for the asymmetric distribution of SKN-1 
(Bowerman et al., 1993). 
How does the par-7 kinase activity contribute to asym- 
metry in the l-cell embryo? Although many possibilities 
are consistent with our results, the local accumulation of 
PAR-1 protein at the posterior periphery leads us to sug- 
gest that the protein acts by modifying the cortical cy- 
toskeleton in the posterior. As a consequence of this modi- 
fication, P granules and other cytoplasmic components 
are localized to the posterior. Modification of the posterior 
cortical cytoskeleton could also be required for the asym- 
metric placement of the spindle that leads to unequal first 
cleavage. In this model, many of the par-7 phenotypes 
would be indirect consequences of failure in localization. 
Interestingly, there may be a role for a Serflhr kinase 
in asymmetric cell division in yeast. Studies of budding 
yeast identified a small GTP-binding protein, Cdc42, 
whose activity is required for the asymmetric assembly of 
actin cytoskeleton at the bud site (for review see Chant, 
1994). The direct downstream target of Cdc42 in yeast is 
unknown. However, a Ser/Thr kinase has been shown to 
be the probable target of the human Cdc42 homolog 
(Manser et al., 1994), suggesting that kinases may also 
be activated by yeast Cdc42. 
It is possible that the role of PAR-1 protein in first cell 


Cdl 
618 
cycle asymmetry is not dependent upon its localization to 
the posterior. The protein first accumulates symmetrically 
at the periphery of the forming oocytes and appears to be 
present throughout the cytoplasm of the zygote. It could 
be that PAR-l acts in an unlocalized manner, but that 
asymmetric localization of the protein is a mechanism to 
ensure a high concentration of PAR-1 in the germline 
lineage. 
PAR-1 and Germline Cell Fate 
Although it is possible that PAR-l is only required for estab- 
lishing asymmetry in the zygote, the localization of PAR-l 
to the cells of the germline lineage suggests a continued 
role of PAR-l in the germline. Consistent with this hypothe- 
sis, we have noted agametic phenotypes in association 
with insufficient activity of the maternal par-7 gene in prog- 
enyof the following: thepar-l homozygotescarryingpar-1+ 
transforming DNA (YAC Y51 F3), wild-type worms injected 
with the par-l antisense or sense RNA, and homozygous 
hermaphrodites bearing a weak allele of par-l(lw7). These 
observations suggest that PAR-1 function is essential for 
germline specification, differentiation, or maintenance. 
Owing to the correlation between PAR-1 distribution and 
P granule localization in wild-type embryos, it is possible 
that PAR-l is required for the asymmetric distribution of 
the P granules, which, in turn, may be involved in speci- 
fying germline cell fates. 
A Conserved Mechanism for Generating 
Intracellular Asymmetry? 
Our work presented here shows that par-7, whose function 
is required for generating intracellular asymmetry in early 
C. elegans embryos, belongs to a conserved kinase sub- 
family. Interestingly, two members of this KlNlSNFl ki- 
nase subfamily may also play roles in generating cellular 
polarity. The Schizosaccharomyces pombe K/N7 gene 
has been shown to be required for cell growth polarity 
(Levin and Bishop, 1990). The human Kp78 is asymmetri- 
cally localized to the apical surface of highly polarized 
epithelial cells forming the lumen of the fetal pancreas, 
and the loss of Kp78 is associated with carcinogenesis 
(Parsa, 1988). The striking similarity between PAR-1 and 
Kp78 strongly suggests that they may have similar func- 
tions. Therefore, the study of PAR-1 function may help us 
understand the role of Kp78 and other kinases in establish- 
ing intracellular asymmetry. 
Experimental Procedures 
Strains and Alleles 
The Bristol strain N2 was used as the standard wild-type strain. The 
genetic markers and balancer chromosomes used are the following: 
LG I, g/p4 (bn2); LG V, rol-4 (scE), him-5 (e1490), par-l (b274, it32, 
it57, it60, it78, it86, it89, itgO, it702, lw7, lw39), uric-76 (e977), ogr-7, 
nT7 uric (n754) IV; V. Nematode strains were cultured by standard 
techniques (Brenner, 1974). 
Genetic Analysis 
Alleles of par-7 were isolated in screens for recessive, maternal-effect, 
embryonic lethal mutants, and the par-7 loctis was mapped 1.5 m.u. 
to the right of ro/-4 and 1 m.u. to the left of uric-760n LG Vby three-factor 
recombination analysis (Kemphues et al., 1988). To facilitate molecular 
cloning, par-7 was further mapped with respect to cloned markers 
ogr-l and him-5 The ogr-7 locus was tagged with a transposable ele- 
ment Tel but with no observable phenotype (Telfer, 1991). A strain, 
rol-4 ogr-7 uric-76/par-7, was constructed, and standard multifactor 
recombination analysis was carried out. except that the presence of 
ogr-7 (Tel) was identified using the single worm PCR technique 
(Barstead et al., 1991). The recombinants obtained (87 between rol-4 
and ogr-7, 5 between ogr-7 and par-l, 57 between par-7 and uric-76) 
placed par-7 -0.1 m.u. to the right of ogr-7. Another gene, him-5, was 
also placed in this region of the physical map (S. Pennington and P. 
Meneely, personal communication). Similarly, rol-4 ogr-7 par-l/him-5 
was constructed, and the recombinants obtained (219 between rol-4 
and ogr-7, 4 between ogr-I and him-5, and 10 between him-5 and 
par-7) indicate that the genetic distance between him-5 and par-7 is 
about three times the distance between ogr-7 and him-5, placing par-7 
-0.075 m.u. to the right of him-5. 
Germline Transformation 
Several overlapping cosmids, covering -40 kb of genomic DNA to 
the right of him-5, were injected into the gonad of KK290 heterozygotes 
(par-7 (b274)unc-76/nT7 unc(n754)IV; V) individually or in combination 
using the procedures of Mello et al. (1991). None of the cosmids res- 
cued the par-7 phenotype. Total genomic DNA from a yeast strain 
containing the YAC Y51 F3 was embedded in agarose plugs and sepa- 
rated by pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). The position of the 
YAG was determined by Southern blot analysis. The YAC DNA band 
was excised from the gel and treated with gelase (Epicentre Technolo- 
gies). The treated DNA sample was dialyzed overnight to remove free 
oligosaccharides and concentrated using centricon (Amicon). The con- 
centrated DNA was mixed with plasmid DNA carrying the dominant 
rol-6 marker and injected into gonads of KK290 heterozygotes. Rol 
non-Uric-78 progeny were picked as individuals to establish transgenic 
lines. One line segregated Rol Uric-76 hermaphrodites that gave viable 
but agametic progeny (19 of 189 Rol Uric-76 mothers produced 
94 viable progeny). Non-Rol Uric-76 siblings were Par (no viable 
wwv). 
Molecular Analyses and cDNA Cloning 
Standard methods (Sambrook et al., 1989) were used for all molecular 
analyses except where indicated. The band corresponding to Y51F3 
was excised from the gel after PFGE as described above and used 
in agarose-embedded restriction digestion with Ascl (New England 
Biolabs) overnight at 37%. The digested DNA was then separated 
by PFGE, and two fragments, 100 kb and 150 kb, were obtained. The 
100 kb fragment was found by Southern blot analysis to contain him-5 
but not ogr-7. The 100 kb fragment was purified by GeneClean (810 
101) and used as a probe in standard Northern blot analysis. A mater- 
nally enriched transcript of - 4.4 kb was detected. cDNAs correspond- 
ing to this transcript were obtained by screening a C. elegans hZAP 
cDNA library (Barstead and Waterston, 1989) using the 100 kb frag- 
ment as the probe. Since the YAC vector contained within the 100 kb 
fragment cross-hybridizes to the lZAP vector, extensive washes were 
carried out. Five strongly hybridizing clones were isolated, four of 
which hybridized to a 4.4 kb transcript by Northern blot analysis. A 
cDNA clone with insert size of 2.5 kb was used as the probe to further 
isolate a 4 kb cDNA clone, named i’C22, which also hybridized to the 
4.4 kb transcript. 
ZC22 was used as the probe in Southern blot analysis to detect 
allele-associated restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Genomic 
DNA was prepared from wild-type (N2) and par-7 strains, and standard 
Southern blot analysis was performed. 
Antisense Phenocopy Analysis 
The ZC22 clone was used as a template to synthesize in vitro tran- 
scribed, capped antisense RNA. The plasmid DNA was linearized with 
appropriate restriction endonucleases and then treated with protein- 
ase K, followed by phenol-chloroform extractions and ethanol precipi- 
tation. Reagents used were treated with diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC) 
to inactivate RNases. RNAs were synthesized using Stratagene in 
vitro transciiption kit, except that a cap analog (Stratagene) and the 
human placental RNase inhibitor (Bethesda Research Laboratories) 
were added. The concentration of injected RNA ranged from 1 mgl 
ml up to 5 mglml; the higher concentrations appeared to give better 
results. Wild-type animals were injected with RNAs in the distal arm 

Kinase Involvement in Asymmetric Divisions 
619 
of one or both gonads. Injected worms were plated out individually at 
20°C to allow egg laying and were transferred to a new plate every 
day. Embryonic lethality (failure to hatch) was checked a minimum 
of 24 hr after each transfer. The early embryonic phenotypes were 
observed by cutting worms open in distilled HZ0 and transferring the 
live early embryos to agar pads for microscopy. 
Sequencing and ldentlflcation of the 5’ Ends 
DNA sequence was determined using the dideoxy chain terminator 
method (Sanger et al., 1977). Sequencing was performed by using 
Sequenase (United States Biochemicals) and double-stranded plas- 
mid DNA; some sequences were determined by the Cornell University 
Biotechnology Program Automatic Sequencing Facility. Both strands 
of the cDNA were sequenced. The S’end of the par-1 gene was deter- 
mined using RACE-PCR, according to the instructions of the manufac- 
turer (Clonetech). Sequence analysis was done using the FASTA 
(Pearson and Lipman, 1988) and BLAST programs (Altschul et al., 
1990) within the Genetics Computer Group package (Madison, Wis- 
consin). 
For sequencing of the kinase domain in the par-7 mutant alleles, 
synthetic oligonucleotide primers were made that would enable the 
entire kinase domain to be amplified from the mutants by reverse 
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). Total RNA was extracted from - 50 ho- 
mozygous par-l hermaphrodites (N2 was used as a control) and used 
for reverse transcription (first-strand cDNA synthesis kit; Pharmacia) 
and PCR. Alterations reported in the mutant alleles (it51 and if90) were 
sequenced from at least five independent PCR products. 
Antibodies and lmmunostaining 
To generate polyclonal antibodies against PAR-I, we cloned a 0.65 kb 
fragment 3’to the kinase domain coding region into pGEX-3X (Amrad 
Corporation), and a fusion protein of the expected size (- 45 kDa) was 
obtained. This protein was purified by affinity binding to agarose- 
immobilized glutathione and injected into two rabbits. 
For affinity purification, the crude antisera were first passed over 
a column containing the GST protein coupled to Affigel 102 (Bio-Rad) 
to eliminate any anti-GST antibodies and then were affinity purified 
by binding to the GST-PAR-1 fusion protein coupled to the same ma- 
trix. After washing, the bound antibodies were eluted with low pH 
glycine and dialyzed against phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). 
The ability of the purified antibody to recognize the PAR-l fusion 
protein and endogenous PAR-1 protein was verified on Western blots. 
To detect endogenous PAR-l, we hand picked - 100 gravid hermaph- 
rodites of each genotype. After washes with M9 buffer, the worms 
were boiled and ground in SDS sample buffer. The whole worm ex- 
tracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE and blotted onto nitrocellulose 
membranes. The Western blots were performed with purified PAR-1 
antibody and horseradish peroxidase-linked donkey anti-rabbit IgG. 
The ECL detection system (Amersham) was used. 
Embryos were stained by a modification of the protocol described 
previously (Albertson, 1984). For each genotype examined, several 
samples of lo-20 hermaphrodites each were transferred to distilled 
Hz0 (- 8 ~1) on polylysine slides. A coverslip (18 mm x 18 mm) was 
added, pressure was applied to extrude embryos, and slides were 
placed in liquid nitrogen for 10 min. After removal of the coverslip, 
slides were incubated for 15 min in -20% absolute methanol and 
then transferred to room-temperature PBS. The samples were blocked 
in goat serum for 1 hr and incubated with PAR-l antibody (diluted in 
1% bovine serum albumin, 10% goat serum in PBS) for 1 hr at room 
temperature or were coincubated with anti-P granule antibody 
(OICiD4 or K76 or both) at 16% for 4 hr. Slides were washed twice 
for 10 min in PBS and once for 10 min in PBST (0.5% Tween in 
PBS) in between the two PBS washes. Slides were then incubated in 
secondary antibodies(for PAR-I, goat anti-rabbit FITC; for P granules, 
goat anti-mouse rhodamine) for 1 hr at room temperature, followed 
by washes as described above, except that DAPI was included in the 
first wash. After the final wash, slides were mounted with mounting 
media and viewed under fluorescence microscopes or confocal micro- 
scopes (Cornell University Biotechnology Program Confocal Micros- 
copy Facility). Typically, each slide had between 10 and 40 embryos 
of each early stage (from zygote to 32-cell stage, lower numbers of 
later stages); a minimum of 50 slides were examined for each of N2, 
it50, itSO, and lw39 genotypes. 
For immunofluorescence detection of PAR-1 in the gonad, a proto- 
col adapted from the laboratory of T. Schedl (Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri) was used: heads of hermaph- 
rodites were cut off (using a syringe needle) in PBS containing 0.2 
mM levamisole to allow the extrusion of gonads; the worm carcasses 
were transferred to polylysine slides after fixation in -20% methanol 
for 5 min. The same staining procedures used for embryos were ap- 
plied thereafter. For SKN-1 staining, the monoclonal antibody FA2 and 
the procedure described by Bowerman et al. (1993) were used. 
To test for specificity in the immunfluorescence assay, we incubated 
samples with affinity-purified PAR-l antibody as described above ex- 
cept that the dilution buffer contained 4 mglml of the GST-PAR-1 
fusion protein. 
Acknowledgments 
Correspondence should be addressed to K. J. K. The authors thank 
the C. elegans genetics stock center for providing strains; Alan Coul- 
son and John Sulston for providing cosmids and YACs that enabled 
us to map and clone par-l; Abby Telfer for providing the Tel-tagged 
ogr-7 strain and for communicating unpublished data on the physical 
map location of par-l; Jocelyn Shaw for par-l(lw39) and par-l(lw7) 
alleles; Susan Strome for anti-P granule antibody; Bruce Draper and 
Jim Priess for anti-SKN-1 antibody. We would like to thank Bingwei Lu, 
Lesilee Rose, and Bijan Etemad-Moghadam for helpful discussions; 
members of the Kemphues lab for valuable comments on the manu- 
script; Drs. Anthony Bretscher, Mariana Wolfner, Thomas Fox, Michael 
Goldberg, and three anonymous reviewers for useful suggestions and 
critical readings of the manuscript; Jim Slattery and Carol Bayles for 
assistance on use of the confocal microscope. This work was sup- 
ported by National Institutes of Health grant HD27689. 
Received January 19, 1995; revised March 10, 1995. 
References 
Albertson. D. (1984). Formation of the first cleavage spindle in nema- 
tode embryos. Dev. Biol. 707, 61-72. 
Altschul, S. F., Miller, W., Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J. (1990). 
Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 275, 403-410. 
Barstead, R. J., and Waterston, R. H. (1989). The basal component 
of the nematode dense-body is vinculin. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 10177- 
10185. 
Barstead, R. J., Kleiman, L., and Waterston, R. H. (1991). Cloning, 
sequencing and mapping of an a-actin gene from the nematode Caeno- 
fhabditis elegans. Cell. Motil. Cytoskel. 20, 69-78. 
Bektesh, S., Van Doren, K., and Hirsh, D. (1988). Presence of the 
Caenorhabdiris elegans spliced leader on different mRNAs and in dif- 
ferent genera of nematodes. Genes Dev. 2, 1277-1283. 
Bowerman, B., Draper, B. W., Mello, C. C., and Priess, J. R. (1993). The 
maternal gene &n-l encodes a protein that is distributed unequally in 
early C. elegans embryos. Cell 74, 443-452. 
Brenner, S. (1974). The genetics of Caenorbabditis elegans. Genetics 
77, 71-94. 
Carling, D., Aguan, K., Woods, A., Verhoeven, A., Beri, R., Brennan, 
C. H., Sidebottom, C., Davison, M. D., and Scott, J. (1994). Mammalian 
AMP-activated protein kinase is homologous to yeast and plant protein 
kinase involved in the regulation of carbon metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 
269, 11432-l 1448. 
Celenza, J. L., and Carlson, M. (1986). A yeast gene that is essential 
for release from glucose repression encodes a protein kinase. Science 
233, 1175-I 180. 
Chant, J. (1994). Cell polarity in yeast. Trends Genet. 10, 328-333. 
Cheng, N. N., Kirby, C. M., and Kemphues, K. J. (1995). Control of 
cleavage spindle organization in Caenorhabditis elegans: the role of 
the genes par-2 and par-% Genetics 739, 549-559. 
Davidson, E. (1986). Gene Activity in Early Development, Third Edition 
(New York: Academic Press). 
Fire, A., Albertson, D., Harrison, S. W., and Moerman, D. G. (1991). 
Production of antisense RNA leads to effective and specific inhibition 

Cell 
620 
of gene expression in Caenorhabditis elegans muscle. Development 
7 73, 503-514. 
Goldstein, 8. (1992). lnductionofgut inCaenorhabdiiise/egans. Nature 
357, 254-257. 
Goldstein, B. (1993). Establishment of gut fate in the E lineage of C. 
elegans: the roles of lineage-dependent mechanisms and cell interac- 
tions Development 778, 1267-1277. 
Hanks, S. K., and Quinn, A. M. (1991). Protein kinase catalytic domain 
sequence database: identification of conserved features of primary 
structure and classification of family members. Meth. Enzymol. 200. 
38-62. 
Hanks, S. K., Quinn, A. M., and Hunter, T. (1988). The protein kinase 
family: conserved features and deduced phylogeny of the catalytic 
domains. Science 247, 42-52. 
Higgins, D. G., and Sharp, P. M. (1989). Fast and sensitive multiple 
sequence alignments on a microcomputer. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 5, 
151-153. 
Hill, D. P., and Strome, S. (1988). An analysis of the role of microfila- 
ments in the establishment and maintenance of asymmetry in Caeno- 
rhabditis elegans zygotes. Dev. Biol. 725, 75-84. 
Hill, D. P., and Strome, S. (1990). Briefcytochalasin-induced disruption 
of microfilaments during a critical interval in l-cell C. elegans embryos 
alters the partitioning of developmental instructions to the 2-cell em- 
bryo. Development 708, 159-172. 
Horvitz, H. R.. and Herskowitz, I. (1992). Mechanisms of asymmetric 
cell division: two Bs or not two Bs, that is the question. Cell 68, 237- 
255. 
Inglis, J. D., Lee, M., and Hill, R. E. (1993). Emk, a protein kinase with 
homologs in yeast maps to mouse chromosome 19. Mammal. Genome 
4, 401-403. 
Kemphues, K. J., Priess, J. R., Morton, D. G., and Cheng, N. (1988). 
Identification of genes required for cytoplasmic localization in early 
embryos of C. elegans. Cell 52, 31 l-320. 
Kieber, J. J, Rothenberg, M., Roman, G., Feldmann, K. A., and Ecker, 
J. R. (1993). CTRI, a negative regulator of the ethylene response 
pathway in Arabidopsis, encodes a member of the raf family of protein 
kinases. Cell 72, 427-441. 
Kirby, C., Kusch, M., and Kemphues, K. (1990). Mutations in the par 
genes of Caenorhabditis elegans affect cytoplasmic reorganization 
during the first cell cycle. Dev. Biol. 742, 203-215. 
Krause, M., and Hirsh, D. (1987). A trans-spliced leader sequence on 
actin mRNA in C. elegans. Cell 49, 753-761. 
Levin, D. E., and Bishop, J. M. (1990). A putative protein kinase gene 
(kinl’) is important for growth polarity in Schizosaccharomycespombe. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 8272-8276. 
Levin, D. E., Hammond, C. I., Ralston, R. O., and Bishop, J. M. (1987). 
Two yeast genes that encode unusual protein kinases. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 84, 6035-6039. 
Manser, E., Leung, T., Salihuddin, H., Zhao, Z., and Lim, L. (1994). 
A brain serinelthreonine protein kinase activated by Cdc42 and Racl. 
Nature 367, 40-46. 
Mello, C. C., Kramer, J. M., Stinchcomb, D., and Ambros, V. (1991). 
Efficient gene transfer in C. elegans: extrachromosomal maintenance 
and integration of transforming sequences. EMBO J. 70, 3959-3970. 
Mello, C. C., Draper, B. W., and Priess, J. R. (1994). The maternal 
genes apx-7 and g/p-l and establishment of dorsal-ventral polarity in 
the early C. elegans embryo. Cell 77, 95-106. 
Morton, D. G., Roos, J. M., and Kemphues, K. J. (1992). par-4, a gene 
required for cytoplasmic localization and determination of specific cell 
types in Caenorhabditis elegans embryogenesis. Genetics 730, 771- 
790. 
Parsa. I. (1988). Loss of a M, 78,000 marker in chemically induced 
transplantable carcinomas and primary carcinoma of human pan- 
creas Cancer Res. 48, 2265-2272. 
Pearson, W. R., and Lipman, D. J. (1988). Improved tools for biological 
sequence analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 2444-2448. 
Priess, J. R., and Thomson, J. N. (1987). Cellular interactions in early 
C. elegans embryos. Cell 48, 241-250. 
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Clon- 
ing: A Laboratory Manual, Second Edition (Cold Spring Harbor, New 
York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory). 
Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. (1977). DNAsequencing with 
chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463- 
5467. 
Schierenberg, E. (1985). Cell determination during earlyembryogene- 
sis of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Cold Spring Harbor 
Symp. Quant. Biol. 50, 59-68. 
Schierenberg, E. (1987). Reversal of cellular polarity and early cell- 
cell interaction in the embryo of Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 
722, 452-463. 
Schierenberg, E. (1988). Localization and segregation of lineage- 
specific cleavage potential in embryos of Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Roux’s Arch. Dev. Biol. 797, 282-293. 
Schnabel, R. (1994). Autonomy and nonautonomy in cell fatespecifica- 
tion of muscle in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo: a reciprocal in- 
duction. Science 263, 1449-1452. 
Slack, J. (1991). From Egg to Embryos, Second Edition, P. W. Barlow, 
D. Bray, P. 8. Green, and J. M. W. Slack, eds. (Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press). 
Strome, S. (1986a). Asymmetric movements of cytoplasmic compo- 
nents in Caenorhabdifis elegans zygotes. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 
97, 15-29. 
Strome, S. (198613). Fluorescence visualization of the distribution of 
microfilaments in gonads and early embryos of the nematode Caeno- 
rhabdifis elegans. J. Cell Biol. 703, 2241-2252. 
Strome. S., and Wood, W. B. (1982). lmmunofluorescence visualiza- 
tion of germ-line-specific cytoplasmicgranules in embryos, larvae, and 
adultsof Caenorhabditiselegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79,1558- 
1562. 
Strome, S., and Wood, W. 8. (1983). Generation of asymmetry and 
segregation of germ line granules in early C. elegans embryos. Cell 
35, 15-25. 
Sulston, J., Schierenberg, E., White, J.. and Thomson, N. (1983). The 
embryonic cell lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. 
Biol. 700, 67-l 19. 
Telfer, A. (1991). Identification and molecular analysis of ogr-7, a ma- 
ternally expressed gene of Caenorhabditis elegans. PhD thesis, Har- 
vard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
GenBank Accession Number 
The accession number for the par-7 sequence reported in this paper 
is U22183.
