RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT
An RNA tertiary switch by modifying how helices
are tethered
Laura R Ganser 1, Anthony M Mustoe 2 and Hashim M Al-Hashimi 1*
Abstract
A viral tRNA-like structure has evolved a unique
strategy to undergo a tertiary structure conformational
switch that may help regulate viral regulation.
The finding that non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are abun-
dant and critical players in gene expression and regulation
is one of the most significant discoveries in modern mo-
lecular biology [1]. Many ncRNAs function by exploiting
RNA's remarkable ability to undergo large conformational
changes in response to specific biological stimuli [2]. This
provides a basis for the many RNA-based molecular
switches that are widely integrated into genetic circuits
and biochemical pathways [2]. A recent paper by Kieft
and colleagues [3] reveals a viral RNA structure that has
modified the way in which its secondary structure helices
are tethered together, thereby achieving a unique capacity
to act as a tertiary conformational switch that may help
regulate viral replication and translation.
The focus of the study by Colussi et al. [3] is a tRNA-
like structure (TLS) located at the 3 ’ end of the turnip
yellow mosaic virus (TYMV) genome. TYMV is a
positive-sense RNA virus that contains a single-stranded
RNA genome, which acts both as the mRNA template
for viral protein translation by cellular host ribosomes
and as the RNA template for virus replication by a viral
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDRP). Whereas
translation proceeds from the 5 ’ to 3 ’ end of the viral
RNA genome, negative-strand synthesis during replica-
tion proceeds in the opposite 3 ’ to 5 ’ direction. A regula-
tory mechanism is thought to prevent the two processes
from occurring simultaneously, but its details remain
poorly understood.
The TLS is so named because since its discovery it has
been presumed to closely mimic the three-dimensional
* Correspondence: hashim.al.hashimi@duke.edu
1Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
structure of tRNA. Early experiments showed that the 3 ’
terminus of the TLS was aminoacylated with a valine by
host amino-acyl synthetases (aaRSs) [4]. This ability of
the TLS to mimic tRNA structure, and thus be recognized
by the host cellular tRNA machinery, allows the virus to
hijack the host for its own purposes. In particular, host
elongation factor proteins have been shown to bind to
aminoacylated TLS and enhance translation [5]. The
bound elongation factor proteins are in turn thought to
deliver TLS to the host ribosomal A-site, where the 5 ’ end
of the viral genome can loop around to bind as an mRNA
template. Elongation factor binding to the TLS also in-
hibits negative-strand synthesis [5,6] in vitro ,p o s s i b l yb y
blocking RDRP binding. Importantly, the terminal 3 ’-CCA
sequence element of the TLS also acts as a promoter for
negative-strand synthesis during replication, but only
when the TLS in not aminoacylated or bound to elong-
ation factors [5,6]. It is thought that viral protein interac-
tions with the 3 ’ end may promote replication and inhibit
TLS aminoacylation, elongation factor protein binding,
and translation from the 5 ’ end, but the mechanisms of
how this is achieved remain poorly understood.
Early on, it was unclear whether the TLS could indeed
adopt a tRNA-like conformation because it lacked many
characteristic features of canonical tRNA sequences. The
TLS secondary structure determined using nuclease prob-
ing data [7] subsequently revealed how the TLS achieved a
tRNA-like fold and highlighted some important differ-
ences from canonical tRNA particularly at the acceptor
stem, which is the site of aminoacylation [7]. In canonical
tRNA, the acceptor stem is formed by base pairing of resi-
dues in the 5 ’ and 3 ’ ends of tRNA (Figure 1a). The TLS
features a truncated 5 ’ strand that is not involved in
canonical pairing with the 3 ’ strand (Figure 1b). This pre-
sumably is important to free up the 5 ’ end to link up with
the rest of the viral genome without sterically obstructing
the 3 ’ end. The longer 3 ’ strand was then proposed [7] to
adopt a so-called ‘pseudoknot’ -a nR N Am o t i fi nw h i c ha
single strand folds back on itself to form two helical stems
in such a way that the strand termini are located on
© 2014 Ganser et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. The licensee has exclusive rights to distribute this article, in any medium, for
12 months following its publication. After this time, the article is available under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Ganser et al. Genome Biology 2014, 15:425
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/425
opposite ends of the motif. This makes it possible to cre-
ate an acceptor-like stem out of the 3 ’-terminus that can
be aminoacylated (Figure 1b).
Given this unique secondary structure, it remained un-
clear how TLS could indeed form an L-shaped conform-
ation similar to that of a canonical tRNA (Figure 1c).
Notably, the acceptor- and D-stems are no longer tethered
by a two-nucleotide single-stranded connector, as is the
case for canonical tRNA. A recent study [8] has shown that
such ‘topological’ constraints imposed by the finite length
of such connectors are critical in restricting the orientation
of helical stems and in defining RNA tertiary structure.
Indeed, previous studies have shown that cutting this
single-stranded connector in tRNA leads to significant
destabilization of tertiary structure. Moreover, many of the
canonical tRNA tertiary interactions are incompatible with
the TLS primary sequence and secondary structure.
Recently, work by Kieft and colleagues verified the pro-
posed TLS secondary structure and provided compelling
evidence using small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) that
the TLS does indeed adopt an L-shaped three-dimensional
structure [9,10]. However, the low resolution structural in-
formation obtained from SAXS did not reveal what inter-
actions stabilize the TLS fold. Intriguingly, these studies
also showed that TLS loses its tRNA-like L-shape upon
deletion of the 5 ’-UUAG sequence element directly up-
stream of the TLS [9,10] (Figure 1d). Moreover, deleting
the 5 ’-UUAG sequence element decreased the levels of
TLS aminoacylation in vitro by 25 % [10]. This led Kieft
and co-workers to hypothesize that disruption of interac-
tions involving these nucleotides could cause a conform-
ational change favoring replication over translation [9,10].
The recent high-resolution X-ray structure by Colussi
et al. [3] confirmed the previously proposed secondary
Figure 1 Secondary structure of tRNA (a,c) and TYMV TLS (b,d) in cloverleaf (a,b) and L-shape (c,d) conformations. A, acceptor; AC,
anticodon; V, variable. Red lines denote the linchpin in TLS and the corresponding junction in tRNA; dotted lines represent the interactions
lost following removal of the 5 ’-UUAG sequence. (a) The cloverleaf diagram shows that the junction between the D- and A-stems found in
tRNA is absent in TLS, but the linchpin forms an interaction in its place. (b) The L-shape fold of the TLS is stabilized by the linchpin interaction.
Destabilizing this interaction allows it to extend, as shown by the arrows, whereas the closed junction of tRNA prevents this extension.
Ganser et al. Genome Biology 2014, 15:425 Page 2 of 3
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/425
structure and shows how a tRNA-like tertiary fold is sta-
bilized using a unique set of interactions. In particular,
the guanine of the 5 ’-UUAG sequence element immedi-
ately upstream of the TLS base-pairs with a cytosine in
the 3 ’ pseudoknot to form a ‘linchpin’ interaction, which
is stabilized by base stacking of the neighboring 5 ’ aden-
ine and V-loop residues. The linchpin effectively tethers
the acceptor- and D-stems (Figure 1b). Furthermore,
residues in the V-loop that normally form tertiary inter-
actions with the D-loop in canonical tRNA form unique
interactions in TLS with the linchpin and a separate up-
stream pseudoknot domain. The structure beautifully
highlights how the same tertiary structure can be stabi-
lized using a different topological organization and unique
set of tertiary interactions.
Significantly, the structure also offers a clear explan-
ation for why removal of the linchpin residues would
destabilize the molecule, leading it to a transition from
an L-shaped to a more extended conformation [9,10].
The linchpin tethers the D- and A-stems together, pla-
cing a connectivity constraint on the structure similar to
that imposed by the two-nucleotide linker in canonical
tRNA. Similar to the way in which breaking this two-
nucleotide linker in canonical tRNA destabilizes three-
dimensional structure, disrupting the linchpin interac-
tions greatly increases the conformational freedom of
the TLS stems, promoting a global loss of tertiary struc-
ture (Figure 1d).
Colussi et al. [3] propose that following initial infec-
tion, and once a sufficient number of RDRP proteins
have been translated from the TYMV genome, RDRP
binding to the TLS could destabilize the linchpin inter-
action, thus causing a conformational switch from the
tRNA-like L-shape towards the extended TLS. This in
turn would disfavor binding of aaRSs and elongation fac-
tors, providing the basis of the translation/replication
regulatory switch [3]. Although there is no evidence that
the two distinct TLS conformations can dynamically
interchange, the linchpin interaction does seem to have
been integrated into the replication promoter in order
that replication efficiently disrupts the L-shaped tRNA
structure required for translation.
The RNA-based conformational switches that have been
characterized so far generally feature changes in secondary
structure that expose or sequester key regulatory elements
through formation of base-pairing interactions [2]. The
TLS conformational switch reported by Colussi et al. [3]
is a rare example of an RNA ‘tertiary switch’ that acts by
modifying global three-dimensional structural features of
an RNA. In a canonical tRNA secondary structure archi-
tecture, disrupting three-dimensional structure would re-
quire energetically costly disruption of multiple secondary
structure helices. Altering the secondary structure con-
nectivity and using a linchpin interaction to re-tether
helices offers a potentially general strategy to construct a
tertiary RNA switch. There seems to be no end to the
versatility of RNA conformational switching.
Abbreviations
aaRS: aminoacyl tRNA synthetase; RDRP: RNA-dependent RNA polymerase;
TLS: TRNA like structure; TYMV: Turnip yellow mosaic virus.
Competing interests
HMA-H is an advisor to and holds an ownership interest in Nymirum, an
RNA-based drug-discovery company.
Acknowledgements
Research on RNA dynamics in this group is funded by NIH R01 2033817, P01
GM0066275 and P50 GM103297. AMM is supported by an US National
Science Foundation graduate research fellowship.
Author details
1Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA. 2Department of Biophysics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
References
1. Cech TR, Steitz JA: The noncoding RNA revolution-trashing old rules to
forge new ones. Cell 2014, 157:77– 94.
2. Dethoff EA, Chugh J, Mustoe AM, Al-Hashimi HM: Functional complexity
and regulation through RNA dynamics. Nature 2012, 482:322– 330.
3. Colussi TM, Costantino DA, Hammond JA, Ruehle GM, Nix JC, Kieft JS: The
structural basis of transfer RNA mimicry and conformational plasticity by
a viral RNA. Nature 2014. doi:10.1038/nature13378.
4. Yot P, Pinck M, Haenni A, Duranton HM, Chapeville F: Valine-specific
tRNA-like structure in turnip yellow mosaic virus RNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1970, 67:1345– 1352.
5. Dreher TW: Role of tRNA-like structures in controlling plant virus
replication. Virus Res 2009, 139:217– 229.
6. Matsuda D, Yoshinari S, Dreher TW: eEF1A binding to aminoacylated viral
RNA represses minus strand synthesis by TYMV RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase. Virology 2004, 321:47– 56.
7. Rietveld K, Van Poelgeest R, Pleij CWA, Van Boom JH, Bosch L: The
tRNA-like structure at the 3 ’ terminus of turnip yellow mosaic virus RNA.
Differences and similarities with canonical tRNA. Nucleic Acids Res 1982,
10:1929– 1946.
8. Mustoe AM, Al-Hashimi HM, Brooks CL: Coarse grained models reveal
essential contributions of topological constraints to the conformational
free energy of RNA bulges. J Phys Chem B 2014, 118:2615– 2627.
9. Hammond JA, Rambo RP, Filbin ME, Kieft JS: Comparison and functional
implications of the 3D architectures of viral tRNA-like structures. RNA
2009, 15:294– 307.
10. Hammond JA, Rambo RP, Kieft JS: Multi-domain packing in the
aminoacylatable 3 ’ end of a plant viral RNA. J Mol Biol 2010, 399:450– 463.
doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0425-z
Cite this article as: Ganser et al. : An RNA tertiary switch by modifying
how helices are tethered. Genome Biology 2014 15:425.
Ganser et al. Genome Biology 2014, 15:425 Page 3 of 3
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/425