--- page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76:9
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3832-8
Regular Article - Theoretical Physics
Exclusive physics at the LHC with SuperChic 2
L. A. Harland-Lang1,a, V . A. Khoze2,3,M .G .R y s k i n3
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2 Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology, University of Durham, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
3 Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, NRC Kurchatov Institute, Gatchina, St. Petersburg 188300, Russia
Received: 29 October 2015 / Accepted: 3 December 2015 / Published online: 6 January 2016
© The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract We present a range of physics results for cen-
tral exclusive production processes at the LHC, using the
new SuperChic 2 Monte Carlo event generator. This
includes signiﬁcant theoretical improvements and updates,
most importantly a fully differential treatment of the soft
survival factor, as well as a greater number of generated
processes. We provide an overview of the latest theoretical
framework, and consider in detail a selection of ﬁnal states,
namely exclusive 2 and 3 jets, photoproduced vector mesons,
two-photon initiated muon andW boson pairs and heavyχc,b
quarkonia.
1 Introduction
Central exclusive production (CEP) is the reaction
pp( ¯p) → p + X + p( ¯p),
where ‘+’ signs are used to denote the presence of large
rapidity gaps, separating the systemX from the intact outgo-
ing protons (anti-protons). Over the last decade there has been
a steady rise of theoretical and experimental interest in stud-
ies of this process in high-energy hadronic collisions, see [1–
4] for reviews. Theoretically, the study of CEP requires the
development of a framework which is quite different from
that used to describe the inclusive processes more commonly
considered at hadron colliders. Moreover, the dynamics of the
CEP process leads to unique predictions and effects which
are not seen in the inclusive mode. Experimentally, CEP rep-
resents a very clean signal, with just the objectX and no other
hadronic activity seen in the central detector (in the absence
of pile up).
The CEP process requires the t-channel exchange of a
color-singlet object, so that the outgoing protons can remain
intact. One possibility to achieve this is the two-photon fusion
a e-mail: l.harland-lang@ucl.ac.uk
process γγ → X, where the radiated photons couple to the
electromagnetic charge of the whole protons. Alternatively,
the process may be mediated purely by the strong interac-
tion: provided the object X mass is large enough, this can
be considered in the framework of pQCD, via the so-called
Durham model [3,4]. Finally it is possible for ‘photoproduc-
tion’ reactions to occur, where one proton interacts electro-
magnetically and one interacts strongly.
In any detailed phenomenological study of such processes,
it is important to have a Monte Carlo (MC) implementa-
tion, so that theoretical predictions can be compared more
directly with experimental measurements. For this reason
the authors have previously produced the publicly available
SuperChic MC [ 5,6], for the CEP of lighter Standard
Model (SM) objects within the Durham model. While ﬁrst
considering χc,b and ηc,b quarkonia, this has subsequently
been extended to include γγ and light meson pair ( ππ ,
η(′)η(′), …) production, as well as the photoproduction of
C-odd vector mesons. Such processes have been measured
and compared to the MC predictions at the Tevatron and
LHC, see for example [ 7–9], with results that are generally
in good agreement. Other related available generators are the
ExHuME [10] and FPMC [11]M C s .
However, there exist a wider range of processes that
are not included in earlier versions of SuperChic,b u t
which have much phenomenological relevance, in particu-
lar in the light of the measurement possibilities for exclu-
sive processes during Run-II of the LHC [ 12]. Here, exclu-
sive events may be measured with both protons tagged using
the approved and installed AFP [ 13] and CT-PPS [14]f o r -
ward proton spectrometers, associated with the ATLAS and
CMS central detectors, respectively, see also [ 15,16], as
well as using rapidity gap vetoes to select a dominantly
exclusive event sample. This latter possibility is in partic-
ular relevant at LHCb, for which the relatively low instan-
taneous luminosity and wide rapidity coverage allowed by
the newly installed HERSCHEL forward detectors [ 17]a r e
123

--- page 2 ---
9 Page 2 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
highly favourable, while similar scintillation counters are
also installed at ALICE [18].
Particularly relevant is the case of exclusive jet production,
which has been observed by both CDF [ 19] and D0 [20]a t
the Tevatron, and for which already a sample of ‘exclusive-
like’ 2- and 3-jet events has been collected in a combined
CMS+TOTEM run at 8 TeV [21,22]; exclusive 3-jet produc-
tion in particular has not been implemented in any public
MC. A further topical process is the exclusive production of
quarkonia pairs, measured by LHCb in [23] and considered
theoretically in [24], but for which a MC implementation has
previously not been made publicly available.
In addition to including a wider range of processes such as
these, there are a number of theoretical updates and improve-
ments which it is important to consider. Most signiﬁcantly,
in all exclusive processes it is necessary to account for the
probability that no additional particles are produced by soft
proton–proton interactions, independent of the hard pro-
cess: the so-called ‘survival factor’. In previous versions of
SuperChic as well as in other generators [ 10,11]t h i si s
simply treated as a constant probability which suppresses
the overall cross section. However, it is well known that
the survival factor can depend sensitively on the ﬁnal-state
particle momenta, and so such an averaging will omit the
inﬂuence this can have on the predicted distributions as well
as only providing an approximate estimate of the (process-
dependent) overall suppression.
With these considerations in mind, we present in this paper
results of the new SuperChic 2 MC generator. This con-
tains a range of theoretical improvements compared to the
previous version, most signiﬁcantly including a fully differ-
ential treatment of the survival factor, maintaining the explicit
dependence of this on the particle momenta in all cases. As
well as the processes generated in the original MC, exclusive
2- and 3-jet, quarkonia ( J/ψ and ψ(2S)) pair, SM Higgs
boson production and the photoproduction ofρ andφ mesons
are now implemented. In addition, the two-photon produc-
tion of γγ , W
+W− and lepton pairs are included; this is the
ﬁrst MC implementation of such photon-induced processes
which includes a complete treatment of soft survival effects.
The case of ae
+e− initial state is also implemented for these
processes.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sect.2 we sum-
marise the theoretical ingredients of the Durham model of
QCD-mediated CEP, and describe how the soft survival factor
can be included differentially in theoretical predictions and
in a MC. In Sect.3 we describe the theory of photon-induced
processes, again providing details of how a full treatment
of the survival factor can be achieved. In Sects. 4.1–4.4 we
present results of this MC for a range of processes: exclusive
2- and 3-jet production in Sect. 4.1; exclusive vector meson
photoproduction in Sect. 4.2; two-photon induced W
+W−
and lepton pair production in Sect.4.3; heavyχc,b quarkonia
production in Sect. 4.4. In Sect. 4.5 a summary is presented
of all processes that are generated, including some motiva-
tion for speciﬁc measurements that may be performed at the
LHC. In Sect.5 we brieﬂy describe the SuperChic 2 MC
and its public availability. Finally, in Sect. 6 we present a
summary and outlook.
2 QCD processes
2.1 Basic formalism
CEP processes that proceed purely by the strong interaction
can be described by the ‘Durham’ model, a pQCD-based
approach that may be applied when the object mass M
X
is sufﬁciently high, see [ 1,3,25] for reviews. The formal-
ism used to calculate the perturbative CEP cross section is
explained in detail elsewhere [1,6,26–30] and we will only
present a very brief summary here. The perturbative CEP
amplitude, corresponding to the diagram shown in Fig. 1,
can be written as
T = π
2
∫ d2Q⊥ M
Q2
⊥(Q⊥ − p1⊥)2(Q⊥ + p2⊥)2
× fg(x1, x′
1, Q2
1,μ 2
F; t1) fg(x2, x′
2, Q2
2,μ 2
F; t2), (1)
where Q⊥ is the transverse momentum in the gluon loop,
with the scale Q2
i = Q2
⊥ in the forward proton limit (see
e.g. [6] for a prescription away from this limit), andM is the
colour-averaged, normalised sub-amplitude for thegg → X
process
M ≡ 2
M2
X
1
N2
C − 1
∑
a,b
δab qμ
1⊥ qν
2⊥ V ab
μν . (2)
Here a and b are colour indices,MX is the central object mass,
V ab
μν is the gg → X vertex, qi⊥ are the transverse momenta of
XQ⊥
x2
x1
Seik Senh
p2
p1
fg(x2, ··· )
fg(x1, ··· )
Fig. 1 The perturbative mechanism for the QCD-induced exclusive
process pp → p + X + p, with the eikonal and enhanced survival
factors shown symbolically
123

--- page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 3 of 20 9
the incoming gluons, and ti is the squared momentum trans-
fer to the outgoing protons. The fg’s in (1)a r et h es k e w e d
unintegrated gluon densities of the proton. These correspond
to the distribution of gluons in transverse momentum Q⊥,
which are evolved in energy up to the hard scale μF , such
that they are accompanied by no additional radiation, as is
essential for exclusive production. While the gluon momen-
tum fractions x
i are set by the mass and rapidity of the ﬁnal
state, the fractions xi′carried by the screening gluon must in
general be integrated over at the amplitude level. However,
for the dominant imaginary part of the amplitude we have
x′ ≪ x, and it can be shown that the fg’s may be simply
written as
fg(x, x′, Q2
⊥,μ 2
F)
= ∂
∂ ln(Q2
⊥)
[
Hg
( x
2, x
2; Q2
⊥
) √
Tg(Q⊥,μ 2
F)
]
, (3)
where Hg is the generalised gluon PDF [31], which for CEP
kinematics can be related to the conventional PDFs [30,32].
The Tg in (3) is a Sudakov factor, which corresponds to the
probability of no extra parton emission from each fusing
gluon.
We can decompose ( 2) in terms of on-shell helicity
amplitudes, neglecting small off-shell corrections of order
∼q2
⊥/M2
X . Omitting colour indices for simplicity, this gives
qi
1⊥ q j
2⊥ Vij =
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎪⎪
⎪
⎩
−
1
2(q1⊥ · q2⊥ )(T++ + T−)( J P
z = 0+)
− i
2|(q1⊥ × q2⊥ )|(T++ − T−)( J P
z = 0−)
+1
2((qx
1⊥ qx
2⊥ − q y
1⊥ q y
2⊥ )
+i(qx
1⊥ q y
2⊥ + q y
1⊥ qx
2⊥ ))T−+ (J P
z =+ 2+)
+1
2((qx
1⊥ qx
2⊥ − q y
1⊥ q y
2⊥ )
−i(qx
1⊥ q y
2⊥ + q y
1⊥ qx
2⊥ ))T+− (J P
z =− 2+)
(4)
where the J P
z indicate the parity and spin projection on the
gg axis, and Tλ1λ2 are the corresponding g(λ1)g(λ2) → X
helicity amplitudes, see [3,6] for more details. In the forward
proton limit (i.e. with outgoing protonp⊥ = 0) the only non-
vanishing term after the Q⊥ integration (1) is the ﬁrst one:
this is the origin of the selection rule [28,33,34] which oper-
ates in this exclusive process, and strongly favoursJ P
z = 0+
quantum numbers for the centrally produced state. More gen-
erally, away from the exact forward limit the non- J P
z = 0+
terms in (4) do not give completely vanishing contributions
to the Q⊥ integral and we ﬁnd that
|A(|Jz|= 2)|2
|A(Jz = 0)|2 ∼ ⟨p2
⊥⟩2
⟨Q2
⊥⟩2 , (5)
which is typically of order ∼1/50 − 1/100, depending on
such factors as the central object mass, c.m.s. energy√s and
choice of PDF set [ 3,6]. The on-shell decomposition ( 4)i s
used throughout, unless otherwise stated.
2.2 Soft survival effects
The expression ( 1) corresponds to the amplitude for the
exclusive production of an objectX in a short-distance inter-
action, that is, with no further perturbative emission. How-
ever, secondary particles may also be produced by additional
soft proton–proton interactions, independent of the hard pro-
cess. Such underlying event activity will spoil the exclu-
sivity of the event, and the probability that no additional
particles are produced by accompanying soft proton–proton
interactions is encoded in the so-called ‘survival factor’; see
e.g. [35,36] for some more recent theoretical work and [ 3]
for further discussion and references.
The survival factor is not a simple multiplicative con-
stant [6], but rather depends quite sensitively on the outgoing
proton transverse momenta. Physically, this is to be expected,
as the survival factor will depend on the impact parame-
ter of the colliding protons; loosely speaking, as the pro-
tons become more separated in impact parameter, we should
expect there to be less additional particle production, and so
for the survival factor to be closer to unity (consequently,
as we will see below, the average survival factor is much
larger in the case of photon-mediated processes, where larger
impact parameters are favoured, when compared to purely
QCD processes). As the transverse momentap
i⊥ of the scat-
tered protons are nothing other than the Fourier conjugates
of the proton impact parameters,bit , we therefore expect the
survival factor to depend on these.
For this reason, survival effects are included fully differ-
entially in the ﬁnal-state momenta in SuperChic 2 .T o
describe in more detail how this is achieved, we can consider
a simpliﬁed ‘one-channel’ model, which ignores any internal
structure of the proton; see [ 37,38] for a discussion of how
this can be generalised to the more realistic ‘mutli-channel’
case. The average suppression factor is written as
⟨S
2
eik⟩=
∫
d2b1t d2b2t |T(s, b1t, b2t)|2 exp(−/Omega1(s, bt))∫
d2 b1t d2b2t |T(s, b1t, b2t)|2 ,
(6)
where bit is the impact parameter vector of proton i, so that
bt = b1t + b2t corresponds to the transverse separation
between the colliding protons, with bt =| bt|. T(s, b1t, b2t)
is the CEP amplitude ( 1) in impact parameter space, and
/Omega1(s, bt) is the proton opacity, which can be extracted from
such hadronic observables as the elastic and total cross sec-
tions as well as, combined with some additional physical
assumption as regards the composition of the proton, the sin-
gle and double diffractive cross sections. From ( 6), we can
123

--- page 4 ---
9 Page 4 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
see that physically exp(−/Omega1(s, bt)) represents the probability
that no inelastic scattering occurs at impact parameter bt .
In the expression above, T(s, b1t, b2t) is just the Fourier
conjugate of the CEP amplitude (1), i.e. we have
T(s, p1⊥ , p2⊥ )
=
∫
d2b1t d2b2t eip1⊥ ·b1t e−ip2⊥ ·b2t T(s, b1t, b2t). (7)
In transverse momentum space, the CEP amplitude including
rescattering effects, T res, is calculated by integrating over the
transverse momentum k⊥ carried round the Pomeron loop
(represented by the grey oval labelled ‘S2
eik’i nF i g .1). The
amplitude including rescattering corrections is given by
T res(s, p1⊥ , p2⊥ ) = i
s
∫ d2k⊥
8π2 Tel(s, k2
⊥) T(s, p′
1⊥ , p′
2⊥),
(8)
where p′1⊥ = (p1⊥ − k⊥) and p′2⊥ = (p2⊥ + k⊥), while
T el(s, k2
⊥) is the elastic pp scattering amplitude in transverse
momentum space, which is related to the proton opacity via
Tel(s, t) = 2s
∫
d2bt eik·bt Tel(s, bt)
= 2is
∫
d2bt eik·bt
(
1 − e−/Omega1(s,bt )/2
)
, (9)
where t =− k2
⊥. We must add ( 8) to the ‘bare’ ampli-
tude excluding rescattering effects to give the full amplitude,
which we can square to give the CEP cross section including
eikonal survival effects
dσ
d2p1⊥ d2p2⊥
∝| T(s, p1⊥ , p2⊥ ) + T res(s, p1⊥ , p2⊥ )|2,
(10)
where here (and above) we have omitted the dependence of
the cross section on all other kinematic variables for simplic-
ity. The overall normalisation of the cross section is achieved
exactly as in the unscreened case. It is this expression, suit-
ably generalised to the multi-channel case, which is used
in the MC. We note that following the discussion above,
the expected soft suppression can be written in transverse
momentum space as
⟨S2
eik⟩=
∫
d2p1⊥ d2p2⊥ |T(s, p1⊥, p2⊥) + T res(s, p1⊥, p2⊥)|2
∫
d2p1⊥ d2p2⊥ |T(s, p1⊥, p2⊥)|2 .
(11)
It can readily be shown that ( 6) and (11) are equivalent. As
expected, the soft suppression factor depends on the proton
transverse momenta, and so may have an important effect on
the distributions of the outgoing proton momenta, via ( 10),
see e.g. [39,40].
Besides the effect of eikonal screening S
eik, there is some
suppression caused by the rescatterings of the protons with
the intermediate partons [38,41,42]. This effect is described
by the so-called enhanced Reggeon diagrams and usually
denoted S
2
enh; see Fig. 1. The precise size of this effect is
uncertain, but due to the relatively large transverse momen-
tum (and so smaller absorptive cross section σ abs)o ft h e
intermediate partons, it is only expected to reduce the corre-
sponding CEP cross section by a factor of at most a ‘few’,
which is a much weaker suppression than in the case of the
eikonal survival factor. Due to this uncertainty, in the current
version of the MC these effects are omitted entirely, how-
ever, by observing any departure from the MC predictions,
for example in the invariant mass M
X distributions, such
enhanced survival effects may still be investigated.
Finally, it is worth pointing out that such soft survival
effects do not only manifest themselves in CEP reactions. For
example, the eikonal model of absorption discussed above
may be used to predict the behaviour of the leading neu-
tron spectra in diffractive dijet photoproduction, measured
using a leading proton detector at HERA, see e.g. [ 43–45].
In addition, this approach may be used to explain [ 46]t h e
breaking of factorisation for diffractive dijet production at
the Tevatron [47], when this is given in terms of diffractive
structure functions measured at HERA. As we only consider
CEP reactions in this paper, we will not discuss these possi-
bilities further here.
3 Photon mediated processes
3.1 Basic formalism
Exclusive photon-exchange processes in pp collisions are
described in terms of the equivalent photon approxima-
tion [48]. The quasi-real photons are emitted by the incoming
proton i = 1, 2 with a ﬂux given by
dN T (ξi) = α
π
d2qi⊥
q2
i⊥ + ξ2
i m2p
dξi
ξi
×
( q2
i⊥
q2
i⊥ + ξ2
i m2p
(1 − ξi)FE(Q2
i ) +
ξ2
i
2 FM(Q2
i )
)
,
(12)
where ξi and qi⊥ are the longitudinal momentum fraction
and transverse momentum of the photon i, respectively; in
the absence of rescattering, we have simplyqi⊥ =− pi⊥ ;s e e
Fig. 2 below. The functions FE and FM are given in terms of
the proton electric and magnetic form factors, via
FM(Q2
i ) = G2
M(Q2
i )
FE(Q2
i ) =
4m2
p G2
E(Q2
i ) + Q2
i G2
M(Q2
i )
4m2p + Q2
i
, (13)
123

--- page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 5 of 20 9
V
(a)
Vk
(b)
Fig. 2 Schematic diagrams for the exclusive photoproduction process
pp → pV p with (a) and without (b) screening corrections included
with
G2
E(Q2
i ) = G2
M(Q2
i )
7.78 = 1
(
1 + Q2
i /0.71GeV2)4 , (14)
in the dipole approximation, where G E and G M are the
‘Sachs’ form factors. The modulus of the photon virtuality,
Q2
i , is given by
Q2
i =
q2
i⊥ + ξ2
i m2
p
1 − ξi
, (15)
i.e. it is cut off at a kinematic minimumQ2
i,min = ξ2
i m2
p/(1−
ξi).
The cross section for the photoproduction of a state V ,
for the case that the photon is emitted from proton i, is then
simply given in terms of the photon ﬂux (12) and the γ p →
Vp subprocess cross section
σ i
pp→ pV p =
∫
dN T (ξi)σ i
γ p→Vp , (16)
integrated over the relevant phase space region. As the trans-
verse momentum transferred by the photon exchange is typ-
ically much smaller than that due to the proton–Pomeron
vertex, we may safely ignore interference effects, so that the
total cross section is simply given by summing overi = 1, 2,
i.e. allowing for the case that the photon is emitted from
either proton. For two-photon productionγγ → X, the cor-
responding cross section is
dσ
pp→ pXp
d/Omega1 =
∫ dσγγ →X (Wγγ )
d/Omega1
dLγγ
dWγγ
dWγγ , (17)
where Wγγ is the γγ c.m.s. energy. The γγ luminosity is
given by
dLγγ
dWγγ dyX
= 2Wγγ
s n(x1) n(x2), (18)
where yX is the object rapidity and x1,2 = Wγγ√s exp(±yX ),
while n(xi) is the photon number density:
n(xi) =
∫
dN T (ξi)δ( ξi − xi). (19)
3.2 Soft survival effects
For photon-mediated processes, survival effects can be
included exactly as described in Sect. 2.2, however, some
additional care is needed. From ( 10) we can see that it is
the amplitude for the production process that is the relevant
object when including these effects. On the other hand, (16)
and (17) and the ﬂux (12) are deﬁned at the cross section level,
with the squared amplitude for the photon-initiated subpro-
cesses summed over the (transverse) photon polarisations.
To translate these expressions to the appropriate amplitude
level, it is important to include the photon transverse momen-
tum q
⊥ dependence in the appropriate way, corresponding to
a correct treatment of the photon polarisation; see [ 49]. To
demonstrate this, we will only consider the FE term in (12)
in the following, but we will comment on the contribution of
the magnetic form factor at the end. Schematic diagrams for
the bare and screened photoproduction amplitudes are shown
in Fig. 2, with the relevant momenta indicated; for the bare
amplitude we have q
i⊥ =− pi⊥ , while for the screened we
have qi⊥ =− p′
i⊥ ; see Sect. 2.2. Using the same decomposi-
tion that leads to ( 4), the photoproduction amplitude corre-
sponding to the ﬁgure behaves as
T(q1⊥ ) ∼ qx
1⊥ (A+ − A−) + iq y
1⊥ (A+ + A−), (20)
where A± is the γ p → Vp amplitude for a photon of ±
helicity, and if the photon is emitted from the other proton we
simply interchange 1 ↔ 2. In the bare case ( q
1⊥ =− p1⊥)
we simply square this, and after performing the azimuthal
angular integration, the cross terms ∼ px
1⊥ py
1⊥ vanish and
we have
|T( p1⊥ )|2 ∼ p2
1⊥σγ p→Vp , (21)
where σγ p→Vp is the subprocess cross section summed over
the incoming photon transverse polarisations. This is con-
sistent with the F
E term in ( 12) and with ( 16), and indeed
a full treatment, keeping all prefactors and expressing the
pp → pV p cross section in terms of ( 21), leads to exactly
these results, and is the essence of the equivalent photon
approximation.
When calculating the screened amplitude it is crucial to
correctly include this explicit transverse momentum depen-
dence as in ( 20), with q
1⊥ =− p′1⊥ included inside the
integral (8); this vector structure of the amplitude can have a
signiﬁcant effect on the expected survival factor. More pre-
cisely for the photoproduction amplitude we take
123

--- page 6 ---
9 Page 6 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
T(q1⊥ , q2⊥)
= T′ FE(Q2
1)1/2
q2
1⊥ + ξ2
1 m2p
((qx
1⊥ (A+ − A−) + iq y
1⊥ (A+ + A−)),
(22)
where T′contains the transverse momentum dependence of
the other proton [i.e.T′∼ e−bV q2
2⊥/2 in the ﬁt of (25)], as well
as the ξ dependence (and other factors) in ( 12) and the γ p
c.m.s. energy Wγ p dependence of theγ p → Vp subprocess.
For the case of two-photon initiated processes, the ampli-
tude can be decomposed precisely as in (4), i.e.
T(q1⊥ , q2⊥) ∼− 1
2(q1⊥ · q2⊥ )(T++ + T−) +··· , (23)
where theTλ1λ2 are now theγ( λ1)γ (λ2) → X helicity ampli-
tudes, and we omit the overall factors for simplicity. Using
this, it can readily be shown that the bare amplitude squared
reduces to the correct cross section level expressions given
in Sect. 3.1, while in the screened case it is again crucial to
include this correct vector form of the amplitude, i.e. with the
q
i⊥ =− p′i⊥ included inside the integral (8). As the relative
contributions of the amplitudes Tλ1λ2 affect the q⊥ depen-
dence in (23), the survival factor may depend sensitively on
the helicity structure of the γγ → X process. For example,
in the case of dilepton production γγ → l+l−,f o rw h i c h
the T±± amplitudes vanish for massless leptons, we ﬁnd
much less suppression than may be naively expected [ 50];
see Sect. 4.3 for further discussion.
Finally, we must also consider the contribution from the
magnetic form factorFM in (12). While generally suppressed
by ξ2, for larger values of MX and/or production in the for-
ward region, the corresponding value of ξ may not be so
small, and the contribution from this term may not be negli-
gible. A careful consideration of the derivation of the equiv-
alent photon approximation shows that this contribution is
generated by a term∼g
μν given by the density matrix of the
virtual photon (i.e. the proton spin sum) in the cross section.
This is not proportional to q
2
i⊥ and does not allow a decom-
position, at the amplitude level, as in ( 20); the FE contri-
bution on the other hand is given by the term proportional
to qμ
i⊥ qν
i⊥ , as expected from (20). Therefore, to evaluate the
FM contribution we simply omit any such qμ
i⊥ dependence
when calculating the screened amplitude (8). For the photo-
production case, we then add this squared amplitude incoher-
ently to the F
E term, which is calculated as described above.
For two-photon production, we keep the explicit vector qi⊥
dependence as in ( 23) for the (dominant) FE(Q1)FE(Q2)
contribution, while for the other terms no explicit vector
qi⊥ dependence is included in the amplitude, and the cor-
responding contributions are again squared and added inco-
herently.
4 Physics processes
In the following sections we consider a selection of represen-
tative examples of the physics processes that are generated
by Superchic 2 .
4.1 Exclusive jet production
Exclusive jet production [52,53], in particular of a 2-jet sys-
tem, has been of great importance in testing the underlying
perturbative CEP formalism. As discussed in the introduc-
tion, it has been observed at the Tevatron [19,20], and there is
much potential to measure this process at the LHC, in partic-
ular with the protons tagged with forward proton spectrome-
ters associated with the ATLAS and CMS central detectors;
see [15,16]. Most events with two scattered protons and cen-
tral jets will correspond to central diffractive (CD) jet pro-
duction, i.e. they will not be truly exclusive, but will have
additional particle production from the Pomeron remnants.
Exclusive production may be regarded as a particular case
of CD jet production with only the jets in the ﬁnal state, and
no Pomeron remnants. It proceeds through the mechanism
shown in Fig. 1, via the gg → gg, q
q and gg → ggg, gq q
subprocesses for 2- and 3-jet production, respectively.
Further details as regards the contributing helicity ampli-
tudes are given in Appendix A. It is found, in particular, that
in the case of the gg → q
q process, the Jz = 0 amplitude
(36) involves a helicity ﬂip along the quark line, and vanishes
as the quark massmq → 0. From this fact, we expect a strong
suppression in the CEP cross section for quark dijets, rela-
tive to the gg case, for which the gg → gg amplitudes (38)
with Jz = 0 incoming gluons display no such suppression.
In this way the exclusive mode offers the possibility to study
almost purely (over 99 % for typical event selections) gluonic
and, crucially, isolated jets [34] produced by the collision of
a color-singlet gg state, shedding light on their underlying
properties (such as multiplicity, particle correlations etc.) in
a well-deﬁned and comparatively clean exclusive environ-
ment. In Table 1, some representative predictions for exclu-
sive 2- and 3-jet production are shown and this gg/q
q hier-
archy is clear. The invariant mass distributions are shown in
Fig. 3, with similar results being evident.
In the case of 3-jet production, that is, qqg and ggg jets,
this suppression in the qq exclusive dijet cross section also
leads to some interesting predictions [ 55,56]. In particular,
we expect the behaviour of the qqg amplitude as the radi-
ated gluon becomes soft to be governed by the correspond-
ing Born-level, qq, amplitude. As this vanishes for massless
quarks and Jz = 0 incoming gluons, it is expected to lead
to an enhancement of ‘Mercedes-like’ conﬁgurations for the
qqg case, where all three partons carry roughly equal ener-
gies and are well separated. The corresponding 3-jet cross
sections are also shown in Table 1: while the gg dijet cross
123

--- page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 7 of 20 9
Table 1 Parton-level predictions for exclusive 2- and 3-jet production
cross sections (in pb) at the LHC for different cuts on the minimum cen-
tral system invariant mass M
X at √s = 13 TeV . The jets are required
to have transverse momentum p⊥ > 20 GeV for MX (min) = 75, 150
GeV and p⊥ > 40 GeV for MX (min) = 250 GeV and pseudorapidity
|η| < 2.5. The anti-kt algorithm with jet radius R = 0.6i su s e di nt h e
3-jet case and the qq cross sections correspond to one massless quark
ﬂavour. Soft survival effects are included using model 4 of [51]
MX (min) gg q qb b ggg gq q
75 120 0.073 0.12 6.0 0.14
150 4.0 1 .4 × 10−3 1.7 × 10−3 0.78 0.02
250 0.13 5 .2 × 10−5 5.2 × 10−5 0.018 5 .0 × 10−4
qqg
ggg
bb
qq
gg
dσ/dMX [pb/GeV], √s =1 3T e V
MX [GeV]
200180160140120100806040
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
1e-05
1e-06
Fig. 3 Parton-level distributions for 2- and 3-jet CEP with respect to
the system invariant mass MX at √s = 13 TeV , using MMHT14 LO
PDFs [54]. The ﬁnal-state partons are required to lie in the pseudorapid-
ity region −2.5 <η< 2.5 and have transverse momentum p⊥ > 20
GeV (leading to minimum invariant masses, MX , of 40 and 60 GeV in
the 2- and 3-jet cases, respectively), while the 3-jet events are deﬁned
using the anti-k
t algorithm with R = 0.6. Distributions are shown for
massless quarks, qq,a sw e l la sf o rbb production. Soft survival effects
are included using model 4 of [51]
sections are of order∼100 pb, the 3-jetggg cross section are
a factor of ∼10 smaller, and the qqg cross section a further
order of magnitude smaller again; this is due to the speciﬁc
colour and spin-dependence of the contributing gg → qqg
amplitudes, which also leads to some suppression in the
inclusive case, as well as the additional dynamical suppres-
sion discussed above. The corresponding invariant mass dis-
tributions are shown in Fig. 3.
So-called ‘planar radiation zeros’ were shown in [57]t o
be present in 5-parton QCD amplitudes, that is, a complete
vanishing of the Born-level amplitudes, independent of the
particle polarisations, when their momenta lie in a plane
and satisfy certain additional conditions on their rapidity
differences. These were seen in particular to occur in the
gg → ggg and, in certain cases, the gg → q
qg ampli-
tudes, when the initial-state gluons are in a colour-singlet
conﬁguration. This is precisely the situation for exclusive 3-
jet production, and so it is interesting to examine whether
such zeros may be observable in the CEP process. In Fig. 4
(left) we show parton-level MC predictions for ggg jet pro-
duction with respect to the azimuthal separation /Delta1φ
ij for
gluon pairs satisfying the cut 0.9 < Aij < 1.1, with
Aij =
sinh2
( /Delta1ij
2
)
cosh2
( /Delta1jk
2
)
+ cosh2
(
/Delta1ik
2
) , (24)
where i, j = 1, 2, 3 label the ﬁnal-state gluons, and /Delta1ij =
yi − y j .I tw a ss h o w ni n[57] that a zero occurs when a gluon
pairing satisﬁes Aij = 1 and has zero azimuthal angular
separation /Delta1φij = 0. In Fig. 4 (left), a clear suppression by
several orders of magnitude for lower/Delta1φij , which is driven
by this zero, is evident; it was shown in [57] that such a strong
suppression is not seen inclusively. In Fig.4 (right) we show
predictions with respect to the rapidity difference|yi, j − yX |,
with the cut /Delta1φij < 10◦ applied on the angular separation,
and with the additional requirement that cosh/Delta1ij > 4, which
helps to isolate the region where Aij = 1 may be satisﬁed.
Again a clear dip is seen in the distribution; as before it can
be shown explicitly that this dip does not occur inclusively,
and it is directly driven by the presence of a radiation zero,
rather than being, say, an artefact of the cut choices.
While measurements of such distributions can in princi-
ple provide quite a clear demonstration of these radiation
zeros, an important question is whether the expected signal
size would be large enough. From Table 1 we may expect
∼500 signal ggg events from 100 pb
−1 of low pile-up run-
ning which can be realistically anticipated at the LHC at√s = 13 TeV , for jet transverse momenta p⊥ > 25 GeV ,
and rapidities |η| < 2.5. By extending to |η| < 5w em a y
increase the event sample by a factor of∼1.5, and in addition
it should be emphasised that the only necessary requirement
of the production mechanism for these radiation zeros to be
present is that the initial-state gluons be in a colour-singlet
state. That is, the effect is independent of the particle polar-
isations, and of any additional kinematic effects speciﬁc to
the pure CEP process, such as the J
PC
z = 0++ selection
rule. Thus events where one or both protons dissociate, but
with large rapidity gaps between the dissociation states and
the jet system, for which the initial-state gluons are also in
123

--- page 8 ---
9 Page 8 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
dσ
d|Δφi,j| [fb], 0.9 <A ij < 1.1
.
|Δφij|
32.521.510.50
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
dσ
d|yi,j| [fb], Δφij < 10◦, coshΔij > 4
.
|yi,j|
2.521.510.50
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Fig. 4 Differential cross sections (in pb) at√s = 13 TeV for exclusive
ggg jet production at parton level, with respect to (left) the separation in
azimuthal angle/Delta1φij for gluon pairsij passing the cut 0.9 < Aij < 1.1,
where Aij is deﬁned in (24), (right) the rapidity differences|yi, j − yX |
for which cosh/Delta1ij > 4a n d/Delta1φij < 10◦,w h e r eyX is the rapidity of
the 3-jet system and the yi, j is the rapidity of parton i, j, both of which
are binned. All partons are required to have p⊥ > 20 GeV and |y| < 5
a colour-singlet conﬁguration, will be expected to contain
such zeros. Allowing for these, we may expect a sample of
∼1000 ggg events, while the q
qg contribution is expected
from Table1 to be ∼ an order of magnitude smaller and will
not be considered in the following.
While such a sample may at ﬁrst glance be sufﬁcient to
be sensitive to the type of dips shown in Fig.4, some caution
is needed. We recall that we are interested in planar conﬁgu-
rations of the jets, where the zeros may occur: after placing
a cut of /Delta1φ
ij < 10◦(20◦) the expected sample is reduced
to only 55 (142) events. Moreover, it can be shown that the
zero condition A
ij = 1 only has a solution if cosh /Delta1ij > 7,
corresponding to |/Delta1ij | ≳ 2.6. Such a separation in rapidity,
which leads to larger invariant masses of the 3-jet system, is
strongly suppressed, and placing such a cut on the original
sample of 1000 events reduces it to only 36. A less restrictive
cut may be placed as in Fig. 4 (right), of cosh/Delta1
ij > 4, but
after combining this with a reasonable cut on/Delta1φij , less than
1 event remains. Clearly a measurement of a dip in such a
rapidity distribution, even with a more ﬁne-tuned choice of
cuts, will be highly challenging during low-luminosity run-
ning at the LHC.
On the other hand, if the cut 0 .7(0.9)< A
ij < 1.3(1.1)
is placed on the same event sample, then 53(16) expected
events remain, and even with such a fairly small number of
events some discrimination may be possible by considering
the azimuthal separation observable /Delta1φ
ij as in Fig. 4 (left).
In Table 2 the expected number of events for which a gluon
pairing ij passes such a cut onAij and with/Delta1φij greater and
less than 60◦ is shown; for exclusive production, we antic-
ipate a strong suppression in the /Delta1φij < 60◦ region. For
comparison results for a colour summed inclusive sample
of 1000 events are also shown: a strong suppression in the
ratio of events passing the /Delta1φij < 60◦ to /Delta1φij > 60◦ cuts
in the exclusive case is seen in comparison to the inclusive.
Although these results are at LO and parton-level only, and
may be washed out somewhat in a more realistic treatment,
including in particular parton shower/higher-order effects as
well as background events, this may nonetheless be a promis-
ing measurement possibility. By comparing such a ratio with
the measured sample of events dominantly due to CD jet
production (for which there is no colour-singlet requirement
and therefore no observable radiation zeros), a more robust
signal of this suppression may be observable.
Finally, it is again worth emphasising that the only require-
ment on the production mechanism for such zeros to occur
is that the initial-state gluons be in a colour-singlet state,
with the particle polarisations playing no role, and so the
pure CEP case is not the only possibility to observe these
zeros. As described above, events with proton dissociation
may also be considered, but it would also be interesting to
examine if jet properties such as the colour ﬂow and mul-
tiplicity might be used to isolate the contribution from a
colour-singlet initial state, and so investigate these zeros in
an inclusive environment. For example, the so-called jet pull
angle variable has been shown to be useful in identifying
jets which originate from a colour-singlet gg initial state
[58,59].
123

--- page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 9 of 20 9
Table 2 Expected number of ggg jet events for which a gluon pairing
ij passes cuts on the azimuthal separation/Delta1φij and Aij , deﬁned in the
text. Results for both exclusive and inclusive parton-level events, using
the MMHT14LO PDFs [54] are shown, with an initial sample of 1000
events, before cuts, considered in both cases for illustration
0.7 < Aij < 1.30 .9 < Aij < 1.1
/Delta1φij < 60◦ /Delta1φij > 60◦ /Delta1φij <60◦
/Delta1φij >60◦ /Delta1φij < 60◦ /Delta1φij > 60◦ /Delta1φij <60◦
/Delta1φij >60◦
Exclusive 0 .6 55 1.1 % 0.15 16 0.9 %
Inclusive 10 .3 157 6.6 % 3.2 48 6.7 %
4.2 Exclusive vector meson photoproduction
In this section we will consider the photoproduction of vec-
tor mesons, focussing on theJ/ψ and ϒ(1S) cases; although
ψ(2S) production is also included in the MC, it will not be
considered here. At the LHC, coherent J/ψ photoproduc-
tion in ultra peripheral p-Pb collisions has been measured
by ALICE at√sNN = 5.02 TeV [60], and LHCb have made
increasingly precise measurements ofJ/ψ (andψ(2S)) pho-
toproduction in pp collisions [9,61]a t √s = 7 TeV . We will
focus here on production (in pp collisions) in the forward
region relevant to the LHCb acceptance, but will also show
some representative results for central production.
Following the notation of Fig. 2,f o rt h eγ p → Vp sub-
process cross section we take the power-law ﬁt
dσγ p→Vp
dq2
2⊥
= NV
( Wγ p
1G e V
) δV
bV e−bV q2
2⊥ . (25)
For the case of J/ψ production we take Nψ = 3.97 nb and
δψ = 0.64, consistently with the HERA ﬁt [62], which ﬁnds
Nψ = 3.97 ± 0.05 and δψ = 0.67 ± 0.03; these precise
choices will be justiﬁed below. For the ϒ(1S) we take the
values of Nϒ = 0.12 pb and δϒ = 1.6 from [63], although
we note that in this case these are quite poorly constrained
by the existing HERA data. The slope b
V is ﬁtted using a
Regge-based parameterisation
bV = b0 + 4α′log
( Wγ p
90 GeV
)
, (26)
with b0 = 4.6G e V−2 and α′ = 0.2G e V−2, consistently
with the HERA measurement [ 64]. In the absence of any
precise data in the cases ofϒ(1S) and ψ(2S) production, we
assume that these values are universal.
In Table3 we show cross sections predictions forJ/ψ →
μ+μ− production at √s = 7 and 13 TeV , with the ﬁnal-
state muons restricted to lie within the LHCb acceptance
(2 <η
μ < 4.5), as well as for central production ( −1 <
ημ < 1) at √s = 13 TeV . The muons are decayed includ-
ing spin correlations, assuming s-channel helicity conserva-
t i o ni nt h eJ/ψ production subprocess and with the corre-
Table 3 Cross section predictions (in pb) for exclusiveJ/ψ → μ+μ−
photoproduction in pp collisions, for different values of the c.m.s.
energy √s and different cuts on the muon pseudorapidities. Results are
shown for the ‘bare’ and ‘screened’ cross sections, i.e. excluding and
including soft survival effects, respectively, and the resulting average
suppression due to these is also given
2 <η μ < 4.5 −1 <η μ < 1
√s = 7T e V √s = 13 TeV √s = 13 TeV
σψ
bare 359 511 333
σψ
sc. 278 406 291
⟨S2
eik⟩ 0.77 0.79 0.87
sponding branching ratio taken from [ 65]. Predictions are
shown for demonstration both with and without soft sur-
vival effects included, with in the latter case model 4 of [51]
taken, although the results are in fact almost insensitive to this
choice. This is to be expected: the main model dependence
in the evaluation of the soft survival factor lies in the region
of small impact parameter b
t ≪ Rp, where Rp is the pro-
ton radius, whereas the peripheral photoproduction process
is relatively insensitive to this lower b
t region.
The (screened) 7 TeV prediction is in excellent agreement
with the LHCb measurement of [9]
σ J/ψ→μ+μ−
(2 <η μ < 4.5) = 291 ± 7 ± 19 pb, (27)
where the ﬁrst error is statistical and the second is systematic.
However, it is important to emphasise that the predicted value
depends sensitively on the precise form of the ﬁt in ( 25)t o
the γ p → J/ψ p subprocess cross section, in particular the
value of the power δψ . As described above we have chosen
a value for this which is at the lower end of the uncertainty
band of the HERA ﬁt. Taking a larger value will lead to
an increase in the predicted cross section, with for example
δ
ψ = 0.70, on the upper end of the uncertainty band, giving
a ∼40 % larger result, although a more precise evaluation
of the uncertainty must account for the error on Nψ and the
anti-correlation between this and δψ . We therefore choose
this value to give a good ﬁt to the LHCb data. However, this
should be considered as a lower bound on the predicted cross
sections, due to the low choice ofδ
ψ . It is therefore clear from
123

--- page 10 ---
9 Page 10 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
bare
screened
dσ/dyψ [nb], √s =7T e V
yψ
4.543.532.52
6
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
Fig. 5 Distributions with respect the J/ψ rapidity yψ at √s = 7T e V ,
compared to the LHCb data points from [9]. Theory curves correspond-
ing to the ‘bare’ and ‘screened’ cross sections, i.e. excluding and includ-
ing soft survival effects, respectively, are shown, and the integrated cross
sections are normalised to the data for display purposes. The correlated
systematic errors are not shown
Table 3 that without the inclusion of soft survival effects, the
LHCb data are in strong tension with such a ﬁt to HERA
data.
To examine the inﬂuence of survival effects further, we
can also consider the distribution with respect to the J/ψ
rapidity, shown1 in Fig. 5. As discussed in Sect. 2.2 the sur-
vival factor is not constant and will therefore have an effect on
the predicted distributions of the ﬁnal-state particles. This is
seen clearly in the ﬁgure, with the inclusion of screening cor-
rections leading to a steeper fall-off with increasing rapidity.
This is to be expected: asy
ψ increases, so does the fractional
momentum ξ = Mψ eyψ /√s (for the dominant case that the
photon is emitted from the proton moving in the positive z
direction), leading to a larger minimum photonQ2;s e e(15).
The reaction therefore becomes less peripheral, and the sur-
vival factor will decrease. This effect is also seen in Table3,
when comparing the average survival factor between the cen-
tral and forward predictions. On the other hand, adjusting the
input value ofδ
ψ in (25) within the range consistent with the
HERA data leads to much smaller changes in the predicted
distribution. Although the agreement is still far from per-
fect,
2 the overall trend of the data clearly prefer the screened
prediction. While this conclusion is only strictly true in the
1 The data points corrected from the ﬁducial measurement are shown
so as to remove the inﬂuence of the muon cuts, giving a clearer demon-
stration of the underlying theory; as the correction factors are in fact
derived in [9] using a previous version of SuperChic, these do not
imply any signiﬁcant model dependence.
2 However, we note that the correlated systematic errors are not shown
in Fig. 5.
context of the simple power-law HERA ﬁt ( 25), nonethe-
less this illustrates the importance of a full inclusion of soft
survival effects in theoretical models such as e.g. [63,66].
We may also consider the distribution with respect to
the J/ψ transverse momentum p
ψ⊥ . This is an important
variable in the LHCb measurements [ 9,61], for which the
selected events contain a non-negligible fraction with proton
dissociation and/or additional particle production that falls
outside the LHCb rapidity coverage. To subtract this back-
ground the measured p
2
ψ⊥ distribution is ﬁtted by a sum of
two exponentials ∼exp(−bp2
ψ⊥ ), corresponding to the elas-
tic and proton dissociative contributions. The data are well
ﬁt by such a parametric form, and in [9] LHCb ﬁnd
bψ
el = 5.70 ± 0.11 GeV−2 (28)
for the pure elastic CEP contribution, while for the proton dis-
sociative contribution the value of the corresponding slope is
signiﬁcantly smaller, reﬂecting the larger average p⊥ in this
case. Recalling that in CEP the vector sum of the proton trans-
verse momenta is transferred directly to the produced object,
this ﬁtted value reﬂects a non-trivial interplay between the
elastic electromagnetic and Pomeron form factors, given in
(12) and (25), respectively. While photon exchange generally
prefers smaller values of the proton p
⊥ and so will have a
smaller impact on bel (28), this contribution cannot neces-
sarily be neglected completely, in particular in the forward
region where the slope of the Pomeron form factor in ( 26)
can be quite high, and the average photon virtuality is larger.
Again, we will expect screening corrections to have some
inﬂuence on this value: in particular, as the expected sup-
pression is larger at higher proton p
⊥, we will expect these
to increase bel compared to the bare case, see [ 5] for addi-
tional discussion. Such an effect, although fairly small, is
clearly seen in Fig. 6, where the J/ψ transverse momentum
distributions in the screened and bare cases are shown. Per-
forming a least-squares ﬁt for p
2
ψ⊥ < 0.4G e V2 we ﬁnd the
distributions can be well ﬁtted by a simple exponential with
slopes
bbare
el = 5.0G e V−2 bsc.
el = 5.5G e V−2 (29)
with a ∼± 0.1G e V−2 error due to the uncertainty on the
HERA ﬁt [ 64]i n( 26), and a smaller error ∼± 0.02 GeV2
due to the ﬁtting procedure. We can see that the bare result is
inconsistent with the quite precise LHCb measurement (28),
but that the introduction of survival effects greatly reduces
this tension. While the predicted rapidity distributions in
Fig. 5 and the preference for screening corrections found
in that case depend on the validity of the power-law ﬁt ( 25)
outside the original Wγ p region of the HERA ﬁt, the param-
eterisation (26) is grounded in more fundamental principles
of Regge theory: the value of the slope is driven by the struc-
123

--- page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 11 of 20 9
bare
screened
dσ/dp2
ψ⊥ [pb], √s =7T e V, 2 <η μ < 4.5
p2
ψ⊥
0.40.350.30.250.20.150.10.050
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Fig. 6 Distributions with respect the J/ψ transverse momentum at√s = 7 TeV , corresponding to the ‘bare’ and ‘screened’ cross sec-
tions for J/ψ → μ+μ− production, i.e. excluding and including soft
survival effects, respectively. The muons are required to have pseudora-
pidity 2 <η
μ < 4.5, and the integrated bare cross section is normalised
to the screened value for display purposes
ture of the Pomeron-proton vertex and the slope α′ of the
exchanged Pomeron, while the contribution from the heavy
vector boson vertex will be very small. This behaviour is
therefore expected to be present in more sophisticated models
such as [63,66], and thus this result provides a more certain,
and less model-dependent indication of the importance of a
correct, fully differential, inclusion of survival effects. Inter-
estingly, it appears that the predicted value may be somewhat
lower than the measurement; further theoretical investigation
of the model dependence of the result, as well as experimen-
tally a more precise measurement of b
el, in particular as a
function of the J/ψ rapidity, would help to clarify this.
Finally, considering the case of exclusive ϒ(1S) →
μ+μ− production, this has recently been measured for the
ﬁrst time in hadronic collisions by the LHCb collabora-
tion [67], at √s = 7 and 8 TeV . As with J/ψ production
(25) we take a power-law ﬁt to the γϒ cross section, but in
this case the available HERA data [68,69] are much less pre-
cise, and the resulting ﬁt parameters are not well determined.
The default ﬁt in earlier versions ofSuperChic, which was
qualitatively similar to the LO prediction of [ 66], leads to
much too steep an energy dependence in comparison to the
LHCb data, and a new ﬁt is therefore required. This is how-
ever complicated by the fact that in pp collisions the photon
may be emitted from either colliding proton, i.e. we must add
the cross sections at energies W
± = (Mϒ
√se±yϒ )1/2;t h e
lower energy W− contribution, due to the positive power δ
in (25), is expected to be smaller, but not necessarily negligi-
ble. A simultaneous ﬁt to these contributions must therefore
be performed, and as the effect of changing δ typically acts
Table 4 Cross section predictions (in pb) for exclusive ϒ → μ+μ−
photoproduction in pp collisions, including screening effects, for dif-
ferent values of the c.m.s. energy √s and different cuts on the muon
pseudorapidities. The 7+8 TeV result is given by the weighted average
of the predictions corresponding to the relative fractions of integrated
luminosity collected by the LHCb measurement [67] at these energies
2 <η μ < 4.5 −1 <η μ < 1
√s = 7 + 8T e V √s = 13 TeV √s = 13 TeV
σϒ
scr. 0.23 0.34 0.29
in opposite directions on the W± contributions, this leads
to a large amount of cancelation between these, such that a
good ﬁt to the combined cross section can be achieved for
a wide range of δ, in particular for the current fairly limited
LHCb and HERA data. This highlights a wider issue: when
attempting to extract information as regards the γ p → Vp
cross section from measurements inpp collisions some addi-
tional assumptions must be made in separating the W
+ and
W− contributions. A more robust extraction may be made
by increasing the statistics and W range of the data, but ulti-
mately a direct and model independent comparison in pp
collisions can only be performed against lab frame variables,
such as the meson rapidity distribution, where both W+ and
W− contributions are suitably included in the theory predic-
tion. On the other hand, in pA collisions this issue does not
arise, as the source of photons can to very good approxima-
tion be uniquely identiﬁed with the heavy ion, due to the Z2
enhancement in the photon ﬂux.
Assuming a simple power-law as in (25) and ﬁtting to the
available data leads to a quite low best ﬁt value of δ ≈ 0.3,
but with a sizeable error. Such a low value is disfavoured on
general grounds [70], from which we would expect a larger
δ than in the case of the lower scaleJ/ψ production process.
Moreover, due to the cancellation effects discussed above,
it is possible to achieve a good ﬁt for much higher values
of δ, and instead we set δ
ϒ = 0.7, with the normalisation
Nϒ = 5.7 pb found from the resulting ﬁt, for which we
still have χ2/d.o.f ∼ 1. The weighted average of the pre-
dicted cross sections within the LHCb acceptance at√s = 7
and 8 TeV , corresponding to the relative fractions of inte-
grated luminosity collected by LHCb [67] at these energies,
is shown in Table 4, and is seen to be reasonably consis-
tent with the measurement of 0 .22 ± 0.07 pb. Predictions
for √
s = 13 TeV are also given: these contain a ∼50 %
uncertainty due to the error in the extracted parameters of
the power-law ﬁt.
4.3 Two-photon mediated processes
In this section we present a very brief selection of results for
the two-photon exclusive production of lepton (electron and
123

--- page 12 ---
9 Page 12 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
Table 5 Cross section predictions (in fb) for exclusive muon and W
boson pair production at √s = 13 TeV . The muons are required to
have p⊥ > 5 GeV and |η| < 2.5, and are shown with and without an
additional cut of Mμμ > 2MW , while in the W boson case, no cuts are
imposed. Results are shown for the ‘bare’ and ‘screened’ cross sections,
i.e. excluding and including soft survival effects, respectively, and the
resulting average suppression due to these is also given
μ+μ− μ+μ−,
Mμμ > 2MW
μ+μ−,
pprot.
⊥ < 0.1
GeV
W+ W−
σbare 6240 11 .2 3170 87 .5
σsc. 5990 9 .58 3150 71 .9
⟨S2
eik⟩ 0.96 0 .86 0.994 0 .82
muon) and W boson pair production. In Table 5 we show
predictions for the muon and W boson pair production cross
sections, with and without soft survival effects included. In
the case of muon pair production we can see that, as expected
from the discussion in Sect. 3, the average soft suppression
factor is close to unity, due to the peripheral two-photon inter-
action, as well as the vanishing of the T
±± amplitudes for
massless leptons discussed in Sect. 3.2. However, as seen in
the previous section, as the system invariant mass increases,
we will expect the photon momentum fraction xγ ∝ MX to
increase. This will lead to a higher average photon virtuality,
see (15), and therefore for the average survival factor to be
smaller for this less peripheral interaction. We also show the
prediction for the same muon pair cross section, but subject
to the requirement that M
μμ > 2MW ; while the suppression
factor is still quite close to unity, it is clearly lower. This
reduction in the survival factor withMX is seen more clearly
in Fig. 7 where the average suppression is shown for muon
S2(MX)
MX
500450400350300250200150100500
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
Fig. 7 Average survival factor ⟨S2
elk⟩= dσscr./dσbare as a function
of the central system invariant mass MX for muon pair production, at√s = 14 TeV . The muons are required to have p⊥ > 2.5 GeV and
|η| < 2.5
Table 6 Cross section predictions (in pb) for exclusive muon and elec-
tron pair production at√s = 7 TeV . The muons (electrons) are required
to have p⊥ > 10(12) GeV , and in both cases |ηl| < 2.4. Results are
shown for the ‘bare’ and ‘screened’ cross sections, i.e. excluding and
including soft survival effects, respectively, and the resulting average
suppression due to these is also given. These are compared to the ATLAS
data [74]
μ+μ− e+e−
σbare 0.795 0.497
σsc. 0.742 0.459
⟨S2
eik⟩ 0.93 0.92
ATLAS data [74]0 .628 ± 0.032 ± 0.021 0 .428 ± 0.035 ± 0.018
pair production as a function of the pair invariant mass; a very
similar result is found in the case of W pair production. We
also show in Table5 the total W boson pair production cross
section, where the suppression factor is smaller still, due to
the different helicity structure of the production amplitudes
(for which the T
±± amplitudes are non-vanishing). Finally,
the muon pair production cross section, but with the outgo-
ing protons required to have transverse momentump⊥ < 0.1
GeV is shown: by placing such a cut, the reaction is required
to be highly peripheral, and it can be seen that the suppres-
sion factor is extremely close to unity. On the other hand, as
discussed in [ 71], in the case that one or both protons dis-
sociate the reaction is generally much less peripheral, and a
proper inclusion of soft survival effects becomes crucial; this
can lead to sizeable deviations in the data with respect to the
result of e.g. the LPAIR MC [72,73], which does not include
these effects.
Recently, the ATLAS collaboration have published a mea-
surement of exclusive μ
+μ− and e+e− production [74]i n
normal LHC running conditions, by vetoing on additional
charged-particle tracks associated with the lepton vertex, and
applying further corrections to extract the exclusive signal.
This is compared to the MC predictions in Table6. The bare
cross sections are in both cases too high compared to the
data, but a better agreement is achieved when survival effects
are included. However, interestingly, while there is excellent
agreement within uncertainties in the electron case, the pre-
diction for the muon cross section lies ∼3 σ above the data,
i.e. a lower value of the average soft suppression appears
to be preferred. Such a discrepancy may indicate that a fur-
ther reﬁnement of the modelling of the opacity in the highb
t
region, to which two-photon induced processes are sensitive,
is required, or alternatively may be a result of contamination
from non-exclusive events due, for example, to proton disso-
ciation, although a detailed attempt is made in [74] to subtract
this background and account for any uncertainty on this in the
systematic error on the data. Further measurements, ideally
differential in mll , as well as with tagged protons, thus effec-
tively eliminating the possibility of proton dissociation, will
123

--- page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 13 of 20 9
be of great use in clarifying this issue. It is worth emphasising
that as the two-photon production process is theoretically so
well understood, this represents a particularly clean probe of
soft survival effects, in particular if the outgoing protons are
tagged.
These results highlight the importance of a proper treat-
ment of screening corrections, which is still often not
included in the literature. In the recent work of [75] for exam-
ple, where the question of constraining the photon PDF in
exclusive l
+l− and W+W− production is considered, soft
survival effects, which as noted above may be particularly
important if proton dissociative events are included, are omit-
ted.
3 Another important example of this is in [77], where an
evaluation of the survival factor for two-photon induced pro-
cesses is given, the predictions of which are compared to in
t h eA T L A Sd a t ai n[74]. While a differential treatment of the
survival factor is given, and for example the same qualitative
decrease with M
X as in Fig. 7 is seen, the correct photon q⊥
dependence, described in Sect. 3.2, is not included in this
work; in impact parameter space, only the bt dependence of
the photon ﬂux (12) is included, and not that of theγγ → X
subprocess. This omits entirely any process-dependence in
the survival factor and will not give a reliable estimate for the
expected suppression. After an explicit calculation, we ﬁnd
that including only the b
t dependence of the photon ﬂux, as
in [77], tends to underestimate the survival factor by ∼10–
20 % for lepton pair production within the ATLAS event
selection. It should be emphasised that this does not corre-
spond to a genuine model dependence: the correct inclusion
of the photon q
⊥ dependence as discussed in Sect. 3.2 fol-
lows simply from the derivation of the equivalent photon
approximation and cannot be omitted. Indeed, in the case
of lepton pair production, if we include the correct photon
q
⊥ dependence at the amplitude level, and instead of using
the model of [ 51] we take the simpliﬁed form for the pro-
ton opacity used in [77], then the predicted survival factor is
almost unchanged for these peripheral interactions.
4.4 Heavy quarkonia production
The CEP of χc,b (and ηc,b) quarkonia states has been con-
sidered in [5,6,78]. These processes are implemented in the
new MC, and in this section we present updated predictions
for a short selection ofχc,b cross sections. However, we note
that a number of theoretical updates and modiﬁcations have
been included in comparison to these earlier studies: we sum-
marise these below ﬁrst.
3 Moreover, in the semi-exclusive case it is not the standard photon PDF
which enters in the hard cross section. Rather, the PDF must be evolved
using a modiﬁed form of the DGLAP equation in which emission in the
experimentally relevant rapidity region is forbidden. This will be the
subject of a future study [76].
As discussed in these earlier studies, the predicted cross
section for χc CEP has a signiﬁcant theoretical uncertainty.
One important source of this is the gluon PDF, which at the
quite low x and Q2 values relevant to the process is not
well determined; for this reason, in [ 5,6], consistently with
the earlier treatment in [ 79], the χc cross section was cal-
culated at a lower value of √s = 60 GeV , where the gluon
is better constrained, and a Regge extrapolation σ ∝ s2/Delta1,
with /Delta1= 0.2, was assumed to calculate the cross section
at higher energies. While the prediction of such an approach
was observed to give good agreement with the CDF mea-
surement of χcJ production [80], clearly it depends on the
validity of the Regge scaling assumption, and in particular on
the precise value of/Delta1. Such a scaling closely corresponds to
assuming a typical power-like low-x form xg ∼ x−/Delta1in the
gluon PDF, which appears in the perturbative amplitude (1)
via (3). However, while typically gluon PDFs extracted from
global ﬁts exhibit to good approximation such a behaviour,
the precise value of/Delta1= ∂ log xg/∂ log x, which will depend
on the PDF set, may be different from /Delta1= 0.2 and, cru-
cially, will depend on the scale Q2, due to DGLAP evolu-
tion; such physics will be missed by the simple assumption
above.
More physically, we now therefore treat quarkonium pro-
duction consistently with other exclusive processes within
the MC, and evaluate the cross section at the appropriate√
s
value, without any explicit Regge scaling assumption. As the
CDF measurement ofγγ CEP [7] strongly favours the results
from typical LO gluon PDFs, see e.g. [ 24], a ﬁnding which
is further supported by the LHCb measurement of J/ψ pair
production at √s = 7 and 8 TeV [ 23], these should be the
appropriate choice here. However, the low x dependence of
such PDFs leads to a signiﬁcantly steeper √s dependence:
for example, with MMHT14LO PDFs [54] for a typical Q2
given by the average gluon transverse momentum⟨Q2
⊥⟩∼ 4
GeV2 we ﬁnd /Delta1≈ 0.32. The effect of instead taking such
a value of /Delta1is dramatic, leading to a factor of ∼5 larger
cross section at Tevatron energies, and ∼ an order of mag-
nitude larger at the LHC. The result of explicitly including
the corresponding PDF set in (1) within the MC is consistent
with this increase, with the precise energy dependence being
somewhat steeper still. This leads to a predicted total χ
cJ
cross section at √s = 1.96 TeV that is signiﬁcantly larger
than the value measured by CDF [80].
There are, however, other corrections to the simpliﬁed
approach of [ 5,6] which we may consider. In particular, in
these works, the χc,b cross sections are given in terms of the
gg → χ vertices
V0+ =
√
1
6
cχ
Mχ
(3M2
χ(q1⊥ q2⊥ )
−(q1⊥ q2⊥ )(q2
1⊥ + q2
2⊥ ) − 2q2
1⊥ q2
2⊥ ), (30)
123

--- page 14 ---
9 Page 14 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
V1+ =− 2icχ
s p1,ν p2,α((q2⊥ )μ(q1⊥ )2
−(q1⊥ )μ(q2⊥ )2)ϵμναβϵ∗χ
β , (31)
V2+ =
√
2cχ Mχ
s (s(q1⊥ )μ(q2⊥)α
+ 2(q1⊥ q2⊥ ) p1μ p2α)ϵ∗μα
χ , (32)
where qi⊥ is the transverse momentum of the incoming gluon
i, with q2
i⊥ =− q2
i⊥, and
cχ = 1
2√NC
16πα S
(q1q2)2
√
6
4π Mχ
φ′
P(0). (33)
Crucially, in [5,6] the vertices (30)–(32) were calculated in
the q2
i⊥ ≪ M2
χ limit. This approximation was justiﬁed by
the fact that, while a more complete treatment of the par-
ticle kinematics, as in the k⊥-factorisation approach of the
Durham model, includes an important part of the higher-
order corrections (within collinear factorisation) which gen-
erate initial-state gluon off-shellness, the q
i⊥ ∼ Mχ region
may be particularly sensitive to the exact form of such correc-
tions, for which a full NLO (and beyond) calculation would
be necessary to give a complete evaluation. Moreover, the
derivation of ( 1) is only strictly valid in the q
2
i⊥ ≪ M2
χ
regime.
On the other hand, as discussed in [ 78], see also [ 81],
keeping the full qi⊥ dependence in gg → χ amplitudes can
have a signiﬁcant effect, and it may still be the case that this
gives a more reliable estimate of the expected cross sections.
Moreover, as we will now show, such a treatment is preferred
by the existing data onχ
c CEP, when the LO PDFs described
above are used. For this reason, we now choose to include
the full gluon q
i⊥ dependence everywhere in the vertices
(30)–(32). The most signiﬁcant effect of this can be seen by
observing that the term appearing in the denominator of (33)
(q1q2) = 1
2
(
M2
χ − q2
1⊥ − q2
2⊥
)
, (34)
which in the on-shell gluon approximation is equal toM2
χ/2,
appears to the fourth power in the cross section, so that even
for relatively small average⟨q2
i⊥⟩/M2
χ , the correction may be
sizeable. Moreover, in general this ratio is not too small: using
the vertex (30)i n(1), for example, we have⟨q
2
i⊥⟩/M2
χ ∼ 0.3.
As this will lead to a larger denominator ( 34), the effect is
to reduce the expected cross section. The precise value of
this depends on such factors as the object mass, PDF choice,
and √
s, but also on the particle spin, through the form of
the vertex (30)–(32), all of which affect⟨q2
i⊥⟩. Taking√s =
60 GeV , so as to compare with the predictions of [5,6], we
ﬁnd that including the full qi⊥ dependence in the gg → χ
amplitudes reduces the expected cross sections for central
χcJ production by factors of ∼3, 6 and 2 for the J = 0, 1
and 2 states, respectively. The reduction in the cross sections
Table 7 Differential cross section, dσ/dyχ , predictions (in nb) atyχ =
0 for exclusive χcJ → J/ψγ production at √s = 1.96 TeV , including
screening effects. The sum over the three spin states, and the ratio of
the χ
c0 to the total cross sections are also given. Results are shown for
three choices of LO PDF: CTEQ6L1 [83], MMHT14 [54], NNPDF 3.0
(αS(M2
Z ) = 0.130) [84], and with model 1 of [51] for the soft survival
factor
σ × Br χc0 χc1 χc2
∑ χcJ
χc0∑ χcJ
CTEQ6L1 0.29 0.12 0.22 0.63 0.46
MMHT14LO 0.38 0.11 0.29 0.78 0.49
NNPDF3.0 0.51 0.15 0.41 1.1 0.48
is sizeable, and the spin dependence is clear, while at larger√s the higher average gluon Q2
⊥ leads to a further increase
in the suppression. For the χc1, the impact is particularly
severe: we recall that the production amplitude vanishes for
on-shell incoming gluons and in the forward proton limit,
and therefore we would expect the predicted cross section to
be particularly sensitive to the precise form of the gluon off-
shell corrections, as well as the protonp
⊥ spectra. In the case
of the higher massχb the effect is greatly reduced, leading to
a factor of ∼10–20 % smaller cross section for the χb0 and
χb2 and a factor of ∼2 smaller cross section for the χb1.
We ﬁnd that this overall reduction in the expected cross
sections is largely cancelled by the increase due to the use
of the LO PDFs at the appropriate √s value, so that the
ﬁnal predicted cross sections at the Tevatron are now in good
agreement with the CDF measurement [80]o f ∑ σ(χ cJ →
J/ψγ ) = 0.97 nb; see Table 7 below. As discussed above,
this PDF choice is well motivated by the agreement it gives
with the CDF measurement of γγ CEP [7] and the LHCb
measurement of J/ψ pair production [23], as well as being
theoretically simpler and arguably more justiﬁed then invok-
ing additional Regge scaling arguments. The full inclusion
of off-shell gluon effects then appears to be required to give
good agreement with the CDF χ
c data [80] when such LO
PDFs are used. It should, however, be emphasised that while
the agreement with these data is equally good between this
updated approach and that of [5,6], the predictions for other
observables are quite distinct. This different treatment of the
gluon off-shellness affects the χc1 and χc2 to χc0 ratios, and
the predicted energy dependence of the χc cross sections is
steeper, leading to increased rates at the LHC. In addition, as
the higher mass χ
b states are much less sensitive to off-shell
gluon effects we predict larger cross sections for these; see
Table 10 below.
A further change compared to the earlier works relates to
the normalisation of the derivative of the wave function at
the origin φ′
P(0) in (33). As in [6] this is normalised in terms
of the total χc0 width
/Gamma1tot(χ0) ≈ /Gamma1(χ0 → gg) = 96 α2
S
M4χ0
|φ′
P(0)|2. (35)
123

--- page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 15 of 20 9
This implicitly includes higher order contributions to the
gg → χ vertex, under the assumption that these are the
same as in the χ → gg case. While in [ 6] an additional
subtraction was made so that these corrections were only
included for the spin-zeroχ0, by dividing the extracted value
of |φ′
P(0)|2 for the χ1,2 by a K-factor, taken to be 1.5, we
now choose to apply this correction uniformly; in this case
the ratio of cross sections between the spin states correspond
to the purely LO results, consistently with the rest of the
calculation. This change leads to a factor of 1.5 smaller χ
c0
cross section compared to previous results. In the case of the
χb, the measurement of [ 82] suggests that earlier estimates
for the total width, such as that taken in [78], underestimate
the true value, and prefers /Gamma1tot(χb0) ≈ 0.8 MeV , excluding
any NLO K-factor. We take this value here: as in [ 78]t h i s
was taken as the value including a K-factor (again assumed to
be 1.5), the χ
b0 predictions are unchanged, while the χb(1,2)
predictions are now a factor of 1.5 larger.
Finally, while in [ 5,6] an additional ‘non-perturbative’
contribution was considered in the case of χc production,
this is no longer included. This does not rule out the possi-
bility of important non-perturbative effects for the relatively
low mass χ
c states; rather, we choose to consistently only
consider the perturbative mechanism in the MC. The inﬂu-
ence of possible non-perturbative effects can then be seen as
deviations from these predictions, for example in the ratio
of cross sections between the different spin states. In addi-
tion, as discussed above, we recall that no enhanced survival
effects are considered here: these may reduce the expected
cross sections somewhat, but will leave the ratios χ
1/χ0 etc
almost unchanged.
Turning now to the MC predictions, in Table 7 we show
the predicted differential cross sections at yχ = 0f o r χcJ
production at the Tevatron for a range of PDF sets, and with
model 1 of the soft survival factor from [ 51]. This can be
compared to the previous predictions of [ 6]. As described
above, the steeper energy dependence due to the LO gluon
PDF sets and the suppression due to the new treatment of
off-shell gluon effects are found to largely cancel, such that
the total χ
cJ cross section is similar in size, and in all cases
consistent with the CDF measurement [ 80]. On the other
hand the ratiosχc(1,2)/χc0 are different. From the discussion
above, in the case of theχc1/χc0 ratio, we expect the updated
off-shell gluon effects to reduce this by a factor of∼3, while
the χc2/χc0 ratio should be increased by a factor of ∼2, and
in both cases the new treatment of the NLO K-factor for
the χ
c0 will increase these by a factor of 1 .5. We therefore
expect the χc1/χc0 ratio to be decreased by a factor of ∼2
and the χc2/χc0 ratio to be increased by a factor of ∼3: this
is indeed consistent with the results of Table 7. It should be
emphasised that as the changes due to the updated treatment
of the off-shell gluon effects are theoretically motived, and
essential to reproduce the CDF χ
c data [ 80] with the LO
Table 8 Cross section predictions (in pb) for exclusive χcJ →
J/ψγ → μ+μ−γ production at √s = 7 TeV , including screening
effects, with the cross section ratios between the different spin states
shown for clarity. Results are shown for three choices of LO PDF:
CTEQ6L1 [83], MMHT14 [54], NNPDF 3.0 (α
S(M2
Z ) = 0.130) [84],
with model 1 of [51] for the soft survival factor, and with theχc decay
products in the rapidity region 2 <η< 4.5. The preliminary LHCb
measurement [8] is shown for comparison, with statistical, systematic
and luminosity errors added in quadrature; for the cross section ratios
only the statistical errors are included
σ × Br χc0 χc1 χc2
χc1
χc0
χc2
χc0
CTEQ6L1 19 8.3 15 0.44 0.79
MMHT14LO 51 17 41 0.33 0.80
NNPDF3.0 23 7.1 19 0.31 0.83
LHCb data 9 .3 ± 4.51 6 .4 ± 7.12 8 .0 ± 12.31 .8 ± 0.73 .0 ± 0.9
PDFs sets preferred by measurements of exclusive processes
at the Tevatron and LHC [23,80] (as well as themselves being
a consistent choice for the LO theoretical calculation), these
may be expected to better describe the data; the difference
due to the treatment of the NLOK-factor, on the other hand,
which enters at the level of the uncertainty due to higher-order
corrections, simply corresponds to one possible prescription,
with everything treated at LO, while the approach [6], where
some approximate K-factors are included, may give a better
estimate. Finally, we note that the ratio χ
c0/∑ χcJ ,a l s o
shown in Table 7, is reasonably consistent with the more
recent CDF limit for this of ≲50 %, calculated from the
corresponding limits on χc0 production in the π+π− and
K+ K− channels [85].
In Table 8 we show predictions for χc → J/ψγ →
μ+μ−γ CEP at √s = 7 TeV for the same event selection
as the preliminary LHCb measurement [ 8]o ft h i sp r o c e s s .
While the default predictions with the MMHT14LO PDFs are
somewhat too large, the agreement is better, although not per-
fect, with the CTEQ6L and NNPDF3.0 PDF sets. These are
on the other hand only the predictions for the central PDFs:
for the MMHT14LO set, for example, the PDF uncertainty
is found to be ±∼ 50 %. The χ
c(1,2)/χc0 ratios also exhibit
some generally small PDF dependence, which is larger in the
χc1 case. These ratios are qualitatively consistent with the
predictions, and it should be emphasised that this is in itself
a highly non-trivial result: for example, for the χ
c2 without
the effect of the Jz = 0 selection rule we would expect the
corresponding ratio to be ∼2 orders of magnitude higher, as
is observed inclusively. However, there remains some indi-
cation of tension with the LHCb data in both cross section
ratios, which, as discussed in detail in [6], may be due to the
inﬂuence of proton dissociation on the selected events, but
may also indicate that further theoretical work is needed to
better model the CEP of these relatively low mass states.
Further measurements of this, with the new HERSCHEL
123

--- page 16 ---
9 Page 16 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
Table 9 Cross section predictions (in pb) for exclusive χcJ →
J/ψγ → μ+μ−γ production at √s = 13 TeV , including screening
effects, with the cross section ratios between the different spin states
shown for clarity. Results are shown for three choices of LO PDF:
CTEQ6L1 [83], MMHT14 [54], NNPDF 3.0 (α
S(M2
Z ) = 0.130) [84],
with model 1 of [51] for the soft survival factor, and with theχc decay
products in the rapidity region 2 <η< 4.5
σ × Br χc0 χc1 χc2
χc1
χc0
χc2
χc0
C T E Q 6 L 1 3 01 42 60 . 4 6 0 . 8 7
MMHT14LO 77 24 68 0.31 0.88
NNPDF3.0 39 11 35 0.28 0.90
Table 10 Cross section predictions (in fb) for exclusiveχbJ → ϒγ →
μ+μ−γ production at √s = 13 TeV , including screening effects, with
the cross section ratios between the different spin states shown. Results
are shown for three choices of LO PDF: CTEQ6L1 [83], MMHT14 [54],
NNPDF 3.0 (α
S(M2
Z ) = 0.130) [84], with model 1 of [51] for the soft
survival factor, and with the χb decay products in the rapidity region
2 <η< 4.5
σ × Br χb0 χb1 χb2
χb1
χb0
χb2
χb0
CTEQ6L1 73 5.3 27 0.073 0.37
MMHT14LO 110 6.6 43 0.060 0.39
NNPDF3.0 62 3.5 24 0.056 0.39
detectors [17] at LHCb allowing a much greater rejection
of non-exclusive events, will greatly clarify this question;
the corresponding cross section predictions at√s = 13 TeV
are shown in Table 9.
A further observable, which is not expected to suffer from
the same uncertainties as in the χc case, is the CEP of the
heavier χb states: for example, as discussed above, the effect
of adjusting the treatment of gluon off-shellness is much
smaller, due to the larger meson mass, and more generally
the production process is safely in the perturbative regime.
In Table10 we show predictions forχ
bJ → ϒγ → μ+μ−γ
production at √s = 13 TeV , within the LHCb acceptance.
Due to the larger mass, the predicted cross sections are sig-
niﬁcantly smaller, although still experimentally realistic. The
expected χ
b1/χb0 ratio is much smaller than in the χc case,
due to the higher meson mass, while the χb2/χb0 ratio is
somewhat smaller, mainly due to the differing branching
ratios for the particle decays. We note that the predicted cross
sections are signiﬁcantly larger than the estimates of [6]: the
SuperChic v1.47 MC predicts for example a χ
b0 cross
section of 8 fb within the same acceptance. This sizeable
difference is primarily due to the steeper energy dependence
induced by the LO PDF sets.
Finally, it is interesting to observe the dependence of the
average survival factor on the spin on the produced states.
This is shown in Table11 forχc production at√s = 1.96 and
7 TeV , and for two different soft models in [51]: the average
Table 11 Average survival factors forχcJ production corresponding to
Tables7 (‘Tevatron’) and8 (‘LHCb’), for two different model choices of
the soft survival factor deﬁned in [51]. Values are shown for MMHT14
LO [54] PDFs, but the results for other choices are similar
Model 1 Model 4
χc0 χc1 χc2 χc0 χc1 χc2
⟨S2
eik⟩, Tevatron 0.027 0.067 0.060 0.033 0.088 0.077
⟨S2
eik⟩, LHCb 0.014 0.029 0.036 0.019 0.041 0.050
suppression is much weaker for the higher spin states, due
to the more peripheral nature of the interaction vertices (31)
and (32), while the stronger overall reduction as the collider
energy is increased, and the variation between the model
choices, is clear.
4.5 Generated processes: summary
In the coming years the LHC will take increasingly precise
data at unprecedented energies. This presents the possibility
for a wide programme of exclusive measurements, building
on those already performed during Run-I [ 12]. For this rea-
son a wide range of processes, some of which have been
discussed in detail above, are included in the MC. We sum-
marise these, and give some motivations for further exper-
imental measurements, below (see [ 5,6,24,86] for further
details of the processes generated):
• Exclusive jet and vector meson production, discussed fur-
ther in Sects. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.
• χ
cJ production, discussed in Sect. 4.4, by both the
J/ψγ → μ+μ−γ and the two-body decay channels,
including full spin correlations. As discussed in Sect.4.4,
the existing preliminary LHCb measurement [8] of exclu-
sive χc → J/ψγ production, while qualitatively agree-
ing with the Durham model expectations, shows some
possible tension with the theory, in particular with an
apparent excess of χ
c2 events visible. Further measure-
ments of this process, with the new HERSCHEL detec-
tors [17] at LHCb allowing a much greater rejection of
non-exclusive events, will greatly clarify this question.
Observables such as two body decays, where theχc2 is no
longer enhanced by theJ/ψγ branching (and theχc1 will
be absent entirely), as well as more differential observ-
ables such as theχc(1,2)/χc0 ratio as a function of p⊥(χ)
will allow a closer comparison to theory.
• Light meson pair ( ππ , KK , η(′)η(′), φφ) production.
Measurements of the meson p⊥ distribution are of par-
ticular importance, as these are sensitive to the transi-
tion from the ‘non-perturbative’ low p⊥ region where
a Regge-based model may be more appropriate 4 to
4 Such a model is not included in SuperChic:s e e[ 40,87] for MC
implementations.
123

--- page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 17 of 20 9
the higher p⊥ region where the perturbative approach
described in [88] should become relevant. Where such a
transition occurs is currently a very uncertain question.
However, we note that the perturbative approach makes
very distinct predictions about, for example, the cross
section for ﬂavour-non-singlet meson pair production,
compared to Regge-based expectations.
• γγ production. As well as being of interest in its own
right, this relatively clean process can serve as a useful
benchmark to compare with other CEP measurements:
by considering cross section ratios with respect to γγ
CEP, uncertainties due to the gluon PDFs and survival
factor largely cancel. In addition, as discussed in [ 89]
the light-by-light scattering process has yet to be seen
experimentally, and may represent an observable at the
LHC, or in a future circular collider; the photon-induced
γγ → γγ process is therefore also included.
• Double J/ψ and ψ(2S) quarkonia production. In [ 23]
LHCb have reported the observation of double J/ψ and
J/ψψ( 2S) production, in broad agreement with theory
expectations in [24]. More precise measurements, in par-
ticular in the case of ψ(2S)J/ψ and double ψ(2S) pro-
duction (so far not seen), as well as more differential mea-
surements of the double J/ψ cross sections, for example
with respect to the meson rapidity separation and p
⊥,
would provide a useful test of the perturbative approach.
As discussed above, a measurement of the ratio to other
exclusive processes such asγγ would also greatly reduce
the potentially large theoretical uncertainties. In addition,
although not currently included in the MC, the cross sec-
tion for double η
c production could be of the same size
or even larger than for the J/ψ, due to the particular
Feynman diagrams which enter in this case.
• χb production, by both the ϒγ → μ+μ−γ and the
two-body decay channels, including full spin correla-
tions. The higher mass compared to the χ
c case means
that the process should be safely perturbative, so that
we should expect good agreement between the measured
χb2/χb0 ratio and theory, while the χb1 should be prac-
tically absent.
• Pseudoscalar ηc,b meson production. These are expected
to be strongly suppressed by theJ P
z = 0+ selection rule.
A measurement of these processes would therefore pro-
vide a direct test of this; for theηc, the predicted cross sec-
tions are large enough that this could represent a realistic
observable, although it may be challenging to identify an
experimentally viable decay channel.
• W
+W− and l+l− production ( l = e,μ,τ ), via two-
photon collisions; see Sect. 4.3. This purely QED cross
section is known theoretically to very high precision, and
in the case of lepton pair production, if cuts are place
to restrict the proton p⊥ [or equivalently p⊥(l−l+)]t o
low values the survival factor may be essentially omit-
ted, so that such a process could be used as a luminos-
ity calibration [ 50]. Alternatively, without placing such
cuts, this well-understood process can serve as a particu-
larly clean probe of soft survival effects, in particular in
the presence of tagged protons. Exclusive W+W− pro-
duction is of particular interest as a probe of potential
anomalous gauge couplings; see [ 90–92]. All photon-
induced processes are also available for e
+e− initial
states.
• SM Higgs boson production. The CEP of a SM Higgs,
in precisely the mass region observed by ATLAS and
CMS [93,94], has received a lot of attention. As discussed
further in [3], the exclusive mode is very well suited to
probe crucial identiﬁcation issues such as thebb coupling
and the CP -parity of this object.
• The photoproduction ofρ(770) and φ(1020) mesons, via
the π+π− and K+ K− decay channels, respectively. As
for other photoproduction processes, the simple ﬁts (25)
and (26)f o rt h eW dependence of the cross section and
slope parameterb are taken. The ﬁt of [95] to the effective
Pomeron trajectories is used, and the normalisations are
set using data from [96,97]. These give δ = 0.19 (0.16)
and α′ = 0.125 (0.158) GeV−2, with σ = 11.4 (0.96)
μba t Wγ p = 75 (70) GeV and b = 11.1 (7.3) GeV−2 at
Wγ p = 84 (70) GeV , for theρ (φ).
In addition, although not currently included in the MC,
the measurement of ‘exotic’ quarkonia in the exclusive
channel may provide further information as regards these
states. For example, the X(3915), for which there has been
recent discussion as to whether this can be interpreted as
a χ
c0(2P) state [98,99], could be searched for exclusively
in the D D channel. The Z(3930), currently associated with
the χc2(2P), may also be searched for via the D D mode;
as mentioned in [ 78], the expected cross section for such
an excited state should be similar to the χc2(1P). In addi-
tion, as discussed further in [ 3], a clear observation of
exclusive X(3872) production can provide important con-
straints on its nature. Other possibilities include the J/ψφ
narrow resonances, such as the X(4350), clearly seen by
Belle [100], for which 0++ or 2++ assignments, as well as
tetraquark or more conventional charmonia interpretations,
remain possible. Such a resonance peak could be searched
for in the exclusive channel, as part of more general reso-
nance searches in for instance the ψ
′φ channel. A further
process not currently included in the MC is exclusive D D
production, for which quite large cross sections are expected,
and is sensitive to the c
c → D D transition with no addi-
tional particle production. This latter process is the subject
of a future work [ 76], including a full MC implementa-
tion.
123

--- page 18 ---
9 Page 18 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
5 SuperChic 2 : code and availability
SuperChic 2 is a Fortran-based Monte Carlo generator
that can generate the processes described in Sect. 4.5, with
and without soft survival effects. User-deﬁned distributions
may be output, as well as unweighted events in the HEPEVT
and Les Houches formats. The code and a user manual can
be found at http://projects.hepforge.org/superchic.
6 Summary and outlook
In this paper we have presented results from a new Monte
Carlo for central exclusive production (CEP): SuperChic
2. In a CEP process, an object X is produced, separated by
two large rapidity gaps from intact outgoing protons, with
no additional hadronic activity. Theoretically, the study of
CEP requires the development of a framework which is quite
different from that used to describe the inclusive processes
more commonly considered at hadron colliders, while exper-
imentally it results in a very clean signal (in the absence of
pile up), and the outgoing protons can be reconstructed by
proton tagging detectors, situated far down the beam line.
SuperChic 2 builds on the earlier SuperChic event
generator but includes a range of theoretical updates and
improvements. Most signiﬁcant of these relates to the soft
survival factor, representing the probability of no additional
underlying event activity, which would spoil the exclusivity
of the ﬁnal state. In previous MC implementations, this has
simply been treated as a constant quantity. However, this is
not in general true, and we have demonstrated in this paper
a number of cases where such an assumption breaks down.
For the ﬁrst time, SuperChic 2 includes a fully differen-
tial treatment of the soft survival factor, and we have seen
that this can lead to some distinct, and model-dependent,
predictions for the corresponding particle distributions.
In addition, a much wider range of processes has been
included, with exclusive 2- and 3-jet production being a
particularly relevant addition; this is the ﬁrst inclusion of
the latter process in a publicly available MC. Other pro-
duction processes currently included are: vector meson
(ρ,φ, J/ψ, ψ(2S), ϒ(1S)) photoproduction, χ
c,b and ηc,b
quarkonia, photon pairs, light meson pairs, heavy ( J/ψ,
ψ(2S)) quarkonia pairs, SM Higgs boson and two-photon
initiated lepton, W boson and photon pair production (with
both pp and e+e− initial states).
We have described the theoretical approach implemented
in the SuperChic 2 MC, and have considered in more
detail a selection of the processes listed above: in Sect. 4.1
we have considered 2- and 3-jet production, and discussed
the possibility for observing the ‘radiation zeros’ described
in [57] in the 3-jet case; in Sect.4.2 we have considered J/ψ
and ϒ(1S) photoproduction, showing how a correct inclu-
sion of soft survival effects leads to important differences
in the predicted meson rapidity and transverse momentum
distributions; in Sect. 4.3 we have considered two-photon
initiated muon and W boson pair production and shown how
the predicted survival factor depends on the system mass
M
X ; in Sect. 4.4 we have described an updated approach
to modelling quarkonium CEP, and we presented results for
χc,b production.
In light of the measurement possibilities for exclusive pro-
cesses during Run-II of the LHC [ 12], the study of CEP
processes is very topical: exclusive events may be mea-
sured with both protons tagged using the approved and
installed AFP [ 13] and CT-PPS [ 14] forward proton spec-
trometers, associated with the ATLAS and CMS central
detectors, respectively, see also [ 15,16], as well as using
rapidity gap vetoes to select dominantly exclusive event sam-
ples, for example at LHCb, where the relatively low instan-
taneous luminosity and wide rapidity coverage allowed by
the newly installed HERSCHEL forward detectors [ 17]a r e
highly favourable. It is our aim that the new SuperChic
2 MC will play an important role in this promising physics
programme.
Acknowledgments We thank David d’Enterria, Phillip Harris, Daniel
Johnson, Oldrich Kepka, Ronan Mcnulty, Risto Orava, Matthias Saim-
pert and Gustavo Gil Da Silveira for useful discussions. LHL thanks the
Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) for support via the
Grant award ST/L000377/1. MGR thanks the IPPP at the University of
Durham for hospitality. The work by MGR was supported by the RSCF
Grant 14-22-00281. V AK thanks the Leverhulme Trust for an Emeritus
Fellowship.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Funded by SCOAP
3.
Appendix A: Jet production: helicity amplitudes
In this appendix we give some further details as regards the
contributing amplitudes in the exclusive jet cross section. The
helicity amplitudes relevant to quark dijet production are
M±±,h ¯h = δcd
2Nc
16πα s
(1 − β2 cos2 θ)
mq
MX
(βh ± 1)δh,¯h, (36)
M±∓,h ¯h = δcd
2Nc
8πα s
(1 − β2 cos2 θ) βh sin θ
×
(
2δh,¯h
mq
MX
sin θ ∓ δh,−¯h(1 ∓ h cos θ)
)
,
(37)
123

--- page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9 Page 19 of 20 9
while for the gluon amplitudes we have
M±±,±± = δCD Nc
N2c − 1
32παs
(1 − cos2 θ) , (38)
M±∓,+− = M∓±,−+ = δCD Nc
N2c − 18παs
( 1 ± cos θ
1 ∓ cos θ
)
,
(39)
for gluons of ‘±’ helicity and quarks of helicity h/2, while
c, d are the outgoing quark color labels, and β = (1 −
4m2
q/M2
X )1/2. As discussed in [ 24], these amplitudes are
shown for the azimuthal angle φ = 0 for the outgoing par-
ticle momenta. In general, some helicity amplitudes have an
overall φ-dependent phase, which while having no effect in
the spin-summed inclusive cross section, must be included
when using the decomposition ( 4) to give the correct result
in the exclusive case.
The amplitudes relevant to 3-jet production are all ‘maxi-
mally helicity violating’ (MHV) [101], and can therefore be
written down quite simply, see [57] for further details.
References
1. M.G. Albrow, T.D. Coughlin, J.R. Forshaw, Prog. Part. Nucl.
Phys. 65, 149 (2010). arXiv:1006.1289
2. M. Tasevsky, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1446012 (2014).
arXiv:1407.8332
3. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W. Stirling, Int. J.
Mod. Phys. A 29, 1430031 (2014). arXiv:1405.0018
4. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A 29, 1446004 (2014)
5. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C 65, 433 (2010). arXiv:0909.4748
6. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C 69, 179 (2010). arXiv:1005.0695
7. CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
081801 (2012). arXiv:1112.0858
8. LHCb Collaboration, CERN-LHCb-CONF-2011-022
9. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., J. Phys. G 41, 055002 (2014).
arXiv:1401.3288
10. J. Monk, A. Pilkington, Comput. Phys. Commun.175, 232 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0502077
11. M. Boonekamp et al., (2011). arXiv:1102.2531
12. LHC Forward physics working group yellow report. http://
www-d0.fnal.gov/Run2Physics/qcd/loi_atlas/fpwg_yellow_
report.pdf
13. CERN Report No. CERN-LHCC-2011-012. LHCC-I-020 (2011)
(unpublished)
14. M. Albrow et al., CERN Report No. CERN-LHCC-2014-021.
TOTEM-TDR-003. CMS-TDR-13 (2014) (unpublished)
15. C. Royon, N. Cartiglia, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 28 (2014)
16. C. Royon, N. Cartiglia, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1446017 (2015).
arXiv:1503.04632
17. M. Albrow, P. Collins, A. Penzo, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A29, 1446018
(2014)
18. R. Schicker, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1446015 (2014).
arXiv:1411.1283
19. CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., Phys. Rev. D 77, 052004
(2008). arXiv:0712.0604
20. D0 Collaboration, V .M. Abazov et al., Phys. Lett. B 705, 193
(2011). arXiv:1009.2444
21. TOTEM Collaboration, K. Osterberg, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29,
1446019 (2014)
22. CMS collaboration, CMS-DP-2013-004
23. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., J. Phys. G 41, 115002 (2014).
arXiv:1407.5973
24. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, J. Phys. G42,
055001 (2015). arXiv:1409.4785
25. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A 30, 1542013 (2015)
26. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Phys. Lett. B 401, 330
(1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9701419
27. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 14, 525
(2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0002072
28. A.B. Kaidalov, V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys.
J. C 31, 387 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0307064
29. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 23, 311
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0111078
30. L.A. Harland-Lang, Phys. Rev. D 88, 034029 (2013).
arXiv:1306.6661
31. A.V . Belitsky, A.V . Radyushkin, Phys. Rep. 418, 1 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504030
32. A. Shuvaev, K.J. Golec-Biernat, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Phys.
Rev. D 60, 014015 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9902410
33. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, inProceedings, 8th Inter-
national Workshop, DIS 2000 , Liverpool, UK, April 25–30, pp.
592–595. arXiv:hep-ph/0006005
34. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 19, 477
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0011393
35. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 30,
1542004 (2015). arXiv:1402.2778
36. E. Gotsman, E. Levin, U. Maor, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A30, 1542005
(2015). arXiv:1403.4531
37. M.G. Ryskin, A.D. Martin, V .A. Khoze, Eur. Phys. J. C 60, 249
(2009). arXiv:0812.2407
38. M.G. Ryskin, A.D. Martin, V .A. Khoze, Eur. Phys. J. C71, 1617
(2011). arXiv:1102.2844
39. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 24, 581
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0203122
40. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C74,
2014 (2848). arXiv:1312.4553
41. M.G. Ryskin, A.D. Martin, V .A. Khoze, Eur. Phys. J. C 60, 265
(2009). arXiv:0812.2413
42. A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, V .A. Khoze, Acta Phys. Polon. B 40,
2009 (1841). arXiv:0903.2980
43. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 48, 797
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0606213
44. A.B. Kaidalov, V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys.
J. C 66, 373 (2010). arXiv:0911.3716
45. H1, V . Andreev et al., JHEP 05, 056 (2015). arXiv:1502.01683
46. A.B. Kaidalov, V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys.
J. C 21, 521 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0105145
47. T. Cdf, Affolder et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5043 (2000)
48. V .M. Budnev, I.F. Ginzburg, G.V . Meledin, V .G. Serbo, Phys. Rep.
15, 181 (1975)
49. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 24, 459
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0201301
50. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, R. Orava, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J.
C 19, 313 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0010163
51. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C73, 2503
(2013). arXiv:1306.2149
52. A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, V .A. Khoze, Phys. Rev. D 56, 5867
(1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9705258
53. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, Eur. Phys. J. C 48, 467
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605113
123

--- page 20 ---
9 Page 20 of 20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :9
54. L.A. Harland-Lang, A.D. Martin, P. Motylinski, R.S. Thorne, Eur.
Phys. J. C 75, 204 (2015). arXiv:1412.3989
55. V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur. Phys. J. C 48, 477
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0607134
56. V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, A.D. Martin, Eur. Phys. J. C 64, 361
(2009). arXiv:0907.0966
57. L.A. Harland-Lang, JHEP 1505, 146 (2015). arXiv:1503.06798
58. CMS Collaboration, CMS-PAS-JME-14-002 (2014)
59. ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Phys. Lett. B 750, 475
(2015). arXiv:1506.05629
60. ALICE Collaboration, B.B. Abelev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
232504 (2014). arXiv:1406.7819
61. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., J. Phys. G 40, 045001 (2013).
arXiv:1301.7084
62. H1 Collaboration, C. Alexa et al., Eur. Phys. J. C73, 2466 (2013).
arXiv:1304.5162
63. L. Motyka, G. Watt, Phys. Rev. D 78, 014023 (2008).
arXiv:0805.2113
64. H1 Collaboration, A. Aktas et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 46, 585 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ex/0510016
65. Particle Data Group, K. Olive et al. Chin. Phys. C 38, 090001
(2014)
66. S. Jones, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, T. Teubner, JHEP1311, 085
(2013). arXiv:1307.7099
67. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., JHEP 09, 084 (2015).
arXiv:1505.08139
68. H1 Collaboration, C. Adloff et al., Phys. Lett. B 483, 23 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ex/0003020
69. ZEUS Collaboration, S. Chekanov et al., Phys. Lett. B 680,4
(2009). arXiv:0903.4205
70. P. Newman, M. Wing, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 2014 (1037).
arXiv:1308.3368
71. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C72, 2110 (2012). arXiv:1204.4803
72. J. Vermaseren, Nucl. Phys. B 229, 347 (1983)
73. S.P. Baranov, O. Duenger, H. Shooshtari, J.A.M. Vermaseren,
Hamburg 1991, Proceedings, Physics at HERA, vol. 3, pp. 1478–
1482 (1991) (see HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS INDEX 30 (1992)
No. 12988)
74. ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al. (2015). arXiv:1506.07098
75. G.G. da Silveira, V .P. Goncalves, Phys. Rev.D9 2, 014013 (2015).
arXiv:1506.01352
76. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, Future publication
77. M. Dyndal, L. Schoeffel, Phys. Lett. B 741, 66 (2015).
arXiv:1410.2983
78. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C71, 1545 (1011). arXiv:1011.0680
79. V .A. Khoze, A.D. Martin, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur. Phys.
J. C
35, 211 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0403218
80. CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
242001 (2009). arXiv:0902.1271
81. R.S. Pasechnik, A. Szczurek, O.V . Teryaev, Phys. Rev. D 78,
014007 (2008). arXiv:0709.0857
82. CLEO Collaboration, M. Kornicer et al., Phys. Rev. D83, 054003
(2011). arXiv:1012.0589
83. J. Pumplin et al., JHEP 0207, 012 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0201195
84. NNPDF, R.D. Ball et al., JHEP 1504, 040 (2015).
arXiv:1410.8849
85. CDF Collaboration, T.A. Aaltonen et al., Phys. Rev. D91, 091101
(2015). arXiv:1502.01391
86. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C 73, 2429 (2013). arXiv:1302.2004
87. P. Lebiedowicz, A. Szczurek, Phys. Rev. D9 2 , 054001 (2015).
arXiv:1504.07560
88. L.A. Harland-Lang, V .A. Khoze, M.G. Ryskin, W.J. Stirling, Eur.
Phys. J. C 71, 1714 (2011). arXiv:1105.1626
89. D. d’Enterria, G.G. da Silveira, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 080405
(2013). arXiv:1305.7142
90. O. Kepka, C. Royon, Phys. Rev. D 78, 073005 (2008).
arXiv:0808.0322
91. E. Chapon, C. Royon, O. Kepka, Phys. Rev. D81, 074003 (2010).
arXiv:0912.5161
92. C. Royon, M. Saimpert, EPJ Web Conf. 90, 06001 (2015)
93. ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Phys. Lett. B 716, 1 (2012).
arXiv:1207.7214
94. CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., JHEP 1306, 081 (2013).
arXiv:1303.4571
95. ZEUS, J. Breitweg et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 14, 213 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ex/9910038
96. ZEUS, M. Derrick et al., Phys. Lett. B 377, 259 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ex/9601009
97. ZEUS, J. Breitweg et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 2, 247 (1998).
arXiv:hep-ex/9712020
98. D.-Y . Chen, X. Liu, T. Matsuki, PTEP 2015, 043 (2013).
arXiv:1311.6274
9 9 . S . L .O l s e n ,P h y s .R e v .D91, 057501 (2015). arXiv:1410.6534
100. Belle Collaboration, C. Shen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 112004
(2010). arXiv:0912.2383
101. M.L. Mangano, S.J. Parke, Phys. Rep. 200, 301 (1991).
arXiv:hep-th/0509223
123