--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2717-6
Special Article - Tools for Experiment and Theory
Information and treatment of unknown correlations
in the combination of measurements using the BLUE method
Andrea Valassi1,a, Roberto Chierici2,b
1 Information Technology Department, CERN, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
2 Institut de Physique Nucléaire de Lyon, CNRS, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France
Received: 10 August 2013 / Accepted: 20 December 2013 / Published online: 27 March 2014
© The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract We discuss the effect of large positive correla-
tions in the combinations of several measurements of a sin-
gle physical quantity using the Best Linear Unbiased Esti-
mate (BLUE) method. We suggest a new approach for com-
paring the relative weights of the different measurements
in their contributions to the combined knowledge about the
unknown parameter, using the well-established concept of
Fisher information. We argue, in particular, that one contribu-
tion to information comes from the collective interplay of the
measurements through their correlations and that this contri-
bution cannot be attributed to any of the individual measure-
ments alone. We show that negative coefﬁcients in the BLUE
weighted average invariably indicate the presence of a regime
of high correlations, where the effect of further increasing
some of these correlations is that of reducing the error on the
combined estimate. In these regimes, we stress that assuming
fully correlated systematic uncertainties is not a truly conser-
vative choice, and that the correlations provided as input to
BLUE combinations need to be assessed with extreme care
instead. In situations where the precise evaluation of these
correlations is impractical, or even impossible, we provide
tools to help experimental physicists perform more conser-
vative combinations.
1 Introduction
Our knowledge about some of the most fundamental param-
eters of physics is derived from a vast number of mea-
surements produced by different experiments using several
complementary techniques. Many statistical methods are
routinely used [ 1] to combine the available data and extract
the most appropriate estimates of the values and uncertain-
ties for these parameters, properly taking into account all
a e-mail: andrea.valassi@cern.ch
b e-mail: roberto.chierici@cern.ch
correlations between the measurements. One the most pop-
ular methods for performing these combinations is the Best
Linear Unbiased Estimate (BLUE) technique, an approach
ﬁrst introduced in the 1930’s [ 2] and whose reformulation
in the context of high-energy physics [ 3,4] has been rou-
tinely used for the combination of the precision measure-
ments performed by experiments at the LEP [5], Tevatron [6]
and LHC [ 7] colliders, as well as in other domains.
To quantify the “relative importance” of each measure-
ment in its contribution to the combined knowledge about
the measured physical quantity, its coefﬁcient in the BLUE
weighted average is traditionally used. In many examples
in the literature where the BLUE technique has been used,
the combinations are dominated by systematic uncertainties,
often assumed as fully correlated among different measure-
ments. This often leads to situations where one or more mea-
surements contribute with a negative BLUE coefﬁcient, push-
ing experimentalists to redeﬁne the “relative importance” of
a measurement as the absolute value of its BLUE coefﬁcient,
normalised to the sum of the absolute values of all coefﬁ-
cients [6,7]. In our opinion, this approach is incorrect.
In this paper, we propose a different approach for com-
paring the relative contributions of the measurements to the
combined knowledge about the unknown parameter, using
the well-established concept of Fisher information [ 8]. We
also show that negative coefﬁcients in the BLUE weighted
average invariably indicate the presence of very high corre-
lations, whose marginal effect is that of reducing the error
on the combined estimate, rather than increasing it. In these
regimes, we stress that taking systematic uncertainties to be
fully (i.e. 100 %) correlated is not a conservative assump-
tion, and we therefore argue that the correlations provided
as inputs to BLUE combinations need to be assessed with
extreme care. In those situations where their precise evalu-
ation is impossible, we offer a few guidelines and tools for
critically re-evaluating these correlations, in order to help
experimental physicists perform more “conservative” com-
123


--- Page 2 ---
2717 Page 2 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
binations. In our discussion, we will generally limit ourselves
to BLUE combinations of a single measured parameter and
where the correlations used as inputs to the combination are
positive. Many of the concepts and tools we present could be
applied also to the more general cases of BLUE combinations
of several measured parameters, and/or involving also nega-
tive correlations between measurements, but this discussion
is beyond the scope of this paper.
The outline of this article is the following. In Sect. 2 we
review the deﬁnition of “relative importance” of a measure-
ment in a BLUE combination as presented by some papers
in the literature and we present our objections to it by using
a simple numerical example. We then present our alternative
deﬁnitions of information weights in Sect. 3, after a brief
recall of the deﬁnition of Fisher information and of its rel-
evant features. By studying marginal information and infor-
mation derivatives, in Sect. 4 we show that negative BLUE
coefﬁcients in the combination of several measurements of
one parameter are always a sign of a “high-correlation”
regime, thus generalising the results presented for two mea-
surements by the authors of Ref. [ 3]. In Sect. 5 we go on to
discuss practical guidelines and tools, illustrated by numer-
ical examples, to identify correlations that may have been
overestimated and to review them in a more “conservative”
way. In Sect. 6 we summarize our discussion and present
some concluding remarks.
2 “Relative importance” and negative BLUE
coefﬁcients
In the BLUE technique, the best linear unbiased estimate
of each unknown parameter is built as a weighed average
of all available measurements. The coefﬁcients multiplying
the measurements in each linear combination are determined
as those that minimize its variance, under the constraint of
a normalisation condition which ensures that this represents
an unbiased estimate of the corresponding parameter. As dis-
cussed extensively in Refs. [ 3,4,9], this technique is equiv-
alent to minimizing the weighted sum of squared distances
of the measurements from the combined estimates, using as
weighting matrix the input covariance matrix of the measure-
ments, which is assumed to be known a priori.
In the case of n measurements y
i of a single parameter
whose true value is Y , in particular, the best linear unbiased
estimate ˆY can be determined as follows. First, the BLUE
should be a linear combination ˆY =∑n
i=1 λi yi of the avail-
able measurements. Second, the BLUE should be an unbiased
estimator, i.e. its expectation value E[ ˆY] should be equal to
t h et r u ev a l u eY of the unknown parameter. Assuming that
each measurement is also an unbiased estimator, i.e. that its
outcomes are distributed as random variables with expec-
tation values E[y
i]= Y , this is equivalent to requiring a
normalisation condition∑n
i=1 λi = 1 for the coefﬁcients λi
in the linear combination. Third, the BLUE should be the best
of such unbiased linear combinations, i.e. that for which the
combined variance σ2
ˆY =∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 λi Mij λj , where M
is the covariance matrix of the measurements, is minimized.
It is then easy to show [ 3] that ˆY is the best linear unbiased
estimate if the coefﬁcients λ
i are equal to
λi =
(
M− 1U
)
i
˜UM− 1U
, (1)
where U is a vector whose elements are all equal to 1.
While the normalisation condition ensures that the coef-
ﬁcients λi sum up to 1, one peculiar and somewhat counter-
intuitive feature of this method is that some of these indi-
vidual coefﬁcients may be negative. Negative coefﬁcients in
the BLUE weighted averages apparently still pose a problem
of interpretation sometimes, especially if these coefﬁcients
are used to compare the contributions of the different mea-
surements to the combined knowledge about the measured
observable. For instance, the “relative importance” of each
measurement in the combination of A TLAS and CMS results
on the top quark mass [ 7] was deﬁned as the absolute value
of its coefﬁcient in the BLUE weighted average, divided by
the sum of the absolute values of the coefﬁcients for all input
measurements,
RI
i = |λi|∑n
j=1 |λj|. (2)
The same procedure had already been used to visualize the
“weight that each measurement carries in the combination”
of CDF and D0 results on the top quark mass [ 6]. In both
cases, the relative importances of the n measurements sum
up to 1 by deﬁnition, ∑
n
i=1 RIi = 1.
In our opinion, this procedure is an artefact that is con-
ceptually wrong and suffers from two important limita-
tions: ﬁrst, it is not internally self-consistent and may eas-
ily lead to numerical conclusions which go against common
sense; second, it does not help to understand in which way
the results with negative coefﬁcients contribute to reduc-
ing the uncertainties on the combined estimates. We will
use a simple example to illustrate the ﬁrst objection. Con-
sider the combination of two uncorrelated measurements
y
A = 103.00± 3.87 and yB = 98.00± 3.16 of an observable
Y in the appropriate units. The covariance matrix is then
(
σ2
A 0
0 σ2
B
)
=
(
15.00 0
0 10.00
)
(3)
and the BLUE for their combination is ˆY = λA yA +λB yB =
100.00 ± 2.45, where the coefﬁcients of these two uncorre-
lated measurements in the BLUE weighted average,λA = 0.4
and λB = 0.6, are proportional to the inverses of the variances
σ2
A and σ2
B as expected from simple error propagation. It is
123


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 3 of 19 2717
rather intuitive in this case to claim that the relative contribu-
tions to the knowledge about Y contributed by the two inde-
pendent measurements A and B can be quantiﬁed by their
BLUE coefﬁcients, 40 % for A and 60 % for B. As λA and
λB are both positive, these are also the “relative importances”
of A and B according to Eq. 2.
Imagine now that yB is not the result of a direct mea-
surement, but is itself the result of the combination of two
measurements yB1 = 99.00±4.00 and yB2 = 101.00±8.00,
where a high positive correlation ρ = 0.875 between them
leads to negative BLUE coefﬁcients in their weighted average
yB = 1.5×yB1 − 0.5×yB2 = 98.00 ± 3.16. Instead of com-
bining ﬁrst yB1 and yB2 and then adding yA, one could also
combine yA, yB1 and yB2 directly using the full covariance
matrix
⎛
⎜⎝
σ2
A 00
0 σ2
B1 ρσB1σB2
0 ρσB1σB2 σ2
B2
⎞
⎟⎠=
⎛
⎜⎝
15.00 00
0 16.00 28 .00
0 28.00 64 .00
⎞
⎟⎠.
(4)
This yields ˆY = λA yA +λB1 yB1 +λB2 yB2 = 100.00± 2.45,
where the BLUE coefﬁcients in this overall weighted average
are given by λ
A = 0.4, λB1 = 0.9 and λB2 =− 0.3.
As expected, the ﬁnal numerical result for ˆY is of course
the same whether it is obtained from the combination of yA
and yB or from the combination of yA, yB1 and yB2.I ti s
also not surprising that the BLUE coefﬁcientλA = 0.4f o ryA
is the same in both combinations, as this is an independent
measurement that is not correlated to either yB1 or yB2 (the
sum of whose BLUE coefﬁcients, λB1 + λB2 = 0.9 − 0.3 =
0.6, of course, equals the BLUE coefﬁcientλB of yB). What is
rather surprising, however, is that the “relative importance” of
yA computed using normalised absolute values of the BLUE
coefﬁcients is very different in the two cases:
{ RIA(combining A, B) = 0.4
0.4+(0.9− 0.3) = 40.0% ,
RIA(combining A, B1, B2) = 0.4
0.4+0.9+0.3 = 25.0% .
(5)
In our opinion, this is an internal inconsistency of Eq. 2,a s
common sense suggests that the relative contribution ofyA to
the knowledge about Y is the same in both combinations. In
particular, we consider that the contribution of yA is indeed
40 %, and that this is underestimated as 25 % in the second
combination because the relative contributions of yB1 and
yB2 in the presence of negative BLUE coefﬁcients are not
being properly assessed and are overall overestimated.
More generally, the problem with deﬁning the “relative
importances” of measurements according to Eq. 2 is that the
coefﬁcient with which a measurement enters the linear com-
bination of all measurements in the BLUE, i.e. its “weight”
in the BLUE weighted average, is being confused with the
impact or “weight” of its relative contribution to the knowl-
edge about the measured observable. In the following we will
therefore clearly distinguish between these two categories of
“weights”: we will sometimes refer to the BLUE coefﬁcient
λ
i of a measurement as its “central value weight” (CVW),
while we will use the term “information weight” (IW) to
refer to, using the same words as in Refs. [ 6,7], its “relative
importance” or the “weight it carries in the combination”.
We will propose and discuss our deﬁnitions of intrinsic and
marginal information weights in the next section, using the
well-established concept of Fisher information.
3 Fisher information and “information weights”
In this section, we present our deﬁnitions of intrinsic and
marginal information weights, after brieﬂy recalling the def-
inition of Fisher information and summarizing its main rel-
evant features. A more general discussion of Fisher infor-
mation and its role in parameter estimation in experimental
science is well beyond the scope of this paper and can be
found in many textbooks on statistics such as the two excel-
lent reviews in Refs. [ 9,10], which will largely be the basis
of the overview presented in this section.
3.1 Deﬁnition of Fisher information
Consider n experimental measurements y
i ={ y1,... yn} that
we want to use to infer the true values Xα ={ X1,... XN }
of N unknown parameters, with n > N (though each of
the yi need not necessarily be a direct measurement of one
of the parameters Xα). We will use the symbols y and X
to indicate the vectors of all yi and of all Xα, respectively.
The measurementsy are random variables distributed accord-
ing to a probability density function p(y; X) that is deﬁned
under the normalisation condition
∫
p(y; X)dy1 ... dyn = 1.
The sensitivity of the measurements to the unknown param-
eters can be represented by the Fisher “score vector” s(X)
α =
∂log p(y; X)/∂Xα, which is itself a random variable, deﬁned
in the n-dimensional space of the measurements and whose
value in general also depends on the parametersX. Under cer-
tain regularity conditions (in summary, the ranges of values
of y must be independent of X, and p(y; X) must be regular
enough to allow ∂2/∂XαXβ and
∫
dy to commute), it can be
shown [9,10] that the expectation value of the Fisher score is
the null vector,
∫
s(X)
α p(y; X) dy1 ... dyn = 0. The Fisher
information matrix, which in the following we will generally
refer to simply as “information”, is deﬁned as the covariance
of the score vector: as the expectation value of the score is
null, this can simply be written as
123


--- Page 4 ---
2717 Page 4 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
I (X)
αβ = E
[ ∂log p(y; X)
∂Xα
∂log p(y; X)
∂Xβ
]
=
∫ ∂log p(y; X)
∂Xα
∂log p(y; X)
∂Xβ
p(y; X) dy1 ... dyn.
(6)
Information is thus deﬁned as the result of an integral over
dy1 ... dyn and does not depend on the speciﬁc numerical
outcomes of the measurements yi , although in general it is a
function of the parameters Xα instead. In other words, infor-
mation is a property of the measurement process, and more
particularly of the errors on the measurements and of the cor-
relations between them, rather than of the speciﬁc measured
central values y
i .
As pointed out in Ref. [ 10], Fisher information is a valu-
able tool for assessing quantitatively the contribution of an
individual measurement to our knowledge about an unknown
parameter inferred from it, because it possesses three remark-
able properties.
First, information increases with the number of observa-
tions y
i and in particular it is additive, i.e. the total informa-
tion yielded by two independent experiments is the sum of
the information from each experiment taken separately.
Second, the deﬁnition of the “information obtained from
a set of measurements” depends on which parameters we
want to infer from them. This is clear from Eq. 6, which
deﬁnes Fisher information I (X) about X in terms of a set of
derivatives with respect to the parameters X.
Finally, information is related to precision: the greater
the information available from a set of measurements about
some unknown parameters, the lower the uncertainty that
can be achieved from the measurements on the estimation of
these parameters. More formally, if ˆx is any unbiased esti-
mator of the parameter vector X derived from the measure-
ments y, then under the same regularity conditions previously
assumed it can be shown that cov (ˆx, ˆx) ⪰ (I
(X))− 1, where
the symbol ⪰ indicates that the difference between the matri-
ces on the left and right hand sides is positive semideﬁnite.
In particular, for the diagonal elements of these matrices,
var(ˆx
α) ≥ (I (X))− 1
αα. (7)
In other words, the quantity (I (X))− 1
αα represents a lower
bound (called Cramer-Rao lower bound) on the variance of
any unbiased estimator of each parameter X
α.
3.2 BLUE estimators and Fisher information
An unbiased estimator whose variance is equal to its Cramer-
Rao lower bound, i.e. one for which the equality in Eq. 7
holds, is called an efﬁcient unbiased estimator. While in the
general case it is not always possible to build one, an efﬁcient
unbiased estimator does exist under the assumption that the
n measurements y are multivariate Gaussian distributed with
a positive deﬁnite covariance matrix that is known a priori
and does not depend on the unknown parameters X.T h i si s
the same assumption that had been used for the description
of the BLUE method in Ref. [ 4] and we will take it as valid
throughout the rest of this paper.
As discussed at length in Refs. [ 9,10], such distributions
possess in fact a number of special properties that signiﬁ-
cantly simplify all statistical calculations involving them. In
particular, it is easy to show, in the general case with several
unknown parameters, that the best linear unbiased estimator
is under these assumptions an unbiased efﬁcient estimator,
i.e. that its covariance matrix is equal to the inverse of the
Fisher information matrix. Moreover, the Fisher information
matrix and the combined covariance do not depend on the
unknown parameters X under these assumptions, while this
is not true in the general case. For Gaussian distributions, the
best linear unbiased estimator also coincides with the maxi-
mum likelihood estimator [ 9], while this is not true in most
other cases, including the case of Poisson distributions.
In the case of one unknown parameter, in particular, i.e.
when the parameter vector X reduces to a scalar Y , the prob-
ability density function is simply
p(y; Y) = 1
(2π)n/2(det M)n/2
× exp
⎡
⎣− 1
2
n∑
i=1
n∑
j=1
(yi − Y)M− 1
ij (yj − Y)
⎤
⎦. (8)
Remembering that Mij = E[(yi − Y)(yj − Y)] is the covari-
ance of the unbiased measurements yi and yj , the Fisher
information for Y , which also reduces to a scalar I(Y), can
simply be written as
I(Y) = ˜UM− 1U. (9)
This is clearly the inverse of the variance of the BLUE for Y
corresponding to the central value weights λi given in Eq. 1,
σ2
ˆY =
n∑
i=1
n∑
j=1
λi Mij λj = 1( ˜UM− 1U
) = 1
I(Y) . (10)
To further simplify the notation, in the following byI we will
always indicate the information I(Y) relative to Y , dropping
the superscript Y .
3.3 Intrinsic and marginal information weights
Having recalled the relevance of the Fisher information con-
cept to quantitatively assess the contribution of a set of mea-
surements to the knowledge about an unknown parameter,
we may now introduce our proposal about how to best rep-
resent the “weight that a measurement carries in the combi-
123


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 5 of 19 2717
nation” or its “relative importance”. We deﬁne this in terms
of intrinsic and marginal information weights. Our approach
is radically different from that of Refs. [ 6,7], because we do
not attempt to make sure that the n weights for the different
measurements sum up to 1.
Formally, we deﬁne the “intrinsic” information weight for
each individual measurement simply as the ratio of the infor-
mation it carries when taken alone (the inverse of its vari-
ance) to the total information for the set of measurements in
the combination (the inverse of the BLUE variance),
IIW
i = 1/σ2
i
1/σ2
ˆY
= 1/σ2
i
I . (11)
We complement this deﬁnition by introducing a weight car-
ried by the ensemble of all correlations between the measure-
ments:
IIW
corr =
1/σ2
ˆY −∑n
i=1 1/σ2
i
1/σ2
ˆY
= I −∑n
i=1 1/σ2
i
I (12)
so that the sum of the n + 1 terms adds up to 1,
IIWcorr +
n∑
i=1
IIWi = 1. (13)
In our opinion, the information contribution represented by
IIWcorr cannot be attributed to any of the individual mea-
surements alone, because it is the result of their collective
interplay through the ensemble of their correlations. Note
that we did not split this weight into sub-contributions from
one or more speciﬁc correlations because, while this is unam-
biguous in some speciﬁc cases, in general it is a complex task
which implies a certain arbitrariness.
Another useful way to quantify the information that an
individual measurement y
i brings in a combination is to look
at its “marginal” information/Delta1Ii , i.e. the additional informa-
tion available when yi is added to a combination that already
includes the othern−1 measurements. We deﬁne the marginal
information weight of yi as the ratio of its marginal infor-
mation to the total information in the combination of all n
measurements:
MIWi = /Delta1Ii
I(n meas.)
= I(n meas.) − I(n−1 meas. i.e. all meas. except i)
I(n meas.)
. (14)
The sum of the weights for all measurements does not add
up to 1, but we do not ﬁnd it appropriate to introduce an extra
weight to re-establish a normalisation condition. The inter-
est of a marginal information weight MIW
i , in fact, is that
it already accounts both for the information 1 /σ2
i “intrin-
sically” contributed by measurement yi , and for that con-
tributed by its correlations to all other measurements in the
presence of their correlations to one another. The sum of the
marginal information weights for all measurements involves
a complex double-counting of these effects and we do not
ﬁnd it to be a useful quantity to easily understand the effect
of correlations.
The intrinsic information weights for the different mea-
surements are, by construction, always positive. The weight
for the correlations can, instead, be negative, null or posi-
tive. In other words, according to our deﬁnition, while every
measurement always adds intrinsic information to a combi-
nation, the net effect of correlations may be to increase the
combined error, to keep the combined error unchanged or,
less frequently, to decrease it.
Marginal information weights are guaranteed to be non-
negative (as discussed more in detail in Sect. 4.2), but they
are generally different from the corresponding intrinsic infor-
mation weights if the measurement is correlated to any of
the others. In particular, MIW
i < IIWi represents the com-
mon situation where one part of the intrinsic information
contributed by one measurement is reduced by correlations,
while MIW
i > IIWi represents the cases where its corre-
lations amplify its net contribution to information. We will
discuss these issues in more detail in Sect. 4.1, in the speciﬁc
case of two measurements of one observable.
In the simple example we used in Sect. 2, the intrinsic and
marginal information weights in the combination of the two
measurements A and B and in the combination of the three
measurements A, B1 and B2 are summarised in the top and
central sections of Table 1, where they are compared to their
BLUE coefﬁcients (or central value weights) and their “rel-
ative importances” according to Eq. 2. Note that all of these
quantities (IIW
i ,M I Wi ,C V Wi ,R Ii ) coincide for both mea-
surements in the combination of A and B, where there are no
correlations, but they differ signiﬁcantly in the combination
of A, B1 and B2, in the presence of large positive correlations.
In particular, the intrinsic and marginal information weights
for A are always equal to 40 % whether A is combined to
B alone or to B1 and B2 together; conversely, the marginal
information weights of B1 and B2 are signiﬁcantly larger
than their intrinsic information weights, precisely because
together, thanks to their correlation, they achieve more than
they could achieve individually. Note also that the “rela-
tive importance” of B1 is larger than both its intrinsic and
marginal information weights, which in our opinion shows
that it is clearly overestimated.
We should stress at this point that information weights
also have their own limitations and should be used with care.
In particular, the main interest of information weights should
not be that of ranking measurements, but rather that of pro-
viding a quantitative tool for a better understanding of how
123


--- Page 6 ---
2717 Page 6 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
Table 1 Results for the combination of A and B (top, χ2/ndof = 1.00/1), for that of A, B1 and B2 (center, χ2/ndof = 1.17/2) and for that of A,
B11, B12 and B2 (bottom, χ2/ndof = 2.42/3). For each input measurement i the following are listed: the central value weight CVW i or λi ,t h e
intrinsic information weight IIWi (also shown for the correlations), the marginal information weight MIW i , the relative importance RIi .I nt h el a s t
row in each table, the BLUE central value and error and the sum of all weights in each column are displayed
Measurements CVW/% IIW/% MIW/% RI/%
A 103.00 ± 3.87 40.00 40.00 40.00 40.00
B 98.00 ± 3.16 60.00 60.00 60.00 60.00
Correlations – – 0.00 – –
BLUE / Total 100.00 ± 2.45 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
A 103.00 ± 3.87 40.00 40.00 40.00 25.00
B1 99.00 ± 4.00 90.00 37.50 50.63 56.25
B2 101.00 ± 8.00 − 30.00 9.38 22.50 18.75
Correlations – – 13.13 – –
BLUE / Total 100.00 ± 2.45 100.00 100.00 113.13 100.00
A 103.00 ± 3.87 40.00 40.00 40.00 25.00
B11 99.01 ± 4.00 45.00 37.50 ∼ 0 28.13
B12 98.99 ± 4.00 45.00 37.50 ∼ 0 28.13
B2 101.00 ± 8.00 − 30.00 9.37 22.50 18.75
Correlations – – − 24.37 – –
BLUE / Total 100.00 ± 2.45 100.00 100.00 62.50 100.00
the different measurements, individually and together, con-
tribute to our combined knowledge about the parameters that
we want to infer. We believe that attempting to determine
which individual experiment provides the “best” or “most
important” contribution to a combination is a goal of rela-
tively limited scientiﬁc use and, more importantly, is a ques-
tion that involves some degree of arbitrariness. As we men-
tioned above, when combining n correlated measurements,
it is very difﬁcult to unambiguously split IIW
corr into sub-
contributions from the several correlations that simultane-
ously exist between those measurements. In particular, it
would be quite complex to disentangle the two competing
effects that each correlation may have on the information
contributed by any given measurement, that of amplifying
this contribution through the collaboration with other mea-
surements, and that of reducing this contribution by making
the measurements partially redundant with each other. As
a consequence, “ranking” individual measurements by their
intrinsic or marginal information weights is a practise that
we do not advocate or recommend.
To better illustrate what we mean, in the bottom section of
Table 1 we have added a slightly different example, where it
is now assumed that y
B1 is itself the result of the combination
of two very similar measurements yB11 = 99.01 ± 4.00 and
yB12 = 98.99 ± 4.00 that are 99.999 % correlated to each
other (and are each individually 87.5 % correlated to yB2). It
is not surprising in this case that B11 and B12 have a central
value weight equal to half that of B1, an intrinsic informa-
tion weight that is the same as that of B1, but a marginal
information weight that is essentially zero (because includ-
ing B12 is largely redundant if the almost identical measure-
ment B11 has already been included, and viceversa). While
in the combination of A, B1 and B2 the net effect of corre-
lations was to amplify the information contribution of both
B1 and B2 by MIW
B1− IIWB1 = MIWB2− IIWB2 = 13.1% ,
in this third example the information contributions of B11
and B12 are also affected by the competing effect of their
mutual correlation, which brings their MIW down essentially
to zero. This example is also interesting because it clearly
shows that very different “rankings” may be obtained for the
individual measurements if they are ordered by decreasing
values of IIW
i ,M I Wi ,C V Wi or RI i : for instance, mea-
surement B11 has the highest CVW and RI, the second
highest IIW, but the lowest MIW. Excluding RI, which
we already argued to be an ill-deﬁned quantity, we see in
this case that CVW, IIW and MIW all have their limita-
tions if they are used for “ranking”. Indeed, CVW can be
negative, which may give the false impression that a mea-
surement makes a combination worse instead of improving
it; IIW completely ignores the effect of correlations; MIW
only describes the marginal contribution of a single measure-
ment and of its correlations. For these reasons, we propose
to quote all of CVW, IIW and MIW whenever a combina-
tion of several measurements is presented, while explicitly
refraining from using any of them for ranking individual
measurements.
123


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 7 of 19 2717
Fig. 1 BLUE coefﬁcient λB for measurements B ( left) and combined BLUE variance σ2
ˆY (right) as a function of the correlation ρ between two
measurements A and B for various ﬁxed values of the ratio σB/σA. This is essentially the same as Fig. 1 in Ref. [ 3]
4 Negative BLUE coefﬁcients and “high-correlation
regimes”
In this section, we use the concept of Fisher information to
explore the relation between negative BLUE coefﬁcients and
the size of correlations between measurements. We start by
revisiting the discussion of these issues presented in Ref. [ 3]
for two measurements of one parameter, whose conclusion
was that negative weights appear when the positive correla-
tion between the two measurements exceeds a well-deﬁned
threshold. We then generalize this conclusion to n measure-
ments of one parameter, ﬁrst by computing marginal informa-
tion and then by analysing the derivatives of Fisher informa-
tion with respect to the correlations between measurements:
we show, in particular, that negative central value weights in
BLUE combinations are always a sign of a “high-correlation”
regime, where the marginal effect of further increasing one
or more of these correlations is that of reducing the errors
on the combined estimates rather than increasing them. In
Sect. 5 we will discuss important practical consequences of
what is presented in this section.
4.1 The simple case of two measurements of one parameter
In the simple case of two measurements A and B of a single
physical quantity Y , the coefﬁcients in the BLUE weighted
average ˆY =λ
A yA + λB yB are simply given by
λA = σ2
B − ρσAσB
σ2
A + σ2
B − 2ρσAσB
, (15)
λB = σ2
A − ρσAσB
σ2
A + σ2
B − 2ρσAσB
, (16)
and the combined variance σ2
ˆY (i.e. the inverse of the Fisher
information) by
σ2
ˆY = σ2
Aσ2
B(1 − ρ2)
σ2
A + σ2
B − 2ρσAσB
= 1
I , (17)
where σA and σB are the errors on the two measurements
and ρ is their correlation. Assuming that the two errors are
ﬁxed, with σB >σ A, the functional dependency on the cor-
relation ρ of the BLUE coefﬁcient λB for measurement B
and of the combined variance σ2
ˆY , given by Eqs. 16 and 17
respectively, are shown in Fig. 1, left and right respectively,
for various values of the ratio σB/σA. For positive correla-
tions, as discussed in Ref. [ 3], the combined BLUE variance
increases from σ2
ˆY = 1/(1/σ2
A + 1/σ2
B) at ρ= 0t oam a x i -
mum value of σ2
ˆY = σ2
A at ρ= σA/σB and it then decreases
to σ2
ˆY = 0 in the limit of ρ= 1. Therefore, for combinations
with large correlations among measurements, the combined
uncertainty strongly depends on ρ, and is expected to vanish
at ρ= 1; this implies that, close to these regions, determining
the correlation with high accuracy is mandatory so as not to
bias the combination. The BLUE coefﬁcient for B steadily
decreases from λB = (1/σ2
B)/(1/σ2
A + 1/σ2
B) at ρ = 0t oa
negative value ofλB =− 1/(σB/σA − 1) in the limit of ρ= 1,
passing through λB = 0 at the correlation ρ=σA/σB where
σ2
ˆY is maximized.
In other words, the threshold value ρ = σA/σB effec-
tively represents a boundary between two regimes, a “low-
correlation regime”, where λB is positive and σ2
ˆY increases
as ρ grows, and a “high-correlation regime”, where λB is
negative and σ2
ˆY decreases as ρ grows. Note that the BLUE
variance from the combination of A and B at the bound-
ary between the two regimes ρ = σA/σB is equal to that
from A alone ( σ2
ˆY = σ2
A), while it is lower on either side of
the boundary. In the same way, the Fisher information from
the combination at the boundary between the two regimes is
equal to that from A alone, while it is higher on either side
123


--- Page 8 ---
2717 Page 8 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
of the boundary: in other words, the marginal contribution to
information from the addition of B in the combination is zero
at the boundary, but it is positive on either side of it. Note in
passing that the fact that the BLUE coefﬁcient for B is zero
does not mean however that the measurement is simply not
used in the combination, because the central value measured
by B does in any case contribute to the calculation of the
overall χ
2 for the combination: this statement remains valid
for the combination of n measurements, although we will not
repeat it in the following.
A possible interpretation of the transition at ρ= σA/σB,
which will become useful later on and is complementary to
that given in Ref. [3] (as well as to that given in Ref. [11]u s i n g
the Cholesky decomposition formalism), is the following. In
the low-correlation regime ρ ≤ σ
A/σB, the full covariance
matrix can be written as the sum of two positive-deﬁnite com-
ponents: one that is common to A and B, i.e. 100 % correlated
and with the same size in both, and one that is uncorrelated:
( σ
2
A ρσAσB
ρσAσB σ2
B
)
=
( ρσAσB ρσAσB
ρσAσB ρσAσB
)
com
+
( σ2
A− ρσAσB 0
0 σ2
B− ρσAσB
)
unc
. (18)
Indeed, only when the off-diagonal covariance ρσAσB is
smaller than both variances σ2
A and σ2
B can the “uncorre-
lated” error component be positive deﬁnite. The possibility
to split the covariance matrix in this way can be interpreted
by saying that, in the low-correlation regime, the marginal
information added to the combination by the less precise
measurement B comes from its contribution of independent
(uncorrelated) knowledge about the unknown parameter. To
combine A and B in this case, in fact, one may simply think
of temporarely ignoring the irreducible common component
of the error, combining the two measurements based only on
the uncorrelated error components and ﬁnally adding back
the common error component: it is easy to see that this would
lead to a total combined variance
σ
2
ˆY =
(
ρσAσB
)
com
+
( σAσB(σA− ρσB)(σB− ρσA)
σ2
A + σ2
B − 2ρσAσB
)
unc
,
(19)
which adds up to the same value given in Eq.17. With respect
to the measurement of A taken alone, adding B helps in this
case by reducing the uncorrelated error component (the sec-
ond term on the right-hand side).
In the high correlation regime, conversely, the covariance
matrix can not be seen as the sum of a common error and an
uncorrelated error as in Eq. 18. Instead, the full covariance
matrix can be written as the sum of a component common to
A and B, i.e. 100 % correlated and with the same size in both,
and of another systematic effect that is also 100 % correlated,
but has different sizes in A and B:
( σ
2
A ρσAσB
ρσAσB σ2
B
)
=
( σ2
ˆY σ2
ˆY
σ2
ˆY σ2
ˆY
)
com
+(σ2
A + σ2
B − 2ρσAσB)
( λ2
B −λAλB
−λAλB λ2
A
)
cor
. (20)
In the combined result, the total error σˆY comes exclu-
sively from the common systematic uncertainty in the ﬁrst
component, while the contribution from the correlated sys-
tematic uncertainty in the second component is 0. In other
words,
σ
2
ˆY =
(
σ2
ˆY
)
com
+
(
0
)
cor
, (21)
which can again be seen by removing the common compo-
nent, combining and then adding it back at the end. For all
practical purposes, one can thus say that, in the high correla-
tion regime, the marginal information added by the less pre-
cise measurement B does not come from independent knowl-
edge it contributes about the unknown parameter, but from its
ability to constrain and remove a systematic uncertainty that
also affects A, but to which B has a larger sensitivity. With
respect to the measurement of A taken alone, in fact, adding
B helps by completely getting rid of the correlated error com-
ponent (the second term on the right-hand side). Note also,
as discussed in Refs. [3,11], that the two individual measure-
ments A and B are on the same side of the combined estimate
in the high correlation regime (unless they coincide), because
λ
B < 0 implies that ˆY < yA < yB or yB < yA < ˆY .
To further illustrate this difference between the low and
high correlation regimes, it is interesting to study the func-
tional dependency on the correlation ρ of the intrinsic and
marginal information weights IIW and MIW that we intro-
duced in Sect. 3.I nF i g .2 we compare the functional depen-
dencies on ρ of the BLUE coefﬁcients λ, intrinsic infor-
mation weights IIW, marginal information weights MIW
and relative importances RI for one speciﬁc example where
σ
B/σA = 2. As expected, both the intrinsic and marginal
information weights of the two individual measurements are
non-negative and actually coincide with each other and with
the BLUE coefﬁcients whenρ= 0, while they have two max-
ima and two minima, respectively, at the boundary between
low-correlation and high-correlation regimes at ρ= σ
A/σB
where the total information from A and B is minimized.
In the limit of extremely high correlation ρ = 1, where
the combined variance tends to 0 as the information con-
tributed by the correlation between the two measurements
tends to inﬁnity, the intrinsic information weights tend to 0
while the marginal information weights tend to 1, because the
intrinsic information contributed by each experiment individ-
ually is negligible with respect to the large contribution they
achieve together through their correlation. For comparison,
note instead that the “relative importances” of A and B at
123


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 9 of 19 2717
Fig. 2 BLUE coefﬁcients λ f o rAa n dB( top left), intrinsic information weights IIW for A, B and correlations ( top right), marginal information
weights MIW for A and B ( bottom left) and relative importances RI for A and B ( bottom right) as a function of the correlation ρ between A and
B for the speciﬁc example σB/σA = 2. The black line in each plot indicates the boundary between low-correlation and high-correlation regimes at
ρ= 1/2 where the total information from A and B is minimized
ρ= 1 are both positive and sum up to 1 while being different
from each other, which in our opinion is another indication
that this concept fails to acknowledge the relevance here of
the information contribution from correlations.
4.2 Marginal information from the ith measurement of one
parameter
To generalize the concepts of low and high correlation
regimes, and show their relation to negative BLUE coefﬁ-
cients, in the more general case of n measurements of one
parameter, we now derive formulas to calculate the marginal
information/Delta1I
i of theith measurement in ann-measurement
combination, using the “information inﬂow” formalism of
Ref. [9]. Without loss of generality, imagine that the n mea-
surements in the combination are reordered so that the ith
measurement we are interested in becomes the last, i.e. the
nth, measurement. The full covariance matrix for all n mea-
surements can then be written as
M =
( D c
˜c d
)
, (22)
where the variance of theith measurement is given byσ2
i =d,
its covariances with all other measurements are the(n−1) ele-
ments of the vectorc, and D is the(n− 1)×(n− 1) covariance
matrix of these n− 1 other measurements. Using Frobenius’
formula [9], the inverse of this matrix can be written as
M− 1 =
⎛
⎜⎝
D− 1 +
(
D− 1c
)(
˜cD− 1)
d−(˜cD− 1c)
−
(
D− 1c
)
d−(˜cD− 1c)
−
(
˜cD− 1)
d−(˜cD− 1c)
1
d−(˜cD− 1c)
⎞
⎟⎠, (23)
where 1/(d − (˜cD− 1c)) > 0 because it is a diagonal element
of the inverse of the symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix M .
Keeping in mind that the informationI from the combination
of n measurements according to Eq. 9 is simply ˜UM− 1U,
it can easily be shown [ 9] that the marginal information /Delta1Ii
(or information inﬂow) from theith measurement is given by
123


--- Page 10 ---
2717 Page 10 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
/Delta1Ii =
(
(˜uD− 1c) − 1
)2
d − (˜cD− 1c) ≥ 0, (24)
where u is a vector whose (n− 1) elements are all equal to 1
(i.e. the equivalent of U, but with one less measurement).
Let us now analyze this formula, assuming that the covari-
ance matrix D of the other (n − 1) measurements and the
variance d of the ith measurement are both ﬁxed, while the
(n− 1) correlations in c can vary. We then observe that the
condition /Delta1Ii = 0, where information has a minimum, cor-
responds to a hyperplane in the (n− 1)-dimensional space of
these correlations, deﬁned by
/Delta1Ii = 0 ⇐⇒ (˜uD− 1c) − 1 = 0. (25)
This hyperplane divides the (n − 1)-dimensional space of
correlations into two half-spaces: a half-space containing the
origin c = 0 (i.e. the point where there are no correlations),
which we will therefore call the “low-correlation” regime;
and a half-space that does not contain the origin, which we
will call the “high-correlation” regime, deﬁned by
(˜uD
− 1c) − 1 ≥ 0. (26)
Keeping in mind that the BLUE coefﬁcients are given by
Eq. 1, i.e. by
˜λ =
˜UM− 1
I , (27)
and substituting M− 1 by the expression in Eq. 23,w e
observe that the BLUE coefﬁcient for theith measurement is
λi =− 1
I × (˜uD− 1c) − 1
d − (˜cD− 1c). (28)
Having already observed that (d − (˜cD− 1c)) > 0, this
implies that
λi ≤ 0 ⇐⇒ (˜uD− 1c) − 1 ≥ 0. (29)
Comparing this to Eq.26, this shows that the conditionλi ≤ 0
coincides with that deﬁning the half-space corresponding to
the “high-correlation” regime. In other words, the BLUE
coefﬁcient for the ith measurement is negative if and only
if its correlations to the other n− 1 measurements are higher
than the thresholds for crossing over into the high-correlation
regime; it is instead zero on the boundary between the two
regimes, i.e. if and only if these correlations are such that the
measurement contributes no additional information to the
combination.
The results presented above are interesting not only to
point out the relation between negative BLUE coefﬁcients
and high-correlation regimes, but also because they provide
a formula for computing marginal information weights. For
the ith measurement, this is simply equal to
MIW
i = /Delta1Ii
I = 1
I ×
(
(˜uD− 1c) − 1
)2
d − (˜cD− 1c) =λ2
i I
(
d− (˜cD− 1c)
)
.
(30)
Keeping in mind that the intrinsic information weight for
the same measurement is IIW i = (1/σ2
i )/I = 1/dI ,t h i s
implies that
MIWi × IIWi = λ2
i
(
1 − (˜cD− 1c)
d
)
≤ λ2
i , (31)
which provides an interesting relationship between intrinsic
information weights, marginal information weights and cen-
tral value weights. Note, in particular, that the equality sign
holds if the ith measurement is not correlated to any other
measurements (i.e. if c is the null vector), in which case all
three weights coincide as seen in Table 1.
4.3 Information derivatives
In the ﬁrst part of this section, we have described the bound-
ary between low-correlation and high-correlation regimes in
the simplest case of the combination of two measurements,
as well as in the more complex but still speciﬁc case of the
combination of n measurements, where only the n− 1 corre-
lations of the ith measurement to all of the others are allowed
to vary. We now analyze the most general case of the com-
bination of n measurements of one parameter, as a function
of the n(n − 1)/2 correlations of all the measurements to
one another. We do this by studying the ﬁrst derivatives of
information with respect to these correlations ρ
ij .
Let us consider the linear dependency of the covariance
matrix M on the n(n − 1)/2 correlations ρij between any
two distinct measurements yi and yj , assuming instead that
the variances Mii are ﬁxed. Applying the generic formula [9]
for the ﬁrst derivatives of the inverse of a non-singular square
matrix with respect to the elements of a vector it depends on,
we ﬁnd that
∂M
− 1
∂ρij
=− M− 1 ∂M
∂ρij
M− 1. (32)
Keeping in mind that I = ˜UM− 1U and that ˜UM− 1 = I ˜λ
according to Eqs. 9 and 27, respectively, the derivatives of
information with respect to the correlationsρij can be written
as
∂I
∂ρij
=− ˜UM− 1 ∂M
∂ρij
M− 1U =− I 2 ˜λ∂M
∂ρij
λ. (33)
Under our assumption that only the off-diagonal covariances
Mij may vary while the variances Mii are ﬁxed, the deriva-
tives of the covariance matrix M with respect to the corre-
lations ρij are
123


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 11 of 19 2717
( ∂M
∂ρij
)
kl
=
√
Mii
√
M jj ×
(
δil δjk + δik δjl
)
=
√
Mii
√
M jj ×
⎧
⎨
⎩
1i f i = k and j = l ,
1i f i = l and j = k ,
0 otherwise .
(34)
The derivatives of information with respect to the correlations
ρij are then simply given by
∂I
∂ρij
=− 2I 2λiλj
√
Mii
√
M jj , (35)
where the factor 2 comes from the fact that the covariance
matrix is symmetric and has twice as many off-diagonal ele-
ments as there are independent correlations.
Equation 35 clearly shows that, if all BLUE coefﬁcients
are positive, the ﬁrst derivatives of information are always
negative with respect to the correlations between any two
measurements, i.e. information can only decrease if correla-
tions are further increased: this is the equivalent inn(n−1)/2
dimensional space of what we have previously called a “low-
correlation” regime, as this sub-space is guaranteed to con-
tain the point where all correlations are zero. Conversely, if at
least one BLUE coefﬁcient is negative (and keeping in mind
that they can not be all negative), then at least one information
derivative must be positive, i.e. there is at least one correla-
tion which leads to higher information if it is increased: this
is the equivalent of what we have previously called a “high-
correlation” regime. The boundary between the two regimes
is a hypersurface in n(n− 1)/2 dimensional space, deﬁned
by the condition that at least one BLUE coefﬁcient is zero,
while all the others are non-negative: when this condition
is satisﬁed, the information derivatives with respect to one
or more correlations are also zero, meaning that informa-
tion has reached a minimum in its partial functional depen-
dency on those correlations. This completes the generaliza-
tion to several measurements of one observable of the discus-
sion presented in Ref. [ 3] for only two measurements. Note
ﬁnally that in that case, i.e. for n= 2, all these considerations
are trivially illustrated by Figs. 1 and 2, showing that the
boundary between low and high correlation regimes in the
1-dimensional space of the correlation ρ is a 0-dimensional
hypersurface (a point) at the value ρ = σ
A/σB.
5 “Conservative” estimates of correlations in BLUE
combinations
A precise assessment of the correlations that need to be used
as input to BLUE combinations is often very hard. Ideally,
one should aim to measure these correlations in the data or
by using Monte Carlo methods. This, however, turns out to
be often impractical, if not impossible, for instance when
combining results produced by different experiments that
use different conventions for assessing the systematic errors
on their measurements, or when trying to combine results
from recent experiments to older results for which not enough
details were published and the expertise and the infrastruc-
ture to analyse the data are no longer available. In these
situations, it may be unavoidable to combine results using
input covariance matrices where the correlations between
the different measurements have only been approximately
estimated, rather than accurately measured. In the following,
we will refer to these estimates of correlations as the “nom-
inal” correlations (and we will extensively study the effect
on BLUE combination results of reducing correlations below
these initial “nominal” values).
In particular, it is not uncommon to read in the literature
that correlations have been “conservatively” assumed to be
100 %. In this section, we question the validity of this kind of
statement. A “conservative” estimate of a measurement error
should mean that, in the absence of more precise assessments,
an overestimate of the true error (at the price of losing some
of the available information from a measurement) is more
acceptable than taking the risk of claiming that a measure-
ment is more accurate than it really is. Likewise, by “conser-
vative” estimate of a correlation, one should mean an estimate
which is more likely to result in an overall larger combined
error than in a wrong claim of smaller combined errors.
When BLUE coefﬁcients are all positive, i.e. in a low-
correlation regime, information derivatives are negative and
the net effect of increasing any correlation can only be that of
reducing information and increasing the combined error: in
this case, choosing the largest possible positive correlations
(100 %) is clearly the most conservative choice. Our discus-
sion in the previous section, however, shows that negative
BLUE coefﬁcients are a sign of a high-correlation regime,
where the net effect of increasing some of these correlations
is that of increasing information and reducing the combined
error: in other words, if correlations are estimated as 100 %
and negative BLUE coefﬁcients are observed, it is wrong to
claim that correlations have been estimated “conservatively”.
In this section, we will ﬁrst analyse under which condi-
tions it is indeed conservative to assume that correlations are
100 %, using a simple two-measurement combination as an
example. For those situations where a precise evaluation of
correlations is impossible, and where setting them to their
“nominal” estimates would result in negative BLUE coefﬁ-
cients, we will then offer a few guidelines and tools to help
physicists make more conservative estimates of correlations.
5.1 Conservative estimates of correlations
in a two-measurement combination
Let us consider the combination of two measurements A and
B, whose errors are well known, but where the correlation ρ
123


--- Page 12 ---
2717 Page 12 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
between them could not be precisely determined. We want
to determine in this case which would be the most “con-
servative” estimate for ρ. We do this by studying the func-
tional dependency of the total combined error on ρ (which
throughout this Sect. 5.1 is taken as a variable parameter,
rather than any “nominal” estimate of the correlation). We
observed in Sect. 4.1 that this combination remains in a low-
correlation regime as long as the off-diagonal covariance
ρσ
AσB is smaller than both variances σ2
A and σ2
B,
{ ρσAσB ≤ σ2
A,
ρσAσB ≤ σ2
B. (36)
Let us now assume that there are only two sources of uncer-
tainty, an uncorrelated error σ(unc), e.g. of statistical ori-
gin, and a single systematic effect σ(cor) whose correlation
between the two measurements is ρcor. The most conserva-
tive estimate for ρcor according to Eq. 36 above is thus the
largest value of ρcor such that
{ ρσAσB = ρcorσA(cor)σB(cor) ≤ (σ2
A(unc) + σ2
A(cor)) = σ2
A,
ρσAσB = ρcorσA(cor)σB(cor) ≤ (σ2
B(unc) + σ2
B(cor)) = σ2
B.
(37)
This expression is very interesting because it is automatically
satisﬁed by any value of ρcor for measurements that are sta-
tistically dominated, i.e. where each of σA(unc) and σB(unc)
is much larger than both σA(cor) and σB(cor): in other words,
for statistically dominated measurements, it is indeed a cor-
rect statement to say that “correlations are conservatively
assumed to be 100 %”.
If the measurements are not statistically dominated, how-
ever, the situation is different. TakingσA(cor) to be the smaller
of the two correlated errors, i.e. σA(cor) ≤ σB(cor), then the
second condition is automatically true, while the ﬁrst condi-
tion is satisﬁed if and only if
ρcor ≤ σ2
A
σA(cor)σB(cor)
= σA(cor)/σB(cor)
(σA(cor)/σA)2 . (38)
This shows that, when systematic errors cannot be ignored
and the sensitivities of A and B to the correlated systematic
effect are so different that(σ
B(cor)/σA(cor)) ≥ (σA/σA(cor))2,
then it is no longer correct to take 100 % as the most con-
servative value of ρcor, and one must choose a correlation
that is smaller than 100 %. This is shown in Fig. 3, where
the most conservative value ofρcor is plotted as a function of
σA(cor)/σA, for several values of σB(cor)/σA(cor).
This ﬁgure shows that there are two different regimes.
When (σB(cor)/σA(cor))<( σ A/σA(cor))2, the most conser-
vative value of ρcor is 1: in this case, both measurements
A and B contribute to the combination with positive BLUE
Fig. 3 Most “conservative” value of an unknown correlation ρcor
between σA(cor) and σB(cor) as a function of σA(cor)/σA, for several
values of σB(cor)/σA(cor) ≥ 1
coefﬁcients because, no matter how large ρcor is, the com-
bination always remains in a low-correlation regime. When
(σB(cor)/σA(cor)) ≥ (σA/σA(cor))2, instead, the most conser-
vative value ofρcor is smaller than 1: in this case, the combi-
nation is at the boundary of low and high correlation regimes,
where the combined error is maximised and equal toσˆY =σA
while λA = 1 and λB = 0, which is more or less equivalent
(modulo the effect on χ2 previously discussed) to excluding
the less precise measurement B from the combination.
5.2 Identifying the least conservative correlations between
n measurements
While it is relatively straightforward to determine the “most
conservative” estimate of correlations with only two mea-
surements, things get more complicated when the combi-
nation includes n measurements, as the number of inter-
measurement correlations increases to n(n − 1)/2 and the
“most conservative” value for any of them would depend on
the values of the others. Instead of treating all correlations as
completely free parameters as we did in Sect.5.1, throughout
this Sect. 5.2 we will then suggest ways to analyse how “con-
servative” an existing “nominal” estimate of correlations is.
In particular, we will consider the most general case where
the full “nominal” covariance matrix is built as the sum of S
sources of uncertainty, each with a different set of “nominal”
correlations between the measurements,
M
ij =
S∑
s=1
M[s]
ij =
S∑
s=1
{
M[s]
ii if i = j,
ρ[s]
ij
√
M[s]
ii
√
M[s]
jj if i ̸= j.
(39)
If the “nominal” values of the correlations ρ[s]
ij are not
assessed rigorously and it is still conceivable to modify them
123


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 13 of 19 2717
to make the combination more “conservative”, it is certainly
useful to know which of these correlations correspond to a
high correlation regime and which of them contribute more
signiﬁcantly to a change in the combined error. To answer
the ﬁrst question, one should look at the correlations of those
measurements whose BLUE coefﬁcients are negative in the
“nominal” combination. In particular, one should concen-
trate on the correlations ρ
ij between two measurements yi
and yj such that the derivatives ∂I/∂ρij in Eq. 35 are posi-
tive. To answer the second question, we propose to use the
information derivatives we derived in Sect. 4.3 and look at
which correlation would yield the largest relative decrease of
information δI/I for the same relative rescaling downwards
δρ
[s]
ij /ρ[s]
ij of that correlation. In other words, we suggest to
rank correlations by the normalised information derivative
ρ[s]
ij
I
(
∂I
∂ρ[s]
ij
)
=− 2Iλiλjρ[s]
ij
√
M[s]
ii
√
M[s]
jj
=− 2
λiλj M[s]
ij
σ2
ˆY
, (40)
where all quantities in the formula (which is easily derived
by extending Eq. 33) are computed at the “nominal” val-
ues of the correlations. The correlations between measure-
ments i and j and for error source s with the highest positive
values of the normalized derivative in Eq. 40 are those that
should be most urgently reassessed. The quantity in Eq. 40
is a dimensionless number: in the simple example presented
in Sect. 2, for instance, the value of this normalised deriva-
tive for the correlation between B1 and B2 (for the single
source of uncertainty considered in that example) is as high
as +2.52, indicating that the combined error would increase
by 2.52 % for a relative reduction of the correlation by 1 %
of its “nominal” value (from 0.87500 to 0.86625). We will
illustrate this in more detail at the end of this section using a
numerical example.
Note that the sums of all (ρ
[s]
ij /I)(∂I/∂ρ[s]
ij ) over all error
sources s effectively represent the effect on information of
rescaling the correlations between measurements i and j by
the same factor for all error sources, while their sums over
measurements i and j represent the effect of rescaling the
correlations between all measurements by the same factor
in a given error source s. Likewise, their global sum over
measurements i and j and error sourcess represents the effect
on information of rescaling all correlations by a global factor.
While they lack the granularity to give more useful insight
about which correlations are most relevant when trying to
make the combination more conservative, these sums also
represent interesting quantities to analyse in some situations.
In particular, we will point out in Sect. 5.3.1 that each of
these different sums of derivatives becomes zero in one of the
information minimization procedures that will be described
in that section.
5.3 Reducing correlations to make them “more
conservative”
Having proposed a way to identify which “nominal” correla-
tions have not been estimated “conservatively” and may need
to be reassessed, we now propose some practical procedures
to reduce their values and try to make the combination more
conservative, when a full and precise reevaluation of these
correlations is impossible. What follows must be understood
as simple guidelines to drive the work of experimental physi-
cists when combining measurements: we propose different
methods, but the applicability of one rather than the other,
which also implies some level of arbitrariness, would have
to be judged on a case-by-case basis.
We propose three main solutions to the problem of reduc-
ing the (large and positive) “nominal” values of correlations
to make the combination more conservative: the ﬁrst is a
numerical minimization of information with respect to these
correlations, the second consists in ignoring some of the input
measurements, and the third one is a prescription that we
indicate with the name of “onionization” and that consists in
decreasing the off-diagonal elements in the covariance matri-
ces so that they are below a speciﬁc threshold. At the end of
the section we will present a practical example that illustrates
the different features of these methods.
5.3.1 Minimizing information by numerical methods
This approach is based on a multi-dimensional minimiza-
tion of information as a function of rescaling factors applied
to the “nominal” values of correlations. In the most general
case, one would independently rescale by a scale factor f
[s]
ij
between 0 and 1 each correlation ρ[s]
ij between the errors on
the measurements yi and yj due to the sth source of uncer-
tainty. This corresponds to studying the effect on information
of replacing the “nominal” covariance matrix M
[s]
ij for each
error source by a modiﬁed covariance matrix (M′)[s]
ij given
by
M[s]
ij → (M′)[s]
ij =
{
f [s]
ij M[s]
ij if i ̸= j,
M[s]
ii if i = j, (41)
where
0 ≤ f [s]
ij = f [s]
ji ≤ 1. (42)
Minimizing information by varying all of those S×n(n−
1)/2 scale factors f [s]
ij , however, is not an option because
information (i.e. the inverse of the total combined variance)
123


--- Page 14 ---
2717 Page 14 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
ultimately depends only on the off-diagonal elements in the
full covariance matrix and the minimization would be under-
constrained. We therefore considered three more speciﬁc
minimization scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario, which we indicate
as “ByErrSrc”, consists in rescaling all correlations within
each error source by the same factor f
[s], thus involving S
independent scale factors ( f [s]
ij = f [s] for every i and j). The
second case, which we indicate as “ByOffDiagElem”, con-
sists in rescaling in all error sources the correlation between
yi and yj by the same factor fij , thus involving n(n− 1)/2
independent scale factors ( f [s]
ij = fij for every s). Finally, the
simplest case, which we indicate as “ByGlobFac”, consists in
rescaling all correlations by the same global rescaling factor
f (i.e. f [s]
ij = f for every i, j and s).
A software package, called BlueFin,1 was speciﬁcally
prepared to study all these issues. Within this package,
numerical minimizations are performed using the
Minuit [12] libraries through their integration in Root [13],
imposing the constraints that scale factors remain between
0 and 1. All scale factors are varied in the minimization,
except those which are known to have no effect on informa-
tion because the information derivatives with respect to them
(which are essentially those presented in Sect. 4.3) are zero
both at “nominal” and at zero correlations (i.e. when all scale
factors are 1 and 0, respectively).
The “ByOffDiagElem” minimization is the most tricky, as
it may trespass into regions where the total covariance matrix
is not positive deﬁnite, sometimes in an unrecoverable way,
in which case we declare the minimization to have failed.
Even when this minimization does converge to a minimum,
one should also keep in mind that at this point the partial
covariance matrices for the different error sources may be
non positive-deﬁnite with negative eigenvalues: this is clearly
a non-physical situation, which should be used for illustra-
tive purposes only and is clearly not suitable for a physics
publication.
Not surprisingly, in the very simple example presented
in Sect. 2, where only one off-diagonal correlation is non-
zero and errors are assumed to come from a single source
of uncertainty, these three minimizations all converge to the
same result, where the off-diagonal covariance is reduced
to ρσ
B1σB2 = σ2
B1 = 16.00, which leads to a combina-
tion where λB2 = 0 and again the less precise measure-
ment B2 is essentially excluded. In a more general case with
several non-zero correlations and many different sources of
uncertainty, the three minimizations may instead converge to
rather different outcomes. The BlueFin software will also
be used for the numerical examples shown at the end of the
section.
1 Best Linear Unbiased Estimate Fisher Information aNalysis—https://
svnweb.cern.ch/trac/blueﬁn.
5.3.2 Iteratively removing measurements with negative
BLUE coefﬁcients
Having observed many times that choosing “more conserva-
tive” correlations may ultimately lead to combinations where
the BLUE coefﬁcients of one or more measurements are
increased from a negative value to zero, it is perfectly legit-
imate to think of excluding these measurements from the
combination from the very beginning. If one should choose
to adopt this approach, we suggest to do this iteratively,
by removing ﬁrst the measurement with the most negative
BLUE coefﬁcient, then performing a new combination and
ﬁnally iterating until only positive BLUE coefﬁcients remain.
This procedure is guaranteed to converge as the combination
of a single measurement has a single BLUE coefﬁcient equal
to 1. We will present an example later on.
Excluding measurements from a combination may be a
very controversial decision to take. At the same time, if there
are negative BLUE coefﬁcients and it is impossible to deter-
mine precisely the correlations, this may be the truly con-
servative and soundest scientiﬁc choice, to avoid the risk of
claiming combined results more accurate than they really are.
Note that excluding a measurement differs from including it
with a rescaled correlation which gives it a zero BLUE coef-
ﬁcient, as in the latter case the measurement does contribute
to theχ
2 for the ﬁt while in the former case it does not. If cor-
relations for that measurement cannot be precisely assessed,
in any case, even the accuracy of its contribution to the χ2
with an ad-hoc rescaled correlation is somewhat question-
able and it may be better to simply exclude the measurement
from the combination altogether.
Note ﬁnally that high correlations between different mea-
surements in a combination are not only caused by correlated
systematic uncertainties in the analyses of independent data
samples, but are also expected for statistical uncertainties
when performing different analyses of the same data samples.
In these cases, where negative BLUE coefﬁcients would be
likely if two such measurements were combined, it is already
common practice to only publish the more precise analysis
and simply use the less precise one as a cross-check.
5.3.3 The “onionization” prescription
Guided by the remarks we have made so far in this paper, but
without any formal demonstration, we ﬁnally propose a sim-
ple rule of thumb for trying to modify “nominal” correlations
to make them more “conservative”. In the following we will
again indicate byM the “nominal” covariance and byM
′ the
modiﬁed covariance matrices (which will only differ in their
off-diagonal terms as we will only modify correlations, keep-
ing variances unchanged). Our proposal essentially consists
in generalising Eq. 36 to n measurements, by deﬁning corre-
lations so that the total modiﬁed covariance (M
′)ij between
123


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 15 of 19 2717
any two measurements remains smaller than both individual
total variances,
{ (M′)ij ≤ (M′)ii = Mii = σ2
i
(M′)ij ≤ (M′)jj = M jj = σ2
j
∀i, j. (43)
Recalling the interpretation of high-correlation regimes we
gave in Sect. 4.1, the idea is to prevent situations where one
part of the systematic error is 100 % correlated between dif-
ferent measurements which have a different sensitivity to it,
as their joint action would effectively constrain that effect
and lead to a reduction of the combined error. It should be
noted that this procedure is similar to the “minimum overlap”
assumption that was used to estimate the correlation between
systematic errors for different energies or experiments in sev-
eral QCD studies at LEP , including, but not limited to, the
analysis presented in Ref. [ 14].
In more detail, if the full covariance matrix is built as the
sum of S error sources as in Eq. 39, then S × n(n − 1)/2
correlations (M
′)[s]
ij /
√
(M′)[s]
ii (M′)[s]
jj need to be separately
estimated in theS partial covariances(M′)[s]. We considered
two possible rules of thumb to provide conservative estimates
of the partial covariances satifying Eq. 43.
The ﬁrst one consists in requiring that
{ (M′)[s]
ij ≤ (M′)ii = Mii = σ2
i
(M′)[s]
ij ≤ (M′)jj = M jj = σ2
j
∀i, j, ∀s, (44)
i.e. in keeping the (M′)[s]
ij unchanged and equal to their
“nominal” values M[s]
ij if these satisfy Eq. 44, or in reducing
them to the upper bounds above otherwise. This limits the
off-diagonal covariance for each error source to the maxi-
mum allowed for the sum of all such contributions, but by
doing so it does not strictly ensure that their sum does not
exceed this limit, hence the resulting correlations may still
be overestimated with respect to their “most conservative”
values.
The second rule of thumb consists in requiring that
{ (M
′)[s]
ij ≤ (M′)[s]
ii = M[s]
ii = (σ[s]
i )2
(M′)[s]
ij ≤ (M′)[s]
jj = M[s]
jj = (σ[s]
j )2 ∀i, j, ∀s,
(45)
i.e. again in keeping the (M′)[s]
ij unchanged and equal to
their “nominal” values M[s]
ij if these satisfy Eq. 45,o ri n
reducing them to the upper bounds above otherwise. This
limits the off-diagonal covariance for each error source to the
maximum allowed when only that error source is considered,
as if there were no others or they were all negligible with
respect to it. While this second rule of thumb may result in
a full covariance matrix where the off-diagonal covariances
are even lower than the “most conservative” values in Eq.43,
we believe that this is a more solid procedure, because it is
applied to each error source independently. In particular, we
think that this may guarantee more “conservative” values of
the combined BLUE errors in the different error sources, and
not only for their total.
In the following, we will refer to this rule of thumb as
the “onionization” prescription. In fact, if we consider a set
of measurements {A,B,C,D…}, ordered so that σ
[s]
A(cor) ≤
σ[s]
B(cor) ≤ σ[s]
C,cor ≤ σ[s]
D,cor for the sth source of uncer-
tainty, this prescription ensures that the corresponding partial
covariance matrix (M′)[s] has no unreasonably large off-
diagonal element, but has instead an upper bound with a
regular layered pattern similar to that of an onion:
⎛
⎜⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜⎝
(σ
[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
A(cor))2 ...
(σ[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
B(cor))2 (σ[s]
B(cor))2 (σ[s]
B(cor))2 ...
(σ[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
B(cor))2 (σ[s]
C,cor)2 (σ[s]
C,cor)2 ...
(σ[s]
A(cor))2 (σ[s]
B(cor))2 (σ[s]
C,cor)2 (σ[s]
D,cor)2 ...
... ... ... ... ...
⎞
⎟⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟⎠
. (46)
Not surprisingly, in the simple example presented in Sect. 2,
the onionization prescription gives the same result as the three
minimization procedures described above (i.e. ρσ
B1σB2 =
σ2
B1 = 16.00), leading to a combination where λB2 = 0
and again the less precise measurement B2 is essentially
excluded. A more complex example is presented below.
Note that, in the procedure described above as well as in
its implementation in the BlueFin software that we used to
produce the results presented in the next section, we sys-
tematically apply the “onionization” of the partial covari-
ance matrix for each source of uncertainty. In a real combi-
nation, it may be more appropriate to only apply this pro-
cedure to the partial covariance matrices of those sources
of uncertainty for which at least some of the information
derivatives in Eq. 40 are positive. More generally, we stress
again that we only propose this prescription as a rule of
thumb, but no automatic procedure can replace an estimate
of correlations based on a detailed understanding of the
physics processes responsible for each source of systematic
uncertainty.
5.4 A more complex example
As an illustration of the tools we presented in this paper, we
ﬁnally present a slightly more complex example represent-
ing the ﬁctitious combination of four different cross-section
measurements A, B, C and D. For consistency with the nota-
tion used so far and to avoid any confusion with the use of the
symbol σ to indicate variances, we refer to the cross-section
observable as y, to its four measurements as y
A, yB, yC, yD,
123


--- Page 16 ---
2717 Page 16 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
Table 2 Results of the combination of yA, yB, yC and yD (χ2/ndof = 4.23/3). The central value, total error and individual error components for
each input measurement i are listed, followed by the central value weight CVW i or λi , the intrinsic information weight IIW i (also shown for the
correlations), the marginal information weight MIW i , the relative importance RI i . In the last row, the BLUE central value and errors and the sum
of all weights in each column are displayed
Measurements σUnc σBkgd σLumi CVW/% IIW/% MIW/% RI/%
yA 95.00 ± 17.92 10.00 10.00 11.00 60.39 50 .91 34.69 48.78
yB 144.00 ± 44.63 14.00 40.00 14.00 − 11.90 8 .20 8.97 9.61
yC 115.00 ± 20.81 18.00 3.00 10.00 25.36 37 .74 14.63 20.49
yD 122.00 ± 25.00 25.00 0 0 26.15 26 .15 26.15 21.12
Correlations – – – – – − 23.01 – –
BLUE / Total 101.30 ± 12.78 10.14 2.04 7.51 100.00 100 .00 84.44 100.00
and to its BLUE as ˆY . Let us assume in the following that
the central values and errors on the four measurements are
given by
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎩
y
A/pb = 95.0 ± 10.0 (UNC) ± 10.0 (BKGD) ± 11.0 (LUMI),
yB/pb = 144.0 ± 14.0 (UNC) ± 40.0 (BKGD) ± 14.0 (LUMI),
yC/pb = 115.0 ± 18.0 (UNC) ± 3.0 (BKGD) ± 10.0 (LUMI),
yD/pb = 122.0 ± 25.0 (UNC),
(47)
where UNC indicates the uncorrelated errors of statistical or
systematic origin, while BKGD and LUMI are systematic
errors assumed to be 100 % correlated between the ﬁrst three
experiments, due for instance to a common background and
a common luminosity measurement.
The assumption that the background is fully correlated
between all experiments may be the result of a detailed analy-
sis, or a supposedly “conservative” assumption in the absence
of more precise correlation estimates. It is rather unlikely that
a more detailed analysis would not be performed in a case
like this one—in particular, in this type of situation, with such
a large difference in the sizes of the fully correlated BKGD
errors in the different measurements, we would recommend
to try to split the BKGD systematics into its sub-components
in the combination—but this is clearly an example for illus-
trative purposes only.
Under the given assumptions, the results of the BLUE
combination are those shown in Table 2, where informa-
tion weights and relative importance are also listed. There
are several comments that can be made about these num-
bers. First, if correlation estimates are actually correct, then
the negative BLUE coefﬁcient for y
B indicates that we are
effectively using this measurement to constrain the back-
ground: note, in particular, the very small ﬁnal uncertainty
on background after the BLUE combination. Second, yD is
for all practical purposes a measurement independent from
yA, yB and yC: this is reﬂected in the fact that its intrinsic
and marginal information weights are both equal to its central
value weight. Third, the relative importance of y
D is clearly
Table 3 Normalised information derivatives ρ/I*dI/dρ for the combi-
nation of of yA, yB, yC and yD in the cross-section example, computed
at “nominal” correlation values. The last column and last row list infor-
mation derivatives when the same rescaling factor is used for a given
off-diagonal element or error source, which are equal to the sums of
individual derivatives in each row and column, respectively
OffDiag & ErrSrc UNC BKGD LUMI OffDiag
yB/yA 0 0.352 0.135 0.487
yC/yA 0 0.056 0.206 0.262
yC/yB 0 0.044 0.052 0.096
yD/yA 00 0 0
yD/yB 00 0 0
yD/yC 00 0 0
ErrSrc 0 0.340 0.019 GlobFact 0.321
underestimated, while that of yB is clearly overestimated, as
it is larger than both its intrinsic and marginal information
weights.
It is also interesting to look in this example at the nor-
malised information derivatives described in Sect.4.3. These
are shown in Table 3. The table tells us that the negative
BLUE coefﬁcient for y
B is primarily due to its correlations
to yA, mainly that between BKGD errors, but to a lesser
extent also that between LUMI errors: these two informa-
tion derivatives, in fact, are both positive and very large. The
correlations between y
B and yC also go in the direction of
increasing information, while those between yA and yC are
in the opposite regime and decrease information.
We now apply to this example the minimization, nega-
tive BLUE coefﬁcient removal and onionization prescrip-
tions described in this section. The results of the combina-
tions performed after modifying correlations according to
these prescriptions are listed in Table 4, where they are com-
pared to the combination using “nominal” correlations and
another where all correlations have been set to zero. This
table is very interesting because it shows a wide range of
values not only for the BLUE combined total error, but also,
and to an even larger extent, for the BLUE combined central
123


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 17 of 19 2717
Table 4 BLUE central values and variances for the cross section example, with “nominal” correlations, with correlations reduced using the
procedures presented in this paper, as well as with no correlations
Combination ( ˆY ± σˆY )/pb UNC BKGD LUMI χ2/ndof λA(%)λ B(%)λ C(%)λ D(%)
“Nominal” corr. 101.3 ±12.8 ±10.1 ±2.0 ±7.5 4.2/3 60.4 − 11.9 25.4 26.1
ByGlobFac 105.2 ±13.0 ±9.9 ±4.1 ±7.3 3.1/3 50.2 − 5.7 28.6 26.9
ByErrSrc 107.3 ±13.2 ±9.8 ±4.7 ±7.6 2.6/3 45.6 − 1.8 28.2 28.0
ByOffDiagElem 108.2 ±13.4 ±9.8 ±5.2 ±7.6 2.4/3 44.1 0.0 27.2 28.7
No CVWs < 0 108.2 ±13.4 ±9.8 ±5.2 ±7.6 1.3/2 44.1 – 27.2 28.7
Onionization 109.2 ±13.1 ±9.5 ±4.9 ±7.6 2.2/3 42.0 2.4 28.3 27.3
No corr. 110.1 ±11.5 ±8.8 ±5.0 ±5.6 1.6/3 41.4 6.7 30.7 21.2
values and for the BLUE combined partial errors for each
source of uncertainty.
The most striking effect, perhaps, is the fact that all
modiﬁcations of the “nominal” correlations to make them
“more conservative” lead to signiﬁcant central value shifts
(i.e. possibly to biased combined estimates) and to much
larger combined BKGD systematics, in spite of relatively
small increases in the total combined errors. In particular,
it is somewhat counter-intuitive that the combined uncor-
related error decreases when reducing correlations, while
the combined systematic errors increase: this is likely to be
another feature of the high-correlation regime characterizing
the “nominal” correlations of this example. We stress that, in
real situations, it is important to analyse this type of effects,
and not only the effect on the total combined error, when
testing different estimates of correlations. This is especially
important if one keeps in mind that the results of BLUE
combinations are generally meant to be further combined
with other results (e.g. the combined top masses from LHC
and the combined top mass from Tevatron will eventually be
combined).
It is not too surprising, conversely, that the effects on
combined BKGD systematics are much larger than those
on the combined LUMI systematics. This could be guessed
by remembering that normalised information derivatives are
much larger for the former than for the latter.
It is also not surprising that the “ByOffDiagElem” min-
imization gives essentially the same results (except for the
χ
2 value) that are found when excluding the measurements
with negative BLUE coefﬁcients. By construction, in fact,
this is the only one of the three minimizations which almost
always guarantees that BLUE coefﬁcients which were ini-
tially negative end up equal to zero after the minimization: if
the minimum is a local minimum, some of the derivatives in
Eq. 35, which are directly proportional to the BLUE coefﬁ-
cients, must eventually be zero.
Note also that the onionization prescription leads to the
only combination where the BLUE coefﬁcient for measure-
ment y
B becomes strictly positive. As mentioned earlier, this
may be a consequence of the fact that this prescription may
Table 5 Onionization of the covariance matrices for the BKGD and
LUMI error sources in the cross-section example. The values are given
in pb
2
BKGD
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
100. 400. 30. 0.
400. 1600. 120. 0.
30. 120. 9. 0.
0. 0. 0. 0.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ →
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
100. 100. 9. 0.
100. 1600. 9. 0.
9. 9. 9. 0.
0. 0. 0. 0.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
LUMI
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
121. 154. 110. 0.
154. 196. 140. 0.
110. 140. 100. 0.
0. 0. 0. 0.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ →
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
121. 121. 100. 0.
121. 196. 100. 0.
100. 100. 100. 0.
0. 0. 0. 0.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
reduce correlations even more than their “most conservative”
values, trespassing well into the low-correlation regime. In
this respect, it is interesting to have a look at the effect of
onionization on the partial covariance matrices, and more
generally at the effect on the total covariance matrices of
all procedures presented in this section: these are shown in
Tables 5 and 6, respectively.
In particular, note in Table 5 that the onionization proce-
dure (but the same is true for minimizations) affects correla-
tions for the BKGD and LUMI error sources in exactly the
same way without distinctions. If this was a real combina-
tion, instead, one would most likely keep the LUMI correla-
tion unchanged (because a common luminosity measurement
would indeed result in a 100 % correlation between y
A, yB
and yC, and these three measurements together could even
help to constrain the error on it), concentrating instead on
the re-assessment of the BKGD correlation alone (because
the initial “nominal” estimate of 100 % correlation is neither
conservative nor realistic in the presence of different sensi-
tivities to differential distributions).
It should ﬁnally be added that the total covariance matrix
derived from the onionization prescription is used as the
starting point of the “ByOffDiagElem” minimization in the
BlueFin software, as we have found this to improve the
efﬁciency of the minimization procedure. As an additional
cross-check of the onionization prescription, we also tested
a fourth type of minimization, where information is indepen-
dently minimized for each source of uncertainty as if this was
123


--- Page 18 ---
2717 Page 18 of 19 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717
Table 6 Modiﬁed input covariances for the four measurements in the
cross-section example, when reducing correlations according to the pro-
cedures described in this paper. The values are given in pb
2
“Nominal” corr.
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
321. 554. 140. 0.
554. 1992. 260. 0.
140. 260. 433. 0.
0. 0. 0. 625.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
ByGlobFac
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
321. 442. 112. 0.
442. 1992. 208. 0.
112. 208. 433. 0.
0. 0. 0. 625.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
ByErrSrc
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
321. 341. 124. 0.
341. 1992. 196. 0.
124. 196. 433. 0.
0. 0. 0. 625.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
ByOffDiagElem
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
321. 272. 140. 0.
272. 1992. 219. 0.
140. 219. 433. 0.
0. 0. 0. 625.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
Onionization
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
321. 221. 109. 0.
221. 1992. 109. 0.
109. 109. 433. 0.
0. 0. 0. 625.
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
the only one, varying each time only the correlations in that
error source (after removing those measurements not affected
by it and slightly reducing the allowed correlation ranges to
keep the partial covariance positive deﬁnite). The prelimi-
nary results of this test (not included in Table 4) indicate that
these minimizations do not seem to signiﬁcantly move par-
tial covariances or the ﬁnal result away from those obtained
through the onionization prescription, which are used as a
starting point also in this case.
We conclude this section by reminding that the prescrip-
tions presented here are only empirical recipes that assume no
prior knowledge of the physics involved and, for this reason,
can never represent valid substitutes for a careful quantita-
tive analysis of correlations using real or simulated data. A
precise estimate of correlations is important in general, but
absolutely necessary in high correlation regimes, where it
may be as important as a precise assessment of measurement
errors themselves.
6 Conclusions
Combining many correlated measurements is a fundamen-
tal and unavoidable step in the scientiﬁc process to improve
our knowledge about a physical quantity. In this paper, we
recalled the relevance of the concept of Fisher information to
quantify and better understand this knowledge. We stressed
that it is extremely important to understand how the informa-
tion available from several measurements is effectively used
in their combination, not only because this allows a fairer
recognition of their relative merit in their contribution to
the knowledge about the unknown parameter, but especially
because this makes it possible to produce a more robust sci-
entiﬁc result by critically reassessing the assumptions made
in the combination.
In this context, we described how the correlations between
the different measurements play a critical role in their com-
bination. We demonstrated, in particular, that the presence
of negative coefﬁcients in the BLUE weighted average of
any number of measurements is a sign of a “high-correlation
regime”, where the effect of increasing correlations is that of
reducing the error on the combined result. We showed that, in
this regime, a large contribution to the combined knowledge
about the parameter comes from the joint impact of several
measurements through their correlation and we argued, as a
consequence, that the merit for this particular contribution to
information cannot be claimed by any single measurement
individually. In particular, we presented our objections to the
standard practice of presenting the “relative importances” of
different measurements based on the absolute values of their
BLUE coefﬁcients, and we proposed the use of (“intrinsic”
and “marginal”) “information weights” instead.
In the second part of the paper, we questioned under
which circumstances assuming systematic errors as fully cor-
related can be considered a “conservative” procedure. We
proposed the use of information derivatives with respect to
inter-measurement correlations as a tool to identify those
“nominal” correlations for which this assumption is wrong
and a more careful evaluation is necessary. We also sug-
gested a few procedures for trying to make a combination
more “conservative” when a precise estimate of correlations
is simply impossible.
We should ﬁnally note that BLUE combinations are not
the only way to combine different measurements, but they are
actually the simplest to understand when combinations are
performed under the most favorable assumptions that mea-
surements are multivariate Gaussian distributed with covari-
ances known a priori, as in this case all relevant quantities
become easily calculable by matrix algebra. We therefore
stress that, while the results in this paper were obtained under
these assumptions and using the BLUE technique, large pos-
itive correlations are guaranteed to have a big impact, and
should be watched out for, also in combinations performed
with other methods or under other assumptions.
Acknowledgments This work has been inspired by many discussions,
during private and public meetings, on the need for critically reviewing
the assumptions about correlations and the meaning of “weights”, when
combining several measurements in the presence of high correlations
between them. It would be difﬁcult to mention and acknowledge all
those colleagues who have hinted us towards the right direction and
with whom we have had very fruitful discussions. We are particularly
grateful to the members of the TopLHCWG and to the A TLAS and
123


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2717 Page 19 of 19 2717
CMS members who have helped in the reviews of the recent top mass
combinations at the LHC. We would also like to thank our colleagues
who have sent us comments about the ﬁrst two public versions of this
paper. In particular, it is a pleasure to thank Louis Lyons for his extensive
feedback and his very useful suggestions. We are also grateful to the
EPJC referees for their detailed and insightful comments, as well as
for making us aware of the research presented in Ref. [ 11]. Finally,
A.V . would like to thank the management of the CERN IT-ES and IT-
SDC groups for allowing him the ﬂexibility to work on this research
alongside his other committments in computing support for the LHC
experiments.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the
source are credited.
Funded by SCOAP
3 /L i c e n s eV e r s i o nC CB Y4 . 0 .
References
1. K. Nakamura et al., (Particle Data Group), review of particle
physics. J. Phys. G 37, 075021 (2010)
2. A.C. Aitken, On least squares and linear combinations of observa-
tions. Proc. R. Soc. Edinb. 55, 42 (1935)
3. L. Lyons, D. Gibaut, P . Clifford, How to combine correlated esti-
mates of a single physical quantity. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 270, 110
(1988)
4. A. V alassi, Combining correlated measurements of several differ-
ent physical quantities. Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 500, 391 (2003)
5. The ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL Collaborations and the
LEP Electroweak Working Group, Electroweak measurements in
electron-positron collisions at W-boson-pair energies at LEP , Phys.
Rep. 532, 119 (2013)
6. The Tevatron Electroweak Working Group for the CDF and D0
Collaborations, Combination of CDF and D0 results on the mass
of the top quark using up to 5.8 fb
− 1 of data. [arXiv:1107.5255v3]
(2011)
7. The A TLAS and CMS Collaborations, Combination of A TLAS and
CMS results on the mass of the top quark using up to 4.9 fb − 1 of
data, A TLAS-CONF-2012-095, CMS PAS TOP-12-001 (2012)
8. R.A. Fisher, Theory of statistical estimation. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc.
12, 700 (1925)
9. A. van den Bos, Parameter Estimation for Scientists and Engineers.
(Wiley-Interscience, 2007)
10. F. James, Statistical Methods in Experimental Physics , 2 nd edn.
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2006)
11. M.G. Cox et al., The generalized weighted mean of correlated quan-
tities. Metrologia 43, S268 (2006)
12. F. James, M. Roos, MINUIT - a system for function minimiza-
tion and analysis of the parameter errors and correlations. Comput.
Phys. Commun. 10, 343 (1975)
13. L. Moneta et al., Recent improvements of the ROOT ﬁtting and
minimization classes. in Proceedings of ACAT08, Erice (2008)
14. P . Achard et al., (L3 Collaboration), Determination of αs from
hadronic event shapes in e+e− annihilation at 192 ≤ √ s ≤208
GeV . Phys. Lett. B536, 217 (2002)
123
