--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0715-2
Review
Flavor physics of leptons and dipole moments*
M. Raidal1,b, A. van der Schaaf2,b,I .B i g i3,b, M.L. Mangano4,a,b, Y. Semertzidis5,b,S .A b e l6,S .A l b i n o7, S. Antusch8,
E. Arganda9,B .B a j c10, S. Banerjee11, C. Biggio8, M. Blanke8,12, W. Bonivento13, G.C. Branco14,4, D. Bryman15,
A.J. Buras12,L .C a l i b b i16,17,18, A. Ceccucci4, P.H. Chankowski19,S .D a v i d s o n20, A. Deandrea20, D.P. DeMille21,
F. Deppisch22,M . A .D i a z23, B. Duling12, M. Felcini4, W. Fetscher24,F .F o r t i25, D.K. Ghosh26,M .G i f f e l s27,
M.A. Giorgi25, G. Giudice4, E. Goudzovskij28,T .H a n29, P.G. Harris30, M.J. Herrero9, J. Hisano31,R . J .H o l t32,
K. Huitu33, A. Ibarra34, O. Igonkina35,36, A. Ilakovac37, J. Imazato38, G. Isidori28,39, F.R. Joaquim9,M .K a d a s t i k1,
Y. Kajiyama1,S . F .K i n g40,K .K i r c h41,M . G .K o z l o v42, M. Krawczyk19,4,T .K r e s s27, O. Lebedev4, A. Lusiani25,
E. Ma43, G. Marchiori25,A .M a s i e r o18,I .M a s i n a4, G. Moreau44, T. Mori45, M. Muntel1, N. Neri25,F .N e s t i46,
C.J.G. Onderwater47, P. Paradisi48,S . T .P e t c o v16,49, M. Picariello50, V . Porretti17, A. Poschenrieder12,
M. Pospelov51, L. Rebane1, M.N. Rebelo14,4,A .R i t z51, L. Roberts52, A. Romanino16, J.M. Roney11, A. Rossi18,
R. Rückl53, G. Senjanovic54, N. Serra13, T. Shindou34, Y. Takanishi16, C. Tarantino12, A.M. Teixeira44,
E. Torrente-Lujan55, K.J. Turzynski56,19, T.E.J. Underwood6, S.K. Vempati57,O .V i v e s17
1National Institute for Chemical Physics and Biophysics, 10143 Tallinn, Estonia
2Physik-Institut der Universität Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland
3Physics Department, University of Notre Dame du Lac, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
4Physics Department, CERN, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
5Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA
6Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
7II. Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Hamburg, 22761 Hamburg, Germany
8Max-Planck-Institut für Physik, 80805 München, Germany
9Departamento de Fisica Teorica and IFT/CSIC-UAM, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain
10J. Stefan Institute, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
11Department of Physics, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3P6, Canada
12Physics Department, TU Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany
13Università degli Studi di Cagliari and INFN Cagliari, 09042 Monserrato (CA), Italy
14Departamento de Física and Centro de Física Teórica de Partículas (CFTP), Instituto Superior Técnico (IST), 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal
15Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2A3, Canada
16SISSA and INFN, Sezione di Trieste, 34013 Trieste, Italy
17Departament de Física Teòrica, Universitat de València-CSIC, 46100 Burjassot, Spain
18Dipartimento di Fisica ‘G. Galilei’ and INFN, 35131 Padova, Italy
19Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Warsaw, 00-681 Warsaw, Poland
20IPNL, CNRS, Université Lyon-1, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France
21Physics Department, Yale University, New Haven, CO 06520, USA
22School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
23Facultad de Fisica, Pontiﬁcia Universita Catolica de Chile, Santiago 22, Chile
24Department of Physics, ETH Honggerberg, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland
25INFN and Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita di Pisa, 56127 Pisa, Italy
26Theoretical Physics Division, Physical Research Lab., Navrangpura, Ahmedabad 380 009, India
27III. Physikalisches Institut B, RWTH Aachen, 52056 Aachen, Germany
28Scuola Normale Superiore, 56100 Pisa, Italy
29Department of Physics, High Energy Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
30Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK
31ICRR, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
32Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439-4843, USA
33Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, and Helsinki Institute of Physics, 00014 Helsinki, Finland
34Theory Group, DESY , 22603 Hamburg, Germany
35Physics Department, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA
36NIKHEF, 1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
37Department of Physics, University of Zagreb, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia
38IPNS, KEK, Ibaraki 305-0801, Japan
39INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, 00044 Frascati, Italy
40School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ Southampton, UK
41Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
42Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina 188300, Russia
43Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA


--- Page 2 ---
14 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
44Laboratoire de Physique Théorique, UMR 8627 Université de Paris-Sud XI, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France
45ICEPP, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
46Università dell’Aquila and INFN LNGS, 67010 L’Aquila, Italy
47Kernfysisch Versneller Instituut (KVI), 9747 AA Groningen, The Netherlands
48University of Rome “Tor Vergata” and INFN Sezione Roma II, 00133 Roma, Italy
49Institute of Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1784 Soﬁa, Bulgaria
50INFN and Dipartimento di Fisica, Università del Salento, 73100 Lecce, Italy
51Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada
52Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
53Institute for Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
54International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy
55Department of Physics, University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain
56Physics Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
57Centre for High Energy Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India
Received: 19 February 2008 / Revised: 12 August 2008 / Published online: 12 November 2008
© Springer-Verlag / Società Italiana di Fisica 2008
Abstract This chapter of the report of the “Flavor in the era
of the LHC” Workshop discusses the theoretical, phenom-
enological and experimental issues related to ﬂavor phenom-
ena in the charged lepton sector and in ﬂavor conserving CP-
violating processes. We review the current experimental lim-
its and the main theoretical models for the ﬂavor structure
of fundamental particles. We analyze the phenomenologi-
cal consequences of the available data, setting constraints
on explicit models beyond the standard model, presenting
benchmarks for the discovery potential of forthcoming mea-
surements both at the LHC and at low energy, and exploring
options for possible future experiments.
Contents
1 Charged leptons and fundamental dipole moments:
alternative probes of the origin of ﬂavor and CP
v i o l a t i o n ....................... 1 5
2 Theoretical framework and ﬂavor symmetries . . . 18
2.1 The ﬂavor puzzle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2 . 2F l a v o r s y m m e t r i e s ............... 1 9
3 Observables and their parameterization . . . . . . 29
3.1 Effective operators and low scale observables 29
3.2 Phenomenological parameterizations of quark
and lepton Yukawa couplings . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3 Leptogenesis and cosmological observables . 44
4 Organizing principles for ﬂavor physics . . . . . . 46
4.1 Grand uniﬁed theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.2 Higher dimensional approaches . . . . . . . . 50
4.3 Minimal ﬂavor violation in the lepton sector . 53
*Report of Working Group 3 of the CERN Workshop “Flavor in the
era of the LHC”, Geneva, Switzerland, November 2005–March 2007.
a e-mail: michelangelo.mangano@cern.ch
bConvenors
5 Phenomenology of theories beyond the standard
model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.1 Flavor violation in non-SUSY models
d i r e c t l y t e s t a b l e a t L H C ............ 5 7
5.2 Flavor and CP violation in SUSY extensions
o f t h e S M .................... 6 6
5 . 3S U S Y G U T s .................. 8 6
5 . 4R - p a r i t y v i o l a t i o n................ 9 7
5.5 Higgs-mediated lepton ﬂavor violation
in supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.6 Tests of unitarity and universality
i n t h e l e p t o n s e c t o r ............... 1 0 9
5.7 EDMs from RGE effects in theories
with low energy supersymmetry . . . . . . . . 116
6 Experimental tests of charged lepton universality . 122
6.1 πdecay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
6.2 K decay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
6.3 τdecay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
7 CP violation with charged leptons . . . . . . . . . 128
7.1 μdecays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
7.2 CP violation in τdecays . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
7.3 Search for T violation in K+ → π0μ+νdecay 131
7.4 Measurement of CP violation
in ortho-positronium decay . . . . . . . . . . 133
8 LFV experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
8.1 Rare μdecays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
8.2 Searches for lepton ﬂavor violation in τdecays 141
8.3 B0
d,s → e±μ∓ .................. 1 4 6
8 . 4I n ﬂ i g h t c o n v e r s i o n s .............. 1 4 7
9 Experimental studies of electric and magnetic
d i p o l e m o m e n t s ................... 1 4 8
9.1 Electric dipole moments . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
9 . 2N e u t r o n E D M .................. 1 5 1
9 . 3D e u t e r o n E D M ................. 1 5 3
9.4 EDM of deformed nuclei: 225R a ........ 1 5 6
9.5 Electrons bound in atoms and molecules . . . 158
9 . 6M u o n E D M................... 1 6 4


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 15
9.7 Muon g − 2................... 1 6 5
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
1 Charged leptons and fundamental dipole moments:
alternative probes of the origin of ﬂavor and CP
violation
The understanding of the ﬂavor structure and CP violation
(CPV) of fundamental interactions has so far been domi-
nated by the phenomenology of the quark sector of the stan-
dard model (SM). More recently, the observation of neutrino
masses and mixing has begun extending this phenomenol-
ogy to the lepton sector. While no experimental data avail-
able today link ﬂavor and CP violation in the quark and
in the neutrino sectors, theoretical prejudice strongly sup-
ports the expectation that a complete understanding should
ultimately expose their common origin. Most attempts to
identify the common origin, whether through grand uniﬁed
(GUT) scenarios, supersymmetry (SUSY), or more exotic
electroweak symmetry breaking mechanisms predict in ad-
dition testable correlations between the ﬂavor and CP vi-
olation observables in the quark and neutrino sector on the
one side, and new phenomena involving charged leptons and
ﬂavor conserving CP-odd effects on the other. This chapter
of the “Flavor in the era of the LHC” report focuses pre-
cisely on the phenomenology arising from these ideas, dis-
cussing ﬂavor phenomena in the charged lepton sector and
ﬂavor conserving CP-violating processes.
Several theoretical arguments make the studies discussed
in this chapter particularly interesting.
– The charged lepton sector provides unique opportunities
to test scenarios tailored to explain ﬂavor in the quark and
neutrino sectors, for example by testing correlations be-
tween neutrino mixing and the rate forμ→ eγdecays, as
predicted by speciﬁc SUSY/GUT scenarios. Charged lep-
tons are therefore an indispensable element of the ﬂavor
puzzle, without which its clariﬁcation could be impossi-
ble.
– The only observed source of CP violation is so far the
Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa (CKM) mixing matrix.
On the other hand, it is by now well established that this is
not enough to explain the observed baryon asymmetry of
the universe (BAU). The existence of other sources of CP
violation is therefore required. CP-odd phases in neutrino
mixing, directly generating the BAU through leptogene-
sis, are a possibility, directly affecting the charged lepton
sector via, e.g., the appearance of electric dipole moments
(EDMs). Likewise, EDMs could arise via CP violation in
ﬂavor conserving couplings, like phases of the gaugino
ﬁelds or in extended Higgs sectors. In all cases, the ob-
servables discussed in this chapter provide essential ex-
perimental input for the understanding of the origin of CP
violation.
– The excellent agreement of all ﬂavor observables in the
quark sector with the CKM picture of ﬂavor and CP vio-
lation has recently led to the concept of minimal ﬂavor vi-
olation (MFV). In scenarios beyond the SM (BSM) with
MFV , the smallness of possible deviations from the SM
is naturally built into the theory. While these schemes
provide a natural setting for the observed lack of new
physics (NP) signals, their consequence is often a re-
duced sensitivity to the underlying ﬂavor dynamics of
most observables accessible by the next generation of
ﬂavor experiments. Lepton ﬂavor violation (LFV) and
EDMs could therefore provide our only probe into this
dynamics.
– Last but not least, with the exception of the magnetic di-
pole moments, where the SM predicts non-zero values
and deviations due to new physics compete with the ef-
fect of higher order SM corrections, the observation of
a non-zero value for any of the observables discussed
in this chapter would be unequivocal indication of new
physics. In fact, while neutrino masses and mixing can
mediate lepton ﬂavor violating transitions, as well as in-
duce CP-odd effects, their size is such that all these effects
are by many orders of magnitude smaller than anything
measurable in the foreseeable future. This implies that,
contrary to many of the observables considered in other
chapters of this report, and although the signal interpre-
tation may be plagued by theoretical ambiguities or sys-
tematics, there is nevertheless no theoretical systematic
uncertainty to claim a discovery once a positive signal is
detected.
The observables discussed here are also very interesting
from the experimental point of view. They call for a very
broad approach, based not only on the most visible tools of
high energy physics, namely the high energy colliders, but
also on a large set of smaller-scale experiments that draw
from a wide variety of techniques. The emphasis of these
experiments is by and large on high rates and high preci-
sion, a crucial role being played by the control of very large
backgrounds and subtle systematics. A new generation of
such experiments is ready to start or will start during the ﬁrst
part of the LHC operations. More experiments have been on
the drawing board for some time, and could become reality
during the LHC era if the necessary resources were made
available. The synergy between the techniques and potential
results provided by both the large- and small-scale exper-
iments makes this ﬁeld of research very rich and exciting
and gives it a strong potential to play a key role in exploring
the physics landscape in the era of the LHC.


--- Page 4 ---
16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
The purpose of this document is to provide a compre-
hensive overview of the ﬁeld, from both the theoretical and
the experimental perspective. While we cover many model
building aspects of neutrino physics that are directly related
to the phenomenology of the quark and charged lepton sec-
tors, for the status of the determinations of the mixing pa-
rameters and for the review of the future prospects we refer
the reader to the vast existing literature, as documented for
example in [1–4].
Several of the results presented are already well known,
but they are nevertheless documented here to provide a self-
contained review, accessible to physicists whose expertise
covers only some of the many diverse aspects of this sub-
ject. Many results emerged during the workshop, including
ideas on possible new experiments, further enrich this re-
port. We present here a short outline and some highlights of
the contents.
Section 2 provides the general theoretical framework that
allows us to discuss ﬂavor from a symmetry point of view.
It outlines the origin of the ﬂavor puzzles and lists the math-
ematical settings that have been advocated to justify or pre-
dict the hierarchies of the mixing angles in both the quark
and neutrino sectors. Section 3 introduces the observables
that are sensitive to ﬂavor in the charged lepton sector and
to ﬂavor conserving CP violation, providing a uniﬁed de-
scription in terms of effective operators and effective scales
for the new physics that should be responsible for them. The
existing data already provide rather stringent limits on the
size of these operators, as shown in several tables. We col-
lect here in Table 1 some of the most signiﬁcant benchmark
results (for details, we refer to the discussion in Sect.3.1.2).
We constrain the dimensionless coefﬁcients ϵi of effective
operatorsOi describing ﬂavor or CP-violating interactions.
Examples of these effective operators include
ℓiσμνγ5ℓiF em
μν, ℓiσμνℓjF em
μν, (1.1)
which describe a CP-violating electric dipole moment
(EDM) of leptonℓi or the ﬂavor violating decayℓi → ℓjγ,
or the four-fermion operators:
ℓiΓaℓjqkΓaql, ℓiΓaℓjℓkΓaℓl, (1.2)
where the Γa represent the various possible Lorentz struc-
tures. The overall normalization of the operators is cho-
sen to reproduce the strength of transitions mediated by
weak gauge bosons, assuming ﬂavor mixing angles and CP-
violating phases of order unity. The smallness of the con-
straints onϵ therefore reﬂects either the large mass scale of
ﬂavor phenomena, or the weakness of the relative interac-
tions.
It is clear from this table that current data are already sen-
sitive to mass scales much larger than the electroweak scale,
or to very small couplings. On the other hand, many of these
constraints leave room for interesting signals coupled to the
new physics at the TeV scale that can be directly discov-
ered at the LHC. For example, a mixing of order 1 between
the supersymmetric scalar partners of the charged leptons
and a mass splitting among them of the order of the lepton
masses is consistent with the current limits if the scalar lep-
ton masses are just above 100 GeV , and it could lead both to
their discovery at the LHC, and to observable signals at the
next generation ofℓ → ℓ′γexperiments.
Most of this report will be devoted to the discussion of
the phenomenological consequences of limits such as those
in Table 1, setting constraints on explicit BSM models, pre-
senting benchmarks for the discovery potential of forthcom-
ing measurements both at the LHC and at low energy, and
exploring options for future experiments aimed at increasing
the reach even further.
Section 3 also introduces the phenomenological parame-
terizations of the quark and lepton mixing matrices that are
found in the literature, emphasizing with concrete exam-
ples the correlations among the neutrino and charged lep-
ton sectors that arise in various proposed models of neutrino
masses. The section is completed by a discussion of the pos-
sible role played by leptogenesis and cosmological observ-
ables in constraining the neutrino sector.
Section 4 reviews the organizing principles for ﬂavor
physics. With a favorite dynamical theory of ﬂavor still
missing, the extended symmetries of BSM theories can pro-
vide some insight in the nature of the ﬂavor structures of
quarks and leptons, and give phenomenologically relevant
constraints on low energy correlations between them. In
GUT theories, for example, leptons and quarks belong to
the same irreducible representations of the gauge group,
and their mass matrices and mixing angles are consequently
tightly related. Extra dimensional theories provide a possible
dynamical origin for ﬂavor, linking ﬂavor to the geometry of
the extra dimensions. This section also discusses the impli-
cations of models adopting for the lepton sector the same
concept of MFV already explored in the case of quarks.
Section 5 discusses at length the phenomenological con-
sequences of the many existing models, and represents the
main body of this document. We cover models based on
Table 1 Bounds on CP- or ﬂavor violating effective operators, ex-
pressed as upper limits on their dimensionless coefﬁcients ϵ, scaled
to the strength of weak interactions. For more details, in particular
the overall normalization convention for the effective operators, see
Sect. 3.1.2
Observable Operator Limit on ϵ
eEDM eLσμνγ5eRFμν ≤ 2.1 × 10− 12
B(μ→ eγ) μσμνeFμν ≤ 3.4 × 10− 12
B(τ→ μγ) τσμνμFμν ≤ 8.4 × 10− 8
B(K0
L → μ±e∓ ) (μγμPLe)(sγμPLd) ≤ 2.9 × 10− 7


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 17
SUSY , as well as on alternative descriptions of electroweak
symmetry breaking, such as little Higgs or extended Higgs
sectors. In this section we discuss the predictions and the de-
tection prospects of standard observables, such as ℓ → ℓ′γ
decays or EDMs, and connect the discovery potential for
these observables with the prospects for direct detection of
the new massive particles at the LHC or at a future Linear
Collider.
This section underlines, as is well known that the ex-
ploration of these processes has great discovery potential,
since most BSM models anticipate rates that are within the
reach of the forthcoming experiments. From the point of
view of the synergy with collider physics, the remarkable
outcome of these studies is that the sensitivities reached
in the searches for rare lepton decays and dipole moments
are often quite similar to those reached in direct searches
at high energy. We give here some explicit examples. In
SO(10) SUSY GUT models, where the charged lepton mix-
ing is induced via renormalization-group evolution of the
heavy neutrinos of different generations, the observation of
B(μ→ eγ)at the level of 10 − 13, within the range of the
just-starting MEG experiment, is suggestive of the existence
of squarks and gluinos with a mass of about 1 TeV , well
within the discovery reach of the LHC. Squarks and gluinos
in the range of 2–2.5 TeV , at the limit of detectability for the
LHC, would push B(μ→ eγ)down to the level of 10 − 16.
While this is well beyond the MEG sensitivity, it would
well ﬁt the ambitious goals of the next-generation μ→ e
conversion experiments, strongly endorsing their plans. The
decayμ→ eγinduced by the mixing of the scalar part-
ners of muon and electron, and with a B(μ→ eγ)at the
level of 10 − 13, could give a χ0
2 → χ0
1μ±e∓ signal at the
LHC, with up to 100 events after 300 fb− 1. Higher statistics
and a cleaner signal would arise at a Linear Collider. Mod-
els where neutrino masses arise not from a see-saw mech-
anism at the GUT scale but from triplet Higgs ﬁelds at the
TeV scale can be tested at the LHC, where processes like
pp → H ++H −− can be detected formH ++ up to 700 GeV ,
using the remarkable signatures due toB(H ++ → τ+τ+) ≈
B(H ++ → μ+μ+) ≈ B(H ++ → μ+τ+) ≈ 1/3.
Should signals of new physics be observed, alternative
interpretations can be tested by exploiting different pat-
terns of correlations that they predict among the various ob-
servables. For example, while typical SUSY scenarios pre-
dictB(μ→ 3e) ∼ 10− 2B(μ→ eγ), these branching ratios
are of the same order in the case of little Higgs models
with T parity. Important correlations also exist in see-saw
SUSY GUT models between B(μ→ eγ)andB(τ→ μγ)
orB(τ→ eγ). Furthermore, SUSY models with CP vio-
lation in the Higgs or gaugino mass matrix, be they super-
gravity (SUGRA) inspired or of the split-SUSY type, predict
the ratio of electron and neutron EDM to be in the range of
10− 2–10− 1. Furthermore, in SUSY GUT models with see-
saw mechanism correlations exist between the values of the
neutron and deuteron EDMs and the heavy neutrino masses.
Section 6 discusses studies of lepton universality. The
branching ratios Γ(π→ μν)/Γ(π→ eν)and Γ(K→
μν)/Γ(K→ eν), for example, are very well known theo-
retically within the SM. Ongoing experiments (at PSI and
TRIUMF for the pion, and at CERN and Frascati for the
kaon) test the existence of ﬂavor-dependent charged Higgs
couplings, by improving the existing accuracies by factors
of order 10.
In Sect. 7 we consider CP-violating charged lepton de-
cays, which offer interesting prospects as alternative probes
of BSM phenomena. SM-allowed τdecays, such as τ→
νKπ, can be sensitive to new CP-violating effects. The
decays being allowed by the SM, the CP-odd asymme-
tries are proportional to the interference of a SM amplitude
with the BSM, CP-violating one. As a result, the small CP-
violating amplitude contributes linearly to the rate, rather
than quadratically, enhancing the sensitivity. In the speciﬁc
case ofτ→ νKπ, and for some models, a CP asymmetry at
the level of 10 − 3 would correspond to B(τ→ μγ)around
10− 8. Another example is the CP-odd transverse polariza-
tion of the muon, PT ,i n K → πμνdecays. The current
sensitivity of the KEK experiment E246, which resulted in
PT < 5 × 10− 3 at 90% C.L., can be improved to the level of
10− 4, by TREK proposed at J-PARC, probing models such
as multi-Higgs or R-parity-violating SUSY .
Section 8 discusses experimental searches for charged
LFV processes. Transitions between e,μ, and τmight be
found in the decay of almost any weakly decaying parti-
cle and searches have been performed in μ,τ,π,K,B,
D,W andZ decay. Whereas the highest experimental sen-
sitivities were reached in dedicated μandK experiments,
τdecay starts to become competitive as well. In Sect. 8 the
experimental limitations to the sensitivities for the various
decay modes are discussed in some detail, in particular forμ
andτdecays, and some key experiments are presented. The
sensitivities reached in searches for μ+ → e+γare limited
by accidentale+γcoincidences and muon beam intensities
have to be reduced now already. Searches for μ–e conver-
sion, on the other hand, are limited by the available beam in-
tensities, and large improvements in sensitivity may still be
achieved. Similarly, in rareτdecays some decay modes are
already background limited at the present B-factories and
future sensitivities may not scale with the accumulated lu-
minosities. Prospects of LFV decays at the LHC are limited
to ﬁnal states with charged leptons, such as τ→ 3μand
B0
d,s → e±μ∓ , which are discussed in detail. This section
ﬁnishes with the preliminary results of a feasibility study
for in-ﬂightμ→ τconversions using a wide beam of high
momentum muons. No working scheme emerged yet.


--- Page 6 ---
18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Section 9 covers electric and magnetic dipole moments.
The muon magnetic moment has been much discussed re-
cently, so we limit ourselves to a short review of the theo-
retical background and of the current and foreseeable ex-
perimental developments. In the case of EDMs, we pro-
vide an extensive description of the various theoretical ap-
proaches and experimental techniques applied to test elec-
tron and quark moments, as well as other possible sources
of ﬂavor diagonal CP-violating effects, such as the gluonic
θ˜FF coupling, or CP-odd four-fermion interactions. While
the experimental technique may differ considerably, the var-
ious systems provide independent and complementary in-
formation. EDMs of paramagnetic atoms such as Tl are sen-
sitive to a combination of the fundamental electron EDM
and CP-odd four-fermion interactions between nucleons and
electrons. EDMs of diamagnetic atoms such as Hg are sen-
sitive, in addition, to the intrinsic EDM of quarks, as well
as to a non-zero QCD θcoupling. The neutron EDM more
directly probes intrinsic quark EDMs,θ, and possible higher
dimension CP-odd quark couplings. EDMs of the electron,
without contamination from hadronic EDM contributions,
can be tested with heavy diatomic molecules with unpaired
electrons, such as YbF. In case of a positive signal the com-
bination of measurements would help to disentangle the var-
ious contributions.
The experimental situation looks particularly promising,
with several new experiments about to start or under con-
struction. For example, new ultracold-neutron setups at ILL,
PSI and Oak Ridge will increase the sensitivity to a neutron
EDM by more than two orders of magnitude, to a level of
about 10− 28 e cm in 5–10 years. This sensitivity probes e.g.
CP-violating SUSY phases of the order of 10 − 4 or smaller.
Similar improvements are expected for the electron EDM.
One of the main new ideas developed in the course of the
workshop is the use of a storage ring to measure the deuteron
EDM. The technical issues related to the design and con-
struction of such an experiment, which could have a statis-
tical sensitivity of about 10 − 29 e cm, are discussed here in
some detail.
All the results presented in this document prove the great
potential of this area of particle physics to shed light on one
of the main puzzles of the standard model, namely the origin
and properties of ﬂavor. Low energy experiments are sensi-
tive to scales of new physics that in several cases extend be-
yond several TeV . The similarity with the scales directly ac-
cessible at the LHC supports the expectation of an important
synergy with the LHC collider programme, a synergy that
clearly extends to future studies of the neutrino and quark
sectors. The room for improvement, shown by the projec-
tions suggested by the proposed experiments, ﬁnally under-
scores the importance of keeping these lines of research at
the forefront of the experimental high energy physics pro-
gramme, providing the appropriate infrastructure, support
and funding.
2 Theoretical framework and ﬂavor symmetries
2.1 The ﬂavor puzzle
The presence of three fermion families with identical gauge
quantum numbers is a puzzle. The very origin of this repli-
cation of families constitutes the ﬁrst element of the SM ﬂa-
vor puzzle. The second element has to do with the Yukawa
interactions of those three families of fermions. While the
gauge principle allows us to determine all SM gauge inter-
actions in terms of three gauge couplings only (once the SM
gauge group and the matter gauge quantum numbers have
been speciﬁed), we do not have clear evidence of a guiding
principle underlying the form of the 3 × 3 matrices describ-
ing the SM Yukawa interactions. Finally, a third element of
the puzzle is represented by the peculiar pattern of fermion
masses and mixing originating from those couplings.
The replication of SM fermion families can be rephrased
in terms of the symmetries of the gauge part of the SM La-
grangian. The latter is in fact symmetric under aU(3)5 sym-
metry acting on the family indexes of each of the ﬁve in-
equivalent SM representations forming a single SM family
(q,uc,dc,l,ec in Weyl notation). In other words, the gauge
couplings and interactions do not depend on the (canonical)
basis we choose in the ﬂavor space of each of the ﬁve sets of
ﬁeldsqi,uc
i,dc
i,l,ec
i ,i = 1, 2, 3.
ThisU(3)5 symmetry is explicitly broken in the Yukawa
sector by the fermion Yukawa matrices. It is because of
this breaking that the degeneracy of the three families is
broken and the ﬁelds corresponding to the physical mass
eigenstates, as well as their mixing, are deﬁned. An addi-
tional source of breaking is provided by neutrino masses.
The smallness of neutrino masses is presumably due to the
breaking of the accidental lepton symmetry of the SM at a
scale much larger than the electroweak, in which case neu-
trino masses and mixing can be accounted for in the SM
effective Lagrangian in terms of a dimension ﬁve operator
breaking theU(3)5 symmetry in the lepton doublet sector.
As mentioned, the special pattern of masses and mixing
originating from theU(3)5 breaking is an important element
of the ﬂavor puzzle. This pattern is quite peculiar. It sufﬁces
to mention the smallness of neutrino masses; the hierarchy
of charged fermion masses relative to that of the two heavier
neutrinos; the smallness of Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa
mixing in the quark sector and the two large mixing angles
in Pontecorvo–Maki–Nakagawa–Sakata (PMNS) matrix in
the lepton sector; the mass hierarchy in the up quark sector,
more pronounced than in the down quark and charged lep-
ton sectors; the presence of a large CP-violating phase in the
quark sector and the need of additional CP violation to ac-
count for baryogenesis; the approximate equality of bottom
and tau masses at the scale at which the gauge couplings


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 19
unify1 and the approximate factor of 3 between the strange
and muon masses, both pointing at a grand uniﬁed picture at
high energy.
The origin of family replication and of the peculiar pat-
tern of fermion masses and mixing are among the most in-
teresting open questions in the SM, which a theory of ﬂavor,
discussed in Sect. 2, should address. As seen in Sect. 3,e x -
periment is ahead of theory in this ﬁeld. All the physical
parameters describing the SM ﬂavor structure in the quark
sector have been measured with good accuracy. In the lep-
ton sector crucial information on lepton mixing and neutrino
masses is being gathered and a rich experimental program is
under way to complete the picture.
Several tools are used to attack the ﬂavor problem. Grand
uniﬁed theories allow one to relate quark and lepton masses
at the GUT scale and provide an appealing framework to
study neutrino masses, leptogenesis, ﬂavor models, etc. Note
that in a grand uniﬁed context the U(3)5 symmetry of the
gauge sector is reduced (to U(3) in the case in which all
fermions in a family are uniﬁed in a single representation,
as in SO(10)). Extra dimensions introduce new ways to ac-
count for the hierarchy of charged fermion masses (and in
some cases for the smallness of neutrino masses) through the
mechanism of localization in extra dimensions and by pro-
viding a new framework for the study of ﬂavor symmetries.
The concept of minimal ﬂavor violation may also provide a
framework for addressing ﬂavor. The impact of those orga-
nizing principles on ﬂavor physics is discussed in detail in
Sect. 4.
From experimental point of view, however, additional
handles are needed to gain more insight in the origin of ﬂa-
vor. Essentially this requires a discovery of new physics be-
yond the SM. New physics at the TeV scale may in fact be
associated with an additional ﬂavor structure, whose origin
might well be related to the origin of the Yukawa couplings.
Some of the present attempts to understand the pattern of
fermion masses and mixing do link the ﬂavor structure of
the SM and that of the new physics sectors. In which case
the search for indirect effects at low energy and for direct
effects at colliders may play a primary role in clarifying our
understanding of ﬂavor. And conversely, the attempts to un-
derstand the pattern of fermion masses and mixing might
lead to the prediction of new ﬂavor physics effects. Those
issues are addressed in Sect. 5.
Finally, lepton ﬂavor physics is not just related to the lep-
ton ﬂavor violation or CP violation in the lepton sector but
also to understanding the unitarity and universality in the
lepton sector. Possible deviations from those are discussed
in Sect. 5.6.
1Needless to say, precise uniﬁcation requires an extension of the SM,
with supersymmetry doing best from this point of view.
2.2 Flavor symmetries
The SM Lagrangian isU(3)5 invariant in the limit in which
the Yukawa couplings vanish. This might suggest that the
Yukawa couplings, or at least some of them, arise from
the spontaneous breaking of a subgroup of U(3)5. Need-
less to say, the use of (spontaneously broken) symmetries
as organizing principles to understand physical phenomena
has been largely demonstrated in the past (chiral symmetry
breaking, electroweak, etc.). In the following, we discuss the
possibility of using such an approach to address the origin
of the pattern of fermion masses and mixing, the constraints
on the ﬂavor structure of new physics, and to put forward
expectations for ﬂavor observables.
The spontaneously broken “ﬂavour” or “family” sym-
metry can be local or global. Many (most) of the conse-
quences of ﬂavor symmetries are independent of this. The
ﬂavor breaking scale must be sufﬁciently high in such a way
to suppress potentially dangerous effects associated with the
new ﬁelds and interactions, in particular with the new gauge
interactions (in the local case) or the unavoidable pseudo-
Goldstone bosons (in the global case). In the context of an
analysis in terms of effective operators of higher dimen-
sions, a generic bound of about 10 3 TeV on the ﬂavor scale
from ﬂavor changing neutral currents (FCNC) processes
would be obtained. Nevertheless, a certain evidence forb–τ
uniﬁcation and the appeal of the see-saw mechanism for
neutrino masses seem to suggest that these Yukawa cou-
plings are already present near the GUT scale. This is indeed
what most ﬂavor models assume, and we shall also assume
in the following.
The SM matter ﬁelds belong to speciﬁc representations of
the ﬂavor group, such that in the unbroken limit the Yukawa
couplings have a particularly simple form. Typically some
or all Yukawa couplings (with the possible exception of
third generation ones) are not allowed. The spontaneous
symmetry breaking of the ﬂavor symmetry is provided by
the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of ﬁelds often called
“ﬂavons”. As the breaking presumably arises at a scale much
higher than the electroweak scale, such ﬂavons are SM sin-
glets (or contain a SM singlet in the case of SM extensions)
and typically they are only charged under the ﬂavor sym-
metry. Flavor breaking is communicated dynamically to the
SM ﬁelds by some interactions (possibly renormalizable,
often not speciﬁed) living at a scale Λf not smaller than
the scale of the ﬂavor symmetry breaking. A typical exam-
ple for these interactions that communicate the breaking is
the exchange of heavy fermions whose mass terms respect
the ﬂavor symmetry. In that case the scale Λf would cor-
respond to this fermion mass Mf . Many consequences of
the ﬂavor symmetry are actually independent of the media-
tion mechanism. It is therefore useful to consider an effec-
tive ﬁeld theory approach below the scale Λf in which the


--- Page 8 ---
20 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Table 2 Transformation of the matter superﬁelds under the family symmetries. The ith generation SM fermion ﬁelds are grouped into the repre-
sentation ¯5i =(Dc,L)i ,1 0i =(Q,Uc,Ec)i ,1i =(Nc)i
Field 10 3 102 101 ¯53 ¯52 ¯51 13 12 11 θ
U(1) 0230 0 1 nc
3 nc
2 nc
1 − 1
ﬂavor messengers have been integrated out. Once the ﬂavon
ﬁelds have acquired their VEVs, the structure of the Yukawa
matrices (and other ﬂavor parameters) can be obtained from
an expansion in non-renormalizable operators involving the
ﬂavon ﬁelds and respecting the different symmetries (ﬂavor
and other symmetries) of the theory.
There are several possibilities for the ﬂavor symmetry,
local, global, accidental, continuous or discrete, Abelian or
non-Abelian. Many examples are available in the literature
for each of those possibilities. Some of them will be dis-
cussed in next subsections in relation to the implications
considered in this study.
2.2.1 Continuous ﬂavor symmetries
In order to provide an explicit example, we shortly discuss
here one of the simplest possibilities, which goes back to
the pioneering work of Froggatt–Nielsen [ 5]. In this model
we have aU(1) ﬂavor symmetry under which the three gen-
eration of SM ﬁelds have different charges. In the simplest
version we assign positive integer charges to the SM fermi-
onic ﬁelds, the Higgs ﬁeld is neutral, and we have a single
ﬂavon ﬁeld θof charge − 1. The VEV of the ﬂavon ﬁeld
is somewhat smaller than the mass of the heavy mediator
ﬁeldsMf , so that the ratio ϵ =v/Mf ≪ 1. In this way the
various entries in the Yukawa matrices are determined by ep-
silon to the power of the sum of the fermion charges with an
undetermined order 1 coefﬁcient. This mechanism explains
nicely the hierarchy of fermion masses and mixing angles.
This idea is the basis for most ﬂavor symmetries. It can
be implemented in a great variety of different models. For
the sake of deﬁniteness, we show here how it works using
as a concrete example a supersymmetric GUT model. Its su-
perpotential is of the form
WYukawa =cd
ijϵqi +dc
j QiDc
jH1 +cu
ijϵqi +uc
jQiUc
jH2
+ce
ijϵli +ec
jLiEc
jH1 +cν
ijϵli +ljLiLj
H2H2
¯M ,
(2.1)
where thec’s areO(1) coefﬁcients and ¯M is the scale asso-
ciated toB − L breaking. The last term in this equation is
an effective operator, giving Majorana masses to neutrinos,
which can be generated, e.g., through a see-saw mechanism.
Notice that the power ofϵ in each Yukawa coupling is pro-
portional to the sum of the fermion charges:Yu
ij =cu
ijϵqi +uc
j ,
Yd
ij =cd
ijϵqi +dc
j , etc. Hence, this mechanism explains the hi-
erarchy of fermion masses and mixing angles through a con-
venient choice of charges. The value of these charges and
the expansion parameter ϵ are constrained by the observed
masses and angles. A convenient set of charges for example
is given in Table 2. It turns out that this set of charges is the
only one compatible with minimal SU(5) uniﬁcation. By in-
troducing three right handed neutrinos with positive charges
it is also possible to successfully realize the see-saw mecha-
nism.
These charges give rise to the following Dirac Yukawa
couplings for charged fermions at the GUT scale
Yu =
⎛
⎝
ϵ6 ϵ5 ϵ3
ϵ5 ϵ4 ϵ2
ϵ3 ϵ2 1
⎞
⎠,
⎛
⎝
ϵ4 ϵ3 ϵ3
ϵ3 ϵ2 ϵ2
ϵ 11
⎞
⎠, (2.2)
whereO(1) coefﬁcients in each entry are understood here
and in the following. With ϵ =O(λc) (the Cabibbo angle),
the observed features of charged fermion masses and mixing
are qualitatively well reproduced. It is known that the high
energy relation YT
e =Yd is not satisfactory for the lighter
families and should be relaxed by means of some mecha-
nism [6–8]. The Dirac neutrino Yukawa couplings and the
Majorana mass matrix of right handed neutrinos are
Yν=
⎛
⎝
ϵnc
1+1 ϵnc
2+1 ϵnc
3+1
ϵnc
1 ϵnc
2 ϵnc
3
ϵnc
1 ϵnc
2 ϵnc
3
⎞
⎠,
MR =
⎛
⎝
ϵ2nc
1 ϵnc
1+nc
2 ϵnc
1+nc
3
ϵnc
1+nc
2 ϵ2nc
2 ϵnc
2+nc
3
ϵnc
1+nc
3 ϵnc
2+nc
3 ϵ2nc
3
⎞
⎠¯M.
(2.3)
Applying the see-saw mechanism to obtain the effective
light neutrino mass matrix Mνin the basis of diagonal
charged lepton Yukawa couplings,2 it is well known [9, 10]
that if all right handed neutrino masses are positive the de-
pendence on the right handed charges disappears:
U ∗
PMNSmdiag
ν U†
PMNS =mν=
⎛
⎝
ϵ2 ϵϵ
ϵ 11
ϵ 11
⎞
⎠v2
2
¯M. (2.4)
2Notice that going to the basis of diagonal charged leptons will only
change the O(1) coefﬁcients, but not the power in ϵ of the different
entries.


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 21
Experiments require ¯M ∼ 5 × 1014 GeV . The features
of neutrino masses and mixing are quite satisfactorily
reproduced—the weak point being the tuning in the 23-
determinant [ 9, 10] that has to be imposed. For later ap-
plication, it is useful to introduce the unitary matrices which
diagonalizeYνin the basis where both Ye andMR are di-
agonal:VLYνVR =Y diag
ν ≈ diag(ϵnc
1,ϵnc
2,ϵnc
3). Notice that,
as a consequence of the equal charges of the lepton doublets
L2 andL3, the model predicts that VL has a large mixing,
although not necessarily maximal, in the 2–3 sector as ob-
served inUPMNS.
The literature is very rich of models based on ﬂavor
symmetries. Some references are [ 5, 9–40]; for more re-
cent attempts the interested reader is referred for instance
to [41–64].
2.2.2 Discrete ﬂavor symmetries
2.2.2.1 Finite groups Discrete ﬂavor symmetries have
gained popularity because they seem to be appropriate to
address the large mixing angles observed in neutrino oscil-
lations. To obtain a non-Abelian discrete symmetry, a simple
heuristic way is to choose two speciﬁc non-commuting ma-
trices and form all possible products. As a ﬁrst example,
consider the two 2 × 2 matrices
A =
( 01
10
)
,B =
(ω 0
0 ω− 1
)
, (2.5)
where ωn = 1, i.e. ω= exp(2πi/n). Since A2 = 1 and
Bn = 1, this group contains Z2 andZn.F o rn = 1, 2, we
obtainZ2 andZ2 ×Z2 respectively, which are Abelian. For
n = 3, the group generated has six elements and is in fact the
smallest non-Abelian ﬁnite groupS3, the permutation group
of three objects. This particular representation is not the one
found in text books, but it is related to it by a unitary trans-
formation [65], and was ﬁrst used in 1990 for a model of
quark mass matrices [66, 67]. Forn = 4, the group generated
has eight elements which are in fact ±1, ±iσ1,2,3, where
σ1,2,3 are the usual Pauli spin matrices. This is the group of
quaternionsQ, which has also been used [68] for quark and
lepton mass matrices. In general, the groups generated by
(2.5)h a v e2n elements and may be denoted asΔ(2n).
Consider next the two 3 × 3 matrices:
A =
⎛
⎝
010
001
100
⎞
⎠,B =
⎛
⎝
ω 00
0 ω2 0
00 ω− 3
⎞
⎠. (2.6)
SinceA3 = 1 andBn = 1, this group contains Z3 andZn.
Forn = 1, we obtain Z3.F o rn = 2, the group generated
has 12 elements and isA4, the even permutation group of 4
objects, which was ﬁrst used in 2001 in a model of lepton
mass matrices [36, 41]. It is also the symmetry group of the
tetrahedron, one of ﬁve perfect geometric solids, identiﬁed
by Plato with the element “ﬁre” [69]. In general, the groups
generated by ( 2.6)h a v e3n2 elements and may be denoted
asΔ(3n2) [70]. They are in fact subgroups ofSU(3). In par-
ticular,Δ(27) has also been used [ 57, 71]. Generalizing to
k ×k matrices, we then have the series Δ(knk− 1).H o w -
ever, since there are presumably only three families, k> 3
is probably not of much interest.
Going back tok = 2, but using instead the following two
matrices:
A =
( 01
10
)
,B =
(ω0
01
)
. (2.7)
Now againA2 = 1 andBn = 1, but the group generated will
have 2n2 elements. Call itΣ(2n2).F o rn = 1, it is just Z2.
Forn = 2, it is D4, i.e. the symmetry group of the square,
which was ﬁrst used in 2003 [47, 72]. Fork = 3, consider
A =
⎛
⎝
010
001
100
⎞
⎠,B =
⎛
⎝
ω00
010
001
⎞
⎠, (2.8)
then the groups generated have 3 n3 elements and may be
denoted asΣ(3n3). They are in fact subgroups ofU(3).F o r
n = 1, it is justZ3.F o rn = 2, it isA4 ×Z2.F o rn = 3, the
groupΣ(81) has been used [73] to understand the Koide for-
mula [74] as well as lepton mass matrices [ 75]. In general,
we have the seriesΣ(knk).
2.2.2.2 Model recipe
1. Choose a group, e.g. S3 orA4, and write down its possi-
ble representations. For exampleS3 has 1,1 ′,2 ;A4 has 1,
1′,1 ′′,3 . Work out all product decompositions. For exam-
ple 2×2 = 1+1′ +2 inS3, and 3×3 = 1+1′ +1′′ +3+3
inA4.
2. Assign (ν,l)1,2,3 and lc
1,2,3 to the representations of
choice. To have only renormalizable interactions, it
is necessary to add Higgs doublets (and perhaps also
triplets and singlets) and, if so desired, neutrino singlets.
3. The Yukawa structure of the model is restricted by the
choice of particle content and their representations. As
the Higgs bosons acquire vacuum expectation values
(which may be related by some extra or residual symme-
try), the lepton mass matrices will have certain particular
forms, consistent with the known values ofme,mμ,mτ,
etc. If the number of parameters involved is less than the
number of observables, there will be one or more predic-
tions.
4. In models with more than one Higgs doublet, ﬂavor non-
conservation will appear at some level. Its phenomeno-
logical consequences need to be worked out, to ensure


--- Page 10 ---
22 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
the consistency with present experimental constraints.
The implications for phenomena at the TeV scale can
then be explored.
5. Insisting on using only the single SM Higgs doublet re-
quires effective non-renormalizable interactions to sup-
port the discrete ﬂavor symmetry. In such models, there
are no predictions beyond the forms of the mass matrices
themselves.
6. Quarks can be considered in the same way. The two
quark mass matricesmu andmd must be nearly aligned
so that their mixing matrix involves only small angles.
In contrast, the mass matrices mνandme should have
different structures so that large angles can be obtained.
Some explicit examples will now be outlined.
2.2.2.3 S3 Being the simplest, the non-Abelian discrete
symmetry S3 was used already [ 76] in the early days of
strong interactions. There are many recent applications
[55, 77–86], some of which are discussed in [87]. Typically,
such models often require extra symmetries beyond S3 to
reduce the number of parameters, or assumptions of how
S3 is spontaneously and softly broken. For illustration, con-
sider the model of Kubo et al. [77] which has recently been
updated by Felix et al. [ 88] .T h es y m m e t r yu s e di sa c t u a l l y
S3 ×Z2, with the assignments
(ν,l),lc,N,
(
φ+,φ0)
∼ 1 + 2, (2.9)
and equal vacuum expectation values for the two Higgs dou-
blets transforming as 2 underS3.T h eZ2 symmetry serves
to eliminate four Yukawa couplings, otherwise allowed by
S3, resulting in an inverted ordering of neutrino masses with
θ23 ≃π/4,θ 13 ≃ 0.0034,m ee ≃ 0.05 eV, (2.10)
wheremee is the effective Majorana neutrino mass measured
in neutrinoless double beta decay. This model relatesθ13 to
the ratiome/mμ.
2.2.2.4 A4 To understand why quarks and leptons have
very different mixing matrices,A4 turns out to be very use-
ful. It allows the two different quark mass matrices to be
diagonalized by the same unitary transformations, implying
thus no mixing as a ﬁrst approximation, but because of the
assumed Majorana nature of the neutrinos, a large mismatch
may occur in the lepton sector, thus offering the possibil-
ity of obtaining the so-called tri-bi-maximal mixing matrix
[89, 90], which is a good approximation to the present data.
One way of doing this is to consider the decomposition
UPMNS =
⎛
⎝
√ 2/31 /
√
30
− 1/
√
61 /
√
3 − 1/
√
2
− 1/
√
61 /
√
31 /
√
2
⎞
⎠
= 1√
3
⎛
⎝
11 1
1 ωω2
1 ω2 ω
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
01 0
1/
√
20 −i/
√
2
1/
√
20 i/
√
2
⎞
⎠,
(2.11)
whereUPMNS is the observed neutrino mixing matrix and
ω= exp(2πi/3) =− 1/2 +i
√
3/2. The matrix involvingω
has equal moduli for all its entries and was conjectured al-
ready in 1978 [91, 92] to be a possible candidate for the 3×3
neutrino mixing matrix.
SinceUPMNS =V †
eVν, whereVe,Vνdiagonalize the ma-
tricesmem†
e ,mνm†
νrespectively, (2.11) may be obtained if
we have
V †
e = 1√
3
⎛
⎝
11 1
1 ωω2
1 ω2 ω
⎞
⎠ (2.12)
and
mν=
⎛
⎝
a + 2b 00
0 a − bd
0 da − b
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝
01 0
1/
√
20 −i/
√
2
1/
√
20 i/
√
2
⎞
⎠
×
⎛
⎝
a − b +d 00
0 a + 2b 0
00 −a +b +d
⎞
⎠
×
⎛
⎝
01 /
√
21 /
√
2
10 0
0 −i/
√
2 i/
√
2
⎞
⎠. (2.13)
It was discovered in Ref. [36] that (2.12) is naturally ob-
tained withA4 if
(ν,l)1,2,3 ∼ 3,l c
1,2,3 ∼ 1 + 1′ + 1′′,
(
φ+,φ0)
1,2,3 ∼ 3
(2.14)
for ⟨φ0
1 ⟩=⟨ φ0
2 ⟩=⟨ φ0
3 ⟩. This assignment also allows me,
mμ,mτto take on arbitrary values, because there are here
exactly three independent Yukawa couplings invariant un-
derA4. If we use this also for quarks [ 41], thenV †
u andV †
d
are also given by (2.12), resulting inUCKM = 1, i.e. no mix-
ing. This should be considered as a good ﬁrst approximation
because the observed mixing angles are all small. In the gen-
eral case without any symmetry, we would have expectedVu
andVd to be very different.
It was later discovered in Ref. [93] that (2.13) may also be
obtained withA4, using two further assumptions. Consider


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 23
the most general 3 × 3 Majorana mass matrix in the form
mν=
⎛
⎝
a +b +cf e
fa +bω+cω2 d
ed a +bω2 +cω
⎞
⎠,
(2.15)
wherea comes from 1,b from 1′,c from 1′′, and(d,e,f)
from 3 of A4. To get ( 2.13), we need e =f = 0, i.e.
the effective scalar A4 triplet responsible for neutrino
masses should have its vacuum expectation value along the
(1, 0, 0) direction, whereas that responsible for charged lep-
ton masses should be(1, 1, 1) as remarked earlier. This mis-
alignment is a technical challenge to all such models [ 50,
94–104]. The other requirement is that b =c. Since they
come from different representations of A4, this is rather ad
hoc. A very clever solution [ 50, 94] is to eliminate both,
i.e.b =c = 0. This results in a normal ordering of neutrino
masses with the prediction [96]
|mνe |2 ≃|mee |2 +/Delta1m2
atm/9. (2.16)
Other applications [60, 105–120]o fA4 have also been con-
sidered. A natural (spinorial) extension of A4 is the binary
tetrahedral group [30, 34] which is under active current dis-
cussion [64, 121–123].
Other recent applications of non-Abelian discrete ﬂavor
symmetries include those ofD4 [47, 72, 124],Q4 [68],D5
[125, 126],D6 [127],Q6 [128–130],D7 [131],S4 [61, 132–
135],Δ(27) [57, 71],Δ(75) [15, 136],Σ(81) [73, 75], and
B3 ×Z3
2 [137, 138] which has 384 elements.
2.2.3 Accidental ﬂavor symmetries
While ﬂavor symmetries certainly represent one of the lead-
ing approaches to understanding the pattern of fermion
masses and mixing, it was recently found that the hierarchi-
cal structure of charged fermion masses and many other pe-
culiar features of the fermion spectrum in the SM (neutrinos
included) do not require a ﬂavor symmetry to be understood,
nor any other special “horizontal” dynamics involving the
family indices of the SM fermions [ 63, 139]. Surprisingly
enough, those features can in fact be recovered in a model
in which the couplings of the three SM families not only are
not governed by any symmetry, but are essentially anarchi-
cal (uncorrelated O(1) numbers) at a very high scale.
The idea is based on the hypothesis that the SM Yukawa
couplings all arise from the exchange of heavy degrees of
freedom (messengers) at a scale not far from the uniﬁca-
tion scale. Examples of diagrams contributing to the up and
down quark Yukawa matrices are shown below, whereφis
a SM singlet ﬁeld getting a VEV . As discussed in Sects.2.2
and 2.2.1, the same exchange mechanism is often assumed
Fig. 1 Contributions to the up- and down-type quark Yukawa mass
matrices, from the exchange of heavy messengers
to be at work in models with ﬂavor symmetries. Here, how-
ever, the couplings of the heavy messengers to the SM ﬁelds
are not constrained by any symmetry.3 An hierarchy among
Yukawa couplings still arises because a single set of left
handed messenger ﬁelds (heavy quark doublets Q + ¯Q in
the quark sector and heavy lepton doubletsL + ¯L in the lep-
ton sector) dominates the exchange at the heavy scale. For
example, the diagrams below represents the dominant con-
tribution to the quark Yukawa matrices. As only one ﬁeld
is exchanged, the Yukawa matrices have rank one. There-
fore, whatever are the O(1) couplings in the diagram, the
top and bottom Yukawa couplings are generated (at theO(1)
level, giving large tan β), but the ﬁrst two families’ ones
are not, which is a good starting point to obtain a hierar-
chy of quark masses. This mechanism is similar to a the
single right handed neutrino dominance mechanism, used
in neutrino model building to obtain a hierarchical spectrum
of light neutrinos [ 140–143]. Note that the diagonalization
of the quark Yukawa matrices involves large rotations, as
all the couplings are supposed to be O(1). However, the
rotations of the up and down left handed quarks turn out
to be the same (because they have same couplings to the
left handed doublet messenger). Therefore, the two rotations
cancel when combined in the CKM matrix, which ends up
vanishing at this level.
The Yukawa couplings of the second family, and a non-
vanishingVcb angle, are generated by the subdominant ex-
change of heavier right handed messengers Dc, Uc, Ec,
Nc. Altogether, the messengers form a heavy (vector-like)
replica of a SM family, with the left handed ﬁelds lighter
than the right handed ones. The (inter-family) hierarchy be-
tween the masses of the second and the third SM family
masses arises from the (intra-family) hierarchy between left
and right handed ﬁelds in the single family of messengers.
In turn, in a Pati–Salam or SO(10) uniﬁed model, the hi-
erarchy between right handed and left handed ﬁelds can be
easily obtained by giving mass to the messengers through a
breaking of the gauge group along the T3R direction. This
way, the hierarchy among different families is explained in
terms of the breaking of a gauge group acting on single fam-
ilies, with no need of ﬂavor symmetries or other dynamics
acting on the family indexes of the SM fermions.
3A discrete Z2 symmetry, under which all the three SM families (and
the ﬁeldφ) are odd, is used for the sole purpose of distinguishing the
light SM ﬁelds from the heavy messengers.


--- Page 12 ---
24 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
It is also possible to describe the mechanism outlined
above in terms of accidental ﬂavor symmetries. In the effec-
tive theory below the scale of the right handed messengers,
in fact, the Yukawa couplings of the two lighter families are
“protected” by an accidental U(2) symmetry. One can also
consider the effective theory below the cut-off of the model,
which is supposed to lie one or two orders of magnitude
above the mass of the right handed messengers. In the effec-
tive theory below the cut-off, the second family gets a non-
vanishing Yukawa coupling, but the Yukawa of the lightest
family is still “protected” by an accidentalU(1) symmetry.
Surprisingly enough, a number of important features of
the fermion spectrum can be obtained in this simple and
economical model. The relation |Vcb |∼ ms/mb is a direct
consequence of the principles of this approach. The stronger
mass hierarchy observed in the up quark sector is accounted
for without introducing a new scale (besides the left handed
and right handed messenger ones) or making the up quark
sector somehow different. In spite of the absence of small
coefﬁcients, the CKM mixing angles turn out to be small. At
the same time, a large atmospheric mixing can be generated
in a natural way in the neutrino sector, together with normal
hierarchical neutrino masses. In fact, a see-saw mechanism
dominated by the single right handed (messenger) neutrino
Nc is at work. The bottom and tau mass unify at the high
scale, while a B − L factor 3 enters the ratios of the muon
and strange masses. For a detailed illustration of the model,
we refer the reader to [63].
The study of FCNC and CPV effects in a supersymmet-
ric context is still under way. Such effects might represent
the distinctive signature of the model, due to the sizable ra-
diative effects one obtains in the (23) block of the “right
handed” sfermion mass matrices in both the squark and slep-
ton sector.
2.2.4 Flavor/CP symmetries and their violation from
supersymmetry breaking
While the vast literature on ﬂavor symmetries covers a num-
ber of interesting aspects of the theory and phenomenology
of ﬂavor, we are interested here in a (non-exhaustive) review
of only those aspects relevant to new physics. The relevance
of ﬂavor symmetries to new physics follows from the fact
that SM extensions often contain new ﬂavor dependent in-
teractions. In the following we shall consider the case of su-
persymmetry, in which new ﬂavor violating gaugino or hig-
gsino interactions can be induced by possible new sources of
SU(5)5 breaking in the soft supersymmetry breaking terms.
While in the SM the Yukawa matrices provide the only
source of ﬂavor (U(3)5) breaking, the supersymmetric ex-
tensions of the SM are characterized by a potentially much
richer ﬂavor structure associated to the soft supersymmetry
breaking Lagrangian. Unfortunately, a generic ﬂavor struc-
ture leads to FCNC and CPV processes that can exceed the
experimental bounds by up to two orders of magnitude—
the so-called supersymmetric ﬂavor and CP problem. The
solution of the latter problem can lie in the supersymmetry
breaking and mediation mechanism (this is the case for ex-
ample of gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking) or in the
constraints on the soft terms provided by ﬂavor symmetries.
In turn, the implications of ﬂavor symmetries on the
structure of the soft terms depends on the interplay between
ﬂavor and supersymmetry breaking. Without entering the
details of speciﬁc models, we can distinguish two opposite
situations.
– The soft terms are ﬂavor universal, or at least symmetric
under the ﬂavor symmetry, at the tree level, and
– ﬂavor symmetry breaking enters the soft terms (as for
the Yukawa interactions) already at the tree level, through
non-renormalizable couplings to the ﬂavon ﬁelds.
Let us consider them in greater detail.
The ﬁrst possibility is that the supersymmetry breaking
mechanism takes care of the FCNC and CPV problems. In
the simplest case, the new sfermion masses andA-terms do
not introduce new ﬂavor structure at all. This is the case if
m2
ij =m2
0δij, Aij =A0δij,
wherei,j are family indexes and the universal values m2
0,
A0 can be different in the different sfermion sectors. 4 The
breaking of the ﬂavor symmetry is felt at the tree level only
by the Yukawa matrices. Needless to say, the tree level uni-
versality of the soft terms will be spoiled by renormaliza-
tion effects associated to interactions sensitive to Yukawa
couplings [ 144, 145]. These effects can be enhanced by
large logarithms if the scale at which the soft terms and the
Yukawa interactions appear in the observable sector is suf-
ﬁciently high. The radiative contributions of Yukawa cou-
plings associated with neutrino masses (or Yukawa cou-
plings occurring in the context of grand uniﬁcation) are par-
ticularly interesting in this context, because they offer new
possibilities to test ﬂavor physics by opening a window for
physics at very large scales. For example, in the minimal
SUSY see-saw model only the off-diagonal elements for
left-slepton soft supersymmetry breaking mass terms are
generated, while in supersymmetric GUTs also the right
handed slepton masses get renormalization induced ﬂavor
non-diagonal contributions. In any case, all the ﬂavor effects
induced by the soft terms can be traced back to the Yukawa
couplings, which remain the only source of ﬂavor breaking.
4This is the case for example of gauge mediation. In supergravity, su-
persymmetry breaking can be fully ﬂavor blind in the case of dila-
ton domination. In this case, we expect the diagonal elements of the
soft mass matrices to be exactly universal. However, this is not always
the case. Moduli domination is often encountered, in which case ﬁelds
with different modular weights receive different soft masses.


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 25
Such unavoidable effects of ﬂavor breaking on the soft terms
will be discussed in Sects. 5.2 and 5.3.
As we have just seen, the radiative contributions to soft
masses represent an unavoidable but indirect effect of the
physics at the origin of fermion masses and mixing. On the
other hand, the mechanism generating the soft terms might
not be blind to ﬂavor symmetry breaking, in which case we
might also expect ﬂavor breaking to enter the soft terms in
a more direct way. If this is the case, the soft term provide
a new independent source of ﬂavor violation. Such model-
dependent “tree level” effects of ﬂavor breaking on the soft
terms add to the radiative effects and will be discussed in
Sect. 2.2.4.1. The actual presence in the soft terms of ﬂavor
violating effects directly induced by the physics account-
ing for Yukawa couplings depends on the interplay of the
supersymmetry breaking and the ﬂavor generation mecha-
nisms.
Theoretical and phenomenological [146–151] constraints
on supersymmetry breaking parameters essentially force su-
persymmetry breaking to take place in a hidden sector with
no renormalizable coupling to observable ﬁelds. 5 The soft
terms are therefore often characterized by the scale ΛSUSY
at which supersymmetry breaking is communicated to the
observable sector by some mediation mechanism. The soft
terms arise in fact from non-renormalizable operators in the
effective theory below ΛSUSY obtained by integrating out
the supersymmetry breaking messenger ﬁelds. Analogously,
in the context of a theory addressing the origin of ﬂavor, we
can deﬁne a scale Λf at which the ﬂavor structure arises.
Let us consider for deﬁniteness the case of ﬂavor symme-
tries. The analogy with supersymmetry breaking is in this
case even more pronounced. Above Λf , the theory is ﬂa-
vor symmetric. By this we mean that we can at least deﬁne
conserved family numbers, perhaps part of a larger ﬂavor
symmetry. The family numbers are then spontaneously bro-
ken by the VEV of ﬂavons that couple to observable ﬁelds
through non-renormalizable interactions suppressed by the
scaleΛf .
We are now in the position to discuss the presence
of “tree-level” ﬂavor violating effects in the soft terms.
A ﬁrst possibility is to have Λf ≲ΛSUSY,a sf o ri n -
stance in the case of gravity mediation, in which we ex-
pectΛf ≲MPlanck =ΛSUSY. The soft breaking terms are
already present below MPlanck. However, the ﬂavor sym-
metry is still exact at scales larger than Λf . Therefore, the
soft terms must respect the family symmetries. At the lower
scaleΛf the effective Yukawa couplings are generated as
functions of the ﬂavon VEVs, ⟨θ⟩/Λf , and analogously the
soft breaking terms will also be functions of ⟨θ⟩/Λf .I n
theΛf ≲ΛSUSY case, we therefore expect new “tree-level”
5The ﬁelds of the minimal supersymmetric standard model (MSSM)
or its relevant extension.
sources of ﬂavor breaking in the soft terms on top of the
effects radiatively induced by the Yukawa couplings.
On the other hand, ifΛSUSY ≪Λf , the soft terms are not
present at the scale of ﬂavor breaking. The prototypical ex-
ample in this case is gauge mediated supersymmetry break-
ing (GMSB) (see [ 152] and references therein). At Λf the
ﬂavor interactions are integrated and supersymmetry is still
unbroken. The only renormalizable remnant of the ﬂavor
physics below Λf are the Yukawa couplings. At the scale
ΛSUSY soft breaking terms feel ﬂavor breaking only through
the Yukawa couplings. Strictly speaking, there could also
be non-renormalizable operators involving ﬂavon ﬁelds sup-
pressed by the heavierΛf . The contributions of these terms
to soft masses would be proportional to ΛSUSY/Λf and
therefore negligible [ 152]. We are then only left with the
radiatively induced effects of Yukawa couplings. The quali-
tative arguments above show that ﬂavor physics can provide
relevant information on the interplay between the origin of
supersymmetry and ﬂavor breaking in the observable sector.
As we just saw, the family symmetry that accounts for
the structure of the Yukawa couplings also constrains the
structure of sfermion masses. In the limit of exact ﬂavor
symmetry, this implies family universal, or at least diago-
nal, sfermion mass matrices. After the breaking of the ﬂavor
symmetry giving rise to the Yukawa couplings, we can have
two cases.
– The SUSY breaking mediation mechanism takes place at
a scale higher or equal to the ﬂavor symmetry breaking
scale and is usually sensitive to ﬂavor. The ﬂavor symme-
try breaking accounts for both the structure of the Yukawa
couplings and the deviations of the soft breaking terms
from universality. This is the general expectation in grav-
ity mediation of the supersymmetry breaking from the
hidden sector.
– The supersymmetry breaking mediation mechanism takes
place at a scale much smaller than the ﬂavor symmetry
breaking scale. In this case the ﬂavor mediation mech-
anism, which is ﬂavor-blind, guarantees the universality
of the soft breaking terms. The ﬂavor symmetry breaking
generates the Yukawa couplings but ﬂavor breaking cor-
rections in the soft mass matrices are suppressed by the
ratio of the two scales. This is the case of gauge-mediation
models of supersymmetry breaking [152].
We begin discussing the ﬁrst case.
2.2.4.1 “Tree level” effects of ﬂavor symmetries in super-
symmetry breaking terms After the breaking of the ﬂa-
vor symmetry responsible for the structure of the Yukawa
couplings, we can expect to have non-universal contribu-
tions to the soft breaking terms at tree level . Under cer-
tain conditions, mainly related to the SUSY-breaking me-
diation mechanism, these tree-level contributions can be


--- Page 14 ---
26 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
sizable and have important phenomenological effects. The
main example among these models where the tree level non-
universality in the soft breaking terms is relevant is provided
by models of supergravity mediation [ 153–157] (for a nice
introduction see the appendix in [158]).
The structure of the scalar mass matrices when SUSY
breaking is mediated by supergravity interactions is deter-
mined by the Kähler potential. We are not going to dis-
cuss here the supergravity Lagrangian; we refer the inter-
ested reader to Refs. [ 153–156, 158]. For our purposes,
we only need to know that the Kähler potential is a non-
renormalizable, real, and obviously gauge-invariant, func-
tion of the chiral superﬁelds with dimensions of mass
squared. This non-renormalizable function includes cou-
plings with the hidden sector ﬁelds suppressed by different
powers of MPlanck, φφ∗(1 +XX∗/M2
Planck + ··· ) with φ
visible sector ﬁelds andX hidden sector ﬁelds. This Kähler
potential gives rise to SUSY breaking scalar masses once
a certain ﬁeld of the hidden sector gets a non-vanishing F-
term. The important point here is that these couplings with
hidden sector ﬁelds that will eventually give rise to the soft
masses are present in the theory at any scale belowMPlanck.
Below this scale, we can basically consider the hidden sector
as frozen and renormalize these couplings only with visible
sector interactions.
Therefore, in the following, to simplify the discussion,
we concentrate only on the soft masses and treat them as
couplings present at all energies below MPlanck. The struc-
ture of the soft mass matrices is easily understood in terms
of the present symmetries. At high energies, our ﬂavor sym-
metry is still an exact symmetry of the Lagrangian and there-
fore the soft breaking terms have to respect this symme-
try [46]. At some stage, this symmetry is broken generat-
ing the Yukawa couplings in the superpotential. In the same
way, the scalar masses will also receive new contributions
after ﬂavor symmetry breaking from the ﬂavon ﬁeld VEVs
suppressed by mediator masses.
First we must notice that a mass term φ†
iφi is clearly in-
variant under gauge, ﬂavor and global symmetries and hence
gives rise to a ﬂavor diagonal contribution to the soft masses
even before the family symmetry breaking.6 Then, after ﬂa-
vor symmetry breaking, any invariant combination of ﬂavon
ﬁelds (VEVs) with a pair of sfermion ﬁelds,φ†
iφj , can also
contribute to the sfermion mass matrix and will break the
universality of the soft masses.
An explicit example with a continuous AbelianU(1) ﬂa-
vor symmetry [5, 11, 13, 16, 19, 21, 44, 48, 54] was given
above in Sect. 2.2.1.
6As we shall discuss in the following, these allowed contributions may
be universal, the same for the different generations, as in the case of
non-Abelian ﬂavor symmetries, or they can be different for the three
generations in some cases with Abelian ﬂavor symmetries.
We turn now to the structure of the scalar mass ma-
trices concentrating mainly on the slepton mass matrix
[13, 14, 16, 43]. In this case, even before the breaking of the
ﬂavor symmetry, we have three different ﬁelds with differ-
ent charges corresponding to each of the three generations.
As we have seen, diagonal scalar masses are allowed by the
symmetry, but being different ﬁelds, there is no reason a pri-
ori for these diagonal masses to be the same, and in general
we have
Lsymm
m2 =m2
1φ∗
1φ1 +m2
2φ∗
2φ2 +m2
3φ∗
3φ3. (2.17)
Notice, however, that this situation is very dangerous, es-
pecially in the case of squarks, given that the rotation to the
basis of diagonal Yukawa couplings from (2.2) will generate
too large off-diagonal entries [43]. In some cases, like dila-
ton domination, these allowed masses can be equal avoid-
ing this problem. In the following we assume m2
1 =m2
2 =
m2
3 =m2
0. However, even in this case, after the breaking of
the ﬂavor symmetry we obtain new contributions propor-
tional to the ﬂavon VEVs that break this universality. All
we have to do is to write all possible combinations of two
MSSM scalar ﬁelds φi and an arbitrary number of ﬂavon
VEVs invariant under the symmetry:
Lm2 =m2
0
(
φ∗
1φ1 +φ∗
2φ2 +φ∗
3φ3 +
( ⟨θ⟩
Mﬂ
)q2−q1
φ∗
1φ2
+
( ⟨θ⟩
Mﬂ
)q3−q1
φ∗
1φ3 +
( ⟨θ⟩
Mﬂ
)q3−q2
φ∗
2φ3 + h.c.
)
.
(2.18)
Therefore, the structure of the charged slepton mass matrix
we would have in this model at the scale of ﬂavor symmetry
breaking would be (suppressingO(1) coefﬁcients):
m2
˜L ≃
⎛
⎝
1 ϵϵ
ϵ 11
ϵ 11
⎞
⎠m2
0. (2.19)
This structure has serious problems with the phenomeno-
logical bounds coming from μ→ eγ, etc. There are other
U(1) examples that manage to alleviate, in part, these prob-
lems [43]. However, large LFV effects are a generic prob-
lem of these models due to the required charge assignments
to reproduce the observed masses and mixing angles.
These FCNC problems in the sfermion mass matrices of
Abelian symmetries were one of the main reasons for the
introduction of non-Abelian ﬂavor symmetries [18, 20]. The
mechanism used in non-Abelian ﬂavor models to generate
the Yukawa couplings is again a variation of the Froggatt–
Nielsen mechanism, very similar to the mechanism we have
just seen for Abelian symmetries. The main difference is
that in this case the left handed fermions are grouped in
larger representations of the symmetry group. For instance,


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 27
in a SU(3) symmetry all three generations are uniﬁed in a
triplet. In a SO(3) ﬂavor symmetry we can assign the three
generations to a triplet or to three singlets. In a U(2) ﬂavor
symmetry the third generation is a singlet and the two light
generations are grouped in a doublet. Then we do not have
to assign different charges to the various generations, but in
exchange, we need several stages of symmetry breaking by
different ﬂavon ﬁelds with specially aligned VEVs.
We begin analyzing a non-Abelian U(2) ﬂavor sym-
metry. As stressed above, if the sfermions mass matrices
are only constrained by a U(1) ﬂavor symmetry there is
no reason why m2
1 should be close to m2
2 in ( 2.17). Un-
less an alignment mechanism between fermions and sfermi-
ons is available, the family symmetry should then suppress
( ˜m2
1 −˜m2
2)/ ˜m2. At the same time, in the fermion sector,
the family symmetry must suppress the Yukawa coupling
of the ﬁrst two families, m1,m 2 ≪m3. If the small break-
ing of a ﬂavor symmetry is responsible for the smallness of
( ˜m2
1 −˜m2
2)/ ˜m2 on one hand and of m1/m3,m 2/m3 on the
other, the symmetric limit should correspond to ˜m2
1 =˜m2
2
and tom1 =m2 = 0. Interestingly enough, the largest fam-
ily symmetry compatible withSO(10) uniﬁcation that forces
m1 =m2 = 0 automatically also forces ˜m2
1 =˜m2
2.T h i si sa
U(2) symmetry under which the ﬁrst two families transform
as a doublet and the third one, as well as the Higgs, as a sin-
glet [16, 18, 20, 24, 26].
ψ=ψa ⊕ ψ3.
The same conclusion can be obtained by using discrete sub-
groups [30, 64]. In the limit of unbrokenU(2), only the third
generation of fermions can acquire a mass, whereas the ﬁrst
two generations of scalars are exactly degenerate. While the
ﬁrst property is not a bad approximation of the fermion spec-
trum, the second one is what is needed to keep FCNC and
CP-violating effects under control. This observation can ac-
tually be considered as a hint that the ﬂavor structure of the
mass matrices of the fermions and of the scalars are related
to each other by a symmetry principle. The same physics
responsible for the peculiar pattern of fermion masses also
accounts for the structure of sfermion masses.
The rank 2 ofU(2) allows for a two step breaking pattern:
U(2)
ϵ
→ U(1)
ϵ′
→ 0, (2.20)
controlled by two small parametersϵ andϵ′<ϵ ,t ob ea tt h e
origin of the generation mass hierarchiesm3 ≫m2 ≫m1 in
the fermion spectrum. Although it is natural to view U(2)
as a subgroup ofU(3), the maximal ﬂavor group in the case
of full intra-family gauge uniﬁcation, U(3) will be anyhow
strongly broken toU(2) by the large top Yukawa coupling.
A nice aspect of the U(2) setting is that there is little
arbitrariness in the way the symmetry breaking ﬁelds cou-
ple to the SM fermions. This is unlike what happens e.g.
with the choice of fermion charges in the cases of U(1)
symmetries. The Yukawa interactions transform as(ψ3ψ3),
(ψ3ψa),(ψaψb) (a,b,c,... = 1, 2). Hence the only rele-
vantU(2) representations for the fermion mass matrices are
1,φa ,Sab andAab , whereS andA are symmetric and an-
tisymmetric tensors, and the upper indices denote a U(1)
charge opposite to that of ψa. While φa andAab are both
necessary, models with [20, 26] or without [24]Sab are both
possible.
Let us ﬁrst consider the case with Sab . At leading order,
the ﬂavons couple to SM fermions through D = 5 opera-
tors suppressed by a ﬂavor scaleΛ. Normalizing the ﬂavons
toΛ, it is convenient to choose a basis in whichφ2 = O(ϵ)
andφ1 = 0, whileA12 =− A21 = O(ϵ′).I fS is present, it
turns out to be automatically aligned with φ[27], in such a
way that in the limit ϵ′ → 0a U(1) subgroup is unbroken.
More precisely, S22 = O(ϵ) and all other components es-
sentially vanish. We are then led to Yukawa matrices of the
form
⎛
⎝
0 ϵ′ 0
−ϵ′ ϵϵ
0 ϵ 1
⎞
⎠. (2.21)
All non-vanishing entries have unknown coefﬁcients of or-
der unity, while still keeping λ12 =− λ21. In the context of
SU(5) or SO(10) uniﬁcation, the mass relations mτ≈ mb,
mμ≈ 3ms ,3me ≈ md are accounted for by the choice of
the transformations ofAab ,Sab under the uniﬁed group. The
stronger mass hierarchy in the up quark sector, a peculiar
feature of the fermion spectrum, is then predicted, due to
the interplay of theU(2) and the uniﬁed gauge symmetry.
The texture in (2.21) leads to the predictions
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Vtd
Vts
⏐⏐⏐⏐ =
√md
ms
,
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Vub
Vcb
⏐⏐⏐⏐ =
√mu
mc
. (2.22)
While the experimental determination of |Vtd/Vts | based on
one loop observables might be affected by new physics, the
tree-level determination of |Vub/Vcb | is less likely to be af-
fected and at present is signiﬁcantly away from the predic-
t i o ni n(2.22)[ 29, 39]. A better agreement can be obtained
by (i) relaxing the condition λ12 =− λ21, (ii) allowing for
small contributions to the 11, 13, 31 entries in ( 2.21)o rb y
(iii) allowing for asymmetric textures [ 39]. The latter pos-
sibility is realized in models in which the Sab ﬂavon is not
present [20].
While the model building degrees of freedom in the quark
and charged lepton sector are limited, a virtue of the U(2)
symmetry, the neutrino sector is less constrained. This is
due, in the see-saw context, to the several possible choices
involved in the modelization of the singlet neutrino mass
matrix. This is reﬂected for example in the possibility to get
both small and large mixing angles [25, 28, 31, 34, 35].


--- Page 16 ---
28 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
In the case of an SU(3) ﬂavor symmetry, all three gener-
ations are grouped in a single triplet representation, ψi .I n
addition we have several new scalar ﬁelds (ﬂavons) which
are either triplets,θ3,θ23 andθ2, or antitriplets,θ3 andθ23.
SU(3)ﬂ is broken in two steps: the ﬁrst step occurs when
θ3 and ¯θ3 get a large VEV breaking SU(3) to SU(2), and
deﬁning the direction of the third generation. Subsequently
a smaller VEV of θ23 and ¯θ23 breaks the remaining sym-
metry and deﬁnes the second generation direction. To repro-
duce the Yukawa textures the large third generation Yukawa
couplings require aθ3 (and ¯θ3) VEV of the order of the me-
diator scale, Mﬂ, while θ23/Mﬂ (and ¯θ23/Mﬂ)h a v es m a l l
VEVs7 of order ε. After this breaking chain we obtain
the effective Yukawa couplings at low energies through
the Froggatt–Nielsen mechanism [ 5] integrating out heavy
ﬁelds. The resulting superpotential invariant under SU(3)
would be
WY =Hψiψc
j
[
θi
3θj
3 +θi
23θj
23 +ϵiklθ23,kθ3,lθj
23(θ23θ3)
+ϵijkθ23,k(θ23θ3)2 +ϵijkθ3,k(θ23θ3)(θ23θ23)
+···
]
. (2.23)
In this equation we can see that each of the SU(3) indices
of the external MSSM particles (triplets) are either satu-
rated individually with an antitriplet ﬂavon index (a “me-
son” in QCD notation) or in an antisymmetric couplings
with other two triplet indices (a “baryon”). The presence
of other singlets in the different term is due to the pres-
ence of additional global symmetries necessaries to en-
sure the correct hierarchy in the different Yukawa elements
[37, 45, 46]. This structure is quite general for the dif-
ferent SU(3) models we can build. Here we are not spe-
cially concerned with additional details and we refer to
[37, 45, 46] for more complete examples. The Yukawa
texture we obtain with this superpotential is the follow-
ing:
Yf =
⎛
⎜⎝
0 αε3 βε3
αε3 ε2
a2 γε2
a2
βε3 γε2
a2 1
⎞
⎟⎠a2, (2.24)
with a = ⟨θ3⟩
M , and α,β,γunknown coefﬁcients of or-
derO(1).
Let us now analyze the structure of scalar soft masses. In
analogy with the Abelian case, in the unbroken limit diago-
nal soft masses are allowed. However, the three generations
belong to the same representation of the ﬂavor symmetry
and now this implies the mass is the same for the whole
7In fact, in realistic models reproducing the CKM mixing matrix, there
are two different mediator scales and expansion parameters,εin the up
quark and ¯εin the down quark sector [37, 45, 46].
triplet. After the breaking of SU(3) symmetry the scalar soft
masses deviate from exact universality [ 46, 160–162]. Any
invariant combination of ﬂavon ﬁelds can also contribute to
the sfermion masses, although ﬂavor symmetry indices can
be contracted with fermion ﬁelds. Including these correc-
tions the leading contributions to the sfermion mass matrices
are given by
(
m2
˜f
)ij =m2
0
(
δij + 1
M2
f
[
θi†
3 θj
3 +θi†
23θj
23
]
+ 1
M4
f
(
ϵiklθ3,kθ23,l
)†(
ϵjmnθ3,mθ23,n
))
. (2.25)
Notice that each term inside the parentheses is trivially neu-
tral under the symmetry because it contains always a ﬁeld
together with its own complex conjugate ﬁeld. However, as
the ﬂavor indices of the ﬂavon ﬁelds are contracted with the
external matter ﬁelds this gives a non-trivial contribution to
the sfermion mass matrices. Therefore in this model, sup-
pressing factors of order 1 we have,
m2
˜f ≃
⎛
⎝
1
1
1
⎞
⎠m2
0 +
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
ε2 00
0 ε2
a2
ε2
a2
0 ε2
a2 1
⎞
⎟⎟⎠a2m2
0, (2.26)
witha =⟨θ3⟩/Mﬂ which is stillO(1). In the model [37, 45,
46], the expansion parameter for right handed down quarks
and charged leptons is ¯ε= 0.15. Using (2.24) and (2.26)w e
can obtain the slepton mass matrix in the basis of diagonal
charged lepton Yukawa couplings:
m2
˜eR ≃
⎛
⎝
1 +¯ε2 −¯ε3 −¯ε3
−¯ε3 1 +¯ε2 ¯ε2
−¯ε3 ¯ε2 1
⎞
⎠m2
0, (2.27)
w h e r ew eh a v eu s e da3 ≃ O(Mﬂ). Therefore that gener-
ates the order ¯ε3 entry in the (1, 2) element. The modulo
of this entry is order 3 × 10− 3 atMGUT. These estimates at
MGUT are slightly reduced through renormalization group
evolution to the electroweak scale and is order 1 × 10− 3 at
MW. This value implies that supersymmetric contribution to
μ→ eγis very big and can even exceed the present bounds
for light slepton masses and large tanβif we are not in the
cancellation region[163–165]. This makes this process per-
haps the most promising one to ﬁnd deviations from uni-
versality in ﬂavor models. The presence of the SU(3) ﬂavor
symmetry controls the structure of the sfermion mass ma-
trices and the supersymmetric ﬂavor problem can be nicely
solved. However, interesting signals of the supersymmetric
ﬂavor structure can be found in the near future LFV experi-
ments.


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 29
3 Observables and their parameterization
3.1 Effective operators and low scale observables
In spite of the clear success of the SM in reproducing all
the known phenomenology up to energies of the order of
the electroweak scale, nobody would doubt the need of a
more complete theory beyond it. There remain many funda-
mental problems such as the experimental evidence for dark
matter (DM) and neutrino masses, as well as the theoretical
puzzles posed by the origin of ﬂavor, the three generations,
etc., that a complete theory should address. Therefore, we
can consider the SM as the low energy effective theory of
some more complete model that explains all these puzzles.
Furthermore, we have strong reasons (gauge hierarchy prob-
lem, uniﬁcation of couplings, dark matter candidate, etc.)
to expect the appearance of new physics close to the elec-
troweak scale. Suppose that these new particles from the
more complete theory are to be found at the LHC. Exper-
iments at lower energies E<m NP are also sensitive [ 166]
to this new physics (NP). Indeed the exchange of new parti-
cles can induce:
– corrections to the SM observables (such as S, T and U),
and
– the appearance of new observables or new (d> 4) opera-
tors, (e.g. the ﬂavor violating dipole operators).
Note that both effects can be parameterized by SU(3) ×
SU(2) ×U(1)-invariant operators of mass dimensiond> 4.
We refer to these non-renormalizable operators as effective
operators. Any NP proposed to explain new phenomena at
the LHC must satisfy the experimental constraints on the ef-
fective operators it generates.
3.1.1 Effective Lagrangian approach: Leff
Considering the SM as an effective theory below the scale
of NP, mNP, where the heavy ﬁelds have been integrated
out, we can describe the physics through an effective La-
grangian, Leff. This effective Lagrangian contains all pos-
sible terms invariant under the SM gauge group and built
with the SM ﬁelds. Besides the usual SM ﬁelds, we could
introduce new light singlet fermions with renormalizable
Yukawa couplings to the lepton doublets (and possibly small
Majorana masses) to accommodate the observed neutrino
masses. In this case we would have more operators allowed
in the effective Lagrangian of the SM + extra light sterile
states. On the assumption that the light sterile particles are
weakly interacting, if present, and therefore not relevant to
the LHC, we focus on the effective Lagrangian that can be
constructed only from the known SM ﬁelds. Then, the effec-
tive Lagrangian at energies E ≪mNP can be written as an
expansion in 1/mNP as,
LSM
eff = L0 + 1
mNP
L1 + 1
m2
NP
L2 + 1
m3
NP
L3 +··· , (3.1)
where L0 is the renormalizable SM Lagrangian contain-
ing the kinetic terms of the U(1), SU(2) and SU(3) gauge
bosonsAμ, the gauge interactions and kinetic terms of the
SM fermions, {f }, and Higgs, and the Yukawa couplings of
the Higgs and SM fermions. In order to ﬁx the notation, we
list the SM fermions as
qi =
(uLi
dLi
)
,ℓ i =
(νLi
eLi
)
,
uRi,d Ri,e Ri,
(3.2)
wherei is a ﬂavor/family/generation index. Note that in the
following we use always four-component Dirac spinors in
the different Lagrangians. Explicit expressions, for L0 in
similar notation, can be found in [167].
The different Ln are Lagrangians of dimensiond = 4 +n
invariant under SU(3) × SU(2) ×U(1) and can be schemat-
ically written
Ln =
∑
a
Ca · Oa
(
H, {f }, {Aμ}
)
+ h.c. (3.3)
The local operators Oa are gauge invariant combinations of
SM ﬁelds of dimension 4 +n. Their coefﬁcient, which in
the full Lagrangian has mass dimension −n, is unknown in
bottom-up effective ﬁeld theory, but calculable in NP mod-
els. We write this coefﬁcient as a dimensionlessCa divided
by thenth power of the mass scale of the NP mediator,mn
NP,
which for new physics relevant at LHC energies would be
mNP ∼ √ sLHC. We shall later normalize toGF (see (3.21)).
We are mainly interested in dimension ﬁve and di-
mension six operators. We assume that any particles cre-
ated at the LHC could generate dimension six operators,
and then we can neglect higher dimension operators con-
tributing to the same physical processes. Operators of di-
mension 7 include the lepton number violating opera-
torϵabϵcdHaℓb
[iσμνHcℓd
j ]Fμνwhich gives neutrino transi-
tion moments (ﬂavor-changing dipole moments) after elec-
troweak symmetry breaking (EWSB). At dimension 8 are
two-Higgs-four-fermion operators, which can give four-
fermion operators after EWSB, with a different ﬂavor struc-
ture from the dimension six terms. We shall not analyze
these operators here, but they are studied in the context of
non-standard neutrino interactions [ 168]. Therefore, in the
following, we restrict our analysis to L1 and L2.
The unique operator allowed with the standard model
ﬁelds and symmetries at dimension ﬁve is Oij
ℓℓ =
ϵabϵmnHaℓcb
iHmℓn
j (a,b,n,m are SU(2) indices). Thus we
have,
L1 = 1
4κij
νℓℓ·ϵabϵmnHaℓcb
iHmℓn
j + h.c., (3.4)


--- Page 18 ---
30 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
whereℓc is the charge conjugate of the lepton doublet. Af-
ter electroweak symmetry breaking, this gives rise to a Ma-
jorana mass matrix 1
4κij
ℓℓ⟨H 0⟩2νciνj + h.c. In the neutrino
mass eigenstate basis, the masses are κii
ℓℓ⟨H 0⟩2/2. The co-
efﬁcientκij
ℓℓ = 2YkiM− 1
k Ykj is generated for instance after
integrating out heavy right handed neutrinos of mass Mk in
a see-saw mechanism with Yukawa couplingY .
L2 is constructed with dimension-six operators built out
of SM ﬁelds. An exhaustive list is given in [ 167], includ-
ing operators with Higgs, W ± andZ0 external legs. Here
we list operators which give interactions among leptons and
photons, and leptons and quarks. We can classify the possi-
ble operators according to the external legs as follows:
– operators with a pair of leptons and an (on-shell) photon:
Oij
eB =ℓiσμνeRjHBμν,
(3.5)
Oij
eW =ℓiσμντIeRjHWI
μν,
– four-lepton operators, with Lorenz structure LLLL,
RRRR orLRRL, singlet or triplet SU(2) gauge contrac-
tions (described in the operator subscript), and all possible
inequivalent ﬂavor index combinations (see Sect. 3.1.2).
The SU(2) ×U(1) invariant operators, with ﬂavor indices
in the superscript, are
Oijkl
(1)ℓℓ =
(
ℓiγμℓj
)
(ℓkγμℓl),
Oijkl
(3)ℓℓ =
(
ℓiτIγμℓj
)(
ℓkτIγμℓl
)
,
Oijkl
ee =
(
eiγμPRej
)
(ekγμPRel),
Oijkl
ℓe =(ℓiej)(ekℓl),
(3.6)
– two lepton two-quark operators, with Lorentz structure
LLLL,RRRR orLRRL, singlet or triplet SU(2) gauge
contractions (described in the operator subscript), and
all possible inequivalent ﬂavor index combinations (see
Sect. 3.1.2). The S(3) × SU(2) ×U(1) invariant opera-
tors, with color indices implicit and ﬂavor indices in the
subscript, are
Oijkl
(1)ℓq =
(
ℓiγμℓj
)
(qkγμql),
Oijkl
(3)ℓq =
(
ℓiτIγμℓj
)(
qkτIγμql
)
,
Oijkl
ed =
(
eiγμPRej
)
(dkγμPRdl),
Oijkl
eu =
(
eiγμPRej
)
(ukγμPRul),
Oijkl
ℓu =(ℓiul)(ukℓj), Oijkl
ℓd =(ℓidl)(dkℓj),
Oijkl
ℓqS =(ℓiej)(qkul), Oijkl
qde =(ℓiej)(dkql).
(3.7)
Therefore the Lagrangian L2 for leptons only is
L2 =Cij
eB · Oij
eB +Cij
eW · Oij
eW
+ 1
1 +δ
(
Cijkl
(1)ℓℓ · Oijkl
(1)ℓℓ +Cijkl
(3)ℓℓ · Oijkl
(3)ℓℓ
+Cijkl
ee · Oijkl
ee + 2Cijkl
ℓe · Oijkl
ℓe .
)
+ h.c., (3.8)
where we introduce the parameter δto cancel possible fac-
tors of 2 that can arise from the + h.c.: it is 1 for Oij...
... =
[Oij...
... ]†; otherwise it is 0. The sums over i,j,k,l run over
inequivalent operators, taking an operator to be inequivalent
if neither it, nor its h.c., are already in the list. The factor of
2 in the deﬁnition of Oℓe is included to compensate the 1/2
in the Fierz rearrangement below (second line of ( 3.13)).8
The effective operators whose coefﬁcients we constrain in
the next section are related to those of ( 3.8) through an ex-
pansion in terms of the SU(2) components of the ﬁelds and
taking into account the electroweak symmetry breaking. For
example, for the lepton operators:
Oij
eB =ℓiσμνeRjHBμν= cosθW ⟨H ⟩eiσμνPRejF em
μν, (3.9)
Oij
eW =ℓiσμντIeRjHWI
μν
=− sinθW ⟨H ⟩eiσμνPRejF em
μν, (3.10)
Oijkl
(1)ℓℓ =
(
ℓiγμℓj
)
(ℓkγμℓl)
=
(
νiγμPLνj +eiγμPLej
)
×(νkγμPLνl +ekγμPLel), (3.11)
Oijkl
(3)ℓℓ =
(
ℓiτIγμℓj
)(
ℓkτIγμℓl
)
= 2
(
νiγμPLej
)
(ekγμPLνl)
+ 2
(
eiγμPLνj
)
(νkγμPLel)
+
[(
νiγμPLνj
)
(νkγμPLνl)
+
(
eiγμPLej
)
(ekγμPLel)
−
(
νiγμPLνj
)
(ekγμPLel)
−
(
eiγμPLej
)
(νkγμPLνl)
]
, (3.12)
Oijkl
ℓe = 2(ℓiej)(ekℓl)
= 2
[
(νiPRej)(ekPLνl) +(eiPRej)(ekPLel)
]
=−
[(
νiγμPLνl
)
(ekγμPRej)
+
(
eiγμPLel
)
(ekγμPRej)
]
. (3.13)
All these operators, together with Oijkl
ee , induce dipole
moments and four-charged-lepton (4CL) vertices, as appear
8Note there will sometimes be other 2 s for identical fermions.


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 31
to the right-hand side (RHS) in the above equations. Con-
straints on the coefﬁcients of the 4CL operators
Oijkl
PP = 1
1 +δ
(
eiγμPej
)
(ekγμPel),
Oijkl
RL = 1
1 +δ
(
eiγμPRej
)
(ekγμPLel),
(3.14)
whereP =PR orPL, are listed in Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7.
After electroweak symmetry breaking, the operators Oij
eB
and Oij
eW become the chirality-ﬂipping dipole moments as
written in ( 3.9), ( 3.10) (where we did not include the Z–
lepton–lepton operators [169]). These dipoles can be ﬂavor
conserving or transition dipole moments. The ﬂavor diag-
onal operators are specially interesting because they corre-
spond to the anomalous magnetic moments and the electric
dipole moments of the different fermions. TakingCij
eγ(q2) =
Cij
eB(q2) cosθW − Cij
eW(q2) sinθW as the Wilson coefﬁcient
with momentum transfer equal toq2,w eh a v ef o rq2 = 0,
Cii
eγ(q2 = 0)
m2
NP
⟨H ⟩eiσμνPReiF em
μν+ h.c.
=
Re{Cii
eγ(q2 = 0)}
m2
NP
⟨H ⟩eiσμνeiF em
μν
+ Im{Cij
eγ(q2 = 0)}
m2
NP
⟨H ⟩ieiσμνγ5eiF em
μν
=e aei
4mei
eiσμνeiF em
μν+i
2deieiσμνγ5eiF em
μν, (3.15)
withaei =(gei − 2)/2 the anomalous magnetic moment and
dei the electric dipole moment of the lepton ei that can be
found in [170].
In a given model, the coefﬁcients of the effective op-
erators can be obtained by matching the effective theory
of ( 3.1) onto the model, at some matching scale (for in-
stance, the mass scale of new particles). However, in partic-
ular models there can appear various pitfalls in constraining
the generic coefﬁcientsCijkl
... . This is illustrated, for example,
in the model of [171] which corresponds to adding a singlet
slepton ˜Ec of ﬂavork, in R-parity violating (RPV) SUSY . In
this case, after integrating out the heavy slepton we obtain
the following effective operator:
λk
[ij]λ∗k
[mn]
M2
(
(νL)cieLj
)(
(eL)n(νL)c
m
)
=
λk
[ij]λ∗k
[mn]
2M2
(
enγμPLej
)
(νmγμPLνi), (3.16)
whereλk
[ij] is antisymmetric ini,j because the SU(2) con-
traction ofℓiℓj is antisymmetric. This is an example of op-
erator Oℓℓ(1), but since it is induced by singlet scalar ex-
change, there is no four-charged-lepton operator (compare
to (3.11)). This illustrates that the bounds obtained here, by
assuming thatCijkl
... ̸= 0 for one choice ofijkl at a time, are
not generic. Each process receives contributions from a sum
of operators, and that sum could contain cancellations in a
particular model.
Many models of new physics introduce new TeV-scale
particles carrying a conserved quantum number (e.g. R-
p a r i t y , T - p a r i t y ...) .Such particles appear in pairs at ver-
tices, so they contribute via boxes and penguins to the
four-fermion and dipole moment operators considered here.
Generic formulae for the one loop contribution to a dipole
moment can be found in [172], and for boxes in [173]. Extra
Higgses [174, 175] would contribute to the same operators
constructed from SM ﬁelds, so they are constrained by the
experimental limits on the coefﬁcients of such operators.
3.1.2 Constraints on low scale observables
In this section we present the low energy constraints on
the different Wilson coefﬁcients introduced before. Any NP
found at LHC will necessarily respect the bounds presented
here.
3.1.2.1 Dipole transitions After electroweak symmetry
breaking, the operators of ( 3.9), ( 3.10) generate magnetic
and electric dipole moments for the charged leptons. Flavor-
diagonal operators give rise to anomalous magnetic mo-
ments and electric dipole moments as shown in ( 3.15).
The anomalous magnetic moment of the electron ae =
(g − 2)e/2 is used to determine αem. The current measure-
ment of the muon anomalous momentaμ=(g − 2)μ/2 de-
viates from the (uncertain) SM expectation by 3.2 σusing
e+e− -data [176], and can be taken as a constraint, or indica-
tion on the presence of new physics. Currently there is only
an upper bound on the magnetic moment of the τfrom the
analysis ofe+e− → τ+τ− [170, 177]. Electric dipole mo-
ments have not yet been observed, although we have very
constraining bounds specially on the electron dipole mo-
ment. In Table3 we present the bounds of ﬂavor diagonal di-
pole moments. The EDMs are discussed in detail in Sect. 5.
The bounds on off-diagonal dipole transitions are pre-
sented in Table 3. It is convenient to normalize these coef-
ﬁcients,Cij
eγ=Cij
eB cosθW − Cij
eW sinθW , to the Fermi in-
teractions given our ignorance on the scale of new physics
mNP:
Cij
eγ
m2
NP
= 4GF√
2
ϵij
eγ. (3.17)
In the literature, it is customary to use the left and right form
factors for lepton ﬂavor violating transitions deﬁned by


--- Page 20 ---
32 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Table 3 Bounds on the different dipole coefﬁcients. Flavor diagonal
dipole coefﬁcients are given in terms of the corresponding anomalous
magnetic moment,aei , and the dipole moment,dei . Bounds on transi-
tion moments are given in terms of the dimensionless coefﬁcients|ϵij
eγ|
(deﬁned in ( 3.17)) from the bounds on the branching ratios given in
the last column. These bounds apply also both to |ϵij
eγ| and |ϵji
eγ|.S e e
Sect. 3.1.2 for details
(ij) ai =gi − 2
2 edmi (e cm) Ref.
ee 0.0011596521859(38) de ≤ 1.6 × 10− 27 PDG [170, 186]
μμ 11659208.0(5.4)(3.3) × 10− 10 dμ≤ 2.8 × 10− 19 Muon g-2 Coll. [187, 188]
ττ − 0.052<aτ< 0.013 (− 2.2<dτ< 4.5) × 10− 17 LEP2 [189], Belle [190]
(ij) ℓiσμνeRjF em
μν expt. limit Ref.
eμ ≤ 3.4 × 10− 11 ≤ 1.2 × 10− 11 MEGA Coll. [180]
eτ ≤ 1.2 × 10− 7 ≤ 1.1 × 10− 7 BaBar [182]
μτ ≤ 8.4 × 10− 8 ≤ 4.5 × 10− 8 Belle, BaBar [181, 191]
/Delta1L2 =emliAμfj
[
iσμνqν
(
Aij
LPL +Aij
RPR
)]
fi + h.c.
(3.18)
wheref is a Dirac (4-component) fermion. The radiative
decayfi → fj +γproceeds at the rateΓ=m5
ie2/(16π)×
(|Aij
L |2 +|Aij
R |2) [178]. QED corrections to those decays
are unusually large and may reach as much as 15% [ 179].
Bounds on the dimensionless coefﬁcients Cij
eγandϵij
eγcan
be obtained by translating fromAij
L andAij
R :
Cij
eγ
m2
NP
⟨H ⟩= emi
2 Aij
R,
Cji ∗
eγ
m2
NP
⟨H ⟩= emi
2 Aij
L. (3.19)
The experimental bounds on radiative lepton decays can
be used to set bounds on these off-diagonal Wilson coefﬁ-
cients. The current experimental bounds are B(μ→ eγ)<
1.2 × 10− 11 [180],B(τ→ μγ)<4.5 × 10− 8 [181], and
B(τ→ eγ)<1.1 × 10− 7 [182].
For the off-shell photon, q2 ̸= 0, there exist additional
form factors,
/Delta1L =emliAμej
[(
gμν− qμqν
q2
)
γν
(
Bij
LPL +Bij
RPR
)]
ei
+ h.c., (3.20)
which induce contributions to the four-fermion operators
to be discussed in the next subsections. These form fac-
tors may be enhanced by a large factor compared to the
on-shell photon form factors [ 184], ln(mNP/mli), depend-
ing on the nature of new physics. Therefore, those operators
become relevant for constraining new physics in R-parity vi-
olating SUSY [185] and in low-scale type-II see-saw mod-
els [184].
3.1.2.2 Four-charged-lepton operators As before, to pres-
ent the bounds on the dimensionless four-charged-fermion
coefﬁcients in (3.14), we normalize them to the Fermi inter-
actions:
Cijkl
(n)ℓℓ
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
(n)ℓℓ, Cijkl
ee
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ee ,
(3.21)
Cilkj
ℓe
m2
NP
= 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ℓe .
The current low energy constraints on the dimensionless
ϵ’s are shown in Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7. The rows of the ta-
bles are labeled by the ﬂavor combination, and the column
by the Lorentz structure. The numbers given in this tables
correspond to the best current experimental bound on the
coefﬁcient of each operator, assuming it is the only non-
zero coefﬁcient present. The last column in the table lists
the experiment setting the bound. The compositeness search
limitsΛ@ LEP are at 95% C.L., the decay rate bounds at
90% C.L.
Regarding the deﬁnition of the different coefﬁcients we
have to make some comments. First, note the ﬂavor index
permutation betweenCℓe andϵℓe:
Cilkj
ℓe (ℓiel)(ekℓj) =− 1
2ϵijkl
ℓe
(
ℓiγμℓj
)
(ekγμel). (3.22)
There are relations between the ﬂavor indices of the differ-
ent operators. For OLL =(eγμPLe)(eγμPLe) and ORR =
(eγμPRe)(eγμPRe) we have
Oijkl
PP = Oklij
PP , Oijkl
PP = O∗jilk
PP , Oijkl
PP = Oilkj
PP ,
(3.23)
by symmetry, Hermitian conjugation and Fierz rearrange-
ment, respectively. Therefore, the constraints oneeμτin the
ﬁrst two columns of Tables 4 to 7 apply to ϵeeμτ
(n)xx ,ϵμτee
(n)xx ,
ϵ∗eeτμ
(n)xx ,ϵ∗τμee
(n)xx ,ϵeτμe
(n)xx ,ϵμeeτ
(n)xx ,ϵ∗τeeμ
(n)xx , andϵ∗eμτe
(n)xx with(n)xx


--- Page 21 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 33
Table 4 Bounds on coefﬁcients of ﬂavor four-lepton operators, from
four-charged-lepton processes. The number is the upper bound on the
dimensionless operator coefﬁcientϵijkl ( d e ﬁ n e di n(3.21)), arising from
the measurement in the last column. The bound applies also to ϵklij .
The second column is the bounds on ϵijkl
(3)ℓℓ,a n dϵijkl
(1)ℓℓ [except in the
case of the bracketed limits, which are the upper bound on ϵijkl
(1)ℓℓ and
2ϵijkl
(1)ℓℓ]. The third column is the bound on ϵijkl
(1)ee . The bounds in these
two columns apply also when the ﬂavor indices are permuted to jilk
andilkj . The fourth column is the bound onϵijkl
ℓe (which does not apply
to the ﬂavor permutationilkj , so this is listed with a line of its own).
The constraints in [brackets] apply to the two charged lepton–two
neutrino operator of the same ﬂavor structure, and arise from lepton
universality inτdecays. See Sect. 3.1.2 for details
(ijkl ) (eγμPLe)(eγμPLe) ( eγμPRe)(eγμPRe) ( eγμPLe)(eγμPRe) expt. limit Ref.
eeee ( − 1.8 −+ 2.8) × 10− 3 (− 1.8 −+ 2.8) × 10− 3 (− 2.4 −+ 4.9) × 10− 3 Λ@LEP2 [ 194]
eeμμ ( − 7.2 −+ 5.2) × 10− 3 (− 7.8 −+ 5.8) × 10− 3 (− 9.0 −+ 9.6) × 10− 3 Λ@LEP2 [ 193, 195]
eμμe ( − 7.2 −+ 5, 2) × 10− 3 (− 7.8 −+ 5.8) × 10− 3 1.3 × 10− 2 Λ,RPV@LEP2 [ 193, 195]
eeττ ( − 7.3 −+ 13) × 10− 3 (− 8.0 −+ 15) × 10− 3 (− 1.2 −+ 1.8) × 10− 2 Λ@LEP2 [ 193, 195]
τeeτ ( − 7.3 −+ 13) × 10− 3 (− 8.0 −+ 15) × 10− 3 1.3 × 10− 2 Λ,RPV@LEP2 [ 193, 195]
μμμμ ∼ 1 ∼ 1 ∼ 1 B(Z → μ¯μ)
μμττ ∼ 1 [0.0014]∼ 1 ∼ 1 [0.01] B(Z → μ¯μ)
μττμ ∼ 1 [0.0014]∼ 1 B(Z → μ¯μ)
ττττ ∼ 1 ∼ 1 ∼ 1 B(Z → τ¯τ)
Table 5 Bounds on coefﬁcients of four-lepton operators with/Delta1Lα=
−/Delta1Lβ= 1. They apply also to ﬂavor index permutationsklij andilkj ,
except in the case ofττeμ, where the bound onτμeτin the fourth col-
umn is fromμdecay and is listed separately. See the caption of Table4
and Sect. 3.1.2 for further details
(ijkl ) (eγμPLe)(eγμPLe) ( eγμPRe)(eγμPRe) ( eγμPLe)(eγμPRe) expt. limit
eeeμ 7.1 × 10− 7 7.1 × 10− 7 7.1 × 10− 7 B(μ→ eee)< 10− 12
eeeτ 7.8 × 10− 4 7.8 × 10− 4 7.8 × 10− 4 B(τ→ eee)< 2 × 10− 7
eeμτ 1.1 × 10− 3 1.1 × 10− 3 1.1 × 10− 3 B(τ→ eeμ)<1.9 × 10− 7
μμeμ ∼ 1 ∼ 1 ∼ 1 B(Z → e ¯μ)<1.7 × 10− 6
μμeτ 1.1 × 10− 3 1.1 × 10− 3 1.1 × 10− 3 B(τ→ μeμ)<2.0 × 10− 7
μμμτ 7.8 × 10− 4 7.8 × 10− 4 7.8 × 10− 4 B(τ→ 3μ)<1.9 × 10− 7
ττeμ ∼ 1 [0.05]∼ 1 ∼ 1 [0.05] B(Z → e ¯μ)<1.7 × 10− 6
τμeτ ∼ 1 [0.05]∼ 1 [0.05] B(Z → e ¯μ)<1.7 × 10− 6
ττeτ ∼ 3 [0.05]∼ 3 ∼ 3 [0.05] B(Z → e ¯τ)<9.8 × 10− 6
τττμ ∼ 3 [0.05]∼ 3 ∼ 3 [0.05] B(Z → τ¯μ)<1.2 × 10− 5
Table 6 Bounds on coefﬁcients of four-lepton operators with/Delta1Lα=/Delta1Lβ= 2. See the caption of Table 4 and Sect. 3.1.2 for details
(ijkl ) (eγμPLe)(eγμPLe) ( eγμPRe)(eγμPRe) ( eγμPLe)(eγμPRe) expt. limit
eμeμ 3.0 × 10− 3 3.0 × 10− 3 2.0 × 10− 3 ( ¯μe)↔ ( ¯eμ)
eτeτ [0.05][ 0.05]
μτμτ [0.05][ 0.05]
Table 7 Bounds on coefﬁcients of four-lepton operators with/Delta1Lα=/Delta1Lβ=− 1
2/Delta1Lρ. See the caption of Table 4 and Sect. 3.1.2 for details
(ijkl ) (eγμPLe)(eγμPLe) ( eγμPRe)(eγμPRe) ( eγμPLe)(eγμPRe) expt. limit
eμeτ 2.3 × 10− 4 2.3 × 10− 4 2.3 × 10− 4 B(τ→ μee)<1.1 × 10− 7
μeμτ 2.6 × 10− 4 2.6 × 10− 4 2.6 × 10− 4 B(τ→ eμμ)<1.3 × 10− 7
τeτμ [0.05][ 0.05]


--- Page 22 ---
34 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
equal to(3)ℓℓ,( 1)ℓℓ,o r(1)ee. Note, however that it is cal-
culated assuming only one of theseϵ is non-zero. Similarly,
the operator Oijkl
LR =(eiγμPLej)(ekγμPRel), with coefﬁ-
cientϵijkl
ℓe , is related by Hermitian conjugation:
Oijkl
LR = O∗jilk
LR , (3.24)
so again the bounds onϵijkl
ℓe apply toϵ∗jilk
ℓe . We can usually
apply also these bounds toϵklij
ℓe because the chirality of the
fermion legs does not affect the matrix element squared, but
ϵilkj
ℓe is bounded separately in the tables.
The bounds from Z decays in Tables 4 and 5 are esti-
mated from the one loop penguin diagram obtained closing
two of the legs of the four-fermion operator and coupling
it with theZ [192]. These bounds would be more correctly
included by renormalization group mixing between the four-
fermion operators and the Z–fermion–fermion operators dis-
c u s s e di n[169]. They are listed in the tables to indicate the
existence of a constraint. The bound can be applied to ϵiikl
ℓe
andϵijkk
ℓe but it does not apply toϵilki
ℓe .
Contact interaction bounds are usually quoted on the
scaleΛ, where
ϵijkl
ab
4GF√
2
=± 1
1 +δ
4π
Λ2, (3.25)
andδ= 1 for the operators Oeeee
LL and Oeeee
RR of (3.14), 0 oth-
erwise. Since our normalization does not have this factor
of 2, we have a Feynman rule ϵ8GF/
√
2 for these oper-
ators, and correspondingly stricter bounds on the ϵ’s. The
bounds are the same for ϵikki
ℓe andϵkiik
ℓe . However, contact
interaction bounds are not quoted on operators of the form
(eiγμPLej)(ejγμPRei), corresponding toϵiijj
ℓe . Such oper-
ators are generated by sneutrino exchange in R-parity violat-
ing SUSY , so we estimate the boundλ2/m2
˜ν< 4/(9T e V2)
from the plotted constraints in [193], and impose 4|ϵijkl
ab |GF/√
2<λ2/(2m2
˜ν).
Many of the 4CL operators involving twoτ’s are poorly
constrained. In some cases, see ( 3.11), (3.12), new physics
that generates 4CL operators also induces (eiγλPej) ×
(νkγλLνl). The coefﬁcients of operators of the form
(μγλPe)(νkγλLνl), (μγλPτ)(νkγλLνl) or (eγλPτ)×
(νkγλLνl), are constrained from lepton universality mea-
surements in μandτdecays [ 196]. The decay rate τ→
eiνk ¯νl in the presence of the operators of ( 3.14), divided by
the SM prediction forτ→ eiντνi ,i s
(
1 − 2δkτδil Re
{
ϵττii
(1)ℓℓ + 2ϵττii
(3)ℓℓ
}
+ 4mi
mτ
δkτδil Re
{
ϵττii
ℓe
}
+
⏐⏐ϵiτkl
(1)ℓℓ
⏐⏐2 + 4
⏐⏐ϵiτkl
(3)ℓℓ
⏐⏐2 +
⏐⏐ϵiτkl
ℓe
⏐⏐2
)
. (3.26)
Within the experimental accuracy, the weak τand μde-
cays verify lepton universality and agree with LEP precision
measurements ofmW . Rough bounds on the ϵ’s can there-
fore be obtained by requiring the new physics contribution
to the decay rates to be less than the errors/Delta1B
B (τ→ eνν)=
0.05/17.84, /Delta1B
B (τ→ μνν)= 0.05/17.36. These are listed
in the tables in [brackets]. The bracketed limit in the sec-
ond column applies toϵijkl
(1)ℓℓ; the bound onϵijkl
(3)ℓℓ is 1/2t h e
quoted number. The limit on ϵτeτμ
ℓe is from its contribution
toμ→ eντ¯ντ.
Finally, we would like to remind the reader the various
caveats to these four-fermion vertex bounds.
– The constraints are calculated “one operator at a time”.
This is unrealistic; new physics is likely to induce many
non-renormalizable operators. In some cases, see ( 3.16),
a symmetry in the new physics can cause cancellations
such that it does not contribute to certain observables.
– The coefﬁcients of the 4CL operators, and two ν–two
charged lepton (2ν2CL) operators may differ by a factor
of few, because they are induced by the exchange of dif-
ferent members of a multiplet, whose masses differ [197].
– The list of operators is incomplete. Perhaps some of
the neglected operators give relevant constraints on new
physics. For instance, bounds from lepton universality on
the(H ∗ℓ)γμ∂μ(Hℓ) operator [198] are relevant to extra
dimensional scenarios [199].
– Operators of dimension >6 are neglected. If the mass
scale of the new physics is ∼ TeV , then higher dimension
operators with Higgs VEVs [ 200] such as HH ¯ψψ¯ψψ
are not signiﬁcantly suppressed.
3.1.2.3 Two lepton–two quark operators Once more, we
normalize the coefﬁcients of the two lepton–two quark op-
erators in (3.6) to the Fermi interactions:
Cijkl
(n)ℓq
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
(n)ℓq, Cijkl
ed
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ed ,
Cijkl
ℓd
m2
NP
= 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ℓd , Cijkl
eu
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
eu ,
(3.27)
Cijkl
ℓu
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ℓu,
Cijkl
ℓqS
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
ℓqS,
Cijkl
qde
m2
NP
=− 4GF√
2
ϵijkl
qde.
The main bounds on the dimensionless ϵsa r eg i v e ni nT a -
bles 8 and 9. These numbers correspond to the best cur-
rent experimental bound on the coefﬁcient of each opera-
tor, assuming it is the only non-zero coefﬁcient present. The
bounds on ϵℓq in Table 8 apply both to ϵ(1)ℓq andϵ(3)ℓq .
These bounds have been obtained from the corresponding
bounds on leptoquark couplings in Refs. [201, 202] that can
be checked for further details.


--- Page 23 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 35
Table 8 Bounds on coefﬁcients of the left handed two quark–two lep-
ton operators. Bound is the upper bound on the dimensionless operator
coefﬁcientϵijkl ( d e ﬁ n e di n(3.28)), arising from the experimental de-
termination of the observable in the next column. Bounds with a ∗ are
also valid under the exchange of the lepton indices
(eγμPLe)(qγμPLq)
(ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
ℓq Observable ( ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
ℓq Observable
11 11 5 .1 × 10− 3 Rπ 22 11 5 .1 × 10− 3 Rπ
12 11 8 .5 × 10− 7 μ–e conversion on Ti 12 12 ∗ 2.9 × 10− 7 B(K0
L → μe)
ij 12 4 .5 × 10− 6 B(K +→ π+νν)
B(K +→ π0e+νe) ij 22 1.0 Vcs
ij 13 3 .6 × 10− 3 Vub ij 23 4 .2 × 10− 2 Vcb
11 23 6 .6 × 10− 5 B(B + → e+e− K+) 11 13 9 .3 × 10− 4 B(B + → e+e− π+)
22 23 5 .4 × 10− 5 B(B + → μ+μ− K+) 22 13 1 .4 × 10− 3 B(B + → μ+μ− π+)
21 23∗ 4.5 × 10− 3 B(B + → e+μ− K+) 21 13∗ 3.9 × 10− 5 B(B + → e+μ− π+)
12 23∗ 1.2 × 10− 2 B(B0
s → μ+e− ) 33 12 6 .6 × 10− 2 K–K
22 22 6 .0 × 10− 2 B(D+
s → μ+νμ)
B(D+s → τ+ντ) 33 22 6 .0 × 10− 2 B(D+
s → μ+νμ)
B(D+s → τ+ντ)
32 23∗ 1.2 × 10− 3 B(B + → μ+τ− X+) 33 23 9 .3 × 10− 3 B(B + → τ+τ− X+)
Table 9 Bounds on coefﬁcients of the right handed vector and scalar 2
quark-2 lepton operators. Bound is the upper bound on the dimension-
less operator coefﬁcient ϵijkl ( d e ﬁ n e di n(3.28)), arising from the ex-
perimental determination of the observable in the next column. Bounds
with a ∗ are also valid under the exchange of the lepton indices
(eγμPRe)(qγμPRq)
(ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
eu Observable ( ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
eu Observable
11 12 1 .7 × 10− 2 B(D+→ π+e+e− )
B(D0 → π− e+νe) 21 12∗ 1.3 × 10− 2 B(D+ → π+μ− e+)
B(D0 → π− e+νe)
22 12 9 .0 × 10− 3 B(D+→ π+μ+μ− )
B(D0→ π− e+νe) 33 12 0.19 B(D0 − D0)
(ℓPRe)(dPLq)
(ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
qde Observable ( ijkl ) Bound on ϵijkl
qde Observable
11 11 1 .5 × 10− 7 Rπ 22 11 3 .0 × 10− 4 Rπ
12 11 5 .1 × 10− 3 B(π+ → μ+νe)1 2 1 2 ∗ 2.1 × 10− 8 B(K0
L → μ+e− )
11 12 2 .7 × 10− 8 B(K0
L → e+e− )2 2 1 2 8 .4 × 10− 7 B(K0
L → μ+μ− )
22 21 1 .3 × 10− 2 B(D+ → μ+νμ)2 2 2 2 1 .2 × 10− 2 B(D+
s → μ+νμ)
B(D+s → τ+ντ)
33 22 0.2 B(D+
s → μ+νμ)
B(D+s → τ+ντ) 33 13 2 .5 × 10− 3 B(B + → τ+ντ)
11 13 9 .0 × 10− 5 B(B0 → e+e− )1 2 1 3 ∗ 1.2 × 10− 4 B(B0 → μ+e− )
13 13∗ 2.5 × 10− 3 B(B0 → τ+e− )2 3 1 3 ∗ 3.3 × 10− 3 B(B0 → τ+μ− )
22 13 7 .5 × 10− 5 B(B0 → μ+μ− )1 1 2 3 6 .0 × 10− 4 B(B0
s → e+e− )
12 23∗ 2.1 × 10− 4 B(B0
s → μ+e− )2 2 2 3 1 .2 × 10− 4 B(B0
s → μ+μ− )
3.2 Phenomenological parameterizations of quark and
lepton Yukawa couplings
3.2.1 Quark sector
The quark Yukawa sector is described by the following La-
grangian:
Lquark =uc
RiYu
ijQjH +dc
RiYd
ijQjH + h.c., (3.28)
wherei,j = 1, 2, 3 are generation indices,Qi =(dLi,uLi)
are the left handed quark doublets, uc
R anddc
R are the right
handed up and down quark singlets respectively, and H is
the Higgs ﬁeld. On the other hand, Yu andYd are complex
3 × 3 matrices, which can be cast by means of a singular
value decomposition as
Yu =Vu
RDu
YVu
L
†,
(3.29)
Yd =Vd
RDd
YVd
L
†
.


--- Page 24 ---
36 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Here,Du
Y = diag(yu
1,yu
2,yu
3) is a diagonal matrix whose en-
tries can be chosen real and positive withyu
1 <yu
2 <yu
3 , and
similarly for Dd
Y .Vu,d
R andVu,d
L are 3 × 3 unitary matri-
ces that depend on three real parameters and six phases. The
unitary matrices Vu,d
R can be absorbed in the deﬁnition of
the right handed ﬁelds without any physical effect. In neu-
tral currents the left rotations cancel out via the Glashow–
Iliopoulos–Maiani (GIM) mechanism [ 203]. On the other
hand, the redeﬁnition of the left handed ﬁelds produces ﬂa-
vor mixing in the charged currents. In the physical basis
where both the up and down Yukawa couplings are simul-
taneously diagonal, the charged current reads
Jμ
cc =uc
L
γμ(1 − γ5)
2
(
Vu
L
†Vd
L
)
dL. (3.30)
The matrixVu
L
†Vd
L can be generically written as Vu
L
†Vd
L =
Φ1UCKMΦ2, whereΦ1,2 are diagonal unitary matrices (thus,
containing only phases) that can be absorbed by appropri-
ate redeﬁnitions of the left handed ﬁelds. Finally,UCKM de-
pends on three angles and one phase that cannot be removed
by ﬁeld redeﬁnitions and accounts for the physical mixing
between quark generations and the CP violation [204, 205].
It is usually parameterized thus:
UCKM =
⎛
⎜⎝
c13c12 c13s12 s13e−iδ
−c23s12 − s23s13c12eiδ c23c12 − s23s13s12eiδ s23c13
s23s12 − c23s13c12eiδ −s23c12 − c23s13s12eiδ c23c13
⎞
⎟⎠,
(3.31)
wheresij = sinθij ,cij = cosθij andδis the CP-violating
phase. Experiments show a hierarchical structure in the off-
diagonal entries of the CKM matrix: |Vub|≪ Vcb ≪Vus ,
that can be well described by the following phenomeno-
logical parameterization of the CKM matrix, proposed by
Wolfenstein [206]. It reads
UCKM =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
1 − λ2
2 λA λ3(ρ− iη)
−λ 1 − λ2
2 Aλ2
Aλ3(1 − ρ− iη)−Aλ2 1
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
+ O
(
λ4)
, (3.32)
whereλis determined with a very good precision in semi-
leptonicK decays, givingλ≃ 0.23, and A is measured in
semileptonicB decays, givingA ≃ 0.82. The parametersρ
andηare more poorly measured, although a rough estimate
isρ≃ 0.1,η≃ 0.3[ 207].
3.2.2 Leptonic sector with Dirac neutrinos
A Dirac mass term for the neutrinos requires the existence
of three right handed neutrinos, which are singlets under the
standard model gauge group. In consequence, the leptonic
Lagrangian would contain in general a Majorana mass term
for the right handed neutrinos, which has to be forbidden by
imposing exact lepton number conservation. Then the lep-
tonic Lagrangian reads
Llep =ec
RiYe
ijLjH +νc
RiYν
ijLjH + h.c., (3.33)
whereLi =(νLi,eLi) are the left handed lepton doublets
andec
R andνc
R are respectively the right handed charged lep-
ton and neutrino singlets. Analogously to the quark sector,
the Yukawa couplings can be decomposed as
Ye =Ve
RDe
YVe
L
†, (3.34)
Yν=Vν
RDν
YVν
L
†, (3.35)
where Ve,ν
R do not have any physical effect, whereas the
Ve,ν
L have an effect in the charged current, that in the ba-
sis where the charged lepton and neutrino Yukawa couplings
are simultaneously diagonal reads
Jμ
cc =ec
L
γμ(1 − γ5)
2
(
Ve
L
†Vν
L
)
νL. (3.36)
As in the case of the quark sector, the matrix Ve
L
†Vν
L de-
pends on three angles and six phases and can be expressed
as Ve
L
†Vν
L =Φ1UPMNSΦ2. The matrices Φ1 and Φ2 can
be absorbed by appropriate redeﬁnitions of the left handed
ﬁelds, yielding a physical mixing matrix UPMNS [208, 209]
that depends on three angles and one phase, and that can
be parameterized by the same structure as for the quark
sector, ( 3.31). However, the values for the angles differ
substantially from the quark sector. The experimental val-
ues that result from the global ﬁt are sin 2θ12 = 0.26–0.36,
sin2θ23 = 0.38–0.63 and sin2θ13 ≤ 0.025 at 2σ[210, 211].
On the other hand, the CP-violating phase δis completely
unconstrained by present experiments.
In the theory under discussion the total lepton number
L =Le +Lμ+Lτis conserved, but the individual lep-
ton ﬂavorsLl ,l =e,μ,τ, are not, and LFV processes like
μ− → e− γdecay are allowed. For the neutrino massesmνj ,
j = 1, 2, 3, satisfying the existing upper limits obtained in
3Hβ-decay experiments,mj < 2.3e V ,t h eμ− → e− γde-
cay branching ratio is given by [212]
B(μ→ eγ)= 3α
32π
⏐⏐⏐⏐
∑
j
UPMNS
ej UPMNS∗
μj
m2
νj
M2
W
⏐⏐⏐⏐
2
, (3.37)
whereMW is the W ±-boson mass. Thus, the μ− → e− γ
decay rate is suppressed by the factor (mj/MW)4< 6.7 ×
10− 43, which renders it unobservable. The same conclusion
is valid for all other LFV decays and reactions in the min-
imal extension of the standard theory with light neutrino
masses we are considering. The only observable manifes-
tation of the non-conservation of the lepton charges Ll in
this theory is the oscillations of neutrinos.


--- Page 25 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 37
3.2.3 Leptonic sector with Majorana neutrinos
Neutrino masses can also be accommodated in the standard
model without extending the particle content, just by adding
a dimension ﬁve operator to the leptonic Lagrangian [213]:
Llep =ec
RiYe
ijLjH + 1
4κij(LiH)(LjH) + h.c. (3.38)
withκa3 × 3 complex symmetric matrix that breaks ex-
plicitly lepton number and that has dimensions of mass − 1.
Then, after the electroweak symmetry breaking, a Majorana
mass term for neutrinos is generated:
mν= 1
2κ
⟨
H 0⟩2. (3.39)
This term can be diagonalized as mν=Vν
L
∗DmνVν
L
†,s o
that the charged current reads as in ( 3.36), with Ve
L
†Vν
L =
Φ1UΦ2, where the matrixU has the form of the CKM ma-
trix, (3.31). The matrix Φ1 containing three phases can be
removed by a redeﬁnition of the left handed charged lepton
ﬁelds. However, due to the Majorana nature of the neutri-
nos, the matrixΦ2 cannot be removed and is physical, yield-
ing a leptonic mixing matrix UPMNS =UΦ2 that is deﬁned
by three angles and three phases [ 214, 215], one associated
toU, the “Dirac phase”, and two associated toΦ2, the “Ma-
jorana phases”.
In the leptonic Lagrangian given by ( 3.38) the origin of
the dimension ﬁve operator remains open. In the rest of this
section, we shall review the heavy Majorana singlet (right
handed) neutrino mass mechanism (type I see-saw) [ 216–
220] and the triplet Higgs mass mechanism (type II see-saw)
[215, 221–224] as the possible origins of this effective op-
erator. The third [ 225] tree level realization of the opera-
tor (3.38) via triplet fermion (type III see-saw) [ 226]i sd i s -
cussed in Sect. 4.1.
3.2.3.1 Type I see-saw In the presence of singlet right
handed neutrinos, the most general Lagrangian compatible
with the standard model gauge symmetry reads
Llep =ec
RiYe
ijLjH +νc
RiYν
ijLjH − 1
2νcT
RiMijνc
Rj + h.c.,
(3.40)
where lepton number is explicitly broken by the Majorana
mass term for the singlet right handed neutrinos. 9 The see-
saw mechanism is implemented when eig (M) ≫⟨H 0⟩.I f
this is the case, at low energies the right handed neutrinos
are decoupled and the theory can be well described by the
9Here we explicitly assume three generations of singlet neutrinos. For
the phenomenology of a large number of singlets as predicted by string
theories, see [227, 228].
effective Lagrangian for Majorana neutrinos, ( 3.38), with
[216–220]
κ= 2YνTM− 1Yν. (3.41)
Working in the basis where the charged lepton Yukawa ma-
trix and the right handed mass matrix are simultaneously
diagonal, it can be checked that the complete Lagrangian,
(3.40), contains ﬁfteen independent real parameters and six
complex phases [ 229]. Of these, three correspond to the
charged lepton masses, three to the right handed masses,
and the remaining nine real parameters and six phases, to
the neutrino Yukawa coupling. The independent parameters
of the neutrino Yukawa coupling can be expressed in several
ways. The most straightforward parameterization uses the
singular value decomposition of the neutrino Yukawa ma-
trix:
Yν=Vν
RDν
YVν
L
†, (3.42)
whereDν
Y = diag(yν
1,yν
2,yν
3), with yν
i ≥ 0 and yν
1 ≤ yν
2 ≤
yν
3 . On the other hand, Vν
L andVν
R are 3 × 3 unitary matri-
ces, that depend in general on three real parameters and six
phases. Both can be generically written asΦ1VΦ2, whereV
has the form of the CKM matrix andΦ1,2 are diagonal uni-
tary matrices (thus, containing only phases). One can check
that forVν
R theΦ2 matrix can be absorbed into the deﬁnition
ofVν
L , so that
Vν
R =
⎛
⎜⎝
eiαR
1
eiαR
2
1
⎞
⎟⎠
×
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
cR
2cR
3 cR
2sR
3 sR
2e−iδR
−cR
1sR
3 − sR
1sR
2cR
3eiδR
cR
1cR
3 − sR
1sR
2sR
3eiδR
sR
1cR
2
sR
1sR
3 − cR
1sR
2cR
3eiδR
−sR
1cR
3 − cR
1sR
2sR
3eiδR
cR
1cR
2
⎞
⎟⎟⎠.
(3.43)
Similarly, for VL theΦ1 matrix can be absorbed into the
deﬁnition ofL andeR, while keepingYe diagonal and real.
In consequence,
Vν
L =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
cL
2cL
3 cL
2sL
3 sL
2e−iδL
−cL
1sL
3 − sL
1sL
2cL
3eiδL
cL
1cL
3 − sL
1sL
2sL
3eiδL
sL
1cL
2
sL
1sL
3 − cL
1sL
2cL
3eiδL
−sL
1cL
3 − cL
1sL
2sL
3eiδL
cL
1cL
2
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
×
⎛
⎜⎝
eiαL
1
eiαL
2
1
⎞
⎟⎠. (3.44)
Therefore, in this parameterization the independent para-
meters in the Yukawa coupling can be identiﬁed with the
three Yukawa eigenvalues, yi , the three angles and three
phases in VL, and the three angles and three phases in


--- Page 26 ---
38 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
VR [229–231]. The requirement that the low energy phe-
nomenology is successfully reproduced imposes constraints
among these parameters. To be precise, the low energy lep-
tonic Lagrangian depends just on the three charged lepton
masses and the six real parameters and three complex phases
of the effective neutrino mass matrix. In consequence, there
are still six real parameters and three complex phases that
are not determined by low energy neutrino data; this infor-
mation about the high energy Lagrangian is “lost” in the de-
coupling of the three right handed neutrinos and cannot be
recovered just from neutrino experiments.
The ambiguity in the determination of the high energy
parameters can be encoded in the three right handed neu-
trino masses and an orthogonal complex matrix R deﬁned
as [232]
R =D− 1√
M YνUPMNSD− 1√ m
⟨
H 0⟩
, (3.45)
so that the most general Yukawa coupling compatible with
the low energy data is given by:
Yν=D√
MRD√ mU†
PMNS
⟨
H 0⟩
. (3.46)
It is straightforward to check that this equation indeed sat-
isﬁes the seesaw formula, ( 3.41). In this expression, D√ m
andD√
M are diagonal matrices whose entries are the square
roots of the light neutrino and the right handed neutrino
masses, respectively, andUPMNS is the leptonic mixing ma-
trix. It is customary to parameterizeR in terms of three com-
plex angles, ˆθi :
R =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
ˆc2 ˆc3 −ˆc1 ˆs3 −ˆs1 ˆs2 ˆc3 ˆs1 ˆs3 −ˆc1 ˆs2 ˆc3
ˆc2 ˆs3 ˆc1 ˆc3 −ˆs1 ˆs2 ˆs3 −ˆs1 ˆc3 −ˆc1 ˆs2 ˆs3
ˆs2 ˆs1 ˆc2 ˆc1 ˆc2
⎞
⎟⎟⎠, (3.47)
up to reﬂections, where ˆci ≡ cos ˆθi , ˆsi ≡ sin ˆθi .
Whereas the physical interpretation of the right handed
masses is very transparent, the meaning of R is more ob-
scure.R can be interpreted as a dominance matrix in the
sense that [233]
– R is an orthogonal transformation from the basis of the
left handed leptons mass eigenstates to the one of the right
handed neutrino mass eigenstates;
– if and only if an eigenvaluemi ofmνis dominated—in the
sense already given before - by one right handed neutrino
eigenstateNj , then |Rji |≈ 1;
– if a light pseudo-Dirac pair is dominated by a heavy
pseudo-Dirac pair, then the corresponding 2 × 2 sector
inR is a boost.
An interesting limit of this dominance behavior is the
seesaw model with two right handed neutrinos (2RHN)
[234, 235]. In this limit, the parameterization ( 3.46) still
holds, with the substitutions D√
M = diag(M− 1
1 ,M − 1
2 ) and
[236–239]
R =
( 0 cos ˆθξsin ˆθ
0 − sin ˆθξcos ˆθ
)
(normal hierarchy), (3.48)
R =
( cos ˆθξsin ˆθ0
− sin ˆθξcos ˆθ0
)
(inverted hierarchy), (3.49)
with ˆθa complex parameter andξ=± 1 a discrete parame-
ter that accounts for a discrete indeterminacy inR.
A third possible parameterization of the neutrino Yukawa
coupling uses the Gram–Schmidt decomposition, in order to
cast the Yukawa coupling as a product of a unitary matrix
and a lower triangular matrix [240]:
Yν=U△Y△ =U△
⎛
⎝
y11 00
y21 y22 0
y31 y32 y33
⎞
⎠, (3.50)
where the diagonal elements of Y△ are real. Three of the
six phases inU△ can be absorbed into the deﬁnition of the
charged leptons. Therefore, the nine real parameters and the
six phases of the neutrino Yukawa coupling are identiﬁed
with the three angles and three phases inU△ and the six real
parameters and three phases inY△.
In the SM extended with right handed neutrinos, the
charged lepton masses and the effective neutrino mass ma-
trix are the only source of information about the leptonic
sector. However, if supersymmetry is discovered, the struc-
ture of the low energy slepton mass matrices would provide
additional information about the leptonic sector, provided
the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking is speciﬁed. As-
suming that the slepton mass matrices are proportional to the
identity at the high energy scale, quantum effects induced by
the right handed neutrinos would yield at low energies a left
handed slepton mass matrix with a complicated structure,
whose measurement would provide additional information
about the seesaw parameters [ 144, 145]. To be more spe-
ciﬁc, in the minimal supersymmetric seesaw model the off-
diagonal elements of the low energy left handed and right
handed slepton mass matrices andA-terms read, in the lead-
ing log approximation [178]
(
m2
˜L
)
ij ≃− 1
8π2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
Yν
ik
†Yν
kj logMX
Mk
, (3.51)
(
m2
˜eR
)
ij ≃ 0, (3.52)
(Ae)ij ≃− 3
8π2A0YeYν
ik
†Yν
kj logMX
Mk
, (3.53)
where m0 and A0 are the universal soft supersymmetry
breaking parameters at high scale MX. Note that the diag-
onal elements of those mass matrices include the tree level
soft mass matrix, the radiative corrections from gauge and


--- Page 27 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 39
charged lepton Yukawa interactions, and the mass contribu-
tions from F- and D-terms (which are different for charged
sleptons and sneutrinos). Therefore, the measurement at low
energies of rare lepton decays, electric dipole moments and
slepton mass splittings would provide information about the
combination
Cij ≡
∑
k
Yν
ik
†Yν
kj logMX
Mk
≡
(
Y †
νLYν
)
ij, (3.54)
whereLij = logMX
Mi δij.
Interestingly enough,C encodes precisely the additional
information needed to reconstruct the complete seesaw La-
grangian from low energy observations [ 241, 242] (note in
particular thatC is a Hermitian matrix that depends on six
real parameters and three phases, which together with the
nine real parameters and three phases of the neutrino mass
matrix sum up to the independent ﬁfteen real parameters and
six complex phases inYνandM).
To determineYνandM from the low energy observables
C andmν, it is convenient to deﬁne
˜Yν= diag
(√
logMX
M1
,
√
logMX
M2
,
√
logMX
M3
)
Yν,
(3.55)
˜Mk =Mk logMX
Mk
,
so that the effective neutrino mass matrix andC now read
mν= ˜Yνtdiag
( ˜M− 1
1 , ˜M− 1
2 , ˜M− 1
3
)˜Yν⟨
H 0
u
⟩2,
(3.56)
C = ˜Yν† ˜Yν,
whereH 0
u is the neutral component of the up-type Higgs
doublet. Using the singular value decomposition ˜Yν=
˜Vν
R ˜Dν
Y ˜Vν†
L , one ﬁnds that ˜Vν†
L and ˜Dν
Y could be straight-
forwardly determined fromC, since
C ≡ ˜Yν† ˜Yν= ˜V †
L ˜D2
Y ˜VL. (3.57)
On the other hand, frommν= ˜Yνt˜D− 1
M ˜Yν⟨H 0
u ⟩2 and the sin-
gular value decomposition of ˜Yν,
˜D− 1
Y ˜V ∗
Lmν˜Vν†
L ˜Dν− 1
Y = ˜Vν∗
R ˜D− 1
M ˜Vν†
R , (3.58)
where the left hand side of this equation is known (mνis one
of our inputs, and ˜Vν
L and ˜Dν
Y were obtained from ( 3.57)).
Therefore, ˜Vν
R and ˜DM can also be determined. This sim-
ple procedure shows that starting from the low energy ob-
servablesmνandC it is possible to determine uniquely the
matrices ˜DM and ˜Yν= ˜Vν
R ˜Dν
Y ˜Vν†
L . Finally, inverting (3.56),
the actual parameters of the Lagrangian Mk andYνcan be
computed.
This procedure is particularly powerful in the case of the
two right handed neutrino model, as the number of inde-
pendent parameters involved (either at high energies or at
low energies) is drastically reduced. The matrix C deﬁned
in (3.54) depends in general on six moduli and three phases.
However, since the Yukawa coupling depends in the 2RHN
model on only three unknown moduli and one phase, so does
C, and consequently it is possible to obtain predictions on
the moduli of three C-matrix elements and the phases of
twoC-matrix elements. Namely, from (3.46) one obtains
U†CU =U† ˜Yν† ˜YνU =D√ mR† ˜DMRD√ m/
⟨
H 0
u
⟩2, (3.59)
where we have written U ≡ UPMNS. Since m1 = 0i nt h e
2RHN model, 10 it follows that (U†CU) 1i = 0, for i =
1, 2, 3, leading to three relations among the elements in C.
For instance, one could derive the diagonal elements inC in
terms of the off-diagonal elements:
C11 =− C∗
12U ∗
21 +C∗
13U ∗
31
U ∗
11
,
C22 =− C12U ∗
11 +C∗
23U ∗
31
U ∗
21
, (3.60)
C33 =− C13U ∗
11 +C23U ∗
21
U ∗
31
.
The observation of these correlations would be non-trivial
tests of the 2RHN model.
The relations for the phases arise from the hermiticity
ofC, since the diagonal elements inC have to be real. Tak-
ing as the independent phase the argument of C12, one can
derive from (3.60) the arguments of the remaining elements:
eiargC13 =
[
−i Im
(
C12U21U ∗
11
)
±
√
|C13|2|U11|2|U31|2 −
[
Im
(
C12U21U ∗
11
)]2]
×
[
|C13|U31U ∗
11
]− 1,
(3.61)
eiargC23 =
[
i Im
(
C12U21U ∗
11
)
±
√
|C23|2|U21|2|U31|2 −
[
Im
(
C12U21U ∗
11
)]2]
×
[
|C23|U31U ∗
21
]− 1,
where the ± sign has to be chosen so that the eigenvalues
ofC are positive. We conclude then that theC-matrix para-
metersC12, |C13| and |C23| can be regarded as independent
and can be used as an alternative parameterization of the
10Here we are assuming a neutrino spectrum with normal hierarchy. In
the case with inverted hierarchy, the analysis is similar, usingm3 = 0.


--- Page 28 ---
40 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
2RHN model [ 243]. Together with the ﬁve moduli and the
two phases of the neutrino mass matrix, we sum up to the
eight moduli and the three phases necessary to reconstruct
the high energy Lagrangian of the 2RHN model.
3.2.3.2 Type II seesaw The type II seesaw mechanism
[215, 221–224] consists on adding to the SM particle con-
tent a Higgs triplet
T =
(
T 0 − 1√
2T +
− 1√
2T + −T ++
)
. (3.62)
Then, the leptonic potential compatible with the SM gauge
symmetry reads
Llep =ec
RiYe
ijLjH +YT
ijLiTLj + h.c. (3.63)
From this Lagrangian, it is apparent that the tripletT carries
lepton number − 2. If the neutral component of the triplet
acquires a VEV and breaks lepton number spontaneously as
happens in the Gelmini–Roncadelli model [224], the associ-
ated massless majoron rules out the model. Therefore phe-
nomenology suggests to break lepton number explicitly via
the triplet coupling to the SM Higgs boson [244]. The most
general scalar potential involving one Higgs doublet and one
Higgs triplet reads
V =m2
HH †H + 1
2λ1
(
H †H
)2 +M2
TT †T + 1
2λ2
(
T †T
)2
+λ3
(
H †H
)(
T †T
)
+μ′H †TH †, (3.64)
where the term proportional to μ′ breaks lepton number
explicitly. The type II seesaw mechanism is implemented
whenMT ≫⟨H 0⟩. Then the minimization of the scalar po-
tential yields
⟨
H 0⟩2 ≃ −m2
H
λ1 − 2μ2
L//M2
T
,
⟨
T 0⟩
≃ −μ′⟨H 0⟩2
M2
T
, (3.65)
which produce Majorana masses for the neutrinos given by
mν=YT
−μ′⟨H 0⟩2
M2
T
. (3.66)
The Yukawa matrixYT has the same ﬂavor structure as the
non-renormalizable operatorκdeﬁned in ( 3.38)f o rt h ee f -
fective Lagrangian of Majorana neutrinos. Therefore, the pa-
rameterization of the type II seesaw model is completely
identical to that case.
Supersymmetric models with low scale triplet Higgses
have been extensively considered in studies of collider phe-
nomenology [ 245–247]. The model [ 244] was ﬁrst super-
symmetrized in Ref. [ 248] as a possible scenario for lepto-
genesis. The requirement of a holomorphic superpotential
implies introducing the triplets in a vector-like SU(2)W ×
U(1)Y representation, as T ∼ (3, 1) and ¯T ∼ (3, − 1).T h e
relevant superpotential terms are
1√
2
Yij
T LiTLj + 1√
2
λ1H1TH 1 + 1√
2
λ2H2 ¯TH 2
+MTT ¯T +μH2H1, (3.67)
whereLi are the SU(2)W lepton doublets and H1(H2) is
the Higgs doublet with hypercharge Y =− 1/2(1/2).D e -
coupling the triplet at high scale at the electroweak scale the
Majorana neutrino mass matrix is given by (v2 =⟨H2⟩)
mij
ν=Yij
T
v2
2λ2
MT
. (3.68)
Note that in the supersymmetric case there is only one mass
parameter,MT , while the mass parameter μ′ of the non-
supersymmetric version is absent.
The couplings YT also induce LFV in the slepton mass
matrix m2
˜L through renormalization group (RG) running
fromMX to the decoupling scaleMT [249]. In the leading-
logarithm approximation those are given by (i ̸=j):
(
m2
˜L
)
ij ≈ − 1
8π2
(
9m2
0 + 3A2
0
)(
Y †
TYT
)
ij logMX
MT
,
(
m2
˜eR
)
ij ≈ 0, (3.69)
(Ae)ij ≈ − 9
16π2A0
(
YeY †
TYT
)
ij logMX
MT
.
Phenomenological implications of those relations will be
presented in Sect. 5.
3.2.3.3 Renormalization of the neutrino mass matrix To
make a connection between high scale parameters and low
scale observables one needs to consider renormalization ef-
fects on neutrino masses and mixing. Below the scale where
the dimension ﬁve operator is generated, the running of the
neutrino mass matrix is governed by the renormalization
group (RG) equation of the coupling matrix κν, given by
[250–253]
(4π)2 d
d lnμκν=(4π)2Agκν+Ce
((
Y †
eYe
)T
κν+κνY †
eYe
)
,
(3.70)
whereCe =− 3/2 for the SM and Ce = 1 for the MSSM.
The ﬁrst term does not affect the running of the neutrino
mixing angles and CP violation phases; however, it affects
of course the running of the neutrino mass eigenvalues. The


--- Page 29 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 41
ﬂavor universal factorAg is given by
Ag =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
− 3α2(4π)+λ+ 2t r(3Y †
uYu + 3Y †
dYd +Y †
eYe)
SM,
− 2α1(4π)− 6α2(4π)+ tr(Y †
uYu) MSSM,
(3.71)
whereλdenotes the Higgs self-coupling constant and αi =
g2
i/(4π), whereg1 andg2 are theU(1)Y and SU(2) gauge
coupling constants, respectively.
Due to the smallness of the tau–Yukawa coupling in the
SM, the mixing angles are not affected signiﬁcantly by the
renormalization group running below the generation scale
of the dimension ﬁve operator. However, if the neutrino
mass matrix mν= ⟨φ⟩2
2 κνis realized in the seesaw sce-
nario (type I), running effects above and between the see-
saw scales can also lead to relevant running effects in the
SM. Note that in the MSSM case the running of the mixing
angles and CP violation phases can be large even below the
seesaw scales due to the possible enhancement of the tau–
Yukawa coupling by the factor(1 + tanβ2)1/2.
In order to understand generic properties of the RG evo-
lution and to estimate the typical size of the RG effects, it
is useful to consider RGEs for the leptonic mixing angles,
CP phases and neutrino masses themselves, which can be
derived from the RGE in ( 3.70). For example, below the
seesaw scales, up to O(θ13) corrections, the evolution of
the mixing angles in the MSSM is given by [ 254]( s e ea l s o
[255, 256])
dθ12
d lnμ= −y2
τ
32π2 sin 2θ12s2
23
|m1eiαM +m2|2
/Delta1m2
21
, (3.72)
dθ13
d lnμ= y2
τ
32π2 sin 2θ12 sin 2θ23
m3
/Delta1m2
31(1 +ζ)
×I(m 1,m 2,αM,βM,δ), (3.73)
dθ23
d lnμ= −y2
τ
32π2
sin 2θ23
/Delta1m2
31
[
c2
12
⏐⏐m2eiβM +m3eiαM
⏐⏐2
+s2
12
|m1eiβM +m3|2
1 +ζ
]
, (3.74)
whereI(m 1,m 2,αM,βM,δ)≡ m1 cos(βM − δ)− (1 +ζ)×
m2 cos(αM − βM +δ)− ζm3 cosδ, sij = sinθij , cij =
cosθij , and ζ=/Delta1m2
21//Delta1m2
31.H e r eyτdenotes the tau–
Yukawa coupling, and one can safely neglect the contri-
butions coming from the electron– and muon–Yukawa cou-
plings. For the matrixP containing the Majorana phases, we
use the conventionP = diag(1,eiαM/2,eiβM/2). In addition
to the above formulae, formulae for the running of the CP
phases have been derived [ 254]. For example, the running
of the Dirac CP-violating phase δ, observable in neutrino
oscillation experiments, is given by
dδ
d lnμ= Cy2
τ
32π2
δ(− 1)
θ13
+Cy2
τ
8π2δ(0) + O(θ13). (3.75)
The coefﬁcientsδ(− 1) andδ(0) are omitted here and can be
found in [ 254], where also formulae for the running of the
Majorana CP phases and for the neutrino mass eigenvalues
(mass squared differences) can be found. From (3.75), it can
be seen that the Dirac CP phase generically becomes more
unstable under RG corrections for smallerθ13.
In the seesaw scenario (type I), the SM or MSSM are
extended by heavy right handed neutrinos and their super-
partners, which are SM gauge singlets. Integrating them out
below their mass scalesMR yields the dimension ﬁve oper-
ator for neutrino masses in the SM or MSSM. Above MR,
the neutrino Yukawa couplings are active, and the RGEs in
the MSSM above the scalesMR are
(4π)2 dκν
d lnμ=
{
− 6
5α1(4π)− 6α2(4π)+ 2t r
(
Y †
νYν
)
+ 6t r
(
Y †
uYu
)}
κν+
(
Y †
eYe
)T
κν+κν
(
Y †
eYe
)
+
(
Y †
νYν
)T
κν+κν
(
Y †
νYν
)
, (3.76)
(4π)2dMR
d lnμ= 1
8π2
[(
YνY †
ν
)
MR +MR
(
YνY †
ν
)T]
, (3.77)
(4π)2 dYν
d lnμ=− Yν
[ 3
5α1(4π)+ 3α2(4π)
− tr
(
3Y †
uYu +Y †
νYν
)
− 3Y †
νYν− Y †
eYe
]
. (3.78)
For non-degenerate seesaw scales, a method for dealing with
the effective theories, where the heavy singlets are partly
integrated out, can be found in [ 257]. Analytical formulae
for the running of the neutrino parameters above the seesaw
scales are derived in [258, 259]. The two loop beta functions
can be found in Ref. [260].
The running correction to the neutrino mass matrix and
its effects on the related issue have been widely analyzed
(see e.g. [250–279]). We shall summarize below some of the
features of RG running of the neutrino mixing parameters in
the MSSM (cf. (3.72)–(3.74)).
– The RG effects are enhanced for relatively large tan β,
because the tau–Yukawa coupling becomes large.
– The mixing angles are comparatively stable with respect
to the RG running in the case ofnormal hierarchical neu-
trino mass spectrum, m1 ≪m2 ≪m3 even when tanβ
is large [261–267]. Nevertheless, the running effects can


--- Page 30 ---
42 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
have important implications facing the high precision of
future neutrino oscillation experiments.
–F o rm1 ≳ 0.05 eV and the case of tan β≳ 10, the RG
running effects can be rather large and the leptonic mixing
angles can run signiﬁcantly. Particularly, the RGE effects
can be very large for the solar neutrino mixing angle θ12
[261–267, 274, 275].
– The solar neutrino mixing angle θ12 at MR depends
strongly on the Majorana phaseαM [254, 267, 268, 275],
which is the relative phase betweenm1 andm2, and plays
very important role in the predictions of the effective
Majorana mass in (ββ)0ν-decay. The effect of RG run-
ning for θ12 is smallest for the CP-conserving odd case
αM =±π, while it is signiﬁcant for the CP-conserving
even case αM = 0. For αM = 0 and tanβ∼ 50, for in-
stance, we have tan 2θ12(MR) ≲ 0.5 × tan2θ12(MZ) for
m1 ≳ 0.02 eV .
– The RG running effect on θ12 due to theτ–Yukawa cou-
pling always makesθ12(MZ) larger thanθ12(MR) [267].
This constrains the models which predict the value of so-
lar neutrino mixing angle at MR,θ12(MR)>θ12(MZ).
For example, the bi-maximal models are strongly re-
stricted. However, the running effects due to the neutrino
Yukawa couplings are free from this feature [257]. Thus,
bi-maximal models can predict the correct value of neu-
trino mixing angles with the neutrino Yukawa contribu-
tions [269–272].
– The RG corrections to neutrino mixing angles depend
strongly on the deviation of the seesaw parameter matrix
R (3.45) from identity [ 274]. For hierarchical light neu-
trinos,m1 ≲ 0.01 eV , tanβ≲ 30 and R non-trivial, the
correction toθ23 andθ13 can be beyond their likely future
experimental errors while θ12 is quite stable against the
RG corrections [274].
– The correction to θ23 can be large when m1 and/or tanβ
are/is relatively large, e.g., (i) when m1 ≳ 0.2e Vi f
tanβ≲ 10, and (ii) for anym1 andαM if tanβ≳ 40 [274,
275].
– The RG corrections to sinθ13 can be relatively small, even
for the large tan βifm1 ≲ 0.05 eV , and for any m1 ≳
0.30 eV , ifθ13(MZ) ∼= 0 andαM ∼= 0 (withβM =δ= 0).
ForαM =πand tanβ∼ 50 one can have sinθ13(MR) ≳
0.10 for m1 ≳ 0.08 eV even if sin θ13(MZ) = 0[ 274,
275].
–F o r t a nβ≳ 30, the value of/Delta1m2
21(MR) depends strongly
onm1 in the interval m1 ≳ 0.05 eV , and onαM ,βM ,δ,
ands13 form1 ≳ 0.1 eV . The dependence of/Delta1m2
31(MR)
onm1 and the CP phases is rather weak, unless tan β≳
40,m1 ≳ 0.10 eV , ands13 ≫ 0.05 [275].
– Some products of the neutrino mixing parameters, such
ass12c12c23(m1/m2 − eiαM) are practically stable with
respect to RG running if one neglects the ﬁrst and sec-
ond generation charged lepton Yukawa couplings ands13
[268, 273, 275].
3.2.4 Quark–lepton complementarity
3.2.4.1 Golden complementarity Quark–lepton comple-
mentarity [280–282] is based on the observation that θ12 +
θC is numerically close toπ/4. Hereθ12 is the solar neutrino
mixing angle andθC is the Cabibbo angle. For hierarchical
light neutrino masses this result is relatively stable against
the renormalization effects [ 274]. To illustrate the idea we
ﬁrst review the model of exact golden complementarity.
Consider the following textures [ 283] for the light neu-
trino Majorana mass matrix mνand for the charged lepton
Yukawa couplingsYe:
mν=
⎛
⎝
0 m 0
mm 0
00 matm
⎞
⎠,
(3.79)
Ye =
⎛
⎝
λe 00
0 λμ/
√
2 λτ/
√
2
0 −λμ/
√
2 λτ/
√
2
⎞
⎠.
It just assumes some texture zeroes and some strict equal-
ities among different entries. The mass eigenstates of the
neutrino mass matrix are given by m1 =− m/ϕ,m2 =mϕ,
m3 =matm, whereϕ=(1 +
√
5)/2 = 1 + 1/ϕ≈ 1.62 is
known as the golden ratio [284]. Thanks to its peculiar math-
ematical properties this constant appears in various natural
phenomena, possibly including solar neutrinos. The three
neutrino mixing angles obtained from (3.79)a r eθatm =π/4,
θ13 = 0 and, more importantly,
tan2θ12 = 1/ϕ2 = 0.382, i.e. sin 2 2θ12 = 4/5, (3.80)
in terms of the parameter sin2 2θ12 directly measured by vac-
uum oscillation experiments, such as KamLAND. This pre-
diction forθ12 is 1.4σbelow the experimental best ﬁt value.
A positive measurement ofθ13 might imply that the predic-
tion forθ12 suffers an uncertainty up toθ13.
Those properties follow from the Z 2 ⊗ Z′
2 symmetry of
the neutrino mass matrix. ExplicitlyRmνRT =mν, where
R =
⎛
⎝
− 1/
√
52 /
√
50
2/
√
51 /
√
50
00 1
⎞
⎠,R ′ =
⎛
⎝
10 0
01 0
00 − 1
⎞
⎠,
(3.81)
and the rotations satisfy det R =− 1, R ·RT = 1 and
R ·R = 1. The ﬁrst Z2 is a reﬂection along the diagonal
of the golden rectangle in the (1, 2) plane, see Fig. 2.T h e
second Z′
2 is the L3 →− L3 symmetry. Those symmetries
allow contributions proportional to the identity matrix to be
added to mν. This property allows one to extend this type
symmetries to the quark sector.


--- Page 31 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 43
A seesaw model with singlet neutrinos satisfying the
Z2 ⊗ Z′
2 symmetry and giving rise to the mass matrix (3.79)
is presented in [283].
Noticing that the golden prediction ( 3.80) satisﬁes with
high accuracy the quark–lepton complementarity motivates
one to give a golden geometric explanation also to the
Cabibbo angle. SU(5) uniﬁcation relates the down-quark
Yukawa matrix Yd to Ye and suggests that the up-quark
Yukawa matrixYu is symmetric, like mν. One can there-
fore assume that Yd is diagonal in the two ﬁrst genera-
tions and thatYu is invariant under aZ2 reﬂection described
by a matrix analogous to R in (3.81), but with the factors
1 ↔ 2 exchanged. Figure 2 illustrates the geometrical mean-
ing of two reﬂection axis (dashed lines): the up-quark re-
ﬂection is along the diagonal of the golden rectangle tilted
byπ/4; note also the connection with the decomposition of
the golden rectangle as an inﬁnite sum of squares (‘golden
spiral’). Similarly to the neutrino case, this symmetry al-
lows for two independent terms that can be tuned such that
mu ≪mc:
Yu =λ
⎛
⎝
100
010
001
⎞
⎠+ λ√
5
⎛
⎝
− 210
12 0
00 c
⎞
⎠. (3.82)
The second term ﬁxes cotθC =ϕ3, as can be geometrically
seen from Fig. 2. We therefore have
sin2 2θC = 1/5i . e . θ12 +θC =π/4i . e .
(3.83)
Vus = sinθC =
(
1 +ϕ6)− 1/2 = 0.229.
This prediction is 1 .9σabove the present best-ﬁt value,
sinθC = 0.2258 ± 0.0021. However, as the basic elements
Fig. 2 Geometrical illustration of the connection between the predic-
tions for θ12 andθC and the golden rectangle. The two dashed lines
are the reﬂection axis of theZ2 symmetry for the neutrino mass matrix
and for the up quark mass matrix
of ﬂavor presented here follow by construction from the
2 × 2 submatrices, one naturally expects that the golden
prediction for Vus has an uncertainty at least comparable
to |Vub|∼| Vtd |∼ few × 10− 3. Thus the numerical accu-
racy is amazing. Should the 1.4σdiscrepancy between the
golden prediction (3.80) and the experimental measurement
hold after ﬁnal SNO and KamLAND results, analogy with
the quark sector would allow one to predict the order of mag-
nitude of neutrino mixing angleθ13.
Interestingly, similar predictions on the mixing angles
are obtained if some suitably chosen assumptions are made
on the properties of neutral currents of quarks and lep-
tons [285].
3.2.4.2 Correlation matrix fromS3 ﬂavor symmetry in GUT
On more general phenomenological ground the quark–
lepton complementarity [281, 282] can be described by the
correlation matrix VM between the CKM and the PMNS
mixing matrices,
VM =UCKMΩUPMNS, (3.84)
whereΩ= diag(eiωi) is a diagonal matrix. In the singlet
seesaw mechanism the correlation matrix VM diagonalizes
the symmetric matrix
C =mdiag
D Vν
R
† 1
MVν
R
⋆mdiag
D , (3.85)
whereM is the heavy neutrino Majorana mass matrix and
Vν
R diagonalizes the neutrino Dirac matrix mD from the
right. In GUT models such as SO(10) orE6 we have in-
triguing relations between the Yukawa coupling of the quark
sector and the one of the lepton sector. For instance, in min-
imal renormalizable SO(10) with Higgs in the 10, 126, and
120,w eh a v eYe ≈ YT
d . In fact the ﬂavor symmetry implies
the structure of the Yukawa matrices: the equivalent entries
ofYe andYd are usually of the same order of magnitude. In
such a case one gets
UPMNS =
(
UCKM)†VM.
As a consequence, aS3 ﬂavor permutation symmetry, softly
broken intoS2, gives us the prediction ofVM
13 = 0[ 286] and
the correlations between CP-violating phases and the mixing
angleθ12 [287].
The six generators of the S3 ﬂ a v o rs y m m e t r ya r et h ee l -
ements of the permutation group of three objects. The ac-
tion of S3 on the ﬁelds is to permute the family label of
the ﬁelds. In the following we shall introduce the S2 sym-
metry with respect the second and third generations. The
S2 group is an Abelian one and swap the second fam-
ily {μL,(νμ)L,sL,cL,μR,(νμ)R,sR,cR } with the third one
{τL,(ντ)L,bL,tL,τR,(ντ)R,bR,tR }.


--- Page 32 ---
44 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Let us assume that there is anS3 ﬂavor symmetry at high
energy, which is softly broken intoS2 [84]. In this case, be-
fore theS3 breaking all the Yukawa matrices have the fol-
lowing structure:
Y =
⎛
⎝
abb
bab
bba
⎞
⎠, (3.86)
wherea andb independent. TheS3 symmetry implies that
(1/
√
3, 1/
√
3, 1/
√
3) is an eigenvector of our matrix in
(3.86). Moreover these kind of matrices have two equal
eigenvalues. This gives us an undetermined mixing angle in
the diagonalizing mixing matrices.
WhenS3 is softly broken intoS2, one gets
Y =
⎛
⎝
abb
bcd
bdc
⎞
⎠, (3.87)
with c ≈ a and d ≈ b. When S3 is broken the degener-
acy is removed. In general the S2 symmetry implies that
(0, 1/
√
2, − 1/
√
2) is an exact eigenvector of our matrix
(3.87). The fact that S3 is only softly broken into S2 al-
lows us to say that (1/
√
3, 1/
√
3, 1/
√
3) is still in a good
approximation an eigenvector ofY in (3.87). Then the mix-
ing matrix that diagonalize from the right the Yukawa mix-
i n gm a t r i xi n(3.87) is given in good approximation by the
tri-bi-maximal mixing matrix (2.11).
Let us now investigate the VM in this model. The mass
matrixmD will have the general structure in ( 3.87). To be
more deﬁned, let us assumed that there is an extra softly
brokenZ2 symmetry under which the 1st and the 2nd fam-
ilies are even, while the 3rd family is odd. This extra softly
brokenZ2 symmetry gives us a hierarchy between the off-
diagonal and the diagonal elements of mD,i . e .b,d ≪a,c .
In fact ifZ2 is exact bothb andd are zero. For simplicity, we
assume also a quasi-degenerate spectrum for the eigenvalues
of the Dirac neutrino matrix as in [288].
The right handed neutrino Majorana mass matrix is of the
form
M =
⎛
⎝
abb ′
bcd
b′ de
⎞
⎠. (3.88)
BecauseS3 is only softly broken into S2 we have that a ≈
c ≈ e, andb ≈ b′ ≈ d. In this approximation the M matrix
is diagonalized by aU of the form in (2.11). In this case we
have thatmνis near to be S3 andS2 symmetric, then it is
diagonalized by a mixing matrixUνnear the tri-bi-maximal
one given in (2.11). The C matrix is diagonalized by the mix-
ing matrix VM =UνU. We obtain that VM is a rotation in
the(1, 2) plane, i.e. it contains a zero in the(1, 3) entry. As
s h o w ni n[288], it is possible to ﬁt the CKM and the PMNS
mixing matrix within this model.
3.3 Leptogenesis and cosmological observables
3.3.1 Basic concepts and results
CP violation in the leptonic sector can have profound cos-
mological implications, playing a crucial role in the genera-
tion, via leptogenesis, of the observed baryon number asym-
metry of the universe [289]:
nB
nγ
=
(
6.1+0.3
− 0.2
)
× 10− 10. (3.89)
In the original framework a CP asymmetry is generated
through out-of-equilibriumL-violating decays of heavy Ma-
jorana neutrinos [290] leading to a lepton asymmetryL ̸= 0.
In the presence of sphaleron processes [ 291], which are
(B +L)-violating and(B − L)-conserving, the lepton asym-
metry is partially transformed to a baryon asymmetry.
The lepton number asymmetry resulting from the decay
of heavy Majorana neutrinos,εNj , was computed by several
authors [292–294]. The evaluation ofεNj , involves the com-
putation of the interference between the tree level diagram
and one loop diagrams for the decay of the heavy Majorana
neutrinoNj into charged leptonsl±
α(α=e,μ,τ). Summing
the asymmetriesεα
Nj over charged lepton ﬂavor, one obtains
εNj = g2
MW 2
∑
α,k̸=j
[
Im
((
m†
D
)
jα(mD)αk
(
m†
DmD
)
jk
)
× 1
16π
(
I(xk) +
√ xk
1 − xk
)] 1
(m†
DmD)jj
, (3.90)
whereMk denote the heavy neutrino masses, the variable
xk is deﬁned as xk = Mk2
Mj 2 and I(xk) = √ xk(1 +(1 +
xk) log( xk
1+xk)).F r o m(3.90) it can be seen that, when one
sums over all charged leptons, the lepton number asymme-
try is only sensitive to the CP-violating phases appearing in
m†
DmD in the basis where MR is diagonal. Note that this
combination is insensitive to rotations of the left-hand neu-
trinos.
If the lepton ﬂavors are distinguishable in the ﬁnal state,
it is the ﬂavored asymmetries that are relevant [ 295–298].
BelowT ∼ 1012 GeV , theτYukawa interactions are fast
compared to the Hubble rate, so at least one ﬂavor may
be distinguishable. The asymmetry in family α, generated
from the decay of thekth heavy Majorana neutrino depends
on the combination [ 299]I m((m†
DmD)kk′(m∗
D)αk(mD)αk′)
as well as on Im ((m†
DmD)k′k(m∗
D)αk(mD)αk′). Summing
over all leptonic ﬂavorsαthe second term becomes real so
that its imaginary part vanishes and the ﬁrst term gives rise
to the combination Im((m†
DmD)jk(m†
DmD)jk) that appears
in (3.90). Clearly, when one works with separate ﬂavors the
matrixUPMNS does not cancel out and one is lead to the


--- Page 33 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 45
interesting possibility of having viable leptogenesis even in
the case ofR being a real matrix [300–303].
The simplest leptogenesis scenario corresponds to the
case of heavy hierarchical neutrinos where M1 is much
smaller thanM2 andM3. In this limit, the asymmetries gen-
erated byN2 andN3 are frequently ignored, because the pro-
duction ofN2 andN3 can be suppressed by kinematics (for
instance, they are not produced thermally, if the re-heat tem-
perature after inﬂation is <M2,M 3), and the asymmetries
from their decays are partially washed out [ 295, 304, 305].
In this hierarchical limit, theεα
N1 can be simpliﬁed into
εα
N1 ≃− 3
16πv2
(
Iα
12
M1
M2
+Iα
13
M1
M3
)
, (3.91)
where
Iα
1i ≡ Im[(m†
D)1α(mD)αi(m†
DmD)1i ]
(m†
DmD)11
. (3.92)
The ﬂavor-summed CP asymmetry εN1 can be written in
terms of the parameterization equation (3.46)a s
εN1 ≈− 3
8π
M1
v2
∑
im2
i Im(R2
1i)∑
imi |R1i |2 . (3.93)
In this case, obviously, leptogenesis demands non-zero
imaginary parts in the R matrix. It has an upper bound
|εN1 |<εDI
N1 where [306]
εDI
N1 = 3
8π
(m3 − m1)M1
v2 , (3.94)
which is proportional toM1. So the requirement of generat-
ing a sufﬁcient baryon asymmetry gives a lower bound on
M1 [306, 307]. Depending on the cosmological scenario,
the range for minimal M1 varies from order 10 7 GeV to
109 GeV [308, 309]. This bound does not move much with
the inclusion of ﬂavor effects [ 296, 310, 311]. In a super-
symmetric world there is an upper bound TRH< 108 GeV
on the re-heating temperature of the universe from the pos-
sible overproduction of gravitinos, the so called gravitino
problem [312–315]. Together with the lower bound on M1
the gravitino problem puts severe constraints on supersym-
metric thermal leptogenesis scenarios.
However, the upper bound ( 3.94) is based on the (nat-
ural) assumption that higher order corrections suppressed by
M1/M2,M 1/M3 in (3.90) are negligible. This may not be
true as explicitly demonstrated in [ 316] in which neutrino
mass model is presented realizingεN1 ≫εDI
N1 . In such a case
low scale standard thermal leptogenesis consistent with the
gravitino bound is possible also for hierarchical heavy neu-
trinos.
Thermal leptogenesis is a rather involved thermodynami-
cal non-equilibrium process and depends on additional para-
meters and on the proper treatment of thermal effects [309].
In the simplest case, theNi are hierarchical, andN1 decays
into a combination of ﬂavors which are indistinguishable.11
In this case, the baryon asymmetry only depends on four pa-
rameters [306, 308, 318, 319]: the mass M1 of the lightest
heavy neutrino, together with the corresponding CP asym-
metryεN1 in its decay, as well as the rescaledN1 decay rate,
or effective neutrino mass ˜m1 deﬁned as
˜m1 =
∑
α
(
m†
D
)
1α(mD)α1/M1, (3.95)
in the weak basis where MR is diagonal, real and positive.
Finally, the baryon asymmetry depends also on the sum of
all light neutrino masses squared,m2 =m2
1 +m2
2 +m2
3, since
it has been shown that this sum controls an important class
of washout processes. If lepton ﬂavors are distinguishable,
the ﬁnal baryon asymmetry depends on partial decay rates
˜mα
1 and CP asymmetriesϵα
1 .
The N1 decays in the early universe at temperatures
T ∼ M1, producing asymmetries in the distinguishable ﬁnal
states. A particular asymmetry will survive once washout
by inverse decays go out of equilibrium. In the unﬂa-
vored calculation (where lepton ﬂavors are indistinguish-
able), the fraction of the asymmetry that survives is of order
min{1,H/Γ}, where the Hubble rateH and theN1 total de-
cay rateΓare evaluated atT =M1. This is usually written
H/Γ=m∗/ ˜m1, where [320–322]
m∗ = 16π5/2
3
√
5
g1/2
∗
v2
MPlanck
≃ 10− 3 eV, (3.96)
andMPlanck is the Planck mass (MPlanck = 1.2 × 1019 GeV),
v =⟨φ0⟩/
√
2 ≃ 174 GeV is the weak scale and g∗ is the
effective number of relativistic degrees of freedom in the
plasma and equals 106.75 in the SM case. In a ﬂavored cal-
culation, the fraction of a ﬂavor asymmetry that survives can
be estimated in the same way, replacingΓby the partial de-
cay rate.
3.3.2 Implications of ﬂavor effects
For a long time the ﬂavor effects in thermal leptogene-
sis were known [ 295] but their phenomenological implica-
tions were considered only in speciﬁc neutrino ﬂavor mod-
els [235]. As discussed, in the single-ﬂavor calculation, the
most important parameters for thermal leptogenesis fromN1
decays are M1, ˜m1,ϵN1 and the light neutrino mass scale.
Including ﬂavor effects gives this parameter space more di-
mensions (M1,ϵα, ˜mα
1 ), but it can still be projected ontoM1,
˜m space. For the readers convenience we summarize here
11This can occur above ∼ 1012 GeV , before theτYukawa interaction
becomes fast compared to the Hubble rate, or in the case where theN1
decay rate is faster than the charged lepton Yukawa interactions [317].


--- Page 34 ---
46 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
some general results on the implications of ﬂavored lepto-
genesis.
In the unﬂavored calculation, leptogenesis does not work
for degenerate light neutrinos with a mass scale above
∼ 0.1e V[ 323–326]. This bound does not survive in the ﬂa-
vored calculation, where models with a neutrino mass scale
up to the cosmological bound, ∑mν< 0.68 eV [327], can
be tuned to work [296, 317].
Considering the scale of leptogenesis, ﬂavored leptoge-
nesis works for M1 a factor of ∼ 3 smaller in the “inter-
esting” region of ˜m<m atm. But the lower bound on M1,
in the optimized ˜m region, remains ∼ 109 GeV [310, 311].
A smaller M1 could be possible for very degenerate light
neutrinos [296].
An important, but disappointing, observation in single-
ﬂavor leptogenesis was the lack of a model-independent
connection between CP violation for leptogenesis and
PMNS phases. It was shown [ 328, 329] that thermal lep-
togenesis can work with no CP violation in UPMNS, and
conversely, that leptogenesis can fail in spite of phases in
UPMNS. In the “ﬂavoured” leptogenesis case, it is still true
that the baryon asymmetry is not sensitive to PMNS phases
[330, 331] (leptogenesis can work for any value of the
PMNS phases). However, interesting observations can be
made in classes of models [297, 300, 302, 331].
3.3.3 Other scenarios
We have presented a brief discussion of minimal thermal
leptogenesis in the context of type I seesaw with hierarchical
heavy neutrinos. This scenario is the most popular one be-
cause it is generic, supported by neutrino mass mechanism
and, most importantly, it has predictions for the allowed see-
saw parameter space, as described above. There are many
other scenarios in which leptogenesis may also be viable.
Resonant leptogenesis [ 293, 332] may occur when two
or more heavy neutrinos are nearly degenerate in mass and
in this scenario the scale of the heavy neutrino masses can
be lowered whilst still being compatible with thermal lepto-
genesis [332–335]. Heavy neutrinos of TeV scale or below
could in principle be detected at large colliders [336]. In the
seesaw context low scale heavy neutrinos may follow from
extra symmetry principles [334, 337–339]. Also, the SM ex-
tensions with heavy neutrinos at TeV scale or below include
Kaluza–Klein modes in models with extra dimensions or ex-
tra matter content of little Higgs models.
Leptogenesis from the out-of-equilibrium decays of a
Higgs triplet [244, 340, 341] is another viable scenario but
requires the presence of at least two triplets for non-zero
CP asymmetry. Despite the presence of gauge interactions
the washout effects in this scenario are not drastically larger
than those in the singlet leptogenesis scenario [341]. Hybrid
leptogenesis from type I and type II seesaw can for instance
occur in SO(10) models [340, 342, 343]. In that case there
are twelve independent CP-violating phases.
“Soft leptogenesis” [344, 345] can work in a one genera-
tional SUSY seesaw model because CP violation in this sce-
nario comes from complex supersymmetry breaking terms.
If the soft SUSY-breaking terms are of suitable size, there is
enough CP violation in ˜N– ˜N∗ mixing to imply the observed
asymmetry. Unlike non-supersymmetric triplet Higgs lepto-
genesis, soft leptogenesis with a triplet scalar [341, 346] can
also work in the minimal supersymmetric model of type II
seesaw mechanism.
A very predictive supersymmetric leptogenesis scenario
is obtained if the sneutrino is playing the role of inﬂaton
[307, 347–350]. In this scenario the universe is dominated
by ˜N. Relating ˜N properties to neutrino masses via the see-
saw mechanism implies a lower bound TRH> 106 GeV on
the re-heating temperature of the universe [349]. A connec-
tion of this scenario with LFV is discussed in Sect. 5.2.
Dirac leptogenesis is another possibility considered in the
literature. In this case neutrinos are of Dirac type rather than
Majorana. In the original paper [ 351] two Higgs doublets
were required and their decays create the leptonic asym-
metry. Recently some authors have studied the connection
between leptogenesis and low energy data with two Higgs
doublets [352].
Finally, let us mention that right handed neutrinos could
have been produced non-thermally in the early universe, by
direct couplings to the inﬂation ﬁeld. If this is the case,
the constraints on neutrino parameters from leptogenesis de-
pend on the details of the inﬂationary model [353–355].
For a recent overview of the present knowledge of
neutrino masses and mixing and what can be learned
about physics beyond the standard model from the vari-
ous proposed neutrino experiments, see [ 4] and references
therein.
4 Organizing principles for ﬂavor physics
4.1 Grand uniﬁed theories
Grand uniﬁcation is an attempt to unify all known inter-
actions but gravity in a single simple gauge group. It is
motivated in part by the arbitrariness of electromagnetic
charge in the standard model. One has charge quantiza-
tion in a purely non-Abelian theory, without an U(1) fac-
tor, as in Schwinger’s original idea [ 356]o fa SU(2) the-
ory of electroweak interactions. The minimal gauge group
which uniﬁes weak and strong interactions, SU(5) [357],
automatically implies a quantized U(1) piece too. While
Dirac needed a monopole to achieve charge quantization
[358], grand uniﬁcation in turn predicts the existence of
magnetic monopoles [359, 360]. Since it uniﬁes quarks and


--- Page 35 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 47
leptons [361], it also predicts another remarkable phenom-
enon: the decay of the proton. Here we are mostly interested
in GUT implications on the ﬂavor structure of Yukawa ma-
trices.
4.1.1 SU(5): the minimal theory
The 24 gauge bosons reduce to the 12 ones of the SM plus
a SU(2) doublet, color triplet pair (Xμ,Yμ) (vector lepto-
quarks), withY = 5/6 (charges +4/3, +1/3) and their an-
tiparticles. The 15 fermions of a single family in the SM ﬁt
in the 5F and 10 F anomaly-free representations of SU(5),
and the new super-weak interactions of leptoquarks with
fermions are (α,βandγare color indices):
L(X,Y) = g5√
2
X(− 4/3)α
μ
×
(
¯eγμdc
α+ ¯dαγμec − ϵαβγucβγμuγ)
− g5√
2
Y(− 1/3)α
μ
×
(
¯νγμdc
α+¯uαγμec +ϵαβγucβγμdγ)
+ h.c., (4.1)
where all fermions above are explicitly left handed and
ψc ≡ C ¯ψT .
The exchange of the heavy gauge bosons leads to the ef-
fective interactions suppressed by two powers of their mass
mX (mX ≃mY due to SU(2)L symmetry), which preserves
B − L, but breaks both B andL symmetries and leads to
(d = 6) proton decay [ 213, 362]. From τP ≳ 6 × 1033 yr
[363],mX ≳ 1015.5 GeV .
The Higgs sector consists of an adjoint 24 H and a fun-
damental 5H , the ﬁrst breaks SU(5) → SM, the latter com-
pletes the symmetry breaking á la Weinberg–Salam. Now,
5H =(T,D) , where T is a color triplet and D the usual
Higgs SU(2)L doublet of the SM and so the Yukawa inter-
actions in the matrix form
LY = 10Fyu10F5H + 5Fyd 10F5∗
H (4.2)
give the quark and lepton mass matrices
mu =yu⟨D⟩,m d =mT
e =yd ⟨D⟩. (4.3)
Note the correlation between down quarks and charged
leptons [ 364], valid at the GUT scale, and impossible to
be true for all three generations. Actually, in the SM it is
wrong for all of them. It can be corrected by an extra Higgs,
45H [6], or higher dimensional non-renormalizable interac-
tion [7].
From (4.2), one gets also the interactions of the triplet,
which lead to proton decay and thus the triplet T must be
superheavy,mT ≳ 1012 GeV . The enormous split between
mT andmD ≃mW can be achieved through the large scale
of the breaking of SU(5),
⟨24H ⟩= vX diag(2, 2, 2, − 3, − 3), (4.4)
withm2
X =m2
Y = 25
4g2
5v2
X. This ﬁne-tuning is known as the
doublet–triplet problem. Whatever solution one may adopt,
the huge hierarchy can be preserved in perturbation theory
only by supersymmetry with low scale breaking of order
TeV.
The consistency of grand uniﬁcation requires that the
gauge couplings of the SM unify at a single scale, in a
tiny window 1015.5 ≲MGUT ≲ 1018 GeV (lower limit from
proton decay, upper limit from perturbativity, i.e. to stay
belowMPl). Here the minimal ordinary SU(5) theory de-
scribed above fails badly, while the version with low en-
ergy supersymmetry does great [ 365–368]. Actually, one
needed a heavy top quark [ 368], with mt ≃ 200 GeV in
order for the theory to work. The same is needed in order
to achieve a radiative symmetry breaking of the SM gauge
symmetry, where only the Higgs doublet becomes tachy-
onic [369, 370]. One can then deﬁne the minimal supersym-
metric SU(5) GUT with the three families of fermions 10 F
and 5F, and with 24H and 5H and 5H supermultiplets. It
predictsmd =mT
e atMGUT, which works well for the third
generation; the ﬁrst two can be corrected by higher dimen-
sional operators. Although this theory typically has a very
fastd = 5[ 150, 371–374] proton decay [375], the higher di-
mensional operators can easily make it in accord with exper-
iments [376–378]. The main problem are massless neutri-
nos, unless one breaks R-parity (whose approximate or ex-
act conservation must be assumed in supersymmetricSU(5),
contrary to some supersymmetric SO(10)). Other ways out
include adding singlets, right handed neutrinos (type I see-
saw [216–220]), or a 15H multiplet (type II see-saw [ 215,
221–223]). In both cases their Yukawa are not connected to
the charged sector, so it is much more appealing to go to
SO(10) theory, which uniﬁes all fermions (of a single fam-
ily) too, besides the interactions.
Before we move to SO(10), what about ordinary non-
supersymmetric SU(5)? In order to have mν̸= 0 and to
achieve the uniﬁcation of gauge couplings one can add ei-
ther (a) 15H Higgs multiplet [379]o r( b )2 4F fermionic mul-
tiplet [380]. The latter one is particularly interesting, since it
leads to the mixing of the type I and type III see-saw [ 225,
226], with the remarkable prediction of a light SU(2) fermi-
onic triplet below TeV and MGUT ≤ 1016 GeV , which of-
fers hope both for the observable see-saw at LHC and de-
tectable proton decay in a future generation of experiments
now planned [381].
These fermionic triplets TF would be produced in pairs
through a Drell–Yan process. The production cross section
for the sum of all three possible ﬁnal states, T +
F T −
F ,T +
F T 0
F


--- Page 36 ---
48 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
andT −
F T 0
F , can be read from Fig. 42 of [382]: it is approxi-
mately 20 pb for 100 GeV triplet mass, and around 40 fb for
500 GeV triplets. The triplets then decay into W orZ and
a light lepton through the same Yukawa couplings that enter
into the seesaw.
The clearest signature would be the three charged lepton
decay of the charged triplet, but it has only a 3% branching
ratio. A more promising situation is the decay into two jets
with SM gauge boson invariant mass plus a charged lepton:
this happens in approximately 23% of all decays. The signa-
tures in this case is two same charge leptons plus two pairs
of jets having theW orZ mass and peaks in the lepton-dijet
mass. From the above estimates the cross section for such
events is around 1 pb (2fb) for 100 (500) GeV triplet mass.
Such signatures were suggested originally inL–R symmet-
ric theories [383] but are quite generic of the seesaw mech-
anism.
4.1.2 SO(10): the minimal theory of matter and gauge
coupling uniﬁcation
There are a number of features that make SO(10) special:
– a family of fermions is uniﬁed in a 16 dimensional spino-
rial representation; this in turn predicts the existence of
right handed neutrinos, making the implementation of the
see-saw mechanism almost automatic;
– L–R symmetry [361, 384–386] is a ﬁnite gauge transfor-
mation in the form of charge conjugation. This is a conse-
quence of both left handed fermions fL and its charged
conjugated counterparts (fc)L ≡ CfT
R residing in the
same representation 16F;
– in the supersymmetric version, the matter parity M =
(− 1)3(B−L), equivalent to the R-parityR =M(− 1)2S ,i s
a gauge transformation [387–389], a part of the centreZ4
of SO(10). In the renormalizable version of the theory it
remains exact at all energies [ 390–392]. The lightest su-
persymmetric partner (LSP) is then stable and is a natural
candidate for the dark matter of the universe;
– its other maximal subgroup, besides SU(5) ×U(1),i s
GPS = SU(2)L × SU(2)R × SU(4)C quark–lepton sym-
metry of Pati and Salam, which plays an important role in
relating quark and lepton masses and mixings;
– the uniﬁcation of gauge couplings can be achieved even
without supersymmetry (for a recent and complete work
and references therein, see [393, 394]).
Fermions belong to the spinor representation 16 F (for
useful reviews on spinors and SO(2N) group theory in gen-
eral see [395–399]). From
16 × 16 = 10 + 120 + 126, (4.5)
the most general Yukawa sector in general contains 10 H ,
120H and 126H , respectively the fundamental vector repre-
sentation, the three-index antisymmetric representation and
the ﬁve-index antisymmetric and anti-self-dual representa-
tion. 126H is necessarily complex, supersymmetric or not;
10H and 126H Yukawa matrices are symmetric in genera-
tion space, while the 120H one is antisymmetric.
The decomposition of the relevant representations under
GPS gives
16 =(2, 1, 4) +(1, 2, ¯4),
10 =(2, 2, 1) +(1, 1, 6),
120 =(2, 2, 1) +(3, 1, 6) +(1, 3, 6) +(2, 2, 15) (4.6)
+(1, 1, 10) +(1, 1, 10),
126 =(3, 1, 10) +(1, 3, 10) +(2, 2, 15) +(1, 1, 6).
The see-saw mechanism, whether type I or II, requires
126: it contains both(1, 3, 10) whose VEV gives a mass to
νR (type I), and (3, 1, 10), which contains a color singlet,
B − L = 2 ﬁeldΔL, that can give directly a small mass to
νL (type II). In SU(5) language this is seen from the decom-
position
126 = 1 + 5 + 15 + 45 + 50. (4.7)
The 1 of SU(5) belongs to the(1, 3, 10) ofGPS and gives a
mass forνR, while 15 corresponds to the(3, 1, 10) and gives
the direct mass toνL.
126 can be a fundamental ﬁeld, or a composite of two
16H ﬁelds (for some realistic examples see for example
[400–402]), or can even be induced as a two-loop effective
representation built out of a 10H and two gauge 45 dimen-
sional representations [403–405].
Normally the light Higgs is chosen to be the smallest
one, 10H . Since ⟨10H ⟩=⟨ (2, 2, 1)⟩ is a SU( 4)C singlet,
md =me follows immediately, independently of the num-
ber of 10H . Thus we must add either 120 H or 126H or
both in order to correct the bad mass relations. Both of these
ﬁelds contain(2, 2, 15), which VEV alone gives the relation
me =− 3mT
d .
As 126H is needed anyway for the see-saw, it is natural
to take this ﬁrst. The crucial point here is that in general
(2, 2, 1) and(2, 2, 15) mix through ⟨(1, 3, 10)⟩ [222, 406]
and thus the light Higgs is a mixture of the two. In other
words, ⟨(2, 2, 15)⟩ in 126H is in general non-vanishing (in
supersymmetry this is not automatic, but depends on the
Higgs superﬁelds needed to break SO(10) atMGUT or on
the presence of higher dimensional operators).
If one considers all the operators allowed by SO(10) for
the Yukawa couplings, there are too many model parame-
ters, and so no prediction is really possible. One option
is to assume that the minimal number of parameters must
be employed. It has been shown that 4 (3 of them non-
renormalizable) operators are enough in models with 10 and
45 Higgs representations only [8]. Although this is an impor-
tant piece of information and it has been the starting point of


--- Page 37 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 49
a lot of model building, it is difﬁcult to see a reason for some
operators (of different dimensions) to be present and other
not, without using some sort of ﬂavor symmetry, so these
type of models will not be considered in this subsection. On
the other hand, a self consistent way of truncating the large
number of SO(10) allowed operators without relying on ex-
tra symmetries is to consider only the renormalizable ones.
This is exactly what we shall assume.
In this case there are just two ways of giving mass toνR:
by a nonzero VEV of the Higgs 126, or generate an effec-
tive non-renormalizable operator radiatively [403]. We shall
consider in turn both of them.
4.1.2.1 Elementary 126H It is rather appealing that 10 H
and 126H may be sufﬁcient for all the fermion masses, with
only two sets of symmetric Yukawa coupling matrices. The
mass matrices atMGUT are
md =vd
10Y10 +vd
126Y126, (4.8)
mu =vu
10Y10 +vu
126Y126, (4.9)
me =vd
10Y10 − 3vd
126Y126, (4.10)
mν=− mDM− 1
R mD +mνL, (4.11)
where
mD =vu
10Y10 − 3vu
126Y126, (4.12)
MR =vRY126, (4.13)
mνL =vLY126. (4.14)
These relations are valid at MGUT, so it is there that their
validity must be tested. The analysis done so far used the
results of renormalization group running fromMZ toMGUT
from [407, 408].
The ﬁrst attempts in ﬁtting the mass matrices assumed the
domination of the type I seesaw. It was pioneered by treating
CP violation perturbatively in a non-supersymmetric frame-
work [406], and later improved with a more detailed treat-
ment of complex parameters and supersymmetric low en-
ergy effective theory [409–411]. Nevertheless, these ﬁts had
problems to reproduce correctly the PMNS matrix parame-
ters.
A new impetus to the whole program was given by the
observation that in case type II seesaw dominates (a way
to enforce it is to use a 54 dimensional Higgs representation
[412]) the neutrino mass, an interesting relation in these type
of models between b–τuniﬁcation and large atmospheric
mixing angle can be found [413–415]. The argument is very
simple and it can be traced to the relation [416]
mν∝ md − me, (4.15)
which follows directly from (4.8), (4.10) and (4.14), if only
the second term (type II) in ( 4.11) is considered. Consid-
ering only the heaviest two generations as an example and
taking the usually good approximation of small second gen-
eration masses and small mixing angles, one ﬁnds all the
elements of the right-hand side small except the 22 element,
which is proportional to the difference of two big numbers,
mb − mτ. Thus, a large neutrino atmospheric mixing angle
is linked to the smallness of this 22 matrix element, and so to
b–τuniﬁcation. Note that in these types of modelsb–τuni-
ﬁcation is no more automatic due to the presence of the126,
which breaks SU(4)C . It is, however, quite a good prediction
of the RGE running in the case of low energy supersymme-
try.
The numerical ﬁtting was able to reproduce also a large
solar mixing angle both in case of type II [ 417, 418]o r
mixed seesaw [ 419], predicting also a quite large |Ue3|≈
0.16 mixing element, close to the experimental upper bound.
The difﬁculty in ﬁtting the CKM CP-violating phase in the
ﬁrst quadrant was overcome by new solutions found in [420,
421], maintaining the prediction of large |Ue3|≥ 0.1m a t r i x
element.
All these ﬁttings were done assuming no constraints com-
ing from the Higgs sector. Regarding it, it was found that
the minimal supersymmetric model [ 422–424] has only 26
model parameters [425], on top of the usual supersymmetry
breaking soft terms, as in the MSSM. When one considers
this minimal model, the VEVs in the mass formulae ( 4.8)–
(4.14) are not completely arbitrary, but are connected by the
restrictions of the Higgs sector. This has been ﬁrst noticed in
[426–428] showing a possible clash with the positive results
of the unconstrained Yukawa sector studied in [ 420, 421].
The issue has been pursued in [429], showing that in the re-
gion of parameter space where the fermion mass ﬁtting is
successful, there are necessarily intermediate scale thresh-
olds which spoil perturbativity of the RGE evolution of the
gauge couplings.
To deﬁnitely settle the issue, two further checks should
be done. (a) The χ2 analysis used in the ﬁtting procedure
should be implemented at MZ, not at MGUT. The point is
in fact that while the errors at MZ are uncorrelated, they
become strongly correlated after running to MGUT, due to
the large Yukawa coupling of top and possibly also of bot-
tom, tau and neutrino. (b) Another issue is to consider also
the effect of the possible increased gauge couplings on the
Yukawas. Only after these two checks will be done, this min-
imal model could be ruled out.
A further important point is that in the case of VEVs
constrained by the Higgs sector one ﬁnds from the charged
fermion masses that the model predicts large tan β≃ 40,
as conﬁrmed by the last ﬁts in [ 429]. In this regime there
may be sizable corrections to the “down” fermion mass ma-
trices from the soft SUSY breaking parameters [ 430]; this


--- Page 38 ---
50 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
brings into the game also the soft SUSY breaking sector,
lowering somewhat the predictivity but relaxing the difﬁ-
culty in ﬁtting the experimental data. In this scenario pre-
dictions on masses would become predictions on the soft
sector.
Some topics have to be still mentioned in connection with
the above: the important calculation of the mass spectrum
and Clebsch–Gordan coefﬁcients inSO(10) [399, 431–439],
the doublet–triplet splitting problem [ 440, 441], the Higgs
doublet mass matrix [ 399, 433], the running of the gauge
couplings at two loops together with threshold corrections
[434], and the study of proton decay [435, 442, 443].
What if this model turns out to be wrong? There are other
models on the market. The easiest idea is to add a 120 di-
mensional Higgs, that may also appear as a natural choice,
being the last of the three allowed representations that cou-
ple with fermions. There are three different ways of doing
it considered in the literature: (a) take 120 as a small, non-
leading, contribution, i.e. a perturbation to the previous for-
mulae [444–446]; (b) consider 120 on an equal footing as
10 and 126, but assume some extra discrete symmetry or real
parameters in the superpotential, breaking CP spontaneously
[447–450] (and suppressing in the ﬁrst two references the
dangerousd = 5 proton decay modes); (c) assume small126
contributions to the charged fermion masses [451–454].
Another limit is to forget the 10H altogether, as has been
proposed for non-supersymmetric theories [ 455]. The two
generation study predicts a too small ratiomb/mτ≈ 0.3, in-
stead of the value 0.6 that one gets by straight running. The
idea is that this could get large corrections due to Dirac neu-
trino Yukawas [456] and the effect of ﬁnite second genera-
tion masses, as well as the inclusion of the ﬁrst generation
and CP-violating phases. This is worth pursuing for it pro-
vides an alternative minimal version ofSO(10), and after all,
supersymmetry may not be there.
4.1.2.2 Radiative 126H The original idea [ 403] is that
there is no 126H representation in the theory, but the same
operator is generated by loop corrections. The representa-
tion that breaks the rank of SO(10) is now 16H , which VEV
we callMΛ. Generically there is a contribution to the right-
handed neutrino mass at two loops:
MR ≈
( α
4π
) 2 M2
Λ
MGUT
MSUSY
MGUT
Y10, (4.16)
which is too small in low energy supersymmetry (low break-
ing scale MSUSY) as well as non-supersymmetric theories
(MSUSY =MGUT, but low intermediate scale MΛrequired
by gauge coupling uniﬁcation). The only exception, pro-
posed in [404], could be split supersymmetry [457, 458].
In the absence of126H , the charged fermion masses must
be given by only 10H and 120H [404], together with radia-
tive corrections. The simplest analysis of the tree order two
generation case gives three interesting predictions-relations
[405, 459]: (1) almost exact b–τuniﬁcation; (2) large at-
mospheric mixing angle related to the small quarkθbc mix-
ing angle; (3) somewhat degenerate neutrinos. For a serious
numerical analysis one needs to use the RGE for the case
of split supersymmetry, taking a very small tanβ<1 to get
an approximateb–τuniﬁcation [458]. One needs also some
ﬁne-tuning of the parameters to account for the small ra-
tioMSUSY/MGUT ≤ 10−(3− 4) required in realistic models
to have gluinos decay fast enough [460].
4.2 Higher dimensional approaches
Recently, in the context of theories with extra spatial di-
mensions, some new approaches toward the question of
SM fermion mass hierarchy and ﬂavor structure have arisen
[461–468]. For instance, the SM fermion mass spectrum
can be generated naturally by permitting the quark/lepton
masses to evolve with a power-law dependence on the mass
scale [465, 466]. The most studied and probably most at-
tractive idea for generating a non-trivial ﬂavor structure is
the displacement of various SM fermions along extra dimen-
sion(s). This approach is totally different from the one dis-
cussed in Sect. 2, as it is purely geometrical and thus does
not rely on the existence of any novel symmetry in the short
distance theory. The displacement idea applies to the scenar-
ios with large ﬂat [467]o rs m a l lw a r p e d[468] extra dimen-
sion(s), as we develop in the following subsections.
4.2.1 Large extra dimensions
In order to address the gauge hierarchy problem, a sce-
nario with large ﬂat extra dimensions has been proposed by
Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali (ADD) [ 469–471],
based on a reduction of the fundamental gravity scale down
to the TeV scale. In this scenario, gravity propagates in the
bulk whereas SM ﬁelds live on a 3-brane. One could as-
sume that this 3-brane has a certain thickness L along an
extra dimension (as for example in [ 472]). Then SM ﬁelds
would feel an extra dimension of size L, exactly as in a
universal extra dimension (UED) model [ 473] (where SM
ﬁelds propagate in the bulk) with one extra dimension of
sizeL.12
In such a framework, the SM fermions can be localized
at different positions along this extra dimension L. Then
the relative displacements of quark/lepton wave function
peaks produce suppression factors in the effective four-
dimensional Yukawa couplings. These suppression factors
12The constraint from electroweak precision measurements is R− 1 ≳
2–5 TeV , the one from direct search at LEP collider is L− 1 ≳ 5T e V
and the expected LHC sensitivity is aboutL− 1 ∼ 10 TeV .


--- Page 39 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 51
being determined by the overlaps of fermion wave func-
tions (getting smaller as the distance between wave func-
tion peaks increases), they can vary with the fermion ﬂavors
and thus induce a mass hierarchy. This mechanism was ﬁrst
suggested in [ 467] and its variations have been studied in
[474–484].
Let us describe this mechanism more precisely. The
fermion localization can be achieved through either non-
perturbative effects in string/M theory or ﬁeld-theoretical
methods. One ﬁeld-theoretical possibility is to couple the
SM fermion ﬁelds Ψi(xμ,x 5) [i = 1,..., 3 being the fam-
ily index andμ= 1,..., 4 the usual coordinate indexes] to
ﬁve dimensional scalar ﬁelds with VEV Φi(x5) depending
on the extra dimension (parameterized byx5).13 Indeed, chi-
ral fermions are conﬁned in solitonic backgrounds [ 485]. If
the scalar ﬁeld proﬁle behaves as a linear function of the
formΦi(x5) = 2μ2x5 − mi around its zero-crossing point
x0
i =mi/2μ2, the zero-mode of ﬁve dimensional fermion
acquires a Gaussian wave function of typical width μ− 1
and centered at x0
i along the x5 direction:Ψ(0)
i (xμ,x 5) =
Ae−μ2(x5−x0
i)2
ψi(xμ), ψi(xμ) being the four-dimensional
fermion ﬁeld and A =(2μ2/π)1/4 a normalization factor.
Then the four-dimensional Yukawa couplings between the
ﬁve dimensional SM Higgs bosonH and zero-mode fermi-
ons, obtained by integration onx5 over the wall widthL,14
SYukawa =
∫
d5x
√
LκH(xμ,x 5) ¯Ψ(0)
i (xμ,x 5)Ψ(0)
j (xμ,x 5)
=
∫
d4xYijh(xμ) ¯ψi(xμ)ψj(xμ), (4.17)
are modulated by the following effective coupling constants,
Yij =
∫
dx5κA2e−μ2(x5−x0
i)2
e−μ2(x5−x0
j)2
=κe− μ2
2 (x0
i −x0
j)2
. (4.18)
It can be considered as natural to have a ﬁve dimensional
Yukawa coupling constant equal to
√
Lκ, where the dimen-
sionless parameter κis universal (in ﬂavor and nature of
fermions) and of order unity, so that the ﬂavor structure
is mainly generated by the ﬁeld localization effect through
the exponential suppression factor in (4.18). The remarkable
feature is that, due to this exponential factor, large hierar-
chies can be created among the physical fermion masses,
even for all fundamental parametersmi of order of the same
energy scaleμ.
13Although we concentrate here on the case with only one extra dimen-
sion, for simplicity, the mechanism can be directly extended to more
extra dimensions.
14Here, the factor
√
L compensates with the Higgs component
alongx5, since the Higgs boson is not localized.
This mechanism can effectively accommodate all the
data on quark and charged lepton masses and mixings [486–
488]. In case that right handed neutrinos are added to the SM
so that neutrinos acquire Dirac masses (as those originating
from Yukawa couplings (4.17)), neutrino oscillation experi-
ment results can also be reproduced [ 472]. The ﬁne-tuning,
arising there on relative x0
i parameters, turns out to be im-
proved when neutrinos get Majorana masses instead [ 489]
(see also [235, 490]).
4.2.2 Small extra dimensions
Another type of higher-dimensional scenario solving the
gauge hierarchy problem was suggested by Randall and
Sundrum (RS) [ 491, 492]. There, the unique extra dimen-
sion is warped and has a size of order M− 1
Pl (MPl being the
reduced Planck mass:MPl = 2.44 ×1018 GeV) leading to an
effective gravity scale around the TeV . In the initial version,
gravity propagates in the bulk and SM particles are all stuck
on the TeV-brane. An extension of the original RS model
was progressively proposed [493–497], motivated by its in-
teresting features with respect to the gauge coupling uniﬁ-
cation [498–503] and dark matter problem [ 504, 505]. This
new set-up is characterized by the presence of SM ﬁelds,
except the Higgs boson (to ensure that the gauge hierarchy
problem does not re-emerge), in the bulk.
In this RS scenario with bulk matter, a displacement
of SM fermions along the extra dimension is also possi-
ble [ 468]: the effect is that the effective four-dimensional
Yukawa couplings are affected by exponential suppression
factors, originating from the wave function overlaps be-
tween bulk fermions and Higgs boson (conﬁned on our TeV-
brane). If the fermion localization depends on the ﬂavor and
nature of fermions, then the whole structure in ﬂavor space
can be generated by these wave function overlaps. In partic-
ular, if the top quark is located closer to the TeV-brane than
the up quark, then its overlap with the Higgs boson, and thus
its mass after electroweak symmetry breaking, is larger rela-
tively to the up quark (for identical ﬁve dimensional Yukawa
coupling constants).
More precisely, the fermions can acquire different local-
izations if each ﬁeldΨi(xμ,x 5) is coupled to a distinct ﬁve
dimensional mass mi :
∫
d4x
∫
dx5
√
Gm i ¯ΨiΨi , G being
the determinant of the RS metric. To modify the location
of fermions, the masses mi must have a non-trivial depen-
dence on x5, like mi = sign(x5)cik, where ci are dimen-
sionless parameters and 1/k is the curvature radius of anti-
de Sitter space. Then the ﬁelds decompose as,Ψi(xμ,x 5) =∑∞
n=0ψ(n)
i (xμ)fi
n(x5) [n labeling the tower of Kaluza–
Klein (KK) excitations], admitting the following solution
for the zero-mode wave function, fi
0(x5) =e(2−ci)k|x5|/Ni
0,
whereNi
0 is a normalization factor.


--- Page 40 ---
52 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
The Yukawa interactions with the Higgs bosonH read
SYukawa =
∫
d5x
√
G
(
Y(5)
ij H ¯Ψ+iΨ−j + h.c.
)
=
∫
d4xMij ¯ψ(0)
Li ψ(0)
Rj + h.c. +··· . (4.19)
The Y(5)
ij are the ﬁve dimensional Yukawa coupling con-
stants and the dots stand for KK mass terms. The fermion
mass matrix is obtained after integrating:
Mij =
∫
dx5
√
GY(5)
ij Hfi
0(x5)fj
0(x5). (4.20)
TheY(5)
ij can be chosen almost universal so that the quark/
lepton mass hierarchies are mainly governed by the over-
lap mechanism. Large fermion mass hierarchies can be pro-
duced for fundamental mass parameters mi all of order of
the unique scale of the theoryk ∼ MPl.
With this mechanism, the quark masses and CKM mix-
ing angles can be effectively accommodated [ 506–508], as
well as the lepton masses and PMNS mixing angles in both
cases where neutrinos acquire Majorana masses (via either
dimension ﬁve operators [ 509] or the see-saw mechanism
[510]) and Dirac masses (see [511], and [512, 513] for order
unity Yukawa couplings leading to mass hierarchies essen-
tially generated by the geometrical mechanism).
4.2.3 Sources of FCNC in extra dimension scenarios
GIM-violating FCNC effects in extra dimension scenarios
may appear both from tree level and from loop effects.
At tree level FCNC processes can be induced by ex-
changes of KK excitations of neutral gauge bosons. The
neutral current action of the effective four-dimensional cou-
pling, between SM fermions ψ(0)
i (xμ) and KK excitations
of any neutral gauge boson A(n)
μ(xμ), reads in the interac-
tion basis
SNC =gSM
L
∫
d4x
∞∑
n=1
¯ψ(0)
Li γμC(n)
Lijψ(0)
LjA(n)
μ+{L ↔ R}.
(4.21)
Therefore, FCNC interactions can be induced by the non-
universality of the effective coupling constantsgSM
L/R ×Ci(n)
0
between KK modes of the gauge ﬁelds and the three SM
fermion families (which have different locations alongx5).
At the loop level, KK fermion excitations may invali-
date the GIM cancellation, as discussed e.g. in [ 511, 514]
forℓ±
α→ ℓ±
βγ. Indeed, these excitations have KK masses
which are not negligible (and thus not quasi-degenerate in
family space) compared to mW ± . The GIM mechanism is
also invalidated by the loop contributions of the KK W ±(n)
modes which couple (KK level by level), e.g. to leptons in
the four-dimensional theory, via an effective mixing matrix
of type V eff
MNS =Ul†
L C(n)
L Uν
L being non-unitary due to the
non-universality of
C(n)
L ≡ diag
(
C1(n)
m ,C 2(n)
m ,C 3(n)
m
)
. (4.22)
In this diagonal matrix, Ci(n)
m quantiﬁes the wave func-
tion overlap along the extra dimension between the W ±(n)
[n ≥ 1] and exchanged ( mth level KK) fermion fi
m(x5)
[i ={ 1, 2, 3} being the generation index] (see below for
more details).
The GIM mechanism for leptons can be clearly restored
if the three coefﬁcientsCi(n)
m as well as the three KK fermion
massesmi(m)
KK are equal to each other, i.e. are universal with
respect toi ={ 1, 2, 3} (KK level by level) [515]. Within the
quark sector, on the other hand, the top quark mass cannot
be totally neglected relatively to the KK up-type quark ex-
citation scales, leading to a mass shift of the KK top quark
mode from the rest of the KK up-type quark modes and re-
moving the degeneracy among three family masses of the up
quark excitations at ﬁxed KK level (with regard tomW ±(n) ).
Moreover, this means that the Yukawa interaction with the
Higgs boson induces a substantial mixing of the top quark
KK tower members among themselves [481, 516].
For example, the data on b → sγ(receiving a contribu-
tion from the exchange of aW ±(n) [n = 0, 1,... ] gauge ﬁeld
and an up quark, or its KK excitations, at one loop-level) can
be accommodated in the RS model withm(W ±(1)) ≃ 1T e V ,
a ss h o w ni n[515] using numerical methods for the diagonal-
ization of a large dimensional mass matrix and taking into
account the top quark mass effects described previously.
4.2.4 Mass bounds on Kaluza–Klein excitations
In this subsection we develop constraints on the KK gauge
boson masses derived from the tree level FCNC effect de-
scribed above. Our purpose is to determine whether these
constraints still allow the KK gauge bosons to be sufﬁciently
light to imply potentially visible signatures at LHC.
4.2.4.1 Large extra dimensions Let us consider the gener-
ic framework of a ﬂat extra dimension, with a large size L,
along which gravity as well as gauge bosons propagate. The
SM fermions are located at different points of the ﬁfth di-
mension, so that their mass hierarchy can be interpreted in
term of the geometrical mechanism described in details in
Sect. 4.2.1. In such a framework the exchange of the KK
excitations of the gluon can bring important contributions
to the K0– ¯K0 mixing (/Delta1F= 2) at tree level. Indeed, the
KK gluon can couple thed quark with thes quark, if these
light down-quarks are displaced along the extra dimension.
The obtained KK contribution to the mass splitting/Delta1mK in


--- Page 41 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 53
the kaon system depends on the KK gluon coupling between
thes andd quarks (which is ﬁxed by quark locations) and
mainly on the mass of the ﬁrst KK gluon M(1)
KK. Assuming
that thes,d quark locations are such that the ms ,md mass
values are reproduced, the obtained/Delta1mK and also |εK | are
smaller than the associated experimental values for, respec-
tively,
M(1)
KK ≳ 25 TeV, and M(1)
KK ≳ 300 TeV, (4.23)
as found by the authors of [ 517]. The same bound coming
from theD0 meson system is weaker.
In the lepton sector the experimental upper limit on the
branching ratio B(μ→ eee) imposes typically the con-
straint [517]
M(1)
KK ≳ 30 TeV, (4.24)
since the exchange of the KK excitations of the electroweak
neutral gauge bosons contributes to the decayμ→ eee.
To conclude, we stress that if the extra dimensions treat
families in a non-universal way (which could explain the
fermion mass hierarchy), the indirect bounds from FCNC
physics like the ones in ( 4.23)–(4.24) force the mass of the
KK gauge bosons to be far from the collider reach. As a
matter of fact, the LHC will be able to probe the KK excita-
tions of gauge bosons only up to 6–7 TeV [ 518–521]i nt h e
present context.
4.2.4.2 Small extra dimensions In the context of the RS
model with SM ﬁelds in the bulk, described in Sect. 4.2.2,
the exchange of KK excitations of neutral gauge bosons (like
e.g. the ﬁrst Z0 excitation:Z(1)) also contributes to FCNC
processes at tree level [ 468, 507, 522–526] since these KK
states possess FC couplings if the different families of fermi-
ons are displaced along the warped extra dimension. There
exist some conﬁgurations of fermion locations, pointed out
in [513], which simultaneously reproduce all quark/lepton
masses and mixing angles via the wave function effects
and lead to amplitudes of FCNC reactions [ lα→ lβlγlγ,
Z0 → lαlβ,P 0 − ¯P 0 mixing of a generic mesonP ,μ–e con-
version,K0 → lαlβandK+ → π+νν] compatible with the
corresponding experimental constraints even for light neu-
tral KK gauge bosons:
M(1)
KK ≳ 1T e V. (4.25)
The explanation of this result is the following. If the SM
fermions with different locations are localized typically
close to the Planck-brane, they have quasi-universal cou-
plingsCi(n)
0 [cf. (4.21)] with the KK gauge bosons which
have a wave function almost constant along the ﬁfth dimen-
sion near the Planck-brane. Therefore, small FC couplings
are generated in the physical basis for these fermions lead-
ing to the weak bound ( 4.25). The fermions from the third
family, associated to heavy ﬂavors, cannot be localized ex-
tremely close to the Planck-brane since their wave function
overlap with the Higgs boson [conﬁned on the TeV-brane]
must be large in order to generate high effective Yukawa
couplings. Nevertheless, this is compensated by the fact that
phenomenological FCNC constraints are usually less severe
in the third generation sector.
As a result, the order of lower limits on M(1)
KK com-
ing from the considerations on both fermion mass data and
FCNC processes can be as low as TeV . From the purely the-
oretical point of view, the favored order of magnitude for
M(1)
KK is O(1) TeV which corresponds to a satisfactory solu-
tion for the gauge hierarchy problem. From the model build-
ing point of view one has to rely on an appropriate extension
of the RS model insuring that, for light KK masses, the devi-
ations of the electroweak precision observables do not con-
ﬂict with the experimental results. The existing RS exten-
sions, like the scenarios with brane-localized kinetic terms
for fermions [527] and gauge bosons [ 528]( s e e[529, 530]
for the localized gauge boson kinetic terms and [531]f o rt h e
fermion ones), or the scenarios with an extended gauge sym-
metry (see [ 532–534] for different fermion charges under
this broken symmetry), allowM(1)
KK to be as low as ∼ 3T e V .
In such a case, one can expect a direct detection of the KK
excited gauge bosons at LHC.
4.3 Minimal ﬂavor violation in the lepton sector
4.3.1 Motivations and basic idea
Within the SM the dynamics of ﬂavor-changing transitions
is controlled by the structure of fermion mass matrices. In
the quark sector, up and down quarks have mass eigen-
values which are up to 10 5 times smaller than the elec-
troweak scale, and mass matrices which are approximately
aligned. This results in the effective CKM and GIM suppres-
sions of charged and neutral ﬂavor violating interactions, re-
spectively. Forcing this connection between the low energy
fermion mass matrices and the ﬂavor-changing couplings to
be valid also beyond the SM, leads to new-physics scenarios
with a high level of predictivity (in the ﬂavor sector) and a
natural suppression of ﬂavor-changing transitions. The latter
achievement is a key ingredient to maintain a good agree-
ment with experiments in models where ﬂavored degrees of
freedom are expected around the TeV scale.
This is precisely the idea behind the minimal ﬂavor vi-
olation principle [ 535–537]. It is a fairly general hypothe-
sis that can be implemented in strongly-interacting theories
[535], low energy supersymmetry [ 536, 537], multi-Higgs
[537, 538] and GUT [ 539] models. In a model indepen-
dent formulation, the MFV construction consists in iden-
tifying the ﬂavor symmetry and symmetry breaking struc-
ture of the SM and enforce it in a more general effec-
tive theory (written in terms of SM ﬁelds and valid above


--- Page 42 ---
54 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
the electroweak scale). In the quark sector this procedure
is unambiguous: the largest group of ﬂavor changing ﬁeld
transformations commuting with the gauge group is Gq =
SU(3)QL × SU(3)uR × SU(3)dR , and this group is broken
only by the Yukawa couplings. The invariance of the SM La-
grangian under Gq can be formally recovered elevating the
Yukawa matrices to spurion ﬁelds with appropriate transfor-
mation properties under Gq . The hypothesis of MFV states
that these are the only spurions breaking Gq also beyond
the SM. Within the effective theory formulation, this im-
plies that all the higher dimensional operators constructed
from SM and Yukawa ﬁelds must be (formally) invariant
under Gq . The consequences of this hypothesis in the quark
sector have been extensively analyzed in the literature (see
e.g. Refs. [540, 541]). Without entering into the details, we
can state that the MFV hypothesis provides a plausible ex-
planation of why no new-physics effects have been observed
so far in the quark sector.
Apart from arguments based on the analogy with quarks,
and despite the scarce experimental information, the deﬁni-
tion of a minimal lepton ﬂavor violation (MLFV) principle
[542] is demanded by a severe ﬁne-tuning problem in LFV
decays of charged leptons. Within a generic effective theory
approach, the radiative decaysli → ljγproceed through the
following gauge-invariant operator
δRL
ij
Λ2
LFV
H † ¯ei
RσσρLj
LFσρ, (4.26)
where δRL
ij are the generic ﬂavor-changing couplings and
ΛLFV denotes the cut-off of the effective theory. In the ab-
sence of a speciﬁc ﬂavor structure, it is natural to expect
δRL
ij = O(1). In this case the experimental limit forμ→ eγ
impliesΛLFV> 105 TeV , in clear tension with the expec-
tation of new degrees of freedom close to the TeV scale in
order to stabilize the Higgs sector of the SM.
The implementation of a MFV principle in the lepton
sector is not as simple as in the quark sector. The problem
is that the neutrino mass matrix itself cannot be accommo-
dated within the renormalizable part of the SM Lagrangian.
The most natural way to describe neutrino masses, explain-
ing their strong suppression, is to assume they are Majorana
mass terms suppressed by the heavy scale of lepton num-
ber violation (LNV). In other words, neutrino masses are
described by a non-renormalizable interaction of the type
equation (3.4) suppressed by the scale ΛLNV ≫v =| ⟨H ⟩|.
This implies that we have to face a two scale problem (pre-
sumably with the hierarchy ΛLNV ≫ΛLFV) and that we
need some additional hypothesis to identify the irreducible
ﬂavor-symmetry breaking structures. As we shall illustrate
in the following, we can choose whether to extend or not
the ﬁeld content of the SM. The construction of the effec-
tive theory based on one of these realizations of the MLFV
hypothesis can be viewed as a general tool to exploit the ob-
servable consequences of a speciﬁc (minimalistic) hypothe-
sis about the irreducible sources of lepton-ﬂavor symmetry
breaking.
4.3.2 MLFV with minimal ﬁeld content
The lepton ﬁeld content is the SM one: three left handed
doubletsLi
L and three right handed charged lepton singlets
ei
R. The ﬂavor symmetry group is Gl = SU(3)LL × SU(3)eR
and we assume the following ﬂavor symmetry breaking La-
grangian
LSym.Br. =− Yij
e ¯ei
R
(
H †Lj
L
)
− 1
2ΛLNV
κij
ν
(¯Lci
Lτ2H
)(
HTτ2Lj
L
)
+ h.c.
→− vYij
e ¯ei
Rej
L − v2
2ΛLNV
κij
ν¯νci
Lνj
L + h.c. (4.27)
Here the two irreducible sources of LFV are the coefﬁcient
of dimension ﬁve LNV operator (κij
ν) and the charged lepton
Yukawa coupling (Ye), transforming respectively as (6, 1)
and(¯3, 3) under Gl . An explicit realization of this scenario is
provided by the so-called triplet see-saw mechanism (or see-
saw of type II). This approach has the advantage of being
highly predictive, but it differs in an essential way from the
MFV hypothesis in the quark sector since one of the basic
spurion originates from a non-renormalizable coupling.
Having identiﬁed the irreducible sources of ﬂavor sym-
metry breaking and their transformation properties, we can
classify the non-renormalizable operators suppressed by in-
verse powers of ΛLFV which contribute to ﬂavor violating
processes. These operators must be invariant combinations
of SM ﬁelds and the spurionsYe andκν. The complete list of
the leading operators contributing to LFV decays of charged
leptons is given in Refs. [ 542, 543]. The case of the radia-
tive decays li → ljγis particularly simple since there are
only two dimension six operators (operators with a structure
as in ( 3.4), with Fσρreplaced by the stress tensors of the
U(1)Y and SU(2)L gauge groups, respectively). The MLFV
hypothesis forces the ﬂavor-changing couplings of these op-
erators to be a spurion combination transforming as (¯3, 3)
under Gl :
(
δRL
min
)
ij ∝
(
Yeκ†
νκν
)
ij +··· (4.28)
where the dots denote terms with higher powers ofYe orκν.
Up to the overall normalization, this combination can be
completely determined in terms of the neutrino mass eigen-
values and the PMNS matrix. In the basis whereYe is diag-
onal we can write,


--- Page 43 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 55
(
Yeκ†
νκν
)
i̸=j = mli
v
(Λ2
LNV
v4 UPMNSm2
νU†
PMNS
)
i̸=j
→ mli
v
Λ2
LNV
v4
[
(UPMNS)i2(UPMNS)∗
j2/Delta1m2
sol
±(UPMNS)i3(UPMNS)∗
j3/Delta1m2
atm
]
, (4.29)
where/Delta1m2
atm and/Delta1m2
sol denote the squared mass differ-
ences deduced from atmospheric- and solar-neutrino data,
and +/− correspond to normal/inverted hierarchy, respec-
tively. The overall factorΛ2
LNV/v2 implies that the absolute
normalization of LFV rates suffers of a large uncertainty.
Nonetheless, a few interesting conclusions can still be drawn
[542].
– The LFV decay rates are proportional toΛ4
LNV/Λ4
LFV and
could be detected only in presence of a large hierarchy
between these two scales. In particular, B(μ→ eγ)>
10− 13 only ifΛLNV> 109ΛLFV.
– Ratios of similar LFV decay rates, such as B(μ→
eγ)/B(τ→ μγ), are free from the normalization am-
biguity and can be predicted in terms of neutrino masses
and PMNS angles: violations of these predictions would
unambiguously signal the presence of additional sources
of lepton-ﬂavor symmetry breaking. One of these predic-
tion is the 10 − 2–10− 3 enhancement ofB(τ→ μγ)ver-
susB(μ→ eγ)s h o w ni nF i g .3. Given the present and
near-future experimental prospects on these modes, this
modest enhancement implies that the μ→ eγsearch is
much more promising within this framework.
– Ratios of LFV transitions among the same two fami-
lies (such as μ→ eγversus μ→ 3e or τ→ μγvs
τ→ 3μandτ→ μe¯e) are determined by known phase
space factors and ratios of various Wilson coefﬁcients.
As data will become available on different lepton ﬂavor
violating processes, if the ﬂavor patter is consistent with
the MLFV hypothesis, from these ratios it will be pos-
Fig. 3 Bli → ljγ≡ Γ(li → ljγ)/Γ(li → ljνi ¯νj) for μ→ eγand
τ→ μγas a function of sinθ13 in the MLFV framework with minimal
ﬁeld content [542]. The normalization of the vertical axis corresponds
toΛLNV/ΛLFV = 1010.T h e shading is due to different values of the
phaseδand the normal/inverted spectrum
sible to disentangle the contributions of different opera-
tors.
– A deﬁnite prediction of the MLFV hypothesis is that
the rates for decays involving light hadrons ( π0 → μe,
KL → μe,τ→ μπ0,... ) are exceedingly small.
4.3.3 MLFV with extended ﬁeld content
In this scenario we assume three heavy right handed Ma-
jorana neutrinos in addition to the SM ﬁelds. As a conse-
quence, the maximal ﬂavor group becomes Gl × SU(3)νR .
In order to minimize the number of free parameters (or to
maximize the predictivity of the model), we assume that the
Majorana mass term for the right handed neutrinos is pro-
portional to the identity matrix in ﬂavor space: (MR)ij =
MR ×δij . This mass term breaks SU(3)νR toO(3)νR and is
assumed to be the only source of LNV (MR ↔ ΛLNV).
Once the ﬁeld content of model is extended, there are
in principle many alternative options to deﬁne the irre-
ducible sources of lepton ﬂavor symmetry breaking (see e.g.
Ref. [544] for an extensive discussion). However, this spe-
ciﬁc choice has two important advantages: it is predictive
and closely resemble the MFV hypothesis in the quark sec-
tor. The νR are the counterpart of right handed up quarks
and, similarly to the quark sector, the symmetry breaking
sources are two Yukawa couplings of ( 3.40). An explicit
example of MLFV with extended ﬁeld content is the min-
imal supersymmetric standard model with degenerate right
handed neutrinos.
The classiﬁcation of the higher dimensional operators in
the effective theory proceeds as in the minimal ﬁeld con-
tent case. The only difference is that the basic spurions are
nowYνandYe, transforming as(¯3, 1, 3) and(¯3, 3, 1) under
Gl ×O(3)νR , respectively. The determination of the spurion
structures in terms of observable quantities is more involved
than in the minimal ﬁeld content case. In general, invert-
ing the see-saw relation allows us to express Yνin terms of
neutrino masses, PMNS angles and an arbitrary complex-
orthogonal matrixR of (3.45)[ 232]. Exploiting theO(3)νR
symmetry of the MLFV Lagrangian, the real orthogonal part
ofR can be rotated away. We are then left with a Hermitian-
orthogonal matrix H [545] which can be parameterized in
terms of three real parameters (φi ) which control the amount
of CP violation in the right handed sector:
Yν=M1/2
R
v H(φi)m1/2
diagU†
PMNS. (4.30)
With this parameterization for Yνthe ﬂavor changing cou-
pling relevant toli → ljγdecays reads
δRL
ext ∝ Ye
(
Y †
νYν
)
→ me
v
(MR
v2 UPMNSm1/2
diagH 2m1/2
diagU†
PMNS
)
. (4.31)


--- Page 44 ---
56 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
In the CP-conserving limit H → I and the phenomenolog-
ical predictions turns out to be quite similar to the minimal
ﬁeld content scenario [542]. In particular, all the general ob-
servations listed in the previous section remain valid. In the
general case, i.e. for H ̸=I , the predictivity of the model
is substantially weakened. However, in principle some in-
formation about the matrix H can be extracted by study-
ing baryogenesis through leptogenesis in the MLFV frame-
work [546].
4.3.4 Leptogenesis
On general grounds, we expect that the tree-level degener-
acy of heavy neutrinos is lifted by radiative corrections. This
allows the generation of a lepton asymmetry in the interfer-
ence between tree-level and one loop decays of right handed
neutrinos. Following the standard leptogenesis scenario, we
assume that this lepton asymmetry is later communicated
to the baryon sector through sphaleron effects and that sat-
urates the observed value of the baryon asymmetry of the
universe.
The most general form of theνR mass splittings allowed
within the MLFV framework has the following form:
/Delta1MR
MR
=cν
[
YνY †
ν+
(
YνY †
ν
)T]
+c(1)
νν
[
YνY †
νYνY †
ν+
(
YνY †
νYνY †
ν
)T]
+c(2)
νν
[
YνY †
ν
(
YνY †
ν
)T]
+c(3)
νν
[(
YνY †
ν
)TYνY †
ν
]
+cνl
[
YνY †
eYeY †
ν+
(
YνY †
eYeY †
ν
)T]
+··· .
Even without specifying the value of theci , this form allows
us to derive a few general conclusions [546].
– The term proportional to cνdoes not generate a CPV
asymmetry, but sets the scale for the mass splittings: these
are of the order of magnitude of the decay widths, realiz-
ing in a natural way the condition of resonant leptogene-
sis.
– The right amount of leptogenesis can be generated even
with Ye = 0, if all the φi are non-vanishing. However,
sinceYν∼ √ MR, for low values ofMR (≲ 1012 GeV) the
asymmetry generated by the cνlterm dominates. In this
caseηB is typically too small to match the observed value
and has a ﬂat dependence on MR.A t MR ≳ 1012 GeV
the quadratic termsc(i)
ννdominate, determining an approx-
imate linear growth of ηB withMR. These two regimes
are illustrated in Fig. 4.
As demonstrated in Ref. [ 546], baryogenesis through lep-
togenesis is viable in MLFV models. In particular, assum-
ing a loop hierarchy between the ci (as expected in a per-
turbative scenario) and neglecting ﬂavor-dependent effects
in the Boltzmann equations (one-ﬂavor approximation of
Ref. [ 547]), the right size of ηB is naturally reached for
MR ≳ 1012 GeV . As discussed in Ref. [301]( s e ea l s o[303]),
this lower bound can be weakened by the inclusion of ﬂavor-
dependent effects in the Boltzmann equations and/or by the
tanβ-enhancement of Ye occurring in two-Higgs doublet
models.
From the phenomenological point of view, an important
difference with respect to the CP-conserving case is the fact
that non-vanishingφi change the predictions of the LFV de-
cays, typically producing an enhancement of the B(μ→
eγ)/B(τ→ μγ)ratio or the both decays separately [ 545].
ForMR ≫ 1012 GeV their effect is moderate and the CP-
conserving predictions are recovered. The other important
information following from the leptogenesis analysis is the
Fig. 4 Baryon asymmetry (ηB )
as a function of the right handed
neutrino mass scale (MR )f o r
cνl= 0( dots)a n dcνl̸= 0
(crosses) in the MLFV
framework with extended ﬁeld
content [546]


--- Page 45 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 57
fact that the largeMR regime is favored. AssumingΛLFV to
be close to the TeV scale, theMR regime favored by lepto-
genesis favors aμ→ eγrate within the reach of the MEG
experiment [548].
4.3.5 GUT implementation
Once we accept the idea that ﬂavor dynamics obeys a MFV
principle, both in the quark and in the lepton sector, it is in-
teresting to ask if and how this is compatible with a grand
uniﬁed theory (GUT), where quarks and leptons sit in the
same representations of a uniﬁed gauge group. This ques-
tion has recently been addressed in [ 539], considering the
exemplifying case of SU(5)gauge.
Within SU(5)gauge, the down-type singlet quarks ( dc
iR )
and the lepton doublets ( LiL ) belong to the ¯5 representa-
tion; the quark doublet (QiL ), the up-type (uc
iR ) and lepton
singlets (ec
iR ) belong to the10 representation, and ﬁnally the
right handed neutrinos (νiR ) are singlet. In this framework
the largest group of ﬂavor transformation commuting with
the gauge group is GGUT = SU(3)¯5 × SU(3)10 × SU(3)1,
which is smaller than the direct product of the quark and
lepton groups discussed before ( Gq × Gl ). We should there-
fore expect some violations of the MFV+MLFV predictions
either in the quark or in the lepton sector or in both.
A phenomenologically acceptable description of the low
energy fermion mass matrices requires the introduction of
at least four irreducible sources of GGUT breaking. From
this point of view the situation is apparently similar to the
non-uniﬁed case: the four GGUT spurions can be put in one-
to-one correspondence with the low energy spurionsYu,Yd ,
Ye, andYν. However, the smaller ﬂavor group does not al-
low the diagonalization ofYd andYe (which transform in the
same way under GGUT) in the same basis. As a result, two
additional mixing matrices can appear in the expressions for
ﬂavor changing rates: C =VT
eRVdL andG =VT
eLVdR .T h e
hierarchical texture of the new mixing matrices is known
since they reduce to the identity matrix in the limitYT
e =Yd .
Taking into account this fact, and analyzing the structure
of the allowed higher-dimensional operators, a number of
reasonably ﬁrm phenomenological consequences can be de-
duced [539]:
– There is a well deﬁned limit in which the standard MFV
scenario for the quark sector is fully recovered: MR ≪
1012 GeV and small tanβ(in a two-Higgs doublet case).
For MR ∼ 1012 GeV and small tan β, deviations from
the standard MFV pattern can be expected in rare K de-
cays but not inB physics. Ignoring ﬁne-tuned scenarios,
MR ≫ 1012 GeV is excluded by the present constraints
on quark FCNC transitions. Independently from the value
ofMR, deviations from the standard MFV pattern can ap-
pear both inK and inB physics for tanβ≳mt/mb.
– Contrary to the non-GUT MFV framework, the rate for
μ→ eγ(and other LFV decays) cannot be arbitrarily
suppressed by lowering the average mass MR of the
heavyνR. This fact can easily be understood by looking
at the ﬂavor structure of the relevant effective couplings,
which now assume the following form:
δRL
GUT =c1YeY †
νYν+c2YuY †
uYe +c3YuY †
uYT
d +··· .
(4.32)
In addition to the terms involving Yν∼ √ MR already
present in the non-uniﬁed case, the GUT group al-
lows also MR-independent terms involving the quark
Yukawa couplings. The latter become competitive for
MR ≲ 1012 GeV and their contribution is such that for
ΛLFV ≲ 10 TeV the μ→ eγrate is above 10 − 13 (i.e.
within the reach of MEG [548]).
– Improved experimental information onτ→ μγandτ→
eγwould be a powerful tool in discriminating the rel-
ative size of the standard MFV contributions versus the
characteristic GUT-MFV contributions due to the differ-
ent hierarchy pattern among τ→ μ,τ→ e, andμ→ e
transitions.
5 Phenomenology of theories beyond the standard
model
5.1 Flavor violation in non-SUSY models directly testable
at LHC
5.1.1 Multi-Higgs doublet models
The arbitrariness of quark masses, mixing and CP violation
in the standard model stems from the fact that gauge invari-
ance does not constrain the ﬂavor structure of Yukawa inter-
actions. In the SM neutrinos are strictly massless. No neu-
trino Dirac mass term can be introduced, due to the absence
of right handed neutrinos and no Majorana mass terms can
be generated, due to exact B − L conservation. Since neu-
trinos are massless, there is no leptonic mixing in the SM,
which in turn leads to separate lepton ﬂavor conservation.
Therefore, the recent observation of neutrino oscillations is
evidence for physics beyond the SM. Fermion masses, mix-
ing and CP violation are closely related to each other and
also to the Higgs sector of the theory.
It has been shown that gauge theories with fermions,
but without scalar ﬁelds, do not break CP symmetry [ 549].
A scalar (Higgs) doublet is used in the SM to break both
the gauge symmetry and generate gauge boson masses as
well as fermion masses through Yukawa interactions. This
is known as the Higgs mechanism, which was proposed by
several authors [ 550–553]. It predicts the existence of one


--- Page 46 ---
58 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
neutral scalar Higgs particle—the Higgs boson. In the SM
where a single Higgs doublet is introduced, it is not possi-
ble to have spontaneous CP violation since any phase in the
vacuum expectation value can be eliminated by rephasing
the Higgs ﬁeld. Furthermore, in the SM it is also not possi-
ble to violate CP explicitly in the Higgs sector since gauge
invariance together with renormalizability restrict the Higgs
potential to have only quadratic and quartic terms and her-
miticity constrains both of these to be real. Thus, CP viola-
tion in the SM requires the introduction of complex Yukawa
couplings.
The scenario of spontaneous CP and T violation has the
nice feature of putting the breakdown of discrete symmetries
on the same footing as the breaking of the gauge symmetry,
which is also spontaneous in order to preserve renormaliz-
ability. A simple extension of the Higgs sector that may give
rise to spontaneous CP violation requires the presence of at
least two Higgs doublets, and was introduced by Lee [554].
If one introduces two Higgs doublets, it is possible to
have either explicit or spontaneous CP breaking. Explicit CP
violation in the Higgs sector arises due to the fact that in this
case there are gauge invariant terms in the Lagrangian which
can have complex coefﬁcients. Note however that the pres-
ence of complex coefﬁcients does not always lead to explicit
CP breaking.
Extensions of the SM with extra Higgs doublets are very
natural since they keep theρparameter at tree level equal to
one [555]. In multi-Higgs systems there are in general, addi-
tional sources of CP violation in the Higgs sector [556]. The
most general renormalizable polynomial consistent with the
SU(2) ×U(1) × SU(3)c model withnd Higgs doublets,φi ,
may be written as
Lφ=Yabφ†
aφb +Zabcd
(
φ†
aφb
)(
φ†
cφd
)
, (5.1)
where repeated indices are summed. Hermiticity of Lφim-
plies:
Y ∗
ab =Yba ; Z∗
abcd =Zbadc. (5.2)
Furthermore, by construction it is obvious that:
Zabcd =Zcdab. (5.3)
In models with more than one Higgs doublet, one has the
freedom to make Higgs-basis transformations (HBT) that do
not change the physical content of the model, but do change
both the quadratic and the quartic coefﬁcients. Coefﬁcients
that are complex in one Higgs basis may become real in an-
other basis. Furthermore, a given model may have complex
quartic coefﬁcients in one Higgs basis, while they may all
become real in another basis, with only the quadratic coef-
ﬁcients now complex, thus indicating that in that particular
model CP is only softly broken. Such Higgs-basis transfor-
mations leave the Higgs kinetic energy term invariant and
are of the form:
φa
HBT
−→ φ′
a =Vaiφi,φ †
a
HBT
−→ (φ′)†
a =V ∗
ai(φ′)†
i, (5.4)
whereV is annd ×nd unitary matrix acting in the space of
Higgs doublets. In [ 557] conditions for a given Higgs po-
tential to violate CP at the Lagrangian level, expressed in
terms of CP-odd Higgs-basis invariants, were derived. These
conditions are expressed in terms of couplings of the un-
broken Lagrangian, therefore they are relevant even at high
energies, where the SU(2) ×U(1) symmetry is restored.
This feature renders them potentially useful for the study of
baryogenesis. The derivation of these conditions follows the
general method proposed in [558] and already mentioned in
previous sections. The method consists of imposing invari-
ance of the Lagrangian under the most general CP transfor-
mation of the Higgs doublets, which is a combination of a
simple CP transformation for each Higgs ﬁeld with a Higgs-
basis transformation:
φa
CP
−→ Waiφ∗
i ; φ†
a
CP
−→ W ∗
aiφT
i . (5.5)
HereW is an nd ×nd unitary matrix operating in Higgs
doublets space.
A set of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for CP in-
variance in the case of two Higgs doublets have been de-
rived [557]:
I1 ≡ Tr[YZY ˆZ − ˆZZY Y ]= 0,
I2 ≡ Tr[YZ 2 ˜Z − ˜ZZ 2Y ]= 0,
(5.6)
where all matrices inside the parenthesis are 2 × 2m a t r i -
ces. In the general case these are nd ×nd matrices, and are
deﬁned by:
(ZY)ij ≡ ZijmnYmn; ˆZij ≡ Zijmm ;
(Z2)ij ≡ ZipnmZmnpj; ˜Zij ≡ Zimmj
(5.7)
CP-odd HBT invariants are also useful [ 557] to ﬁnd out
whether, in a given model, there is hard or soft CP breaking.
One may also construct CP-odd weak basis invariants, in-
volvingvi ≡⟨ 0|φ0
i |0⟩, i.e., after spontaneous gauge symme-
try breaking has occurred [559, 560]. Further discussions on
Higgs-basis independent methods for the two-Higgs-doublet
model can be found in [561–564].
So far, we have considered CP violation at the La-
grangian level in models with multi-Higgs doublets, i.e., ex-
plicit CP violation. It is also possible to derive criteria [565]
to verify whether CP and T in a given model are sponta-
neously broken. Under T the Higgs ﬁeldsφj transform as
TφjT − 1 =Ujkφk, (5.8)


--- Page 47 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 59
whereU is a unitary matrix which may mix the scalar dou-
blets. If no extra symmetries beyond SU(2) ×U(1) are
present in the Lagrangian, U reduces to a diagonal ma-
trix possibly with phases. Invariance of the vacuum under
T leads to the following condition:
⟨0|φ0
j |0⟩= U ∗
jk ⟨0|φ0
k |0⟩∗. (5.9)
Therefore, a set of vacua lead to spontaneous T, CP viola-
tion if there is no unitary matrixU satisfying (5.8) and (5.9)
simultaneously.
Most of the previous discussion dealt with the general
case ofn-Higgs doublets. We analyze now the case of two
Higgs doublets, where the most general gauge invariant
Higgs potential can be explicitly written as
VH2 =m1φ†
1φ1 +peiϕφ†
1φ2 +pe−iϕφ†
2φ1 +m2φ†
2φ2
+a1
(
φ†
1φ1
)2 +a2
(
φ†
2φ2
)2 +b
(
φ†
1φ1
)(
φ†
2φ2
)
+b′(
φ†
1φ2
)(
φ†
2φ1
)
+c1eiθ1
(
φ†
1φ1
)(
φ†
2φ1
)
+c1e−iθ1
(
φ†
1φ1
)(
φ†
1φ2
)
+c2eiθ2
(
φ†
2φ2
)(
φ†
2φ1
)
+c2e−iθ2
(
φ†
2φ2
)(
φ†
1φ2
)
+deiδ(
φ†
1φ2
)2
+de−iδ(
φ†
2φ1
)2, (5.10)
wheremi ,p,ai ,b,b′,ci , andd are real and all phases are
explicitly displayed. It is clear that this potential contains an
excess of parameters. With the appropriate choice of Higgs
basis some of these may be eliminated, without loss of gen-
erality, leaving eleven independent parameters [ 569–571].
The Higgs sector contains ﬁve spinless particles: three neu-
tral and a pair of charged ones, usually denoted byh,H (CP
even),A (CP odd) (or if CP is violatedh1,2,3) andH ±.
In general, models with two Higgs doublets have tree
level Higgs-mediated ﬂavor changing neutral currents
(FCNC). This is a problem in view of the present strin-
gent experimental limits on FCNC. In order to solve this
problem the concept of natural ﬂavor conservation (NFC)
was introduced by imposing extra symmetries on the La-
grangian. These symmetries constrain the Yukawa couplings
of the neutral scalars in such a way that the resulting neu-
tral currents are diagonal. Glashow and Weinberg [566] and
Paschos [567] have shown that the only way to achieve NFC
is to ensure that only one Higgs doublet gives mass to quarks
of a given charge.
In the case of two Higgs doublets the simplest solution to
avoid FCNC is to require invariance of the Lagrangian under
the following transformation of theZ2 type:
φ1 −→ φ1,φ 2 −→ − φ2,
(5.11)
dR −→ dR,u R −→ − uR,
wheredR (uR) denote the right handed down (up) quarks;
all other ﬁelds remain unchanged.
It is clear from ( 5.10) that this symmetry eliminates ex-
plicit CP violation in the Higgs sector, since the only term of
the Higgs potential with a phase that survives is the one with
coefﬁcientd, moreover a HBT of the form φ1 −→ eiδ/2φ1,
φ2 −→ φ2, eliminates the phase from the Higgs potential.
Furthermore, it can be shown that this symmetry also elimi-
nates the possibility of having spontaneous CP violation.
In conclusion, models with two Higgs doublets and ex-
act NFC cannot give rise to spontaneous CP violation. Ex-
plicit CP violation in this case requires complex Yukawa
couplings leading to the Kobayashi–Maskawa mechanism
with no additional source of CP violation through neutral
scalar Higgs boson exchange. An interesting alternative sce-
nario in the case of two Higgs doublets was considered in
[568] with no NFC. Here CP violating Higgs FCNC are nat-
urally suppressed through a permutation symmetry which is
softly broken, still allowing for spontaneous CP violation.
Three Higgs doublet models have been considered in an
attempt to introduce CP violation in an extension of the SM
with NFC [ 566] in the Higgs sector. It was shown that in-
deed, in such models it is possible to violate CP in the Higgs
sector either at the Lagrangian level [572] or spontaneously
[573–575].
It is also possible to generate spontaneous CP violation
with only one additional Higgs singlet [576], but in this case
at least one isosinglet vectorial quark is required in order to
generate a non-trivial phase at low energies in the Cabibbo–
Kobayashi–Maskawa matrix. Such models may provide a
solution to the strong CP problem of the type proposed by
Nelson [577, 578] and Barr [579]a sw e l la sac o m m o no r i -
gin to all CP violations [ 580, 581] including the generation
of the observed baryon asymmetry of the Universe. The fact
that the SM cannot provide the observed baryon asymmetry
[582–587], provides yet another reason to study an enlarged
Higgs sector.
A lot of work has been done by many authors on possible
extensions of the Higgs sector and their implications both
for the hadronic and the leptonic sectors at the existing and
future colliders, see e.g. [ 588]. Among the simplest multi-
Higgs models are the two Higgs Doublet Models (2HDM)
which have been analyzed in detail in many different real-
izations. The need to avoid potentially dangerous tree level
Higgs FCNC has led to the consideration of different vari-
ants of this model with a certain discrete Z2 symmetry im-
posed.
In the Type-I 2HDM theZ2 discrete symmetry imposed
on the Lagrangian is such that only one of the Higgs dou-
blets couples to quarks and leptons. A very well known
fermiophobic Higgs boson may arise in such model [ 589–
591]. Another example is the Inert Doublet Model, with an
unbroken discrete Z2 symmetry which forbids one Higgs


--- Page 48 ---
60 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
doublet to couple to fermions and to get a non-zero VEV
[592, 593]. Physical particles related to such doublets are
called “inert” particles, the lightest is stable and contributes
to the Dark Matter density. In [594], the naturalness problem
has been addressed in the framework of an Inert Doublet
Model with a heavy (SM-like) Higgs boson. In this con-
text Dark Matter may be composed of neutral inert Higgs
bosons. Predictions are given for multilepton events with
missing transverse energy at the LHC, and for the direct de-
tection of dark matter.
The Type-II 2HDM allows one of the Higgs doublet to
couple only to the right-handed up quarks while the other
Higgs doublet can only couple to right handed down-type
quarks and charged leptons. This is achieved by the intro-
duction of an appropriate Z2 symmetry, analogous to the
one in (5.12). The Higgs sector of the MSSM model can be
viewed as a particular realization of Type-II models but with
additional constraints required by supersymmetry. Various
scenarios are possible for these models—with and without
decoupling of heavy Higgs particles [570, 571, 595].
Type-III 2HDM are models where, unlike in models of
Type-I and II, NFC is not imposed on the Yukawa interac-
tions. This class of models has in general scalar mediated
FCNC at tree level. Various schemes have been proposed
to suppress these currents, including the ad-hoc assumption
that FCNC couplings are approximately given by the geo-
metric mean of the Yukawa couplings of the two generations
[596]. A very interesting alternative [597] is to have an exact
symmetry of the Lagrangian which constrains FCNC cou-
plings to be related in an exact way to the elements of the
CKM matrix in such a way that FCNC are non-vanishing
but naturally suppressed by the smallness of CKM mixing.
Another example of Type III 2HDM is the Top Two Higgs
Doublet Model which was ﬁrst proposed in [ 598], and re-
cently analyzed in detail in [ 599]. In this framework a dis-
crete symmetry is imposed allowing only the top quark to
have Yukawa couplings to one of the doublets while all other
quarks and leptons have Yukawa couplings to the other dou-
blet.
Lepton ﬂavor violation is a feature common to many
possible extensions of the SM. It can occur both through
charged and neutral currents. The possibility of having lep-
ton ﬂavor violation in extensions of the SM, has been con-
sidered long before the discovery of neutrino masses [ 600,
601]. For example, in the case of multi-Higgs doublet mod-
els, it has been pointed out that even for massless neutrinos
lepton ﬂavor can be violated [ 602, 603]. In the context of
the minimal extension of the SM, necessary to accommo-
date neutrino masses, where only right handed neutrinos are
included LFV effects are extremely small. It is well known
that the effects of LFV can be large in supersymmetry.
CLEO submitted recently a paper [604] where the ratio of
the tauonic and muonic branching fractions is examined for
the threeΥ(1S, 2S, 3S) states. Agreement with expectations
from lepton universality is found. The conclusion is that lep-
ton universality is respected within the current experimental
accuracy which is roughly 10%. However there is tendency
for the tauonic branching fraction to turn out systematically
larger than the muonic at a few per cent level.
5.1.2 Low scale singlet neutrino scenarios
In the pre-LHC era neutrino oscillations have provided some
of the most robust evidence for physics beyond the SM.
There are many open questions in this ﬁeld; why is the ab-
solute mass scale for the neutrinos so small with respect to
the other SM particles? what is this mass scale? why is the
pattern of mixing so different from the quark sector? If na-
ture has chosen the singlet seesaw scenario [216–220]a sa n
answer to those questions we face the prospect of never be-
ing able to produce the heavy neutrinos at a collider. Never-
theless, several extensions of this minimal see-saw scenario
contain heavy neutrinos at or around the TeV scale, these
include models based around the group E6 [605, 606] and
also in SO(10) models [403].
Furthermore, even within the usual see-saw scenario, the
observed nearly maximal mixing pattern of the light neutri-
nos requires further explanation. Flavor symmetries are of-
ten invoked as possible reasons for the almost tri-bi-maximal
structure of the PMNS mixing matrix [607]. It is also possi-
ble that the small magnitude of the light neutrino masses is
due to an approximate symmetry, allowing the right handed
neutrinos to be as light as O(200 GeV) [337].
TeV scale right handed neutrinos can also arise in radia-
tive mechanisms of neutrino mass generation. Generically,
in these models a tree-level neutrino mass is forbidden or
suppressed by a symmetry but small neutrino masses may
arise through loops sensitive to symmetry breaking effects
[225, 608]. Indeed, several supersymmetric realizations of
radiative mechanisms contain TeV scale right handed neu-
trinos linked to the scale of supersymmetry breaking [ 609,
610].
5.1.2.1 Heavy neutrinos accessible to the LHC Al o w ,
electroweak-scale mass is not sufﬁcient to imply that heavy
neutrinos could be produced and detected at the LHC. They
must have a large enough coupling (mixing) with other SM
ﬁelds so that experiments will be able to distinguish their
production and decay from SM background processes. In
this review we concentrate on the case where heavy neu-
trino production and decay occurs through mixing with SM
ﬁelds only. Quantitatively, we can consider a generalization
of the Langacker–London parameters,Ωll ′ , deﬁned as
Ωll ′ =δll ′ −
3∑
i=1
BliB∗
l′i =
(3+nR)∑
i=4
BliB∗
l′i, (5.12)


--- Page 49 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 61
wherel,l ′ =e,μ,τandBli is the full 3 ×(3 +nR) neu-
trino mixing matrix taking into account all (3 light and nR
heavy) neutrinos. The 3× 3m a t r i xBli wherei = 1,..., 3i s
a good approximation to the usual PMNS matrix andΩll ′ es-
sentially measures the deviation from unitarity of the PMNS
matrix.
TheΩll ′ are constrained by precision electroweak data
[611] and the following upper limits have been set at 90%
C.L.
Ωee ≤ 0.012,Ω μμ≤ 0.0096,Ω ττ≤ 0.016.
(5.13)
In addition, the off-diagonal elements of Ωll ′ are con-
strained by limits on lepton ﬂavor violating processes such
as τ,μ→ eγand τ,μ→ eee and μ→ e conversion in
nuclei [514, 612]. These limits are rather model dependent
but forMR ≫MW andmD ≪MW (wheremD is the Dirac
component of the neutrino mass matrix), the present upper
bounds are [182]
|Ωeμ|≤ 0.0001, |Ωeτ|≤ 0.02, |Ωμτ|≤ 0.02.
(5.14)
It has been pointed out that a heavy Majorana neutrino
(N) may be produced via a DY type of mechanism at hadron
colliders [608, 613–617],pp → W +∗ → ℓ+N, whereN →
ℓ+W − , leading to lepton number violation by 2. Most of the
previous studies were concentrated on the ee mode, which
would result in a too week signal to be appreciable due to the
recent very stringent bound |VeN |2/mN < 5 × 10− 8 GeV− 1,
from the absence of the neutrinoless double beta decay. It
has been recently proposed to search for the unique and
clean signal, μ±μ±+2 jets at the LHC [ 617]. It was con-
cluded that a search at the LHC with an integrated luminos-
ity of 100 fb− 1 can be sensitive to a mass range ofmN ∼ 10–
400 GeV at a 2σlevel, and up to 250 GeV at a 5σlevel. If
this type of signal could be established, it would be even
feasible to consider the search for CP violation in the heavy
Majorana sector [618].
A recent analysis [ 619] studied more background proc-
esses including some fast detector simulations. In particu-
lar, the authors claimed a large background due to the faked
leptonsb ¯b → μ+μ+. The search sensitivity is thus reduced
to 175 GeV at a 5 σlevel. However, the background esti-
mate for processes such asb ¯b +n-jet has large uncertainties
due to QCD perturbative calculations and kinematical ac-
ceptance. More studies remain to be done for a deﬁnitive
conclusion.
5.1.2.2 Low scale model with successful baryogenesis As
a more detailed example satisfying the constraints of ( 5.14)
we consider a model potentially accessible to colliders,
whereMR ≃ 250 GeV which has been shown to success-
fully explain the baryon asymmetry of the Universe [337].
Leptogenesis has been discussed in Sect.3.3.1. Low scale
leptogenesis scenario would be possible with nearly degen-
erate heavy neutrinos, where self-energy effects on the lep-
tonic asymmetries become relevant [ 293, 294]. In this case
the CP asymmetry in the heavy neutrino decays can be
resonantly enhanced [ 332], to the extent that the observed
baryon asymmetry can be explained with heavy neutrinos as
light as the electroweak scale [335, 337].
We shall consider a model with right handed neutrinos
which transform under an SO(3) ﬂavor symmetry. Ignoring
effects from the neutrino Yukawa couplings this symmetry
is assumed to be exact at some high scale, e.g. the GUT
scaleMGUT. This restricts the form of the heavy Majorana
neutrino mass matrix atMGUT
MR = 1mN +δMS, (5.15)
whereδMS = 0a tMGUT. This form has also been consid-
ered in a class of “minimal ﬂavor violating” models of the
lepton sector [542] and naturally provides nearly degenerate
heavy neutrinos compatible with resonant leptogenesis.
All other ﬁelds are singlets under this SO(3) ﬂavor sym-
metry and so the neutrino Yukawa couplings will break
SO(3) explicitly. We can still choose heavy neutrino Yukawa
couplingsYνso that a subgroup of the SO(3) ×U(1)Le ×
U(1)Lμ×U(1)Lτﬂavor symmetry present without the neu-
trino Yukawa couplings remains unbroken. In this case
a particular ﬂavor direction can be singled out leaving
SO(2) ≃U(1) unbroken. This residualU(1) symmetry acts
to prevent the light Majorana neutrinos from acquiring a
mass. The form of the neutrino Yukawa couplings can be
written
YνT=
⎛
⎝
0 ae−iπ/4 aeiπ/4
0 be−iπ/4 beiπ/4
0 ce−iπ/4 ceiπ/4
⎞
⎠+δYν. (5.16)
The residualU(1) s y m m e t r yi sb r o k e nb o t hb ys m a l lSO(3)
breaking effects in the heavy Majorana mass matrix, δMS ,
and by small effects parameterized by δYνin the Yukawa
couplings. Although we shall not consider the speciﬁc origin
of these effects, δMS could arise through renormalization
group running for example.
In [337], a speciﬁc model was considered where mN =
250 GeV and which successfully explained the baryon
asymmetry of the Universe. One of eithera,b orc was con-
strained to be small to allow a single lepton ﬂavor asymme-
try (and subsequently a baryon asymmetry) to be generated
atT ∼ 250 GeV . The other two parameters could be as large
as O(10− 2). This scenario has the features necessary for a
model to be visible at the LHC; heavy neutrinos with masses


--- Page 50 ---
62 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
around O(1 TeV) and sufﬁcient mixing between these neu-
trinos and the light neutrinos to allow them to be produced
from a vector boson. Speciﬁcally
Ωee = |a|2v2
m2
N
,Ω μμ= |b|2v2
m2
N
,Ω ττ= |c|2v2
m2
N
,
(5.17)
wherev = 246 GeV is the vacuum expectation value of the
Higgs ﬁeld.
It should be noted that in this model the heavy neutrinos
produced at the LHC would be linked indirectly with the
mechanism providing light neutrinos with small masses. The
light neutrinos acquire masses directly through the mecha-
nism responsible for breaking the ﬂavor symmetries. How-
ever, studying the properties of the heavy neutrinos acces-
sible to the LHC would allow us to better understand the
underlying symmetry protecting light neutrinos from large
masses and may give us insight into the observed pattern of
large mixing. In addition, further knowledge of heavy neu-
trinos seen at the LHC, for example small couplings with
one or more lepton ﬂavors or large, resonantly enhanced
CP violation, would provide us with further information on
possible explanations for the baryon asymmetry of the Uni-
verse.
5.1.3 Lepton ﬂavor violation from the mirror leptons in
little Higgs models
Little Higgs models [ 620–624] offer an alternative route to
the solution of the little hierarchy problem. One of the most
attractive models of this class is the littlest Higgs model
[625] with T-parity (LHT) [ 626–628], where the discrete
symmetry forbids tree-level corrections to electroweak ob-
servables, thus weakening the electroweak precision con-
straints [629]. Under this new symmetry the particles have
distinct transformation properties, that is, they are either
T-even or T-odd. The model is based on a two-stage sponta-
neous symmetry breaking occurring at the scale f and the
electroweak scalev. Here the scale f i st a k e nt ob el a r g e r
than about 500 GeV , which allows to expand expressions in
the small parameterv/f. The additionally introduced gauge
bosons, fermions and scalars are sufﬁciently light to be dis-
covered at LHC and there is a dark matter candidate [ 630].
Moreover, the ﬂavor structure of the LHT model is richer
than the one of the SM, mainly due to the presence of three
doublets of mirror quarks and three doublets of mirror lep-
tons and their weak interactions with the ordinary quarks
and leptons, as discussed in [631–633].
Now, it is well known that in the SM the FCNC processes
in the lepton sector, like ℓi → ℓjγandμ→ eee, are very
strongly suppressed due to tiny neutrino masses. In particu-
lar, the branching ratio forμ→ eγin the SM amounts to at
most 10− 54, to be compared with the present experimental
upper bound, 1.2 × 10− 11 [180], and with the one that will
be available within the next two years, ∼ 10− 13 [634, 635].
Results close to the SM predictions are expected within the
LH model without T-parity, where the lepton sector is iden-
tical to the one of the SM and the additional O(v2/f2) cor-
rections have only minor impact on this result. Similarly the
new effects on(g − 2)μturn out to be small [636, 637].
A very different situation is to be expected in the LHT
model, where the presence of new ﬂavor violating interac-
tions and of mirror leptons with masses of order 1 TeV can
change the SM expectations by up to 45 orders of magni-
tude, bringing the relevant branching ratios for lepton ﬂa-
vor violating (LFV) processes close to the bounds available
presently or in the near future.
5.1.3.1 The model A detailed description of the LHT
model can be found in [ 638], where also a complete set
of Feynman rules has been derived. Here we just want to
state brieﬂy the ingredients needed for the analysis of LFV
decays.
The T-odd gauge boson sector consists of three heavy
“partners” of the SM gauge bosons
W ±
H,Z H,A H, (5.18)
with masses given to lowest order inv/f by
MWH =gf, M ZH =gf, M AH =g′f√
5
. (5.19)
The T-even fermion sector contains, in addition to the
SM fermions, the heavy top partner T+. On the other hand,
the T-odd fermion sector [631] consists of three generations
of mirror quarks and leptons with vectorial couplings under
SU(2)L ×U(1)Y , that are denoted by
(
ui
H
di
H
)
,
(
νi
H
ℓi
H
)
(i = 1, 2, 3). (5.20)
To ﬁrst order inv/f the masses of up- and down-type mirror
fermions are equal. Naturally, their masses are of order f .
In the analysis of LFV decays, except for KL,S → μe,
KL,S → π0μe,Bd,s → ℓiℓj andτ→ ℓπ,ℓη,ℓη′, only mir-
ror leptons are relevant.
As discussed in detail in [ 632], one of the important
ingredients of the mirror sector is the existence of four
CKM-like unitary mixing matrices, two for mirror quarks
(VHu,VHd) and two for mirror leptons(VHν,VHℓ), that are
related via
V †
HuVHd =VCKM,V †
HνVHℓ =V †
PMNS. (5.21)
An explicit parameterization of VHd and VHℓ in terms
of three mixing angles and three complex (non-Majorana)
phases can be found in [633].


--- Page 51 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 63
The mirror mixing matrices parameterize ﬂavor violating
interactions between SM fermions and mirror fermions that
are mediated by the heavy gauge bosonsW ±
H ,ZH andAH .
The matrix notation indicates which of the light fermions of
a given electric charge participates in the interaction.
In the course of the analysis of charged LFV decays it
is useful to introduce the following quantities ( i = 1, 2, 3)
[639]:
χ(μe)
i =V ∗ie
HℓViμ
Hℓ,χ (τe)
i =V ∗ie
HℓViτ
Hℓ,
χ(τμ)
i =V ∗iμ
Hℓ Viτ
Hℓ,
(5.22)
that govern μ→ e, τ→ e and τ→ μtransitions, re-
spectively. Analogous quantities in the mirror quark sector
(i = 1, 2, 3) [638, 641],
ξ(K)
i =V ∗is
HdVid
Hd,ξ (d)
i =V ∗ib
Hd Vid
Hd,
ξ(s)
i =V ∗ib
Hd Vis
Hd,
(5.23)
are needed for the analysis of the decays KL,S → μe,
KL,S → π0μeandBd,s → ℓiℓj .
As an example, the branching ratio for theμ→ eγdecay
contains theχ(μe)
i factors introduced in (5.22) via the short
distance function [639]
¯D′μe
odd = 1
4
v2
f 2
∑
i
(
χ(μe)
i
(
D′
0(yi) − 7
6E′
0(yi)
− 1
10E′
0(y′
i)
))
, (5.24)
whereyi =(mℓ
Hi/MWH)2,y ′
i =ayi witha = 5/ tan2θW ,
and explicit expressions for the functions D′
0,E ′
0 can be
found in [642].
The new parameters of the LHT model, relevant for the
study of LFV decays, are
f, mℓ
H 1,m ℓ
H 2,m ℓ
H 3,θℓ
12,θℓ
13,θℓ
23,
δℓ
12,δℓ
13,δℓ
23
(5.25)
and the ones in the mirror quark sector that can be probed by
FCNC processes inK andB meson systems, as discussed in
detail in [638, 641]. Once the new heavy gauge bosons and
mirror fermions will be discovered and their masses mea-
sured at the LHC, the only free parameters of the LHT model
will be the mixing anglesθℓ
ij and the complex phasesδℓ
ij of
the matrixVHℓ , that can be determined with the help of LFV
processes. Analogous comments apply to the determination
ofVHd parameters in the quark sector (see [ 638, 641]f o r
details onK andB physics in the LHT model).
5.1.3.2 Results LFV processes in the LHT model have for
the ﬁrst time been discussed in [ 643], where the decays
ℓi → ℓjγhave been considered. Further, the new contri-
butions to (g − 2)μin the LHT model have been calcu-
lated by these authors. In [ 639, 640] the analysis of LFV
in the LHT model has been considerably extended, and in-
cludes the decays ℓi → ℓjγ,μ→ eee, the six three body
leptonic decays τ− → ℓ−
i ℓ+
j ℓ−
k , the semileptonic decays
τ→ ℓπ,ℓη,ℓη′ and the decaysKL,S → μe,KL,S → π0μe
andBd,s → ℓiℓj that are ﬂavor violating both in the quark
and lepton sector. Moreover, μ–e conversion in nuclei and
the ﬂavor conserving (g − 2)μhave been studied. Further-
more, a detailed phenomenological analysis has been per-
formed in that paper, paying particular attention to various
ratios of LFV branching ratios that will be useful for a clear
distinction of the LHT model from the MSSM.
In contrast toK andB physics in the LHT model, where
the SM contributions constitute a sizable and often the dom-
inant part, the T-even contributions to LFV observables
are completely negligible due to the smallness of neutrino
masses and the LFV decays considered are entirely gov-
erned by mirror fermion contributions.
In order to see how large these contributions can pos-
sibly be, it is useful to consider ﬁrst those decays for
which the strongest constraints exist. Therefore Fig.5 shows
B(μ→ eee) as a function of B(μ→ eγ), obtained from a
general scan over the mirror lepton parameter space, with
f = 1 TeV. It is found that in order to fulﬁll the present
bounds, either the mirror lepton spectrum has to be quasi-
degenerate or the VHℓ matrix must be very hierarchical.
Moreover, as shown in Fig. 6, even after imposing the con-
straints onμ→ eγandμ→ eee,t h eμ–e conversion rate
in Ti is very likely to be found close to its current bound,
and for some regions of the mirror lepton parameter space
even violates this bound.
The existing constraints on LFV τdecays are still rela-
tively weak, so that they presently do not provide a useful
constraint on the LHT parameter space. However, as seen
in Table 10, most branching ratios in the LHT model can
Fig. 5 Correlation betweenB(μ→ eγ)andB(μ→ eee) in the LHT
model (upper dots)[ 639]. The lower dots represent the dipole contri-
bution toμ→ eee separately, which, unlike in the LHT model, is the
dominant contribution in the MSSM. Thegrey regionis allowed by the
present experimental bounds


--- Page 52 ---
64 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 6 R(μTi → eTi) as a
function ofB(μ→ eγ),a f t e r
imposing the existing
constraints onμ→ eγand
μ→ eee [639]. The grey region
is allowed by the present
experimental bounds
Table 10 Upper bounds on LFVτdecay branching ratios in the LHT
model, for two different values of the scalef , after imposing the con-
straints on μ→ eγandμ→ eee [639]. For f = 500 GeV, also the
bounds onτ→ μπ,eπhave been included. The current experimental
upper bounds are also given. The bounds in [ 183] have been obtained
by combining Belle [646, 647] and BaBar [182, 648]r e s u l t s
Decay f = 1000 GeV f = 500 GeV exp. upper bound
τ→ eγ 8 × 10− 10 1 × 10− 8 9.4 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ μγ 8 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 1.6 × 10− 8 [183]
τ− → e− e+e− 7 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 2.0 × 10− 7 [644]
τ− → μ− μ+μ− 7 × 10− 10 3 × 10− 8 1.9 × 10− 7 [644]
τ− → e− μ+μ− 5 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 2.0 × 10− 7 [645]
τ− → μ− e+e− 5 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 1.9 × 10− 7 [645]
τ− → μ− e+μ− 5 × 10− 14 2 × 10− 14 1.3 × 10− 7 [644]
τ− → e− μ+e− 5 × 10− 14 2 × 10− 14 1.1 × 10− 7 [644]
τ→ μπ 2 × 10− 9 5.8 × 10− 8 5.8 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ eπ 2 × 10− 9 4.4 × 10− 8 4.4 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ μη 6 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 5.1 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ eη 6 × 10− 10 2 × 10− 8 4.5 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ μη′ 7 × 10− 10 3 × 10− 8 5.3 × 10− 8 [183]
τ→ eη′ 7 × 10− 10 3 × 10− 8 9.0 × 10− 8 [183]
reach the present experimental upper bounds, in particular
for low values off , and are very interesting in view of new
experiments taking place in this and the coming decade.
The situation is different in the case ofKL → μe,KL →
π0μeandBd,s → ℓiℓk, due to the double GIM suppression
in the quark and lepton sectors. E.g.B(KL → μe)can reach
values of at most 3 × 10− 13 which is still one order of mag-
nitude below the current bound, andKL → π0μeis even by
two orders of magnitude smaller. Still, measuring the rates
forKL → μeandKL → π0μewould be desirable, as, due
to their sensitivity to Re (ξ(K)
i ) and Im(ξ(K)
i ) respectively,
these decays can shed light on the complex phases present
in the mirror quark sector.
While the possible huge enhancements of LFV branch-
ing ratios in the LHT model are clearly interesting, such ef-
fects are common to many other NP models, such as the
MSSM, and therefore cannot be used to distinguish these
models. However, correlations between various branching
ratios should allow a clear distinction of the LHT model
from the MSSM. While in the MSSM [ 169, 175, 242, 649,
650] the dominant role in decays with three leptons in the ﬁ-
nal state and inμ–e conversion in nuclei is typically played
by the dipole operator, in [639] it is found that this operator
is basically irrelevant in the LHT model, whereZ0-penguin
and box diagram contributions are much more important. As
can be seen in Table11 and also in Fig.5 this implies a strik-
ing difference between various ratios of branching ratios in
the MSSM and in the LHT model and should be very useful
in distinguishing these two models. Even if for some decays
this distinction is less clear when signiﬁcant Higgs contri-
butions are present [169, 175, 650], it should be easier than
through high energy processes at LHC.
Another possibility to distinguish different NP models
through LFV processes is given by the measurement of
μ→ eγwith polarized muons. Measuring the angular dis-
tribution of the outgoing electrons, one can determine the


--- Page 53 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 65
Table 11 Comparison of various ratios of branching ratios in the LHT model and in the MSSM without and with signiﬁcant Higgs contributions
[639]
Ratio LHT MSSM (dipole) MSSM (Higgs)
B(μ− → e− e+e− )/B(μ→ eγ) 0.4–2.5 ∼ 6 × 10− 3 ∼ 6 × 10− 3
B(τ− → e− e+e− )/B(τ→ eγ) 0.4–2.3 ∼ 1 × 10− 2 ∼ 1 × 10− 2
B(τ− → μ− μ+μ− )/B(τ→ μγ) 0.4–2.3 ∼ 2 × 10− 3 0.06–0.1
B(τ− → e− μ+μ− )/B(τ→ eγ) 0.3–1.6 ∼ 2 × 10− 3 0.02–0.04
B(τ− → μ− e+e− )/B(τ→ μγ) 0.3–1.6 ∼ 1 × 10− 2 ∼ 1 × 10− 2
B(τ− → e− e+e− )/B(τ− → e− μ+μ− ) 1.3–1.7 ∼ 5 0.3–0.5
B(τ− → μ− μ+μ− )/B(τ− → μ− e+e− ) 1.2–1.6 ∼ 0.2 5–10
R(μTi → eTi)/B(μ→ eγ) 0.01–100 ∼ 5 × 10− 3 0.08–0.15
size of left and right handed contributions separately [ 651].
In addition, detecting also the electron spin would yield in-
formation on the relative phase between these two contribu-
tions [652]. We recall that the LHT model is peculiar in this
respect as it does not involve any right handed contribution.
On the other hand, the contribution of mirror leptons to
(g − 2)μ, being a ﬂavor conserving observable, is negli-
gible [639, 643], so that the possible discrepancy between
SM prediction and experimental data [653] cannot be cured.
This should also be contrasted with the MSSM with large
tanβand not too heavy scalars, where those corrections
could be signiﬁcant, thus allowing to solve the possible dis-
crepancy between SM prediction and experimental data.
5.1.3.3 Conclusions We have seen that LFV decays open
up an exciting playground for testing the LHT model. In-
deed, they could offer a very clear distinction between this
model and supersymmetry. Of particular interest are the ra-
tiosB(ℓi → eee)/B(ℓi → eγ)that are O(1) in the LHT
model but strongly suppressed in supersymmetric models
even in the presence of signiﬁcant Higgs contributions. Sim-
ilarly, ﬁnding theμ–e conversion rate in nuclei at the same
level asB(μ→ eγ)would point into the direction of LHT
physics rather than supersymmetry.
5.1.4 Low scale triplet Higgs neutrino mass scenarios in
little Higgs models
An important open issue to address in the context of lit-
tle Higgs models is the origin of non-zero neutrino masses
[654–658]. The neutrino mass mechanism which naturally
occurs in these models is the triplet Higgs mechanism [244]
which employs a scalar with the SU(2)L ×U(1)Y quan-
tum numbers T ∼ (3, 2). The existence of such a multi-
plet in some versions of the little Higgs models is a direct
consequence of global symmetry breaking which makes the
SM Higgs light. For example, in the minimal littlest Higgs
model [ 625], the triplet Higgs with non-zero hypercharge
occurs from the breaking of global SU(5) down to SO(5)
symmetry as one of the Goldstone bosons. Its mass MT ∼
gsf, wheregs< 4πis a model dependent coupling constant
in the weak coupling regime [659], is therefore predicted to
be below the cut-off scaleΛ, and could be within the mass
reach of LHC. The present lower bound for the invariant
mass ofT is set by Tevatron toMT ≥ 136 GeV [660, 661].
Although the triplet mass scale is of order O(1) TeV, the
observed neutrino masses can be obtained naturally. Due to
the speciﬁc quantum numbers the triplet Higgs boson cou-
ples only to the left-chiral lepton doublets Li ∼ (2, − 1),
i =e,μ,τ,via the Yukawa interactions of (3.63) and to the
SM Higgs bosons via (3.64). Those interactions induce lep-
ton ﬂavor violating decays of charged leptons which have
not been observed. The most stringent constraint on the
Yukawa couplings comes from the upper limit on the tree-
level decayμ→ eee and is15Yee
T Yeμ
T < 3 ×10− 5(M/TeV)2
[662, 663]. Experimental bounds on the tau Yukawa cou-
plings are much less stringent. The hierarchical light neu-
trino masses imply Yee
T ,Yeμ
T ≪Yττ
T consistently with the
direct experimental bounds.
Non-zero neutrino masses and mixing is presently the
only experimentally veriﬁed signal of new physics beyond
the SM. In the triplet neutrino mass mechanism [ 244]p r e -
sented in Sect. 3.2.3.2 the neutrino masses are given by
(mν)ij =Yij
T vT, (5.26)
where vT is the induced triplet VEV of ( 3.65). It is nat-
ural that the smallness of neutrino masses is explained by
the smallness of vT. In the little Higgs models this can be
achieved by requiring the Higgs mixing parameterμ≪MT ,
which can be explained, for example, via shining of explicit
lepton number violation from extra dimensions as shown in
Refs. [664, 665], or if the triplet is related to the Dark Energy
of the Universe [666, 667]. Models with additional (approx-
imate) T-parity [626] make the smallness of vT technically
15In little Higgs models with T-parity there exist additional sources of
ﬂavor violation from the mirror fermion sector [639, 643] discussed in
the previous subsection.


--- Page 54 ---
66 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
natural (if the T-parity is exact,vT must vanish). In that case
YTvT ∼ O(0.1) eV while the Yukawa couplings Y can be
of order charged lepton Yukawa couplings of the SM. As a
result, the branching ratio of the decay T → WW is negli-
gible. We also remind thatvT contributes to the SM oblique
corrections, and the precision data ﬁt ˆT< 2 × 10− 4 [668]
sets an upper boundvT ≤ 1.2 GeV on that parameter.
Notice the particularly simple connection between the
ﬂavor structure of light neutrinos and the Yukawa couplings
of the triplet via ( 5.26). Therefore, independently of the
overall size of the Yukawa couplings, one can predict the
leptonic branching ratios of the triplet from neutrino oscil-
lations. For the normally hierarchical light neutrino masses
neutrino data implies negligible T branching fractions to
electrons and B(T ++ → μ+μ+) ≈ B(T ++ → τ+τ+) ≈
B(T ++ → μ+τ+) ≈ 1/3. Those are the ﬁnal state signa-
tures predicted by the triplet neutrino mass mechanism for
collider experiments.
At LHCT ++ can be produced singly and in pairs. The
cross section of the singleT ++ production via theWW fu-
sion process [ 662]qq → q′q′T ++ scales as ∼ v2
T. In the
context of the littlest Higgs model this process, followed
by the decaysT ++ → W +W +, was studied in Refs. [669–
671]. The detailed ATLAS simulation of this channel shows
[671] that in order to observe an 1 TeV T ++, one must
havevT > 29 GeV . This is in conﬂict with the precision
physics bound vT ≤ 1.2 GeV as well as with the neutrino
data. Therefore the WW fusion channel is not experimen-
tally promising for the discovery of doubly charged Higgs.
On the other hand, the Drell–Yan pair production process
[662, 672–678]
pp → T ++T −−
is not suppressed by any small coupling and its cross sec-
tion is known up to next to leading order [ 674] (possible
additional contributions from new physics such as ZH are
strongly suppressed and we neglect those effects here). Fol-
lowed by the lepton number violating decaysT ±± → ℓ±ℓ±,
this process allows to reconstructT ±± invariant mass from
the same charged leptons rendering the SM background
to be very small in the signal region. If one also assumes
that neutrino masses come from the triplet Higgs interac-
tions, one ﬁxes the T ±± leptonic branching ratios. This al-
lows to test the triplet neutrino mass model at LHC. The pure
Monte Carlo study of this scenario shows [ 677] that T ++
up to the mass 300 GeV is reachable in the ﬁrst year of LHC
(
˜ℓ†
L ˜ℓ†
R
)(
m2
L(1 +δLL)( A ∗ − μtanβ)mℓ +mLmRδLR
(A − μ∗ tanβ)mℓ +mLmRδLR† m2
R(1 +δRR)
)( ˜ℓL
˜ℓR
)
(L = 1f b − 1) and T ++ up to the mass 800 GeV is reach-
able for the luminosityL = 30 fb− 1. Including the Gaussian
measurement errors to the Monte Carlo the corresponding
mass reaches become [677] 250 GeV and 700 GeV , respec-
tively. The errors of those estimates of the required luminos-
ity for discovery depend strongly on the size of statistical
Monte Carlo sample of the background processes.
5.2 Flavor and CP violation in SUSY extensions of the SM
Supersymmetric models provide the richest spectrum of lep-
ton ﬂavor and CP-violating observables among all mod-
els. They are also among the best studied scenarios of new
physics beyond the standard model. In this Section we re-
view phenomenologically most interesting aspects of some
of the supersymmetric scenarios.
5.2.1 Mass insertion approximation and phenomenology
In the low energy supersymmetric extensions of the SM
the ﬂavor and CP-violating interactions would originate
from the misalignment between fermion and sfermion mass
eigenstates. Understanding why all these processes are
strongly suppressed is one of the major problems of low
energy supersymmetry, the supersymmetric ﬂavor and CP
problem. The absence of deviations from the SM predic-
tions in LFV and CPV (and other ﬂavor changing processes
in the quark sector) experiments suggests the presence of
a quite small amount of fermion-sfermion misalignment.
From the phenomenological point of view those effects
are most easily described by the mass insertion approxima-
tion.
The relevant one loop amplitudes can be exactly writ-
ten in terms of the general mass matrix of charginos and
neutralinos, resulting in quite involved expressions. To ob-
tain simple approximate expressions, it is convenient to use
the so-called mass insertion method [ 145, 679]. This is a
particularly convenient method since, in a model indepen-
dent way, the tolerated deviation from alignment is quan-
tiﬁed by the upper limits on the mass insertion δ’s, de-
ﬁned as the small off-diagonal elements in terms of which
sfermion propagators are expanded, normalized with an av-
erage sfermion mass,δij =Δij/m2
˜f . They are of four types:
δLL,δRR ,δRL andδLR, according to the chiralities of the
corresponding partner fermions. We shall adopt here the
usual convention for the slepton mass matrix in the basis
where the lepton mass matrixmℓ is diagonal:


--- Page 55 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 67
wheremL,mR, are respectively the average real masses of
the left handed and right handed sleptons and A contains
only the diagonal entries the trilinear matrices at the elec-
troweak scale. Notice that these ﬂavor diagonal left–right
mixing are always present in any MSSM and play a very
important role in LFV processes. In this way, our δLR con-
tain only the off-diagonal elements of the trilinear matrices.
This deﬁnition is then slightly different from the original de-
ﬁnition in Refs. [145, 680]. The deviations from universality
are then all gathered in the differentδmatrices.
Each element in these δmatrices can be tested by ex-
periment. Searches for the decayℓi → ℓjγprovide bounds
on the absolute values of the off-diagonal (ﬂavor violat-
ing) |δLL
ij |, |δRR
ij |, |δLR
ij | and |δRL
ij |, while measurements of
the lepton EDM (MDM), parameters and their CP-violating
phases, also provide limits on the imaginary (real) part
of combinations of ﬂavor violating δ’s,δLL
ij δLR
ji ,δLR
ij δRR
ji ,
δLL
ij δRR
ji andδLR
ij δLR
ji . Many authors have addressed the is-
sue of the bounds on these misalignment parameters and
phases in the sleptonic sector [ 680]. Following [ 163]w e
present the current limits onμ→ eγand we analyze the im-
pact of the planned experimental improvements onτ→ μγ.
In the basis whereYℓ is diagonal, and in the mass insertion
approximation, the branching ratio of the process reads
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)= 10− 5 ×B(ℓi → ℓj ¯νjνi)M4
W
¯m4
L
× tan2β
⏐⏐δLL
ij
⏐⏐2FSUSY, (5.27)
where FSUSY =O(1) is a function of supersymmetric
masses including both chargino and neutralino exchange
(see e.g., [ 163], and references therein). We focus for def-
initeness on the mSUGRA scenario, also assuming gaug-
ino and scalar universality at the gauge coupling uniﬁcation
scale and ﬁxing μas required by the radiative electroweak
symmetry breaking.
As for LFV , Figs.7 and 8 display the upper bounds on the
|δ|’s in the(M1,mR) plane, whereM1 andmR are the bino
Fig. 7 Upper limits onδ12’s in mSUGRA. HereM1 andmR are the bino and right-slepton masses, respectively
Fig. 8 Upper limits onδ23’s in mSUGRA. HereM1 andmR are the bino and right-slepton masses, respectively


--- Page 56 ---
68 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
and right-slepton masses, respectively. Deviations from the
mSUGRA assumptions can be estimated by means of rela-
tively simple analytical expressions. In Figs. 7 and 8 we can
see that the bounds on δRR
ji depend strongly and are prac-
tically absent for some values of M1 andmR. This fact is
due to a destructive interference between the bino and bino–
higgsino amplitudes [ 163]. On the contrary, the limits on
δLL
ji are robust because of a constructive interference be-
tween the chargino and bino amplitudes. A weaker bound
onδRR
12 on the cancellation regions can be obtained combin-
ing the experimental information from the decays μ→ eγ,
μ→ eee and μ–e conversion in nuclei [ 165, 681]. The
present limits onμ→ eγprovide interesting constraints on
the related δ’s. As will be discussed in the following, the
present sensitivity already allow to test theseδ’s at the level
of the radiative effects. Such a sensitivity could hopefully be
reached also in future experiments onτ→ μγ.
Another issue is the origin of the CP-violating phases
in the leptonic EDMs. Unless the sparticle masses are in-
creased above several TeVs, the phases in the ﬂavor diag-
onal elements of the slepton left–right mass matrices (in
the lepton ﬂavor basis), in the parameters μand Ai of
supersymmetric models, have to be quite small, and this
constitutes the so-called supersymmetric CP problem. For
the bounds on the sources of CPV also associated to FV ,
like e.g. Im(δLL
ij δRR
ji )ee and so on, we refer to the plots in
Ref. [163].
5.2.2 Lepton ﬂavor violation from RGE effects in SUSY
seesaw model
5.2.2.1 Predictions from ﬂavor models Consider ﬁrst the
possibility that ﬂavor and CP are exact symmetries of the
soft supersymmetry breaking sector deﬁned at the appropri-
ate cutoff scaleΛ(to be identiﬁed with the Planck scale for
supergravity, the messenger mass for gauge mediation, etc).
If below this scale there are ﬂavor and CP-violating Yukawa
interactions, it is well-known that in the running down to
mSUSY they will induce a small amount of ﬂavor and CP
violation in sparticle masses.
The Yukawa interactions associated to the fermion mass-
es and mixing of the SM clearly violate any ﬂavor and CP
symmetries. However, with the exception of the third gener-
ation Yukawa couplings, all the entries in the Yukawa ma-
trices are very small and the radiatively induced misalign-
ment in the sfermion mass matrices turns out to be negligi-
ble. The Yukawa interactions of heavy states beyond the SM
coupling to the SM fermions induce misalignments propor-
tional to a proper combination of their Yukawa couplings
times lnmF/Λ, where mF represents the heavy state mass
scale. This is the case for the seesaw interactions of the right
handed neutrinos [144, 145] and/or the GUT interactions of
the heavy colored triplets [ 682, 683] (those eventually ex-
changed in diagrams inducing proton decay). Notice that
the observation of large mixing in light neutrino masses,
may suggest the possibility that also the seesaw interactions
could signiﬁcantly violate ﬂavor- and potentially also CP,
in particular in view of the mechanism of leptogenesis. Re-
markably, for sparticle masses not exceeding the TeV , the
seesaw and colored-triplet induced radiative contributions to
the LFV decays and lepton EDM might be close to or even
exceed the present or planned experimental limits. Clearly,
these processes constitute an important constraint on seesaw
and/or GUT models.
For instance, in a type I seesaw model in the low energy
basis where charged leptons are diagonal, theij element of
the left handed slepton mass matrix provides the dominant
contribution in the decayℓi → ℓjγ. Assuming, for the sake
of simplicity, an mSUGRA spectrum at Λ=MPl, one ob-
tains at the leading log [178]:
δLL
ij =
(m2
ij)LL
m2
L
=− 1
8π2
3m2
0 +A2
0
m2
L
Cij,
Cij ≡
∑
k
Yν∗
kiYνkj lnMPl
Mk
,
(5.28)
where m0 and A0 are respectively the universal scalar
masses and trilinear couplings at MPl, m2
L is an average
left handed slepton mass and Mk the mass of the right
handed neutrino with k = 1, 2, 3. An experimental limit
onB(ℓi → ℓjγ)corresponds to an upper bound on |Cij |
[38, 233]. Forμ→ eγandτ→ μγthis bound is shown in
Fig. 9 as a function of the right handed selectron mass.
The seesaw model dependence resides inCij . Notice that
in the fundamental theory at high energy, the size of Cij is
determined both by the Yukawa eigenvalues and the large-
ness of the mixing angles of VR,VL, the unitary matrices
which diagonalizeYν(in the basis whereMR andYe are di-
agonal):VRYνVL =Y(diag)
ν . The left handed misalignment
between neutrino and charged lepton Yukawa’s is given by
VL and, due to the mild effect of the logarithm in Cij ,i n
ﬁrst approximation VL itself diagonalizes Cij . If we con-
sider hierarchicalYνeigenvalues,Y3>Y 2>Y 1, the contri-
butions fromk = 1, 2i n( 5.28) can in ﬁrst approximation be
neglected with respect to the contribution from the heaviest
eigenvalue (k = 3):
|Cij |≈| VLi3VLj3|Y 2
3 log(MPl/M3). (5.29)
Taking supersymmetric particle masses around the TeV
scale, it has been shown that many seesaw models predict
|Cμe| and/or |Cτμ| close to the experimentally accessible
range. Let us consider the predictions for the seesaw-RGE
induced contribution toτ→ μγandμ→ eγin the ﬂavor
models discussed previously.


--- Page 57 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 69
Fig. 9 Upper limit onC32 and
C21 for the experimental
sensitivities displayed [38]
The present experimental bound on τ→ μγis not
very strong but nevertheless promising. In models with
“lopsided” Yν, one has VL32VL32 ≈ 1/2, hence |Cτμ|=
O(4 ×Y 2
3),f o rM3 ≃ 4 × 1015 GeV . This is precisely the
case for theU(1) ﬂavor model discussed in Sect. 2.2, where
Y3 ≈ ϵnc
3 withϵ ≈ 0.22 (the Cabibbo angle). For this model,
plannedτ→ μγsearches could thus be successful if the
heaviest right handed neutrino has null charge, nc
3 = 0. On
the contrary, in models with small VL23 mixing, like in the
non-Abelian models discussed previously, the seesaw-RGE
induced effect is below the experimental sensitivity.
The present experimental bound on μ→ eγis already
very severe in constraining |Cμe|. For instance, if VL ≈
VCKM, one obtains Cμe=O(10− 3 ×Y 2
3). As can be seen
from Fig. 9,VL could in future be tested at a CKM-level if
Y3 =O(1) [164]. The predictions forμ→ eγare however
very model dependent. For the simple U(1) ﬂavor model
of Sect. 2.2, the mixings of VL are of the same order of
magnitude as those of UPMNS and one expects |Cμe|=
O(8 ×ϵ2nc
3+1):i fnc
3 = 0 the prediction exceeds the experi-
mental limit, which is respected only withnc
3 ≥ 1[ 684]. On
the contrary, the non-Abelian models discussed previously
haveY3 ∼ 1, but the VL-mixings are sufﬁciently small to
suppress the seesaw-RGE induced effect below the present
experimental level [164].
5.2.2.2 Parameter dependence for degenerate heavy neutri-
nos Equation (5.28) indicates that LFV in the minimal su-
persymmetric seesaw model depends on soft supersymmetry
breaking masses as well as on the seesaw parameters. The
latter can be parameterized via the heavy and light neutrino
masses, the light neutrino mixing matrix and the orthogonal
matrixR of (3.45). The three complex mixing angles para-
meterizingR can be written as ˆθj =xj +iyj,j = 1, 2, 3.
For the following numerical examples we use the mSUGRA
point SPS1a [685] for SUSY breaking masses.
In the case of degenerate heavy neutrino masses, Mi =
MR (i = 1, 2, 3), and real R,t h eR dependence in ( 5.28)
and hence also in B(li → ljγ)drops out. However, ifR is
complex, the LFV observables have more freedom since the
dependence on yi can be as signiﬁcant as the MR depen-
dence, as Fig. 10 shows. For small |yi |, the change inY †
νYν
is approximately
ΔR
(
Y †
νYν
)
≈ UPMNS diag(√ mi)
(
R†R − 1
)
× diag(√ mi)U†
PMNS, (5.30)
while the renormalization effects on the soft supersymmetry
breaking masses can be estimated via [273]
m8
L ≃ 0.5m2
0M2
1/2
(
m2
0 + 0.6M2
1/2
)2, (5.31)
whereM1/2 is the universal gaugino mass at high scale. In
certain cases, the leading logarithmic approximation fails, as
pointed out in [238, 273, 275, 686].
Equation (5.30) implies three features seen in Fig. 10:
(i) Compared to the case of degenerate light neutrino
masses, the y dependence in the hierarchical case is
weaker.
(ii) Observables like ( 5.27) are larger in the case of com-
plexR than in the case of realR. For a givenMR,e v e n
small values of y can enhance a process by orders of
magnitude.
(iii) In contrast to the real R case, where B(li → ljγ)for
degenerate light neutrinos is always larger than for hi-
erarchical light neutrinos, the relative magnitude can be
reversed for complexR.
To examine the parameter dependence of rare decays at
large |yi |> 0.1, we extend the above analysis to the case
where the yi are independent of one another. For random
values of all parameters in their full ranges, the typical be-


--- Page 58 ---
70 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 10 (Color online) Degenerate heavy neutrinos: LFV branching ratio versus |yi |= y for ﬁxedMi =MR = 1012 GeV in mSUGRA scenario
SPS1a for hierarchical (dark red) and degenerate (light green) light neutrino masses. Thexi are scattered over 0<xi < 2π
Fig. 11 Degenerate heavy neutrinos: LFV branching ratios versus
MR
√
y2
1 +y2
2 +y2
3 , for light neutrinos. The yi are scattered logarith-
mically in the range 10 − 5 < |yi |< 1 (independently of one another)
andMR is scattered logarithmically in the range 1010<MR<M GUT.
Thexi are scattered over 0<xi < 2π
havior
⏐⏐(
Y †
νLYν
)
jk
⏐⏐2 ∝
{
M2
R(C1y2
1 +C2y2
2 +C3y2
3) deg.νL
M2
R hier.νL
(j ̸=k), (5.32)
is found, with Ci =O(1), slightly dependent on j,k .T h i s
behavior can be seen in Fig. 11 for degenerate light neutri-
nos. Thus for large |yi | all rare decays may be of a similar
order of magnitude. For hierarchical light neutrinos, a simi-
lar behavior is observed, but versusM2
R only.
5.2.2.3 Parameter dependence for hierarchical heavy neu-
trinos Hierarchical spectrum of heavy Majorana neutrinos,
M1 ≪M2 ≪M3, is well motivated by the arguments of
light neutrino mass and mixing generation and leptogen-
esis. Requiring successful thermal leptogenesis puts addi-
tional constraints on the seesaw parameters and constrains
the LFV observables [ 329]. This is the approach we take
in this subsection. In particular, the relation ( 3.93) implies
a lower bound on M1 [306], e.g., if ϵ1> 10− 6, thenM1>
5 × 109 GeV . Furthermore, to allow for thermal production
of right handed neutrinos after inﬂation, one has to exclude
M1> 1011 GeV , at least in simple scenarios. Otherwise a too
high re-heating temperature would lead to an overabundance
of gravitinos, whose decays into energetic photons can spoil
big bang nucleosynthesis. Details of leptogenesis have been
described in Sect. 3.3.1.
Assuming hierarchical light neutrinos with /Delta1m2
sol <
m2
3 </Delta1m2
atm, the condition to reproduce the experimental
baryon asymmetry, ηB =(6.3 ± 0.3) × 10− 10, puts con-
straints on M1 and the R matrix [ 687]. This is illustrated
in Fig. 12 in theM1–x2 plane. ForM1< 1011 GeV ,x2 has
to approach the values 0,π,2π. A similar behavior is ob-
served in theM1–x3 plane.
TakingM1 = 1010 GeV and x2 ≈ x3 ≈ n ·π, experi-
mental bounds on B(μ→ eγ)can be used to constrain
the heavy neutrino scale, here represented by the heaviest
right handed neutrino mass M3, as shown in the right plot
of Fig. 12. Quantitatively, the present bound on B(μ→
eγ)already constrains M3 to be smaller than ≈ 1013 GeV ,
while the MEG experiment at PSI is sensitive to M3 ≤
O(1012) GeV . If no signal is observed it will be difﬁcult
to test the type I seesaw model considered here at future col-
liders.


--- Page 59 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 71
Fig. 12 Hierarchical heavy neutrinos: Region in the plane (x2,M 1)
consistent with the generation of the baryon asymmetry ηB =(6.3 ±
0.3) × 10− 10 via leptogenesis ( left). [ Right] B(μ→ eγ)versus
M3| cos2θ2| in mSUGRA scenario SPS1a, for M1 = 1010 GeV and
x2 ≈ x3 ≈ n ·π. All other seesaw parameters are scattered in their
allowed ranges for hierarchical light and heavy neutrinos. The solid
(dashed) line indicates the present (expected future) experimental sen-
sitivity
Fig. 13 The branching ratios of the LFV decaysμ→ e +γandτ→
μ+γversusm1 in the cases of complex and real matrix R withα=
0;π/2;π. The three parameters describing the matrix R [275, 545]
are generated randomly. The SUSY parameters are tan β= 10,m0 =
100 GeV ,m1/2 = 250 GeV ,A0 =− 100 GeV , and the neutrino mixing
parameters are /Delta1m2
⊙ = 8.0 × 10− 5 eV2,/Delta1m2
atm = 2.2 × 10− 3 eV2,
tan2θ⊙ = 0.4, tan 2θatm = 1, and sin θ13 = 0.0. The neutrino mass
spectrum atMZ is assumed to be with normal hierarchy, m1(MZ)<
m2(MZ)<m 3(MZ). The right handed neutrino mass spectrum is taken
to be degenerate asM1 =M2 =M3 = 2 × 1013 GeV [275]
5.2.2.4 Effects of renormalization of light neutrino masses
on LFV The RG running of the neutrino parameters
can have an important impact on lepton ﬂavor violating
processes in MSSM extended by right handed neutrinos.
In this example we assume universal soft SUSY break-
ing terms at GUT scale and degenerate heavy neutrinos
with mass MR. The running effects below MR are rel-
atively small when tan βis smaller than 10 and/or m1
is much smaller than 0 .05 eV . Because the combination
s12c12c23(m1 − m2eiαM), where we use the notation of
Sect. 3.2.3.3, is practically stable against the RG running,
and this combination is the dominant term of(Y †
νYν)21 when
αM = 0,θ13 = 0 and R∗ =R are satisﬁed, the running ef-
fect on LFV can be neglected in this case [ 275]. In gen-
eral,(Y †
νYν)21 andB(μ→ e +γ)can depend strongly on
θ13 and RG running has to be taken into account [ 686,
688]. Note that due to RG running, the value of θ13 at
MR differs from 0, even if θ13 = 0 is assumed at low en-
ergy [275].
In many cases, the running of the neutrino parameters
can signiﬁcantly affect the prediction of the LFV branch-
ing ratios. In particular, for 0 .05 ≲m1 ≲ 0.30 eV , 30 ≲
tanβ≲ 50, the predicted μ→ e +γandτ→ e +γde-
cay branching ratios, B(μ→ e +γ)andB(τ→ e +γ),
can be enhanced by the effects of the RG running ofθij and
mj by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude if π/4 ≲αM ≲π, while
B(τ→ μ+γ)can be enhanced by up to a factor of 10 [275].
The effects of the running of the neutrino mixing parame-
ters ofB(μ→ e +γ)andB(τ→ e +γ)are illustrated in
Fig. 13.


--- Page 60 ---
72 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
5.2.3 Correlations between LFV observables and collider
physics
5.2.3.1 Correlations of LFV rare decays Equations (5.27)
and ( 5.28) imply correlations between different LFV ob-
servables. In addition to the correlations between different
classes of LFV observables in the same ﬂavor mixing chan-
nels, the assumed LFV mechanism induces also correlations
among the |(mL)2
ij |2 and hence among observables of dif-
ferent ﬂavor mixing channels. In this framework, the ratios
of the branching ratios are approximately independent of
SUSY parameters:
B(τ→ μγ)
B(μ→ eγ)∝ |(Y †
νLYν)23|2
|(Y †
νLYν)12|2
. (5.33)
Thus the measurement of the ratio between the decay rates
of the different LFV channels can provide unique informa-
tion on the ﬂavor structure of the lepton sector. The ratios
of interest, such as ( 5.33), can exhibit, for instance, strong
dependence on CP-violating parameters in neutrino Yukawa
couplings [691] especially in the case of quasi-degenerate
heavy RH neutrinos. As a consequence such correlations
have been widely studied (see, e.g., [38, 178, 238, 242, 249,
329, 334, 649, 691, 693] and the references quoted therein).
Consequently, bounds on one LFV decay channel (process)
will limit the parameter space of the LFV mechanism and
thus lead to bounds on the other LFV decay channels
(processes). In Fig. 14, the correlation induced by the type I
seesaw mechanism between B(μ→ eγ)andB(τ→ μγ)
is shown, and the bounds induced by the former on the
latter can be easily read off. Interestingly, these bounds
do not depend on whether hierarchical or quasi-degenerate
heavy and light neutrinos are assumed. The present and fu-
ture prospective bounds are summarized in Table 12.N o t e
that the present upper bound on B(μ→ eγ)implies a
stronger constraint on B(τ→ μγ)than its expected future
bound.
The above results were derived in the simplifying case
of a real R matrix. For complex R with |yi |< 1 there is
no signiﬁcant change with respect to the results in Table 12
in the case of hierarchical heavy and hierarchical light neu-
trinos due to the weak R dependence of B(μ→ eγ)and
B(τ→ μγ). However, for quasi-degenerate light neutrinos,
B(τ→ μγ)is lowered by roughly one order of magnitude,
somewhat spoiling the overlap of all scenarios observed in
Fig. 14.
In Fig. 15, we display the correlation between B(μ→
eγ)andB(τ→ μγ)for complexR and some ﬁxed values
ofMR in the case of quasi-degenerate RH neutrino masses
Fig. 14 B(τ→ μγ)versusB(μ→ eγ), in mSUGRA scenario SPS1a
with neutrino parameters scattered within their experimentally allowed
ranges [ 689]. For quasi-degenerate heavy neutrino masses, both hi-
erarchical (triangles) and quasi-degenerate ( diamonds) light neutrino
masses are considered with real R and 10 11 <MR < 1014.5 GeV.
In the case of hierarchical heavy and light neutrino masses ( stars),
the xi are scattered over their full ranges 0 <xi < 2πand the yi
and Mi are scattered within the bounds demanded by leptogenesis
and perturbativity. Also indicated are the present experimental bounds
B(μ→ eγ)<1.2 × 10− 11 andB(τ→ μγ)<6.8 × 10− 8 [191, 690]
Table 12 Present and expected future bounds onB(μ→ eγ)from experiment, and bounds onB(τ→ μγ)from (i) experiment (ii) the bound on
B(μ→ eγ)together with correlations from the SUSY type I seesaw mechanism
B(μ→ eγ)(exp.) B(τ→ μγ)(exp.) B(τ→ μγ)a
Present 1 .2 × 10− 11 6.8 × 10− 8 10− 9
Future 10 − 14 10− 9 10− 12
afromB(μ→ eγ)(exp.) and SUSY seesaw


--- Page 61 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 73
Fig. 15 The correlation betweenB(μ→ eγ)andB(τ→ μγ)for quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos and light neutrino mass spectrum of normal
hierarchical (left panel) and inverted hierarchical (right panel) type
Fig. 16 Correlation of LFV LC processes and rare decays in theeμ-channel (left)a n dt h eμτ-channel (right). The seesaw parameters are scattered
as in Fig. 14. The mSUGRA scenarios used are (from left to right): SPS1a, G′ (eμ)a n dC′,B ′, SPS1a, I′ (μτ)
and a normal and inverted hierarchical light neutrino mass
spectrum. We note that, as Fig. 15 suggests,B(τ→ μγ)
is almost independent of the CP violating parameters and
phases respectively in R andU, while the dependence of
B(μ→ eγ)on the CP-violating quantities is much stronger.
This is reﬂected, in particular, in the fact that for a ﬁxedMR,
B(τ→ μγ)is practically constant while B(μ→ μγ)can
change by 2–3 orders of magnitude.
If theμ→ eγandτ→ μγdecays will be observed, the
ratio of interest can give unique information on the origin of
the lepton ﬂavor violation.
5.2.3.2 LFV rare decays and linear collider processes In
high energye+e− colliders [692], feasible tests of LFV are
provided by the processes e+e− → ˜l−
a ˜l+
b → l−
i l+
j + 2 ˜χ0
1 .
Analogously to ( 5.27), one can derive the approximate ex-
pression [695]
σ
(
e+e− → l−
i l+
j + 2 ˜χ0
1
)
≈
|(δmL)2
ij |2
m2
˜lΓ2
˜l
σ
(
e+e− → l−
i l+
i + 2 ˜χ0
1
)
, (5.34)
for the production cross section in the limit of small slep-
ton mass corrections. By comparing (5.27) with (5.34), it is
immediately apparent that the linear collider (LC) processes
are ﬂavor-correlated with the rare decays considered previ-
ously. These correlations are shown in Fig. 16 for the two
most important channels.
This observation implies that once the SUSY parameters
are known, a measurement of, e.g.,B(μ→ eγ)will lead to
a prediction forσ(e+e− → μe+2 ˜χ0
1). Quite obviously, this
prediction will be independent of the speciﬁc LFV mecha-
nism (seesaw or other). Figure 16 also demonstrates that the
uncertainties in the neutrino parameters nicely drop out ex-
cept at large cross sections and branching ratios.


--- Page 62 ---
74 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
In the previous results we have assumed a speciﬁc choice
of the as yet unknown mSUGRA parameters. The results of
a more systematic study of the model dependence are visual-
ized in Fig.17 by contour plots forσ(e+e− → μ+e− +2 ˜χ0
1)
andB(μ→ eγ)in the m0–m1/2 plane with the remaining
mSUGRA parameters ﬁxed.
Fig. 17 Contours of the polarized cross section σ(e+e− →
μ+e− + 2 ˜χ0
1) (solid)a n dB(μ→ eγ)(dashed)i nt h em0–m1/2 plane.
The remaining mSUGRA parameters are A0 = 0 GeV , tanβ= 5,
sign(μ)=+ . The energy and beam polarizations are √ see = 1.5T e V ,
Pe− =+ 0.9, Pe+ =+ 0.7. The neutrino oscillation parameters are
ﬁxed at their central values as given in [689], the lightest neutrino mass
m1 = 0 and all complex phases are set to zero, and the degenerate right
handed neutrino mass scale is MR = 1014 GeV . Theshaded (red) ar-
eas are already excluded by mass bounds from various experimental
sparticle searches
5.2.3.3 LFV rare decays and LHC processes At the LHC,
a feasible test of LFV is provided by squark and gluino pro-
duction, followed by cascade decays of squarks and gluinos
via neutralinos and sleptons [696, 697]:
pp →˜ qa ˜qb, ˜g ˜qa, ˜g ˜g,
˜qa( ˜g) →˜ χ0
2qa(g),
˜χ0
2 → ˜lαlβ,
˜lα→˜ χ0
1lβ,
(5.35)
where a, b run over all squark mass eigenstates, includ-
ing antiparticles, andα,βare slepton (lepton) mass (ﬂavor)
eigenstates, including antiparticles. LFV can occur in the
decay of the second lightest neutralino and/or the slepton,
resulting in different lepton ﬂavors, α̸=β. The total cross
section for the signaturel+
αl−
β+X can then be written as
σ
(
pp → l+
αl−
β+X
)
=
[∑
a,b
σ(pp→˜ qa ˜qb) ×B
(
˜qa →˜ χ0
2qa
)
+
∑
a
σ(pp→˜ qa ˜g) ×
(
B
(
˜qa →˜ χ0
2qa
)
+B
(
˜g →˜ χ0
2g
))
+σ(pp→˜ g ˜g) ×B
(
˜g →˜ χ0
2g
)]
×B
(
˜χ0
2 → l+
αl−
β˜χ0
1
)
, (5.36)
whereX can involve jets, leptons and LSPs produced by
lepton ﬂavor conserving decays of squarks and gluinos, as
well as low energy proton remnants. The LFV branching ra-
tioB( ˜χ0
2 → l+
αl−
β˜χ0
1) is for example calculated in [ 698]i n
the framework of model-independent MSSM slepton mix-
ing. In general, it involves a coherent summation over all
intermediate slepton states.
Just as for the linear collider discussed in the previous
section, we can correlate the expected LFV event rates at
the LHC with LFV rare decays. This is shown in Fig. 18 for
Fig. 18 (Color online) Correlation of the number of ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1
events per year at the LHC and B(μ→ eγ)in mSUGRA scenario
C′ (m0 = 85 GeV ,m1/2 = 400 GeV ,A0 = 0 GeV , tanβ= 10 GeV ,
signμ=+ ) for the case of hier. νR/L (blue stars), deg. νR /hier.νL
(red boxes) and deg. νR/L (green triangles). The respective neutrino
parameter scattering ranges are as in Fig. 14. An integrated LHC lu-
minosity of 100 fb − 1 is assumed. The current limit on B(μ→ eγ)is
displayed by the vertical line


--- Page 63 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 75
the event ratesN( ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1) andN( ˜χ0
2 → τ+μ− ˜χ0
1),
respectively, originating from the cascade reactions ( 5.35).
Both are correlated with B(μ→ eγ), yielding maximum
rates of around 10 2–3 per year for an integrated luminosity
of (100 fb− 1) in the mSUGRA scenario C ′, consistent with
the current limit onB(μ→ eγ).
As in the linear collider case, the correlation is approxi-
mately independent of the neutrino parameters, but highly
dependent on the mSUGRA parameters. This is contem-
plated further in Fig.19, comparing the sensitivity of the sig-
natureN( ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1) at the LHC with B(μ→ eγ)in
them0–m1/2 plane. As for the linear collider, LHC searches
can be competitive with the rare decay experiments for
smallm0 ≈ 200 GeV . Tests in the large-m0 region are again
severely limited by collider kinematics.
Up to now we have considered LFV in the class of type I
SUSY seesaw model described in Sect. 3.2.3.1, which is
representative of models of ﬂavor mixing in the left handed
slepton sector only. However, it is instructive to analyze gen-
eral mixing in the left and right handed slepton sector, inde-
pendent of any underlying model for slepton ﬂavor viola-
tion. The easiest way to achieve this is by assuming mixing
between two ﬂavors only, which can be parameterized by a
mixing angleθL/R and a mass difference(/Delta1m)L/R between
the sleptons, in the case of left/right handed slepton mixing,
respectively.16 In particular, the left/right handed selectron
Fig. 19 Contours of the number of ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1 events at the LHC
with an integrated luminosity of 100 fb − 1 (solid) and of B(μ→ eγ)
in them0–m1/2 plane. The remaining mSUGRA and neutrino oscilla-
tion parameters are as in Fig. 17.T h e shaded (red) areas are already
excluded by mass bounds from various experimental sparticle searches
16Note that this is different to the approach in [698], where the slepton
mass matrix elements are scattered randomly.
and smuon sector is then diagonalized by
( ˜l1
˜l2
)
=U ·
(
˜eL/R
˜μL/R
)
, with
U =
(
cosθL/R sinθL/R
− sinθL/R cosθL/R
)
, (5.37)
and a mass difference m˜l2 − m˜l1 =(/Delta1m)L/R between
the slepton mass eigenvalues. 17 The LFV branching ratio
B( ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1) can then be written in terms of the mix-
ing parameters and the ﬂavor conserving branching ratio
B( ˜χ0
2 → e+e− ˜χ0
1) as
B
(
˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1
)
= 2s i n2θL/R cos2θL/R
(/Delta1m)2
L/R
(/Delta1m)2
L/R +Γ2
˜l
×B
(
˜χ0
2 → e+e− ˜χ0
1
)
, (5.38)
whereΓ˜l is the average width of the two sleptons involved.
Maximal LFV is thus achieved by choosing θL/R =π/4
and(/Delta1m)L/R ≫Γ˜l . For deﬁniteness, we use (/Delta1m)L/R =
0.5 GeV . The results of this calculation can be seen in
Fig. 20, which shows contour plots of N( ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1)
in the m0–m1/2 plane for maximal left and right handed
slepton mixing, respectively. Also displayed are the corre-
sponding contours of B(μ→ eγ). We see that the present
boundB(μ→ eγ)= 10− 11 still permits sizable LFV sig-
nal rates at the LHC. However, B(μ→ eγ)<10− 14
would exclude the observation of such an LFV signal at
the LHC.
5.2.4 Impact of θ13 on LFV in SUSY seesaw
In this subsection we present the results of the LFV tau
and muon decays within the SUSY singlet-seesaw con-
text. Speciﬁcally, we consider the constrained minimal su-
persymmetric standard model (CMSSM) extended by three
right handed neutrinos, νRi and their corresponding SUSY
partners, ˜νRi (i = 1, 2, 3), and use the seesaw mechanism
for the neutrino mass generation. We include the predic-
tions for the branching ratios (BRs) of two types of LFV
channels,lj → liγandlj → 3li , and compare them with
the present bounds and future experimental sensitivities. We
ﬁrst analyze the dependence of the BRs with the most rel-
evant SUSY-seesaw parameters, and we then focus on the
particular sensitivity to θ13, which we ﬁnd specially inter-
esting on the light of its potential future measurement. We
17In case of left handed mixing, the mixing angle θL and the mass
difference(/Delta1m)L are also used to describe the sneutrino sector.


--- Page 64 ---
76 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 20 Contours of the events per year N( ˜χ0
2 → μ+e− ˜χ0
1) at the
LHC with an integrated luminosity of 100 fb − 1 in the m0–m1/2
plane ( solid lines ). The remaining mSUGRA parameters are: A0 =
− 100 GeV , tanβ= 10, sign(μ)=+ .T h e left and right panels are
for maximal ˜eL ˜μL and ˜eR ˜μR mixing (θ=π/4,/Delta1m= 1 GeV), re-
spectively. For comparison,B(μ→ eγ)is shown by dashed lines.T h e
shaded (red) areas are forbidden by mass bounds from various experi-
mental sparticle searches
further study the constraints from the requirement of suc-
cessfully producing the Baryon Asymmetry of the Universe
via thermal leptogenesis, which is another appealing feature
of the SUSY-seesaw scenario. We conclude with the impact
that a potential measurement of the leptonic mixing angle
θ13 can have on LFV physics.
Regarding the technical aspects of the computation of the
branching ratios, the most relevant points are (for details, see
[649, 686]:
– It is a full one loop computation of BRs, i.e., we include
all contributing one loop diagrams with the SUSY par-
ticles ﬂowing in the loops. For the case of lj → liγthe
analytical formulas can be found in [ 178, 649]. For the
case lj → 3li the complete set of diagrams (including
photon-penguin, Z-penguin, Higgs-penguin and box di-
agrams) and formulae are given in [649].
– The computation is performed in the physical basis for all
SUSY particles entering in the loops. In other words, we
do not use the mass insertion approximation (MIA).
– The running of the CMSSM-seesaw parameters from the
universal scaleMX down to the electroweak scale is per-
formed by numerically solving the full one loop renor-
malization group equations (RGEs) (including the ex-
tended neutrino sector) and by means of the public For-
tran Code SPheno2.2.2. [699]. More concretely, we do not
use the Leading Log Approximation (LLog).
– The light neutrino sector parameters that are used in
mD =
√
mdiag
N R
√
mdiag
νU†
MNS are those evaluated at the
seesaw scalemR. That is, we start with their low energy
values (taken from data) and then apply the RGEs to run
them up tomR.
– We have added to the SPheno code extra subroutines that
compute the LFV rates for all the lj → liγandlj → 3li
channels. We have also included additional subroutines
to: Implement the requirement of successful baryogene-
sis (which we deﬁne as having nB/nγ∈[ 10− 10, 10− 9])
via thermal leptogenesis in the presence of upper bounds
on the reheat temperature; Implement the requirement of
compatibility with present bounds on lepton electric di-
pole moments: EDMeμτ≲(6.9 × 10− 28,3 .7 × 10− 19,
4.5 × 10− 17)e cm.
In what follows we present the main results for the case
of hierarchical heavy neutrinos. We also include a compari-
son with present bounds on LFV rates [ 180, 182, 191, 644,
700] and their future sensitivities [ 694, 701–706]. For hi-
erarchical heavy neutrinos, the BRs are mostly sensitive to
the heaviest massmN3 ,t a nβ,θ1 andθ2 (using theR para-
meterization of [ 232]). The other input seesaw parameters
mN1 ,mN2 andθ3 play a secondary role since the BRs do not
strongly depend on them. The dependence on mN1 andθ3
appears only indirectly, once the requirement of a success-
ful generation of baryon asymmetry of the universe (BAU)
is imposed. We shall comment more on this later.
We display in Fig.21 the predictions forB(μ→ eγ)and
B(τ→ μγ)as a function of mN3 , for a speciﬁc choice of
the other input parameters. This ﬁgure clearly shows the
strong sensitivity of the BRs to mN3 . In fact, the BRs vary
by as much as six orders of magnitude in the explored range
of 5 × 1011 ≤ mN3 ≤ 5 × 1014 GeV. Notice also that for


--- Page 65 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 77
Fig. 21 On the left ,B(μ→ eγ)as a function of mN3 for SPS 1a,
withmν1 = 10− 5 eV and mν1 = 10− 3 eV (times, dots, respectively),
andθ13 = 0◦ ,5 ◦ (blue/darker, green/lighter lines). Baryogenesis is en-
abled by the choiceθ2 = 0.05e0.2i (θ1 =θ3 = 0). On the upper horizon-
tal axis we display the associated value of (Yν)33.A dashed (dotted)
horizontal line denotes the present experimental bound (future sensi-
tivity). On the right,B(τ→ μγ)as a function ofmN3 for SPS5, with
mν1 = 10− 3 eV andθ2 = 0.05e0.2i (θ1 =θ3 = 0◦ ). The predictions for
θ13 = 0◦, 5◦ are superimposed one on the top of the other. The upper
curve is obtained using the LLog approximation and the lower one is
the full RGE prediction. The dashed (dotted) horizontal line denotes
the present experimental bound (future sensitivity)
the largest values of mN3 considered, the predicted rates
forμ→ eγenter into the present experimental reach and
only into the future experimental sensitivity for τ→ μγ.
It is also worth mentioning that by comparing our full re-
sults with the LLog predictions, we ﬁnd that the LLog ap-
proximation dramatically fails in some cases. In particular,
for the SPS5 point, the LLog predictions overestimate the
BRs by about four orders of magnitude. For the other points
SPS4, SPS1a,b and SPS2 the LLog estimate is very sim-
ilar to the full result, whereas for SPS3 it underestimates
the full computation by a factor of three. In general, the di-
vergence of the LLog and the full computation occurs for
lowM0 and large M1/2 [238, 273] and/or large A0 values
[686]. The failure of the LLog is more dramatic for SUSY
scenarios with large A0. Figure 21 also shows that while
in some cases (as for instance SPS1a) the behavior of the
BR withmN3 does follow the expected LLog approximation
(BR ∼ (mN3 logmN3)2), there are other scenarios where this
is not the case. A good example is SPS5. It is also worth
commenting on the deep minima of B(μ→ eγ)appearing
in Fig. 21 for the lines associated withθ13 = 0◦ . These min-
ima are induced by the effect of the running of θ13, shifting
it from zero to a negative value (or equivalentlyθ13> 0 and
δ=π). In the LLog approximation, they can be understood
as a cancellation occurring in the relevant quantity Y †
νLYν,
withLij = log(MX/mNi)δij . Most explicitly, the cancella-
tion occurs between the terms proportional to mN3L33 and
mN2L22 in the limitθ13(mR) → 0− (withθ1 =θ3 = 0). The
depth of these minima is larger for smallermν1 , as is visible
in Fig. 21.
Regarding the tan βdependence of the BRs we obtain
that, similar to what was found for the degenerate case, the
BR grow as tan 2β. The hierarchy of the BR predictions
for the several SPS points is dictated by the corresponding
tanβvalue, with a secondary role being played by the given
SUSY spectra. We ﬁnd again the following generic hierar-
chy:BSPS4>B SPS1b ≳BSPS1a>B SPS3 ≳BSPS2>B SPS5.
In what concerns to the θi dependence of the BRs, we
have found that they are mostly sensitive to θ1 andθ2.T h e
BRs are nearly constant withθ3. As has been shown in [649],
the predictions for B(μ→ eγ),B(μ→ 3e),B(τ→ μγ)
andB(τ→ eγ)are above their corresponding experimen-
tal bound for speciﬁc values of θ1. Particularly, the LFV
muon decay rates are well above their present experimen-
tal bounds for most of the θ1 explored values. Notice also
for SPS4 that the predictedB(τ→ μγ)rates are very close
to the present experimental reach even at θ1 = 0 (that is,
R = 1). We have also explored the dependence withθ2 and
found similar results (not shown here), with the appearance
of pronounced dips at particular real values of θ2 with the
B(μ→ eγ),B(μ→ 3e) andB(τ→ μγ)predictions being
above the experimental bounds for someθ2 values.
We next address the sensitivity of the LFV BRs toθ13.W e
ﬁrst present the results for the simplestR = 1 case and then
discuss how this sensitivity changes when moving from this
case towards the more general case of complex R, taking
into account additional constraints from the requirement of
a successful BAU.
ForR = 1, the predictions of the BRs as functions ofθ13
in the experimentally allowed range of θ13,0 ◦ ≤ θ13 ≤ 10◦
are illustrated in Fig. 22. In this ﬁgure we also include the
present and future experimental sensitivities for all channels.
We clearly see that the BRs of μ→ eγ,μ→ 3e,τ→ eγ


--- Page 66 ---
78 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 22 B(μ→ eγ)andB(μ→ 3e) as a function ofθ13 (in degrees), for SPS 1a (dots), 1b (crosses), 2 (asterisks), 3 (triangles), 4 (circles)a n d
5( times). A dashed (dotted) horizontal line denotes the present experimental bound (future sensitivity)
andτ→ 3e are extremely sensitive to θ13, with their pre-
dicted rates varying many orders of magnitude along the ex-
ploredθ13 interval. In the case of μ→ eγthis strong sen-
sitivity was previously pointed out in Ref. [ 707]. The other
LFV channels,τ→ μγandτ→ 3μ(not displayed here),
are nearly insensitive to this parameter. The most important
conclusion from Fig.22 is that, for this choice of parameters,
the predicted BRs for both muon decay channels, μ→ eγ
and μ→ 3e, are clearly within the present experimental
reach for several of the studied SPS points. The most strin-
gent channel is manifestlyμ→ eγwhere the predicted BRs
for all the SPS points are clearly above the present experi-
mental bound forθ13 ≳ 5◦ . With the expected improvement
in the experimental sensitivity to this channel, this would
happen forθ13 ≳ 1◦ .
In addition to the small neutrino mass generation, the see-
saw mechanism offers the interesting possibility of baryo-
genesis via leptogenesis [ 290]. Thermal leptogenesis is an
attractive and minimal mechanism to produce a successful
BAU with rates which are compatible with present data,
nB/nγ≈ (6.10 ± 0.21) × 10− 10 [327]. In the supersym-
metric version of the seesaw mechanism, it can be success-
fully implemented if provided that the following conditions
can be satisﬁed. Firstly, Big Bang Nucleosynthesis grav-
itino problems have to be avoided, which is possible, for in-
stance, for sufﬁciently heavy gravitinos. Since we consider
the gravitino mass as a free parameter, this condition can
be easily achieved. In any case, further bounds on the re-
heat temperature TRH still arise from decays of gravitinos
into lightest supersymmetric particles (LSPs). In the case of
heavy gravitinos and neutralino LSPs masses into the range
100–150 GeV (which is the case of the present work), one
obtainsTRH ≲ 2 × 1010 GeV . In the presence of these con-
straints onTRH, the favored region by thermal leptogenesis
corresponds to small (but non-vanishing) complexR-matrix
anglesθi . For vanishing UMNS CP phases the constraints
onR are basically |θ2|, |θ3| ≲ 1r a d(modπ). Thermal lep-
togenesis also constrains mN1 to be roughly in the range
[109 GeV, 10 ×TRH] (see also [ 309, 311]). In the present
work we have explicitly calculated the produced BAU in the
presence of upper bounds on the reheat temperature TRH.
We have furthermore set as “favored BAU values” those
that are within the interval [10− 10, 10− 9], which contains
the WMAP value, and choose the value ofmN1 = 1010 GeV


--- Page 67 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 79
in some of our plots. Similar studies of the constraints from
leptogenesis on LFV rates have been done in [239].
Concerning the EDMs, which are clearly non-vanishing
in the presence of complexθi , we have checked that all the
predicted values for the electron, muon and tau EDMs are
well below the experimental bounds. In the following we
therefore focus on complex but small θ2 values, leading to
favorable BAU, and study its effects on the sensitivity toθ13.
Similar results are obtained forθ3, but for shortness are not
shown here.
Figure 23 shows the dependence of the most sensitive BR
toθ13,B(μ→ eγ),o n |θ2|. We consider two particular val-
ues ofθ13,θ13 = 0◦ ,5 ◦ and choose SPS 1a. Motivated from
the thermal leptogenesis favored θ2-regions [686], we take
0 ≲ |θ2| ≲π/4, with arg θ2 ={π/8,π/4, 3π/8}.W ed i s -
play the numerical results, considering mν1 = 10− 5 eV and
mν1 = 10− 3 eV , while for the heavy neutrino masses we take
mN =(1010, 1011, 1014) GeV . There are several important
conclusions to be drawn from Fig.23. Let us ﬁrst discuss the
casemν1 = 10− 5 eV . We note that one can obtain a baryon
asymmetry in the range 10 − 10 to 10 − 9 for a considerable
region of the analyzed |θ2| range. Notice also that there is
a clear separation between the predictions of θ13 = 0◦ and
θ13 = 5◦ , with the latter well above the present experimen-
tal bound. This would imply an experimental impact ofθ13,
in the sense that the BR predictions become potentially de-
tectable for this non-vanishing θ13 value. With the planned
MEG sensitivity [ 701], both cases would be within exper-
imental reach. However, this statement is strongly depen-
dent on the assumed parameters, in particular mν1 .F o ri n -
stance, a larger value of mν1 = 10− 3 eV , illustrated on the
right panel of Fig. 23, leads to a very distinct situation re-
garding the sensitivity to θ13. While for smaller values of
|θ2| the branching ratio displays a clear sensitivity to hav-
ingθ13 equal or different from zero (a separation larger than
two orders of magnitude for |θ2| ≲ 0.05), the effect of θ13
is diluted for increasing values of |θ2|.F o r |θ2| ≳ 0.3t h e
B(μ→ eγ)associated with θ13 = 5◦ can be even smaller
than for θ13 = 0◦ . This implies that in this case, a poten-
tial measurement of B(μ→ eγ)would not be sensitive
toθ13. Whether or not a SPS 1a scenario would be disfa-
vored by current experimental data onB(μ→ eγ)requires
a careful weighting of several aspects. Even though Fig. 23
suggests that for this particular choice of parameters only
very small values ofθ2 andθ13 would be in agreement with
current experimental data, a distinct choice of mN3 (e.g.
mN3 = 1013 GeV) would lead to a rescaling of the estimated
BRs by a factor of approximately 10− 2. Although we do not
display the associated plots here, in the latter case nearly the
entire |θ2| range would be in agreement with experimental
data (in fact the points which are below the present MEGA
bound on Fig. 23 would then lie below the projected MEG
sensitivity). Regarding the other SPS points, which are not
shown here, we ﬁnd BRs for SPS 1b comparable to those of
SPS 1a. Smaller ratios are associated with SPS 2, 3 and 5,
while larger (more than one order of magnitude) BRs occur
for SPS 4.
Let us now address the question of whether a joint mea-
surement of the BRs andθ13 can shed some light on exper-
imentally unreachable parameters, like mN3 . The expected
improvement in the experimental sensitivity to the LFV ra-
tios supports the possibility that a BR could be measured
in the future, thus providing the ﬁrst experimental evidence
for new physics, even before its discovery at the LHC. The
prospects are especially encouraging regarding μ→ eγ,
where the experimental sensitivity will improve by at least
two orders of magnitude. Moreover, and given the impres-
sive effort on experimental neutrino physics, a measurement
ofθ13 will likely also occur in the future [ 708–717]. Given
Fig. 23 B(μ→ eγ)as a function of |θ2|,f o ra r g θ2 =
{π/8,π/4, 3π/8} (dots, times, diamonds, respectively) and θ13 = 0◦ ,
5◦ (blue/darker, green/lighter lines). We takemν1 = 10− 5 (10− 3)e V ,
on the left (right) panel. In all cases black dots represent points associ-
ated with a disfavored BAU scenario and a dashed (dotted) horizontal
line denotes the present experimental bound (future sensitivity)


--- Page 68 ---
80 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
that, as previously emphasized, μ→ eγis very sensitive
to θ13, whereas this is not the case for B(τ→ μγ), and
that both BRs display the same approximate behavior with
mN3 and tanβ, we now propose to study the correlation
between these two observables. This optimizes the impact
of a θ13 measurement, since it allows us to minimize the
uncertainty introduced from not knowing tan βand mN3 ,
and at the same time offers a better illustration of the un-
certainty associated with the R-matrix angles. In this case,
the correlation of the BRs with respect to mN3 means that,
for a ﬁxed set of parameters, varying mN3 implies that the
predicted point (B(τ→ μγ),B(μ→ eγ)) moves along a
line with approximately constant slope in the B(τ→ μγ)–
B(μ→ eγ)plane. On the other hand, varyingθ13 leads to a
displacement of the point along the vertical axis.
In Fig. 24, we illustrate this correlation for SPS 1a,
choosing distinct values of the heaviest neutrino mass, and
we scan over the BAU-enablingR-matrix angles (settingθ3
to zero) as
0 ≲ |θ1| ≲π/4, −π/4 ≲ argθ1 ≲π/4,
0 ≲ |θ2| ≲π/4, 0 ≲ argθ2 ≲π/4,
mN3 = 1012, 1013, 1014 GeV.
(5.39)
We consider the following values, θ13 = 1◦ ,3 ◦ ,5 ◦ and
10◦ , and only include in the plot the BR predictions which
allow for a favorable BAU. Other SPS points have also been
considered but they are not shown here for brevity (see
[686]). We clearly observe in Fig. 24 that for a ﬁxed value
ofmN3 , and for a given value of θ13, the dispersion aris-
ing from aθ1 andθ2 variation produces a small area rather
than a point in the B(τ→ μγ–B(μ→ eγ)plane. The dis-
persion along theB(τ→ μγ)axis is of approximately one
order of magnitude for all θ13. In contrast, the dispersion
along the B(μ→ eγ)axis increases with decreasing θ13,
ranging from an order of magnitude for θ13 = 10◦ , to over
three orders of magnitude for the case of small θ13 (1◦ ).
From Fig. 24 we can also infer that other choices ofmN3 (for
θ13 ∈[ 1◦, 10◦ ]) would lead to BR predictions which would
roughly lie within the diagonal lines depicted in the plot.
Comparing these predictions for the shaded areas along the
expected diagonal “corridor”, with the allowed experimental
region, allows us to conclude about the impact of aθ13 mea-
surement on the allowed/excludedmN3 values. The most im-
portant conclusion from Fig. 24 is that for SPS 1a, and for
the parameter space deﬁned in ( 5.39), an hypothetical θ13
measurement larger than 1 ◦ , together with the present ex-
perimental bound on the B(μ→ eγ), will have the impact
of excluding values ofmN3 ≳ 1014 GeV . Moreover, with the
planned MEG sensitivity, the same θ13 measurement can
further constrain mN3 ≲ 3 × 1012 GeV . The impact of any
otherθ13 measurement can be analogously extracted from
Fig. 24.
As a ﬁnal comment let us add that, remarkably, within a
particular SUSY scenario and scanning over speciﬁcθ1 and
θ2 BAU-enabling ranges for various values ofθ13, the com-
parison of the theoretical predictions for B(μ→ eγ)and
B(τ→ μγ)with the present experimental bounds allows us
to set θ13-dependent upper bounds on mN3 . Together with
the indirect lower bound arising from leptogenesis consider-
ations, this clearly provides interesting hints on the value of
the seesaw parametermN3 . With the planned future sensitiv-
ities, these bounds would further improve by approximately
one order of magnitude. Ultimately, a joint measurement of
the LFV branching ratios, θ13 and the sparticle spectrum
would be a powerful tool for shedding some light on other-
wise unreachable SUSY seesaw parameters. It is clear from
all this study that the interplay between LFV processes and
future improvement in neutrino data is challenging for the
searches of new physics.
Fig. 24 (Color online)
Correlation between
B(μ→ eγ)andB(τ→ μγ)as
a function ofmN3 , for SPS 1a.
The areas displayed represent
the scan overθi as given in
(5.39). From bottom to top,t h e
colored regions correspond to
θ13 = 1◦ ,3 ◦ ,5 ◦ and 10◦ (red,
green, blue and pink,
respectively). Horizontal and
vertical dashed (dotted) lines
denote the experimental bounds
(future sensitivities)



--- Page 69 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 81
5.2.5 LFV in the CMSSM with constrained sequential
dominance
Sequential Dominance (SD) [ 140, 141, 143] represents
classes of neutrino models where large lepton mixing an-
gles and small hierarchical neutrino masses can be readily
explained within the seesaw mechanism. To understand how
Sequential Dominance works, we begin by writing the right
handed neutrino Majorana mass matrix MRR in a diagonal
basis asMRR = diag(MA,MB,MC). We furthermore write
the neutrino (Dirac) Yukawa matrixλνin terms of(1, 3) col-
umn vectorsAi,Bi,Ci asYν=(A,B,C) using left–right
convention. The term for the light neutrino masses in the ef-
fective Lagrangian (after electroweak symmetry breaking),
resulting from integrating out the massive right handed neu-
trinos, is
Lν
eff =
(νT
i Ai)(AT
jνj)
MA
+
(νT
i Bi)(BT
j νj)
MB
+
(νT
i Ci)(CT
j νj)
MC
, (5.40)
whereνi (i = 1, 2, 3) are the left handed neutrino ﬁelds. Se-
quential dominance then corresponds to the third term being
negligible, the second term subdominant and the ﬁrst term
dominant:
AiAj
MA
≫BiBj
MB
≫CiCj
MC
. (5.41)
In addition, we shall shortly see that small θ13 and almost
maximalθ23 require that
|A1|≪| A2|≈| A2|. (5.42)
Without loss of generality, then, we shall label the dom-
inant right handed neutrino and Yukawa couplings as A,
the subdominant ones asB, and the almost decoupled (sub-
subdominant) ones asC. Note that the mass ordering of right
handed neutrinos is not yet speciﬁed. Again without loss of
generality we shall order the right handed neutrino masses
asM1<M 2<M 3, and subsequently identifyMA,MB,MC
withM1,M 2,M 3 in all possible ways. LFV in some of these
classes of SD models has been analyzed in [ 718]. Tri-bi-
maximal neutrino mixing corresponds to the choice for ex-
ample [719], sometimes referred to as constrained sequen-
tial dominance (CSD):
Yν=
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
0 beiβ2 c1
−aeiβ3 beiβ2 c2
aeiβ3 beiβ2 c3
⎞
⎟⎟⎠. (5.43)
When dealing with LFV it is convenient to work in the ba-
sis where the charged lepton mass matrix is diagonal. Let
us now discuss the consequences of charged lepton correc-
tions with a CKM-like structure, for the neutrino Yukawa
matrix with CSD. By CKM-like structure we mean that
VeL is dominated by a 1–2 mixing θ, i.e. that its elements
(VeL)13,(VeL)23,(VeL)31 and(VeL)32 are very small com-
pared to (VeL)ij (i,j = 1, 2). After re-diagonalizing the
charged lepton mass matrix, Yνin ( 5.43) becomes trans-
formed asYν→ VeLYν. In the diagonal charged lepton mass
basis the neutrino Yukawa matrix therefore becomes
Yν=
⎛
⎝
asθe−iλeiβ3 b(cθ− sθe−iλ)eiβ2 (c1cθ− c2sθe−iλ)
−acθeiβ3 b(cθ+sθeiλ)eiβ2 (c1sθeiλ+c2cθ)
aeiβ3 beiβ2 c3
⎞
⎠.
(5.44)
After ordering MA,MB,MC according to their size,
there are six possible forms of Yνobtained from permut-
ing the columns, with the convention always being that the
dominant one is labeled by A, and so on. In particular the
third column of the neutrino Yukawa matrix could be A,B
orC depending on which of MA,MB orMC is the heavi-
est. If the heaviest right handed neutrino mass is MA then
the third column of the neutrino Yukawa matrix will con-
sist of the (re-ordered) ﬁrst column of ( 5.44) and assuming
Yν
33 ∼ 1 we conclude that all LFV processes will be deter-
mined approximately by the ﬁrst column of (5.44). Similarly
if the heaviest right handed neutrino mass is MB then we
conclude that all LFV processes will be determined approx-
imately by the second column of ( 5.44). Note that in both
cases the ratios of branching ratios are independent of the
unknown Yukawa couplings which cancel, and only depend
on the charged lepton angle θ, which in the case of tri-bi-
maximal neutrino mixing is related to the physical reactor
angle byθ13 =θ/
√
2[ 719, 720]. Also note that λ=δ− π
whereδis the standard PDG CP-violating oscillation phase.
The results for these two cases are shown in Fig. 25 [721].
The third caseM3 =MC is less predictive.
5.2.6 Decoupling of one heavy neutrino and cosmological
implications
The supersymmetric seesaw model involves many free para-
meters. In order to correlate the model predictions for LFV
processes one has to resort to some supplementary hypothe-
ses. Here we discuss the consequences of the assumption
that one of the heavy singlet neutrinos (not necessarily the
heaviest one) decouples from the see-saw mechanism [238].
If the light neutrino masses are hierarchical, in which
case the effects of the renormalization group (RG) running
[722]o fκare negligible, at least 3 arguments support this
assumption. The ﬁrst one is the naturalness of the see-saw


--- Page 70 ---
82 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 25 Ratios of branching ratios of LFV processes ℓi → ℓjγin
CSD for M3 =MA (left panel )a n d M3 =MB (right panel )w i t h
right handed neutrino massesM1 = 108 GeV ,M2 = 5 × 108 GeV and
M3 = 1014 GeV . The solid lines show the (naive) prediction, from
the MI and LLog approximation and with RG running effects ne-
glected, while the dots show the explicit numerical computation (using
SPheno2.2.2. [699] extended by software packages for LFV BRs and
neutrino mass matrix running [ 649, 686]) with universal CMSSM pa-
rameters chosen as m0 = 750 GeV ,m1/2 = 750 GeV ,A0 = 0G e V ,
tanβ= 10 and sign(μ)=+ 1. While the ratios do not signiﬁcantly
depend on the choice of the SUSY model, since the model-dependence
has canceled out, they show a pronounced dependence on θ13 (andδ)
in the case ofM3 =MA (andM3 =MB )
mechanism. Large mixing angles are not generic for hierar-
chical light neutrino masses (for a review, see [ 723]). They
are natural only for special patterns of the matrixκ.O n ei sa
large hierarchy between one and the remaining two terms in
the sum in ( 3.41)[ 38, 140, 233, 724]. This is what we call
decoupling (one term hierarchically smaller) or dominance
(hierarchically larger). Seesaw with only two heavy singlet
neutrinos [234, 235] is the limiting case of the decoupling
ofN3 withM3 →∞ andY 3A
ν → 0. The immediate conse-
quence of decoupling ismν1 ≪mν2 (κhas rank 2 if there are
only 2 terms in the sum in (3.41)). Similarly, for dominance
one hasmν2 ≪mν3 .
Secondly, decoupling of the lightest singlet neutrino al-
leviates the gravitino problem of leptogenesis which in
the see-saw models of neutrino masses appears to be the
most natural mechanism for producing the observed baryon
asymmetry of the Universe18 (BAU). As the Universe cools
down leptonic asymmetries (subsequently converted into
baryon asymmetry through sphaleron transitions) Yα≡
(nα−¯nα)/s ̸= 0 (where nαand ¯nαare the ﬂavor αlep-
ton and antilepton number densities, respectively and s is
the entropy density) are produced in the decays of N1.T h e
ﬁnal magnitudes ofYαare proportional to the decay asym-
metries ε1α, (which in turn are proportional to the heavy
neutrino masses) and crucially depend on the processes
which wash out the asymmetries generated by the N1 de-
cays. The efﬁciency of these processes depends on the pa-
18See [290]; for a review of leptogenesis, see [324]; for a discussion of
ﬂavor effects in leptogenesis see, e.g. [296]; for recent analyses of the
gravitino problem, see, e.g., [725].
rameters ˜m1α=∑
A |R1AU ∗
αA|2mνA , where U ≡ UPMNS
and it is the smallest (i.e. leptogenesis is most efﬁcient)
for ˜m1αin the meV range (assuming vanishing density of
N1 after re-heating and strongly hierarchical spectrum of
MA). If it is N1 which is decoupled, there are essentially
no lower bounds on ˜m1αandM1, hence also the re-heating
temperatureTRH, already of order 10 9 GeV are sufﬁcient
[311, 726] (see, however, e.g., [ 316]) to reproduce the ob-
served BAU.19
Finally, one heavy singlet neutrino NA must be decou-
pled if its superpartner, ˜NA, plays the role of the inﬂaton ﬁeld
[347]. In such a scenario the (s)neutrino mass MA must be
[349]2 × 1013 GeV and the re-heating temperature follow-
ing inﬂaton decay is given by TRH ∼ √ ˜mAMPl(MA/⟨H ⟩).
Requiring TRH < 106 GeV (the gravitino problem) then
impliesmνA ≤ ∑
α˜mAα< 10− 17 eV . In this scenario, the
leptonic asymmetries must be produced non-thermally in
the inﬂaton decay. Decoupling of N1 is favored because if
it is ˜N2 or ˜N3 which is the inﬂaton the produced asym-
metry may be subsequently washed out during the decays
ofN1.
T h ea s s u m p t i o nt h a tNA effectively decouples from the
seesaw mechanism or thatNA effectively dominates the see-
saw mechanism translates into one of the following forms
19In contrast, for N2 orN3 decoupled, the washout is much stronger
andM1 has to be >∼ 1010 GeV . This requiresTRH leading to a much
larger dangerous gravitino production [727]. LowerTRH is in this case
possible only ifN1 andN2 are sufﬁciently degenerate [728].


--- Page 71 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 83
ofR:
Rdec ≃Π(A)
⎛
⎝
10 0
0 zp
0 ∓p ±z
⎞
⎠ or
Rdom ≃Π(A)
⎛
⎝
∓p ±z 0
zp 0
00 1
⎞
⎠,
(5.45)
wherez,p are complex numbers satisfyingz2 +p2 = 1 and
Π(A) denotes permutation of the rows ofR. Both conditions
can be simultaneously satisﬁed for R =Π(A) · 1, known as
sequential dominance (for a review, see, e.g. [729]).
In the framework considered, violation of the leptonic ﬂa-
vor is transmitted from the neutrino Yukawa couplings Yν
to the slepton mass matrices through the RG corrections.
Branching ratios of LFV decays are well described by a
single mass-insertion approximation via ( 5.27) and ( 5.28).
Since decoupling ofN1 is best motivated we discuss the re-
sults for LFV only in this case.20
The matrixR has then the ﬁrst of the patterns displayed in
(5.45) withΠ(1) = 1. The discussion simpliﬁes if a technical
assumption thatmν3M2<mν2M3 is made.( ˜m2
L)32 relevant
forτ→ μγthen reads
(
˜m2
L
)
32 ≈ κmν3M3U33U ∗
23
⟨H ⟩2
[(
|z|2 +S|p|2)
+ρU ∗
22
U ∗
23
x
+ρU32
U33
x∗ +ρ2U32U ∗
22
U33U ∗
23
(
S|z|2 +|p|2)]
, (5.46)
whereρ=√mν2/mν3 ∼ 0.4,S =M2(1 +/Delta1l2//Delta1t)/M3 ∼
M2/M3 andx =Sp∗z − z∗p.F o r( ˜m2
L)A1 relevant forℓA →
eγwe get:
(
˜m2
L
)
A1 ≈ κmν3M3UA3U ∗
12
⟨H ⟩2
[U ∗
13
U ∗
12
(
|z|2 +S|p|2)
+ρx
+ρ2UA2
UA3
(
S|z|2 +|p|2)]
. (5.47)
Analysis of the expressions ( 5.46) and ( 5.47) leads to a
number of conclusions [238]. Firstly, the branching ratios of
the LFV decays depend (apart from the scales of soft su-
persymmetry breaking and the value of tanβ) mostly on the
20Results forN2 decoupled are the same as for decoupledN1 (includ-
ing sub-leading effects if M1 takes the numerical value of M2). The
same is true also for N3 decoupled (including the case with only 2
heavy singlet neutrinos) if M2 is numerically the same as M3 for de-
coupledN1.H o w e v e r ,i f˜N3 is the inﬂaton the LFV decays have the
rates too low to be observed. In addition, if N3 decouples due to its
very large mass its large Yukawa can, for mν1/mν3 >M 2/M3, still
dominate the LFV effects which are then practically unconstrained by
the oscillation data; some constraints can then be obtained from the
limits on the electron EDM [730].
mass of the heaviest of the two un-decoupled singlet neu-
trinos (in this case N3). Secondly, for ﬁxed M3, they de-
pend strongly on the magnitude and phase of R32, mildly
on the undetermined elementU13 of the light neutrino mix-
ing matrix and, in addition, on the Majorana phases of U
which cannot be measured in oscillation experiments [545].
The latter dependence is mild for B(τ→ μγ)but can lead
to strong destructive interference either inB(μ→ eγ)or
inB(τ→ eγ)decreasing them by several orders of mag-
nitude. The interference effects are seen in Fig. 26(a), (b)
where the predicted ranges (resulting from varying the un-
known Majorana phases) of B(μ→ eγ)are shown as a
function of |R32| forM1 appropriate for the sneutrino in-
ﬂation scenario, three different values of arg (R32) and for
m0 = 100 GeV ,M1/2 = 500 GeV and tan β= 10, consis-
tent with the dark matter abundance [731]. Results for other
values of these parameters can be obtained by appropriate
rescalings using ( 5.27). For comparison, for selected val-
ues of R23, we also indicate the ranges of B(μ→ eγ)
resulting from generic form of the matrix R (constrained
only by the conditions 0 <R 12,R 13 < 1.5 and Re(YAB
ν),
Im(YAB
ν)< 10).
The bulk of the predicted values of B(μ→ eγ)shown
in Fig. 26(a) and (b) exceed the current experimental limit.
SinceM1/2 = 500 GeV leads to masses of the third gen-
eration squarks above 1 TeV , suppressing B(μ→ eγ)by
increasing the SUSY breaking scale conﬂicts with the sta-
bility of the electroweak scale. Moreover, as discussed in
[238] in the scenario considered here generically B(τ→
μγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ 0.1. Thus the observationτ→ μγwith
B>∼ 10− 9, accessible to future experiments would exclude
this scenario.
For completeness, in Fig. 26(c) we also show pre-
dictions for B(μ→ eγ)in the case of N3 dominance.
( ˜m2
L)21 is in this case controlled mainly by |U13|. More-
over,B(τ→ μγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ max(|U13|2,ρ4S2), while
B(τ→ eγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ 1 allowing for experimental test
of this scenario (cf. [ 732]). The limitsR32 → 0 in panelsa
andb and orR21 → 0 in panelc correspond to pure sequen-
tial dominance.
In conclusion, the well motivated assumption about the
decoupling/dominance of one heavy singlet neutrino sig-
niﬁcantly constrains the predictions for the LFV processes
in supersymmetric model. The forthcoming experiments
should be able to verify this assumption and, in conse-
quence, to test an interesting class of neutrino mass models.
5.2.7 Triplet seesaw mechanism and lepton ﬂavor violation
In this subsection we intend to discuss the aspect of low
scale LFV in rare decays arising in the context of the triplet
seesaw mechanism of Sect. 3.2.3.2. We consider both non-
SUSY and SUSY versions of it. The ﬂavor structure of the


--- Page 72 ---
84 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 26 (Color online) Predicted ranges of B(μ→ eγ)for
(M1,M 2,M 3) =(2, 3, 50) × 1013 GeV ,m0 = 100 GeV , M1/2 =
500 GeV and tan β= 10, for the decoupling of N1 and U13 = 0
(panel a)o r U13 = 0.1i (panel b). Yellow ranges show the possible
variation for arbitrary form of R with arg(R32) = 0. Lower (upper)
pairs of lines in the panel c show similar ranges forN3 dominance for
U13 = 0( 0.1i). The current experimental bound of 1.2 × 10− 11 [180]
is also shown
Fig. 27 Diagrams that
contribute to the decay
ℓj → ℓiγthrough the exchange
of the triplet scalars
(high energy) Yukawa matrix YT of (3.63) is the same as
that of the (low energy) neutrino mass matrix mν. There-
fore, in the triplet seesaw scenario the neutrino mass matrix
(containing nine real parameters), which can be tested in the
low energy experiments, is directly linked to the symmet-
ric matrixYT (containing also nine real parameters), mod-
ulo the ratioM2
T/μ′,s e e(3.66). This feature has interesting
implications for LFV [249]. Collider phenomenology of the
low scale triplet was discussed in Sect. 5.1.4 The triplet La-
grangian also induces LFV decays of the charged leptons
through the one loop exchange of the triplet states.
The diagrams relevant for the LFV radiative decaysℓj →
ℓiγ(see e.g., [733, 734]) are depicted in Fig. 27. Denoting
UPMNS =V · diag(1, eiφ1, eiφ2), where, φ1,2 are the Majo-
rana phases, those imply the following ﬂavor structure:
(
Y †
TYT
)
ij =
( M2
T
μ′v2
) 2(
m†
νmν
)
ij
=
( M2
T
μ′v2
) 2[
V
(
mD
ν
)2V †]
ij, (5.48)
where i,j =e,μ,τare family indices. Therefore, the
amount of LFV is directly and univocally expressed in terms
of the low energy neutrino parameters. In particular, LFV
decays depend only on 7 independent neutrino parameters
(there is no dependence on the Majorana phases φi ). No-
tice that this simple ﬂavor structure is peculiar of the triplet
seesaw case, which represents a concrete and explicit real-
ization of the ‘minimal ﬂavor violation’ hypothesis [536]i n
the lepton sector [ 542]. Indeed, according to the latter, the
low energy SM Yukawa couplings are the only source of
LFV . This is not generically the case for the seesaw mech-
anism realized through the exchange of the so-called ‘right
handed’ neutrinos, where the number of independent para-
meters of the high energy ﬂavor structures is twice more that
of the mass matrixmν.
Finally, the parametric dependence of the dipole ampli-
tude in Fig. 27 is
Dij ≈ (Y †
TYT)ij
16π2M2
T
=(m†
νmν)ij
16π2v4
(MT
μ′
) 2
. (5.49)
From the present experimental bound on B(μ→ eγ)<
1.2 × 10− 11 [180], one infers the bound μ′ > 10− 10MT
[comparable limit is obtained from B(τ→ μγ)]. We can
push further our discussion considering the relative size of
LFV in different family sectors:
(Y †
TYT)τμ
(Y †
TYT)μe
≈ [V(mD
ν)2V †]τμ
[V(mDν)2V †]μe
,
(5.50)
(Y †
TYT)τe
(Y †
TYT)μe
≈ [V(mD
ν)2V †]τe
[V(mDν)2V †]μe
.


--- Page 73 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 85
These ratios depend only on the neutrino parameters, while
do not depend on details of the model, such as the mass
scalesMT ,o r μ′. By taking the present best ﬁt values of
the neutrino masses and mixing angles [ 211, 735] provided
by the analysis of the experimental data, those ratios can be
explicitly expressed as
(Y †
TYT)τμ
(Y †
TYT)μe
≈
(/Delta1m2
A
/Delta1m2
S
) sin 2θ23
sin 2θ12 cosθ23
∼ 40,
(5.51)
(Y †
TYT)τe
(Y †
TYT)μe
≈− tanθ23 ∼− 1,
where/Delta1m2
A(/Delta1m2
S) is the squared-mass difference relevant
for the atmospheric (solar) neutrino oscillations. These re-
sults hold for θ13 = 0 and for either hierarchical, quasi-
degenerate or inverted hierarchical neutrino spectrum (for
more details see [249, 736]). It is immediate to translate the
above relations into model-independent predictions for ra-
tios of LFV processes:
B(τ→ μγ)
B(μ→ eγ)≈
((Y †
TYT)τμ
(Y †
TYT)μe
) 2B(τ→ μντ¯νμ)
B(μ→ eνμ¯νe) ∼ 300,
(5.52)
B(τ→ eγ)
B(μ→ eγ)≈
((Y †
TYT)τe
(Y †
TYT)μe
) 2B(τ→ eντ¯νe)
B(μ→ eνμ¯νe) ∼ 0.2.
Now we focus upon the supersymmetric version of the
triplet seesaw mechanism. (Just recall just that in the su-
persymmetric case there is only one mass parameter, MT ,
while the mass parameterμ′ of the non-supersymmetric ver-
sion is absent from the superpotential and its role is taken by
λ2MT .) Regarding the aspect of LFV , in this case we have
to consider besides the diagrams of Fig. 27 also the related
ones with each particle in the loop replaced by its superpart-
ner (ℓk → ˜ℓk,T → ˜T ). Such additional contributions would
cancel those in Fig. 27 in the limit of exact supersymme-
try. In the presence of soft supersymmetry breaking (SSB)
the cancellation is only partial and the overall result for the
coefﬁcient of the dipole amplitude behaves like
Dij ≈ (Y †
TYT)ij
16π2
˜m2
M4
T
∼ (m†
νmν)ij
16π2(λ2v2
2)2
˜m2
M2
T
, (5.53)
which is suppressed with respect to the non-supersymmetric
result (5.49)f o rMT > ˜m ∼ O(102 GeV) ( ˜m denotes an av-
erage soft breaking mass parameter). In the supersymmet-
ric version of the triplet seesaw mechanism ﬂavor violation
can also be induced by renormalization effects via ( 3.69)
(the complete set of RGEs of the MSSM with the triplet
states have been computed in [ 249]). Thus in SUSY model
the LFV processes can occur also in the case of very heavy
triplet. In that case the relevant ﬂavor structure responsible
for LFV is again Y †
TYT for which we have already noticed
its unambiguous dependence on the neutrino parameters in
(5.48). Clearly, we ﬁnd that analogous ratios as in ( 5.50)
hold also for the LFV entries of the soft breaking parame-
ters, e.g.,
(m2
˜L)τμ
(m2
˜L)μe
≈ [V(mD
ν)2V †]τμ
[V(mDν)2V †]μe
,
(5.54)
(m2
˜L)τe
(m2
˜L)μe
≈ [V(mD
ν)2V †]τe
[V(mDν)2V †]μe
.
Such SSB ﬂavor violating mass parameters induce extra
contributions to the LFV processes. For example, the radia-
tive decays ℓj → ℓiγreceive also one loop contributions
with the exchange of the charged-sleptons/neutralinos and
sneutrinos/charginos, where the slepton masses (m2
˜L)ij are
the source of LFV . The relevant dipole terms have a para-
metric dependence of the form
Dij ≈ g2
16π2
(m2
˜L)ij
˜m4 tanβ
≈ g2
16π2
(m†
νmν)ij
(λ2v2
2)2
M2
T
˜m2 log
(MG
MT
)
tanβ. (5.55)
Notice the inverted dependence on the ratio ˜m/MT with re-
spect to the triplet exchange contribution. Due to this fea-
ture, the MSSM sparticle induced contributions (5.55) tends
to dominate over the one induced by the triplet exchange. In
this case, analogous ratios as in (5.52) can be derived, i.e.,
B(τ→ μγ)
B(μ→ eγ)≈
((m2
˜L)τμ
(m2
˜L)μe
) 2B(τ→ μντ¯νμ)
B(μ→ eνμ¯νe) ∼ 300,
(5.56)
B(τ→ eγ)
B(μ→ eγ)≈
((m2
˜L)τe
(m2
˜L)μe
) 2B(τ→ eντ¯νe)
B(μ→ eνμ¯νe) ∼ 0.2.
(For more details see [249].)
The presence of extra SU(2)W triplet states at intermedi-
ate energy spoils the successful gauge coupling uniﬁcation
of the MSSM. A simple way to recover gauge coupling uni-
ﬁcation is to introduce more statesX, to complete a certain
representationR—such thatR =T +X—of some unifying
gauge groupG,G ⊃ SU(3) × SU(2)W ×U(1)Y . In general
the Yukawa couplings of the statesX are related to those of
the triplet partners T . Indeed, this is generally the case in
minimal GUT models. In this case RG effects generates not
only lepton-ﬂavor violation but also closely correlated ﬂa-
vor violation in the quark sector (due to the X-couplings).
An explicit scenario withG = SU(5) where both lepton and
quark ﬂavor violation arise from RG effects was discussed
in Ref. [ 249]. In Sect. 5.3.2 we review a supersymmetric
SU(5) model for the triplet seesaw scenario.


--- Page 74 ---
86 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
5.3 SUSY GUTs
5.3.1 Flavor violation in the minimal supersymmetric
SU(5) seesaw model
In this section we review ﬂavor- and/or CP-violating phe-
nomena in the minimal SUSY SU(5) GUT, in which the
right handed neutrinos are introduced to generate neutrino
masses by the type-I seesaw mechanism [216–220]. Here, it
is assumed that the Higgs doublets in this MSSM are em-
bedded in 5- and ¯5-dimensional SU(5) multiplets. Rich ﬂa-
vor structure is induced even in those minimal particle con-
tents. The ﬂavor violating SUSY breaking terms for the right
handed squarks and sleptons are generated by the GUT in-
teraction, while those are suppressed in the MSSM ( +νR)
under the universal scalar mass hypothesis for the SUSY
breaking terms.
The Yukawa interactions for quarks and leptons and the
Majorana mass terms for the right handed neutrinos in this
model are given by the following superpotential,
W = 1
4Yu
ijΨiΨjH +
√
2Yd
ijΨiΦjH
+Yν
ijΦiNjH + 1
2MNijNiNj, (5.57)
whereΨandΦare for 10- and ¯5-dimensional multiplets,
respectively, andN is for the right handed neutrinos.H (H )
is 5-( ¯5-) dimensional Higgs multiplets. After removing the
unphysical degrees of freedom, the Yukawa coupling con-
stants in (5.57)a r eg i v e na sf o l l o w s ,
Yu
ij =VkiYuk eiϕukVkj,
Yd
ij =Ydiδij, (5.58)
Yν
ij = eiϕdiU⋆
ijYνj.
Here,Yu,Yd,Yνdenote diagonal Yukawa couplings, ϕui
andϕdi (i = 1–3) are CP-violating phases inherent in the
SUSY SU(5) GUT (∑
iϕui =∑
iϕdi = 0). The unitary ma-
trixV is the CKM matrix in the extension of the SM to
the SUSY SU(5) GUT, and each unitary matrices U and
V have only a phase. When the Majorana mass matrix for
the right handed neutrinos is real and diagonal in the basis
of (5.59),U is the PMNS matrix measured in the neutrino
oscillation experiments and the light neutrino mass eigen-
values are given asmνi =Y 2
νi ⟨H2⟩2/MNi , in whichMNi are
the diagonal components.
The colored Higgs multipletsHc andHc are introduced
inH andH as SU(5) partners of the Higgs doubletsHf and
Hf in the MSSM, respectively, and they have new ﬂavor
violating interactions. Equation (5.57) is represented by the
ﬁelds in the MSSM as follows,
W =WMSSM+N
+ 1
2VkiYuk eiϕukVkjQiQjHc +YuiVij eiϕdjUiEjHc
+Ydi e−iϕdiQiLiHc + e−iϕuiV⋆
ijYdjUiDjHc
+ eiϕdiU⋆
ijYνjDiNjHc. (5.59)
Here, the superpotential in the MSSM with the right handed
neutrinos is
WMSSM+N =VjiYujQiUjHf +YdiQiDiHf +YdiLiEiHf
+U⋆
ijYνjLiNjHf +MijNiNj. (5.60)
The ﬂavor violating interactions, which are absent in the
MSSM, emerge in the SUSY SU(5) GUT due to existence
of the colored Higgs multiplets. The colored Higgs interac-
tions are also baryon-number violating [150, 371], and then
proton decay induced by the colored Higgs exchange is a se-
rious problem, especially in the minimal SUSYSU(5) GUT
[374]. However, the constraint from the proton decay de-
pends on the detailed structure in the Higgs sector, and it
is also loosened by global symmetries, such as the Peccei–
Quinn symmetry and the U(1)R symmetry. Thus, we may
ignore the constraint from the proton decay while we adopt
the minimal Yukawa structure in (5.57).
The sfermion mass terms get sizable corrections by the
colored Higgs interactions, when the SUSY-breaking terms
in the MSSM are generated by dynamics above the col-
ored Higgs masses. In the minimal supergravity scenario the
SUSY breaking terms are supposed to be given at the re-
duced Planck mass scale (MG). In this case, the ﬂavor vio-
lating SUSY breaking mass terms at low energy are induced
by the radiative correction, and they are qualitatively given
in a ﬂavor basis as
(
m2
˜uL
)
ij ≃− Vi3V⋆
j3
Y 2
b
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
×
(
2l o gM2
G
M2
Hc
+ log
M2
Hc
MSUSY2
)
,
(
m2
˜uR
)
ij ≃− e−iϕuijV⋆
i3Vj3
2Y 2
b
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
logM2
G
M2
Hc
,
(
m2
˜dL
)
ij ≃− V⋆
3iV3j
Y 2
t
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
×
(
3l o gM2
G
M2
Hc
+ log
M2
Hc
M2
SUSY
)
, (5.61)
(
m2
˜dR
)
ij ≃− eiϕdijU⋆
ikUjk
Y 2
νk
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
logM2
G
M2
Hc
,
(
m2
˜lL
)
ij ≃− UikU⋆
jk
f 2
νk
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
log M2
G
M2
Nk
,


--- Page 75 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 87
(
m2
˜eR
)
ij ≃− eiϕdijV3iV⋆
3j
3Y 2
t
(4π)2
(
3m2
0 +A2
0
)
logM2
G
M2
Hc
,
withi ̸=j, whereϕuij ≡ ϕui − ϕuj andϕdij ≡ ϕdi − ϕdi and
MHc is the colored Higgs mass. Here,MSUSY is the SUSY-
breaking scale in the MSSM, m0 andA0 are the universal
scalar mass and trilinear coupling, respectively, in the mini-
mal supergravity scenario.Yt is the top quark Yukawa cou-
pling constant while Yb is for the bottom quark. The off-
diagonal components in the right handed squarks and slep-
ton mass matrices are induced by the colored Higgs inter-
actions, and they depend on the CP-violating phases in the
SUSY SU(5) GUT with the right handed neutrinos [737].
One of the important features of the SUSY GUTs is the
correlation between the leptonic and hadronic ﬂavor viola-
tions [738, 739]. From (5.62), we get a relation
(
m2
˜dR
)
23 ≃ eiϕd23
(
m2
˜lL
)⋆
23 ×
(
logM2
G
M2
Hc
/
logM2
G
M2
N3
)
. (5.62)
The right handed bottom-strange squark mixing may be
tested in the B factory experiments since it affects Bs – ¯Bs
mixing, CP asymmetries in theb–s penguin processes such
asBd → φKs , and the mixing induced CP asymmetry in
Bd → Msγ. (See Chap. 2.) The relation in ( 5.62) implies
that the deviations from the standard model predictions in
theb–s transition processes are correlated withB(τ→ μγ)
in the SUSY SU(5) GUT. We may test the model in the B
factories.
In Fig. 28 we show the CP asymmetry in Bd → φKs
(SφKS ) and B(τ→ μγ)as an example of the correlation.
Here, we assume the minimal supergravity hypothesis for
the SUSY breaking terms. See the caption and Ref. [ 738]
for the input parameters and the details of the ﬁgure. It is
found thatSφKS andB(τ→ μγ)are correlated and a large
deviation from the standard model prediction for SφKS is
not possible due to the current bound onB(τ→ μγ)in the
SUSY SU(5) GUT.
In (5.62), we take the SU(5)-symmetric Yukawa interac-
tions given in (5.57), while they fails to explain the fermion
mass relations in the ﬁrst and second generations. We have
to extend the minimal model by introducing non-trivial
Higgs or matter contents or the higher-dimensional opera-
tors including SU(5)-breaking Higgs ﬁeld. These extensions
may affect the prediction for the sfermion mass matrices.
However, the relation in (5.62) is rather robust when the neu-
trino Yukawa coupling constant of the third generation is as
large as those for the top and bottom quarks and the large
mixing in the atmospheric neutrino oscillation comes from
the lopside structure of the neutrino Yukawa coupling.
Another important feature of the SUSY GUTs is that both
the left and right handed squarks and sleptons have ﬂavor
mixing terms. In this case, the hadronic and leptonic electric
dipole moments (EDMs) are generated due to the ﬂavor vi-
olation, and they may be large enough to be observed in the
future EDM measurements [ 740]. A diagram in Fig. 29(a)
generates the electron EDM even at one loop level, when
the relative phase between the left and right handed slep-
ton mixing terms is non-vanishing. While this contribution
is suppressed by the ﬂavor violation, it is compensated by
a heavier fermion mass, that is, mτ. Similar diagrams in
Fig. 29(b) contribute to quark EDMs and chromo-electric di-
pole moments (CEDM), which induce the hadronic EDMs.
Fig. 28 B(τ→ μγ)as a function of the CP asymmetry inBd → φKs
(SφKS ) for ﬁxed gluino masses m ˜g = 400, 600, 800, and 1000 GeV .
Here, tanβ= 10, 200 GeV<m 0<1T e V ,A0 = 0,mντ= 5 × 10− 2 eV ,
MN3 = 5 × 1014 GeV , andU32 = 1/
√
2.ϕd23 is taken for the deviation
ofSφKS from the SM prediction to be maximum. The current experi-
mental bound onB(τ→ μγ)[647] is also shown in the ﬁgure
Fig. 29 (a) Diagrams that
generate electron EDM and
(b) those that generate EDMs
and CEDMs of theith quark
due to ﬂavor violation in
sfermion mass terms



--- Page 76 ---
88 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 30 CEDMs for the strange (dc
s ) and down quarks (dc
d ) as func-
tions of the right handed tau neutrino mass, MN3 . Here, MHc = 2 ×
1016 GeV ,mντ= 0.05 eV ,U23 = 1/
√
2, and U13 = 0.2, 0.02, and
0.002. For the MSSM parameters, we take m0 = 500 GeV ,A0 = 0,
m ˜g = 500 GeV and tanβ= 10. The CP phases ϕdi are taken for the
CEDMs to be maximum. The upper bounds on the strange and down
quark CEDMs from the mercury atom and neutron EDMs are shown
in the ﬁgures
The EDM measurements are important to probe the interac-
tion of the SUSY SU(5) GUT.
In Fig. 30 the CEDMs for strange (dc
s ) and down quarks
(dc
d ) are shown as functions of the right handed tau neutrino
mass in the SUSY SU(5) GUT with the right handed neu-
trinos. See the caption and Ref. [ 741] for the input parame-
ters. The mercury atom EDM, which is a diamagnetic atom,
is sensitive to quark CEDMs via the nuclear force, while
the neutron EDM depends on them in addition to the quark
EDMs. (The evaluation of the hadronic EDMs from the ef-
fective operators at the parton level is reviewed in Sect. 9.1
and also Ref. [ 742].) The strange quark contribution to the
mercury atom EDM is suppressed by the strange quark
mass. On the other hand, it is argued in Refs. [743, 744] that
the strange quark component in nucleon is not negligible and
the strange quark CEDM may give a sizable contribution to
the neutron EDM. It implies that we may probe the differ-
ent ﬂavor mixings by measurements of the various hadronic
EDMs, though the evaluation of the hadronic EDMs still has
large uncertainties.
It is argued that the future measurements of neutron and
deuteron EDMs may reach to levels of ∼ 10− 28 e cm and
∼ 10− 29e cm, respectively. When the sensitivity of deuteron
EDM is established, we may probe the new physics to the
level ofdc
s ∼ 10− 28 e cm anddc
d ∼ dc
u ∼ 10− 30 e cm [849].
The future measurements for the EDMs will give great im-
pacts on the SUSY SU(5) GUT with the right handed neu-
trinos.
5.3.2 LFV in the minimal SU(5) GUT with triplet seesaw
In this section we discuss phenomenology of the minimal
SU(5) GUT which incorporates the triplet seesaw mecha-
nism, previously presented in Sects. 3.2.3.2 and 5.2.7.R e -
view of more general class of GUT models also including
triplet Higgs has been given in Sect. 4.1. In GUTs based on
SU(5) there is no natural place for incorporating singlet neu-
trinos. From this point of view SU(5) presents some advan-
tage for implementing the triplet seesaw mechanism. In par-
ticular, a very predictive scenarios can be obtained in the su-
persymmetric case [249, 736, 745]. The triplet statesT (T )
ﬁt into the 15(15) representation, 15 =S +T +Z withS,
T andZ transforming asS ∼ (6, 1, − 2
3),T ∼ (1, 3, 1),Z ∼
(3, 2, 1
6) under SU(3) × SU(2)L ×U(1)Y (the 15 decompo-
sition is obvious). We shall brieﬂy show that it is also pos-
sible to relate not only neutrino mass parameters and LFV
(as shown in Sect.5.2.7) but also sparticle and Higgs spectra
and electroweak symmetry breakdown [ 736, 745]. For this
purpose, consider that the SU(5) model conservesB − L,s o
that the relevant superpotential reads
WSU(5) = 1√
2
(Y15 ¯51 5 ¯5 +λ5H 15 5H) +Y5 ¯5 ¯5H 10
+Y1010 10 5H +M55H ¯5H +ξX15 15, (5.63)
where the multiplets are understood as ¯5 =(dc,L) ,1 0 =
(uc,ec,Q) and the Higgs doublets ﬁt with their colored
partnerst and ¯t, like 5H =(t,H 2), ¯5H =(¯t,H 1) andX is
a singlet superﬁeld. The B − L quantum numbers are the
combination Q + 4
5Y where Y are the hypercharges and
Q10 = 1
5 ,Q¯5 =− 3
5 ,Q5H(¯5H) =− 2
5(2
5),Q15 = 6
5 ,Q15 = 4
5 ,
QX =− 2. Both the scalarSX and auxiliaryFX components
of the superﬁeld X are assumed to acquire a VEV through
some unspeciﬁed dynamics in the hidden sector. Namely,
while ⟨SX⟩ only breaksB − L, ⟨FX⟩ breaks both SUSY and
B − L. These effects are parameterized by the superpotential
mass termM1515 15, whereM15 =ξ⟨SX⟩, and the bilinear
SSB term −B15M1515 15, withB15M15 =− ξ⟨FX⟩. The 15
and 15 states act, therefore, as messengers of both B − L
and SUSY breaking to the MSSM observable sector. Once


--- Page 77 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 89
SU(5) is broken to the SM group we ﬁnd, below the GUT
scaleMG,
W =W0 +WT +WS,Z,
W0 =YeecH1L +YddcH1Q +YuucQH2 +μH2H1,
WT = 1√
2
(YTLTL +λH2 ¯TH 2) +MTT ¯T,
WS,Z = 1√
2
YSdcSdc +YZdcZL +MZZ ¯Z +MSS ¯S.
(5.64)
Here, W0 denotes the MSSM superpotential, 21 the term
WT is responsible for neutrino mass generation [cf. (3.67)],
while the couplings and masses of the colored fragments
S andZ are included in WS,Z . It is also understood that
MT =MS =MZ ≡ M15. At the decoupling of the heavy
statesS,T,Z we obtain at tree-level the neutrino masses,
given by (3.68) and at the quantum level all SSB mass para-
meters of the MSSM via gauge and Yukawa interactions. At
one loop level, only the trilinear scalar couplings, the gaug-
ino masses and the Higgs bilinear mass termBH are gener-
ated:
Ae = 3BT
16π2Ye
(
Y †
TYT +Y †
ZYZ
)
,A u = 3BT
16π2 |λ|2Yu,
Ad = 2BT
16π2
(
YZY †
Z + 2YSY †
S
)
Yd, (5.65)
Ma = 7BT
16π2g2
a,B H = 3BT
16π2 |λ|2.
The scalar mass matrices instead are generated at the two-
loop level and receive both gauge-mediated contributions
proportional to Cf
ag4
a (Cf
a is the quadratic Casimir of the
f -particle) and Yukawa-mediated ones of the form Y †
pYp
(p =S,T,Z) . The former piece is the ﬂavor blind contribu-
tion, which is proper of the gauge-mediated scenarios [ 151,
152, 746–751], while the latter ones constitute the ﬂavor vi-
olating contributions transmitted to the SSB terms by the
Yukawa’sYS,T,Z . These contributions are mostly relevant
for the mass matricesm2
˜L andm2
˜dc . For example,
m2
˜L =
( BT
16π2
) 2[ 21
10g4
1 + 21
2g4
2 −
( 27
5g2
1 + 21g2
2
)
Y †
TYT
−
( 21
15g2
1 + 9g2
2 + 16g2
3
)
Y †
ZYZ
+ 18
(
Y †
TYT
)2 + 15
(
Y †
ZYZ
)2 + 3Tr
(
Y †
TYT
)
Y †
TYT
+ 12Y †
ZYSY †
SYZ + 3Tr
(
Y †
ZYZ
)
Y †
ZYZ
21This should be regarded as an effective approach where the Yukawa
matricesYd,Ye,Yu include SU(5)-breaking effects needed to repro-
duce a realistic fermion spectrum.
+ 9Y †
TYT
ZY ∗
ZYT + 9
(
Y †
TYTY †
ZYZ + h.c.
)
+ 3Y †
TYT
e Y ∗
eYT + 6Y †
ZYdY †
dYZ
]
. (5.66)
Since the ﬂavor structure of m2
˜L is proportional to YT (and
toYZ which is SU(5)-related toYT ), it can be expressed in
terms of the neutrino parameters [cf. ( 3.68)] and so the rel-
ative size of LFV in different leptonic families is predicted
according to the results of (5.54).
All the soft masses have the same scaling behavior ˜m ∼
BT/(16π2) which demandsB> 10 TeV to fulﬁll the natu-
ralness principle. This scenario appears very predictive since
it contains only three free parameters: the triplet mass MT ,
the effective SUSY breaking scaleBT and the coupling con-
stantλ. The parameter space is then constrained by the ex-
perimental bounds on the Higgs boson mass, the B(μ→
eγ), the sfermion masses, and the requirement of radia-
tive electroweak symmetry breaking. The phenomenologi-
cal predictions more important and relevant for LHC, the
B-factories [694] the incoming MEG experiment [548], the
Super Flavor factory [ 752] or the PRISM/PRIME exper-
iment at J-PARC [ 753], concern the sparticle and Higgs
boson spectra and the LFV decays. Regarding the spec-
trum, the gluino is the heaviest sparticle while, in most
of the parameter space, ˜ℓ1 is the lightest. In the exam-
ple shown in Fig. 31 the squark and slepton masses lie in
the ranges 700–950 GeV and 100–300 GeV , respectively.
The gluino mass is about 1.3 TeV . The chargino masses
arem ˜χ±
1
∼ 320 GeV and m ˜χ±
2
∼ 450–550 GeV . Moreover,
m ˜χ0
1
∼ 190 GeV ,m ˜χ0
2
≈ m ˜χ±
1
andm ˜χ0
3,4
≈ m ˜χ±
2
. These mass
ranges are within the discovery reach of the LHC.
The Higgs sector is characterized by a decoupling regime
with a light SM-like Higgs boson (h) with mass in the range
110–120 GeV which is testable in the near future at LHC
(mainly through the decay into 2 photons). The remaining
three heavy states (H,A andH ±)h a v em a s smH,A,H ± ≈
450–550 GeV (again, forBT = 20 TeV). All the spectra in-
crease almost linearly withBT .
Figure 32(b) shows instead several LFV processes:μ→
eX,μ→ e conversion in nuclei,τ→ eY andτ→ μY(X=
γ,ee, Y =γ,ee,μμ). One observe that e.g., the behav-
ior of the radiative-decay branching ratios is in agreement
with the estimates given in (5.56)f o rθ13 = 0. Forθ13 = 0.2
one obtains instead that B(τ→ μγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ 2 and
B(τ→ eγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ 0.1 (the full analysis can be
found in Ref. [ 736]). The other LFV processes shown are
also correlated to the radiative ones in a model-independent
way [736, 745]. The analysis shows that the future experi-
mental sensitivity will allow to measure at mostB(μ→ γ),
B(μ→ 3e),B(τ→ μγ)and CR(μ→ e Ti) for tinyθ13.I n
particular, being B(τ→ μγ)/B(μ→ eγ)∼ 300,B(τ→
μγ)is expected not to exceed 3 × 10− 9, irrespective of
the type of neutrino spectrum. Thereforeτ→ μγfalls into


--- Page 78 ---
90 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 31 (Color online) Sparticle and Higgs spectrum for BT =
20 TeV. Left panel : squark masses, m ˜u (black solid line ), m ˜d (red
dashed) and the gluino mass (blue dash-dotted). In the inner plot tanβ
andμare shown as obtained by the electroweak symmetry breaking
conditions. Right panel: the masses of the charged sleptons, the sneu-
trinos, the charginos, the neutralinos and the Higgs bosons as the labels
indicate
the LHC capability. All the decaysτ→ ℓiℓkℓk would have
B< O(10− 11). The predictions for the LFV branching ra-
tios in the present scenario are summarized in Table 13.
Finally, such supersymmetric SU(5) framework with a
15, 15 pair may be realized in contexts based on string in-
spired constructions [754, 755].
5.3.3 LFV from a generic SO(10) framework
The spinorial representation of the SO(10), given by a 16-
dimensional spinor, can accommodate all the SM model par-
ticles as well as the right handed neutrino. As discussed
in Sect. 4.1, the product of two 16 matter representations
can only couple to 10, 120 or 126 representations, which
can be formed by either a single Higgs ﬁeld or a non-
renormalizable product of representations of several Higgs
ﬁelds. In either case, the Yukawa matrices resulting from the
couplings to 10 and 126 are complex symmetric, whereas
they are antisymmetric when the couplings are to the 120.
Thus, the most general SO(10) superpotential relevant to
fermion masses can be written as
WSO(10) =Y 10
ij 16i 16j 10 +Y 126
ij 16i 16j 126
+Y 120
ij 16i 16j 120, (5.67)
wherei,j refer to the generation indices. In terms of the SM
ﬁelds, the Yukawa couplings relevant for fermion masses are
given by [756, 757]:
16 16 10⊃ 5
(
uuc +ννc)
+ ¯5
(
ddc +eec)
,
16 16 126⊃ 1νcνc + 15νν+ 5
(
uuc − 3ννc)
+ ¯45
(
ddc − 3eec)
,
16 16 120⊃ 5ννc + 45uuc + ¯5
(
ddc +eec)
+ ¯45
(
ddc − 3eec)
,
(5.68)
where we have speciﬁed the corresponding SU(5) Higgs
representations for each of the couplings and all the fermi-
ons are left handed ﬁelds. The resulting up-type quarks and
neutrinos’ Dirac mass matrices can be written as
mu =M5
10 +M5
126 +M45
120, (5.69)
mν
D =M5
10 − 3M5
126 +M5
120. (5.70)
A simple analysis of the fermion mass matrices in the
SO(10) model, as detailed in (5.70) leads us to the following
result: At least one of the Yukawa couplings inYν=v− 1
u mν
D
has to be as large as the top Yukawa coupling [164]. This
result holds true in general, independently of the choice of
the Higgses responsible for the masses in (5.69), (5.70), pro-
vided that no accidental ﬁne-tuned cancellations of the dif-
ferent contributions in ( 5.70) are present. If contributions
from the 10’s solely dominate,YνandYu would be equal.
If this occurs for the 126’s, thenYν=− 3Yu [395]. In case
both of them have dominant entries, barring a rather pre-
cisely ﬁne-tuned cancellation between M5
10 and M5
126 in
(5.70), we expect at least one large entry to be present inYν.
A dominant antisymmetric contribution to top quark mass


--- Page 79 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 91
Fig. 32 Branching ratios of several LFV processes as a function ofλ.
The left (right) vertical line indicates the lower bound onλimposed by
requiring perturbativity of the Yukawa couplingsYT,S,Z whenm1 = 0
(0.3) eV [normal-hierarchical (quasi-degenerate) neutrino mass spec-
trum]. The regions in green(grey) are excluded by them ˜ℓ1 > 100 GeV
constraint (perturbativity requirement whenm1 = 0)
Table 13 Expectations for the
various LFV processes
assuming
B(μ→ eγ)= 1.2 × 10− 11.T h e
results in parenthesis apply to
the case of the
inverted-hierarchical neutrino
spectrum, whenever these are
different from those obtained for
the normal-hierarchical and
quasi-degenerate ones
Decay mode Prediction for branching ratio
s13 = 0 s13 = 0.2
τ− → μ− γ 3 × 10− 9 2(3) × 10− 11
τ− → e− γ 2 × 10− 12 1(3) × 10− 12
μ− → e− e+e− 6 × 10− 14 6 × 10− 14
τ− → μ− μ+μ− 7 × 10− 12 4(6) × 10− 14
τ− → μ− e+e− 3 × 10− 11 2(3) × 10− 13
τ− → e− e+e− 2 × 10− 14 1(3) × 10− 14
τ− → e− μ+μ− 3 × 10− 15 2(4) × 10− 15
μ→ e; Ti 6 × 10− 14 6 × 10− 14


--- Page 80 ---
92 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
due to the 120 Higgs is phenomenologically excluded, since
it would lead to at least a pair of heavy degenerate up quarks.
Apart from sharing the property that at least one eigenvalue
of bothmu andmν
D has to be large, for the rest it is clear from
(5.69) and ( 5.70) that these two matrices are not aligned
in general, and hence we may expect different mixing an-
gles appearing from their diagonalization. This freedom is
removed if one sticks to particularly simple choices of the
Higgses responsible for up quark and neutrino masses.
Therefore, we see that the SO(10) model with only two
ten-plets would inevitably lead to small mixing in Yν.I n
fact, with two Higgs ﬁelds in symmetric representations,
giving masses to the up sector and the down sector sep-
arately, it would be difﬁcult to avoid the small CKM-like
mixing inYν. We shall call this case the CKM case. From
here, the following mass relations hold between the quark
and leptonic mass matrices at the GUT scale:22
Yu =Yν; Yd =Ye. (5.71)
In the basis where charged lepton masses are diagonal, we
have
Yν=VT
CKMYu
DiagVCKM. (5.72)
The large couplings in Yν∼ O(Yt) induce signiﬁcant off-
diagonal entries in m2
˜L through the RG evolution between
MGUT and the scale of the right handed Majorana neutrinos,
MRi . The induced off-diagonal entries relevant tolj → li,γ
are of the order of:
(
m2
˜L
)
i̸=j ≈− 3m2
0 +A2
0
8π2 Y 2
t VtiVtj lnMGUT
MR3
+ O
(
Y 2
c
)
,
(5.73)
whereVij are elements ofVCKM, andi,j ﬂavor indices. In
this expression, the CKM angles are small but one would
expect the presence of the large top Yukawa coupling to
compensate such a suppression. The required right handed
neutrino Majorana mass matrix, consistent with both the ob-
served low energy neutrino masses and mixing as well as
with CKM-like mixing inYνis easily determined from the
seesaw formula deﬁned at the scale of right handed neutri-
nos.
TheB(li → ljγ)are now predictable in this case. Con-
sidering mSUGRA boundary conditions and taking tanβ=
40, we obtain that reaching a sensitivity of O(10− 13–
10− 14), as planned by the MEG experiment at PSI, for
B(μ→ eγ)would allow us to probe the SUSY spectrum
22Clearly this relation cannot hold for the ﬁrst two generations of down
quarks and charged leptons. One expects, small corrections due to non-
renormalizable operators or suppressed renormalizable operators [6]t o
be invoked.
Fig. 33 Contour plot of B(μ→ e,γ)in the plane of the GUT-scale
universal scalar and gaugino masses, (m0,M 1/2),a t A0 = 0i nt h e
CKM high tanβcase. Note that while the plane is presently uncon-
strained, the planned MEG experiment sensitivity of O(10− 13–10− 14)
will be able to probe it in the(m0,m ˜g) ≲ 1 TeV region
completely up tom0 = 1200 GeV,M 1/2 = 400 GeV (notice
that this corresponds to gluino and squark masses of order
1 TeV). This clearly appears from Fig. 33, which shows the
B(μ→ eγ)contour plot in the (m0,M 1/2) plane. Thus, in
summary, though the present limits on B(μ→ e,γ)would
not induce any signiﬁcant constraints on the supersymmetry
breaking parameter space, an improvement in the limit to
∼ O(10− 13–10− 14), as foreseen, would start imposing non-
trivial constraints especially for the large tanβregion.
To obtain mixing angles larger than CKM angles, asym-
metric mass matrices have to be considered. In general, it is
sufﬁcient to introduce asymmetric textures either in the up
sector or in the down sector. In the present case, we assume
that the down sector couples to a combination of Higgs rep-
resentations (symmetric and antisymmetric)23Φ, leading to
an asymmetric mass matrix in the basis where the up sector
is diagonal. As we shall see below, this would also require
that the right handed Majorana mass matrix be diagonal in
this basis. We have:
WSO(10) = 1
2Yu,ν
ii 16i 16i 10u + 1
2Yd,e
ij 16i 16jΦ
+ 1
2YR
ii 16i 16i 126,
where the 126, as before, generates only the right handed
neutrino mass matrix. To study the consequences of these
assumptions, we see that at the level of SU(5),w eh a v e
23The couplings of the Higgs ﬁelds in the superpotential can be
either renormalizable or non-renormalizable. See [ 758] for a non-
renormalizable example.


--- Page 81 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 93
WSU(5) = 1
2Yu
ii 10i 10i 5u +Yν
ii ¯5i 1i 5u
+Yd
ij 10i ¯5j ¯5d + 1
2MR
ii 1i 1i,
where we have decomposed the 16 into 10 + ¯5 + 1 and 5u
and ¯5d are components of 10u andΦrespectively. To have
large mixing ∼UPMNS inYνwe see that the asymmetric ma-
trixYd should now give rise to both the CKM mixing as well
as PMNS mixing. This is possible if
VT
CKMYdUT
PMNS =Yd
Diag. (5.74)
Therefore the 10 that contains the left handed down-
quarks would be rotated by the CKM matrix whereas the
¯5 that contains the left handed charged leptons would be ro-
tated by the UPMNS matrix to go into their respective mass
bases [737, 758–760]. Thus we have the following relations
in the basis where charged leptons and down quarks are di-
agonal:
Yu =VCKMYu
DiagVT
CKM, (5.75)
Yν=UPMNSYu
Diag. (5.76)
Using the seesaw formula of (3.41) and (5.76), we have
MR = Diag
{ m2
u
mν1
, m2
c
mν2
, m2
t
mν3
}
. (5.77)
We now turn our attention to lepton ﬂavor violation in this
case. The branching ratio,B(μ→ e,γ)would now depend
on
[
YνYνT]
21 =Y 2
t Uμ3Ue3 +Y 2
cUμ2Ue2 + O
(
h2
u
)
. (5.78)
It is clear from the above that in contrast to the CKM case,
the dominant contribution to the off-diagonal entries de-
pends on the unknown magnitude of the elementUe3 [761].
IfUe3 is close to its present limit ∼ 0.14 [762] (or at least
larger than(Y 2
c/Y 2
t )Ue2 ∼ 4 × 10− 5), the ﬁrst term on the
RHS of the ( 5.78) would dominate. Moreover, this would
lead to large contributions to the off-diagonal entries in the
slepton masses withUμ3 of O(1).T h u s ,w eh a v e
(
m2
˜L
)
21 ≈− 3m2
0 +A2
0
8π2 Y 2
t Ue3Uμ3 lnMGUT
MR3
+ O
(
Y 2
c
)
.
(5.79)
This contribution is larger than the CKM case by a factor
of(Uμ3Ue3)/(VtdVts) ∼ O(102). This would mean about a
factor 104 times larger than the CKM case inB(μ→ e,γ).
Such enhancement with respect to the CKM case is clearly
shown in the scatter plots of Fig.34, where the CKM case is
compared with the PMNS case with Ue3 = 0.07. The aim
of the ﬁgure is to show the capability of MEG to probe
the region of mSUGRA parameter space accessible to the
LHC. In fact, the plots show the value of B(μ→ e,γ)
obtained by scanning the parameter space in the large re-
gion (0<m 0< 5T e V ,0<M 1/2< 1.5T e V ,− 3m0<A 0<
+3m0, sign(μ)), and then keeping the points which give at
least one squark lighter than 2.5 TeV (so roughly accessible
to the LHC). We see that in this “LHC accessible” region
the maximal case (withUe3 = 0.07) is already excluded by
the MEGA limit (B(μ→ e,γ)<1.2 × 10− 11), and there-
fore MEG will constrain the parameter space far beyond the
LHC sensitivity for this case. IfUe3 is very small, i.e. either
zero or ≲(Y 2
c/Y 2
t )Ue2 ∼ 4 × 10− 5, the second term ∝ Y 2
c in
(5.78) would dominate, thus giving a strong suppression to
the branching ratio. This could be not true, once RG effects
Fig. 34 Scatter plots of B(μ→ e,γ)(left)a n dB(τ→ μγ)(right)
versusM1/2 for tanβ= 40, both for the (maximal) PMNS case with
|Ue3|= 0.07 and the (minimal) CKM case. The plots were obtained by
scanning the SUSY parameter space in the LHC accessible region (see
the text for details)


--- Page 82 ---
94 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
onUe3 itself [258, 722] are taken into account. The point
is that the PMNS boundary condition (5.76) is valid at high
scale. Thus, it is necessary to evolve the neutrino masses and
mixing from the low energy scale, where measurements are
performed, up to high energy. Such effect turns out to be not
negligible in case of low energy Ue3 ≲ 10− 3, giving a high
energy constant enhancement of order O(10− 3) [688]. The
consequence is that the term in ( 5.78) ∝ Y 2
t always dom-
inates, giving a contribution to the branching ratio larger
than the CKM case (which turns out to be really a “mini-
mal” case) and bringing the most of the parameter space in
the realm of MEG even for very small low energy values of
Ue3 [688, 763].
The τ→ μtransitions are instead Ue3-independent
probes of SUSY , whose importance was ﬁrst pointed out
in Ref. [ 732]. The off-diagonal entry in this case is given
by:
(
m2
˜L
)
32 ≈− 3m2
0 +A2
0
8π2 Y 2
t Uμ3Uτ3 lnMGUT
MR3
+ O
(
Y 2
c
)
.
(5.80)
In the τ→ μγdecay the situation is at the moment simi-
larly constrained with respect toμ→ eγ,i fUe3 happens to
be very small. The main difference is thatB(τ→ μγ) does
not depend on the value of Ue3, so that τ→ μγwill be a
promising complementary channel with respect toμ→ eγ.
As far as Beauty factories [ 191, 644, 764] are concerned,
we see from Fig. 34, that even with the present bound it
is possible to rule out part of LHC accessible region in the
PMNS high tanβregime; the planned accuracy of the Su-
perKEKB [694] machine ∼ O(10− 8) will allow to test much
of high tan βregion and will start probing the low tan β
PMNS case, with a sensitivity to soft masses as high as
(m0,m ˜g) ≲ 900 GeV . The situation changes dramatically if
one takes into account the possibility of a Super Flavor fac-
tory: taking the sensitivity of the most promising τ→ μγ
process to ∼ O(10− 9), the PMNS case will be nearly ruled
out in the high tanβregime and severely constrained in the
low tanβone; as for the CKM case we would enter the re-
gion of interest.
Let’s ﬁnish with some remarks. Suppose that the LHC
does ﬁnd signals of low energy supersymmetry, then grand
uniﬁcation becomes a very appealing scenario, because of
the successful uniﬁcation of gauge couplings driven by the
SUSY partners. Among SUSY-GUT models, an SO(10)
framework is much favored as it is the ‘minimal’ GUT to
host all the fermions in a single representation and it ac-
counts for the smallness of the observed neutrino masses by
naturally including the see-saw mechanism. In the above we
have addressed the issue by a generic benchmark analysis,
within the ansatz that there is no ﬁne-tuning in the neutrino
Yukawa sector. We can state that LFV experiments should
be able to tell us much about the structure of such a SUSY-
GUT scenario. If they detect LFV processes, by their rate
and exploiting the interplay between different experiments,
we would be able to get hints of the structure of the un-
known neutrinos’ Yukawa’s. On the contrary, in the case that
both MEG and a future Super Flavor factory happen not to
see any LFV process, only two possibilities should be left:
(i) the minimal mixing, low tan βscenario; (ii) mSUGRA
SO(10) see-saw without ﬁne-tunedYνcouplings is not a vi-
able framework of physics beyond the standard model.
Actually one should remark that LFV experiments will
be able to falsify some of above scenarios even in regions
of the mSUGRA parameter space that are beyond the reach
of LHC experiments. In this sense, the power of LFV ex-
periments of testing/discriminating among different SUSY-
GUTs models results very interesting and highly comple-
mentary to the direct searches at the LHC.
5.3.4 LFV , QFV and CPV observables in GUTs and their
correlations
In a SUSY grand uniﬁed theory (GUT), quarks and lep-
tons sit in same multiplets and are transformed ones into
the others through GUT symmetry transformations. If the
energy scale where the SUSY breaking terms are transmit-
ted to the visible sector is larger then the GUT scale, as in
the case of gravity mediation, such breaking terms, and in
particular the sfermion mass matrices, will have to respect
the underlying GUT symmetry. Hence, as already discussed
in Sect. 5.3.1, the quark–lepton uniﬁcation seeps also into
the SUSY breaking soft sector. If the soft SUSY breaking
terms respect boundary conditions which are subject to the
GUT symmetry to start with, we generally expect the pres-
ence of relations among the (bilinear and trilinear) scalar
terms in the hadronic and leptonic sectors [ 165, 739]. Such
relations hold true at the (superlarge) energy scale where the
correct symmetry of the theory is the GUT symmetry. After
its breaking, the mentioned relations will undergo correc-
tions which are computable through the appropriate RGE’s
which are related to the speciﬁc structure of the theory be-
tween the GUT and the electroweak scale (for instance, new
Yukawa couplings due to the presence of RH neutrinos act-
ing down to the RH neutrino mass scale, presence of a sym-
metry breaking chain with the appearance of new symme-
tries at intermediate scales, etc.). As a result of such a com-
putable running, we can infer the correlations between the
softly SUSY breaking hadronic and leptonic MIs at the low
scale where FCNC tests are performed. Moreover, given that
a common SUSY soft breaking scalar term of Lsoft at scales
close to MPlanck can give rise to RG-induced δq ’s andδl ’s
at the weak scale, one may envisage the possibility to make
use of the FCNC constraints on such low energyδ’s to infer
bounds on the soft breaking parameters of the original su-
pergravity Lagrangian ( Lsugra). Indeed, for each scalar soft


--- Page 83 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 95
Table 14 Links between
various transitions between
up-type, down-type quarks and
charged leptons for SU(5).m2
˜f
refers to the average mass for
the sfermionf ,
m2
˜Qavg
=
√
m2
˜Qm2
˜dc and
m2
˜Lavg
=
√
m2
˜Lm2
˜ec
Relations at weak-scale Boundary conditions at MGUT
(δu
ij)RR ≈ (m2
˜ec/m2
˜uc)(δl
ij)RR m2
˜uc(0) =m2
˜ec(0)
(δq
ij)LL ≈ (m2
˜ec/m2
˜Q)(δl
ij)RR m2
˜Q(0) =m2
˜ec(0)
(δd
ij)RR ≈ (m2
˜L/m2
˜dc)(δl
ij)LL m2
˜dc(0) =m2
˜L(0)
(δd
ij)LR ≈ (m2
˜Lavg
/m2
˜Qavg
)(mb/mτ)(δl
ij)⋆
LR Ae
ij =Ad
ji
parameter of Lsugra one can ascertain whether the hadronic
or the leptonic corresponding bound at the weak scale yields
the strongest constraint at the large scale [165].
Let us consider the scalar soft breaking sector of the
MSSM:
− Lsoft =m2
Qii
˜Q†
i ˜Qi +m2
uc
ii
˜uc⋆
i ˜uci +m2
ec
ii
˜ec⋆
i ˜eci
+m2
dc
ii
˜dc⋆
i ˜dci +m2
Lii
˜L†
i ˜Li +m2
H1H †
1H1
+m2
H2H †
2H2 +Au
ij ˜Qi ˜ucjH2 +Ad
ij ˜Qi ˜dcjH1
+Ae
ij ˜Li ˜ecjH1 +
(
Δl
ij
)
LL ˜L†
i ˜Lj +
(
Δe
ij
)
RR ˜ec⋆
i ˜ecj
+
(
Δq
ij
)
LL ˜Q†
i ˜Qj +
(
Δu
ij
)
RR ˜uc⋆
i ˜ucj
+
(
Δd
ij
)
RR ˜dc⋆
i ˜dcj +
(
Δe
ij
)
LR ˜eL⋆
i ˜ecj
+
(
Δu
ij
)
LR ˜uL⋆
i ˜ucj +
(
Δd
ij
)
LR ˜dL
⋆
i ˜dcj +··· ,
(5.81)
where we have explicitly written down the various off-
diagonal entries of the soft SUSY breaking matrices. Con-
sider now that SU(5) is the relevant symmetry at the scale
where the above soft terms ﬁrstly show up. Then, taking into
account that matter is organized into the SU(5) representa-
tions 10 =(q,uc,ec) and ¯5 =(l,dc), one obtains the fol-
lowing relations
m2
Q =m2
˜ec =m2
˜uc =m2
10,
m2
˜dc =m2
L =m2
¯5
, (5.82)
Ae
ij =Ad
ji.
These equations for matrices in ﬂavor space lead to relations
between the slepton and squark ﬂavor violating off-diagonal
entriesΔij . These are:
(
Δu
ij
)
LL =
(
Δu
ij
)
RR =
(
Δd
ij
)
LL =
(
Δl
ij
)
RR, (5.83)
(
Δd
ij
)
RR =
(
Δl
ij
)
LL, (5.84)
(
Δd
ij
)
LR =
(
Δl
ji
)
LR =
(
Δl
ij
)⋆
RL. (5.85)
These GUT correlations among hadronic and leptonic scalar
soft terms are summarized in the second column of Table14.
Table 15 Links between various transitions between up-type, down-
type quarks and charged leptons for PS/SO(10) type models
Relations at weak-scale Boundary conditions at MGUT
(δu
ij)RR ≈ (m2
˜ec/m2
˜uc)(δl
ij)RR m2
˜uc(0) =m2
˜ec(0)
(δq
ij)LL ≈ (m2
˜L/m2
˜Q)(δl
ij)LL m2
˜Q(0) =m2
˜L(0)
Assuming that no new sources of ﬂavor structure are present
from the SU(5) scale down to the electroweak scale, apart
from the usual SM CKM one, one infers the relations in the
ﬁrst column of Table 14 at low scale. Here we have taken
into account that due to their different gauge couplings “av-
erage” (diagonal) squark and slepton masses acquire differ-
ent values at the electroweak scale.
Two comments are in order when looking at Table 14.
First, the boundary conditions on the sfermion masses at the
GUT scale (last column in Table 14) imply that the squark
masses are always going to be larger at the weak scale com-
pared to the slepton masses due to the participation of the
QCD coupling in the RGEs. As a second remark, notice
that the relations between hadronic and leptonicδMI in Ta-
ble 14 always exhibit opposite “chiralities”, i.e. LL inser-
tions are related to RR ones and vice-versa. This stems from
the arrangement of the different fermion chiralities inSU(5)
ﬁve- and ten-plets (as it clearly appears from the ﬁnal col-
umn in Table 14). This restriction can easily be overcome if
we move from SU(5) to left-right symmetric uniﬁed mod-
els like SO(10) or the Pati–Salam (PS) case (we exhibit the
corresponding GUT boundary conditions and δMI at the
electroweak scale in Table 15).
So far we have conﬁned the discussion within the sim-
ple SU(5) model, without the presence of any extra parti-
cles like right handed (RH) neutrinos. In the presence of RH
neutrinos, one can envisage of two scenarios [164]: (a) with
either very small neutrino Dirac Yukawa couplings and/or
very small mixing present in the neutrino Dirac Yukawa ma-
trix, (b) Large Yukawa and large mixing in the neutrino sec-
tor. In the latter case, (5.83)–(5.85) are not valid at all scales
in general, as large RGE effects can signiﬁcantly modify the
sleptonic ﬂavor structure while keeping the squark sector
essentially unmodiﬁed; thus essentially breaking the GUT
symmetric relations. In the former case where the neutrino
Dirac Yukawa couplings are tiny and do not signiﬁcantly


--- Page 84 ---
96 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 35 Left four panels: allowed region for (δd
23)RR using constraints as indicated. Right four panels: the same for (δd
12)RR . For the parameter
space considered, please see the text
modify the sleptonic ﬂavor structure, the GUT symmetric
relations are expected to be valid at the weak scale. How-
ever, in both cases it is possible to say that there exists a
bound on the hadronicδparameters of the form [739]:
⏐⏐(
δd
ij
)
RR
⏐⏐ ≥
m2
˜L
m2
˜dc
⏐⏐(
δl
ij
)
LL
⏐⏐. (5.86)
The situation is different if we try to translate the bound from
quark to lepton MIs. An hadronic MI bound at low energy
leads, after RGE evolution, to a bound on the correspond-
ing grand uniﬁed MI atMGUT, applying both to slepton and
squark mass matrices. However, if the neutrino Yukawa cou-
plings have sizable off-diagonal entries, the RGE running
fromMGUT toMW could still generate a new contribution
to the slepton MI that exceeds this GUT bound. Therefore
hadronic bounds cannot be translated to leptons unless we
make some additional assumptions on the neutrino Yukawa
matrices. On general grounds, given that SM contributions
in the lepton sector are absent and that the branching ratios
of leptonic processes constrain only the modulus of the MIs,
it turns out that all the MI bounds arising from the lepton
sector are circles in the Re(δd
ij)AB–Im(δd
ij)AB plane and are
centered at the origin.
In the following the effect of leptonic bounds on the
quark mass insertions are reviewed, following the results
presented in [ 165], where constraints on δs were stud-
ied scanning the mSUGRA parameter space in the ranges:
M1/2 ≤ 160 GeV ,m0 ≤ 380 GeV , |A0|≤ 3m0 and 5 <
tanβ<15. For instance, in presence of a (Δd
23)LR at the
GUT scale, this would have effects both in the τ→ μγ
andb → sγdecays. Using(δd
23)LR ≲(mb/mτ)(m2
˜l/m2
˜q) ×
(δl
23)RL, a bound on(δl
23)RL from theτ→ μγdecay trans-
lates into a bound on (Δd
23)LR (neglecting the effects of
neutrino Yukawa’s the inequality transforms into equality).
Thus, leptonic processes set a bound on the SUSY contribu-
tions toB(B → Xsγ). However, it turns out that the present
leptonic bounds have no effect on the (δd
23)LR couplings.
This is due both to the existence of strong hadronic bounds
fromb → sγand CP asymmetries and to the relatively weak
leptonic bounds here.
Similarly, in presence of a (Δd
23)RR at the GUT scale,
the corresponding MIs at the electroweak scale are (δd
23)RR
and(δl
23)LL that contribute to /Delta1MBs andτ→ μγrespec-
tively (the impact of(Δd
23)RR onb → sγandb → sℓ+ℓ− is
not relevant because of the absence of interference between
SUSY and SM contributions). In Fig. 35 the allowed values
of Re(δd
23)RR and Im(δd
23)RR with the different constraints
are shown. The leptonic constraints are quite effective as
the bound on the B(τ→ μγ)fromB-factories is already
very stringent, while the recent measurement of /Delta1MBs is
less constraining. The plots correspond to 5 < tanβ<15,
thus, the absolute bound on (δl
23)LL is set by tanβ= 5 and
it scales with tanβas(δl
23)LL ∼ (5/ tanβ).24
24Sizable SUSY contributions to /Delta1MBs are still possible from the
Higgs sector in the large tanβregime both within [765–767]a n da l s o
beyond [768] the Minimal Flavor Violating framework. However, for
the considered parameter space, the above effects are completely neg-
ligible.


--- Page 85 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 97
As in the LR sector, in the LL one, there is no apprecia-
ble improvement from the inclusion of leptonic constraints.
In fact,τ→ μγis not effective to constrain(δl
23)RR ,i . e .t h e
leptonic MI related to(δd
23)LL in this SUSY-GUTs scheme,
in large portions of the parameter space because of strong
cancellations among amplitudes. The analysis of the con-
straints on the different (δd
13) MIs gives similar results to
that of the (δd
23) MIs. In this case, the hadronic constraints
come mainly from/Delta1MBd and the different CP asymmetries
measured at B-factories, while the leptonic bounds are due
to the decayτ→ eγ.
Coming to the 1–2 sector, let’s see, as an example, the
allowed values of Re(δd
12)RR and Im(δd
12)RR . In this case, as
it appears from Fig. 35, leptonic constraints, already using
the present limit on B(μ→ eγ), are competitive and con-
strain the direction in which the constraint from εK is not
effective (upper left plot). Similarly in the LR sector, even
if the hadronic bounds coming fromε′/εare quite stringent,
the bounds fromμ→ eγare even more effective, while the
LL sector results less constrained by leptonic processes, as
an effect of the cancellations that μ→ eγdecay suffers in
theRR leptonic sector.
5.4 R-parity violation
5.4.1 Introduction
In supersymmetric extensions of the standard model (SM),
baryon and lepton numbers are no longer automatically pro-
tected. This is the main reason for introducing R-parity.
R-parity is associated with a Z2 subgroup of the group of
continuous U(1) transformations acting on the gauge su-
perﬁelds and the two chiral doublet Higgs superﬁelds Hd
and Hu, with their deﬁnition extended to quark and lep-
ton superﬁelds so that quarks and leptons carry R = 0
and squarks and sleptons R =± 1. One can express R-
parity in terms of spin S, baryon B and lepton L num-
ber [769]:
R-parity =(− 1)2S (− 1)3(B−L). (5.87)
Taking into account the important phenomenological dif-
ferences between models with and without R-parity, it is
worth studying if and how R-parity can be broken. One
of the main reasons to introduce R-parity is avoiding pro-
ton decay. However there are in principle other discrete or
continuous symmetries that can protect proton decay while
allowing for some R-parity violating couplings. In the ab-
sence of R-parity, R-parity odd terms allowed by renormal-
izability and gauge invariance [ 150] must be included in
the superpotential of the minimal supersymmetric standard
model,
WRp =μiHuLi + 1
2λijkLiLjEc
k +λ′
ijkLiQjDc
k
+ 1
2λ′′
ijkUc
iDc
jDc
k, (5.88)
where there is summation over the generation indices
i,j,k = 1, 2, 3, and summation over gauge indices is un-
derstood. One has for example LiLjEc
k ≡ (ϵabLa
iLb
j)Ec
k =
(NiEj − EiNj)Ec
k and Uc
iDc
jDc
k ≡ ϵαβγUαc
i Dβc
j Dγc
k ,
wherea,b = 1, 2a r e SU(2)L indices,α,β,γ= 1, 2, 3a r e
SU(3)C indices, andϵab andϵαβγare totally antisymmetric
tensors (withϵ12 =ϵ123 =+ 1). Gauge invariance enforces
antisymmetry of theλijk couplings in their ﬁrst two indices
and antisymmetry of theλ′′
ijk couplings in their last two in-
dices,
λijk =− λjik, (5.89)
λ′′
ijk =− λ′′
ikj. (5.90)
The bilinear terms μiHuLi in (5.88) can be rotated away
from the superpotential upon suitably redeﬁning the lepton
and Higgs superﬁelds. However, in the presence of generic
soft supersymmetry breaking terms of dimension two, bilin-
ear R-parity violation will reappear. The fact that one can
makeμi = 0i n( 5.88) does not mean that the Higgs–lepton
mixing associated with bilinear R-parity breaking is unphys-
ical, but rather that there is not a unique way of parameteriz-
ing it. If R-parity is violated in the leptonic sector, no quan-
tum numbers differentiate between lepton and Higgs super-
ﬁelds, and they consequently mix with each other [ 770].
The R-parity violation in the baryonic sector does not imply
lepton ﬂavor violation, and we do not consider such option
here.
A general consequence of R-parity violation is that unless
the relevant couplings are negligibly small, the supersym-
metric model does not have a dark matter candidate. Thus
experimental studies on dark matter will also shed light on
R-parity violation.
5.4.2 Limits on couplings
Limits on R-parity violating couplings can be obtained by
direct searches at colliders or requiring that the R-parity vi-
olating contribution to a given observable does not exceed
the limit imposed by the precision of the experimental mea-
surement.
On the collider side R-parity violation implies the pos-
sibility of the creation, decay or exchange of single sparti-
cles, thus allowing new decay channels. For example, even
for relatively small R-parity violating interactions, the decay
of the lightest supersymmetric particle will lead to collider
events departing considerably from the characteristic miss-
ing momentum signal of R-parity conserving theories. In ab-
sence of deﬁnite theoretical predictions for the values of the


--- Page 86 ---
98 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
45 independent trilinear Yukawa couplingsΛ(λijk ,λ′
ijk and
λ′′
ijk ), it is necessary in practice to assume a strong hierar-
chy among the couplings. A simplifying assumption widely
used for the search at colliders is to postulate the existence
of a single dominant R-parity violating coupling. When dis-
cussing speciﬁc bounds, it is necessary to choose a deﬁnite
basis for quark and lepton superﬁelds. Often it is understood
that the single coupling dominance hypothesis applies in the
mass eigenstate basis. It can be more natural to apply this
hypothesis in the weak eigenstate basis when dealing with
models in which the hierarchy among couplings originates
from a ﬂavor theory. In this case, a single process allows
one to constrain several couplings, provided one has some
knowledge of the rotations linking the weak eigenstate and
mass eigenstate bases. Indirect bounds from loop processes
typically lead to bounds on the products of two most impor-
tant R-parity violating couplings, or on the sum of products
of two couplings. The limits on single dominant couplings,
and on products of couplings, as well as a more complete
list of references, are collected in [771].
5.4.3 Spontaneous R-parity breaking
The spontaneous breaking of R-parity is characterized by
an R-parity invariant Lagrangian leading to non-vanishing
VEVs for some R-parity odd scalar ﬁeld, which in turn gen-
erates R-parity violating terms. Such a spontaneous break-
down of R-parity generally also entails the breaking of
the global U(1) lepton number symmetry L which im-
plies the existence of a massless Nambu–Goldstone real
pseudoscalar boson J , the majoron. Another light scalar
particle, denoted ρ, generally accompanies the majoron
in the supersymmetric models. If the U(1) symmetry is
also explicitly broken by interaction terms in the La-
grangian, both of these particles acquire ﬁnite masses. The
most severe constraints on the models with a spontaneous
R-parity breaking, arise in the cases where the majoron car-
ries electroweak gauge charges and hence is coupled to the
Z bosons and to quarks and leptons. The non-singlet compo-
nents contribute to theZ boson invisible width by an amount
of one-half that a single light neutrino, δΓZ
inv/6 ≃ 83 MeV .
To suppress the non-singlet components one must allow ei-
ther for sufﬁciently small sneutrino VEVs, vL/MZ ≪ 1, or
for some large hierarchy of scales betweenvL and the VEV
parameters associated with additional electroweak singlet
scalar ﬁelds [772].
However, it is not necessary that models with sponta-
neous R-parity violation have a majoron. Models without
a majoron include a class of models with triplet Higgses,
where B − L is a gauge symmetry, which is necessarily
spontaneously broken unless effects of non-renormalizable
terms or some additional new ﬁelds are included [ 773]. An
interesting experimental signal in these models may be a
relatively light doubly charged scalar, which decays domi-
nantly to same charge leptons (not necessarily of the same
generation) [ 774]. Another possibility for a model with-
out a majoron is a model where the lepton number is bro-
ken by two units explicitly, in which case the spontaneous
breaking by one unit (which breaks the R-parity) does not
lead to a majoron [ 775]. The interactions in spontaneously
R-parity breaking models through the lepton number vio-
lation closely resemble explicitly R-parity breaking models
with only bilinear R-parity violation. In the case of sponta-
neous breaking, the parameters which are free in the model
with only bilinear couplings are related to each other via
the sneutrino vacuum expectation value (VEV). Thus a con-
straint from one process affects availability of the other
processes. Example bounds for such a model can be found
in [776].
It is worth emphasizing that choosing single coupling
dominance in the case of spontaneous breaking is not possi-
ble and in this sense, the models with spontaneous breaking
are more predictive than those without.
5.4.4 Neutrino sector
The presence of non-zero couplings λijk ,λ′
ijk or bilinear
R-parity violating parameters implies the generation of neu-
trino masses and mixing [777]. This is an interesting feature
of R-parity violating models, but it can also be a problem,
since the contribution of R-parity violating couplings may
exceed by orders of magnitude the experimental bounds.
Two types of contributions can be distinguished: tree-level
or loop contributions.
The tree-level contributions are due to bilinear R-parity
violation terms which induce a mixing between neutrinos
and neutralinos [778]. This gives a massive neutrino state at
tree level. When quantum corrections are included, all three
neutrinos acquire a mass. The tree-level contribution arising
from the neutrino–neutralino mixing can be understood, in
the limit of small neutrino–neutralino mixing, as a sort of
seesaw mechanism, in which the neutral gauginos and hig-
gsinos play the role of the right handed neutrinos.
The loop contributions are induced by the trilinear
R-parity violating couplings λijk andλ′
ijk and by bilinear
R-parity violating parameters [779]. If bilinear R-parity vio-
lation is strongly suppressed one can concentrate on the dia-
grams involving trilinear R-parity violating couplings only.
The trilinear couplingsλijk andλ′
ijk contribute to each en-
try of the neutrino mass matrix through the lepton–slepton
and quark–squark loops. The neutrino mass matrix depends
therefore on a large number of trilinear R-parity violating
couplings. In order to obtain a predictive model, one has
to make assumptions on the structure of the trilinear cou-
plings. In general, however, the bilinear R-parity violation
contribution cannot be neglected. The presence of bilinear


--- Page 87 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 99
terms drastically modiﬁes the calculation of one loop neu-
trino masses. The neutrino mass matrix receives contribu-
tions already at tree level, as discussed above, and moreover
in addition to the lepton–slepton and quark–squark loops,
one loop diagrams involving insertions of bilinear R-parity
violating masses or slepton VEVs must be considered. One
should note that the bilinear R-parity violating terms, if not
suppressed, give too large loop contributions to neutrino
masses.
The scenario known as bilinear R-parity violation
(BRpV) corresponds to the explicit introduction of the three
mass parameters μi in the ﬁrst term in ( 5.88), without re-
ferring to their origin, and assuming that all the trilinear pa-
rameters are zero. Theμi terms introduce tree-level mixing
between the Higgs and lepton superﬁelds. Therefore, they
violate R-parity and lepton number, and contribute to the
breaking of the SU(2) symmetry by the induction of sneu-
trino vacuum expectation values vi . As it was mentioned
before, the mixing between neutralinos and neutrinos leads
to an effective tree-level neutrino mass matrix of the form,
m0ij
ν=M1g2 +M2g′ 2
4 detMχ0
ΛiΛj, (5.91)
where the parametersΛi =μvi +μivd are proportional to
the sneutrino vacuum expectation values in the basis where
theμi terms are removed from the superpotential. Due to the
symmetry of this mass matrix, only one neutrino acquires a
mass. Once quantum corrections are included, this symme-
try is broken, and the effective neutrino mass matrix takes
the form [780],
mij
ν=AΛiΛj +B(Λiϵj +Λjϵi) +Cϵiϵj. (5.92)
If the tree-level contribution dominates, as for example in
SUGRA models with low values of tan β, the atmospheric
mass scale is given at tree level, and the solar mass scale
is generated at one loop, explaining the hierarchy between
them. Most of the time, the dominant loop in SUGRA is
the one formed with bottom quarks and squarks, followed
in importance by loops with charginos and neutralinos. In
the tree-level dominance case the atmospheric mixing angle
is well approximated by tan2θatm =Λ2
2/Λ2
3, and the reactor
angle by tan2θ13 =Λ2
1/(Λ2
2 +Λ2
3). In this case, the small-
ness of the reactor angle is achieved with a small value of
Λ1, and the maximal mixing in the atmospheric sector with
a similar value forΛ2 andΛ3. Supergravity scenarios where
tree-level contribution does not dominate can also be found
[781], in which case the previous approximations for the an-
gles are not valid.
5.4.5 Lepton ﬂavor violating processes at low energies
Many processes, which are either rare or forbidden in the
R-parity conserving model, become possible when interac-
tions following from the superpotential WRp in (5.88)a r e
available. These interactions include tree-level couplings be-
tween different lepton or quark generations, as well as tree-
level couplings between leptons and quarks, or leptons and
Higgses.
In addition to the trilinear couplings λandλ′, bilinear
couplings or spontaneous R-parity breaking contribute to the
lepton ﬂavor violating processes mentioned below through
mixing.
For references about this section, see Ref. [771].
– li → ljγ, li → ljlklm, and μ–e-conversion, and semi-
leptonic decays of τ-leptons. The rare decays of leptons
to lighter leptons are excellent probes of new physics,
because they do not involve any hadronic uncertain-
ties. Both the lepton ﬂavor violating trilinear λ- and λ′-
type couplings give rise to LFV decays li → ljγ(loop
level process with ˜ν–l,ν–˜l,o r ˜q–q′ in the loop), li →
ljlklm (tree-level process via ˜νor ˜l), as well as for μ–e-
conversion. In these processes, two non-vanishingΛcou-
plings are needed and usual approach is to assume a dom-
inant product of two couplings, when determining bounds
on couplings. In theμ–e-conversion, certain pairs of cou-
plings can be probed only in the loop-level process, me-
diated by virtual γorZ, which are logarithmically en-
hanced compared toμ→ eγ[185]. The hadronic contri-
butions to theμ–e-conversion in nuclei make the theoret-
ical error larger than in the decays without hadrons. The
relatively large mass of τallows for new semileptonic
decay modes for τ. The bounds from these processes
vary betweenΛ∼ O(10− 4–10− 1) for 100 GeV fermion
masses, and they scale as mass2.
The experimental accuracies of the processes men-
tioned above are expected to increase considerably in the
coming years.
– Leptonic and semileptonic decays of hadrons and top
quarks. R-parity violating couplings λ′
ijk allow for lep-
ton ﬂavor violating decays of hadrons, e.g.KL → e±μ∓ ,
Bd → μ+τ− ,K+ → π+νiνj [782], as well as semilep-
tonic LFV top decays, e.g. t →˜ τ+b, if kinematically al-
lowed. The sensitivity on the couplings is restricted by
the theoretical uncertainties in hadronic contributions. For
100 GeV sfermions, the bounds areΛ∼ O(10− 4–10− 1).
5.4.6 Anomalous muon magnetic moment aμand electron
electric dipole moment
Λcouplings affect leptons also through contributions to di-
pole moments. The experimental measurement ofaμis quite
precise. The theoretical calculation of the standard model
contribution toaμcontains still uncertainty, which prevents
exact comparison with measurement. The contribution of
R-parity violation on aμis small, and constrained by tiny
neutrino masses.


--- Page 88 ---
100 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Contribution from complexΛto electron EDM could be
large for large phases. The one loop contribution involving
both bilinear and trilinear couplings is sizable for electron
EDM, while one loop terms with only trilinear terms are
suppressed by neutrino masses.
5.4.7 Collider signatures
The main advantage of collider studies compared to the low
energy probes is that the particles can be directly produced,
and thus their masses and couplings can be experimentally
measured.
A major difference between R-parity conserving and
breaking models from the detection point of view is the
amount of missing energy. If R-parity is violated, the super-
symmetric particles decay to the SM particles leaving lit-
tle or no missing energy. Decays of sparticles through λ-
andλ′-type couplings lead to multi-lepton ﬁnal states, and
λ′ andλ′′ to multi-jet ﬁnal states. Sparticles can decay ﬁrst
via the R-parity conserving couplings to the lightest super-
symmetric particle (LSP), which then decays via R-parity
violating couplings. If e.g. a neutralino is the LSP, it may be
a cascade decay product of a sfermion, chargino, or a heav-
ier neutralino. Thus typically one gets a larger number of
jets or leptons in the ﬁnal state in R-parity violating than in
the R-parity conserving decay. The sparticles can also de-
cay directly to the standard model fermions via λ,λ′,o rλ′′
couplings. Assuming all the supersymmetric particles decay
inside the detector, a consequence of the decay of the LSP is
that the amount of missing energy when R-parity is violated
is considerably lower than in the R-parity conserving case,
and only neutrinos carry the missing energy. When R-parity
is violated, the LSP is not stable and need not be neutral.
If then the coupling through which the LSP decays is sup-
pressed, a long lived possibly charged particle appears, leav-
ing a heavily ionizing, easily detectable charged track in the
detector.
A simplifying assumption for the search strategy at col-
liders is to postulate the existence of a single dominant
R-parity violating coupling. In case a non-vanishing cou-
pling does exist with a magnitude leading to distinct phe-
nomenology at colliders, a direct sensitivity to a long-lived
LSP might be provided by the observation of displaced
vertices in an intermediate range of coupling values up to
O(10− 5–10− 4). For largerΛvalues the presence of R-parity
violating supersymmetry will become manifest through the
decay of short-lived sparticles produced by pair via gauge
couplings. A possible search strategy in such cases consists
of neglecting R-parity violating contributions at production
in non-resonant processes. This is valid provided that the
interaction strength remains sufﬁciently small compared to
electromagnetic or weak interaction strengths, forΛvalues
typically below O(10− 2–10− 1). In a similar or larger range
of couplings values, R-parity violation could show up at col-
liders via single resonant or non-resonant production of su-
persymmetric particles.
For bilinear or spontaneous breaking, the lightest super-
symmetric particle decays through mixing with the corre-
sponding Rp =+ 1 particle. If the LSP is neutralino or
chargino, it decays through mixing with neutrino or charged
lepton, and if the LSP is a slepton it decays through mix-
ing with the Higgs bosons, e.g. stau mixes with charged
Higgs. Assuming that neutralino is the LSP, the dominant
decay mode of stau is to tau and neutralino. Through mix-
ing the charged Higgs has then a branching ratio to tau and
neutralino. Thus the detection of R-parity violation includes
precise measurement of the branching ratios of particles.
The main signature of BRpV is the decay of the neu-
tralino, which decays 100% of the time into R-parity
and lepton number violating modes. If squarks and slep-
tons are heavy and the neutralino is heavier than the
gauge bosons, the neutralino decays into on-shell gauge
bosons and leptons:χ0
1 → W ∓ ℓ±
i ,Zνi . If the gauge bosons
are produced off-shell, then the decay modes are χ0
1 →
qq′ℓ±
i ,ℓ ∓
j νjℓ±
i ,qqνi,ℓ ±
j ℓ∓
j νi,νjνjνi . When sfermions
cannot be neglected, the decay channels are the same, but
squarks and sleptons contribute as intermediate particles
[783]. In this model, very useful quantities are formed with
ratios of branching ratios, since they can be directly linked
to R-parity violating parameters and neutrino observables.
We have for example,
B(χ0
1 → qq′μ)
B(χ0
1 → qq′τ)
≈ Λ2
2
Λ2
3
≈ tan2θatm, (5.93)
where the last approximation is valid in the tree-level dom-
inance scenario. In this way, collider and neutrino measure-
ments, coming from very different experiments, can be con-
trasted.
Detection possibilities and extraction of limits depend a
lot on the speciﬁc model and on the collider type and energy.
On general grounds a lepton–hadron collider provides both
leptonic and baryonic quantum numbers in the initial state
and is therefore suited for searches involvingλ′.I ne+p col-
lisions, the production of ˜uj
L squarks of the jth generation
viaλ′
1j1 is especially interesting as it involves a valence d
quark of the incident proton. In contrast, for e− p collisions
where charge conjugate processes are accessible, the λ′
11k
couplings become of special interest as they allow for the
production, involving a valence u quark, of ˜dk
R squarks of
thekth generation.
The excluded regions of the parameter space for R-parity
violating scenarios have been worked out from the data at
LEP, HERA and Tevatron, see e.g. [ 784–789]. In the fol-
lowing we shall concentrate on the search possibilities at the
LHC.


--- Page 89 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 101
5.4.8 Hadron colliders
In hadron colliders theλorλ′ couplings can provide a viable
signal. In many SUSY scenarios neutralinos and charginos
are among the lightest supersymmetric particles. Their pair
production or associated production of ˜χ±
1 ˜χ0 via gauge cou-
plings and decay via λorλ′ couplings may lead to a tri-
lepton signal from each particle, providing a clean signature.
One should notice that if the couplings are small, the vertex
may be displaced which makes the analysis more compli-
cated. With small enough couplings the lightest neutralino,
if LSP, decays outside the detector.
If kinematically possible, gluinos and squarks are copi-
ously produced at hadron colliders. The NLO cross section
has been calculated in [ 790]. Form ˜q >m ˜g>m ˜cL , the pro-
duction with decay via λ′
121 ̸= 0 was studied at CDF. Also
couplingλ′
13k from ˜t pair production at CDF and λ′ cou-
plings fromχ0
1 decay at D0 have been investigated.
When R-parity is violated, the supersymmetric particles
can be produced singly, and thus they can be produced
as resonances through R-parity violating interactions. In a
hadron–hadron collider this allows one to probe for res-
onances in a wide mass range because of the continuous
energy distribution of the colliding partons. This produc-
tion mode requires non-negligible R-parity violating cou-
pling. If a single R-parity violating coupling is dominant,
the exchanged supersymmetric particle may decay through
the same coupling involved in its production, giving a two
fermion ﬁnal state. It is also possible that the decay of the
resonant SUSY particle goes through gauge interactions,
giving rise to a cascade decay.
The resonant production of sneutrinos and charged slep-
tons (viaλ′ couplings) has been investigated at hadron col-
liders [791–795]. The production of a charged lepton with
neutralino leads to a like-sign dilepton signature viaλ′ cou-
plings. The production of a charged lepton with a chargino
in the resonant sneutrino case decay leads to a tri-lepton ﬁnal
state viaλ′ couplings. The ˜χ0
1 , ˜χ±
1 , ˜νmasses can be recon-
structed using the tri-lepton signal.
Single production is possible also in two-body processes
without resonance [796]. Sfermion production with a gauge
boson has been studied in either via λorλ′-coupling. (The
process ¯qiqj → W − ˜νk or ¯qiqj → W + ˜lkL can get contri-
bution also from resonant production, but e.g. in SUGRA
m˜l − m˜ν= cos 2βm2
W and resonance production is not kine-
matically viable.) Similarly via λ′ orλ′′ gluino can be pro-
duced with a lepton or quark, respectively. Sneutrino pro-
duction with two associated jets may also provide a de-
tectable signal [797].
Resonant production of squarks can occur via λ′′-type
couplings, leading eventually to jets in the ﬁnal states. Al-
though the cross sections can be considerable for these
processes, the backgrounds in hadronic colliders are large,
and the processes seem difﬁcult to study [ 798]. In special
circumstances the backgrounds can be small, e.g. for stop
production in ¯di ¯dj → ˜t1 → b ˜χ+
1 , with ˜χ+
i → ¯liνi ˜χ0
i (here
it is assumed m˜t1 >mχ+
1
>mχ0
1
, mtop >mχ0
1
). Then for
λ′′
3jk ,mχ0
1
is stable [ 799, 800]. Also single gluino produc-
tion, didj →˜ g ¯t via resonant stop production has a good
signal to background ratio forλ′′
3jk = O(0.1) [801].
With the tt production cross section of the order of
800 pb, the LHC can be considered a top quark factory, with
∼ 108 top quarks being produced per year, assuming an in-
tegrated luminosity of 100 fb − 1. This statistics allows for
precise studies of top quark physics, in particular, for mea-
surements of rare RpV decays. A simulation of the signal
and background using ATLFAST [802], to take into account
the experimental conditions prevailing at the ATLAS detec-
tor [803], was made for a top quark decaying through aλ′
ℓ31
coupling tot →˜ χ0ℓd, assuming only one slepton gives the
leading contribution as an intermediate state [804].
The importance of treating the top quark production and
decay simultaneously gg → t ˜χ0ℓd, rather than Γ(gg→
tt)B(t →˜ χ0ℓd), was shown. The latest approach can un-
derestimate the cross section by a factor of a few units, de-
pending on the slepton mass. The reason is that the slepton
forces the top quark to be off-shell, becoming the resonance
itself, as can be appreciated from ˜χ0ℓ mass invariant distri-
butions.
Two scenarios were chosen for the neutralino decay,
˜χ0 → bdνe and ˜χ0 → cde , the last one assuming a large
stop–scharm mixing. The sensitivity of the LHC is presented
as the signiﬁcance S/
√
B as a function of λ′
131, for slep-
ton masses 150 and 200 GeV . The channel t →˜ χ0ed →
cdeed is more promising with exclusion limits at 2 σc.l.
for λ′ > 0.03 and observation at 5 σc.l. for λ′ > 0.05,
with these values slightly increasing for heavier sleptons.
Thet →˜ χ0ed → bdνeed channel is observable only for
a 150 GeV slepton mass. The signiﬁcance is reduced to
λ′> 0.08 at 2σandλ′> 0.15 at 5σlevel.
Since a λ′
ℓ33 ∼ hbϵℓ/μtrilinear term is generated in
BRpV when the ϵℓ term is removed from the superpoten-
tial, we can see that the above exclusion limits forλ′ are not
signiﬁcant in BRpV , probing only values of ϵℓ parameters
much larger than what is needed for neutrino oscillations.
5.5 Higgs-mediated lepton ﬂavor violation in
supersymmetry
If neutrinos are massive, one would expect LFV transitions
in the Higgs sector through the decay modesH 0 → lilj me-
diated at one loop level by the exchange of the W bosons
and neutrinos. However, as for theμ→ eγand theτ→ μγ
case, also the H 0 → lilj rates are GIM suppressed. In a
supersymmetric (SUSY) framework the situation is com-
pletely different. Besides the previous contributions, super-
symmetry provides new direct sources of ﬂavor violation,


--- Page 90 ---
102 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
namely the possible presence of off-diagonal soft terms in
the slepton mass matrices and in the trilinear couplings
[144]. In practice, ﬂavor violation would originate from any
misalignment between fermion and sfermion mass eigen-
states. LFV processes arise at one loop level through the
exchange of neutralinos (charginos) and charged sleptons
(sneutrinos). The amount of the LFV is regulated by a Super-
GIM mechanism that can be much less severe than in the
non-supersymmetric case [144]. Another potential source of
LFV in models such as the minimal supersymmetric stan-
dard model (MSSM) could be the Higgs sector, in fact, ex-
tensions of the SM containing more than one Higgs dou-
blet generally allow ﬂavor violating couplings of the neutral
Higgs bosons. Such couplings, if unsuppressed, will lead
to large ﬂavor-changing neutral currents in direct opposi-
tion to experiments. The MSSM avoid these dangerous cou-
plings at the tree level segregating the quark and Higgs ﬁelds
so that one Higgs (Hu) can couple only to up-type quarks
while the other(Hd) couples only to d-type. Within unbro-
ken supersymmetry this division is completely natural, in
fact, it is required by the holomorphy of the superpotential.
However, after supersymmetry is broken, couplings of the
formQUcHd andQDcHu are generated at one loop [ 430].
In particular, the presence of a non-zero μterm, coupled
with SUSY breaking, is enough to induce non-holomorphic
Yukawa interactions for quarks and leptons. For large tanβ
values the contributions to d-quark masses coming from
non-holomorphic operator QDcHu can be equal in size to
those coming from the usual holomorphic operatorQDcHd
despite the loop suppression suffered by the former. This is
because the operator itself gets an additional enhancement
of tanβ.
As shown in Ref. [ 805] the presence of these loop in-
duced non-holomorphic couplings also leads to the ap-
pearance of ﬂavor-changing couplings of the neutral Higgs
bosons. These new couplings generate a variety of ﬂavor-
changing processes such asB0 → μ+μ− , ¯B0–B0 etc. [537].
Higgs-mediated FCNC can have sizable effects also in the
lepton sector [806, 807]: given a source of non-holomorphic
couplings, and LFV among the sleptons, Higgs-mediated
LFV is unavoidable. These effects have been widely dis-
cussed in the recent literature both in a generic 2HDM
[808, 809] and in supersymmetry [ 807, 810] frameworks.
Through the study of many LFV processes as ℓi → ℓjℓkℓk
[806, 807], τ→ ℓjη[169, 810], ℓi → ℓjγ[175, 650],
μN→ eN [811],Φ0 → ℓjℓk [174] (withℓi =τ,μ,ℓj,k =
μ,e,Φ=h0,H 0,A 0) or the cross section of theμN→ τX
reaction [812].
5.5.1 LFV in the Higgs sector
SM extensions containing more than one Higgs doublet gen-
erally allow ﬂavor violating couplings of the neutral Higgs
bosons with fermions. Such couplings, if unsuppressed, will
lead to large ﬂavor-changing neutral currents in direct oppo-
sition to experiments. The possible solution to this problem
involves an assumption about the Yukawa structure of the
model. A discrete symmetry can be invoked to allow a given
fermion type to couple to a single Higgs doublet, and in such
case FCNC’s are absent at tree level. In particular, when a
single Higgs ﬁeld gives masses to both types of fermions the
resulting model is referred as 2HDM-I. On the other hand,
when each type of fermion couples to a different Higgs dou-
blet the model is said 2HDM-II.
In the following, we shall assume a scenario where the
type-II 2HDM structure is not protected by any symmetry
and is broken by loop effects (this occurs, for instance, in
the MSSM).
Let us consider the Yukawa interactions for charged lep-
tons, including the radiatively induced LFV terms [806]:
− L ≃lRiYliH1Li +lRi
(
YliΔij
L +YljΔij
R
)
H2Lj + h.c.,
(5.94)
whereH1 andH2 are the scalar doublets,lRi are lepton sin-
glet for right handed fermions,Lk denote the lepton doublets
andYlk are the Yukawa couplings.
In the mass eigenstate basis for both leptons and Higgs
bosons, the effective ﬂavor violating interactions are de-
scribed by the four dimension operators [806]:
− L ≃
(
2G2
F
)1
4 mli
c2
β
(
Δij
Lli
Rlj
L +Δij
Rli
Llj
R
)
×
(
cβ−αh0 − sβ−αH 0 − iA0)
+
(
8G2
F
)1
4 mli
c2
β
(
Δij
Lli
Rνj
L +Δij
Rνi
Llj
R
)
H ± + h.c.,
(5.95)
whereαis the mixing angle between the CP-even Higgs
bosonsh0 andH0,A0 is the physical CP-odd boson, H ±
are the physical charged Higgs-bosons and tβis the ratio
of the vacuum expectation value for the two Higgs (where
we adopt the notation, cx,sx = cosx, sinx andtx = tanx).
Irrespective to the mechanism of the high energy theories
generating the LFV , we treat theΔij
L,R terms in a model in-
dependent way. In order to constrain the Δij
L,R parameters,
we impose that their contributions to LFV processes do not
exceed the experimental bounds [175, 650].
On the other hand, there are several models with a spe-
ciﬁc ansatz about the ﬂavor-changing couplings. For in-
stance, the famous multi-Higgs-doublet models proposed by
Cheng and Sher [596] predict that the LFV couplings of all
the neutral Higgs bosons with the fermions have the form
Hfifj ∼ √ mimj .
In supersymmetry, theΔij terms are induced at one loop
level by the exchange of gauginos and sleptons, provided


--- Page 91 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 103
a source of slepton mixing. In the so mass insertion (MI)
approximation, the expressions ofΔij
L,R are given by
Δij
L =− α1
4πμM1δij
LLm2
L
×
[
I
′(
M2
1,m 2
R,m 2
L
)
+ 1
2I
′(
M2
1,μ2,m 2
L
)]
+ 3
2
α2
4πμM2δij
LLm2
LI
′(
M2
2,μ2,m 2
L
)
, (5.96)
Δij
R = α1
4πμM1m2
Rδij
RR
[
I
′(
M2
1,μ2,m 2
R
)
− (μ↔ mL)
]
,
(5.97)
respectively, whereμis the Higgs mixing parameter, M1,2
are the gaugino masses and m2
L(R) stands for the left–left
(right–right) slepton mass matrix entry. The LFV mass in-
sertions (MIs), i.e.δ3ℓ
XX =( ˜m2
ℓ)3ℓ
XX/m2
X (X =L,R) ,a r et h e
off-diagonal ﬂavor changing entries of the slepton mass ma-
trix. The loop function I
′
(x,y,z) is such that I
′
(x,y,z) =
dI(x,y,z)/dz , whereI(x,y,z) refers to the standard three
point one loop integral which has mass dimension-2
I3(x,y,z) =xy log(x/y) +yz log(y/z) +zx log(z/x)
(x − y)(z − y)(z − x) .
(5.98)
The above expressions, i.e. ( 5.96), (5.97), depend only on
the ratio of the SUSY mass scales and they do not decou-
ple for largemSUSY. As ﬁrst shown in Ref. [ 174], bothΔij
R
andΔij
L couplings suffer from strong cancellations in cer-
tain regions of the parameter space due to destructive in-
terferences among various contributions. For instance, from
(5.97) it is clear that, in theΔij
R case, such cancellations hap-
pen ifμ=mL.
In the SUSY see-saw model, in the mass insertion ap-
proximation, one obtains speciﬁc values for δij
LL depending
on the assumptions on the ﬂavor mixing in Yν[164, 707].
I ft h el a t t e ri so fC K Ms i z e ,δ21(31)
LL ≃ 3 × 10− 5 andδ32
LL ≃
10− 2, while in the case of the observed neutrino mixing, tak-
ingUe3 = 0.07 at about half of the current CHOOZ bound,
we getδ21(31)
LL ≃ 10− 2 andδ32
LL ≃ 10− 1.
5.5.2 Phenomenology
In order to constrain the Δij
L,R parameters, we impose that
their contributions to LFV processes asli → ljlklk andli →
ljγdo not exceed the experimental bounds. At tree level,
Higgs exchange contribute only to ℓi → ℓjℓkℓk,τ→ ℓjη
andμN→ eN . On the other hand, a one loop Higgs ex-
change leads to the LFV radiative decays ℓi → ℓjγ.I nt h e
following, we report the expression for the branching ratios
of the above processes.
5.5.2.1 ℓi → ℓjγThe ℓi → ℓjγprocess can be gener-
ated by the one loop exchange of Higgs and leptons. How-
ever, the dipole transition implies three chirality ﬂips: two in
the Yukawa vertices and one in the lepton propagator. This
strong suppression can be overcome at higher order level.
Going to two loop level, one has to pay the typical price of
g2/16π2 but one can replace the light fermion masses from
Yukawa vertices with the heavy fermion (boson) masses cir-
culating in the second loop. In this case, the virtual Higgs
boson couples only once to the lepton line, inducing the
needed chirality ﬂip. As a result, the two loop amplitude can
provide the major effects. Naively, the ratio between the two
loop fermionic amplitude and the one loop amplitude is
A
(2-loop)f
li → ljγ
A1-loop
li → ljγ
∼ αem
4π
m2
f
m2
li
log
(m2
f
m2
H
)
,
wheremf =mb,mτis the mass of the heavy fermion circu-
lating in the loop. We remind that in a Model II 2HDM (as
SUSY) the Yukawa couplings between neutral Higgs bosons
and quarks areH ¯tt ∼ mt/ tanβandH ¯bb ∼ mb tanβ. Since
the Higgs mediated LFV is relevant only at large tanβ≥ 30,
it is clear that the main contributions arise from theτandb
fermions and not from the top quark. So, in this framework,
τ→ ljγdoes not receive sizable two loop effects by heavy
fermionic loops, contrary to theμ→ eγcase.
However, the situation can drastically change when aW
boson circulates in the two loop Barr–Zee diagrams. Bear-
i n gi nm i n dt h a tHW +W − ∼ mW and that pseudoscalar
bosons do not couple to aW pair, it turns out thatA(2-loop)W
li → ljγ/
A
(2-loop)f
li → ljγ ∼ m2
W/(m2
f tanβ); thus, two loop W effects
are expected to dominate, as it is conﬁrmed numerically
[650, 808].
As ﬁnal result, the following approximate expression
holds [175, 650]:
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)
B(ℓi → ℓj ¯νjντ)
≃ 3
2
αel
π
(m2
ℓi
m2
A
) 2
t6
βΔ2
ij
{ δm
mA
log
m2
ℓi
m2
A
+ 1
6
+αel
π
[m2
W
m2
ℓi
F(aW)
tβ
−
∑
f =b,τ
Nfq2
f
m2
f
m2
ℓi
(
log
m2
f
m2
ℓi
+ 2
)
− Nc
4
(
q2
˜t
mtμ
tβm2
ℓi
s2θ˜th(x˜tH)
− q2
˜b
mbAb
m2
ℓi
s2θ˜bh(x ˜bH)
)]} 2
≃ 3
2
α3
el
π3Δ2
21t4
β
(m4
W
M4
H
)(
F(aW)
)2, (5.99)
where δm=(mH − mA) ∼ O(m2
Z/mA0).T h et e r m so f
the ﬁrst row of ( 5.99) refer to one loop effects and their


--- Page 92 ---
104 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
role is non-negligible only in τdecays. It turns out that
pseudoscalar and scalar one loop amplitudes have opposite
signs, so, as we havemA ≃mH , they cancel each other to a
very large extent. Since these cancellations occur, two loop
effects can become important or even dominant. The two
terms of the second row of ( 5.99) refer to two loop Barr–
Zee effects induced byW and fermionic loops, respectively,
while the last row of (5.99) is relative two loop Barr–Zee ef-
fects with a squark loop in the second loop. As regards the
squark loop effects, it is very easy to realize that they are
negligible compared to W effects. In fact, it is well known
that Higgs mediated LFV can play a relevant or even a dom-
inant role compared to gaugino mediated LFV provided that
slepton masses are not below the TeV scale while maintain-
ing the Higgs masses at the electroweak scale (and assuming
largetβvalues). In this context, it is natural to assume squark
masses at least of the same order as the slepton masses (at
the TeV scale). So, in the limit wherex ˜fH =m2
˜f/m2
H ≫ 1,
the loop functionh(x ˜fH) is such that(logx ˜fH +5/3)/6x ˜fH
thus, even for maximum squark mixing angles θ˜t, ˜b, namely
fors2θ˜t, ˜b = sin 2θ˜t, ˜b ≃ 1, and largeAb andμterms, two loop
squark effects remain much below the W effects, as it is
straightforward to check by (5.99).
As a ﬁnal result the main two loop effects are provided
by the exchange of a W boson, with the loop function
F(aW) ∼ 35
16(logaW)2 foraW =m2
W/m2
H ≪ 1. It is note-
worthy that one and two loop amplitudes have the same
signs. In addition, two loops effects dominate in large por-
tions of the parameter space, specially for largemH values,
where the mass splittingδm=mH − mA decreases to zero.
5.5.2.2 ℓi → ℓjℓkℓk Theli → ljlklk process can be me-
diated by a tree level Higgs exchange [ 806, 807]. However,
up to one loop level,li → ljlklk gets additional contributions
induced byli → ljγ∗ amplitudes [175, 650]. It is worth not-
ing that the Higgs mediated monopole (chirality conserving)
and dipole (chirality violating) amplitudes have the same
tan3βdependence. This has to be contrasted to the non-
Higgs contributions. For instance, within SUSY , the gaugino
mediated dipole amplitude is proportional to tanβwhile the
monopole amplitude is tan βindependent. The expression
for the Higgs mediated li → ljlklk can be approximated in
the following way [175, 650]:
B(τ→ ljlklk)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ)
≃
m2
τm2
lk
32m4
A
Δ2
τjtan6β[3 + 5δjk ]
+αel
3π
(
logm2
τ
m2
lk
− 3
) B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ), (5.100)
where we have disregarded subleading monopole effects.
5.5.2.3 μN→ eN The μ→ e conversion in Nuclei
process can be generated by a scalar operator through the
tree level Higgs exchange [ 811]. Moreover, at one loop
level, additional contributions induced byli → ljγ∗ ampli-
tudes arise [ 175]; however they are subleading [ 175]. Fi-
nally, the following expression for B(μAl→ eAl) is de-
rived [811]:
B(μAl→ eAl) ≃ 1.8 × 10− 4 m7
μm2
p
v4m4
hωAl
capt
Δ2
21t6
β, (5.101)
whereωAl
capt ≃ 0.7054 × 106 s− 1. We observe that B(μ→
3e) is completely dominated by the photonic μ→ eγ∗ di-
pole amplitude so that B(μ→ eee) ≃αemB(μ→ eγ).O n
the other hand, tree level Higgs mediated contributions are
negligible because suppressed by the electron mass through
theH(A) ¯ee ∼ me coupling. On the contrary,μN→ eN is
not suppressed by the light constituent quark mu andmd
but only by the nucleon masses, because the Higgs-boson
coupling to the nucleon is shown to be characterized by the
nucleon mass using the conformal anomaly relation [ 811].
In particular, the most important contribution turns out to
come from the exchange of the scalar Higgs bosonH which
couples to the strange quark [811].
In fact, the coherent μ–e conversion process, where
the initial and ﬁnal nuclei are in the ground state, is ex-
pected to be enhanced by a factor of O(Z) (where Z
is the atomic number) compared to incoherent transition
processes. Since the initial and ﬁnal states are the same,
the elements ⟨N |¯pp|N⟩ and ⟨N|¯nn|N⟩ are nothing but the
proton and the neutron densities in a nucleus in the non-
relativistic limit of nucleons. In this limit, the other matrix
elements ⟨N|¯pγ5p|N⟩ and ⟨N|¯nγ5n|N⟩ vanish. Therefore,
in the coherentμ–e conversion process, the dominant con-
tributions come from the exchange ofH , notA [811].
Moreover, we know thatμ→ eγ∗ (chirality conserving)
monopole amplitudes are generally subdominant compared
to (chirality ﬂipping) dipole effects [ 175]. Note also that,
the enhancement mechanism induced by Barr–Zee type di-
agrams is effective only for chirality ﬂipping operators so,
in the following, we shall disregard chirality conserving one
loop effects.
5.5.2.4 τ→ μP(P=π,η,η′) Now we consider the im-
plications of virtual Higgs exchange for the decays τ→
μP, whereP is a neutral pseudoscalar meson (P =π,η,η′)
[169, 810]. Since we assume CP conservation in the Higgs
sector, only the exchange of the A Higgs boson is relevant.
Moreover, in the large tanβlimit, only the A couplings to
down-type quarks are important. These can be written as
−i(
√
2GF)1/2 tanβA(ξdmd ¯dRdL +ξsms ¯sRsL
+ξbmb ¯bRbL) + h.c. (5.102)


--- Page 93 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 105
The parametersξd,ξs,ξb are equal to one at tree level, but
they can signiﬁcantly deviate from this value because of
higher order corrections proportional to tan β[537, 805],
generated by integrating out superpartners. In the limit of
quark ﬂavor conservation, each ξq (q =d,s,b) has the
formξq =(1 +Δq tanβ)− 1, whereΔq appears in the loop-
generated term −hqΔqH 0∗
2 qcq + h.c. [537, 805]. At ener-
gies below the bottom mass, the b-quark can be integrated
out so the bilinear −imbbcb + h.c. is effectively replaced by
the gluon operator Ω= g2s
64π2ϵμνρσGa
μνGa
ρσ, wheregs and
Ga
μνare the SU(3)C coupling constant and ﬁeld strength, re-
spectively [169]. In the limit in which the processesτ→ 3μ
andτ→ μηare both dominated by Higgs exchange, these
decays are related as [169]:
B(τ→ ljη)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ) ≃ 9π2
(f 8
ηm2
η
m2
Amτ
) 2(
1 −
m2
η
m2τ
) 2
×
[
ξs +ξb
3
(
1 +
√
2
f 0
η
f 8η
)] 2
Δ2
3j tan6β,
where m2
η/m2
τ≃ 9.5 × 10− 2 and the relevant decay con-
stants aref 0
η∼ 0.2fπ,f 8
η∼ 1.2fπandfπ∼ 92 MeV . In the
above expression, both the contribution of the (bottom-loop
induced) gluon operatorΩand the factorsξq were included.
Forξs ∼ ξb ∼ 1, it turns out thatB(τ− → μ− η)/B(τ− →
μ− μ+μ− ) ≃ 5, but it could also be a few times larger
or smaller than that, depending on the actual values of
ξs,ξb. Finally, let us compare τ→ μη′ andτ→ μπwith
τ→ μηin the limit of Higgs exchange domination. Both
ratios are suppressed, although for different reasons. The
ratioB(τ→ μπ)/B(τ→ μη)is small because it is para-
metrically suppressed bym4
π/m4
η∼ 10− 2. The ratioB(τ→
μη′)/B(τ→ μη), which seems to be O(1), is much smaller
because the singlet and octet contributions toτ→ μη′ tend
to cancel against each other [169].
These results, combined with the present bound on τ→
μη, imply that the Higgs mediated contribution to B(τ→
μη′) andB(τ→ μπ)can reach O(10− 9) [169].
5.5.2.5 Higgs → μτThe LFV Higgs → μτdecays and
the related phenomenology have been extensively investi-
g a t e di n[174]. Concerning the Higgs boson decays, we
have [174]
B
(
A → μ+τ− )
= tan2β
(
|ΔL|2 +|ΔR |2)
B
(
A → τ+τ− )
,
(5.103)
where we have approximated 1 /c2
β≃ tan2βsince non-
negligible effects can only arise in the large tan βlimit. If
A is replaced withH [orh]i n( 5.103), the r.h.s. should also
be multiplied by a factor (cβ−α/sα)2 [or(sβ−α/cα)2]. We
recall thatB(A → μτ)can reach values of order 10− 4.T h e
same holds for the ‘non-standard’ CP-even Higgs boson (ei-
therH orh, depending onmA).
We now make contact with the physical observable, i.e.
theB(Φ0 → μ+τ− ), and discuss the phenomenological im-
plications. We outline some general features of B(Φ0 →
μ+τ− ) at large tanβand the prospects for these decay chan-
nels at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and other collid-
ers. Let us discuss the different Higgs bosons, as reported in
[174], assuming for deﬁniteness tanβ∼ 50, |50Δ|2 ∼ 10− 3
(Δ=ΔL orΔR) and an integrated luminosity of 100 fb − 1
at LHC.
IfΦ0 denotes one of the ‘non-standard’ Higgs bosons,
we haveCΦ≃ 1 andB(Φ0 → τ+τ− ) ∼ 10− 1,s oB(Φ0 →
μ+τ− ) ∼ 10− 4. The main production mechanisms at LHC
are bottom-loop mediated gluon fusion and associated pro-
duction withb ¯b, which yield cross sections σ∼ (103, 102,
20) pb for mA ∼ (100, 200, 300) GeV , respectively. The
corresponding numbers of Φ0 → μ+τ− events are about
(104, 103, 2 × 102). These estimates do not change much
if the bottom Yukawa couplingYb is enhanced (suppressed)
by radiative corrections, since in this case the enhancement
(suppression) of σwould be roughly compensated by the
suppression (enhancement) ofB(Φ0 → μ+τ− ).
If Φ0 denotes the other (more ‘standard model-like’)
Higgs boson, the factor CΦ·B(Φ0 → τ+τ− ) strongly de-
pends on mA, while the production cross section at LHC,
which is dominated by top-loop mediated gluon fusion, is
σ∼ 30 pb. FormA ∼ 100 GeV we may haveCΦ·B(Φ0 →
τ+τ− ) ∼ 10− 1 andB(Φ0 → μ+τ− ) ∼ 10− 4, which would
imply ∼ 300μ+τ− events. The number of events is generi-
cally smaller for largemA sinceCΦscales as 1/m4
A, consis-
tently with the expected decoupling of LFV effects for such
a Higgs boson.
The above discussion suggests that LHC may offer good
chances to detect the decays Φ0 → μτ, especially in the
case of non-standard Higgs bosons. This indication should
be supported by a detailed study of the background. At Teva-
tron the sensitivity is lower than at LHC because both the
expected luminosity and the Higgs production cross sec-
tions are smaller. The number of events would be smaller
by a factor 10 2–103. A few events may be expected also at
e+e− orμ+μ− future colliders, assuming integrated lumi-
nosities of 500 and 1 fb − 1, respectively. At a μ+μ− col-
lider an enhancement may occur for the non-standard Higgs
bosons if radiative corrections strongly suppress Yb, since
in this case both the resonant production cross section [σ∼
(4π/m2
A)B(Φ0 → μ+μ− )] and the LFV branching ratios
B(Φ0 → μ+τ− ) would be enhanced. As a result, for light
mA, hundreds ofμ+τ− events could occur.
5.5.2.6 μN→ τXHiggs mediated LFV effects can have
also relevant impact on the cross section of the μN→ τX


--- Page 94 ---
106 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
reaction [812]. The contribution of the Higgs boson media-
tion to the differential cross section μ− N → τ− X is given
by [812]
d2σ
dxdy =
∑
q
xfq(x)
{
|CL|2
q
( 1 − Pμ
2
)
+| CR |2
q
( 1 + Pμ
2
)}
× s
8πy2, (5.104)
where the function fq(x) is the PDF for q-quarks, Pμis
the incident muon polarization such that Pμ=+ 1 and − 1
correspond to the right and left handed polarization, respec-
tively, ands is the centre-of-mass (CM) energy. The para-
metersx andy are deﬁned asx ≡ Q2/2P ·q,y ≡ 2P ·q/s ,
in the limit of massless tau leptons, whereP is the four mo-
mentum of the target, q is the momentum transfer, and Q
is deﬁned asQ2 ≡− q2. As seen in (5.104), experimentally,
the form factors of ChH
L and CA
L ( ChH
R and CA
R ) can be se-
lectively studied by using purely left handed (right handed)
incident muons. In SUSY models such as the MSSM with
heavy right handed neutrinos, LFV is radiatively induced
due to the left handed slepton mixing, which only affects
ChH
L and CA
L . Therefore, in the following, we focus only on
those ChH
L and CA
L couplings.
The magnitudes of the effective couplings are con-
strained by the current experimental results of searches for
LFV processes of tau decays. Therefore, both couplings are
determined by the one that is more constrained, namely the
pseudo-scalar coupling. It is constrained by the τ→ μη
decay (B(τ→ μη)<3.4 × 10− 7). Then the constraint is
given on thes-associated scalar and pseudo-scalar couplings
by
(⏐⏐CA
L
⏐⏐2)
s ≤ 10− 9[
GeV− 4]
×B(τ→ μη). (5.105)
The largest values of ChH
L and CA
L can be realized with
mSUSY ∼ O(1) TeV and the higgsino massμ∼ O(10) TeV
[169, 810].
The cross sections of the μN→ τXreaction in the DIS
region is evaluated for the maximally allowed values of the
effective couplings as a reference. They are plotted in Fig.36
for different quark contributions as a function of the muon
beam energy in the laboratory frame. For the PDF, CTEQ6L
has been used. The targetN is assumed to be a proton. For
a nucleus target, the cross section would be higher, approx-
imately by the number of nucleons in the target. The cross
section sharply increases above Eμ∼ 50 GeV in Fig. 36.
This enhancement comes from the b-quark contribution in
addition to the d- and s-quark contributions which is en-
hanced by a factor ofmb/ms over thes-quark contribution.
The cross section is enhanced by one order of magnitude
when the muon energy changes from 50 to 100 GeV . Typi-
cally, forEμ= 100 GeV andEμ= 300 GeV , the cross sec-
tion is 10− 4 and 10− 3 fb, respectively. With an intensity of
Fig. 36 Cross section of theμ− N → τ− X DIS process as a function
of the muon energy for the Higgs mediated interaction [ 812]. It is as-
sumed that the initial muons are purely left handed. CTEQ6L is used
for the PDF
1020 muons per year and a target mass of 100 g/cm 2, about
104 (102) events could be expected for σ(μN→ τX)=
10− 3 (10− 5) fb, which corresponds toEμ= 300(50) GeV
from Fig. 36. This would provide good potential to improve
the sensitivity by four (two) orders of magnitude from the
present limit fromτ→ μηdecay, respectively. Such a muon
intensity could be available at a future muon collider and a
neutrino factory.
5.5.3 Correlations
The numerical results shown in Figs. 37 and 38 allow us to
draw several observations [175, 650].
– τ→ ljγhas the largest branching ratios except for a re-
gion around mH ∼ 700 GeV where strong cancellations
among two loop effects reduce their size. 25 The follow-
ing approximate relations are found:
B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ ljη)
≃
(δm
mA
logm2
τ
m2
A
+ 1
6 +αel
π
(m2
W
m2τ
)F(aW)
tanβ
) 2
≥ 1,
where the last relation is easily obtained by using the
approximation for F(z). If two loop effects were dis-
regarded, then we would obtain B(τ→ ljγ)/B(τ→
ljη)∈ (1/36, 1) forδm/mA ∈ (0, 10%). Two loop con-
25For a detailed discussion about the origin of these cancellations and
their connection with non-decoupling properties of two loopW ampli-
tude, see Ref. [808].


--- Page 95 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 107
Fig. 37 Branching ratios of various τ→ μandτ→ e LFV processes versus the Higgs boson mass mH in the decoupling limit as reported in
[650].X =γ,μμ,ee,η
Fig. 38 Left: branching ratios ofμ→ eγ,μ→ eee andμAl→ eAl
in the Higgs mediated LFV case versus the Higgs boson mass mh
[175]. Right: branching ratios of μ→ eγ,μ→ eee andμAl→ eAl
in the gaugino mediated LFV case versus a common SUSY mass
mSUSY [175]. In the ﬁgure we settβ= 50 andδ21
LL = 10− 2
tributions signiﬁcantly enhanceB(τ→ ljγ)specially for
δm/mA → 0.
–I n F i g .37 non-negligible mass splitting δm/mA effects
can be visible at low mH regime through the bands of
theτ→ ljγandτ→ ljee processes. These effects tend
to vanish with increasing mH as is correctly reproduced
in Fig. 37.τ→ ljμμdoes not receive visible effects by
δm/mA terms being dominated by the tree level Higgs
exchange.
– As is shown in Fig. 37B(τ→ ljγ)is generally larger
thanB(τ→ ljμμ); their ratio is regulated by the follow-
ing approximate relation:
B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ ljμμ)≃ 36
3 + 5δjμ
B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ ljη)≥ 36
3 + 5δjμ
,
where the last relation is valid only out of the cancellation
region. Moreover, from the above relation it turns out that
B(τ→ ljη)
B(τ→ ljμμ)≃ 36
3 + 5δjμ
.


--- Page 96 ---
108 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
If we relax the condition ξs,b = 1,B(τ→ ljη)can get
values few times smaller or bigger than those in Fig. 37.
– It is noteworthy that a tree level Higgs exchange predicts
thatB(τ→ ljee)/B(τ→ ljμμ)∼ m2
e/m2
μwhile, at two
loop level, we obtain (out of the cancellation region):
B(τ→ ljee)
B(τ→ ljμμ)≃ 0.4
3 + 5δjμ
B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ ljη)≥ 0.4
3 + 5δjμ
.
Let us underline that, in the cancellation region, the lower
bound ofB(τ→ ljee) is given by the monopole contri-
butions. So, in this region,B(τ→ ljee) is much less sup-
pressed thanB(τ→ ljγ).
– The approximate relations among μAl→ eAl,μ→ eγ
andμ→ eee branching ratios are
B(μ→ eγ)
B(μAl→ eAl) ≃ 102
(F(aW)
tanβ
) 2
,
(5.106)
B(μ→ eee)
B(μ→ eγ)≃αel.
In the above equations we retained only dominant two
loop effects arising fromW exchange. The exact behavior
for the examined processes is reported in Fig. 38 where
we can see that μ→ eγgets the largest branching ratio
except for a region aroundmH ∼ 700 GeV where strong
cancellations among two loop effects sink its size.
The correlations among the rates of the above processes
are an important signature of the Higgs-mediated LFV and
allow us to discriminate between different SUSY scenarios.
In fact, it is well known that, in a supersymmetric frame-
work, besides the Higgs mediated LFV transitions, we have
also LFV effects mediated by the gauginos through loops of
neutralinos (charginos)–charged sleptons (sneutrinos). On
the other hand, the above contributions have different decou-
pling properties regulated by the mass of the heaviest scalar
mass (mH ) or by the heaviest mass in the slepton gaugino
loops (mSUSY). In principle, themSUSY andmH masses may
be unrelated, so we can always proceed by considering only
the Higgs mediated effects (assuming a relatively light mH
and an heavymSUSY) or only the gaugino mediated contri-
butions (ifmH is heavy). In the following, we are interested
to make a comparison between Higgs and gaugino mediated
LFV effects. In order to make the comparison as simple as
possible, let us consider the simple case where all the SUSY
particles are degenerate. In this case, it turns out that
Δ21
L ∼ α2
24πδ21
LL,
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)
B(ℓi → ℓj ¯νjνi)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Gauge
= 2αel
75π
(
1 + 5
4 tan2θW
) 2( m4
W
m4
SUSY
)⏐⏐δij
LL
⏐⏐2t2
β,
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)
B(ℓi → ℓj ¯νjνi)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Higgs
≃ 10α3
el
π3
( α2
24π
) 2(m4
W
M4
H
)(
logm2
W
M2
H
) 4⏐⏐δij
LL
⏐⏐2t4
β. (5.107)
In Fig. 38 we report the branching ratios of the examined
processes as a function of the heaviest Higgs boson mass
mH (in the Higgs LFV mediated case) or of the common
SUSY mass mSUSY (in the gaugino LFV mediated case).
We set tβ= 50 and we consider the PMNS scenario as
discussed above so that (δ21
LL)PMNS ≃ 10− 2. Sub-leading
contributions proportional to (δ23
LL(RR)δ31
RR(LL))PMNS were
neglected since, in the PMNS scenario, it turns out that
(δ23
LL(RR)δ31
RR(LL))PMNS/(δ21
LL)PMNS ≃ 10− 3 [707]. As we
can see from Fig. 38, Higgs mediated effects start being
competitive with the gaugino mediated ones whenmSUSY is
roughly one order of magnitude larger than the Higgs mass
mH . Moreover, we stress that, both in the gaugino and in the
Higgs mediated cases, μ→ eγgets the largest effects. In
particular, within the PMNS scenario, it turns out that Higgs
mediatedB(μ→ eγ)∼ 10− 11 whenmH ∼ 200 GeV and
tβ= 50, that is just closed to the present experimental reso-
lution.
The correlations among different processes predicted in
the gaugino mediated case are different from those predicted
in the Higgs mediated case. For instance, in the gaugino me-
diated scenario,B(τ→ ljlklk) gets the largest contributions
by the dipole amplitudes that are tan βenhanced with re-
spect to all other amplitudes resulting in a precise ratio with
B(τ→ ljγ), namely
B(ℓi → ℓjℓkℓk)
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Gauge
≃αel
3π
(
logm2
τ
m2
lk
− 3
)
≃αel, (5.108)
B(τ→ ℓjee)
B(τ→ ℓjμμ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Gauge
≃
logm2
τ
m2e
− 3
logm2τ
m2μ
− 3
≃ 5. (5.109)
Moreover, in the large tanβregime, one can ﬁnd the simple
theoretical relations
B(μ− e in Ti)
B(μ→ eγ)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
Gauge
≃αel. (5.110)
If some ratios different from the above were discovered, then
this would be clear evidence that some new process is gen-
erating theℓi → lj transition, with Higgs mediation being a
leading candidate.
5.5.4 Conclusions
We have reviewed the allowed rates for Higgs-mediated
LFV decays in a SUSY framework. In particular, we have


--- Page 97 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 109
analyzed the decay modes of the τ,μlepton, namelyℓi →
ℓjℓkℓk,ℓi → ℓjγ,τ→ ljηandμN→ eN .W eh a v ea l s o
discussed the LFV decay modes of the Higgs bosons Φ→
ℓiℓj (Φ=h0,H 0,A 0) so as the impact of Higgs mediated
LFV effects on the cross section of theμN→ τXreaction.
Analytical relations and correlations among the rates of the
above processes have been established at the two loop level
in the Higgs boson exchange. The correlations among the
processes are a precise signature of the theory. In this respect
experimental improvements in all the decay channels of the
τlepton would be very welcome. In conclusion, the Higgs-
mediated contributions to LFV processes can be within the
present or upcoming attained experimental resolutions and
provide an important opportunity to detect new physics be-
yond the standard model.
5.6 Tests of unitarity and universality in the lepton sector
5.6.1 Deviations from unitarity in the leptonic mixing
matrix
The presence of physics beyond the SM in the leptonic sec-
tor can generate deviations from unitarity in the mixing ma-
trix. This is analogous to what happens in the quark sector,
where the search for deviations from unitarity of the CKM
matrix is considered a sensitive way to look for new physics.
In the leptonic sector a clear example of non-unitarity
is given by the see-saw mechanism [ 216–220]. To generate
naturally small neutrino masses, new heavy particles—right
handed neutrinos—are added, singlet under the SM gauge
group. Thus a Yukawa coupling for neutrinos can be writ-
ten, as well as Majorana masses for the new heavy ﬁelds.
The mass matrix of the complete theory is now an enlarged
mass matrix (5 × 5 at least), whose diagonalization leads to
small Majorana neutrino masses. The non-unitarity of the
3 × 3 leptonic mixing matrix can now be understood simply
by observing that it is a sub-matrix of a bigger one which is
unitary, since the complete theory must conserve probabili-
ties.
Another way to see this is looking at the effective the-
ory we obtain once the heavy ﬁelds are integrated out. The
unique dimension ﬁve operator is the well-known Weinberg
operator [213] which generates neutrino masses when the
electroweak symmetry is broken. Masses are naturally small
since they are suppressed by the mass M of the heavy par-
ticles which have been integrated out:mν∼ v2/M, wherev
is the Higgs VEV . If we go on in the expansion in effective
operators, we obtain only one dimension six operator which
renormalizes the kinetic energy of neutrinos. Once we per-
form a ﬁeld redeﬁnition to go into a mass basis with canon-
ical kinetic terms, a non-unitary mixing matrix is obtained
[813]. In minimal models deviations from unitarity gener-
ated in this way are very suppressed, since the dimension
six operator is proportional tov2/M2. However, in more so-
phisticated versions of this mechanism like double (or in-
verse) see-saw [814] the suppression can be reduced with-
out affecting the smallness of neutrinos masses and avoid-
ing any ﬁne-tuning of Yukawa couplings. In terms of effec-
tive operators, this means that it is possible to “decouple”
the dimension ﬁve operator from the dimension six, permit-
ting small neutrino masses and not so small unitarity devia-
tions.
Usually the elements of the leptonic mixing matrix are
measured using neutrino oscillation experiments assuming
unitarity. No information can be extracted from electroweak
decays on the individual matrix elements, due to the im-
possibility of detecting neutrino mass eigenstates. This is
quite different from the way of measuring the CKM ma-
trix elements. Here oscillations are important too, but since
quark mass eigenstates can be tagged, direct measurements
of the matrix elements can be made using electroweak de-
cays.
The situation changes if we relax the hypothesis of uni-
tarity of the leptonic mixing matrix. Electroweak decays ac-
quire now an important meaning, since they can be used to
constrain deviations from unitarity. Consider as an exam-
ple the decay W → l ¯νl . The decay rate is modiﬁed as fol-
lows:Γ=ΓSM(NN †)ll , where N is the non-unitary lep-
tonic mixing matrix and ΓSM is the SM decay rate. This,
and other electroweak processes, can therefore be used to
obtain information on(NN †)ll . Moreover, lepton ﬂavor vi-
olating processes like μ→ 3e orμ–e conversion in nuclei
can occur, while rare lepton decays likeli → ljγcan be en-
hanced, permitting to constrain the off-diagonal elements of
(NN †). Finally, universality violation effects are produced,
even if the couplings are universal: for example the branch-
ing ratio of πdecay (see Sect. 6) is now proportional to
(NN †)ee/(NN †)μμ.
In Ref. [ 815] all these processes have been considered,
a global ﬁt has been performed and the matrix |(NN †)| has
been determined (90% C.L.):
⏐⏐NN †⏐⏐ ≈
⎛
⎝
0.994 ± 0.005 <7.0 × 10− 5 <1.6 × 10− 2
<7.0 × 10− 5 0.995 ± 0.005 <1.0 × 10− 2
<1.6 × 10− 2 <1.0 × 10− 2 0.995 ± 0.005
⎞
⎠.
(5.111)
Similar bounds can be inferred for |N†N|, leading to the
conclusion that deviations from unitarity in the leptonic mix-
ing matrix are experimentally constrained to be smaller than
few percent. Notice however that these bounds apply to a
3 × 3 mixing matrix, i.e. they constrain deviations from uni-


--- Page 98 ---
110 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
tarity induced by higher energy physics which has been in-
tegrated out.26
However, since on the contrary the quark sector decays
can only constrain the elements of |(NN †)|, to determine
the individual elements of the leptonic mixing matrix, oscil-
lation experiments are needed. In Ref. [ 815] neutrino oscil-
lation physics is reconsidered in the case in which the mix-
ing matrix is not unitary. The main consequence of this is
that the ﬂavor basis is no longer orthogonal, which gives
rise to two physical effects:
– “zero distance” effect, i.e. ﬂavor conversion in neutrino
oscillations atL = 0:Pνανβ(E,L = 0) ˆA·∝| (NN †)βα|2;
– non-diagonal matter effects.
With the resulting formulas for neutrino oscillations, a ﬁt to
present oscillation experiments is performed, in order to de-
termine the individual matrix elements. As in the standard
case, no information at all is available on phases (four or
six, depending on the nature—Dirac or Majorana—of the
neutrinos), since appearance experiments would be needed.
However the moduli of matrix elements can be determined,
but now they are all independent, so that the free parame-
ters are nine instead of three. The elements of thee-row can
be constrained using the data from CHOOZ [ 816], Kam-
LAND [ 817] and SNO [ 818], together with the informa-
tion on /Delta1m2
23 resulting from an analysis of K2K [ 819]. In
contrast, less data are available for the μ-row: only those
coming from K2K and Super-Kamiokande [ 820]o na t -
mospheric neutrinos, and only |Nμ3| and the combination
|Nμ1|2 +|Nμ2|2 can be determined. No information at all is
available on theτ-row. The ﬁnal result is the following (3σ
ranges):
|N |=
⎛
⎝
0.75–0.89 0 .45–0.66 <0.34[
(|Nμ1|2 +|Nμ2|2)1/2 = 0.57–0.86
]
0.57–0.86
?? ?
⎞
⎠.
(5.112)
Notice that, without assuming unitarity, only half of the
elements can be determined from oscillation experiments
alone. Adding the information from near detectors at NO-
MAD [821], KARMEN [822], BUGEY [823] and MINOS
[824], which put bounds on |(NN †)αβ|2 by measuring the
“zero distance” effect, the degeneracy in the μ-row can be
solved, but theτ-row is still unknown.
In order to determine/constrain all the elements of the
leptonic mixing matrix without assuming unitarity, data on
26They do not apply for instance to the case of light sterile neutrinos,
where the low energy mixing matrix is larger. Indeed in this case they
would be included in the sum over all light mass eigenstates contained
inside(NN †)ll and unitarity would be restored.
oscillations must be combined with data from decays. The
ﬁnal result is
|N|=
⎛
⎝
0.75–0.89 0 .45–0.65 <0.20
0.19–0.55 0 .42–0.74 0 .57–0.82
0.13–0.56 0 .36–0.75 0 .54–0.82
⎞
⎠, (5.113)
which can be compared to the one obtained with standard
analysis [825] where similar bounds are found.
It would be good to be able to determine the elements of
the mixing matrix with oscillation experiments alone, per-
mitting thus a “direct” test of unitarity. This would be for
instance a way to detect light sterile neutrinos [ 826]. This
could be possible exploring the appearance channels for in-
stance at future facilities under discussion, such as Super-
Beams [713, 827–829],β-Beams [830] and Neutrino Facto-
ries [831, 832], where theτ-row and phases could be mea-
sured. Moreover, near detectors at neutrino factories could
also improve the bounds on (NN †)eτand (NN †)μτby
about one order of magnitude. All this information, com-
ing from both decays and oscillation experiments, will be
important not only to detect new physics, but even to dis-
criminate among different scenarios.
5.6.2 Lepton universality
High precision electroweak tests (HPET) represent a power-
ful tool to probe the SM and, hence, to constrain or obtain
indirect hints of new physics beyond it. A typical and rel-
evant example of HPET is represented by the Lepton Uni-
versality (LU) breaking. Kaon and pion physics are obvious
grounds where to perform such tests, for instance in the well
studiedπℓ2 (π→ ℓνℓ) and Kℓ2 (K → ℓνℓ) decays, where
l =e orμ.
Unfortunately, the relevance of these single decay chan-
nels in probing the SM is severely hindered by our theoret-
ical uncertainties, which still remain at the percent level (in
particular due to the uncertainties on non-perturbative quan-
tities likefπandfK ). This is what prevents us from fully
exploiting such decay modes in constraining new physics, in
spite of the fact that it is possible to obtain non-SM contri-
butions which exceed the high experimental precision which
has been achieved on those modes.
On the other hand, in the ratios RπandRK of the elec-
tronic and muonic decay modesRπ=Γ(π→ eν)/Γ(π→
μν)andRK =Γ(K→ eν)/Γ(K→ μν), the hadronic un-
certainties cancel to a very large extent. As a result, the SM
predictions of RπandRK are known with excellent accu-
racy [833] and this makes it possible to fully exploit the great
experimental resolutions onRπ[834] andRK [834, 835]t o
constrain new physics effects. Given our limited predictive
power onfπandfK , deviations from the μ–e universality
represent the best hope we have at the moment to detect new
physics effects inπℓ2 andKℓ2.


--- Page 99 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 111
The most recent NA48/2 result onRK :
Rexp.
K =(2.416 ± 0.043stat. ± 0.024syst.) × 10− 5 NA48/2,
which will further improve with current analysis, signiﬁ-
cantly improves on the previous PDG value:
Rexp.
K =(2.44 ± 0.11) × 10− 5.
This is to be compared with the SM prediction, which reads
RSM
K =(2.472 ± 0.001) × 10− 5.
The details of the experimental measurement ofRK are pre-
sented in Sect. 6.2 of this report. Denoting by /Delta1re−μ
NP the
deviation fromμ–e universality inRK due to new physics,
i.e.,
RK =RSM
K
(
1 +/Delta1re−μ
NP
)
, (5.114)
the NA48/2 result requires (at the 2σlevel):
− 0.063 ≤ /Delta1re−μ
NP ≤ 0.017 NA48 /2.
In the following, we consider low energy minimal SUSY
extensions of the SM (MSSM) with R parity as the source
of new physics to be tested by RK [836]. The question we
intend to address is whether SUSY can cause deviations
fromμ–e universality inKl2 at a level which can be probed
with the present attained experimental sensitivity, namely at
the percent level. We shall show that (i) it is indeed possi-
ble for regions of the MSSM to obtain /Delta1re−μ
NP of O(10− 2)
and (ii) such large contributions to Kℓ2 do not arise from
SUSY lepton ﬂavor conserving (LFC) effects, but, rather,
from LFV ones.
At ﬁrst sight, this latter statement may seem rather puz-
zling. TheK → eνe andK → μνμdecays are LFC and one
could expect that it is through LFC SUSY contributions af-
fecting differently the two decays that one obtains the domi-
nant source of lepton ﬂavor non-universality in SUSY . On
the other hand, one can easily guess that, whenever new
physics intervenes in K → eνe andK → μνμto create a
departure from strict SMμ–e universality, these new contri-
butions will be proportional to the lepton masses; hence, it
may happen (and, indeed, this is what occurs in the SUSY
case) that LFC contributions are suppressed with respect
to the LFV ones by higher powers of the ﬁrst two genera-
tions lepton masses (it turns out that the ﬁrst contributions
to/Delta1re−μ
NP from LFC terms arise at the cubic order in mℓ,
withℓ =e,μ). A second, important reason for such result
is that among the LFV contributions to RK one can select
those which involve ﬂavor changes from the ﬁrst two lepton
generations to the third one with the possibility of picking
up terms proportional to the tau–Yukawa coupling which
can be large in the large tan βregime (the parameter tanβ
denotes the ratio of Higgs vacuum expectation values re-
sponsible for the up- and down-quark masses, respectively).
Moreover, the relevant one loop induced LFV Yukawa inter-
actions are known [806] to acquire an additional tanβfactor
with respect to the tree level LFC Yukawa terms. Thus, the
loop suppression factor can be (partially) compensated in
the large tanβregime.
Finally, given the NA48/2 RK central value below the
SM prediction, one may wonder whether SUSY contribu-
tions could have the correct sign to account for such an ef-
fect. Although the above mentioned LFV terms can only add
positive contributions toRK (since their amplitudes cannot
interfere with the SM one), it turns out that there exist LFC
contributions arising from double LFV mass insertions (MI)
in the scalar lepton propagators which can destructively in-
terfere with the SM contribution. We shall show that there
exist regions of the SUSY parameter space where the to-
talRK arising from all such SM and SUSY terms is indeed
lower thanRSM
K .
Finally, we also discuss the potentiality of τ–μ(e)uni-
versality breaking in τdecays to probe new physics ef-
fects.
5.6.2.1 μ–e universality in π→ ℓνandK → ℓνdecays
D u et ot h eV –A structure of the weak interactions, the
SM contributions to πℓ2 andKℓ2 are helicity suppressed;
hence, these processes are very sensitive to non-SM effects
(such as multi-Higgs effects) which might induce an effec-
tive pseudoscalar hadronic weak current.
In particular, charged Higgs bosons ( H ±) appearing
in any model with two Higgs doublets (including the
SUSY case) can contribute at tree level to the above
processes. The relevant four-Fermi interaction for the de-
cay of charged mesons induced by W ± and H ± has the
following form:
4GF√
2
Vud
[
(uγμPLd)
(
lγμPLν
)
− tan2β
(mdml
m2
H ±
)
(uPRd)(lPLν)
]
, (5.115)
wherePR,L =(1 ±γ5)/2. Here we keep only the tanβen-
hanced part of the H ±ud coupling, namely the md tanβ
term. The decays M → lν(being M the generic meson)
proceed via the axial-vector part of the W ± coupling and
via the pseudoscalar part of the H ± coupling. Then, once
we implement the PCACs
⟨0|uγμγ5d
⏐⏐M− ⟩
=ifMpμ
M,
⟨0|uγ5d
⏐⏐M− ⟩
=− ifM
m2
M
md +mu
,
(5.116)


--- Page 100 ---
112 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
we easily arrive at the amplitude
MM→ lν=GF√
2
Vu(d,s)fM
[
ml − ml tan2β
×
( md
md +mu
) m2
M
m2
H ±
]
l(1 − γ5)ν. (5.117)
We observe that the SM term is proportional to ml because
of the helicity suppression while the charged Higgs term is
proportional toml because of the Yukawa coupling. The tree
level partial width is given by [806]
Γ
(
M− → l− ν
)
=G2
F
8π|Vu(d,s) |2f 2
MmMm2
l
(
1− m2
l
m2
M
)
×rM,
(5.118)
where
rM =
[
1 − tan2β
( md,s
mu +md,s
) m2
M
m2
H ±
] 2
, (5.119)
and wheremu is the mass of the up quark whilems,d stands
for the down-type quark mass of theM meson (M =K,π).
From ( 5.119) it is evident that such tree level contribu-
tions do not introduce any lepton ﬂavor dependent correc-
tion. The ﬁrst SUSY contributions violating the μ–e uni-
versality in π→ ℓνandK → ℓνdecays arise at the one
loop level with various diagrams involving exchanges of
(charged and neutral) Higgs scalars, charginos, neutrali-
nos and sleptons. For our purpose, it is relevant to divide
all such contributions into two classes: (i) LFC contribu-
tions where the charged meson M decays without FCNC
in the leptonic sector, i.e.M → ℓνℓ; (ii) LFV contributions
M → ℓiνk, with i andk referring to different generations
(in particular, the interesting case will be for i =e,μ, and
k =τ).
5.6.2.2 The lepton ﬂavor conserving case One-loop cor-
rections to RπandRK include box, wave function renor-
malization and vertex contributions from SUSY particle ex-
change. The complete calculation of the μdecay in the
MSSM [837] can be easily applied to meson decays.
The dominant diagrams containing one loop corrections
to the lWνl vertex have the following suppression factors
(compared to the tree level graph):
– g2
2
16π2
m2
l
m2
W
tanβm2
W
m2
h
for loops with hW ±l exchange (with
h =H 0,h 0),
– g2
2
16π2
m2
l
m2
W
tan2βm2
W
m2
h
for loops with hH ±l exchange (with
h =H 0,h 0 andA0),
– g2
2
16π2
m2
W
M2
SUSY
for loops generated by charginos/neutralinos
and sleptons.
For dominant box contributions we have the following esti-
mates:
– g2
2
16π2
mdml
M2 tan2βfor boxes with hW ±l or Z0H ±l ex-
change (where M is the heavier mass circulating in the
loop),
– g2
2
16π2( mdml
mWMH ±)2 tan4βfor boxes withhH ±l ,
– g2
2
16π2
m2
W
M2
SUSY
for loops generated by charginos/neutralinos
and sleptons (whereMSUSY is the heavier mass circulat-
ing in the loop).
To get a feeling of the order of magnitude of the above con-
tributions let us show the explicit expression of the dominant
Higgs contributions to thelWνl vertex [837]:
/Delta1re−μ
SUSY = α2
32π
m2
μ
M2
W
tan2β
(
− 2 +I
(
A0,H ±)
+c2
αI
(
H 0,H ±)
+s2
αI
(
h0,H ±))
,
where
I( 1, 2) = 1
2
m2
1 +m2
2
m2
1 − m2
2
logm2
1
m2
2
,
andαis the mixing angle in the CP-even Higgs sector. Even
if we assume tanβ= 50 and arbitrary relations among the
Higgs boson masses we get a value for /Delta1re−μ
SUSY ≤ 10− 6
much below the actual experimental resolution. In addition,
in the large tanβlimit,α→ 0 andmA0 ∼ mH 0 ∼ mH ± and
/Delta1re−μ
SUSY tends to vanish. The charginos/neutralinos sleptons
(˜le,μ) contributions to/Delta1re−μ
SUSY are of the form
/Delta1re−μ
SUSY ∼ α2
4π
( ˜m2
μ−˜m2
e
˜m2μ+˜m2e
) m2
W
M2
SUSY
.
The degeneracy of slepton masses (in particular those of
the ﬁrst two generations) severely suppresses these contribu-
tions. Even if we assume a quite large mass splitting among
slepton masses (at the 10% level for instance) we end up
with/Delta1re−μ
SUSY ≤ 10− 4. For the box-type non-universal con-
tributions, we ﬁnd similar or even more suppressed effects
compared to those we have studied. So, ﬁnally, it turns out
that all these LFC contributions yield values of /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY
which are much smaller than the percent level required by
the achieved experimental sensitivity.
On the other hand, one could wonder whether the quan-
tity/Delta1re−μ
SUSY can be constrained by the pion physics. In prin-
ciple, the sensitivity could be even higher: from
Rexp.
π =(1.230 ± 0.004) × 10− 4 PDG,
and by making a comparison with the SM prediction
RSM
π =(1.2354 ± 0.0002) × 10− 4,


--- Page 101 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 113
one obtains (at the 2σlevel)
− 0.0107 ≤ /Delta1re−μ
NP ≤ 0.0022.
Unfortunately, even in the most favorable cases,/Delta1re−μ
SUSY re-
mains much below its actual experimental upper bound.
In conclusion, SUSY effects with ﬂavor conservation in
the leptonic sector can differently contribute to theK → eνe
andK → μνμdecays, hence inducingμ–e non-universality
inRK , however such effects are still orders of magnitude
below the level of the present experimental sensitivity on
RK . The same conclusions hold forRπ.
5.6.2.3 The lepton ﬂavor violating case It is well known
that models containing at least two Higgs doublets gener-
ally allow for ﬂavor violating couplings of the Higgs bosons
with the fermions [838]. In the MSSM such LFV couplings
are absent at tree level. However, once non-holomorphic
terms are generated by loop effects (so called HRS correc-
tions [ 430]) and given a source of LFV among the slep-
tons, Higgs-mediated (radiatively induced)Hℓiℓj LFV cou-
plings are unavoidable [ 806, 807]. These effects have been
widely discussed through the study of several processes,
namelyτ→ ℓjℓkℓk [806, 807],τ→ μη[810],μ–e con-
version in nuclei [ 811],B → ℓjτ[807],H → ℓjℓk [174]
andℓi → ℓjγ[650].
Moreover, it has been shown [ 839] that Higgs-mediated
LFV couplings generate a breaking of μ–e universality in
purely leptonicπ± andK± decays.
One could naively think that SUSY effects in the LFV
channelsM → ℓiνk are further suppressed with respect to
the LFC ones. On the contrary, charged Higgs mediated
SUSY LFV contributions, in particular in the kaon decays
into an electron or a muon and a tau neutrino, can be strongly
enhanced. The quantity which now accounts for the devia-
tion from theμ–e universality reads
RLFV
π,K=
∑
iΓ(π(K)→ eνi)∑
iΓ(π(K)→ μνi),i =e,μ,τ,
with the sum extended over all (anti)neutrino ﬂavors (exper-
imentally one determines only the charged lepton ﬂavor in
the decay products).
The dominant SUSY contributions to RLFV
π,Karise from
the charged Higgs exchange. The effective LFV Yukawa
couplings we consider are (see Fig. 39)
ℓH ±ντ→ g2√
2
mτ
MW
Δ3l
R tan2β, ℓ=e,μ. (5.120)
A crucial ingredient for the effects we are going to discuss
is the quadratic dependence on tanβin the above coupling:
one power of tanβcomes from the trilinear scalar coupling
in Fig. 39, while the second one is a speciﬁc feature of the
above HRS mechanism.
Fig. 39 Contribution to the effective ¯ντℓRH + coupling
TheΔ3ℓ
R terms are induced at one loop level by the ex-
change of bino (see Fig. 39) or bino–higgsino and sleptons.
Since the Yukawa operator is of dimension four, the quan-
tities Δ3ℓ
R depend only on ratios of SUSY masses, hence
avoiding SUSY decoupling. In the so called MI approxima-
tion the expression ofΔ3ℓ
R is given by:
Δ3ℓ
R ≃ α1
4πμM1m2
Rδ3ℓ
RR
[
I ′(
M2
1,μ2,m 2
R
)
− (μ↔ mL)
]
,
(5.121)
whereμis the Higgs mixing parameter,M1 is the bino ( ˜B)
mass andm2
L(R) stands for the left–left (right–right) slepton
mass matrix entry. The LFV MIs, i.e. δ3ℓ
XX =( ˜m2
ℓ)3ℓ
XX/m2
X
(X =L,R) , are the off-diagonal ﬂavor changing entries
of the slepton mass matrix. The loop function I
′
(x,y,z)
is such that I
′
(x,y,z) =dI(x,y,z)/dz , where I(x,y,z)
refers to the standard three point one loop integral which
has mass dimension-2.
Making use of the LFV Yukawa coupling in ( 5.120), it
turns out that the dominant contribution to /Delta1re−μ
NP reads
[839]
RLFV
K ≃RSM
K
[
1 +
(m4
K
M4
H
)(m2
τ
m2e
)⏐⏐Δ31
R
⏐⏐2 tan6β
]
. (5.122)
In (5.122) terms proportional toΔ32
R are neglected given that
they are suppressed by a factor m2
e/m2
μwith respect to the
term proportional toΔ31
R .
TakingΔ31
R ≃ 5 × 10− 4 (by means of a numerical analy-
sis, it turns out that Δ3ℓ
R ≤ 10− 3 [174]), tanβ= 40 and
MH = 500 GeV we end up with RLFV
K ≃RSM
K (1 + 0.013).
We see that in the large (but not extreme) tanβregime and
with a relatively heavyH ±, it is possible to reach contribu-
tions to/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY at the percent level thanks to the possible
LFV enhancements arising in SUSY models.
Turning to pion physics, one could wonder whether the
analogous quantity /Delta1re−μ
πSUSY is able to constrain SUSY
LFV . However, the correlation between /Delta1re−μ
πSUSY and
/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY:
/Delta1re−μ
πSUSY ≃
( md
mu +md
) 2(m4
π
m4
k
)
/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY, (5.123)


--- Page 102 ---
114 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
clearly shows that the constraints on /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY force
/Delta1re−μ
πSUSY to be much below its actual experimental upper
bound.
5.6.2.4 On the sign of /Delta1re−μ
SUSY The above SUSY domi-
nant contribution to/Delta1re−μ
NP arises from LFV channels in the
K → eνmode, hence without any interference effect with
the SM contribution. Thus, it can only increase the value
of RK with respect to the SM expectation. On the other
hand, the recent NA48/2 result exhibits a central value lower
thanRSM
K (and, indeed, also lower than the previous PDG
central value). One may wonder whether SUSY could ac-
count for such a lower RK . Obviously, the only way it can
is through terms which, contributing to the LFC K → lνl
channels, can interfere (destructively) with the SM contribu-
tion. We already commented that SUSY LFC contributions
are subdominant. However, one can envisage the possibility
of making use of the large LFV contributions to give rise
to LFC ones through double LFV MI that, as a ﬁnal effect,
preserves the ﬂavor.
To see this point explicitly, we report the corrections to
the LFCH ±ℓνℓ vertices induced by LFV effects
ℓH ±νℓ → g2√
2
mℓ
MW
tanβ
(
1 +mτ
mℓ
Δℓℓ
RL tanβ
)
, (5.124)
whereΔℓℓ
RL is generated by the same diagram as in Fig. 39
but with an additional δ3ℓ
LL MI in the sneutrino propagator.
In the MI approximation,Δℓℓ
RL is given by
Δℓℓ
RL ≃− α1
4πμM1m2
Lm2
Rδℓ3
RRδ3ℓ
LLI ′′(
M2
1,m 2
L,m 2
R
)
,
(5.125)
whereI ′′(x,y,z) =d2I(x,y,z)/dydz . In the large slepton
mixing case, Δℓℓ
RL terms are of the same order of Δ3ℓ
R .27
These new effects modify the previous RLFV
K expression in
the following way [839]:
RLFV
K ≃RSM
K
[⏐⏐⏐⏐1 − m2
K
M2
H
mτ
me
Δ11
RLt3
β
⏐⏐⏐⏐
2
+
(m4
K
M4
H
)(m2
τ
m2e
)⏐⏐Δ31
R
⏐⏐2 tan6β
]
. (5.126)
In the above expression, besides the contributions reported
in (5.122), we also included the interference between SM
and SUSY LFC terms (arising from a double LFV source).
Setting the parameters as in the example of the above section
and ifΔ11
RL = 10− 4 we getRLFV
K ≃RSM
K (1 − 0.032), that is
27Im(δ13
RRδ31
LL) is strongly constrained by the electron electric dipole
moment [163]. However, sizable contributions toRLFV
K can still be in-
duced by Re(δ13
RRδ31
LL).
just within the expected experimental resolution reachable
by NA48/2 once all the available data will be analyzed. Fi-
nally, we remark that the above effects do not spoil the pion
physics constraints.
The extension of the above results to B → ℓν[766]i s
obtained with the replacement mK → mB , while for the
D → ℓνcasem2
K → (ms/mc)m2
D. In the most favorable
scenarios, taking into account the constraints from LFV τ
decays [650], spectacular order-of-magnitude enhancements
forRe/τ
B and O(50%) deviations from the SM in Rμ/τ
B are
allowed [766]. There exists a stringent correlation between
Re/τ
B andRe/μ
K so that
Re/τ
B ≃
[
rH +m4
B
m4
K
/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY
]
≤ 2 × 102. (5.127)
In particular, it turns out that /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY is much more ef-
fective to constrainRe/τ
B Γ(B→ eντ) than LFV tau decay
processes.
5.6.2.5 Lepton universality in M → ℓνversus LFV τde-
cays Obviously, a legitimate worry when witnessing such
a huge SUSY contribution through LFV terms is whether
the bounds on LFV tau decays, like τ→ eX (with X =
γ,η,μμ), are respected [ 650]. Higgs mediated B(τ→
ℓjX) and/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY have exactly the same SUSY depen-
dence; hence, we can compute the upper bounds of the rel-
evant LFV tau decays which are obtained for those values
of the SUSY parameters yielding /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY at the percent
level.
The most sensitive processes to Higgs mediated LFV in
theτlepton decay channels are τ→ μ(e)η,τ→ μ(e)μμ
andτ→ μ(e)γ. The related branching ratios are [650]
B(τ→ ljη)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ) ≃ 18π2
(f 8
ηm2
η
mτ
) 2(
1 −
m2
η
m2τ
) 2
×
( |Δ3j |2 tan6β
m4
A
)
, (5.128)
wherem2
η/m2
τ≃ 9.5 × 10− 2 and the relevant decay constant
isf 8
η∼ 110 MeV,
B(τ→ ljγ)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ) ≃ 10
(αel
π
) 3
tan4β|Δτj|2
×
[mW
mA
log
(m2
W
m2
A
)] 4
, (5.129)
B(τ→ ljμμ)
B(τ→ lj ¯νjντ) ≃
m2
τm2
μ
32
( |Δ3j |2 tan6β
m4
A
)
×(3 + 5δjμ), (5.130)


--- Page 103 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 115
where |Δ3j |2 =|Δ3j
L |2 +|Δ3j
R |2. It is straightforward to
check that, in the large tan βregime, B(τ→ ljη)and
B(τ→ ljγ)are of the same order of magnitude [ 650] and
they are dominant compared toB(τ→ ljμμ).28
Given that /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY and B(τ→ ljX) have the same
SUSY dependence, once we saturate the/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY value (at
the % level), the upper bounds onB(τ→ ljX) (allowed by
|Δ31
R |2) are automatically predicted. We ﬁnd that
B(τ→ ljγ)∼ B(τ→ ljη)≃ 10− 2
( |Δ3j |2 tan6β
m4
A
)
≃ 10− 8/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY. (5.131)
So, employing the constraints for /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY at the %
level, we obtain the desired upper bounds: B(τ→ eη),
B(τ→ eγ)≤ 10− 10. Given the experimental upper bounds
on the LFV τlepton decays [ 764], we conclude that it is
possible to saturate the upper bound on/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY while re-
maining much below the present and expected future upper
bounds on such LFV decays. There exist other SUSY con-
tributions to LFV τdecays, like the one loop neutralino-
charged slepton exchanges, for instance, where there is a di-
rect dependence on the quantitiesδ3j
RR . Given that the exist-
ing bounds on the leptonic δRR involving transitions to the
third generation are rather loose [ 681], it turns out that also
these contributions fail to reach the level of experimental
sensitivity for LFVτdecays.
5.6.2.6 e–μuniversality inτdecays Studying theτ–μ–e
universality in the leptonicτdecays is an interesting labora-
tory for search for physics beyond the SM. In the SM the τ
decay partial width for the leptonic modes is
Γ
(
τ→ l ¯νlντ(γ)
)
=G2
Fm5
τ
192π3f
(
m2
l/m2
τ
)
×
[
1 + 3
5
m2
τ
M2
W
][
1 +α(mτ)
π
( 25
4 − π2
)]
, (5.132)
wheref(x) = 1 − 8x + 8x3 − x4 − 12x2 logx is the lepton
mass correction and the last two factors are corrections from
the nonlocal structure of the intermediateW ± boson propa-
gator and QED radiative corrections respectively. The Fermi
constantGF is determined by the muon life-time
GF ≡ Gμ=(1.16637 ± 0.00002) × 10− 5 GeV− 2, (5.133)
28It is remarkable that /Delta1re−μ
K SUSY ∼| Δ31
R |2 while B(τ→ eX) ∼
|Δ31
L |2 +|Δ31
R |2 (withX =η,γorμμ). In practice,/Delta1re−μ
K SUSY is sen-
sitive only to RR-type LFV terms in the slepton mass matrix while
B(τ→ eX) does not distinguish between left and right sectors.
and absorbs all the remaining electroweak radiative (loop)
corrections.
The main source of non-universal contributions would be
the tree level contribution from the charged Higgs boson
(mass dependent couplings) and different slepton masses of
the ˜μ, ˜τand ˜e sleptons exchanged in the one loop induced
ℓ–W –νℓ vertex. On the other hand, as discussed in previous
sections, the last contribution can provide a correction that
can be at most as large as 10− 4 (in the limiting case of very
light sleptons and gauginos ∼MW ), very far for the actual
and forthcoming experimental resolutions. However, differ-
ently from theM → ℓνcase, a tree level charged Higgs ex-
change breaks the lepton universality and it provides a con-
tribution that we are going to discuss.
The deviations from τ− μ− e universality can be
conveniently discussed by studying the ratios Gτ,e/Gμ,e,
Gτ,μ/Gμ,eandGτ,μ/Gτ,e, given by the ratios of the cor-
responding branching fractions. With the highly accurate
experimental result for the Gμ,e, the ﬁrst two ratios are es-
sentially a direct measure of non-universality in the corre-
sponding tau decays. When the statistical error of future
experiments will become negligible, the main problem for
achieving maximum precision will be to reduce the system-
atic errors. One may expect that certain systematic errors
will be canceled in the ratioGτ,μ/Gτ,e.
The 2004 world averaged data for the leptonic τdecay
modes andτlife-time are [834, 840]
Be|exp =(17.84 ± 0.06)%,
Bμ|exp =(17.37 ± 0.06)%, (5.134)
ττ=(290.6 ± 1.1) × 10− 15 s.
Note that the relative errors of the above measured quantities
are of the 0.34–0.38%, the biggest being for the life-time.
One can parameterize a possible beyond the SM contribu-
tion by a quantityΔl (l =e,μ), deﬁned as
Bl =Bl |SM
(
1 +Δl)
. (5.135)
Including the W -propagator effect and QED radiative cor-
rections, the following results for the branching ratios in the
SM are obtained [840]:
Be|SM =(17.80 ± 0.07)%,
Bμ|SM =(17.32 ± 0.07)%.
(5.136)
Together with the experimental data this leads to the fol-
lowing 95% C.L. bounds on Δl , for the electron and muon
decay mode, respectively [840]:
(
− 0.80 ≤ Δe ≤ 1.21
)
%,
(
− 0.76 ≤ Δμ≤ 1.27
)
%.
(5.137)


--- Page 104 ---
116 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
One can see that the negative contributions are constrained
more strongly that the positive ones. A tree level charged
Higgs exchange leads to the following contribution [841]:
ΓW ±+H ±
=ΓW ±
[
1 − 2mlmτtan2β
M2
H ±
ml
mτ
κ
(m2
l
m2τ
)
+m2
τm2
l tan4β
4M4
H ±
]
≃ΓW ±
[
1 − 1.15 × 10− 3
( 200 GeV
MH ±
) 2( tanβ
50
) 2]
,
(5.138)
whereκ(x)=g(x)
f(x) ≃ 0.94 withg(x) = 1 + 9x − 9x2 − x3 +
6x(1 +x) ln(x). In the above expression, the second term
comes from the interference with the SM amplitude and it is
much more important than the last one, which is suppressed
by a factorm2
τtan2β/8M2
H ± .
For the future precision ofGτ,μandGτ,emeasurements
of order 0.1% (Gμ,eis known with 0.002% precision) the
only effect that eventually can be observed is the slightly
smaller value of Gτ,μas compared to Gτ,eand Gμ,e.I f
measured, such effect would mean a rather precise informa-
tion about MSSM: large tanβ≥ 40 and smallMH ± ∼ 200–
300 GeV.
5.6.2.7 Conclusions High precision electroweak tests,
such as deviations from the SM expectations of the lep-
ton universality breaking, represent a powerful tool to probe
the SM and, hence, to constrain or obtain indirect hints of
new physics beyond it. Kaon and pion physics are obvious
grounds where to perform such tests, for instance in the well
studiedπ→ ℓνℓ andK → ℓνℓ decays, where l =e orμ.
In particular, a precise measurement of the ﬂavor conserv-
ingK → ℓνℓ decays may shed light on the size of LFV in
new physics.μ–e non-universality inKℓ2 is quite effective
in constraining relevant regions of SUSY models with LFV .
A comparison with analogous bounds coming from τLFV
decays shows the relevance of the measurement of RK to
probe LFV in SUSY . Moreover,τ–μ–e universality in the
leptonicτdecays is an additional interesting laboratory for
searching for physics beyond the SM.
5.7 EDMs from RGE effects in theories with low energy
supersymmetry
EDMs probe new physics in general and in particular low
energy supersymmetry. For deﬁniteness and for simplic-
ity, we focus here on lepton EDMs, as they are free from
the theoretical uncertainties associated to the calculation of
hadronic matrix elements. After a brief review of the con-
straints on slepton masses we discuss here a speciﬁc kind
of sources of CPV , those induced radiatively by the Yukawa
interactions of the heavy particles present in see-saw and/or
grand uniﬁed models. It has been emphasized that these in-
teractions could lead to LFV decays, in particular μ→ eγ,
at an observable rate; it is then natural to wonder whether
this is also the case for EDMs.
As shown in Sect. 3, LFV decays, EDMs and additional
contribution to MDMs all have a common origin, the di-
mension ﬁve dipole operator possibly induced by some new
physics beyond the SM:
Ld=5 = 1
2
¯ψRiAijψLjσμνFμν+ h.c., (5.139)
B(ℓi → ℓjγ)∝| Aij |2,δ aℓi = 2mℓi
e ReAii,
(5.140)
dℓi = ImAii.
If induced at one loop, this amplitude displays a quadratic
suppression with respect to the new physics mass scale,
MNP, and a linear dependence on the non-dimensional cou-
plingΓNP encoding the pattern of F and CP violations (in
the basis where the charged lepton mass matrix is diagonal):
Aij ≈ emℓi
(4π)2
ΓNP
ij
M2
NP
. (5.141)
For low energy supersymmetry, the loops involve ex-
change of gauginos and sleptons, so thatΓNP is proportional
to the misalignment between leptons and sleptons, conve-
niently described by the ﬂavor violating (FV)δ’s of the mass
insertion approximation. It is well known that the ﬂavor con-
serving (FC)μanda terms are potentially a very important
source of CPV . In the expansion in powers of the FV δ’s,
they indeed contribute todℓi at zero order:
Im(Aii) =fμmℓi Arg(μ)+famℓi Im(ai)
+fLLRR Im
(
δLLmℓδRR)
ii +··· , (5.142)
where the various f represent supersymmetric loop func-
tions and can be found for instance in [163]. Notice that the
contribution arising at second order in the FV δ’s could be
even more important than the FC one, as happens for in-
stance if CPV is always associated to FV .
Assuming no cancellations between the amplitudes, we
ﬁrst review brieﬂy some limits considering for deﬁnite-
ness the mSUGRA scenario with tan β= 10 and slepton
masses in the range suggested by gμ. The strong impact
ofμ→ eγonδLL has been emphasized previously, where
it was stressed that the impact of de is also remarkable
in constraining the FC sources of CPV: arg μ≤ 2 × 10− 3,
Imae/mR ≤ 0.2. As for the other FV source in (5.142), one
obtains Im(δLLmℓδRR)ee/mτ≤ 10− 5. The planned sensi-
tivitydμ≤ 10− 23 e cm would also give interesting bounds:
argμ≤ 10− 1,I m(δLLmℓδRR)μμ/mτ≤ 10− 1. Notice that,


--- Page 105 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 117
due to the lepton mass scaling law of the μ-term contribu-
tion, the present bound on arg μfromde implies that the
μ-term contribution to dμcannot exceed 2 × 10− 25 e cm,
below the planned projects. A positive measure ofdμwould
thus signal a different source of CPV , i.e. theaμ-term or the
FV contribution. In the following we take realμ.
Theai -terms and the FVδ’s at low energy can be thought
as the sum of two contributions. The ﬁrst is already present
at the Planck scale where soft masses are deﬁned; we as-
sume that this contribution is absent because of some inhi-
bition mechanism, as could happen in supergravity. The sec-
ond contribution is induced radiatively running from high to
low energies by the Yukawa couplings of heavy particles 29
that potentially violate F and CP. Since LFV experiments
are testing this radiatively induced misalignment, in the fol-
lowing we shall consider what happens for EDMs, begin-
ning with the pure see-saw model and then adding a grand
uniﬁcation scenario, where heavy colored Higgs triplets are
present to complete the Higgs doublets representations (in
SU(5) for instance they complete the 5 and ¯5). Notice that
these triplets are important as in supersymmetric theories
proton decays mainly through their exchange.
Consider ﬁrst the case of degenerate right handed neutri-
nos with massM. One can solve approximately the RGE by
expanding in powers of ln(Λ/M)/(4π)2,i . e .t h el o go ft h e
ratio of the two scales between which the neutrino Yukawa
couplingsYνare present times the corresponding loop fac-
tor suppression. For LFV decaysδLL
ij is induced at 1st order
and is proportional to the combination (Y †
νYν)ij . In partic-
ular,μ→ eγconstrains(Y †
νYν)21 to be small and this has
a strong impact on see-saw models. To obtain an imaginary
part for EDMs, one needs a non-hermitian combination of
Yukawa couplings, which can be found only at 4th order:
Im(Y †
νYν[Y †
νYν,Y †
ℓYℓ]Y †
νYν)ii . Such a contribution is negli-
gibly small with respect to the present and planned experi-
mental sensitivities.
Allowing for a non-degenerate spectrum of right handed
neutrinos, EDMs get strongly enhanced while LFV decays
not. The latter are simply modiﬁed by taking into account
the different mass thresholds:
δLL
ij ∝
∑
k
Ck,C k ≡ Y †
νik ln Λ
Mk
Yνkj. (5.143)
On the contrary for EDMs the see-saw induced FC and
FV contributions—coming respectively from Im ai [229,
242, 842, 843] and Im(δRRmℓδLL)ii [843, 844]—arise at
2nd and 3rd order and are proportional to the combinations
[684]:
Im(ai) ∝
∑
k>k′
ln(Mk/Mk′)
ln(Λ/Mk′) Im
(
CkCk′)
ii,
29The SM fermion Yukawa couplings induce negligible effects.
Im
(
δRRmℓδLL)
ii ∝
∑
k>k′
˜lnk
k′ Im
(
Ckm2
ℓCk′)
ii,
where ˜lnk
k′ is a logarithmic function. The FV contribution
generically dominates for tanβ≳ 10. Without going in the
details of this formulae, we just display some representa-
tive upper estimates for the see-saw induced EDMs, con-
sidering for deﬁniteness the gμregion with tan β= 20.
The see-saw induced dμis below the planned sensitivity,
dSS
μ≲ 10− 25e cm. On the contrary forde it could be at hand,
dSS
e ≲ 0.5 ×10− 27e cm; the expectation is however strongly
model dependent and usually see-saw models that satisfy the
bound from μ→ eγpredict a much smaller value [ 684].
The possibility of largede and its correlation with leptogen-
esis is discussed in [329].
Perspectives are much more interesting if there is also
a stage of grand uniﬁcation. In minimal supersymmetric
SU(5), the Higgs triplet Yukawa couplings contribute to
the RGE-running for energies larger than their mass scale
MT ∼ MGUT.F o rL F V ,δRR is generated at 1st order and is
proportional to a combination of the up quark Yukawa cou-
plings [683]:
δRR
ij ∝
(
YT
u Y ∗
u
)
ij ln Λ
MT
. (5.144)
Due to the weaker experimental bounds onδRR , this contri-
bution is not very signiﬁcant. On the other hand δLL is not
changed, as also happens to the FC contribution to EDMs
[843]. The FV contribution to EDMs is on the contrary
strongly enhanced: it arises at 2nd order (also for degenerate
right handed neutrinos) and is proportional to:
Im
(
δRRmℓδLL)
ii ∝ Im
(
CmℓYT
u Y ∗
u
)
ii ln Λ
MT
. (5.145)
As a result, considering for deﬁniteness the gμregion with
tanβ= 20 and the representative values for triplet and right
handed neutrino masses MT = 2 × 1016 GeV and M3 =
1015 GeV , the induceddμis still below planned, dSS5
μ ≲
5 × 10− 25 e cm, but the induced de could exceed by much
the present limit:dSS5
e ≲ 10− 25e cm. In turn this means that
Im(e−iβC13) ≲ 0.1(βbeing the angle of the unitarity tri-
angle), which has of course an impact on see-saw models.
Further details can be found in [ 843, 845]. Notice however
that, in addition to the problems with light fermion masses,
minimal supersymmetric SU(5) is generically considered to
be ruled out by proton decay induced by Higgs triplet ex-
change.
More realistic GUTs like SO(10) succeed in suppress-
ing the proton decay rate by introducing more Higgs triplets
and enforcing a peculiar structure for their mass matrix.
What are the expectation forde in this case? Consider what
happens in a semirealistic SO(10) model [ 845], where in


--- Page 106 ---
118 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 40 (Color online) The predictions for τp→ K ¯νandde are shown
as a function of r for the degenerate (ﬂat blue) and close to pseudo
Dirac (red) cases by taking mT = 1017 GeV ,Λ= 2 × 1018 GeV and
maximal CPV phase forde. The supersymmetric parameters tanβ= 3,
˜M1 = 200 GeV ,¯mR = 400 GeV , have been selected. Theshaded (grey)
regions are excluded experimentally. See [845] for more details
addition to the three 16 fermion representations we intro-
duce a couple of 10H ’s containing the Higgs doublets and
triplets, 10u
H =(Hu
D,Hu
T) +( ¯Hu
D, ¯Hu
T),1 0d
H =(Hd
D,Hd
T) +
( ¯Hd
D, ¯Hd
T). Up and down quark fermion masses arise when
the doubletsHu
D and ¯Hd
D acquire a VEV; in particularYν=
Yu,Yℓ =Yd , and also the triplet Yukawa couplings are fully
determined in terms ofYu andYd . As for the mass matrices
of the Higgses, the doublets are diagonal in this basis, while
the triplets are a priori undetermined:
( ¯Hd
D ¯Hu
D
)( e.w. 0
0 MGUT
)(
Hu
D
Hd
D
)
,
( ¯Hd
T ¯Hu
T
)
MT
(
Hu
T
Hd
T
)
.
(5.146)
Let consider two limiting cases for the pattern of the triplet
mass matrix, diagonal degenerate and close to pseudo-Dirac:
Mdeg
T =
( 10
01
)
mT,M cpD
T =
( 01
1 r
)
mT, (5.147)
where r is a small real parameter, r< 1, and the exact
pseudo-Dirac form corresponds to the limit r → 0. Notice
that the close to pseudo-Dirac form is naturally obtained in
the Dimopoulos–Wilczek mechanism to solve the doublet–
triplet splitting problem. The prediction for proton life-time
displays a strong dependence on the structure of MT , and
only the pseudo-Dirac form is allowed, as can be seen in
Fig. 40 (there is an intrinsic ambiguity due to GUT phases,
so that the prediction is in between the dotted and solid
curves). For EDMs on the contrary the Higgs triplets con-
tribution to RGE is cumulative and, due to the log, mildly
sensitive to the triplet mass matrix structure. In the case of
O(1) CPV phase (a small phase would be unnatural in this
context),de would exceed the present bound for the values
of supersymmetric parameters selected in Fig. 40. Planned
searches will be a fortiori more constraining. The impact of
these results go beyond the essential model described above.
Indeed, the week points of the model, like the fermion mass
spectra, could be addressed without changing by much the
expectations for de. It is remarkable that EDMs turns out
to be complementary to proton decay in constraining super-
symmetric GUTs.
In the above model one obtains the relation dμ/de ∼
|Vts/Vtd |2 ≈ 25, so that the prediction for dμis below the
planned sensitivity. However, there are GUT models where
this is not the case. For instance a signiﬁcantdμis obtained
in L-R symmetric guts [846].
5.7.1 Electron–neutron EDM correlations in SUSY
One of the questions we would like to address is whether
non-zero EDM signals can constitute indirect evidence for
supersymmetry. Supersymmetric models contain additional
sources of CP violation compared to the SM, which induce
considerable and usually too large EDMs (Fig. 41). In typi-
cal (but not all) SUSY models, the same CP-violating source
induces both hadronic and leptonic EDMs such that these
are correlated. The most important source is usually the CP-
phase of theμ-term and, in certain non-universal scenarios,
the gaugino phases. The CP-phases of theA-terms generally
lead to smaller contributions.
Typical SUSY models lead to |dn|/|de|∼ O(10)–
O(100). Thus, if both the neutron and the electron EDMs
are observed, and this relation is found, it can be viewed as
a clue pointing towards supersymmetry.
Since generic SUSY models suffer from the “SUSY CP
problem”, EDMs should be analyzed in classes of models
which allow for their suppression. These include models
with either small CP phases or heavy spectra. dn–de EDM
correlations have been analyzed in mSUGRA, the decou-
pling scenario with 2 heavy sfermion generations, and split
Fig. 41 One loop EDM
contributions


--- Page 107 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 119
Fig. 42 EDM correlation in mSUGRA
SUSY [847]. Assuming that the SUSY CP phases are all of
the same order of magnitude at the GUT scale, one ﬁnds
mSUGRA: de ∼ 10− 1dn,
split SUSY: de ∼ 10− 1dn,
decoupling: de ∼
(
10− 1–10− 2)
dn.
These results are insensitive to tan βand order one varia-
tions in the mass parameters. The de/dn ratio is dominated
by the factor me/mq ∼ 10− 1, although different diagrams
contribute tode anddn.
An example of thedn–de correlation in mSUGRA is pre-
sented in Fig. 42. Therem0,m 1/2, |A| are varied randomly
in the range [200 GeV , 1 TeV], tanβ= 5 and the phase of
theμ-termφμis taken to be in the range [−π/500,π/500].
The effect of the phase of the A-terms,φA, is negligible as
long is it is of the same order of magnitude asφμat the GUT
scale. Clearly, the relationdn/de ∼ 10 holds for essentially
all parameter values.
As the next step, we would like to see how stable these
correlations are. One might expect that breaking universal-
ity at the GUT scale would completely invalidate the above
results. To answer this question, we study a non-universal
MSSM parameterized by
msquark,m slepton,M 3,M 1 =M2, |A|,
φμ,φA,φM3
(5.148)
at the GUT scale. The mass parameters are varied randomly
in the range [200 GeV , 2 TeV] and the phases in the range
[−π/300,π/300],t a nβ= 5. We ﬁnd that although the cor-
relation is not as precise as in the mSUGRA case, about 90%
of the points satisfy the relation dn/de ∼ 10–100 (Fig. 43).
In most of the remaining 10%, 10 4>dn/de > 102, which
arise when the gluino phase dominates. The reason for the
correlation is that in most casesφμis signiﬁcant and induces
bothdn andde. Apart from the factor mq/me, the SUSY
EDM diagrams are comparable as long as there are no large
mass hierarchies in the SUSY spectrum. This means that the
EDM correlation survives to a large extent, although it is
possible to violate it in certain cases.
Fig. 43 EDM correlation in non-universal SUSY models
It is instructive to compare the SUSY EDM ‘prediction’
to those of other models. Start with the standard model. The
SM background due to the CKM phase is very small, prob-
ably beyond the experimental reach. The neutron EDM can
also be induced by the QCDθ-term,
dn ∼ 3 × 10− 16θecm, (5.149)
which does not affect the electron EDM. Thus, one has
dn ≫de.
In extra dimensional models, usually there are no extra
sources of CP violation and the EDM predictions are similar
to the SM values. Two Higgs doublet models have additional
sources of CP violation, however, the leading EDM contri-
butions appear at 2 or 3 loops such that the typical EDM
values are signiﬁcantly smaller than those in SUSY models.
To conclude, we ﬁnd that typical SUSY models predict
|dn|/|de|∼ O(10)– O(100). Thus, if
de>dn (5.150)
or
de ≪dn (5.151)
is found, common SUSY scenarios would be disfavored,
although such relations could still be obtained in baroque
SUSY models.
It is interesting to consider SUSY GUT model, where
CP phases in the neutrino Yukawa couplings contributes to
hadronic EDMs. For instance, in SU(5) SUSY GUT with
right handed neutrinos, not only large mixing but also CP-
violating phases in neutrino sector give signiﬁcant contribu-
tion to the mixing and CP phases in the right handed scalar
down sector. Though 1–2 mixing in the neutrino Yukawa
coupling is strongly restricted by theB(μ→ eγ), 2–3 mix-
ing in the neutrino Yukawa couplings can be signiﬁcantly
large and this case is interesting in B physics. Large 2–3


--- Page 108 ---
120 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
mixing with CP violation in neutrino sector may give a sig-
niﬁcant contribution not only to theB(τ→ μγ)but also to
color EDM ofs quark which may affect [848, 849] neutron
and Hg EDM.
5.7.2 EDMs in split supersymmetry
Supersymmetry breaking terms involve many new sources
of CP violation. Particularly worrisome are the phases asso-
ciated with the invariants arg(A∗M ˜g) and arg(A∗B), where
A andB represent the usual trilinear and bilinear soft terms
andM ˜g the gaugino masses. Such phases survive in the uni-
versal limit in which all the ﬂavor structure originates from
the SM Yukawa’s. If these phases are of order one, the elec-
tron and neutron EDMs induced at one loop by gaugino-
sfermion exchange are typically (barring accidental cancel-
lations [ 848, 850, 851]) a couple of orders of magnitude
above the limits [ 852–855], a difﬁculty which is known as
the supersymmetric CP problem.
Different remedies are available to this problem mak-
ing the one loop sfermion contribution to the EDMs small
enough, each with its pros and cons. One remedy is to have
heavy enough sfermions (say heavier than 50–100 TeV to be
on the safe side). Gauginos and higgsinos are not required
to be heavy, and can be closer to the electroweak scale, thus
preserving the supersymmetric solution to the dark matter
problem and gauge coupling uniﬁcation. This is the “Split”
limit of the MSSM [ 457, 458, 856]. In this limit, the heavy
sfermions suppress the dangerous one loop contributions to
a negligible level. Nevertheless, some phases survive below
the sfermion mass scale and, if they do not vanish for an ac-
cidental or a symmetry reason, they give rise to EDMs that
are safely below the experimental limits, but sizable enough
to be well within the sensitivity of the next generation of
experiments [847, 856–858]. Such contributions only arise
at the two-loop level, since the new phases appear in the
gaugino–higgsino sector, which is not directly coupled to
the SM fermions.
Besides the large EDMs, a number of additional unsat-
isfactory issues, all related to the presence of TeV scalars,
plague the MSSM. The number of parameters exceeds 100;
ﬂavor changing neutral current processes are also one or
two orders of magnitudes above the experimental limits
in most of the wide parameter space; in the context of a
grand uniﬁed theory, the proton decay rate associated to
sfermion-mediated dimension ﬁve operators is ruled out by
the Super-Kamiokande limit, at least in the minimal ver-
sion of the supersymmetric SU(5) model; in the supergrav-
ity context, another potential problem comes from the grav-
itino decay, whose rate is slow enough to interfere with pri-
mordial nucleosynthesis. While none of those issues is of
course deadly—remedies are well known for each of them—
it should be noted that the split solution of the supersymmet-
ric CP problem also solves all of those issues at once. At the
same time, it gives rise to a predictive framework, character-
ized by a rich, new phenomenology, mostly determined in
terms of only 4 relevant parameters. Of course the price to
be paid to make the sfermions heavy is the large ﬁne-tuning
(FT) necessary to reproduce the Higgs mass, which exac-
erbates the FT problem already present in the MSSM. This
could be hard to accept, or not, depending on the interpre-
tation of the FT problem, the two extreme attitudes being
(i) ignoring the problem, as long as the tuning is not much
worse than permille and (ii) accepting a tuning in the Higgs
mass as we accept the tuning of the cosmological constant,
as in split supersymmetry. The second possibility can in turn
be considered as a manifestation of an anthropic selection
principle [859–863].
Before moving the quantitative discussion of the effect,
let us note that the pure gaugino–higgsino contribution to
the EDMs, dominant in split supersymmetry and possibly
near the experimental limit, might also be important in the
non-split case, depending on the mechanism invoked to push
the one loop sfermion contribution below the experimental
limit.
5.7.2.1 Sources of CP violation in the split limit Below
the heavy sfermion mass scale, denoted generically by ˜m,
the MSSM gauginos and higgsinos, together with the SM
ﬁelds constitute the ﬁeld content of the model. The only in-
teractions of gauginos and higgsinos besides the gauge ones
are
− L =
√
2
(
˜guH † ˜WaTa ˜Hu +˜g′
uYHuH † ˜B ˜Hu
+˜gdH †
c ˜WaTa ˜Hd +˜g′
dYHdH †
c ˜B ˜Hd
)
+ h.c., (5.152)
where the Higgs–higgsino–gaugino couplings ˜gu, ˜gd , ˜g′
u,
˜g′
d can be expressed in terms of the gauge couplings and
tanβthrough the matching with the supersymmetric gauge
interactions at the scale ˜m,Hc =iσ2H ∗ ,Ta are the SU(2)
generators, and YHu =− YHd = 1/2. CP violating phases
can enter the effective Lagrangian below the sfermion mass
scale ˜m through the μ-parameter, the gaugino masses Mi ,
i = 1, 2, 3, or the couplings ˜gu, ˜gd , ˜g′
u, ˜g′
d (besides of course
the Yukawa couplings, not relevant here). Only three combi-
nations of the phases of the above parameters are physical, in
a basis in which the Higgs VEV is in its usual form, ⟨H ⟩=
(0,v)T , with v positive. The three combinations are φ1 =
arg( ˜g′∗
u ˜g′∗
dM1μ),φ2 = arg( ˜g∗
u ˜g∗
dM2μ),ξ= arg( ˜gu ˜g∗
d ˜g′
d ˜g′∗
u).
Actually, the parameters above are not independent them-
selves. The tree-level matching with the full theory above
˜m gives in fact arg( ˜gu) = arg( ˜g′
u),a r g( ˜gd) = arg( ˜g′
d).A sa
consequence, the phaseξvanishes, thus leaving only two in-
dependent phases. Moreover, if the phases ofM1 andM2 are
equal, as in most models of supersymmetry breaking, there
is actually only one CP invariant:φ2 = arg( ˜g∗
u ˜g∗
dM2μ).


--- Page 109 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 121
Fig. 44 Two loop contributions
to the light SM fermion EDMs.
The third diagram is for a
down-type fermionf
In terms of mass eigenstates, the relevant interactions are
− L = g
cW
χ+
i γμ(
GR
ijPR +GL
ijPL
)
χ+
j Zμ
+
[
gχ+
i γμ(
CR
ijPR +CL
ijPL
)
χ0
jW +
μ
+ g√
2
χ+
i
(
DR
ijPR +DL
ijPL
)
χ+
j h + h.c.
]
, (5.153)
where
GL
ij =ViW +cW +V †
W +j +Vih+u
ch+uV †
h+uj,
(5.154)
−GR
ij
∗
=UiW − cW − U†
W − j +Uih−
d
ch−
d
U†
h−
dj,
CL
ij =− ViW +N∗
jW3 + 1√
2
Vih+u
N∗
jh0u
,
(5.155)
CR
ij =− U ∗
iW − NjW3 − 1√
2
U ∗
ih−
d
Njh0
d
,
gDR
ij =˜g∗
uVih+uUjW − +˜g∗
dViW +Ujh −
d
,
(5.156)
DL =
(
DR)†.
In (5.154),cf =T3f − s2
WQf (s2
W ≡ sin2θW ) is the neutral
current coupling coefﬁcient of the fermion ˜f and, accord-
ingly,cW ± =± cos2θW ,ch+u,h−
d
=±(1/2 − s2
W).T h em a -
tricesU,V ,N diagonalize the complex chargino and neu-
tralino mass matrices, M+ =UTMD
+V , M0 =NTND
0 N,
where MD
+ = Diag(M+
1 ,M +
2 ) ≥ 0, MD
0 = Diag(M0
1,...,
M0
4) ≥ 0 and
M+ =
(M2 ˜guv
˜gdvμ
)
,
M0 =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
M1 0 −˜g′
dv/
√
2 ˜g′uv/
√
2
0 M2 ˜gdv/
√
2 −˜guv/
√
2
−˜g′
dv/
√
2 ˜gdv/
√
20 −μ
˜g′uv/
√
2 −˜guv/
√
2 −μ 0
⎞
⎟⎟⎠.
(5.157)
5.7.2.2 Two loop contributions to EDMs Fermion EDMs
are generated only at two loops, since charginos and neu-
tralinos, which carry the information on CP violation, are
only coupled to gauge and Higgs bosons. Three diagrams
contribute to the EDM of the light SM fermionf at the two-
loop level. They are induced by the effective γγh,γZh,
andγWWeffective couplings and are shown in Fig.44.T h e
EDMdf of the fermionf is then given by [857], where
df =dγH
f +dZH
f +dWW
f , (5.158)
dγH
f = eQfα2
4
√
2π2s2
W
Im
(
DR
ii
)mfM+
i
MWm2
H
fγH
(
r+
iH
)
(5.159)
dZH
f =e(T3fL − 2s2
WQf)α2
16
√
2π2c2
Ws4
W
Im
(
DR
ijGR
ji − DL
ijGL
ji
)
,
× mfM+
i
MWm2
H
fZH
(
rZH,r +
iH,r +
jH
)
, (5.160)
dWW
f =eT3fLα2
8π2s4
W
Im
(
CL
ijCR∗
ij
)mfM+
i M0
j
M4
W
×fWW
(
r+
iW,r 0
jW
)
. (5.161)
In (5.159) a sum over indices i,j is understood,Qf is the
charge of the fermionf ,T3fL is the third component of the
weak isospin of the fermion’s left handed component. Also,
rZH =(MZ/mH)2,r+
iH =(M+
i /mH)2,r+
iW =(M+
i /MW)2,
r0
iW =(M0
i/MW)2, where mH is the Higgs mass, and the
loop functions are given by
fγH(r) =
∫ 1
0
dx
1 − xj
(
0, r
x(1 − x)
)
, (5.162)
fZH(r,r1,r 2) = 1
2
∫ 1
0
dx
x(1 − x)j
(
r,xr1 +(1 − x)r2
x(1 − x)
)
,
(5.163)
fWW(r1,r 2) =
∫ 1
0
dx
1 − xj
(
0,xr1 +(1 − x)r2
x(1 − x)
)
. (5.164)
Their analytic expressions can be found in Ref. [ 857]. The
symmetric loop functionj(r,s) is deﬁned recursively by
j(r) =r logr
r − 1,j ( r , s )=j(r) − j(s)
r − s . (5.165)
Equation ( 5.159) hold at the chargino mass scale M+.
The neutron EDM is determined as a function of the down


--- Page 110 ---
122 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
and up quark dipoles at a much lower scaleμ, at which
dq(μ)=ηQCDdq
(
M+)
,ηQCD =
[αs(M+)
αs(μ)
]γ/2b
,
(5.166)
where the β-function coefﬁcient is b = 11 − 2nq/3 and
nq is the number of effective light quarks. The anomalous-
dimension coefﬁcient is γ= 8/3. For αs(MZ) = 0.118 ±
0.004 and μ= 1 GeV (the scale of the neutron mass),
the value of ηQCD is 0.75 for M+ = 1 TeV and 0.77 for
M+ = 200 GeV. We expect an uncertainty of about 5% from
next-to-leading order effects. This result [857]g i v e saQ C D
renormalization coefﬁcient about a factor of 2 smaller than
usually considered [864], and it agrees with the recent ﬁnd-
ings of Ref. [865].
The neutron EDM can be expressed in terms of the quark
EDMs using QCD sum rules [866, 867]:
dn =(1 ± 0.5) f 2
πm2
π
(mu +md)(225 MeV)3
( 4
3dd − 1
3du
)
,
(5.167)
where fπ≈ 92 MeV and we have neglected the contri-
bution of the quark chromo-electric dipoles, which does
not arise at the two-loop level in the heavy-squark mass
limit. Since dd anddu are proportional to the correspond-
ing quark masses, dn depends on the light quark masses
only through the ratiomu/md , for which we take the value
mu/md = 0.553 ± 0.043.
It is instructive to consider the limit Mi,μ≫MZ,mH
which simpliﬁes the EDM dependence on the CP-violating
invariants |˜gu ˜gd/M2μ| sinφ2 and |˜g′
u ˜g′
d/M1μ| sinφ1.T h e
terms depending on the second invariant are actually sup-
pressed, so that both the electron and neutron EDM are
mostly characterized by a single invariant even in the case
in which the phases of M1 andM2 are different. The rela-
tive importance of the three contributions to df in (5.158)
can be estimated to leading order in log(M2μ/m2
H) from
dZH
f
dγH
f
≈ (T3fL − 2s2
WQf)(3 − 4s2
W)
8c2
WQf
;
(5.168)
dWW
f
dγH
f
≈− T3fL
8s2
WQf
(M2 =μ).
Numerically, ( 5.168)g i v e s dZH
e ≈ 0.05dγH
e , dWW
e ≈
− 0.3dγH
e anddZH
n ≈ dγH
n ,dWW
n ≈− 0.7dγH
n . These sim-
ple estimates show the importance of the ZH contribution
to the neutron EDM.
5.7.2.3 Numerical results Let us consider a standard uni-
ﬁed framework for the gaugino masses at the GUT scale.
Using the RGEs given in Refs. [ 458, 868], the parame-
ters in ( 5.159) can be expressed in terms of the (single)
phaseφ≡ φ2 and four positive parameters M2,μ(evalu-
ated at the low energy scale), tan β, and the sfermion mass
scale ˜m. In ﬁrst approximation, the dipoles depend on β
and φthrough an overall factor sin 2 βsinφ. The overall
sfermion scale ˜m enters only logarithmically through the
RGE equations for ˜gu,d , ˜g′
u,d . The numerical results for the
electron and neutrino EDMs can then conveniently be pre-
sented in the M2–μplane by setting sin 2βsinφ= 1 (it is
then sufﬁcient to multiply the results by sin 2 βsinφ) and,
for example, ˜m = 109 GeV. Figure 45 shows the predic-
tion for the electron EDM, the neutron EDM, and their ra-
tiodn/de. The red thick line corresponds to the present ex-
perimental limits de < 1.6 × 10− 27 e cm [ 186], while the
limitdn< 3×10− 26e cm [869] does not impose a constraint
on the parameters shown in Fig. 45.
An interesting test of split supersymmetry can be pro-
vided by a measurement of both the electron and the neu-
tron EDMs. Indeed, in the ratio dn/de the dependence on
sinφ,t a nβand ˜m approximately cancels out. Nevertheless,
because of the different loop functions associated with the
different contributions, the ratio dn/de varies by O(100%)
whenM2 andμare varied in the range spanned in the ﬁg-
ures. Still, the variation of dn/de is comparable to the the-
oretical uncertainty in ( 5.167), and is signiﬁcantly smaller
than the variation in the ordinary MSSM prediction, even
in the case of universal phases [ 847].30 On the other hand,
the usual tight correlation between the electron and muon
EDMs,dμ/de =mμ/me persists.
6 Experimental tests of charged lepton universality
Lepton universality postulates that lepton interactions do
not depend explicitly on lepton family number other than
through their different masses and mixings. Whereas there is
little doubt about the universality of electric charge there are
scenarios outside the standard model in which lepton univer-
sality is violated in the interactions with W andZ bosons.
Violations may also have their origin in non-SM contribu-
tions to the transition amplitudes. Such apparent violations
of lepton universality can be expected in various particle de-
cays:
–i n W ,Z andπdecay resulting from R-parity violating
extensions to the MSSM [870, 871],
30Note that theZH contribution is missing in the analysis of the split
supersymmetry case in Ref. [847], which leads to a somewhat stronger
correlation betweende anddn.


--- Page 111 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 123
Fig. 45 Prediction fordn,de,
and their ratiodn/de.I nt h e
contour plots we have chosen
tanβ= 1, sinφ= 1, and
˜m = 109 GeV. The results for
dn andde scale approximately
linearly with sin 2βsinφ,w h i l e
the ratio is fairly independent of
tanβ,s i nφand ˜m.T h ered thick
line corresponds to the present
experimental limit
de< 1.6 × 10− 27e cm [186].
Note that the uncertainty indn is
a factor of a few. The scatter
plot showsdn values whenM1,3
andμare varied in the range
[200 GeV, 1T e V],mh in
[100 GeV, 300 GeV] and the CP
phase in the range [−π,π]
–i n W decay resulting from charged Higgs bosons [ 872,
873],
–i n πdecay resulting from box diagrams involving non-
degenerate sleptons [874],
–i n K decay resulting from LFV contributions in SUSY
[839] (see Sect. 5.6),
–i n Υdecay resulting from a light Higgs boson [875],
–i n πand K decay from scalar interactions [ 876], en-
hanced by the strong chiral suppression of the SM ampli-
tude for decays into eνe. Since these contributions result
in interference terms with the SM amplitude the devia-
tions scale with the massM of the exchange particle like
1/M2 rather than 1/M4 as may be expected naively.
We assume the V –A Lorentz structure of the charged
weak current, and parameterize universality violations by
allowing for different strengths of the couplings of the in-
dividual lepton ﬂavors: 31
L =
∑
l=e,μ,τ
gl√
2
Wμνlγμ
( 1 − γ5
2
)
l + h.c. (6.1)
Experimental limits have recently been compiled by
Loinaz et al. [877]. Results are shown in Table 16.
Following the notation of Ref. [ 877] one may parame-
terize the violations by gl ≡ g(1 − ϵl/2). After introducing
31Still more general violations lead to deviations from the 1− γ5 struc-
ture of the weak interaction.
Table 16 Limits on lepton universality from various processes. One
should keep in mind that violations may affect the various tests differ-
ently so which constraint is best depends on the mechanism. Hypothet-
ical non-V –A contributions, for example, would lead to larger effects
in decay modes with stronger helicity suppression such asπ→ eνand
K → eν. Adapted from Ref. [ 877]. The ratios estimated from tau de-
cays are re-calculated using PDG averages, as described in the text
Decay mode Constraint
W → eνe (gμ/ge)W = 0.999 ± 0.011
W → μνμ (gτ/ge)W = 1.029 ± 0.014
W → τντ
μ→ eνeνμ (gμ/ge)τ= 1.0002 ± 0.0020
τ→ eνeντ (gτ/ge)τμ= 1.0012 ± 0.0023
τ→ μνμντ
π→ eνe (gμ/ge)π= 1.0021 ± 0.0016
π→ μνμ (gτ/ge)τπ= 1.0030 ± 0.0034
τ→ πντ
K → eνe (gμ/ge)K = 1.024 ± 0.020
K → μνμ (gτ/gμ)Kτ= 0.979 ± 0.017
τ→ Kντ
Δll ′ ≡ ϵl − ϵl′ the various experimental limits on deviations
from lepton universality can be compared (see Fig. 46).
It is very fortunate that for most decay modes new dedi-
cated experiments are being prepared. In the following sub-


--- Page 112 ---
124 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 46 Experimental constraints on violations of lepton universal-
ity from ( a)W decay, (b)τdecay, (c)πandK decay and ( d)t h e
combination of ( a)–(c). Parameters are deﬁned in the text. The ±1σ
bands are indicated. The shaded areas correspond to 68% and 90%
conﬁdence levels. Results from the analysis in Ref. [877]
sections the status and prospects of these experimental tests
of lepton universality are presented.
6.1 πdecay
In lowest order the decay width of π→ lνl (l =e,μ)i s
given by:
Γtree
π→ lνl =g2
lg2
udV 2
ud
256π
f 2
π
M4
W
m2
lmπ
(
1 − m2
l
m2π
) 2
. (6.2)
By taking the branching ratio the factors affected by hadron-
ic uncertainties cancel:
Rtree
e/μ≡ Γtree
π→ eν
Γtree
π→ μν
=
(ge
gμ
×me
mμ
× 1 − m2
e/m2
π
1 − m2μ/m2π
) 2
.
Radiative corrections lower this result by 3.74(3)% [ 878]
when assuming that ﬁnal states with additional photons are
included. Within the SM (i.e.ge =gμ) this leads to:
RSM
e/μ= 1.2354(2) × 10− 4. (6.3)
Two experiments [879, 880] contribute to the present world
average for the measured value:
Rexp
e/μ= 1.231(4) × 10− 4. (6.4)
As a result μeuniversality has been tested at the level:
(gμ/ge)π= 1.0021(16).
Measurements of Re/μare based on the analysis of e+
energy and time delay with respect to the stopping π+.
The decay π→ eνis characterized by Ee+ = 0.5mπc2 =
69.3 MeV and an exponential time distribution following the
pion life-timeτπ= 26 ns. In the case of theπ→ μνdecay
the 4 MeV muons, which have a range of about 1.4 mm in
plastic scintillator, can be kept inside the target and are mon-
itored by the observation of the subsequent decayμ→ eνν,
which is characterized byEe+ < 0.5mμc2 = 52.3 MeV , and


--- Page 113 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 125
a time distribution which ﬁrst grows according to the pion
life-time and then falls with the muon life-time. A major
systematic error is introduced by uncertainties in the low
energy tail of the π→ eν(γ)energy spectrum in the re-
gion below 0.5mμc2. This tail fraction typically amounts to
≈ 1%. The low energy tail can be studied by suppressing
theπ→ μ→ e chain by the selection of early decays and
by vetoing events in which the muon is observed in the tar-
get signal. Suppression factors of typically 10 − 5 have been
obtained. A study of this region is also interesting, since it
might reveal the signal from a heavy sterile neutrino [881].
Although the two experiments contributing to the present
world average of Re/μreached very similar statistical and
systematic errors there were some signiﬁcant differences.
The TRIUMF experiment [ 880] made use of a single large
NaI(Tl) crystal as main positron detector, with an energy res-
olution of 5% (fwhm) and a solid angle acceptance of 2.9%
of 4πsr. The PSI experiment [879] used a setup of 132 iden-
tical BGO crystals with 99.8% of 4πsr acceptance and an
energy resolution of 4.4% (fwhm). A large solid angle re-
duces the low energy tail ofπ→ eν(γ)events but may also
introduce a high energy tail forμ→ eννγ.
Two new experiments have been approved recently aim-
ing at a reduction of the experimental uncertainty by an or-
der of magnitude. First results may be expected in the year
2009.
– At PSI [ 882]t h e3πsr CsI calorimeter built for a determi-
nation of theπ+ → π0e+νbranching ratio will be used.
Large samples ofπ→ eνdecays have been recorded par-
asitically in the past which were used as normalization for
π+ → π0e+νwith an accuracy of<0.3%, i.e. the level of
the present experimental uncertainty of Re/μ.T h es e t u p
was also used for the most complete studies of the radia-
tive decaysπ→ eνγ[883] andμ→ eννγ[884] done so
far. Based on this experience an improvement in precision
forRe/μby almost an order of magnitude is expected.
– At TRIUMF [ 885] a single large NaI(Tl) detector will be
used again. The detector is similar in size to the one used
in the previous experiment but has signiﬁcantly better en-
ergy resolution. The crystal will be surrounded by CsI de-
tectors to reduce the low energy tail of the π→ eνre-
sponse function. By reducing the distance between target
and positron detector the geometric acceptance will be in-
creased by an order of magnitude.
6.2 K decay
Despite the poor theoretical control over the meson decay
constants, ratios of leptonic decay widths of pseudoscalar
mesons such as RK ≡ Γ(K→ eν)/Γ(K→ μν)can be
predicted with high accuracy, and have been traditionally
considered as tests of the V –A structure of weak interac-
tions through their helicity suppression and of μ–e univer-
sality. The standard model predicts [878]:
RK(SM) =(2.472 ± 0.001) × 10− 5 (6.5)
to be compared with the world average [ 170] of published
RK measurements:
RK(exp) =(2.44 ± 0.11) × 10− 5. (6.6)
As mentioned above the strong helicity suppression of
Γ(K→ eν)makesRK sensitive to physics beyond the SM.
As discussed in detail in Sect. 5.6.2.3 lepton ﬂavor violat-
ing contributions predicted in SUSY models may lead to a
deviation of RK from the SM value in the percent range.
Such contributions, arising mainly from charged Higgs ex-
change with large lepton ﬂavor violating Yukawa couplings,
do not decouple if SUSY masses are large and exhibit a
strong dependence on tanβ. For large (but not extreme) val-
ues of this parameter, not excluded by other measurements,
the interference between the SM amplitude and a double
lepton-ﬂavor violating contribution could produce a − 3%
effect. Other experimental constraints such as those from
Rπor lepton ﬂavor violatingτdecays were shown in [839]
not to be competitive with those fromRK in this scenario.
6.2.1 Preliminary NA48 results forRK
In the original NA48/2 proposal [ 886] the measurement of
K leptonic decays was not considered interesting enough to
be mentioned. Nevertheless, triggers for such decays were
implemented during the 2003 run. Since these were not very
selective they had to be highly down-scaled. The data still
contain about 4000 Ke2 decays which is more than four
times the previous world sample. In the analysis of these
data [887] ∼ 15% background due to misidentiﬁedKμ2 de-
cays was observed (see below). The preliminary result was
presented at the HEP2005 Europhysics conference in Lis-
bon [888]:
RK(exp) =(2.416 ± 0.043stat ± 0.024syst) × 10− 5, (6.7)
marginally consistent with the SM value. While the uncer-
tainty in this result is dominated by the statistical error, the
unoptimizedKe2 trigger and the lack of a sufﬁciently large
control sample resulted in a ±0.8% uncertainty.
During 2004 a 56 hours special run with simpliﬁed trig-
ger logic at ∼ 1/4 nominal beam intensity was performed,
dedicated to the collection of semileptonic K± decays for
a measurement of |Vus |. About 4000 Ke2 decays were ex-
tracted from these data. The preliminary result for RK is
consistent with the 2003 value with similar uncertainty al-
though the trigger efﬁciencies were better known.
The NA48 apparatus includes the following subsystems
relevant for theRK measurement


--- Page 114 ---
126 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
– a magnetic spectrometer, composed of four drift cham-
bers and a dipole magnet (MNP33)
– a scintillator hodoscope consisting of two planes seg-
mented into vertical and horizontal strips, providing a fast
level-1 (L1) trigger for charged particles
– a liquid krypton electromagnetic calorimeter (LKr) with
an L1 trigger system.
In the analysis of the 2003-04 data Ke2 decays were se-
lected using two main criteria:
–0 .95<E/pc< 1.05 whereE is the energy deposited in
LKr andp is the momentum measured with the magnetic
spectrometer.
– the missing mass MX must be zero within errors, as ex-
pected for a neutrino.
The main background resulted from misidentiﬁed Kμ2 de-
cays. TheE/pc distribution of muons has a tail which ex-
tends toE/pc ∼ 1 and the observed fraction of muons with
0.95<E/pc< 1.05 is ∼ 5 × 10− 6.Kμ2 background was
present forp> 25 GeV/c where theMX resolution provided
by the magnetic spectrometer was insufﬁcient to separate
Ke2 fromKμ2 decays.
6.2.2 A new measurement of Γ(K → eν)/Γ(K → μν)at
the SPS
During the Summer of 2007 NA62, the evolution of the
NA48 experiment, has accumulated more than 100K Ke2
decays. For this run the spectrometer momentum resolution
was improved by increasing the MNP33 momentum kick
from 120 to 263 MeV/c.
Ke2 decays are selected by requiring signals from the two
hodoscope planes (denoted byQ1) and an energy deposition
of at least 10 GeV in the LKr calorimeter. This trigger has
an efﬁciency >0.99 for electron momenta p> 15 GeV/c.
The same down-scaledQ1 trigger was used to collect Kμ2
decays. The beam intensity was adjusted to obtain a total
trigger rate of 10 4 Hz, which saturates the data acquisition
system.
Figure 47 shows theM2
X versus momentum distribution
forKe2 andKμ2 decays for the 2004 data, together with
the predicted distributions for the 2004 run and for the 2007
run, as obtained from a Monte Carlo simulation (for Kμ2
decays the electron mass is assigned to the muon). In the
2007 run, for electron momenta up to 35 GeV/ c theKμ2
contamination to the Ke2 signal is reduced to a negligible
level thanks to the improved spectrometer momentum reso-
lution (see Fig. 48(a)). Using a lower limit of 15 GeV/ c for
the electron momentum, and taking into account the detec-
tor acceptance, this means that ∼ 43% of theKe2 events will
be kinematically background free (see Fig. 48(b)).
The fraction ofKμ2 fakingKe2 decays was measured at
all momenta in parallel with data taking. For this purpose
Fig. 47 Distributions of M2
X versusp forKe2 andKμ2 decays. In
theMX calculation the electron mass is assumed for both processes:
(a) measured data from the 2004 run, ( b) Monte Carlo predictions for
2004 conditions, ( c) Monte Carlo predictions for the conditions ex-
pected in 2007
Fig. 48 (a)Kμ2 contamination in theKe2 sample. (b) Simulated mo-
mentum distributions of genuine electrons from Ke2 decay (full his-
togram), and of fake electrons fromKμ2 decays (dashed histogram)
a ∼ 5 cm thick lead plate was inserted between the two ho-
doscope planes covering six 6.5 cm wide vertical hodoscope
counters. The requirement that charged particles traverse the
lead without interacting helps to select a pure sample ofKμ2
decay for which the muonE/pc distribution can be directly
measured for the evaluation of theKμ2 contamination to the
Ke2 signal. Table 17 lists the relevant parameters describing
the running conditions both for the 2004 and 2007 runs.


--- Page 115 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 127
Table 17 Comparison of the 2004 and 2007 running conditions
2004 2007 2004 2007
Acceptance (mr2)0 .36 × 0.36 0 .18 × 0.18 SPS duty cycle (s/s) 4.8 / 16.8 4.8 / 16.8
/Delta1Ω(sr) 4 × 10− 7 1 × 10− 7 live time (days) 2.1 100
/Delta1p/peffective (%) ±3 ±2.5 nr. of pulses 1 .08 × 104 3 × 105
RMS (%) ∼ 3.0 ∼ 1.8 Protons per pulse 2 .5 × 1011 1.5 × 1012
TRIM3x′ (mr) 0 ±0.3 beam momentum (GeV/ c) ≈ 60 ≈ 75
pT (MeV/c) 0 ±22.5 Triggers/pulse 45,000 48,000
MNP33x′ (mr) ±2.0 ±3.5 Good Ke2/pulse ∼ 0.37 ∼ 0.5
pT (MeV/c) ±120 ±263 Good Ke2 (total) 4000 >100,000
The overall statistical error, which includes the statistical
uncertainty on the background measurement, is expected to
be 0.3%. The uncertainty in the trigger efﬁciency will be re-
duced to less than ±0.2%. The data collected in 2007 will
provide a measurement ofRK with a total uncertainty (sta-
tistical and systematic errors combined in quadrature) of less
than ±0.5%.
6.3 τdecay
There are two ways to test lepton universality in charged
weak interactions usingτdecays:
– the universality of all three couplings can be tested by
comparing the rates of the decays τ→ μνν,τ→ eνν
andμ→ eνν, and
– gτ/gμcan be extracted by comparingτ→ πνandπ→
μν.
When comparing the experimental constraints one should
keep in mind the complementarity of these two tests.
Whereas the purely leptonic decay modes are mediated by
a transversely polarizedW , the semileptonic modes involve
longitudinal polarization.
6.3.1 Leptonic τdecays
The decay width of ℓi → ℓfννincluding radiative correc-
tions is given by [889]:
Γ(ℓi → ℓfνν)=
g2
ℓig2
ℓf
32m2
W
m5
ℓi
192π3(1 +Cℓiℓf), (6.8)
where(1 +Cℓiℓf) =f(x)( 1 + 3
5
m2
ℓi
M2
W
)(1 +
α(mℓi)
2π(25
4 − π2))
combines weak and radiative corrections and f(x) = 1 −
8x + 8x3 − x4 − 12x2 lnx withx ≡ m2
ℓf/m2
ℓi .
Electron–muon universality could thus be tested at the
0.2% level using:
gμ
ge
=
√
B(τ→ μνν)
B(τ→ eνν)
(1 +Cτe)
(1 +Cτμ) = 1.0002 ± 0.0020, (6.9)
whereCτe=− 0.004 and Cτμ=− 0.0313 are the correc-
tions from (6.8). The values of the branching ratios of lep-
tonicτdecays are taken from [170] and are based mostly on
measurements from LEP experiments. e–τuniversality has
been veriﬁed with similar precision:
gτ
ge
=
√
(1 +Cμe)
(1 +Cτμ)
τμ
ττ
(mμ
mτ
) 5
B(τ→ μνν)
= 1.0012 ± 0.0023, (6.10)
whereΓ(ℓi → ℓfνν)=B(ℓi → ℓfνν)/τℓi has been used
andCμe=− 0.0044. The measurement ofμ–τuniversality
can then be derived fromgτ/ge andgμ/ge,g i v i n ggτ/gμ=
1.0010 ± 0.0023.
The measurements used in above formulas are relatively
old [170], and no input from BaBar or Belle is used. The
measurements of leptonic branching fractions were done by
the LEP experiments in the course of the runs at or near
the Z0 resonance [ 170]. The τ+τ− events were selected
via their topology, and the τdecay products were required
to pass particle identiﬁcation, using information from the
calorimetry, tracking devices, time projection chambers and
muon systems. The largest uncertainty on the measurement
of tau branching ratios was statistical, with systematics lim-
itations arising from the simulation and from particle identi-
ﬁcation.
The measurement of the τlife-time [ 170] comes from
LEP experiments as well. Due to the large √ s, each τin
the event has a large boost and travels 90 µm in average.
However, as there is nothing butτ’s produced in each event,
their production vertex is unknown and has to be estimated
averaging over other events or by minimizing the sum of
impact parameters of bothτ’s decay products.
The most accurate published measurement of theτmass
[890] was done by the BES experiment, through an energy
scan of the τ+τ− production cross section in e+e− colli-
sions around the threshold region. The collision energy scale
was calibrated withJ/ψandψ(2S) resonances, with a pre-
cision of 0.25 MeV .


--- Page 116 ---
128 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Therefore the major contributions to the uncertainties on
the ratiosgτ/ge andgμ/ge are:
–t h eτleptonic branching fractions (0.3%), and
–t h eτlife-time (0.34%).
In the calculation above, the measurements of leptonicτ
decays are taken as independent. However, there are com-
mon sources of systematic uncertainties such as uncertain-
ties on track reconstruction, number of τdecays registered
by an experiment and so on. If one measured the branch-
ing ratio B(τ→ eνν)/B(τ→ μνν)directly in one exper-
iment, as was done by ARGUS and CLEO and as is done
for pion decays as well, most uncertainties would cancel.
Taking the PDG average on the branching ratio [ 170] one
obtainsgμ/ge = 1.0028 ± 0.0055.
The following improvements can be expected in the fu-
ture. The KEDR experiment is working, like BES, at the
τ-pair production threshold. They plan to measure mτwith
a 0.15 MeV accuracy. A preliminary result, with accuracy
comparable to BES’s measurement, is available [891]. Both
BaBar and Belle have accumulated large statistics of τ+τ−
events and should be able to perform measurements of lep-
tonic and semileptonic τdecays, as well as to improve the
measurement of theτlife-time. While the collectedτsam-
ple is much larger than at LEP, there are still signiﬁcant
uncertainties remaining on luminosity, tracking and parti-
cle identiﬁcation. If the ratio of decay fractions is measured,
then only the particle identiﬁcation uncertainties will re-
main. Currently the electron and muon identiﬁcation uncer-
tainties for both BaBar and Belle are around 1–2%. At the
B-factories the τboost in the c.m frame is much smaller
than at LEP, and in addition the energies of the e+ ande−
beams are not the same. This leads to signiﬁcant differences
in the technique of the life-time measurement. In particular
the 3-dimensional reconstruction of the trajectories of the
decay products is poor and only the impact parameter in the
plane transverse to the beams, multiplied by the polar angle
of the total momentum vector of 3-prongτdecay products,
can be used [892]. While the statistics allows for a very ac-
curate measurement, the work focuses on understanding the
alignment of the vertex detector and the systematics in the
reconstruction of the impact parameter. The measurement of
theτmass can also be done at theB-factories. Belle has pre-
sented a mass measurement analyzing the kinematic limit of
the invariant mass of 3-prongτdecays [893]. This measure-
ment is however less precise than those of BES or KEDR.
If one takes into account recent preliminary measure-
ments of theτmass from the KEDR experiment [ 891] and
of the life-time from BaBar [892], the determination ofτ–e
universality changes slightly togτ/ge = 1.0021 ± 0.0020.
6.3.2 Hadronic τdecays
Another way to test τ–μuniversality is to compare the de-
cay rates forτ→ πνandπ→ μν:
g2
τ
g2μ
=B(τ→ πν)
B(π→ μν)
τπ
ττ
2mτm2
μ
m3π
(m2
π− m2
μ
m2τ− m2π
) 2
(1 +Cτπ),
(6.11)
whereCτπ=− (1.6+0.9
− 1.4)10− 3 [833, 894].
Taking measurements from Ref. [ 170] one obtains
gτ/gμ= 0.9996 ± 0.037. Here the main uncertainties come
from
– τ→ πνdecay (1%), where the dominant contribution is
due toτ→ ππ0νcontamination andπ0 reconstruction,
–t h eτlife-time (0.34%), and
– the hadronic correction (0.1%).
Again, no results from the B factories are available yet,
and one should expect that the largeτsamples collected by
BaBar and Belle will allow a signiﬁcant improvement, in
case the understanding of particle identiﬁcation will be im-
proved.
7 CP violation with charged leptons
There are two powerful motivations for probing CP symme-
try in lepton decays:
– The discovery of CP asymmetries in B decays that are
close to 100% in a sense ‘de-mystiﬁes’ CP violation. For
it established that complex CP phases are not intrinsi-
cally small and can be close to 90 degrees even. This de-
mystiﬁcation would be completed, if CP violation were
found in the decays of leptons as well.
– We know that CKM dynamics, which is so successful
in describing quark ﬂavor transitions, is not relevant to
baryogenesis. There are actually intriguing arguments for
baryogenesis being merely a secondary effect driven by
primary leptogenesis [895]. To make the latter less spec-
ulative, one has to ﬁnd CP violation in dynamics of the
leptonic sector.
The strength of these motivations has been well recognized
in the community, as can be seen from the planned experi-
ments to measure CP violation in neutrino oscillations and
the ongoing heroic efforts to ﬁnd an electron EDM. Yet
there are other avenues to this goal as well that certainly
are at least as difﬁcult, namely to probe CP symmetry in
muon andτdecays. Those two topics are addressed below
in Sects. 7.1 and 7.2. There are also less orthodox probes,
namely attempts (i) to extract an EDM for τleptons from


--- Page 117 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 129
e+e− → τ+τ− , (ii) to search for a T-odd correlation in po-
larized ortho-positronium decays and (iii) to measure the
muon transverse polarization in K+ → μ+νπ0 decays. It
is understood that the standard model does not produce an
observable effect in any of these three cases or the other ones
listed above (except forτ± → νKSπ±, as described below).
Concerning topic (i), one has to understand that one is
searching for a CP-odd effect in an electromagnetic pro-
duction process unlike inτdecays, which are controlled by
weak forces.
In [e+e− ]OP → 3γ, topic (ii), one can construct various
T-odd correlations or integrated moments between the spin
vector ⃗SOP of polarized ortho-positronium and the momenta
⃗ki of two of the photons that deﬁne the decay plane:
AT odd =
⟨ ⃗SOP ·(⃗k1 × ⃗k2)
⟩
,
ACP =
⟨
( ⃗SOP · ⃗k1)
(⃗SOP ·(⃗k1 × ⃗k2)
)⟩
.
(7.1)
– The moment AT odd is P and CP even, yet T odd. Rather
than by CP or T violation in the underlying dynamics it
is generated by higher order QED processes. It has been
conjectured [ 896] that the leading effect is formally of
orderαrelative to the decay width due to the exchange
of a photon between the two initial lepton lines. From it
one has to remove the numerically leading contribution,
which has to be absorbed into the bound state wave func-
tion. The remaining contribution is presumably at the sub-
permille level. Alternatively AT odd can be generated at
orderα2—or at roughly the 10 − 5 level—through the in-
terference of the lowest order decay amplitude with one
where a fermion loop connects two of the photon lines.
– On the other hand the moment ACP is odd under T as
well as under P and in particular CP. Final state interac-
tions cannot generate a CP-odd moment with CP invari-
ant dynamics. Observing ACP ̸= 0 thus unambiguously
establishes CP violation. The present experimental up-
per bound is around few percent; it seems feasible, see
Sect. 7.4, to improve the sensitivity by more than three
orders of magnitude, i.e. down to the 10 − 5 level! The
caveat arises at the theoretical level: with the ‘natural’
scale for weak interference effects in positronium given
byGFm2
e ∼ 10− 11, one needs a dramatic enhancement to
obtain an observable effect.
Discussing topic (iii)—the muon transverse polarization
inKμ3 decays—under the heading of CP violation in the
leptonic sector will seem surprising at ﬁrst. Yet a general,
though hand waving argument, suggests that the highly sup-
pressed direct CP violation in nonleptonic /Delta1S= 1—as ex-
pressed throughϵ′—rules against an observable signal even
in the presence of new physics—unless the latter has a spe-
cial afﬁnity for leptons. The present status of the data and
future plans are discussed in Sect. 7.3.
7.1 μdecays
The muon decay μ− → e− νeνμand its ‘inverse’ νμe− →
μ− νe are successfully described by the ‘V –A’ interaction,
which is a particular case of the local, derivative-free, lep-
ton number conserving, four-fermion interaction [897]. The
‘V –A’ form and the nature of the neutrinos (νe andνe)h a v e
been determined by experiment [898–900].
The observables—energy spectra, polarizations and an-
gular distributions—may be parameterized in terms of the
dimensionless coupling constants gγ
εμand the Fermi cou-
pling constantGF. The matrix element is
M = 4GF√
2
∑
γ=S,V,T
ε,μ=R,L
gγ
εμ⟨eε|Γγ⏐⏐(νe)n
⟩⟨
(νμ)m
⏐⏐Γγ|μμ⟩. (7.2)
We use here the notation of Fetscher et al. [ 898, 901]w h o
in turn use the sign conventions and deﬁnitions of Scheck
[902]. Here γ= S, V, T indicate a (Lorentz) scalar, vec-
tor, or tensor interaction, and the chirality of the electron
or muon (right or left handed) is labeled byε,μ= R, L. The
chiralitiesn andm of theνe and theνμare determined by
given values ofγ,εandμ. The 10 complex amplitudesgγ
εμ
andGF constitute 19 independent parameters to be deter-
mined by experiment. The ‘ V –A’ interaction corresponds
togV
LL = 1, with all other amplitudes being 0.
Experiments show the interaction to be predominantly
of the vector type and left handed [ gV
LL.0.96(90% C.L.)]
with no evidence for other couplings. The measurement of
the muon life-time yields the most precise determination of
the Fermi coupling constant GF, which is presently known
with a relative precision of 8 × 10− 6 [903, 904]. Continued
improvement of this measurement is certainly an important
goal [905], sinceGF is one of the fundamental parameters
of the standard model.
7.1.1 T invariance in μdecays
PT2 —the component of the decay positron polarization
which is transverse to the positron momentum and the muon
polarization—is T odd and due to the practical absence of a
strong or electromagnetic ﬁnal state interaction it probes T
invariance. A second-generation experiment has been per-
formed at PSI by the ETH Zürich–Cracow–PSI Collabora-
tion [ 906]. They obtained, for the energy averaged trans-
verse polarization component:
⟨PT2 ⟩= (− 3.7 ± 7.7stat. ± 3.4syst.) × 10− 3. (7.3)
7.1.2 Future prospects
The precision on the muon life-time can presumably be in-
creased over the ongoing measurements by one order of


--- Page 118 ---
130 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
magnitude [903]. Improvement in measurements of the de-
cay parameters seems more difﬁcult. The limits there are
not given by the muon rates which usually are high enough
already ( ≈ 3 × 108 s− 1 at the µE1 beam at PSI, for exam-
ple), but rather by effects like positron depolarization in
matter or by the small available polarization ( <7 % )o ft h e
electron targets used as analysers. The measurement of the
transverse positron polarization might be improved with a
smaller phase space (lateral beam dimension of a few mil-
limetres or better). This experiment needs a pulsed beam
with high polarization.
7.2 CP violation in τdecays
The betting line is thatτdecays—next to the electron EDM
andνoscillations—provide the best stage to search for man-
ifestations of CP breaking in the leptonic sector. There ex-
ists a considerable literature on the subject started by dis-
cussions on a tau-charm factory more than a decade ago
[907–910] and attracting renewed interest recently [ 911–
914] stressing the following points:
– There are many more channels than in muon decays mak-
ing the constraints imposed by CPT symmetry much less
restrictive.
–T h e τlepton has sizable rates into multi-body ﬁnal
states. Due to their non-trivial kinematics asymmetries
can emerge also in the ﬁnal state distributions, where
they are likely to be signiﬁcantly larger than in the in-
tegrated widths. The channel KL → π+π− e+e− can il-
lustrate this point. It commands only the tiny branching
ratio of 3 × 10− 7. The forward-backward asymmetry ⟨A⟩
in the angle between theπ+π− ande+e− planes consti-
tutes a CP odd observable. It has been measured by KTeV
and NA48 to be truly large, namely about 13%, although
it is driven by the small value of |ϵK |∼ 0.002. I.e., one
can trade branching ratio for the size an CP asymmetry.
– New physics in the form of multi-Higgs models can con-
tribute on the tree-level like the SMW exchange.
– Some of the channels should exhibit enhanced sensitivity
to new physics.
– Having polarizedτleptons provides a powerful handle on
CP asymmetries and control over systematics.
These features will be explained in more detail below. It
seems clear that such measurements can be performed only
in e+e− annihilation, i.e. at the B factories running now
or better still at a Super-Flavor factory, as discussed in the
Working Group 2 report. There one has the added advantage
that one can realistically obtain highly polarized τleptons:
This can be achieved directly by having the electron beam
longitudinally polarized or more indirectly even with unpo-
larized beams by using the spin alignment of the produced
τpair to ‘tag’ the spin of theτunder study by the decay of
the otherτlikeτ→ νρ.
7.2.1 τ→ νKπ
The most promising channels for exhibiting CP asymmetries
areτ− → νKSπ− ,νK− π0 [910]:
– Due to the heaviness of the lepton and quark ﬂavors they
are most sensitive to non-minimal Higgs dynamics while
being Cabibbo suppressed in the SM.
– They can show asymmetries in the ﬁnal state distribu-
tions.
The SM does generate a CP asymmetry in τdecays that
should be observable. Based on known physics one can reli-
ably predict a CP asymmetry [911]:
Γ(τ+ → KSπ+ν)− Γ(τ− → KSπ− ν)
Γ(τ+ → KSπ+ν)+Γ(τ− → KSπ− ν)
=(3.27 ± 0.12) × 10− 3 (7.4)
due to KS ’s preference for antimatter over matter. Strictly
speaking, this prediction is more general than the SM: no
matter what produces the CP impurity in theKS wave func-
tion, the effect underlying ( 7.4) has to be present, while of
course not affectingτ∓ → νK∓ π0.
To generate a CP asymmetry, one needs two different am-
plitudes contribute coherently. This requirement is satisﬁed,
since theKπsystem can be produced from the (QCD) vac-
uum in a vector and scalar conﬁguration with form factors
FV andFS , respectively. Both are present in the data, with
the vector component (mainly in the form of theK∗ ) domi-
nant as expected [915]. Within the SM, there does not arise a
weak phase between them on an observable level, yet it can
readily be provided by a charged Higgs exchange in non-
minimal Higgs models, which contributes toFS .
A few general remarks on the phenomenology might be
helpful to set the stage. For a CP violation in the underlying
weak dynamics to generate an observable asymmetry in par-
tial widths or energy distributions one needs also a relative
strong phase between the two amplitudes:
Γ
(
τ− → νK− π0)
− Γ
(
τ+ →¯ νK+π0)
∝ Im
(
FHF ∗
V
)
ImgHg∗
W, (7.5)
d
dEK
Γ
(
τ− → νK− π0)
− d
dEK
Γ
(
τ+ →¯ νK+π0)
∝ Im
(
FHF ∗
V
)
ImgHg∗
W, (7.6)
whereFH denotes the Higgs contribution to FS andgH its
weak coupling. This should not represent a serious restric-
tion, since theKπsystem is produced in a mass range with
several resonances. If on the other hand one is searching for
a T-odd correlation like
OT ≡
⟨
⃗στ·( ⃗pK ×⃗pπ)
⟩
, (7.7)


--- Page 119 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 131
then CP violation can surface even without a relative strong
phase
OT ∝ Re
(
FHF ∗
V
)
ImgHg∗
W. (7.8)
Yet there is a caveat: ﬁnal state interactions can generate
T-odd moments even from T invariant dynamics, when one
has
OT ∝ Im
(
FHF ∗
V
)
RegHg∗
W. (7.9)
Fortunately one can differentiate between the two scenar-
i o so f(7.8), (7.9)a ta B or a Super-Flavor factory, where
one can compare directly the T-odd moments for the CP-
conjugate pairτ+ andτ− :
OT
(
τ+)
̸=OT
(
τ− )
=⇒ CP violation! (7.10)
A few numerical scenarios might illuminate the situa-
tion: a Higgs amplitude 1% or 0.1% the strength of the
SMW -exchange amplitude—the former [latter] contribut-
ing [mainly] toFS [FV ]—is safely in the ‘noise’ of present
measurements of partial widths; yet it could conceivably
create a CP asymmetry as large 1% or 0.1%, respectively.
More generally a CP-odd observable in a SM allowed
process is merely linear in a new physics amplitude, since
the SM provides the other amplitude. On the other hand
SM forbidden transitions—say lepton ﬂavor violation as in
τ→ μγ—have to be quadratic in the new physics ampli-
tude.
CP odd ∝
⏐⏐T ∗
SMTNP
⏐⏐ vs. LFV ∝| TNP|2. (7.11)
Probing CP symmetry at the 0.1% level in τ→ νKπthus
has roughly the same sensitivity for a new physics amplitude
as searching forB(τ→ μγ)at the 10− 8 level.
CLEO has undertaken a pioneering search for a CP asym-
metry in the angular distribution of τ→ νKSπplacing an
upper bound of a few percent [916].
7.2.2 Other τdecay modes
It appears unlikely that analogous asymmetries could be ob-
served in the Cabibbo allowed channel τ→ νππ, yet de-
tailed studies ofτν3π/4πlook promising, also because the
more complex ﬁnal state allows us to form T-odd correla-
tions with unpolarizedτleptons; yet the decays of polarized
τmight exhibit much larger CP asymmetries [912].
Particular attention should be paid toτ→ νK2π, which
has potentially very signiﬁcant additional advantages:
– One can interfere vector with axial vectorK2πconﬁgu-
rations.
– The larger number of kinematical variables and of speciﬁc
channels should allow more internal cross checks of sys-
tematic uncertainties like detection efﬁciencies for posi-
tive vs. negative particles.
7.3 Search for T violation in K+ → π0μ+νdecay
The transverse muon polarization in K+ → π0μ+νdecay,
PT , is an excellent probe of T violation, and thus of physics
beyond the standard model. Most recently the E246 experi-
ment at the KEK proton synchrotron has set an upper bound
of |PT |≤ 0.0050 (90% C.L.). A next generation experi-
ment is now being planned for the high intensity accelerator
J-PARC which is aiming at more than one order of magni-
tude improvement in the sensitivity withσ(PT) ∼ 10− 4.
7.3.1 Transverse muon polarization
A non-zero value for the transverse muon polarization (PT )
in the three body decay K → πμν(Kμ3) violates T con-
servation with its T-odd correlation [ 917]. Over the last
three decades dedicated experiments have been carried out
in search for a non-zero PT . Unlike other T-odd chan-
nels in e.g. nuclear beta decays, PT in Kμ3 has the ad-
vantage that ﬁnal state interactions (FSI), which may in-
duce a spurious T-odd effect, are very small. With only one
charged particle in the ﬁnal state the FSI contribution orig-
inates only in higher loop effects and has been shown to be
small. The single photon exchange contribution from two-
loop diagrams was estimated more than twenty years ago
asP FSI
T ≤ 10− 6 [918]. Quite recently two-photon exchange
contributions have been studied [919]. The average value of
P FSI
T over the Dalitz plot was calculated to be less than 10− 5.
An important feature of a PT study is the fact that the
contribution from the standard model (SM) is practically
zero. Since only a single element of the CKM matrixVus is
involved for the semileptonicKμ3 decay in the SM, no CP
violation appears in ﬁrst order. The lowest order contribution
comes from radiative corrections to the ¯uγμ(1 − γ5)sWμ
vertex, and this was estimated to be less than 10 − 7 [920].
Therefore, non-zero PT in the range of 10 − 3–10− 4 would
unambiguously imply the existence of a new physics contri-
bution [920].
SizablePT can be accommodated in multi-Higgs doublet
models through CP violation in the Higgs sector [921–928].
PT can be induced due to interference between charged
Higgs exchange (FS , FP ) and W exchange (FV , FA)a s
shown in Fig. 49. It is conceivable that the coupling of
charged Higgs ﬁelds to leptons is strongly enhanced rela-
tive to the coupling to the up-type quarks [929] which would
lead to an experimentally detectablePT ofO(10− 3). Thus,
PT could reveal a source of CP violation that escapes detec-
tion inK → 2π,3π[920].
A number of other models also allow PT at an observ-
able level without conﬂicting with other experimental con-
straints, and experimental limits onPT could thus constrain
those models. Among them SUSY models with R-parity


--- Page 120 ---
132 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 49 Two interfering
diagrams inducingPT in the
multi-Higgs model (from
Ref. [920])
Fig. 50 E246 setup using the superconducting toroidal spectrometer. The elaborate detector system [933] consists of an active target (to monitor
stoppingK+), a large-acceptance CsI(Tl) barrel (to detectπ0), tracking chambers (to trackμ+), and muon polarimeters (to measurePT )
breaking [930] and a SUSY model with squark family mix-
ing [931] should be mentioned. A recent paper [ 932]d i s -
cusses a generic effective operator leading to a PT expres-
sion in terms of a cut-off scaleΛand the Wilson coefﬁcients
CS andCT .
7.3.2 KEK E246 experiment
The most recent and highest precision PT experiment was
performed at the KEK proton synchrotron. The experi-
ment used a stopped K+ beam with an intensity of ∼ 105/s
and a setup with a superconducting toroidal spectrometer
(Fig. 50). Data were taken between 1996 and 2000 for a to-
tal of 5200 hours of beam time. The determination of the
muon polarization was based on a measurement of the de-
cay positron azimuthal asymmetry in a longitudinal mag-
netic ﬁeld using “passive polarimeters”. Thanks to (i) the
stopped beam method which enabled total coverage of the
decay phase space and hence a forward/backward symmet-
ric measurement with respect to theπ0 direction and (ii) the
rotational-symmetric structure of the toroidal system, sys-
tematic errors could be substantially suppressed.
The T-odd asymmetry was deduced using a double ratio
scheme as
AT =(Afwd − Abwd)/2, (7.12)
where the fwd(bwd) asymmetry was calculated using the
“clockwise” and “counter-clockwise” positron emission
ratesNcw andNccw as
Afwd(bwd) =
Ncw
fwd(bwd) − Nccw
fwd(bwd)
Ncw
fwd(bwd) +Nccw
fwd(bwd)
. (7.13)
PT was then deduced using
PT =AT/
{
α⟨cosθT ⟩
} ′ (7.14)
withαthe analyzing power and ⟨cosθT ⟩ the average kine-
matic attenuation factor. The ﬁnal result was [934]
PT =− 0.0017 ± 0.0023(stat) ± 0.0011(syst), (7.15)


--- Page 121 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 133
Table 18 Goal of the J-PARC
TREK experiment compared
with the E246 result
E246 @ KEK-PS TREK @ J-PARC
Detector SC toroidal spectrometer E246-upgraded
Proton beam energy 12 GeV 30 GeV
Proton intensity 1 .0 × 1012/s 6 × 1013/s
K+ intensity 1 .0 × 105/s 3 × 106/s
Run time ∼ 2.0 × 107 s1 .0 × 107 s
σ(PT)stat 2.3 × 10− 3 ∼ 1.0 × 10− 4
σ(PT)syst 1.1 × 10− 3 <1.0 × 10− 4
Imξ=− 0.0053 ± 0.0071(stat) ± 0.0036(syst), (7.16)
corresponding to the upper limits of |PT |< 0.0050 (90%
C.L.) and | Imξ|< 0.016 (90% C.L.), respectively. Here
Imξis the physics parameter proportional to PT after
removal of the kinematic factor. This result constrained
the three-Higgs doublet model parameter in the way of
| Im(α1γ∗
1)|< 544(MH1/ GeV)2, as the most stringent con-
straint on this parameter. Systematic errors were investi-
gated thoroughly, although the total size was smaller than
half of the statistical error. There were two items that could
not be canceled out by any of the two cancellation mech-
anisms of the 12-fold azimuthal rotation and π0-fwd/bwd:
the effect from the decay plane rotation,θz and the misalign-
ment of the muon magnetic ﬁeld, δz, which should both be
eliminated in the next generation J-PARC experiment.
7.3.3 The proposed J-PARC E06 (TREK) experiment
A new possible PT experiment, E06 (TREK), at J-PARC
is aiming at a sensitivity of σ(PT) ∼ 10− 4.J - P A R Ci sa
high intensity proton accelerator research complex now un-
der construction in Japan with the ﬁrst beam expected in
2008. In the initial phase of the machine, the main syn-
chrotron will deliver a 9 µA proton beam at 30 GeV . A low
momentum beam of 3×106K+ per second will be available
for stopped K+; this is about 30 times the beam intensity
used for E246. Essentially the same detector concept will
be adopted; namely the combination of a stoppedK+ beam
and the toroidal spectrometer, because this system has the
advantage of suppressing systematic errors by means of the
double ratio measurement scheme. However, the E246 setup
will be upgraded signiﬁcantly. The E246 detector will be
upgraded in several parts so as to accommodate the higher
counting rate and to better control the systematics. The ma-
jor planned upgrades are the following:
– The muon polarimeter will become an active polarime-
ter, providing the muon-decay vertex and the positron
track, leading to an essentially background-free muon de-
cay measurement, with an increased positron acceptance
and analyzing power.
– New dipole magnets will be added, improving the ﬁeld
uniformity and the alignment accuracy.
– The electronics and readout of the CsI(Tl) E246 calorime-
ter will be replaced to maximize the counting rate, fully
exploiting the intrinsic crystal speed.
– The tracking system and the active target will be im-
proved for higher resolution and higher decay-in-ﬂight
background rejection.
As a result, 20 times higher sensitivity to PT will be ob-
tained after a one year run. The systematic errors will be
controlled with sufﬁcient accuracy and a ﬁnal experimen-
tal error of ∼ 10− 4 will be attained (see Table 18). A full
description of the experiment can be found in the proposal
[935].
It is now proposed to run for net 10 7s corresponding to
roughly one year of J-PARC beam-time under the above
mentioned beam condition. This would yield 2.4 ×109 good
K+
μ3 events in the π0-fwd/bwd regions, providing an esti-
mate of σ(PT)stat = 1.35 × 10− 4. The inclusion of other
π0 regions, enabled by the adoption of the active polarime-
ter, would bring the statistical sensitivity further down to
the 10− 4 level. The dominant systematic errors is expected
to arise from the misalignment of the polarimeter and the
muon magnetic ﬁeld; this will be determined from data, and
Monte Carlo studies indicate a residual systematics at the
10− 4 level.
It is proposed to run TREK in the early stage of J-PARC
operation. The experimental group has already started rel-
evant R&D for the upgrades after obtaining scientiﬁc ap-
proval, and the exact schedule will be determined after fund-
ing is granted.
7.4 Measurement of CP violation in ortho-positronium
decay
CP violation in the o-Ps decay can be detected by an ac-
curate measurement of the angular correlation between the
o-Ps spin ⃗SOP and the momenta of the photons from the o-Ps
decay [936] ,a ss h o w ni n(7.1). It is useful then to write the
measurable quantity:
N(cosθ)=N0(1 +CCP cosθ), (7.17)


--- Page 122 ---
134 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
with the CP violation amplitude parameter, CCP, different
from zero, if CP violating interactions take part in the o-Ps
decay. In this equation, N(cosθ)is the number of events
with a measured value cos θ±|/Delta1(cos(θ))| (hereafter, for
the sake of simplicity, it will be referred to as the cosθvalue,
intending that this is measured with an uncertainty, depend-
ing on the spatial resolution of the detector). Here cos θis
deﬁned as the product of cosθ1, the cosine of the angle be-
tween the ⃗SOP and the unit vector in the direction of highest
energy photon ˆk1, and cos θn, the cosine of the angle be-
tween the ⃗SOP and the unit vector in the direction perpen-
dicular to the o-Ps decay plane, ˆn [937].
The measured distribution N(cosθ)should show an
asymmetry given by N(cosθ+) − N(cosθ− ) = 2N0CCP ×
cosθ, for cosθ+ =− cosθ− = cosθ. The quantityCCP can
be determined by measuring the rate of events N+ for a
given cosθ+ = cosθandN− for cosθ− =− cosθ. In prac-
tice,N+ is the number of events in which ˆk2 forms an angle
with ˆk1 smaller thanπ, and the o-Ps spin forms an angleθn
smaller than π/2 with the perpendicular to the o-Ps decay
plane. In theN− events, ˆk2 forms an angle 2π− θ12 with ˆk1
and the ⃗SOP forms an angle π− θn with the normal to the
o-Ps decay plane. In other terms, in the N− events the per-
pendicular to the o-Ps decay plane is reversed with respect
to theN+ events, by ﬂipping the direction of ˆk2 specularly
with respect to ˆk1. Then the measurement of the asymmetry
A =(N+ − N− )
(N+ +N− ) =CCP cosθ (7.18)
allows us to derive the experimental value ofCCP.
The measurement of the asymmetryA implies that cosθ
in ( 7.18) is a well deﬁned quantity in the experiment. In
turn, this implies that the o-Ps spin direction is deﬁned. This
direction can be selected using an external magnetic ﬁeld
⃗B, which aligns the o-Ps spin parallel (m = 1), perpendic-
ular(m = 0) or antiparallel (m =− 1) to the ﬁeld direction.
The magnetic ﬁeld, in addition, perturbs and mixes the two
m = 0 states (one for the para-Ps and the other for the o-Ps).
Thus, two new states are possible for the Ps system: the
perturbed singlet and the perturbed triplet states, both with
m = 0. Their life-times depend on the ⃗B ﬁeld intensity. The
perturbed singlet state has a life-time shorter than 1 ns (as for
the unperturbed singlet state of the para-Ps), which is not rel-
evant in the measurement described here, because too short
compared to the typical detector time resolution of 1 ns. For
values of | ⃗B| of few kGauss, the perturbed o-Ps life-time
can be substantially reduced [938] with respect to the unper-
turbed value of about 142 ns [ 939]. Thanks to this effect, it
is possible to separate the m = 0 from the m =± 1 states,
by measuring the o-Ps decay time. This is the time between
the positron emission (by e.g., a 22Na positron source) and
the detection of the o-Ps decay photons. The Ps is formed in
a target region, where SiO2 powder is used as target mater-
ial. The value of the | ⃗B| ﬁeld that maximizes the decay time
separation between m = 0 and m =± 1 states is found to
beB = 4 kGauss, corresponding to am = 0 perturbed o-Ps
life-time of 30 ns.
The measurement of the asymmetry A is performed in
the following way. The direction and intensity of the ⃗B ﬁeld
are ﬁxed. The ˆk1 and ˆk2 detectors are also ﬁxed. In this
way cosθhas a well deﬁned value. For each event, the Ps
decay time and the energies of the three photons from the
o-Ps decay are measured. The off-line analysis requires the
highest energy photon in the ˆk1 detector to be within an en-
ergy range /Delta1E1 =Emax
1 − Emin
1 . The second highest en-
ergy photon must be recorded in the ˆk2 detector within an
energy range /Delta1E2 =Emax
2 − Emin
2 . Then the N+ andN−
events are counted to determine the asymmetry in ( 7.18).
The measurement of the asymmetryA in both the perturbed
states (selected imposing short decay time, e.g., between 10
and 60 ns) and unperturbed states (selected imposing long
decay time, between 60 and 170 ns) allows one to elimi-
nate the time-independent systematics [937]. Other system-
atics, which are time-dependent, do not cancel out with this
method and determine the ﬁnal uncertainty on theCCP mea-
surement.
An improved detector with superior spatial and energy
resolution, as compared to [ 937], is sketched in Fig. 51.I t
consists of a barrel of BGO crystals with the o-Ps form-
ing region at its centre. The crystal signals are read out by
avalanche photodiodes (APD), as the detector must work in
the magnetic ﬁeld. Improved spatial and angular resolution
is obtained thanks to the smaller size of the crystal face ex-
posed to the photons, 3× 3c m2, and the larger barrel radius,
42 cm. Note that such a detector could also be used efﬁ-
ciently for PET scanning, combined with NMR diagnostic.
Fig. 51 Schematic view of the BGO crystal barrel calorimeter used to
detect the photons from the o-Ps decay: left, detector front view and
deﬁnition of the ˆk1 and ˆk2 vectors; right, detector side view, showing
also the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld ⃗B


--- Page 123 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 135
This possibility makes this detector a valuable investment
also for applications in nuclear medical imaging.
With this detector conﬁguration and a simulation of the
detector response, the precision to be reached in the mea-
surement of the CCP parameter has been evaluated. A sim-
ilar analysis was used for the event selection as described
in [938], except that no veto is needed in the present conﬁg-
uration, thanks to the good spatial resolution of the proposed
crystals. Various uncertainties affect theCCP measurement.
The time-dependent uncertainties on the asymmetry A are
induced mainly by the two-photon background, which af-
fect more strongly the events with shorter decay time, as
well as by the inhomogeneity of the o-Ps formation re-
gion, which affect the measurement of the o-Ps decay time.
For high event statistics (at least 1012 selected three photon
events) the following contributions to the asymmetry mea-
surement were found: /Delta1Astat ∼ 10− 6,/Delta1Asyst(2γbkgd) ∼
10− 6,/Delta1Asyst(o-Ps formation) ∼ 2 × 10− 6 resulting into a
total uncertainty: /Delta1Astat+syst ∼ 2.5 × 10− 6. Being /Delta1CCP
related to the asymmetry total uncertainty by the relation
/Delta1CCP =/Delta1Astat+syst/Q [937] withQ, the analyzing power,
evaluated to be∼ 0.5 for this detector conﬁguration, the total
uncertainty on theCCP parameter is/Delta1CCP ∼ 5 × 10− 6.
Although this precision is not sufﬁcient to measure the
expected standard model CCP value of order of 10 − 9,i t
is suitable to discover CP-violating terms in the order
of 10 − 5, which if detected would be signal of unexpected
new physics beyond the standard model.
8 LFV experiments
Mixing of leptonic states with different family number as
observed in neutrino oscillations does not necessarily im-
ply measurable branching ratios for LFV processes involv-
ing the charged leptons. In the standard model the rates of
LFV decays are suppressed relative to the dominant family-
number conserving modes by a factor (δmν/mW)4 which
results in branching ratios which are out of reach experimen-
tally. Note that a similar family changing quark decay such
asb → sγdoes obtain a very signiﬁcant branching ratio of
O(10− 4) due to the large top mass.
As has been discussed in great detail in this report, in
almost any further extension to the standard model such as
supersymmetry, grand uniﬁcation or extra dimensions ad-
ditional sources of LFV appear. For each scenario a large
number of model calculations can be found in the literature
and have been reviewed in previous sections, with predic-
tions that may well be accessible experimentally. Improved
searches for charged LFV thus may either reveal physics be-
yond the SM or at least lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in
parameter space allowed for such exotic contributions.
Charged LFV processes, i.e. transitions between e, μ,
andτ, might be found in the decay of almost any weakly de-
caying particle. Although theoretical predictions generally
depend on numerous unknown parameters these uncertain-
ties tend to cancel in the relative strengths of these modes.
Once LFV in the charged lepton sector were found, the com-
bined information from many different experiments would
allow us to discriminate between the various interpretations.
Searches have been performed inμ,τ,π,K,B,D,W and
Z decay. Whereas highest experimental sensitivities were
reached in dedicated μandK experiments,τdecay starts
to become competitive as well.
8.1 Rare μdecays
LFV muon decays include the purely leptonic modesμ+ →
e+γandμ+ → e+e+e− , as well as the semileptonic μ–e
conversion in muonic atoms and the muonium–antimuonium
oscillation. The present experimental limits are listed in Ta-
ble 19.
Whereas most theoretical models favorμ+ → e+γ,t h i s
mode has a disadvantage from an experimental point of view
since the sensitivity is limited by accidental e+γcoinci-
dences and muon beam intensities have to be reduced now
already. Searches forμ–e conversion, on the other hand, are
limited by the available beam intensities and large improve-
ments in sensitivity may still be achieved.
All recent results forμ+ decays were obtained with “sur-
face” muon beams containing muons originating in the de-
cay ofπ+’s that stopped very close to the surface of the pion
production target, or “subsurface” beams from pion decays
Table 19 Present limits on rare
μdecays Mode Upper limit (90% C.L.) Year Exp./Lab. Ref.
μ+ → e+γ 1.2 × 10− 11 2002 MEGA / LAMPF [ 180, 940]
μ+ → e+e+e− 1.0 × 10− 12 1988 SINDRUM I / PSI [ 700]
μ+e− ↔ μ− e+ 8.3 × 10− 11 1999 PSI [ 941]
μ− Ti → e− Ti 6 .1 × 10− 13 1998 SINDRUM II / PSI [ 942]
μ− Ti → e+Ca∗ 3.6 × 10− 11 1998 SINDRUM II / PSI [ 943]
μ− Pb → e− Pb 4 .6 × 10− 11 1996 SINDRUM II / PSI [ 944]
μ− Au → e− Au 7 × 10− 13 2006 SINDRUM II / PSI [ 945]


--- Page 124 ---
136 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
just below that region. Such beams are superior to conven-
tional pion decay channels in terms of muon stop density
and permit the use of relatively thin (typically 10 mg/cm 2)
foils to stop the beam. Such low-mass stopping targets are
required for the ultimate resolution in positron momentum
and emission angle, minimal photon yield, or the efﬁcient
production of muonium in vacuum.
8.1.1 μ→ eγ
Neglecting the positron mass the 2-body decay μ+ → e+γ
of muons at rest is characterized by
Eγ=Ee =mμc2/2 = 52.8M e V,
Θeγ= 180◦,
tγ=te,
wheret is the time of emission from the target, and Θthe
opening angle between positron and photon. All μ→ eγ
searches performed during the past three decades were lim-
ited by accidental coincidences between a positron from nor-
mal muon decay,μ→ eνν, and a photon produced in the de-
cay of another muon, either by bremsstrahlung or by e+e−
annihilation in ﬂight. This background dominates by far the
intrinsic background from radiative muon decayμ→ eννγ.
Accidentaleγcoincidences can be suppressed by testing the
three conditions listed above. The vertex constraint resulting
from the ability to trace back positrons and photons to an
extended stopping target can further reduce background. At-
tempts have been made to suppress accidental coincidences
by observing the low energy positron associated with the
photon, but with minimal success. High muon polarization
(Pμ) could help if one would limit the solid angle to ac-
cept only positrons and photons (anti)parallel to the muon
spin since their rate is suppressed by the factor 1 − Pμfor
antiparallel emission at E =mμc2/2 but the reduced solid
angle would have to be compensated by increased beam in-
tensity which would raise the background again.
The most sensitive search to date was performed by the
MEGA Collaboration at the Los Alamos Meson Physics Fa-
cility (LAMPF) which established an upper limit (90% C.L.)
onB(μ→ eγ)of 1.2 × 10− 11 [180, 940]. The MEG exper-
iment [946, 947] at PSI, aims at a single-event sensitivity
of ∼ 10− 13–10− 14, and began commissioning in early 2007.
A straightforward improvement factor of more than an or-
der of magnitude in suppression of accidental background
results from the DC muon beam at PSI, as opposed to the
pulsed LAMPF beam which had a macro duty cycle of 7.7%.
Another order of magnitude improvement is achieved by su-
perb time resolution (≈ 0.15 ns FWHM ontγ− te).
The MEG setup is shown in Fig. 52. The spectrometer
magnet makes use of a novel “COBRA” (COnstant Bend-
ing RAdius) design which results in a graded magnetic ﬁeld
varying from 1.27 T at the centre to 0.49 T at both ends.
This ﬁeld distribution not only results in a constant projected
bending radius for the 52.8 MeV positron, for polar emission
anglesθwith | cosθ|< 0.35, but also sweeps away positrons
with low longitudinal momenta much faster than a constant
ﬁeld as used by MEGA. This design signiﬁcantly reduces
the instantaneous rates in the drift chambers.
The drift chambers are made of 12.5 µm thin foils sup-
ported by C-shaped carbon ﬁbre frames which are out of the
Fig. 52 Side and end views of the MEG setup. The magnetic ﬁeld is
shaped such that positrons are quickly swept out of the tracking re-
gion thus minimizing the load on the detectors. The cylindrical 0.8 m3
single-cell LXe detector is viewed from all sides by 846 PMTs im-
mersed in the LXe allowing the reconstruction of photon energy, time,
conversion point and direction and the efﬁcient rejection of pile-up sig-
nals


--- Page 125 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 137
Fig. 53 Installing one of the
timing counters into the
COBRA magnet during the pilot
run with the positron
spectrometer at the end of 2006.
The large ring is one of two
Helmholtz coils used to
compensate the COBRA stray
ﬁeld at the locations of the
photomultipliers of the LXe
detector
way of the positrons. The foils have “vernier” cathode pads
which permit the measurement of the trajectory coordinate
along the anode wires with an accuracy of about 500 µm.
There are two timing counters at both ends of the mag-
net (see Fig. 53), each of which consists of a layer of plastic
scintillator ﬁbers and 15 plastic scintillator bars of dimen-
sions 4 × 4 × 90 cm3. The ﬁbers give hit positions along the
beam axis and the bars measure positron timings with a pre-
cision ofσ= 40 ps. The counters are placed at large radii so
only high energy positrons reach them, giving a total rate of
af e w1 04/s for each bar.
High-strength Al-stabilized conductor for the magnet coil
makes the magnet as thin as 0.20 X0 radially, so that 85%
of 52.8 MeV gamma rays traverse the magnet without in-
teraction before entering the gamma detector placed out-
side the magnet. Whereas MEGA used rather inefﬁcient pair
spectrometers to detect the photon, MEG developed a novel
liquid Xe scintillation detector, shown in Fig. 52.B yv i e w -
ing the scintillation light from all sides the electromagnetic
shower induced by the photon can be reconstructed which
allows for a precise measurement of the photon conversion
point [ 948]. Special PMTs that work at LXe temperature
(− 110◦ C), persist under high pressures and are sensitive to
the VUV scintillation light of LXe (λ≈ 178 nm) have been
developed in collaboration with Hamamatsu Photonics. To
identify and separate pile-up efﬁciently, fast waveform digi-
tizing is used for all the PMT outputs.
The performance of the detector was measured with a
prototype. The results are shown in Table 20. First data tak-
ing with the complete setup took place during the second
half of 2007. A sensitivity ofO(10− 13) for the 90% C.L. up-
per limit in case no candidates are found should be reached
after two years.
8.1.1.1 Beyond MEG Ten times larger surface muon rates
than used by MEG can be achieved at PSI today already but
the background suppression would have to be improved by
Table 20 Performance of a prototype of the MEG LXe detector at
Eγ= 53 MeV
Observable Resolution ( σ)
energy 1.2%
time 65 ps
conversion point ≈ 4m m
two orders of magnitude. Accidental backgroundNacc scales
with the detector resolutions as
Nacc ∝ /Delta1Ee ·/Delta1t·(/Delta1Eγ·/Delta1Θeγ·/Delta1xγ)2 ·A− 1
T ,
withxγthe coordinate of the photon trajectory at the target
andAT the target area. Here it is assumed that the photon
can be traced back to the target with an uncertainty which is
small compared to AT . Since the angular resolution is dic-
tated by the positron multiple scattering in the target this can
be written:
Nacc ∝ /Delta1Ee ·/Delta1t·(/Delta1Eγ·/Delta1xγ)2 · dT
AT
,
withdT the target thickness. When using a series ofn target
foils each of them could have a thickness of dT/n and the
beam would still be stopped. Since the area would increase
liken ·AT the background could be reduced in proportion
with 1/n2:
Nacc ∝ /Delta1Ee ·/Delta1t·(/Delta1Eγ·/Delta1xγ)2 · dT/n
n ·AT
,
so a geometry with ten targets, 1 mg/cm 2 each, would lead
to the required background suppression.
8.1.2 μ→ 3e
As has been discussed above the sensitivity of μ→ eγ
searches is limited by background from accidental coinci-


--- Page 126 ---
138 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
dences between a positron and a photon originating in the in-
dependent decays of two muons. Similarly, searches for the
decayμ→ 3e suffer from accidental coincidences between
positrons from normal muon decay and e+e− pairs origi-
nating from photon conversions or scattering of positrons
off atomic electrons (Bhabha scattering). For this reason the
muon beam should be continuous on the time scale of the
muon life-time and longer. In addition to the obvious con-
straints on relative timing and total energy and momentum,
which can be applied inμ→ eγsearches as well, there are
powerful constraints on vertex quality and location to sup-
press the accidental background. Since the ﬁnal state con-
tains only charged particles the setup may consist of a mag-
netic spectrometer without the need for an electromagnetic
calorimeter with its limited performance in terms of energy
and directional resolution, rate capability, and event deﬁni-
tion in general. On the other hand, of major concern are the
high rates in the tracking system of a μ→ 3e setup which
has to stand the load of the full muon decay spectrum.
8.1.2.1 The SINDRUM I experiment The present experi-
mental limit,B(μ→ 3e)< 1 × 10− 12 [700], was published
way back in 1988. Since no new proposals exist for this de-
cay mode we shall analyse the prospects of an improved
experiment with this SINDRUM experiment as a point of
reference. A detailed description of the experiment may be
found in Ref. [949].
Data were taken during six months using a 25 MeV/ c
subsurface beam. The beam was brought to rest with a rate
of 6 × 106μ+/s in a hollow double-cone foam target (length
220 mm, diameter 58 mm, total mass 2.4 g). SINDRUM
I is a solenoidal spectrometer with a relatively low mag-
netic ﬁeld of 0.33 T corresponding to a transverse momen-
tum threshold around 18 MeV/ c for particles crossing the
tracking system. This system consisted of ﬁve cylindrical
MWPCs concentric with the beam axis. Three-dimensional
space points were found by measuring the charges induced
on cathode strips oriented ±45◦ relative to the sense wires.
Gating times were typically 50 ns. The spectrometer ac-
ceptance for μ→ 3e was 24% of 4 πsr (for a constant
transition-matrix element) so the only place for a signiﬁcant
improvement in sensitivity would be the beam intensity.
Figure 54 shows the time distribution of the recorded
e+e+e− triples. Apart from a prompt contribution of cor-
related triples one notices a dominant contribution from
accidental coincidences involving low-invariant-masse+e−
pairs. Most of these are explained by Bhabha scattering of
positrons from normal muon decayμ→ eνν. The acciden-
tal background thus scales with the target mass, but it is not
obvious how to reduce this mass signiﬁcantly below the 11
mg/cm2 achieved in this search.
Figure 55 shows the vertex distribution of prompt events.
One should keep in mind that most of the uncorrelated
Fig. 54 Relative timing of e+e+e− events. The two positrons are
labeled low and high according to the invariant mass when com-
bined with the electron. One notices a contribution of correlated
triples in the centre of the distribution. These events are mainly
μ→ 3eννdecays. The concentration of events along the diagonal is
due to low-invariant-mass e+e− pairs in accidental coincidence with
a positron originating in the decay of a second muon. The e+e− pairs
are predominantly due to Bhabha scattering in the target
Fig. 55 Spatial distribution of
the vertex ﬁtted to prompt
e+e+e− triples. One clearly
notices the double-cone target



--- Page 127 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 139
Fig. 56 Total momentum
versus total energy for three
event classes discussed in the
text. The line shows the
kinematic limit (within
resolution) deﬁned by
Σ|⃗pc|+|Σ⃗pc|≤ mμc2 for any
muon decay. The enhancement
in the distribution of correlated
triples below this limit is due to
the decayμ→ 3eνν
triples containe+e− pairs coming from the target and their
vertex distribution will thus follow the target contour as
well. This 1-fold accidental background is suppressed by the
ratio of the vertex resolution (couple of mm2) and the target
area. There is no reason, other than the cost of the detection
system, not to choose a much larger target. Such an increase
might also help to reduce the load on the tracking detectors.
Better vertex resolution would help as well. At these low en-
ergies tracking errors are dominated by multiple scattering
in the ﬁrst detector layer but it should be possible to gain by
bringing it closer to the target.
Finally, Fig. 56 shows the distribution of total momen-
tum versus total energy for three classes of events, (i) uncor-
relatede+e+e− triples, (ii) correlated e+e+e− triples, and
(iii) simulatedμ→ 3e decays. The distinction between un-
correlated and correlated triples has been made on the basis
of relative timing and vertex as discussed above.
8.1.2.2 How to improve? What would a μ→ 3e set-
up look like that would aim at a single-event sensitiv-
ity around 10 − 16, i.e., would make use of a beam rate
around 10 10 μ+/s? The SINDRUM I measurement was
background-free at the level of 10− 12 with a beam of 0.6 ×
107 μ+/s. Taking into account that background would have
set in at 10− 13, the increased stop rate would raise the back-
ground level to ≈ 10− 10, so six orders of magnitude in back-
ground reduction would have to be achieved. Increasing
the target size and improving the tracking resolution should
bring two orders of magnitude from the vertex requirement
alone. Since the dominant sources of background are acci-
dental coincidences between two decay positrons (one of
which undergoes Bhabha scattering) the background rate
scales with the momentum resolution squared. Assuming
an improvement by one order of magnitude, i.e., from the
≈ 10% FWHM obtained by SINDRUM I to ≈ 1% for a new
search, one would gain two orders of magnitude from the
constraint on total energy alone. The remaining factor 100
would result from the test on the collinearity of the e+ and
thee+e− pair.
As mentioned in Ref. [ 949] a dramatic suppression of
background could be achieved by requiring a minimal open-
ing angle (typically 30 ◦ ) for both e+e− combinations. De-
pending on the mechanism for μ→ 3e, such a cut might,
however, lead to a strong loss inμ→ 3e sensitivity as well.
Whereas background levels may be under control, the
question remains whether detector concepts can be devel-
oped that work at the high beam rates proposed. A large
modularity will be required to solve problems of pattern
recognition.
8.1.3 μ–e conversion
When negatively charged muons stop in matter they quickly
form muonic atoms which reach their ground states in a
time much shorter than the life-time of the atom. Muonic
atoms decay mostly through muon decay in orbit (MIO)
μ− (A,Z) → e− νμνe(A,Z) and nuclear muon capture
(MC)μ− (A,Z) → νμ(A,Z − 1)∗ which in lowest order
may be interpreted as the incoherent sum of elementary
μ− p → nνμcaptures. The MIO rate decreases slightly for
increasing values ofZ (down to 85% of the free muon rate
in the case of muonic gold) due to the increasing muon bind-
ing energy. The MC rate at the other hand increases roughly
proportional toZ4. The two processes have about equal rates
aroundZ = 12.
When the hypotheticalμ–e conversion leaves the nucleus
in its ground state the nucleons act coherently, boosting the
process relative to the incoherent processes with exited ﬁnal
states. The resultingZ dependence has been studied by sev-
eral authors [950–953]. ForZ ≲ 40 all calculations predict a
conversion probability relative to the MC rate which follows
the linear rise withZ expected naively. The predictions may,
however, deviate by factors 2–3 at higherZ values.
As a result of the two-body ﬁnal state the electrons pro-
duced in μ–e conversion are mono-energetic and their en-
ergy is given by:
Eμe=mμc2 − Bμ(Z) − R(A), (8.1)
where Bμ(Z) is the atomic binding energy of the muon
andR is the atomic recoil energy for a muonic atom with
atomic numberZ and mass number A. In ﬁrst approxima-
tionBμ(Z) ∝ Z2 andR(A) ∝ A− 1.


--- Page 128 ---
140 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
8.1.3.1 Background Muon decay in orbit (MIO) consti-
tutes an intrinsic background source which can only be
suppressed with sufﬁcient electron energy resolution. The
process predominantly results in electrons with energyEMIO
below mμc2/2, the kinematic endpoint in free muon de-
cay, with a steeply falling high energy component reaching
up to Eμe. In the endpoint region the MIO rate varies as
(Eμe− EMIO)5 and a resolution of 1–2 MeV (FWHM) is
sufﬁcient to keep MIO background under control. Since the
MIO endpoint rises at lowerZ great care has to be taken to
avoid low-Z contaminations in and around the target.
Another background source is due to radiative muon cap-
ture (RMC) μ− (A,Z) → γ(A,Z− 1)∗νμafter which the
photon creates ane+e− pair either internally (Dalitz pair) or
throughγ→ e+e− pair production in the target. The RMC
endpoint can be kept belowEμefor selected isotopes.
Most low energy muon beams have large pion contam-
inations. Pions may produce background when stopping in
the target through radiative pion capture (RPC) which takes
place with a probability of O(10− 2). Most RPC photons
have energies aboveEμe. As in the case of RMC these pho-
tons may produce background throughγ→ e+e− pair pro-
duction. There are various strategies to cope with RPC back-
ground:
– One option is to keep the total number of π− stopping
in the target during the live time of the experiment be-
low 104− 5. This can be achieved with the help of a mod-
erator in the beam exploiting the range difference between
pions and muons of given momentum or with a muon stor-
age ring exploiting the difference in life-time.
– Another option is to exploit the fact that pion capture
takes place at a time scale far below a nanosecond. The
background can thus be suppressed with a beam counter
in front of the experimental target or by using a pulsed
beam selecting only delayed events.
Cosmic rays (electrons, muons, photons) are a copious
source of electrons with energies around ≈ 100 MeV . With
the exception of γ→ e+e− pair production in the target
these events can be recognized by an incoming particle. In
addition, passive shielding and veto counters above the de-
tection system help to suppress this background.
8.1.3.2 SINDRUM II The present best limits (see Ta-
ble 19) have been measured with the SINDRUM II spec-
trometer at PSI. Most recently a search was performed on a
gold target [945]. In this experiment (see Fig. 57) the pion
suppression is based on the factor of two shorter range of
pions as compared to muons at the selected momentum of
52 MeV/c. A simulation using the measured range distri-
bution shows that about one in 10 6 pions cross an 8 mm
thick CH2 moderator. Since these pions are relatively slow
99.9% of them decay before reaching the gold target which
is situated some 10 m further downstream. As a result pion
stops in the target have been reduced to a negligible level.
What remains are radiative pion capture in the degrader and
π− → e− νe decay in ﬂight shortly before entering the de-
grader. The resulting electrons may reach the target where
they can scatter into the solid angle acceptance of the spec-
trometer. O(10) events are expected with a ﬂat energy dis-
tribution between 80 and 100 MeV . These events are peaked
in forward direction and show a time correlation with the
cyclotron rf signal. To cope with this background two event
classes have been introduced based on the values of polar
angle and rf phase. Fig. 58 shows the corresponding mo-
mentum distributions.
Fig. 57 Plan view of the SINDRUM II experiment. The 1 MW
590 MeV proton beam hits the 40 mm carbon production target ( top
left of the ﬁgure ). The πE5 beam line transports secondary particles
(π,μ,e) emitted in the backward direction to a degrader situated at the
entrance of a solenoid connected axially to the SINDRUM II spectrom-
eter. Inset a shows the momentum dispersion at the position of the ﬁrst
slit system. Inset b shows a cross section of the beam at the position of
the beam focus


--- Page 129 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 141
Fig. 58 Momentum distributions of electrons and positrons for two event classes described in the text. Measured distributions are compared with
the results of simulations of muon decay in orbit andμ–e conversion
The spectra show no indication forμ–e conversion. The
corresponding upper limit on
Bμe≡ Γ
(
μ− Au → e− Aug.s.
)
/Γcapture
(
μ− Au
)
< 7 × 10− 13 90% C.L. (8.2)
has been obtained with the help of a likelihood analysis of
the momentum distributions shown in Fig. 58 taking into
account muon decay in orbit, μ–e conversion, a contribu-
tion taken from the observed positron distribution describing
processes with intermediate photons such as radiative muon
capture and a ﬂat component from pion decay in ﬂight or
cosmic ray background.
8.1.3.3 New initiatives Based on a scheme originally de-
veloped during the eighties for the Moscow Meson Factory
[954]μe-conversion experiments are being considered both
in the USA and in Japan. The key elements are:
– A pulsed proton beam allows one to remove pion back-
ground by selecting events in a delayed time window. Pro-
ton extinction factors below 10− 9 are needed.
– A large acceptance capture solenoid surrounding the pion
production target leads to a major increase in muon ﬂux.
– A bent solenoid transporting the muons to the experi-
mental target results in a signiﬁcant increase in momen-
tum transmission compared to a conventional quadrupole
channel. A bent solenoid not only removes neutral parti-
cles and photons but also separates electric charges.
Unfortunately, the MECO proposal at BNL [ 955] de-
signed along these lines was stopped because of the high
costs. Presently the possibilities are studied to perform a
MECO-type of experiment at Fermilab (mu2e). There is
good hope that a proton beam with the required characteris-
tics can be produced with minor modiﬁcations to the exist-
ing accelerator complex which will become available after
the Tevatron stops operation in 2009. A letter of intent is in
preparation.
Further improvements are being considered for an ex-
periment at J-PARC. To fully exploit the life-time differ-
ence to suppress pion induced background the separation
has to occur in the beam line rather than after the muon has
stopped since the life-time of the muonic atom may be sig-
niﬁcantly shorter than the 2.2 µs of the free muon. For this
purpose a muon storage ring PRISM (Phase Rotated Intense
Slow Muon source, see Fig. 59) is being considered [ 956]
which makes use of large-acceptance ﬁxed-ﬁeld alternating-
gradient (FFAG) magnets. A portion of the PRISM-FFAG
ring is presently under construction as r&d project. As the
name suggests the ring is also used to reduce the momentum
spread of the beam (from ≈ 30% to ≈ 3%) which is achieved
by accelerating late muons and decelerating early muons in
RF electric ﬁelds. The scheme requires the construction of
a pulsed proton beam [ 957] a decision about which has not
been made yet. The low momentum spread of the muons
allows for the use of a relatively thin target which is an es-
sential ingredient for high resolution in the momentum mea-
surement with the PRIME detector [704, 705].
Table 21 lists theμ− stop rates and single-event sensitiv-
ities for the various projects discussed above.
8.2 Searches for lepton ﬂavor violation in τdecays
Highest sensitivities to date are achieved at the B-factories
and further improvements are to be expected. At the LHC
the modes with three charged leptons in the ﬁnal state such
asτ→ 3μcould be sufﬁciently clean to reach even higher
sensitivity. Studies have been performed for LHCb [ 159]
and CMS (see below).
8.2.1 B-factories
Present generationB-factories operating around the Υ(4S)
resonance also serve as τ-factories, because the production


--- Page 130 ---
142 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 59 Layout of
PRISM/PRIME. The
experimental target is situated at
the entrance of the 180◦ bent
solenoid that transports decay
electrons to the detection
system. See text for further
explanations
Table 21 μ–e conversion searches
Project Lab Status Ep [GeV] pμ[MeV/c] μ− stops [s− 1] Sa
SINDRUM II PSI ﬁnished 0.6 52 ± 11 0 7 2 × 10− 13
MECO BNL canceled 8 45 ± 25 10 11 2 × 10− 17
mu2e FNAL under study 8 45 ± 25 0 .6 × 1010 4 × 10− 17
PRISM/PRIME J-PARC LOI 40 68 ± 31 0 12 5 × 10− 19
aSingle-event sensitivity: value ofBμecorresponding to an expectation of one observed event
cross sections σbb = 1.1 nb and στ+τ− = 0.9 nb are quite
similar at centre-of-mass energy near 10.58 GeV. BaBar and
Belle have thus been able to reach the highest sensitivity to
lepton ﬂavor violating tau decays.
Many theories beyond the standard model allow for
τ± → ℓ±γandτ± → ℓ±ℓ∓ ℓ± decays, whereℓ− =e− ,μ− ,
at the level of ∼ O(10− 10–10− 7). Examples are
– SM with additional heavy right handed Majorana neutri-
nos or with left handed and right handed neutral isosin-
glets [958];
– mSUGRA models with right handed neutrinos introduced
via the see-saw mechanism [242, 959];
– supersymmetric models with Higgs exchange [ 174, 807]
or SO(10) symmetry [164, 960];
– technicolour models with non-universal Z′ exchange
[961].
Large neutrino mixing could induce large mixing be-
tween the supersymmetric partners of the leptons. While
some scenarios predict higher rates for τ± → μ±γde-
cays, others, for example with inverted mass hierarchy for
the sleptons [ 242], predict higher rates for τ± → e±γde-
cays.
Semi-leptonic neutrino-less decays involving pseudo-
scalar mesons likeτ± → ℓ±P 0, whereP 0 =π0,η,η′ may
be enhanced over τ± → ℓ±ℓ∓ ℓ± decays in supersymmet-
ric models, for example, arising out of exchange of CP-odd
pseudo-scalar neutral Higgs boson, which are further en-
hanced by color factors associated with these decays. The
large coupling of Higgs at thes ¯s vertex enhances ﬁnal states
containing the ηmeson, giving a prediction of B(τ± →
μ±η):B(τ± → μ±μ∓ μ±) :B(τ± → μ±γ)= 8.4 : 1 : 1.5
[810]. Some models with heavy Dirac neutrinos [198, 962],
two Higgs doublet models, R-parity violating supersym-
metric models, and ﬂavor changing Z′ models with non-
universal couplings [ 963] allow for observable parameter
space of new physics [ 964], while respecting the existing
experimental bounds at the level of ∼ O(10− 7).


--- Page 131 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 143
Fig. 60 Transverse and longitudinal views of a simulatedτ→ μγevent in the BaBar detector. The second tau decays toeνν
Fig. 61 mEC vs./Delta1Efor simulatedτ→ μγevents as reconstructed
in the BaBar detector. The tails of distributions are due to initial state
radiation and photon energy reconstruction effects. Latter causes also
the shift in ⟨/Delta1E⟩
8.2.1.1 Search strategy In the cleane+e− annihilation en-
vironment, the decay products of two taus produced are well
separated in space as illustrated in Fig. 60.
A ss h o w ni nF i g .61 neutrino-less τ-decays have two
characteristic features:
– the measured energy of τdaughters is close to half the
centre-of-mass energy,
– the total invariant mass of the daughters is centered
around the mass of theτlepton.
While forℓℓℓ modes the achieved mass resolution is excel-
lent, the resolution (σ)o ft h eℓγﬁnal state improves from
∼ 20 to 9 MeV by assigning the point of closest approach of
the muon trajectory to the e+e− collision axis as the decay
vertex and by using a kinematic ﬁt with theμγCM energy
constrained to √ s/2[ 191]. The energy resolution is typi-
cally 45 MeV with a long tail due to radiation.
The principal sources of background are radiative QED
(di-muon or Bhabha) and continuum ( qq) events as well
asτ+τ− events with a mis-identiﬁed standard model de-
cay mode. There is also some irreducible contribution from
τ+τ− events with hard initial state radiation in which one of
theτ’s decays into a mode with the same charged particle as
the signal. For example,τ→ μν¯νdecays accompanied by a
hardγis an irreducible background in theτ→ μγsearch.
The general strategy to search for the neutrino-less de-
cays is to deﬁne a signal region, typically of size ∼ 2σ,i n
the energy–mass plane of theτdaughters and to reduce the
background expectation from well-known CM processes in-
side the signal region by optimizing a set of selection crite-
ria:
– the missing momentum is consistent with the zero-mass
hypothesis
– the missing momentum points inside the acceptance of
the detector
– the second tau is found with the correct invariant mass
– minimal opening angle between two tau decay products
– minimal value for the highest momentum of any recon-
structed track
– particle identiﬁcation
The analyses are performed in a blind fashion by excluding
events in the region of the signal box until all optimizations
and systematic studies of the selection criteria have been
completed. The cut values are optimized using control sam-
ples, data sidebands and Monte Carlo extrapolation to the
signal region to yield the lowest expected upper limit under
the no-signal hypothesis. The measuredmEC vs./Delta1Edistri-
bution for theτ→ μγsearch after applying the constraints
listed above is shown in Fig. 62.
For theτ± → ℓ±P 0 searches, the pseudo-scalar mesons
(P 0) are reconstructed in the following decay modes:π0 →
γγforτ± → ℓ±π0,η→ γγandη→ π+π− π0 (π0 →
γγ)f o rτ± → ℓ±η, andη′ → π+π− η(η→ γγ)andη′ →
ρ0γforτ± → ℓ±η′.


--- Page 132 ---
144 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
8.2.1.2 Experimental results from BaBar and Belle By the
beginning of 2007 BaBar and Belle had recorded integrated
luminosities of L ∼ 400 and 700 fb − 1, respectively, which
corresponds to a total of ∼ 109 τ-decays. Analysis of these
data samples is still ongoing and published results include
only part of the data analysed. No signal has yet been ob-
served in any of the probed channels and some limits and
the corresponding integrated luminosities are summarized
in Table 22. Frequentest upper limits have been calculated
for the combination of the two experiments [ 183]u s i n gt h e
technique of Cousins and Highland [965] following the im-
plementation of Barlow [966].
8.2.1.3 Projection of limits to higher luminosities B(τ± →
μ±γ)andB(τ± → μ±μ∓ μ±) have been lowered by ﬁve
orders of magnitude over the past twenty-ﬁve years. Fur-
ther signiﬁcant improvements in sensitivity are expected
during the next ﬁve years. Depending upon the nature of
backgrounds contributing to a given search, two extreme
scenarios can be envisioned in extrapolating to higher lumi-
nosities:
Fig. 62 Measured distribution of mEC vs./Delta1Eforτ→ μγrecon-
structed by BaBar [ 191]. The shaded region taken from Fig. 61 con-
tains 68% of the hypothetical signal events
– If the expected background is kept below O(1) events,
while maintaining the same efﬁciency B90
UL ∝ 1/L if no
signal events would be observed. In τ± → μ±μ∓ μ±
searches, for example, the backgrounds are still quite low
and the irreducible backgrounds are negligible even for
projected SuperB-factories.
– If there is background now already and no reduction could
be achieved in the future measurements B90
UL ∝ 1/
√
L.
The
√
L scaling is, however, unduly pessimistic since the
analyses improve steadily. Better understanding of the na-
ture of the backgrounds will lead to a more effective separa-
tion of signal and background.
Theτ± → μ±γsearches suffer from signiﬁcant back-
ground from both μ+μ− andτ+τ− events and to a lesser
extend from qq production. While one can expect to re-
duce these backgrounds with continued optimization with
more luminosity at the present day B-factories, much of
the background from τ+τ− events is irreducible coming
fromτ→ μν¯νdecays accompanied by initial state radia-
tion. This source represents about 20% of the total back-
ground in the searches performed by the BaBar experiment
[191] and it is conceivable that an analysis can be developed
that reduces all but this background with minimal impact on
the efﬁciency. One could also include new selection criteria
such as a cut on the polar angle of the photon which could
reduce the radiative “irreducible” background by 85% with
a 40% loss of signal efﬁciency. Table23 summarizes the fu-
ture sensitivities for various LFV decay modes.
In order to further reduce the impact of irreducible back-
grounds at a future Super B-factory experiment, one can
consider what is necessary to improve the mass resolution
of the, e.g., μ–γsystem. Currently, this resolution is lim-
i t e db yt h eγangular resolution. Therefore improvements
might be expected if the granularity of the electromagnetic
calorimeter is increased.
Table 22 Integrated luminosities and observed upper limits on the branching fractions at 90% C.L. for selected LFV tau decays by BaBar and
Belle
Channel BaBar Belle
L(fb− 1) BUL (10− 8) Ref. L(fb− 1) BUL (10− 8) Ref.
τ± → e±γ 232 11 [ 182] 535 12 [ 181]
τ± → μ±γ 232 6.8 [ 191] 535 4.5 [ 181]
τ± → ℓ±ℓ∓ ℓ± 92 11–33 [ 644] 535 2–4 [ 967]
τ± → e±π0 339 13 [ 648] 401 8.0 [ 968]
τ± → μ±π0 339 11 [ 648] 401 12 [ 968]
τ± → e±η 339 16 [ 648] 401 9.2 [ 968]
τ± → μ±η 339 15 [ 648] 401 6.5 [ 968]
τ± → e±η′ 339 24 [ 648] 401 16 [ 968]
τ± → μ±η′ 339 14 [ 648] 401 13 [ 968]


--- Page 133 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 145
8.2.2 CMS
So far, only τ→ μtransitions have been studied since
muons are more easily identiﬁed and the CMS trigger
thresholds for muons are generally lower than for electrons.
Theτ→ μγchannel was studied in the past [969] both for
CMS and for ATLAS but found not to be competitive with
the prospects at theB-factories. Theτ→ 3μchannel looks
more promising and will be discussed below.
8.2.2.1 τproduction at the LHC It is planned to operate
the LHC in three different phases. After a commissioning
phase the LHC will be ramped up to an initial luminosity
of L = 1032 cm− 2 s− 1 followed by a low luminosity phase
( L = 2 × 1033 cm− 2 s− 1). A high luminosity phase with
L = 1034 cm− 2 s− 1 will start in 2010 and last for a period
of several years. The integrated luminosity per year will be
10–30 and 100–300 fb − 1 for the low and high luminosity
phases, respectively [970].
The rate of τleptons produced was estimated with the
help of PYTHIA 6.227 using the parton distribution func-
tion CTEQ5L. The results are shown in Table 24.D u r i n g
the low luminosity phase assuming an integrated luminosity
of only 10 fb − 1 per year about 10 12 τleptons will be pro-
duced within the CMS detector. The dominant production
sources ofτleptons at the LHC are the Ds and variousB
mesons. TheW and theZ production sources will provide
considerably lessτleptons per year, but at higher energies
which is an advantage for the efﬁcient detection of their de-
cay products (see below).
8.2.2.2 τ→ 3μdetection A key feature of CMS is a 4 T
magnetic ﬁeld, which ensures the measurement of charged-
particle momenta with a resolution of σpT/pT = 1.5% for
Table 23 Expected 90% C.L. upper limits on LFV τdecays with
75 ab− 1 assuming no signal is found and reducible backgrounds are
small (∼ O(1) events) and the irreducible backgrounds scale as 1/L
Decay mode Sensitivity
τ→ μγ 2 × 10− 9
τ→ eγ 2 × 10− 9
τ→ μμμ 2 × 10− 10
τ→ eee 2 × 10− 10
τ→ μη 4 × 10− 10
τ→ eη 7 × 10− 10
10 GeV muons [ 970] using a four-station muon system.
A silicon pixel detector and tracker allow to reconstruct
secondary vertices with a resolution of about 50 µm [ 971]
and help to improve the muon reconstruction. Furthermore,
CMS has an electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL) composed
of PbWO 4 and a copper scintillator hadronic calorime-
ter (HCAL). As a result of the high magnetic ﬁeld and
the amount of material that has to be crossed only muons
withpT > 3G e V /c are accepted. The reconstruction efﬁ-
ciency varies between ≈ 70% at 5 GeV [ 972] and ≈ 98% at
100 GeV/c [970].
The two levels of the CMS trigger system are called
“level 1” (L1) and “high level” (HLT). The triggers relevant
for this analysis are the dedicated single and di-muon trig-
gers. For the low luminosity phase it is planned to use aspT
thresholds for single muons 14 GeV/c at L1 and 19 GeV/c
for the HLT. The thresholds for the di-muon trigger will be
3G e V /c at L1 and 7 GeV/c for the HLT.
Mostτ→ 3μevents produced viaW andZ decays will
be accepted by the present triggers. Unfortunately, the low
pT of the muons from the decays of τ’s originating in Ds
orB decay result in a very low trigger efﬁciency (Fig. 63).
Dedicated trigger algorithms with improved efﬁciency are
presently being studied.
To improve the identiﬁcation of low pT muons a new
method is currently under development combining the en-
ergy deposit in the ECAL, HCAL and the number of recon-
structed muon track segments in the muon systems. The in-
Fig. 63 pT distributions of the leading and next-to-leading muon from
the decayτ→ 3μat CMS. The indicated trigger thresholds for the low
luminosity phase are clearly too high for the efﬁcient detection of these
events
Table 24 Number ofτleptons per year produced during the low-luminosity phase of the LHC
Production channel W → τντ γ/Z→ ττ B 0 → τX B ± → τX B s → τX D s → τX
Nτ/10 fb− 1 1.7 × 108 3.2 × 107 4.0 × 1011 3.8 × 1011 7.9 × 1010 1.5 × 1012


--- Page 134 ---
146 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 64 Invariant mass
distribution from the simulation
ofτ→ 3μevents
variant mass distribution of reconstructedτ→ 3μevents is
shown in Fig. 64. The resolution is about 24 MeV/c2, which
ensures a good capability to reduce background events.
8.2.2.3 Background and expected sensitivity The main
sources of muons are decays of D and B mesons which
are copiously produced at LHC energies. A previous study
[973] suggested that these background events can be sup-
pressed by appropriate selection criteria. The probability to
misidentify an event from pile-up is small and cosmic rays
can be rejected by timing. Due to the high momentum of the
muons from directW andZ decays, the contribution to the
background is negligible [974].
One rare decay that can mimic the signal isDs → φμνμ
followed by a decay φ→ μμ. This background can be re-
duced by an invariant mass cut around the φmass. Radia-
tiveφdecayφ→ μμγsurvives this cut since the photon
usually remains undetected. These radiative decays and any
other heavy meson decays may be suppressed using sec-
ondary vertex properties and isolation criteria and by explor-
ing the three-muon angular distributions. These studies are
in progress.
Predictions of the achievable sensitivity are available in
an older CMS Note [973]. In case no signal is observed the
expected upper limit on theτ→ 3μbranching ratio at 95%
C.L. for theW source is 7.0 ×10− 8 (3.8 ×10− 8) for 10 fb− 1
(30 fb− 1) of collected data. For theZ source a limit of 3.4 ×
10− 7 and for theB meson source a limit of 2.1 × 10− 7 was
derived assuming an integrated luminosity of 30 fb − 1.T h e
Ds source was not studied in this early paper.
Potentially including the muons fromD andB meson de-
cays may lead to signiﬁcant improvements of the sensitivity.
Further studies are necessary to make ﬁrm predictions.
8.3 B0
d,s → e±μ∓
The present limits B(B0
d → eμ)<1.7 × 10− 7 [975] deter-
mined by Belle andB(B0
s → eμ)<6.1 × 10− 6 [976] from
CDF are of interest since they place bounds on the masses
of two Pati–Salam leptoquarks [361] (see below). Both mea-
surements are almost background free so signiﬁcant im-
provements should be expected from these experiments.
These decay modes have similarities with theK0
L → μede-
cay for which an upper limit of 4.7 × 10− 12 exists [977].
The prospects of a more sensitive search have been stud-
ied for the LHCb experiment [ 978]. Although background
levels are higher, this is more than compensated by the im-
proved single-event sensitivity. The event selection closely
follows that of theB0
s → μ+μ− decay. The dominant back-
grounds come from (i) events in which two b hadrons de-
cay into leptons combining to a fake vertex and (ii) from
two-body charmless hadronic decays when the two hadrons
are misidentiﬁed as leptons. Signal and background are
separated on the basis of particle identiﬁcation, invariant
mass (σ(mB) = 50 MeV/c2), transverse momenta, proper
distance and the isolation of the B0 candidate from the
other decay products. See Ref. [ 978] for details. Simula-
tion shows that for an integrated luminosity of 2 fb − 1 the
total background can be reduced to ≈ 80 events with a se-
lection efﬁciency of 1.4%. Assuming no signal would be
found the 90% C.L. upper limits would be 1 .6 × 10− 8 and
6.5 × 10− 8 forB(B0
d → e±μ∓ ) andB(B0
s → e±μ∓ ), re-
spectively. These values correspond to 90% C.L. lower lim-
its on the leptoquark mass and mixings of 90×Fd
mix TeV and
65 ×Fs
mix TeV , whereFd,s
mix are factors taking into account
generation mixing within the model. Present limits are 50
and 21 TeV , respectively (see Fig.65).


--- Page 135 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 147
Fig. 65 90% C.L. limits on
B(B0
d → eμ)(left panel)a n d
B(B0
s → eμ)(right panel)a n d
the corresponding lower limits
on the products of Pati–Salam
leptoquark mass and mixing.
Present results are compared
with results projected for LHCb
for an integrated luminosity of
2f b− 1 in case no signal would
be observed. Dashed regions
indicate the theoretical
uncertainties in the relation
between the variables
8.4 In ﬂight conversions
Lepton Flavor Violation could manifest itself in the conver-
sion of high energy muons into tau leptons when scatter-
ing on nucleons in a ﬁxed target conﬁguration [979]. Muons
can be produced much more copiously than tau leptons so
μ→ τconversions could be more sensitive than neutrino-
lessτ→ μXdecays. When considering the effective lepton
ﬂavor violating four-fermion couplings, tau decays mainly
involve light quarks, so heavy quark couplings are only
loosely constrained [ 980]. In SUSY models, muon to tau
conversion could be greatly enhanced by Higgs mediation
at energies where heavy quarks contribute [812].
Within the context of this workshop the experimental fea-
sibility of such experiment has been investigated. The cross
section for mu to tau lepton conversion on target has been
estimated to be at most 550 ab [980] for 50 GeV muons, us-
ing an effective model independent interpretation of the tau
decay LFV constraints [964] based on the 2000 data [ 981].
By rescaling the upper limit onB(τ→ μπ+π− ) to the cur-
rent value [982, 983], one obtains an upper limit at 90% C.L.
on the cross section of 4.7 ab. This value scales roughly lin-
early with the muon energy. In the context of the MSSM,
the experimental data available in 2004 constrained the cross
section in the range from 0.1 ab to 1 ab for muon energies
from 100 to 300 GeV [812].
The following assumptions were made to assess the ex-
perimental feasibility:
– the goal is a sensitivity to the cross section corresponding
to 1/10 of the present limits from tau decay, collecting at
least thousand events per year;
– the active target consists of 330 planes of 300 µm thick
silicon, with either strip or pixel readout;
– the target has transverse dimensions corresponding to an
area of 1 m2 and the beam is distributed homogeneously
over the target.
As a consequence, 3 .75 × 1019 muons/yr are needed
which, assuming a 10% duty cycle and an effective data tak-
ing year of 107 s, corresponds to 3.75 ×1013 muons/s (peak)
and 3.75 × 1012 muons/s (average).
Using the LEPTO 6.5.1 generator [ 984] deep inelastic
muon scattering off nucleons was studied. The amount of
power dissipated in the target is sustainable, and the interac-
tion rate is 0.6 interactions per 25 ns, which is comparable
to LHC experiments. Radiation levels and occupancy in the
silicon active target appear to be tractable, provided pixel
readout is used.
When requiring momentum transfer above 2 GeV and in-
variant mass of the hadronic ﬁnal state above 3 GeV an ef-
fective interaction cross section of 47 nb was found. This
value reduces to 15 nb when applying the level 0 trigger
requirement of at least 60 GeV of hadronic energy which re-
sults in a rate of 7.7 MHz. The amount of data that needs to
be extracted from the tracker for further event selection can
probably be handled at such rate.
Unfortunately it appears that the required muon ﬂux is
incompatible with the operation of calorimeters as trigger-
ing and detecting devices. Assuming an LHCb-like electro-
magnetic calorimeter with a 2.6 cm thick lead absorber and
an integration time of 25 ns, and assuming that electrons
from muon decay travel unscreened for 4 m before encoun-
tering the electro-magnetic calorimeter, three high energy
electrons per 25 ns integration time reach the calorime-
ter, preventing any effective way of triggering on electrons.
Assuming an LHCb-like hadronic calorimeter structured in
towers consisting of 75 layers including 13 × 13 cm2 scin-
tillating pads and 16 mm of iron each, each tower will de-
tect 25 TeV of equivalent hadronic energy for each 25 ns of
integration time just because of the muon ﬂux energy loss.
The Poisson ﬂuctuation of the number of muons will induce
a ﬂuctuation in the detected hadronic energy per tower of
about 200 GeV , preventing the use of the hadronic calorime-
ter as a trigger forμN→ τX.
In conclusion, the idea of using an intense but trans-
versely spread muon ﬂux to produce and detect LFV muon
conversions to tau leptons does not appear feasible in this
preliminary study, mainly because it does not appear possi-
ble to operate calorimeters at these rates.


--- Page 136 ---
148 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
9 Experimental studies of electric and magnetic dipole
moments
9.1 Electric dipole moments
We review here the current status and prospects of the
searches for fundamental EDMs, a ﬂavor diagonal signal of
CP violation. At the non-relativistic level, the EDM d de-
termines a coupling of the spin to an external electric ﬁeld,
H ∼ d ⃗E · ⃗S. Searches for intrinsic EDMs have a long his-
tory, stretching back to the prescient work of Purcell and
Ramsey who used the neutron EDM as a test of parity
in nuclear physics. At the present time, there are two pri-
mary motivations for anticipating a nonzero EDM at or near
current sensitivity levels. Firstly, a viable mechanism for
baryogenesis requires a new CP-odd source, which if tied
to the electroweak scale necessarily has important implica-
tions for EDMs. The second is that CP-odd phases appear
quite generically in models of new physics introduced for
other reasons, e.g. in supersymmetric models. Indeed, it is
only the limited ﬁeld content of the SM which limits the ap-
pearance of CP-violation to the CKM phase and θQCD.T h e
lack of any observation of a nonzero EDM has, on the ﬂip-
side, provided an impressive source of constraints on new
physics, and there is now a lengthy body of literature on the
constraints imposed, for example, on the soft breaking sector
of the MSSM. Generically, the EDMs ensure that new CP-
odd phases in this sector are at most of O(10− 1–10− 2),a
tuning that appears rather unwarranted given the O(1) value
of the CKM phase.
The strongest current EDM constraints are shown for
three characteristic classes of observables in Table 25, and
will be discussed in detail in the following.
We summarize ﬁrst the details of the EDM constraints,
and the induced bounds on a generic class of CP-odd opera-
tors normalized at 1 GeV , commenting on how the next gen-
eration of experiments will impact signiﬁcantly on the level
of sensitivity in all sectors. We then turn to a brief discus-
sion of some of the constraints on new physics that ensue
from these bounds. More detailed discussions of phenom-
enology of EDMs is given in the ﬁrst half of this report (see
e.g. Sect. 5.7).
9.1.1 CP-odd operators and electric dipole moments
We shall brieﬂy review the relevant formulae for the ob-
servable EDMs in terms of CP-odd operators normalized at
1 GeV . Including the most signiﬁcant ﬂavor diagonal CP-
odd operators (see e.g. [ 742]) up to dimension six, the cor-
responding effective Lagrangian takes the form,
L1G e V
eff = g2
s
32π2
¯θGa
μν˜Gμν,a− i
2
∑
i=e,u,d,s
di ¯ψi(Fσ)γ5ψi
− i
2
∑
i=u,d,s
˜di ¯ψigs(Gσ)γ5ψi
+ 1
3wfabcGa
μν˜Gνβ,bGμ,c
β
+
∑
i,j =e,q
Cij( ¯ψiψi)(ψjiγ5ψj) +··· . (9.1)
Theθ-term, as it has a dimensionless coefﬁcient, is partic-
ularly dangerous leading to the strong CP problem and in
what follows we shall invoke the axion mechanism [986]t o
remove this term.
The physical observables can be conveniently separated
into three main categories, depending on the physical mech-
anisms via which an EDM can be generated: EDMs of
paramagnetic atoms and molecules; EDMs of diamagnetic
atoms; and the neutron EDM. The inheritance pattern for
these three classes is represented schematically in Fig. 66
and, while the experimental constraints on the three classes
of EDMs differ by several orders of magnitude, it is impor-
tant that the actual sensitivity to the operators in ( 9.1) turns
out to be quite comparable in all cases. This is due to vari-
ous enhancements or suppression factors which are relevant
in each case, primarily associated with various violations
of “Schiff shielding”—the non-relativistic statement that an
electric ﬁeld applied to a neutral atom must necessarily be
screened and thus remove any sensitivity to the EDM.
9.1.2 EDMs of paramagnetic atoms
For paramagnetic atoms, Schiff shielding is violated by rel-
ativistic effects which can in fact be very large. One has
roughly [987],
dpara(de) ∼ 10α2Z3de, (9.2)
which for large atoms such as Thallium amounts to a huge
enhancement of the ﬁeld seen by the electron EDM (see e.g.
Table 25 Current constraints
within three representative
classes of EDMs
Class EDM Current bound Ref.
Paramagnetic 205Tl |dTl|< 9 × 10− 25e cm [ 186]
Diamagnetic 199Hg |dHg|< 2 × 10− 28e cm [ 985]
Nucleon n |dn|< 3 × 10− 26e cm [ 869]


--- Page 137 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 149
Fig. 66 A schematic plot of the hierarchy of scales between the lep-
tonic and hadronic CP-odd sources and three generic classes of ob-
servable EDMs. The dashed lines indicate generically weaker depen-
dencies in SUSY models. The current situation is given on the left ,
while on the right we show the dependencies of several classes of next-
generation experiments
[987, 988]), which counteracts the apparently lower sensi-
tivity of the Tl EDM bound,
dTl =− 585de − 43 GeV ×eCsinglet
S . (9.3)
We have also included here the most relevant CP-odd
electron–nucleon interaction, namely CS ¯eiγ5e ¯NN , which
in turn is related to the semileptonic four-fermion operators
in (9.1).
9.1.3 EDMs of diamagnetic atoms
For diamagnetic atoms, Schiff shielding is instead violated
by the ﬁnite size of the nucleus and differences in the distri-
bution of the charge and the EDM. However, this is a rather
subtle effect,
ddia ∼ 10Z2(RN/RA)2 ˜dq, (9.4)
and the suppression by the ratio of nuclear to atomic radii,
RN/RA, generally leads to a suppression of the sensitivity
to the nuclear EDM, parameterized to leading order by the
Schiff momentS, by a factor of 10 3 (see e.g. [ 987, 988]).
Thus, although the apparent sensitivity to the Hg EDM is
orders of magnitude stronger than for the Tl EDM, both
experiments currently have comparable sensitivity to vari-
ous CP-odd operators and thus play a very complementary
role. Combining the atomic dHg(S), nuclearS( ¯gπNN), and
QCD ¯g(1)
πNN( ˜dq), components of the calculation [ 742, 988],
we have
dHg = 7 × 10− 3e( ˜du − ˜dd) + 10− 2de + O(CS,Cqq), (9.5)
where the overall uncertainty is rather large, a factor of 2–3,
due to signiﬁcant cancellations between various contribu-
tions. A valuable feature ofdHg is its sensitivity to the triplet
combination of color EDM operators ˜dq .
9.1.4 Neutron EDM
The neutron EDM measurement is of course not sensitive
to the above atomic enhancement/suppression factors and,
using the results obtained using QCD sum rule techniques
[742]( s e ea l s o[849, 989, 990] for alternative chiral ap-
proaches), wherein under Peccei–Quinn relaxation of the
axion the contribution of sea-quarks is also suppressed at
leading order:
dn =(1.4 ± 0.6)(dd − 0.25du)
+(1.1 ± 0.5)e( ˜dd + 0.5 ˜du)
+ 20 MeV ×ew + O(Cqq). (9.6)
Note that the proportionality to dq ⟨¯qq ⟩∼ mq ⟨¯qq ⟩∼ f 2
πm2
π
removes any sensitivity to the poorly known absolute value
of the light quark masses.
9.1.5 Future developments
The experimental situation is currently very active, and a
number of new EDM experiments, as detailed in this re-
port, promise to improve the level of sensitivity in all three
classes by one-to-two orders of magnitude in the coming
years. These include: new searches for EDMs of polarizable
paramagnetic molecules, which aim to exploit additional po-
larization effects enhancing the effective ﬁeld seen by the
unpaired electron by a remarkable factor of up to 10 5, and
are therefore primarily sensitive to the electron EDM; new
searches for the EDM of the neutron in cryogenic systems;


--- Page 138 ---
150 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
and also proposed searches for EDMs of charged nuclei and
ions using storage rings. This latter technique clearly aims to
avoid the effect of Schiff shielding and enhance sensitivity to
the nuclear EDM and its hadronic constituents. A schematic
summary of how a number of these new experiments will
be sensitive to the set of CP-odd operators is exhibited in
Fig. 66.
9.1.6 Constraints on new physics
Taking the existing bounds, and the formulae above, we ob-
tain the following set of constraints on the CP-odd sources
at 1 GeV (assuming an axion removes the dependence on¯θ),
⏐⏐⏐⏐de +e(26 MeV)2
(
3Ced
md
+ 11Ces
ms
+ 5Ceb
mb
)⏐⏐⏐⏐
< 1.6 × 10− 27e cm from dTl, (9.7)
⏐⏐( ˜dd − ˜du) + O( ˜ds,de,Cqq,Cqe)
⏐⏐< 2 × 10− 26e cm
fromdHg, (9.8)
⏐⏐e( ˜dd + 0.56 ˜du) + 1.3(dd − 0.25du) + O( ˜ds,w,Cqq)
⏐⏐
< 2 × 10− 26e cm from dn, (9.9)
where the additional O(··· ) dependencies are known less
precisely, but may not always be sub-leading in particular
models. The precision of these results varies from 10–15%
for the Tl bound, to around 50% for the neutron bound, and
to a factor of a few for Hg. It is remarkable to note that, ac-
counting for the naive mass-dependencedf ∝ mf , all these
constraints are of essentially the same order of magnitude
and thus highly complementary. Constraints obtained in the
hadronic sector using other calculational techniques differ
somewhat but generally give results consistent with these
within the quoted precision.
The application of these constraints to models of new
physics has many facets and is discussed in several speciﬁc
cases elsewhere in this report. We shall limit our attention
here to just a few simple examples relevant to the motiva-
tions noted above.
9.1.7 The SUSY CP-problem
It is now rather well-known that a generic spectrum of
soft SUSY-breaking parameters in the MSSM will generate
EDMs via one loop diagrams [ 852] that violate the exist-
ing bounds by one-to-two orders of magnitude leading to
the SUSY CP problem. The situation is summarized rather
schematically in Fig. 67.
In many respects the situation is better described by the
amount of ﬁne tuning of the MSSM spectrum that is required
to avoid these leading order contributions, and by how much
the ability to avoid the EDM constraints is limited by sec-
ondary constraints from numerous, and more robust, two
Fig. 67 Constraints on the CMSSM phases θA andθμfrom a com-
bination of the three most sensitive EDM constraints,dn,dTl anddHg,
forMSUSY = 500 GeV , and tanβ= 3 (from [742]). The region allowed
by EDM constraints is at the intersection of all three bands around
θA =θμ= 0
loop contributions [ 991] and four-fermion sources [ 992].
Indeed, if we consider two extreme cases: (i) the 2HDM,
where all SUSY fermions and sfermions are very heavy; and
(ii) split SUSY , where all SUSY scalars are very heavy, one
ﬁnds that while one loop EDMs are suppressed, two loop
contributions are already very close to the current bounds
[857, 858, 992]. This bodes well for the ability of next-
generation experiments to provide a comprehensive test of
large SUSY phases at the electroweak scale, regardless of
the detailed form of the SUSY spectrum.
9.1.8 Constraints on new SUSY thresholds
If SUSY is indeed discovered at the LHC, but with no sign of
phases in the soft sector, one may instead consider the abil-
ity of EDMs to detect new supersymmetric CP-odd thresh-
olds. At dimension ﬁve there are several R-parity conserv-
ing operators, besides those well-known examples associ-
ated with neutrino masses and baryon and lepton number
violation [150, 371]. Writing the relevant dimension ﬁve su-
perpotential as [993, 994]
/Delta1W = yh
Λh
HdHuHdHu +
Yqe
ijkl
Λqe
(UiQj)EkLl
+
Yqq
ijkl
Λqq
(UiQj)(DkQl)
+
˜Yqq
ijkl
Λqq
(
UitAQj
)(
DktAQl
)
, (9.10)
one ﬁnds that order-one CP-odd coefﬁcients with a generic
ﬂavor structure, particularly for the semileptonic operators,
are probed by the sensitivity ofdTl anddHg at the remarkable
level of Λ∼ 108 GeV [ 993, 994]. This is comparable to,
or better than, the corresponding sensitivity of lepton-ﬂavor
violating observables.


--- Page 139 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 151
9.1.9 Constraints on minimal electroweak baryogenesis
As noted above, one of the primary motivations for antici-
pating nonzero EDMs at or near the current level of sensitiv-
ity is through the need for a viable mechanism of baryogene-
sis. This is clear in essentially all baryogenesis mechanisms
that are tied to the electroweak scale. As a simple illustra-
tion, one can consider a minimal extension of the SM Higgs
sector [995–997],
Ldim 6 = 1
Λ2
(
H †H
)3 +
Zu
ij
Λ2
CP
(
H †H
)
Uc
iHQj
+
Zd
ij
Λ2
CP
(
H †H
)
Dc
iH †Qj
+
Ze
ij
Λ2
CP
(
H †H
)
Ec
iH †Lj. (9.11)
The ﬁrst term is required to induce a sufﬁciently strong ﬁrst
order electroweak phase transition, while the remaining op-
erators provide the additional source (or sources) of CP-
violation, where we have assumed consistency with the prin-
ciple of minimal ﬂavor violation. Modiﬁed Higgs couplings
of this kind, including CP-violating effects, are currently the
subject of signiﬁcant research within collider physics, rele-
vant to the LHC in particular [588], making EDM probes of
models of this kind quite complementary.
As discussed in [ 997], such a scenario can reproduce
the required baryon-to-entropy ratio, ηb = 8.9 × 10− 11,
while remaining consistent with the EDM bounds, pro-
vided the thresholds and the Higgs mass are quite low, e.g.
400 GeV<Λ,ΛCP< 800 GeV. The EDMs in this case are
generated at the two loop level, and it is clear that an im-
provement in EDM sensitivity by an order of magnitude
would provide a conclusive test of minimal mechanisms of
this form.
9.2 Neutron EDM
The neutron electric dipole moment is sensitive to many
sources of CP violation. Most famously, it constrains QCD
(the “strong CP problem”), but it also puts tight con-
straints on supersymmetry and other physics models be-
yond the standard model. The standard model prediction
of ∼ 10− 32 e cm is a factor of 10 6 below existing limits, so
any convincing signal within current or foreseen sensitivity
ranges will be a clear indication of physics beyond the SM.
All current nEDM experiments use NMR techniques to
search for electric-ﬁeld induced changes in the Larmor pre-
cession frequency of bottled ultracold neutrons. Recent re-
sults from a room-temperature apparatus at ILL yielded a
new limit of|dn|< 2.9 ×10− 26e cm (90% C.L.) which rules
out many “natural” varieties of SUSY . Several new experi-
ments hope to improve on this limit: two of these involve
new cryogenic techniques that promise an eventual increase
in sensitivity by two orders of magnitude. First results, at the
level of ∼ 10− 27 e cm, are to be expected within about four
years.
9.2.1 ILL
A measurement of the neutron EDM was carried out at the
ILL between 1996 and 2002, by a collaboration from the
University of Sussex, the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
and the ILL itself. The ﬁnal published result provided a limit
of |dn|< 2.9 × 10− 26 e cm (90% C.L.) [ 869]. This repre-
sents a factor of two improvement beyond the intermediate
result [998] and almost a factor of four beyond the results
existing prior to this experiment [ 999, 1000]. The collabo-
ration, which has now expanded to include Oxford Univer-
sity and the University of Kure, has designed and developed
“CryoEDM”, a cryogenic version of the experiment that is
expected to achieve two orders of magnitude improvement
in sensitivity. Construction and initial testing are underway
at the time of writing.
Experimental technique The room-temperature measure-
ment was carried out using stored ultracold neutrons (i.e.
having energies ≲200 neV) from the ILL reactor. The Ram-
sey technique of separated oscillatory ﬁelds was used to de-
termine the Larmor precession frequency of the neutrons
within ⃗B and ⃗E ﬁelds. The signature of an EDM is a fre-
quency shift proportional to any change in the applied elec-
tric ﬁeld.
The innovative feature of this experiment was the use of
a cohabiting atomic-mercury magnetometer [ 1001]. Spin-
polarized Hg atoms shared the same volume as the neutrons,
and the measurement of their precession frequency provided
a continuous high-resolution monitoring of the magnetic
ﬁeld drift: prior to this, such drift entirely dominated the tiny
⃗E-ﬁeld induced frequency changes that were sought.
Systematics Analysis of the data revealed a new source
of systematic error, which, as the problem of B-ﬁeld drift
had been virtually eliminated, became potentially the dom-
inant error. Its origins lay in a geometric-phase (GP) effect
[1002]—an unfortunate collusion between any small applied
axial ⃗B-ﬁeld gradient and the component of ⃗B induced in
the particle’s rest frame by the Lorentz transformation of the
electric ﬁeld. This GP effect induced a frequency shift pro-
portional to ⃗E, and hence a false EDM signal. In fact, the Hg
magnetometer itself was some 50 times more susceptible to
this effect than were the neutrons, so the introduction of the
magnetometer brought the GP systematic with it.


--- Page 140 ---
152 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
This effect was overcome by careful measurement of the
neutron-to-Hg frequency ratios for both polarities of mag-
netic ﬁeld, in order to determine the point nominally cor-
responding to zero applied axial B-ﬁeld gradient, as well
as by a series of auxiliary measurements to pin down small
corrections due to local dipole [1003] and quadrupole ﬁelds
(as well as the Earth’s rotation). The ﬁnal result therefore
remained statistically limited.
The experiment is now complete and, as will be discussed
below, the equipment will be used for further studies by an-
other collaboration based largely at the PSI.
Still another collaboration, led by the PNPI in Russia,
is developing a new room-temperature nEDM apparatus,
which they plan to run at ILL. It is also intended to reach
a sensitivity of ∼ 10− 27 e cm, to be achieved in part by the
use of multiple back-to-back measurement chambers with
opposing electric ﬁelds to cancel some systematic errors.
Cryogenic experiments overview It has been known for
several decades [1004] that 8.9 Å neutrons incident on su-
perﬂuid 4He at 0.5 K will down-scatter, transferring their en-
ergy and momentum to the helium and becoming ultracold
neutrons (UCN) in the process. This so-called super-thermal
UCN source provides a much higher ﬂux than is available
simply from the low energy tail of the Maxwell distribution.
In addition, the immersion of the apparatus in a bath of liq-
uid helium should allow for the provision of stronger elec-
tric ﬁelds than could be sustained in vacuo. The other two
variables that contribute to the ﬁgure of merit for this experi-
ment, namely the polarization and the NMR coherence time,
should also be improved: the incident cold neutron beam can
be very highly polarized, and the polarization remains intact
during the down-scattering process; and the improved uni-
formity of magnetic ﬁeld attainable with superconducting
shields and coil will reduce depolarization during storage,
while losses from up-scattering will be much reduced due to
the cryogenic temperatures of the walls of the neutron stor-
age vessels.
ILL CryoEDM experiment status The majority of the ap-
paratus for the cryoEDM experiment has been installed at
ILL, and testing is underway. UCN production via this su-
perthermal mechanism has been demonstrated [ 1005], and
the solid-state UCN detectors developed by the collabora-
tion have also been shown to work well [1006]. At the time
of writing, there are still some hardware problems to be
resolved, in particular with components in and around the
Ramsey measurement chamber. A high precision scan of the
magnetic ﬁeld was carried out in 2007, and measurements
were made of the neutron polarization. An initial HV sys-
tem will be installed in spring 2008. By the end of 2008,
the system is expected to have a statistical sensitivity of
∼ 10− 27 e cm.
Future plans In order to achieve optimum sensitivity, a
number of improvements will need to be made:
– The superconducting magnetic shielding requires addi-
tional protective “end caps” to shield fully the ends of the
superconducting solenoid.
– The current measurement chamber only has two cells: one
with HV applied, and one at ground as a control. It is
planned to upgrade to a four-cell chamber, with the HV
applied to the central electrode, in order to be able to carry
out simultaneous measurements with electric ﬁelds in op-
posite directions. As well as canceling several potential
systematic errors, this will reduce the statistical uncer-
tainty by doubling the number of neutrons counted.
– The ILL is preparing a new beam line with six times the
currently available intensity of 8.9 Å neutrons, and wishes
to transfer the experiment to that beam line in 2009. Fund-
ing for these improvements is expected to be contingent
on successful running of the existing apparatus.
A sensitivity of ∼ 2 × 10− 28 e cm should be achievable
within two to three years of running at the new beam line.
9.2.2 PSI
The present best limit for the neutron electric dipole mo-
ment (EDM), |dn|< 2.9 × 10− 26 e cm [869], was obtained
by the Sussex/Rutherford/ILL Collaboration from measure-
ments at the ILL source for ultracold neutrons [ 1007], as
discussed in the previous section. The experiment is at this
point statistically limited and also facing systematic chal-
lenges not far away [869, 1002, 1003]. In order to make fur-
ther progress, both, statistical sensitivity and control of sys-
tematics, have to be improved. Gaining in statistics requires
new sources for ultracold neutrons (UCN). These can be in-
tegrated into the experiment as for the new cryogenic EDM
searches, delivering UCN in superﬂuid helium, or a multi-
purpose UCN source, delivering UCN in vacuum. This high
intensity UCN source is presently under construction at the
Paul Scherrer Institut in Villigen, Switzerland [ 1008]. It is
expected to become operational towards the end of 2008 and
to deliver UCN densities of more than 1000 cm− 3 to typical
experiments, i.e. almost two orders of magnitude more than
presently available.
The in-vacuum technique will be pushed to its limits, de-
livering ﬁrst results in about 4 years. The following steps are
planned by a sizable international collaboration [1009]:
– While the new UCN source is under construction the col-
laboration operates and improves the apparatus of the for-
mer Sussex/RAL/ILL Collaboration at ILL Grenoble. In
order to better control the systematic issues, the magnetic
ﬁeld and its gradients will be monitored and stabilized us-
ing an array of laser optically pumped Cs-magnetometers


--- Page 141 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 153
[1010, 1011]. An order of magnitude improvement com-
pared to todays ﬁeld ﬂuctuations over the typical mea-
surement times of 100–1000 s is certainly feasible. It is
also necessary to improve the sensitivity of the Hg co-
magnetometer [1012]. Other improvements of the system
are with regard to UCN polarization and detection as well
as upgrading the data acquisition system. The hardware
efforts are accompanied by a full simulation of the sys-
tem.
– It is planned to move the apparatus from ILL to PSI to-
wards the end of 2008 in order to be ready for data taking
for about two years, 2009 and 2010. In addition to the
improvements of phase I, an external magnetic ﬁeld sta-
bilization system and a temperature stabilization are en-
visaged. Furthermore, work on developing a second co-
magnetometer using a hyper-polarized noble gas species
is ongoing and might further improve the systematics con-
trol. In case of a successful development, also the re-
placement of the Hg system together with an increase of
the electric ﬁeld strength may become possible. In any
case, a factor of 5 gain in sensitivity is expected from the
higher UCN intensity, corresponding to a limit of about
5–6 × 10− 27e cm in case the EDM is not found. In paral-
lel to the described activities, the design of a new experi-
mental apparatus will start in 2007. After a major design
effort in 2008, set-up of the new apparatus will start in
2009.
– The new experiment will be an optimized version of the
room-temperature in-vacuum approach. Another order of
magnitude gain in sensitivity will be obtained by a consid-
erable increase of the statistics due to a larger experimen-
tal volume ( ×
√
5), a better adaption to the UCN source
(×
√
2), longer running time ( ×
√
3) and by an improve-
ment of the electric ﬁeld strength ( ×2). Completion of
the new experimental apparatus is anticipated for end of
2010, and data taking planned for 2011–2014.
The features of the experiment include
– continued use of the successful Ramsey-technique with
UCN in vacuum and the apparatus at room-temperature,
– increased sensitivity due to much larger UCN statistics
at the new PSI source, larger experimental volume, bet-
ter polarization product and possibly larger electric ﬁeld
strength,
– application of a double neutron chamber system,
– improved magnetic ﬁeld control and stabilization with
multiple laser optically pumped Cs-magnetometers, and
– an improved co-magnetometry system.
As another very strong source for UCN is currently un-
der construction at the FRMII in Munich, in the long run and
for the optimum conditions for the experiment, the collabo-
ration will have the opportunity to choose between PSI and
FRMII.
9.2.3 SNS
A sizable US Collaboration [1013] is planning to develop a
cryogenic experiment, following an early concept by Golub
and Lamoreaux [1014]. It will be based at the SNS 1.4 MW
spallation source at Oak Ridge. A fundamental neutron
physics beam line is under construction, which will include
a double monochromator to select 8.9 Å neutrons for UCN
production in liquid helium.
In this experiment, spin-polarized 3He will be used both
as a magnetometer and as a neutron detector. The precession
of the 3He can, in principle, be detected with SQUID mag-
netometers. Meanwhile, the cross section for the absorption
reactionn + 3He → p + 3H + 764 keV is negligible for a
total spinJ = 1, but very large (∼ 5M b )f o rJ = 0. In con-
sequence, a scintillation signal from this reaction will be de-
tected with a beat frequency corresponding to the difference
between the Larmor precession frequencies of the neutrons
and the 3He.
An application for funding to construct this experiment
is currently under review. Extensive tests are underway to
study, for example, the electric ﬁelds attainable in liquid he-
lium, the 3He spin relaxation time and the diffusion of 3He
in 4He. If construction goes according to plan, commission-
ing will be in approximately 2013, with results following
probably four or ﬁve years later. The ultimate sensitivity will
be below 10− 28 e cm.
9.3 Deuteron EDM
A new concept of investigating the EDM of bare nuclei in
magnetic storage rings has been developed by the storage
ring EDM Collaboration (SREC) over the past several years.
The latest version of the methods analyzed turns out to be
very sensitive for light (bare) nuclei and promises the best
EDM experiment forθQCD, quark and quark-color EDMs.
The search for hadronic EDMs has been dominated by
the search for a neutron EDM and nuclear Schiff moments in
heavy diamagnetic atoms, such as 199Hg. The latter depend
on nuclear theory to relate the measured Schiff moment to
the underlying CP violating interaction.
The sensitive ‘traditional’ EDM experiments are, so far,
all performed on electrically neutral systems, such as the
neutron, atoms, or molecules. A strong electric ﬁeld is im-
posed, together with a weak magnetic ﬁeld, and using NMR
techniques, a change of the Larmor precession frequency is
looked for. The application of strong electric ﬁelds precludes
a straightforward use of this technique on charged particles.
These particles would accelerate out of the setup, leaving
little time to make an accurate measurement.
Attempt to search for an EDM on simple nuclear sys-
tems, such as the proton or deuteron, when part of an atom,
are severely hindered by shielding. This so-called Schiff-
screening precludes an external electric ﬁeld to penetrate


--- Page 142 ---
154 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
to the nucleus. Due to rearrangement of the atomic elec-
trons, the net effect of the electric ﬁeld on the nucleus is es-
sentially zero. Known loop-holes include relativistic effects,
non-electric components in the binding of the electrons, and
an extended size of the nucleus. None of these loopholes
are sufﬁciently strong to allow a sensitive measurement on
a light atom. For hydrogen atoms, the atomic EDM result-
ing from a nuclear EDM is down by some seven orders of
magnitude.
Nevertheless, light nuclei, and the deuteron in particular,
are attractive to search for hadronic EDMs because of their
relatively simple structure. Moreover, a novel experimental
technique, using the motional electric ﬁeld experienced by
a relativistic particle when traversing a magnetic ﬁeld, make
it possible to directly search for EDM on charged systems,
such as the (bare) deuteron.
9.3.1 Theoretical considerations
The deuteron is the simplest nucleus. It consists of a weakly
bound proton and neutron in a predominantly3S1 state, with
a small admixture of the D-state. From a theoretical point
of view, the deuteron is especially attractive, because it is
the simplest system in which the P-odd, T-odd nucleon–
nucleon (NN) interaction contributes to an EDM. Moreover,
the deuteron properties are well understood, so reliable and
precise calculations are possible.
In [1015], a framework is presented that could serve as
a starting point for the microscopic calculation of complex
systems. The most general form of the interaction, based
only on symmetry considerations, contains ten P- and T-odd
meson-nucleon coupling constants for the lightest pseudo-
scalar and vector mesons (π,ρ,ηandω).
This P-odd, T-odd interaction induces a P -wave admix-
ture to the deuteron wave function. It is this admixture that
leads to an EDM. Since the proton and neutron that make up
the deuteron may also have an EDM, a disentanglement of
one- and two-body contributions,
dD ≃d(1)
D +d(2)
D (9.12)
to the EDM is necessary to uncover the underlying structure
of the P-odd T-odd physics.
The two-body component is predominantly due to the po-
larization effect, and shows little model dependence for all
leading high-quality potentials. Additional contributions ar-
rive from meson exchange.
The one body contribution is simply the sum of the pro-
ton and neutron EDMs. The nucleon EDM has a wide vari-
ety of sources, as already discussed for the neutron. There
exists no good model to describe the non-perturbative dy-
namics of bound quarks. A commonly used method is to
evaluate hadronic loop diagrams, containing mesonic and
baryonic degrees of freedom. Within the framework pre-
sented in [ 1015], the EDMs for the proton, neutron and
deuteron are found (reproducing only the pion dependence),
dp =− 0.05 ¯g(0)
π+ 0.03 ¯g(1)
π+ 0.14 ¯g(2)
π+··· ,
dn =+ 0.14 ¯g(0)
π− 0.14 ¯g(2)
π+··· ,
dD =+ 0.09 ¯g(0)
π+ 0.23 ¯g(1)
π+··· .
(9.13)
These dependences clearly show the complementarity of
these three particles.
The magnitudes of the coupling constants can be calcu-
lated for several viable sources of CP violation. In the stan-
dard model, there is room for CP violation via the so-called
¯θparameter. In the case of the nucleons, one has the relation
dn ≃− dp ≃ 3 × 10− 16 ¯θecm, (9.14)
which yields the severe constraint ¯θ<1 × 10− 10.F o rt h e
deuteron, one ﬁnds
dD ≃− 10− 16 ¯θecm. (9.15)
At the level ofdD ≃ 10− 29 e cm, one probes ¯θat the level
of 10− 13. Since ¯θcontributes differently to the neutron and
the deuteron, it is clear that both experiments are comple-
mentary. Indeed. the prediction
dD/dn =− 1/3 (9.16)
provides a beautiful check as to whether ¯θis the source
of the observed EDMs, should both be measured. In fact,
measurement of the EDMs of the proton, deuteron and 3He
would allow to verify if they satisfy the relation
dD :dp :d3He ≃ 1 : 3 :− 3. (9.17)
Here, it was assumed that 3He has properties very similar to
the neutron, which provides most of the spin.
Generic supersymmetric models contain a plethora of
new particles, which may be discovered at LHC, and new
CP-violating phases. Following the work by Lebedev et
al. [1016] and the review by Pospelov and Ritz [ 742], we
ﬁnd that SUSY loops give rise to ordinary quark EDMs,
dq , as well as quark-color EDMs, ˜dq . For the neutron and
deuteron one ﬁnds (with the color EDM part divided in
isoscalar and isovector parts)
dn ≃ 1.4(dd − 0.25du) + 0.83e( ˜dd + ˜du)
+ 0.27e( ˜dd − ˜du),
dD ≃(dd +du) − 0.2e( ˜dd + ˜du) + 6e( ˜dd − ˜du),
(9.18)
and similar relations for e.g. the mercury EDM. The isovec-
tor part is limited to |ec( ˜dd − ˜du)|< 2 × 10− 26 e cm by the
present limit on the 199Hg atom. The experimental bound


--- Page 143 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 155
on the neutron suggests that |e( ˜dd + ˜du)|< 4 × 10− 26 e cm,
assuming the isoscalar contribution to be dominant. Also in
this case, the deuteron and neutron show complementarity.
This is in particular in their sensitivity to the isovector con-
tribution, which is 20 times larger for the deuteron.
The large sensitivity to new physics (see e.g.[1016]) and
the relative simplicity of calculating the nuclear wave func-
tion, make it clear that small nuclei hold great discovery po-
tential and should therefore be vigorously pursued.
9.3.2 Experimental approach
All sensitive EDM searches are performed on neutral sys-
tems, which are (essentially) at rest. The only exception
is the proposed use of molecular ions (HfF + and ThF +)
[1017], but also for this experiment, the motion of the mole-
cules is not crucial.
In the recent past, several novel techniques have been
proposed to use the motional electric ﬁeld sensed by a parti-
cle moving through a magnetic ﬁeld at relativistic velocities.
The evolution of the spin orientation for a spin-1/2 particle
in an electromagnetic ﬁeld ( ⃗E, ⃗B) is described by the so-
called Thomas or BMT equation [ 1018]. The spin preces-
sion vector ⃗Ω, relative to the momentum of the particle, is
given by [1019]
⃗Ω= e
m
[
a ⃗B +
(
a − 1
γ2 − 1
)
⃗β× ⃗E
+η
2
(
⃗E + ⃗β× ⃗B − γ
γ+ 1
⃗β(⃗β· ⃗E)
)]
(9.19)
with ⃗μ= 2(1 +a)(e/m) ⃗S and ⃗d =η/2(e/m) ⃗S. It was as-
sumed that ⃗β· ⃗B = 0. The ﬁrst two terms between brackets
will be referred to as ωa, whereas the last one will be re-
ferred to asωη.
For fast particles, the electric ﬁeld in the rest frame of the
particle is dominated by ⃗β× ⃗B. For commonplace storage
rings, this ﬁeld can exceed the size of a static electric ﬁeld
made in the laboratory by more than an order of magnitude,
thus giving the storage ring method a distinct advantage.
In a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, ⃗ωa ∝ ⃗B and ⃗ωη∝
⃗β× ⃗B are orthogonal, leading to a small tilt in the preces-
sion plane and an second order increase in the precession
frequency. Although this was used to set a limit on the muon
EDM [188, 1020], it does not allow for a sensitive search.
The application of a radially oriented electric ﬁeld Er to
slow downωa and thus to increase the tilt, was proposed in
[1021]. For a ﬁeld strength
Er = aβ
1 − (1 +a)β2Bz (9.20)
the spin of an originally longitudinally polarized beam re-
mains aligned with the momentum at all times. In this case
⃗β· ⃗E = 0, and thus
⃗Ω= e
m
η
2( ⃗E + ⃗β× ⃗B). (9.21)
The EDM thus manifests itself as a precession of the spin
around the motional electric ﬁeld ⃗E∗ =γ[ ⃗E + ⃗β× ⃗B],i . e .
as a growing vertical polarization component parallel to ⃗B.
This approach can be used for all particles with a small mag-
netic anomaly, so that the necessary electric ﬁeld strength
remains feasible. Concept experiments, employing this tech-
nique, have been worked out for the muon [1022–1024] and
the deuteron [ 1025]. Other candidate particles have been
identiﬁed as well (see e.g. [1026]).
A third, most sensitive approach is reminiscent of the
magnetic resonance technique introduced by Rabi [ 1027].
The spin is allowed to precess under the inﬂuence of a di-
pole magnetic ﬁeld. In the original application, an oscillat-
ing magnetic ﬁeld oriented perpendicular to the driving ﬁeld
is applied. By scanning the oscillation frequency, a reso-
nance will be observed when the frequency of the oscillating
ﬁeld matches the spin precession frequency.
In this application, the oscillating magnetic ﬁeld are re-
placed by an oscillating electric ﬁeld [1028]. When at reso-
nance, the electric ﬁeld coherently interacts with the electric
dipole moment. As a consequence, the polarization compo-
nent along the magnetic ﬁeld oscillates in the case of a siz-
able EDM. In practice, only the onset of the ﬁrst oscillation
cycle will be visible in the form of a slow growth of the ver-
tical polarization, proportional to the EDM.
The oscillating electric ﬁeld is obtained by modulating
the velocity of the deuterons circulating in a magnetic ﬁeld,
setting up a so-called synchrotron oscillation. For a time de-
pendent velocity β(t)=β0 +δβ(t)generated by an oscil-
lating longitudinal electric ﬁeldERF(t) and a constant mag-
netic ﬁeldB, the spin evolution follows from
⃗Ω= e
m
[{
aB +η
2
⃗β0 × ⃗B
}
+η
2
{
δ⃗β(t)× ⃗B − β2γ
γ+ 1
⃗ERF(t)
}]
≡ ⃗Ω0 + ⃗δΩ(t). (9.22)
The ﬁrst term yields spin precession about ⃗Ω0, with-
out affecting the polarization parallel to it. For δβ(t)=
δβcos(ωt+ψ), and Bδβ≫β2γ/(γ+ 1)ERF, the paral-
lel polarization component is given by
dP∥
dt ≃ e
mP◦ηδβBcos(/Delta1ωt+/Delta1φ), (9.23)
with/Delta1ω≡ Ω0 − ωand/Delta1φ≡ φ− ψ. The beam is assumed
to have a longitudinal polarizationP0 at injection time. For
/Delta1ω= 0 the vertical polarization will grow continuously at


--- Page 144 ---
156 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
a rate proportional to the EDM. Maximum sensitivity is ob-
tained for /Delta1φ= 0o r π, whereas for /Delta1φ=π/2o r3 π/2
there is no sensitivity to the EDM. The latter will prove use-
ful in controlling systematic errors. At the same time, the
radial polarization component is given by
P⊥ ≃P0 sin(Ω0t +φ). (9.24)
This polarization component can be incorporated in a feed-
back cycle, to phase-lock the velocity modulation to the spin
precession, i.e. to guarantee/Delta1ω= 0 and/Delta1φconstant. In ad-
dition, observation ofΩ0 allows to measure or stabilize the
magnetic ﬁeld.
From (9.23) and (9.24), the main design criteria are eas-
ily derived, several of which are common to all other EDM
experiments. They include
– high initial polarization P0;
– large ﬁeld strength Eeff ∝ (δβB);
– close control over the resonance conditions /Delta1ωand
phase/Delta1φ;
– long spin coherence time P◦(t);
– long synchrotron coherence time δβ(t);
– sensitive method for independent observation of P∥
andP⊥ .
The parameters of the current concept deuteron EDM
ring are presented in Table 26. Coherent synchrotron os-
cillation can be obtained by a set of two RF cavities, one
operating at a harmonic of the revolution frequency to bring
the beam close to the spin-synchrotron resonance, and a sec-
ond operating at the resonance frequency to create a forced
oscillation.
The statistical reach of the experiment is determined by
the number of particles used to determine the polarization,
Table 26 Parameters of the concept deuteron EDM storage ring.
Parameter Symbol Design value
Deuteron momentum p D 1500 MeV/c
Magnetic ﬁeld strength B 2T
Bending radius ρ 2.5 m
Length of each straight section l 5m
Orbit length L 26 m
Momentum compaction αp 1
Cyclotron period tc 137 ns
Spin precession period ts 660 ns
Spin coherence time τs 1000 s
Motional electric ﬁeld E∗/γ 375 MV/m
Synchrotron amplitude δβ/β1%
Synchrotron harmonic h 40
Particles per ﬁll N 1012
Initial polarization P◦ 0.9
EDM precession rate @d = 10− 26 e cm ωη 1µ r a d / s
as well as the analyzing power of the polarimeter. The most
efﬁcient way to probe the deuteron polarization at the en-
ergy considered is by nuclear scattering. To obtain high efﬁ-
ciency, conventional techniques, in which a target is inserted
into the beam are unsuitable. Instead, slow extraction of the
beam onto a thick analyzer target is necessary. Slow extrac-
tion could be realized by exciting a weak beam resonance,
or alternatively, by Coulomb scattering off a thin gas jet. The
thickness of the analyzer target is optimized to yield maxi-
mum efﬁciency, which may reach the percent level.
The EDM will create a left-right asymmetry in the scat-
tered particle rate, whose initial rate of growth is propor-
tional to the EDM. False signals from, e.g., oscillating radial
magnetic ﬁelds in the ring will be mitigated by varying the
lattice parameters. This will change the systematic error am-
plitude, while leaving the EDM signal unchanged. Various
features of the ring design and bunches with opposite EDM
signals will be used to reduce the impact of other systematic
effects.
The expected very high observability of most of the ﬁeld
imperfections in the experiment comes from the combina-
tion of gross ampliﬁcation of the original perturbations in
the control bunches, and observation and correction of the
ampliﬁed parasitic growth of the vertical polarization com-
ponent. This growth is many orders of magnitude more sen-
sitive to ring imperfections than any other beam parameter.
Preliminary studies shows no unmanageable sources of sys-
tematic errors at the level of the expected statistical uncer-
tainty of 10− 29 e cm.
There is currently great interest in EDM experiments be-
cause of their potential to ﬁnd new physics complementary
to and even reaching beyond that which can be found at fu-
ture accelerators (LHC and beyond). The new approach de-
scribed here would be the most sensitive experiment for the
measurement of several possible sources of EDMs in nu-
cleons and nuclei for the foreseeable future, if systematic
uncertainties can be controlled.
9.4 EDM of deformed nuclei: 225Ra
In the nuclear sector, the strongest EDM limits have been set
by cell measurements which restrict the EDM of 199Hg to
<2.1 × 10− 28e cm. A promising avenue for extending these
searches is to take advantage of the large enhancements in
the atomic EDM predicted for octupole deformed nuclei.
One such case is 225Ra, which is predicted to be two to three
orders of magnitude more sensitive to T-violating interac-
tions than 199Hg. The next generation EDM search around
laser-cooled and trapped 225Ra is being developed by the
Argon group. They have demonstrated transverse cooling,
Zeeman slowing, and capturing of225Ra and 226Ra atoms in
a magneto-optical trap (MOT). They have measured many
of the transition frequencies, life-times, hyperﬁne splittings


--- Page 145 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 157
and isotope shifts of the critical transitions. This new devel-
opment should enable them to launch a new generation of
nuclear EDM searches. The combination of optical trapping
and the use of octupole deformed nuclei should extend the
reach of a new EDM search by two orders of magnitude.
A non-zero EDM in diamagnetic atoms is expected to be
most sensitive to a chromo-electric induced EDM effect.
Radium-225 is an especially good case for the search of
the EDM because it has a relatively long life-time ( t1/2 =
14.9 d), has spin 1 /2 which eliminates systematic effects
due to electric quadrupole coupling, is available in rela-
tively large quantities from the decay of the long-lived229Th
(t1/2 = 7300 yr), and has a well-established octupole nature.
The octupole deformation enhances parity doubling of the
energy levels. For example, the sensitivity to T-odd, P-odd
effects in 225Ra is expected to be a factor of approximately
400 larger than in 199Hg, which has been used by previous
searches to set the lowest limit (<2 × 10− 28e cm) so far on
the atomic EDM. The 14.9-day half-life for 225Ra is sufﬁ-
ciently long that measurements can be performed and sys-
tematics can be checked without resorting to an accelerator-
based experiment. Nevertheless, if a 225Ra beam facility
were available for this experiment, approximately a hundred
times more atoms could be produced which could have the
impact of improving the sensitivity by yet another order of
magnitude.
Laser cooling and trapping of 225Ra atoms was devel-
oped in preparation of an EDM search. The laser trap allows
one to collect and store the radioactive 225Ra atoms that are
otherwise too rare to be used for the search with conven-
tional atomic-beam or vapor-cell type methods. Moreover,
an EDM measurement on atoms in a laser trap would bene-
ﬁt from the advantages of high electric ﬁeld, long coherence
time, and a negligible so-called “v ×E” systematic effect.
The Argon group has demonstrated a magneto optical
trap (MOT) of Ra atoms by using the 7 s21 S0 → 7s7p
3P1 transition as the primary trapping transition, and 7 s6d
3D1 → 7s7p 1P1 as the re-pump transition (see Fig. 68).
They used a Ti:Sapphire ring laser system to generate the
714 nm light to excite the 7s21 S0 → 7s7p 3P1 transition.
Fig. 68 Atomic level structure
of radium-225 indicating the
cycling transition at 714 nm and
the re-pump transition at
1428 nm. The values in boxes
indicate the relative transition
probabilities



--- Page 146 ---
158 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
The primary leak channel from this two-level quasi-cycling
system is the decay from 7s7p 3P1 to 7s6d 3D1, from which
the atoms were pumped back to the ground-level via the
7s6d 3D1 → 7s7p 1P1 transition followed by a spontaneous
decay from 7s7p 1P1 back to the ground-level. The re-pump
was induced by laser light at 1428.6 nm generated by a diode
laser. This re-pump transition can be excited for an average
of 1400 times before the atom leaks to other metastable lev-
els. Therefore, with the re-pump in place, an atom can cycle
for an average of 3.5 × 107 times and stay in the MOT for
at least 30 s before it leaks to dark levels. Here the MOT
is used only to capture the atoms; the trapped atoms would
then be transferred to an optical dipole trap for storage and
measurement. They plan to achieve a life-time of 300 s in
the dipole trap.
The ultimate goal of the present series of measurements
is to provide a measurement that is comparable in sensitivity
to the atomic EDM experiment for 199Hg. Because of the
enhancement from the octupole deformation of 225Ra, the
measurement would then be more than two orders of mag-
nitude more sensitive to T-violating effects in the nucleus
than that of the 199Hg experiment. The immediate goal over
the next two years is to provide an initial atomic EDM limit
of ∼ 1 × 10− 26 e cm. Thereafter, the plan is to improve the
experiment until the ultimate goal is achieved.
9.5 Electrons bound in atoms and molecules
9.5.1 Theoretical aspects
We discuss here permanent EDMs of diatomic molecules in-
duced by the EDM of the electron and by P- and T-odde–N
neutral currents. In heavy molecules the effective electric
ﬁeldEeff on unpaired electron(s) is many orders of mag-
nitude higher than the external laboratory ﬁeld required to
polarize the molecule. As a result, the EDM of such mole-
cules is strongly enhanced. The exact value of the enhance-
ment factor is very sensitive to relativistic effects and to elec-
tronic correlations. In recent years several methods to calcu-
lateEeff were suggested and reliable results were obtained
for a number of molecules.
The study of a non-relativistic electron in a stationary
state immediately leads to the zero energy shift δεfor an
atom in the external ﬁeld E0 induced by the electron EDM
de =deσ. Indeed, the average acceleration ⟨a⟩= 0, so the
average force −e⟨E⟩= 0. Therefore, δε=− de ·⟨ E⟩= 0.
This statement is known as Schiff theorem. In the relativis-
tic case, the position-dependence of the Lorentz contraction
of the electron EDM leads instead to a net overall atomic
EDM [1029]. Even though ⟨E⟩= 0, it still can be (and in-
deed is) the case that ⟨de · E⟩̸ = 0, if de is not spatially uni-
form. Taking account of the fact that the length-contracted
value of de is NOT spatially uniform for an electron inside
the Coulomb ﬁeld of an atom exactly reproduces the form
of the enhancement factor.
Reliable calculations of atomic energy shifts are easier
with the relativistic EDM Hamiltonian for the Dirac elec-
tron, which automatically turns to zero in the non-relativistic
approximation [1030]:
Hd = 2de
( 00
0 σ
)
· E ∼= 2de
( 00
0 σ
)
· Eint. (9.25)
This Hamiltonian is singular at the origin and we ne-
glected the external ﬁeld E0.U s i n g(9.25) it is straightfor-
ward to show that the induced EDM of the heavy atomdat is
of the order of 10α2Z3de, whereZ is the number of protons
in the nucleus. If Z ∼ 102 the atomic enhancement factor
kat ≡ dat/de ∼ 103. This estimate holds for atoms with an
unpaired electron with j = 1
2 . For higher angular momen-
tumj the centrifugal barrier strongly suppressesdat.
Atomic EDM can be also induced by a scalar P, T-odd
e–N neutral current [1030]:
HS =iGα
21/2ZkSγ0γ5n(r), (9.26)
whereG is Fermi constant, γi are Dirac matrices, n(r) is
the nuclear density normalized to unity, andZkS =ZkS,p +
NkS,n is the dimensionless coupling constant for a nucleus
with Z protons and N neutrons. Atomic EDMs induced
by the interactions ( 9.25), ( 9.26) are obviously sensitive
to relativistic corrections to the wave function. Numerical
calculations also show their sensitivity to correlation ef-
fects. For example, the Dirac–Fock calculation for Tl gives
dTl =− 1910de while the ﬁnal answer within all order many-
body perturbation theory is dTl =− 585de (see Ref. [1030]
for details). Note that the present limit on the electron EDM
follows from the experiment with Tl [186].
The internal electric ﬁeld in a polar molecule, Emol ∼
e
R2o
∼ 109 V/cm, is 4–5 orders of magnitude larger than the
typical laboratory ﬁeld in an atomic EDM experiment. This
ﬁeld is directed along the molecular axis and is averaged to
zero by the rotation of the molecule. The molecular axis can
be polarized in the direction of the external electric ﬁeldE0.
One usually needs the ﬁeldE0 ∼ 104V/cm to fully polarize
the heavy diatomic molecule. The corresponding molecular
enhancement factor iskmol ∼ kat ×Emol
E0
∼ 104kat.
For closed-shell molecules all electrons are coupled and
the net EDM is zero. Therefore one needs a molecule with
at least one unpaired electron. Such molecules have nonzero
projectionΩof electronic angular momentum on the mole-
cular axis. Again, as in the case of atoms, for the molecules
with one unpaired electron the largest enhancement corre-
sponds to Ω= 1
2 . The centrifugal barrier leads to strong
suppression of the factor kmol for higher values of Ω.O n


--- Page 147 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 159
Table 27 Calculated values of parameters Eeff andWS from (9.27) for diatomic molecules. The question marks reﬂect the uncertainty in the
knowledge of the ground state
Molecule State ΩE eff(109 V/cm)W S (kHz) Ref.
BaF ground 1 /2 − 7.5 ± 0.8 − 12 ± 1[ 1031, 1032]
YbF ground 1 /2 − 25 ± 3 − 44 ± 5[ 1032, 1033]
HgF ground 1 /2 − 100 ± 15 − 190 ± 30 [ 1034]
HgH ground 1 /2 − 79 − 144 [ 1034]
PbF ground 1 /2 +29 +55 [ 1034]
PbO metastable 1 − 26 [ 1035]
HI+ ground 3 /2 − 4[ 1036]
PtH+ ground (?) 3 20 [ 1037]
HfF+ metastable (?) 1 24 [ 1038]
the other hand, such molecules can be polarized in a much
weaker external ﬁeld.
For strong external ﬁeldE0 the factorkmol depends onE0
and it is more practical to deﬁne an effective electric ﬁeld on
the electronEeff so, that the P, T-odd energy shift for a fully
polarized molecule is equal to:
δεP,T =Eeffde + 1
2WSkS, (9.27)
where two terms correspond to interactions ( 9.25) and
(9.26). Calculated values of Eeff andWS for a number of
molecules are listed in Table 27.
An EDM experiment is currently going on with YbF
molecules. This molecule has a ground state with Ω= 1
2 .
The P, T-odd parameters (9.27) were calculated with differ-
ent methods by several groups, and estimates of the system-
atic uncertainty are available. Several other molecules and
molecular ions have been suggested for the search for elec-
tron EDM including PbO, PbF, HgH, and PtH +. PbF and
HgH have Ω= 1
2 and calculations are similar to the YbF
case. The ground state of PbO has closed shells and the ex-
periment is done on the metastable state with two unpaired
electrons andΩ= 1. Here electronic correlations are much
stronger and calculations are more difﬁcult.
Finally, molecular ions like PtH + are less studied and
even their ground states are not known exactly. It is antic-
ipated that such ions can be trapped and a long coherence
time for the EDM experiment can be achieved. Recently
the ﬁrst estimates of the effective ﬁeld for PtH+ and several
other molecular ions were reported [1037]. These estimates
are based on non-relativistic molecular calculations. Proper
relativistic molecular calculations for these ions may be ex-
tremely challenging.
9.5.2 Experimental aspects
Over a dozen different experiments searching for the elec-
tron electric dipole moment that are under way or planned
will be reviewed here. At present the experimental upper
limit on de is [ 186]: |de|≤ 1.6 × 10− 27 e cm, where e is
the unit of electronic charge.
Most of this work is being done in small groups on uni-
versity campuses. These experiments employ a wide range
of technologies and conceptual approaches. Many of the lat-
est generation of experiments promise two or more orders of
magnitude improvement in statistical sensitivity, and most
have means to suppress systematic errors well beyond those
obtained in the previous generation.
To detectde, most experiments rely on the energy shift
/Delta1E=− de · ⃗E upon application of ⃗E to an electron. Un-
til recently, most experimental searches for de used gas-
phase paramagnetic atoms or molecules and employed the
standard methods of atomic, molecular, and optical physics
(laser and rf spectroscopy, optical pumping, atomic and
molecular beams or vapor cells, etc.) in order to directly
measure the energy shift/Delta1E. Recently, another class of ex-
periments has been actively pursued, in which paramagnetic
atoms bound in a solid are studied. Here the principles are
rather different than for the gas-phase experiments, and tech-
niques are more similar to those used in condensed matter
physics (magnetization and electric polarization of macro-
scopic samples, cryogenic methods, etc.). We discuss these
two classes of experiments separately.
9.5.2.1 A simple model experiment using gas-phase atoms
or molecules Experimental searches for de using gas-
phase atoms or molecules share many broad features. Each
consists of a state selector, where the initial spin state of
the system is prepared; an interaction interval in which the
system evolves for a time τin an electric ﬁeld ⃗E (and of-
ten a magnetic ﬁeld B ∥ ⃗E as well); and a detector to de-
termine the ﬁnal state of the spin. To understand the es-
sential features, we consider a simple model that is read-
ily adapted to describe most realistic experimental condi-
tions. In this model, an “atom” of spin 1 /2 with enhance-
ment factor R, containing an unpaired electron with spin


--- Page 148 ---
160 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
magnetic momentμand EDMde. The spin is initially pre-
pared to lie along ˆx, i.e., is in the eigenstate |χx
+⟩ of spin
along ˆx: |ψ0⟩=| χx
+⟩≡ 1√
2( 1
1). During the interaction in-
terval the spin precesses about ⃗E = Eˆz and B =B ˆz,i nt h e
xy plane, by angle 2 φ=− (deRE +μB)τ/ℏ. At time τ
the quantum state has then evolved to |ψ⟩= 1√
2(e−iφ
eiφ).F i -
nally, the detector measures the probability that the result-
ing spin state lies along ˆy. This is determined by the over-
lap of the wave function |ψ⟩ with |χy
+⟩≡ 1√
2( 1
1). Hence
the signal S fromN detected atoms observed in time τis
S =N|⟨χy
+|ψ⟩|2 =N cos2φ.
The angleφis the sum of a large termφ1 =− μBτ/(2ℏ)
and an extremely small term φ2 =− deREτ/(2ℏ).T oi s o -
lateφ2 one observes S for ⃗E and B both parallel and an-
tiparallel. Reversing ⃗E · B changes the relative sign of φ1
andφ2 and thus changes S; the largest change in S occurs
by choosingB such thatφ1 =±π/4. With this choice, we
haveS± ≡ S( ⃗E ·B>
<0) =N
2(1 ± 2φ2). The minimum uncer-
tainty in determination of the phaseφ2 in timeτ, due to shot
noise, is δφ2 = √ 1/N. If the experiment is repeated T/τ
times for a total time of observation T, the statistical uncer-
tainty inde isδde = √ 1/N0
√ 1/Tτ|ℏ/Eeff|, where we used
RE = Eeff. In practice, other “technical” noise sources can
signiﬁcantly increase this uncertainty, particularly ﬂuctua-
tions in the magnetic ﬁeld. Hence, careful magnetic shield-
ing is required in all EDM experiments.
9.5.2.2 Systematic errors The EDM is revealed by a term
in the signal proportional to a P, T-odd pseudoscalar such
as ⃗E · B. False terms of the same apparent form can ap-
pear even without P, T violation through a variety of exper-
imental imperfections. The most dangerous effects appear
when B depends on the sign of ⃗E, which can occur in sev-
eral ways. For example, leakage currents ﬂowing through
insulators separating the electric ﬁeld electrodes can gener-
ate an undesired magnetic ﬁeld BL. Also, if the atoms or
molecules have a non-zero velocity v, a motional magnetic
ﬁeld Bmot = 1
c ⃗E × v exists in addition to the applied mag-
netic ﬁeld B; along with various other imperfections in the
system, this effect can lead to systematic errors. A related
systematic effect involves geometric phases, which appear
if the direction of the quantization axis (often determined by
Btotal = B + Bmot) varies between the state selector and the
analyzer [1030].
A variety of approaches are employed to deal with these
and other systematics. Aside from leakage currents, most
systematics depend on a combination of two or more imper-
fections in the experiment (i.e. misaligned or stray ﬁelds);
these can be isolated by deliberately enhancing one im-
perfection and looking for a change in the EDM signal.
Some experiments utilize, in addition to the atoms of in-
terest, additional species as so-called “co-magnetometers”.
These co-magnetometer species (e.g., paramagnetic atoms
with lowR) are chosen to have negligible or small enhance-
ment factors, but retain sensitivity to magnetic systematics
such as those mentioned above.
In paramagnetic molecule experiments, issues with sys-
tematic effects are somewhat different. Here the ratio
Eeff/Eext is enhanced, and relative sensitivity to magnetic
systematics is correspondingly reduced. The ⃗E × v effect is
effectively eliminated by the large tensor Stark effect [1039]
typically found in molecular states. The saturation of the
molecular polarization |P | (and hence Eeff) leads to a well-
understood non-linear dependence of the EDM signal on
Eext that can discriminate against certain systematics. Con-
versely, the extreme electric polarizability leads to a variety
of new effects, such as a dependence of the magnetic mo-
ment μon Eext, and geometric phase induced systematic
errors related to variations in the direction of ⃗Eext.
9.5.2.3 Experiments with gas-phase atoms and molecules
• The Berkeley thallium atomic beam experiment
This experiment gives the best current limit on de.I ni t s
ﬁnal version [186], two pairs of vertical counter-propagating
atomic beams, each consisting of Tl ( Z = 81,R Tl =− 585
[1040]) and Na(Z = 11,R Na = 0.32), were employed (see
Fig. 69). Spin alignment and rotation of the 6 2P1/2(F = 1)
state of Tl and the 3 2S1/2(F = 2,F = 1) states of Na were
accomplished, respectively, by laser optical pumping and by
atomic beam magnetic resonance with separated oscillating
rf ﬁelds of the Ramsey type. Detection was achieved via
alignment-sensitive laser induced ﬂuorescence. In the inter-
action region, with length ≈ 1 meter, the side-by-side atomic
beams were exposed to nominally identical B ﬁelds, but
opposite ⃗E ﬁelds of ≈ 120 kV/cm. This provided common-
mode rejection of magnetic noise and control of some sys-
tematic effects. Average thermal velocities corresponded to
an interaction timeτ≈ 2.3m s( 1m s )f o rT l( N a )a t o m s .U s e
of counter-propagating atomic beams served to cancel all but
a very small remnant of the ⃗E × v effect. Various auxiliary
measurements, including use of Na as a co-magnetometer,
further reduced this remnant and isolated the geometric
phase effect. E and leakage currents were measured using
auxiliary measurements based on the observable quadratic
Stark effect in Tl. About 5.2×1013 photo-electrons of signal
per up/down beam pair were collected by the ﬂuorescence
detectors. The ﬁnal result isde =(6.9 ± 7.4) × 10− 28e cm,
which yields the limit |de|≤ 1.6 × 10− 27e cm (90% conf.).
• Cesium vapor cell experiments
An experiment to search for de in a vapor cell of Cs
(Z = 55; RCs = 115 [ 1041]) was reported by L. Hunter
and co-workers [1042] at Amherst in 1989. The method is
being revisited in a present-day search by led by M. Ro-
malis at Princeton [ 1043]. The Amherst experiment was
carried out with two glass cells, one stacked on the other
in the z direction. Nominally equal and opposite ⃗E ﬁelds


--- Page 149 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 161
Fig. 69 Schematic diagram of the Berkeley thallium experi-
ment [186], not to scale. Laser beams for state selection and analysis
at 590 nm (for Na) and 378 nm (for Tl) are perpendicular to the page,
with indicated linear polarizations. The diagram shows the up-going
atomic beams active
were applied in the two cells. The cells were ﬁlled with
C s ,a sw e l la sN2 buffer gas to minimize Cs spin relax-
ation. Circularly polarized laser beams, directed along x,
were used for spin polarization via optical pumping. Mag-
netic ﬁeld components in all three directions were reduced
to less than 10 − 7 G. Thus precession of the atomic polar-
ization in the xy plane was nominally due to ⃗E alone. The
ﬁnal spin orientation was monitored by a probe laser beam
directed alongy. The effective interaction time was the spin
relaxation timeτ≈ 15 ms. The signals were the intensities
of the probe beams transmitted through each cell. A non-
zero EDM would have been indicated by a dependence of
these signals on the rotational invariantJ ·(σ × ⃗E)τ, where
σ,J were the pump and probe circular polarizations, re-
spectively. The most important sources of possible system-
atic error were leakage currents and imperfect reversal of ⃗E.
The result wasde =(− 1.5 ± 5.5 ± 1.5) × 10− 26e cm.
In the new experiment at Princeton, each cell also con-
tains 129Xe at high pressure. Cs polarization is transferred
to the 129Xe nuclei by spin exchange collisions. Under cer-
tain conditions this coupling can also give rise to a self-
compensation mechanism, where slow changes in compo-
nents of magnetic ﬁeld transverse to the initial polarization
axis are nearly canceled by interaction between the alkali
electron spin and the noble gas nuclear spin. This leaves only
a signal proportional to an anomalous interaction that does
not scale with the magnetic moments—for example, interac-
tion ofde with Eeff. This mechanism (which is understood
in some detail [1044, 1045]) has the potential to reduce both
the effect of magnetic noise, and some systematic errors.
• Experiments with laser-cooled atoms
Laser-cooled atoms offer signiﬁcant advantages for elec-
tron EDM searches. The low velocities of cold atoms yield
long interaction times, and also suppress⃗E ×v effects. How-
ever, these techniques typically yield small numbers of de-
tectable atoms, and magnetic noise must be controlled at
unprecedented levels. New systematics due to, e.g., electric
forces on atoms and/or perturbations due to trapping ﬁelds
(see e.g. [1046]) can appear.
Experiments based on atoms trapped in an optical lattice
have been proposed by a number of investigators [ 1047–
1049]. Two such experiments, similar in their design, are
currently being developed: one led by D.S. Weiss at Penn-
sylvania State University and another led by D. Heinzen at
the University of Texas. Both plan to use Cs atoms to de-
tectde, along with Rb atoms (Z = 37,RRb = 25) as a co-
magnetometer. The Texas apparatus consists of two side-by-
side far-off-resonance optical dipole traps, each in a vertical
1-D lattice conﬁguration. These traps are placed in nomi-
nally equal and opposite ⃗E ﬁelds and a common B ﬁeld of
several mG parallel to ⃗E. To load the atoms into the optical
lattice, cold atomic beams from 2D magneto-optical traps
exterior to the shields will be captured with optical molasses
between the ⃗E-ﬁeld plates. The electric ﬁeld plates will be
constructed from glass coated with a transparent, conductive
indium tin oxide layer.
We are aware of two other EDM experiments based on
laser-cooled atoms. One employing a slow “fountain”, in
which Cs atoms are launched upwards and then fall back
down due to gravity, has been proposed and developed by
H. Gould and co-workers at the Lawrence Berkeley Na-
tional Laboratory [1050]. Another, using210Fr(τ= 3.2min;
Z = 87,R Fr = 1150), has been proposed and is being devel-
oped by a group at the Research Center of Nuclear Physics
(RCNP), Osaka University, Japan [1051].
• The YbF experiment
E.A. Hinds and co-workers [1052–1054] at Imperial Col-
lege, London have developed a molecular beam experi-
ment for investigation of de using YbF. Figure 70 shows
the relevant energy level structure of the X2Σ+
1/2(v = 0,
N = 0)J = 1/2 ground state of a 174YbF molecule.
174Yb has nuclear spin IYb = 0, whileIF = 1/2; hence the
J = 1/2 state has two hyperﬁne components, F = 1 and


--- Page 150 ---
162 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
Fig. 70 Schematic diagram, not to scale, of the hyperﬁne structure
of the X2Σelectronic state of 174YbF in the lowest vibrational and
rotational level.Δis the tensor Stark shift.δi st h es h i f tc a u s e db yt h e
combination of the Zeeman effect and the effect ofde in ⃗Eeff
F = 0, separated by 170 MHz. An external electric ﬁeld
⃗Eext along ˆz with magnitude Eext = 8.3 kV/cm corresponds
to Eeff ≈ 13 GV/cm [ 1033, 1052–1054], which splits the
F = 1,m F =± 1l e v e l sb y2deEeff. In this external ﬁeld,
the level F = 1,m F = 0 is shifted downward relative to
mF =± 1 by an amountΔ= 6.7 MHz due to the large tensor
Stark shift associated with the molecular electric dipole.
In the experiment, a cold beam of YbF molecules is gen-
erated by chemical reactions within a supersonic expan-
sion of Ar or Xe carrier gas. Laser optical pumping re-
moves all F = 1 state molecules, leaving only F = 0r e -
maining in the beam. Next, a 170 MHz rf magnetic ﬁeld
alongx excites molecules from F = 0 to the coherent su-
perposition |ψ⟩= 1√
2 |F = 1,m F = 1⟩+ 1√
2 |1, − 1⟩. While
ﬂying through the central interaction region of length 65 cm,
the beam is exposed to parallel electric and magnetic ﬁelds
(±E, ±B) ˆz (B ∼ 0.1 mGauss). Next, an rf ﬁeld drives each
F = 1 molecule back to F = 0. Because of the phase shift
2φdeveloped in the central region, the ﬁnal population of
F = 0 molecules is proportional to cos 2φ. These F = 0
molecules are detected by laser induced ﬂuorescence in the
probe region.
The most signiﬁcant systematic errors in this experiment
are expected to arise from variation in the direction and
magnitude of ⃗E along the beam axis. If the direction of ⃗E
changes in an absolute sense, a geometric phase could be
generated, and if ⃗E changes relative to B, the magnetic pre-
cession phase φ1, proportional to ⃗Eext · B/| ⃗Eext|, could be
affected. A preliminary result of the YbF experiment [1052–
1054], published in 2002, isde =(− 0.2±3.2)×10− 26e cm.
Many signiﬁcant improvements have been made since 2002,
and it is likely that this experiment will yield a much more
precise result in the near future.
• The PbO experiment
A search for de using the metastable a(1)3Σ1 state of
PbO is being carried out at Yale [1055–1057]. Thea(1) state
has a relatively long natural life-time: τ[a(1)]= 82(2) µs,
and can be populated in large numbers using laser excitation
in a vapor cell. In this state, the level of total (rotational +
electronic) angular momentumJ = 1 contains two closely-
spaced “Ωdoublet” states of opposite parity, denoted ase−
andf +. An external electric ﬁeld ⃗Eext = Eext ˆz mixese−
andf + states with the same value of M, yielding molecu-
lar states with equal but opposite electrical polarization P .
The degree of polarization |P |≈ 1f o r Eext ≳ 10 V/cm.
When |P |= 1 the effective molecular ﬁeld is calculated to
be Eeff ∼= 26 GV/cm [1035]. The opposite molecular polar-
ization in the twoΩ-doublet levels leads to a sign difference
in the EDM-induced energy shift between these two levels.
This difference provides an excellent opportunity for effec-
tive control of systematic errors, since comparison of the en-
ergy shifts in the upper and lower states acts as an “internal
co-magnetometer” requiring only minor changes in experi-
mental parameters to monitor.
The Yale experiment is carried out in a cell contain-
ing PbO vapor, consisting of an alumina body supporting
top and bottom gold foil electrodes, and ﬂat sapphire win-
dows on all 4 sides. The electric ﬁeld ⃗Eext = Eext ˆz is quite
uniform over a large cylindrical volume (diameter 5 cm,
height 4 cm), and is chosen in the range 30–90 V/cm. The
magnetic ﬁeld Bz is chosen in the range 50–200 mG. The
cell is enclosed in an oven mounted in a vacuum cham-
ber. At the operating temperature 700 C, the PbO density
isnPbO ≈ 4 × 1013 cm− 3.
A state with simultaneously well-deﬁned spin and elec-
trical polarization is populated as follows. A pulsed laser
beam withz linear polarization excites the transitionX[J =
0+]→ a(1)[J = 1− ,M = 0].(X is the electronic ground
state of PbO.) Following the laser pulse a Raman transi-
tion is driven by two microwave beams. The ﬁrst, with x
linear polarization, excites the upward 28.2 GHz transition
a(1)[J = 1− ,M = 0]→ a(1)[J = 2+,M =± 1]. The sec-
ond, withz linear polarization and detuned to the red or blue
with respect to the ﬁrst by 20–60 MHz, drives the downward
transitiona(1)[J = 2+,M =± 1]→ a(1)[J = 1,M =± 1].
The net result is that about 50% of theJ = 1− ,M = 0 mole-
cules are transferred to a coherent superposition ofM =± 1
levels in a single desiredΩ-doublet component. The subse-
quent spin precession (due to E andB) is detected by ob-
serving the frequency of quantum beats in the ﬂuorescence
that accompanies spontaneous decay to theX state. The sig-
nature of a non-zero EDM is a term in the quantum beat
frequency that is proportional to ⃗Eext · B and that changes
sign when one switches from one Ω-doublet component to
the other.
The present experimental conﬁguration is sufﬁcient to
yield statistical uncertainty comparable to the present limit
onde in a reasonable integration time of a few weeks. How-
ever, large improvements can be made in a next generation
of the experiment. In the new scheme, detection will be ac-
complished via absorption of a resonant microwave probe


--- Page 151 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 163
beam tuned to the 28.2 GHz transition described above.
With this method, the signal-to-noise ratio is linearly pro-
portional to the path length of the probe beam in the PbO va-
por. In a second generation experiment the cell can be made
∼ 10 times longer than it is now, and the probe beam can
pass through the cell multiple times by using suitable mir-
rors. Improvements in sensitivity of up to a factor of 3000
over the current generation are envisioned.
• Other molecule experiments
E. Cornell and co-workers at the Joint Institute for Labo-
ratory Astrophysics (Boulder, Colorado) have proposed an
experiment [ 1058] to search for de in the 3Δ1 electronic
state of the molecular ion HfF +. The premise is to take ad-
vantage of the long spin coherence times typical for trapped
ion experiments with atoms, along with the large effective
electric ﬁeld acting on de in a molecule. Preliminary cal-
culations [ 1036] suggest that the 3Δ1 state is a low-lying
metastable state with very smallΩ-doublet splittings; as in
PbO, this state could thus be polarized by small external
electric ﬁelds (≲10 V/cm) to yieldEeff ≈ 18 GV/cm [1037].
To search forde, electron-spin-resonance spectroscopy, us-
ing the Ramsey method, is to be performed in the presence
of rotating electric and magnetic ﬁelds. The electric ﬁeld po-
larizes the ions and its rotation prevents them from being ac-
celerated out of the trap. As in PbO, use of both upper and
lowerΩ-doublet components will yield opposite signs of
the EDM signal, but nearly identical signals due to system-
atic effects. However, this experiment has the unique disad-
vantage that it is impossible to reverse the electric ﬁeld: in
the laboratory frame it must always point inward toward the
trap center.
N. Shafer-Ray and co-workers at Oklahoma University
have proposed an experiment to search forde in the ground
2Π1/2 electronic state of PbF [ 1059, 1060]. The proposed
scheme is similar to the YbF experiment, and the value of
Eeff is also approximately the same as for YbF. The primary
advantage of PbF is that its electric ﬁeld-dependent mag-
netic moment should vanish when a suitable, large external
electric ﬁeld E0 ≈ 67 kV/cm is applied [ 1059, 1060]. This
could dramatically reduce magnetic ﬁeld-related systematic
errors.
9.5.2.4 Experiments with solid-state samples Recently,
S. Lamoreaux [ 1061] revived an old idea of F. Shapiro
[1062] to search for de by applying an electric ﬁeld ⃗Eext
to a solid sample with unpaired electron spins. If de ̸= 0,
at sufﬁciently low temperature the sample can acquire sig-
niﬁcant spin-polarization and thus a detectable magnetiza-
tion along the axis of ⃗Eext. Lamoreaux pointed out that use
of modern magnetometric techniques and materials (such
as Gd3Ga5O12: gadolinum gallium garnet, or GGG) could
yield impressive sensitivity to de. GGG has a number of
attractive properties. Its resistivity is so high (>1016 Ohm-
cm forT< 77 K) that it can support large applied electric
ﬁelds ( ⃗Eext ≈ 10 kV/cm) with very small leakage currents.
Moreover, the ion of interest in GGG, Gd 3+ (Z = 64) has
a non-negligible enhancement factor [1063]. A complemen-
tary experiment is being done by L. Hunter and co-workers
[1064] at Amherst College. Here, a strong external magnetic
ﬁeld is applied to the ferrimagnetic solid Gd 3−x Yx Fe5O12
(gadolinium yttrium iron garnet, or GdYIG), thus caus-
ing substantial polarization of the Gd 3+ electron spins. If
de ̸= 0, this results in electric charge polarization of the
sample, and thus a voltage developed across the sample that
reverses with applied magnetic ﬁeld.
The basic theoretical considerations that must be taken
into account to estimate the expected signals [1065] in these
solid-state experiments include the same types of calcula-
tions needed for free atoms. In addition, however, it is neces-
sary to construct models for the modiﬁcation of atomic elec-
tron orbitals in the solid material, as well as the response of
the material to the EDM-induced perturbation of the heavy
paramagnetic atom. The results of the calculations are as fol-
lows. When all Gd spins are polarized in the GdIG sample,
the resulting macroscopic electric ﬁeld across the sample is
E = 0.7 × 10− 10(de/10− 27 e cm) V/cm. A similar calcula-
tion can be used to determine the degree of spin polarization
of GGG upon application of an external electric ﬁeld [1061].
An externally applied electric ﬁeld of 10 kV/cm yields an
effective electric ﬁeld E∗ =− /Delta1E/de = 3.6 × 105 V/cm
acting on the EDM ([ 1065]; see also [ 1066]). The result-
ing magnetization M of the sample is simply related to
its magnetic susceptibility χ:M =χdE∗/μa, whereμa is
the magnetic moment of a Gd 3+ ion. Using the standard
expression for χ(T)in a paramagnetic sample, one ﬁnds
M ≈ 8nGd(deE∗)/(kBT) .H e r ekB is the Boltzmann con-
stant and T is the sample temperature. This yields a mag-
netic ﬂuxΦ= 4πMSover an areaS of an inﬁnite ﬂat sheet.
In a recent development [1066], Lamoreaux has pointed out
that this type of electrically induced spin polarization can be
ampliﬁed in a system that is super-paramagnetic, so that its
magnetic susceptibilityχis extremely large. It appears that
GdIG (GdYIG with x = 0) has this property at sufﬁciently
low magnetic ﬁeld. If so, the sensitivity of a magnetization
measurement in GdIG atT = 4 K could be similar to that of
GGG at much lower temperatures, greatly simplifying the
required experimental techniques.
• The Indiana GGG experiment
C.Y . Liu of Indiana University has devised a prototype
experiment [ 1067, 1068] in which two GGG disks, 4 cm
in diameter and of thickness ≈ 1 cm, are sandwiched be-
tween three planar electrodes. High voltages are applied so
that the electric ﬁelds in the top and bottom samples are in
the same direction. If de ̸= 0, a magnetic ﬁeld similar to a
dipole ﬁeld should be generated, and this is to be detected
by a ﬂux pickup coil located in the central ground plane.
The latter is designed as a planar gradiometer with 3 con-
centric loops, arranged to sum up the returning ﬂux and to


--- Page 152 ---
164 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
reject common-mode magnetic ﬂuctuations. As the electric
ﬁeld polarization is modulated, the gradiometer detects the
changing ﬂux and feeds it to a SQUID sensor. The entire
assembly is immersed in a liquid helium bath.
The EDM sensitivity of the prototype experiment is esti-
mated to beδde ≈ 4 × 10− 26e cm. Although this falls short
of the ultimate desired sensitivity of 10 − 30 e cm, the proto-
type experiment is useful as a learning tool for solving some
basic technical problems. At Indiana, a second-generation
experiment is also being planned, which will operate at
much lower temperatures ( ≈ 10–15 mK), and will employ
lower-noise SQUID magnetometers. However, questions re-
main as to the nature of the magnetic susceptibility χof
GGG at such low temperatures.
Some thought has gone into possible systematic effects
in this system. Although crystals with inversion symmetry
such as GGG and GdIG should not exhibit a linear mag-
netoelectric effect [1069], crystal defects and substitutional
impurities can spoil this ideal. Furthermore a quadratic mag-
netoelectric effect does exist, and to avoid systematic errors
arising from it, good control of electric ﬁeld reversal is re-
quired.
• The Amherst GdYIG experiment
GdYIG is ferrimagnetic, and both Gd 3+ ions and Fe lat-
tices contribute to its magnetizationM. Their contributions
are generally of opposite sign, but at moderately low temper-
aturesT the Fe component is roughly constant while the Gd
component changes rapidly withT . There exists a “compen-
sation” temperatureTC where the Gd and Fe magnetizations
cancel each other, and the net magnetization M vanishes.
ForT>T C(<TC),M is dominated by Fe (Gd). The Gd
contribution toM can be reduced by replacing some Gd 3+
ions with non-magnetic Y3+. Withx the average number of
Y ions per unit cell, (so that 3-x is the average number of Gd
ions per unit cell), the compensation temperature becomes
TC =[ 290 − 115(3 − x)] K. This dependence of TC onx
is exploited in the Amherst GdYIG experiment. A toroidal
sample is employed, consisting of two half-toroids, each in
the shape of the letter C. One “C” has x = 1.35 with a cor-
respondingTC = 103 K. The other “C” has x = 1.8 with a
correspondingTC = 154 K. These are joined together with
copper foil electrodes at the interface. At T = 127 K, the
magnetizations of the 2 “C’s” are identical, but their Gd
magnetizations are nominally opposite. When a magnetic
ﬁeldH is applied to the sample with a toroidal current coil,
all Gd spins are nominally oriented toward the same copper
electrode. Thus EDM signals fromC1 andC2 add construc-
tively. However below 103 K (above 154 K) the Gd mag-
netization is parallel (antiparallel) to M in both C’s, which
results in cancellation of one EDM signal by the other. Data
are acquired by observing the voltage difference A(B) be-
tween the two foil electrodes for positive (negative) polar-
ity of the applied magnetic ﬁeld H . An EDM should be re-
vealed by the appearance of an asymmetry d =A − B that
has a speciﬁc temperature dependence, as described above.
A large spurious effect has been seen that mimics an
EDM signal when T< 180 K, but which deviates grossly
from expectations for T> 180 K. This effect, which is as-
sociated with a component of magnetization that does not
reverse with H , has so far frustrated efforts to realize the
full potential of the GdYIG experiment. The best limit that
has been achieved so far is [1064]:de< 5 × 10− 24e cm.
9.6 Muon EDM
The best direct upper limits for an electric dipole moment
(EDM) of the muon come from the experiments measur-
ing the muon anomalous magnetic moment ( g − 2). The
CERN experiment obtained 1.1 × 10− 18 e cm (95% C.L.)
[1020] and the preliminary limit from Brookhaven is 2.8 ×
10− 19e cm [188]. Assuming lepton universality, the electron
EDM limit ofde< 2.2 × 10− 27e cm [186] can be scaled by
the electron to muon mass ratio, in order to obtain an indi-
rect limit ofdμ< 5 × 10− 25 e cm. However, viable models
exist in which the simple linear mass scaling does not ap-
ply and the value for the muon EDM could be pushed up
to values in the 10 − 22 e cm region (see, e.g., [ 846, 1070–
1072]). In order for experimental searches to become sufﬁ-
ciently sensitive, dedicated efforts are needed. Several years
ago, a letter of intent for a dedicated experiment at JPARC
[1073] was presented, proposing a new sensitive “frozen
spin” method [ 1021, 1022]: The anomalous magnetic mo-
ment precession of the muon spin in a storage ring can be
compensated by the application of a radial electric ﬁeld, thus
freezing the spin; a potential electric dipole moment would
lead to a rotation of the spin out of the orbital plane and thus
an observable up-down asymmetry which increases with
time. The projected sensitivity of the proposed experiment
(0.5 GeV/c muon momentum, 7 m ring radius) is 10 − 24–
10− 25 e cm. Recently it has been pointed out that there is
no immediate advantage from working at high muon mo-
menta and a sensitive approach with a very compact setup
(125 MeV/c muon momentum, 0.42 m ring radius) was out-
lined [1024]. Already at an existing beam line, such as the
µE1 beam at PSI, a measurement with a sensitivity of bet-
ter thandμ∼ 5 × 10− 23e cm within one year of data taking
appears feasible. The estimates for the sensitivity assume an
operation in a “one-muon-per-time” mode and the experi-
ment would appear to be statistically limited. With an im-
proved muon accumulation and injection scheme, the sensi-
tivity could be further increased [ 1074]. Thus the compact
storage ring approach at an existing facility could bring the
proof of principle for the frozen spin technique and cover
the next 3–4 orders of magnitude in experimental sensitivity
to a possible muon EDM.


--- Page 153 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 165
9.7 Muon g − 2
In his famous 1928 paper [ 1075–1077] Dirac pointed out
that the interaction of an electron with external electric and
magnetic ﬁelds may have two extra terms where “the two
extra terms
eh
c (σ,H) +ieh
c ρ1(σ,E), (9.28)
...w h e n d i v i d e d b y t h e f a c t o r 2m can be regarded as the
additional potential energy of the electron due to its new de-
gree of freedom.” These terms represent the magnetic di-
pole (Dirac) moment and electric dipole moment interac-
tions with the external ﬁelds.
In modern notation, for the magnetic dipole moment of
the muon we have:
¯uμ
[
eF1
(
q2)
γβ+ ie
2mμ
F2
(
q2)
σβδqδ
]
uμ, (9.29)
whereF1(0) = 1, andF2(0) =aμ.
The magnetic dipole moment of a charged lepton can dif-
fer from its Dirac value (g = 2) for several reasons. Recall
that the proton’sg-value is 5.6 (ap = 1.79), a manifestation
of its quark-gluon internal structure. On the other hand, the
leptons appear to have no internal structure, and the mag-
netic dipole moments are thought to deviate from 2 through
radiative corrections, i.e. resulting from virtual particles
that couple to the lepton. We should emphasize that these
radiative corrections need not be limited to the standard
model particles. While the current experimental uncertainty
of ±0.5 ppm on the muon anomaly is 770 times larger than
that on the electron anomaly [ 1078] ,t h ef o r m e ri sf a rm o r e
sensitive to the effects of high mass scales. In the lowest or-
der diagram where mass effects appear, the contribution of
heavy virtual particles with massM scales as(mlepton/M)2,
giving the muon a factor of(mμ/me)2 ≃ 43000 increase in
sensitivity over the electron.
9.7.1 The standard model value of the anomalous magnetic
moment
The standard model value of a lepton’s anomalous magnetic
moment (the anomaly)
aℓ ≡ (gs − 2)
2
has contributions from three different sets of radiative
processes: quantum electrodynamics (QED)—with loops
containing leptons ( e,μ,τ) and photons; hadronic—with
hadrons in vacuum polarization loops; and weak—with
loops involving the bosonsW,Z, and Higgs:
aSM
ℓ =aQED
ℓ +ahadronic
ℓ +aweak
ℓ . (9.30)
The QED contribution has been calculated up to the lead-
ing ﬁve-loop corrections [1079]. The dominant “Schwinger
term” [1080, 1081]a(2) =α/2π, is shown diagrammatically
in Fig. 71(a). Examples of the hadronic and weak contribu-
tions are given in Fig. 71(b)–(d).
The hadronic contribution cannot be calculated directly
from QCD, since the energy scale ( mμc2)i sv e r yl o w ,a l -
though Blum has performed a proof of principle calculation
on the lattice [ 1082–1084]. Fortunately, dispersion theory
gives a relationship between the vacuum polarization loop
and the cross section fore+e− → hadrons,
aμ(Had; 1) =
(αmμ
3π
) 2∫ ∞
4m2π
ds
s2K(s)R(s), (9.31)
where
R ≡ σtot
(
e+e− → hadrons
)
/σtot
(
e+e− → μ+μ− )
(9.32)
and experimental data are used as input [1085, 1086].
The standard model value of the muon anomaly has re-
cently been reviewed [ 1085], and the latest values of the
contributions are given in Table 28. The sum of these con-
tributions, adding experimental and theoretical errors in
quadrature, gives
aSM(06)
μ = 11 659 1785(61) × 10− 11, (9.33)
Fig. 71 The Feynman graphs for: (a) lowest order QED (Schwinger)
term; ( b) lowest order hadronic correction; ( c)a n d( d) lowest order
electroweak terms. The * emphasizes that in the loop the muon is
off-shell. With the known limits on the Higgs mass, the contribution
from the single Higgs loop is negligible
Table 28 Standard model
contributions to the muon
anomalous magnetic dipole
moment,aμ. All values are
taken from Ref. [1085]
QED 116 584 718 .09 ± 0.145loops ± 0.08α± 0.04masses ×10− 11
Hadronic (lowest order) aμ[HVP(06)]= 6901 ± 42exp ± 19rad ± 7QCD ×10− 11
Hadronic (higher order) aμ[HVPh.o.]=− 97.9 ± 0.9exp ± 0.3rad ×10− 11
Hadronic (light-by-light) aμ[HLLS]= 110 ± 40 ×10− 11
Electroweak aμ[EW ]= 154 ± 2 ± 1 ×10− 11


--- Page 154 ---
166 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
which should be compared with the experimental world av-
erage [187]
aexp
μ = 11 659 2080(63) × 10− 11. (9.34)
One ﬁnds/Delta1aμ= 295(88) × 10− 11,a3 .4σdifference. It is
clear that both the theoretical and the experimental uncer-
tainty should be reduced to clarify whether there is a true
discrepancy or a statistical ﬂuctuation. We shall discuss po-
tential improvements to the experiment below.
9.7.2 Measurement of the magnetic dipole moment
The measured value of the muon anomaly has a 0.46 ppm
statistical uncertainty and a 0.28 ppm systematic uncer-
tainty, which are combined in quadrature to obtain the to-
tal error of 0.54 ppm. To signiﬁcantly improve the measured
value, both errors must be reduced. We ﬁrst discuss the ex-
perimental technique, and then the systematic errors.
In all but the ﬁrst experiments by Garwin et al. [ 1087]
the measurement of the magnetic anomaly made use of the
spin rotation in a magnetic ﬁeld relative to the momentum
rotation:
⃗ωS =− qg ⃗B
2m − q ⃗B
γm(1 − γ),
⃗ωC =− q ⃗B
mγ, (9.35)
⃗ωa ≡⃗ωS −⃗ωC =−
(g − 2
2
)q ⃗B
m =− aμ
q ⃗B
m.
A series of three beautiful experiments at CERN culminated
in a 7.3 ppm measure ofaμ[1088]. In the third CERN exper-
iment, a new technique was developed based on the observa-
tion that electrostatic quadrupoles could be used for vertical
focusing. With the velocity transverse to the magnetic ﬁeld
( ⃗β· ⃗B = 0), the spin precession formula becomes
⃗ωa =− q
m
[
aμ⃗B −
(
aμ− 1
γ2 − 1
) ⃗β× ⃗E
c
]
. (9.36)
Forγmagic = 29.3(p = 3.09 GeV/c), the second term van-
ishes so ωa becomes independent of the electric ﬁeld and
the precise knowledge of the muon momentum. Also knowl-
edge of the muon trajectories to determine the average mag-
netic ﬁeld becomes less critical, which reduces the uncer-
tainty inB.
This technique was used also in experiment E821 at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory Alternating Gradient Syn-
chrotron (AGS) [187, 1085]. The AGS proton beam is used
to produce a beam of pions that decay to muons in an 80 m
pion decay channel. Muons withpmagic are brought into the
storage ring and stored using a fast muon kicker. Calorime-
ters, placed on the inner radius of the storage ring measure
both the energy and arrival time of the decay electrons. Since
the highest energy electrons are emitted antiparallel to the
muon spin the rate of high energy electrons is modulated by
the spin precession frequency:
N(t,E th) =N0(Eth)e−t/γτ[
1 +A(Eth) cos
(
ωat +φ(Eth)
)]
.
(9.37)
The time spectrum for electrons with E>E th = 1.8G e V
is shown in [187]F i g .72.T h ev a l u eo fωa is obtained from
these data using the ﬁve parameter function (9.37)a sas t a r t -
ing point, but many additional small effects must be taken
into account [187, 1085].
The magnetic ﬁeld is measured with nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) probes, and tied through calibration to the
Fig. 72 The time spectrum of
109 positrons with energy
greater than 1.8 GeV from the
Y2000 run. The endpoint energy
is 3.1 GeV . The time interval for
each of the diagonal “wiggles”
is given on the right


--- Page 155 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 167
Larmor frequency of the free proton [ 187]. The anomaly is
determined from
aμ= ˜ωa/ωp
λ−˜ωa/ωp
= R
λ− R, (9.38)
where the tilde on ˜ωa indicates that the measured muon
precession frequency has been adjusted for any necessary
(small) corrections, such as the pitch and radial electric ﬁeld
corrections [1085], andλ=μμ/μp is the ratio of the muon
to proton magnetic moments.
9.7.3 An improved g − 2 experiment
One of the major features of an upgraded experiment would
be a substantially increased ﬂux of muons into the storage
ring. The BNL beam [ 187] took forward muons from pion
decays, and selected muons 1.7% below the pion momen-
tum. With this scheme, approximately half of the injected
beam consisted of pions. An upgraded experiment would
need to quadruple the quadrupoles in the pion decay chan-
nel, to increase the beam line acceptance. To decrease the
hadron ﬂash at injection one would need to go further away
from the pion momentum. Alternatively one could increase
the pion momentum to 5.32 GeV/ c so that backward de-
cays would produce muons at the magic momentum. Then
the pion ﬂash would be completely eliminated, which would
signiﬁcantly reduce the systematic error from gain instabili-
ties.
The inﬂector magnet that permits the beam to enter the
storage ring undeﬂected would need to be replaced, since the
present model loses half of the beam through multiple scat-
tering in material across the beam channel. The fast muon
kicker would also need to be improved. With the signiﬁcant
increase in beam, the detectors would have to be segmented,
new readout electronics would be needed, and a better mea-
sure of lost muons would also be needed.
To reduce the magnetic ﬁeld systematic errors, signiﬁcant
effort will be needed to improve on the tracking of the ﬁeld
with time, and the calibration procedure used to tie the NMR
frequency in the probes to the free proton Larmor frequency
[187].
While there are technical issues to be resolved, the
present technique—magicγ, electrostatic focusing, uniform
magnetic ﬁeld—could be pushed to below 0.1 ppm. To go
further would probably require a new technique. One pos-
sibility discussed by Farley [ 1089] would be to use muons
at much higher energy, say 15 GeV , which would increase
the number of precessions that can be observed. The storage
ring would consist of a small number of discrete magnets
with uniform ﬁeld and edge focusing and the ﬁeld averaged
over the orbit would be independent of orbit radius (parti-
cle momentum). The averaged ﬁeld could be calibrated by
injecting polarized protons and observing the proton g − 2
precession.
Acknowledgements The authors of this report are grateful to all
the additional workshop participants who contributed with their pre-
sentations during the Working Group meetings: A. Baldini, W. Bertl,
G. Colangelo, F. Farley, L. Fiorini, G. Gabrielse, J.R. Guest, A. Ho-
ecker, J. Hosek, P. Iaydijev, Y . Kuno, S. Lavignac, D. Leone, A. Luc-
cio, J. Miller, W. Morse, H. Nishiguchi, Y . Orlov, E. Paoloni, A. Pilaft-
sis, W. Porod, N. Ramsey, S. Redin, W. Rodejohann, M.-A. Sanchis-
Lozano, N. Shafer-Ray, A. Soni, A. Strumia, G. Venanzoni, T. Ya-
mashita, Z. Was, H. Wilschut.
This work was supported in part by the Marie Curie research train-
ing network “HEPTOOLS” (MRTN-CT-2006-035505).
References
1. T. Akesson et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 51, 421 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0609216
2. A. Blondel et al. (eds.), ECFA/CERN studies of a Euro-
pean neutrino factory complex. CERN-2004-002, ECFA-04-
230, April 2004
3. V . Barger et al., arXiv:0705.4396 [hep-ph]
4. R.N. Mohapatra et al., Rep. Prog. Phys. 70, 1757 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0510213
5. C.D. Froggatt, H.B. Nielsen, Nucl. Phys. B 147, 277 (1979)
6. H. Georgi, C. Jarlskog, Phys. Lett. B 86, 297 (1979)
7. J.R. Ellis, M.K. Gaillard, Phys. Lett. B 88, 315 (1979)
8. G. Anderson, S. Raby, S. Dimopoulos, L.J. Hall, G.D. Stark-
man, Phys. Rev. D 49, 3660 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9308333
9. N. Irges, S. Lavignac, P. Ramond, Phys. Rev. D 58, 035003
(1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9802334
10. J.K. Elwood, N. Irges, P. Ramond, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5064
(1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9807228
11. M. Leurer, Y . Nir, N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B 398, 319 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9212278
12. M. Dine, R.G. Leigh, A. Kagan, Phys. Rev. D 48, 4269 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9304299
13. Y . Nir, N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B 309, 337 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9304307
14. M. Leurer, Y . Nir, N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B 420, 468 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9310320
15. D.B. Kaplan, M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D 49, 3741 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9311281
16. A. Pomarol, D. Tommasini, Nucl. Phys. B 466, 3 (1996)
arXiv:hep-ph/9507462
17. C.D. Carone, L.J. Hall, H. Murayama, Phys. Rev. D 53, 6282
(1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9512399
18. R. Barbieri, G.R. Dvali, L.J. Hall, Phys. Lett. B 377, 76 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ph/9512388
19. E. Dudas, C. Grojean, S. Pokorski, C.A. Savoy, Nucl. Phys. B
481, 85 (1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9606383
20. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, S. Raby, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B
493, 3 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9610449
21. P. Binetruy, S. Lavignac, P. Ramond, Nucl. Phys. B 477, 353
(1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9601243
22. P. Binetruy, S. Lavignac, S.T. Petcov, P. Ramond, Nucl. Phys. B
496, 3 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9610481
23. Y . Nir, R. Rattazzi, Phys. Lett. B 382, 363 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ph/9603233
24. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. A
52, 141 (1997)
25. C.D. Carone, L.J. Hall, Phys. Rev. D 56, 4198 (1997).
arXiv:hep-ph/9702430
26. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, A. Romanino, Phys. Lett. B 401,4 7
(1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9702315
27. R. Barbieri, L. Giusti, L.J. Hall, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B
550, 32 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9812239


--- Page 156 ---
168 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
28. L.J. Hall, N. Weiner, Phys. Rev. D 60, 033005 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9811299
29. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B 551,9 3
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9812384
30. A. Aranda, C.D. Carone, R.F. Lebed, Phys. Lett. B 474, 170
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9910392
31. R. Barbieri, P. Creminelli, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B 559,1 7
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9903460
32. Z. Berezhiani, A. Rossi, Nucl. Phys. B 594, 113 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0003084
33. M.C. Chen, K.T. Mahanthappa, Phys. Rev. D 62, 113007
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0005292
34. A. Aranda, C.D. Carone, R.F. Lebed, Phys. Rev. D 62, 016009
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0002044
35. A. Aranda, C.D. Carone, P. Meade, Phys. Rev. D 65, 013011
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0109120
36. E. Ma, G. Rajasekaran, Phys. Rev. D 64, 113012 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0106291
37. S.F. King, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 520, 243 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0108112
38. S. Lavignac, I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. B 520, 269
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0106245
39. R.G. Roberts, A. Romanino, G.G. Ross, L. Velasco-Sevilla,
Nucl. Phys. B 615, 358 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0104088
40. J.L. Chkareuli, C.D. Froggatt, H.B. Nielsen, Nucl. Phys. B 626,
307 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0109156
41. K.S. Babu, E. Ma, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Lett. B 552, 207 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0206292
42. G.G. Ross, L. Velasco-Sevilla, Nucl. Phys. B 653, 3 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0208218
43. Y . Nir, G. Raz, Phys. Rev. D 66, 035007 (2002). arXiv:
hep-ph/0206064
44. H.K. Dreiner, H. Murayama, M. Thormeier, Nucl. Phys. B 729,
278 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0312012
45. S.F. King, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 574, 239 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0307190
46. G.G. Ross, L. Velasco-Sevilla, O. Vives, Nucl. Phys. B 692,5 0
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0401064
47. W. Grimus, A.S. Joshipura, S. Kaneko, L. Lavoura,
M. Tanimoto, J. High Energy Phys. 0407, 078 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0407112
48. G.L. Kane, S.F. King, I.N.R. Peddie, L. Velasco-Sevilla, J. High
Energy Phys. 0508, 083 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0504038
49. Z. Berezhiani, F. Nesti, J. High Energy Phys. 0603, 041 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0510011
50. G. Altarelli, F. Feruglio, Nucl. Phys. B 741, 215 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0512103
51. O. Vives, arXiv:hep-ph/0504079
52. S. Abel, D. Bailin, S. Khalil, O. Lebedev, Phys. Lett. B504, 241
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0012145
53. J.L. Diaz-Cruz, J. Ferrandis, Phys. Rev. D 72, 035003 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504094
54. P.H. Chankowski, K. Kowalska, S. Lavignac, S. Pokorski, Phys.
Rev. D 71, 055004 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0501071
55. W. Grimus, L. Lavoura, J. High Energy Phys. 0508, 013 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504153
56. I. de Medeiros Varzielas, G.G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B 733,3 1
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0507176
57. I. de Medeiros Varzielas, S.F. King, G.G. Ross, arXiv:hep-ph/
0607045
58. I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Nucl. Phys. B 755, 1 (2006). arXiv:
hep-ph/0603101
59. I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. B 642, 472 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0606097
60. S.F. King, M. Malinsky, Phys. Lett. B 645, 351 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0610250
61. C. Hagedorn, M. Lindner, R.N. Mohapatra, J. High Energy
Phys. 0606, 042 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0602244
62. T. Appelquist, Y . Bai, M. Piai, Phys. Lett. B 637, 245 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0603104
63. L. Ferretti, S.F. King, A. Romanino, J. High Energy Phys.0611,
078 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0609047
64. F. Feruglio, C. Hagedorn, Y . Lin, L. Merlo, arXiv:hep-ph/
0702194
65. E. Ma, arXiv:hep-ph/0409075
66. E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 43, 2761 (1991)
67. N.G. Deshpande, M. Gupta, P.B. Pal, Phys. Rev. D 45, 953
(1992)
68. M. Frigerio, S. Kaneko, E. Ma, M. Tanimoto, Phys. Rev. D 71,
011901 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0409187
69. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17, 2361 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0211393
70. C. Luhn, S. Nasri, P. Ramond, arXiv:hep-th/0701188
71. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 21, 1917 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0607056
72. W. Grimus, L. Lavoura, Phys. Lett. B 572, 189 (2003). arXiv:
hep-ph/0305046
73. E. Ma, arXiv:hep-ph/0612022
74. Y . Koide, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 34, 201 (1982)
75. E. Ma, arXiv:hep-ph/0701016
76. Y . Yamaguchi, Phys. Lett.9, 281 (1964)
77. J. Kubo, A. Mondragon, M. Mondragon, E. Rodriguez-
Jauregui, Prog. Theor. Phys. 109, 795 (2003) [Erratum: Prog.
Theor. Phys. 114, 287 (2005)]. arXiv:hep-ph/0302196
78. J. Kubo, H. Okada, F. Sakamaki, Phys. Rev. D 70, 036007
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0402089
79. S.L. Chen, M. Frigerio, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 70, 073008
(2004) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 70, 079905 (2004)].
arXiv:hep-ph/0404084
80. L. Lavoura, E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 20, 1217 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0502181
81. T. Teshima, Phys. Rev. D 73, 045019 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0509094
82. Y . Koide, Phys. Rev. D 73, 057901 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0509214
83. R.N. Mohapatra, S. Nasri, H.B. Yu, Phys. Lett. B 639, 318
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605020
84. S. Morisi, M. Picariello, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 45, 1267 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0505113
85. S. Kaneko, H. Sawanaka, T. Shingai, M. Tanimoto, K.
Yoshioka, Prog. Theor. Phys. 117, 161 (2007). arXiv:
hep-ph/0609220
86. F. Feruglio, Y . Lin, arXiv:0712.1528 [hep-ph]
87. E. Ma, arXiv:hep-ph/0612013
88. O. Felix, A. Mondragon, M. Mondragon, E. Peinado, arXiv:
hep-ph/0610061
89. P.F. Harrison, D.H. Perkins, W.G. Scott, Phys. Lett. B 530, 167
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0202074
90. X.G. He, A. Zee, Phys. Lett. B 560, 87 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/
0301092
91. N. Cabibbo, Phys. Lett. B 72, 333 (1978)
92. L. Wolfenstein, Phys. Rev. D 18, 958 (1978)
93. E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 70, 031901 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0404199
94. G. Altarelli, F. Feruglio, Nucl. Phys. B 720, 64 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504165
95. K.S. Babu, X.G. He, arXiv:hep-ph/0507217
96. E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 72, 037301 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0505209
97. A. Zee, Phys. Lett. B 630, 58 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0508278
98. E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 73, 057304 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511133
99. X.G. He, Y .Y . Keum, R.R. V olkas, J. High Energy Phys.0604,
039 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0601001
100. B. Adhikary, B. Brahmachari, A. Ghosal, E. Ma, M.K. Parida,
Phys. Lett. B 638, 345 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0603059


--- Page 157 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 169
101. B. Adhikary, A. Ghosal, Phys. Rev. D 75, 073020 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0609193
102. F. Yin, Phys. Rev. D 75, 073010 (2007). arXiv:0704.3827 [hep-
ph]
103. G. Altarelli, F. Feruglio, Y . Lin, Nucl. Phys. B 775, 31 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0610165
104. X.G. He, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 168, 350 (2007). arXiv:
hep-ph/0612080
105. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17, 289 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0201225
106. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 17, 627 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0203238
107. K.S. Babu, T. Kobayashi, J. Kubo, Phys. Rev. D 67, 075018
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0212350
108. S.L. Chen, M. Frigerio, E. Ma, Nucl. Phys. B 724, 423 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504181
109. M. Hirsch, A. Villanova del Moral, J.W.F. Valle, E. Ma, Phys.
Rev. D 72, 091301 (2005) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 72, 119904
(2005)]. arXiv:hep-ph/0507148
110. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 20, 1953 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/
0502024
111. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 20, 2601 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/
0508099
112. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 20, 2767 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/
0506036
113. E. Ma, H. Sawanaka, M. Tanimoto, Phys. Lett. B 641, 301
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0606103
114. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 21, 2931 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0607190
115. E. Ma, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 22, 101 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/
0610342
116. L. Lavoura, H. Kuhbock, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 22, 181 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0610050
117. I. de Medeiros Varzielas, S.F. King, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B
644, 153 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0512313
118. S. Morisi, M. Picariello, E. Torrente-Lujan, Phys. Rev. D 75,
075015 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0702034
119. Y . Koide, arXiv:hep-ph/0701018
120. M. Hirsch, A.S. Joshipura, S. Kaneko, J.W.F. Valle,
arXiv:hep-ph/0703046
121. P.D. Carr, P.H. Frampton, arXiv:hep-ph/0701034
122. M.C. Chen, K.T. Mahanthappa, arXiv:0705.0714 [hep-ph]
123. P.H. Frampton, T.W. Kephart, arXiv:0706.1186 [hep-ph]
124. T. Kobayashi, H.P. Nilles, F. Ploger, S. Raby, M. Ratz, Nucl.
Phys. B 768, 135 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0611020
125. E. Ma, Fizika B 14, 35 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0409288
126. C. Hagedorn, M. Lindner, F. Plentinger, Phys. Rev. D 74,
025007 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0604265
127. Y . Kajiyama, J. Kubo, H. Okada, Phys. Rev. D 75, 033001
(2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0610072
128. P.H. Frampton, T.W. Kephart, Phys. Rev. D 51, 1 (1995).
arXiv:hep-ph/9409324
129. K.S. Babu, J. Kubo, Phys. Rev. D 71, 056006 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0411226
130. J. Kubo, Phys. Lett. B 622, 303 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0506043
131. S.L. Chen, E. Ma, Phys. Lett. B 620, 151 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0505064
132. E. Ma, Phys. Lett. B 632, 352 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0508231
133. Y . Cai, H.B. Yu, Phys. Rev. D74, 115005 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0608022
134. H. Zhang, arXiv:hep-ph/0612214
135. Y . Koide, arXiv:0705.2275 [hep-ph]
136. M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D 52, 1643 (1995). arXiv:hep-ph/
9411383
137. W. Grimus, L. Lavoura, J. High Energy Phys. 0601, 018 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0509239
138. W. Grimus, L. Lavoura, arXiv:hep-ph/0611149
139. S.M. Barr, Phys. Rev. D 65, 096012 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0106241
140. S.F. King, Phys. Lett. B 439, 350 (1998). arXiv:hep-ph/
9806440
141. S.F. King, Nucl. Phys. B 562, 57 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/
9904210
142. S.F. King, Nucl. Phys. B 576, 85 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/
9912492
143. S.F. King, J. High Energy Phys. 0209, 011 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0204360
144. F. Borzumati, A. Masiero, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 961 (1986)
145. L.J. Hall, V .A. Kostelecky, S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B 267, 415
(1986)
146. S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, F. Palumbo, Phys. Rev. D 20, 403
(1979)
147. P. Fayet, Phys. Lett. B 69, 489 (1977)
148. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 188, 513 (1981)
149. S. Dimopoulos, H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B 193, 150 (1981)
150. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D 26, 287 (1982)
151. L. Alvarez-Gaume, M. Claudson, M.B. Wise, Nucl. Phys. B
207, 96 (1982)
152. G.F. Giudice, R. Rattazzi, Phys. Rep. 322, 419 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9801271
153. E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, A. Van Proeyen, Nucl.
Phys. B 212, 413 (1983)
154. S.K. Soni, H.A. Weldon, Phys. Lett. B 126, 215 (1983)
155. V .S. Kaplunovsky, J. Louis, Phys. Lett. B 306, 269 (1993).
arXiv:hep-th/9303040
156. A. Brignole, L.E. Ibanez, C. Munoz, Nucl. Phys. B 422,
125 (1994) [Erratum: Nucl. Phys. B 436, 747 (1995)].
arXiv:hep-ph/9308271
157. P.H. Chankowski, O. Lebedev, S. Pokorski, Nucl. Phys. B 717,
190 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0502076
158. S.P. Martin, arXiv:hep-ph/9709356
159. M. Shapkin, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 169, 363 (2007)
160. G.G. Ross, O. Vives, Phys. Rev. D 67, 095013 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0211279
161. S.F. King, I.N.R. Peddie, G.G. Ross, L. Velasco-Sevilla,
O. Vives, J. High Energy Phys. 0507, 049 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0407012
162. S. Antusch, S.F. King, M. Malinsky, arXiv:0708.1282 [hep-ph]
163. I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Nucl. Phys. B 661, 365 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0211283
164. A. Masiero, S.K. Vempati, O. Vives, Nucl. Phys. B 649, 189
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0209303
165. M. Ciuchini, A. Masiero, P. Paradisi, L. Silvestrini, S.K. Vem-
p a t i ,O .V i v e s ,arXiv:hep-ph/0702144
166. K. Hagiwara, S. Matsumoto, D. Haidt, C.S. Kim, Z. Phys.
C 64, 559 (1994) [Erratum: Z. Phys. C 68, 352 (1995)].
arXiv:hep-ph/9409380
167. W. Buchmuller, D. Wyler, Nucl. Phys. B 268, 621 (1986)
168. Z. Berezhiani, A. Rossi, Phys. Lett. B 535, 207 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0111137
169. A. Brignole, A. Rossi, Nucl. Phys. B 701, 3 (2004). arXiv:
hep-ph/0404211
170. W.M. Yao et al. (Particle Data Group), J. Phys. G 33, 1 (2006)
171. M.S. Bilenky, A. Santamaria, Nucl. Phys. B 420, 47 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9310302
172. L. Lavoura, Eur. Phys. J. C 29, 191 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/
0302221
173. T. Inami, C.S. Lim, Prog. Theor. Phys. 65, 297 (1981) [Erratum:
Prog. Theor. Phys. 65, 1772 (1981)]
174. A. Brignole, A. Rossi, Phys. Lett. B 566, 217 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0304081
175. P. Paradisi, J. High Energy Phys. 0608, 047 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0601100


--- Page 158 ---
170 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
176. F. Jegerlehner, arXiv:hep-ph/0703125
177. G.A. Gonzalez-Sprinberg, A. Santamaria, J. Vidal, Nucl. Phys.
B 582, 3 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0002203
178. J. Hisano, T. Moroi, K. Tobe, M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. D 53,
2442 (1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9510309
179. A. Czarnecki, E. Jankowski, Phys. Rev. D 65, 113004 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0106237
180. M.L. Brooks et al. (MEGA Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
1521 (1999). arXiv:hep-ex/9905013
181. K. Hayasaka et al. (Belle Collaboration), arXiv:0705.0650
[hep-ex]
182. B. Aubert et al. (BaBar Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
041801 (2006). arXiv:hep-ex/0508012
183. S. Banerjee, arXiv:hep-ex/0702017
184. M. Raidal, A. Santamaria, Phys. Lett. B 421, 250 (1998).
arXiv:hep-ph/9710389
185. K. Huitu, J. Maalampi, M. Raidal, A. Santamaria, Phys. Lett. B
430, 355 (1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9712249
186. B.C. Regan, E.D. Commins, C.J. Schmidt, D. DeMille, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 88, 071805 (2002)
187. G.W. Bennett et al. (Muon g-2 Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 73,
072003 (2006). arXiv:hep-ex/0602035
188. R. McNabb (Muon g-2 Collaboration), arXiv:hep-ex/
0407008
189. J. Abdallah et al. (DELPHI Collaboration), Eur. Phys. J. C 35,
159 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0406010
190. K. Inami et al.(Belle Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 551,1 6
(2003). arXiv:hep-ex/0210066
191. B. Aubert et al. (BaBar Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
041802 (2005). arXiv:hep-ex/0502032
192. S. Davidson, C. Pena-Garay, N. Rius, A. Santamaria, J. High
Energy Phys. 0303, 011 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0302093
193. M. Acciarri et al. (L3 Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 489,8 1
(2000). arXiv:hep-ex/0005028
194. D. Bourilkov, Phys. Rev. D 64, 071701 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/
0104165
195. G. Abbiendi et al. (OPAL Collaboration), Eur. Phys. J. C 33,
173 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0309053
196. A. Pich, J.P. Silva, Phys. Rev. D 52, 4006 (1995). arXiv:
hep-ph/9505327
197. S. Bergmann, Y . Grossman, D.M. Pierce, Phys. Rev. D 61,
053005 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9909390
198. M.C. Gonzalez-Garcia, J.W.F. Valle, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 7, 477
(1992)
199. A. De Gouvea, G.F. Giudice, A. Strumia, K. Tobe, Nucl. Phys.
B 623, 395 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0107156
200. Z. Berezhiani, R.S. Raghavan, A. Rossi, Nucl. Phys. B 638,6 2
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0111138
201. S. Davidson, D.C. Bailey, B.A. Campbell, Z. Phys. C 61, 613
(1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9309310
202. M. Herz, arXiv:hep-ph/0301079
203. S.L. Glashow, J. Iliopoulos, L. Maiani, Phys. Rev. D 2, 1285
(1970)
204. N. Cabibbo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 531 (1963)
205. M. Kobayashi, T. Maskawa, Prog. Theor. Phys. 49, 652 (1973)
206. L. Wolfenstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1945 (1983)
207. M. Battaglia et al., hep-ph/0304132
208. B. Pontecorvo, Sov. Phys. JETP 7, 172 (1958) [Zh. Eksp. Teor.
Fiz. 34, 247 (1957)]
209. Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa, S. Sakata, Prog. Theor. Phys. 28, 870
(1962)
210. M. Maltoni, T. Schwetz, M.A. Tortola, J.W.F. Valle, New J.
Phys. 6, 122 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0405172
211. G.L. Fogli, E. Lisi, A. Marrone, A. Palazzo, Prog. Part. Nucl.
Phys. 57, 742 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0506083
212. S.T. Petcov, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 25, 340 (1977) [Yad. Fiz. 25,
641 (1977); Errata: Yad. Fiz.25, 698 (1977), Yad. Fiz.25, 1336
(1977)]
213. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1566 (1979)
214. S.M. Bilenky, J. Hosek, S.T. Petcov, Phys. Lett. B 94, 495
(1980)
215. J. Schechter, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D 22, 2227 (1980)
216. P. Minkowski, Phys. Lett. B 67, 421 (1977)
217. T. Yanagida, in Proceedings of the Workshop on the Baryon
Number of the Universe and Uniﬁed Theories, Tsukuba, Japan,
13–14 February 1979
218. M. Gell-Mann, P. Ramond, R. Slansky, in Supergravity, ed. by
P. van Nieuwenhuizen, D.Z. Freedman (North Holland, Ams-
terdam, 1979)
219. S.L. Glashow, NATO Adv. Study Inst. Ser. B Phys. 59, 687
(1979)
220. R.N. Mohapatra, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. Lett.44, 912 (1980)
221. M. Magg, C. Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B 94, 61 (1980)
222. G. Lazarides, Q. Shaﬁ, C. Wetterich, Nucl. Phys. B 181, 287
(1981)
223. R.N. Mohapatra, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. D 23, 165 (1981)
224. G.B. Gelmini, M. Roncadelli, Phys. Lett. B 99, 411 (1981)
225. E. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1171 (1998).arXiv:hep-ph/9805219
226. R. Foot, H. Lew, X.G. He, G.C. Joshi, Z. Phys. C44, 441 (1989)
227. W. Buchmuller, K. Hamaguchi, O. Lebedev, S. Ramos-
Sanchez, M. Ratz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 021601 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0703078
228. J.R. Ellis, O. Lebedev, arXiv:0707.3419 [hep-ph]
229. J.R. Ellis, J. Hisano, S. Lola, M. Raidal, Nucl. Phys. B 621, 208
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0109125
230. S. Pascoli, S.T. Petcov, W. Rodejohann, Phys. Rev. D 68,
093007 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0302054
231. J.A. Casas, A. Ibarra, F. Jimenez-Alburquerque, arXiv:hep-ph/
0612289
232. J.A. Casas, A. Ibarra, Nucl. Phys. B 618, 171 (2001). arXiv:
hep-ph/0103065
233. S. Lavignac, I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Nucl. Phys. B 633, 139
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0202086
234. P.H. Frampton, S.L. Glashow, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 548,
119 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0208157
235. M. Raidal, A. Strumia, Phys. Lett. B 553, 72 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0210021
236. A. Ibarra, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 575, 279 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0307051
237. A. Ibarra, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 591, 285 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0312138
238. P.H. Chankowski, J.R. Ellis, S. Pokorski, M. Raidal, K. Turzyn-
ski, Nucl. Phys. B 690, 279 (2004)
239. S.T. Petcov, W. Rodejohann, T. Shindou, Y . Takanishi, Nucl.
Phys. B 739, 208 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0510404
240. T. Endoh, T. Morozumi, T. Onogi, A. Purwanto, Phys. Rev. D
64, 013006 (2001) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 64, 059904 (2001)].
arXiv:hep-ph/0012345
241. S. Davidson, A. Ibarra, J. High Energy Phys. 0109, 013 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0104076
242. J.R. Ellis, J. Hisano, M. Raidal, Y . Shimizu, Phys. Rev. D 66,
115013 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0206110
243. A. Ibarra, J. High Energy Phys. 0601, 064 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0511136
244. E. Ma, U. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5716 (1998).
arXiv:hep-ph/9802445
245. K. Huitu, J. Maalampi, M. Raidal, Nucl. Phys. B 420, 449
(1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9312235
246. K. Huitu, J. Maalampi, M. Raidal, Phys. Lett. B 328, 60 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9402219
247. M. Raidal, P.M. Zerwas, Eur. Phys. J. C 8, 479 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9811443


--- Page 159 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 171
248. T. Hambye, E. Ma, U. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B 602, 23 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0011192
249. A. Rossi, Phys. Rev. D 66, 075003 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0207006
250. K.S. Babu, C.N. Leung, J.T. Pantaleone, Phys. Lett. B 319, 191
(1993)
251. P.H. Chankowski, Z. Płuciennik, Phys. Lett. B 316, 312 (1993)
252. S. Antusch, M. Drees, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, Phys.
Lett. B 519, 238 (2001)
253. S. Antusch, M. Drees, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, Phys.
Lett. B 525, 130 (2002)
254. S. Antusch, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, Nucl. Phys. B 674,
401 (2003)
255. P.H. Chankowski, W. Krolikowski, S. Pokorski, Phys. Lett. B
473, 109 (2000)
256. J.A. Casas, J.R. Espinosa, A. Ibarra, I. Navarro, Nucl. Phys. B
573, 652 (2000)
257. S. Antusch, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, Phys. Lett. B 538,
87 (2002)
258. S. Antusch, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, M.A. Schmidt, J.
High Energy Phys. 0503, 024 (2005)
259. J.W. Mei, Phys. Rev. D 71, 073012 (2005)
260. S. Antusch, M. Ratz, J. High Energy Phys. 0207, 059 (2002)
261. N. Haba, N. Okamura, M. Sugiura, Prog. Theor. Phys. 103, 367
(2000)
262. N. Haba, Y . Matsui, N. Okamura, M. Sugiura, Eur. Phys. J. C
10, 677 (1999)
263. N. Haba, N. Okamura, Eur. Phys. J. C 14, 347 (2000)
264. J.R. Ellis, S. Lola, Phys. Lett. B 458, 310 (1999)
265. J.A. Casas, J.R. Espinosa, A. Ibarra, I. Navarro, Nucl. Phys. B
556, 3 (1999)
266. J.A. Casas, J.R. Espinosa, A. Ibarra, I. Navarro, Nucl. Phys. B
569, 82 (2000)
267. T. Miura, T. Shindou, E. Takasugi, Phys. Rev. D 66, 093002
(2002)
268. N. Haba, Y . Matsui, N. Okamura, Eur. Phys. J. C17, 513 (2000)
269. S. Antusch, J. Kersten, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, Phys. Lett. B 544,
1 (2002)
270. T. Miura, T. Shindou, E. Takasugi, Phys. Rev. D 68, 093009
(2003)
271. S. Kanemura, K. Matsuda, T. Ota, T. Shindou, E. Takasugi,
K. Tsumura, Phys. Rev. D 72, 093004 (2005)
272. T. Shindou, E. Takasugi, Phys. Rev. D 70, 013005 (2004)
273. S.T. Petcov, S. Profumo, Y . Takanishi, C.E. Yaguna, Nucl. Phys.
B 676, 453 (2004)
274. J.R. Ellis, A. Hektor, M. Kadastik, K. Kannike, M. Raidal, Phys.
Lett. B 631, 32 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0506122
275. S.T. Petcov, T. Shindou, Y . Takanishi, Nucl. Phys. B 738, 219
(2006)
276. H.B. Nielsen, Y . Takanishi, Nucl. Phys. B636, 305 (2002)
277. R. Gonzalez Felipe, F.R. Joaquim, B.M. Nobre, Phys. Rev. D
70, 085009 (2004)
278. G.C. Branco, R. Gonzalez Felipe, F.R. Joaquim, B.M. Nobre,
Phys. Lett. B 633, 336 (2006)
279. J.W. Mei, Z.Z. Xing, Phys. Rev. D 70, 053002 (2004)
280. S.T. Petcov, A.Y . Smirnov, Phys. Lett. B 322, 109 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9311204
281. M. Raidal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 161801 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/
0404046
282. H. Minakata, A.Y . Smirnov, Phys. Rev. D 70, 073009 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0405088
283. Y . Kajiyama, M. Raidal, A. Strumia,arXiv:0705.4559 [hep-ph]
284. Euclid, Elements, Book 6, Deﬁnition 3. (A straight line is said
to have been cut in extreme and mean ratio when, as the whole
line is to the greater segment, so is the greater to the less)
285. Q. Duret, B. Machet, arXiv:0705.1237 [hep-ph]
286. B.C. Chauhan, M. Picariello, J. Pulido, E. Torrente-Lujan,
arXiv:hep-ph/0605032
287. M. Picariello, arXiv:hep-ph/0611189
288. F. Caravaglios, S. Morisi, arXiv:hep-ph/0611078
289. C.L. Bennett et al. (WMAP Collaboration), Astrophys. J. Suppl.
148, 1 (2003). arXiv:astro-ph/0302207
290. M. Fukugita, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 174, 45 (1986)
291. V .A. Kuzmin, V .A. Rubakov, M.E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. B
155, 36 (1985)
292. J. Liu, G. Segre, Phys. Rev. D 48, 4609 (1993). arXiv:
hep-ph/9304241
293. M. Flanz, E.A. Paschos, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B 345, 248
(1995) [Erratum: Phys. Lett. B 382, 447 (1996)]. arXiv:hep-ph/
9411366
294. L. Covi, E. Roulet, F. Vissani, Phys. Lett. B 384, 169 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ph/9605319
295. R. Barbieri, P. Creminelli, A. Strumia, N. Tetradis, Nucl. Phys.
B 575, 61 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9911315
296. A. Abada, S. Davidson, F.X. Josse-Michaux, M. Losada,
A. Riotto, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 0604, 004 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0601083
297. E. Nardi, Y . Nir, E. Roulet, J. Racker, J. High Energy Phys.
0601, 164 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0601084
298. A. Abada, S. Davidson, A. Ibarra, F.X. Josse-Michaux, M.
Losada, A. Riotto, J. High Energy Phys. 0609, 010 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0605281
299. T. Fujihara, S. Kaneko, S. Kang, D. Kimura, T. Morozumi,
M. Tanimoto, Phys. Rev. D 72, 016006 (2005). arXiv:
hep-ph/0505076
300. S. Pascoli, S.T. Petcov, A. Riotto, arXiv:hep-ph/0609125
301. G.C. Branco, A.J. Buras, S. Jager, S. Uhlig, A. Weiler,
arXiv:hep-ph/0609067
302. G.C. Branco, R. Gonzalez Felipe, F.R. Joaquim, arXiv:hep-ph/
0609297
303. S. Uhlig, arXiv:hep-ph/0612262
304. M. Plumacher, Z. Phys. C 74, 549 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/
9604229
305. G. Engelhard, Y . Grossman, E. Nardi, Y . Nir, arXiv:hep-ph/
0612187
306. S. Davidson, A. Ibarra, Phys. Lett. B 535, 25 (2002). arXiv:
hep-ph/0202239
307. K. Hamaguchi, H. Murayama, T. Yanagida, Phys. Rev. D 65,
043512 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0109030
308. W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, M. Plumacher, Nucl. Phys. B 643,
367 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0205349
309. G.F. Giudice, A. Notari, M. Raidal, A. Riotto, A. Strumia, Nucl.
Phys. B 685, 89 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0310123
310. S. Blanchet, P. Di Bari, arXiv:hep-ph/0607330
311. S. Antusch, A.M. Teixeira, arXiv:hep-ph/0611232
312. J.R. Ellis, J.E. Kim, D.V . Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B 145, 181
(1984)
313. J.R. Ellis, D.V . Nanopoulos, S. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B 259, 175
(1985)
314. J.R. Ellis, D.V . Nanopoulos, K.A. Olive, S.J. Rey, Astropart.
Phys. 4, 371 (1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9505438
315. T. Moroi, arXiv:hep-ph/9503210
316. M. Raidal, A. Strumia, K. Turzynski, Phys. Lett. B 609, 351
(2005) [Erratum: Phys. Lett. B 632, 752 (2006)]. arXiv:hep-ph/
0408015
317. S. Blanchet, P. Di Bari, G.G. Raffelt, arXiv:hep-ph/0611337
318. W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, M. Plumacher, Phys. Lett. B 547,
128 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0209301
319. S. Davidson, arXiv:hep-ph/0304120
320. E.W. Kolb, M.S. Turner, Front. Phys. 69, 1 (1990)
321. W. Fischler, G.F. Giudice, R.G. Leigh, S. Paban, Phys. Lett. B
258, 45 (1991)


--- Page 160 ---
172 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
322. W. Buchmuller, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 302, 240 (1993)
323. W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, M. Plumacher, Nucl. Phys. B 665,
445 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0302092
324. W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, M. Plumacher, Ann. Phys. 315, 305
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0401240
325. W. Buchmuller, P. Di Bari, M. Plumacher, New J. Phys. 6, 105
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0406014
326. T. Hambye, Y . Lin, A. Notari, M. Papucci, A. Strumia, Nucl.
Phys. B 695, 169 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0312203
327. WMAP Collaboration, D.N. Spergel et al., arXiv:astro-ph/
0603449
328. G.C. Branco, T. Morozumi, B.M. Nobre, M.N. Rebelo, Nucl.
Phys. B 617, 475 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0107164
329. J.R. Ellis, M. Raidal, Nucl. Phys. B 643, 229 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0206174
330. S. Davidson, J. Garayoa, F. Palorini, N. Rius, arXiv:0705.1503
[hep-ph]
331. S. Antusch, S.F. King, A. Riotto, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys.
0611, 011 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0609038
332. A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. D 56, 5431 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/
9707235
333. A. Pilaftsis, Nucl. Phys. B 504, 61 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/
9702393
334. J.R. Ellis, M. Raidal, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 546, 228
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0206300
335. A. Pilaftsis, T.E.J. Underwood, Nucl. Phys. B 692, 303 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0309342
336. F. del Aguila, J.A. Aguilar-Saavedra, R. Pittau, J. Phys. Conf.
Ser. 53, 506 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0606198
337. A. Pilaftsis, T.E.J. Underwood, Phys. Rev. D72, 113001 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0506107
338. W. Buchmuller, C. Greub, Nucl. Phys. B 381, 109 (1992)
339. J. Gluza, Phys. Rev. D 66, 010001 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0201002
340. T. Hambye, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Lett. B 582, 73 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0307237
341. T. Hambye, M. Raidal, A. Strumia, Phys. Lett. B 632, 667
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0510008
342. S. Antusch, S.F. King, Phys. Lett. B 597, 199 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0405093
343. S. Antusch, Phys. Rev. D 76, 023512 (2007). arXiv:0704.1591
[hep-ph]
344. Y . Grossman, T. Kashti, Y . Nir, E. Roulet, Phys. Rev. Lett.91,
251801 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0307081
345. G. D’Ambrosio, G.F. Giudice, M. Raidal, Phys. Lett. B 575,7 5
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0308031
346. G. D’Ambrosio, T. Hambye, A. Hektor, M. Raidal, A. Rossi,
Phys. Lett. B 604, 199 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0407312
347. H. Murayama, H. Suzuki, T. Yanagida, J. Yokoyama, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 70, 1912 (1993)
348. H. Murayama, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 322, 349 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9310297
349. J.R. Ellis, M. Raidal, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 581, 9 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0303242
350. S. Antusch, M. Bastero-Gil, S.F. King, Q. Shaﬁ, Phys. Rev. D
71, 083519 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0411298
351. K. Dick, M. Lindner, M. Ratz, D. Wright, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,
4039 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9907562
352. D. Atwood, S. Bar-Shalom, A. Soni, Phys. Lett. B 635, 112
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0502234
353. T. Asaka, K. Hamaguchi, M. Kawasaki, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett.
B 464, 12 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9906366
354. G.F. Giudice, M. Peloso, A. Riotto, I. Tkachev, J. High Energy
Phys. 9908, 014 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9905242
355. M. Endo, F. Takahashi, T.T. Yanagida, Phys. Rev. D74, 123523
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0611055
356. J.S. Schwinger, Ann. Phys. 2, 407 (1957)
357. H. Georgi, S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 438 (1974)
358. P.A.M. Dirac, Phys. Rev. 74, 817 (1948)
359. G. ’t Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B 79, 276 (1974)
360. A.M. Polyakov, JETP Lett. 20, 194 (1974) [Pisma Zh. Eksp.
Teor. Fiz.20, 430 (1974)]
361. J.C. Pati, A. Salam, Phys. Rev. D 10, 275 (1974)
362. F. Wilczek, A. Zee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1571 (1979)
363. K. Kobayashi et al. (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Phys.
Rev. D 72, 052007 (2005). arXiv:hep-ex/0502026
364. A.J. Buras, J.R. Ellis, M.K. Gaillard, D.V . Nanopoulos, Nucl.
Phys. B 135, 66 (1978)
365. S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D 24, 1681
(1981)
366. L.E. Ibanez, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 105, 439 (1981)
367. M.B. Einhorn, D.R.T. Jones, Nucl. Phys. B 196, 475 (1982)
368. W.J. Marciano, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. D 25, 3092 (1982)
369. K. Inoue, A. Kakuto, H. Komatsu, S. Takeshita, Prog. Theor.
Phys. 68, 927 (1982) [Erratum: Prog. Theor. Phys. 70, 330
(1983)]
370. L. Alvarez-Gaume, J. Polchinski, M.B. Wise, Nucl. Phys. B
221, 495 (1983)
371. N. Sakai, T. Yanagida, Nucl. Phys. B 197, 533 (1982)
372. J. Hisano, H. Murayama, T. Yanagida, Nucl. Phys. B 402,4 6
(1993). arXiv:hep-ph/9207279
373. V . Lucas, S. Raby, Phys. Rev. D 55, 6986 (1997). arXiv:
hep-ph/9610293
374. T. Goto, T. Nihei, Phys. Rev. D 59, 115009 (1999). arXiv:
hep-ph/9808255
375. H. Murayama, A. Pierce, Phys. Rev. D 65, 055009 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0108104
376. B. Bajc, P. Fileviez Perez, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. D 66,
075005 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0204311
377. B. Bajc, P. Fileviez Perez, G. Senjanovic, arXiv:hep-ph/
0210374
378. D. Emmanuel-Costa, S. Wiesenfeldt, Nucl. Phys. B 661,6 2
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0302272
379. I. Dorsner, P.F. Perez, Nucl. Phys. B 723, 53 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504276
380. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovic, arXiv:hep-ph/0612029
381. R.J. Wilkes, arXiv:hep-ex/0507097
382. K. Cheung, C.W. Chiang, Phys. Rev. D 71, 095003 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0501265
383. W.Y . Keung, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. Lett.50, 1427 (1983)
384. R.N. Mohapatra, J.C. Pati, Phys. Rev. D 11, 2558 (1975)
385. G. Senjanovic, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 12, 1502 (1975)
386. G. Senjanovic, Nucl. Phys. B 153, 334 (1979)
387. R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 34, 3457 (1986)
388. A. Font, L.E. Ibanez, F. Quevedo, Phys. Lett. B 228, 79 (1989)
389. S.P. Martin, Phys. Rev. D 46, 2769 (1992). arXiv:hep-ph/
9207218
390. C.S. Aulakh, K. Benakli, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,
2188 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9703434
391. C.S. Aulakh, A. Melfo, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. D 57, 4174
(1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9707256
392. C.S. Aulakh, A. Melfo, A. Rasin, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Lett. B
459, 557 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9902409
393. N.G. Deshpande, E. Keith, P.B. Pal, Phys. Rev. D 46, 2261
(1993)
394. N.G. Deshpande, E. Keith, P.B. Pal, Phys. Rev. D 47, 2892
(1993). arXiv:hep-ph/9211232
395. R.N. Mohapatra, B. Sakita, Phys. Rev. D 21, 1062 (1980)
396. F. Wilczek, A. Zee, Phys. Rev. D 25, 553 (1982)
397. R. Slansky, Phys. Rep. 79, 1 (1981)
398. P. Nath, R.M. Syed, Nucl. Phys. B 618, 138 (2001).
arXiv:hep-th/0109116


--- Page 161 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 173
399. C.S. Aulakh, A. Girdhar, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 20, 865 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0204097
400. C.H. Albright, S.M. Barr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 244 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0002155
401. K.S. Babu, J.C. Pati, F. Wilczek, Nucl. Phys. B 566, 33 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9812538
402. T. Blazek, S. Raby, K. Tobe, Phys. Rev. D 60, 113001 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9903340
403. E. Witten, Phys. Lett. B 91, 81 (1980)
404. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Lett. B 610, 80 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0411193
405. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 261804 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0507169
406. K.S. Babu, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2845 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9209215
407. H. Fusaoka, Y . Koide, Phys. Rev. D 57, 3986 (1998).
arXiv:hep-ph/9712201
408. C.R. Das, M.K. Parida, Eur. Phys. J. C 20, 121 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0010004
409. K. Matsuda, Y . Koide, T. Fukuyama, Phys. Rev. D 64, 053015
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0010026
410. K. Matsuda, Y . Koide, T. Fukuyama, H. Nishiura, Phys. Rev. D
65, 033008 (2002) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 65, 079904 (2002)].
arXiv:hep-ph/0108202
411. T. Fukuyama, N. Okada, J. High Energy Phys. 0211, 011
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0205066
412. H.S. Goh, R.N. Mohapatra, S. Nasri, Phys. Rev. D 70, 075022
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0408139
413. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani,arXiv:hep-ph/0110310
414. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani, Phys. Rev. Lett.90, 051802
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0210207
415. B. Bajc, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani, Phys. Rev. D 70, 093002
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0402140
416. B. Brahmachari, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 58, 015001
(1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9710371
417. H.S. Goh, R.N. Mohapatra, S.P. Ng, Phys. Lett. B 570, 215
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0303055
418. H.S. Goh, R.N. Mohapatra, S.P. Ng, Phys. Rev. D 68, 115008
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0308197
419. B. Dutta, Y . Mimura, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D69, 115014
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0402113
420. S. Bertolini, M. Malinsky, Phys. Rev. D 72, 055021 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0504241
421. K.S. Babu, C. Macesanu, Phys. Rev. D 72, 115003 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0505200
422. T.E. Clark, T.K. Kuo, N. Nakagawa, Phys. Lett. B 115,2 6
(1982)
423. C.S. Aulakh, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 28, 217 (1983)
424. D.G. Lee, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 51, 1353 (1995).
arXiv:hep-ph/9406328
425. C.S. Aulakh, B. Bajc, A. Melfo, G. Senjanovi´c, F. Vissani, Phys.
Lett. B 588, 196 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0306242
426. C.S. Aulakh, arXiv:hep-ph/0506291
427. B. Bajc, A. Melfo, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani, Phys. Lett. B634,
272 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511352
428. C.S. Aulakh, S.K. Garg, arXiv:hep-ph/0512224
429. S. Bertolini, T. Schwetz, M. Malinsky, Phys. Rev. D73, 115012
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605006
430. L.J. Hall, R. Rattazzi, U. Sarid, Phys. Rev. D 50, 7048 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9306309
431. X.G. He, S. Meljanac, Phys. Rev. D 41, 1620 (1990)
432. D.G. Lee, Phys. Rev. D 49, 1417 (1994)
433. B. Bajc, A. Melfo, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani, Phys. Rev. D 70,
035007 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0402122
434. C.S. Aulakh, A. Girdhar, Nucl. Phys. B 711, 275 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0405074
435. T. Fukuyama, A. Ilakovac, T. Kikuchi, S. Meljanac, N. Okada,
E u r .P h y s .J .C42, 191 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0401213
436. T. Fukuyama, A. Ilakovac, T. Kikuchi, S. Meljanac, N. Okada,
J. Math. Phys. 46, 033505 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0405300
437. T. Fukuyama, A. Ilakovac, T. Kikuchi, S. Meljanac, N. Okada,
Phys. Rev. D 72, 051701 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0412348
438. C.S. Aulakh, arXiv:hep-ph/0501025
439. C.S. Aulakh, Phys. Rev. D 72, 051702 (2005)
440. D.G. Lee, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Lett. B 324, 376 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9310371
441. K.S. Babu, I. Gogoladze, Z. Tavartkiladze, arXiv:hep-ph/
0612315
442. H.S. Goh, R.N. Mohapatra, S. Nasri, S.P. Ng, Phys. Lett. B587,
105 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0311330
443. T. Fukuyama, A. Ilakovac, T. Kikuchi, S. Meljanac, N. Okada,
J. High Energy Phys. 0409, 052 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0406068
444. S. Bertolini, M. Frigerio, M. Malinsky, Phys. Rev. D70, 095002
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0406117
445. W.M. Yang, Z.G. Wang, Nucl. Phys. B 707, 87 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0406221
446. B. Dutta, Y . Mimura, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Lett. B 603,3 5
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0406262
447. B. Dutta, Y . Mimura, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
091804 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0412105
448. B. Dutta, Y . Mimura, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D72, 075009
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0507319
449. W. Grimus, H. Kuhbock, arXiv:hep-ph/0607197
450. W. Grimus, H. Kuhbock, arXiv:hep-ph/0612132
451. C.S. Aulakh, arXiv:hep-ph/0602132
452. L. Lavoura, H. Kuhbock, W. Grimus, arXiv:hep-ph/0603259
453. C.S. Aulakh, arXiv:hep-ph/0607252
454. C.S. Aulakh, S.K. Garg, arXiv:hep-ph/0612021
455. B. Bajc, A. Melfo, G. Senjanovi ´c, F. Vissani, Phys. Rev. D 73,
055001 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0510139
456. F. Vissani, A.Y . Smirnov, Phys. Lett. B 341, 173 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9405399
457. N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, J. High Energy Phys. 0506,
073 (2005). arXiv:hep-th/0405159
458. G.F. Giudice, A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B 699, 65 (2004) [Er-
ratum: Nucl. Phys. B 706, 65 (2005)]. arXiv:hep-ph/0406088
459. B. Bajc, AIP Conf. Proc. 805, 326 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/
0602166
460. A. Arvanitaki, C. Davis, P.W. Graham, A. Pierce, J.G. Wacker,
Phys. Rev. D 72, 075011 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0504210
461. K. Yoshioka, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 15, 29 (2000). arXiv:
hep-ph/9904433
462. M. Bando, T. Kobayashi, T. Noguchi, K. Yoshioka, Phys. Rev.
D 63, 113017 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0008120
463. A. Neronov, Phys. Rev. D 65, 044004 (2002). arXiv:gr-qc/
0106092
464. N. Arkani-Hamed, L.J. Hall, D.R. Smith, N. Weiner, Phys. Rev.
D 61, 116003 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9909326
465. K.R. Dienes, E. Dudas, T. Gherghetta, Phys. Lett. B 436,5 5
(1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9803466
466. K.R. Dienes, E. Dudas, T. Gherghetta, Nucl. Phys. B 537,4 7
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9806292
467. N. Arkani-Hamed, M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D 61, 033005
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9903417
468. T. Gherghetta, A. Pomarol, Nucl. Phys. B 586, 141 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0003129
469. N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G.R. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B
429, 263 (1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9803315
470. I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G.R. Dvali,
Phys. Lett. B 436, 257 (1998). arXiv:hep-ph/9804398
471. N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G.R. Dvali, Phys. Rev. D59,
086004 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9807344


--- Page 162 ---
174 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
472. G. Barenboim, G.C. Branco, A. de Gouvea, M.N. Rebelo, Phys.
Rev. D 64, 073005 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0104312
473. T. Appelquist, H.C. Cheng, B.A. Dobrescu, Phys. Rev. D 64,
035002 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0012100
474. M.V . Libanov, S.V . Troitsky, Nucl. Phys. B 599, 319 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0011095
475. J.M. Frere, M.V . Libanov, S.V . Troitsky, Phys. Lett. B512, 169
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0012306
476. J.M. Frere, M.V . Libanov, S.V . Troitsky, J. High Energy Phys.
0111, 025 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0110045
477. M.V . Libanov, E.Y . Nougaev, J. High Energy Phys. 0204, 055
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0201162
478. G.R. Dvali, M.A. Shifman, Phys. Lett. B 475, 295 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0001072
479. P.Q. Hung, Phys. Rev. D 67, 095011 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/
0210131
480. D.E. Kaplan, T.M.P. Tait, J. High Energy Phys. 0006, 020
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0004200
481. D.E. Kaplan, T.M.P. Tait, J. High Energy Phys. 0111, 051
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0110126
482. M. Kakizaki, M. Yamaguchi, Prog. Theor. Phys. 107, 433
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0104103
483. C.H. Chang, W.F. Chang, J.N. Ng, Phys. Lett. B558, 92 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0301271
484. S. Nussinov, R. Shrock, Phys. Lett. B 526, 137 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0101340
485. R. Jackiw, C. Rebbi, Phys. Rev. D 13, 3398 (1976)
486. E.A. Mirabelli, M. Schmaltz, Phys. Rev. D 61, 113011 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9912265
487. G.C. Branco, A. de Gouvea, M.N. Rebelo, Phys. Lett. B 506,
115 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0012289
488. P.Q. Hung, M. Seco, Nucl. Phys. B 653, 123 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0111013
489. J.M. Frere, G. Moreau, E. Nezri, Phys. Rev. D 69, 033003
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0309218
490. H.V . Klapdor-Kleingrothaus, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B 541, 332
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0201226
491. M. Gogberashvili, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 11, 1635 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/9812296
492. L. Randall, R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9905221
493. Y . Grossman, M. Neubert, Phys. Lett. B 474, 361 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9912408
494. H. Davoudiasl, J.L. Hewett, T.G. Rizzo, Phys. Lett. B 473,4 3
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9911262
495. A. Pomarol, Phys. Lett. B 486, 153 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/
9911294
496. S. Chang, J. Hisano, H. Nakano, N. Okada, M. Yamaguchi,
Phys. Rev. D 62, 084025 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9912498
497. B. Bajc, G. Gabadadze, Phys. Lett. B 474, 282 (2000).
arXiv:hep-th/9912232
498. A. Pomarol, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4004 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/
0005293
499. L. Randall, M.D. Schwartz, J. High Energy Phys. 0111, 003
(2001). arXiv:hep-th/0108114
500. L. Randall, M.D. Schwartz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 081801 (2002).
arXiv:hep-th/0108115
501. W.D. Goldberger, I.Z. Rothstein, Phys. Rev. D 68, 125011
(2003). arXiv:hep-th/0208060
502. K.W. Choi, I.W. Kim, Phys. Rev. D 67, 045005 (2003).
arXiv:hep-th/0208071
503. K. Agashe, A. Delgado, R. Sundrum, Ann. Phys. 304, 145
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0212028
504. K. Agashe, G. Servant, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 231805 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0403143
505. K. Agashe, G. Servant, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 0502, 002
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0411254
506. S.J. Huber, Q. Shaﬁ, Phys. Lett. B 498, 256 (2001). arXiv:
hep-ph/0010195
507. S.J. Huber, Nucl. Phys. B 666, 269 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/
0303183
508. S. Chang, C.S. Kim, M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. D 73, 033002
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511099
509. S.J. Huber, Q. Shaﬁ, Phys. Lett. B 544, 295 (2002). arXiv:
hep-ph/0205327
510. S.J. Huber, Q. Shaﬁ, Phys. Lett. B 583, 293 (2004). arXiv:
hep-ph/0309252
511. S.J. Huber, Q. Shaﬁ, Phys. Lett. B 512, 365 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0104293
512. G. Moreau, J.I. Silva-Marcos, J. High Energy Phys. 0601, 048
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0507145
513. G. Moreau, J.I. Silva-Marcos, J. High Energy Phys. 0603, 090
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0602155
514. A. Ilakovac, A. Pilaftsis, Nucl. Phys. B 437, 491 (1995). arXiv:
hep-ph/9403398
515. C.S. Kim, J.D. Kim, J.h. Song, Phys. Rev. D 67, 015001 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0204002
516. F. del Aguila, M. Perez-Victoria, J. Santiago, Phys. Lett. B 492,
98 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0007160
517. A. Delgado, A. Pomarol, M. Quiros, J. High Energy Phys.0001,
030 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9911252
518. T.G. Rizzo, J.D. Wells, Phys. Rev. D 61, 016007 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9906234
519. I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli, M. Quiros, Phys. Lett. B 460, 176
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9905311
520. P. Nath, Y . Yamada, M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Lett. B 466, 100
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9905415
521. T.G. Rizzo, Phys. Rev. D 61, 055005 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/
9909232
522. G. Burdman, Phys. Lett. B 590, 86 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/
0310144
523. K. Agashe, G. Perez, A. Soni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 201804
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0406101
524. K. Agashe, G. Perez, A. Soni, Phys. Rev. D 71, 016002 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0408134
525. K. Agashe, A.E. Blechman, F. Petriello, Phys. Rev. D 74,
053011 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0606021
526. K. Agashe, G. Perez, A. Soni, arXiv:hep-ph/0606293
527. F. del Aguila, M. Perez-Victoria, J. Santiago, J. High Energy
Phys. 0302, 051 (2003). arXiv:hep-th/0302023
528. M. Carena, T.M.P. Tait, C.E.M. Wagner, Acta Phys. Pol. B 33,
2355 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0207056
529. M. Carena, E. Ponton, T.M.P. Tait, C.E.M. Wagner, Phys. Rev.
D 67, 096006 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0212307
530. M. Carena, A. Delgado, E. Ponton, T.M.P. Tait, C.E.M. Wagner,
Phys. Rev. D 68, 035010 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0305188
531. M. Carena, A. Delgado, E. Ponton, T.M.P. Tait, C.E.M. Wagner,
Phys. Rev. D 71, 015010 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0410344
532. K. Agashe, A. Delgado, M.J. May, R. Sundrum, J. High Energy
Phys. 0308, 050 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0308036
533. K. Agashe, R. Contino, L. Da Rold, A. Pomarol, Phys. Lett. B
641, 62 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605341
534. A. Djouadi, G. Moreau, F. Richard, arXiv:hep-ph/0610173
535. R.S. Chivukula, H. Georgi, Phys. Lett. B 188, 99 (1987)
536. L.J. Hall, L. Randall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2939 (1990)
537. G. D’Ambrosio, G.F. Giudice, G. Isidori, A. Strumia, Nucl.
Phys. B 645, 155 (2002). hep-ph/0207036
538. A.V . Manohar, M.B. Wise, Phys. Rev. D 74, 035009 (2006).
hep-ph/0606172
539. B. Grinstein, V . Cirigliano, G. Isidori, M.B. Wise, Nucl. Phys.
B 763, 35 (2007). hep-ph/0608123
540. A.J. Buras, P. Gambino, M. Gorbahn, S. Jager, L. Silvestrini,
Phys. Lett. B 500, 161 (2001). hep-ph/0007085


--- Page 163 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 175
541. M. Bona et al. (UTﬁt Collaboration), J. High Energy Phys.
0603, 080 (2006). hep-ph/0509219
542. V . Cirigliano, B. Grinstein, G. Isidori, M.B. Wise, Nucl. Phys.
B 728, 121 (2005). hep-ph/0507001
543. V . Cirigliano, B. Grinstein, Nucl. Phys. B 752, 18 (2006).
hep-ph/0601111
544. S. Davidson, F. Palorini, Phys. Lett. B 642, 72 (2006).
hep-ph/0607329
545. S. Pascoli, S.T. Petcov, C.E. Yaguna, Phys. Lett. B 564, 241
(2003). hep-ph/0301095
546. V . Cirigliano, G. Isidori, V . Porretti, Nucl. Phys. B 763, 228
(2007). hep-ph/0608123
547. S. Blanchet, P. Di Bari, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 0606, 023
(2006). hep-ph/0603107
548. M. Grassi (MEG Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 149,
369 (2005)
549. W. Grimus, M.N. Rebelo, Phys. Rep. 281, 239 (1997).
arXiv:hep-ph/9506272
550. F. Englert, R. Brout, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 321 (1964)
551. G.S. Guralnik, C.R. Hagen, T.W.B. Kibble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13,
585 (1964)
552. P.W. Higgs, Phys. Lett. 12, 132 (1964)
553. P.W. Higgs, Phys. Rev. 145, 1156 (1966)
554. T.D. Lee, Phys. Rev. D 8, 1226 (1973)
555. W. Bernreuther, O. Nachtmann, Eur. Phys. J. C 9, 319 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9812259
556. G.C. Branco, L. Lavoura, J.P. Silva, CP Violation (Clarendon,
Oxford, 1999)
557. G.C. Branco, M.N. Rebelo, J.I. Silva-Marcos, Phys. Lett. B614,
187 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0502118
558. J. Bernabeu, G.C. Branco, M. Gronau, Phys. Lett. B 169, 243
(1986)
559. L. Lavoura, J.P. Silva, Phys. Rev. D 50, 4619 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9404276
560. F.J. Botella, J.P. Silva, Phys. Rev. D 51, 3870 (1995).
arXiv:hep-ph/9411288
561. S. Davidson, H.E. Haber, Phys. Rev. D72, 035004 (2005) [Erra-
tum: Phys. Rev. D 72, 099902 (2005)]. arXiv:hep-ph/0504050
562. J.F. Gunion, H.E. Haber, Phys. Rev. D 72, 095002 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0506227
563. I.P. Ivanov, Phys. Lett. B 632, 360 (2006). arXiv:
hep-ph/0507132
564. H.E. Haber, D. O’Neil, Phys. Rev. D 74, 015018 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0602242
565. G.C. Branco, J.M. Gerard, W. Grimus, Phys. Lett. B 136, 383
(1984)
566. S.L. Glashow, S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D 15, 1958 (1977)
567. E.A. Paschos, Phys. Rev. D 15, 1966 (1977)
568. G.C. Branco, M.N. Rebelo, Phys. Lett. B 160, 117 (1985)
569. L. Lavoura, Phys. Rev. D 50, 7089 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/
9405307
570. I.F. Ginzburg, M. Krawczyk, Phys. Rev. D 72, 115013 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0408011
571. J.F. Gunion, H.E. Haber, Phys. Rev. D 67, 075019 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0207010
572. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 657 (1976)
573. G.C. Branco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 504 (1980)
574. G.C. Branco, Phys. Rev. D 22, 2901 (1980)
575. G.C. Branco, A.J. Buras, J.M. Gerard, Nucl. Phys. B 259, 306
(1985)
576. L. Bento, G.C. Branco, P.A. Parada, Phys. Lett. B 267,9 5
(1991)
577. A.E. Nelson, Phys. Lett. B 136, 387 (1984)
578. A.E. Nelson, Phys. Lett. B 143, 165 (1984)
579. S.M. Barr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 329 (1984)
580. G.C. Branco, P.A. Parada, M.N. Rebelo,arXiv:hep-ph/0307119
581. Y . Achiman, Phys. Lett. B 599, 75 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/
0403309
582. M.B. Gavela, P. Hernandez, J. Orloff, O. Pene, C. Quimbay,
Nucl. Phys. B 430, 382 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9406289
583. P. Huet, E. Sather, Phys. Rev. D 51, 379 (1995). arXiv:hep-ph/
9404302
584. G.W. Anderson, L.J. Hall, Phys. Rev. D 45, 2685 (1992)
585. W. Buchmuller, Z. Fodor, T. Helbig, D. Walliser, Ann. Phys.
234, 260 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9303251
586. K. Kajantie, M. Laine, K. Rummukainen, M.E. Shaposhnikov,
Nucl. Phys. B 466, 189 (1996). arXiv:hep-lat/9510020
587. L. Fromme, S.J. Huber, M. Seniuch, J. High Energy Phys.0611,
038 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605242
588. E. Accomando et al., arXiv:hep-ph/0608079
589. L. Brucher, R. Santos, Eur. Phys. J. C 12, 87 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9907434
590. C. Delaere (LEP Collaboration), PoS HEP2005, 331 (2006)
591. A.G. Akeroyd, M.A. Diaz, F.J. Pacheco, Phys. Rev. D 70,
075002 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0312231
592. N.G. Deshpande, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 18, 2574 (1978)
593. Q.H. Cao, E. Ma, G. Rajasekaran, arXiv:0708.2939 [hep-ph]
594. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, V .S. Rychkov, Phys. Rev. D 74, 015007
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0603188
595. I.F. Ginzburg, M. Krawczyk, P. Osland, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
A 472, 149 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0101229
596. T.P. Cheng, M. Sher, Phys. Rev. D 35, 3484 (1987)
597. G.C. Branco, W. Grimus, L. Lavoura, Phys. Lett. B 380, 119
(1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9601383
598. A.K. Das, C. Kao, Phys. Lett. B 372, 106 (1996). arXiv:
hep-ph/9511329
599. E. Lunghi, A. Soni, arXiv:0707.0212 [hep-ph]
600. T.P. Cheng, L.F. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 381 (1977)
601. S.M. Bilenky, S.T. Petcov, B. Pontecorvo, Phys. Lett. B 67, 309
(1977)
602. J.D. Bjorken, S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 622 (1977)
603. G.C. Branco, Phys. Lett. B 68, 455 (1977)
604. D. Besson et al. (CLEO Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
052002 (2007). arXiv:hep-ex/0607019
605. R.N. Mohapatra, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D 34, 1642 (1986)
606. S. Nandi, U. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 564 (1986)
607. P.F. Harrison, D.H. Perkins, W.G. Scott, Phys. Lett. B 458,7 9
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9904297
608. A. Pilaftsis, Z. Phys. C 55, 275 (1992). arXiv:hep-ph/9901206
609. N. Arkani-Hamed, L.J. Hall, H. Murayama, D.R. Smith,
N. Weiner, Phys. Rev. D 64, 115011 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/
0006312
610. F. Borzumati, Phys. Rev. D 64, 053005 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/
0007018
611. S. Bergmann, A. Kagan, Nucl. Phys. B 538, 368 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ph/9803305
612. A. Ioannisian, A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. D 62, 066001 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9907522
613. D.A. Dicus, D.D. Karatas, P. Roy, Phys. Rev. D44, 2033 (1991)
614. A. Datta, M. Guchait, A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. D 50, 3195
(1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9311257
615. F.M.L. Almeida, Y .D.A. Coutinho, J.A. Martins Simoes,
M.A.B. do Vale, Phys. Rev. D 62, 075004 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0002024
616. O. Panella, M. Cannoni, C. Carimalo, Y .N. Srivastava, Phys.
Rev. D 65, 035005 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0107308
617. T. Han, B. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 171804 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0604064
618. S. Bray, J.S. Lee, A. Pilaftsis, arXiv:hep-ph/0702294
619. F. del Aguila, J.A. Aguilar-Saavedra, R. Pittau, arXiv:hep-ph/
0703261
620. N. Arkani-Hamed, A.G. Cohen, H. Georgi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
4757 (2001). arXiv:hep-th/0104005


--- Page 164 ---
176 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
621. H.C. Cheng, C.T. Hill, S. Pokorski, J. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 64,
065007 (2001). arXiv:hep-th/0104179
622. N. Arkani-Hamed, A.G. Cohen, H. Georgi, Phys. Lett. B 513,
232 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0105239
623. M. Schmaltz, D. Tucker-Smith, Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 55,
229 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0502182
624. M. Perelstein, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 58, 247 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0512128
625. N. Arkani-Hamed, A.G. Cohen, E. Katz, A.E. Nelson, J. High
Energy Phys. 0207, 034 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0206021
626. S. Chang, J. High Energy Phys. 0312, 057 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0306034
627. H.C. Cheng, I. Low, J. High Energy Phys. 0309, 051 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0308199
628. H.C. Cheng, I. Low, J. High Energy Phys. 0408, 061 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0405243
629. J. Hubisz, P. Meade, A. Noble, M. Perelstein, J. High Energy
Phys. 0601, 135 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0506042
630. J. Hubisz, P. Meade, Phys. Rev. D 71, 035016 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0411264
631. I. Low, J. High Energy Phys. 0410, 067 (2004). arXiv:
hep-ph/0409025
632. J. Hubisz, S.J. Lee, G. Paz, J. High Energy Phys. 0606, 041
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0512169
633. M. Blanke, A.J. Buras, A. Poschenrieder, S. Recksiegel,
C. Tarantino, S. Uhlig, A. Weiler, Phys. Lett. B646, 253 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0609284
634. S. Yamada, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 144, 185 (2005)
635. http://meg.web.psi.ch/
636. S.C. Park, J.h. Song, arXiv:hep-ph/0306112
637. R. Casalbuoni, A. Deandrea, M. Oertel, J. High Energy Phys.
0402, 032 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0311038
638. M. Blanke, A.J. Buras, A. Poschenrieder, S. Recksiegel,
C. Tarantino, S. Uhlig, A. Weiler, J. High Energy Phys. 0701,
066 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0610298
639. M. Blanke, A.J. Buras, B. Duling, A. Poschenrieder,
C. Tarantino, arXiv:hep-ph/0702136
640. P.Q. Hung, Phys. Lett. B 659, 585 (2008). arXiv:0711.0733
[hep-ph]
641. M. Blanke, A.J. Buras, A. Poschenrieder, C. Tarantino, S. Uh-
lig, A. Weiler, J. High Energy Phys. 0612, 003 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0605214
642. A.J. Buras, arXiv:hep-ph/9806471
643. S.R. Choudhury, A.S. Cornell, A. Deandrea, N. Gaur, A. Goyal,
Phys. Rev. D 75, 055011 (2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0612327
644. B. Aubert et al. (BaBar Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
121801 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0312027
645. Y . Yusa et al. (Belle Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 589, 103
(2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0403039
646. Y . Enari et al.(Belle Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 622, 218
(2005). arXiv:hep-ex/0503041
647. K. Abe et al. (Belle Collaboration), arXiv:hep-ex/0609049
648. B. Aubert et al.(BaBar Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
061803 (2007). arXiv:hep-ex/0610067
649. E. Arganda, M.J. Herrero, Phys. Rev. D 73, 055003 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0510405
650. P. Paradisi, J. High Energy Phys. 0602, 050 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0508054
651. Y . Kuno, Y . Okada, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 434 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ph/9604296
652. Y . Farzan, arXiv:hep-ph/0701106
653. A. Czarnecki, W.J. Marciano, A. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev. D 67,
073006 (2003) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 73, 119901 (2006)].
arXiv:hep-ph/0212229
654. J. Lee, arXiv:hep-ph/0504136
655. T. Han, H.E. Logan, B. Mukhopadhyaya, R. Srikanth, Phys.
Rev. D 72, 053007 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0505260
656. F. del Aguila, M. Masip, J.L. Padilla, Phys. Lett. B 627, 131
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0506063
657. S.R. Choudhury, N. Gaur, A. Goyal, Phys. Rev. D 72, 097702
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0508146
658. A. Abada, G. Bhattacharyya, M. Losada, Phys. Rev. D 73,
033006 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511275
659. G.F. Giudice, C. Grojean, A. Pomarol, R. Rattazzi, arXiv:
hep-ph/0703164
660. D. Acosta et al. (CDF Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
221802 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0406073
661. V .M. Abazov et al. (D0 Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
141801 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0404015
662. K. Huitu, J. Maalampi, A. Pietila, M. Raidal, Nucl. Phys. B487,
27 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9606311
663. C.X. Yue, S. Zhao, arXiv:hep-ph/0701017
664. E. Ma, M. Raidal, U. Sarkar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3769 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0006046
665. E. Ma, M. Raidal, U. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B 615, 313 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0012101
666. E. Ma, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B 638, 356 (2006). arXiv:
hep-ph/0602116
667. N. Sahu, U. Sarkar, arXiv:hep-ph/0701062
668. G. Marandella, C. Schappacher, A. Strumia, Phys. Rev. D 72,
035014 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0502096
669. T. Han, H.E. Logan, B. McElrath, L.T. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 67,
095004 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0301040
670. T. Han, H.E. Logan, L.T. Wang, J. High Energy Phys.0601, 099
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0506313
671. G. Azuelos et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 39S2, 13 (2005). arXiv:
hep-ph/0402037
672. J.F. Gunion, C. Loomis, K.T. Pitts, in Proceedings of 1996
DPF/DPB Summer Study on New Directions for High-Energy
Physics (Snowmass 96), Snowmass, CO, 25 June–12 July 1996,
p. LTH096. arXiv:hep-ph/9610237
673. J.F. Gunion, J. Grifols, A. Mendez, B. Kayser, F.I. Olness, Phys.
Rev. D 40, 1546 (1989)
674. M. Muhlleitner, M. Spira, Phys. Rev. D 68, 117701 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0305288
675. A.G. Akeroyd, M. Aoki, Phys. Rev. D 72, 035011 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0506176
676. T. Rommerskirchen, T. Hebbeker, J. Phys. G 33, N47 (2007)
677. A. Hektor, M. Kadastik, M. Muntel, M. Raidal, L. Rebane,
arXiv:0705.1495 [hep-ph]
678. T. Han, B. Mukhopadhyaya, Z. Si, K. Wang, arXiv:0706.0441
[hep-ph]
679. F. Gabbiani, A. Masiero, Nucl. Phys. B 322, 235 (1989)
680. F. Gabbiani, E. Gabrielli, A. Masiero, L. Silvestrini, Nucl. Phys.
B 477, 321 (1996). arXiv:hep-ph/9604387
681. P. Paradisi, J. High Energy Phys. 0510, 006 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0505046
682. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, Phys. Lett. B 338, 212 (1994).
arXiv:hep-ph/9408406
683. R. Barbieri, L.J. Hall, A. Strumia, Nucl. Phys. B 445, 219
(1995). arXiv:hep-ph/9501334
684. I. Masina, C.A. Savoy, Phys. Rev. D 71, 093003 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0501166
685. B.C. Allanach et al., in Proceedings of the APS/DPF/DPB Sum-
mer Study on the Future of Particle Physics (Snowmass 2001) ,
ed. by N. Graf, Snowmass, CO, 30 June–21 July 2001, p. P125.
arXiv:hep-ph/0202233
686. S. Antusch, E. Arganda, M.J. Herrero, A.M. Teixeira, J. High
Energy Phys. 0611, 090 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0607263
687. F. Deppisch, H. Päs, A. Redelbach, R. Rückl, Phys. Rev. D 73,
033004 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511062
688. L. Calibbi, A. Faccia, A. Masiero, S.K. Vempati, arXiv:hep-ph/
0610241


--- Page 165 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 177
689. M. Maltoni, T. Schwetz, M.A. Tortola, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Rev.
D 68, 113010 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0309130
690. S. Eidelman et al. (PDG Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 592,1
(2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0310053
691. S.T. Petcov, T. Shindou, Phys. Rev. D 74, 073006 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0605151
692. G. Weiglein et al. (LHC/LC Study Group), Phys. Rep. 426,4 7
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0410364
693. F. Deppisch, H. Päs, A. Redelbach, R. Rückl, Y . Shimizu,
arXiv:hep-ph/0206122
694. A.G. Akeroyd et al. (SuperKEKB Physics Working Group),
arXiv:hep-ex/0406071
695. F. Deppisch, H. Päs, A. Redelbach, R. Rückl, Y . Shimizu, Phys.
Rev. D 69, 054014 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0310053
696. K. Agashe, M. Graesser, Phys. Rev. D 61, 075008 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9904422
697. Yu.M. Andreev, S.I. Bityukov, N.V . Krasnikov, A.N. Toropin,
arXiv:hep-ph/0608176
698. A. Bartl, K. Hidaka, K. Hohenwarter-Sodek, T. Kernreiter,
W. Majerotto, W. Porod, Eur. Phys. J. C 46, 783 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0510074
699. W. Porod, Comput. Phys. Commun. 153, 275 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0301101
700. U. Bellgardt et al. (SINDRUM Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. B
299, 1 (1988)
701. S. Ritt (MEGA Collaboration), on the web page http://meg.web.
psi.ch/docs/talks/s_ritt/mar06_novosibirsk/ritt.ppt
702. T. Iijima, talk given at the 6th Workshop on a Higher Luminos-
ity B Factory, KEK, Tsukuba, Japan, November 2004
703. J. Aysto et al., arXiv:hep-ph/0109217
704. The PRIME Working Group, Search for the μ–e Conversion
Process at an Ultimate sensitivity of the order of 10 18 with
PRISM, unpublished
705. LOI to J-PARC 50-GeV PS, LOI-25, http://psux1.kek.jp/jhf-np/
LOIlist/LOIlist.html
706. Y . Kuno, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 149, 376 (2005)
707. A. Masiero, S.K. Vempati, O. Vives, New J. Phys.6, 202 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0407325
708. E. Ables et al. (MINOS Collaboration), Fermilab-proposal-
0875
709. G.S. Tzanakos (MINOS Collaboration), AIP Conf. Proc. 721,
179 (2004)
710. M. Komatsu, P. Migliozzi, F. Terranova, J. Phys. G 29, 443
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0210043
711. P. Migliozzi, F. Terranova, Phys. Lett. B 563, 73 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0302274
712. P. Huber, J. Kopp, M. Lindner, M. Rolinec, W. Winter, J. High
Energy Phys. 0605, 072 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0601266
713. Y . Itow et al., arXiv:hep-ex/0106019
714. A. Blondel, A. Cervera-Villanueva, A. Donini, P. Huber,
M. Mezzetto, P. Strolin, arXiv:hep-ph/0606111
715. P. Huber, M. Lindner, M. Rolinec, W. Winter, arXiv:hep-ph/
0606119
716. J. Burguet-Castell, D. Casper, E. Couce, J.J. Gomez-
Cadenas, P. Hernandez, Nucl. Phys. B 725, 306 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0503021
717. J.E. Campagne, M. Maltoni, M. Mezzetto, T. Schwetz, arXiv:
hep-ph/0603172
718. T. Blazek, S.F. King, Nucl. Phys. B 662, 359 (2003). arXiv:
hep-ph/0211368
719. S.F. King, J. High Energy Phys. 0508, 105 (2005)
arXiv:hep-ph/0506297
720. S. Antusch, S.F. King, Phys. Lett. B 631, 42 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0508044
721. S. Antusch, S.F. King, arXiv:0709.0666 [hep-ph]
722. P.H. Chankowski, S. Pokorski, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17, 575
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0110249
723. G. Altarelli, F. Feruglio, Phys. Rep. 320, 295 (1999)
724. A.Y . Smirnov, Phys. Rev. D 48, 3264 (1993). arXiv:hep-ph/
9304205
725. J. Pradler, F.D. Steffen, Phys. Rev. D 75, 023509 (2007).
arXiv:hep-ph/0608344
726. S. Davidson, J. High Energy Phys. 0303, 037 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0302075
727. P.H. Chankowski, K. Turzynski, Phys. Lett. B 570, 198 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0306059
728. A. Pilaftsis, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 14, 1811 (1999). arXiv:
hep-ph/9812256
729. S.F. King, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67, 107 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/
0310204
730. F.R. Joaquim, I. Masina, A. Riotto, arXiv:hep-ph/0701270
731. J.R. Ellis, K.A. Olive, Y . Santoso, V .C. Spanos, Phys. Lett. B
565, 176 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0303043
732. T. Blazek, S.F. King, Phys. Lett. B 518, 109 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0105005
733. F. Cuypers, S. Davidson, Eur. Phys. J. C 2, 503 (1998).
arXiv:hep-ph/9609487
734. E.J. Chun, K.Y . Lee, S.C. Park, Phys. Lett. B 566, 142 (2003).
arXiv:hep-ph/0304069
735. A. Strumia, F. Vissani, arXiv:hep-ph/0606054
736. F.R. Joaquim, A. Rossi, arXiv:hep-ph/0607298
737. T. Moroi, Phys. Lett. B 493, 366 (2000)
738. J. Hisano, Y . Shimizu, Phys. Lett. B 565, 183 (2003)
739. M. Ciuchini, A. Masiero, L. Silvestrini, S.K. Vempati, O. Vives,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 071801 (2004)
740. S. Dimopoulos, L.J. Hall, Phys. Lett. B 344, 185 (1995)
741. J. Hisano, M. Kakizaki, M. Nagai, Y . Shimizu, Phys. Lett. B
604, 216 (2004)
742. M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Ann. Phys. 318, 119 (2005)
743. V .M. Khatsimovsky, I.B. Khriplovich, A.R. Zhitnitsky, Z. Phys.
C 36, 455 (1987)
744. A.R. Zhitnitsky, Phys. Rev. D 55, 3006 (1997)
745. F.R. Joaquim, A. Rossi, arXiv:hep-ph/0604083
746. M. Dine, W. Fischler, M. Srednicki, Nucl. Phys. B 189, 575
(1981)
747. S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B 192, 353 (1981)
748. C.R. Nappi, B.A. Ovrut, Phys. Lett. B 113, 175 (1982)
749. S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B 219, 479 (1983)
750. M. Dine, A.E. Nelson, Phys. Rev. D 48, 1277 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9303230
751. M. Dine, A.E. Nelson, Y . Shirman, Phys. Rev. D 51, 1362
(1995). arXiv:hep-ph/9408384
752. M.A. Giorgi et al. (SuperB Group,), INFN Roadmap Report,
March 2006
753. Y . Mori et al., (PRISM/PRIME Working Group), LOI
at J-PARC 50-GeV PS, LOI-25. http://psux1.kek.jp/
~jhf-np/LOIlist/LOIlist.html
754. M. Cvetic, I. Papadimitriou, G. Shiu, Nucl. Phys. B 659, 193
(2003) [Erratum:Nucl. Phys. B 696, 298 (2004)]
755. M. Cvetic, P. Langacker, arXiv:hep-th/0607238
756. R. Barbieri, D.V . Nanopoulos, G. Morchio, F. Strocchi, Phys.
Lett. B 90, 91 (1980)
757. P. Langacker, Phys. Rep. 72, 185 (1981)
758. D. Chang, A. Masiero, H. Murayama, Phys. Rev. D 67, 075013
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0205111
759. T. Moroi, J. High Energy Phys. 0003, 019 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0002208
760. N. Akama, Y . Kiyo, S. Komine, T. Moroi, Phys. Rev. D 64,
095012 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0104263
761. J. Sato, K. Tobe, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 498, 189 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0010348
762. M. Apollonio et al.(CHOOZ Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 466,
415 (1999). arXiv:hep-ex/9907037


--- Page 166 ---
178 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
763. L. Calibbi, A. Faccia, A. Masiero, S.K. Vempati, Phys. Rev. D
74, 116002 (2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0605139
764. K. Abe et al. (Belle Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 171802
(2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0310029
765. A.J. Buras, P.H. Chankowski, J. Rosiek, L. Slawianowska,
Nucl. Phys. B 659, 3 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0210145
766. G. Isidori, P. Paradisi, Phys. Lett. B 639, 499 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0605012
767. E. Lunghi, W. Porod, O. Vives, Phys. Rev. D74, 075003 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0605177
768. J. Foster, K.i. Okumura, L. Roszkowski, Phys. Lett. B 641, 452
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0604121
769. G.R. Farrar, P. Fayet, Phys. Lett. B 76, 575 (1978)
770. L.J. Hall, M. Suzuki, Nucl. Phys. B 231, 419 (1984)
771. R. Barbier et al., Phys. Rep. 420, 1 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/
0406039
772. D. Comelli, A. Masiero, M. Pietroni, A. Riotto, Phys. Lett. B
324, 397 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9310374
773. R. Kuchimanchi, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 48, 4352
(1993). arXiv:hep-ph/9306290
774. K. Huitu, J. Maalampi, Phys. Lett. B 344, 217 (1995).
arXiv:hep-ph/9410342
775. R. Kitano, K.y. Oda, Phys. Rev. D 61, 113001 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9911327
776. M. Frank, K. Huitu, Phys. Rev. D 64, 095015 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0106004
777. J.R. Ellis, G. Gelmini, C. Jarlskog, G.G. Ross, J.W.F. Valle,
Phys. Lett. B 150, 142 (1985)
778. S. Davidson, M. Losada, Phys. Rev. D 65, 075025 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0010325
779. K.S. Babu, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1705 (1990)
780. M. Hirsch, M.A. Diaz, W. Porod, J.C. Romao, J.W.F. Valle,
Phys. Rev. D 62, 113008 (2000) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 65,
119901 (2002)]. arXiv:hep-ph/0004115
781. M.A. Diaz, C. Mora, A.R. Zerwekh, Eur. Phys. J. C 44, 277
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0410285
782. A. Deandrea, J. Welzel, M. Oertel, J. High Energy Phys. 0410,
038 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0407216
783. W. Porod, M. Hirsch, J. Romao, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Rev. D 63,
115004 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0011248
784. A. Heister et al.(ALEPH Collaboration), Eur. Phys. J. C 31,1
(2003). arXiv:hep-ex/0210014
785. P. Abreu et al.(DELPHI Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 500,2 2
(2001). arXiv:hep-ex/0103015
786. P. Achard et al. (L3 Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 524,6 5
(2002). arXiv:hep-ex/0110057
787. B. Abbott et al. (D0 Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 62, 071701
(2000). arXiv:hep-ex/0005034
788. S. Aid et al. (H1 Collaboration), Z. Phys. C 71, 211 (1996).
arXiv:hep-ex/9604006
789. C. Adloff et al. (H1 Collaboration), Eur. Phys. J. C 20, 639
(2001). arXiv:hep-ex/0102050
790. W. Beenakker, R. Hopker, M. Spira, P.M. Zerwas, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 2905 (1995). arXiv:hep-ph/9412272
791. J. Kalinowski, R. Ruckl, H. Spiesberger, P.M. Zerwas, Phys.
Lett. B 414, 297 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9708272
792. G. Moreau, E. Perez, G. Polesello, Nucl. Phys. B 604, 3 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0003012
793. G. Moreau, M. Chemtob, F. Deliot, C. Royon, E. Perez, Phys.
Lett. B 475, 184 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9910341
794. S. Dimopoulos, L.J. Hall, Phys. Lett. B 207, 210 (1988)
795. H.K. Dreiner, P. Richardson, M.H. Seymour, Phys. Rev. D 63,
055008 (2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0007228
796. F. Deliot, G. Moreau, C. Royon, Eur. Phys. J. C 19, 155 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0007288
797. M. Chaichian, A. Datta, K. Huitu, S. Roy, Z.h. Yu, Phys. Lett.
B 594, 355 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0311327
798. S. Dimopoulos, R. Esmailzadeh, L.J. Hall, G.D. Starkman,
Phys. Rev. D 41, 2099 (1990)
799. B. Allanach et al. (R Parity Working Group Collaboration),
arXiv:hep-ph/9906224
800. E.L. Berger, B.W. Harris, Z. Sullivan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4472
(1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9903549
801. M. Chaichian, K. Huitu, Z.H. Yu, Phys. Lett. B 490, 87 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0007220
802. E.D. Richter-Was, L. Poggioli, ATLAS note ATLAS-PHYS-98-
131 (1998)
803. W.W. Armstrong et al., ATLAS technical proposal CERN-
LHCC-94-43, 1994
804. A. Belyaev, M.H. Genest, C. Leroy, R.R. Mehdiyev, J. High
Energy Phys. 0409, 012 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0401065
805. K.S. Babu, C.F. Kolda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 228 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/9909476
806. K.S. Babu, C. Kolda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 241802 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0206310
807. A. Dedes, J.R. Ellis, M. Raidal, Phys. Lett. B 549, 159 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0209207
808. D. Chang, W.S. Hou, W.Y . Keung, Phys. Rev. D48, 217 (1993).
arXiv:hep-ph/9302267
809. M. Sher, Y . Yuan, Phys. Rev. D44, 1461 (1991)
810. M. Sher, Phys. Rev. D 66, 057301 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/
0207136
811. R. Kitano, M. Koike, S. Komine, Y . Okada, Phys. Lett. B 575,
300 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0308021
812. S. Kanemura, Y . Kuno, M. Kuze, T. Ota, Phys. Lett. B607, 165
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0410044
813. A. Broncano, M.B. Gavela, E. Jenkins, Phys. Lett. B 552, 177
(2003) [Erratum: Phys. Lett. B 636, 330 (2006)]. arXiv:hep-ph/
0210271
814. M.C. Gonzalez-Garcia, J.W.F. Valle, Phys. Lett. B 216, 360
(1989)
815. S. Antusch, C. Biggio, E. Fernandez-Martinez, M.B. Gavela,
J. Lopez-Pavon, J. High Energy Phys. 0610, 084 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0607020
816. M. Apollonio et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 27, 331 (2003). hep-ex/
0301017
817. T. Araki et al. (KamLAND Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
081801 (2005). hep-ex/0406035
818. B. Aharmim et al. (SNO Collaboration), Phys. Rev. C 72,
055502 (2005). nucl-ex/0502021
819. M.H. Ahn et al. (K2K Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
041801 (2003). hep-ex/0212007
820. Y . Ashie et al. (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Phys. Rev.
D 71, 112005 (2005). hep-ex/0501064
821. P. Astier et al. (NOMAD Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. B 611,3
(2001). hep-ex/0106102
822. K. Eitel (KARMEN Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.
91, 191 (2001). hep-ex/0008002
823. Y . Declais et al., Nucl. Phys. B 434, 503 (1995)
824. D.A. Petyt (MINOS Collaboration) First MINOS results from
the NuMI beam. http://www-numi.fnal.gov/
825. M.C. Gonzalez-Garcia, Phys. Scr. T 121, 72 (2005).
hep-ph/0410030
826. V . Barger, S. Geer, K. Whisnant, New J. Phys. 6, 135 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0407140
827. D.S. Ayres et al. (NOvA Collaboration), hep-ex/0503053
828. J.J. Gomez-Cadenas et al. (CERN Working Group on Super
Beams Collaboration), hep-ph/0105297
829. J.E. Campagne, A. Cazes, Eur. Phys. J. C 45, 643 (2006).
hep-ex/0411062
830. P. Zucchelli, Phys. Lett. B 532, 166 (2002)
831. S. Geer, Phys. Rev. D 57, 6989 (1998) hep-ph/9712290
832. A. De Rujula, M.B. Gavela, P. Hernandez, Nucl. Phys. B 547,
21 (1999) hep-ph/9811390


--- Page 167 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 179
833. W.J. Marciano, A. Sirlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3629 (1993)
834. S. Eidelman et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Lett. B 592,1
(2004)
835. L. Fiorini (for the NA48/2 Collaboration), at ICHEP 2005
836. V .D. Barger, G.F. Giudice, T. Han, Phys. Rev. D 40, 2987
(1989)
837. P.H. Chankowski, A. Dabelstein, W. Hollik, W.M. Mosle,
S. Pokorski, J. Rosiek, Nucl. Phys. B 417, 101 (1994)
838. J.F. Gunion, H.E. Haber, G.L. Kane, S. Dawson, The Higgs
hunter Guide (Addison–Wesley, Reading, 1990)
839. A. Masiero, P. Paradisi, R. Petronzio, Phys. Rev. D 74, 011701
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511289
840. M. Krawczyk, D. Temes, Eur. Phys. J. C 44, 435 (2005).
arXiv:hep-ph/0410248
841. P. Krawczyk, S. Pokorski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 182 (1988)
842. J.R. Ellis, J. Hisano, M. Raidal, Y . Shimizu, Phys. Lett. B 528,
86 (2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0111324
843. I. Masina, Nucl. Phys. B 671, 432 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/
0304299
844. Y . Farzan, M.E. Peskin, Phys. Rev. D 70, 095001 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0405214
845. I. Masina, C. Savoy, Phys. Lett. B 579, 99 (2004). arXiv:
hep-ph/0309067
846. K.S. Babu, B. Dutta, R.N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5064
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0006329
847. S. Abel, O. Lebedev, J. High Energy Phys. 0601, 133 (2006)
848. T. Ibrahim, P. Nath, Phys. Rev. D 58, 111301 (1998) [Erratum:
Phys. Rev. D 60, 099902 (1999)]. arXiv:hep-ph/9807501
849. J. Hisano, Y . Shimizu, Phys. Rev. D 70, 093001 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ph/0406091
850. M. Brhlik, L.L. Everett, G.L. Kane, J.D. Lykken, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 83, 2124 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9905215
851. S. Abel, S. Khalil, O. Lebedev, Phys. Rev. Lett.86, 5850 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0103031
852. J.R. Ellis, S. Ferrara, D.V . Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B 114, 231
(1982)
853. S. Abel, S. Khalil, O. Lebedev, Nucl. Phys. B 606, 151 (2001).
hep-ph/0103320
854. D.A. Demir, O. Lebedev, K.A. Olive, M. Pospelov, A. Ritz,
Nucl. Phys. B 680, 339 (2004). hep-ph/0311314
855. K.A. Olive, M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Y . Santoso, Phys. Rev. D72,
075001 (2005). hep-ph/0506106
856. N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G.F. Giudice, A. Romanino,
Nucl. Phys. B 709, 3 (2005). hep-ph/0409232
857. G.F. Giudice, A. Romanino, Phys. Lett. B 634, 307 (2006).
hep-ph/0510197
858. D. Chang, W.-F. Chang, W.-Y . Keung, Phys. Rev. D71, 076006
(2005). hep-ph/0503055
859. A.D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B 129, 177 (1983)
860. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2607 (1987)
861. V . Agrawal, S.M. Barr, J.F. Donoghue, D. Seckel, Phys. Rev. D
57, 5480 (1998). hep-ph/9707380
862. R. Bousso, J. Polchinski, J. High Energy Phys. 06, 006 (2000).
hep-th/0004134
863. N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, S. Kachru, hep-th/0501082
864. R. Arnowitt, J.L. Lopez, D.V . Nanopoulos, Phys. Rev. D 42,
2423 (1990)
865. G. Degrassi, E. Franco, S. Marchetti, L. Silvestrini, J. High En-
ergy Phys. 11, 044 (2005). hep-ph/0510137
866. M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2526 (1999).
hep-ph/9904483
867. M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Phys. Rev. D 63, 073015 (2001).
hep-ph/0010037
868. A. Arvanitaki, C. Davis, P.W. Graham, J.G. Wacker, Phys. Rev.
D 70, 117703 (2004). hep-ph/0406034
869. C.A. Baker et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 131801 (2006).
hep-ex/0602020
870. O. Lebedev, W. Loinaz, T. Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. D 61, 115005
(2000)
871. M.J. Ramsey-Musolf, Phys. Rev. D 62, 056009 (2000).
arXiv:hep-ph/0004062
872. O. Lebedev, W. Loinaz, T. Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. D 62, 055014
(2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0002106
873. J.H. Park, J. High Energy Phys. 0610, 077 (2006)
874. M.J. Ramsey-Musolf, S. Su, arXiv:hep-ph/0612057
875. M.A. Sanchis-Lozano, Contributed paper to the Workshop on
B-Factories and New Measurements, KEK, 13–14 September
2006. arXiv:hep-ph/0610046
876. B.A. Campbell, D.W. Maybury, Nucl. Phys B 709, 419 (2005)
877. W. Loinaz, N. Okamura, S. Rayyan, T. Takeuchi, L.C.R. Wije-
wardhana, Phys. Rev. D 70, 113004 (2004)
878. M. Finkemeier, Phys. Lett. B 387, 391 (1996). arXiv:hep-ph/
9505434
879. G. Czapek et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 17 (1993)
880. D.I. Britton et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3000 (1992)
881. A.Y . Smirnov, R. Zukanovich Funchal, Phys. Rev. D74, 013001
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0603009
882. D. Pocanic, A. van der Schaaf (PEN Collaboration), PSI exper-
iment R-05-01
883. M.A. Bychkov, Ph.D. thesis, University of Virginia (2005),
unpublished. http://pibeta.phys.virginia.edu/docs/publications/
max_thesis/thesis.pdf
884. B.A. VanDevender, Ph.D. thesis, University of Virginia,
2005, unpublished. http://pibeta.phys.virginia.edu/docs/
publications/brent_diss.pdf
885. D. Bryman and T. Numao (PIENU Collaboration), TRIUMF
experiment 1072
886. NA48/2 Collaboration, Report CERN/SPSC/2000-003, 16 Jan-
uary 2000
887. L. Fiorini, PhD thesis, Scuola Normale Superi-
ore, Pisa, Italy, 2005, unpublished. Available from
http://lﬁorini.home.cern.ch/lﬁorini/
888. L. Fiorini (for the NA48/2 Collaboration), in Proc. HEP2005
Europhysics Conference, Lisbon, 21–27 July 2005, PoS (HEP
2005) 288
889. W.J. Marciano, A. Sirlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1815 (1988)
890. J.Z. Bai et al.(BES Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 53, 20 (1996)
891. V .V . Anashin et al. (KEDR Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. Proc.
Suppl. 169, 125 (2007). arXiv:hep-ex/0611046
892. A. Lusiani (BaBar Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.144,
105 (2005)
893. K. Abe et al. (Belle Collaboration), arXiv:hep-ex/0608046
894. R. Decker, M. Finkemeier, Phys. Lett. B 334, 199 (1994)
895. W. Buchmüller, R.D. Peccei, T. Yanagida, Annu. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. 55, 311 (2005)
896. W. Bernreuther, private communication
897. L. Michel, Proc. Phys. Soc. A, 63, 514 (1950)
898. W. Fetscher, H.-J. Gerber, K.F. Johnson, Phys. Lett. B 173, 102
(1986)
899. P. Langacker, Commun. Nucl. Part. Phys. 19 (1989)
900. A. Aktas et al. (H1 Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 634, 173
(2006). arXiv:hep-ex/0512060
901. W. Fetscher, H.-J. Gerber, Eur. Phys. J. C 15, 316 (2000)
902. F. Scheck, Electroweak and Strong Interactions (Springer,
Berlin, 1996)
903. J. Kirkby et al., PSI proposal R-99-06, 1999
904. A. Barczyk et al. (FAST Collaboration), arXiv:0707.3904 [hep-
ex]
905. W. Marciano, Phys. Rev. D 60, 093006 (1999)
906. I.C. Barnett et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 455, 329 (2000)
907. Y .S. Tsai, in Stanford Tau Charm(1989), pp. 0387-0393
908. Y .S. Tsai, Phys. Rev. D51, 3172 (1995)
909. J.H. Kuhn, E. Mirkes, Z. Phys. C 56, 661 (1992) [Erratum:
Z. Phys. C 67, 364 (1995)]


--- Page 168 ---
180 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
910. J.H. Kühn, E. Mirkes, Phys. Lett. B 398, 407 (1997)
911. I.I. Bigi, A.I. Sanda, Phys. Lett. B 625, 47 (2005)
912. A. Datta et al., hep-ph/0610162
913. J. Bernabeu et al., Nucl. Phys. B 763, 283 (2007)
914. D. Delepine et al., Phys. Rev. D 74, 056004 (2006)
915. A. Pich, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 21, 5652 (2006)
916. S. Anderson et al. (CLEO Collaboration),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3823 (1998)
917. J.J. Sakurai, Phys. Rev. 109, 980 (1958)
918. A.R. Zhitnitkii, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 31, 529 (1980)
919. V .P. Efrosinin, I.B. Khriplovich, G.G. Kirilin, Yu.G. Kudenko,
Phys. Lett. B 493, 293 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/0008199
920. I.I. Bigi, A.I. Sanda, CP Violation(Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2000)
921. A.I. Sanda, Phys. Rev. D 23, 2647 (1981)
922. N.G. Deshpande, Phys. Rev. D 23, 2654 (1981)
923. H.Y . Cheng, Phys. Rev. D26, 143 (1982)
924. H.Y . Cheng, Phys. Rev. D34, 1397 (1986)
925. I.I.Y . Bigi, A.I. Sanda, Phys. Rev. Lett.58, 1604 (1987)
926. M. Leurer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1967 (1989)
927. H.Y . Cheng, Phys. Rev. D42, 2329 (1990)
928. G. Belanger, C.Q. Geng, Phys. Rev. D 44, 2789 (1991)
929. R. Garisto, G.L. Kane, Phys. Rev. D 44, 2038 (1991)
930. M. Fabbrichesi, F. Vissani, Phys. Rev. D 55, 5334 (1997).
arXiv:hep-ph/9611237
931. G.H. Wu, J.N. Ng, Phys. Lett. B 392, 93 (1997). arXiv:
hep-ph/9609314
932. W.F. Chang, J.N. Ng, arXiv:hep-ph/0512334
933. J.A. Macdonald et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect.
A 506, 60 (2003)
934. M. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. D 73, 072005 (2006)
935. J-PARC experiment proposal P06. http://j-parc.jp/NuclPart/
Proposal_0606_e.html
936. W. Bernreuther, U. Low, J.P. Ma, O. Nachtmann, Z. Phys. C41,
143 (1988)
937. M. Skalsey, J. Van House, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1993 (1991)
938. M. Felcini, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 19, 3853 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ex/0404041
939. O. Jinnouchi, S. Asai, T. Kobayashi, Phys. Lett. B 572, 117
(2003). arXiv:hep-ex/0308030
940. M. Ahmed et al. (MEGA Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 65,
112002 (2002). arXiv:hep-ex/0111030
941. L. Willmann et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 49 (1999).
arXiv:hep-ex/9807011
942. P. Wintz, in ICHEP 98, Vancouver, Canada, 23–29 July 1998
943. J. Kaulard et al. (SINDRUM II Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B
422, 334 (1998)
944. W. Honecker et al. (SINDRUM II Collaboration), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 76, 200 (1996)
945. W. Bertl et al. (SINDRUM II Collaboration), Eur. Phys. J. C47,
337 (2006)
946. T. Mori et al., PSI proposal R-99-5, May 1999, available as UT-
ICEPP 00-02
947. A. Baldini et al., Research Proposal to INFN, Septembet 2002.
http://meg.web.psi.ch/docs/
948. S. Mihara et al., Cryogenics 44, 223 (2004)
949. W. Bertl et al. (SINDRUM Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. B 260,
1 (1985)
950. A. Czarnecki, W.J. Marciano, K. Melnikov, AIP Conf. Proc.
549, 938 (2002)
951. T.S. Kosmas, I.E. Lagaris, J. Phys. G 28, 2907 (2002)
952. R. Kitano, M. Koike, Y . Okada, Phys. Rev. D 66, 096002
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0203110
953. T.S. Kosmas, J.D. Vergados, O. Civitarese, A. Faessler, Nucl.
Phys. A 570, 637 (1994)
954. R.M. Dzhilkibaev, V .M. Lobashev, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 49, 384
(1989) [Yad. Fiz. 49, 622 (1989)]
955. M. Bachman et al., MECO, BNL proposal E 940, 1997
956. Letter of Intent to J-PARC, L24: The PRISM Project, a Muon
Source of the World-Highest Brightness by Phase Rotation,
2003
957. Letter of Intent to J-PARC, L26: Request for a Pulsed Proton
Beam Facility at J-PARC
958. G. Cvetic, C. Dib, C.S. Kim, J.D. Kim, Phys. Rev. D 66,
034008 (2002) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 059901].
arXiv:hep-ph/0202212
959. J.R. Ellis, M.E. Gomez, G.K. Leontaris, S. Lola, D.V . Nanopou-
l o s ,E u r .P h y s .J .C14, 319 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/9911459
960. T. Fukuyama, T. Kikuchi, N. Okada, Phys. Rev. D 68, 033012
(2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0304190
961. C.X. Yuex, Y .M. Zhang, L.J. Liu, Phys. Lett. B547, 252 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0209291
962. A. Ilakovac, Phys. Rev. D 62, 036010 (2000). arXiv:hep-ph/
9910213
963. W.J. Li, Y .D. Yang, X.D. Zhang, Phys. Rev. D 73, 073005
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0511273
964. D. Black, T. Han, H.J. He, M. Sher, Phys. Rev. D 66, 053002
(2002). arXiv:hep-ph/0206056
965. R.D. Cousins, V .L. Highland, Nucl. Instrum, Methods Phys.
Res. Sect. A 320, 331 (1992)
966. R. Barlow, Comput. Phys. Commun. 149, 97 (2002)
967. K. Abe et al. (Belle Collaboration), arXiv:0708.3272 [hep-ex]
968. Y . Miyazaki et al. (Belle Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 648, 341
(2007). arXiv:hep-ex/0703009
969. N.G. Unel, arXiv:hep-ex/0505030
970. M. Della Negra et al., CMS Physics Technical Design Report,
vol. 1, 2006
971. T. Speer et al., CMS Note 2006/032, 2006
972. E. James et al., CMS Note 2006/010, 2006
973. R. Santinelli, M. Biasini, CMS Note 2002/037, 2002
974. R. Santinelli, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 123, 234 (2003)
975. M.C. Chang et al. (Belle Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 68,
111101 (2003). arXiv:hep-ex/0309069
976. F. Abe et al. (CDF Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5742
(1998)
977. D. Ambrose et al. (BNL Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
5734 (1998). arXiv:hep-ex/9811038
978. W. Bonivento, N. Serra, LHCb Note 2007-028, 2007
979. S.N. Gninenko, M.M. Kirsanov, N.V . Krasnikov, V .A. Matveev,
P. Nedelec, D. Sillou, M. Sher, CERN-SPSC-2004-016
980. M. Sher, I. Turan, Phys. Rev. D 69, 017302 (2004). arXiv:
hep-ph/0309183
981. D.E. Groom et al. (Particle Data Group), Eur. Phys. J. C 15,1
(2000)
982. B. Aubert et al. (BaBar Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
191801 (2005). arXiv:hep-ex/0506066
983. Y . Yusa et al. (Belle Collaboration), Phys. Lett. B 640, 138
(2006). arXiv:hep-ex/0603036
984. G. Ingelman, A. Edin, J. Rathsman, Comput. Phys. Commun.
101, 108 (1997). arXiv:hep-ph/9605286
985. M.V . Romalis, W.C. Grifﬁth, E.N. Fortson, Phys. Rev. Lett.86,
2505 (2001). arXiv:hep-ex/0012001
986. R.D. Peccei, H.R. Quinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1440 (1977)
987. J.S.M. Ginges, V .V . Flambaum, Phys. Rep. 397, 63 (2004).
arXiv:physics/0309054
988. I.B. Khriplovich, S.K. Lamoreaux, CP Violation Without
Strangeness: Electric Dipole Moments of Particles, Atoms, and
Molecules (Springer, Berlin, 1997)
989. R.J. Crewther, P. Di Vecchia, G. Veneziano, E. Witten, Phys.
Lett. B 88, 123 (1979) [Erratum: Phys. Lett. B 91, 487 (1980)]
990. K. Kawarabayashi, N. Ohta, Prog. Theor. Phys.66, 1789 (1981)
991. D. Chang, W.Y . Keung, A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 900
(1999)


--- Page 169 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182 181
992. O. Lebedev, M. Pospelov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 101801 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0204359
993. M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Y . Santoso, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 091801
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0510254
994. M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Y . Santoso, Phys. Rev. D 74, 075006
(2006). arXiv:hep-ph/0608269
995. C. Grojean, G. Servant, J.D. Wells, Phys. Rev. D 71, 036001
(2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0407019
996. D. Bodeker, L. Fromme, S.J. Huber, M. Seniuch, J. High Energy
Phys. 0502, 026 (2005). arXiv:hep-ph/0412366
997. S.J. Huber, M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Phys. Rev. D 75, 036006
(2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0610003
998. P.G. Harris et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 904 (1999)
999. K.F. Smith et al., Phys. Lett. B 234, 191 (1990)
1000. I.S. Altarev et al., Phys. At. Nucl. 59, 1152 (1996) [Yad. Fiz.
59(N7) 1204 (1996)]
1001. K. Green et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 404, 381 (1998)
1002. J.M. Pendlebury et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 032102 (2004)
1003. P.G. Harris, J.M. Pendlebury, Phys. Rev. A 73, 014101 (2006)
1004. R. Golub, J.M. Pendlebury, Phys. Lett. A 62, 337 (1977)
1005. C.A. Baker et al., Phys. Lett. A 308-1, 67 (2003)
1006. C.A. Baker et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 501, 517 (2003)
1007. A. Steyerl et al., Phys. Lett. A 116, 347 (1986)
1008. http://ucn.web.psi.ch
1009. http://nedm.web.psi.ch
1010. S. Groeger et al., J. Res. NIST 110, 179 (2005)
1011. S. Groeger et al., Appl. Phys. B 80, 645 (2005)
1012. K. Green et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 404, 381 (1998)
1013. http://p25ext.lanl.gov/edm/edm.html
1014. R. Golub, K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rep. 237, 1 (1994)
1015. C.P. Liu, R.G.E. Timmermans, Phys. Rev. C70, 055501 (2004).
arXiv:nucl-th/0408060
1016. O. Lebedev, K.A. Olive, M. Pospelov, A. Ritz, Phys. Rev. D70,
016003 (2004). arXiv:hep-ph/0402023
1017. R. Stutz, E. Cornell, Bull. Am. Soc. Phys. 89, 76 (2004)
1018. J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics , Wiley, New York
(1975)
1019. A.J. Silenko, arXiv:hep-ph/0604095
1020. J. Bailey et al. (CERN Muon Storage Ring Collaboration),
J. Phys. G 4, 345 (1978)
1021. F.J.M. Farley et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 052001 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ex/0307006
1022. Y .K. Semertzidis et al., arXiv:hep-ph/0012087
1023. J.P. Miller et al. (EDM Collaboration), AIP Conf. Proc. 698,
196 (2004)
1024. A. Adelmann, K. Kirch, arXiv:hep-ex/0606034
1025. Y .K. Semertzidis et al. (EDM Collaboration), AIP Conf. Proc.
698 200 (2004). arXiv:hep-ex/0308063
1026. I.B. Khriplovich, Phys. Lett. B 444, 98 (1998). arXiv:
hep-ph/9809336
1027. I.I. Rabi, J.R. Zacharias, S. Millman, P. Kusch, Phys. Rev. 53,
318 (1938)
1028. Y .F. Orlov, W.M. Morse, Y .K. Semertzidis, Phys. Rev. Lett.96,
214802 (2006). arXiv:hep-ex/0605022
1029. E.D. Commins, J.D. Jackson, D.P. DeMille, Am. J. Phys. 75,
532 (2007)
1030. E.D. Commins, Am. J. Phys. 59, 1077 (1991)
1031. M.G. Kozlov, A.V . Titov, N.S. Mosyagin, P.V . Souchko, Phys.
Rev. A 56, R3326 (1997)
1032. M.K. Nayak, R.K. Chaudhuri, B.P. Das, Phys. Rev. A 75,
022510 (2007)
1033. N. Mosyagin, M. Kozlov, A. Titov, J. Phys. B 31, L763 (1998)
1034. M.G. Kozlov, L. Labzowski, J. Phys. B 28, 1933 (1995)
1035. A.N. Petrov et al., Phys. Rev. A 72, 022505 (2005)
1036. T.A. Isaev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 163004 (2005)
1037. E.R. Meyer, J.L. Bohn, M.P. Deskevitch, Phys. Rev. A 73,
062108 (2006)
1038. A.N. Petrov, N.S. Mosyagin, T.A. Isaev, A.V . Titov, Phys. Rev.
A 76, 030501(R) (2007)
1039. M.A. Player, P.G.H. Sandars, J. Phys. B 3, 1620 (1970)
1040. Z.W. Liu, H.P. Kelly, Phys. Rev. A 45, R4210 (1992)
1041. W.R. Johnson, D.S. Guo, M. Idrees, J. Sapirstein, Phys. Rev. A
34, 1043 (1986)
1042. S.A. Murthy, D. Krause, Z.L. Li, L. Hunter, Phys. Rev. Lett.63,
965 (1989)
1043. M.V . Romalis, private communication
1044. T.W. Kornack, M.V . Romalis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 253002
(2002)
1045. T.W. Kornack, R.K. Ghosh, M.V . Romalis, Phys. Rev. Lett.95,
230801 (2005)
1046. M.V . Romalis, E.N. Fortson, Phys. Rev. A59, 4547 (1999)
1047. C. Chin, V . Leiber, V . Vuletic, A.J. Kerman, S. Chu, Phys. Rev.
A 63, 033401 (2001)
1048. D. Heinzen, private communication
1049. D.S. Weiss, F. Fang, J. Chen, Bull. Am, Phys. Soc. APR03
J1.008 (2003)
1050. J. Amini, H. Gould, arxiv.org/abs/physics/0602011 (2006)
1051. Y . Sakemi, private communication
1052. J.J. Hudson, B.E. Sauer, M.R. Tarbutt, E.A. Hinds, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 023003 (2002)
1053. M.R. Tarbutt et al., J. Phys. B 35, 5013 (2002)
1054. B.E. Sauer, J. Wang, E. Hinds, J. Chem. Phys.105, 7412 (1996)
1055. D. DeMille et al., Phys. Rev. A 61, 052507 (2000)
1056. L.R. Hunter et al., Phys. Rev. A 65, 030501(R) (2002)
1057. D. Kawall, F. Bay, S. Bickman, Y . Jiang, D. DeMille, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 133007 (2004)
1058. E. Cornell, co-workers, private communication
1059. N.E. Shafer-Ray, Phys. Rev. A 73, 34102 (2006);
1060. N.E. Shafer-Ray, private communication
1061. S.K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. A 66, 022109 (2002)
1062. F.L. Shapiro, Sov. Phys. Usp. 11, 345 (1968)
1063. V .A. Dzuba, O.P. Sushkov, W.R. Johnson, U.I. Safronova, Phys.
Rev. A 66, 032105 (2002)
1064. B.J. Heidenreich et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 253004 (2005)
1065. T.N. Mukhamedjanov, V .A. Dzuba, O.P. Sushkov, Phys. Rev. A
68, 042103 (2003)
1066. S. Lamoreaux, arXiv:physics/0701198 (2007)
1067. C.-Y . Liu, S.K. Lamoreaux, Mod. Phys. A 19, 1235 (2004)
1068. C.-Y . Liu, private communication
1069. M. Mercier, Magnetism 6, 77 (1974)
1070. J.L. Feng, K.T. Matchev, Y . Shadmi, Nucl. Phys. B 613, 366
(2001). arXiv:hep-ph/0107182
1071. A. Romanino, A. Strumia, Nucl. Phys. B 622, 73 (2002).
arXiv:hep-ph/0108275
1072. A. Bartl, W. Majerotto, W. Porod, D. Wyler, Phys. Rev. D 68,
053005 (2003). arXiv:hep-ph/0306050
1073. M. Aoki et al., J-Parc Letter of Intent, 2003
1074. A. Adelmann, K. Kirch, C.J.G. Onderwater, T. Schietinger,
A. Streun, to be published
1075. P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. (London) A 117, 610 (1928),
1076. P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. (London) A 118, 351 (1928).
1077. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics , 4th edn.
(Oxford University Press, London, 1958). Eq. 9.28 uses Dirac’s
original notation
1078. B.C. Odom, D. Hanneke, B. D’Urso, G. Gabrielse, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 97, 030801 (2006) [Erratum: Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 039902
(2007)]
1079. T. Kinoshita, M. Nio, Phys. Rev. D 73, 053007 (2006).
arXiv:hep-ph/0512330
1080. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 73 416L (1948)
1081. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 76, 790 (1949). The former paper con-
tains a misprint in the expression for ae that is corrected in the
longer paper


--- Page 170 ---
182 Eur. Phys. J. C (2008) 57: 13–182
1082. T. Blum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 052001 (2003)
1083. C. Aubin, T. Blum, PoS LAT2005:089 (2005). hep-lat/
0509064,
1084. M. Hayakawa et al., PoS LAT2005:353 (2005). hep-lat/
0509016
1085. J.P. Miller, E. de Rafael, B.L. Roberts, Rep. Prog. Phys. 70, 795
(2007). arXiv:hep-ph/0703049
1086. It has been proposed that the hadronic contributions could also
be determined from hadronicτdecay, plus the conserved vector
current hypothesis, but this prescriptions seems to have internal
consistency issues which are still under study. See Ref. [1082]
and references therein
1087. R.L. Garwin, L.M. Lederman, M. Weinrich, Phys. Rev. 105,
1415 (1957)
1088. J. Bailey et al. (CERN-Mainz-Daresbury Collaboration), Nucl.
Phys. B 150, 1 (1979)
1089. F.J.M. Farley, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 523, 251 (2004).
arXiv:hep-ex/0307024
