--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1849-1
Regular Article - Experimental Physics
Performance of the ATLAS Trigger System in 2010
The ATLAS Collaboration⋆
CERN, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
Received: 8 October 2011 / Revised: 3 December 2011 / Published online: 3 January 2012
© CERN for the beneﬁt of the ATLAS collaboration 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Proton–proton collisions at √ s = 7 TeV and
heavy ion collisions at √ sNN = 2.76 TeV were produced
by the LHC and recorded using the ATLAS experiment’s
trigger system in 2010. The LHC is designed with a maxi-
mum bunch crossing rate of 40 MHz and the ATLAS trigger
system is designed to record approximately 200 of these per
second. The trigger system selects events by rapidly identi-
fying signatures of muon, electron, photon, tau lepton, jet,
and B meson candidates, as well as using global event signa-
tures, such as missing transverse energy. An overview of the
ATLAS trigger system, the evolution of the system during
2010 and the performance of the trigger system components
and selections based on the 2010 collision data are shown.
A brief outline of plans for the trigger system in 2011 is
presented.
1 Introduction
ATLAS [ 1] is one of two general-purpose experiments
recording LHC [ 2] collisions to study the Standard Model
(SM) and search for physics beyond the SM. The LHC
is designed to operate at a centre of mass energy of√ s = 14 TeV in proton–proton ( pp) collision mode with
an instantaneous luminosity L = 1034 cm−2 s−1 and at√ sNN = 2.76 TeV in heavy-ion (PbPb) collision mode with
L = 1031 cm−2 s−1. The LHC started single-beam opera-
tion in 2008 and achieved ﬁrst collisions in 2009. During
a prolonged period of pp collision operation in 2010 at√ s = 7 TeV, ATLAS collected 45 pb−1of data with lumi-
nosities ranging from 1027 cm−2 s−1 to 2 × 1032 cm−2 s−1.
The pp running was followed by a short period of heavy ion
running at √ sNN = 2.76 TeV in which ATLAS collected
9.2 µb−1of PbPb collisions.
Focusing mainly on the pp running, the performance
of the ATLAS trigger system during 2010 LHC operation
is presented in this paper. The ATLAS trigger system is
⋆ e-mail: atlas.publications@cern.ch
designed to record events at approximately 200 Hz from
the LHC’s 40 MHz bunch crossing rate. The system has
three levels; the ﬁrst level ( L1) is a hardware-based sys-
tem using information from the calorimeter and muon sub-
detectors, the second (L2) and third (Event Filter, EF)l e v e l s
are software-based systems using information from all sub-
detectors. Together, L2 and EF are called the High Level
Trigger (HLT).
For each bunch crossing, the trigger system veriﬁes if at
least one of hundreds of conditions ( triggers) is satisﬁed.
The triggers are based on identifying combinations of can-
didate physics objects ( signatures) such as electrons, pho-
tons, muons, jets, jets with b-ﬂavour tagging (b-jets) or spe-
ciﬁc B-physics decay modes. In addition, there are triggers
for inelastic pp collisions (minbias) and triggers based on
global event properties such as missing transverse energy
(Emiss
T ) and summed transverse energy (∑ET).
In Sect. 2, following a brief introduction to the ATLAS
detector, an overview of the ATLAS trigger system is given
and the terminology used in the remainder of the paper is
explained. Section 3 presents a description of the trigger
system commissioning with cosmic rays, single-beams, and
collisions. Section 4 provides a brief description of the L1
trigger system. Section 5 introduces the reconstruction al-
gorithms used in the HLT to process information from the
calorimeters, muon spectrometer, and inner detector track-
ing detectors. The performance of the trigger signatures, in-
cluding rates and efﬁciencies, is described in Sect. 6. Sec-
tion 7 describes the overall performance of the trigger sys-
tem. The plans for the trigger system operation in 2011 are
described in Sect. 8.
2 Overview
The ATLAS detector [ 1] shown in Fig. 1, has a cylindri-
cal geometry 1 which covers almost the entire solid angle
1The ATLAS coordinate system has its origin at the nominal interac-
tion point at the centre of the detector and the z-axis coincident with


--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 1 The ATLAS detector
around the nominal interaction point. Owing to its cylindri-
cal geometry, detector components are described as being
part of the barrel if they are in the central region of pseudo-
rapidity or part of the end-caps if they are in the forward
regions. The ATLAS detector is composed of the following
sub-detectors:
Inner detector:T h e Inner Detector tracker (ID) consists of
a silicon pixel detector nearest the beam-pipe, surrounded
by a SemiConductor Tracker (SCT) and a Transition Ra-
diation Tracker (TRT). Both the Pixel and SCT cover the
region |η| < 2.5, while the TRT covers |η| < 2. The ID is
contained ina2T e s l as o lenoidal magnetic ﬁeld. Although
not used in the L1 trigger system, tracking information is a
key ingredient of the HLT.
Calorimeter: The calorimeters cover the region |η| < 4.9
and consist ofelectromagnetic (EM) and hadronic (HCAL)
calorimeters. The EM, Hadronic End-Cap (HEC) and For-
ward Calorimeters (FCal) use a Liquid Argon and ab-
sorber technology ( LAr). The central hadronic calorimeter
is based on steel absorber interleaved with plastic scintil-
lator ( Tile). A presampler is installed in front of the EM
calorimeter for |η| < 1.8. There are two separate readout
paths: one with coarse granularity ( trigger towers )u s e d
the beam pipe, such that pseudorapidity η≡− ln(tan θ
2 ). The positive
x-axis is deﬁned as pointing from the interaction point towards the
centre of the LHC ring and the positive y-axis is deﬁned as pointing
upwards. The azimuthal degree of freedom is denoted φ.
by L1, and one with ﬁne granularity used by the HLT and
ofﬂine reconstruction.
Muon spectrometer:T h e Muon Spectrometer (MS) detec-
tors are mounted in and around air core toroids that gener-
ate an average ﬁeld of 0.5 T in the barrel and 1 T in the end-
cap regions. Precision tracking information is provided by
Monitored Drift Tubes (MDT) over the region |η| < 2.7
(|η| < 2.0 for the innermost layer) and by Cathode Strip
Chambers (CSC) in the region 2 < |η| < 2.7. Information
is provided to the L1 trigger system by the Resistive Plate
Chambers (RPC) in the barrel ( |η| < 1.05) and the Thin
Gap Chambers (TGC) in the end-caps (1.05 < |η| < 2.4).
Specialized detectors: Electrostatic beam pick-up devices
(BPTX) are located at z =± 175 m. The Beam Condi-
tions Monitor (BCM) consists of two stations containing
diamond sensors located at z =± 1.84 m, corresponding
to |η|≃ 4.2. There are two forward detectors, the LUCID
Cerenkov counter covering 5 .4 < |η|
< 5.9 and the Zero
Degree Calorimeter (ZDC) covering |η| > 8.3. The Mini-
mum Bias Trigger Scintillators (MBTS), consisting of two
scintillator wheels with 32 counters mounted in front of the
calorimeter end-caps, cover 2.1 < |η| < 3.8.
When operating at the design luminosity of 1034 cm−2 s−1
the LHC will have a 40 MHz bunch crossing rate, with
an average of 25 interactions per bunch crossing. The pur-
pose of the trigger system is to reduce this input rate to an
output rate of about 200 Hz for recording and ofﬂine pro-
cessing. This limit, corresponding to an average data rate of
∼ 300 MB/s, is determined by the computing resources for


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 3 of 61
Fig. 2 Schematic of the ATLAS trigger system
ofﬂine storage and processing of the data. It is possible to
record data at signiﬁcantly higher rates for short periods of
time. For example, during 2010 running there were physics
beneﬁts from running the trigger system with output rates of
up to ∼ 600 Hz. During runs with instantaneous luminosity
∼10
32 cm−2 s−1, the average event size was ∼ 1.3 MB.
A schematic diagram of the ATLAS trigger system is
s h o w ni nF i g .2. Detector signals are stored in front-end
pipelines pending a decision from the L1 trigger system.
In order to achieve a latency of less than 2.5 µs, the L1 trig-
ger system is implemented in fast custom electronics. The
L1 trigger system is designed to reduce the rate to a maxi-
mum of 75 kHz. In 2010 running, the maximum L1 rate did
not exceed 30 kHz. In addition to performing the ﬁrst selec-
tion step, the L1 triggers identify Regions of Interest (RoIs)
within the detector to be investigated by the HLT.
The HLT consists of farms of commodity processors con-
nected by fast dedicated networks (Gigabit and 10 Gigabit
Ethernet). During 2010 running, the HLT processing farm
consisted of about 800 nodes conﬁgurable as either L2 or
EF and 300 dedicated EF nodes. Each node consisted of
eight processor cores, the majority with a 2.4 GHz clock
speed. The system is designed to expand to about 500 L2
nodes and 1800 EF nodes for running at LHC design lumi-
nosity. When an event is accepted by the L1 trigger (referred
to as an L1 accept), data from each detector are transferred
to the detector-speciﬁc Readout Buffers (ROB), which store
the event in fragments pending the L2 decision. One or more
ROBs are grouped into Readout Systems (ROS) which are
connected to the HLT networks. The L2 selection is based on
fast custom algorithms processing partial event data within
the RoIs identiﬁed by L1. The L2 processors request data
from the ROS corresponding to detector elements inside
each RoI, reducing the amount of data to be transferred and
Fig. 3 Electron trigger chain
processed in L2 to 2–6% of the total data volume. The L2
triggers reduce the rate to ∼ 3 kHz with an average process-
ing time of ∼ 40 ms/event. Any event with an L2 processing
time exceeding 5 s is recorded as a timeout event. During
runs with instantaneous luminosity∼1032 cm−2 s−1,t h ea v -
erage processing time of L2 was ∼ 50 ms/event (Sect. 7).
The Event Builder assembles all event fragments from
the ROBs for events accepted by L2, providing full event
information to the EF. The EF is mostly based on ofﬂine
algorithms invoked from custom interfaces for running in
the trigger system. The EF is designed to reduce the rate to
∼ 200 Hz with an average processing time of ∼ 4 s/event.
Any event with an EF processing time exceeding 180 s is
recorded as a timeout event. During runs with instantaneous
luminosity ∼1032 cm−2 s−1, the average processing time of
EF was ∼ 0.4 s/event (Sect. 7).
Data for events selected by the trigger system are written
to inclusive datastreams based on the trigger type. There are
four primary physics streams, Egamma, Muons, JetTauEt-
miss, MinBias, plus several additional calibration streams.
Overlaps and rates for these streams are shown in Sect. 7.
About 10% of events are written to anexpress stream where
prompt ofﬂine reconstruction provides calibration and Data
Quality (DQ) information prior to the reconstruction of
the physics streams. In addition to writing complete events
to a stream, it is also possible to write partial information
from one or more sub-detectors into a stream. Such events,
used for detector calibration, are written to the calibration
streams.
The trigger system is conﬁgured via a trigger menu
which deﬁnes trigger chains that start from a L1 trigger and
specify a sequence of reconstruction and selection steps for
the speciﬁc trigger signatures required in the trigger chain.
A trigger chain is often referred to simply as a trigger. Fig-
ure 3 shows an illustration of a trigger chain to select elec-
trons. Each chain is composed of Feature Extraction (FEX)


--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Table 1 The key trigger objects, the shortened names used to represent them in the trigger menu at L1 and the HLT, and the L1 thresholds used
for each trigger signature in the menu at L = 1032 cm−2 s−1. Thresholds are applied to ET for calorimeter triggers and pT for muon triggers
Trigger signature Representation
L1 HLT L1 Thresholds [GeV]
Electron EM e 2 3 5 10 10i 14 14i 85
Photon EM g 2 3 5 10 10i 14 14i 85
Muon MU mu 0 6 10 15 20
Jet J j 5 10 15 30 55 75 95 115
Forward jet FJ fj 10 30 55 95
Tau TAU tau 5 6 6 i 11 11i 20 30 50
Emiss
T XE xe 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 50∑ET TE te 20 50 100 180
Total jet energy JE je 60 100 140 200
b jet1 –b
MBTS MBTS mbts
BCM BCM –
ZDC ZDC –
LUCID LUCID –
Beam Pickup (BPTX) BPTX –
algorithms which create the objects (like calorimeter clus-
ters) and Hypothesis (HYPO) algorithms that apply selec-
tion criteria to the objects (e.g. transverse momentum greater
than 20 GeV). Caching in the trigger system allows features
extracted from one chain to be re-used in another chain, re-
ducing both the data access and processing time of the trig-
ger system.
Approximately 500 triggers are deﬁned in the current
trigger menus. Table 1 shows the key physics objects iden-
tiﬁed by the trigger system and gives the shortened repre-
sentation used in the trigger menus. Also shown are the L1
thresholds applied to transverse energy (ET) for calorimeter
triggers and transverse momentum (pT) for muon triggers.
The menu is composed of a number of different classes of
trigger:
Single object triggers: used for ﬁnal states with at least one
characteristic object. For example, a single muon trigger
with a nominal 6 GeV threshold is referred to in the trigger
menu as mu6.
Multiple object triggers: used for ﬁnal states with two or
more characteristic objects of the same type. For example,
di-muon triggers for selecting J/ψ → μμ decays. Trig-
gers requiring a multiplicity of two or more are indicated
in the trigger menu by perpending the multiplicity to the
trigger name, as in, 2mu6.
Combined triggers: used for ﬁnal states with two or more
characteristic objects of different types. For example,
a 13 GeV muon plus 20 GeV missing transverse energy
(E
miss
T ) trigger for selecting W → μν decays would be de-
noted mu13_xe20.
Topological triggers: used for ﬁnal states that require selec-
tions based on information from two or more RoIs. For ex-
ample the J/ψ → μμ trigger combines tracks from two
muon RoIs.
When referring to a particular level of a trigger, the level
(L1, L2 or EF) appears as a preﬁx, so L1_MU6 refers to the
L1 trigger item with a 6 GeV threshold and L2_mu6 refers to
the L2 trigger item with a 6 GeV threshold. A name without
a level preﬁx refers to the whole trigger chain.
Trigger rates can be controlled by changing thresholds or
applying different sets of selection cuts. The selectivity of
a set of cuts applied to a given trigger object in the menu
is represented by the terms loose, medium, and tight.T h i s
selection criteria is sufﬁxed to the trigger name, for exam-
ple e10_medium. Additional requirements, such as isola-
tion, can also be imposed to reduce the rate of some trig-
gers. Isolation is a measure of the amount of energy or num-
ber of particles near a signature. For example, the amount of
transverse energy (E
T) deposited in the calorimeter within
/Delta1R≡
√
(/Delta1η)2 + (/Delta1φ)2 < 0.2 of a muon is a measure of
the muon isolation. Isolation is indicated in the trigger menu
by an i appended to the trigger name (capital I for L1), for
example L1_EM20I or e20i_tight. Isolation was not used in
any primary triggers in 2010 (see below).
Prescale factors can be applied to each L1 trigger and
each HLT chain, such that only 1 in N events passing the
trigger causes an event to be accepted at that trigger level.
Prescales can also be set so as to disable speciﬁc chains.
Prescales control the rate and composition of the express
stream. A series of L1 and HLT prescale sets, covering a


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 5 of 61
range of luminosities, are deﬁned to accompany each menu.
These prescales are auto-generated based on a set of rules
that take into account the priority for each trigger within the
following categories:
Primary triggers: principal physics triggers, which should
not be prescaled.
Supporting triggers: triggers important to support the pri-
mary triggers, e.g. orthogonal triggers for efﬁciency mea-
surements or lowerE
T threshold, prescaled versions of pri-
mary triggers.
Monitoring and calibration triggers: to collect data to en-
sure the correct operation of the trigger and detector, in-
cluding detector calibrations.
Prescale changes are applied as luminosity drops during
an LHC ﬁll, in order to maximize the bandwidth for physics,
while ensuring a constant rate for monitoring and calibration
triggers. Prescale changes can be applied at any point during
a run at the beginning of a new luminosity block (LB). A lu-
minosity block is the fundamental unit of time for the lumi-
nosity measurement and was approximately 120 seconds in
2010 data-taking.
Further ﬂexibility is provided by deﬁning bunch groups,
which allow triggers to include speciﬁc requirements on the
LHC bunches colliding in ATLAS. These requirements in-
clude paired (colliding) bunches for physics triggers and
empty bunches for cosmic ray, random noise and pedestal
triggers. More complex schemes are possible, such as re-
quiring unpaired bunches separated by at least 75 ns from
any bunch in the other beam.
2.1 Datasets used for performance measurements
During 2010 the LHC delivered a total integrated luminosity
of 48.1 pb
−1 to ATLAS during stable beams in√ s = 7T e V
pp collisions, of which 45 pb −1 was recorded. Unless oth-
erwise stated, the analyses presented in this publication are
based on the full 2010 dataset. To ensure the quality of data,
events are required to pass data quality (DQ) conditions that
include stable beams and good status for the relevant detec-
tors and triggers. The cumulative luminosities delivered by
the LHC and recorded by ATLAS are shown as a function
of time in Fig. 4.
In order to compare trigger performance between data
and MC simulation, a number of MC samples were gen-
erated. The MC samples used were produced using the
PYTHIA [3] event generator with a parameter set [4] tuned
to describe the underlying event and minimum bias data
from Tevatron measurements at 0.63 TeV and 1.8 TeV . The
generated events were processed through a GEANT4 [ 5]
based simulation of the ATLAS detector [6].
In some cases, where explicitly mentioned, performance
results are shown for a subset of the data corresponding to
Fig. 4 Proﬁle with respect to time of the cumulative luminosity
recorded by ATLAS during stable beams in √ s = 7T e Vpp collisions
(from the online luminosity measurement). The letters A–I refer to the
data taking periods
Table 2 Data-taking periods in 2010 running
Period Dates
∫
L [pb−1]M a x . L [cm−2 s−1]
Proton–proton
A 30/3–22/4 0 .4 × 10−3 2.5 × 1027
B 23/4–17/5 9 .0 × 10−3 6.8 × 1028
C 18/5–23/6 9 .5 × 10−3 2.4 × 1029
D 24/6–28/7 0.3 1 .6 × 1030
E 29/7–18/8 1.4 3 .9 × 1030
F 19/8–21/9 2.0 1 .0 × 1031
G 22/9–07/10 9.1 7 .1 × 1031
H 08/10–23/10 9.3 1 .5 × 1032
I 24/10–29/10 23.0 2 .1 × 1032
Heavy ion
J 8/11–6/12 9 .2 × 10−6 3.0 × 1025
a speciﬁc period of time. The 2010 run was split into data-
taking periods; a new period being deﬁned when there was
a signiﬁcant change in the detector conditions or instanta-
neous luminosity. The data-taking periods are summarized
in Table 2. The rise in luminosity during the year was ac-
companied by an increase in the number of proton bunches
injected into the LHC ring. From the end of September (Pe-
riod G onwards) the protons were injected in bunch trains
each consisting of a number of proton bunches separated by
150 ns.
3 Commissioning
In this section, the steps followed to commission the trig-
ger are outlined and the trigger menus employed during


--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
the commissioning phase are described. The physics trigger
menu, deployed in July 2010, is also presented and the evo-
lution of the menu during the subsequent 2010 data-taking
period is described.
3.1 Early commissioning
The commissioning of the ATLAS trigger system started be-
fore the ﬁrst LHC beam using cosmic ray events and, to
commission L1, test pulses injected into the detector front-
end electronics. To exercise the data acquisition system and
HLT, simulated collision data were inserted into the ROS
and processed through the whole online chain. This proce-
dure provided the ﬁrst full-scale test of the HLT selection
software running on the online system.
The L1 trigger system was exercised for the ﬁrst time
with beam during single beam commissioning runs in 2008.
Some of these runs included so-called splash events for
which the proton beam was intentionally brought into col-
lision with the collimators upstream from the experiment in
order to generate very large particle multiplicities that could
be used for detector commissioning. During this short pe-
riod of single-beam data-taking, the HLT algorithms were
tested ofﬂine.
Following the single beam data-taking in 2008, there was
a period of cosmic ray data-taking, during which the HLT
algorithms ran online. In addition to testing the selection al-
gorithms used for collision data-taking, triggers speciﬁcally
developed for cosmic ray data-taking were included. The lat-
ter were used to select and record a very large sample of
cosmic ray events, which were invaluable for the commis-
sioning and alignment of the detector sub-systems such as
the inner detector and the muon spectrometer [7].
3.2 Commissioning with colliding beams
Specialized commissioning trigger menus were developed
for the early collision running in 2009 and 2010. These
menus consisted mainly of L1-based triggers since the ini-
tial low interaction rate, of the order of a few Hz, allowed
all events passing L1 to be recorded. Initially, the L1 MBTS
trigger (Sect. 6.1) was unprescaled and acted as the primary
physics trigger, recording all interactions. Once the luminos-
ity exceeded ∼2×10
27 cm−2 s−1, the L1 MBTS trigger was
prescaled and the lowest threshold muon and calorimeter
triggers became the primary physics triggers. With further
luminosity increase, these triggers were also prescaled and
higher threshold triggers, which were included in the com-
missioning menus in readiness, became the primary physics
triggers. A coincidence with ﬁlled bunch crossing was re-
quired for the physics triggers. In addition, the menus con-
tained non-collision triggers which required a coincidence
with an empty or unpaired bunch crossing. For most of
the lowest threshold physics triggers, a corresponding non-
collision trigger was included in the menus to be used for
background studies. The menus also contained a large num-
ber of supporting triggers needed for commissioning the L1
trigger system.
In the commissioning menus, event streaming was based
on the L1 trigger categories. Three main inclusive physics
streams were recorded: L1Calo for calorimeter-based trig-
gers, L1Muon for triggers coming from the muon system
and L1MinBias for events triggered by minimum bias de-
tectors such as MBTS, LUCID and ZDC. In addition to
these L1-based physics streams, the express stream was also
recorded. Its content evolved signiﬁcantly during the ﬁrst
weeks of data-taking. In the early data-taking, it comprised
a random 10–20% of all triggered events in order to exercise
the ofﬂine express stream processing system. Subsequently,
the content was changed to enhance the proportion of elec-
tron, muon, and jet triggers. Finally, a small set of triggers
of each trigger type was sent to the express stream. For each
individual trigger, the fraction contributing to the express
stream was adjustable by means of dedicated prescale val-
ues. The use of the express stream for data quality assess-
ment and for calibration prior to ofﬂine reconstruction of
the physics streams was commissioned during this period.
3.2.1 HLT commissioning
The HLT commissioning proceeded in several steps. Dur-
ing the very ﬁrst collision data-taking at √
s = 900 GeV in
2009, no HLT algorithms were run online. Instead they were
exercised ofﬂine on collision events recorded in the express
stream. Results were carefully checked to conﬁrm that the
trigger algorithms were functioning correctly and the algo-
rithm execution times were evaluated to verify that timeouts
would not occur during online running.
After a few days of running ofﬂine, and having veriﬁed
that the algorithms behaved as expected, the HLT algorithms
were deployed online in monitoring mode. In this mode, the
HLT algorithms ran online, producing trigger objects (e.g.
calorimeter clusters and tracks) and a trigger decision at the
HLT; however events were selected based solely on their L1
decision. Operating ﬁrst in monitoring mode allowed each
trigger to be validated before the trigger was put into active
rejection mode. Recording the HLT objects and decision in
each event allowed the efﬁciency of each trigger chain to be
measured with respect to ofﬂine reconstruction. In addition a
rejection factor, deﬁned as input rate over output rate, could
be evaluated for each trigger chain at L2 and EF. Running
the HLT algorithms online also allowed the online trigger
monitoring system to be exercised and commissioned under
real circumstances.
Triggers can be set in monitoring or active rejection mode
individually. This important feature allowed individual trig-


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 7 of 61
Fig. 5 L1 and EF trigger rates during the ﬁrst √ s = 7T e Vpp colli-
sion run
gers to be put into active rejection mode as luminosity in-
creased and trigger rates exceeded allocated maximum val-
ues. The ﬁrst HLT trigger to be enabled for active rejection
was a minimum bias trigger chain (mbSpTrk) based on a
random bunch crossing trigger at L1 and an ID-based selec-
tion on track multiplicity at the HLT (Sect.6.1). This trigger
was already in active rejection mode in 2009.
Figure 5 illustrates the enabling of active HLT rejection
during the ﬁrst √
s = 7 TeV collision run, in March 2010.
Since the HLT algorithms were disabled at the start of the
run, the L1 and EF trigger rates were initially the same. The
HLT algorithms were turned on, following rapid validation
from ofﬂine processing, approximately two hours after the
start of collisions, at about 15:00. All trigger chains were
in monitoring mode apart from the mbSpTrk chain, which
was in active rejection mode. However the random L1 trig-
ger that forms the input to the mbSpTrk chain was disabled
for the ﬁrst part of the run and so the L1 and EF trigger rates
remained the same until around 15:30 when this random L1
trigger was enabled. At this time there was a signiﬁcant in-
crease in the L1 rate, but the EF trigger rate stayed approxi-
mately constant due to the rejection by the mbSpTrk chain.
During the ﬁrst months of 2010 data-taking, the LHC
peak luminosity increased from 10
27 cm−2 s−1 to
1029 cm−2 s−1. This luminosity was sufﬁciently low to al-
low the HLT to continue to run in monitoring mode and
trigger rates were controlled by applying prescale factors at
L1. Once the peak luminosity delivered by the LHC reached
1.2 × 10
29 cm−2 s−1, it was necessary to enable HLT rejec-
tion for the highest rate L1 triggers. As luminosity progres-
sively increased, more triggers were put into active rejection
mode.
In addition to physics and commissioning triggers, a set
of HLT-based calibration chains were also activated to pro-
duce dedicated data streams for detector calibration and
Table 3 Main calibration streams and their average event size per
event. The average event size in the physics streams is 1.3 MB
Stream Purpose Event size
[kB/event]
LArCells LAr detector calibration 90
Beamspot Online beamspot
determination based on Pixel
and SCT detectors
54
IDTracks ID alignment 20
PixelNoise, SCTNoise Noise of the silicon detectors 38
Tile Tile calorimeter calibration 221
Muon Muon alignment 0.5
CostMonitoring HLT system performance
information including
algorithm CPU usage
233
monitoring. Table3 lists the main calibration streams. These
contain partial event data, in most cases data fragments from
one sub-detector, in contrast to the physics streams which
contain information from the whole detector.
3.3 Physics trigger menu
The end of July 2010 marked a change in emphasis from
commissioning to physics. A physics trigger menu was de-
ployed for the ﬁrst time, designed for luminosities from
10
30 cm−2 s−1 to 1032 cm−2 s−1. The physics trigger menu
continued to evolve during 2010 to adapt to the LHC condi-
tions. In its ﬁnal form, it consisted of more than 470 triggers,
the majority of which were primary and supporting physics
triggers.
In the physics menu, L1 commissioning items were re-
moved, allowing for the addition of higher threshold physics
triggers in preparation for increased luminosity. At the same
time, combined triggers based on a logical “and” between
two L1 items were introduced into the menu. Streaming
based on the HLT decision was introduced and the corre-
sponding L1-based streaming was disabled. In addition to
calibration and express streams, data were recorded in the
physics streams presented in Sect. 2. At the same time, pre-
liminary bandwidth allocations were deﬁned as guidelines
for all trigger groups, as listed in Table 4.
The maximum instantaneous luminosity per day is shown
in Fig. 6(a). As luminosity increased and the trigger rates
approached the limits imposed by ofﬂine processing, pri-
mary and supporting triggers continued to evolve by pro-
gressively tightening the HLT selection cuts and by prescal-
ing the lower E
T threshold triggers. Table 5 shows the low-
est unprescaled threshold of various trigger signatures for
three luminosity values.
In order to prepare for higher luminosities, tools to op-
timize prescale factors became very important. For exam-


--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Table 4 Preliminary bandwidth allocations deﬁned as guidelines to
the various trigger groups, at three luminosity points, for an EF trigger
rate of ∼ 200 Hz
Trigger signature Luminosity [cm −2 s−1]
1030
Rate [Hz]
1031
Rate [Hz]
1032
Rate [Hz]
Minimum bias 20 10 10
Electron/Photon 30 45 50
Muon 30 30 50
Tau 20 20 15
Jet and forward jet 25 25 20
b-jet 10 15 10
B-physics 15 15 10
Emiss
T and ∑ET 15 15 10
Calibration triggers 30 13 13
Table 5 Examples of pT thresholds and selections for the lowest un-
prescaled triggers in the physics menu at three luminosity values
Category Luminosity [cm −2 s−1]:
3 × 1030 2 × 1031 2 × 1032
pT threshold [GeV], selection
Single muon 4, none 10, none 13,tight
Di-muon 4, none 6, none 6, loose
Single electron 10, medium 15, medium 15, medium
Di-electron 3, loose 5, medium 10, loose
Single photon 15, loose 30, loose 40, loose
Di-photon 5, loose 15, loose 15, loose
Single tau 20, loose 50, loose 84, loose
Single jet 30, none 75, loose 95, loose
Emiss
T 25, tight 30, loose 40, loose
B-physics mu4_DiMu mu4_DiMu 2mu4_DiMu
ple, the rate prediction tool uses enhanced bias data (data
recorded with a very loose L1 trigger selection and no HLT
selection) as input. Initially, these data were collected in
dedicated enhanced bias runs using the lowest trigger thresh-
olds, which were unprescaled at L1, and no HLT selec-
tion. Subsequently, enhanced bias triggers were added to
the physics menu to collect the data sample during normal
physics data-taking.
Figure 7 shows a comparison between online rates at
10
32 cm−2 s−1 and predictions based on extrapolation from
enhanced bias data collected at lower luminosity. In gen-
eral online rates agreed with predictions within 10%. The
biggest discrepancy was seen in rates from the JetTauEt-
miss stream, as a result of the non-linear scaling of E
miss
T
and ∑ET trigger rates with luminosity, as shown later in
Fig. 13. This non-linearity is due to in-time pile-up, deﬁned
as the effect of multiple pp interactions in a bunch cross-
Fig. 6 Proﬁles with respect to time of (a) the maximum instantaneous
luminosity per day and ( b) the peak mean number of interactions per
bunch crossing (assuming a total inelastic cross section of 71.5 mb)
recorded by ATLAS during stable beams in√ s = 7T e Vpp collisions.
Both plots use the online luminosity measurement
ing. The maximum mean number of interactions per bunch
crossing, which reached 3.5 in 2010, is shown as a function
of day in Fig. 6(b). In-time pile-up had the most signiﬁcant
effects on the Emiss
T , ∑ET (Sect. 6.6), and minimum bias
(Sect. 6.1) signatures. Out-of-time pile-up is deﬁned as the
effect of an earlier bunch crossing on the detector signals for
the current bunch crossing. Out-of-time pile-up did not have
a signiﬁcant effect in the 2010 pp data-taking because the
bunch spacing was 150 ns or larger.
4L e v e l 1
The Level 1 (L1) trigger decision is formed by the Cen-
tral Trigger Processor (CTP) based on information from the
calorimeter trigger towers and dedicated triggering layers in


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 9 of 61
Fig. 7 Comparison of online rates (solid) with ofﬂine rate predictions
(hashed) at luminosity 1032 cm−2 s−1 for L1, L2, EF and main physics
streams
the muon system. An overview of the CTP, L1 calorimeter,
and L1 muon systems and their performance follows. The
CTP also takes input from the MBTS, LUCID and ZDC sys-
tems, described in Sect. 6.1.
4.1 Central trigger processor
The CTP [ 1, 8] forms the L1 trigger decision by applying
the multiplicity requirements and prescale factors speciﬁed
in the trigger menu to the inputs from the L1 trigger sys-
tems. The CTP also provides random triggers and can apply
speciﬁc LHC bunch crossing requirements. The L1 trigger
decision is distributed, together with timing and control sig-
nals, to all ATLAS sub-detector readout systems.
The timing signals are deﬁned with respect to the LHC
bunch crossings. A bunch crossing is deﬁned as a 25 ns
time-window centred on the instant at which a proton bunch
may traverse the ATLAS interaction point. Not all bunch
crossings contain protons; those that do are called ﬁlled
bunches. In 2010, the minimum spacing between ﬁlled
bunches was 150 ns. In the nominal LHC conﬁguration,
there are a maximum of 3564 bunch crossings per LHC rev-
olution. Each bunch crossing is given a bunch crossing iden-
tiﬁer (BCID) from 0 to 3563. A bunch group consists of a
numbered list of BCIDs during which the CTP generates an
internal trigger signal. The bunch groups are used to apply
speciﬁc requirements to triggers such as paired (colliding)
bunches for physics triggers, single (one-beam) bunches for
background triggers, and empty bunches for cosmic ray,
noise and pedestal triggers.
4.1.1 Dead-time
Following an L1 accept the CTP introduces dead-time, by
vetoing subsequent triggers, to protect front-end readout
buffers from overﬂowing. Thispreventive dead-time mecha-
nism limits the minimum time between two consecutive L1
accepts (simple dead-time), and restricts the number of L1
accepts allowed in a given period ( complex dead-time). In
2010 running, the simple dead-time was set to 125 ns and
the complex dead-time to 8 triggers in 80 µs. This preventa-
tive dead-time is in addition tobusy dead-time which can be
introduced by ATLAS sub-detectors to temporarily throttle
the trigger rate.
The CTP monitors the total L1 trigger rate and the rates
of individual L1 triggers. These rates are monitored before
and after prescales and after dead-time related vetoes have
been applied. One use of this information is to provide a
measure of the L1 dead-time, which needs to be accounted
for when determining the luminosity. The L1 dead-time cor-
rection is determined from the live fraction, deﬁned as the
ratio of trigger rates after CTP vetoes to the corresponding
trigger rates before vetoes. Figure 8 shows the live fraction
based on the L1_MBTS_2 trigger (Sect. 6.1), the primary
trigger used for these corrections in 2010. The bulk of the
data were recorded with live fractions in excess of 98%. As
a result of the relatively low L1 trigger rates and a bunch
spacing that was relatively large (≥ 150 ns) compared to the
nominal LHC spacing (25 ns), the preventive dead-time was
typically below 10
−4 and no bunch-to-bunch variations in
dead-time existed.
Towards the end of the 2010 data-taking a test was per-
formed with a ﬁll of bunch trains with 50 ns spacing, the
running mode expected for the bulk of 2011 data-taking. The
dead-time measured during this test is shown as a function
of BCID in Fig. 9, taking a single bunch train as an exam-
ple. The ﬁrst bunch of the train (BCID 945) is only sub-
ject to sub-detector dead-time of ∼ 0.1%, while the follow-
ing bunches in the train (BCIDs 947 to 967) are subject to
up to 4% dead-time as a result of the preventative dead-time
generated by the CTP. The variation in dead-time between
bunch crossings will be taken into account when calculating
the dead-time corrections to luminosity in 2011 running.
4.1.2 Rates and timing
Figure 10 shows the trigger rate for the whole data-taking
period of 2010, compared to the luminosity evolution of the
LHC. The individual rate points are the average L1 trigger
rates in ATLAS runs with stable beams, and the luminosity
points correspond to peak values for the run. The increasing
selectivity of the trigger during the course of 2010 is illus-
trated by the fact that the L1 trigger rate increased by one
order of magnitude; whereas, the peak instantaneous lumi-
nosity increased by ﬁve orders of magnitude. The L1 trigger


--- Page 10 ---
Page 10 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 8 L1 live fraction per run
throughout the full data-taking
period of 2010, as used for
luminosity estimates for
correcting trigger dead-time
effects. The live fraction is
derived from the trigger
L1_MBTS_2
Fig. 9 L1 dead-time fractions per bunch crossing for a LHC test ﬁll
with a 50 ns bunch spacing. The dead-time fractions as a function of
BCID (left), taking a single bunch train of 12 bunches as an example
and a histogram of the individual dead-time fractions for each paired
bunch crossing ( right). The paired bunch crossings (odd-numbered
BCID from 945 to 967) are indicated by vertical dashed lines on the
left hand plot
Fig. 10 Evolution of the L1
trigger rate throughout
2010 (lower panel), compared
to the instantaneous luminosity
evolution (upper panel)
system was operated at a maximum trigger rate of just above
30 kHz, leaving more than a factor of two margin to the de-
sign rate of 75 kHz.
The excellent level of synchronization of L1 trigger sig-
nals in time is shown in Fig. 11 for a selection of L1 trig-
gers. The plot represents a snapshot taken at the end of


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 11 of 61
Fig. 11 L1 trigger signals in units of bunch crossings for a number
of triggers. The trigger signal time is plotted relative to the position
of ﬁlled paired bunches for a particular data-taking period towards the
end of the 2010 pp run
October 2010. Proton–proton collisions in nominal ﬁlled
paired bunch crossings are deﬁned to occur in the central
bin at 0. As a result of mistiming caused by alignment of the
calorimeter pulses that are longer than a single bunch cross-
ing, trigger signals may appear in bunch crossings preceding
or succeeding the central one. In all cases mistiming effects
are below 10
−3. The timing alignment procedures for the L1
calorimeter and L1 muon triggers are described in Sect. 4.2
and Sect. 4.3 respectively.
4.2 L1 calorimeter trigger
The L1 calorimeter trigger [ 9] is based on inputs from the
electromagnetic and hadronic calorimeters covering the re-
gion |η| < 4.9. It provides triggers for localized objects (e.g.
electron/photon, tau and jet) and global transverse energy
triggers. The pipelined processing and logic is performed in
a series of custom built hardware modules with a latency of
less than 1 µs. The architecture, calibration and performance
of this hardware trigger are described in the following sub-
sections.
4.2.1 L1 calorimeter trigger architecture
The L1 calorimeter trigger decision is based on dedicated
analogue trigger signals provided by the ATLAS calorime-
ters independently from the signals read out and used at the
HLT and ofﬂine. Rather than using the full granularity of
the calorimeter, the L1 decision is based on the information
from analogue sums of calorimeter elements within projec-
tive regions, called trigger towers. The trigger towers have
a size of approximately /Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.1 × 0.1 in the cen-
tral part of the calorimeter, |η| < 2.5, and are larger and
Fig. 12 Building blocks of the electron/photon and tau algorithms
with the sums to be compared to programmable thresholds
less regular in the more forward region. Electromagnetic and
hadronic calorimeters have separate trigger towers.
The 7168 analogue inputs must ﬁrst be digitized and then
associated to a particular LHC bunch crossing. Much of the
tuning of the timing and transverse energy calibration was
performed during the 2010 data-taking period since the ﬁnal
adjustments could only be determined with colliding beam
events. Once digital transverse energies per LHC bunch
crossing are formed, two separate processor systems, work-
ing in parallel, run the trigger algorithms. One system, the
cluster processor uses the full L1 trigger granularity infor-
mation in the central region to look for small localized clus-
ters typical of electron, photon or tau particles. The other,
the jet and energy-sum processor,u s e s2× 2 sums of trig-
ger towers, called jet elements, to identify jet candidates and
form global transverse energy sums: missing transverse en-
ergy, total transverse energy and jet-sum transverse energy.
The magnitude of the objects and sums are compared to
programmable thresholds to form the trigger decision. The
thresholds used in 2010 are shown in Table 1 in Sect. 2.
The details of the algorithms can be found elsewhere [9]
and only the basic elements are described here. Figure12 il-
lustrates the electron/photon and tau triggers as an example.
The electron/photon trigger algorithm identiﬁes an Region
of Interest as a 2 × 2 trigger tower cluster in the electro-
magnetic calorimeter for which the transverse energy sum
from at least one of the four possible pairs of nearest neigh-
bour towers (1 × 2o r2 × 1) exceeds a pre-deﬁned thresh-


--- Page 12 ---
Page 12 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
old. Isolation-veto thresholds can be set for the 12-tower sur-
rounding ring in the electromagnetic calorimeter, as well as
for hadronic tower sums in a central 2 × 2 core behind the
cluster and the 12-tower hadronic ring around it. Isolation
requirements were not applied in 2010 running. Jet RoIs are
deﬁned as 4 × 4, 6 × 6o r8 × 8 trigger tower windows for
which the summed electromagnetic and hadronic transverse
energy exceeds pre-deﬁned thresholds and which surround
a2 × 2 trigger tower core that is a local maximum. The lo-
cation of this local maximum also deﬁnes the coordinates of
the jet RoI.
The real-time output to the CTP consists of more than
100 bits per bunch crossing, comprising the coordinates and
threshold bits for each of the RoIs and the counts of the num-
ber of objects (saturating at seven) that satisfy each of the
electron/photon, tau and jet criteria.
4.2.2 L1 calorimeter trigger commissioning and rates
After commissioning with cosmic ray and collision data,
including event-by-event checking of L1 trigger results
against ofﬂine emulation of the L1 trigger logic, the calorime-
ter trigger processor ran stably and without any algorithmic
errors. Bit-error rates in digital links were less than 1 in
10
20. Eight out of 7168 trigger towers were non-operational
in 2010 due to failures in inaccessible analogue electronics
on the detector. Problems with detector high and low volt-
age led to an additional ∼ 1% of trigger towers with low or
no response. After calibration adjustments, L1 calorimeter
trigger conditions remained essentially unchanged for 99%
of the 2010 proton–proton integrated luminosity.
The scaling of the L1 trigger rates with luminosity is
shown in Fig. 13 for some of the low-threshold calorimeter
trigger items. The localised objects, such as electrons and
Fig. 13 L1 trigger rate scaling for some low threshold trigger items
as a function of luminosity per bunch crossing. The rate for XE10 has
been scaled by 0.2
jet candidates, show an excellent linear scaling relationship
with luminosity over a wide range of luminosities and time.
Global quantities such as the missing transverse energy and
total transverse energy triggers also scale in a smooth way,
but are not linear as they are strongly affected by in-time
pile-up which was present in the later running periods.
4.2.3 L1 calorimeter trigger calibration
In order to assign the calorimeter tower signals to the cor-
rect bunch crossing, a task performed by the bunch cross-
ing identiﬁcation logic, the signals must be synchronized to
the LHC clock phase with nanosecond precision. The tim-
ing synchronization was ﬁrst established with calorimeter
pulser systems and cosmic ray data and then reﬁned using
the ﬁrst beam delivered to the detector in the splash events
(Sect. 3). During the earliest data-taking in 2010 the correct
bunch crossing was determined for events with transverse
energy above about 5 GeV. Timing was incrementally im-
proved, and for the majority of the 2010 data the timing of
most towers was better than ±2 ns, providing close to ideal
performance.
In order to remove the majority of fake triggers due to
small energy deposits, signals are processed by an optimized
ﬁlter and a noise cut of around 1.2 GeV is applied to the
trigger tower energy. The efﬁciency for an electromagnetic
tower energy to be associated to the correct bunch crossing
and pass this noise cut is shown in Fig. 14 as a function
of the sum of raw cell E
T within that tower, for different
regions of the electromagnetic calorimeter. The efﬁciency
turn-on is consistent with the optimal performance expected
from a simulation of the signals and the full efﬁciency in the
plateau region indicates the successful association of these
small energy deposits to the correct bunch crossing.
Special treatment, using additional bunch crossing iden-
tiﬁcation logic, is needed for saturated pulses withE
T above
Fig. 14 Efﬁciency for an electromagnetic trigger tower energy to be
associated with the correct bunch crossing and pass a noise cut of
around 1.2 GeV as a function of the sum of raw cell ET within that
tower


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 13 of 61
Fig. 15 Typical transverse energy correlation plots for two individual
central calorimeter towers, (a) electromagnetic and (b) hadronic
about 250 GeV. It was shown that BCID logic performance
was more than adequate for 2010 LHC energies, working for
most trigger towers up to transverse energies of 3.5 TeV and
beyond. Further tuning of timing and algorithm parameters
will ensure that the full LHC energy range is covered.
In order to obtain the most precise transverse energy mea-
surements, a transverse energy calibration must be applied
to all trigger towers. The initial transverse energy calibra-
tion was produced by calibration pulser runs. In these runs
signals of a controlled size are injected into the calorime-
ters. Subsequently, with sufﬁcient data, the gains were recal-
ibrated by comparing the transverse energies from the trig-
ger with those calculated ofﬂine from the full calorimeter in-
formation. By the end of the 2010 data-taking this analysis
had been extended to provide a more precise calibration on a
tower-by-tower basis. In most cases, the transverse energies
derived from the updated calibration differed by less than
3% from those obtained from the original pulser-run based
calibration. Examples of correlation plots between trigger
and ofﬂine calorimeter transverse energies can be seen in
Fig. 15. In the future, with even larger datasets, the tower-
by-tower calibration will be further reﬁned based on physics
objects with precisely known energies, for example, elec-
trons from Z boson decays.
4.3 L1 muon trigger
The L1 muon trigger system [1, 10] is a hardware-based sys-
tem to process input data from fast muon trigger detectors.
The system’s main task is to select muon candidates and
identify the bunch crossing in which they were produced.
The primary performance requirement is to be efﬁcient for
muon p
T thresholds above 6 GeV . A brief overview of the
L1 muon trigger is given here; the performance of the muon
trigger is presented in Sect. 6.3.
4.3.1 L1 muon trigger architecture
Muons are triggered at L1 using the RPC system in the bar-
rel region (|η| < 1.05) and the TGC system in the end-cap
regions (1.05 < |η| < 2.4), as shown in Fig. 16.T h eR P C
and TGC systems provide rough measurements of muon
candidate p
T, η, and φ. The trigger chambers are arranged
in three planes in the barrel and three in each endcap (TCG I
shown in Fig. 16 did not participate in the 2010 trigger).
Each plane is composed of two to four layers. Muon can-
didates are identiﬁed by forming coincidences between the
muon planes. The geometrical coverage of the trigger in the
end-caps is ≈99%. In the barrel the coverage is reduced to
≈80% due to a crack around η= 0, the feet and rib support
structures for the ATLAS detector and two small elevators
in the bottom part of the spectrometer.
The L1 muon trigger logic is implemented in similar
ways for both the RPC and TCG systems, but with the fol-
lowing differences:
− The planes of the RPC system each consist of a doublet
of independent detector layers, each read out in the η (z)
and φ coordinates. A low-p
T trigger is generated by re-
quiring a coincidence of hits in at least 3 of the 4 layers
of the inner two planes, labelled as RPC1 and RPC2 in
Fig. 16. The high-p
T logic starts from a low-pT trigger,
then looks for hits in one of the two layers of the high-pT
conﬁrmation plane (RPC3).
− The two outermost planes of the TGC system (TGC2 and
TGC3) each consist of a doublet of independent detectors
read out by strips to measure the φ coordinate and wires
to measure the η coordinate. A low-pT trigger is gener-
ated by a coincidence of hits in at least 3 of the 4 layers
of the outer two planes. The inner plane (TGC1) contains
3 detector layers, the wires are read out from all of these,
but the strips from only 2 of the layers. The high-p
T trig-
ger requires at least one of two φ-strip layers and 2 out
of 3 wire layers from the innermost plane in coincidence
with the low-pT trigger.


--- Page 14 ---
Page 14 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 16 As e c t i o nv i e wo ft h e
L1 muon trigger chambers.
TCG I was not used in the
trigger in 2010
In both the RPC and TGC systems, coincidences are gener-
ated separately for η and φ and can then be combined with
programmable logic to form the ﬁnal trigger result. The con-
ﬁguration for the 2010 data-taking period required a logical
AND between the η and φ coincidences in order to have a
muon trigger.
In order to form coincidences, hits are required to lie
within parametrized geometrical muon roads. A road rep-
resents an envelope containing the trajectories, from the
nominal interaction point, of muons of either charge with
a p
T above a given threshold. Example roads are shown in
Fig. 16. There are six programmable pT thresholds at L1
(see Table 1) which are divided into two sets: three low- pT
thresholds to cover values up to 10 GeV , and three high-pT
thresholds to cover pT greater than 10 GeV .
To enable the commissioning and validation of the per-
formance of the system for 2010 running, two triggers were
deﬁned which did not require coincidences within roads
and thus gave maximum acceptance and minimum trig-
ger bias. One (MU0) based on low- p
T logic and the other
(MU0_COMM) based on the high-pT logic. For these trig-
gers the only requirement was that hits were in the same
trigger tower (η× φ ∼ 0.1 × 0.1).
4.3.2 L1 muon trigger timing calibration
In order to assign the hit information to the correct bunch
crossing, a precise alignment of RPC and TGC signals, or
timing calibration, was performed to take into account signal
delays in all components of the read out and trigger chain.
Test pulses were used to calibrate the TGC timing to within
25 ns (one bunch crossing) before the start of data-taking.
Tracks from cosmic ray and collision data were used to cal-
ibrate the timing of the RPC system. This calibration re-
quired a sizable data sample to be collected before a time
Fig. 17 The timing alignment with respect to the LHC bunch clock
(25 ns units) for the RPC system (before and after the timing calibra-
tion) and the TGC system
alignment of better than 25 ns was reached. As described in
Sect. 4.1, the CTP imposes a 25 ns window about the nomi-
nal bunch crossing time during which signals must arrive in
order to contribute to the trigger decision. In the ﬁrst phase
of the data-taking, while the timing calibration of the RPC
system was on-going, a special CTP conﬁguration was used
to increase the window for muon triggers to 75 ns. The ma-
jority of 2010 data were collected with both systems aligned
to within one bunch crossing for both high- p
T and low-pT
triggers. In Fig. 17 the timing alignment of the RPC and


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 15 of 61
TGC systems is shown with respect to the LHC bunch clock
in units of the 25 ns bunch crossings (BC).
5 High level trigger reconstruction
The HLT has additional information available, compared
to L1, including inner detector hits, full information from
the calorimeter and data from the precision muon detectors.
The HLT trigger selection is based on features reconstructed
in these systems. The reconstruction is performed, for the
most part, inside RoIs in order to minimize execution times
and reduce data requests across the network at L2. The sec-
tions below give a brief description of the algorithms for
inner detector tracking, beamspot measurement, calorime-
ter clustering and muon reconstruction. The performance of
the algorithms is presented, including measurements of ex-
ecution times which meet the timing constraints outlined in
Sect. 2.
5.1 Inner detector tracking
The track reconstruction in the Inner Detector is an essential
component of the trigger decision in the HLT. A robust and
efﬁcient reconstruction of particle trajectories is a prereq-
uisite for triggering on electrons, muons, B-physics, taus,
and b-jets. It is also used for triggering on inclusive pp in-
teractions and for the online determination of the beamspot
(Sect. 5.2), where the reconstructed tracks provide the input
to reconstruction of vertices. This section gives a short de-
scription of the reconstruction algorithms and an overview
of the performance of the track reconstruction with a focus
on tracking efﬁciencies in the ATLAS trigger system.
5.1.1 Inner detector tracking algorithms
The L2 reconstruction algorithms are speciﬁcally designed
to meet the strict timing requirements for event processing
at L2. The track reconstruction at the EF is less time con-
strained and can use, to a large extent, software components
from the ofﬂine reconstruction. In both L2 and EF the track
ﬁnding is preceded by a data preparation step in which de-
tector data are decoded and transformed to a set of hit po-
sitions in the ATLAS coordinate system. Clusters are ﬁrst
formed from adjacent signals on the SCT strips or in the
Pixel detector. Two-dimensional Pixel clusters and pairs of
one-dimensional SCT clusters (from back-to-back detectors
rotated by a small stereo angle with respect to one another)
are combined with geometrical information to provide three-
dimensional hit information, called space-points.C l u s t e r s
and space-points provide the input to the HLT pattern recog-
nition algorithms.
The primary track reconstruction strategy is inside-out
tracking which starts with pattern recognition in the SCT
and Pixel detectors; track candidates are then extended to
the TRT volume. In addition, the L2 has an algorithm that
reconstructs tracks in the TRT only and the EF has an addi-
tional track reconstruction strategy that isoutside-in, starting
from the TRT and extending the tracks to the SCT and Pixel
detectors.
Track reconstruction at both L2 and EF is run in an RoI-
based mode for electron, muon, tau and b-jet signatures.
B-physics signatures are based either on a FullScan (FS)
mode (using the entire volume of the Inner Detector) or a
large RoI. The tracking algorithms can be conﬁgured differ-
ently for each signature in order to provide the best perfor-
mance.
L2 uses two different pattern recognition strategies:
− A three-step histogramming technique, called IdScan.
First, the z-position of the primary vertex, z
v, is deter-
mined as follows. The RoI is divided into φ-slices and
z-intercept values are calculated and histogrammed for
lines through all possible pairs of space-points in each
phi-slice; z
v is determined from peaks in this histogram.
The second step is to ﬁll a (η,φ) histogram with values
calculated with respect to zv for each space-point in the
RoI; groups of space-points to be passed on to the third
step are identiﬁed from histogram bins containing at least
four space-points from different detector layers. In the
third step, a(1/p
T,φ) histogram is ﬁlled from values cal-
culated for all possible triplets of space-points from dif-
ferent detector layers; track candidates are formed from
bins containing at least four space-points from different
layers. This technique is the approach used for electron,
muon and B-physics triggers due to the slightly higher
efﬁciency of IdScan relative to SiTrack.
− A combinatorial technique, called SiTrack. First, pairs
of hits consistent with a beamline constraint are found
within a subset of the inner detector layers. Next, triplets
are formed by associating additional hits in the remain-
ing detector layers consistent with a track from the beam-
line. In the ﬁnal step, triplets consistent with the same
track trajectory are merged, duplicate or outlying hits are
removed and the remaining hits are passed to the track
ﬁtter. SiTrack is the approach used for tau and jet triggers
as well as the beamspot measurement as it has a slightly
lower fake-track fraction.
In both cases, track candidates are further processed by a
common Kalman [11] ﬁlter track ﬁtter and extended to the
TRT for an improved p
T resolution and to beneﬁt from the
electron identiﬁcation capability of the TRT.
The EF track reconstruction is based on software shared
with the ofﬂine reconstruction [12]. The ofﬂine software was
extended to run in the trigger environment by adding sup-
port for reconstruction in an RoI-based mode. The pattern
recognition in the EF starts from seeds built from triplets of


--- Page 16 ---
Page 16 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
space-points in the Pixel and SCT detectors. Triplets consist
of space-points from different layers, all in the pixel detec-
tor, all in the SCT or two space-points in the pixel detector
and one in the SCT. Seeds are preselected by imposing a
minimum requirement on the momentum and a maximum
requirement on the impact parameters. The seeds deﬁne a
road in which a track candidate can be formed by adding
additional clusters using a combinatorial Kalman ﬁlter tech-
nique. In a subsequent step, the quality of the track candi-
dates is evaluated and low quality candidates are rejected.
The tracks are then extended into the TRT and a ﬁnal ﬁt is
performed to extract the track parameters.
5.1.2 Inner detector tracking algorithms performance
The efﬁciency of the tracking algorithms is studied using
speciﬁc monitoring triggers, which do not require a track
to be present for the event to be accepted, and are thus
unbiased for track efﬁciency measurements. The efﬁciency
is deﬁned as the fraction of ofﬂine reference tracks that
are matched to a trigger track (with matching requirement
/Delta1R=
√
/Delta1φ2 + /Delta1η2 < 0.1). Ofﬂine reference tracks are re-
quired to have |η| < 2.5, |d0| < 1.5 mm, |z0| < 200 mm and
|(z0 − zV ) sinθ| < 1.5 mm, where d0 and z0 are the trans-
verse and longitudinal impact parameters, and zV is the po-
sition of the primary vertex along the beamline as recon-
structed ofﬂine. The reference tracks are also required to
have one Pixel hit and at least six SCT clusters. For tau
and jet RoIs, the reference tracks are additionally required
to have χ
2 probability of the track ﬁt higher than 1%, two
Pixel hits, one in the innermost layer, and a total of at least
seven SCT clusters.
The L2 and EF tracking efﬁciencies are shown as a func-
tion of p
T for ofﬂine muon candidates in Fig. 18(a) and for
ofﬂine electron candidates in Fig. 18(b). Tracking efﬁcien-
cies in tau and jet RoIs are shown in Fig. 19, determined
with respect to all ofﬂine reference tracks lying within the
RoI. In all cases, the efﬁciency is close to 100% in the p
T
range important for triggering.
Fig. 18 L2 and EF tracking reconstruction efﬁciency with respect to ofﬂine (a) muon candidates and (b) electron candidates
Fig. 19 L2 and EF tracking reconstruction efﬁciency with respect to ofﬂine reference tracks inside (a) tau RoIs and (b)j e tR o I s


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 17 of 61
Fig. 20 The RMS of the core 95% (RMS95)o ft h ei n v e r s e -pT residual
as a function of ofﬂine track η
The RMS of the core 95% (RMS 95)o ft h ei n v e r s e -pT
residual (( 1
pT )trigger − ( 1
pT )ofﬂine) distribution is shown as a
function of η in Fig. 20. Both L2 and EF show good agree-
ment with ofﬂine, although the residuals between L2 and
ofﬂine are larger, particularly at high |η| as a consequence
of the speed-optimizations made at L2. Figure 21 shows
the residuals in d0, φ and η. Since it uses ofﬂine software,
EF tracking performance is close to that of the ofﬂine re-
construction. Performance is not identical, however, due to
an online-speciﬁc conﬁguration of ofﬂine software designed
to increase speed and be more robust to compensate for
the more limited calibration and detector status information
available in the online environment.
5.1.3 Inner detector tracking algorithms timing
Distributions of the algorithm execution time at L2 and EF
are shown in Fig. 22. The total time for L2 reconstruction
i ss h o w ni nF i g .22(a) for a muon algorithm in RoI and
FullScan mode. The times of the different reconstruction
steps at the EF are shown in Fig. 22(b) for muon RoIs and
in Fig. 22(c) for FullScan mode. The execution times are
shown for all instances of the algorithm execution, whether
the trigger was passed or not. The execution times are well
within the online constraints.
5.2 Beamspot
The online beamspot measurement uses L2 ID tracks from
the SiTrack algorithm (Sect. 5.1) to reconstruct primary ver-
tices on an event-by-event basis [ 13]. The vertex position
distributions collected over short time intervals are used
to measure the position and shape of the luminous region,
beamspot, parametrized by a three-dimensional Gaussian.
The coordinates of the centroids of reconstructed vertices
determine the average position of the collision point in the
Fig. 21 Residuals with respect to ofﬂine for track parameters ( a) d0,
(b) φ and (c) η
ATLAS coordinate system as well as the size and orienta-
tion of the ellipsoid representing the luminous region in the
horizontal (x–z) and vertical (y–z) planes.
These observables are continuously reconstructed and
monitored online in the HLT, and communicated, for each
luminosity block, to displays in the control room. In addi-
tion, the instantaneous rate of reconstructed vertices can be


--- Page 18 ---
Page 18 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 22 Execution times for ( a) FullScan reconstruction and recon-
struction within muon RoIs at L2, ( b) the different EF reconstruction
steps in muon RoIs and (c) the different steps of the EF FullScan. The
mean time of each algorithm is marked in the legend. The structure in
the TRT data preparation time in (b) is due to caching
used online as a luminosity monitor. Following these online
measurements, a system for applying real-time conﬁgura-
tion changes to the HLT farm distributes updates for use by
trigger algorithms that depend on the precise knowledge of
the luminous region, such as b-jet tagging (Sect. 6.7).
Figure 23 shows the variation of the collision point cen-
troid around the nominal beam position in the transverse
plane (ynominal) over a period of a few weeks. The nomi-
nal beam position, which is typically up to several hundred
microns from the centre of the ATLAS coordinate system,
is deﬁned by a time average of previous measured centroid
positions. The ﬁgure shows that updates distributed to the
online system as a part of the feedback mechanism take ac-
count of the measured beam position within a narrow band
of only a few microns. The large deviations on Oct 4 and
Sept 22 are from beam-separation scans.
During 2010 data-taking, beamspot measurements were
averaged over the entire period of stable beam during a run
and updates applied, for subsequent runs, in the case of
signiﬁcant shifts. For 2011 running, when triggers that are
sensitive to the beamspot position, such as the b-jet trig-
ger (Sect. 6.7), are activated, updates will be made more
frequently.
5.2.1 Beamspot algorithm
The online beamspot algorithm employs a fast vertex ﬁtter
able to efﬁciently ﬁt the L2 tracks emerging from the inter-
action region to common vertices within a fraction of the
L2 time budget. The tracks used for the vertex ﬁts are re-
quired to have at least one Pixel space-point and three SCT
space-points and a transverse impact parameter with respect
to the nominal beamline of |d
0| < 1 cm. Clusters of tracks
with similar impact parameter (z0) along the nominal beam-
line form the input to the vertex ﬁts. The tracks are ordered
in p
T and the highest-pT track above 0.7 GeV is taken as a
seed. The seed track is grouped with all other tracks with
pT > 0.5 GeV within /Delta1z0 < 1 cm. The average z0 value
of the tracks in the group provides the initial estimate of
the vertex position in the longitudinal direction, used as a
starting point for the vertex ﬁtter. In order to ﬁnd additional
vertices in the event, the process is repeated taking the next
highest p
T track above 0.7 GeV as the seed.
5.2.2 Beamspot algorithm performance
Using the event-by-event vertex distribution computed in
real-time by the HLT and accumulated in intervals of typ-
ically two minutes, the position, size and tilt angles of the
luminous region within the ATLAS coordinate system are
measured. A view of the transverse distribution of vertices
reconstructed by the HLT is shown in Fig.24 along with the
transverse (x and y) and longitudinal (z) proﬁles.
The measurement of the true size of the beam relies on
an unfolding of the intrinsic resolution of the vertex position


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 19 of 61
Fig. 23 At i m e l i n eo ft h e
observed collision point
centroid position relative to the
nominal beam position
Fig. 24 The distribution of
primary vertices reconstructed
by the online beamspot
algorithm in an example run for
vertices with at least two tracks
(pT > 0.5G e Va n d|η| < 2.5) in
(a) the transverse plane, (b) x,
(c) y,a n d(d) z. The mean beam
position and observed widths,
before correction for the
intrinsic vertex position
resolution;
μ
x = (−0.370 ± 0.001) mm,
σx = (0.120 ± 0.001) mm,
μy = (0.628 ± 0.001) mm,
σy = (0.132 ± 0.001) mm,
μz = (1.03 ± 0.10) mm,
σz = (22.14 ± 0.07) mm
measurement. A correction for the intrinsic resolution is de-
termined, in real-time, by measuring the distance between
two daughter vertices constructed from a primary vertex
when its tracks are split into two random sets for re-ﬁtting.
This correction method has the beneﬁt that it allows the de-
termination of the beam width to be relatively independent
of variations in detector resolution, by explicitly taking the
variation into account.


--- Page 20 ---
Page 20 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 25 The corrected width of the measured vertex position, in x,
along with the measured intrinsic resolution and the raw measured
width before correction for the resolution. The asymptotic value of the
corrected width provides a measurement of the true beam width
Figure 25 shows the measured beam width, in x,a sa
function of the number of tracks per vertex. The raw mea-
sured width is shown as well as the width after correction
for the intrinsic resolution of the vertex position measure-
ment. The measured intrinsic resolution is also shown. The
intrinsic resolution is overestimated, and hence the corrected
width is underestimated, for vertices with a small number of
tracks. The true beam width (50 µm) is, therefore, given by
the asymptotic value of the corrected width. For this reason
vertices used for the beam width measurement are required
to have more than a minimum number of tracks. The value
of this cut depends on the beamspot size. Data and MC stud-
ies have shown that intrinsic resolution must be less than
about two times the beamspot size to be measured. For the
example ﬁll shown in Fig. 25, this requirement corresponds
to ≳10 tracks per vertex. To resolve smaller beam sizes, the
multiplicity requirement can be raised accordingly.
5.3 Calorimeter
The calorimeter reconstruction algorithms are designed to
reconstruct clusters of energy from electrons, photons, taus
and jet objects using calorimeter cell information. At the EF,
global E
miss
T is also calculated. Calorimeter information is
also used to provide information to the muon isolation algo-
rithms.
At L2, custom algorithms are used to conﬁrm the results
of the L1 trigger and provide cluster information as input
to the signature-speciﬁc selection algorithms. The detailed
calorimeter cell information available at the HLT allows the
position and transverse energy of clusters to be calculated
with higher precision than at L1. In addition, shower shape
variables useful for particle identiﬁcation are calculated. At
the EF, ofﬂine algorithms with custom interfaces for online
running are used to reproduce ofﬂine clustering performance
as closely as possible, using similar calibration procedures.
More details on the HLT and ofﬂine clustering algorithms
can be found in Refs. [10, 14].
5.3.1 Calorimeter algorithms
While the clustering tools used in the trigger are customized
for the different signatures, they take their input from a com-
mon data preparation software layer. This layer, which is
common to L2 and the EF, requests data using the gen-
eral trigger framework tools and drives sub-detector speciﬁc
code to convert the digital information into the input objects
(calorimeter cells with energy and geometry) used by the al-
gorithms. This code is optimized to guarantee fast unpack-
ing of detector data. The data is organized so as to allow
efﬁcient access by the algorithms. At the EF the calorimeter
cell information is arranged using projective regions called
towers,o fs i z e/Delta1η×/Delta1φ= 0.025× 0.025 for EM clustering
and /Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.1 × 0.1 for jet algorithms.
The L2 electron and photon ( e/γ) algorithm performs
clustering withing an RoI of dimension /Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.4 ×
0.4. The algorithm relies on the fact that most of the energy
from an electron or photon is deposited in the second layer
of the electromagnetic (EM) calorimeter. The cell with the
most energy in this layer provides the seed to the cluster-
ing process. This cell deﬁnes the centre of a /Delta1η× /Delta1φ=
0.075 × 0.125 window within this layer. The cluster posi-
tion is calculated by taking an energy-weighted average of
cell positions within this window and the cluster transverse
energy is calculated by summing the cell transverse ener-
gies within equivalent windows in all layers. Subsequently,
a correction for the upstream energy loss and for lateral and
longitudinal leakage is applied.
At the EF a clustering algorithm similar to the ofﬂine al-
gorithm is used. Cluster ﬁnding is performed using a slid-
ing window algorithm acting on the towers formed in the
data preparation step. Fixed window clusters in regions of
/Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.075 × 0.175 (0.125 × 0.125) are built in the
barrel (end-caps). The cluster transverse energy and posi-
tion are calculated in the same way as at L2. Distributions
of E
T residuals, deﬁned as the fractional difference between
online and ofﬂine ET values, are shown in Fig. 26 for L2
and EF. The broader L2 distribution is a consequence of the
specialized fast algorithm used at L2.
The L2 tau clustering algorithm searches for a seed in
all EM and hadronic calorimeter layers and within an RoI of
/Delta1η×/Delta1φ= 0.6× 0.6. At the EF the calorimeter cells within
a /Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.8 × 0.8 region are used directly as input to
a topological clustering algorithm that builds clusters of any
shape by adding neighbouring cells that have energy above a
given number (0–4) of standard deviations of the noise dis-
tribution. The large RoI size is motivated by the cluster size


--- Page 21 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 21 of 61
Fig. 26 Residuals between online and ofﬂine ET values for EM clus-
tering at (a)L 2a n d(b)E F
Fig. 27 Tau EF ET residuals with respect to ofﬂine
Fig. 28 Residuals between L2 and ofﬂine values of jet cluster ( a) φ
and (b) η shown for data and MC simulation. The anti- kT algorithm
with R = 0.4 was used for ofﬂine clustering
used in ofﬂine tau reconstruction. The EF tau ET residual
with respect to the ofﬂine clustering algorithm is shown in
Fig. 27.
The L2 jet reconstruction uses a cone algorithm iterating
over cells in a relatively large RoI (/Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 1.0 × 1.0).
Figure 28 shows L2 φ and η residuals with respect to of-
ﬂine, showing reasonable agreement with simulation. The
asymmetry, which is reproduced by the simulation, is due
to the fact that L2 jet reconstruction, unlike ofﬂine, is per-
formed within an RoI whose position is deﬁned with the
granularity of the L1 jet element size (Sect. 4.2). The L2
jet ET reconstruction and jet energy scale are discussed fur-


--- Page 22 ---
Page 22 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
ther in Sect. 6.4. During 2010, EF jet trigger algorithms ran
online in monitoring mode i.e. without rejection. In 2011,
the EF jet selection will be activated based on EF clustering
within all layers of the calorimeter using the ofﬂine anti- kT
jet algorithm [15].
Recalculation of Emiss
T at the HLT requires data from
the whole calorimeter, and so was only performed at the
EF where data from the whole event is available. Correc-
tions to account for muons were calculated at L2, but these
corrections were not applied during 2010 data-taking. Fu-
ture improvements will allow E
miss
T to be recalculated at L2
based on transverse energy sums calculated in the calorime-
ter front-end boards. The E
miss
T reconstruction, which uses
the common calorimeter data preparation tools, is described
in Sect. 6.6.
5.3.2 Calorimeter algorithms timing
Figure 29(a) shows the processing time per RoI for the L2
e/gamma, tau and jet clustering algorithms, including data
preparation. The processing time increases with the RoI
Fig. 29 Execution times per RoI for calorimeter clustering algorithms
at (a)L 2a n d( b) EF. The mean execution time for each algorithm is
given in the legend
size. The tau algorithm has a longer processing time than the
e/γ algorithm due to the larger RoI size as well as the seed
search in all layers. The distributions have multiple peaks
due to caching of results in the HLT, which leads to shorter
times when overlap of RoIs allows cached information to be
used. Caching of L2 results occurs in two places: ﬁrst, at the
level of data requests from the readout buffers; second, in
the data preparation step, where raw data is unpacked into
calorimeter cell information. Most of the L2 time is con-
sumed in requesting data from the detector buffers.
Figure 29(b) shows the processing time per RoI for the
EF e/gamma, tau, jet and E
miss
T clustering algorithms. Since
more complex ofﬂine algorithms are used at the EF, the pro-
cessing times are longer and the distributions have more fea-
tures than for L2. The mean execution times do not show the
same dependence on RoI size as at L2, since algorithm dif-
ferences are more signiﬁcant than RoI size at the EF. The
multiple peaks due to caching of data preparation results are
clearly visible. The measured L2 and EF algorithm times are
well within the requirements given in Sect. 2.
5.4 Muon tracking
Muons are triggered in the ATLAS experiment within a ra-
pidity range of |η| < 2.4[ 1]. In addition to the L1 trigger
chambers (RPC and TGC), the HLT makes use of informa-
tion from the MDT chambers, which provide precision hits
in the ηcoordinate. The CSC, that form the innermost muon
layer in the region 2 < |η| < 2.7, were not used in the HLT
during 2010 data-taking period, but will be used in 2011.
5.4.1 Muon tracking algorithms
The HLT includes L2 muon algorithms that are speciﬁcally
designed to be fast and EF algorithms that rely on ofﬂine
muon reconstruction software [10].
At L2, each L1 muon candidate is reﬁned by including
the precision data from the MDTs in the RoI deﬁned by the
L1 candidate. There are three algorithms used sequentially
at L2, each building on the results of the previous step.
L2 MS-only: The MS-only algorithm uses only the Muon
Spectrometer information. The algorithm uses L1 trigger
chamber hits to deﬁne the trajectory of the L1 muon and
opens a narrow road around this to select MDT hits. A track
ﬁt is then performed using the MDT drift times and posi-
tions and a p
T measurement is assigned using look-up ta-
bles.
L2 muon combined: This algorithm combines the MS-only
tracks with tracks reconstructed in the inner detector
(Sect. 5.1) to form a muon candidate with reﬁned track
parameter resolution.
L2 isolated muon: The isolated muon algorithm starts from
the result of the combined algorithm and incorporates
tracking and calorimetric information to ﬁnd isolated muon


--- Page 23 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 23 of 61
candidates. The algorithm sums the |pT| of inner detector
tracks and evaluates the electromagnetic and hadronic en-
ergy deposits, as measured by the calorimeters, in cones
centred around the muon direction. For the calorimeter,
two different concentric cones are deﬁned: an internal cone
chosen to contain the energy deposited by the muon it-
self; and an external cone, containing energy from detector
noise and other particles.
At the EF, the muon reconstruction starts from the RoI
identiﬁed by L1 and L2, reconstructing segments and tracks
using information from the trigger and precision chambers.
There are three different reconstruction strategies used in
the EF:
EF MS-only: Tracks are reconstructed using Muon Spec-
trometer information and extrapolated to determine track
parameters at the interaction point and form MS-only
muon candidates.
EF combined: Using an outside-in strategy, MS-only muon
candidates are combined with inner detector tracks to form
combined muon candidates.
EF inside–out: The inside-out strategy starts with inner de-
tector tracks and extrapolates them to the Muon Spectrom-
eter to search for MS-only candidates in order to form com-
bined muon candidates.
EF Combined and Inside-out are both used for the trigger
and ofﬂine reconstruction; MS-only is an alternative strategy
for specialized triggers. For the EF MS-only and EF Com-
bined strategies, the reconstruction is performed in the fol-
lowing steps:
SegmentFinder: Segments are formed from hits in the trig-
ger and precision chambers within each of the three layers
of the muon detector.
TrackBuilder: The segments are combined to form tracks.
Extrapolator: The tracks are extrapolated to the interaction
point, track parameters are corrected for energy loss in
the traversed material, producing EF MS-only muon can-
didates.
Combiner: The tracks from the muon spectrometer are
combined with inner detector tracks to form combined
tracks, resulting in EF Combined muon candidates.
5.4.2 Muon tracking performance
Comparisons between online and ofﬂine muon track param-
eters are presented in this section; muon trigger efﬁciencies
are presented in Sect. 6.3. Distributions of the residuals be-
tween online and ofﬂine track parameters ( 1
pT , η and φ)
were constructed in bins of pT and Gaussian ﬁts were per-
formed to extract the widths, σ, of the residual distribu-
tions as a function of pT. The inverse-pT residual widths,
σ(( 1
pT )trigger − ( 1
pT )ofﬂine),a r es h o w ni nF i g .30 as a function
Fig. 30 Inverse-pT residual widths as a function of ofﬂine muon pT
(pT > 13 GeV) for the L2 combined, EF MS-only and EF Combined
reconstruction
of the ofﬂine muon pT for the L2 Muon Combined, EF MS-
only and EF Combined reconstruction. As a consequence
of the optimisations made for algorithm speed, the L2 has
worse track parameter resolution than the EF. The increase
in the L2 inverse- pT widths at high pT is due to the ﬁnite
granularity of the look-up table used in the L2 MS-only al-
gorithm; at lower values of pT the inner detector pT resolu-
tion dominates. The improvement in pT resolution, partic-
ularly at lower pT resulting from the inclusion of inner de-
tector information is also evident from a comparison of the
pT resolution of the EF MS-only and combined algorithms.
The η residual widths, σ(ηtr − ηoff), and φ residual widths,
σ(ηtr − ηoff), are shown as a function of pT in Fig. 31(a)
and Fig. 31(b) respectively. These ﬁgures show the residual
widths for L2 and EF combined reconstruction and illustrate
the good agreement between track parameters calculated on-
line and ofﬂine.
5.4.3 Muon tracking timing
The processing times for the L2 muon reconstruction algo-
rithms are shown in Fig. 32(a) for the MS-only algorithm
and for the combined reconstruction chain, which includes
the ID track reconstruction time. Figure32(b) shows the cor-
responding times for the EF algorithms. The execution times
are measured for each invocation of the algorithm, and are
well within the time restrictions for both L2 and EF given
in Sect. 2.
6 Trigger signature performance
In this section the different trigger signature selection crite-
ria are described. The principal triggers used in 2010 are
listed, their performance is presented and compared with


--- Page 24 ---
Page 24 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 31 Residual widths as a function of the ofﬂine muon pT (pT > 13 GeV) for ( a) η and (b) φ calculated by L2 and EF muon combined
algorithms
Fig. 32 Measured execution times per RoI for the ( a) L2 MS-only algorithm and L2 Combined chain and ( b) EF SegmentFinder, TrackBuilder,
Extrapolator and Combiner algorithms. The mean time of each algorithm is indicated in the legend
Monte Carlo simulation and some references are given as
examples of published results that rely on these triggers.
Efﬁciencies have been measured using the following
methods:
Tag and probe method, where the event contains a pair of
related objects reconstructed ofﬂine, such as electrons from
a Z → ee decay, one that triggered the event and the other
that can be used to measure trigger efﬁciency;
Orthogonal triggers method, where the event is triggered
by a different and independent trigger from the one for
which the efﬁciency is being determined;
Bootstrap method, where the efﬁciency of a higher thresh-
old is determined using a lower threshold to trigger the
event.
An example of the tag and probe method is the de-
termination of low- pT muon trigger efﬁciencies using
J/ψ → μμ events. In this method, μμ pairs are selected
from J/ψ → μμ decays reconstructed ofﬂine in events
triggered by a single muon trigger. The tag is selected by
matching (in /Delta1R) one of the ofﬂine muons with a trigger
muon that passed the trigger selection. The other muon in
the μμ pair is deﬁned as the probe. The efﬁciency is then
deﬁned as the fraction of probe muons that match (in/Delta1R)a
trigger muon that passes the trigger selection. An efﬁciency
determined in this way must be corrected for background
due to fake J/ψ → μμ decays reconstructed ofﬂine. The
background subtraction uses a variable that discriminates
the signal from the background, in this case, the invariant
mass of μμ candidates. By ﬁtting this variable with an ex-


--- Page 25 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 25 of 61
ponential background shape in the side bands and with a
Gaussian signal shape in the J/ψ mass region, the back-
ground content in the J/ψ mass region can be determined
and subtracted. The subtracted distribution is then used to
determine the trigger efﬁciency. Biases due to, for example,
topological correlations, are determined by MC.
6.1 Minimum bias, high multiplicity and luminosity
triggers
Triggers were designed for inclusive inelastic event selec-
tion with minimal bias, for use in inclusive physics studies
as well as luminosity measurements. Events selected by the
minimum bias (minbias) trigger are used directly for physics
analyses of inelastic pp interactions [ 16, 17], PbPb inter-
actions [ 18], as well as indirectly as control samples for
other physics analyses. A high multiplicity trigger is also
implemented for studies of two-particle correlations in high-
multiplicity events.
6.1.1 Reconstruction and selection criteria
The minbias and luminosity triggers are primarily hardware-
based L1 triggers, deﬁned using signals from the Minimum
Bias Trigger Scintillators (MBTS), a Cherenkov light detec-
tor (LUCID), the Zero Degree Calorimeter (ZDC), and the
random clock from the CTP. In addition to these L1 triggers,
HLT algorithms are deﬁned using inner detector and MBTS
information (Sect. 2).
In 2010, inelastic pp events were primarily selected with
the L1_MBTS_1 trigger requirement, deﬁned as having at
least one of the 32 MBTS counters on either side of the de-
tector above threshold. Several supporting MBTS require-
ments were also deﬁned in case of higher beam-induced
backgrounds and for online luminosity measurements. For
some of these triggers (e.g. L1_MBTS_1_1) a coincidence
was required between the signals from the counters on either
side of the detector. In all cases, a coincidence with colliding
bunches was required. During the PbPb running the beam
backgrounds were found to be signiﬁcantly higher and se-
lections requiring more MBTS counters above threshold on
both sides of the detector were used.
The mbSpTrk trigger [19], used for minbias trigger efﬁ-
ciency measurements, selects events using the random clock
of the CTP at L1 and inner detector tracker silicon space-
points (Sect. 5.1)a tt h eH L T .
The LUCID triggers were used to select events for com-
parison with real-time luminosity measurements. LUCID
trigger items required a LUCID signal above threshold on
one side,
2 either side, or both sides of the detector. In all
2The ±z sides of the ATLAS detector are named “A” and “C”.
cases a coincidence with colliding proton bunches was re-
quired.
The ZDC detector was included in the ATLAS experi-
ment primarily for selection of PbPb interactions with mini-
mal bias. Due to the ejection of neutrons from colliding ions,
the ZDC covers most of the inelastic PbPb cross-section, but
not the inelastic pp cross-section. Like the LUCID triggers,
the ZDC triggers included a one-sided, either side, and two-
sided trigger.
The high multiplicity trigger was based on a L1 total en-
ergy trigger and includes requirements on the number of
L2 SCT space-points and the number of EF inner detector
tracks associated to a single vertex.
The Beam Conditions Monitor (BCM) detectors were
used to trigger on events with higher than nominal beam
background conditions and were also used to monitor the
luminosity.
6.1.2 Menu and rates
The main minbias, high multiplicity and luminosity triggers
used in the 2010 run are shown in Table 6. These triggers
were prescaled for the majority of the 2010 data-taking to
keep the rates around a few Hz.
6.1.3 Minimum bias trigger efﬁciency
The efﬁciency of the L1_MBTS_1 trigger was studied in
the context of the charged particle multiplicity analysis [17]
which used the L1_MBTS_1 trigger to select its dataset.
The efﬁciency of the L1_MBTS_1 trigger was determined
using the mbSpTrk trigger as an orthogonal trigger. The
efﬁciency was deﬁned as the fraction of events triggered
by mbSpTrk passing the ofﬂine selection of an inelas-
tic pp interaction that also passed the L1_MBTS_1 trig-
ger. This efﬁciency was determined with respect to ofﬂine-
selected events containing at least two good tracks with
p
T > 100 MeV, |η| < 2.5, and transverse impact parame-
ter with respect to the beamspot satisfying dBS
0 < 1.8 mm.
Events with more than one interaction were vetoed.
Figure 33 shows the L1_MBTS_1 efﬁciency as a function
of the number of selected ofﬂine tracks per event, NTrack,i n
the data sample. The inefﬁciency in the lowNTrack region is
small but visible.
One source of systematic uncertainty in the measured ef-
ﬁciency is a possible correlation between the control trig-
ger (mbSpTrk) and L1_MBTS_1. The trigger efﬁciency of
L1_MBTS_1 in the MC inelastic sample was calculated
with and without the control trigger. The difference was
found to be negligible. A second source investigated was
the different impact parameter requirements from those in
the ofﬂine selection. The trigger efﬁciency was studied with
various sets of these requirements and the largest difference


--- Page 26 ---
Page 26 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Table 6 Minimum bias, high multiplicity and luminosity trigger items deﬁned during the 2010pp and PbPb running periods. In all cases, a ﬁlled
bunch crossing is also required
Trigger item Deﬁnition
Minbias triggers: L1_MBTS_1(2) ≥1(2) of the 2 × 32 counters above threshold
L1_MBTS_1_1 ≥1 counter above threshold in each side, in coincidence
L1_MBTS_4_4 ≥4 counters above threshold in each side, in coincidence
mbSpTrk Random L1 trigger and space-points in the ID at HLT
Luminosity triggers: L1_LUCID_A(C) At least one A(C)-side signal above threshold
L1_LUCID_A_C ≥1 signal above threshold in each side, in coincidence
L1_LUCID ≥1 signal above threshold
L1_ZDC_A(C) ≥1 A(C)-side signal above threshold
L1_ZDC_A_C ≥1 signal above threshold in each side, in coincidence
L1_ZDC ≥1 signal above threshold
High luminosity trigger: mbSpTrkVtxMh High Multiplicity trigger starting from L1_TE20
Fig. 33 The L1_MBTS_1 trigger efﬁciency for inelasticpp collisions
at √ s = 7T e V .T h eshaded areas represent the statistical and system-
atic uncertainties added in quadrature. The statistical uncertainty is
negligible compared to the systematic uncertainty
among these sets in each bin was taken as the systematic
uncertainty for that bin. This variation provides a very con-
servative estimate of the effect of beam-induced background
and secondary tracks on the trigger efﬁciency.
The efﬁciency of the ZDC trigger was measured in PbPb
collisions using a procedure similar to that used for the ini-
tial L1_MBTS_1 efﬁciency measurement. The efﬁciency is
shown as a function of the number of tracks in the event
in Fig. 34.
6.2 Electrons and photons
Events with electrons and photons ( e/γ) in the ﬁnal state
are important signatures for many ATLAS physics analy-
Fig. 34 The L1_ZDC_A_C trigger efﬁciency as a function of the
number of tracks for inelastic PbPb collisions at √ sNN = 2.76 TeV.
The vertical bars represent the statistical uncertainty, while theshaded
areas represent the statistical and systematic uncertainties added in
quadrature
ses, from SM precision physics, such as top quark or W bo-
son mass measurement, to searches for new physics. Vari-
ous triggers cover the energy range between a few GeV and
several TeV . In the low-ET range (5–15 GeV), the data col-
lected are used for measuring the cross sections and prop-
erties of standard candle processes, such as J/ψ → ee,
di-photon, low mass Drell–Yan, and Z → ττ production.
The data collected in the higher E
T range (>15 GeV) are
used to measure the production cross-sections for top quark
pairs, direct photons and for the Z → ee and W → eν
channels [20–23], as well as searches for new physics such
as Higgs bosons, SUSY and exotic particles as in extra-
dimension models [ 24, 25]. Some of these channels, such
as J/ψ → ee, Z → ee, W → eν and γ + jet, are valuable


--- Page 27 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 27 of 61
benchmarks to extract the calibration and alignment con-
stants, and to establish the detector performance.
6.2.1 Electron and photon reconstruction and selection
criteria
Electrons and photons are reconstructed in the trigger sys-
tem in the region|η| < 2.5. At L1, photons and electrons are
selected using calorimeter information with reduced granu-
larity. For each identiﬁed electromagnetic object, RoIs are
formed containing the η and φ directions and the transverse
energy thresholds that have been passed, e.g. EM5, EM10,
as speciﬁed by the L1 trigger menu (Table1). Seeded by the
position of the L1 cluster, the L2 photon and electron se-
lections employ a fast calorimeter reconstruction algorithm
(Sect. 5.3), and in the case of electrons also fast track re-
construction (Sect. 5.1). The EF also performs calorimeter
cluster and track reconstruction, but uses the ofﬂine recon-
struction algorithms [10].
At L2 and the EF a calorimeter-based selection is made,
for both electrons and photons, based on cluster E
T and
cluster shape parameters. Distributions of two important pa-
rameters are shown in Fig. 35(a). The hadronic leakage
parameter, R
had = Ehad
T /EEM
T , is the ratio of the cluster
transverse energy in the hadronic calorimeter to that in the
electromagnetic calorimeter; the distribution for ofﬂine re-
constructed electrons is shown in Fig. 35(b) for L2. Fig-
ure 35(b) shows the distribution, at the EF, of the parameter
E
ratio = (E(1)
T − E(2)
T )/(E(1)
T + E(2)
T ) where E(1)
T and E(2)
T
are the transverse energies of the two most energetic cells in
the ﬁrst layer of the electromagnetic calorimeter in a region
of /Delta1η×/Delta1φ= 0.125× 0.2. The distribution of this parame-
ter peaks at one for showers with no substructure and so dis-
tinguishes clusters due to single electrons and photons from
hadrons and π
0 → γγ decays. Another important parame-
ter, Rη, is based on the cluster shape in the second layer of
the electromagnetic calorimeter; it is deﬁned as the ratio of
transverse energy in a core region of 3 × 7 cells in η× φ to
that in a 7 × 7 region, expanded in η from the 3 × 7 core.
In addition, the electron selection requires that a track be
matched to the calorimeter cluster.
For electrons, three sets of reference cuts are deﬁned with
increasing power to reject background: loose, medium, and
tight. All selections include the same cuts on the shower
shape parameter, R
η, and hadronic leakage parameter,Rhad.
The medium selection adds cuts on the shower shape in
the ﬁrst calorimeter layer, Eratio, track quality requirements
and stricter cluster-track matching. The tight selection adds,
on top of the medium selection, requirements on the ratio,
E
T/pT, of calorimeter cluster ET to inner detector track pT,
a requirement for a hit on the innermost tracking layer, and
particle identiﬁcation by the TRT.
Fig. 35 Distributions of the e/γ cluster shape variables (a) Rhad at L2
and (b) Eratio at the EF for ofﬂine electrons passing the L1 EM trigger
with a nominal 3 GeV threshold
For photons, two reference sets of cuts, loose and tight,
are deﬁned. Only the loose selections were used for trigger-
ing in 2010. The loose photon selection is the same as the
calorimeter-based part of the loose electron selection. The
tight selection, in addition, applies cuts on cluster shape in
the ﬁrst calorimeter layer, E
ratio, and further requirements
on cluster shape in the second calorimeter layer. For more
detailed information on e/γ triggers in 2010, see Ref. [26].
6.2.2 Electron and photon trigger menu and rates
Table 7 g i v e sa no v e r v i e wo ft h er a t e so ft h em a i ne/γ trig-
gers used in the 2010 menu for instantaneous luminosities
around 10
32 cm−2 s−1.T h e ET thresholds of the electron
and photon triggers range from 5 GeV to 40 GeV. In addi-
tion, supporting triggers were deployed, which were used
for efﬁciency extraction, monitoring, commissioning and
cross-checks. The overall rate of the e/γ trigger stream was


--- Page 28 ---
Page 28 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Table 7 Principal e/γ triggers
and approximate HLT rates at a
luminosity of 10
32 cm−2 s−1.
The rates given are inclusive;
there are signiﬁcant overlaps
between triggers
Trigger Motivation Rate [Hz]
2e5_tight J/ψ → ee, Drell–Yan 1
2e10_loose Z → ee, Drell–Yan 1
e10_loose_mu6 SM physics, di-lepton searches e.g. for Higgs searches 1
2g15_loose di-photon cross-section, di-photon searches 1
e15_medium high- p
T physics 20
e20_loose high- pT physics 22
g40_loose direct photons and searches for new particles 5
Fig. 36 Observed rates for primary e/γ triggers at ( a) L1, before
pre-scaling (PS), and (b) EF, after pre-scaling
∼ 70 Hz at L = 1032 cm−2 s−1, constituting ∼ 25% of the
total bandwidth written to mass storage at the end of 2010.
The L1 and HLT trigger rates ofe/γ triggers are shown in
Fig. 36 as a function of luminosity. No signiﬁcant deviation
from linearity was observed during 2010 running. It should
be noted that during the course of 2010, no deterioration in
performance of e/γ triggers or effect on rates was observed
due to in-time or out-of-time pile-up.
6.2.3 Electron and photon trigger efﬁciencies
Trigger efﬁciencies are presented for electrons and pho-
tons identiﬁed by the ofﬂine reconstruction. More details
are given in Ref. [26], including a full study of the system-
atic uncertainties in the plateau efﬁciencies which amount
to ∼ 0.4% for the electron trigger and ∼ 1% for the photon
trigger. The EF selection of electrons and photons is very
similar to the ofﬂine identiﬁcation: the same criteria are used
for loose, medium and tight selections in ofﬂine reconstruc-
tion as detailed in Sect. 6.2.1.
The determination of the efﬁciencies of electron and pho-
ton triggers share the following common selection crite-
ria. Collision event candidates are selected by requiring a
primary vertex with at least three tracks. Rare events that
contain very localised high-energy calorimeter deposits not
originating from proton–proton collisions, for example from
sporadic discharges in the calorimeter or cosmic ray muons
undergoing a hard bremsstrahlung, are removed, resulting in
predicted losses of less than 0.1% of minimum-bias events
and 0.004% of W → eν events [27]. In addition, events are
rejected if the candidate electromagnetic cluster is located
in a problematic region of the EM calorimeter, for example
where the effect of inactive cells could be signiﬁcant. Due
to hardware problems [28], the signal could not be read out
from ∼ 2% of the EM calorimeter cells in 2010. Ofﬂine elec-
trons are selected if they are within the region |η| < 2.47
and outside the transition between the barrel and end-caps
of the EM calorimeter, 1 .37 < |η| < 1.52. The acceptance
region for photons is limited to |η| < 2.37 due to the geo-
metrical acceptance of the ﬁrst layer of the EM calorimeter
(ﬁne strips in the η direction), which is crucial for the rejec-
tion of background photons originating from π
0 decay.
The decays Z → ee and W → eν provide samples to
measure the electron trigger efﬁciency in the higher- ET
range (>15 GeV). The Z → ee decays provide a sample of
electrons to use with the tag-and-probe method. In the case
of W → eν decays, the orthogonal trigger method is em-
ployed, using the Emiss
T triggers with thresholds between 20
and 40 GeV to collect the data sample. Figure 37 compares
the efﬁciencies of the e15_medium and e20_loose triggers at
the EF, measured inW boson events with those measured in


--- Page 29 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 29 of 61
Fig. 37 Efﬁciencies for the e15_medium and e20_loose triggers, mea-
sured with respect to ofﬂine tight electrons in W → eν and Z → ee
events, shown as a function of (a) ET and (b) η
Z boson events. The efﬁciencies are measured with respect
to ofﬂine tight electrons as functions of the ofﬂine electron
E
T and η. The efﬁciencies measured by the two methods
are in excellent agreement, differing by less than about 1%.
The dominant contribution (0.4%) to the systematic uncer-
tainty in the plateau efﬁciency comes from an analysis of the
spread of differences in efﬁciency between data and simula-
tion as a function of E
T and η. Figure 37(b) shows that the
response in η is ﬂat except at the outer edges of the end-
caps. Above 20 GeV the e15_medium trigger efﬁciency for
W → eν and Z → ee events is greater than 99%.
In contrast to electrons, there is no suitable decay chan-
nel that would allow the trigger efﬁciency to be measured
for prompt photons in the ∼10–50 GeV energy range using
tag and probe or orthogonal triggers. Therefore, the boot-
strap method is used, where the HLT efﬁciency is measured
for events that pass a lower L1 E
T threshold. For exam-
ple, the g20_loose efﬁciency is measured using a sample
of events passing the 14 GeV E
T L1 threshold (EM14). In
Fig. 38 Photon efﬁciencies measured with the bootstrap method,
as a function of the ofﬂine tight photon ( a) ET and ( b) η (with
ET > 25 GeV) for events passing the L1_EM14 threshold
most physics analyses, the photons are selected ofﬂine with
tight identiﬁcation requirements. Thus, the trigger efﬁciency
is shown with respect to photons identiﬁed with the tight of-
ﬂine requirements. The bootstrap method relies on measur-
ing the HLT efﬁciency in a pT region where the L1 trigger
is fully efﬁcient with respect to ofﬂine photons. It has been
veriﬁed that L1_EM14 is fully efﬁcient for photon clusters
with ET > 20 GeV using a sample of events selected by the
L1_EM5 trigger. The bootstrap method suffers from a large
contamination of fake photons, such as hadronic jet clus-
ters mis-reconstructed as photons. The bias on the measured
efﬁciency has been estimated to be less than ∼ 0.25% for
photons with E
T > 25 GeV by comparing the efﬁciencies
from data with those from a signal-only simulation. Fig-
ure 38 shows the L2 and EF efﬁciencies for the g20_loose
trigger, as functions of ofﬂine tight photonET and η.F o rt h e
η distribution, photons were selected with ET > 25 GeV in
the plateau region of the turn-on curve.


--- Page 30 ---
Page 30 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Table 8 Principal muon
triggers and their approximate
HLT rates at a luminosity of
10
32 cm−2 s−1
Trigger Motivation Rate [Hz]
mu13 Z → μμ, W → μν, top, new physics 12
mu40_MSonly new physics 20
2mu6 Z → μμ, Drell–Yan,B physics, new physics 14
The L2 and EF g20_loose triggers reach the efﬁciency
plateau at about ET = 25 GeV, with efﬁciencies above this
threshold of greater than 99% for both L2 and EF. The ef-
ﬁciency remains ﬂat, at the plateau value, as far as can be
tested in the 2010 data, up to∼500 GeV. The agreement be-
tween the efﬁciencies measured in data and simulated events
is better than 1%.
6.3 Muons
Muons are produced in many ﬁnal states of interest to the
broad physics programme being conducted at the LHC, from
SM precision physics, such as top quark and W boson mass
measurements, to searches for new physics. Muons are iden-
tiﬁed with high purity compared to other signatures and
cover a wide momentum range between a few GeV and
several TeV . Trigger thresholds in the p
T range 4–10 GeV
are used to collect data for measurements of processes such
as J/ψ → μμ,l o w -p
T di-muons, and Z → ττ. Higher pT
thresholds are used to collect data used to measure the prop-
erties of SM particles such as W and Z bosons, and top
quarks, [20, 21, 23] as well as to search for new physics,
like the Higgs boson, SUSY [25] and extra-dimension mod-
els. Some of these channels, such as J/ψ → μμ, Z → μμ,
and W → μνdecays are valuable benchmarks to extract cal-
ibration and alignment constants, and to establish the detec-
tor performance.
6.3.1 Muon reconstruction and selection criteria
The trigger reconstruction algorithms for muons at L1 and
the HLT are described in Sects. 4.3 and 5.4 respectively.
The selection criteria applied to reconstructed muon candi-
dates depend on the algorithm with which they were recon-
structed. The MS-only algorithm selects solely on the p
T of
the muon; the combined algorithm makes selections based
on the match between the inner detector and muon spec-
trometer tracks and their combined p
T; the isolated muon
algorithm applies selection criteria based on the amounts of
energy found in the isolation cones.
6.3.2 Muon trigger menu and rates
Table 8 gives an overview of the principal muon triggers and
their approximate rates at a luminosity of 10
32 cm−2 s−1.I n
addition to these principal physics triggers, a range of sup-
porting triggers were included for commissioning, monitor-
ing, and efﬁciency measurements. In 2010 running, in order
to maximize acceptance, all HLT selections were based on
L1 triggers using the low-p
T logic (described in Sect. 4.3),
including mu13, mu20 and mu40 that were seeded from the
L1 MU10 trigger.
The trigger rates at L1, L2, and EF are dependent on
thresholds, algorithms (Sect. 5.4) and luminosity. The trig-
ger rates have been measured as a function of the luminosity
and parametrized with (1):
r = c1L + c0NBC, (1)
where r is the rate, L the instantaneous luminosity, NBC
the number of colliding bunches, and c1, c0 are proportion-
ality constants. The second term represents the contribution
to the trigger rate from cosmic rays: as the number of collid-
ing bunches increases, so does the amount of time the trigger
gate is open to accept cosmic rays. The instantaneous lumi-
nosity was taken from the online measurements averaged
over ten successive luminosity blocks.
The measured muon trigger rates are shown for L1 and
EF in Fig. 39 together with lines representing the result of
ﬁtting ( 1) to the measurements. Steps in the rate are due
to the increases in N
BC, and hence the contribution to the
rate from cosmic rays. This is signiﬁcant at L1 and for al-
gorithms using only the muon spectrometer data at the HLT.
For combined algorithms, the contribution from cosmic rays
to the rate is negligible (within the errors of the ﬁt).
6.3.3 Muon trigger efﬁciency
The muon trigger efﬁciencies have been measured for ofﬂine
muons [29]. The L1 RPC trigger efﬁciencies measured using
an orthogonal L1 calorimeter trigger are shown in Fig.40(a)
for various thresholds. The efﬁciencies measured using the
tag and probe method withJ/ψ → μμ and Z → μμ decays
are shown for the L1 TGC trigger in Fig.40(b). The geomet-
rical acceptance of the RPC low- p
T trigger is about 80%
which explains the lower efﬁciency compared to the TGC
trigger, which has a geometrical acceptance close to 95%.
For the RPC trigger, a further reduction in plateau efﬁciency
is evident for the high-p
T (pT >10 GeV) triggers compared
to the low-pT triggers (pT ≤10 GeV). About half (6%) of
this difference is due to a smaller geometrical coverage of


--- Page 31 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 31 of 61
Fig. 39 Observed mean trigger rates as a function of the instantaneous
luminosity for (a)L 1a n d(b)t h eE F
the high-pT triggers. Part of this inefﬁciency will be recu-
perated in the muon spectrometer upgrade planned for 2013.
The remaining difference is largely due to detector inefﬁ-
ciency which affects the high-pT trigger more than the low-
pT trigger due to the additional coincidence requirements.
Improved efﬁciency is expected for 2011 running.
The efﬁciency in the HLT was determined using the
tag and probe method with J/ψ → μμ samples for low
pT (6 GeV) triggers and Z → μμ for high pT (13 GeV)
triggers. In both studies, collision events were selected by
requiring that the event has at least three tracks associ-
ated with the same reconstructed primary vertex. Reference
muons reconstructed ofﬂine using both ID and MS infor-
mation were required to be inside the ﬁducial volume of
the muon triggers ( |η| < 2.4) and the associated ID track
was required to have at least one Pixel hit and at least six
SCT hits. Events were required to contain a pair of refer-
ence muons with opposite charge and an invariant mass ly-
ing within a window around the mass of the relevant res-
onance: 2.86 GeV<m
μμ < 3.34 GeV for J/ψ → μμ de-
cays and 77 GeV <m μμ < 106 GeV for Z → μμ decays.
The resulting efﬁciency in the low- pT region for the mu6
trigger is shown in Fig. 41. For the high-pT region, Fig. 42
shows the efﬁciency as a function ofpT for the mu13, mu20
and mu40_MSonly triggers in the TGC and RPC regions de-
rived from the weighted average of the efﬁciency measured
from the J/ψ and Z samples. Note that the 40 GeV thresh-
old trigger has not yet reached its plateau efﬁciency in the
highest p
T bin in the ﬁgure; extending the ﬁgure to higher
pT is limited by the small number of probe muons above
90 GeV. The efﬁciencies are seen to have a sharp turn-on
with a plateau efﬁciency (pT > 13 GeV) for the mu13 trig-
ger of 74% for the barrel region (dominated by the RPC ge-
ometrical acceptance), Fig. 42(a), and 91% for the end-cap
region, Fig. 42(b). The systematic uncertainty on the plateau
efﬁciency has been evaluated to be ∼ 1%.
6.4 Jets
Jet signatures are important for QCD measurements [30, 31],
top quark measurements, and searches for new particles de-
caying into jets [32, 33]. Data collected with jet triggers also
provide important control samples for many other physics
analyses. Jet triggers select events containing high p
T clus-
ters, and can be separated into four categories: inclusive
jets (J), forward jets (FJ), multi-jets (nJ, n = 2, 3... ), and
total jet ET (JE).
6.4.1 Jet reconstruction and selection criteria
For a large part of 2010 data-taking, only L1 jet triggers
(Sect. 4.2) were used for selection. L2 rejection was enabled
late in 2010, while EF rejection was not enabled during 2010
running as it was not needed [34].
Calibration constants that correct for the hadron response
of the non-compensating calorimeters in ATLAS (hadronic
energy scale) were not applied in the trigger during 2010
data-taking. As a result, the jet trigger algorithms applied
cuts to energy variables at the electromagnetic scale, the
scale for energy deposited by electrons and photons in the
calorimeter.
Figure 43 shows the ratio of the L2 jet E
T to the ofﬂine
jet ET as a function of the ofﬂine jet ET. Data and MC sim-
ulation agree well.


--- Page 32 ---
Page 32 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 40 L1 trigger efﬁciency for combined muons reconstructed ofﬂine for ( a)R P Ca n d(b) TGC triggers. A Fermi function is ﬁtted to the
measurements for each trigger. Statistical uncertainties are represented by vertical bars
Fig. 41 Efﬁciencies of the 6 GeV threshold combined muon trigger (mu6) as a function of reconstructed muonpT for J/ψ → μμ decays in data
and simulation for the (a) barrel and (b) end-caps. Statistical uncertainties are represented by vertical bars
Fig. 42 Efﬁciencies in the (a) barrel and (b) end-caps of the combined muon triggers with 13 GeV and 20 GeV thresholds and the MS-only trigger
with a 40 GeV threshold. Statistical uncertainties are represented by vertical bars


--- Page 33 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 33 of 61
Table 9 The primary triggers in
each of the jet trigger categories
with their L1 threshold and
approximate prescale factor for
an instantaneous luminosity of
∼10
32 cm−2 s−1 (a prescale
value of 1 means unprescaled).
The trigger name contains the
EF threshold value; the L2
threshold is 5 GeV lower
Category Name L1 threshold Prescale Motivation
Inclusive jets:j 2 0 J 5 ∼105 Jets in central region (|η| < 3.2)
j30 J10 ∼104
j35 J15 ∼104
j50 J30 ∼103
j75 J55 ∼102
j95 J75 ∼10
none J95 1
Forward jets: fj30 FJ10 ∼103 Jets in the forward region (|η| > 3.2)
fj50 FJ30 ∼50
fj75 FJ55 ∼10
none FJ95 1
Multi-jets: 2j75 2J70 ∼30 Two or more central jets above threshold
3j30 3J10 ∼200
4j30 4J10 ∼5
5j30 5J10 1
Total jetET: je195 JE100 ∼70 Total ET of all jets above threshold
je255 JE140 1
Fig. 43 Ratios of transverse momenta of jets in |η| < 2.8 recon-
structed at L2 and jets reconstructed ofﬂine with the anti-kT algorithm
with parameter R = 0.4, as a function of the ofﬂine jet ET. For this
comparison, both online and ofﬂine jet energies have been calibrated
to the electromagnetic energy scale. The errors shown are statistical
only
6.4.2 Jet trigger menu and rates
The principal jet triggers for an instantaneous luminosity of
∼1032 cm−2 s−1 are listed in Table 9 for inclusive jets, for-
ward jets, multi-jets, and total jetET. The set of L1 prescales
applied provided an approximately ﬂat event yield as a func-
tion of jetpT. The L1 rates of the inclusive and multi-jet trig-
gers are shown in Fig. 44. During 2010 running, the level
of pileup was small enough not to have a visible effect on
the rates, which were observed to rise linearly with instanta-
neous luminosity.
6.4.3 Jet trigger efﬁciency
The jet trigger efﬁciency was measured using the orthogo-
nal trigger and bootstrap methods. For the lowest-threshold
chains, the jet trigger efﬁciency was calculated using the
orthogonal trigger method with events selected by the
L1_MBTS_1 trigger (Sect. 6.1). For the higher thresholds,
the bootstrap method was used. The systematic uncertainty
in the plateau efﬁciencies is less than ∼ 1%.
This efﬁciency determination [30] used jets that were re-
constructed ofﬂine from calorimeter clusters at the electro-
magnetic scale, using the anti- k
T jet algorithm [ 15] with
R = 0.4o r R = 0.6, in the region |η| < 2.8. These jets were
calibrated for calorimeter response to hadrons using param-
eters taken from the simulation, after comparison with the
data [35]. Cleaning cuts were applied to suppress fake jets
from noise, cosmic rays, and other sources. These cleaning
cuts were designed to reject pathological jets with almost all
energy coming from a very small number of cells, out-of-
time cell signals, or abnormal electromagnetic components.
These cuts are explained in detail in Ref. [36].
The efﬁciency of the L1_J30 jet trigger in the central re-
gion, |η| < 0.8, of the detector is shown in Fig. 45(a) as a


--- Page 34 ---
Page 34 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 44 Rates for various L1 jet triggers as a function of the instanta-
neous luminosity during the 2010 run for (a) inclusive triggers and (b)
multi-jet triggers (with the inclusive trigger L1_J10 for reference)
function of ofﬂine jet pT for two different data-taking peri-
ods, the difference between the periods being that in peri-
ods G to I the LHC beam had a bunch train structure. The
change in bunch structure had a small effect on the efﬁ-
ciency turn-on curve and a negligible effect on the efﬁciency
in the plateau region. The efﬁciency of the L2_j45 trigger
chain, which includes the L1_J30 trigger, is also shown in
Fig. 45(a) for periods G to I, for which L2 rejection was
enabled. Since the efﬁciency turn-on is signiﬁcantly sharper
for L2 than L1, the L2 thresholds were set 15 GeV higher
Fig. 45 (a) Efﬁciency of the L1_J30 trigger as a function of ofﬂine
jet transverse momentum (after applying hadronic calibration) for two
different data-taking periods. For the second period the efﬁciency of
the L2_j45 trigger is also shown. ( b) Efﬁciency for several triggers,
integrated over 2010
than the L1 values, reducing the overall trigger rate while en-
suring that the L2 trigger reached full efﬁciency at the same
pT value as the corresponding L1 trigger. Jet trigger efﬁcien-
cies integrated over the whole year are shown in Fig. 45(b)
for several chains as a function of the calibrated ofﬂine jet
pT. Figure 46 shows the efﬁciency for two thresholds of the
inclusive forward trigger. The efﬁciency plateaus at a lower
p
T than for central jet triggers due to different energy res-
olutions and different contributions from noise and pile-up.
After reaching the plateau, the jet and forward jet triggers
remain fully efﬁcient to within ∼1%.
The total jet ET triggers require the ET sum of all jets in
the event (deﬁned asHT) to be higher than a given threshold


--- Page 35 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 35 of 61
Fig. 46 Efﬁciency for two L1 thresholds of the forward jet trigger
Fig. 47 Ofﬂine transverse momentum distribution for all jets, and for
those passing each of three thresholds of the L1 total jet ET trigger
and have the effect of selecting events with high jet multi-
plicity. Figure 47 shows the distribution of HT for events,
triggered by an orthogonal muon trigger, that pass three dif-
ferent JE trigger thresholds, compared to predictions from
the MC. The MC distributions are in agreement with the
data.
In the initial phase of data-taking the jet triggers were
limited to inclusive and multi-jet topologies, with no cuts on
the relative directions of the jets. Near the end of the 2010
data-taking, additional triggers that require di-jets with large
rapidity differences or small differences in azimuthal angle
were implemented at L2. Figure 48 shows the /Delta1φdistribu-
tions for di-jets at L2, indicating that these distributions are
well described by the simulation.
Fig. 48 The /Delta1φbetween the highest pT and second highest pT jet in
the event for jets reconstructed at L2
6.5 Taus
The ATLAS physics programme uses tau leptons for SM
measurements and new physics searches. Being able to trig-
ger on hadronic tau signatures is important for this part
of the ATLAS physics programme. Dedicated trigger algo-
rithms have been designed and implemented based on the
features of hadronic tau decays: narrow calorimeter clusters
and a small number of associated tracks. Due to the high
production rate of jets with very similar features to hadronic
tau decays, keeping the rate of tau triggers under control is
particularly challenging.
6.5.1 Tau reconstruction and selection criteria
At L1 the tau trigger uses EM and hadronic calorimeter
information within regions of 4 × 4 trigger towers ( /Delta1η×
/Delta1φ≈ 0.4 × 0.4) to calculate the energy in a core and an
isolation region (Sect. 4.2).
At L2 selection criteria are applied using tracking and
calorimeter information, taking advantage of narrowness
and low track multiplicity to discriminate taus from jets. The
L2 tau candidate is reconstructed from cells in a rectangu-
lar L2 RoI of size /Delta1η× /Delta1φ= 0.6 × 0.6 centred at the L1
RoI position. The L2 calorimeter algorithm ﬁrst reﬁnes the
L1 RoI position using the second layer of the EM calorime-
ter. It then selects narrow jets in the detector by means of a
calorimeter shape variable determined only from the second
layer of the EM calorimeter. The shape variable,R
EM,i sa n


--- Page 36 ---
Page 36 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 49 Comparison of ( a)t h ev a r i a b l e∑piso
T /∑pcore
T at L2 and
(b) REM at the EF in periods A–C (no pile-up) and period I (in-time
pile-up of between two and three collisions per bunch crossing and
150 ns bunch trains)
energy-weighted radius squared within the L2 RoI, i.e.
REM =
∑
cell Ecell · (/Delta1Rcell)n
∑
cell Ecell
(2)
where Ecell is the energy of the calorimeter cell and /Delta1Rcell
is the radius /Delta1R(deﬁned in Sect. 5.1) of the cell from the
centre of the L2 RoI, which is squared (n = 2). Track recon-
struction at L2 uses the SiTrack algorithm (Sect. 5.1), but to
minimize the execution time, tracks are not extended to the
TRT. Tracks withpT > 1.5 GeV are reconstructed in the L2
RoI.
Exploiting the same characteristics of narrowness and
low track multiplicity, the EF selects 1-prong and multi-
prong decays, with different selection criteria, using algo-
rithms that are similar to the ofﬂine reconstruction algo-
rithms [1]. The EF tau candidate is reconstructed from cells
in a rectangular region of size/Delta1η×/Delta1φ= 0.8× 0.8 centred
at the L1 RoI position. The position, transverse energy, and
calorimeter shower shape variables of the EF tau candidate
are calculated from cells of all calorimeter layers within this
0.8 × 0.8 region. An overall hadronic calibration [37]i sa p -
plied to all cells, and a tau-speciﬁc calibration is applied to
the tau trigger candidate. The EM radius shape variable used
at the EF is deﬁned by2 with n = 1. Additional quality crite-
ria are applied to tracks reconstructed in the RoI, and if more
than one track is found a secondary vertex reconstruction is
attempted.
The stability of the tau trigger selection variables against
pile-up was evaluated by comparing the distributions of
these variables for events passing the L1_TAU5 trigger from
data-taking periods A–C with those from period I. Periods
A–C contain a negligible amount of pile-up, while events
from period I contain the largest amount of pile-up (Sect. 2)
observed in 2010. The distributions of the two most impor-
tant variables ( ∑p
iso
T /∑pcore
T at L2 and REM at EF) are
s h o w ni nF i g .49 for events with and without pile-up. The
variable ∑piso
T /∑pcore
T describes the ratio of the scalarpT
sums of the tracks in an isolation ring ( R = 0.1 to 0.3) and
in the core area (R = 0.1). The plots show a small shift due
to the presence of additional energy and tracks, but these
variables are in general quite stable with respect to the pile-
up of two to three collisions per bunch crossing. The same
behaviour was observed for other variables used for making
the HLT decision.
6.5.2 Tau trigger menu and rates
Both single tau triggers and tau triggers in combination with
electrons, muons, jets and missing energy signatures were
present in the 2010 trigger menus. Tau signatures were used
in combination with other triggers to keep rates low enough
while maintaining acceptance for the physics processes of
interest. Table 10 shows a subset of these items with their
rates that represent the lowest threshold triggers that re-
mained unprescaled at a luminosity of 10
32 cm−2 s−1.
Figure 50 shows the trigger rates for various L1 and HLT
tau triggers as a function of instantaneous luminosity show-
ing a linear increase of rates during 2010 running.
Table 10 Tau trigger menu and approximate HLT rates for a luminos-
ity of 1032 cm−2 s−1
Trigger Motivation Rate [Hz]
tau50_medium H+, Z′ 8
2tau29_loose1 H , Z′ 1
tau16_medium_xe22 H+, t, W 10
tau12_loose_e10_medium H , t, Z 4
tau12_loose_mu10 H , t, Z 3


--- Page 37 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 37 of 61
Fig. 50 Trigger rates as a function of instantaneous luminosity for
several (a)L 1a n d( b) HLT tau triggers. The rates for L1_TAU5 and
L1_TAU11 have been scaled by 0.1 and 0.5 respectively
6.5.3 Tau trigger efﬁciency
Tau trigger efﬁciencies were measured using ofﬂine recon-
structed tau candidates in events containing QCD jets. Since
QCD jets are the biggest source of fake taus in data, a sam-
ple of jets reconstructed ofﬂine provides a useful reference
for tau trigger performance measurements. For the L1 trig-
ger efﬁciency determination, ofﬂine jets were reconstructed
with the anti- k
T algorithm (using parameter R = 0.4) and
required to have at least one associated track. Figure 51(a)
shows the efﬁciency of the L1_TAU trigger for these jets,
as a function of the jet E
T. Although the L1 trigger efﬁ-
ciency has a slower turn-on for jets than for true taus, due to
Fig. 51 Efﬁciency for (a) jets reconstructed ofﬂine with at least one
associated track to pass the L1 tau trigger with thresholds of 5, 11,
20 and 30 GeV as a function of the ofﬂine jet ET and (b)o f ﬂ i n et a u
candidates to pass the HLT tau16_loose trigger in a di-jet data sample,
simulated QCD di-jets and a simulated tau signal sample, as a function
of the ofﬂine tau pT
the wider shower proﬁle of QCD jets, above the turn-on re-
gion the performance is similar, as conﬁrmed from MC sim-
ulation studies. The L1 trigger efﬁciency reaches a plateau
value of 100% (to within a systematic uncertainty of ∼ 1%).
Figure 51(b) shows the efﬁciency of the tau16_loose trig-
ger for ofﬂine tau candidates in data, simulated di-jet events,
and simulated signal τ events. Data events were selected
by requiring two back-to-back jets (within 0.3 radians), bal-
anced in p
T (within 50% of the higher pT jet). The data
sample was collected with jet triggers (Sect. 6.4). Bias re-
lated to the jet trigger selection was removed by randomly
selecting one of the jets (tag jet) that passed the jet trigger
and using the other jet (probe jet) to match to a reconstructed
tau candidate. Reconstructed tau candidates that pass the
tight ofﬂine identiﬁcation requirements and match a probe
jet (/Delta1R <0.4) were used as the denominator of the efﬁ-
ciency measurement. The numerator was deﬁned as the sub-


--- Page 38 ---
Page 38 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
set of those candidates that also passed the tau16_loose trig-
ger. The efﬁciencies from data agree with those for the simu-
lated di-jets, but have a slower turn-on than for the simulated
signal sample. This is because of the lower L1 efﬁciency for
jets than taus in the threshold region. The trigger efﬁciency
for ofﬂine tau candidates with p
T > 30 GeV is 94% with a
total uncertainty of ∼ 5%. Measurements of the tau trigger
efﬁciency from Z → ττand W → τνdecays are consistent
with the QCD jet measurement but, with 2010 data, have
relatively large statistical uncertainties.
6.6 Missing transverse energy
The missing transverse-energy ( E
miss
T ) signature is ex-
ploited in the measurement of the W boson and top quark
[20, 21, 23] to provide information on the kinematics of neu-
trinos in the events. It is also extensively used in searches for
new physics [ 24, 25] including possibly new particles that
are not directly detected [ 38]. The E
miss
T is estimated by
calculating the vector sum of all energies deposited in the
calorimeters, projected onto the transverse plane, corrected
for the transverse energies of all reconstructed muons. The
E
miss
T triggers [39] are designed to select events for which
the measured transverse energy imbalance is above a given
threshold. Triggers based on the scalar sum of the transverse
energies (∑E
T) are also used.
6.6.1 Reconstruction and selection criteria
During 2010, the Emiss
T and ∑ET triggers used calorimet-
ric measurements calibrated at the EM scale. In the L1
calorimeter trigger system trigger towers are used to com-
pute both E
miss
T and ∑ET over the full ATLAS acceptance
(|η| < 4.9). The magnitude of Emiss
T is not calculated di-
rectly at L1, but rather is derived from a look-up table that
takes the values of∑Ex and ∑Ey (expressed in integer val-
ues in GeV) as inputs [39]. The resulting resolution smearing
is ∼1 GeV. The noise suppression scheme adopted at L1 in
2010 was very conservative with a rather high ET thresh-
old, in the range 1.0–1.3 GeV, applied to each trigger tower
before computing the sums ∑Ex , ∑Ey and Emiss
T .
The discreteness of the L1 approach is smoothed out at
L2, where the ∑Ex and ∑Ey values from L1 are summed
in quadrature and a threshold is placed on the magnitude of
Emiss
T =
√
(∑Ex)2 + (∑Ey)2. At L2, the L1 energy mea-
surement can also be corrected using the measured momenta
of detected muons in the event. Since the muon correction
has only a small impact on trigger rates, for 2010 running
the correction was calculated at L2 and the value of the cor-
rection stored in the event. However, this correction was not
applied to the E
miss
T value calculated online, and thus was
not used in the trigger decision.
Because recalculation of Emiss
T and ∑ET using the full
granularity of the calorimeters requires access to the whole
event, it is only performed at the EF. Both E
miss
T and ∑ET
are estimated by the same algorithm, which loops over all
calorimeter cells discarding those whose energy is negative
or has a value less than three standard deviations of the noise
distribution. For each of the cells with energy above thresh-
old, an energy vector is deﬁned whose direction is given by
the unit vector starting from the nominal interaction point
and pointing to the cell centre, with magnitude equal to the
measured cell energy.
6.6.2 Menu and rates
There are eight L1 E
miss
T thresholds shown in Table 1.T h e
L2 (EF) thresholds were set at least 2 GeV (10 GeV) higher
than the corresponding thresholds at L1 to mask the reduced
granularity of the look-up table and the effects of the slowly
increasing efﬁciency at L1. For example the xe40 trigger has
a 25 GeV threshold at L1 (L1_XE25) and a 30 GeV thresh-
old at L2 (L2_xe30). To control the trigger rate as the in-
stantaneous luminosity increased it was necessary to reduce
the energy difference between the L1 and EF thresholds for
some chains; these chains were sufﬁxed with “tight” in the
trigger menu, e.g. xe30_tight. For these triggers, the effect
of the L1 efﬁciency turn-on extends above the EF thresh-
old. The principal E
miss
T and ∑ET triggers used in 2010
and their rates at a luminosity of 10 32 cm−2 s−1 are shown
in Table 11.
Figure 52 shows the impact of in-time pile-up on Emiss
T .
The measured L1 and EF distributions are compared to a
MC sample of minimum bias events simulated without pile-
up. The simulation reproduces theE
miss
T distributions for the
bunch crossings with a single pp collision (Npv = 1). For
data events with multiple collisions (0.6–2.0 collisions/BC)
there is a visible broadening of theE
miss
T distribution reﬂect-
ing an increase in Emiss
T due to pile-up. The Emiss
T trigger
rates at L1 and the EF are shown in Fig.53 for the xe40 trig-
ger which has a 25 GeV threshold at L1 (L1_XE25) and a
40 GeV thresholds at the EF. The E
miss
T rate increase with
luminosity is faster than linear, due to the effects of pile-up.
6.6.3 Resolution
The correlations between the trigger and ofﬂine values of
Emiss
T and ∑ET using uncalibrated calorimeter energies are
Table 11 Principal Emiss
T and ∑ET triggers and their rates at a lumi-
nosity of 1032 cm−2 s−1
Trigger Motivation Rate [Hz]
xe40 W , top, new physics 3
te350 new physics 3


--- Page 39 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 39 of 61
Fig. 52 Distributions of Emiss
T computed at (a)L 1a n d(b)t h eE Ff o r
all 2010 pp collision events (dots) and for the subset obtained by re-
jecting events with multiple primary vertices ( squares), compared to
simulated minimum bias events that do not include pile-up effects (cir-
cles)
shown in Figs. 54 and 55. The ofﬂine calculations use an
algorithm (MET_Topo) which sums the energy deposited
in topological clusters [14]. Figure 54(a) shows the correla-
tion between L1 and ofﬂineE
miss
T for events triggered by the
mu13 trigger (Sect. 6.3). The L1 Emiss
T resolution is worse
than ofﬂine, as expected, while the EF shows a good corre-
lation and improved resolution with respect to L1, as seen
in Fig. 54(b). Figure 55(a) shows the correlation between
the L1 ∑E
T and that calculated by the ofﬂine algorithm
MET_Topo for events selected by the mu13 trigger. L1 un-
derestimates the ∑E
T particularly at low values, due to the
rather conservative noise suppression (i.e. high trigger tower
E
T thresholds) employed at L1. The effect is to shift the en-
ergy scale at low ∑ET values, as shown by the non-linear
behaviour in Fig. 55(a).
T h ep l o ti nF i g .55(b) shows the correlation between the
EF and ofﬂine values of ∑ET. There is an offset of about
10 GeV for the values of ∑ET computed at EF, as the of-
Fig. 53 Rate of the Emiss
T triggers at (a) L1 (L1_XE25) and (b)t h eE F
(xe40) as a function of instantaneous luminosity for a set of runs taken
near the end of 2010 running
ﬂine ∑ET approaches zero. The offset arises because of
a one-sided noise cut applied by the trigger, compared to
symmetric cuts applied ofﬂine. The main motivation for the
choice made at the EF is to protect against large negative en-
ergy values, which could arise from read-out problems and
which would constitute a source of fake E
miss
T . The choice
of the online noise cut (of three times the r.m.s. noise) is
a compromise between minimising the offset (a lower cut
of twice the r.m.s. noise would give a much larger bias of
∼200 GeV) and maintaining sensitivity, since higher thresh-
olds would cause a greater loss of the real signal [39].
6.6.4 Efﬁciency
Figure 56(a) shows the efﬁciency of the L1 E
miss
T trigger
with a 25 GeV threshold as a function ofEmiss
T reconstructed
ofﬂine for W → μν candidates selected in ofﬂine recon-
struction, triggered by mu13. The plateau region is described


--- Page 40 ---
Page 40 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 54 Correlation between the trigger and ofﬂine Emiss
T shown for
(a)L 1a n d( b) the EF for events triggered by the mu13 trigger. The
black crosses show the mean value of online Emiss
T calculated in each
vertical slice with the vertical length of the cross representing the error
on the mean. Energies are at EM scale
Fig. 55 Correlation between the trigger and ofﬂine∑ET measurements shown for (a)L 1a n d(b) the EF for events triggered by the mu13 trigger.
The black crosses have the same meaning as in Fig. 54. Energies are at EM scale
well by the MC. The agreement with the simulation is not
perfect for low energies; background events from QCD pro-
cesses and W boson decays into taus, which subsequently
decay into muons, are difﬁcult to simulate precisely. Fig-
ure 56(b) shows the corresponding efﬁciency for the full
trigger chain including a 40 GeVE
miss
T threshold at EF. The
initial faster rise of the efﬁciency turn-on is dominated by
the EF Emiss
T resolution whereas the slower rise approaching
the plateau is due to the slower L1 turn-on. This behaviour
is modelled well by the simulation. Once the plateau has
been reached the E
miss
T triggers remain fully efﬁcient within
a negligible systematic uncertainty.
Figure 57(a) shows the L1 efﬁciency turn-on for a nom-
inal ∑ET threshold of 50 GeV. The late turn-on, starting
only at about 150 GeV in ofﬂine ∑ET, results from an
under-estimation of∑ET at L1 due to the noise suppression
scheme, as described in Sect. 6.6.3. The efﬁciency reaches
90% at about 260 GeV. Data and MC agree reasonably well;
the shift in the efﬁciency turn-on is due to small errors in the
modelling of noise at the individual cell level in the simula-
tion. Figure 57(b) shows the efﬁciency of the EF selection
alone, not including L1 and L2. The EF efﬁciency reaches
90% at about 230 GeV. Once the plateau has been reached
the ∑E
T triggers remain fully efﬁcient within a negligi-
ble systematic uncertainty. Data and simulation agree well.
More details can be found in Ref. [40].
6.7 b-Jets
The ability to separate heavy ﬂavour jets from light-quark
and gluon jets is an important asset for many physics anal-
yses, such as measurements in the top-quark sector and
searches for Higgs bosons or other new physics signatures.
The ability to identify b-jets in the ATLAS trigger system


--- Page 41 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 41 of 61
Fig. 56 Efﬁciency of theEmiss
T trigger as a function of ofﬂineEmiss
T for (a) the 25 GeV L1 threshold and (b) the 40 GeV EF threshold, forW → μν
candidates selected ofﬂine and a sample of simulated W → μν events
Fig. 57 Efﬁciency of (a)t h eL 1∑ET threshold at 50 GeV and (b)t h e
EF-only ∑ET threshold at 200 GeV, as a function of∑ET calculated
by the ofﬂine algorithm MET_Topo, for W → μν candidates selected
ofﬂine and a sample of simulated W → μν events
gives access to signals that would otherwise be lost in the
multi-jet background, such as t ¯t → jets. ATLAS employs
two categories of b-jet triggers: lifetime triggers that exploit
the B-hadron time-of-ﬂight and muon-jet triggers that ex-
ploit the presence of a muon in B-hadron decays.
During the 2010 data-taking period, the lifetime triggers
were not in active rejection mode and the muon-jet triggers
were used to collect data to validate the lifetime triggers.
The lifetime triggers will be used in 2011 to collect data
for physics analysis. In this section a brief description of
the muon-jet triggers is given, but the main focus is on the
performance of the lifetime triggers.
6.7.1 b-Jets reconstruction and selection criteria
Muon-jet triggers were used to select events containing jets
associated with a lowp
T muon. At L1 a combined muon-jet
trigger, L1_MU0_JX (X = 5, 10, 15, 30, 55), required the
lowest threshold muon trigger in combination with a jet. No
topological matching between muon and jet is possible at
L1. The HLT selection introduces a reﬁnement of the muon
selection (L2_mu4) and requires matching within/Delta1R <0.4
between the muon and the corresponding L1 jet. The se-
lected jet sample is enriched inb-jets and is used to calibrate
both trigger and ofﬂine b-tagging algorithms.
Lifetime triggers use tracks and vertices reconstructed at
the HLT (in the region η< 2.5) to select a sample enriched
in b-jets. These triggers are based on the impact parame-
ters of tracks with respect to the reconstructed primary ver-
tex. The HLT selection is based on inner detector tracks re-
constructed within a L1 jet RoI. The lowest threshold b-jet
trigger is b10 which starts from a L1 jet with a 10 GeV E
T
threshold (L1_J10).
At the HLT, the ﬁrst step for the lifetime triggers is to
ﬁnd the location of the primary vertex. The coordinates of


--- Page 42 ---
Page 42 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
the primary vertex in the transverse plane are determined
by the beamspot information which is part of the conﬁgu-
ration data provided to the algorithm via the online condi-
tions database. The beamspot position can be updated dur-
ing a run based on information from the online beamspot
measurement (Sect. 5.2). During 2010 running, when the
lifetime triggers were not in active rejection mode, this up-
date was initiated manually whenever the beamspot showed
a signiﬁcant displacement. The longitudinal coordinate of
the primary vertex is determined on an event-by-event ba-
sis from a histogram of the z positions of all tracks in the
RoI. The z position of the vertex is identiﬁed, using a slid-
ing window algorithm, as thez position at which the window
contains the most histogram entries. In the case of multiple
primary vertices, this algorithm selects the vertex with the
most tracks.
The transverse and longitudinal impact parameters are
determined, for each track, as the distances from the primary
vertex to the point of closest approach of the track, in the ap-
propriate projection. The impact parameters are signed with
respect to the jet axis determined by a track-based cone jet
reconstruction algorithm. The impact parameter is positive
if the angle between the jet axis and a line from the primary
vertex to the point of closest approach of the track is less
than 90
◦.
Two different methods, likelihood and χ2 taggers, both
based on the track impact parameters, are then used to build
a variable discriminating between b and light jets:
Likelihood taggers: longitudinal and transverse impact pa-
rameters are combined, using a likelihood ratio method, to
form a discriminant variable.
χ
2 tagger: the compatibility of the tracks in the RoI with
the beamspot is tested using the transverse impact parame-
ter signiﬁcance (deﬁned as the transverse impact param-
eter divided by the transverse impact parameter resolu-
tion) [41]. The distribution of the χ
2 probability of the im-
pact parameter signiﬁcance for all the tracks reconstructed
in an RoI is expected to be uniform for light jets, as tracks
come from the primary vertex, while it peaks toward 0 for
b-jets, which contain tracks that are not from the primary
vertex. The χ
2 probability can, therefore, be used as a dis-
criminant variable. It is set to 1 for RoIs that do not contain
any reconstructed tracks.
Likelihood taggers are more powerful, in principle, but
require signiﬁcant validation from data as they rely on de-
termining probability density functions that give the signal
and background probabilities corresponding to a given im-
pact parameter value. The χ
2 tagger, though less powerful,
can be tuned more easily on data using the negative side of
the transverse impact parameter distribution. This technique
is used because the shape of the negative side of the distri-
bution is determined only by resolution effects and there is
Fig. 58 The χ2 probability distribution before and after the beamspot
measurement update in a data-taking period when the beamspot was
signiﬁcantly displaced with respect to the reference
no signiﬁcant contribution from highly displaced tracks in
this part of the distribution.
The importance of the online beamspot measurement is
demonstrated in Fig. 58 which shows theχ2 probability dis-
tribution of the χ2 tagger before and after a beamspot up-
date in a data-taking period when the beamspot was signiﬁ-
cantly displaced with respect to the initial reference. In 2011
the beamspot will be updated automatically every few min-
utes because a transverse displacement of the beamspot can
cause tracks in light-quark jets to artiﬁcially acquire large
impact parameters and so resemble the tracks in b-jets.
6.7.2 b-Jets menu and rates
During the 2010 data-taking period the muon-jet triggers
were the only b-jet triggers in active rejection mode, se-
lecting the calibration sample. The lifetime triggers ran in
monitoring mode, allowing for tuning in preparation for ac-
tivation in 2011 running. Similar algorithms ran at both L2
and the EF.
The muon-jet triggers were maintained at a rate of
about 7 Hz, using prescaling when luminosity exceeded
10
31 cm−2 s−1. Prescaling of the triggers with lower jet
thresholds was done in such a way as to collect a sample of
events with a uniform jet transverse momentum distribution
in the reconstructed muon-jet pairs. The uniformity of the
distribution is important for a precise determination of the
b-jet efﬁciency in a wide range of jet transverse momenta.
6.7.3 b-Jet trigger performance
The performance of the χ
2 tagger is shown in Table 12,
which gives the rejection obtained from data collected with
the b10 trigger and the efﬁciency obtained from simulation
of b-jets with a similar p
T distribution to the data. The ef-
ﬁciency measurement from simulation requires a tagged jet


--- Page 43 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 43 of 61
Table 12 Single b-RoI efﬁciency and rejection for theχ2 tagger at L2
and for the HLT. The efﬁciency is computed using MC with respect to
tagged ofﬂine b-jets while rejection is computed on data
Efﬁciency L2 rejection HLT rejection
0.7 2 8
0.6 3 17
0.5 6 28
RoI matched with an ofﬂine jet ( /Delta1R <0.4). The ofﬂine jet
is required to be associated with a true b quark (/Delta1R <0.3)
and identiﬁed by an ofﬂine tagger based on the secondary
vertex transverse ﬂight length signiﬁcance.
The data collected with the b10 trigger has been used to
tune the χ2 tagger ready for the activation of the b-jet trig-
ger in 2011 data-taking. The tuning procedure is identical
for L2 and EF and consists mainly of a parameterization
of the transverse impact parameter resolution. The selec-
tion cuts applied at L2 and the EF are chosen to give the
optimum overall balance of efﬁciency and rejection at each
level, taking into account the different impact parameter res-
olutions of the L2 and EF tracking algorithms (Sect. 5.1).
Figure 59(a) shows the L2 transverse impact parameter sig-
niﬁcance distribution for data, where the impact parameter is
signed with respect to the jet axis. The negative side of this
distribution is mainly due to tracks originating from light
quarks decays, allowing the resolution to be studied using
an almost pure sample of tracks coming from the primary
vertex. A ﬁt was made to the negative part of the impact
parameter signiﬁcance distribution using a double Gaussian
function. The result of the ﬁt is shown superimposed on the
data points in Fig. 59(a). The same tuning procedure was
applied separately to MC simulated data. The χ
2 probabil-
ity distributions obtained using the parameterized resolution
are shown in Fig. 59(b) for data and simulation. Data and
MC simulation show reasonable agreement, although there
are some differences at values of the χ
2 probability close
to 0 and 1. A typical cut would be to select jets with a χ2
probability less than 0.07. The peak at 1 reﬂects the choice
of setting theχ2 probability to 1 for RoIs that do not contain
any reconstructed tracks.
6.8 B-Physics
The ATLAS B-physics programme includes searches for
rare B hadron decays and CP violation measurements, as
well as tests of QCD calculations through production and
spin-alignment measurements of heavy ﬂavour quarkonia
and B baryons [42, 43]. B-physics triggers complement the
low-p
T muon triggers by providing invariant mass based
selections for J/ψ , Υ , and B mesons. There are two cat-
egories of B-physics triggers, topological and single RoI
seeded, each one exploiting a different characteristic of the
ATLAS trigger system to manage the event rates.
Fig. 59 (a) Transverse impact parameter signiﬁcance distribution for
L2 tracks with a ﬁt to the negative side. (b) χ2 distribution in data and
simulation after tuning procedure
6.8.1 B-Physics reconstruction and selection criteria
Topological triggers require 2 muon RoIs to have been
found at L1 and the HLT (see Sect. 6.3). The B-physics
algorithms in the HLT then combine the information from
the two muon RoIs to search for the parent J/ψ , Υ ,o r
B meson, and a vertex ﬁt is performed for the two recon-
structed ID tracks. The requirement for two muons at L1
reduces the rate, but is inefﬁcient for events where the sec-
ond muon does not give rise to a L1 RoI because it has low
momentum, or falls outside the L1 acceptance.
Single RoI seeded triggers recover events that have been
missed by the topological triggers by starting from a sin-
gle L1 muon and ﬁnding the second muon at the HLT.
In this approach, tracking is performed in a large region
(/Delta1η×/Delta1φ= 1.5× 1.5) around the L1 muon. At L2, tracks
found in this large RoI are extrapolated to the muon sys-
tem. The algorithm searches for muon hits within a road
around the extrapolated track; if enough hits are found then


--- Page 44 ---
Page 44 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
the track is ﬂagged as a muon. At the EF the search for
tracks within the large RoI uses the EF Combined strategy
(Sect. 5.4) which starts from the Muon Spectrometer and
then adds inner detector information. If a second track is
found, it is combined with the ﬁrst one to search for the
parent di-muon object in the same way as in the topolog-
ical trigger. This approach can also be used in FullScan
(FS) mode (Sect. 5.1). The FS mode is particularly useful
for triggering Υ events where the muons tend to be sepa-
rated by more than the RoI size, but requires approximately
8 times more CPU time than the RoI approach.
In both approaches, a series of cuts can be made on the
muon pair requiring: the two muons are opposite charge; the
mass cuts J/ψ :2 .5 − 4.3G e V ,Υ : 8–12 GeV, B:4 – 7G e V ,
DiMu >0.5 GeV; a cut on theχ
2 of the reconstructed vertex.
The mass cuts are very loose compared to the mass resolu-
tions (∼ 40 MeV and ∼ 100 MeV for J/ψ and Υ respec-
tively). In 2010 chains were run both with and without the
opposite sign requirement and with and without a require-
ment on the vertex χ
2.
6.8.2 B-Physics trigger menu and rates
Table 13 gives an overview of the main B-physics triggers
and their rates at a luminosity of 10 32 cm−2 s−1.A tt h i s
luminosity the mu4 trigger was prescaled by 1500 and the
2mu4 trigger was prescaled by 85. The single muon-seeded
“DiMu” triggers needed to be prescaled by ∼ 20; however
the topological triggers ran unprescaled. Figure 60 shows
the rates for some of the triggers shown in Table 13 as a
function of instantaneous luminosity.
6.8.3 B-Physics trigger efﬁciency
The efﬁciencies of the B-physics triggers have been mea-
sured from data using triggers in monitoring mode (Sect.3).
The efﬁciencies of the mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with respect
to L1_MU0 and the 2mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with respect
to L1_2MU0 are shown in Fig. 61(a) for events contain-
ing a J/ψ → μμ decay reconstructed ofﬂine with both
muon’s p
T > 4 GeV. The efﬁciencies shown in Fig. 61(a)
include the HLT muon trigger efﬁciencies and the efﬁciency
of the subsequent J/ψ → μμ selection cuts. The efﬁcien-
cies have been determined within a systematic uncertainty
of less than 1%; statistical uncertainties are presented in the
ﬁgures.
In order to show the efﬁciency of the J/ψ → μμ selec-
tion itself, independent of the muon trigger, Fig.61(b) shows
Fig. 60 Plot of rates for several triggers for ( a) single RoI seeded
chains and (b) topological chains
Table 13 B-physics primary
trigger menu and rates at a
luminosity of 1032 cm−2 s−1
Trigger Motivation Rate [Hz]
mu4_DiMu a loose single RoI seeded trigger 8
mu4_DiMu_FS a loose single RoI seeded trigger using FullScan 13
mu4_Jpsimumu a single RoI seeded selection for J/ψ 3
mu4_Upsimumu_FS a single RoI seeded selection for Υ 3
mu4_Bmumu a single RoI seeded selection for B mesons <1
2mu4_DiMu a loose topological selection 4
2mu4_Jpsimumu topological selection for J/ψ 1
2mu4_Upsimumu topological selection for Υ< 1
2mu4_Bmumu topological selection for B mesons <1


--- Page 45 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 45 of 61
Fig. 61 Efﬁciencies for J/ψ → μμ events selected ofﬂine as a func-
tion of the J/ψ p T for (a) the single RoI-seeded mu4_Jpsimumu trig-
ger with respect to L1_MU0 and the topological 2mu4_Jpsimumu trig-
ger with respect to L1_2MU0 and (b) the mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with
respect to the mu4 trigger and the 2mu4_Jpsimumu with respect to the
mu4 and 2mu4 triggers
the efﬁciency of: the single RoI-seeded mu4_Jpsimumu
trigger with respect to the mu4 trigger; the topological
2mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with respect to the 2mu4 trigger;
and the topological 2mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with respect
to the mu4 trigger. The mu4_Jpsimumu trigger has an ef-
ﬁciency of 85% with respect to mu4 including the efﬁ-
ciency to reconstruct the second muon at the HLT, which
causes a reduction of efﬁciency for low p
T J/ψ . The ben-
eﬁt of using single RoI triggers is shown by comparing the
mu4_Jpsimumu trigger efﬁciency with the lower efﬁciency
of 50% for the 2mu4_Jpsimumu trigger with respect to the
mu4 trigger. The lower efﬁciency of the topological trig-
ger results mainly from the requirement for a second L1
Fig. 62 Total output trigger rates as a function of instantaneous lumi-
n o s i t yi nas a m p l er u nf r o mp e r i o dIf o r(a) each trigger level and ( b)
each stream. B-jet triggers are included in the JetTauEtmiss stream and
B-physics triggers are included in the muon stream
muon; the efﬁciency of the 2mu4_Jpsimumu trigger is 92%
for events with a 2mu4 trigger.
7 Overall trigger performance
In this section the overall performance of the ATLAS trig-
ger is presented. Overall trigger performance parameters in-
clude the total rates at each trigger level, the CPU processing
time per event, and the load on CPU resources available at
L2 and EF. To demonstrate these performance parameters,
a run from period I was selected which took place during
the last pp ﬁll of 2010 and had instantaneous luminosities
ranging from 0.85× 10
32 cm−2 s−1 to 1.8× 1032 cm−2 s−1.
This run was 15 hours long and had an integrated luminosity
of 6.4 pb
−1.


--- Page 46 ---
Page 46 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
Fig. 63 Processing time per event for (a)L 2a n d(b) EF in the sample
run
7.1 Total trigger rates
The total L1, L2, and EF output rates are given in Fig.62(a)
as a function of instantaneous luminosity for the sample run
from period I. By changing prescale factors as the luminos-
ity fell, the trigger rates were kept stable throughout the run
at ∼ 30 kHz (L1), ∼ 4 kHz (L2), and ∼ 450 Hz (EF). The
prescale factor changes can be seen in the ﬁgures as dis-
continuities in the rate as a function of luminosity. Prescale
factors at L2 and EF are changed at the same time, while
L1 prescale factors are set independently. The output rates
for each stream in the same run are given in Fig. 62(b). The
relative fractions of each stream are tuned as a function of
instantaneous luminosity in order to optimize the total rate
and physics yield.
ATLAS utilizes an inclusive streaming scheme, meaning
that an event that ﬁres a trigger in two different streams will
be written twice, once in each stream, creating some overlap
between different streams. The only pairs of streams that
show a signiﬁcant overlap ( >1%) at L = 10
32 cm−2 s−1
Fig. 64 (a) Mean time per event and ( b) fraction of trigger system
CPU usage for L2 and EF as function of luminosity in the sample run
are: Egamma–JetTauEtmiss14%, Egamma–Muons 2%, and
Muons–JetTauEtmiss 4%. At higher instantaneous luminos-
ity, when the lower pT threshold items will have higher
prescales, the Egamma–JetTauEtmiss overlap will decrease.
The goal is to keep the total overlap between streams be-
low 10%.
7.2 Timing
The timing performance of the individual algorithms has
been discussed throughout the paper. Figure 63 shows the
total processing time per event in the sample run for L2
and EF.
Figure 64(a) presents the mean processing time per event
at L2 and EF as a function of instantaneous luminosity; L2
is further subdivided into the mean time to retrieve data over
the network from the Read out Buffers (ROB time) and the
computational time taken by the algorithms (CPU time). The
ﬁgure shows that L2 was running close to the design limit of
∼40 ms and EF was running at ∼400 ms, well below the
design limit of ∼4 s. Figure 64(b), reporting the fraction of
CPU used in the HLT farm, shows that the HLT farm was


--- Page 47 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 47 of 61
well within its CPU capacity. As was the case for the trig-
ger rates, discontinuities in the CPU usage with luminosity
are due to deliberate changes of prescale sets to control the
trigger rate.
8 Outlook
The trigger menus for 2011 and 2012 running will cover
instantaneous luminosities from ∼10
32 cm−2 s−1 to ∼5 ×
1033 cm−2 s−1 at √ s = 7 TeV with around 10–23 pp inter-
actions per bunch crossing and a 50 ns bunch spacing. At
these instantaneous luminosities the main triggers will se-
lect electrons and muons with p
T above about 20 GeV, jets
with pT above about 200 GeV, Emiss
T above about 50 GeV,
as well as Emiss
T in combination with a tau or jet. The pri-
mary triggers are shown in Table 14 together with the L1
and HLT thresholds and predicted trigger rates for a lumi-
nosity of 10
33 cm−2 s−1.
The table also shows the bandwidth allocation guidelines
for each group of triggers. The primary triggers make up
about two thirds of the output bandwidth. The remainder of
the bandwidth is ﬁlled with supporting, commissioning, cal-
ibration, and monitoring triggers. Supporting triggers popu-
late the largest part of the remaining bandwidth. For exam-
ple, prescaled jet and photon supporting triggers provide an
approximately ﬂat event yield as a function ofpT to be used
for measurements limited by systematic uncertainties. In ad-
dition, a smaller fraction of bandwidth is allocated to com-
missioning triggers speciﬁcally intended for the further de-
velopment of the trigger menu. The total number of triggers
is reduced compared to 2010 menus, as many items neces-
sary for commissioning or lower luminosities are removed.
In contrast to the rapid evolution in 2010, the 2011/12
LHC conditions will be increasingly stable, and changes in
the trigger menu will be less frequent than in 2010. Daily
changes will be limited to adjustments of prescales, mainly
Table 14 The bandwidth
allocation guidelines per trigger
group for 2011 for a total rate of
∼ 200 Hz. For primary physics
triggers, the L1 and HLT
thresholds and predicted trigger
rates are given for a luminosity
of 1033 cm−2 s−1
Category pT threshold [GeV] Rate [Hz] Bandwidth [Hz]
L1 HLT
minbias, zerobias 10
muon 45
single muon 10 20 25
di-muon 4 10 3
B-physics 15
Jpsimumu 8
Upsimumu 4
Rare B decays 3
e/γ 55
s i n g l e e l e c t r o n 1 42 02 0
di-electron 7 12 0 .5
electron + muon 5(e), 4( μ) 10(e), 6( μ)3 .5
single photon 14 80 1
di-photon 14 20 1 .5
tau, tau + E
miss
T 30
single tau 30 100 4
di-tau 11 29 4
tau + electron 6( τ), 10(e) 16( τ), 15(μ)3
tau + muon 6( τ), 4(μ) 16( τ), 15(μ)5
jet, b-jet, jet + Emiss
T 55
jet + Emiss
T 50(jet), 20(Emiss
T ) 75(jet), 45( Emiss
T )1 5
single jet 75 250 3
single forward jet 50 100 3
multi-jets (with b-tagging) 10 8
Emiss
T , ∑ET, exotics 10
Calibration & commissioning 10


--- Page 48 ---
Page 48 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
for monitoring and commissioning triggers. To improve the
stability of the data recorded for physics analysis, changes
to primary triggers and re-tuning of the menu is limited
to monthly updates. The trigger will, however, continue to
evolve to match LHC luminosity and beam conditions.
9 Conclusion
The ATLAS trigger system has been commissioned and has
successfully delivered data for ATLAS physics analysis. Ef-
ﬁciencies, which meet the original design criteria, have been
determined from data. These include overall trigger efﬁcien-
cies of: greater than 99% for electrons and photons with
E
T > 25 GeV; 94–96% for muons with pT > 13 GeV, in
the regions of full acceptance; greater than 90% for tau
leptons with pT > 30 GeV; greater than 99% for jets with
ET > 60 GeV. The missing ET trigger was fully efﬁcient
above 100 GeV throughout the 2010 data-taking period.
Quantities calculated online, using fast trigger algorithms,
show excellent agreement with those reconstructed ofﬂine.
Data and simulation agree well for these quantities and for
measured trigger efﬁciencies.
The trigger system has been demonstrated to function
well, satisfying operational requirements and evolving to
meet the demands of rapidly increasing LHC luminosity.
Trigger menus will continue to evolve to fulﬁll future de-
mands via progressive increase of prescales, tightening of
selection cuts, application of isolation requirements, and in-
creased use of multi-object and combined triggers. The ex-
cellent performance of the trigger system in 2010 and the re-
sults of studies conﬁrming the scaling to higher luminosities
give conﬁdence that the ATLAS trigger system will continue
to meet the challenges of running in 2011 and beyond.
Acknowledgements We thank CERN for the very successful oper-
ation of the LHC, as well as the support staff from our institutions
without whom ATLAS could not be operated efﬁciently.
We acknowledge the support of ANPCyT, Argentina; YerPhI, Ar-
menia; ARC, Australia; BMWF, Austria; ANAS, Azerbaijan; SSTC,
Belarus; CNPq and FAPESP, Brazil; NSERC, NRC and CFI, Canada;
CERN; CONICYT, Chile; CAS, MOST and NSFC, China; COLCIEN-
CIAS, Colombia; MSMT CR, MPO CR and VSC CR, Czech Republic;
DNRF, DNSRC and Lundbeck Foundation, Denmark; ARTEMIS, Eu-
ropean Union; IN2P3-CNRS, CEA-DSM/IRFU, France; GNAS, Geor-
gia; BMBF, DFG, HGF, MPG and AvH Foundation, Germany; GSRT,
Greece; ISF, MINERV A, GIF, DIP and Benoziyo Center, Israel; INFN,
Italy; MEXT and JSPS, Japan; CNRST, Morocco; FOM and NWO,
Netherlands; RCN, Norway; MNiSW, Poland; GRICES and FCT, Por-
tugal; MERYS (MECTS), Romania; MES of Russia and ROSATOM,
Russian Federation; JINR; MSTD, Serbia; MSSR, Slovakia; ARRS
and MVZT, Slovenia; DST/NRF, South Africa; MICINN, Spain; SRC
and Wallenberg Foundation, Sweden; SER, SNSF and Cantons of Bern
and Geneva, Switzerland; NSC, Taiwan; TAEK, Turkey; STFC, the
Royal Society and Leverhulme Trust, United Kingdom; DOE and NSF,
United States of America.
The crucial computing support from all WLCG partners is ac-
knowledged gratefully, in particular from CERN and the ATLAS Tier-1
facilities at TRIUMF (Canada), NDGF (Denmark, Norway, Sweden),
CC-IN2P3 (France), KIT/GridKA (Germany), INFN-CNAF (Italy),
NL-T1 (Netherlands), PIC (Spain), ASGC (Taiwan), RAL (UK) and
BNL (USA) and in the Tier-2 facilities worldwide.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits
any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN
Large Hadron Collider, J. Instrum. 3, S08003 (2008)
2. L. Evans, P. Bryant, LHC Machine. J. Instrum. 3, S08001 (2008)
3. T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, P.Z. Skands, PYTHIA 6.4 Physics and
Manual. J. High Energy Phys. 0605, 026 (2006)
4. ATLAS Collaboration, ATLAS Monte Carlo tunes for MC09,
Tech. Rep. ATL-PHYS-PUB-2010-002 (CERN, Geneva, 2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1247375
5. S. Agostinelli et al., GEANT4: a simulation toolkit. Nucl. Instrum.
Methods 506(3), 250–303 (2003)
6. ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS simulation infrastructure. Eur.
P h y s .J .C70, 823–874 (2010)
7. ATLAS Collaboration, Commissioning of the ATLAS Muon
Spectrometer with cosmic rays. Eur. Phys. J. C 70, 875–916
(2010)
8. S. Ask et al., The ATLAS central level-1 trigger logic and TTC
system. J. Instrum. 3, P08002 (2008)
9. R. Achenbach et al., The ATLAS level-1 calorimeter trigger. J. In-
strum. 3:P03001, 1–39 (2008)
10. ATLAS Collaboration, Expected performance of the ATLAS ex-
periment: detector, trigger and physics. arXiv:0901.0512
11. R. Fruhwirth, Application of Kalman ﬁltering to track and vertex
ﬁtting. Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 262, 444 (1987)
12. T. Cornelissen et al., Concepts, design and implementation of
the ATLAS New Tracking (NEWT), Tech. Rep. ATL-SOFT-
PUB-2007-007 (CERN, Geneva, 2007). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/
record/1020106?ln=en
13. ATLAS Collaboration, Characterization of interaction-point beam
parameters using the pp event-vertex distribution reconstructed in
the ATLAS detector at the LHC, ATLAS-CONF-2010-027 (2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1277659
14. W. Lampl et al., Calorimeter clustering algorithms: descrip-
tion and performance, Tech. Rep. ATL-LARG-PUB-2008-002
(CERN, Geneva, 2008). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1099735
15. M. Cacciari et al., The anti-kt jet clustering algorithm. J. High
Energy Phys. 0804, 063 (2008)
16. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of underlying event charac-
teristics using charged particles in pp collisions at √ s = 900 GeV
and 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector. Eur. Phys. J. C 71, 1–24
(2011)
17. ATLAS Collaboration, Charged-particle multiplicities in pp inter-
actions measured with the ATLAS detector at the LHC. New J.
Phys. 13(5), 053033 (2011)
18. ATLAS Collaboration, Observation of a centrality-dependent dijet
asymmetry in lead-lead collisions at √ sNN = 2.76 TeV with the
ATLAS detector at the LHC. Phys. Rev. Lett.105, 252303 (2010)
19. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the minimum bias trig-
ger in p–p collisions at √ s = 7 TeV , ATLAS-CONF-2010-068
(2010). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1281343
20. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the W → ℓν and
Z/γ∗→ ℓℓ production cross sections in proton–proton collisions
at √ s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector. J. High Energy Phys.12,
060 (2010)


--- Page 49 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 49 of 61
21. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the top quark-pair produc-
tion cross section with ATLAS in pp collisions at√ s = 7T e V .E u r .
Phys. J. C 71, 1577 (2011)
22. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the inclusive isolated
prompt photon cross-section in pp collisions at √ s = 7T e Vw i t h
the ATLAS detector. Phys. Rev. D83, 052005 (2011)
23. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the production cross sec-
tion for W-bosons in association with jets in pp collisions at√ s = 7 with the ATLAS detector. Phys. Lett. B 698, 325–345
(2010)
24. ATLAS Collaboration, Search for diphoton events with large miss-
ing transverse energy in 7 TeV proton–proton collisions with the
ATLAS detector. Phys. Rev. Lett.106, 121803 (2011)
25. ATLAS Collaboration, Search for supersymmetry using ﬁnal
states with one lepton, jets, and missing transverse momentum
with the ATLAS detector in√
s = 7T e Vpp collisions. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 106, 131802 (2011)
26. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the ATLAS electron and
photon triggers with √ s = 7 TeV collisions, ATLAS-CONF-
2011-114 (2011). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1375551
27. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the W → ℓν and Z → ℓℓ
production cross-sections in proton–proton collisions at √ s =
7 TeV with the ATLAS detector. J. High Energy Phys. 2010,1 –
65 (2010)
28. ATLAS Collaboration, Readiness of the ATLAS liquid argon
calorimeter for LHC collisions. Eur. Phys. J. C 70(3), 723–753
(2010)
29. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the ATLAS muon trigger
in p–p collisions at √ s = 7 TeV , ATLAS-CONF-2010-95 (2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1299573
30. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of inclusive jet and dijet
cross sections in proton–proton collisions at 7 TeV centre-of-mass
energy with the ATLAS detector. Eur. Phys. J. C71, 1–59 (2011)
31. ATLAS Collaboration, Study of jet shapes in inclusive jet produc-
tion in pp collisions at √
s = 7 TeV using the ATLAS Detector.
Phys. Rev. D 83, 052003 (2011)
32. ATLAS Collaboration, Search for new particles in two-jet ﬁnal
states in 7 TeV proton–proton collisions with the ATLAS detector
at the LHC. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 161801 (2010)
33. ATLAS Collaboration, Search for quark contact interactions in di-
jet angular distributions in 7 TeV proton–proton collisions with the
ATLAS detector at the LHC. Phys. Lett. B 694, 327–345 (2011)
34. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the ATLAS jet trigger from
the early √ s = 7 TeV data, ATLAS-CONF-2010-094 (2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1299109
35. ATLAS Collaboration, Jet energy scale and its systematic uncer-
tainty in proton–proton collisions at √ (s) = 7 TeV in ATLAS
2010 data, ATLAS-CONF-2011-032 (2011). http:cdsweb.cern.
ch/record/1337782
36. ATLAS Collaboration, Data-quality requirements and event clean-
ing for jets and missing transverse energy reconstruction with
the ATLAS detector in proton–proton collisions at a center
of mass energy √ s = 7 TeV , ATLAS-CONF-2010-038 (2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1277678
37. ATLAS Collaboration, Properties of jets and inputs to jet re-
construction and calibration with the ATLAS detector using
proton–proton collisions at √ s = 7 TeV , ATLAS-CONF-2010-
053 (2010). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1281310
38. ATLAS Collaboration, Search for stable hadronising squarks and
gluinos with the ATLAS experiment at the LHC. Phys. Lett. B
701(1), 1–19 (2011)
39. D. Casadei et al., The implementation of the ATLAS missing Et
triggers for the initial LHC operation, Tech. Rep. ATL-DAQ-PUB-
2011-001, CERN, Geneva, 2011. http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/
1331180
40. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the ATLAS transverse en-
ergy triggers with initial LHC runs at √ s = 7 TeV , ATLAS-
CONF-2011-072 (2011). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1351836
41. ALEPH Collaboration, A precise measurement of
ΓZ→ b¯b/ΓZ→ hadrons. Phys. Lett. B 313, 535–548 (1993)
42. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the Υ (1S) production
cross-section in pp collisions at √ s = 7 TeV in ATLAS. arXiv:
1106.5325v1
43. ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the differential cross-
sections of inclusive, prompt and non-prompt J/ψ production in
proton–proton collisions at √ s = 7 TeV . Nucl. Phys. B850, 387–
444 (2011)
The ATLAS Collaboration
G. Aad 48, B. Abbott 111, J. Abdallah 11, A.A. Abdelalim 49,A .A b d e s s e l a m118, O. Abdinov 10,B .A b i112,M .A b o l i n s88,
H. Abramowicz 153, H. Abreu 115, E. Acerbi 89a,89b, B.S. Acharya 164a,164b,D . L .A d a m s24, T.N. Addy 56, J. Adelman 175,
M. Aderholz 99, S. Adomeit 98, P. Adragna 75, T. Adye 129,S .A e f s k y22, J.A. Aguilar-Saavedra 124b,a, M. Aharrouche 81,
S.P. Ahlen21, F. Ahles48,A .A h m a d148, M. Ahsan 40, G. Aielli 133a,133b, T. Akdogan18a, T.P.A. Åkesson79,G .A k i m o t o155,
A.V . Akimov94, A. Akiyama 67,M . S .A l a m1,M . A .A l a m76, S. Albrand 55, M. Aleksa 29, I.N. Aleksandrov 65,F .A l e s s a n -
dria89a,C .A l e x a25a, G. Alexander153, G. Alexandre49, T. Alexopoulos9,M .A l h r o o b20,M .A l i e v15,G .A l i m o n t i89a,J .A l -
ison120,M .A l i y e v10, P.P. Allport73, S.E. Allwood-Spiers 53, J. Almond 82, A. Aloisio 102a,102b,R .A l o n171, A. Alonso 79,
M.G. Alviggi 102a,102b,K .A m a k o66,P .A m a r a l29,C .A m e l u n g22, V .V . Ammosov128,A .A m o r i m124a,b, G. Amorós 167,
N. Amram 153, C. Anastopoulos 29, N. Andari 115, T. Andeen 34, C.F. Anders 20, K.J. Anderson 30, A. Andreazza 89a,89b,
V . Andrei58a, M-L. Andrieux 55, X.S. Anduaga 70, A. Angerami 34, F. Anghinolﬁ 29, N. Anjos 124a, A. Annovi 47,A .A n -
tonaki8, M. Antonelli 47, S. Antonelli 19a,19b, A. Antonov 96,J .A n t o s144b,F .A n u l l i132a, S. Aoun 83, L. Aperio Bella 4,
R. Apolle118,c, G. Arabidze 88, I. Aracena 143,Y .A r a i66, A.T.H. Arce44, J.P. Archambault28, S. Arfaoui 29,d,J - F .A r g u i n14,
E. Arik 18a,*,M .A r i k18a, A.J. Armbruster 87, O. Arnaez 81, C. Arnault 115, A. Artamonov 95,G .A r t o n i132a,132b,D .A r u t i -
nov20,S .A s a i155, R. Asfandiyarov172,S .A s k27,B .Å s m a n146a,146b, L. Asquith5, K. Assamagan24,A .A s t b u r y169,A .A s t -
vatsatourov52, G. Atoian 175, B. Aubert 4, B. Auerbach 175, E. Auge 115,K .A u g s t e n127, M. Aurousseau 145a,N .A u s t i n73,


--- Page 50 ---
Page 50 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
G. Avolio 163, R. Avramidou 9,D .A x e n168,C .A y 54, G. Azuelos 93,e, Y . Azuma155, M.A. Baak 29, G. Baccaglioni 89a,
C. Bacci134a,134b,A . M .B a c h14, H. Bachacou 136, K. Bachas 29, G. Bachy 29, M. Backes 49, M. Backhaus 20, E. Badescu 25a,
P. Bagnaia132a,132b, S. Bahinipati 2,Y .B a i32a,D . C .B a i l e y158,T .B a i n158, J.T. Baines 129, O.K. Baker 175,M . D .B a k e r24,
S. Baker 77, F. Baltasar Dos Santos Pedrosa 29, E. Banas 38, P. Banerjee 93, Sw. Banerjee 169, D. Banﬁ 29, A. Bangert 137,
V . Bansal169,H . S .B a n s i l17,L .B a r a k171, S.P. Baranov94, A. Barashkou65, A. Barbaro Galtieri 14, T. Barber27, E.L. Barbe-
rio86, D. Barberis50a,50b, M. Barbero20, D.Y . Bardin65, T. Barillari99, M. Barisonzi174,T .B a r k l o w143,N .B a r l o w27,B . M .B a r -
nett129, R.M. Barnett 14, A. Baroncelli 134a, G. Barone 49,A . J .B a r r118, F. Barreiro 80, J. Barreiro Guimarães da Costa 57,
P. Barrillon115, R. Bartoldus 143,A . E .B a r t o n71, D. Bartsch 20, V . Bartsch149, R.L. Bates 53,L .B a t k o v a144a, J.R. Batley 27,
A. Battaglia16, M. Battistin 29, G. Battistoni 89a, F. Bauer136,H . S .B a w a143,f,B .B e a r e158, T. Beau78, P.H. Beauchemin118,
R. Beccherle 50a,P .B e c h t l e41,H . P .B e c k16, M. Beckingham 48, K.H. Becks 174, A.J. Beddall 18c, A. Beddall 18c,S .B e -
dikian175, V .A. Bednyakov65,C . P .B e e83,M .B e g e l24, S. Behar Harpaz 152, P.K. Behera63, M. Beimforde 99, C. Belanger-
Champagne166,P . J .B e l l49,W . H .B e l l49,G .B e l l a153,L .B e l l a g a m b a19a, F. Bellina29,M .B e l l o m o119a, A. Belloni57,O .B e -
loborodova107, K. Belotskiy 96, O. Beltramello 29, S. Ben Ami 152, O. Benary 153, D. Benchekroun 135a, C. Benchouk 83,
M. Bendel 81, B.H. Benedict 163, N. Benekos 165, Y . Benhammou153, D.P. Benjamin 44, M. Benoit 115, J.R. Bensinger 22,
K. Benslama 130, S. Bentvelsen 105,D .B e r g e29, E. Bergeaas Kuutmann 41, N. Berger 4, F. Berghaus 169, E. Berglund 49,
J. Beringer 14, K. Bernardet 83, P. Bernat 77, R. Bernhard 48, C. Bernius 24,T .B e r r y76, A. Bertin 19a,19b, F. Bertinelli 29,
F. Bertolucci 122a,122b, M.I. Besana 89a,89b, N. Besson 136, S. Bethke 99,W .B h i m j i45, R.M. Bianchi 29, M. Bianco 72a,72b,
O. Biebel98, S.P. Bieniek77,J .B i e s i a d a14, M. Biglietti 134a,134b, H. Bilokon 47, M. Bindi 19a,19b, S. Binet 115, A. Bingul 18c,
C. Bini132a,132b, C. Biscarat 177, U. Bitenc 48,K . M .B l a c k21, R.E. Blair 5, J.-B. Blanchard 115, G. Blanchot 29, T. Blazek144a,
C. Blocker22, J. Blocki38, A. Blondel49,W .B l u m81, U. Blumenschein54, G.J. Bobbink105, V .B. Bobrovnikov107,S . S .B o c -
chetta79, A. Bocci 44, C.R. Boddy 118, M. Boehler 41, J. Boek 174, N. Boelaert 35, S. Böser 77, J.A. Bogaerts 29, A. Bog-
danchikov107, A. Bogouch90,*, C. Bohm146a, V . Boisvert76,T .B o l d163,g, V . Boldea25a, N.M. Bolnet136,M .B o n a75, V .G. Bon-
darenko96, M. Boonekamp 136, G. Boorman 76,C . N .B o o t h139, S. Bordoni 78,C .B o r e r16,A .B o r i s o v128, G. Borissov 71,
I. Borjanovic 12a,S .B o r r o n i132a,132b,K .B o s 105, D. Boscherini 19a,M .B o s m a n11, H. Boterenbrood 105, D. Botterill 129,
J. Bouchami93, J. Boudreau123, E.V . Bouhova-Thacker71, C. Boulahouache123, C. Bourdarios115, N. Bousson83,A .B o v e i a30,
J. Boyd29, I.R. Boyko65, N.I. Bozhko128, I. Bozovic-Jelisavcic12b, J. Bracinik17,A .B r a e m29, P. Branchini134a, G.W. Bran-
denburg57, A. Brandt 7, G. Brandt 15, O. Brandt 54,U .B r a t z l e r156,B .B r a u84,J . E .B r a u114, H.M. Braun 174,B .B r e -
lier158,J .B r e m e r29, R. Brenner 166,S .B r e s s l e r152,D .B r e t o n115, D. Britton 53, F.M. Brochu 27,I .B r o c k20, R. Brock 88,
T.J. Brodbeck71, E. Brodet 153, F. Broggi89a, C. Bromberg 88, G. Brooijmans 34, W.K. Brooks31b,G .B r o w n82,H .B r o w n7,
E. Brubaker30, P.A. Bruckman de Renstrom38, D. Bruncko144b, R. Bruneliere48, S. Brunet61, A. Bruni19a,G .B r u n i19a,M .B r -
uschi19a, T. Buanes13, F. Bucci49, J. Buchanan118, N.J. Buchanan2, P. Buchholz141, R.M. Buckingham118, A.G. Buckley45,
S.I. Buda25a, I.A. Budagov65, B. Budick108, V . Büscher81, L. Bugge117,D .B u i r a - C l a r k118, O. Bulekov96,M .B u n s e42,T .B u -
ran117, H. Burckhart29,S .B u r d i n73, T. Burgess13,S .B u r k e129,E .B u s a t o33, P. Bussey53,C . P .B u s z e l l o166, F. Butin29,B .B u t -
ler143,J . M .B u t l e r21,C . M .B u t t a r53, J.M. Butterworth77, W. Buttinger27,T .B y a t t77, S. Cabrera Urbán167, D. Caforio19a,19b,
O. Cakir3a, P. Calaﬁura14, G. Calderini78, P. Calfayan98, R. Calkins106, L.P. Caloba23a, R. Caloi132a,132b,D .C a l v e t33,S .C a l -
vet33, R. Camacho Toro33, A. Camard78,P .C a m a r r i133a,133b, M. Cambiaghi119a,119b, D. Cameron117, J. Cammin20,S .C a m -
pana29, M. Campanelli 77, V . Canale102a,102b, F. Canelli 30, A. Canepa 159a, J. Cantero 80,L .C a p a s s o102a,102b, M.D.M. Ca-
peans Garrido 29,I .C a p r i n i25a,M .C a p r i n i25a, D. Capriotti 99, M. Capua 36a,36b, R. Caputo 148, C. Caramarcu 25a,R .C a r -
darelli133a,T .C a r l i29, G. Carlino102a, L. Carminati89a,89b, B. Caron159a, S. Caron48, G.D. Carrillo Montoya172,A . A .C a r t e r75,
J.R. Carter 27,J .C a r v a l h o124a,h, D. Casadei 108, M.P. Casado 11,M .C a s c e l l a122a,122b,C .C a s o50a,50b,*, A.M. Castaneda
Hernandez172, E. Castaneda-Miranda 172, V . Castillo Gimenez167,N . F .C a s t r o124a, G. Cataldi 72a, F. Cataneo 29,A .C a t i -
naccio29,J . R .C a t m o r e71, A. Cattai 29, G. Cattani 133a,133b, S. Caughron 88, D. Cauz 164a,164c, P. Cavalleri 78,D .C a v -
alli89a, M. Cavalli-Sforza 11, V . Cavasinni122a,122b, A. Cazzato 72a,72b, F. Ceradini 134a,134b, A.S. Cerqueira 23a,A .C e r r i29,
L. Cerrito 75, F. Cerutti 47,S . A .C e t i n18b, F. Cevenini 102a,102b, A. Chafaq 135a, D. Chakraborty 106, K. Chan 2, B. Chap-
leau85, J.D. Chapman 27, J.W. Chapman 87,E .C h a r e y r e78,D . G .C h a r l t o n17, V . Chavda82, S. Cheatham 85, S. Chekanov 5,
S.V . Chekulaev159a, G.A. Chelkov 65, M.A. Chelstowska 104, C. Chen 64, H. Chen 24, L. Chen 2, S. Chen 32c, T. Chen 32c,
X. Chen 172, S. Cheng 32a, A. Cheplakov 65, V .F. Chepurnov65, R. Cherkaoui El Moursli 135e, V . Chernyatin24, E. Cheu 6,
S.L. Cheung158,L .C h e v a l i e r136, G. Chiefari 102a,102b, L. Chikovani 51, J.T. Childers58a, A. Chilingarov 71, G. Chiodini 72a,
R.T. Chislett 77, M.V . Chizhov 65, G. Choudalakis 30, S. Chouridou 137, I.A. Christidi 77, A. Christov 48, D. Chromek-
Burckhart29,M . L .C h u151, J. Chudoba 125, G. Ciapetti 132a,132b,K .C i b a37, A.K. Ciftci 3a,R .C i f t c i3a,D .C i n c a33,V .C i n -
dro74, M.D. Ciobotaru 163, C. Ciocca 19a,19b,A .C i o c i o14, M. Cirilli 87, M. Ciubancan 25a,A .C l a r k49,P . J .C l a r k45,W .C l e -
land123, J.C. Clemens 83,B .C l e m e n t55, C. Clement 146a,146b,R . W .C l i f f t129, Y . Coadou83, M. Cobal 164a,164c, A. Coc-
caro50a,50b, J. Cochran64,P .C o e118, J.G. Cogan143, J. Coggeshall165, E. Cogneras177, C.D. Cojocaru28, J. Colas4,A . P .C o l -
ijn105,C .C o l l a r d115, N.J. Collins 17, C. Collins-Tooth 53,J .C o l l o t55, G. Colon 84, P. Conde Muiño 124a, E. Coniavitis 118,


--- Page 51 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 51 of 61
M.C. Conidi 11, M. Consonni 104, V . Consorti48, S. Constantinescu 25a,C .C o n t a119a,119b, F. Conventi 102a,i, J. Cook 29,
M. Cooke 14, B.D. Cooper 77, A.M. Cooper-Sarkar 118, N.J. Cooper-Smith 76, K. Copic 34,T .C o r n e l i s s e n50a,50b,M .C o r -
radi19a, F. Corriveau85,j, A. Cortes-Gonzalez 165, G. Cortiana 99,G .C o s t a89a,M . J .C o s t a167, D. Costanzo 139, T. Costin 30,
D. Côté 29,R .C o u r aT o r r e s23a, L. Courneyea 169,G .C o w a n76,C .C o w d e n27,B . E .C o x82, K. Cranmer 108,F .C r e s c i -
oli122a,122b, M. Cristinziani20, G. Crosetti36a,36b,R .C r u p i72a,72b, S. Crépé-Renaudin55, C.-M. Cuciuc25a, C. Cuenca Alme-
nar175, T. Cuhadar Donszelmann 139, S. Cuneo 50a,50b, M. Curatolo 47, C.J. Curtis 17, P. Cwetanski 61,H .C z i r r141,Z .C z y -
czula117,S .D ’ A u r i a53, M. D’Onofrio 73, A. D’Orazio 132a,132b, A. Da Rocha Gesualdi Mello 23a, P.V .M. Da Silva 23a,
C. Da Via82, W. Dabrowski37, A. Dahlhoff48,T .D a i87, C. Dallapiccola84,M .D a m35,M .D a m e r i50a,50b, D.S. Damiani137,
H.O. Danielsson29, D. Dannheim 99,V .D a o49, G. Darbo 50a,G . L .D a r l e a25b, C. Daum 105, J.P. Dauvergne29, W. Davey86,
T. Davidek126,N .D a v i d s o n86,R .D a v i d s o n71,E .D a v i e s118,c,M .D a v i e s93,A . R .D a v i s o n77, Y . Davygora58a,E .D a w e142,
I. Dawson139,J . W .D a w s o n5,*,R . K .D a y a39,K .D e7, R. de Asmundis102a,S .D eC a s t r o19a,19b, P.E. De Castro Faria Salgado24,
S. De Cecco 78, J. de Graat 98,N .D eG r o o t104, P. de Jong 105, C. De La Taille 115,H .D el aT o r r e80, B. De Lotto 164a,164c,
L. De Mora 71, L. De Nooij 105, M. De Oliveira Branco 29, D. De Pedis 132a, P. de Saintignon 55,A .D eS a l v o132a,
U. De Sanctis164a,164c, A. De Santo 149,J . B .D eV i v i eD eR e g i e115, S. Dean77, D.V . Dedovich65, J. Degenhardt120,M .D e -
hchar118, M. Deile 98, C. Del Papa 164a,164c, J. Del Peso 80, T. Del Prete 122a,122b, A. Dell’Acqua 29, L. Dell’Asta 89a,89b,
M. Della Pietra102a,i, D. della V olpe102a,102b,M .D e l m a s t r o29, P. Delpierre83, N. Delruelle29,P . A .D e l s a r t55, C. Deluca148,
S. Demers175, M. Demichev65,B .D e m i r k o z11,k, J. Deng163,S . P .D e n i s o v128, D. Derendarz38, J.E. Derkaoui135d, F. Derue78,
P. Dervan73, K. Desch 20,E .D e v e t a k148,P . O .D e v i v e i r o s158,A .D e w h u r s t129,B .D e W i l d e148, S. Dhaliwal 158,R .D h u l -
lipudi24,l, A. Di Ciaccio133a,133b, L. Di Ciaccio4, A. Di Girolamo29,B .D iG i r o l a m o29,S .D iL u i s e134a,134b, A. Di Mattia88,
B. Di Micco 29,R .D iN a r d o133a,133b, A. Di Simone 133a,133b,R .D iS i p i o19a,19b,M . A .D i a z31a,F .D i b l e n18c,E . B .D i e h l87,
M.V . Dieli58a,H .D i e t l99, J. Dietrich41, T.A. Dietzsch58a, S. Diglio115, K. Dindar Yagci39, J. Dingfelder20, C. Dionisi132a,132b,
P. Dita25a,S .D i t a25a, F. Dittus29,F .D j a m a83, R. Djilkibaev108, T. Djobava51, M.A.B. do Vale23a,A .D oV a l l eW e m a n s124a,
T.K.O. Doan 4, M. Dobbs 85, R. Dobinson 29,*, D. Dobos 42, E. Dobson 29, M. Dobson 163,J .D o d d34, O.B. Dogan 18a,*,
C. Doglioni 118, T. Doherty 53,Y .D o i66,*, J. Dolejsi 126, I. Dolenc 74, Z. Dolezal 126, B.A. Dolgoshein 96,*, T. Dohmae 155,
M. Donadelli 23d,M .D o n e g a120, J. Donini 55, J. Dopke 29,A .D o r i a102a,A .D o sA n j o s172,M .D o s i l11,A .D o t t i122a,122b,
M.T. Dova70,J . D .D o w e l l17, A.D. Doxiadis 105,A . T .D o y l e53,Z .D r a s a l126, J. Drees 174, N. Dressnandt 120,H .D r e v e r -
mann29, C. Driouichi 35,M .D r i s9, J. Dubbert 99, T. Dubbs 137, S. Dube 14, E. Duchovni 171, G. Duckeck 98, A. Dudarev 29,
F. Dudziak64, M. Dührssen 29, I.P. Duerdoth82, L. Duﬂot 115, M-A. Dufour 85, M. Dunford 29, H. Duran Yildiz 3b,R .D u x -
ﬁeld139, M. Dwuznik 37, F. Dydak 29, D. Dzahini 55,M .D ü r e n52, W.L. Ebenstein 44,J .E b k e98,S .E c k e r t48,S .E c k -
weiler81, K. Edmonds 81, C.A. Edwards76, N.C. Edwards53, W. Ehrenfeld41,T .E h r i c h99,T .E i f e r t29, G. Eigen 13,K .E i n s -
weiler14, E. Eisenhandler75,T .E k e l o f166,M .E lK a c i m i135c,M .E l l e r t166,S .E l l e s4, F. Ellinghaus81, K. Ellis75, N. Ellis29,
J. Elmsheuser 98, M. Elsing 29,R .E l y14, D. Emeliyanov 129, R. Engelmann 148, A. Engl 98,B .E p p62, A. Eppig 87,J .E r d -
mann54, A. Ereditato16,D .E r i k s s o n146a,J .E r n s t1,M .E r n s t24,J .E r n w e i n136, D. Errede165,S .E r r e d e165,E .E r t e l81,M .E s -
calier115, C. Escobar167,X .E s p i n a lC u r u l l11,B .E s p o s i t o47, F. Etienne83, A.I. Etienvre136, E. Etzion153, D. Evangelakou54,
H. Evans61, L. Fabbri19a,19b, C. Fabre29, R.M. Fakhrutdinov128, S. Falciano132a,A . C .F a l o u115,Y .F a n g172,M .F a n t i89a,89b,
A. Farbin7, A. Farilla134a,J .F a r l e y148, T. Farooque158, S.M. Farrington118, P. Farthouat29, P. Fassnacht29, D. Fassouliotis8,
B. Fatholahzadeh158, A. Favareto89a,89b, L. Fayard 115, S. Fazio 36a,36b, R. Febbraro 33, P. Federic144a, O.L. Fedin 121, I. Fe-
dorko29, W. Fedorko88, M. Fehling-Kaschek 48, L. Feligioni 83, D. Fellmann 5, C.U. Felzmann 86, C. Feng 32d, E.J. Feng 30,
A.B. Fenyuk 128, J. Ferencei 144b, J. Ferland 93, W. Fernando 109,S .F e r r a g53, J. Ferrando 53, V . Ferrara41, A. Ferrari 166,
P. Ferrari105, R. Ferrari 119a, A. Ferrer 167,M . L .F e r r e r47, D. Ferrere 49,C .F e r r e t t i87, A. Ferretto Parodi 50a,50b,M .F i a s -
caris30, F. Fiedler81, A. Filip ˇciˇc74, A. Filippas 9, F. Filthaut104, M. Fincke-Keeler 169, M.C.N. Fiolhais 124a,h,L .F i o r i n i167,
A. Firan 39, G. Fischer 41, P. Fischer 20, M.J. Fisher 109, S.M. Fisher 129, M. Flechl 48, I. Fleck 141, J. Fleckner 81, P. Fleis-
chmann173, S. Fleischmann174,T .F l i c k174, L.R. Flores Castillo172,M . J .F l o w e r d e w99, F. Föhlisch58a, M. Fokitis9,T .F o n -
seca Martin 16,D . A .F o r b u s h138, A. Formica 136,A .F o r t i82,D .F o r t i n159a,J . M .F o s t e r82, D. Fournier 115,A .F o u s s a t29,
A.J. Fowler44,K .F o w l e r137,H .F o x71, P. Francavilla122a,122b, S. Franchino119a,119b, D. Francis29, T. Frank171,M .F r a n k l i n57,
S. Franz29,M .F r a t e r n a l i119a,119b,S .F r a t i n a120, S.T. French27, R. Froeschl29,D .F r o i d e v a u x29,J . A .F r o s t27, C. Fukunaga156,
E. Fullana Torregrosa 29,J .F u s t e r167, C. Gabaldon 29, O. Gabizon 171, T. Gadfort 24, S. Gadomski 49,G .G a g l i a r d i50a,50b,
P. Gagnon61,C .G a l e a98,E . J .G a l l a s118, M.V . Gallas29,V .G a l l o16, B.J. Gallop129, P. Gallus125, E. Galyaev40,K . K .G a n109,
Y. S . G a o143,f, V .A. Gapienko128, A. Gaponenko 14, F. Garberson 175, M. Garcia-Sciveres 14,C .G a r c í a167, J.E. García
Navarro49, R.W. Gardner 30,N .G a r e l l i29, H. Garitaonandia 105, V . Garonne29,J .G a r v e y17,C .G a t t i47, G. Gaudio 119a,
O. Gaumer 49,B .G a u r141, L. Gauthier 136, I.L. Gavrilenko 94,C .G a y 168, G. Gaycken 20, J-C. Gayde 29,E . N .G a z i s9,
P. Ge32d, C.N.P. Gee 129, D.A.A. Geerts 105, Ch. Geich-Gimbel 20, K. Gellerstedt 146a,146b,C .G e m m e50a, A. Gemmell 53,
M.H. Genest 98, S. Gentile 132a,132b, M. George 54, S. George 76, P. Gerlach 174, A. Gershon 153, C. Geweniger 58a,H .G h a -
zlane135b,P .G h e z4, N. Ghodbane 33, B. Giacobbe 19a,S .G i a g u132a,132b, V . Giakoumopoulou8, V . Giangiobbe122a,122b,


--- Page 52 ---
Page 52 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
F. Gianotti 29, B. Gibbard 24,A .G i b s o n158,S . M .G i b s o n29, L.M. Gilbert 118, M. Gilchriese 14, V . Gilewsky91, D. Gill-
berg28, A.R. Gillman 129,D . M .G i n g r i c h2,e, J. Ginzburg 153, N. Giokaris 8, R. Giordano 102a,102b,F . M .G i o r g i15, P. Giovan-
nini99, P.F. Giraud 136, D. Giugni 89a, M. Giunta 132a,132b,P .G i u s t i19a, B.K. Gjelsten 117, L.K. Gladilin 97,C .G l a s m a n80,
J. Glatzer48,A .G l a z o v41, K.W. Glitza174,G . L .G l o n t i65, J. Godfrey142, J. Godlewski29, M. Goebel41, T. Göpfert43,C .G o -
eringer81,C .G ö s s l i n g42, T. Göttfert 99, S. Goldfarb 87,D .G o l d i n39, T. Golling 175, S.N. Golovnia 128, A. Gomes 124a,b,
L.S. Gomez Fajardo41, R. Gonçalo76, J. Goncalves Pinto Firmino Da Costa41,L .G o n e l l a20, A. Gonidec29, S. Gonzalez172,
S. González de la Hoz167, M.L. Gonzalez Silva26, S. Gonzalez-Sevilla49, J.J. Goodson148, L. Goossens29, P.A. Gorbounov95,
H.A. Gordon24,I .G o r e l o v103, G. Gorﬁne174,B .G o r i n i29,E .G o r i n i72a,72b, A. Gorišek74, E. Gornicki38, S.A. Gorokhov128,
V .N. Goryachev128, B. Gosdzik41, M. Gosselink105, M.I. Gostkin65, M. Gouanère4, I. Gough Eschrich163, M. Gouighri135a,
D. Goujdami 135c, M.P. Goulette 49, A.G. Goussiou 138,C .G o y4, I. Grabowska-Bold 163,g, V . Grabski176,P .G r a f s t r ö m29,
C. Grah174, K-J. Grahn 41, F. Grancagnolo 72a, S. Grancagnolo 15, V . Grassi148,V .G r a t c h e v121,N .G r a u34,H . M .G r a y29,
J.A. Gray 148, E. Graziani 134a, O.G. Grebenyuk 121, D. Greenﬁeld 129, T. Greenshaw 73, Z.D. Greenwood 24,l,I . M .G r e -
gor41, P. Grenier143, E. Griesmayer46,J .G r i f ﬁ t h s138, N. Grigalashvili65, A.A. Grillo137, S. Grinstein11, Y .V . Grishkevich97,
J.-F. Grivaz115, J. Grognuz29,M .G r o h99,E .G r o s s171,J .G r o s s e - K n e t t e r54, J. Groth-Jensen171, K. Grybel141,V . J .G u a r i n o5,
D. Guest175, C. Guicheney33, A. Guida72a,72b, T. Guillemin4, S. Guindon54, H. Guler85,m, J. Gunther125,B .G u o158,J .G u o34,
A. Gupta30, Y . Gusakov65, V .N. Gushchin128, A. Gutierrez93, P. Gutierrez111, N. Guttman153, O. Gutzwiller172, C. Guyot136,
C. Gwenlan118, C.B. Gwilliam73,A .H a a s143,S .H a a s29, C. Haber14, R. Hackenburg24, H.K. Hadavand39,D . R .H a d l e y17,
P. Haefner99,F .H a h n29, S. Haider29, Z. Hajduk38, H. Hakobyan176,J .H a l l e r54, K. Hamacher174, P. Hamal113,A .H a m i l -
ton49, S. Hamilton 161,H .H a n32a,L .H a n32b, K. Hanagaki 116, M. Hance 120, C. Handel 81,P .H a n k e58a, J.R. Hansen 35,
J.B. Hansen35, J.D. Hansen 35, P.H. Hansen35,P .H a n s s o n143,K .H a r a160,G . A .H a r e137, T. Harenberg174, S. Harkusha 90,
D. Harper 87, R.D. Harrington 21,O . M .H a r r i s138,K .H a r r i s o n17,J .H a r t e r t48,F .H a r t j e s105, T. Haruyama 66,A .H a r -
vey56,S .H a s e g a w a101, Y. Hasegawa140,S .H a s s a n i136,M .H a t c h29,D .H a u f f99, S. Haug16, M. Hauschild29, R. Hauser88,
M. Havranek20,B . M .H a w e s118,C . M .H a w k e s17, R.J. Hawkings29,D .H a w k i n s163, T. Hayakawa67, D Hayden76, H.S. Hay-
ward73, S.J. Haywood129, E. Hazen21,M .H e32d, S.J. Head17, V . Hedberg79, L. Heelan7,S .H e i m88,K .H e i n e41, B. Heine-
mann14, S. Heisterkamp 35,L .H e l a r y4, M. Heldmann 48,M .H e l l e r115,S .H e l l m a n146a,146b, C. Helsens 11, R.C.W. Hender-
son71, M. Henke58a, A. Henrichs54, A.M. Henriques Correia 29, S. Henrot-Versille115, F. Henry-Couannier83, C. Hensel54,
T. Henß174, C.M. Hernandez 7, Y . Hernández Jiménez167, R. Herrberg 15, A.D. Hershenhorn 152,G .H e r t e n48, R. Herten-
berger98,L .H e r v a s29, N.P. Hessey105,A .H i d v e g i146a, E. Higón-Rodriguez167, D. Hill5,*, J.C. Hill27, N. Hill5,K . H .H i l l e r41,
S. Hillert 20, S.J. Hillier 17,I .H i n c h l i f f e14,E .H i n e s120,M .H i r o s e116,F .H i r s c h42, D. Hirschbuehl 174, J. Hobbs 148,
N. Hod 153, M.C. Hodgkinson 139, P. Hodgson 139, A. Hoecker 29, M.R. Hoeferkamp 103,J .H o f f m a n39, D. Hoffmann 83,
M. Hohlfeld81, M. Holder141,A .H o l m e s118,S . O .H o l m g r e n146a,T .H o l y127, J.L. Holzbauer88, Y . Homma67,T . M .H o n g120,
L. Hooft van Huysduynen 108, T. Horazdovsky 127,C .H o r n143, S. Horner 48,K .H o r t o n118, J-Y . Hostachy55,S .H o u151,
M.A. Houlden73, A. Hoummada135a,J .H o w a r t h82,D . F .H o w e l l118,I .H r i s t o v a15, J. Hrivnac115,I .H r u s k a125,T .H r y n ’ o v a4,
P.J. Hsu175,S . - C .H s u14, G.S. Huang 111, Z. Hubacek 127, F. Hubaut 83, F. Huegging 20, T.B. Huffman118, E.W. Hughes 34,
G. Hughes71, R.E. Hughes-Jones 82, M. Huhtinen 29,P .H u r s t57, M. Hurwitz 14, U. Husemann 41, N. Huseynov 65,n,J .H u s -
ton88,J .H u t h57, G. Iacobucci 49, G. Iakovidis 9, M. Ibbotson 82, I. Ibragimov 141, R. Ichimiya 67, L. Iconomidou-Fayard 115,
J. Idarraga115,M .I d z i k37, P. Iengo102a,102b, O. Igonkina105,Y .I k e g a m i66, M. Ikeno66, Y . Ilchenko39, D. Iliadis154,D .I m -
bault78, M. Imhaeuser 174,M .I m o r i155, T. Ince 20, J. Inigo-Golﬁn 29, P. Ioannou 8, M. Iodice 134a, G. Ionescu 4,A .I r l e s
Quiles167,K .I s h i i66,A .I s h i k a w a67,M .I s h i n o66, R. Ishmukhametov39,C .I s s e v e r118, S. Istin18a,Y .I t o h101,A . V .I v a s h i n128,
W. Iwanski 38,H .I w a s a k i66, J.M. Izen 40,V .I z z o102a, B. Jackson 120, J.N. Jackson 73, P. Jackson 143, M.R. Jaekel 29,
V. J a i n61, K. Jakobs48, S. Jakobsen35, J. Jakubek127,D . K .J a n a111, E. Jankowski158, E. Jansen77, A. Jantsch99, M. Janus20,
G. Jarlskog 79, L. Jeanty 57,K .J e l e n37, I. Jen-La Plante 30, P. Jenni 29, A. Jeremie 4,P .J e ž35, S. Jézéquel 4,M . K .J h a19a,
H. Ji172,W .J i81,J .J i a148, Y . Jiang32b, M. Jimenez Belenguer 41,G .J i n32b,S .J i n32a, O. Jinnouchi157, M.D. Joergensen35,
D. Joffe39, L.G. Johansen13, M. Johansen146a,146b, K.E. Johansson146a, P. Johansson139, S. Johnert41, K.A. Johns6, K. Jon-
And146a,146b, G. Jones82, R.W.L. Jones71, T.W. Jones77, T.J. Jones73, O. Jonsson29,C .J o r a m29, P.M. Jorge124a,b, J. Joseph14,
X. Ju 130, V . Juranek125, P. Jussel 62, V .V . Kabachenko128, S. Kabana 16,M .K a c i167, A. Kaczmarska 38, P. Kadlecik 35,
M. Kado 115, H. Kagan 109, M. Kagan 57,S .K a i s e r99, E. Kajomovitz 152, S. Kalinin 174, L.V . Kalinovskaya65,S .K a m a39,
N. Kanaya 155, M. Kaneda 29, T. Kanno 157, V .A. Kantserov96, J. Kanzaki 66, B. Kaplan 175, A. Kapliy 30, J. Kaplon 29,
D. Kar43, M. Karagoz 118, M. Karnevskiy 41,K .K a r r5, V . Kartvelishvili71, A.N. Karyukhin 128,L .K a s h i f172,A .K a s m i39,
R.D. Kass 109, A. Kastanas 13, M. Kataoka 4, Y . Kataoka 155, E. Katsouﬁs 9, J. Katzy 41, V . Kaushik 6, K. Kawagoe 67,
T. Kawamoto155, G. Kawamura81,M . S .K a y l105, V .A. Kazanin107, M.Y . Kazarinov65, J.R. Keates82, R. Keeler169,R .K e -
hoe39,M .K e i l54, G.D. Kekelidze 65,M .K e l l y82, J. Kennedy 98, C.J. Kenney 143, M. Kenyon 53, O. Kepka 125,N .K e r -
schen29, B.P. Kerševan 74,S .K e r s t e n174, K. Kessoku 155, C. Ketterer 48, J. Keung 158, M. Khakzad 28, F. Khalil-zada 10,


--- Page 53 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 53 of 61
H. Khandanyan165, A. Khanov 112, D. Kharchenko 65, A. Khodinov 96, A.G. Kholodenko 128,A .K h o m i c h58a, T.J. Khoo27,
G. Khoriauli20, A. Khoroshilov174, N. Khovanskiy65, V . Khovanskiy95, E. Khramov65, J. Khubua51,H .K i m7,M . S .K i m2,
P.C. Kim143,S . H .K i m160,N .K i m u r a170,O .K i n d15,B . T .K i n g73,M .K i n g67, R.S.B. King 118,J .K i r k129,G . P .K i r s c h118,
L.E. Kirsch 22, A.E. Kiryunin 99, D. Kisielewska 37, T. Kittelmann 123,A . M .K i v e r128, H. Kiyamura 67, E. Kladiva 144b,
J. Klaiber-Lodewigs42, M. Klein73, U. Klein73, K. Kleinknecht81, M. Klemetti85, A. Klier171,A .K l i m e n t o v24, R. Klingen-
berg42, E.B. Klinkby35, T. Klioutchnikova29,P . F .K l o k104,S .K l o u s105, E.-E. Kluge58a,T .K l u g e73, P. Kluit105,S .K l u t h99,
E. Kneringer62, J. Knobloch 29, E.B.F.G. Knoops 83,A .K n u e54,B . R .K o44, T. Kobayashi155, M. Kobel 43, M. Kocian 143,
A. Kocnar113, P. Kodys126, K. Köneke29, A.C. König104, S. Koenig81, L. Köpke81, F. Koetsveld104,P .K o e v e s a r k i20,T .K o f -
fas29,E .K o f f e m a n105,F .K o h n54, Z. Kohout127,T .K o h r i k i66,T .K o i143,T .K o k o t t20, G.M. Kolachev107, H. Kolanoski15,
V . Kolesnikov65, I. Koletsou 89a,J .K o l l88,D .K o l l a r29, M. Kollefrath 48,S . D .K o l y a82,A . A .K o m a r94, J.R. Komara-
giri142, Y . Komori155, T. Kondo 66, T. Kono 41,o, A.I. Kononov 48, R. Konoplich 108,p, N. Konstantinidis 77, A. Kootz 174,
S. Koperny37,S . V .K o p i k o v128,K .K o r c y l38, K. Kordas154, V . Koreshev128,A .K o r n14,A .K o r o l107, I. Korolkov11,E . V .K o -
rolkova139, V .A. Korotkov128, O. Kortner 99, S. Kortner 99, V .V . Kostyukhin20, M.J. Kotamäki 29,S .K o t o v99,V . M .K o -
tov65,A .K o t w a l44, C. Kourkoumelis8, V . Kouskoura154, A. Koutsman 105, R. Kowalewski169,T . Z .K o w a l s k i37, W. Koza-
necki136, A.S. Kozhin 128,V .K r a l127, V .A. Kramarenko97, G. Kramberger 74,O .K r a s e l42,M . W .K r a s n y78, A. Kraszna-
horkay108, J. Kraus88,A .K r e i s e l153,F .K r e j c i127, J. Kretzschmar73, N. Krieger54, P. Krieger158, K. Kroeninger54, H. Kroha99,
J. Kroll 120, J. Kroseberg 20, J. Krstic 12a, U. Kruchonak 65, H. Krüger 20,T .K r u k e r16,Z . V .K r u m s h t e y n65,A .K r u t h20,
T. Kubota86, S. Kuehn 48, A. Kugel 58c,T .K u h l174, D. Kuhn 62, V . Kukhtin65, Y . Kulchitsky90, S. Kuleshov 31b,C .K u m -
mer98, M. Kuna78, N. Kundu118, J. Kunkle120, A. Kupco125, H. Kurashige67, M. Kurata160, Y .A. Kurochkin90,V .K u s125,
W. Kuykendall138, M. Kuze157, P. Kuzhir91,O .K v a s n i c k a125, J. Kvita29, R. Kwee15,A .L aR o s a172, L. La Rotonda36a,36b,
L. Labarga 80, J. Labbe 4, S. Lablak 135a, C. Lacasta 167, F. Lacava 132a,132b, H. Lacker 15, D. Lacour 78, V .R. Lacuesta167,
E. Ladygin65, R. Lafaye 4, B. Laforge 78, T. Lagouri80,S .L a i48,E .L a i s n e55, M. Lamanna 29, C.L. Lampen 6, W. Lampl6,
E. Lancon136, U. Landgraf 48, M.P.J. Landon75, H. Landsman 152, J.L. Lane 82, C. Lange 41, A.J. Lankford 163, F. Lanni 24,
K. Lantzsch 29, V .V . Lapin128,*, S. Laplace 78, C. Lapoire 20, J.F. Laporte 136,T .L a r i89a, A.V . Larionov128, A. Larner 118,
C. Lasseur29,M .L a s s n i g29,W .L a u118, P. Laurelli47,A .L a v o r a t o118, W. Lavrijsen14, P. Laycock73, A.B. Lazarev65, A. Laz-
zaro89a,89b,O .L eD o r t z78,E .L eG u i r r i e c83, C. Le Maner158, E. Le Menedeu136, A. Lebedev64, C. Lebel93, T. LeCompte5,
F. Ledroit-Guillon 55,H .L e e 105, J.S.H. Lee 150,S . C .L e e151,L .L e e 175, M. Lefebvre 169, M. Legendre 136,A .L e g e r49,
B.C. LeGeyt120, F. Legger98, C. Leggett14, M. Lehmacher20, G. Lehmann Miotto29,X .L e i6, M.A.L. Leite23d, R. Leitner126,
D. Lellouch 171, M. Leltchouk 34, V . Lendermann58a, K.J.C. Leney 145b, T. Lenz 174, G. Lenzen 174, B. Lenzi 29, K. Leon-
hardt43, S. Leontsinis 9,C .L e r o y93,J - R .L e s s a r d169,J .L e s s e r146a,C . G .L e s t e r27, A. Leung Fook Cheong 172,J .L e v -
êque4,D .L e v i n87,L . J .L e v i n s o n171, M.S. Levitski 128, M. Lewandowska 21,A .L e w i s118,G . H .L e w i s108,A . M .L e y k o20,
M. Leyton 15,B .L i 83,H .L i 172,S .L i 32b,d,X .L i 87,Z .L i a n g39,Z .L i a n g118,q, B. Liberti 133a, P. Lichard 29,M .L i c h t -
necker98,K .L i e165,W .L i e b i g13, R. Lifshitz 152, J.N. Lilley 17, C. Limbach 20, A. Limosani 86, M. Limper 63,S . C .L i n151,r,
F. Linde105, J.T. Linnemann 88, E. Lipeles 120, L. Lipinsky 125, A. Lipniacka 13,T . M .L i s s165, D. Lissauer 24, A. Lister 49,
A.M. Litke137,C .L i u28,D .L i u151,s,H .L i u87,J . B .L i u87,M .L i u32b,S .L i u2,Y .L i u32b,M .L i v a n119a,119b, S.S.A. Liv-
ermore118,A .L l e r e s55, J. Llorente Merino 80,S . L .L l o y d75, E. Lobodzinska 41, P. Loch 6, W.S. Lockman 137, S. Lock-
witz175, T. Loddenkoetter 20, F.K. Loebinger 82, A. Loginov 175,C . W .L o h168, T. Lohse 15,K .L o h w a s s e r48, M. Loka-
jicek125, J. Loken 118, V .P. Lombardo4,R . E .L o n g71, L. Lopes 124a,b, D. Lopez Mateos 34,t, M. Losada 162, P. Loscutoff14,
F. Lo Sterzo 132a,132b,M . J .L o s t y159a,X .L o u40, A. Lounis 115, K.F. Loureiro 162, J. Love 21, P.A. Love71,A . J .L o w e143,f,
F. Lu32a,L .L u 39,H . J .L u b a t t i138,C .L u c i132a,132b, A. Lucotte 55, A. Ludwig 43, D. Ludwig 41,I .L u d w i g48, J. Ludwig 48,
F. Luehring 61,G .L u i j c k x105,D .L u m b48, L. Luminari 132a, E. Lund 117, B. Lund-Jensen 147, B. Lundberg 79, J. Lund-
berg146a,146b, J. Lundquist 35, M. Lungwitz 81,A .L u p i122a,122b,G .L u t z99,D .L y n n24,J .L y s14,E .L y t k e n79,H .M a 24,
L.L. Ma 172, J.A. Macana Goia 93, G. Maccarrone 47, A. Macchiolo 99,B .M a ˇcek74, J. Machado Miguens 124a, R. Mack-
eprang35, R.J. Madaras14, W.F. Mader43, R. Maenner58c, T. Maeno24, P. Mättig174, S. Mättig41, P.J. Magalhaes Martins124a,h,
L. Magnoni 29, E. Magradze 54, Y . Mahalalel153, K. Mahboubi 48, G. Mahout 17, C. Maiani 132a,132b, C. Maidantchik 23a,
A. Maio124a,b,S .M a j e w s k i24, Y . Makida66, N. Makovec115,P .M a l6, Pa. Malecki38, P. Malecki38, V .P. Maleev121,F .M a l e k55,
U. Mallik63,D .M a l o n5, S. Maltezos 9, V . Malyshev107, S. Malyukov 29, R. Mameghani 98, J. Mamuzic 12b, A. Manabe 66,
L. Mandelli89a, I. Mandi ´c74, R. Mandrysch15, J. Maneira124a, P.S. Mangeard88, I.D. Manjavidze65,A .M a n n54,P . M .M a n -
ning137, A. Manousakis-Katsikakis8, B. Mansoulie136, A. Manz99, A. Mapelli29, L. Mapelli29, L. March80, J.F. Marchand29,
F. Marchese133a,133b, G. Marchiori 78, M. Marcisovsky 125,A .M a r i n21,*,C . P .M a r i n o61, F. Marroquim 23a, R. Marshall 82,
Z. Marshall 29, F.K. Martens 158, S. Marti-Garcia 167, A.J. Martin 175, B. Martin 29, B. Martin 88, F.F. Martin 120,J . P .M a r -
tin93, Ph. Martin 55,T . A .M a r t i n17, B. Martin dit Latour 49, M. Martinez 11, V . Martinez Outschoorn57, A.C. Martyniuk 82,
M. Marx 82, F. Marzano 132a, A. Marzin 111,L .M a s e t t i81, T. Mashimo 155, R. Mashinistov 94,J .M a s i k82, A.L. Maslen-


--- Page 54 ---
Page 54 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
nikov107,M .M a ß42,I .M a s s a19a,19b, G. Massaro105,N .M a s s o l4, P. Mastrandrea132a,132b, A. Mastroberardino36a,36b,T .M a -
subuchi155, M. Mathes20, P. Matricon115,H .M a t s u m o t o155, H. Matsunaga155, T. Matsushita67, C. Mattravers118,c, J.M. Mau-
gain29, S.J. Maxﬁeld73, D.A. Maximov107,E . N .M a y5, A. Mayne139, R. Mazini151, M. Mazur20, M. Mazzanti89a,E .M a z -
zoni122a,122b,S . P .M cK e e87,A .M c C a r n165,R . L .M c C a r t h y148,T . G .M c C a r t h y28, N.A. McCubbin129, K.W. McFarlane56,
J.A. Mcfayden139, H. McGlone 53, G. Mchedlidze 51, R.A. McLaren 29, T. Mclaughlan17, S.J. McMahon 129, R.A. McPher-
son169,j, A. Meade84, J. Mechnich105, M. Mechtel174, M. Medinnis41, R. Meera-Lebbai111, T. Meguro116, R. Mehdiyev93,
S. Mehlhase35, A. Mehta73, K. Meier58a, J. Meinhardt48,B .M e i r o s e79, C. Melachrinos30, B.R. Mellado Garcia172,L .M e n -
doza Navas162,Z .M e n g151,s, A. Mengarelli19a,19b, S. Menke99, C. Menot29, E. Meoni11, K.M. Mercurio57,P .M e r m o d118,
L. Merola 102a,102b, C. Meroni 89a,F . S .M e r r i t t30,A .M e s s i n a29, J. Metcalfe 103,A . S .M e t e64, S. Meuser 20,C .M e y e r81,
J-P. Meyer136,J .M e y e r173,J .M e y e r54,T . C .M e y e r29, W.T. Meyer64,J .M i a o32d, S. Michal29,L .M i c u25a, R.P. Middleton129,
P. Miele29,S .M i g a s73, L. Mijovi ´c41, G. Mikenberg 171, M. Mikestikova 125, M. Mikuž 74, D.W. Miller 143, R.J. Miller 88,
W.J. Mills168, C. Mills57, A. Milov171, D.A. Milstead146a,146b, D. Milstein171, A.A. Minaenko128, M. Miñano167,I . A .M i -
nashvili65, A.I. Mincer 108, B. Mindur 37,M .M i n e e v65,Y .M i n g130,L . M .M i r11, G. Mirabelli 132a, L. Miralles Verge 11,
A. Misiejuk 76, J. Mitrevski 137, G.Y . Mitrofanov 128, V .A. Mitsou 167,S .M i t s u i66, P.S. Miyagawa 82, K. Miyazaki 67,
J.U. Mjörnmark79,T .M o a146a,146b, P. Mockett138,S .M o e d57, V . Moeller27,K .M ö n i g41,N .M ö s e r20, S. Mohapatra 148,
B. Mohn 13,W .M o h r48, S. Mohrdieck-Möck 99,A . M .M o i s s e e v128,*,R .M o l e s - V a l l s167, J. Molina-Perez 29,J .M o n k77,
E. Monnier83, S. Montesano89a,89b, F. Monticelli70, S. Monzani19a,19b, R.W. Moore2, G.F. Moorhead86, C. Mora Herrera49,
A. Moraes53,A .M o r a i s124a,b, N. Morange136,J .M o r e l54, G. Morello36a,36b, D. Moreno81, M. Moreno Llácer167, P. Moret-
tini50a,M .M o r i i57,J .M o r i n75, Y . Morita66,A . K .M o r l e y29, G. Mornacchi29, M-C. Morone49, S.V . Morozov96,J . D .M o r r i s75,
L. Morvaj101,H . G .M o s e r99, M. Mosidze51,J .M o s s109, R. Mount143, E. Mountricha136,S . V .M o u r a v i e v94, E.J.W. Moyse84,
M. Mudrinic12b, F. Mueller58a,J .M u e l l e r123,K .M u e l l e r20,T . A .M ü l l e r98, D. Muenstermann 29,A .M u i j s105,A .M u i r168,
Y . Munwes153, K. Murakami 66, W.J. Murray 129, I. Mussche 105,E .M u s t o102a,102b, A.G. Myagkov 128, M. Myska 125,
J. Nadal 11,K .N a g a i160, K. Nagano 66, Y . Nagasaka60,A . M .N a i r z29, Y . Nakahama29, K. Nakamura 155, I. Nakano 110,
G. Nanava20, A. Napier 161,M .N a s h77,c, N.R. Nation 21,T .N a t t e r m a n n20, T. Naumann 41,G .N a v a r r o162, H.A. Neal 87,
E. Nebot80, P.Yu. Nechaeva94,A .N e g r i119a,119b,G .N e g r i29, S. Nektarijevic49,A .N e l s o n64,S .N e l s o n143,T . K .N e l s o n143,
S. Nemecek125, P. Nemethy108, A.A. Nepomuceno 23a,M .N e s s i29,u,S . Y .N e s t e r o v121, M.S. Neubauer 165, A. Neusiedl 81,
R.M. Neves 108,P .N e v s k i24, P.R. Newman 17, V . Nguyen Thi Hong 136,R . B .N i c k e r s o n118, R. Nicolaidou 136,L .N i c o -
las139, B. Nicquevert29, F. Niedercorn115,J .N i e l s e n137, T. Niinikoski29, A. Nikiforov15, V . Nikolaenko128, K. Nikolaev65,
I. Nikolic-Audit 78, K. Nikolopoulos 24, H. Nilsen 48, P. Nilsson 7, Y . Ninomiya155,A .N i s a t i132a, T. Nishiyama 67,R .N i -
sius99, L. Nodulman5, M. Nomachi116, I. Nomidis154, H. Nomoto155, M. Nordberg29, B. Nordkvist146a,146b,P . R .N o r t o n129,
J. Novakova126, M. Nozaki66, M. Nožiˇcka41, L. Nozka113, I.M. Nugent159a, A.-E. Nuncio-Quiroz20, G. Nunes Hanninger20,
T. Nunnemann98,E .N u r s e77, T. Nyman29, B.J. O’Brien45, S.W. O’Neale17,*,D . C .O ’ N e i l142, V . O’Shea53, F.G. Oakham28,e,
H. Oberlack99,J .O c a r i z78, A. Ochi67,S .O d a155, S. Odaka66,J .O d i e r83, H. Ogren61,A .O h82,S . H .O h44,C . C .O h m146a,146b,
T. Ohshima101, H. Ohshita 140,T . K .O h s k a66, T. Ohsugi 59, S. Okada 67,H .O k a w a163, Y . Okumura101, T. Okuyama 155,
M. Olcese 50a, A.G. Olchevski 65,M .O l i v e i r a124a,h, D. Oliveira Damazio 24,E .O l i v e rG a r c i a167, D. Olivito 120,A .O l -
szewski38,J .O l s z o w s k a38, C. Omachi 67,A .O n o f r e124a,v, P.U.E. Onyisi 30,C . J .O r a m159a, M.J. Oreglia 30,Y .O r e n153,
D. Orestano 134a,134b,I .O r l o v107, C. Oropeza Barrera 53,R . S .O r r158,E . O .O r t e g a130, B. Osculati 50a,50b, R. Ospanov 120,
C. Osuna 11, G. Otero y Garzon 26, J.P Ottersbach 105, M. Ouchrif 135d, F. Ould-Saada 117, A. Ouraou 136, Q. Ouyang 32a,
M. Owen 82,S .O w e n139,O . K .Ø y e13, V .E. Ozcan18a,N .O z t u r k7, A. Pacheco Pages 11, C. Padilla Aranda 11, E. Paga-
nis139,F .P a i g e24, K. Pajchel117, S. Palestini29, D. Pallin33,A .P a l m a124a,b,J . D .P a l m e r17,Y . B .P a n172, E. Panagiotopoulou9,
B. Panes31a, N. Panikashvili 87, S. Panitkin 24, D. Pantea 25a, M. Panuskova125, V . Paolone123, A. Papadelis 146a,T h . D .P a -
padopoulou9, A. Paramonov5,W .P a r k24,w,M . A .P a r k e r27, F. Parodi50a,50b, J.A. Parsons34, U. Parzefall48, E. Pasqualucci132a,
A. Passeri134a,F .P a s t o r e134a,134b,F r .P a s t o r e29, G. Pásztor49,x, S. Pataraia172, N. Patel150, J.R. Pater82,S .P a t r i c e l l i102a,102b,
T. Pauly29, M. Pecsy144a, M.I. Pedraza Morales172, S.V . Peleganchuk107, H. Peng172, R. Pengo29, A. Penson34, J. Penwell61,
M. Perantoni 23a, K. Perez 34,t, T. Perez Cavalcanti 41, E. Perez Codina 11, M.T. Pérez García-Estañ 167, V . Perez Reale34,
I. Peric20,L .P e r i n i89a,89b, H. Pernegger 29, R. Perrino 72a, P. Perrodo4,S .P e r s e m b e3a, V .D. Peshekhonov65, O. Peters 105,
B.A. Petersen29, J. Petersen29, T.C. Petersen35, E. Petit83, A. Petridis154, C. Petridou154,E .P e t r o l o132a, F. Petrucci134a,134b,
D. Petschull 41, M. Petteni 142, R. Pezoa 31b, A. Phan 86, A.W. Phillips 27, P.W. Phillips129, G. Piacquadio 29, E. Piccaro 75,
M. Piccinini 19a,19b, A. Pickford 53,S . M .P i e c41, R. Piegaia 26, J.E. Pilcher 30, A.D. Pilkington 82,J .P i n a124a,b, M. Pina-
monti164a,164c, A. Pinder 118, J.L. Pinfold 2,J .P i n g32c,B .P i n t o124a,b, O. Pirotte 29, C. Pizio 89a,89b, R. Placakyte 41,M .P l a -
mondon169, W.G. Plano82, M.-A. Pleier 24, A.V . Pleskach128, A. Poblaguev24, S. Poddar 58a, F. Podlyski33, L. Poggioli 115,
T. Poghosyan20, M. Pohl 49, F. Polci 55, G. Polesello 119a, A. Policicchio 138,A .P o l i n i19a, J. Poll 75, V . Polychronakos24,
D.M. Pomarede136, D. Pomeroy 22, K. Pommès 29, L. Pontecorvo 132a, B.G. Pope 88, G.A. Popeneciu 25a, D.S. Popovic 12a,


--- Page 55 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 55 of 61
A. Poppleton 29, X. Portell Bueso 29,R .P o r t e r163, C. Posch 21, G.E. Pospelov 99, S. Pospisil 127,I . N .P o t r a p99,C . J .P o t -
ter149,C . T .P o t t e r114, G. Poulard 29, J. Poveda 172, R. Prabhu 77,P .P r a l a v o r i o83,S .P r a s a d57, R. Pravahan 7,S .P r e l l64,
K. Pretzl16, L. Pribyl29,D .P r i c e61,L . E .P r i c e5,M . J .P r i c e29, P.M. Prichard73,D .P r i e u r123,M .P r i m a v e r a72a,K .P r o k o ﬁ e v108,
F. Prokoshin31b, S. Protopopescu 24, J. Proudfoot 5, X. Prudent 43, H. Przysiezniak 4, S. Psoroulas 20, E. Ptacek 114, J. Pur-
dham87, M. Purohit 24,w, P. Puzo 115, Y . Pylypchenko117,J .Q i a n87,Z .Q i a n83,Z .Q i n 41, A. Quadt 54,D . R .Q u a r r i e14,
W.B. Quayle172, F. Quinonez 31a,M .R a a s104, V . Radescu58b, B. Radics 20, T. Rador 18a, F. Ragusa 89a,89b, G. Rahal 177,
A.M. Rahimi 109, D. Rahm 24, S. Rajagopalan 24, M. Rammensee 48,M .R a m m e s141, M. Ramstedt 146a,146b, K. Randria-
narivony28, P.N. Ratoff 71, F. Rauscher 98, E. Rauter 99, M. Raymond 29, A.L. Read 117, D.M. Rebuzzi 119a,119b, A. Redel-
bach173, G. Redlinger 24, R. Reece 120,K .R e e v e s40, A. Reichold 105, E. Reinherz-Aronis 153, A. Reinsch 114, I. Reisinger 42,
D. Reljic12a, C. Rembser29,Z . L .R e n151, A. Renaud115, P. Renkel39, B. Rensch35, M. Rescigno132a, S. Resconi89a,B .R e -
sende136, P. Reznicek98, R. Rezvani 158, A. Richards 77, R. Richter 99, E. Richter-Was38,y,M .R i d e l78,S .R i e k e81,M .R i -
jpstra105, M. Rijssenbeek 148,A .R i m o l d i119a,119b, L. Rinaldi 19a,R . R .R i o s39,I .R i u11, G. Rivoltella 89a,89b, F. Rizatdi-
nova112,E .R i z v i75, S.H. Robertson 85,j, A. Robichaud-Veronneau49, D. Robinson 27, J.E.M. Robinson 77, M. Robinson 114,
A. Robson 53, J.G. Rocha de Lima 106, C. Roda 122a,122b, D. Roda Dos Santos 29, S. Rodier 80, D. Rodriguez 162,Y .R o -
driguez Garcia15,A .R o e54,S .R o e29, O. Røhne117,V .R o j o1,S .R o l l i161, A. Romaniouk96, V .M. Romanov65, G. Romeo26,
D. Romero Maltrana31a, L. Roos78,E .R o s167, S. Rosati132a,132b, K. Rosbach49,M .R o s e76, G.A. Rosenbaum158, E.I. Rosen-
berg64, P.L. Rosendahl 13,L .R o s s e l e t49, V . Rossetti11,E .R o s s i102a,102b, L.P. Rossi 50a,L .R o s s i89a,89b,M .R o t a r u25a,
I. Roth 171, J. Rothberg 138, D. Rousseau 115,C . R .R o y o n136, A. Rozanov 83, Y . Rozen152, X. Ruan 115, I. Rubinskiy 41,
B. Ruckert98, N. Ruckstuhl105,V . I .R u d97, G. Rudolph62,F .R ü h r6, F. Ruggieri134a,134b, A. Ruiz-Martinez64, E. Rulikowska-
Zarebska37, V . Rumiantsev91,*, L. Rumyantsev 65, K. Runge 48, O. Runolfsson 20,Z .R u r i k o v a48,N . A .R u s a k o v i c h65,
D.R. Rust 61, J.P. Rutherfoord 6, C. Ruwiedel 14, P. Ruzicka 125, Y .F. Ryabov121, V . Ryadovikov128,P .R y a n88,M .R y -
bar126, G. Rybkin 115, N.C. Ryder 118,S .R z a e v a10, A.F. Saavedra150, I. Sadeh 153, H.F-W. Sadrozinski 137, R. Sadykov 65,
F. Safai Tehrani132a,132b, H. Sakamoto155, G. Salamanna75, A. Salamon133a, M. Saleem111, D. Salihagic99, A. Salnikov143,
J. Salt167, B.M. Salvachua Ferrando 5, D. Salvatore 36a,36b,F .S a l v a t o r e149, A. Salvucci 104, A. Salzburger 29, D. Sampsoni-
dis154,B . H .S a m s e t117, H. Sandaker 13, H.G. Sander 81, M.P. Sanders98, M. Sandhoff 174, T. Sandoval27, R. Sandstroem 99,
S. Sandvoss 174, D.P.C. Sankey 129, A. Sansoni 47, C. Santamarina Rios 85, C. Santoni 33, R. Santonico 133a,133b, H. San-
tos124a, J.G. Saraiva124a,b, T. Sarangi172, E. Sarkisyan-Grinbaum7, F. Sarri122a,122b, G. Sartisohn174, O. Sasaki66, T. Sasaki66,
N. Sasao 68, I. Satsounkevitch 90, G. Sauvage 4, J.B. Sauvan 115,P .S a v a r d158,e,V .S a v i n o v123,D . O .S a v u29,P .S a v v a9,
L. Sawyer24,l, D.H. Saxon 53, L.P. Says33, C. Sbarra 19a,19b, A. Sbrizzi 19a,19b, O. Scallon 93, D.A. Scannicchio 163, M. Scar-
cella150, J. Schaarschmidt 115, P. Schacht 99, U. Schäfer 81, S. Schaepe 20, S. Schaetzel 58b, A.C. Schaffer 115, D. Schaile 98,
R.D. Schamberger148, A.G. Schamov107, V . Scharf58a, V .A. Schegelsky121, D. Scheirich87, M. Schernau163, M.I. Scherzer14,
C. Schiavi 50a,50b, J. Schieck 98, M. Schioppa 36a,36b, S. Schlenker 29, J.L. Schlereth 5, E. Schmidt 48, M.P. Schmidt 175,*,
K. Schmieden 20, C. Schmitt 81, S. Schmitt 58b, M. Schmitz 20, A. Schöning 58b, M. Schott 29, D. Schouten 142, J. Schovan-
cova125, M. Schram 85, C. Schroeder 81, N. Schroer 58c, S. Schuh 29, G. Schuler 29, J. Schultes 174, H.-C. Schultz-Coulon 58a,
H. Schulz15, J.W. Schumacher20, M. Schumacher48, B.A. Schumm137, Ph. Schune136, C. Schwanenberger82, A. Schwartz-
man143, Ph. Schwemling78, R. Schwienhorst88, R. Schwierz43, J. Schwindling136, W.G. Scott129, J. Searcy114, E. Sedykh121,
E. Segura11, S.C. Seidel 103, A. Seiden 137,F .S e i f e r t43, J.M. Seixas 23a, G. Sekhniaidze 102a, D.M. Seliverstov 121,B .S e l l -
den146a,G .S e l l e r s73, M. Seman 144b, N. Semprini-Cesari 19a,19b,C .S e r f o n98,L .S e r i n115, R. Seuster 99,H .S e v e r i n i111,
M.E. Sevior 86, A. Sfyrla 29, E. Shabalina 54, M. Shamim 114, L.Y . Shan32a, J.T. Shank 21, Q.T. Shao 86, M. Shapiro 14,
P.B. Shatalov95,L .S h a v e r6,C .S h a w53, K. Shaw 164a,164c, D. Sherman 175, P. Sherwood 77, A. Shibata 108, H. Shichi 101,
S. Shimizu 29, M. Shimojima 100, T. Shin 56, A. Shmeleva 94, M.J. Shochet 30, D. Short 118, M.A. Shupe 6, P. Sicho 125,
A. Sidoti132a,132b, A. Siebel174, F. Siegert48,J .S i e g r i s t14, Dj. Sijacki12a, O. Silbert171, J. Silva124a,b, Y . Silver153, D. Silver-
stein143, S.B. Silverstein146a,V .S i m a k127,O .S i m a r d136,L j .S i m i c12a,S .S i m i o n115, B. Simmons77, M. Simonyan35,P .S i n -
ervo158,N . B .S i n e v114, V . Sipica141, G. Siragusa81, A.N. Sisakyan65, S.Yu. Sivoklokov97, J. Sjölin146a,146b,T . B .S j u r s e n13,
L.A. Skinnari 14, K. Skovpen 107, P. Skubic 111, N. Skvorodnev 22, M. Slater 17, T. Slavicek 127, K. Sliwa 161, T.J. Sloan 71,
J. Sloper29,V .S m a k h t i n171, S.Yu. Smirnov96,L . N .S m i r n o v a97,O .S m i r n o v a79,B . C .S m i t h57,D .S m i t h143, K.M. Smith53,
M. Smizanska71,K .S m o l e k127, A.A. Snesarev 94,S . W .S n o w82, J. Snow 111, J. Snuverink 105, S. Snyder 24, M. Soares 124a,
R. Sobie169,j, J. Sodomka127,A .S o f f e r153, C.A. Solans167, M. Solar127,J .S o l c127, E. Soldatov96, U. Soldevila167,E .S o l -
faroli Camillocci132a,132b, A.A. Solodkov 128, O.V . Solovyanov128, J. Sondericker 24, N. Soni 2, V . Sopko127, B. Sopko 127,
M. Sorbi89a,89b, M. Sosebee7, A. Soukharev107, S. Spagnolo72a,72b, F. Spanò34, R. Spighi19a, G. Spigo29,F .S p i l a132a,132b,
E. Spiriti134a, R. Spiwoks 29, M. Spousta 126, T. Spreitzer 158, B. Spurlock 7,R . D .S t .D e n i s53,T .S t a h l141,J .S t a h l m a n120,
R. Stamen58a, E. Stanecka 29, R.W. Stanek5, C. Stanescu 134a, S. Stapnes 117, E.A. Starchenko 128,J .S t a r k55, P. Staroba125,
P. Starovoitov91, A. Staude 98, P. Stavina 144a, G. Stavropoulos 14, G. Steele 53, P. Steinbach 43, P. Steinberg 24,I .S t e k l127,


--- Page 56 ---
Page 56 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
B. Stelzer142,H . J .S t e l z e r88, O. Stelzer-Chilton159a, H. Stenzel52, K. Stevenson75,G . A .S t e w a r t29, J.A. Stillings20, T. Stock-
manns20, M.C. Stockton 29, K. Stoerig 48,G .S t o i c e a25a, S. Stonjek 99, P. Strachota 126, A.R. Stradling 7, A. Straessner 43,
J. Strandberg147, S. Strandberg146a,146b, A. Strandlie117,M .S t r a n g109,E .S t r a u s s143, M. Strauss111, P. Strizenec144b, R. Ströh-
mer173,D . M .S t r o m114,J . A .S t r o n g76,*, R. Stroynowski39,J .S t r u b e129,B .S t u g u13,I .S t u m e r24,*, J. Stupak148,P .S t u r m174,
D.A. Soh151,q,D .S u143, HS. Subramania2, A. Succurro11, Y . Sugaya116, T. Sugimoto101, C. Suhr106, K. Suita67, M. Suk126,
V. V. S u l i n94, S. Sultansoy 3d, T. Sumida 29,X .S u n55, J.E. Sundermann 48, K. Suruliz 139, S. Sushkov 11, G. Susinno 36a,36b,
M.R. Sutton149, Y . Suzuki66,M .S v a t o s125, Yu.M. Sviridov128, S. Swedish 168, I. Sykora 144a, T. Sykora 126, B. Szeless 29,
J. Sánchez 167,D .T a 105, K. Tackmann 41,A .T a f f a r d163, R. Taﬁrout 159a,A .T a g a117, N. Taiblum 153, Y . Takahashi101,
H. Takai24, R. Takashima 69, H. Takeda 67, T. Takeshita 140, M. Talby 83, A. Talyshev 107,M . C .T a m s e t t24, J. Tanaka 155,
R. Tanaka 115, S. Tanaka 131, S. Tanaka 66, Y . Tanaka100, K. Tani 67, N. Tannoury 83, G.P. Tappern 29, S. Tapprogge 81,
D. Tardif158, S. Tarem 152,F .T a r r a d e24, G.F. Tartarelli89a,P .T a s126,M .T a s e v s k y125, E. Tassi 36a,36b, M. Tatarkhanov 14,
Y . Tayalati135d, C. Taylor 77, F.E. Taylor 92, G.N. Taylor 86, W. Taylor 159b, M. Teixeira Dias Castanheira 75,P .T e i x e i r a -
Dias76,K . K .T e m m i n g48,H .T e nK a t e29,P . K .T e n g151, S. Terada66, K. Terashi155, J. Terron80,M .T e r w o r t41,o,M .T e s t a47,
R.J. Teuscher 158,j, J. Thadome 174, J. Therhaag 20, T. Theveneaux-Pelzer 78,M .T h i o y e175,S .T h o m a48, J.P. Thomas 17,
E.N. Thompson84, P.D. Thompson17, P.D. Thompson158, A.S. Thompson53,E .T h o m s o n120,M .T h o m s o n27,R . P .T h u n87,
T. Tic125, V .O. Tikhomirov94, Y .A. Tikhonov107, C.J.W.P. Timmermans104, P. Tipton175, F.J. Tique Aires Viegas29,S .T i s -
serant83, J. Tobias48, B. Toczek37, T. Todorov4, S. Todorova-Nova161, B. Toggerson163,J .T o j o66, S. Tokár144a, K. Toku-
naga67, K. Tokushuku66,K .T o l l e f s o n88,M .T o m o t o101, L. Tompkins14,K .T o m s103, G. Tong32a, A. Tonoyan13, C. Topfel16,
N.D. Topilin65, I. Torchiani29, E. Torrence114, E. Torró Pastor167,J .T o t h83,x, F. Touchard83, D.R. Tovey139, D. Traynor75,
T. Trefzger173,J .T r e i s20,L .T r e m b l e t29, A. Tricoli29, I.M. Trigger159a, S. Trincaz-Duvoid78,T . N .T r i n h78, M.F. Tripiana70,
W. Trischuk158,A .T r i v e d i24,w,B .T r o c m é55, C. Troncon 89a, M. Trottier-McDonald 142, A. Trzupek 38, C. Tsarouchas 29,
J.C-L. Tseng 118,M .T s i a k i r i s105, P.V . Tsiareshka90, D. Tsionou 4, G. Tsipolitis 9, V . Tsiskaridze48, E.G. Tskhadadze 51,
I.I. Tsukerman 95, V . Tsulaia123, J.-W. Tsung 20, S. Tsuno 66, D. Tsybychev 148,A .T u a139, J.M. Tuggle 30, M. Turala 38,
D. Turecek127, I. Turk Cakir 3e,E .T u r l a y105,R .T u r r a89a,89b,P . M .T u t s34, A. Tykhonov 74,M .T y l m a d146a,146b, M. Tyn-
del129, H. Tyrvainen29, G. Tzanakos8, K. Uchida20,I .U e d a155, R. Ueno28, M. Ugland13, M. Uhlenbrock20, M. Uhrmacher54,
F. Ukegawa160,G .U n a l29, D.G. Underwood5, A. Undrus24,G .U n e l163, Y . Unno66, D. Urbaniec34,E .U r k o v s k y153,P .U r r e -
jola31a,G .U s a i7, M. Uslenghi119a,119b, L. Vacavant83, V . Vacek127, B. Vachon85, S. Vahsen14, J. Valenta125, P. Valente132a,
S. Valentinetti19a,19b, S. Valkar 126, E. Valladolid Gallego 167, S. Vallecorsa 152,J . A .V a l l sF e r r e r167, H. van der Graaf 105,
E. van der Kraaij105, R. Van Der Leeuw105, E. van der Poel105, D. van der Ster29, B. Van Eijk105, N. van Eldik84,P .v a nG e m -
meren5, Z. van Kesteren 105, I. van Vulpen 105, W. Vandelli29, G. Vandoni29, A. Vaniachine5,P .V a n k o v41, F. Vannucci78,
F. Varela Rodriguez29,R .V a r i132a, E.W. Varnes6, D. Varouchas 14, A. Vartapetian 7,K . E .V a r v e l l150, V .I. Vassilakopou-
los56, F. Vazeille 33, G. Vegni 89a,89b, J.J. Veillet 115, C. Vellidis 8,F .V e l o s o124a, R. Veness 29, S. Veneziano 132a,A .V e n -
tura72a,72b, D. Ventura138, M. Venturi48, N. Venturi16, V . Vercesi119a, M. Verducci138,W .V e r k e r k e105, J.C. Vermeulen105,
A. Vest43, M.C. Vetterli 142,e, I. Vichou 165,T .V i c k e y145b,z, G.H.A. Viehhauser 118,S .V i e l168, M. Villa 19a,19b,M .V i l l a -
plana Perez 167, E. Vilucchi 47, M.G. Vincter 28,E .V i n e k29, V .B. Vinogradov65, M. Virchaux 136,*,S .V i r e t33,J .V i r z i14,
A. Vitale19a,19b, O. Vitells171, M. Viti41,I .V i v a r e l l i48, F. Vives Vaque11, S. Vlachos 9,M .V l a s a k127,N .V l a s o v20,A .V o -
gel20, P. V okac127, G. V olpi47,M .V o l p i11, G. V olpini89a, H. von der Schmitt 99, J. von Loeben 99, H. von Radziewski 48,
E. von Toerne 20, V . V orobel126, A.P. V orobiev128,V .V o r w e r k11,M .V o s167,R .V o s s29,T . T .V o s s174, J.H. V ossebeld73,
N. Vranjes 12a, M. Vranjes Milosavljevic 12a,V .V r b a125, M. Vreeswijk 105,T .V uA n h81, R. Vuillermet 29,I .V u k o t i c115,
W. Wagner174, P. Wagner120, H. Wahlen 174, J. Wakabayashi 101, J. Walbersloh 42,S .W a l c h87, J. Walder 71,R .W a l k e r98,
W. Walkowiak141,R .W a l l175, P. Waller73, C. Wang44,H .W a n g172, H. Wang32b,aa,J .W a n g151, J. Wang32d, J.C. Wang138,
R. Wang103, S.M. Wang 151,A .W a r b u r t o n85,C . P .W a r d27, M. Warsinsky 48, P.M. Watkins17,A . T .W a t s o n17,M . F .W a t -
son17,G .W a t t s138,S .W a t t s82, A.T. Waugh 150, B.M. Waugh 77, J. Weber 42, M. Weber 129, M.S. Weber 16, P. Weber 54,
A.R. Weidberg118, P. Weigell99, J. Weingarten 54,C .W e i s e r48, H. Wellenstein 22,P . S .W e l l s29,M .W e n47, T. Wenaus 24,
S. Wendler123, Z. Weng151,q, T. Wengler29,S .W e n i g29,N .W e r m e s20, M. Werner48, P. Werner29,M .W e r t h163,M .W e s -
sels58a, C. Weydert55, K. Whalen28, S.J. Wheeler-Ellis163, S.P. Whitaker21, A. White7, M.J. White86,S .W h i t e24,S . R .W h i t e -
head118, D. Whiteson 163, D. Whittington 61, F. Wicek 115,D .W i c k e174,F . J .W i c k e n s129, W. Wiedenmann 172, M. Wiel-
ers129, P. Wienemann20, C. Wiglesworth75, L.A.M. Wiik48, P.A. Wijeratne77, A. Wildauer167,M . A .W i l d t41,o,I .W i l h e l m126,
H.G. Wilkens29, J.Z. Will98, E. Williams34, H.H. Williams120, W. Willis34,S .W i l l o c q84,J . A .W i l s o n17,M . G .W i l s o n143,
A. Wilson 87, I. Wingerter-Seez 4,S .W i n k e l m a n n48,F .W i n k l m e i e r29, M. Wittgen 143, M.W. Wolter 38, H. Wolters 124a,h,
G. Wooden118,B . K .W o s i e k38, J. Wotschack 29, M.J. Woudstra 84,K .W r a i g h t53, C. Wright 53, B. Wrona 73,S . L .W u172,
X. Wu49,Y .W u32b,ab,E .W u l f34,R .W u n s t o r f42, B.M. Wynne45, L. Xaplanteris9,S .X e l l a35,S .X i e48,Y .X i e32a,C .X u32b,ac,
D. Xu139,G .X u 32a,B .Y a b s l e y150, M. Yamada 66, A. Yamamoto 66, K. Yamamoto 64, S. Yamamoto 155, T. Yamamura155,


--- Page 57 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 57 of 61
J. Yamaoka44, T. Yamazaki155, Y . Yamazaki67,Z .Y a n21,H .Y a n g87,U . K .Y a n g82, Y . Yang61, Y . Yang32a,Z .Y a n g146a,146b,
S. Yanush91,W - M .Y a o14,Y .Y a o14,Y .Y a s u66, G.V . Ybeles Smit130,J .Y e39,S .Y e24, M. Yilmaz3c, R. Yoosoofmiya123,
K. Yorita170, R. Yoshida5, C. Young143, S. Youssef21,D .Y u24,J .Y u7,J .Y u32c,ac,L .Y u a n32a,ad, A. Yurkewicz148,V . G .Z a -
ets128, R. Zaidan 63,A . M .Z a i t s e v128, Z. Zajacova 29, Yo.K. Zalite121,L .Z a n e l l o132a,132b, P. Zarzhitsky39,A .Z a y t s e v107,
C. Zeitnitz 174, M. Zeller 175,A .Z e m l a38, C. Zendler 20, A.V . Zenin128,O .Z e n i n128, T. Ženiš 144a, Z. Zenonos 122a,122b,
S. Zenz14,D .Z e r w a s115, G. Zevi della Porta57, Z. Zhan32d, D. Zhang32b,aa, H. Zhang88, J. Zhang5, X. Zhang32d, Z. Zhang115,
L. Zhao108, T. Zhao138, Z. Zhao 32b, A. Zhemchugov 65, S. Zheng 32a, J. Zhong 151,ae, B. Zhou 87,N .Z h o u163,Y .Z h o u151,
C.G. Zhu32d,H .Z h u41,Y .Z h u172, X. Zhuang 98, V . Zhuravlov99,D .Z i e m i n s k a61, R. Zimmermann 20, S. Zimmermann 20,
S. Zimmermann48, M. Ziolkowski 141, R. Zitoun 4,L .Ž i v k o v i´c34, V .V . Zmouchko128,*, G. Zobernig 172, A. Zoccoli 19a,19b,
Y . Zolnierowski4, A. Zsenei29, M. zur Nedden15,V .Z u t s h i106, L. Zwalinski29
1University at Albany, Albany NY , United States of America
2Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada
3(a) Department of Physics, Ankara University, Ankara; (b)Department of Physics, Dumlupinar University, Kutahya;
(c)Department of Physics, Gazi University, Ankara; (d)Division of Physics, TOBB University of Economics and
Technology, Ankara;(e)Turkish Atomic Energy Authority, Ankara, Turkey
4LAPP, CNRS/IN2P3 and Université de Savoie, Annecy-le-Vieux, France
5High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne IL, United States of America
6Department of Physics, University of Arizona, Tucson AZ, United States of America
7Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington TX, United States of America
8Physics Department, University of Athens, Athens, Greece
9Physics Department, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou, Greece
10Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
11Institut de Física d’Altes Energies and Departament de Física de la Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona and ICREA,
Barcelona, Spain
12(a) Institute of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade; (b)Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia
13Department for Physics and Technology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
14Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and University of California, Berkeley CA, United States of
America
15Department of Physics, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany
16Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics and Laboratory for High Energy Physics, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland
17School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
18(a) Department of Physics, Bogazici University, Istanbul;(b)Division of Physics, Dogus University, Istanbul;
(c)Department of Physics Engineering, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep; (d)Department of Physics, Istanbul Technical
University, Istanbul, Turkey
19(a) INFN Sezione di Bologna; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
20Physikalisches Institut, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
21Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston MA, United States of America
22Department of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham MA, United States of America
23(a) Universidade Federal do Rio De Janeiro COPPE/EE/IF, Rio de Janeiro; (b)Federal University of Juiz de Fora (UFJF),
Juiz de Fora; (c)Federal University of Sao Joao del Rei (UFSJ), Sao Joao del Rei; (d)Instituto de Fisica, Universidade de
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
24Physics Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton NY , United States of America
25(a) National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering, Bucharest; (b)University Politehnica Bucharest, Bucharest;
(c)West University in Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania
26Departamento de Física, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
27Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
28Department of Physics, Carleton University, Ottawa ON, Canada
29CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
30Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago IL, United States of America
31(a) Departamento de Fisica, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago; (b)Departamento de Física, Universidad
Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso, Chile


--- Page 58 ---
Page 58 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
32(a) Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing; (b)Department of Modern Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui; (c)Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Jiangsu; (d)High
Energy Physics Group, Shandong University, Shandong, China
33Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Clermont Université and Université Blaise Pascal and CNRS/IN2P3, Aubiere
Cedex, France
34Nevis Laboratory, Columbia University, Irvington NY , United States of America
35Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Kobenhavn, Denmark
36(a) INFN Gruppo Collegato di Cosenza; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università della Calabria, Arcavata di Rende, Italy
37Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH-University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
38The Henryk Niewodniczanski Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, Poland
39Physics Department, Southern Methodist University, Dallas TX, United States of America
40Physics Department, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson TX, United States of America
41DESY , Hamburg and Zeuthen, Germany
42Institut für Experimentelle Physik IV , Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
43Institut für Kern- und Teilchenphysik, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
44Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham NC, United States of America
45SUPA – School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
46Fachhochschule Wiener Neustadt, Johannes Gutenbergstrasse 3, 2700 Wiener Neustadt, Austria
47INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
48Fakultät für Mathematik und Physik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg i.Br., Germany
49Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
50(a) INFN Sezione di Genova; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Genova, Genova, Italy
51Institute of Physics and HEP Institute, Georgian Academy of Sciences and Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
52II Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany
53SUPA – School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
54II Physikalisches Institut, Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen, Germany
55Laboratoire de Physique Subatomique et de Cosmologie, Université Joseph Fourier and CNRS/IN2P3 and Institut
National Polytechnique de Grenoble, Grenoble, France
56Department of Physics, Hampton University, Hampton V A, United States of America
57Laboratory for Particle Physics and Cosmology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, United States of America
58(a) Kirchhoff-Institut für Physik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg; (b)Physikalisches Institut,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg; (c)ZITI Institut für technische Informatik,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
59Faculty of Science, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan
60Faculty of Applied Information Science, Hiroshima Institute of Technology, Hiroshima, Japan
61Department of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington IN, United States of America
62Institut für Astro- und Teilchenphysik, Leopold-Franzens-Universität, Innsbruck, Austria
63University of Iowa, Iowa City IA, United States of America
64Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames IA, United States of America
65Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, JINR Dubna, Dubna, Russia
66KEK, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization, Tsukuba, Japan
67Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan
68Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
69Kyoto University of Education, Kyoto, Japan
70Instituto de Física La Plata, Universidad Nacional de La Plata and CONICET, La Plata, Argentina
71Physics Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
72(a) INFN Sezione di Lecce; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università del Salento, Lecce, Italy
73Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
74Department of Physics, Jožef Stefan Institute and University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
75Department of Physics, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
76Department of Physics, Royal Holloway University of London, Surrey, United Kingdom
77Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London, United Kingdom
78Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et de Hautes Energies, UPMC and Université Paris-Diderot and CNRS/IN2P3, Paris,
France


--- Page 59 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 59 of 61
79Fysiska Institutionen, Lunds Universitet, Lund, Sweden
80Departamento de Fisica Teorica C-15, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
81Institut für Physik, Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany
82School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
83CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
84Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst MA, United States of America
85Department of Physics, McGill University, Montreal QC, Canada
86School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
87Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, United States of America
88Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing MI, United States of America
89(a) INFN Sezione di Milano; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano, Milano, Italy
90B.I. Stepanov Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, Minsk, Republic of Belarus
91National Scientiﬁc and Educational Centre for Particle and High Energy Physics, Minsk, Republic of Belarus
92Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, United States of America
93Group of Particle Physics, University of Montreal, Montreal QC, Canada
94P.N. Lebedev Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
95Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics (ITEP), Moscow, Russia
96Moscow Engineering and Physics Institute (MEPhI), Moscow, Russia
97Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
98Fakultät für Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany
99Max-Planck-Institut für Physik (Werner-Heisenberg-Institut), München, Germany
100Nagasaki Institute of Applied Science, Nagasaki, Japan
101Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
102(a) INFN Sezione di Napoli; (b)Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, Università di Napoli, Napoli, Italy
103Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque NM, United States of America
104Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University Nijmegen/Nikhef, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
105Nikhef National Institute for Subatomic Physics and University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
106Department of Physics, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb IL, United States of America
107Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics (BINP), Novosibirsk, Russia
108Department of Physics, New York University, New York NY , United States of America
109Ohio State University, Columbus OH, United States of America
110Faculty of Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan
111Homer L. Dodge Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Oklahoma, Norman OK, United States of
America
112Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater OK, United States of America
113Palacký University, RCPTM, Olomouc, Czech Republic
114Center for High Energy Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene OR, United States of America
115LAL, Univ. Paris-Sud and CNRS/IN2P3, Orsay, France
116Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
117Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
118Department of Physics, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom
119(a) INFN Sezione di Pavia; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica Nucleare e Teorica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy
120Department of Physics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, United States of America
121Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia
122(a) INFN Sezione di Pisa; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica E. Fermi, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy
123Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, United States of America
124(a) Laboratorio de Instrumentacao e Fisica Experimental de Particulas – LIP, Lisboa, Portugal;(b)Departamento de Fisica
Teorica y del Cosmos and CAFPE, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain
125Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Praha, Czech Republic
126Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic
127Czech Technical University in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic
128State Research Center Institute for High Energy Physics, Protvino, Russia


--- Page 60 ---
Page 60 of 61 Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849
129Particle Physics Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
130Physics Department, University of Regina, Regina SK, Canada
131Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan
132(a) INFN Sezione di Roma I; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università La Sapienza, Roma, Italy
133(a) INFN Sezione di Roma Tor Vergata;(b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy
134(a) INFN Sezione di Roma Tre; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università Roma Tre, Roma, Italy
135(a) Faculté des Sciences Ain Chock, Réseau Universitaire de Physique des Hautes Energies – Université Hassan II,
Casablanca; (b)Centre National de l’Energie des Sciences Techniques Nucleaires, Rabat; (c)Université Cadi Ayyad,
Faculté des sciences Semlalia Département de Physique, B.P. 2390 Marrakech 40000;(d)Faculté des Sciences, Université
Mohamed Premier and LPTPM, Oujda; (e)Faculté des Sciences, Université Mohammed V , Rabat, Morocco
136DSM/IRFU (Institut de Recherches sur les Lois Fondamentales de l’Univers), CEA Saclay (Commissariat a l’Energie
Atomique), Gif-sur-Yvette, France
137Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz CA, United States of America
138Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle W A, United States of America
139Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom
140Department of Physics, Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan
141Fachbereich Physik, Universität Siegen, Siegen, Germany
142Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby BC, Canada
143SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford CA, United States of America
144(a) Faculty of Mathematics, Physics & Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava;(b)Department of Subnuclear
Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice, Slovak Republic
145(a) Department of Physics, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg; (b)School of Physics, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
146(a) Department of Physics, Stockholm University; (b)The Oskar Klein Centre, Stockholm, Sweden
147Physics Department, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
148Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook NY , United States of America
149Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
150School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
151Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
152Department of Physics, Technion: Israel Inst. of Technology, Haifa, Israel
153Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
154Department of Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
155International Center for Elementary Particle Physics and Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
156Graduate School of Science and Technology, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan
157Department of Physics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
158Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto ON, Canada
159(a) TRIUMF, Vancouver BC;(b)Department of Physics and Astronomy, York University, Toronto ON, Canada
160Institute of Pure and Applied Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
161Science and Technology Center, Tufts University, Medford MA, United States of America
162Centro de Investigaciones, Universidad Antonio Narino, Bogota, Colombia
163Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California Irvine, Irvine CA, United States of America
164(a) INFN Gruppo Collegato di Udine, Udine; (b)ICTP, Trieste;(c)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Udine, Udine, Italy
165Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana IL, United States of America
166Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden
167Instituto de Física Corpuscular (IFIC) and Departamento de Física Atómica, Molecular y Nuclear and Departamento de
Ingenierá Electrónica and Instituto de Microelectrónica de Barcelona (IMB-CNM), University of Valencia and CSIC,
Valencia, Spain
168Department of Physics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada
169Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria BC, Canada
170Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
171Department of Particle Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
172Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison WI, United States of America
173Fakultät für Physik und Astronomie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität, Würzburg, Germany


--- Page 61 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2012) 72:1849 Page 61 of 61
174Fachbereich C Physik, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany
175Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven CT, United States of America
176Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
177Domaine scientiﬁque de la Doua, Centre de Calcul CNRS/IN2P3, Villeurbanne Cedex, France
aAlso at Laboratorio de Instrumentacao e Fisica Experimental de Particulas – LIP, Lisboa, Portugal
bAlso at Faculdade de Ciencias and CFNUL, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
cAlso at Particle Physics Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
dAlso at CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
eAlso at TRIUMF, Vancouver BC, Canada
fAlso at Department of Physics, California State University, Fresno CA, United States of America
gAlso at Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH-University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
hAlso at Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal
iAlso at Università di Napoli Parthenope, Napoli, Italy
jAlso at Institute of Particle Physics (IPP), Canada
kAlso at Department of Physics, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
lAlso at Louisiana Tech University, Ruston LA, United States of America
mAlso at Group of Particle Physics, University of Montreal, Montreal QC, Canada
nAlso at Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
oAlso at Institut für Experimentalphysik, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
pAlso at Manhattan College, New York NY , United States of America
qAlso at School of Physics and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guanzhou, China
rAlso at Academia Sinica Grid Computing, Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
sAlso at High Energy Physics Group, Shandong University, Shandong, China
tAlso at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA, United States of America
uAlso at Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
vAlso at Departamento de Fisica, Universidade de Minho, Braga, Portugal
wAlso at Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of South Carolina, Columbia SC, United States of America
xAlso at KFKI Research Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics, Budapest, Hungary
yAlso at Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
zAlso at Department of Physics, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom
aaAlso at Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
abAlso at Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, United States of America
acAlso at DSM/IRFU (Institut de Recherches sur les Lois Fondamentales de l’Univers), CEA Saclay (Commissariat a
l’Energie Atomique), Gif-sur-Yvette, France
adAlso at Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et de Hautes Energies, UPMC and Université Paris-Diderot and
CNRS/IN2P3, Paris, France
aeAlso at Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Jiangsu, China
*Deceased
