--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2625-1
Special Article - Tools for Experiment and Theory
QED bremsstrahlung in decays of electroweak bosons
Andrej B. Arbuzov1,2,a, Renat R. Sadykov1,b, Zbigniew Wa¸s3,4,c
1Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Joliot-Curie str. 6, Dubna 141980, Russia
2Dep. of Higher Mathematics, Dubna University, Universitetskaya str. 19, Dubna 141980, Russia
3Institute of Nuclear Physics, PAN, ul. Radzikowskiego 152, Kraków, Poland
4CERN PH-TH, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
Received: 30 May 2013 / Revised: 13 September 2013 / Published online: 5 November 2013
© The Author(s) 2013. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Isolated lepton momenta, in particular their direc-
tions are the most precisely measured quantities in pp col-
lisions at LHC. This offers opportunities for multitude of
precision measurements.
It is of practical importance to verify if precision mea-
surements with leptons in the ﬁnal state require all theo-
retical effects evaluated simultaneously or if QED brems-
strahlung in the ﬁnal state can be separated without un-
wanted precision loss.
Results for ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung in the decays of
narrow resonances are obtained from the Feynman rules of
QED in an unambiguous way and can be controlled with
a very high precision. Also for resonances of non-negligible
width, if calculations are appropriately performed, such sep-
aration from the remaining electroweak effects can be ex-
pected.
Our paper is devoted to validation that ﬁnal-state QED
bremsstrahlung can indeed be separated from the rest of
QCD and electroweak effects, in the production and decay
of Z and W bosons, and to estimation of the resulting sys-
tematic error. The quantitative discussion is based on Monte
Carlo programs PHOTOS and SANC,a sw e l la so n KKMC
which is used for benchmark results. We show that for a
large class of W and Z boson observables as used at LHC,
the theoretical error on photonic bremsstrahlung is 0.1 or
0.2 %, depending on the program options used. An overall
theoretical error on the QED ﬁnal-state radiation, i.e. taking
into account missing corrections due to pair emission and
interference with initial state radiation is estimated respec-
tively at 0.2 % or 0.3 % again depending on the program
option used.
a e-mail: arbuzov@theor.jinr.ru
b e-mail: Renat.Sadykov@cern.ch
c e-mail: z.was@cern.ch
1 Introduction
Several of the most important measurements at LHC exper-
iments, such as Higgs boson searches [1, 2], precision mea-
surements of the W boson mass at LHC and Tevatron [3–6]
or measurements of Drell–Yan (DY) processes [7] and elec-
troweak (EW) boson pair production [5, 8]r e l yo nap r e c i s e
reconstruction of momenta for the ﬁnal-state leptons [9, 10].
A substantial effort of the experimental community was de-
voted to optimize detector design and understand detector
responses. Precision of 0.1 % (even 0.01 % for lepton direc-
tions) is of no exception. For more details, see e.g. Refs. [9–
12].
The QED effects of the ﬁnal-state radiation (FSR) play
an important role in such experimental studies. FSR is in-
cluded in all simulation chains and indeed should be studied
together with the detector response to leptons. It can not be
separated, because of infrared singularities of QED. Differ-
ent approaches based on various theoretical simpliﬁcations
are in use at present. At the level of the collinear approx-
imation, expressions for higher order FSR corrections are
not only well deﬁned but are in fact process independent. In
general, QED calculations are process dependent, but meth-
ods for obtaining results withO(α2) corrections and resum-
mation of higher order effects are well established as well
as techniques for evaluating theoretical errors. There is no
need for introducing effective models. Situation is different
if intermediate or outgoing particles, such as Z or W ,a r e
unstable, an effort like documented in [ 13] is then needed.
In case of Z and W decays if the narrow width approxi-
mation is used, the theoretical framework for QED FSR ef-
fects is unambiguous. In case of the Z decay (in fact for
hard processes mediated by s-channel Z/γ∗ exchange) the
framework in which the QED ﬁnal-state radiation is sepa-
rated from other contributions is deﬁned unambiguously as
well. This was explored in e+e− collisions at LEP and high
precision solutions were proposed.


--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
For LEP I experiments Monte Carlo simulation programs
based on exclusive exponentiation and featuring second or-
der matrix elements were developed [ 14, 15]. Considerable
theoretical effort was invested in the reordering of the per-
turbative expansion. This opened a scheme for proper re-
summation of vacuum polarization diagrams into terms con-
tributing toZ width and remaining vacuum polarization cor-
rections [ 16]. The deﬁnition of ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung
was affected in a minimal way. The by-product of this ef-
fort was separation of the electroweak corrections into QED
parts, corrections to the Z boson propagator (which have to
be resummed to all orders) and remaining weak corrections
which, with the proper choice of the calculation schemes,
were small.
In the case of LEP II this theoretical approach had to
be reconsidered, because of the new W
+W− pair produc-
tion processes. The gauge cancellation between diagrams
of electroweak bosons exchanged in s and t channels, had
to be carefully respected. The resummation of the domi-
nant contribution of the vacuum polarization had to be re-
stricted to the case of the constant width. It was not neces-
sary however to reopen discussion on details of scheme for
ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung calculations because of the rela-
tively small available statistics of W -pair samples [ 17, 18]
and thus limited interest in high precision calculations for
the QED bremsstrahlung.
1
It is important to stress that the QED ﬁnal-state effects
in processes where leptons are produced through decays of
W or Z/γ
∗ can be calculated and simulated with an essen-
tially arbitrary high precision. They form a separate class
of Feynman diagrams and already developed techniques
should be explored at LHC, especially as the attractiveness
of such an approach was conﬁrmed [ 21] in the context of
W mass measurement of CDF and D0 collaborations. With
the ever increasing precision, effects beyond photonic ﬁnal-
state bremsstrahlung have to be of course considered as part
of FSR effects as well, in particular those due to emission of
extra lepton pairs. Also interference effects, such as initial-
ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung interference, has to be taken into
account.
The interference becomes an issue for separating QED
FSR from the rest of the electroweak corrections, at the
level of cross section. That is why, the interference of pho-
ton emission from the initial state quarks and the ﬁnal-state
1Consequences of resummation of parts of the electroweak effects are
complex but will not be covered in this paper. Let us point to another
theoretical constraint restricting naive resummation. It could be ob-
served that even in the case of initial state QED bremsstrahlung for the
process e
+e− → νe ¯νe, previously performed step of resummation had
to be partially revisited, because of amplitude featuring t-channel W
exchange [19]. For the complete second order matrix element of the
two hard photon emission the diagrams of charged pseudo-Goldstone
boson exchange had to be taken into account [20].
lepton has to be discussed carefully. It is of practical im-
portance to verify if the suppression of the interference due
to boson’s lifetime survives experimental cuts. If it is the
case, then separation of effects due to the QED ﬁnal-state
bremsstrahlung and remaining parts of the electroweak and
strong interaction corrections can be conveniently explored
in the experimental studies.
For this paper we assume, that in practical applications,
all other corrections than QED ﬁnal-state interactions, that
is remaining electroweak, and initial state hadronic inter-
actions are expected to be measured with the properly de-
ﬁned observables. Thanks to this approach we will be able to
achieve very competitive precision of theoretical predictions
on the class of corrections directly affecting lepton momenta
measurements. This represents a complementary approach
to the one used in [22]. There, emphasis was put on the use
of electroweak calculations together with all hadronic ini-
tial state interactions necessary for complete predictions for
observables.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we de-
scribe two programsPHOTOS andSANC, and their theoreti-
cal base. Section 3 is devoted to tests of the ﬁrst order QED
calculations. This is of importance in itself but also represent
consistency checks of deﬁnitions of this part of electroweak
corrections which will be considered at the amplitude level
as QED ﬁnal-state radiation. Deﬁnition of observables and
calculation schemes used all over the paper are also given
in this section. Section 4 is devoted to discussion of results
for multiphoton emission and theoretical uncertainties inφ
∗
η
measurements. Section 5 is devoted to discussion for other
than photonic bremsstrahlung effects which contribute to the
theoretical error of QED FSR simulated using PHOTOS or
SANC. In particular, comments on emissions of pairs and in-
terferences between photon emission from the ﬁnal state and
other sources are given here. Section6, Summary, closes the
paper.
Our discussion of theoretical error is limited to system-
atic error of QED FSR only, but it is performed in the
context of full event generation. Other effects, like orien-
tation of spin state for the intermediate W or Z bosons,
affecting input for calculation of QED FSR spin ampli-
tudes are addressed in Sect. 5.3. Precision tag for the QED
FSR calculation implemented inPHOTOS orSANC is ﬁnally
given for a broad class of observables: ﬁrst for the photonic
bremsstrahlung and then for complete FSR corrections.
2
In our work we concentrate on the applications for LHC
experiments of techniques, calculations and programs devel-
oped earlier: PHOTOS [23–29], SANC [30–39] and KKMC
2In this paper we use the name photonic bremsstrahlung whenever we
want to stress that only diagrams resulting from supplementing Born
level amplitudes with photon lines are considered. The nameﬁnal-state
radiation is used when we stress presence of additional pairs andﬁnal-
state interaction when we want to discuss separation with remaining
parts of electroweak interactions.


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 3 of 18
[14, 15] including systematic error estimation for these new
applications. Substantial and well known effort documented
in these references and which form theoretical basis of our
present work, will not be recalled. This would require sub-
stantial increase of our paper size with the repetition of
published material. Our naming conventions originate from
those papers as well. Aim of our present work is establish-
ing physics precision of the new results of importance for
LHC applications. Whenever necessary, (essentially for val-
idating compatibility of our calculation schemes), we will
address issues of technical correctness as well.
2 Description of the programs
Usually when discussing phenomenological processes at
LHC in the context of the detector response one concentrates
on description of the hard process and initial state QCD ef-
fects embedded e.g. in general purpose Monte Carlo gener-
ators featuring parton shower, models of underlying events,
and ﬁnally QCD NLO or NNLO corrections to the hard scat-
tering process itself are taken into account, see e.g. [ 40]f o r
ar e v i e w .
In this paper we concentrate on the QED FSR effects.
This determines the choice of programs which will be used
by us for simulations. The ﬁnal-state interactions consist of
QED bremsstrahlung in decays of electroweak bosons (in-
cluding cases of substantial virtualities) and to some degree
on the other parts of weak corrections as well. Let us re-
call the massive effort of years 1980–2000 for establishing
deﬁnition of calculation scheme at LEP [ 41–43] where the-
oretically sophisticated and numerically essential separation
from electroweak corrections of the initial-state, ﬁnal-state,
vacuum polarization (including deﬁnition of the width) and
interferences was established.
In this context discussion of theoretical errors of all parts
being necessary for predictions is important, since it is not
straightforward to disentangle effects of new physics and
their genuine weak backgrounds. This represents however
further separate work on weak corrections. In the present
paper we concentrate on ﬁnal-state radiation, especially on
the ﬁnal-state photonic one.
For the purpose of these studies, two programs featur-
ing QED ﬁnal-state radiation for LHC applications will be
ﬁrst described and later used. We will start with presen-
tation of the SANC system [ 30], because it features com-
plete electroweak corrections as well. Description of PHO-
TOS [23–25, 29] implementing the QED ﬁnal-state photonic
bremsstrahlung only, will follow.
It might be useful to note that abbreviations LO and
NLO in SANC and PHOTOS have somewhat different
meaning. In the case of SANC, “LO” (the Leading Or-
der) means just the tree-level Born cross section, while an
exclusive-exponentiation-like notation is adopted in PHO-
TOS, where “LO” supposes exponentiation/resummation of
the terms responsible for leading logarithmic terms of pho-
tonic bremsstrahlung. Full coverage of multiphoton phase-
space is assured. The same concerns “NLO”: in SANC it
means the one-loop approximation (Born plus O(α) EW
corrections), while in PHOTOS exponentiation of the O(α)
result is assumed.
2.1 SANC
SANC is a computer system for Support of Analytic and
Numeric calculations for experiments at Colliders [ 30]. It
can be accessed through the Internet at http://sanc.jinr.ru/
and at http://pcphsanc.cern.ch/.T h eSANC system is suited
for calculations of one-loop QED, EW, and QCD radiative
corrections (RC) to various Standard Model processes. Au-
tomatized analytic calculations inSANC provide FORM and
FORTRAN modules [ 35], which can be used as building
blocks in computer codes for particular applications.
For Drell–Yan-like processes within the
SANC project
there are implemented:
– complete one-loop EW RC in the charged current [ 31]
and neutral current [32] processes;
– photon induced Drell–Yan processes [ 33];
– higher order photonic FSR in the collinear leading loga-
rithmic approximation;
– higher order photonic and pair FSR in the QED leading
logarithmic approximation [38, 44, 45];
– complete next-to-leading QCD corrections [ 34, 36];
– Monte Carlo integrators [ 37] and event generators;
– interface to parton showers in PYTHIA and HERWIG
based on the standard Les Houches Accord format.
Tuned comparisons with results of HORACE [46] and
Z(W)GRADE [47] for EW RC to charged current (CC) and
neutral current (NC) Drell–Yan (DY) were performed within
the scope of Les Houches ’05 [48], ’07 [49] and TEV4LHC
’06 [ 50] workshops. A good agreement achieved in these
comparisons conﬁrms correctness of the implementation of
the complete one-loop EW corrections in all these programs.
An important feature of the SANC approach is the pos-
sibility to control and directly access different contributions
to the observables being under consideration. In particular,
SANC code allows to separate effects due to the ﬁnal-state
radiation, the interference of initial and ﬁnal radiation, the
so called pure weak contributions, etc.
Separation of the FSR contribution in the case of neutral
current DY processes is straightforward, it naturally appears
at the level of Feynman diagrams. But the corresponding
separation in the case of the charged current DY processes
is not so trivial. In general it is even not gauge invariant.


--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
For the sake of tuned comparison with PHOTOS, a special
prescription for this separation3 was introduced intoSANC.
Let us consider a formal separation of the pure weak
(PW) and QED contributions δPW and δQED to the total
W+ → u + ¯d decay width
Γ PW+QED
W = Γ LO(
δPW + δQED)
. (1)
This process at the O (α) is described by 6 QED-like dia-
grams with virtual photon line and 3 other ones with real
photon emission which together lead to the formula
δ
QED = α
π
[
Q2
W
( 11
6 − π2
3
)
+
(
Q2
u + Q2
d
)( 11
8 − 3
4 log M2
W
μ2
PW
)]
,
where parameter μPW is the ’t Hooft scale introduced
for separation of QED and PW contributions. In order to
separate the FSR QED contribution, we choose μPW =
MW exp(− 11
12). This value of the ’t Hooft scale makes the
total QED contribution to the W boson decay being equal
to zero. This is in agreement with the corresponding treat-
ment in PHOTOS, where by construction the effect of FSR
to a process does not change the normalization of the cross
section.
2.2 PHOTOS
Already in the era of data analysis of LEP experiments sim-
ulation of bremsstrahlung in decays of resonances and par-
ticles required specialized tools. In parallel, two programs
oriented toward highest possible overall precision for the
whole processes in e
+e− collisions such as KKMC [14]o r
KORALZ [51], programs dealing with decays only, gradually
became of a broad use. The PHOTOS Monte Carlo was one
of such applications [ 23, 24]. Naturally comparisons with
these high-precision generators became parts of test-beds for
PHOTOS package.
The principle of PHOTOS algorithm is to replace, on the
basis of well deﬁned rules, the decay vertex embedded in the
event record such asHEPEVT [52] or HepMC [53] with the
new one, where additional photons are added. Such solution,
initially not aimed for high precision simulations, turned out
to be very effective and precise as well. Phase space pa-
rameterization was carefully documented in [26]. Gradually
for selected decays [26–28, 54], also exact matrix elements
were implemented and could be activated in place of uni-
versal kernels.
4 Originally [ 23], only single photon radia-
tion was possible and approximations in the universal kernel
3This prescription should be respected also in electroweak, non-QED
FSR calculations used together withPHOTOS in practical applications.
4Prior to introduction of theC++ interface matrix element kernels were
available for our test only. They require more detailed information from
were present even in the soft photon region. With time, mul-
tiphoton radiation was introduced [25] and then installation
of exact ﬁrst order matrix elements in W and Z decays be-
came available with C++ implementation of PHOTOS [29].
The algorithm ofPHOTOS is constructed in such a way, that
the same function, but with different input kinematical vari-
ables, is used if the single photon emission or full multi-
photon emission is requested. Such an arrangement enables
tests in a rigorous ﬁrst order emission environment. For mul-
tiphoton emission, the same kernel is used iteratively, thanks
to the factorization properties. Technical checks are thus
spared. Optimal solution for the iteration was chosen and
veriﬁed with alternative calculations [ 55, 56] based on the
second order matrix element. It was later extended to the
multiphoton case for Z decays in Ref. [27]. Numerical tests
of that paper, for distributions of generic kinematical observ-
ables pointed to the theoretical precision for the simulation
of photon bremsstrahlung of the 0.1 % level.
When presenting numerical results fromPHOTOS we al-
ways refer to its C++ version [29] with matrix elements for
W and Z decays switched on. If the LO level is explicitly
mentioned, matrix elements are replaced by universal ker-
nels and algorithm as of FORTRAN version 2.14 [ 25], or
higher is used. At present, version [29] represents the up-to-
date version of PHOTOS; it is available, with few technical
updates, from LCG library [57] as well.
3 Deﬁnitions and results of the ﬁrst order calculations
As a ﬁrst step of our tests we have compared numerical re-
sults obtained from PHOTOS and from SANC programs in
case of the single photon emission. These tests cross-check
conventions used and numerical stability of the two calcu-
lations. They also verify the proper choice of parameters in
PYTHIA8 generator, which is used to produce electroweak
Born level events, on which PHOTOS is activated. We have
monitored distributions for the following observables: pseu-
dorapidity η of ℓ
− , transverse mass MT of ℓ− ¯νℓ pair, and
transverse momentum pT of ℓ− in the case of charged cur-
rent; and pseudorapidity ηof ℓ− , invariant massM of ℓ+ℓ−
pair, and transverse momentumpT of ℓ− in the case of neu-
tral current.
The following set of input parameters was used:
Gμ = 1.6637 × 10−5 GeV−2,
MW = 80.403 GeV,Γ W = 2.091 GeV,
MZ = 91.1876 GeV,Γ Z = 2.4952 GeV, (2)
Vud = 0.9738,V us = 0.2272,
the event record which was available fromPHOTOS interface inFOR-
TRAN.


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 5 of 18
Vcd = 0.2271,V cs = 0.9730,
me = 0.511 MeV,m μ = 0.10566 GeV,
and the following experiment motivated cuts were applied
on momenta of the ﬁnal-state leptons:
NC:
⏐⏐η
(
ℓ+)⏐⏐ < 10,
⏐⏐η
(
ℓ− )⏐⏐ < 10,
p⊥
(
ℓ+)
> 15 GeV,p ⊥
(
ℓ− )
> 15 GeV,
70 <M
(
ℓ+ℓ− )
< 110 GeV; (3)
CC:
⏐⏐η
(
ℓ− )⏐⏐ < 10,p ⊥
(
ℓ− )
> 0.1G e V,
p⊥ (¯νℓ)> 0.1G e V.
We work in the running width scheme for W and Z bo-
son propagators and ﬁx value of the weak mixing angle:
Fig. 1 Ratios for Born-level distributions in W → eν decay
cosθW = MW /MZ,s i n2 θW = 1− cos2 θW . The value of the
electromagnetic coupling α is evaluated in the Gμ-scheme
using the Fermi constant Gμ: the effective coupling is de-
ﬁned by αGμ =
√
2GμM2
W sin2 θW /π.
To compute the hadronic cross section we have used
CTEQ6L1 set of parton distribution functions with running
factorization scale μ
2
r =ˆs, where ˆs is squared total energy
of the colliding partons in their center-of-mass system.
Comparison is performed for muon and electron ﬁnal
states. For the electron ﬁnal states and for each observable
the bare and calo results are provided. In the calo case the
four-momenta of the ﬁnal electron and photon are combined
into effective four-momentum of the electron when the sep-
Fig. 2 Ratios for Born-level distributions in Z → ee decay


--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
Fig. 3 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W → eν decay
aration
/Delta1R=
√
(/Delta1η(e,γ ))2 + (/Delta1φ(e,γ ))2 < 0.1.
To check that the normalization of Born cross sections
is properly adjusted between simulations using SANC and
PHOTOS, we have completed tests at a sub-permille preci-
sion level. The corresponding results for electrons and ratios
of differential cross sections are shown in Fig. 1 for CC and
in Fig. 2 for NC. Errorbars in this plot and in all that fol-
low represent the statistical ﬂuctuations of the correspond-
ing Monte Carlo integration.
For SANC and PYTHIA+PHOTOS cases, the results
for O(α) corrections which are deﬁned by δ= (σ
O(α) −
σBorn)/σBorn are presented on Figs.3–8. As we can see from
these ﬁgures agreement at the one-loop level was found to
Fig. 4 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W → μν decay
be excellent, at the level of 0.01 % for bothZ and W decays,
once biases due to the technical parameter separating hard
and soft photon emission were properly tuned between the
two calculations.
3.1 Dependence on technical parameters
While performing tests we had to address well known tech-
nical problem of the so called “ k
0 bias”. In case of ﬁxed
order correction implemented into Monte Carlo algorithm, a
threshold on energy for emitted photon, typically in the rest-
frame of the decaying particle, has to be introduced. It regu-
larizes infrared singularity. Below this threshold photons are
simply integrated out and resulting contribution is summed
up with virtual corrections to cancel the infrared singular-
ity. Unfortunately k
0 → 0 limit can not be reached, unless


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 7 of 18
Fig. 5 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W → eν decay (calo electrons)
one accept working with negative event weights. The de-
pendence on the technical parameterk0 is however small for
inclusive quantities such as the total cross section. The effect
becomes enhanced on differential distributions near the res-
onance peaks. Such an effect can be observed in Fig. 9 for
invariant mass mμμ in Z → μμ(γ )decay. Generally this
dependence is nowadays of no interest, since in practical
application options of the programs with multiple photon
emission should be used. This example however may be in-
structive for studies of ambiguities in implementation like in
[58] where PHOTOS is used for soft photon emission only,
while the hard photon phase space is populated with the help
of genuinePOWHEG simulation for the ﬁnal and initial state
emissions simultaneously.
Fig. 6 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in Z → ee decay
4 Multiple photon emissions
Let us now turn to the same observables, but calculated with
the multiple photon emission option ofSANC andPHOTOS,
suitable for the actual comparisons with the data. One can
see from Figs. 10, 11, 12 and 13, that agreement is a bit
worse than for the single photon case, but well within the
expected theoretical precision. The relative contribution of
higher order corrections is deﬁned as δ= (σ
O(α2+higher) −
σO(α))/σBorn, so that it can be directly summed with the
ﬁrst order effect considered in the previous section. One
should stress that these results represent quantitative com-
parisons of different approximations used in the SANC and
PHOTOS as well. In fact, the approximations used, con-
trary to the single photon case, are not identical. Results of


--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
Fig. 7 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in Z → μμ decay
PHOTOS represent the NLO calculations with exponentia-
tion and resummation of the collinear terms of the ﬁrst or-
der photon emission matrix element. Results of SANC use
the collinear leading logarithmic approximation which in-
troduces by construction numerical dependence on the cor-
responding QED factorization scale μ
2. Differences due to
non-optimal choice of the scale μ2 inSANC are below sev-
eral permille for differential distributions and below 0.1 %
otherwise, see Figs. 10, 11, 12 and 13. Additional effort and
care in estimation of the size of seemingly minor effects may
be required, if further improvements on theoretical preci-
sion, beyond 0.1 % are needed.
One should keep in mind that in precision measurements
of LHC experiments unfolding procedure is applied (see e.g.
Table 1 and discussion in Sect. 7 of Ref. [ 65]) to obtain the
so called dressed leptons (charged leptons and accompany-
Fig. 8 O(α) corrections for basic kinematical distributions from
PYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in Z → ee decay (calo electrons)
ing them collinear photons are recombined into a single ef-
fective lepton). In this way the conditions of the Kinoshita–
Lee–Nauenberg theorem [59, 60] are fulﬁlled and the large
corrections proportional to logarithms of the lepton mass
cancel out. Numerically this effect can be seen from a com-
parison of Figs. 6 and 8 for the ﬁrst order RC. Such a reduc-
tion happens with the higher order photonic corrections as
well.
4.1 Comparisons of PHOTOS withKKMC
In Ref. [ 27] we have demonstrated physics reasons behind
very good, 0.1 % level, agreement between PHOTOS and
KKMC results for ﬁnal-state photonic bremsstrahlung. Still
until now, only in case of Z/γ
∗ intermediate state rigorous
tests with second order QED matrix element Monte Carlo


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 9 of 18
Fig. 9 Ratio of invariant mass
distributions fromSANC and
PHOTOS in Z decay as function
of k0 = ϵ = 2Eγ,min/√ s
are available, and only in restricted condition of no hadronic
activities in the initial state. For the reference simulations
of q ¯q → Z/γ
∗ → l+l− (nγ )processes KKMC Monte Carlo
[14] was used. 5 A l s ot h eB o r nl e v e lq ¯q → Z/γ∗ → l+l−
events fromKKMC were used for simulations withPHOTOS.
For both cases the monochromatic series of events with ﬁxed
virtuality of intermediate Z/γ
∗ state have been generated.
This provides source of particularly valuable benchmarks as
KKMC is the only program which features exclusive expo-
nentiation combined with spin amplitudes for double pho-
ton emissions. As the numerical results of such quite exten-
sive tests, more than 1000 ﬁgures are collected on our web
page [62]: plots for Z → μ
+μ− (nγ )and Z → e+e− (nγ )
are presented there.
For all plots of collection [ 62], before selection cuts are
applied, events are boosted to the laboratory frame assum-
ing ﬁxed 4-vector of Z deﬁned by its p
Z
T and ηZ;t h et w o
dimensional grid in (pZ
T ,ηZ) is constructed, with 7 bins in
pZ
T spanning region 0–50 GeV and 4 bins in ηZ spanning
from 0–2, for each point in the grid 40M events are sim-
ulated. Kinematical selection is applied on lepton and pho-
ton 4-momenta and kinematical distributions are constructed
from accepted events. It is required that each lepton has
p
l
T > 20 GeV and |η±| < 2.47, with the gap 1.37 < |η±| <
1.52 excluded. The gap in η± corresponds to transition re-
gion between central and end-cap calorimeter in ATLAS
detector, and is used here to somewhat arbitrary enhance
possible effect of exclusive selection. Then, straightforward
comparison between electron and muon cases is available;
the only difference originating from leptons’ masses. For
photon |η
γ| < 2.37 and region 1 .37 < |ηγ| < 1.52 is ex-
cluded again, pγ
T > 15 GeV is required. In example shown
in Fig. 14, angle between photon and a closer lepton is
5This program, at present can not be used with simulation of the whole
processes at LHC. An effort in this direction should be mentioned, see
Ref. [61] but the corresponding results are not available for us at this
moment.
shown for pZ
T = 9 GeV and ηZ = 2. Results from KKMC
and PHOTOS NLO are compared. In both cases multipho-
ton emission is generated in Z/γ∗ rest frame for u¯u →
Z/γ∗ → μ+μ− (nγ ) production process, with no initial
state activity of any sort and virtuality of intermediate state
MZ + 6G e V = 97.187 GeV , where MZ is the Z-boson
mass.
For each choice of pZ
T and ηZ used to deﬁne Z/γ∗ state
4-momentum a set of three observables: angle between pho-
ton and closer lepton, directions of leptons and an overall
acceptance rate is monitored in [ 62]. A general agreement
of 0.1 % can be concluded for all distributions. The results
for LO restrictedPHOTOS are collected there as well.
For all cases one has to bear in mind that overall normal-
ization correction factors for cross section, like (1 + 3
4
α
π ) in
the case of Z decay, have to be included when using PHO-
TOS package.
4.2 The φ∗
η observable
Motivated by [63, 64] and by recent ATLAS publication [65]
on precise observable φ∗
η, representing important improve-
ment for the measurement ofZ boson transverse momentum
(pZ
T ) at LHC, we have decided to devote section of this pa-
per to discussion on the respective QED FSR corrections.
The measurement of the Z boson transverse momentum
(pZ
T or φ∗
η) offers a very sensitive way for studying dynam-
ical effects of the strong interaction, complementary to the
measurements of the associated production of bosons with
jets. The knowledge of the pZ
T distribution is crucial also to
improve the modeling of theW boson production needed for
a precise measurement of theW mass [6], in particular in the
low pZ
T region which dominates the cross section. The study
of the low pZ
T spectrum (pZ
T <M Z), has also an important
implication for the understanding of the Higgs signatures [1]
as well as for the New Physics searches at the LHC [66].
The precision of the direct measurement of the spectrum
at low pZ
T at the LHC and at the Tevatron using the Z lep-


--- Page 10 ---
Page 10 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
Fig. 10 Higher order corrections for basic kinematical distributions
fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W → eν decay
tonic decay is limited by systematic uncertainties related to
the knowledge and unfolding of the experiments resolution,
in particular lepton energy scale [67, 68].
In recent years, additional observables with better experi-
mental resolution and less sensitive to experimental system-
atic uncertainties have been investigated [69–72]. The opti-
mal experimental observable to probe the low pZ
T domain
of Z/γ∗ production at hadron colliders was found to be φ∗
η
which is deﬁned as
φ∗
η = tan(φacop/2) · sin
(
Θ ∗
η
)
, (4)
where φacop is an azimuthal opening angle between the two
leptons and the angle Θ ∗
η is the scattering angle of the lep-
tons with respect to the proton beam direction in the rest
Fig. 11 Higher order corrections for basic kinematical distributions
fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W → μν decay
frame of the dilepton system. The Θ ∗
η angle is deﬁned as
cos
(
Θ ∗
η
)
= tanh
( η− − η+
2
)
, (5)
where η− and η+ are the pseudorapiditities of the negatively
and positively charged lepton, respectively. The variableφ∗
η
is correlated to the quantity pZ
T /mll , where mll is the in-
variant mass of the lepton pair. It therefore probes the same
physics as the transverse momentumpZ
T and can be approxi-
mately related to it bypZ
T ≃ MZ ·φ∗
η. From the experimental
point of view the variable φ∗
η relies entirely on the angle re-
construction of the leptons in pair production, therefore on
the tracking devices of high precision.
We have studied the theoretical error on φ∗
η distributions
due to photonic bremsstrahlung effects. As in Sect.4.1 com-


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 11 of 18
Fig. 12 Higher order corrections for basic kinematical distributions
fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in Z → ee decay
parison of results from PHOTOS and KKMC generators was
performed and stored on web page [ 62]. Let us list the ap-
propriate cuts and give sample results.
We have requested that for both leptons pl
T > 20 GeV
and |η±| < 2.4. Distributions of dN(Z → l+l− )
dφ∗η
from KKMC
and PHOTOS were monitored. As before, the monochro-
matic samples of q ¯q → Z/γ∗ → l+l− (nγ )were generated
for two virtualities: MZ + 6 GeV (97.187 GeV) andMZ − 4
GeV (87.187 GeV), for incoming up and down quarks. Gen-
erated events were boosted to the laboratory frame assuming
ﬁxed p
Z
T and ηZ of intermediate Z/γ∗ state. Again the grid
of 7 bins in pZ
T spanning region 0–50 GeV and 4 bins in ηZ
spanning from 0–2 was used.
In Fig. 15 an example for one point of (pZ
T ,ηZ) grid is
chosen and the φ∗
η distribution is shown. An agreement sig-
Fig. 13 Higher order corrections for basic kinematical distribu-
tions fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in Z → μμ decay
niﬁcantly better than 0.1 % between KKMC andPHOTOS is
observed. For other choices of ﬂavor of incoming quarks,
Z/γ
∗ momentum and virtuality agreement is equally good
[62].
4.3 Case of universal kernel
So far, in all numerical resultsPHOTOS with ﬁrst order ma-
trix elements as available in C++ version were used both
in Z and W decays. If only the universal kernel was used,
as available in public FORTRAN PHOTOS v e r s i o n2 . 1 4o r
higher, the loss of precision would be noticeable, but the
uncertainty calculated with respect to the total rate would
remain at 0.2 % level, for photonic bremsstrahlung correc-
tions to the shapes of distributions [62]. As in the NLO case,
overall normalization factor has to be corrected separately.


--- Page 12 ---
Page 12 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
Fig. 14 The distribution of the angle in the laboratory frame between
photon and the closer muon, as generated from KKMC (thick line)a n d
PHOTOS (thin line); selection cuts are applied, see the text. The inter-
mediate state of virtuality MZ + 6G e V= 97.187 GeV with the trans-
verse momentum pT = 9 GeV and pseudorapidity η= 2 was created
in the u¯u annihilation. The samples of 40M events were simulated.
Rates of events with photon passing selection cuts deﬁned in the text,
differ for the two programs by a factor 0.9991. Relatively large (0.1 %)
difference to unity is typical for the larger values of pseudorapidity.
For LO results (see web page [ 62] for extended results) the ratio for
the surfaces, is of the same order, for electrons it is closer to 1. The
distribution would feature plateau if the angle and cuts were calculated
in the rest frame of Z/γ∗ state
Fig. 15 The distribution of the φ∗
η in Z/γ∗ → μ+μ− (nγ )as gener-
ated fromKKMC andPHOTOS; selection cuts are applied, see the text.
The intermediate state of virtuality 97.187 GeV with the transverse mo-
mentum pT = 9 GeV and pseudorapidity η= 2 decaying into muon
pair was created in the u¯u annihilation. The samples of 40M events
were used, ratio of the surfaces under distributions is 0.9991. Rela-
tively large (0.1 %) difference to unity is typical for the larger value of
pseudorapidity. For LO results (see web page [62] for extended results)
the ratio for the surfaces, is of the same order. For electrons, both in LO
and NLO cases, this ratio is closer to 1
5 Non-photonic ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung
In this section we concentrate on those effects which go be-
yond multiple photon emissions. They can be divided into
three groups. Emission of additional pairs, the effect which
certainly belongs to ﬁnal-state emissions, effect of interfer-
ence of initial-ﬁnal-state QED effects and ﬁnally all effects
which are not directly related to ﬁnal-state radiation, but
nonetheless may affect their matrix element calculations.
5.1 Emission of pairs
Emission of light fermion pairs should be included starting
from the second order of QED, i.e. from the O(α
2) cor-
rections. There are two classes of diagrams which need to
be taken into account. Emission of real pairs (Fig. 16) and
the corresponding correction to the vertex (Fig. 17). These
two effects cancel each other to a large degree due to the
Kinoshita–Lee–Nauenberg theorem. The generic size of the
effect can be expected to be of the order of higher order pho-
tonic bremsstrahlung corrections discussed so far. Moreover,
it is well known from direct calculations in particular cases
that the pair corrections are typically several times smaller
than the photonic bremsstrahlung ones in the same order in
α. Let us recall that careful studies of pair radiation effects
were performed at LEP times [39, 73].
In the context of this paper we will estimate theoretical
uncertainty due to neglecting of pair effects in the Drell–Yan
observables.
The SANC integrators allow to perform a quick calcu-
lation of the pair corrections within the leading logarith-
mic approximation. We apply here the formalism of elec-
tron structure (fragmentation) functions [ 38, 44, 45] which
describe radiation in the approximation of collinear kine-
matics.
The leading logarithmic approximation (LLA) was ap-
plied to take into account the corrections of the orders
O(α
nLn), n = 2, 3. Let us remind that in the ﬁrst order
O(α) SANC has the complete calculation. The large log-
arithm L = ln(μ2/m2
l ) depends on the lepton mass ml and
on the factorization scale μ. The latter is taken to be equal
to the c.m.s. incoming parton energy (other choices are also
possible).
The pure photonic contribution to the non-singlet elec-
tron fragmentation function in the collinear leading logarith-
mic approximation reads:
Dγ
ee(y,L) = δ(1 − y) + α
2π(L − 1)P(1)(y)
+ 1
2
( α
2π(L − 1)
) 2
P(2)(y)
+ 1
6
( α
2π(L − 1)
) 3
P(3)(y) +O
(
α4L4)
. (6)
Analytic expressions for the relevant higher order splitting
functions can be found in Refs. [38, 45].
For numerical evaluations of the splitting functions regu-
larized by the plus prescription, we applied the phase space


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 13 of 18
Fig. 16 A typical example of
real pair correction
Fig. 17 A typical example of virtual pair correction
slicing as follows:
P(1)(y) =
[ 1 + y2
1 − y
]
+
= lim
/Delta1→ 0
{
δ(1 − y)
(
2l n/Delta1+ 3
2
)
+ Θ( 1 − y − /Delta1)1 + y2
1 − y
}
, (7)
where an auxiliary small parameter /Delta1is introduced. In ac-
tual computations we used /Delta1= 10−4 and veriﬁed the inde-
pendence of the numerical results from the variations of this
parameter, deﬁnition of P
i(y), i> 1i sg i v e ni nR e f s .[38,
45].
The effect due to emission of real and virtual electron-
positron pairs can be estimated using the non-singlet and
singlet pair contributions to the LLA electron fragmentation
functions:
D
pair
ee (y,L) =
( α
2π(L − 1)
) 2[ 1
3P(1)(y) + 1
2Rs(y)
]
+
( α
2π(L − 1)
) 3
×
[ 1
3P(2)(y) + 4
27P(1)(y)
+ 1
3Rs ⊗ P(1)(y) − 1
9Rs(y)
]
+O
(
α4L4)
.
(8)
Expressions for the relevant singlet splitting functionsRs
and Rs ⊗ P(1) can be found in Ref. [45].
The differential cross section of the neutral current Drell–
Yan process with FSR leading logarithmic corrections takes
the factorized form
d5σFSR
LLA
(
p + p → X + l+(
y1p+)
+ l− (
y2p− ))
= d3σBorn(
p + p → X + l+(
p+)
+ l− (
p− ))
× dy1
(
Dγ(y1,L) +Dpair(y1,L)
)
× dy2
(
Dγ(y2,L) +Dpair(y2,L)
)
. (9)
For consistency we expand the product of the fragmenta-
tion functions in α and take in only terms of the order
O(α2L2) and O(α3L3). Terms coming from the product of
the photonic and pair parts of the fragmentation functions
are treated as a part of pair corrections.
Numerical results for the contribution of pair corrections
are presented in Figs. 18, 19,f o rW → lν decays.
If further improvement in precision would be required,
pair emission can be implemented e.g. into C++ PHOTOS
generator [29].
We assume that in the experimental analysis, there is no
speciﬁc implicit cut rejecting Z → l
+l− f ¯f events. Our cut
on pl
T may reject some Z → l+l− f ¯f events, since with the
real f ¯f pair emission, leptons l will have a somewhat softer
energy spectrum. But this require relatively high energy to
be carried out by the f ¯f pair, the dominant triple logarith-
mic term will thus cancel between contributions from dia-
grams of Figs. 16 and 17. Let us stress that special care is
needed in case of selection cuts sensitive to the soft, small
virtuality and collinear to primary lepton pairs. Only this re-
gion of phase space may contribute signiﬁcantly to pair cor-
rections. Cuts affecting additional leptons of larger energies
are thus of no concern.
The direction of the leptons originating from Z decays
(and therefore our φ
∗
η observable) may be affected by partial
reconstruction of two leptons (or two hadronized quarks) of
the extra pair. Resulting phenomena may be important only
if the pair f ¯f is not collinear to any of the primary leptons
l. Again this represents a non dominant effect, thus substan-
tially below required precision goal of a permille level.
Summarizing, details of pair corrections are still not im-
portant for precision tag at the level of 0.1–0.2 %.
5.2 Initial-ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung interference
The effect of QED-type interference between spin ampli-
tudes for emission from the initial and ﬁnal states repre-


--- Page 14 ---
Page 14 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
Fig. 18 Higher order photonic and pair corrections (δin %) for basic
distributions fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W− → μ− ¯νdecay
sents important, even if numerically small, class of cor-
rections. Even if separation of the initial and ﬁnal-state
bremsstrahlung at the spin amplitude level is clear, large in-
terference effects may make this separation of limited prac-
tical convenience. However in certain approaches interfer-
ences can be combined with QED ﬁnal-state effects in a con-
venient way.
Before we will present numerical results, let us recall ﬁrst
some details of the discussion from LEP times, see Ref.
[73]. The discussion was devoted to energies higher than
resonance peak, that is why interference cancellations as ex-
plained e.g. in [ 74, 75] did not apply. In the case of LHC
observables discussed in this paper, oriented on production
of W and Z resonances, such suppression is nonetheless ex-
pected. The reason is of a physical origin; time separation
between boson production and decay. However, as a conse-
Fig. 19 Higher order photonic and pair corrections (δin %) for basic
distributions fromPYTHIA+PHOTOS andSANC in W− → e− ¯νdecay
quence of the uncertainty principle this suppression can be
broken with strong event selection cuts if these cuts would
constrain the ﬁnal-state energies.
In the studies of Drell–Yan processes at LHC one can re-
strict discussion of the interference to the ﬁrst order only.
On the technical level control of the QEDO(α) interference
contribution is realized in the SANC Monte Carlo integra-
tor rather simply. The corresponding effect is computed by
switching a respective ﬂag in the code.
For the W decays similar arguments related to intermedi-
ate state life-time apply. In this case however, size of cor-
rections is calculation scheme dependent, i.e. depends on
the way how diagrams of photon emission off W line are
treated. Studies with SANC demonstrated that the interfer-
ence is below 0.1 % for LHC applications. They were com-
pleted not only for W but for Z as well, see e.g. [76].


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 15 of 18
Fig. 20 IFI/FSR ratio in Z decay for φ∗ distribution. For φ∗
η > 0.2
interference effects become sizable
Let us show in Fig. 20, as an example, corrections from
interference to the φ∗
η observable discussed previously. The
effect is small, below 0.1 % forφ∗
η < 0.15 and rises to 0.5 %
for φ∗
η ≃ 0.3. After combining the interference and FSR cor-
rections with QCD parton showers (for this purpose we used
SANC Monte Carlo generator interfaced to Pythia8 pro-
gram) the effect becomes signiﬁcantly smaller (see Fig.21).
This is due to the fact that parton showers strongly affect the
distribution of φ
∗
η variable, increasing the population of bins
with φ∗
η > 0.004 by a few orders of magnitude.
Recent measurement from ATLAS collaboration [65]o f
φ∗
η observable extends to 1.3 but with large so far, statistical
errors in range φ∗
η > 0.2. If precision requirements would
become more demanding, the effect should be included to-
gether with the FSR corrections. At present, size of the in-
terference effect can be used to estimate the size of the cor-
responding theoretical uncertainty due to its omission.
We can conclude that the initial-ﬁnal-state interference
does not represent a problem for separating ﬁnal-state pho-
tonic bremsstrahlung from the remaining electroweak cor-
rections in processes of W and Z production at LHC. This
conclusion is justiﬁed for the precision of 0.1 %, but it will
have to be studied in more detail for more exclusive con-
ﬁgurations, like e.g. larger values of φ
∗
η distribution or for
observables deﬁned for off resonance peak regions of lepton
pair invariant masses.
Fig. 21 IFI/FSR ratio in Z decay for φ∗ distribution combined with
parton showers
5.3 Relations with other electroweak and hadronic
interactions
In calculation of ﬁnal-state radiation matrix element, depen-
dence on the direction of incoming quarks is present. How-
ever one can see from [ 27] that such effects due to e.g. ini-
tial state interactions, affect numerical results for ﬁnal-state
bremsstrahlung in a minor way, through the term which is in
itself at the permille level, thus well below present precision
requirement of 0.1 %.
For decays of narrow width states or when gauge sym-
metry can be used to separate phenomena from other parts
of the interactions, there are no major difﬁculties to iden-
tify QED effects at the spin amplitude level. In the general
case, QED FSR can be deﬁned and its systematic error can
be discussed as well. However, if e.g. contribution of dia-
grams featuring t-channel exchange of bosons complicate
the separation, discussion of systematic errors of other parts
of calculations may become scheme dependent. Our discus-
sion on QED FSR corrections only will nonetheless be still
useful for experimental applications.
6 Summary
We have addressed question of theoretical error for predic-
tions of QED ﬁnal-state bremsstrahlung in decays of W and
Z bosons, used in precision measurements at LHC and Teva-
tron experiments.
Tests and comparisons of PHOTOS versus SANC pro-
grams for ﬁnal-state photonic bremsstrahlung were per-
formed in realistic conditions. Hard processes and initial
state hadronic interactions were simulated with the help of
PYTHIA8 [77] Monte Carlo program, for results withPHO-
TOS.F o rSANC its own set-up was used. Related differences
in electroweak Born-level processes required careful tuning
until agreement was established.
We have started our discussion with technical tests and
results obtained at the ﬁrst order. Separation into QED FSR


--- Page 16 ---
Page 16 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
and remaining electroweak corrections have been studied
and veriﬁed at the spin amplitude level. We have checked
that in PHOTOS and SANC numerically compatible, down
to 0.01 % precision level, schemes of such separation were
deﬁned. This agreement conﬁrms proper installation of ma-
trix elements and numerical stability ofSANC andPHOTOS
as well. Then the comparison was repeated after allowing
multi-photon emission in both programs. An agreement nec-
essary to estimate systematic error in implementation of the
QED ﬁnal-state photonic bremsstrahlung for the precision
level of 0.1 % was found. This conclusion holds for the de-
cays of intermediate states, produced from annihilation of
light quarks, predominantly close to theW and Z resonance
peaks but with tails of the distributions taken into account.
The conclusion holds if NLO kernel is active in PHOTOS
and forSANC multiphoton option. ForPHOTOS with theLO
kernel theoretical precision is estimated to be 0.2 %. This
conclusion is limited to effects resulting from shapes of dis-
tributions and for the selection cuts discussed in the paper.
In principle, whenever new type of cuts is applied such com-
parison needs to be repeated. Effects on normalization have
to be taken into account independently, either as part of gen-
uine electroweak corrections (thanks to the proper choice
of μ
PW in W decays), or as an simple overall factor, like
(1 + 3
4
α
π ) in case of the Z decay.
We have estimated the size of the higher orders QED pho-
tonic bremsstrahlung corrections using other programs. The
KKMC [14, 15] Monte Carlo program of LEP era, featuring
exclusive exponentiation and second order matrix element
for ﬁnal-state photonic bremsstrahlung was used for refer-
ence results. With the help of this program monochromatic
intermediate Z/γ
∗ states of ﬁxed virtuality were produced
from annihilation of light quarks. This provided interesting
test while grid of predeﬁned values of (pT ,η) was popu-
lated, in particular forφ∗
η observable. The differences versus
NLO PHOTOS was found below 0.1 % (0.2 % forPHOTOS
kernel restricted toLO only).
Contributions due to interference of the initial and ﬁ-
nal state QED radiation were found to be below 0.1 %
for selected W and Z observables, as expected from the
physics arguments. Separation of the ﬁnal-state radiation
from the remaining electroweak effects is of a practical im-
portance as it facilitate phenomenological work. Our calcu-
lation schemes are convenient from that point of view. In-
terference effect was found to be below required precision
level.
We estimate precision level of photonic ﬁnal-state correc-
tions at 0.1 %. With such precision tag separation of QED
FSR from the rest of the process can be used for the sake
of detector studies on ﬁnal-state leptons. Such detector stud-
ies represent also a well deﬁned segment in comparison of
theoretical predictions with the measured data. One excep-
tion is φ
∗
η distribution in region of large φ∗
η > 0.15 if ini-
tial state parton shower is not taken into account. Already at
φ∗
η ≃ 0.3 interference reach 0.5 %. In this region of phase
space spin amplitudes for bremsstrahlung in the initial and
ﬁnal states become gradually of comparable size. Emission
of additional pairs was discussed as well and a size of effect
was estimated at 0.1 % level.
We estimate an overall systematic error for FSR imple-
mentation inPHOTOS andSANC at 0.2 % (0.3 % for PHO-
TOS with LO kernel). Further improvement of precision is
possible, but requires more detailed discussion. Details of
experimental acceptance have to be taken into account.
At a margin of the discussion we entered investigation
of dependence on scheme speciﬁc parameters such as elec-
tromagnetic factorization scale μ
2 or photon energy thresh-
old k0 = ϵ used in ﬁxed order simulations. This may be of
some interest for further studies of uncertainties resulting
from some choices of matching of FSR with hard process
and/or initial state interactions and/or hard emission matrix
elements.
Acknowledgements This project is ﬁnanced in part from funds of
Polish National Science Centre under decisions DEC-2011/03/B/ST2/
00220, DEC-2012/04/M/ ST2/00240 and by Russian Foundation for
Basic Research, grant No 10-02-01030-a. A.A. is grateful for a ﬁnan-
cial support to the Dynasty Foundation.
Part of this work devoted to observable of φ
∗
η angle has been in-
spired by the discussion with Lucia di Ciaccio Elzbieta Richter-Was
and other members of ATLAS LAPP-Annecy group, continuous en-
couragements and comments on intermediate steps of the work are ac-
knowledged. Work was performed in frame of IN2P3 collaboration be-
tween Krakow and Annecy. Useful discussion with Ashutosh Kotwal
on distributions of importance for benchmarking algorithm in context
of its reliability for the simulations of importance for CDF W mass
measurements is to be mentioned as well.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s)
and the source are credited.
References
1. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Observation of a new par-
ticle in the search for the Standard Model Higgs boson with
the ATLAS detector at the LHC. Phys. Lett. B 716, 1 (2012).
arXiv:1207.7214 [hep-ex]
2. S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS Collaboration), Observation of a new
boson at a mass of 125 GeV with the CMS experiment at the LHC.
Phys. Lett. B 716, 30 (2012). arXiv:1207.7235 [hep-ex]
3. N. Besson et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Measurement of the W
boson mass with early data (2009). ATL-COM-PHYS-2009-102
4. V .M. Abazov et al. (D0 Collaboration), Measurement of the W
boson mass with the D0 detector. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 151804
(2012). arXiv:1203.0293 [hep-ex]
5. T. Aaltonen et al. (CDF Collaboration), Measurement of the
W
+W− production cross section and search for anomalous WW
gamma and WWZ couplings in p p-bar collisions at √ s =
1.96-TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.104, 201801 (2010). arXiv:0912.4500
[hep-ex]
6. T. Aaltonen et al. (CDF Collaboration), Precise measurement of
the W -boson mass with the CDF II detector. Phys. Rev. Lett.108,
151803 (2012). arXiv:1203.0275 [hep-ex]


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625 Page 17 of 18
7. A. Kyriakis (CMS and ATLAS Collaboration), W & Z boson pro-
duction (LHC). PoS EPS HEP2009, 344 (2009)
8. S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS Collaboration), Measurement of
W+W− production and search for the Higgs boson in pp
collisions at √ s = 7 TeV . Phys. Lett. B 699, 25 (2011).
arXiv:1102.5429 [hep-ex]
9. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Electron performance
measurements with the ATLAS detector using the 2010 LHC
proton–proton collision data. Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 1909 (2012).
arXiv:1110.3174 [hep-ex]
10. S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS Collaboration), Performance of CMS
muon reconstruction in pp collision events at √ s = 7T e V .J .I n -
strum. 7, P10002 (2012). arXiv:1206.4071 [physics.ins-det]
11. S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS Collaboration), Measurement of the
Drell–Yan cross section in pp collisions at √ s = 7T e V .J .H i g h
Energy Phys. 1110, 007 (2011). arXiv:1108.0566 [hep-ex]
12. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), The ATLAS experiment at
the CERN large hadron collider. J. Instrum. 3, S08003 (2008)
13. D. Bardin, G. Passarino, The Standard Model in the Making: Pre-
cision Study of the Electroweak Interactions (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1999)
14. S. Jadach, B. Ward, Z. Was, The precision Monte Carlo event gen-
erator KK for two fermion ﬁnal states in e+e− collisions. Comput.
Phys. Commun. 130, 260 (2000). hep-ph/9912214
15. S. Jadach, B. Ward, Z. Was, Coherent exclusive exponentiation
for precision Monte Carlo calculations. Phys. Rev. D 63, 113009
(2001). hep-ph/0006359
16. M. Böhm, H. Spiesberger, W. Hollik, On the one loop renormal-
ization of the electroweak standard model and its application to
leptonic processes. Fortschr. Phys. 34, 687 (1986)
17. G. Altarelli, T. Sjostrand, F. Zwirner (eds.), Physics at LEP2:
vol. 1. CERN Yellow Report, CERN-96-01 (1996)
18. G. Altarelli, T. Sjostrand (eds.) Physics at LEP2: vol. 2. CERN
Yellow Report, CERN-96-01 (1996)
19. D. Bardin, S. Jadach, T. Riemann, Z. Was, Predictions for anti-
nu nu gamma production at LEP. Eur. Phys. J. C 24, 373 (2002).
hep-ph/0110371
20. Z. Was, Gauge invariance, infrared/collinear singularities and tree
level matrix element for e+e− → νe ¯νeγγ. Eur. Phys. J. C 44, 489
(2005). hep-ph/0406045
21. T.E.W. Group (CDF and D0 Collaborations), Update of the com-
bination of CDF and D0 results for the mass of the W boson.
arXiv:1204.0042 [hep-ex] (2012)
22. P. Richardson, R. Sadykov, A. Sapronov, M. Seymour, P. Skands,
QCD parton showers and NLO EW corrections to Drell–Yan.
J. High Energy Phys. 1206, 090 (2012). arXiv:1011.5444 [hep-
ph]
23. E. Barberio, B. van Eijk, Z. Was, PHOTOS: a universal Monte
Carlo for QED radiative corrections in decays. Comput. Phys.
Commun. 66, 115 (1991)
24. E. Barberio, Z. Was, PHOTOS: a universal Monte Carlo for QED
radiative corrections. Version 2.0. Comput. Phys. Commun. 79,
291 (1994)
25. P. Golonka, Z. Was, PHOTOS Monte Carlo: a precision tool for
QED corrections inZ and W decays. Eur. Phys. J. C45, 97 (2006).
hep-ph/0506026
26. G. Nanava, Z. Was, Scalar QED, NLO and PHOTOS Monte Carlo
E u r .P h y s .J .C51, 569 (2007). hep-ph/0607019
27. P. Golonka, Z. Was, Next to leading logarithms and the PHOTOS
Monte Carlo. Eur. Phys. J. C 50, 53 (2007). hep-ph/0604232
28. G. Nanava, Q. Xu, Z. Was, Matching NLO parton shower matrix
element with exact phase space: case of W → lν(γ) and γ∗ →
π+π− (γ ). Eur. Phys. J. C 70, 673 (2010). arXiv:0906.4052 [hep-
ph]
29. N. Davidson, T. Przedzinski, Z. Was, PHOTOS interface in C++:
technical and physics documentation. arXiv:1011.0937 [hep-ph]
30. A. Andonov, A. Arbuzov, D. Bardin, S. Bondarenko, P. Chris-
tova, L. Kalinovskaya, G. Nanava, W. von Schlippe, SANCscope
v. 1.00. Comput. Phys. Commun.174, 481 (2006). Erratum: Com-
put. Phys. Commun. 177, 623 (2007). hep-ph/0411186
31. A. Arbuzov, D. Bardin, S. Bondarenko, P. Christova, L. Kali-
novskaya, G. Nanava, R. Sadykov, One-loop corrections to the
Drell–Yan process in SANC, I: the charged current case. Eur.
P h y s .J .C46, 407 (2006). Erratum: Eur. Phys. J. C50, 505 (2007).
hep-ph/0506110
32. A. Arbuzov, D. Bardin, S. Bondarenko, P. Christova, L. Kali-
novskaya, G. Nanava, R. Sadykov, One-loop corrections to the
Drell–Yan process in SANC, II: the neutral current case. Eur.
P h y s .J .C54, 451 (2008). arXiv:0711.0625 [hep-ph]
33. A.B. Arbuzov, R.R. Sadykov, Inverse bremsstrahlung contribu-
tions to Drell–Yan like processes. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 106, 488
(2008). arXiv:0707.0423 [hep-ph]
34. A. Andonov, A. Arbuzov, S. Bondarenko, P. Christova, V .
Kolesnikov, R. Sadykov, Implementation of NLO QCD correc-
tions into the framework of computer system SANC. Phys. Part.
Nucl. Lett. 4, 451 (2007)
35. A. Andonov, A. Arbuzov, D. Bardin, S. Bondarenko, P. Chris-
tova, L. Kalinovskaya, V . Kolesnikov, R. Sadykov, Standard
SANC modules. Comput. Phys. Commun. 181, 305 (2010).
arXiv:0812.4207 [physics.comp-ph]
36. A. Andonov, A. Arbuzov, S. Bondarenko, P. Christova, V .
Kolesnikov, G. Nanava, R. Sadykov, NLO QCD corrections to
Drell–Yan processes in the SANC framework. Phys. At. Nucl.73,
1761 (2010). arXiv:0901.2785 [hep-ph]
37. D. Bardin, S. Bondarenko, P. Christova, L. Kalinovskaya, L.
Rumyantsev, A. Sapronov, W. von Schlippe, SANC integrator in
the progress: QCD and EW contributions. JETP Lett. 96, 285
(2012). arXiv:1207.4400 [hep-ph]
38. A.B. Arbuzov, Nonsinglet splitting functions in QED. Phys. Lett.
B 470, 252 (1999). hep-ph/9908361
39. A.B. Arbuzov, Higher order pair corrections to electron positron
annihilation. J. High Energy Phys. 0107, 043 (2001)
40. A. Buckley, J. Butterworth, S. Gieseke, D. Grellscheid, S. Höche
et al., General-purpose event generators for LHC physics. Phys.
Rep. 504, 145 (2011). arXiv:1101.2599 [hep-ph]
41. G. Altarelli, R. Kleiss, C. Verzegnassi (eds.), Z Physics at
Lep-1, vol. 1: Standard Physics. Proceedings, Workshop, Geneva,
Switzerland, September 4–5, 1989. CERN Geneva, CERN 89-08
(1989), 453 p.
42. G. Altarelli, R. Kleiss, C. Verzegnassi (eds.), Z Physics at Lep-
1, vol. 2: Higgs Search And New Physics . Proceedings, Work-
shop, Geneva, Switzerland, September 4–5, 1989. CERN Geneva,
CERN 89-08 (1989), 211 p.
43. G. Altarelli, R. Kleiss, C. Verzegnassi (eds.), Z Physics at Lep-
1, vol. 3: Event Generators And Software . Proceedings, Work-
shop, Geneva, Switzerland, September 4–5, 1989. CERN Geneva,
CERN 89-08 (1989), 340 p.
44. E.A. Kuraev, V .S. Fadin, On radiative corrections to e +e− single
photon annihilation at high-energy. Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 41, 466
(1985) [Yad. Fiz., 41, 1985, 733]
45. M. Skrzypek, Leading logarithmic calculations of QED correc-
tions at LEP. Acta Phys. Pol. B 23, 135 (1992)
46. C.M. Carloni Calame, G. Montagna, O. Nicrosini, A. Vicini,
Precision electroweak calculation of the production of a high
transverse-momentum lepton pair at hadron colliders. J. High En-
ergy Phys. 0710, 109 (2007). arXiv:0710.1722 [hep-ph]
47. U. Baur, D. Wackeroth, Electroweak radiative corrections to
p ¯p → W
± → ℓ±ν beyond the pole approximation. Phys. Rev. D
70, 073015 (2004). hep-ph/0405191
48. C. Buttar, S. Dittmaier, V . Drollinger et al., Les houches physics
at TeV colliders 2005, standard model and Higgs working group:
summary report. hep-ph/0604120


--- Page 18 ---
Page 18 of 18 Eur. Phys. J. C (2013) 73:2625
49. C. Buttar, J. D’Hondt, M. Kramer et al., Standard model han-
dles and candles working group: tools and jets summary report.
arXiv:0803.0678 [hep-ph]
50. C.E. Gerber et al. (TeV4LHC-Top and Electroweak Working
Group Collaboration), arXiv:0705.3251 [hep-ph]
51. S. Jadach, B.F.L. Ward, Z. Was, The Monte Carlo program KO-
RALZ, version 4.0, for the lepton or quark pair production at LEP
/ SLC energies. Comput. Phys. Commun. 79, 503 (1994)
52. G. Altarelli, R. Kleiss, C. Verzegnassi, Z physics at LEP1: event
generators and software. Preprint CERN-89-08-V-3 (1989)
53. M. Dobbs, J.B. Hansen, The HepMC C++ Monte Carlo event
record for high energy physics. Comput. Phys. Commun. 134,4 1
(2001)
54. Q. Xu, Z. Was, Bremsstrahlung simulation in K → πl
±νl(γ )de-
cays. Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 2158 (2012). arXiv:1201.0189 [hep-ph]
55. E. Richter-Was, Hard bremsstrahlung photons in the t anti-t pro-
duction and decay: a background for the intermediate Higgs
search. Z. Phys. C 61, 323 (1994)
56. E. Richter-Was, Hard photon bremsstrahlung in the process pp →
Z0/γ∗ → lepton+lepton− : a background for the intermediate
mass Higgs. Z. Phys. C 64, 227 (1994)
57. http://sftweb.cern.ch/generators/, http://lcg.web.cern.ch/LCG/
58. L. Barze, G. Montagna, P. Nason, O. Nicrosini, F. Piccinini, Im-
plementation of electroweak corrections in the POWHEG BOX:
single W production. J. High Energy Phys. 1204, 037 (2012).
arXiv:1202.0465 [hep-ph]
59. T. Kinoshita, Mass singularities of Feynman amplitudes. J. Math.
Phys. 3, 650 (1962)
60. T.D. Lee, M. Nauenberg, Phys. Rev. 133, B1549 (1964)
61. S. Yost, V . Halyo, M. Hejna, B.F.L. Ward, HERWIRI2: CEEX
electroweak corrections in a hadronic MC. PoS RADCOR 2011,
017 (2011). arXiv:1201.5906 [hep-ph]
62. http://annapurna.ifj.edu.pl/~wasm/phNLO.htm
63. V .M. Abazov et al. (D0 Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
122001 (2011)
64. R. Aaij et al. (LHCb Collaboration), J. High Energy Phys. 02, 106
(2013)
65. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Measurement of angular
correlations in Drell–Yan lepton pairs to probe Z/gamma* boson
transverse momentum at √
(s) = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector.
Phys. Lett. B 720, 32 (2013). arXiv:1211.6899 [hep-ex]
66. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Search for dilepton reso-
nances in pp collisions at √ s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 272002 (2011). arXiv:1108.1582 [hep-ex]
67. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Measurement of the trans-
verse momentum distribution of Z/gamma* bosons in proton–
proton collisions at √ s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector. Phys.
Lett. B 705, 415 (2011). arXiv:1107.2381 [hep-ex]
68. S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS Collaboration), Measurement of the
rapidity and transverse momentum distributions of Z bosons in
pp collisions at √ s = 7 TeV . Phys. Rev. D 85, 032002 (2012).
arXiv:1110.4973 [hep-ex]
69. M. Boonekamp, M. Schott, Z boson transverse momentum spec-
trum from the lepton angular distributions. J. High Energy Phys.
1011, 153 (2010). arXiv:1002.1850 [hep-ex]
70. M. Vesterinen, T.R. Wyatt, A novel technique for studying the
Z boson transverse momentum distribution at hadron colliders.
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 602, 432 (2009).
arXiv:0807.4956 [hep-ex]
71. A. Banﬁ, S. Redford, M. Vesterinen, P. Waller, T.R. Wyatt, Opti-
misation of variables for studying dilepton transverse momentum
distributions at hadron colliders. Eur. Phys. J. C 71, 1600 (2011).
arXiv:1009.1580 [hep-ex]
72. A. Banﬁ, M. Dasgupta, S. Marzani, QCD predictions for new vari-
ables to study dilepton transverse momenta at hadron colliders.
Phys. Lett. B 701, 75 (2011). arXiv:1102.3594 [hep-ph]
73. M. Kobel et al. (Two Fermion Working Group Collaboration), Re-
ports of the working groups on precision calculations for LEP2
physics: proceedings. two fermion production in electron positron
collisions, in Geneva 1999/2000, Reports of the Working Groups
on Precision Calculation for LEP2 Physics (2000), pp. 269–378.
hep-ph/0007180
74. S. Jadach, Z. Was, Suppression of qed interference contributions
to the charge asymmetry at the Z0 resonance. Phys. Lett. B 219,
103 (1989)
75. S. Jadach, B. Pietrzyk, E. Tourneﬁer, B.F.L. Ward, Z. Was, Initial
ﬁnal state interference in the Z line shape. Phys. Lett. B 465, 254
(1999). hep-ph/9907547
76. G. Aad et al. (ATLAS Collaboration), Measurement of the inclu-
sive W
± and Z/gamma cross sections in the electron and muon
decay channels in pp collisions at √ s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS
detector. Phys. Rev. D 85, 072004 (2012). arXiv:1109.5141 [hep-
ex]
77. T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, P. Skands, A brief introduction
to PYTHIA 8.1. Comput. Phys. Commun. 178, 852 (2008).
arXiv:0710.3820 [hep-ph]
