--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2916-1
Review
Review of single vector boson production in pp collisions
at √ s = 7T e V
Matthias Schott1,a, Monica Dunford2,b
1 Institut für Physik, Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany
2 Kirchhoff Institut für Physik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
Received: 13 December 2013 / Accepted: 8 May 2014 / Published online: 1 July 2014
© The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract This review summarises the main results on the
production of single vector bosons in the Standard Model,
both inclusively and in association with light- and heavy-
ﬂavour jets, at the Large Hadron Collider in proton–proton
collisions at a centre-of-mass energy of 7 TeV. The general
purpose detectors at this collider, A TLAS and CMS, each
recorded an integrated luminosity of ≈ 40 pb
− 1 and 5 fb− 1
in the years 2010 and 2011, respectively. The correspond-
ing data offer the unique possibility to precisely study the
properties of the production of heavy vector bosons in a new
energy regime. The accurate understanding of the Standard
Model is not only crucial for searches of unknown parti-
cles and phenomena but also to test predictions of perturba-
tive Quantum-Chromodynamics calculations and for preci-
sion measurements of observables in the electroweak sector.
Results from a variety of measurements in which singleW or
Z bosons are identiﬁed are reviewed. Special emphasis in this
review is given to interpretations of the experimental results
in the context of state-of-the-art predictions.
Contents
1 Introduction ..................... 1
2 V ector Boson Production in the Standard Model .. 3
3 Detectors and data .................. 1 5
4 Production cross section measurements at the LHC .2 1
5 Event selection and background estimates ...... 2 2
6 Inclusive and differential cross-section measurements 28
7 V ector boson production in association with jets .. 4 3
8 Summary and outlook ................ 5 4
References ........................ 5 6
a e-mail: Matthias.Schott@cern.ch
b e-mail: Monica.Dunford@cern.ch
1 Introduction
The W and Z bosons, since their discovery at UA1 [1,2] and
UA2 [3,4] in the early 1980s, have been the subject of detailed
measurements at both electron–positron and hadron collid-
ers. The ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL experiments at the
large electron–positron collider, LEP , preformed many preci-
sion studies of these vector bosons, including measurements
of the branching ratios [ 5], the magnetic dipole moment and
the electric quadrupole moment [ 6], all of which were mea-
sured with a precision of better than 1 %. At hadron col-
liders, single vector boson production has been explored at√
s = 0.63 TeV at the CERN S ¯pp S by UA1 and UA2, and at
both √ s = 1.8 TeV and √ s = 1.96 TeV at the Tevatron by
CDF [7,8] and D0 [ 9,10]. The distinct advantage of W and
Z production measurements at the hadron colliders is that
the number of single vector boson events is large, roughly
138,000 Z → ee and 470,000 W → eνcandidates using 2.2
fb
− 1of data at CDF [ 11,12] with relatively low background
rates, roughly 0.5 % ofZ candidates and 1 % ofW candidates
at CDF. The major disadvantage is that the parton centre-of-
mass energy cannot be determined for each event because
of the uncertainties in the structure of the proton. Despite
these challenges, the CDF and D0 experiments have reported
measurements of the mass of the W [12,13] with a precision
comparable to the measurements at LEP . In addition with the
large data samples, measurements of W and Z production in
association with jets [ 14–19] and the production of W and
Z production in association with heavy-ﬂavour quarks [ 20–
25] were preformed. Measurements of single vector boson
production at the S¯pp S and the Tevatron have been especially
important for the development of leading-order and next-to-
leading order theoretical predictions, most of which are used
today for comparisons to data at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). Finally W and Z production has also been observed
at heavy-ion colliders at RHIC at√
s = 0.5T e V [26,27] and
the LHC at √ s = 2.76 TeV [28–30]. For a detailed review of
123


--- Page 2 ---
2916 Page 2 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 1 Correlation for different hadron colliders between the Bjorken
x values of the two interacting partons at leading order in the reac-
tion pp → Z/γ∗ for LHC and SPS and p ¯p → Z/γ∗ for Tevatron,
respectively
the measurements preformed at LEP and S ¯pp Ss e e[31,32],
respectively. Today, the focus of measurements of W and
Z production at the LHC is to test the theory of perturbative
Quantum-Chromodynamics (QCD) in a new energy regime,
to provide better constraints on the parton distribution func-
tions, and to improve electroweak precision measurements,
such as the mass of theW and sin
2 θ.A s W and Z production
are dominant backgrounds to Higgs boson measurements and
searches for physics beyond the Standard Model, these new
measurements also provide insight to these studies.
For tests of the predictions of perturbative QCD, the ben-
eﬁt of the increase in energy at the LHC can readily be seen
in Fig. 1, where the Bjorken x-values of the interacting par-
tons for a given process, e.g. the production of a Z boson, is
shown. The reach in the low- x region has been increased by
more than two orders of magnitude compared to that of the
SPS and the Tevatron. As a matter of fact, these new measure-
ments not only beneﬁt from the higher centre-of-mass energy
but also from improved statistical and systematic uncertain-
ties. At the LHC, copious amounts of W and Z boson events,
more than a million Z → ee events at each of the A TLAS
and CMS experiments during the 2011 √
s = 7 TeV run,
were detected, with an improved experimental precision. For
example, the uncertainty on the jet energy scale is almost a
factor of 3 better [ 33,34] compared to that at the Tevatron
experiments. Furthermore, the detectors have been designed
to have an increased rapidity acceptance and can measure
electrons for some measurements to |η| < 4.9 and jets
to |η| < 4.4. As a result, a large fraction of these low- x
events shown in Fig. 1 can be reconstructed by the LHC
detectors.
The theoretical predictions used for comparison to these
measurements have been extended and improved. For inclu-
x
-710 -610 -510 -410 -310 -210 -110 1
]2 [GeV2Q
-110
1
10
210
310
410
510
610
710
810
910
1010
M = 10GeV
M = 100GeV
M = 1TeV
M = 7TeV
  LHC 7 TEV (Allowed Range)
  LHC W/Z Bosons (Incl. Forw. leptons)
  LHC Forw.+Cent. Jets (ATLAS, CMS)
  Tevatron Forw.+Cent. Jets (D0, CDF)
  HERA (H1, Zeus)
N (BCDMS, E665, NMC)μ
  SLAC
Fig. 2 Illustration of kinematic plane in bins of Bjorken x and Q2 for
Drell–Y an scattering at the Tevatron and the LHC and the corresponding
deep inelastic scattering experiments
sive W and Z production, theoretical predictions at next-to-
next-to-leading order in perturbation theory are available. For
measurements of single vector boson production in associ-
ation with jets predictions at next-to-leading order for up to
ﬁve additional partons in the ﬁnal state exist. The magnitude
of the theoretical uncertainties in these calculations are com-
parable to those of the experimental uncertainties. In addition
several advanced leading-order predictions exist which sim-
ulate the entire event process from the hard scatter to the
parton showering and the fragmentation. Although many of
these predictions have been vetted by measurements at previ-
ous hadron colliders, the LHC measurements will test these
predictions in previously unexplored regions of the phase
space.
The structure functions of the proton, which are a domi-
nant source of uncertainties in electroweak precision mea-
surements at hadron colliders, can also be constrained
through studies of the differential cross sections of W or
Z bosons production. This is illustrated in Fig. 2, where the
kinematic plane as a function of the Bjorken x and Q
2 for
Drell–Y an scattering at the Tevatron, the LHC and the cor-
responding deep inelastic scattering experiments are com-
pared. Similarly, measurements of the W production in asso-
ciation with a charm quark test the contributions in the pro-
ton from the strange quarks at x ≈ 0.01 as well as any s −¯s
asymmetries.
This review article summarises the major results of the
single W and Z production in the proton–proton collision
data at √
s = 7 TeV recorded in the years 2010 and 2011 at
the LHC by the two general purpose experiments, A TLAS
and CMS. The article is organised as follows. First, in Sect.2,
we review the basic theory behind single vector boson pro-
duction. In this section, we pay special attention to some of
the basic elements of cross-section calculations such as the
123


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 3 of 59 2916
matrix-element calculations, the parton shower modelling
and parton distribution functions. We also summarise here
the theoretical predictions used in this review. In Sect. 3,
we describe the A TLAS and CMS detectors at the LHC and
discuss in a general manner the basic principles of lepton
and jet reconstruction. Section 4 delineates how cross sec-
tions are measured at the LHC, while Sect. 5 highlights the
event selection and the background estimates for the mea-
surements presented here. Finally we present the results for
inclusive single vector boson production in Sect. 6 as well as
the production in association with jets in Sect. 7. In Sect. 8,
we conclude and provide thoughts on future measurements.
2 Vector Boson Production in the Standard Model
The electroweak Lagrangian of the Standard Model after
electroweak symmetry breaking, i.e. after the Higgs boson
has acquired a vacuum expectation value, can be written as
[35]
L
EW = LK + LN + LC + LWWV + LWWVV
+ LH + LHV + LY , (1)
where the terms in Eq. 1 are schematically illustrated as
tree-level Feynman graphs in Fig. 3. The kinetic term, LK ,
describes the free movement all fermions and bosons. It
involves quadratic terms and the respective masses. The term
L
N describes the interaction of the photon and theZ boson to
fermions, while LC describes the interaction of the W boson
to left-handed particles or right-handed anti-particles. The
self-interaction of gauge bosons is a direct consequence of
the SU(2)L group structure and is described by LWWV and
LWWVV , representing three-point and four-point interac-
f
f
”+” ”+”
”+” ”+” ”+”
”+” ”+”+”
f
¯f
W±
fL
¯f′
R
W
V1
V2
”
L =” ”+” ”+” ”
Lkin LkinLkin
LN LC LWWV
LH LH LWWV V
LY LHV
Fig. 3 Schematic illustration of the Lagrangian describing the elec-
troweak sector of the Standard Model (see Eq. 1)
tions, respectively. The three- and four-point self-interaction
of the Higgs boson is described by LH , while the interac-
tion of the Higgs boson to the gauge bosons is represented in
LHV . The last term in Eq. 1, LY characterises the Y ukawa
couplings between the massive fermions of the Standard
Model and the Higgs ﬁeld.
For the single Z boson production at hadron colliders,L
N
is
LN = eJ em
μ Aμ + g
cos θW
(
J 3
μ − sin2θW Jem
μ
)
Zμ, (2)
where Jem
μ describes the electromagnetic current, i.e. the
sum over all fermion ﬁelds weighted by their electromag-
netic charges, and J 3
μ represents the weak current, involv-
ing only left-handed particles and right-handed anti-particles
with their respective weak isospins. The Weinberg mixing
angle, θ
W , describes the relative contribution of the weak
and electromagnetic part of the interaction. The production
of the single W bosons is described by
L
C =− g√
2
[
¯uiγμ 1− γ5
2 V CKM
ij dj +¯viγμ 1− γ5
2 ei
]
W+
μ
+ h.c., (3)
where only the terms for the ﬁrst generation are explicitly
shown. The quark and lepton spinor ﬁelds are denoted by
ui, dj and vi, ei .T h et e r m(1 − γ5) acts as a projector for
the left-handed components of the spinors, meaning that the
charge current acts exclusively on left-handed particles and
right-handed anti-particles, while for the neutral current all
spinor components play a role due to the electromagnetic part
of the interaction term. The Cabbibo–Kobayashi–Maskawa
(CKM) matrix is denoted V
CKM
ij [36]. In this review arti-
cle, we will concentrate on the terms of the Electroweak
Lagrangian represented in Eqs. 2 and 3, as they describe the
single vector boson production within the Standard Model.
Before discussing the experimental results, we ﬁrst review
the central parts of the theoretical predictions of the gauge
boson production cross sections at the LHC. In Sect. 2.1
the calculation of the cross section is deﬁned, which is
shown to consist of two main parts; the matrix-element term
describing the parton interactions and the parton distribu-
tion functions describing the proton. As the lowest-order
matrix-element term for W and Z production is a frequent
example in many particle physics textbooks, we extend the
formalism in Sect. 2.2 by discussing higher-order correc-
tions from the QCD and Electroweak theories and emphasise
why these are important to the experimental measurements.
The hard scatter process, which at high-energy scales can
be connected to the lower energies scales via parton show-
ering models is discussed in Sect. 2.3. Finally, the second
part of the cross-section calculation, the parton distribution
functions, is brieﬂy reviewed in Sect.2.4. In addition, we dis-
cuss some critical inputs which are needed to perform these
123


--- Page 4 ---
2916 Page 4 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
calculations. This includes the available models for hadroni-
sation of ﬁnal-state particles (Sect. 2.5) and the description
of multiple-particle interactions (Sect. 2.6). A discussion of
the available computing codes, which are used to compare
the latest LHC measurements with the predictions of the
Standard Model, can be found in Sect. 2.7. Our discussion
ends with an overview of the deﬁnition and interpretation
of some observables which are important for understanding
QCD dynamics (Sect. 2.8).
Several introductory articles on the production of vec-
tor bosons in hadron collisions are available. We summarise
here the essential aspects along the lines of [ 37,38]. Related
overview articles on parton density functions at next-to-
leading order at hadron colliders and subsequently jet in
electron–proton physics can be found in [ 39,40], respec-
tively.
2.1 Cross-section calculations
The calculation of production cross sections in proton–proton
collisions at the LHC is, in general, a combination of two
energy regimes: the short-distance or high-energy regime
and the long-distance or low-energy regime. By the factori-
sation theorem, the production cross section can therefore
be expressed as a product of two terms: one describing the
parton–parton cross section, ˆσ
q ¯q→ n at short-distances and
another describing the complicated internal structure of pro-
tons at long distances. For large momentum transfers of the
interacting partons in the short-distance term, the parton–
parton interaction can be evaluated using perturbative QCD
calculations. However, in the long-distance term, where per-
turbative calculations are no longer applicable, parton density
functions (PDFs) are used to describe the proton structure
in a phenomenological way. These functions are written as
f
a/A(x, Q2) for the partona in the proton A wherex = pa
pA is
the relative momentum of the parton in direction of the pro-
ton’s momentum and Q2 is this energy scale of the scattering
process. The scale at which the long-distance physics of the
PDF description and the short-distance physics of parton–
parton interaction separate is called the factorisation scale
and is deﬁned as μ
F = Q. For the production of a vector
boson via quark-fusion, the energy scale is set to the mass of
the vector boson, which in turn can be expressed by the invari-
ant mass of ﬁnal state fermions f , i.e. Q2 = m2
V = m f ¯f .
The proton–proton cross section is thereby expressed as
σpA pB→ n =
∑
q
∫
dx adx b fa/A(xa, Q2)
× fb/B(xb, Q2)ˆσab→ n (4)
and shown graphically for Z production in Fig. 4. The func-
tions fa/A and fb/B denote the PDFs for the partons a and
b in protons A and B. All quark ﬂavours are accounted for
pA
pB
p
p
xApA
xBpB
γx/Z
f
¯f
f¯q(xA,Q 2)
f¯q(xA,Q 2)
Fig. 4 Illustration of cross-section calculation in a proton–proton col-
lision at the LHC
in the sum and the integration is performed over xa and xb,
describing the respective momentum fractions of the interact-
ing partons. The subset of perturbative corrections from real
and virtual gluon emissions, which are emitted collinearly
to the incoming partons, lead to large logarithms that can be
absorbed in the PDFs.
Inclusive hard-scattering processes can be described using
the factorisation theorem [ 41,42]. This approach is also
applicable when including the higher-order perturbative
QCD corrections, which are discussed in more detail in
Sect. 2.2.2. When expanding the parton–parton cross sec-
t i o ni nt e r m so f α
s , the formula for the cross section
becomes
σpA pB→ n =
∑
q
∫
dx adx b
∫
fa/A(xa, Q2) fb/B(xb, Q2)
×[ˆσ0 + αs(μ2
R)ˆσ1 + ....]ab→ n, (5)
where σ0 is the tree-level parton–parton cross section and σ1
is the ﬁrst order QCD correction to the parton–parton cross
section, etc. The renormalisation scale, μR is the reference
scale for the running of αs(μ2
R), caused by ultraviolet diver-
gences in ﬁnite-order calculations.
Writing this equation in terms of the matrix elements
yields
σpA pB→ n =
∑
q
∫
dx adx b
∫
dφn fa/A(xa, Q2)
× fb/B(xb, Q2) 1
2ˆs |mq ¯q→ n|2(φn), (6)
where 1 /(2ˆs) is the parton ﬂux, φn is the phase space of
the ﬁnal state and |mq ¯q→ n| is the corresponding matrix ele-
ment for a ﬁnal state n, which is produced via the initial
state q ¯q. The matrix element can then be evaluated accord-
ing to perturbation theory as a sum of Feynman diagrams,
mq ¯q→ n = ∑
i F(i)
q ¯qn . The evaluation of these integrals over
the full phase space is typically achieved via Monte Carlo
sampling methods.
123


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 5 of 59 2916
2.2 Matrix-element calculations
2.2.1 Leading-order calculations
The calculation of the electron–positron annihilation cross
section in pure quantum electrodynamics (QED), i.e.e+e− →
μ+μ− , is straightforward and can easily be extended to the
quark-antiquark annihilation cross section by including the
colour factor of 1/3 and accounting for the charge Qq of the
involved quarks q:
ˆσq ¯q→ l¯l′ = 4π
9ˆs · α2
em · Q2
q, (7)
where ˆs = (xA PA + xB PB)2 = xAxB s and √ s denotes
the centre-of-mass energy of the proton–proton collision. In
an electroweak uniﬁed theory, the cross section must also
include the exchange of a Z boson for larger energies (√
s >
40 GeV) and is therefore extended by
ˆσq ¯q→ l¯l′ = 4π
9ˆs
{
Q2
q − Qq
√
2GF m2
Z
4πα gl
V gq
V Re(K(ˆs))
+ G2
F m4
Z
8π2α2em
· ((gl
V )2 + (gl
A)2)
· ((gq
V )2 + (gq
A)2)|K(ˆs)|2
}
.
The vector and axial couplings of the Z bosons to the leptons
and quarks are denoted gV = gL + gR and gA = gL −
gR , which can be expressed as combinations of left- and
right-handed chiral states for the quarks q and leptons l.T h e
Z boson propagator K(ˆs) can be written as
K(ˆs) = ˆs
ˆs − m2
Z + im Z ΓZ
. (8)
In the narrow-width approximation, the Z boson is assumed
to be a stable particle and the propagator reduces to a δ-
function. This approximation is based on the fact that the
width of the Z boson ( Γ
Z ≈ 2.5 GeV) is small compared
to its mass ( mZ ≈ 91 GeV). Hence the parton–parton cross
section can be expressed as
ˆσq ¯q→ Z =
√
2π
3 GF m2
Z ((gq
V )2 + (gq
A)2)δ(ˆs − m2
Z ), (9)
when omitting the interference with the photon exchange in
the s-channel.1
The decay of the Z boson into fermion pairs is described
by the branching ratio Br(Z → f ¯f ) = Γ( Z → f ¯f )/ΓZ ,
where the partial widthΓ( Z → f ¯f ) is given in lowest order
by
Γ( Z → f ¯f ) = NC
GF m3
Z
6
√
2π
((g f
V )2 + (g f
A)2), (10)
1 The interference at ˆs = m2
Z is at per mille level.
where the factors g f
V and g f
A are again the vector and axial
couplings for the respective fermions f to the Z boson. The
colour factor NC is 1 for leptons and 3 for quarks. This leads
to a prediction of ≈ 70 % decays into quark and antiquarks,
but only ≈ 3.4 % for the decay into a single generation of
charged leptons.
The lowest-order cross section for the W boson produc-
tion via quark-antiquark fusion can be derived in a similar
manner. In contrast to the Z boson production, quarks from
different generations can couple to the W boson, while the
interference with the electromagnetic sector is not present.
The cross section in the narrow-width approximation is given
by
ˆσ
q ¯q′→ W =
√
2π
3 GF m2
W |V CKM
qq′ |2δ(ˆs − m2
W ), (11)
where the CKM matrix element accounts for the quark-
generation mixing. The partial decay width of the W boson
at lowest order is
Γ( W → f ¯f ′) = NC
GF m3
W
6
√
2π
, (12)
leading to 1 /3 probability for leptonic decays and 2 /3f o r
decays into quark/antiquark pairs.
2.2.2 Perturbative QCD corrections and jets
The leading-order calculations of the W and Z boson pro-
duction, as shown in Sect. 2.2.1, suggest that the momen-
tum of the boson in the transverse plane is zero. Y et it is
well known from collider experiments that the transverse
momentum ( pT)o f W and Z bosons peaks at few GeV , with
a pronounced tail to high values, i.e. pT ≫ mV [43–46].
To understand the physical origin of this, two different
effects have to be taken into account. First, the interacting
partons are believed to have an intrinsic transverse momen-
tum (k
T ) relative to the direction of the proton, leading to an
exponentially decreasing pT distribution of the vector boson.
The experimentally determined value of the average
intrinsic momentum is < kT >= 0.76 GeV, measured
in proton–neutron collisions [ 47] and is not large enough
to explain the observed pT distribution of vector bosons
in hadron collisions. The second, larger effect arises from
higher-order QCD corrections to the vector boson produc-
tion, which can lead to the radiation of additional quarks and
gluons in the ﬁnal state in the transverse plane. The vec-
tor sum of these emissions has to be balanced by the trans-
verse momentum of the produced vector boson, which in
turn acquires a transverse momentum. In the regime where
α
s is small, these perturbative QCD corrections may be calcu-
lated. The two contributing classes of next-to-leading-order
(NLO) corrections, i.e. the virtual-loop corrections and the
real emissions of gluons/quarks, are illustrated in Fig. 5.T h e
123


--- Page 6 ---
2916 Page 6 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 5 Perturbative QCD corrections
correction terms with virtual loops do not affect the trans-
verse momentum spectrum of the vector boson directly. The
real corrections however, imply the existence of 2 → 2p r o -
cesses, leading to an additional parton in the ﬁnal state which
boosts the W or Z boson in the transverse plane.
The generic form of the production cross section for the
processes q ¯q → Vg and qg → Vq
′, where V stands for a
vector boson, can be expressed by the Mandelstam variables,
describing the Lorentz invariant kinematics of a 2 → 2 scat-
tering process. The resulting cross section at NLO is propor-
tional to
σ ∼ 2 · m
2
V · s + t2 + u2
tu , (13)
As t, u → 0, divergencies in Eq. 13 occur. This can be
interpreted as ﬁnal-state quarks or gluons with a vanishing
transverse momentum, i.e. those which are collinear to the
incoming parton. Therefore, a minimal pT requirement of the
additional quark or gluon in the ﬁnal state needs to be applied
to obtain a ﬁnite production cross-section prediction. In the
calculation of the fully inclusive production cross section,
the divergencies are compensated by the virtual-loop correc-
tions.
Two main energy regimes of the transverse momentum
spectrum of the vector boson production are considered here:
A high-energy regime, where p
T ≫ mV , and an intermediate
regime, where kT < pT(V)< mV /2. For very large trans-
verse momenta of the vector bosons ( pT ≫ mV ), the real
NLO corrections lead to an expected transverse momentum
distribution of
d
2σ
d2 pT
∼ αs(p2
T)
p4
T
. (14)
The linear dependence of αs is a consequence of the NLO
QCD corrections, leading to one additional parton in the ﬁnal-
state (V+1 jet production).
Each additional parton in the ﬁnal state requires one addi-
tional higher-order QCD correction and therefore an addi-
tional order of αs . Examples of leading-order Feynman dia-
grams for the Z+2 jet production are shown in Fig. 6.F o r
g
q
Z
g
g q
q′
q
q
Fig. 6 Leading-order Feynman diagram for Z + 2-jet production
QCD corrections with multiple jets, the probability that an
additional parton is a radiated gluon is governed by a Pois-
son distribution. This implies that the leading-order term for
a V+n-jet ﬁnal state, called Poisson scaling, has the form of
σ
LO
V+n− jet ∼ ¯ne−¯n
n! σtot , (15)
where σtot is the total cross section, ¯n is a expectation value
of the Poisson. This is the expected behaviour ate+e− collid-
ers [48], where PDFs do not play a role. However, at hadron
colliders, the experimentally observed V+n-jet ﬁnal state,
called staircase scaling, has the form of
σLO
V+n− jet ∼ σ0e−an, (16)
where the coefﬁcients a depend on the exact deﬁnition of a
jet and σ0 is the zero-jet exclusive cross section. The ratio of
the n-jet and (n+1)-jet cross sections is then a constant value,
σn+1
σn = e−a , where e−a is a phenomenological parameter
which is measurement dependent. The reason for observed
staircase scaling at hadron colliders is two-fold. At small
numbers of additional partons, the emission of an additional
parton is suppressed in the parton density function. At larger
numbers of additional partons, the probability of gluon radi-
ation no longer follows a Poisson distribution due to the non-
abelian nature of QCD theory, which states that a gluon can
radiate from another gluon. For large jet multiplicities a devi-
ation from the staircase scaling behaviour is expected, as the
available phase space for each additional jet in the ﬁnal state
decreases.
Today, several leading-order calculations, such as [49,50],
are available that describe more than six partons in the ﬁnal
state. The inclusive production cross section and the asso-
ciated rapidity distribution for vector bosons is well known
today to next-to-next-to-leading order (NNLO) [ 51–53].
The intermediate momentum range of k
T < pT(V)<
mV /2 can also be assessed with perturbative calculations.
However, higher-order corrections, manifested as low ener-
getic gluons emitted off the incoming partons at intermedi-
ate energies, must be included for a correct description of
the experimental data. This can be most easily seen in the
limit of t → 0 and u → 0; then the ﬁnal-state gluon in the
q ¯q
′ → Vg process becomes collinear to the incoming par-
123


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 7 of 59 2916
q
¯q
g
Z
q
¯q
g
Z
g
...
q
¯q
g
Z ...
Fig. 7 Example Feynman diagrams illustrating initial-state radiation
of gluons in the leading-order Drell–Y an process
ton. The corresponding Feynman diagram can be redrawn as
initial-state radiation (ISR) as shown in Fig. 7.
The main contributions of these collinear gluon emissions
to the cross section at nth order are given by
1
σ
dσ
dp 2
T
∼ 1
p2
T
αn
s ln 2n− 1 m2
V
p2
T
. (17)
Such collinear gluon emissions are also the basis for parton
showers, which will be discussed in Sect. 2.3. Summing up
the gluon emissions to all orders leads to
1
σ
dσ
dp 2
T
≈ d
dp 2
T
e
(
− αs
2π CF ln 2 m2
V
p2
T
)
, (18)
where CF = 4/3 is the QCD colour factor for gluons.
This approach, known as Resummation [54], has been sig-
niﬁcantly improved and extended in recent years and pro-
vides currently the most precise predictions for the transverse
momentum distribution of vector bosons in the low-energy
regime.
2.2.3 Electroweak corrections
So far, only QCD corrections to W and Z boson produc-
tion have been discussed. The virtual one-loop QED cor-
rections and the real photon radiation corrections are illus-
trated via Feynman diagrams in Fig. 8. The NLO correc-
tions to the charged and neutral currents are well known
[55,56]. In particular, the full O(α
em) corrections to the
pp → γ/Z → l+l− process with O(g4m2
T/m2
W ) correc-
tions to the effective mixing anglesin 2θ2
eff and mW are avail-
able [57–61].
Even though the electroweak corrections to the vector
boson production cross section are small compared to the
higher-order QCD corrections, they lead to a signiﬁcant dis-
tortion of the line shape of the invariant mass and subse-
quently to the transverse momentum spectrum of the decay
γ
¯q
q
Z
l+
l−
Z
l+
l−
γ
Z
γ
¯q
q l+
l−
Z
l−
l+γ
Fig. 8 Examples of leading-order QED corrections
28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42
Ratio0.95
1
1.05
 [arbitrary units]σ/σd
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Electroweak Effects
(Z)<2GeVT<92GeV, pZ, 90GeV<m-e+ e→Z
Born Level
EWK Corrections
-recombinationγ        e
Fig. 9 Electroweak (EWK) corrections to the lepton transverse
momentum for the neutral current Drell–Y an process at the LHC
[62]. Results are presented for bare electrons and electrons employing
electron–photon recombination, respectively
leptons. The comparison between the corresponding distribu-
tions with and without electroweak corrections is illustrated
in Fig. 9.
In general, electroweak corrections at moderate energies
are dominated by ﬁnal-state radiations (FSR) of photons,
which is indicated by the upper right diagram in Fig. 8.C e r -
tain measurements, like the determination of the W boson
mass from the decay lepton pT distribution, are sensitive
to these corrections. For this measurement, this effect can
induce a shift of up to 10 MeV on mW in the muon decay
channel. In contrast, the electron decay channel is less
effected due to the nature of electron reconstruction in the
detector, where the FSR photons are usually reconstructed
together with the decay electron. Therefore the relative mag-
nitude of the electroweak corrections with respect to the QCD
corrections must be considered individually for each mea-
surement.
2.3 Parton shower models
As discussed in the previous section, matrix-element calcula-
tions at ﬁxed-order provide cross sections assuming that the
123


--- Page 8 ---
2916 Page 8 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
ﬁnal-state partons have large momenta and are well separated
from each other. Parton shower models provide a relation
between the partons from the hard interaction (Q
2 ≫ /Lambda1QCD)
to partons near the energy scale of /Lambda1QCD.H e r e /Lambda1QCD is
deﬁned as the transition energy between the high-energy and
low-energy regions. A commonly used approach for par-
ton shower models is the leading-log approximation, where
showers are modelled as a sequence of splittings of a partona
to two partons b and c. QCD theory allows for three types of
possible branchings, q → qg , g → gg and g → q ¯q, while
only two branchings exist in QED theory, namely q → qγ
and l → lγ.
The differential probability dP
a for a branching for
QCD emissions is given by the Dokshitzer–Gribov–Lipatov–
Altarelli–Parisi (DGLAP) evolution equations [ 63–65]
dPa =
∑
b,c
αs(t)
2π Pa→ b,c(z)dtdz , (19)
with the evolution time t deﬁned as t = ln(Q2//Lambda12
QCD).
Q2 denotes the momentum scale at the branching and z the
momentum fraction of the partonb compared to partona.T h e
sum runs over all possible branchings andPa→ b,c denotes the
corresponding DGLAP splitting kernel.
This relation also holds for the QED branchings, where
the coupling constant in Eq. 19 is replaced with αem .F o r
ﬁnal-state radiation, the emission of particles due to sub-
sequent branchings of a mother parton is evolved from
t = Q2
hard at the hard interaction to the non-perturbative
regime t ≈ /Lambda1QCD. Initial-state radiation can be ordered by
an increasing time, i.e. going from a low-energy scale to the
hard interaction. This can be interpreted as a probabilistic
evolution process connection two different scales: the initial
scale Q
2
0 of the interaction to the scale of the hard interaction
scale Q2
hard. During this evolution, all possible conﬁgurations
of branchings, leading to a deﬁned set of partons taking part
in the hard interaction, are considered.
The implementation of parton showers is achieved with
Monte Carlo techniques. They are used to calculate the step-
length t
0 to t where the virtuality of the parton decreases
with no emissions. At the evolution time t, a branching into
two partons occurs where the resulting sub-partons have
smaller virtuality than the initial parton. This procedure is
then repeated for the sub-partons, starting at the new evolu-
tion time t
0 = t.
Therefore the probability for the parton a at the scale t0
not to have branched when it is found at the scale t has to be
determined. This probability Pno− branching(t0, t) is given by
the Sudakov form factor [ 66], which can be expressed as
Sa(t) = exp
⎛
⎝−
t∫
t0
dt′ ∑
b,c
Ia→ b,c(t′)
⎞
⎠ , (20)
where
Ia→ b,c(t) =
z+(t)∫
z− (−t)
dz αs(t)
2 · Pa→ b,c(z) (21)
is the differential branching probability for a given evolution
time t with respect to the differential range dt′. The latter
relation follows directly from Eq. 19, by integrating over
the allowed momentum distributions z. The probability for a
branching of a given partona at scale t can then be expressed
by the derivative of the Sudakov form factor Sa(t):
dPa(t)
dt =
⎛
⎝∑
b,c
Ia→ b,c
⎞
⎠ Sa(t). (22)
This relation describes the effect known as Sudakov suppres-
sion: The ﬁrst factor Ia→ b,c, which describes the branching
probability at a given time t, is suppressed by the Sudakov
form factor Sa(t), i.e. by taking into account the possibility
of branchings before reaching the actual scale t.
The branching of the initial-state partons during the parton
shower therefore leads to the emission of gluons or quarks,
which in turn may add an additional jet to the event. The ﬁnal-
state partons predicted within the leading-log approximation
are dominated by soft and collinear radiations and hence
large momentum jets that are not expected to be described
correctly within this approximation. The kinematics of the
missing hard scatter components are predicted by the corre-
sponding higher-order diagrams, which have been discussed
in Sect. 2.2.2.
The main advantage of the parton shower approach is its
simplicity compared to matrix-element calculations which
increase in complexity when considering more indepen-
dent partons in the initial and ﬁnal states. However, there
is an important difference between the soft-gluon emission
described by parton shower and the emission of a gluon calcu-
lated by NLO matrix element. While the full matrix-element
calculation includes the spin-1 nature of the gluon and hence
induced polarisation effects on the intermediate gauge boson,
the parton shower algorithm does not take into account spin
effects.
2.4 Parton distribution functions and scale dependencies
The PDFs play a central role not only in the calculation
of the cross section in Eq. 5, but also in the modelling of
parton showers and hadronisation effects. A generic PDF
f
i(x,μ F,μ R) describes at lowest order the probability of
ﬁnding a parton of typei with a momentum fractionx when a
proton is probed at the scaleμF . The factorisation and renor-
malisation scale parametersμF and μR in the PDF deﬁnition
act as cut-off parameters to prohibit infrared and ultravio-
let divergences. If a cross section could be calculated to all
123


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 9 of 59 2916
orders in perturbation theory, the calculation would be inde-
pendent from the choice of the scale parameters, since the
additional terms would lead to an exact cancellation of the
explicit scale dependence of the coupling constant and the
PDFs. Both scales are usually chosen to be on the order of
the typical momentum scales of the hard scattering process,
to avoid terms with large logarithms appearing in the pertur-
bative corrections. For the Drell–Y an process at leading order
this implies μ
F = μR = mZ . It should be noted that both
scales are usually assumed to be equal, even though there is
no reason from ﬁrst principles for this choice. The depen-
dence of the predicted cross section on μF and μR is thus
a consequence of the missing/unknown higher-order correc-
tions. The dependence is therefore reduced when including
higher orders in the perturbation series. The uncertainty on
the cross-section prediction due to scale uncertainties is usu-
ally estimated by varying both scales simultaneously within
0.5· Q <μ
F,μ R < 2· Q, where Q is the typical momentum
scale of the hard process studied. However, this evaluation
procedure sometimes provides results that are too optimistic
and the differences between the leading-order and NLO cal-
culations are not always covered by the above procedure.
As the actual form of f
i(x,μ F) cannot be predicted with
perturbative QCD theory, a parameterised functional form
has to be ﬁtted to experimental data. The available data for
the PDF determination comes mainly from deep inelastic
scattering experiments at HERA, neutrino data, as well as
Drell–Y an and jet production at the Tevatron and LHC col-
liders. Note that the scale dependence of f
i is predicted by
the DGLAP evolution equations.
In order to ﬁt PDFs to data, a starting scale, where pertur-
bative QCD predictions can be made, has to be chosen and
a certain functional form of the PDFs has the be assumed. A
typical parametrisation of f
i(x,μ F) takes the form
fi(x,μ F) = a0xa1 (1 − x)a2 P(x, a3, a4, ...), (23)
where P is a polynomial function and a j are free ﬁt param-
eters which cannot be predicted from perturbative QCD cal-
culations, but it can only be determined by experiment. In a
second step, a factorisation scheme, i.e. a model for the han-
dling of heavy quarks, and an order of perturbation theory
has to be chosen. The DGLAP evolution equations can then
be solved in order to evolve the chosen PDF parametrisation
to the scale of the data. The measured observables can then
be computed and ﬁtted to the data. The PDF ﬁts are currently
performed and published for leading-order, NLO and NNLO
calculations. Even though most matrix elements are known
to NLO order in QCD theory, some parton shower models
are still based on leading-order considerations and therefore
leading-order PDF sets are still widely used.
PDF ﬁtting is performed by several groups. The CTEQ-
TEA [67], MSTW [68], ABKM [69], GJR [70] and NNPDF
[71] collaborations include all available data for their ﬁts,
Bjoerken x
-210 -110
)2
Z=M2(x,Qfx
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4 Z
2=M2  PDF (CT10) Q u-quark
d-quark
gluon
 - quarksss + 
 - quarksd + u
Fig. 10 PDF distribution of the CT10 PDF set at Q2 = m2
Z
but they face the problem of possible incompatibilities of the
input data, caused by inconsistent measurement results from
different experiments. These results differ in the treatment of
the parametrisation assumptions of f
i .T h e HeraPDF [72]
group bases their PDF ﬁts on a subset of the available data,
where only the HERA measurements have been chosen as
input and therefore possible inconsistencies in the ﬁt are
reduced.
It should be highlighted that the PDF approach and ﬁt-
ting is subject to several assumptions and model uncertain-
ties. The actual form of the input distributions is arbitrary
and hence the choice of the analytical function implies a
model uncertainty. The approach of the NNPDF group is
an exception as the parametrisation is chosen to be han-
dled by a ﬂexible neural network approach. In addition it
is commonly assumed that the strange-quark content follows
s =¯s = (¯u+ ¯d)/4. The suppression ofs- and ¯s-quark content
is due to their larger masses compared to the¯u- and ¯d-quarks,
but a rigorous argument of the chosen suppression factor can-
not be derived from ﬁrst principles. Similar is the situation
for heavy-ﬂavour (c, b, t-quarks) contributions to the proton
structure. Their contribution is 0 below the Q
2-threshold and
is evolved according to the DGLAP-equations above.
The results presented in this paper rely mainly on the
CTEQ-10 and MRST PDF sets [ 67,68]. The PDF set for
Q2 = m2
Z from the CTEQ collaboration are illustrated in
Fig. 10. The Bjorken x values of partons, which are involved
in the leading-order production of Z bosons at 7 TeV pp col-
lisions, are illustrated in Fig. 11, where the x-values of both
interacting quarks per events have been used.
The associated uncertainties of a given PDF set are based
on the Hessian method [ 73], where a diagonal error matrix
with corresponding PDF eigenvectors is calculated. The
matrix and the PDF eigenvectors are functions of the ﬁt-
parameters ai . Non-symmetric dependencies are accounted
for by using two PDF errors for each eigenvector in each
123


--- Page 10 ---
2916 Page 10 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Bjoerken x
-310 -210 -110
 Z)/x→(ppσd
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Z→PYTHIA (LO, CT10): ppu-quark
d-quark
s-quark
-quarku
-quarkd
-quarks
Fig. 11 Distribution of Bjorken x values of partons that are involved
in the leading-order production of Z bosons at 7 TeV pp collisions as
a stacked histogram. It should be noted that each participating valence-
quark has to be matched with a corresponding sea quark
direction. The PDF uncertainties on a cross section is then
given by
/Delta1σ= 1
2

√
n∑
k=1
[σ(a+
i ) − σ(a−
i )]2, (24)
where a±
i labels the corresponding eigenvectors of a cho-
sen PDF error set. This approach assesses only the PDF ﬁt
uncertainties within a certain framework, i.e. for a chosen
parametrisation and various base assumption. Hence, usually
also the difference between two different PDF sets from two
independent groups, e.g. CTEQ and MRST,a r et a k e na sa n
additional uncertainty. The same procedure for the impact of
PDF related uncertainties can be applied for any observable
and is not restricted to inclusive cross sections.
2.5 Hadronisation
The process of how hadrons are formed from the ﬁnal-state
partons is call hadronisation. The scale at which the hadro-
nisation is modelled is Q
2 = /Lambda12
QCD. Since this process is
complex, phenomenological models must be used. A detailed
discussion can be found elsewhere [ 74].
The ﬁrst models of hadronisation were proposed in the 70s
[75] and today, two models are widely in use. The so-called
string model [76] is based on the assumption of a linear con-
ﬁnement and provides a direct transformation from a parton
to hadron description. It accurately predicts the energy and
momentum distributions of primary produced hadrons, but it
requires numerous parameters for the description of ﬂavour
properties, which have been tuned using data. The second
approach for the description of hadronisation is known as
cluster model [77,78], which is based on the pre-conﬁnement
property of parton showers [79]. It involves an additional step
before the actual hadronisation, where colour-singlet subsys-
tems of partons (denotedclusters) are formed. The mass spec-
trum of these clusters depend only on a given scale Q
0 and
/Lambda1QCD, but not on a starting scale Q, with Q ≫ Q0 >/Lambda1QCD.
The cluster model has therefore fewer parameters than the
string model, however, the description of data is in general
less accurate.
The subsequent decay of primary hadrons is either directly
implemented in the computing codes for hadronisation, or
in more sophisticated libraries such as EVTGEN [ 80]. Spe-
cial software libraries can be used for the description of the
τ-lepton decay, e.g. TAUOLA [ 81], correctly taking into
account all branching ratios and spin correlations. Since
hadronisation effects usually have only a small impact on
the relevant observables discussed in this article, we refer to
[74] for a detailed discussion.
2.6 Multiple-parton interactions
Equation 5 describes only a single parton–parton interaction
within a proton–proton collision. However, in reality, several
parton–parton interactions can occur within the same colli-
sion event. This phenomenon is known as multiple-parton
interactions (MPI). Most of the MPI lead to soft additional
jets in the event which cannot be reconstructed in the detec-
tor due to their small energies. Hence they contribute only
as additional energy deposits in the calorimeters. However, a
hard perturbative tail of the MPI, following∼ dp
2
T/p4
T, where
pT is the transverse momentum of the additional jets, can
lead to additional jets in the experimental data. These effects
must be taken into account for the study of vector boson
production in association with jets. Further information as
regards the current available models for MPI can be found in
[82]. Dedicated studies of MPI have been done at the LHC
using W events with two associated jets [ 83]. The fraction
of events arising from MPI is 0.08± 0.01(stat.)± 0.02(sys.)
for jets with a p
T > 20 GeV and a rapidity |y| < 2.5.
This fraction decreases when the pT requirements on the jets
increases.
2.7 Available computing codes
2.7.1 Multiple purpose event generators
Multiple purpose event generators include all aspects of the
proton–proton collisions: the description of the proton via
an interface to PDF sets, initial-state shower models, the
hard scattering process and the subsequent resonance decays,
the simulation of ﬁnal-state showering, MPI, the hadronisa-
tion modelling and further particle decays. Some frequently
used generators in the following analyses are Pythia6[ 84],
Pythia8[ 85], Herwig [86], Herwig++ [ 87] and Sherpa
123


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 11 of 59 2916
[88]. All of these generators contain an extensive list of Stan-
dard Model and new physics processes, calculated with ﬁxed-
order tree-level matrix elements. Some important processes,
such as the vector boson production are also matched to NLO
cross sections.
The Pythia generator family is a long established set of
multiple purpose event generators. While Pythia6, devel-
oped in Fortran in 1982 is still in use, the new Pythia8 gen-
erator was coded afresh in C++. The showering in Pythia6
used in this review is implemented with a p
T-ordered show-
ering scheme, whereas the new version used here is based on
a dipole showering approach. The hadronisation modelling
in both versions is realised via the Lund string model. MPI
are internally simulated in addition.
Similar to Pythia,t h e Herwig generator was originally
developed in Fortan and is now superseded by Herwig++,
written in C++. Both versions use an angular-ordered parton
shower model and the cluster model for hadronisation. The
Jimmy library [89] is used for the simulation of MPI.
The Sherpa generator was developed in C++ from the
beginning and uses the dipole approach for the parton show-
ering. The hadronisation is realised with the cluster model.
The MPI are described with a model that is similar to the one
used in Pythia. For the analyses described here, Sherpa is
generated with up to ﬁve additional partons in the ﬁnal state.
2.7.2 Leading-order and NLO matrix-element calculations
Several programs such as Alpgen [49] and MadGraph [90]
calculate matrix elements for leading-order and some NLO
processes, but they do not provide a full event generation
including parton shower or hadronisation modelling. These
generators as well asSherpa are important because they con-
tain matrix-element calculations for the production of vec-
tor bosons in association with additional partons. Alpgen is
a leading-order matrix-element generator and includes pre-
dictions up to six additional partons in the ﬁnal state. This
is achieved by adding real emissions to the leading-order
diagrams before the parton shower modelling. In this way,
although the process is calculated at leading-order, tree-level
diagrams corresponding to higher jet multiplicities can be
included. Some of the virtual corrections are then added when
a parton shower model is used. MadGraph for the analyses
presented here follows a similar method and produces predic-
tions up to four additional partons. The subsequent event gen-
eration, starting from the ﬁnal parton conﬁguration, is then
performed by Pythia or Herwig for Alpgen and Pythia for
MadGraph.
2.7.3 Parton shower matching
There is signiﬁcant overlap between the phase space of
NLO or n-parton ﬁnal-state QCD matrix-element calcula-
tions and the application to parton showers with respect to
their initial- and ﬁnal-state partons, as both lead to associated
jets. To avoid a potential double counting, matching schemes
have been developed that allow matrix-element calculations
for different parton multiplicities in the initial state and
ﬁnal state to be combined with parton shower models. The
main strategies are based on re-weighting methods and veto-
algorithms. The Catani–Krauss–Kuler–Webber (CKKW)
matching scheme [91,92] and the Mangano (MLM) scheme
[93] are widely used for tree-level generators. For exam-
ple, the Alpgen generator uses the MLM scheme, whereas
Sherpa uses CKKW matching for leading-order matrix-
element calculation. A detailed discussion can be found in
the references given.
An alternative, less generalised approach to matching
schemes are merging strategies. Here the parton showers are
reweighted by weights calculated by matrix-element calcu-
lations. In the Pythia generator only the ﬁrst branching is
corrected, while Herwig modiﬁes all emissions which could
be in principle the hardest. These approaches model correctly
one additional jet, but they fail for higher jet multiplicities.
2.7.4 NLO generators
While matrix-element calculations give both a good descrip-
tion for the hard emission of jets in the ﬁnal states and handle
inferences of initial and ﬁnal states correctly, they are not
NLO calculations. A combined NLO calculation with par-
ton shower models therefore is much desired. However, the
above described methods work only for leading-order matrix-
element calculations. For the matching between NLO matrix
element and parton shower models more sophisticated meth-
ods have to be used. The MC@NLO approach [94]w a st h e
ﬁrst available prescriptions to match NLO QCD matrix ele-
ments to the parton shower framework of the Herwig gen-
erator. The basic idea is to remove all terms of the NLO
matrix-element expression which are generated by the sub-
sequent parton shower. Due to this removal approach, neg-
ative event weights occur during the event generation. The
aMC@NLO generator follows a similar approach for NLO
calculations. The second approach is the Powheg procedure
[95], which is currently implemented in the PowhegBox
framework [ 96]. This framework allows for an automated
matching of a generic NLO matrix element to the parton
shower. The Powheg procedure foresees that the hardest
emission is generated ﬁrst. The subsequent softer radiations
are passed to the showering generator. In contrast to the
MC@NLO approach, only positive weights appear and in
addition the procedure can be interfaced to other event gen-
erators apart from Herwig. Pythia8 also includes possibil-
ities to match to NLO matrix element using the Powheg
scheme.
123


--- Page 12 ---
2916 Page 12 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
2.7.5 NLO calculations and non-perturbative corrections
MCFM [97] and Blackhat-Sherpa [98] provide NLO cal-
culations up to two and ﬁve additional partons respectively.
These calculations differ from NLO generators as they do not
provide any modelling of the parton shower. These calcula-
tions compute both the virtual and the real emission correc-
tions for higher jet multiplicities. For the virtual corrections,
the calculation is achieved by evaluating one-loop corrections
to the tree-level diagrams, while the real emission corrections
are obtained by matrix-element calculations which include
an additional emitted parton. Several different techniques are
used for these calculations; see for example [ 98].
Since MCFM and Blackhat-Sherpa are not matched to
a parton shower model, they cannot be directly compared to
data or simulations which have parton showering and hadro-
nisation applied to the ﬁnal-state particles. To mimic the
effects of both the parton shower and the hadronisation, non-
perturbative corrections are estimated using a multiple pur-
pose generator such asPythia. These corrections are derived
by comparing Pythia with and without the parton shower
and hadronisation models and applied directly to prediction
cross sections. The non-perturbative corrections are on the
order of 7 % for jets of p
T < 50 GeV and reduce to zero at
higher pT values.
Finally, the inclusiveW and Z boson production cross sec-
tions in proton–proton collisions are also known to NNLO
precision in αs and can be calculated with the Fewz genera-
tor [99]. This generator allows also the prediction of several
observables of the ﬁnal-state objects, such as the rapidity
distribution of the produced vector bosons.
2.7.6 Calculations based on resummation
There are speciﬁc programs available, such asResBos [100],
which are based on resummed calculations and therefore are
suited to describe the transverse momentum spectrum of vec-
tor boson production. ResBos provides a fully differential
cross section versus the rapidity, the invariant mass and the
transverse momentum of the vector boson as intermediate
state of a proton–proton collision. The resummation is per-
formed to NNLL approximation and matched to NNLO per-
turbative QCD calculations at large boson momenta.
2.7.7 Overview and predicted inclusive cross sections
A summary of all Monte Carlo (MC) generators used to
describe the relevant signal processes in this work is shown
in Table 1. The order of perturbation theory, the parton
shower matching algorithms and the corresponding physics
processes are also stated.
Table 2 summarises several predictions for different gen-
erators and PDF sets for production cross sections of selected
ﬁnal states in proton–proton collisions at √
s = 7T e V .
Uncertainties due to scale and PDF variations are shown in
addition. As indicated in the table, the increase of the cross
section from leading-order to NNLO predictions is more than
15 %. The difference between different PDF sets is in the
order of 1.5 % and covered by the associated PDF uncertain-
ties.
2.8 QCD dynamics and angular coefﬁcients
To leading order, the angular distribution of the decay prod-
ucts in the process e
+e− → μ+μ− can easily be calcu-
lated and exhibits a (1 + cos2 θ) dependence, where θ is the
angle between the incoming electron and the outgoing posi-
tive charged muon. A similar angular dependence is derived
for the quark/antiquark annihilation including a Z boson
exchange in the corresponding s-channel diagram. However,
the coupling and gauge structure of the weak interaction
as well as higher-order corrections leads to new angular-
dependent terms in the differential production cross sections.
The measurement of these terms therefore provides not only
an important test of perturbative QCD but also of the funda-
mental properties of the electroweak sector, as described in
more detail in the following paragraphs. The discussion starts
with two deﬁnitions of rest frames that allow for the deﬁnition
of the angle θin proton–proton collisions (Sect. 2.8.1). Then
the general form of the differential Drell–Y an cross section is
introduced in Sect. 2.8.2, while the interpretation of the cor-
responding angular coefﬁcients is discussed in Sect. 2.8.3.
2.8.1 Collins–Soper and helicity frame
The direction of the incoming particles and anti-particles is
well known in an e
+e− collider and hence the reference axis
for the deﬁnition of the angleθcan be deﬁned in a straightfor-
ward way. The situation is very different at a proton–proton
collider such as the LHC. Since the vector boson originates
from a q ¯q annihilation, a natural choice would be the direc-
tion the incoming quark but this cannot be done for two rea-
sons. First, the direction of the incoming quark is not know at
the LHC. Second, the incoming partons are subject to initial-
state radiation, which leads to a non-negligible transverse
momenta, p
T, of the vector boson when annihilating that
cannot be determined for the two interacting partons.
To overcome these problems, the rest frame of the vector
boson is typically chosen as rest frame in which the angular
distributions of the decay leptons is measured. However, the
deﬁnition of the axes is this rest frame is still ambiguous. To
minimise the effect due to the lack of information as regards
the kinematics of the incoming partons, the polar axis can be
deﬁned in the rest frame of the vector boson, such that it is
bisecting the angle between the momentum of the incoming
protons. The y axis can then be deﬁned as the normal vector
123


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 13 of 59 2916
Table 1 Monte Carlo programs which are used for the analyses
described in this review article. The information on the order ofO(αs) in
the matrix-element calculation, the generator functionality, the possi-
bility to match matrix-element calculations with parton showers and the
functionality within the analyses are given. The structure of the table is
based on [37]
Program Matrix-element O(αs) Full event generator Merging/matching Functionality w.r.t. W /Z production
Pythia LO Y es Matrix-element correction Inclusive production
For ﬁrst branching
Herwig LO Y es Matrix-element correction Inclusive production
For hardest branching
MC@NLO NLO Y es (Inter face to Herwig) PS matching Inclusive production
aMC@NLO NLO Y es (Interface to Herwig) PS matching Inclusive production
PowhegBox NLO Y es (Interface to Pythia or PS matching Inclusive production
Herwig)
Alpgen LO No (But interface to MLM (all W /Z +Jets
Pythia/Herwig) parton multiplicities) (incl. large multipl.)
MadGraph LO No (but interface to n.a. (all W /Z +Jets
Pythia) parton multiplicities) (incl. large multipl.)
Sherpa LO Y es CKKW (all W /Z +Jets
parton multiplicities) (incl. large multipl.)
Blackhat-Sherpa NLO No (only n.a. W /Z +Jets
parton level) (incl. large multipl.)
ResBos Resummation No (only n.a. pT spectrum
boson kinematics) of W /Z bosons
MCFM NLO No (only n.a. NLO corrections to
parton level) integral rates and shapes
Fewz NNLO No (Only n.a. NNLO corrections to
boson kinematics) integral rates and shapes
Table 2 Prediction of the cross sections of W and Z boson (66 GeV <
mll < 116 GeV) production in √ s = 7 TeV pp collisions at leading
order, NLO and NNLO in αs calculated by the FEWZ generator. The
given uncertainty is calculated for the NNLO cross section and includes
PDF and scale uncertainties
Process LO in O(αs) NLO in O(αs) NNLO in O(αs) NNLO in O(αs) Uncertainty
PDF-set MSTW2008LO MSTW2008NLO MSTW2008NNLO CT10
σ(pp → Z + X) × BR (Z → l+l− ) [nb] 0 .753 0 .931 0 .960 0 .991 0.05
σ(pp → W+ + X) × BR (W+ → l+ν) [nb] 4 .80 5 .80 5 .98 6 .16 0.3
σ(pp → W− + X) × BR (W− → l− ν) [nb] 3 .27 4 .06 4 .20 4 .30 0.2
σ(pp → W± + X) × BR (W± → l±ν)[nb] 8 .11 9 .86 10 .18 10 .46 0.3
Z
X
p  p  
e−  
θ
Particle Rest Frame
YCollins−Soper
Frame
p  p  
Particle Rest Frame
Frame
Helicity
Z
Y
e−  
θ
Z
X
Y
Frame
p  p  
W/Z Boson
Laboratory
Center of Mass Frame
X
Fig. 12 Centre-of-mass frame (left), helicity frame ( middle) and Collins–Soper frame ( right)
to the plane spanned by the two incoming protons and the x
axis is chosen such that a right-handed Cartesian coordinate
system is deﬁned (Fig. 12). The resulting reference frame is
called Collins–Soper (CS) frame [ 101].
When measuring θ in an analogous way as in an e
+e−
collision, the direction of the incoming quark and antiquark
must also be known but cannot be inferred on an event-by-
event basis. However, this can be addressed on a statistical
123


--- Page 14 ---
2916 Page 14 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
basis. V ector bosons with a longitudinal momentum pz(V)
have been produced by partons which have signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent Bjorken- x values. Figure 10 illustrates that large x-
values enhance the probability for having valence quarks in
the interaction and therefore the corresponding antiquark can
be associated to the smaller x-values. Hence the measure-
ment of p
z(V) allows us to assign the longitudinal quark and
antiquark directions on a statistical basis. It should be noted
that large pz(Z) values also imply large rapidities and there-
fore the statistical precision for the correct quark/antiquark
assignment is enhanced for Z bosons in the forward region.
In summary, the angleθcan be expressed in the CS frames
as
cos θ∗
CS = pz(V)
|pz(V)| · 2(p+
1 p−
2 − p−
1 p+
2 )
mll
√
m2
ll + pT(ll)2
, (25)
with p±
1/2 = 1/
√
2 · (E1/2 ± pz,1/2), where E and pZ are
the energy and longitudinal momenta of the ﬁrst and sec-
ond lepton. The ﬁrst term of this equation deﬁnes the sign
and hence the direction of the incoming quark. As previously
discussed, large rapidities enhance the probability for a cor-
rection assignment of the direction. The second term of the
equation corrects for the measured boost due to the hadronic
recoil of the event and deﬁnes an average angle between the
decay leptons and the quarks.
While angular measurements of the Z boson decays are
usually done in the CS frame, measurements of the W boson
are traditionally performed in the so-called helicity frame.
The helicity frame is also chosen to be the rest frame of the
vector boson. The z axis is deﬁned along the W laboratory
direction of ﬂight and the x axis is deﬁned orthogonal in the
event plane, deﬁned by the two protons, in the hemisphere
opposite to the recoil system. The y axis is then chosen to
form a right-handed Cartesian coordinate system as shown
in Fig. 12.
2.8.2 Differential cross section of the Drell–Yan process
The general form of the differential cross section of the Drell–
Y an process pp → Z(W) + X → l
+l− (lν)+ X can be
decomposed as [ 102,103]
dσ
dp 2
Tdyd cos θdφ = dσunpol
dp 2
Tdy ·
(
(1 + cos2 θ)
+ A0
1
2(1 − 3 cos2(θ))
+ A1 sin(2θ)cos(φ)
+ A2
1
2 sin2(θ)cos(2φ)
+ A3 sin(θ)cos(φ)
+ A4(cos θ)
+ A5 sin2(θ)sin(2φ)
+ A6 sin(2θ)sin(φ)
+ A7 sin(θ)sin(φ)
)
, (26)
whereθandφ are the polar and azimutal angles of the charged
lepton in the ﬁnal state 2 in the CS frame to the direction of
the incoming quark/antiquark. This decomposition is valid
in the limit of massless leptons in a 2-body phase space and
helicity conservation in the decay.
While the functional dependence of Eq. 26 on θ and φ
is independent on the reference frame chosen, the param-
eters A
i are frame dependent. When no cuts on the ﬁnal-
state kinematics are applied, the parameters Ai can be trans-
formed from one reference frame to another. Due to the lim-
ited detector coverage and additional analysis requirements
on the kinematics, the coefﬁcients exhibit an experiment-
dependent kinematic behaviour. Hence the optimal choice of
the reference frame will differ for each analysis.
The angular coefﬁcients A
i are functions of the vector
boson kinematics, i.e. its transverse momentum, pT(V), its
rapidity,YV and mV ; and they contain information as regards
the underlying QCD dynamics. They are subject to modiﬁ-
cations from higher-order perturbative and non-perturbative
corrections, structure functions and renormalisation and fac-
torisation scale uncertainties. Since the PDFs of the pro-
ton impact the vector boson kinematics, the coefﬁcients
A
i also depend indirectly on the PDFs themselves. The 1-
dimensional angular distributions can be obtained by inte-
grating either over cos θ or φ, leading to
dσ
cos θ ∼ (1 + cos2 θ)+ 1
2 A0(1 − 3 cos2 θ)+ A4 cos θ
(27)
dσ
cos φ ∼ 1 + 2π
16 A3(cos2 φ) + 1
4 A2(cos(2φ))
+ 3π
16 A7 sin φ + 1
4 A5 sin(2φ) (28)
which can be used to extracted several coefﬁcients indepen-
dently in case of small data samples.
2.8.3 Interpretation of coefﬁcients
The (1+cos2 θ)term in Eq. 26 comes from the pure leading-
order calculation of the vector boson production and decay.
The terms corresponding to the coefﬁcients A
0, A1, A2 are
parity conserving, while the terms A3 to A7 are parity vio-
lating. The A0 to A4 coefﬁcients receive contributions from
the QCD theory at leading and all higher orders, while the
parameters A5, A6 and A7 appear only in NLO QCD cal-
culations and are typically small. Several studies have been
2 For measurements of the Z, the negative lepton is used.
123


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 15 of 59 2916
published which discuss and predict these coefﬁcients for
hadron colliders [ 104].
It should be noted that all terms except ofA4 are symmetric
in cos θ. In the case of Z/γ∗ exchange, A4 appears also in
leading-order calculations as it is directly connected to the
forward–backward asymmetry A
fb via
A fb = 3
8 A4 (29)
which will be discussed in more detail in Sect. 6.5.
The A4 parameter also plays a special role in the case
of W boson polarisation measurements. As discussed in the
previous section, vector bosons tend to be boosted in the
direction of the initial quark. In the massless quark approx-
imation, the quark must be left-handed in the case of the
W boson production and as a result W bosons with large
rapidities are expected to be purely left-handed. For more
centrally produced W bosons, there is an increasing probabil-
ity that the antiquark carries a larger momentum fraction and
hence the helicity state of the W bosons becomes a mixture
of left- and right-handed states. The respective proportion-
als are labelled with f
L and fR .F o rW bosons with a larger
transverse momenta, the production via a gluon in the initial
or ﬁnal state becomes relevant, e.g. via u ¯d → W+g. Hence
the vector nature of the gluon has to be taken into account in
the prediction of the production mechanisms. For high trans-
verse momenta, also polarisations in the longitudinal state of
the W bosons can appear. This fraction is denoted by f
0 and
is directly connected to the massive character of the gauge
bosons. The helicity fractions fL , fR and f0 can be directly
connected to the coefﬁcients A0 and A4 via
fL
(
YW , pW
T
)
= 1
4(2 − A0(YW , pW
T )) ∓ A4(YW , pW
T )
(30)
fR
(
YW , pW
T
)
= 1
4(2 − A0(YW , pW
T )) ± A4(YW , pW
T )
(31)
f0
(
YW , pW
T
)
= 1
2 A0(YW , pW
T ), (32)
where the upper (lower) signs correspond to W+ (W− ). In
particular, the difference of fL and fR depends only on A4
as
fR − fL =± 1
2 A4. (33)
The coefﬁcients A0 and A2 also play a particular role in
the angular decay distributions, as they are related via the
Lam–Tung relation [ 105]. This relation states that A0(pT)
and A2(pT) are identical for all pT if the spin of the gluon is
1. In case of a scalar gluon, this relation would be broken. It
should be noted that the test of this relation is therefore not a
test of QCD theory, but a consequence of the rotational invari-
ance of decay angles and the properties of the quark-coupling
to Z/γ
∗ and the W boson. At the Z-pole, the leading-order
predictions of the pT dependence of A0/2 for a gluon of spin
1a r eg i v e nb y[106–108]
A0,2 = p2
T
p2
T + m2
Z
(34)
for the process q ¯q → Zg and by
A0,2 = 5 · p2
T
5 · p2
T + m2
Z
(35)
for the process qg → Zq . NLO order corrections do not
impact A0 signiﬁcantly, while A2 receives contributions up
to 20 %.
3 Detectors and data
3.1 The LHC and the data collected at √ s = 7T e V
From March 2010 to October 2011, the Large Hadron Col-
lider [ 109] delivered proton–proton collisions at a centre-
of-mass energy of √ s = 7 TeV to its four main experi-
ments A TLAS [110], CMS [ 111], LHCb [ 112] and ALICE
[113]. The primary LHC machine parameters at the end of
the data taking in 2010 and 2011 are given in Table 3.F r o m
2010 to 2011, the number of circulating proton bunches
was increased by a factor of 3 .8, the spacing between two
bunches was decreased from 150 to 50 ns and the beam-focus
parameter β∗ was reduced by a factor of 3 .5. This resulted
in a signiﬁcant increase of instantaneous luminosity from
L = 2× 1032 cm− 2 s− 1 in 2010 to L = 3.7× 1033 cm− 2 s− 1
in 2011 [114].
The total integrated luminosity delivered to the experi-
ments was L ≈ 44 pb − 1in 2010 and L ≈ 6.1f b− 1in 2011.
The data taking efﬁciency of A TLAS and CMS, when the
detector and data-acquisition systems were fully operational,
was above 90 % for both years. The recorded integrated lumi-
nosity, which was used as the data samples for the published
physics analyses for A TLAS and CMS in 2010 and 2011,
Table 3 Parameters of the LHC at the end of 2010 and the end of 2011
including an estimate of the average number of interactions per bunch
crossing [114]
Parameter 2010 2011
√ s 7T e V 7T e V
N(1011 p/b) 1.2 1.5
k(nbunches) 368 1380
Bunch spacing (ns) 150 50
L( c m− 2 s− 1)2 × 1032 3.6 × 1033
Average pp-interactions
per bunch crossing
≈ 1.2 ≈ 10–15
123


--- Page 16 ---
2916 Page 16 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Table 4 Overview of recorded integrated luminosity in 2010 and 2011
by the A TLAS and CMS experiments. Also shown is the integrated
luminosity which is used for physics analyses
Experiment
∫
L dt (2010)
∫
L dt (2010)
Recorded Used Recorded Used
A TLAS 45 pb − 1 35 pb− 1 5.08 fb− 1 4.6 fb− 1
CMS 40.8 pb − 1 36 pb− 1 5.55 fb− 1 4.5–4.8 fb− 1
is shown in Table 4 together with their respective relative
uncertainties.
The precise knowledge of the recorded integrated lumi-
nosity is a crucial aspect for all cross-section measurements.
The V an der Meer method [ 115,116] was applied in total
three times in 2010 and 2011 to determine the luminosity
for A TLAS and CMS, leading to relative uncertainties below
2 %. It should be noted that the luminosity determination
is highly correlated between A TLAS and CMS, leading to
correlated uncertainties in the corresponding cross-section
measurements.
The change in the machine settings from 2010 to 2011
leads to an increase of pile-up noise, which is the occur-
rence of several independent, inelastic proton–proton colli-
sions during one or more subsequent proton–proton bunch
crossings. These additional collisions can lead to a signiﬁ-
cant performance degradation of some observables which are
used in physics analysis. The in-time pile-up, i.e. the addi-
tional collisions occurring within the same bunch crossing,
can be described by the number of reconstructed collision
vertices N
vtx in one event. The out-of-time pile-up is due to
additional collisions from previous bunch crossings that can
still affect the response of the detector, in particular calorime-
ters, whose response time is larger than two subsequent bunch
crossings. The number of interactions per crossing is denoted
μ and can be used to quantify the overall pile-up conditions.
On average, there is roughly a linear relationship between
μ and N
vtx , i.e. ⟨Nvtx ⟩≈ 0.6⟨μ> ⟩. In 2010, the average
number of interactions per collision was μ = 2. The ﬁrst∫
L dt ≈ 1f b− 1 in 2011 had ⟨μ⟩≈ 6, while ⟨μ⟩ of greater
than 15 was reached by the end of 2011. This affects several
systematic uncertainties related to precision measurements
at the LHC.
3.2 Coordinate system
The coordinate system of the A TLAS and CMS detectors are
orientated such that the z axis is in the beam direction, the x
axis points to the center of the LHC ring and the y axis points
vertically upwards (Fig. 13). The radial coordinate in the x-
y plane is denoted by r , the azimuthal angle φ is measured
from the x axis. The pseudorapidity η for particles coming
from the primary vertex is deﬁned as η =− log
θ
2 , where θ
Z Beam Line
Point
Collision
Detector
Y
X (Center of LHC)
θφ
Fig. 13 Illustration of the A TLAS and CMS coordinate system
is the polar angle of the particle direction measured from the
positive z axis. The transverse momentumpT is deﬁned as the
transverse momentum component to the beam direction, i.e.
in the x-y-plane. The transverse energy is deﬁned as ET =
E sin θ.
3.3 The A TLAS detector
The “A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS” (A TLAS) detector is one
of the two general purpose detector at the LHC. It has a
symmetric cylinder shape with nearly 4π coverage (Fig. 14).
A TLAS has a length of 45 m, a diameter of 25 m and weighs
about 7,000 tons. It can be grouped into three regions: the
barrel region in the center of the detector and two end-cap
regions which provide coverage in the forward and backward
direction with respect to the beam pipe. A TLAS consists of
one tracking, two calorimeter and one muon system, which
are brieﬂy described below. A detailed review can be found
in [110].
The tracking detector is the closest to the LHC beam
pipe and extends from an inner radius of 5 cm to an outer
radius of 1.2 m. It measures tracking information of charged
particles in a 2 T axial magnetic ﬁeld provided by a super-
conducting solenoid magnet system. In addition, the track-
ing detector provides vertex information, which can be used
to identify the interaction point of proton–proton collision
and the decay of short-lived particles. Three technologies
are used. The innermost part of the tracking detector con-
sists of three silicon pixel detector layers. Each pixel has a
size of 50 × 400 µm, leading in total to 80 million readout
channels. The pixel detector provides tracking information
up to a pseudorapidity of |η|= 2.5. The same region is also
covered by the semi-conductor tracker, which surrounds the
pixel detector. It consists of narrow silicon strips in the size
of 80 µm ×12 cm, which are ordered in four double layers.
The outermost part of the tracking detector is the transition
radiation tracker which uses straw detectors and covers an
area up to |η|= 2.0. It provides up to 36 additional measure-
ment points of charged particles with a spatial resolution of
123


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 17 of 59 2916
Fig. 14 A TLAS experiment
200 µm. In addition, the produced transition radiation can be
used for electron identiﬁcation.
In the electromagnetic (EM) calorimeter of A TLAS, the
energy of incoming electrons and photons is fully deposited
to the detector materials and can be precisely determined.
Moreover, the A TLAS calorimeter can measure the location
of the deposited energy to a precision of 0 .025rad. Liquid
argon is used as active material, while lead plates act as
absorbers. The absorbers are arranged in an accordion shape
which ensures a fast and uniform response of the calorimeter.
The barrel region covers a range up to |η| < 1.475, the two
endcaps provide coverage for 1.375 < |η| < 3.2. A presam-
pler detector is installed in the region up to |η| < 1.8, which
is used to correct the energy loss of electrons and photons in
front of the calorimeter.
The hadronic calorimeter ranges from r = 2.28 m to
r = 4.23 m and measures the full energy deposition of
all remaining hadrons. The barrel part is the so-called tile
calorimeter and covers a region up to|η| < 1.0. An extended
barrel detector is used for the region 0 .8 < |η| < 1.7. Scin-
tillating plastic tiles are used as active medium. Iron plates
act not only as absorber material, but also as the return yoke
for the solenoid magnetic ﬁeld of the tracking detector. The
granularity of /Delta1φ× /Delta1η= 0.1 × 0.1 determines the posi-
tion information of the measured energy deposits, which is
roughly 0.1 rad. The hadronic endcap calorimeter covers a
pseudorapidity range from 1 .5 < |η| < 3.5, where liquid
argon is used as the ionisation material and copper as the
absorber. The very forward region from 3 .1 < |η| < 4.5
is covered by the forward calorimeters, which also uses liq-
uid argon with copper and tungsten as absorbers. Electrons
and photons are also detected in the forward calorimeters, as
no dedicated electromagnetic calorimeter is present in that
region.
The muon spectrometer is not only the largest part of
the A TLAS Experiment, ranging from r = 4.25 m to r =
11.0 m, but also its namesake. Three air-core toroidal mag-
nets provide a toroidal magnetic ﬁeld with an average ﬁeld
strength of 0 .5 T. Muons with an energy above ≈ 6G e V
that enter the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld will be deﬂected. This
deﬂection is measured in three layers of tracking chambers.
In the barrel region ( |η| < 1.0) and partly in the endcaps
up to |η| < 2.0. Monitored drift-tube chambers provide
the precise tracking information of incoming muons. For
2.0 < |η| < 2.7, cathode strip chambers with a higher granu-
larity are used. The trigger system of the muon spectrometer
is based on resistive plate chambers in the barrel region and
by thin gap chambers in the endcap. Since the A TLAS muon
system is ﬁlled with air, effects from multiple scattering are
minimised. In addition, the long bending path of the muons
provides an accurate measurement of their momentum.
The trigger system of the A TLAS detector has three lev-
els. The ﬁrst level is a hardware-based trigger, which uses
a reduced granularity information of the calorimeters and
the muon system. It deﬁnes so-called regions-of-interest, in
which possible interesting objects have been detected, and
reduces the event rate to ≈ 75 kHz. The second-level trigger
is software-based and has the full granularity information
within the region-of-interest and the inner detector informa-
tion. By this system, the rates are reduced to 1 kHz. The last
trigger level has access to the full event information with full
granularity and uses reconstruction algorithms that are the
123


--- Page 18 ---
2916 Page 18 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 15 CMS experiment
same or similar to those used in the ofﬂine reconstruction.
The ﬁnal output rate is ≈ 400 Hz.
3.4 The CMS detector
The Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) detector is the second
general purpose detector at the LHC with a similar design as
the A TLAS detector. It offers also a nearly full 4π coverage
which is achieved via one barrel and two endcap sections
(Fig. 15). CMS is 25 m long, has a diameter of 15 m and
weights 12500 tons. Most of its weight is due to its name-
giving solenoid magnet, which provides a 3.8 T magnetic
ﬁeld. The magnet is 12.5 m long with a diameter of 6 m and
consists of four layers of superconducting niobium–titanium
at an operating temperature of 4.6 K. The CMS tracking sys-
tem as well as the calorimeters are within the solenoid, while
the muon system is placed within the iron return yoke. We
brieﬂy discuss the four main detector systems of CMS below;
a detailed description can be found in [ 111].
The inner tracking system of CMS is used for the recon-
struction of charged particle tracks and is fully based on
silicon semi-conductor technology. The detector layout is
arranged in 13 layers in the central region and 14 layers in
each endcap. The ﬁrst three layers up to a radius of 11 cm
consist of pixel-detectors with a size of 100 µm ×150 µm.
The remaining layers up to a radius of 1.1 m consist of silicon
strips with dimensions 100µm×10 cm and 100µm×25 cm.
In total, the CMS inner detector consists of 66 million read-
out channels of pixels and 96 million readout channels of
strips, covering an η-range of up to 2 .5.
The CMS electromagnetic calorimeter is constructed from
crystals of lead tungstate (PbWO
4). The crystalline form
together with oxygen components in PbWO 4 provide a
highly transparent material which acts as a scintillator. The
readout of the crystals in achieved by silicon avalanche photo-
diodes. The barrel part of the EM calorimeter extends to r =
1.29 m and consists of 61200 crystals (360 inφ and 170 inη),
covering a range of |η| < 1.479. The EM calorimeter end-
caps are placed at z =± 3.154 m and cover an η-range up to
3.0 with 7324 crystals on each side. A pre-shower detector is
installed in order to discriminate between pions and photons.
The hadronic calorimeter of the CMS detector is a sam-
pling calorimeter which consists of layers of brass or steel as
passive material, interleaved with tiles of plastic scintillator.
It is split in four parts. The barrel part ( |η| < 1.3) con-
sists of 14 brass absorbers and two stainless steel absorbers
as the innermost and outermost plates. The granularity is
0.087× 0.087 in the η,φ-plane. Due to the space limitations
from the solenoid, an outer calorimeter has been installed. It
consists of two scintillators at r = 3.82 m and r = 4.07 m
with 12.5 cm steel in between. The endcap calorimeters cover
1.3 < |η| < 3.0 and are made of 18 layers of 77 mm brass
plates interleaved by 9 mm scintillators. The η-region from
3.0 < |η| < 5.0 is covered by forward calorimeters, posi-
tioned at z =± 11 m. They will also register the energy
deposits of electrons and photons in this rapidity range.
The barrel and endcap parts of the CMS muon system con-
sist of four layers of precision tracking chambers. The barrel
part covers a range up to |η
|= 1.3 and drift-tube cham-
bers are used for the tracking. The tracking information in
both endcaps (0.9 < |η| < 2.4) is provided by cathode strip
123


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 19 of 59 2916
Table 5 Reconstruction performance of electrons, muons and particle jets of the A TLAS and CMS experiment. The reconstruction efﬁciency and
momentum/energy resolutions are shown for the kinematic ranges deﬁned. Further details can be found in the references given
Object Deﬁnition and algorithm Kinematic range Reconstruction efﬁciency pT-resolution Reference
A TLAS
Electron Medium quality deﬁnition |η| < 2.4 94–98 % ≈ 2% [ 118]
20 GeV < ET < 40 GeV
Muon Combined tracking+muon |η| < 2.5 ≈ 95 % ≈ 2% [ 121]
20 GeV < pT < 40 GeV
Jet Anti- kT (/Delta1R = 0.4) |η| < 0.8, ET = 100 GeV 100 % ≈ 10 [ 123]
CMS
Electron Medium, multivariate |η| < 1.479 75–85 % ≈ 3–4 % [ 127]
20 GeV < ET < 40 GeV
Muon Combined tracking+muon |η| < 1.2 ≈ 95 % ≈ 2% [ 120]
20 GeV < pT < 40 GeV
Jet Anti- kT (/Delta1R = 0.5) |η| < 0.5, ET = 100 GeV 100 % ≈ 10 [ 124]
chambers. The muon triggers are based on resistive place
chambers, similar to the A TLAS experiment [117].
The CMS trigger system has two levels. The ﬁrst-level
trigger is hardware-based and uses coarsely segmented infor-
mation from the calorimeters and the muon system. It reduces
the rate to 100 kHz. The second-level trigger, called the high-
level trigger, is a software-based trigger system which is
based on fast reconstruction algorithms. It reduces the ﬁnal
rate for data-recording down to 400 Hz.
3.5 Reconstructed objects
Measurements of single vector boson production using
A TLAS and CMS data involve in general ﬁve primary physics
objects. These objects are electrons, photons, muons, neutri-
nos, whose energy can only be inferred, and particle jets,
which originate from hadronised quarks and gluons. An
overview of the A TLAS and CMS detector performance for
several physics objects is summarised in Table 5.
3.5.1 Electron, photon and muon reconstruction
Electrons candidates are identiﬁed by requiring that sig-
niﬁcant energy deposits in the EM calorimeter, which are
grouped to so-called electromagnetic clusters, exist and that
there is an associated track in the tracking detector. The
transverse momenta of the electrons are calculated from the
energy measurement in the EM calorimeter and the track-
direction information is taken from the tracking detector. A
series of quality cuts are deﬁned to select electron candi-
dates. These cuts include cuts on the shower-shape distribu-
tions in the calorimeter, track-quality requirements and the
track-matching quality to the clusters. Stringent cuts on these
quantities ensure a good rejection of non-electron objects,
such as particle jets faking electron signatures in the detector.
A TLAS has three different quality deﬁnitions for electrons,
named loose, medium and tight [118] and CMS analyses use
two deﬁnitions, called loose and tight [119].
For some analyses in both A TLAS and CMS, electron
clusters in the transition region between the barrel and endcap
sections are rejected, as cables and services in this detector
region lead to a lower quality of reconstructed clusters. These
regions are deﬁned as 1 .37 < |η| < 1.52 and 1.44 < |η| <
1.57 in A TLAS and CMS respectively. Electron candidates
in the forward region from 2 .5 < |η| < 4.9 (used by some
A TLAS analyses) have no associated track information and
therefore their identiﬁcation is based solely on the shower-
shape information.
Photons candidates are reconstructed by clustered energy
deposits on the EM calorimeter in a range of |η| < 2.37 and
|η| < 2.5f o rA T L A S[118
] and CMS [ 119], respectively,
as well as speciﬁc shower-shape cuts. If no reconstructed
track in the tracking detector can be associate to the elec-
tromagnetic cluster, then the photon candidate is marked as
an unconverted photon candidate. If the EM cluster can be
associated to two tracks, which are consistent with a recon-
structed conversion vertex, the candidate is deﬁned as a con-
verted photon candidate.
Muon candidates are identiﬁed by one reconstructed track
in the muon spectrometer. Combined muons are required to
have in addition an associated track in the tracking detec-
tor. The measured 4-momenta, in particular the transverse
momenta, of combined muons are based on a statistical
combination of the independent measurements within the
tracking and muon detectors or a complete reﬁt of all avail-
able parameters. For the measurements presented here, the
momentum resolution for muons is dominated by the infor-
mation from the tracking detector for both experiments. CMS
can reconstruct muons within |η| < 2.4[ 120], while the
A TLAS muon spectrometer reaches |η| < 2.7[ 121]. How-
123


--- Page 20 ---
2916 Page 20 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
ever, muons that are reconstructed beyond |η| > 2.5, have
no associated information from the tracking detector avail-
able and therefore only kinematic information from the muon
spectrometer can be used. A TLAS analyses therefore often
restrict the muon range to |η| < 2.4.
In many single vector boson measurements, the leptons
are required to be isolated meaning that there is no signif-
icant energy deposited around the lepton itself. Requiring
isolation greatly reduces the number of particle jets which
are misreconstructed as electron, photons or muons.
Isolation can be deﬁned in several ways. First, a tracking-
based isolation can be used that is deﬁned as
p
iso
T =
/Delta1R(η,φ)<0,3∑
i
pi
T/plepton
T , (36)
where i indicates the sum over all reconstructed tracks in the
tracking detector with an energy above a given threshold and
within a cone radius of 0.3 in the(η, φ)-plane. The track from
the lepton candidate itself is not considered. This quantity
can be normalised by the transverse momentum of the lepton
candidate, which ensures a more stable isolation deﬁnition
for larger transverse momenta. A similar deﬁnition can be
made using the EM calorimeter, i.e.
E
iso
T =
/Delta1R(η,φ)<0.3∑
i
Ei
T /Elepton
T , (37)
where i runs over all EM clusters within /Delta1R < 0.3 that are
not associated to the reconstructed lepton. A TLAS uses both,
tracking- and calorimeter-based isolation criteria as deﬁned
above. CMS uses similar isolation variables, but in addition it
applies non-normalised isolation deﬁnitions based on tracks
or energies in the hadronic calorimeter.
3.5.2 Hadronic jets and missing energy reconstruction
Hadronised partons are detected as particle jets in the EM and
hadronic calorimeters. To reconstruct particle jets in A TLAS,
the energy deposits are merged to topological clusters in a
pseudorapidity range of |η| < 4.9. Clusters are seeded by
calorimeter cell deposits with a four sigma deviation from
the noise level. An anti- k
T algorithm [ 122] is then used to
reconstruct the clusters into jets. The typical A TLAS dis-
tance parameter of the jet deﬁnition is R = 0.4. In addition
it is often required that the distance between leptons and
jets in the ( η,φ)-plane of the detector satisﬁes the condi-
tion /Delta1R(l, jet )> 0.3 to avoid double counting [ 123]. The
jet energy and direction is corrected for effects like addi-
tional dead material in the detector, the difference in energy
response in the calorimeter to hadronic versus EM interac-
tions, the loss of energy outside the jet radius and the presence
of energy from pile-up interactions [ 123]. For CMS analy-
ses, where the detector features a superior tracking system but
offers a less precise calorimetry system, the so-called particle
ﬂow technique [124] is used. This method combines informa-
tion from all detector systems, in particular the calorimeter
and the tracking detector and aims to identify all particles
in mutual exclusive categories: muons, electrons, including
the identiﬁcation of bremsstrahlung photons, converted and
unconverted photons, charged and uncharged hadrons. Thus,
a full event description of each particle is attempted. This
event description is used as input to an anti- k
T algorithm
with a typical distance parameter of R = 0.5. The jet energy
and direction is also corrected for effects like the presence of
pile-up and the non-compensation of the calorimeter [ 125].
Both experiments have dedicated algorithms to identify
particle jets originating from b- and c-quarks. These algo-
rithms combine information as regards the impact parameter
signiﬁcance of tracks with the expected topology of semilep-
tonic b-o r c-decays [126].
The energy of neutrinos, which leave the detector unseen,
must be inferred though missing energy. While the initial
collision energy in beam direction of the partons that are
involved in the hard scattering process is not known at hadron
colliders, the vector sum of all transverse momenta and ener-
gies in the initial state must be zero. Due to energy and
momentum conservation, this must also hold for all ﬁnal-
state objects in the transverse plane, deﬁned as
0 =
∑
i
Ecalo
T,i +
∑
i
pμ
t,i +
∑
i
pν
T,i, (38)
where the ﬁrst term corresponds to the vector sum of all
transverse energy deposits in the calorimetric system, the
second term corresponds to the transverse momenta of the
muons reconstructed by the muon systems and the last term
corresponds to the transverse momentum sum of all neutrinos
in the ﬁnal state. The latter term is called the missing energy,
E
miss
T =− ∑
i Ecalo
T,i −∑
i pμ
t,i , and its absolute value is called
missing transverse energy Emiss
T .
The A TLAS measurement of Emiss
T uses all electromag-
netic and hadronic energy clusters up to |η|= 4.9. Cells
which are associated with a particle jet are calibrated with
a hadronic energy scale correction, while cells associated to
electromagnetic showers are calibrated via the electromag-
netic energy scale [123]. The CMS measurement ofE
miss
T fol-
lows similar lines, but again it uses the information provided
by the particle ﬂow algorithms to improve the measurement
[124].
3.6 Detector simulation and calibration
A detailed simulation of the A TLAS and CMS detector
response has been developed over recent years. Both simula-
tions are based on the GEANT4 package [128], which offers
the possibility to describe the interaction of all ﬁnal-state par-
ticles with the detectors at a microscopic level. In a second
123


--- Page 21 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 21 of 59 2916
step, the digitisation of the simulated detector interactions is
performed and the nominal data reconstruction algorithms
are applied.
Several methods are used to calibrate the detector and to
compare data to the simulated events. One important calibra-
tion for lepton and jet reconstruction is based on the study
of the leptonic decays of the Z boson, which will be brieﬂy
summarised in the following. More details of lepton and jet
calibration can be found in [ 123,125].
The lepton reconstruction and identiﬁcation efﬁciencies
can be determined in data via the tag-and-probe method .
This method makes use of well known decay properties of
a resonance, e.g. the Z boson, into two well identiﬁed parti-
cles. One particle is selected with a strict selection (the tag)
to obtain a low background rate. The second particle (the
probe) is required to only pass loose selection cuts and can
then be used to determine the selection efﬁciency for tighter
requirements.
A simple example is the reconstruction efﬁciency of
muons in the muon spectrometer. The Z boson decays into
two muons, resulting in two oppositely charged tracks in the
tracking and muon detectors. The tag object is required to
have a track in both detector systems. The probe object is
required to have only a track in the tracking detector which
forms an invariant mass close to the Z boson mass. This
ensures a rather clean sample of Z boson events in the muon
decay channel. The corresponding reconstruction efﬁciency
can be determined by testing if a matching track to the probe
can be found.
Since the Z boson mass and width is precisely known
from the LEP experiments, it can also be used to calibrate
the energy scale and resolution of leptons. Here, the invariant
mass spectra of the leptonic Z boson decays are compared
in data and simulations. The peak of the mass distribution
is sensitive to the lepton energy/momentum scale, while the
width of the distributions gives a handle on the energy and
momentum resolutions.
The production of the Z boson also offers the possibility
to calibrate the energy scale of particle jets and the hadronic
activity in the calorimeters. Z bosons which are produced
with large transverse momenta must balance this momenta
with additional partons in the ﬁnal state. The transverse
momenta of theZ boson can be reconstructed rather precisely
by the 4-momentum measurements of its decay leptons. This
transverse momentum must be balanced by reconstructed
particle jets, or to be more general, by the total measured
hadronic activity. Hence the energy scale and the resolution
of particle jets can be calibrated in data.
It should be noted that these methods rely on the available
statistics of the corresponding control samples, e.g. on the
available number of recorded Z boson events in the leptonic
decay channel. While the uncertainties on the detector cali-
bration are usually treated as systematic uncertainties in the
physics analyses, they have a signiﬁcant statistical compo-
nent which can be reduced by studying more data. Analyses
which are based on the 2010 data have therefore signiﬁcant
larger uncertainties due to the limited statistics of the cali-
bration samples.
4 Production cross section measurements at the LHC
For experimental measurements, the production cross section
is calculated via the following equation:
σ
incl
V = Nsignal
ε· BR ·
∫
L dt . (39)
The number of signal events is determined as Nsignal =
Ndata − Nbkg, where Ndata is the number selected events in
data and Nbkg is the number of background events surviv-
ing the signal selection. The factor εis the efﬁciency of the
signal events passing the signal selection criteria. To correct
the cross section for the choice of a speciﬁc decay chan-
nel, a branching ratio factor, BR is applied. These ratios are
known to a high accuracy for the gauge bosons from LEP
experiments [35]. Finally,
∫
L dt is the integrated luminos-
ity, which is a measure of the size of the data sample used.
The efﬁciency correction factorεis usually estimated with
simulations of the signal process. These simulations include
both a detailed description of the object reconstruction in the
detector, called the reconstruction level, and the ﬁnal-state
particle information of the generator calculations, called the
generator level. The same signal selection cuts as applied to
the data can be applied to the simulated events at reconstruc-
tion level. However, the simulation do not model the data
perfectly and these differences are corrected in the estima-
tion of ε, following the methods described in Sect. 3.6.I n
addition, basic signal selection cuts, such as minimal p
T cut,
can also be applied to the ﬁnal-state particles at the genera-
tor level. The object value for the ﬁnal-state particles though
differs from the reconstructed quantity. Following these def-
initions, εcan be deﬁned as the ratio of all events which pass
the signal selection on reconstruction level N
selected
reco. over the
number of all generated events N all
gen..
The efﬁciency correction ε can further be decomposed
as the product of a ﬁducial acceptance, A, and a detector-
induced correction factor, C, i.e. ε = A · C. The ﬁducial
acceptance is the ratio of the number of events that pass the
geometrical and kinematic cuts in the analysis on generator
level (N
selected
gen. ) over the total number of generated events in
a simulated sample of signal process ( N all
gen.). These selec-
tion cuts on generator level usually require geometrical and
kinematic constraints close to the cuts applied on the recon-
structed objects, e.g. leptons in the ﬁnal state should fulﬁl
p
T > 20 GeV and |η| < 2.5. The dominant uncertainties on
the ﬁducial acceptance are the scale and PDF uncertainties.
123


--- Page 22 ---
2916 Page 22 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
The detector correction factor C is deﬁned as the number
of selected events in simulated sample (N selected
reco. ), which now
includes a detailed simulation of the detector response, over
the number of events in the ﬁducial phase space at generator
level (N selected
gen. ). Hence the product of A· C can be written as
ε= C · A = N selected
reco.
N selectedgen.
·
N selected
gen.
N allgen.
= N selected
reco.
N allgen.
. (40)
The uncertainties associated with the detector correction
factor are dominated by experimental sources, such as limited
knowledge of reconstruction or cut efﬁciencies and the accu-
racy of the energy/momentum measurements. This factor can
be larger than unity due to migration effects from outside
the ﬁducial region into the reconstructed sample. However,
in practice this is rarely the case, as detector inefﬁciencies
and the selection criteria on reconstructed objects reduce the
number of events.
Deﬁning ε as A · C is convenient because if the deﬁni-
tion of the ﬁducial volume used for N
selected
gen. is close to the
cuts applied to the data, this factorisation allows for a separa-
tion of theoretical and experimental uncertainties. The ﬁdu-
cial acceptance, A, is completely independent of the detector
response whereas the detector correction factor, C, is largely
independent of theoretical modelling uncertainties.
In many experimental measurements, the ﬁducial cross
section, deﬁned as
σ fid .
V = Ndata − Nbkg
C · BR ·
∫
L dt = σincl .
V · A, (41)
is therefore used, as this deﬁnition is only affected to a small
extend by theoretical uncertainties. Using ﬁducial cross sec-
tions has the added beneﬁt that experimental data can be more
easily compared to future theory predictions with improved
theoretical uncertainties. On the other hand, it should be
noted that the theoretical predictions for ﬁducial cross sec-
tions are also subject to sizeable PDF and scale uncertainties.
In addition to measurements of the inclusive cross section,
measurements of the cross section as a function of one or
more observables can also be made. For a given range of a
single observable, this is expressed as
dσ
fid .
V
dx = N(/Delta1x)data − N(/Delta1x)bkg
C(/Delta1x) · BR ·
∫
L dt (42)
where x is the observable being measured, N(/Delta1x)data,
N(/Delta1x)bkg and C(/Delta1x) are the same as deﬁned above but for a
speciﬁc range of x. Differential cross-section measurements
allow for a comparison of distributions of the theoretical pre-
dictions to the data.
The challenge of measuring the differential cross section
is the transformation of the measured distribution, which is
distorted by the limited resolution and efﬁciencies of the
detector, to the underlying or true distribution. One possibil-
ity to infer the true distribution from the measurement is to
directly use Eq. 42, which is known as bin-by-bin unfolding.
However, this method is only a valid approach if the purity,
deﬁned as the ratio of events which fall in the same range of
/Delta1x in both the reconstructed- and the generator-level selec-
tions over the total number of events that have been generated
in the range /Delta1x, of the underlying distribution is high, typi-
cally above 90 %. When the purity is low, C(/Delta1x) can have
large theoretical uncertainties, since simulations are the only
means to estimate this migration between bins. To reduce
these uncertainties, advanced unfolding methods have to be
used. One widely used approach is Bayesian unfolding [129].
Here, the experimental detector effects are represented in a
response matrix, whose elements are the probability of an
event in the ith bin at generator level to be reconstructed in
the jth bin at reconstruction level. The bin size is chosen
to be wider than the detector resolution effects, aiming at a
purity of > 60 %. In the ﬁrst iteration, the response matrix
is derived from simulations. It is then multiplied to the mea-
sured spectrum, resulting in a ﬁrst unfolded spectrum of the
data. For the nth iteration, the response matrix is reweighted
to the unfolded spectrum of step n − 1 in order to minimise
the bias of the initial prediction. Thus the unfolded spectrum
becomes insensitive to the original prior. Other unfolding
techniques, such as matrix inversion or single value decom-
position [130], are also used.
5 Event selection and background estimates
The event selection of vector bosons is similar for all studies
that are discussed in this article. Hence we introduce a general
approach for the signal selection and background estimation
for W and Z bosons. The discussion is mainly based on the
published inclusive cross-section analyses based on the 2010
data sample [131,132]. However, important differences in the
signal selection for other analyses, such as the production of
vector bosons in association with jets, are also highlighted.
As the event selection is rather technical matter in nature,
this section should be understood as an introduction to the
basic concepts. Experienced readers might ﬁnd the relevant
information summarised in Tables 6, 7 and 8.
5.1 Signal selection and background estimations of Z/γ
∗
events
The experimental signature of Z bosons in the leptonic decay
channel are two oppositely charged, isolated and energetic
leptons. These leptons stem from the same vertex and form an
invariant mass close to theZ boson mass ofm
Z = 91.2G e V .
An event display of the typical Z → μμ event candidate,
recorded by the A TLAS detector, is shown in Fig. 16.I t
should be noted that the di-lepton ﬁnal state contains contri-
123


--- Page 23 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 23 of 59 2916
Table 6 Summary of the kinematic cuts used by the A TLAS [131] and CMS analysis [132] on leptons and their invariant quantities for the electron
and muon decay channel of Z and W Bosons respectively
A TLAS CMS
Z → l+l− W± → l±ν Z → l+l− W± → l±ν
Electron-channel ET (e+)> 20 GeV pT (e±)> 20 GeV ET (e+)> 25 GeV One e± with ET > 25 GeV
ET (e− )> 20 GeV pT (ν) >25 GeV ET (e− )> 25 GeV |ηe± | < 1.44 or
|ηe± | < 1.37 or |ηe± | < 1.37 or |ηe± | < 1.44 or 1 .57 < |ηe± | < 2.5
1.47 < |ηe± | < 2.47 1 .47 < |ηe± | < 2.47 1 .57 < |ηe± | < 2.5
66 GeV < mee < 116 GeV mT > 40 GeV 60 GeV < mee < 120 GeV
Muon-channel pT (μ+)> 20 GeV pT (μ±)> 20 GeV pT (μ+)> 25 GeV One e± with pT > 25 GeV
pT (μ− )> 20 GeV pT (ν) >25 GeV pT (μ− )> 25 GeV |ημ± | < 2.1
|ημ± | < 2.4 |ημ± | < 2.4 |ημ± | < 2.1
66 GeV < mμμ < 116 GeV mT > 40 GeV 60 GeV < mμμ < 120 GeV
Table 7 Data sample and
background estimations of the
A TLAS and CMS inclusive
analyses for the process
Z → l
+l− , based on the 2010
data sample
A TLAS CMS
Z → e+e− Z → μ+μ− Z → e+e− Z → μ+μ−
Data (2010) 9725 11709 8452 13 728
Total background 206 ± 64 86 ± 32 35 ± 11 60 ± 21
Percentage of each background compared to the total number of backgrounds
WW , WZ , ZZ 10 % 26 % 37 % 47 %
t ¯t, Z → ττ 14 % 22 % 47 % 50 %
Q C Dm u l t i - j e t s 7 6% 5 2% 1 6% 3%
Table 8 Data sample and
background estimations of the
A TLAS and CMS inclusive
analyses for the process
W
± → l±ν, based on the 2010
data sample
A TLAS CMS
W± → e±ν W± → μ±ν W± → e±ν W± → μ±ν
Data (2010) 130741 139748 235687 166457
Total background 9610 ± 590 12300 ± 1100 99684 ± 388 25700 ± 383
Percentage of each background compared to the total number of backgrounds
W → τν 3 4% 3 4% 4% 1 6%
Top 5 % 4 % 1 % 2 %
Z → l+l− , WW ,
WZ , ZZ
7% 2 3% 1 1% 2 6%
QCD multi-jet 54 % 38 % 85 % 56 %
butions from bothZ boson and virtual photons (γ∗) exchange
as well as interference. Therefore, the measured production
cross sections are usually given in terms of a combinedZ/γ
∗
exchange.
In most A TLAS analyses, the generic Z/γ∗ → l+l−
selection requires two oppositely charged leptons with an
invariant mass between 66 GeV < mll < 116 GeV. Muons
are required to have a reconstructed track in both the track-
ing and the muon detectors within |η| < 2.4 and a mini-
mal transverse momentum of p
T > 20 GeV. In addition, the
muons are required to pass a relative tracking-based isolation
requirement based on a cone radius of /Delta1R = 0.2. Electrons
are required to fulﬁl |η| < 1.37 or 1 .52 < |η| < 2.4 with
a minimum transverse energy of ET > 20 GeV. In addi-
tion, the medium identiﬁcation criteria have to be satisﬁed.
A TLAS also uses forward electrons for some analyses, i.e.
electrons within 2.4 < |η| < 4.9, which have no associated
track in the tracking system. For those electrons tight iden-
tiﬁcation criteria have to be fulﬁlled and at least one of the
two signal electrons must be within |η| < 2.5 and have a
corresponding track in the tracking detector.
CMS selects Z → μμ events by requiring two recon-
structed, oppositely charged muons within |η| < 2.1 coming
from the same vertex and a transverse momentum require-
ment of p
T > 20 GeV. Both muons have to fulﬁl a relative
tracking-based isolation requirement within a cone radius
123


--- Page 24 ---
2916 Page 24 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 16 Event display of a typical Z → μμ event candidate, recorded
by the A TLAS detector. The reconstructed muon tracks in the barrel
and endcap region are indicated as red lines
of /Delta1R = 0.3 and must match to the corresponding di-
lepton trigger objects. Later CMS analyses, extend the |η|-
requirement to 2 .4 and lower the cuts on the muon trans-
verse momenta: the leading and subleading muon have to
fulﬁl pT > 14 GeV and pT > 9 GeV, respectively. For
the electron decay channel of Z → ee, at least two recon-
structed electrons within |η| < 1.44 or 1.57 < |η| < 2.5 and
ET > 20 GeV are required. In later CMS analyses, this was
relaxed to require the leading electron to havepT > 20 GeV,
while the subleading electron must fulﬁl pT > 10 GeV.
While it is not required that both electrons have oppositely
reconstructed charge, they must be matched to the corre-
sponding trigger objects. The electrons must also satisfy a
relative tracking-based isolation requirements within a cone
radius of /Delta1R < 0.3. The Z boson mass range for both chan-
nels is deﬁned as 60 GeV < m
ll < 120 GeV. The chosen
mass range of the CMS experiment is larger compared to
the A TLAS deﬁnition. This leads to an increase of the avail-
able phase space by a factor of 1 .015 for CMS. The signal
selection cuts are summarised in Table 6.
For measurements of Z/γ∗ production in association with
jets, the jets are required to have pT > 30 GeV. For A TLAS
measurements, the jets at high rapidities are used, |y| < 4.4,
whereas CMS uses jets within the acceptance of the tracker,
|η| < 2.4. Since A TLAS and CMS use jet algorithms with
different size parameters (see Sect. 3.5) the jet energies can
not be directly compared. Jets within an /Delta1R < 0.3o r /Delta1R <
0.5 of an electron or muon are not counted for CMS and
A TLAS analyses, respectively.
For Z/γ∗ → l+l− events, the main background contribu-
tions stem from Z → ττevents, di-boson events, t ¯t decays
and QCD multi-jet events.Z → ττevents can pass the signal
selection when the τ-leptons decay into electrons or muons.
Di-boson production such asWZ → l±νl+l− and top-quark
pair production such as (t ¯t → W+bW − ¯b → l+νbl− ν) both
have signatures with two energetic and isolated leptons. With
the exception of the WZ di-boson process, these processes
though do not peak atmZ and are largely removed by the mass
cut. The QCD multi-jet events do not necessarily have a lep-
ton in the ﬁnal state and are discussed in more detail below.
To estimate the backgrounds, CMS often uses a data-
driven approach, which exploits the fact that most of the
mentioned background processes have an eμ decay channel,
while the signal has two same ﬂavour leptons in the ﬁnal
state. By requiring opposite ﬂavour leptons, the background
can be directly estimated after correcting for differences in
the lepton reconstruction. For most A TLAS analyses, sim-
ulations are used for these estimates, since these processes
are theoretical well understood in both the absolute back-
ground contribution and the predictions of the kinematic dis-
tributions. In Z/γ
∗ production in association with jets, the
background from t ¯t production becomes more signiﬁcant for
larger jet multiplicities. In this case, A TLAS analyses use a
data-driven approach similar to the CMS method.
The QCD multi-jet background cannot be predicted pre-
cisely and must be estimated with data-driven methods. QCD
multi-jet events pass the signal selection cuts in one of two
ways: a jet is misreconstructed in the calorimeter andfakes an
electron signature or the jet contains a heavy-ﬂavour quark
or kaon which decays into an electron or muon. In the ﬁrst
case, jets can fake an electron signal without a real electron
in the jet itself whereas in the second case a real lepton is
present. The main difference between the lepton signatures
for QCD multi-jets versus those from Z/γ
∗ events is the iso-
lation properties and - in the case of electrons - the calorimeter
shower-shapes. While the leptons in signal events appear very
isolated in the detector, jets contain a signiﬁcant number of
adjacent particles. Similarly W boson production in associa-
tion with jets can also mimic this signature, where one lepton
comes from the leptonic W boson decay, and the second lep-
ton originates from or is faked by the accompanying jet.
To estimate these backgrounds, both experiments use sim-
ilar data-driven approaches. A control region in data domi-
nated by the QCD multi-jet events is used to deﬁne the kine-
matic distributions of the background. For the muon decay
channel, this is achieved by inverting the isolation cut of one
of the muons. The control region for the electron channel
is obtained by requiring a non-isolated electron which only
passes the loose electron identiﬁcation cuts. The uncertain-
ties of the predicted background distributions can be cross-
checked by comparing the spectra to same-sign, isolated di-
lepton events, which is also expected to be dominated by
QCD multi-jet background. The absolute normalisation of
the QCD multi-jet background is then achieved by adjust-
ing the sum of the expected signal and other background
template to the data as a function of the invariant mass. For
Z/γ
∗ production in association with jets, the normalisation
of the QCD multi-jet background is determined for each jet
multiplicity separately.
123


--- Page 25 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 25 of 59 2916
Fig. 17 A TLAS [131]:
Di-lepton invariant mass and
rapidity yZ -distribution for the
central electrons and muons.
The simulation is normalised to
the data. The QCD multi-jet
background shapes have been
estimated by data-driven
methods
 [GeV]eem
70 80 90 100 110
Events / 1 GeV
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
 ee→Z 
QCD
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 36 pb∫
 ee→Central Z 
Zy
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Events / 0.2
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
 ee→Z 
QCD
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 36 pb∫
 [GeV]μμm
70 80 90 100 110
Events / 1 GeV
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
 [GeV]μμm
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
μμ→ Z
 QCD
-1
 L dt = 33 pb∫
ATLAS
Zy
-2 -1 0 1 2
Events
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Zy
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
μμ→ Z
 QCD
-1
 L dt = 33 pb∫
ATLAS
Some CMS analyses extract the signal yield together with
the lepton trigger and reconstruction efﬁciencies by using
a simultaneous ﬁt to the measured invariant mass spectra
in several di-lepton candidate categories, e.g. two combined
muons or one combined muon and one inner detector track.
The shapes of the signal and background distributions are
taken from MC predictions or data-driven approaches as
described above.
For measurements of a Z boson in association with b-jets,
backgrounds from Z events in association with light ( u, d,
and gluon) jets and c-quark jets dominate. To determine the
number of Z+ b-jet events, ﬁrst di-boson, single-top, t ¯t, and
W → τνor Z → τνbackgrounds are removed. For CMS
analyses, the dominant background of t ¯t is normalised to
the data at large values of the Z boson mass peak, whereas
for the A TLAS analysis, simulations are used to subtract the
background. To extract the number of Z +b-jets events from
the light- and c-jet events, both A TLAS and CMS use a simi-
lar approach; a maximum likelihood ﬁt is preformed using a
b-tagging observable. For the CMS analysis, this observable
used is the invariant mass of the secondary vertex, estimated
from the b-tagging algorithm. For A TLAS measurements, the
observable used is one of the outputs of the b-tagging algo-
rithm’s neural network. In both cases, these observables are
chosen because they give good separation between light-, c-
and b-jet events. The number of Z+b-jets is then determined
from the ﬁt.
The selected data for the inclusive Z boson production
measurements based on the 2010 data sample for A TLAS
and CMS together with their expected signal and background
contributions, as well as the respective uncertainties, are sum-
marised in Table 7. Similar background contaminations and
associated uncertainties are seen in the analyses which are
based on the 2011 data. The invariant mass distributions and
the p
T spectra of the decay leptons for the selected data sam-
ples and the signal MC predictions are shown for A TLAS and
CMS in Figs. 17 and 18, respectively. All detector correction
effects have been applied. The background contribution is
a few percent, making the leptonic Z boson decay channel
one of the cleanest signatures at the LHC. Hence it is an ideal
channel for precision measurements of the Standard Model as
well as for the detector calibration. Overall, excellent agree-
ment between data and the predictions can be seen.
5.2 Signal selection and background estimations
of W boson events
The leptonic decay of the W bosons ( W
± → l±ν) leads
to an isolated and energetic lepton and missing transverse
energy. An event display of the typical W → eν event can-
didate, recorded by the CMS detector, is shown in Fig. 19.
Since no information on the z-component of the missing
energy is available, the mass of the W-boson cannot be recon-
structed. However, the invariant mass projection to the trans-
123


--- Page 26 ---
2916 Page 26 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 18 CMS [132]: Di-lepton
invariant mass spectra of
selected Z boson events, where
all detector corrections have
been applied. The points with
the error bars represent the data.
Superimposed are the expected
distributions from simulations,
normalised to an integrated
l u m i n o s i t yo f3 6p b
− 1.T h e
expected distributions are the
Z signal (yellow, light
histogram), other EWK
processes (orange,m e d i u m
histogram) and ttbar background
(red, dark histogram)
number of events / GeV
-110
1
10
210
3
10
   data
-μ+μ→   Z 
   EWK
t   t
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
)    [GeV]-μ+μM(
50 100 150 200
χ
-5
0
5
CMS
Fig. 19 Event display of a typical W → eνevent candidate, recorded
by the CMS detector. The reconstructed cluster in the electromagnetic
calorimeter is shown in red, the missing transverse energy in yellow
verse plane, deﬁned as
mT =
√
2 · pl
T · pν
T · (1 − cos(φl − φν)), (43)
can be reconstructed, since the(x, y) components of the neu-
trino momentum are inferred from theEmiss
T . This observable
is identical to the W boson mass when the decay happens
purely in the x-y-plane.
The A TLAS analyses select W boson events by requir-
ing one reconstructed, isolated lepton, a minimal Emiss
T of
25 GeV and a minimal transverse mass of mT > 40 GeV.
For the muon decay channel, one combined reconstructed
muon with pT > 20 GeV within |η| < 2.4 is required. In
the electron decay channel, electrons are required to fulﬁl
|η| < 1.37 or 1.52 < |η| < 2.4 with a minimum transverse
energy of ET > 20 GeV and medium identiﬁcation criteria.
The signal selection in the corresponding CMS analy-
sis is signiﬁcantly different. W boson candidate events are
selected by only requiring one reconstructed electron with
ET > 25 GeV and |η| < 2.5 or one reconstructed muon
with pT > 25 GeV and |η| < 2.1. In later analyses, the η
requirement has been relaxed to |η| < 2.4 for muons but the
threshold for electrons raised toET > 35 GeV. Events with a
second reconstructed lepton with pT > 15 GeV are vetoed.
No additional cuts on Emiss
T and mT are imposed. For the
CMS measurement of W events in association with jets, the
selection is slightly modiﬁed. The cut on the reconstructed
lepton is p
T > 20 GeV with no additional leptons above
pT > 10 GeV. A cut of mT > 20 GeV is applied.
Both experiments use the signed curvature of the lepton
tracks in the inner detector to determine its charge and hence
also the charge of theW boson. While the charge misidentiﬁ-
cation is rare in muon events, a signiﬁcant fraction of electron
charges are mismeasured. Due to substantial material in the
tracking detector, a large fraction of electrons radiate photons
which in turn may convert to electron–positron pairs close
to the original electrons, leading to charge misidentiﬁcations
during the track reconstruction. In addition to the tracking
information, CMS also uses the vertex and cluster position
of the calorimeter for the charge identiﬁcation.
For W production in association with jets, the jet selection
is the same as described in Sect. 5.1.
For both experiments, the major sources of backgrounds
for the signal selection are Z/γ
∗ production, the τ-lepton
decay channel of the W-boson, di-boson production, QCD
multi-jet events and top-pair production.
The Z/γ∗ process can pass the signal signature when
one lepton is not reconstructed, e.g. by being outside of the
detector acceptance, thereby creating signiﬁcant amounts of
123


--- Page 27 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 27 of 59 2916
Fig. 20 A TLAS [131]:
Distribution of the Emiss
T (left)
and mT (right) in the selected
W+ → l+ν candidate events
after all cuts for electrons ( left
two plots) and muons ( right two
plots). The simulation is
normalised to the data. The
QCD multi-jet background is
estimated via data-driven
methods
 [GeV]TE
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Events / 2.5 GeV2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
ν e→W 
QCD
τν→W 
-1
 L dt = 36 pb∫
+e
ATLAS
 [GeV]T m
 Events / 2.5 GeV
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
ν e→W 
QCD
τν→W 
-1
 L dt = 36 pb∫ +eATLAS
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
 [GeV]miss
TE
Events / 2.5 GeV
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
νμ→W 
QCD
μμ→Z 
τν→W 
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 33 pb∫
-μ
40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
 [GeV]Tm
Events / 2.5 GeV
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
νμ→W 
QCD
μμ→Z 
τν→W 
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 33 pb∫ -μ
40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120
Emiss
T . This background is theoretically understood to high
precision and therefore the kinematic distributions can be
predicted directly from simulations. The normalisation is
either taken from a control sample (by requiring two recon-
structed leptons), or also from simulations. Similarly the
W → τν background, where the τ lepton decays further
into electrons or muons and di-boson production, where one
or both of the bosons decays to leptons, is also theoretically
well understood and modelled to a sufﬁcient precision by
simulations.
As discussed in Sect. 5.1, the QCD multi-jet background
must be estimated using data-driven techniques. In A TLAS
analyses, the QCD multi-jet control region in the muon chan-
nel is deﬁned by reversing the isolation and removing the
cut on E
miss
T . For the electron channel, the control sample
is deﬁned by inverting some electron identiﬁcation criteria
and not applying an Emiss
T requirement. The normalisation of
the QCD multi-jet background is determined from data using
aﬁ to ft h e Emiss
T distribution, the results of which can seen
in Figs. 20 and 21.F o r W production in association with
jets, the normalisation is determined separately for each jet
multiplicity.
For measurements of the inclusive W production, CMS
extracts the number of W signal events with a binned,
extended maximum likelihood ﬁt to the Emiss
T distributions.
The Emiss
T distributions for the signal and for the Z/γ∗, t ¯t
and W → τνbackgrounds are based on simulations. The
shape of the QCD multi-jet background Emiss
T template is
determined in a control region, deﬁned by inverting a sub-
set of the electron identiﬁcation criteria or the muon isolation
requirement for the W → eνand W → μν-channel, respec-
tively. The ﬁt is performed separately forW
+ and W− signal
events.
Similar to Z/γ∗ and di-boson production, top-pair pro-
duction is also theoretically well understood but this back-
ground is large for W production in association with jets.
For inclusive measurements of W production where the top-
pair production is a small contribution, simulations are used
for the background estimates. For W events with jets, CMS
uses a data-driven approach to determine simultaneously the
number of both the top-pair events and the QCD multi-jet
events. This method exploits two features about t ¯t and QCD
multi-jet events. First, since t ¯t events contain a semileptonic
decay of the W, these events also peak inm
T at the W mass. In
contrast, QCD multi-jet events do not peak and have a falling
mT spectra. Second, t ¯t events also contain jets from b-quarks
which can be selected via b-tagging. To determine the nor-
malisation for t ¯t and QCD multi-jet events, a 2-dimensional
ﬁt in mT and the number of b-tagged jets is performed in
each jet multiplicity bin. For the A TLAS measurements, the
number of t ¯t events is determined using a 1-dimensional ﬁt
in the rapidity of the lepton as well as the mass of the W-
123


--- Page 28 ---
2916 Page 28 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 21 CMS [132]: The Emiss
T
and mT distributions for the
selected W+ → l+ν candidate
events. The points with the error
bars represent the data.
Superimposed are the
contributions obtained with the
ﬁt for QCD multi-jet
background (violet,d a r k
histogram), all other
backgrounds (orange,m e d i u m
histogram), and signal plus
background (yellow, light
histogram). The orange dashed
line is the signal contribution
number of events / 2.5 GeV
5
10
15
20
3
10×
  data
ν e→  W 
t  EWK+t
  QCD
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
0 20 40 60 80 100
χ -5
0
5
number of events / 5 GeV
5
10
15
20
25
3
10×
  data
ν e→  W 
t  EWK+t
  QCD
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
0 50 100 150
χ -5
0
5
number of events / 2 GeV
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
  data
νμ→  W 
t  EWK+t
  QCD
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
 [GeV]TE
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
χ -5
0
5
number of events / 5 GeV
5
10
15
20
25
  data
νμ→  W 
t  EWK+t
  QCD
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
 [GeV]TM
0 50 100 150
χ -5
0
5
 [GeV]TE  [GeV]TM
3
10× 3
10×
jet system for each jet multiplicity. The ﬁtted number of t ¯t
events is consistent with those from the simulations but has a
large statistical uncertainty. For this reason, the A TLAS mea-
surements use t ¯t simulations for the background estimates.
For the measurement of W + b-jets from A TLAS where
the t ¯t background is kinematically very similar to the signal
events, control regions with four jets are used to constrain the
normalisation for the t ¯t events. In addition the normalisation
of single-top events is constrained by ﬁtting the invariant
mass of the W boson and b-jet system. The extraction of the
b-quark events from the light- and c-jet background uses a
similar approach as outline in Sect. 5.1.
Again, the 2010 analyses for A TLAS [131] and for CMS
[132] are chosen as an example of the expected background
contributions. The resulting number of selected events of
A TLAS and CMS together with their expected signal and
background contributions and their uncertainties are sum-
m a r i s e di nT a b l e8. The corresponding E
miss
T and mT dis-
tributions of selected W-boson events is shown for the
A TLAS and CMS experiments in Figs. 20 and 21 respec-
tively.
6 Inclusive and differential cross-section measurements
The Standard Model predictions of the Drell–Y an processes
pp → W
± + X and pp → Z/γ∗ + X can be tested in a
completely new energy regime at the LHC: the study of the
Drell–Y an processes provides a unique opportunity to test
perturbative QCD predictions and improve the knowledge of
the proton’s PDFs (Sects. 6.1, 6.2). The measurement of the
transverse momentum distribution of vector bosons can be
used to test resummation techniques in addition to higher-
order corrections in QCD calculation. The corresponding
measurements are presented in Sect. 6.3. Moreover, the mea-
surement of the forward–backward production asymmetry
can constrain the vector and axial-vector couplings of the
Z boson to the quarks, where the latest results are presented
in Sect. 6.5 and the measurement of W boson polarisation
can test the electroweak properties of the underlying produc-
tion mechanism, discussed in Sect. 6.6. Finally, the precise
understanding of the Drell–Y an processes is a key-element
for the search of beyond the Standard Model signatures at
the LHC. V ery similar decay signatures of W and Z bosons
123


--- Page 29 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 29 of 59 2916
Table 9 Summary of the cross-section results of the inclusiveW and Z analyses of A TLAS and CMS based on the 2010 data sample. The combined
cross sections are given with their respective statistical, systematic, acceptance and luminosity uncertainty, respectively
A TLAS W+ → e+ν W+ → μ+ν W− → e− ν W− → μ− ν Z → e+e− Z → μ+μ−
Acceptance A 0 .479 ± 0.008 0 .4595 ± 0.008 0 .452 ± 0.009 0 .470 ± 0.010 0 .447 ± 0.009 0 .487 ± 0.010
Correction C 0 .693 ± 0.012 0 .796 ± 0.016 0 .706 ± 0.014 0 .779 ± 0.015 0 .618 ± 0.016 0 .7820.007
σincl. [nb] 6.06 6.06 4.15 4.20 0.952 0.935
stat. unc. [nb] 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.010 0.009
sys. unc. [nb] 0.10 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.026 0.009
lumi. unc. [nb] 0.21 0.21 0.14 0.17 0.032 0.032
theo. unc. [nb] 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.07 0.019 0.019
σ
incl. (comb.) 6 .05 ± 0.02 ± 0.07 ± 0.10 ± 0.21 4 .16 ± 0.01 ± 0.06 ± 0.08 ± 0.14 0 .937 ± 0.006 ± 0.009 ± 0.016 ± 0.032
CMS W+ → e+ν W+ → μ+ν W− → e− ν W+ → μ− ν Z → e+e− Z → μ+μ−
Acceptance A 0.5017 0.4594 0.4808 0.4471 0.3876 0.3978
Correction C 0 .737 ± 0.01 0 .854 ± 0.008 0 .732 ± 0.01 0 .841 ± 0.008 0 .609 ± 0.011 0 .871 ± 0.011
σincl. [nb] 6.15 5.98 4.34 4.20 0.992 0.968
stat. unc. [nb] 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.011 0.008
sys. unc. [nb] 0.10 0.07 0.07 0.05 0.018 0.007
theo. unc. [nb] 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.016 0.018
lumi. unc. [nb] 0.25 0.25 0.17 0.17 0.040 0.049
σ
incl. (comb.) 6 .04 ± 0.02 ± 0.06 ± 0.08 ± 0.24 4 .26 ± 0.01 ± 0.04 ± 0.07 ± 0.17 0 .974 ± 0.007 ± 0.007 ± 0.018 ± 0.039
are for example predicted by models of large extra dimen-
sions [ 133], additional U(1) gauge groups [ 134] or quark-
lepton compositeness models [ 135]. Hence, deviations from
the predicted production properties could open the window
to new physics.
6.1 Inclusive cross-section measurements
The inclusive production cross sections for the Drell–Y an
processes for the W boson and Z/γ∗ exchange are known
to NNLO precision in the strong coupling constant to a pre-
cision of ≈ 2 % (Sect. 2.7.7). The dominating uncertainties
are to due the limited knowledge of PDFs, while scale uncer-
tainties play only a minor role.
At tree level, Z bosons are produced by the annihilation of
quarks and antiquark pairs, i.e. u ¯u, d ¯d and to some extent s¯s.
While the u- and d-quarks are mainly the valence quarks of
the proton, their respective antiquarks are always sea quarks
in proton–proton collisions. The situation is different for the
production of W
± bosons, since their production mechanism
depends on their charge. The dominant processes forW+ and
W− are u ¯d → W+ and d ¯u → W− , respectively. Since two
u-valence quarks are available in the proton, but only one
d-valence quark, more W+ bosons are expected to be pro-
duced. The ratio of the W+ and W− production therefore
allows for a precise test of QCD predictions, as many the-
oretical and experimental uncertainties cancel in their ratio
(Table 10).
As one of the ﬁrst measurements performed at the LHC,
the cross sections times leptonic branching ratios σ
W± ·
BR (W → l±ν) and σZ · BR (Z → l+l− ) of inclusive
W and Z production for electron and muon ﬁnal states were
published by both experiments. These measurements, based
on the 2010 data sample with
∫
L dt = 35 pb − 1, are not
limited by their statistical precision [ 131,132], but by the
knowledge of the integrated luminosity. Hence, the inclusive
results, which are discussed in the following, are based solely
on the 2010 data sample.
The measurement strategy is based on Eq. 39, which was
discussed in detail in Sect. 4: The number of selected signal
events is ﬁrst corrected for the expected background con-
tribution and then for detector effects via a factor C within
a ﬁducial volume. The division by the integrated luminosity
corresponding to the analysed data sample results in the ﬁdu-
cial cross section. This can be extrapolated in a second step
to the full inclusive cross section via the acceptance factor
A. The detector efﬁciency factors C and the acceptance fac-
tors A with their respective uncertainties are shown for both
experiments and both decay channels in Table 9. The dom-
inating experimental uncertainties are due to lepton scales
and efﬁciencies.
The combined results for the inclusive cross sections for
W
± and Z/γ∗ for both experiments are also shown in Table
9. The dominating experimental uncertainties are due to the
limited knowledge on the integrated luminosity. In fact, by
using the theoretical predicted cross section, the integrated
luminosity of a data sample can be estimated.
123


--- Page 30 ---
2916 Page 30 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Table 10 Results of the production cross-section ratioσ(W+)/σ(W− )
and σ(W±)/σ(Z) from the A TLAS and CMS analyses, based on the
2010 data sample. The A TLAS measurement ofσ(W±)/σ(Z) = 10.89
was extrapolated to the CMS mass-range deﬁnition of the Z-Boson. The
expected theoretical value is also shown
A TLAS CMS Theory (NNLO)
σ(W+)/σ(W− ) 1.454 1 .421 1.43
Stat. Unc. 0 .006 0 .006 –
Sys. Unc. 0 .012 0 .014 –
Theo. Unc. 0 .022 0 .029 0.01
σ(W±)/σ(Z) 10.73 10 .54 10.74
Stat. Unc. 00 .08 00 .07 –
Sys. Unc. 00 .11 00 .08 –
Theo. Unc. 00 .12 00 .16 0.04
The luminosity uncertainty on the cross-section measure-
ment cancels in cross-section ratios, as well as some of the
experimental and theoretical uncertainties. Hence, also cross-
section ratios have been published for A TLAS and CMS. Spe-
cial focus will be drawn to the σ(W+)+σ(W− )
σ(Z) ratio, shown in
Table 10, where all correlated uncertainties have been taken
into account. The NNLO prediction of the ratio is also given.
A simple leading-order calculation for the expected cross-
section ratio for(W++W− )/Z highlights the dependence on
the quark-distribution functions. Ignoring heavy quark and
the γ
∗ contributions, as well as Cabibbo suppressed parts of
the cross section, leads to
σ(W+) + σ(W− ) = uv(x) + ¯ds(x) + dv(x) +¯us(x)
σ(Z) = (gV (u)2 + gA(u)2) · uq(x))
+(gV (d)2 + gA(d)2) · vq(x)) (44)
with
uq(x) = (uv(x) +¯us(x)), v q(x) = (dv(x) + ¯ds(x))
where uv(x) and dv(x) are the up- and down-valence quark
distributions and us(x) and ds(x) the respective sea-quark
distributions. When assuming that the light sea-quark and
antiquark distributions are the same for a given x and con-
sidering that (gV (u)2 + gA(u)2) ≈ (gV (d)2 + gA(d)2),t h i s
reduces to
σ(W+) + σ(W− ) ∼ σ(Z)
i.e. only a small dependence on PDFs is expected if the PDFs
have been determined with the assumption of same light sea
and antiquark distributions in the proton, i.e. ¯q(x) = q(x)
for q = u, d, s. As this symmetry assumption is inherent
for the main PDF ﬁts, 3 no large difference in the theoretical
predictions based on different PDF sets are observed. The
3 Small deviations are included to account for some light sea-quark
asymmetry near Bjorken variable x ≈ 0.1.
good agreement between the measurements (Table 10) and
the predictions are a remarkable conﬁrmation of perturbative
QCD calculations, but also support strongly the assumption
of a ﬂavour independent light quark sea at high scales, where
x is small compared to 0.1, i.e. ¯u ≈ ¯d ≈¯c ≈ ¯d at Q
2 ≈ m2
Z .
The above argument does not hold true for charge-
dependent cross-section ratios, such as σ(W+)/σ(Z),
σ(W− )/σ(Z) and σ(W+)/σ(W− ). They inhibit a signiﬁ-
cantly larger dependency on differences in the u- and d-quark
distribution functions. However, the largest constraints on
PDFs do not come from the inclusive cross-section measure-
ments but from differential measurements, which are also
discussed in the following section.
In summary, the inclusive cross-section measurements
were one of the ﬁrst published measurements at the LHC
that conﬁrmed NNLO perturbative QCD predictions in a new
energy regime. By now, also inclusive measurements of the
W and Z cross section at a centre-of-mass energy of 8 TeV
are available [ 136], which are also in very good agreement
with the theoretical predictions.
6.2 Differential W boson and Z/γ
∗ measurements
In addition to the inclusive production cross section, the large
available statistics at the LHC also allows for measurements
of differential production cross sections with high precision.
Of special importance here is the measurement of the rapid-
ity distribution y
V 4 of the vector boson, as it allows for a
direct determination of the momentum fractions x1/2 of the
interaction partons, via
x1/2 = mV√ s e±yV ,
where mV is the mass of the vector boson. A centre-of-mass
energy of √ s = 7 TeV allows therefore to reach x-range
from ≈ 0.001 to ≈ 0.1 for the study of W and Z bosons.
The boson rapidity distributions are calculated up to NNLO
in QCD theory [ 99] and are dominated by PDF uncertain-
ties. Hence the measurement of the differential production
cross section of gauge bosons versus their rapidity distribu-
tion will provide additional constraints on the proton’s PDFs.
The results of deep inelastic scattering experiments provide
constraints on the sea-quark and gluon distributions at small
and medium x values, while the studies of W and Z pro-
duction at the Tevatron provided important information on
the valence-quark distributions. The additional information
by measurements at the LHC on the valence-quark distribu-
tion is therefore expected to be marginal. However, the LHC
measurements have a signiﬁcant impact on the strange-quark
4 The rapidity of a particle is deﬁned as y = 1
2
E+pz
E− pz ,w h e r eE is the
particle’s energy and pz is the longitudinal momentum w.r.t. to proton
direction.
123


--- Page 31 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 31 of 59 2916
Z Boson Rapidity
-4 -2 0 2 4
 [arbitrary units]σ/σd
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Z
2=M2PYTHIA (LO), PDF (CTEQ10) Q Z→uu
 Z→dd
 Z→ss
W Boson Rapidity
-4 -2 0 2 4
 [arbitrary units]σ/σd
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
PYTHIA (LO), PDF (CTEQ10)-
 W→ud
-
 W→us
+ W→du
+ W→su
Fig. 22 Rapidity distribution for the leading-order production of Z (left)a n d W bosons (right) in 7 TeV pp collisions. The relative contribution
of the different production channels is also shown
PDFs, as well as on the ratio of u/d-quark distributions as
discussed below.
The rapidity distribution of theZ/γ∗ → l+l− process can
be directly inferred from data, since both four-momenta of its
decay-leptons can be precisely measurement. Hence it will
give new information on the u ¯u, d ¯d and s¯s PDFs. While the
information on u- and d-quark distribution is already largely
determined by previous experiments, in particular the uncer-
tainty on the strange-quark content can be improved. Figure
22 shows the contribution of the different quark/antiquark
annihilation processes for different yZ values. While the u ¯u
annihilation is dominating in the central region, the d ¯d anni-
hilation process is expected to have a larger inﬂuence for
larger rapidity values. A precise measurement in the cen-
tral rapidity region can also give additional constraints on
the s¯s PDFs. In addition, the study of y
Z/γ∗ for different
mass intervals can probe different x-regimes, e.g. low-mass
Drell–Y an events will probe in general small values of x
than high-mass Drell–Y an events. Such studies can be used
to improve the knowledge on the ratio of u- and d-quark
distributions.
A TLAS published a combined differentialdσ/d|yZ | cross
section in the ﬁducial region5 for the electron and muon decay
channel of Z/γ∗ → l+l− based on
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb− 1 [131].
Figure 23 shows the results including NNLO theory predic-
tions with various PDF sets. The largest rapidity reached is
yZ = 3.5, which is due to the inclusion of forward electrons
in this study. In addition, A TLAS published a differential
cross section of the Drell–Y an process in the electron decay
channel versus the invariant mass of the di-electron pairs,
based on the full 2011 data sample [137]. The comparison of
data and NNLO predictions with various PDF sets is shown
in Fig. 24.
5 This is deﬁned by a cut on the invariant mass of the di-lepton system
of 66 GeV < mll < 116 GeV and a minimal requirement of pT >
20 GeV and η< 2.4 for both decay leptons.
|Z|y
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Theory/Data
0.9
1
1.1
| [pb]Z/d|yσd
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
MSTW08
HERAPDF1.5
ABKM09
JR09
-1
 L dt = 33-36 pb∫
-
l+ l→Z 
Uncorr. uncertainty
Total uncertainty
ATLAS
Fig. 23 A TLAS [131]: The combined dσ/d|yZ | cross-section mea-
surement for Z/γ∗ → l+l− compared to NNLO theory predictions
using various PDF sets. The kinematic requirements are 66 GeV <
mll < 116 GeV and pl
T > 20 GeV. The ratio of theoretical predictions
to data is also shown. Theoretical points are displaced for clarity within
each bin
The latest CMS publication on Z → l+l− [138]i sa l s o
based on an integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 4.5f b− 1and∫
L dt ≈ 4.8f b − 1for the muon and electron channels,
respectively. The measurement is performed in a double-
differential way over the mass range of 20 to 1500 GeV and
an absolute di-muon rapidity from 0 < |η| < 2.4. The result-
ing rapidity distributions for three different mass regions are
shown in Fig. 25, together with the NNLO prediction for
various PDF sets. The differential cross sections have been
extrapolated to the full phase space and normalised to the
Z peak cross section, which is deﬁned in a mass region of
60–120 GeV. Hence many systematic uncertainties cancel
123


--- Page 32 ---
2916 Page 32 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
310
 [pb/GeV] (Born)
eedm
σd
-6
10
-5
10
-410
-3
10
-210
-110
Data
Sys. uncertainty
Total uncertainty
ATLAS
-1 L dt = 4.9 fb∫ = 7 TeV,  s
| < 2.5η > 25 GeV, |Telectron p
1.8 % luminosity uncertainty not included
116 1500
 [GeV]eem
200 300 400 1000
Theory/Data0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
 [GeV]eem
200 300 400 1000
Theory/Data0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
) + scale + PI unc.sαMSTW2008 with 68% CL (PDF +   
MSTW2008 w/o PI corrections
) + scale unc.sαMSTW2008 with 68% CL (PDF +   
HERAPDF1.5 CT10 ABM11 NNPDF2.3
Fig. 24 A TLAS [137]: Measured differential cross section at the Born
level within the ﬁducial region (electron pT > 25 GeV and |η| < 2.5)
with statistical, systematic and combined statistical and systematic
(total) uncertainties, excluding the 1.8 % uncertainty on the luminos-
ity. The measurement is compared to Fewz 3.1 calculations at NNLO
QCD with NLO electroweak corrections using the G
m u electroweak
parameter scheme
in the ratio. The dominating remaining uncertainties are due
to the efﬁciency corrections in the muon channel and energy
scale uncertainties in the electron channel.
Especially in the low-mass region, sizeable differences
between the different PDF sets can be seen. The uncertainties
of the available data are small enough to provide sufﬁcient
sensitivity to allow for an improvement over the existing PDF
sets. The uncertainty on the u/d ratio can be improved by
more than 20 %.
The W
± boson rapidity distribution is sensitive to the
u ¯d- and d ¯u-quark distribution. Their respective contribu-
tion is shown in Fig. 22. However, its rapidity distribution
in the leptonic decay channel is not directly accessible as
the longitudinal momentum of the neutrino is not measured.
Therefore only an indirect measurement is possible, which
is achieved by the measurement of the pseudorapidity of the
charged decay leptons η
l , which are correlated to yW .T h e
production and decay of W boson is described by the V -
A nature of the weak interaction. It is therefore expected
that the spin of the W boson is aligned with the direction of
the antiquark and the charged decay lepton is preferentially
emitted opposite to the boost of the decaying boson. The
corresponding experimental quantity is the lepton-charge
asymmetry
A(η)= dσ(W
+ → l+ν)/dη− dσ(W− → l− ν)/dη
dσ(W+ → l+ν)/dη+ dσ(W− → l− ν)/dη,
(45)
where l denotes the lepton and dσ/dη the differential cross
section for charged leptons from the W events. The deﬁni-
tion of A(η)has the advantage that several systematic uncer-
tainties cancel in its ratio and can constrain the u/d-quark
ratio and the corresponding sea-quark densities. Clearly,
also the measurement of separate differential cross sec-
tions dσ(W
± → l±ν)/dη provides the same information
when the correlation between the systematic uncertainties is
known.
CMS published results on the lepton-charge asymmetry in
the electron and muon decay channels within a ﬁducial phase
space deﬁned by apT > 35 GeV requirement for the charged
decay leptons. Since the study of W → eν [139] is based
on only
∫
L dt = 0.84 fb− 1 and the W → μν analyses
[140] uses the full available data sample at √ s = 7T e V , w e
discuss here only the latter. The A(η) measurement after all
corrections is shown in Fig. 26 for a minimal muon require-
ment of pT > 35 GeV. The dominating systematic uncer-
tainties are due to efﬁciencies and scale uncertainties, as well
as uncertainties on the QCD multi-jet background. Statistical
uncertainties are small compared to the systematic uncertain-
ties, which range from 0 .2 % in the central region to 0 .4%
in the forward region. The correlations between different η-
bins are small. The results are compared to NLO predictions
for several PDF sets.
A TLAS has published similar results for the full 2010
data sample in both leptonic decay channels within a ﬁducial
phase space, deﬁned by p
lep
T > 20 GeV, pν
T > 25 GeV and
mT > 40 GeV. In addition to the lepton-charge asymmetry,
which is shown in Fig. 27, also the individual lepton-charge
distributions for W+ and W− have been derived. Similar
to the CMS results, statistical uncertainties are negligible
compared to the systematic uncertainties.
While most PDF sets show good agreement with data,
the MSTW2008 PDF parametrisation has a poor agreement,
especially in the region of small rapidities. This is due to
a problem in d-valence distribution which was ﬁxed in the
MSTW2008CPdeutnlo set, which is also shown. Since the
uncertainties of the measured A(η) values are smaller by
a factor of 2–3 compared to the predicted uncertainties of
the studied PDF sets, an improvement of future PDF sets is
expected. Some preliminary results which make use if the
currently published LHC data, can be found for example in
[141].
Figures 28 and 29 show a comparison of the A TLAS
and CMS results for the Z/γ
∗ and AW (η) distributions,
respectively. We extrapolate the results to a common ﬁdu-
cial volume, deﬁned by 60 GeV < mll < 120 GeV for
the Z/γ∗ process and by pT > 35 GeV for the W± boson.
The extrapolation was performed with thePowhegBox gen-
erator and no additional systematic uncertainties have been
added to the shown values. Both experiments show consistent
results.
123


--- Page 33 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 33 of 59 2916
Fig. 25 CMS [138]: Comparison with theory expectations with vari-
ous NNLO PDF sets: CT10, HERA, NNPDF2.1, MSTW08, CT10W,
JR09, ABKM. The error bands in the theory predictions indicates the
statistical calculation error only. Thebottom plots show the ratio of data
to theory expectation. The error bar is the quadrature sum of experi-
mental uncertainty on the data and statistical calculation error on theory
expectation
A TLAS has studied the impact of their data on the proton
PDFs using the HERAFitter framework [ 142]. Here, espe-
cially the yZ measurement has a large impact on the con-
straints of the strange-quark PDFs. Even with the limited
data sample of 2010, the hypothesis of a symmetric com-
position of the light sea quarks at low x [131] is supported.
Speciﬁcally, the ratio of the strange sea-quark content to the
down sea-quark content at x = 0.023 was found to be 1
+0.25
− 0.28
at Q2 = 1.9G e V2. This is a remarkable results and was con-
ﬁrmed in an improved analyses of the 2011 data sample [143].
So far it has been assumed in most PDF ﬁtting approaches
that s =¯s = ¯u
2 = ¯d
2 due to the mass difference of the quarks
at the starting scale, i.e. before the QCD evolution starts. At
higher values of Q
2, the gluon splitting processes become
dominant and lead to a symmetric distribution of sea quarks.
This new results suggests even an equal ¯u− , ¯d- and s-quark
123


--- Page 34 ---
2916 Page 34 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
|ηMuon |
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Charge asymmetry
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
NLO CT10nlo 68% CL
FEWZ
RESBOS
>35 GeVTp
Data
-1 = 7 TeV, 4.7 fbsCMS preliminary
|ηMuon |
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Charge asymmetry
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
NLO FEWZ 68% CL
CT10nlo
NNPDF23nlo
HERAPDF15nlo
MSTW2008nlo
MSTW2008CPdeutnlo
>35 GeVTp
Data
-1 = 7 TeV, 4.7 fbsCMS preliminary
Fig. 26 CMS [140]: Comparison of the measured muon charge asym-
metry to theoretical predictions based on Fewz 3.0 and ResBos calcu-
lations, for muons with pT > 35 GeV (left). The CT10 NLO PDF is
used in both predictions. A comparison of the measured muon charge
asymmetries to predictions with CT10, NNPDF2.3, HERAPDF1.5,
MSTW2008 and MSTW2008CPdeut NLO PDF models, for muons
with p
T > 35 GeV, is shown on the right
Fig. 27 A TLAS [131]:
Differential dσ/d|η+ (left)a n d
dσ/d|η− (middle) cross-section
measurements within the
ﬁducial volume for W → lν.
Measured W charge asymmetry
as a function of lepton
pseudorapidity |η| is shown on
the right. All results are
compared to the NNLO theory
predictions using various PDF
sets
|lη|
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Theory/Data
0.9
1
1.1
| [pb]lη/d|σd
300
400
500
600
700
800
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
MSTW08
HERAPDF1.5
ABKM09
JR09
-1
 L dt = 33-36 pb∫ lν+ l→+W
Uncorr. uncertainty
Total uncertainty
ATLAS
|lη|
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Theory/Data
0.9
1
1.1
| [pb]lη/d|σd
100
200
300
400
500
600
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
MSTW08
HERAPDF1.5
ABKM09
JR09
-1
 L dt = 33-36 pb∫ lν
-
 l→
-
W
Uncorr. uncertainty
Total uncertainty
ATLAS
|lη|
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
lA
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
 = 7 TeV)sData 2010 (
MSTW08
HERAPDF1.5
ABKM09
JR09
-1
 L dt = 33-36 pb∫
Stat. uncertainty
Total uncertainty
ATLAS
content at lowQ2 values [131]. A visualisation of the impacts
on the strange-quark distributions is shown in Fig. 30.T h e
inclusion of electrons in the forward region of the A TLAS
detector extends the availableyZ regime and should therefore
improve the information on the valence quark distributions.
However, the current experimental uncertainties are too large
for a signiﬁcant effect.
The published results on the lepton-charge asymmetry for
the W boson production impacts moderately the valence-
quark distribution functions compared to the existing data
123


--- Page 35 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 35 of 59 2916
 [GeV]Z
llY
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Ratio0.95
1
1.05
)Z
ll
/dYσ(d×)fidσ(1/
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
ATLAS Results 
ATLAS Results (Extra-
        polated to CMS fid. volume)
CMS Results
Ratio (CMS extrapolated to
        ATLAS binning)
Fig. 28 Comparison of the A TLAS and CMS: Measurements of the
normalised differential cross section of the Drell–Y an process as a func-
tion of the rapidity of the di-lepton system. The A TLAS results have
been extrapolated to the CMS ﬁducial volume, as it is signiﬁcantly
reduced in Y
ll . For completeness, also the full normalised differential
cross section of the A TLAS experiment is shown
|
lepton
η|
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
Ratio0.9
1
1.1
|
l
Charge Asymmetry A
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
ATLAS Results (Extra-
        polated to CMS fid. volume)
CMS Results
Ratio (ATLAS extrapolated to
        CMS binning)
Fig. 29 Comparison of the A TLAS and CMS: Measurements of the
W charge asymmetry, where the A TLAS results have been extrapolated
to the CMS ﬁducial volume
that include Tevatron results. However, when only using mea-
surements from HERA and LHC, an improvement on the
valance quark distributions of more than 30 % for the full
x-range can be observed, compared to HERA measurements
alone.
Also the LHCb experiment published a differential cross
section of the W
± and Z boson production in the forward-
rapidity region (2 .0 <η< 4.0), based on
∫
L dt ≈ 37
pb− 1, which is consistent with the measurements of A TLAS
and CMS. A detailed discussion can be found in [ 144].
In summary, the double-differential cross-section mea-
surements of the W and Z bosons lead to important con-
straints to the PDFs of the proton. Figure 31 shows the
improvement of the ¯u and ¯s parton density functions with
and without including the current available LHC data based
on the NNPDF group [145]. In particular the A TLAS analysis
[131] suggests that the strange-quark content is comparable
to the ¯u and ¯d content even at low scales- With measure-
ments using the full 2011 data set, the statistical and system-
atic uncertainties are expected to be decreased signiﬁcantly
and a further improvement > 20 % of the strange-quark
PDFs and the u/d-quark ratio is anticipated. It is not clear
how much improvement of a similar study of the full 2012
data set at a centre-of-mass energy of √
s = 8 TeV can be
expected. Even though the data set is larger by a factor of 5,
the 2011 results are not statistics limited and the increase of
centre-of-mass energy is only 10 %.
6.3 Transverse momentum measurements of vector bosons
As discussed in Sect. 2.7.6, the transverse momentum distri-
butions of vector bosons provides an important test of QCD
corrections in the initial state of the production process due to
the absence of colour ﬂow between the initial and ﬁnal state.
In particular, predictions based on resummation techniques
can be tested, which play an important role for the expected
p
T spectra between 0 and ≈ MV /2 GeV. Only a mild depen-
dence on the proton PDFs is expected. Besides the test of
QCD calculations, the accurate understanding of the vector
Fig. 30 A TLAS [131]: The
strange antiquark density vs. x
for the A TLAS (denoted epWZ)
free ¯s NNLO ﬁt (magenta band)
compared to predictions from
NNPDF2.1 (blue hatched)a n d
CT10 (green hatched)a t
Q
2 = 1.9G e V2 (left)a n d
Q2 = 91 GeV2 (right)
123


--- Page 36 ---
2916 Page 36 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
x
-510 -410 -310 -210 -110 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
)0
2(x, Qux
NNPDF2.3 NNLO
NNPDF2.3 noLHC NNLO
NNPDF2.3 NNLO
NNPDF2.3 noLHC NNLO
x
-510 -410 -310 -210 -110 1
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
)0
2(x, Qsx
NNPDF2.3 NNLO
NNPDF2.3 noLHC NNLO
NNPDF2.3 NNLO
NNPDF2.3 noLHC NNLO
Fig. 31 Comparison of ¯u-quark (left)a n d¯s-quark (right) PDFs from the NNPDF2.3 NNLO sets with no LHC data and with LHC data used in the
ﬁt. Further comparison plots can be found in [ 141,145]
boson’s pT spectra is essential for the measurement of the
W boson mass at the LHC, especially when the pT spectrum
of the decay leptons of W± → l±ν is used as a sensitive
variable for mW .
The transverse momentum distributions of electron and
muon pairs from Z/γ∗ events can be measured directly with
the reconstructed four-momentum information of the decay
leptons. The pT(Z) momentum resolution for pT(Z)<
40 GeV is typically ≈ 3 GeV for A TLAS and CMS. A ﬁnite
binning with a similar size leads therefore to resolution
effects, i.e. bin migration, which make a dedicated unfolding
procedure necessary (see Sect. 4).
CMS has published normalised transverse momentum dis-
tributions of the Z/γ∗ process based on the 2010 data sam-
ple [146]. The differential cross section has been normalised
to the cross section integrated over the acceptance region,
deﬁned by p
l
T > 20 GeV, |η| < 2.1 and 60 GeV < mll <
120 GeV. Both decay channels have been unfolded using an
inverted response matrix and show consistent results, as seen
in Fig. 32.
A TLAS also published an analysis using the full 2010
data sample [ 147], also using both leptonic decay channels.
The differential cross sections have been normalised to the
ﬁducial cross section with 66 GeV < m
ll < 116 GeV,
pl
T > 20 GeV and |η| < 2.4. A Bayesian method has
been used for the unfolding of the data, where the resulting
distribution is shown in Fig. 33 in comparison with differ-
ent MC generator predictions.
6 The dominating systematic
uncertainties are due to uncertainties of the momentum scale
and resolution uncertainties as well as from the unfolding
procedure.
6 It should be noted that the differences in predictions of different gen-
erators could be due to different scale-parameter settings used.
 ]-1 [GeVTq/dσ) dσ(1/
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
 combined)μdata (e + 
 Z2POWHEG+PYTHIA
 Z2PYTHIA
 ProQ20PYTHIA
 Perugia 2011PYTHIA
 [GeV]Tq
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
dataδ(data - theory)/-5
0
5
CMS = 7 TeVs at
-1
 L dt = 36 pb∫
0 GeV2>
T
.1, p2<|η|
Fig. 32 CMS [146]: The combined electron and muon measurement of
the Z boson transverse momentum distribution (points) and the predic-
tions of severalPythia tunes andPowheg interfaced withPythia using
the Z2 tune (histograms). Theerror barson the points represent the sum
of the statistical and systematic uncertainties on the data. Thelower por-
tion of the ﬁgure shows the difference between the data and the simula-
tion predictions divided by the uncertainty delta on the data. The green
(inner)a n d yellow (outer) bands are the ±1δ and ±2δ experimental
uncertainties
The low pT(Z) domain of the Z/γ∗ production can be
alternatively probed with the /Phi1∗ observable, deﬁned as
/Phi1∗ = tan
( π − /Delta1/Phi1
2
)
· sin(θ∗),
123


--- Page 37 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 37 of 59 2916
 [GeV]Z
Tp
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
 [1/GeV]Z
T/dpfidσ dfidσ1/
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 35-40 pb∫
μμCombined ee+
Data 2010
RESBOS
PYTHIA
 | < 2.4lη| 
 > 20 GeVl
Tp
 < 116 GeVll66 GeV < m
 [GeV]Z
Tp
1 10 210
Data (Prediction) / RESBOS0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
μμCombined ee+
Data 2010
RESBOS
PYTHIA
MC@NLO
POWHEG
ALPGEN
SHERPA
 | < 2.4lη| 
 > 20 GeVl
Tp
 < 116 GeVll66 GeV < m
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 35-40 pb∫
Fig. 33 A TLAS [147]: The combined normalised differential cross
section as a function ofpT(Z) for the range pT(Z)< 30 GeV compared
to the predictions of ResBos and Pythia. Ratios of the combined data
and predictions from different generators over the ResBos prediction
for the normalised differential cross section are shown below
where /Delta1/Phi1is the azimuthal opening angle between the two
decay leptons and
cos(θ∗) = tanh
( (η− − η+)
2
)
as the measure of the scattering angle of the positive and neg-
ative leptons with respect to the beam [148]. The /Phi1∗ observ-
ables is highly correlated to pT(Z)/mll ;as m a l lpT(Z) leads
to a large opening angle and hence a small value of/Phi1∗, while
large transverse momenta lead to small opening angles and
therefore larger values of /Phi1∗. A typical value of pT(Z) ≈
100 GeV leads to /Phi1∗ ≈ 1. This variable has the advan-
tage that it is solely constructed using track-based directions
which are known to much higher precision than their trans-
verse momenta. A TLAS has published unfolded normalised
7
/Phi1∗ distributions for three different regions Z boson rapidity
regions (|yZ | < 0.8, 0.8 < |yZ | < 1.6 and|yZ | > 1.6) [149].
The resulting distribution is shown in Fig. 34 for both decay
channels, together with the theoretical prediction based on
7 The results have been normalised to the same ﬁducial regime as the
corresponding pT(Z) analysis.
η*φ
-310 -210 -110 1
Data (Prediction) / RESBOS0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2  Data 2011-μ+μ + -e+e
RESBOS
)s αFEWZ 2.1 O( 2
 = 7 TeVs
| < 2.4η|
 > 20 GeVTp
 < 116 GeV66 GeV < m
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
Fig. 34 A TLAS: [149] The ratio of the combined normalised differ-
ential cross section to ResBos predictions as a function of /Phi1∗.T h e
inner and outer error bars on the data points represent the statistical
and total uncertainties, respectively. The uncertainty due to QED FSR is
included in the total uncertainties. The measurements are also compared
to predictions, which are represented by a dashed line, from Fewz 2.1.
Uncertainties associated to this calculation are represented by a shaded
band. The prediction from Fewz 2.1 is only presented for /Phi1
∗ > 0.1
the ResBos generator. Both decay channels lead to consis-
tent results and a clear deviation from the theoretical predic-
tion can be observed; these are consistent with the published
results on p
T(Z). The systematic uncertainties are smaller
than the associated statistical uncertainties for all bins. The
statistical precision varies 0 .3%f o r /Phi1
∗ ≈ 0t o1 .6%f o r
/Phi1∗ ≈ 2.5.
The measurements of the pT(Z) distribution provides
important information for the tuning of MC generators,
which can then be indirectly transferred to the prediction of
transverse momentum distribution of the W boson, p
T(W).
However, an explicit measurement of pT(W) would allow
one to directly constrain the pT spectrum of the W boson’s
decay leptons and therefore estimate uncertainties on an asso-
ciated mW measurement.
A TLAS also published a measurement of the transverse
momentum distribution of the W boson pT(W) based on the
2010 data sample [150]. The pT(W) cannot be directly mea-
sured from its decay leptons due to the neutrino. However,
the p
T(W) must be balanced by the hadronic activity induced
by QCD corrections in the initial and ﬁnal state, i.e.
pT(W) =− pT(had ) = pT(l±) + pT(ν),
where pT(had ) denotes the hadronic recoil (Fig. 35).
Hence pT(had ) can be used for the measurement of
pT(W), since it reﬂects the underlying hadronic activity
from the hard QCD interactions. The hadronic recoil has
several experimental uncertainties (e.g. pile-up) and also a
rather poor resolution compared to the reconstruction of lep-
tons. Hence a data-driven model of the relation between
p
T(had ) and pT(W) has been used. This model is derived
from Z boson events, where pT(Z) can be directly deter-
123


--- Page 38 ---
2916 Page 38 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Charged Lepton
Neutrino
Hadronic
Recoil Transverse Plane
W Boson
Fig. 35 Illustration of the hadronic recoil inW± → l±νevents. While
the transverse momenta of the Z boson can be directly interfered by its
both decay leptons, the hadronic recoil has to be used in the leptonic
decay modes of the W boson
 [GeV]W
Tp
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
(Data,Prediction) / RESBOS
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
 = 7 TeVs
ATLAS
-1
 31 pb≈Ldt ∫
Combined Data 2010
   Stat. Uncert.
ALPGEN+HERWIG
MC@NLO
POWHEG+PYTHIA
PYTHIA
RESBOS
SHERPA
Fig. 36 A TLAS [150]: Ratio of the combined measurement of pT(W)
and various predictions to the ResBos prediction for the normalised
differential cross section from different generators
mined via the lepton-decay measurements with a sufﬁciently
good resolution. It is then assumed that the dependence of
the hadronic recoil to the transverse momentum of the vector
boson is the same in W and Z boson events. The unfold-
ing is performed with a Bayesian approach. The result-
ing differential cross section, which has been normalised
to the ﬁducial cross section measured in the phase space
deﬁned via p
l
T > 20 GeV, |ηl| < 2.4, pν
T > 25 GeV and
mT > 40 GeV, is shown in Fig. 36. It should be noted that
the poor resolution of pT(had ) implies a signiﬁcantly larger
binning to ensure a stable unfolding procedure. The system-
atic uncertainties of the data-driven modelling of pT(had )
during the unfolding procedure dominate the overall uncer-
tainties up to pT(W)< 75 GeV. Statistical uncertainties
start to dominate for larger pT(W) values. This measurement
has not yet been repeated for the 2011 data sample, as the
increase of pile-up further reduces the resolution of pT(had )
and hence complicates the unfolding procedure when aiming
at a similar binning for the low p
T(W) region. The compari-
 [GeV]Z
T
p
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0
Ratio0.8
1
1.2
)Z
T
/dpσ(d×)fidσ(1/
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
ATLAS Results (Extra-
        polated to CMS fid. volume)
CMS Results
Ratio (ATLAS extrapolated to
        CMS binning)
Fig. 37 Comparison of the results of the transverse momentum mea-
surement of the Z boson for A TLAS and CMS. The A TLAS results
have been extrapolated to the CMS ﬁducial volume. The CMS results
have been corrected to the A TLAS binning for the direct comparisonson to the prediction based on ResBos for both, pT(W) and
pT(Z) (Figs. 33, 36), shows a signiﬁcant disagreement and
hence will allow for an improved tuning of the underlying
MC generators.
A comparison of the published p
T(Z) distributions of
A TLAS and CMS is shown in Fig. 37. We extrapolated the
A TLAS results to the CMS ﬁducial volume, while the CMS
results have been corrected to the A TLAS binning to allow
for a direct comparison. A slight tension can be observed for
pT(Z)< 10 GeV, which is not yet signiﬁcant.
In summary, a new tuning of generators like Pythia is
needed in order to describe the deviations between measure-
ment and simulations. First measurements of the Z boson
transverse momentum distribution at √ s = 8 TeV based on
a very reduced data set have also become available [ 151].
The expected measurements of the full 2012 data set at√ s = 8 TeV could also allow one to test electroweak cor-
rections which are predicted to become sizeable at large
transverse momenta. In addition, the higher statistics will
allow for the measurement of angular coefﬁcients in the
Drell–Y an production, as introduced in Sect. 2.8 (Eq. 26),
in up to three dimensions. Figure 38 shows the Powheg and
MC@NLO prediction of A
0 vs. the transverse momentum of
the Z boson. The observed discrepancy between both gener-
ators could be due to the difference in the matching scheme of
NLO calculations and the underlying parton shower model
(see Sect. 2.7.3). Therefore a precise measurement of the
angular correlations with the available √
s = 8 TeV data
sample is mandatory to test this important aspect in modern
QCD calculations.
123


--- Page 39 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 39 of 59 2916
(Z) [GeV]Tp
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0
 - Parameter0A
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
QCD Angular Coefficients
PowHegBox Prediction
MC@NLO Prediction
Fig. 38 Predictions byMC@NLO and PowhegBox of the QCD angu-
lar parameters A0 (left)a n d A2 (right)i n Z boson events vs. the trans-
verse momentum of the Z boson
6.4 Determination of ΓW
The measurement of the ratioR of leptonic rates for the inclu-
sive production of W and Z bosons at the LHC, as discussed
in the previous section, can be written as
R = σ(pp → W + X)
σ(pp → Z + X) · Γ( Z)
Γ( Z → l+l− )
· Γ( W± → l±ν)
Γ( W) . (46)
The inclusive cross-section ratio is known to NNLO in αs
and has a numerical value of σW /σZ = 3.34 ± 0.08 [152].
The leptonic branching ratio for theZ boson BR (Z → l+l− )
is well known to be(3.366±0.002) % from the LEP and SLC
experiments [35]. Hence, the measurement of R allows for
an indirect determination of the leptonic W boson branching
ratio BR (W → l±ν)= Γ( W±→ l±ν)
Γ( W) .
The CMS analysis [ 132] used the measured ratio R =
σ(W± → l±ν)/σ(Z → l+l− ) = 10.54 ± 0.19 leading to
an indirect determination of
BR (W → l±ν)= 0.106 ± 0.003
In addition, the partial leptonic decay width of the W boson
can be calculated within the Standard Model and is given by
Γ( W → e¯νe) = GF M3
W
6π
√
2
(1 + δSM
l ) = 226.2 ± 0.2M e V,
where corresponding electroweak correctionsδSM
l are small,
since they are largely absorbed in GF and mW [153]. There-
fore the W boson width can be extracted via BR (W → l±ν)
and results in
ΓW = 2144 ± 62 MeV,
which is consistent with the current world average ΓW =
2085 ± 42 MeV.
A combination of the A TLAS and CMS results on the
cross-section ratio could reduce the overall uncertainty by
≈ 20 %, when assuming no correlations between the system-
atic uncertainties. This would lead to an uncertainty on ΓW
of 50 MeV and hence would lead to a signiﬁcant reduction
of the uncertainty on the current world average.
6.5 Forward–backward asymmetries of the Z boson
The study of the Drell–Y an production at the LHC does also
provide information on the Weinberg mixing angle. This
measurement is complementary to the Z -pole analyses of
the LEP experiments [ 154,155].
The differential cross section for an f ¯f → f ′ ¯f ′ anni-
hilation process8 at lowest order for a Z boson exchange is
given by
dσ
d cos θ = N f
C G2
F m4
Z
16π
s
(s − m2
Z )2 + s2
m2
Z
Γ 2
Z
·
[(
v2
f + a2
f
)(
v2
f ′ + a2
f ′
)(
1 + cos2 θ
)
+ 2v f a f v f ′ a f ′ · cos θ
]
(47)
dσ
d cos θ = κ[A · (1 + cos2 θ)+ B · cos θ] (48)
where cos θis the angle between the incoming and outgoing
fermions,9 and a f and v f = a f · (1 − 4|q f |sin 2θW ) are the
axial and vector-axial couplings to the Z boson and q f is
the fractional charge of the fermion. Several things should
be noted. First of all, the (1+ cos2 θ)dependence would also
appear in a pure γ exchange diagram. However, the vector-
and axial-vector couplings of the Z boson introduce an addi-
tional cos θdependence. Secondly, the differential cross sec-
tion depends only on the Weinberg mixing angle sin 2θW ,
when ﬁxing the electric charges, the weak hypercharges, mZ
and ΓZ for a given centre-of-mass energy. By deﬁning for-
ward and background cross sections in terms of the angle of
the incoming fermions,
σ
F =
1∫
0
dσ
d cos θd cos θ, σ B =
0∫
− 1
dσ
d cos θd cos θ,
where the angle θ is deﬁned in the CS frame as introduced
in Sect. 2.8.1, a measure for the asymmetry at cos θ= 0 can
be deﬁned as
AFB = σF − σB
σF + σB
8 With f ̸= f ′ since no t-channel contributions should be allowed.
9 Or between incoming and outgoing anti-fermions.
123


--- Page 40 ---
2916 Page 40 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
also known as the forward–backward asymmetry parameter
AFB .A tt r e el e v e l ,AFB is given by
AFB = 16
3 · (1 − 4|q f | sin2 θW )
1 + (1 − 4|q f | sin2 θW )2
· (1 − 4|q f ′ | sin2 θW )
1 + (1 − 4|q f ′ | sin2 θW )2 .
The measurement at the Z pole provides the most sen-
sitive measurement as Z exchange contributes roughly 100
times more than the γ exchange. Therefore, only small cor-
rections from the interference and pureγ exchange terms are
expected. It should be noted that electroweak corrections to
sin θW can be absorbed by deﬁning an effective weak mixing
angle sin θeff , which is therefore used in the actual measure-
ments.
The advantage of the AFB measurement is that it reduces
to a good approximation to a pure counting experiment, e.g.
by deﬁning
A
FB = Ncos θ>0 − Ncos θ<0
Ncos θ>0 + Ncos θ<0
where the number of events in the forward and backward
regions are labelled as Ncos θ>0 and Ncos θ<0.
The measurement of AFB can also be used for the search
for new physics. While AFB at the Z boson mass is used
for the determination of sin 2 θW , large invariant masses are
governed by virtual photon andZ interference terms. A direct
search for a new resonance in the electroweak section via the
study of the invariant mass spectra of di-lepton events might
not show an excess if the new resonance has a large width.
However, such a new resonance would also interfere with the
Standard Model amplitudes and hence introduce a structure
in the measured asymmetries A
FB near its mass.
Both, A TLAS and CMS have published unfolded AFB
measurements and also a determination of the electroweak
mixing angle. In addition to the backgrounds from other pro-
cesses, the measured AFB is diluted by a wrong assignment
of the incoming quark and antiquark. This is accounted for in
both analyses using simulations and hence relies on a precise
knowledge of the PDFs.
The A TLAS analysis is based on the full 2011 data sam-
ple and uses the electron and muon decay channels [ 156].
Since a high acceptance of Z bosons with large rapidities
reduces the dilution of falsely identiﬁed quark-directions,
A TLAS also includes forward electrons in their analysis. By
requiring one electron with |η| < 2.4 and allowing a second
electron within |η| < 4.9, an acceptance for Z boson events
up to |y
Z | < 3.6 is achieved. The AFB is measured in the
same ﬁducial region as the Z boson inclusive measurements.
A Bayesian unfolding technique was used to transform the
measured raw cos θ∗
CS distribution in a given mass region
to cos θ∗
CS at the parton level. The unfolding does not only
FBA
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Data
PYTHIA
ATLAS Preliminary
 = 7 TeVs @ 
-1
L dt = 4.8 fb∫
 [GeV]CF
eem
70 80 90 210 210×2
σ/Δ
-2
-1
0
1
2
Fig. 39 A TLAS [156]: A fb unfolded to Born-level central-forward
electrons. For the data, the boxed shaded region represents the total
(statistical+systematic) uncertainty and the error bars represent the sta-
tistical uncertainty. The boxed shaded regions for the Pythia predic-
tions represent the statistical uncertainty only. The ratio plots at the
bottom display the distribution of pulls
remove detector effects, but also effects from QED radiative
corrections. The latter lead to deformations of the di-lepton
invariant mass distribution. In order to account for these cor-
rections, the results are unfolded to Born level, i.e. the state,
before any emission of ﬁnal-state radiation. The unfolding is
based on a Pythia MC sample, where NLO corrections have
been applied. QED ﬁnal-state radiation was accounted for by
interfacing the Photos generator. The p
T and y distributions
of the Z boson have been reweighted to NLO QCD predic-
tions. NLO electroweak corrections have been estimated with
Horace [157]. The resulting AFB distribution for the elec-
tron decay channel, including one central and one forward
electron, is shown in Fig. 39, where the results including
forward electrons are denoted CF . Dominating systematic
uncertainties arise from the limited knowledge of electron
identiﬁcation efﬁciencies in the forward region, NLO QCD
effects and PDF uncertainties.
The effective electroweak mixing angle was not deter-
mined from the unfolded distributions but measured directly
from the raw-data distributions. The measured A
FB spec-
tra have been compared to MC predictions which have been
produced by varying initial values for sin 2 θeff . Each predic-
tion was compared to the measured distribution via a χ2 test.
The minimum of the resulting χ2 distribution yields then the
measured sin 2 θeff value. The combination for all channels
results in
123


--- Page 41 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 41 of 59 2916
Fig. 40 CMS [158]: The unfolded and combined measurement ofAFB
at the Born level with 1 .5 < |y| < 2.4a n d pT > 20 GeV. The data
points are shown with both statistical and combined statistical and sys-
tematic error bars. The error bars on the MC prediction points are due
to PDF uncertainties. The MC prediction statistical errors are of the
same order of magnitude as the PDF uncertainties
sin2 θeff = 0.2297 ± 0.0004(stat ) ± 0.0009(syst .)
= 0.2297 ± 0.001,
in agreement with the current world average of sin 2 θeff =
0.23153 ± 0.00016.
The CMS study of AFB is also based on the full 2011
data sample [158] and the same ﬁducial volume as the inclu-
sive measurement in both decay channels. AFB has been
measured in four different rapidity regions (0–1, 1–1.25,
1.25–1.5 and 1.5–2.4) and ten mass regions ranging from
40 to 400 GeV, leading to 40 measurements in total. The
mass spectra of forward and backward events are unfolded
independently for each rapidity region using an inverted
response matrix approach. The response matrix is based on
a NLO MC predictions from Powheg and Pythia.A l s ot h e
Pythia model for ﬁnal-state radiation has been used. Simi-
lar to A TLAS, the unfolding procedure corrects not only for
detector effects but also gives the number of forward and
backward events on Born level. The resulting A
FB distri-
bution for the combination of both decay channels in the
most forward region is shown in Fig. 40. Dominating sys-
tematic uncertainties are due PDFs in the central rapidity
regions and due ﬁnal-state radiation modelling uncertain-
ties in the forward region. Overall, good agreement with the
NLO prediction by Powheg is observed for all kinematic
regions.
The measurement of sin
2 θW by the CMS experiment
is based exclusively on the muon decay channel with an
integrated luminosity of 1 .1f b − 1 [159]. CMS focuses on
the muon decay channel because of the smaller background
Table 11 Summary of the A TLAS and CMS measurements of the weak
mixing angle sin2θeff , together with the associated uncertainties and the
current world average
A TLAS CMS World average
sin2θeff 0.2297 0.2287 0.23153
Total uncertainty 0.0010 0.0032 0.00016
Stat. uncertainty 0.0004 0.0020 –
Sys. uncertainty 0.0009 0.0025 –
PDF 0.0007 0.0013 –
Modelling+FSR 0.0005 0.0016 –
Detector effects 0.0005 0.0013 –
uncertainties and a better understanding of the corresponding
detector performance.
The actual methodology for the sin 2 θW measurement is
different from A TLAS. CMS uses an unbinned extended
maximum likelihood function which is ﬁtted to data in order
to extract the effective weak mixing angle. The likelihood
function is evaluated on an event-by-event basis and depends
on the number of signal and background events and the
expected event the probability density functions for the sig-
nal and background processes. These probability densities
are parameterised as a function of the di-lepton rapidity, the
di-lepton invariant mass, their decay angle cos θ
∗ and the
weak mixing angle and rely on leading order predictions of
Pythia, leading order PDF set and a full detector simulation.
The impact of NLO effects has been estimated. The minimi-
sation of the likelihood functions leads to a measured value
of
sin
2θeff = 0.2287 ± 0.0020(stat ) ± 0.0025(syst .)
= 0.2287 ± 0.003,
also in agreement with the current world average [ 154]. A
summary of the systematic uncertainties of the A TLAS and
CMS measurements is shown in Table 11. The dominating
uncertainty for A TLAS comes from PDF uncertainties. Also
at CMS, theoretical uncertainties due to PDF, FSR and NLO
corrections dominate. The remaining experimental uncer-
tainties could be in principle reduced by future studies. Hence
a competitive measurement of sin
2 θW at the LHC relies on
a signiﬁcant improvement of the proton PDFs.
6.6 Polarisation measurement of W bosons
The measurement of the angular distribution of W → μν
and W → eν events allows for the determination of the
W boson polarisation in proton–proton collisions. The theo-
retical basis of this measurement was introduced in Sect. 2.8
and relies on Eq.26. This can be rewritten in terms of the frac-
tions of left-handed, right-handed and longitudinal polarised
123


--- Page 42 ---
2916 Page 42 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
W bosons, fL , fR and f0, which is given by
1
σ
dσ
d cos θ = 3
8 fL(1 ∓ cos θ)2
+ 3
8 fR(1 ± cos θ)2 + 3
4 f0 sin2 θ
where the superscripts ± relate to the charge of the W boson.
By deﬁnition, fi > 0 and fL + fR + f0 = 1 must hold. The
parameters fi are not expected to be the same for W+ and
W− in proton–proton collisions, as the ratio of valence u-
quarks to sea quarks is higher than for valence d-quarks.
Hence different angular distributions are expected.
The choice of an appropriate reference frame is not triv-
ial, as the W boson rest frame can be only deﬁned by the full
four-momentum information of both decay leptons. While
the four-momentum information of the muon is present, only
the transverse momentum of the neutrino can be measured.
In principle, its longitudinal component can be determined
through the W mass constraint. However, the corresponding
equations lead to two possible solutions; thus an unambigu-
ous choice is not possible. Therefore, the measurement is
based on a highly correlated variable cos θ
2D , deﬁned as
cos θ2D = pTl∗.pTW
|pl∗
T |·| pTW |,
where pTl∗ is the transverse momentum of the lepton in the
transverse W boson rest frame and pTW is the transverse
momentum of the W boson in the laboratory frame. The
observable cos θ2D can be interpreted as the 2-dimensional
projection of cos θon the transverse plane. The helicity frac-
tions can then be determined by ﬁtting the measured cos θ2D
distributions with a weighted sum of templates obtained from
the simulations. Each template corresponds to one helicity
state and is weighted by the corresponding f
i value.
The A TLAS measurement of the polarisation ofW bosons
is based on
∫
L dt = 35 pb− 1of the 2010 data sample [160].
The selection of signal events and the background determi-
nation methods are similar to the inclusive measurement. In
addition it is required that the transverse W boson mass is
within a range of 50 GeV < mW
T < 110 GeV. The upper
cut was chosen to reject badly reconstructed jets. In order
to enhance the polarisation effects, two regions for events
with a large transverse momentum of W boson have been
deﬁned as 35 < p
W
T < 50 GeV and pW
T > 50 GeV. The
MC prediction of the cos θ2D templates have been obtained
independently from MC@NLO and Powheg. The actual
ﬁt was performed using a binned maximum likelihood ﬁt
based on MC@NLO templates. The templates predicted by
Powheg have been used for estimating systematic uncertain-
ties. Since only two of the three parameters fi are indepen-
dent, it was chosen to measure f0 and fL − fR . The results
for pW
T > 50 GeV averaged over both decay channels and
both charges are shown in Fig. 41 together with the expecta-
R - fLf
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0f
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 < 50 GeVW
T35 < p
 > 25 GeV,ν
Tp
 > 20 GeV, l
T| > 2.4, plη|
 < 110 GeV,W
T50 < m
ATLAS
R - fLf
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0f
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 > 50 GeVW
Tp
 > 25 GeV,ν
Tp
 > 20 GeV, l
T| > 2.4, plη|
 < 110 GeV,W
T50 < m
 = 7 TeVsData 
 uncertaintyσ1 
MC@NLO
POWHEG
ATLAS
 = 7 TeVsData 
 uncertaintyσ1 
MC@NLO
POWHEG
Fig. 41 A TLAS [160]: Measured values of f0 and fL − fR , after cor-
rections, within acceptance cuts for 35 < pW
T < 50 GeV ( left)a n d
50 GeV < pW
T (right) compared with the predictions corresponding
to MC@NLO and Powheg. The ellipses around the data points corre-
spond to one standard deviation, summing quadratically the statistical
and systematic uncertainties. The forbidden region is hatched
tions from simulations, which agree with the measurement.
The systematic uncertainties are dominated by experimental
uncertainties on the measured pW
T .
The CMS measurement is also based on the 2010 data
sample [161] and relies on a binned maximum likelihood for
to the cos θ2D variable. The ﬁtting templates for the differ-
ent helicity states are based on the MadGraph generator.
In contrast to the inclusive measurements, CMS requires in
this case a cut on the transverse mass of mT > 50 GeV for
the electrons and of mT > 30 GeV for the muon channel,
in order to reduce the QCD multi-jet background. In addi-
tion, also a minimal pW
T > 50 GeV is required, similar to
the A TLAS analysis. The background from t ¯t is reduced by
vetoing events with more than three reconstructed jets with a
pT > 30 GeV. The resulting ﬁt values for f0 and fL − fR are
shown in Fig. 42, independently for both W boson charges.
Both measurements show a clear difference between the
left- and right-handed polarisation parameters in proton–
proton collisions and are compatible with the Standard Model
expectations.
123


--- Page 43 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 43 of 59 2916
0.4
 -
R - fLf
 -
0f
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.6 0.8 10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-1 = 36 pb int = 7 TeV, LsCMS,
 +
R - fLf
 +
0f
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-1 = 36 pb int = 7 TeV, LsCMS,
Fig. 42 CMS [ 161]: The muon ﬁt result ( black dot )i nt h e [( fL −
fR), f0] plane for negatively charged leptons (left) and positively charge
leptons (right). The 68 % conﬁdence level contours for the statistical
and total uncertainties are shown by the green shaded region and the
black contour, respectively. The forbidden region is hatched
7 Vector boson production in association with jets
The cross sections of W and Z production for different jet
multiplicities are an important measure for NLO and MC
predictions but the exploratory power of measurements of
W +jets and Z +jets production today lies in the precision
tests of differential distributions. The cross section as a func-
tion of the jet p
T for example is a sensitive test of the scale
used in αs calculations whereas the rapidity distributions of
the jets is a sensitive test to different PDF sets. Studying the
angular distributions between the jets, such as the rapidity
differences between two jets, tests hard parton radiation at
large angles. Previous publications from CDF and D0 have
measured the differential cross sections as a function of the
jet p
T, the boson pT, the angular separation between jets
as well as other observables [ 15–17,162,163]. However, the
kinematic reach of these measurements compared to that at
the LHC is limited. For example, at the Tevatron using an
integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 1.7f b
− 1,j e t su pt oa
pT of 400 GeV can be measured in Z +jets events, while at
the LHC using of integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 4.6
fb− 1,j e t su pt oa pT of 700 GeV can be studied. These large
data samples at the LHC allow us to make precision mea-
surements over large regions of the phase space. In addition,
we can measure in detail speciﬁc topologies, like Z +jets pro-
duction where p
Z
T is greater than 100 GeV or measure dif-
ferential cross sections for rare processes, like Z + b¯b pro-
duction.
In addition, the last ﬁve years have been an ‘NLO revolu-
tion’. At the time of the LHC turn-on, NLO calculations up
to two associated jets were available, while today an NLO
calculation up to six associated jets can be achieved [ 98]. In
addition NLO calculations for W and Z production associ-
ated with heavy-ﬂavour jets have also expanded greatly in
recent years.
7.1 Measurements of W +jets and Z +jets cross sections
At the LHC, W +jets and Z +jets production is dominated
by quark-gluon interactions making these measurements dif-
ferent from measurements of the QCD multi-jet process,
which is dominated by gluon–gluon interactions. In MC cal-
culations, associated jets to W and Z production can arise
either from the matrix-element calculation itself or from
quarks or gluons in the parton showering. Jets from the
matrix element tend to have a higher p
T compared to those
from the parton shower and therefore not including multi-
ple partons in the matrix element will result in an underes-
timate of the jet multiplicity cross sections. For an excel-
lent review on jets and their properties at hadron colliders,
see [164].
Both A TLAS and CMS have performed measurements of
Z production in association with jets. The A TLAS and CMS
results are based on an integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 4.6
fb
− 1 [165] and
∫
L dt ≈ 4.9f b− 1 [166], respectively. Both
results measure the jet multiplicity cross sections up to seven
associated jets. Shown in Fig. 43 for the A TLAS measure-
ment, several theory predictions are compared to the data.
The Alpgen and Sherpa generators both include matrix-
element calculations that cover up to ﬁve partons, with addi-
tional jets coming from the parton showering. MC@NLO
generates the Drell–Y an process at NLO and includes the real
emission of one additional parton and any additional jets from
the parton showering. The Blackhat-Sherpa results pro-
vide ﬁxed-order calculations at NLO for up to four jets. The
data is in excellent agreement with Blackhat-Sherpa and
Sherpa predictions. Alpgen tends to underestimate the data
above ﬁve jets, as expected, since above ﬁve partons all
additional jets in the predictions originate from the parton
shower. While MC@NLO agrees with the data for zero-
123


--- Page 44 ---
2916 Page 44 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
) [pb]jet N≥) + 
-
l+ l→*(γ(Z/σ
-310
-210
-110
1
10
210
310
410
510
610
 = 7 TeV)sData 2011 (
ALPGEN
SHERPA
MC@NLO
 + SHERPAATHLACKB
ATLAS )μ)+jets (l=e,
-
l+ l→*(γZ/
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
 jets, R = 0.4tanti-k
| < 4.4
jet
 > 30 GeV, |yjet
Tp
NLO / Data0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4  + SHERPAATHLACKB
MC / Data0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4 ALPGEN
jetN
0≥ 1≥ 2≥ 3≥ 4≥ 5≥ 6≥ 7≥
MC / Data0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4 SHERPA
Fig. 43 A TLAS [165]: Measured cross section for Z +jets as a function
of the number of jets. The data are compared to Blackhat-Sherpa,
Alpgen, Sherpa and MC@NLO
jet and one-jet events, its parton shower model underes-
timates the observed jet rate by a factor of 2. The CMS
results are also in good agreement with the Blackhat-
Sherpa predictions as well as the MadGraph predictions,
which includes matrix-element calculations up to four par-
tons and the PowhegBox predictions, which is a NLO cal-
culation for one jet. The dominant experimental uncertainty
in both of these measurements is the uncertainty on the jet
energy scale, while the dominant theory uncertainty is due
to the scale uncertainties.
Taking the ratio of jet multiplicity cross section allows for
many of the experimental systematic uncertainties to can-
cel, thereby improving the precision of the measurement.
The ratios, R
(n+1)/n , shown in Fig. 44 for the A TLAS mea-
surement, exhibit a constant or staircase scaling pattern, as
derived in Eq. 16. As described in Sect. 2.2.2, basic quan-
tum ﬁeld theory would predict a Poisson scaling of R
(n+1)/n
due to successive gluon radiation from an energetic quark. At
higher jet multiplicities, though, a constant value of R(n+1)/n
is expected due to the non-abelian nature of QCD ﬁnal-state
radiation, i.e. a ﬁnal-state gluon can radiate an additional
gluon. At low multiplicities this constant value is due to a
combination of Poisson scaling and parton density suppres-
sion, where the emission of the ﬁrst parton has a stronger
suppression than any additional parton. This Poisson scal-
ing can be recovered if the scale difference between the
main process (such as Z+1-jet events) and p
T of the sec-
ond leading jet is large [167]. When requiring the leading jet
to have pT > 150 GeV and all other additional jets to have a
pT > 30 GeV, the ratio changes dramatically (Fig. 44, right)
and the Poisson scaling is clearly seen. The theory predic-
tions track this trend and are all in good agreement with the
data.
Similarly, using a smaller data sample of
∫
L dt ≈ 35
pb
− 1, a CMS analysis [ 168] tested the Berends–Giele scal-
ing hypothesis which similarly states that the ratio can be
described as a constant. Since phase space effects can mod-
ify this ansatz slightly, a linear function is usedC
n = α+βn.
The Berends–Giele scaling is conﬁrmed to describe the data
for events with up to four jets.
Measurements of W production in association with jets
has also been performed by A TLAS [169] using an integrated
luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb− 1and by CMS [ 170]u s i n g
an integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 5.0f b− 1.T h eC M S
results, preformed using only W → μνevents, measured the
cross section with up to 6 associated jets (Fig. 45). Similar to
the Z +jets production, the data is in good agreement with the
Blackhat-Sherpa, MadGraph and Powheg predictions.
The Berends–Giele scaling, measured by both A TLAS and
CMS [ 168]a t
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb− 1, also describes well the
W +jets data up to four jets.
Using a common phase space, we summarise in Fig.46 the
W +jets and Z +jets results from A TLAS and CMS. For the
W +jets results the common phase space is one lepton with
a pT> 20 GeV and |η| < 2.5, a neutrino from the W decay
with pT> 25 and the transverse mass of the W of greater
than 40 GeV. For theZ +jets results the phase space is deﬁned
as two leptons each with a pT> 20 GeV and |η| < 2.5 and
invariant mass of 66 GeV< mll < 116 GeV. For bothW and
Z production, the jets are deﬁned using an anti-kT algorithm
with a distance parameter of R = 0.5, a pT > 30 GeV and a
rapidity less than 2.4. The correction factors applied to both
the A TLAS and the CMS results are derived fromSherpa and
range from 1 to 23 %. For all jet multiplicities, the correction
factors are smaller than the experimental systematic uncer-
tainties.
In summary measurements of the cross sections of W and
Z production in association with jets are in excellent agree-
ment with the predictions. For measurements of the cross-
section ratios of R
(n+1)/n the experimental uncertainties are
much smaller compared to those from the theory predictions.
Future measurements should therefore focus on differential
measurements of the cross section to further test perturbative
QCD theory.
123


--- Page 45 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 45 of 59 2916
)jet)+N
-
l+ l→*(γ(Z/σ+1)/jet)+N
-
l+ l→*(γ(Z/σ
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4  = 7 TeV)sData 2011 (
ALPGEN
SHERPA
 + SHERPAATHLACKB
ATLAS )μ)+jets (l=e,
-
l+ l→*(γZ/
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
 jets, R = 0.4tanti-k
| < 4.4
jet
 > 30 GeV, |yjet
Tp
NLO / Data0.5
1
1.5  + SHERPAATHLACKB
MC / Data0.5
1
1.5 ALPGEN
jet+1/NjetN
1/0 2/1 3/2 4/3 5/4 6/5
MC / Data0.5
1
1.5 SHERPA
)jet)+N
-
l+ l→*(γ(Z/σ+1)/jet)+N
-
l+ l→*(γ(Z/σ
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
 = 7 TeV)sData 2011 (
ALPGEN
SHERPA
 + SHERPAATHLACKB
(leading jet) > 150 GeVjet
Tp
ATLAS )μ 1 jet (l=e,≥)+
-
l+ l→*(γZ/
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
 jets, R = 0.4tanti-k
| < 4.4
jet
 > 30 GeV, |yjet
Tp
NLO / Data0.5
1
1.5  + SHERPAATHLACKB
MC / Data0.5
1
1.5 ALPGEN
jet+1/NjetN
2/1 3/2 4/3 5/4 6/5
MC / Data0.5
1
1.5 SHERPA
Fig. 44 A TLAS [165]: Measurements of the ratio of cross sections
for successive exclusive jet multiplicities. The data are compared to
Blackhat-Sherpa, Alpgen and Sherpa predictions. Left The stan-
dard jet selection of p
T > 30 GeV is used. Right The leading jet
is required to have pT > 150 GeV, while all other jets must have
pT > 30 GeV
7.2 Differential W +jets and Z +jets measurements
Differential measurements of the properties of the jets in
W +jets and Z +jets events probe not only perturbative QCD
theory, but they are also sensitive to renormalisation scales,
PDFs and hard parton radiation at large angles. For these
measurements, A TLAS and CMS have two major advan-
tages. First, with large data samples very high jet p
T and
scalar sum scales can be probed. Second, the detectors can
measure jets at large rapidities. Both the highp
T and the large
rapidity jet phase spaces have not been extensively measured
in the past.
The differential cross section of both W or Z events
as a function of HT is of particular interest. In the CMS
measurements HT is deﬁned as the scale sum of all jets
passing the selection criteria. In many ﬁxed-order calcula-
tions, HT is often used as the value of the renormalisa-
tion and factorisation scales. It is also an observable that
is very sensitive to missing higher-order terms in theoret-
ical predictions as well as an observable which is often
used in searches for new physics. The effect of miss-
ing higher-order terms in the predictions can readily be
seen in Fig. 47, which shows the differential cross sec-
tion as a function of H
T for W+≥ 1-jet events. At
large values of HT ,t h eN L O Blackhat-Sherpa predic-
tions underestimate the data. This is because of the lim-
ited order of the Blackhat-Sherpa calculations, which do
not include matrix-element calculations of three or more
real emissions. Modifying Blackhat-Sherpa to include
higher-order NLO terms to the N
jet ≥ 1 predictions yields
good agreement to the data [ 169]. The Sherpa predictions
shows better agreement to the data, compared to Mad-
Graph.
The discrepancy between data and predictions in the HT
distribution, which is attributed to missing higher jet mul-
tiplicities in ﬁxed-order calculations, can be further investi-
gated by comparing the average jet multiplicity as a function
of HT . Figure 48 shows that for higher values of HT ,10 the
average jet multiplicity increases. Therefore at large values
of HT , a ﬁxed-order calculation for only N jet = 1 will not
model correctly the data and agreement to the data can only
be restored when including higher jet multiplicities. This con-
clusion is especially important for searches for new physics
10 A TLAS measurements deﬁne HT as the scalar sum of all jets and
leptons in the event.
123


--- Page 46 ---
2916 Page 46 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
/dN [pb]σd
-110
1
10
210
310
Data
BlackHat+Sherpa (NLO)
Sherpa (LO+PS)
MadGraph+Pythia (LO+PS)
CMS Preliminary
-1 = 5.0 fbint = 7 TeV, Ls
 (R = 0.5) JetsTanti-k
|<2.4jetη>30 GeV, |jet
Tp
 channelνμ→W
NLO/Data0.5
1
1.5
 4 jets NLO, with PDF and Ren./Fac. Scale Unc.)≤Blackhat+Sherpa (
MC/Data0.5
1
1.5
NNLOσSherpa (LO+PS), Normalized to 
Inclusive Jet Multiplicity
123456
MC/Data0.5
1
1.5
NNLOσMadgraph (LO+PS), Normalized to 
Fig. 45 CMS [170]: Measured cross section for W +jets as a function
of the number of jets. The data are compared to Blackhat-Sherpa,
Sherpa and MadGraph
 [pb/GeV]T/dHσd
-510
-410
-310
-210
-110
1
10
Data
BlackHat+Sherpa (NLO)
Sherpa (LO+PS)
MadGraph+Pythia (LO+PS)
CMS Preliminary
-1 = 5.0 fbint = 7 TeV, Ls
 (R = 0.5) JetsTanti-k
|<2.4jetη>30 GeV, |jet
Tp
 channelνμ→W
NLO/Data0.5
1
1.5
 4 jets NLO, with PDF and Ren./Fac. Scale Unc.)≤Blackhat+Sherpa (
MC/Data0.5
1
1.5
NNLOσSherpa (LO+PS), Normalized to 
 1 jet) [GeV]≥ (TH
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
MC/Data0.5
1
1.5
NNLOσMadgraph (LO+PS), Normalized to 
Fig. 47 CMS [170]: Differential cross section as a function of HT for
W+≥ 1-jet events. Predictions are shown forSherpa, MadGraph and
Blackhat-Sherpa
JetsInclusive N
1234
Ratio0.5
1
1.5
)
jets
 N≥(σ×fidσ1/ -310
-210
-110
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
ATLAS Results 
 Resultsν e→CMS W
 Resultsνμ→CMS W
SHERPA MC
JetsInclusive N
1234
Ratio0.5
1
1.5
)
jets
 N≥(σ×fidσ1/
-310
-210
-110
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
ATLAS Results 
 ee Results→CMS Z
 Resultsμμ→CMS Z
SHERPA MC
Fig. 46 Summary of the W +jets (left)a n dZ +jets (right) cross sections
as a function of the number of jets. Both the A TLAS [165,169]a n dt h e
CMS [ 168] results have been corrected to a common phase space as
described in the text. The cross sections for each jet multiplicity have
been normalised by the inclusiveW or Z cross section. The CMS results
shown here use an integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb− 1,a st h e
most recent CMS results are not yet published. The ratio between the
A TLAS and combined CMS results are shown below. Predictions from
Sherpa are also shown
123


--- Page 47 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 47 of 59 2916
 [GeV]TH
>jet<N
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
ATLAS
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
 1 jet≥) + -e+ e→*(γZ/
 jets, R = 0.4,tanti-k
| < 4.4
jet
 > 30 GeV, |yjet
Tp
 = 7 TeV)sData 2011 (
Z+jets(ALPGEN)
Z+jets(SHERPA)
 [GeV]TH
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
MC / Data
0.95
1
1.05 ALPGEN SHERPA
Fig. 48 A TLAS [165]: The average number of jets,< N jet >,i n Z →
ee events with jets as a function ofHT . Alpgen and Sherpa predictions
are also shown
which rely on simulations to predict the number of W and
Z background events with large values of HT . Using simula-
tions with an insufﬁcient number of partons in the ﬁnal state
will lead to an underestimate the number of W and Z events
at high values of HT .
When the pT of the jet is larger than the mass of the
Z or W boson, the NLO to leading-order correction fac-
tors become large due to QCD corrections, which are of the
order α
s ln2(pT/mZ ). Also at high values of the jet pT,t h e
electroweak corrections, which are usually small compared
to QCD corrections, can also reduce the cross section by
5–20 % for 100 GeV < p
ll
T < 500 GeV [ 171]. The differ-
ential cross section as a function of the leading jet pT for
Z events with N jet ≥ 1 measured by the CMS experiment is
shown in Fig. 49. The experimental systematic uncertainties
are smaller than those of the theoretical predictions. The NLO
predictions from Blackhat-Sherpa are consistent with the
data, while Powheg tends to predict slightly harder jet spec-
tra. MadGraph also slightly models incorrectly the shape of
the data.
The differential cross sections as a function of theZ boson
and jet rapidities for Z+1 jet events was performed by the
CMS collaboration [ 172]. Since Z +jets production involves
a relatively high momentum valence quark and a low momen-
tum gluon or quark, the Z boson and jet are usually produced
in the same end of the detector, which implies that the rapid-
ity of the jet and the Z boson in one-jet events is highly
correlated. Measuring the rapidity sum, y
sum =| yz + yjet |,
between the jet and the Z boson is therefore sensitive to the
PDFs, while the rapidity difference ydif =| yz − yjet | is sen-
sitive to the leading-order parton differential cross section.
These results are shown in Fig. 50. Sherpa models the data
 [pb/GeV]T/dpσd
-410
-310
-210
-110
1
 (R = 0.5) JetsTanti-k
| < 2.4
jet
η > 30 GeV, |
jet
Tp
 ll channel→*γZ/
CMS Preliminary -1 = 4.9 fbint = 7 TeV Ls Data
4j@LO +PS)≤Sherpa2 (0,1j@NLO 
Powheg+Pythia6 (Z+1j@NLO +PS)
4j@LO +PS)≤MadGraph+Pythia6 (
Theory/Data0.5
1
1.5
4j@LO +PS)≤Sherpa2 (0,1j@NLO 
Theory unc. (gen) Statistical unc. (gen)
Theory/Data0.5
1
1.5
Powheg+Pythia6 (Z+1j@NLO +PS)
Theory unc. (gen) Statistical unc. (gen)
 [GeV]
T
Leading jet p
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Theory/Data0.5
1
1.5
4j@LO +PS)≤MadGraph+Pythia6 (
Statistical unc. (gen)
Fig. 49 CMS [ 166]: Differential cross section as a function of the
leading jet pT for Z +jets events. Predictions are shown for Powheg,
MadGraph and Blackhat-Sherpa
well, whereas the MadGraph and MCFM predictions are
less consistent with the data. The differences between the
different predictions is most clearly seen in the ydif distribu-
tion where Sherpa best models the data.
The large data samples of the LHC also allow for precision
measurements at high scales. One topological observable of
interest in many searches for new physics is the event thrust,
which is deﬁned as
τ
T ≡ 1 − max
∑
i |pT,i · nτ|∑
i pT,i
,
where the index i is over all jets and the Z boson, pT,i is the
transverse momentum of object i and nτ is the unit vector
that maximises the sum. In events where the Z and the jet
are back-to-back, the thrust is zero. For events with addi-
tional jets that are isotropically distributed, the value of the
thrust becomes larger. Traditionally the results are presented
as ln τ
T , so that back-to-back events have a value approach-
ing inﬁnite and isotropic events have a value of − 1. CMS
measured the differential cross section as a function of the
thrust in two different phase spaces [173]: an inclusive phase
space with pZ
T > 0 GeV and a phase space region with
pZ
T > 150 GeV. Similar to measurements of the jet pT,
123


--- Page 48 ---
2916 Page 48 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 50 CMS [172]:
Differential cross sections as a
function of rapidity sum, ysum
(right) and rapidity difference,
ydif between the Z boson and
the leading jet. The distributions
are normalised to unity. The
lower panel gives the ratios of
data and the Sherpa and
MadGraph simulations to the
MCFM predictions
/dyσ dσ1/
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Z + 1 jet
CMS Data
SHERPA (NLO PDF)
MADGRAPH (NLO PDF)
MCFM (NLO)
-1 = 7 TeV, L = 5 fbsCMS,
(d)
dif
y
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Ratio to MCFM
0.5
1.0
1.5
SHERPA with stat. uncert.
MADGRAPH with stat. uncert.
MADGRAPH (LO PDF)
 uncert.Fμ and RμMCFM
MCFM PDF uncert.
/dyσ dσ1/
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Z + 1 jet
CMS Data
SHERPA (NLO PDF)
MADGRAPH (NLO PDF)
MCFM (NLO)
-1 = 7 TeV, L = 5 fbsCMS,
(c)
sumy
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Ratio to MCFM
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
SHERPA with stat. uncert.
MADGRAPH with stat. uncert.
MADGRAPH (LO PDF)
 uncert.Fμ and RμMCFM
MCFM PDF uncert.
Tln 
-12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2
T/dln  d1/
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16  1jets > 150 GeV, NZ
T, p
-
l
+
 l
*
Z/
Data
RAPHGADM
SHERPA
 (Z+1j)POWHEG
6 (Z2)PYTHIA
-1 = 7 TeV, L = 5.0 fbsCMS, 
Tln 
-12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2
T/dln  d1/
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18  1jets > 0 GeV, NZ
T, p
-
l
+
 l
*
Z/
Data
RAPHGADM
SHERPA
 (Z+1j)POWHEG
6 (Z2)PYTHIA
-1 = 7 TeV, L = 5.0 fbsCMS, 
Fig. 51 CMS [ 173]: Differential cross sections as a function of the ln τT for Z +jets events. The distributions are normalised by the inclusive
Z → ll cross section. MadGraph, Sherpa, Powheg and Pythia predictions are shown
applying a cut on the pZ
T tests perturbative QCD theory in a
region of phase space where the QCD corrections can be
large. As seen in Fig. 51, the predictions are within 10–
15 % of the data in the inclusive phase space, except for
Pythia which shows large deviations. In the phase space
region with large p
Z
T , the agreement with Pythia improves
but both Pythia and Sherpa tend to predict more events in
back-to-back topologies compared to the data.
A measure of the hadronic activity accompanying W pro-
duction can be investigated by studying thesplitting scales in
the kT cluster sequence [174]. These splitting scales are deter-
mined by the clustering of objects, either calorimeter energy
deposits or particle-level hadrons, according to their distance
from each other. The ﬁnal splitting scale in the clustering
sequence, called d
0, is the hardest scale and corresponds to
the pT of the jet. Studying the hardest splitting scales is there-
fore like studying the kT jet algorithm clustering in reverse.
Since this algorithm clusters the soft and collinear branchings
ﬁrst, this clustering sequence is akin to studying the QCD
evolution in reverse. 11 The results of the hardest splitting
scale, d0 are shown in Fig. 52 and compared to MC@NLO,
Alpgen, Sherpa and Powheg predictions. Although there
is reasonable agreement to the data, the NLO predictions do
not describe well the high tail even though the leading-order
accuracy for all of these generators should be the same. This
study, which also includes measurements that are sensitive
to the hadronisation effects and multiple-parton interactions,
can be used to help tune these generators in the future.
With the large data sets available from the LHC, both the
A TLAS and the CMS collaborations have studied extensively
differential cross sections for W and Z production in associ-
ation with jets. These measurements have highlighted a few
features. First, at large values of H
T the predictions must
11 This is not case for the anti-kT algorithm which clusters the collinear
branchings ﬁrst but not the soft emissions.
123


--- Page 49 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 49 of 59 2916
ATLAS
Data 2010√
 s=7T e V∫
Ldt = 36 pb–1
W → eν
Data (Syst + stat unc.)
ALPGEN +HERWIG
SHERPA (MENLOPS )
MC@NLO
POWHEG +PYTHIA 6
POWHEG +PYTHIA 810–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1/σ dσ/d
√
d0 [1/GeV]
1 10 1 10 2
0.5
1
1.5
√
d0 [GeV]
MC/Data
Fig. 52 A TLAS [174]: Distribution of the hardest splitting scale (d0)i n
the kT clustering sequence for W → eνevents. The data are compared
to the MC@NLO, Alpgen, Sherpa and Powheg predictions. The yel-
low bands represent the combined statistical and systematic uncertain-
ties. The histograms are normalised to unit area
include a sufﬁcient number of partons in the matrix-element
calculation in order to model the data correctly, even at low
jet multiplicities. Second, the experimental precision of mea-
surements such as the Z boson differential cross section as
a function of leading jet pT can test not only QCD correc-
tions but for the ﬁrst time become sensitive to the QED cor-
rections in one-jet events. Future measurements with higher
transverse momenta of the jets and the boson will be able to
better probe these large QCD corrections at these high values
of pT as well as be able to make qualitative statements about
the accuracy of the QED corrections.
7.3 Measurements of the ratio of W+ to W− in association
with jets
As discussed in Sect. 6.2,t h eW± rapidity distribution is sen-
sitive to the u ¯d and d ¯u quark distributions. In addition the
number of W± events depends on the number of associated
jets because the fraction of u- and d-quarks contributing to
the different jet multiplicity processes changes. CMS mea-
sured the charge asymmetry deﬁned as AW = σ(W+)−σ(W− )
σ(W+)+σ(W− )
for different numbers of associated jets [ 168]. Since many
experimental systematic uncertainties especially the domi-
nant uncertainties due to the jet energy scale cancel in this
ratio, the charge asymmetry is a sensitive test even at large
jet multiplicities. Figure 53 shows the charge asymmetry for
W → μν events. The MadGraph predictions agree well
with the data, while Pythia fails to model the data even for
one-jet events.
inclusive jet multiplicity, n
Charge asymmetry
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 data
 MadGraph Z2
 Pythia Z2
CMS
 = 7 TeVs  at-136 pb
νμ→W
 > 30 GeV
jet
TE
01 23
Fig. 53 CMS [168]: W charge asymmetry AW as a function of the jet
multiplicity for W → μν events. MadGraph and Pythia predictions
are also included
In order to place constraints on the PDFs, measurements
of the W charge asymmetry as a function of the number of
jets and as a function of the pT of the W boson are needed.
Such measurements at large values of the boson pT could
constrain the PDFs at larger momentum fractionsx compared
to inclusive measurements [ 175].
7.4 Measurements of the ratio of W +jets to Z +jets
Measurements of the W and Z cross sections in association
with jets are plagued by dominant uncertainties from the jet
energy scale. Although both CMS and A TLAS have achieved
excellent understanding of the jet energy scale, these uncer-
tainties still dominate especially for jets at high rapidities.
However, in other cases, such as the measurement of the jet
pT (Sect. 7.2), the experimental measurement is more precise
than the theory predictions. Both the theory and the experi-
mental uncertainties can be reduced through a measurement
of the cross-section ratio between W +jets and Z +jets pro-
cesses. For example, when comparing A TLAS measurements
of W +jets production to the ratio of W +jets to Z +jets pro-
duction for events with one associated jet, the jet energy scale
uncertainty is roughly a factor of 2 smaller in the ratio mea-
surement.
CMS measured the ratio of W +jets to Z +jets for up to
four associated jets [168]. In both the electron and the muon
channels, the data were in good agreement with the Mad-
Graph and Pythia predictions. A TLAS measured the ratio
for exactly one associated jet but for different thresholds of
the jet pT [176]. The combined results from the electron and
muon channels are shown in Fig. 54 and compared to pre-
dictions from Pythia, Alpgen and NLO predictions from
MCFM. The ratio, which is not constant as a function of
the jet pT threshold, decreases because at large jet momenta
the difference in the boson masses is small compared to the
effective scale of the interaction. All of the predictions model
this trend well.
123


--- Page 50 ---
2916 Page 50 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
 l l ) + 1-jet)→(Z (σ
) + 1-jet)ν l →(W (σ
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
 Channels combinedμData e-
Total syst. uncertainty
 stat. uncertainty⊕Total syst. 
MCFM
-1
 Ldt = 33 pb∫
ATLAS
 > 20 GeV
T
| < 2.5, pη|
 Threshold [GeV]TJet p
40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Theory / Data ratio
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4 PYTHIA
ALPGEN
MCFM
Fig. 54 A TLAS [176]: Ratio of W +jets to Z +jets in N jet = 1e v e n t s
for varying thresholds of the jet pT. NLO predictions from MCFM and
predictions from Alpgen and Pythia are also shown
The measurement of the ratio of W to Z production in
association with jets is one of the most precise measurements
of perturbative QCD. Future measurements, using the full
2011 data set from the LHC will be able to measure this
ratio for higher jet multiplicities and as a function of the
p
T and rapidity of the jets and HT . This ratio is sensitive
to new physics models, especially if the new particles decay
preferentially either to the W vs. the Z ﬁnal state.
7.5 Cross-section measurements of W and Z bosons
in association with heavy-ﬂavour quarks
The study of W and Z production in association with heavy-
ﬂavour quarks is of particular importance today. First, the
theoretical predictions are less well known compared to the
inclusive W +jets and Z +jets predictions. Second, precision
measurements of these processes are critical since they are a
dominant background in Higgs measurements of WH pro-
duction with H → bb decays and new physics searches
involving heavy-ﬂavour production.
The production ofW +b-jet events has two main diagrams
at leading order (Fig. 55): W plus a gluon in the ﬁnal state,
where the gluon splits to a b¯b pair, and b-quark in the initial
state where the W is produced from radiation from a quark.
The former can be produced both by the matrix-element cal-
culation and by the parton showering model, whereas the
q
q
b
b
W
q q’
bb
W
Fig. 55 Leading-order Feynman diagram for the production of
W bosons in association with a b-quark
latter diagram can only be modelled by including a b-quark
in the initial state from the PDF.
The predictions and measurements of W + b-jet cross
section have a long history. The ﬁrst measurements by CDF
[21] indicated that the measured cross section was too large
by 2.8 standard deviations compared to the predictions. A
measurement by A TLAS, using only an integrated lumi-
nosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb
− 1, also reported a larger cross
section by 1.5 standard deviations, while the D0 measure-
ment was consistent with the predictions [ 24]. An updated
A TLAS measurement [177]o ft h e W + b-jet cross section
using an integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 4.5f b− 1 offers
the statistical and systematic precision to deﬁnitively close
this debate. The measurement presented cross sections for
the exclusive one-jet and two-jet ﬁnal states with a ﬁducial
phase space requirement of at least one b-jet, deﬁned by the
presence of a weakly decaying b-hadron with p
T > 5G e V
and within a cone radius of /Delta1R = 0.3 of the jet axis. The
cross-section results are summarised in Fig. 56 and com-
pared to calculations from MCFM, Powheg and Alpgen.
The MCFM predictions are calculated using the ﬁve-ﬂavour
scheme (5FNS) which accounts for the presence of b-quarks
in the PDF. The Alpgen and Powheg predictions use the
four-ﬂavour scheme (4FNS). For one-jet events, the mea-
sured cross section is consistent with 1.5 standard devi-
ations to the NLO MCFM predictions, while for two-jet
events the measured cross section is in good agreement with
the predictions. In the one-jet case, the difference between
data and the predictions can be more clearly understood
in the differential cross-section measurement as a function
of the jet p
T shown in Fig. 56.T h e MCFM and Alp-
gen predict a softer jet pT spectrum with respect to the
data.
In a complementary result, theW +bb ﬁnal state was mea-
sured by CMS [ 178], by requiring events with only two jets,
both of which must originate from ab-hadron. The measured
cross section of
0.53 ± 0.05(stat ) ± 0.09(syst ) ± 0.06(th) ± 0.02(lumi )pb
is in excellent agreement with the MCFM prediction of
0.52 ± 0.03pb.
Similar to measurements of W + b-jet, the Z + b-jet cross
section is much less studied compared to the inclusive Z
measurements. Unlike W + b-jet which only has two main
contributing diagrams at leading order, Z + b-jet production
123


--- Page 51 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 51 of 59 2916
1 jet 2 jet 1+2 jet
 [pb]fiducialσ
0
5
10
15
20
Electron Channel
Combined Electron and Muon
Muon Channel
MCFM 4FNS + 5FNS
Powheg + Pythia
ALPGEN + Herwig (norm. to NNLO inclusive W)
ATLAS  = 7 TeVsData 2011, 
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
 [GeV]Tb-jet p
25-30 30-40 40-60 60-140
Data/MC1
2
34 Data / MCFM
theor. uncertainties
 [GeV]Tb-jet p
25-30 30-40 40-60 60-140
Data/MC1
2
34 Data / ALPGEN
 [pb/GeV]
b-jet
T/dpσ d
-210
-110
1
ATLAS 
-1
 L dt = 4.6 fb∫
=7 TeV)sData (
MCFM
ALPGEN
, NJet = 1μe + 
Fig. 56 A TLAS [177]: Measurement of the cross section for W +b-jet
events for one-jet, two-jet and 1+2-jet events (left). NLO MCFM predic-
tions and Alpgen and Powheg predictions are also shown. Differential
cross section as a function of theb-jet pT for one-jet events (right). NLO
MCFM predictions and Alpgen predictions are also shown
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
Z
b
ZZ
Zq
q
q
q
Fig. 57 Leading-order Feynman diagrams for the production of
Z bosons in association with a b-quark
includes additional leading-order diagrams of Z radiation
from an initial-stateb-quark and Z radiation from a ﬁnal-state
b¯b pair (Fig. 57). Predictions which include diagrams with an
initial-state b are therefore necessary. CMS presented a mea-
surement of the Z +b-jet cross section with exactly one b-jet,
with at least one b-jet and with at least two b-jets, using an
integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 5f b− 1 [179]. The results
were compared toMadGraph,a MC@NLO and MCFM pre-
dictions. While the measured cross sections were found to
be in fair agreement with MadGraph and aMC@NLO,t h e
MCFM results differ by approximately two standard devia-
tions from the data. A TLAS also measured theZ +b-jet cross
section using a smaller data sample with an integrated lumi-
nosity of
∫
L dt ≈ 35 pb− 1 [180]. The NLO MCFM pre-
dictions as well as Alpgen and Sherpa were found to be
consistent with the data but there were signs of tension espe-
cially between the Alpgen and Sherpa predictions them-
selves. These results are summarised in Fig. 64. Updated
results with better statistical precision and predictions with
massive quark models are needed here to help resolve these
differences.
In both W + b-jet and Z + b-jet production, diagrams
with a gluon splitting to a b¯b pair contribute to the matrix-
element calculations and in the parton showering model. In a
generator like Alpgen, this overlap is removed by applying
a /Delta1R cut, so that at small values of /Delta1R the gluon splitting
is handled by the parton shower, while at large values it is
predicted from the matrix element. The theoretical uncertain-
ties describing collinear b-quark production are large. To test
this transition from parton shower to matrix-element calcula-
tions, measurements of the gluon splitting at small values of
/Delta1R is an important topic at the LHC today. This is especially
important for new physics searches and Higgs measurements
that select b-jets, since high p
T b-jets tend to be produced
via gluon splitting.
While measurements of gluon splitting at small values of
/Delta1R are interesting, it is experimentally challenging to mea-
sure since the two b-quarks are often reconstructed within
the same jet. CMS presented a new approach for this mea-
surement by measuring Z events with two b-hadrons [181].
As the b-hadrons can be reconstructed from displaced sec-
ondary vertices, only tracking information is needed and
there is no dependence on a jet algorithm. The angular reso-
lution is /Delta1R ≈ 0.02 between the two b hadrons. The dif-
ferential cross section measurement as a function of /Delta1R
of the two b-hadrons is shown in Fig. 58. The collinear
region ( /Delta1R < 0.5) is best described by Alpgen, while
MadGraph and a MC@NLO predictions tend to underes-
timate the data. In addition, the differential cross section was
measured for a phase space region where p
Z
T > 50 GeV
123


--- Page 52 ---
2916 Page 52 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
/0.7 (pb)σd
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
data
MG 5F CTEQ6L1
MG 4F MSTW2008
ALPGEN 4F CTEQ5M
aMC@NLO MSTW2008
-1CMS, L = 5.2 fb
 = 7 TeVs
Z
Tall p
BBRΔ
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
MC/data0
0.5
1
1.5
/0.84 (pb)σd
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
data
MG 5F CTEQ6L1
MG 4F MSTW2008
ALPGEN 4F CTEQ5M
aMC@NLO MSTW2008
-1CMS, L = 5.2 fb
 = 7 TeVs
 > 50 GeVZ
Tp
BBRΔ
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
MC/data0
0.5
1
1.5
Fig. 58 CMS [181]: Differential cross section as a function of /Delta1R of
the two b hadrons for Z + b¯b events. The right plot shows the inclu-
sive phase space of pZ
T > 0G e V . T h eleft plot shows the phase space
region of pZ
T > 50 GeV. Also shown are the predictions from Mad-
Graph using the 5- and four-ﬂavour schemes, Alpgen and MC@NLO
s, d
c
W
c
g c
W
c
g
s, d− +
_
__
_
Fig. 59 Leading-order Feynman diagrams for the production of the
W boson in association with a c-quark
(Fig. 58). In this phase space, the relative fraction of events
with collinear b-quarks increases. Again, Alpgen gives the
best description of the data.
The cross section of the W boson in association with c-
quarks, which have sensitivity to the s-quark contribution in
PDFs, have not been experimentally well measured in the
past. At the LHC, the dominant W+ c production takes place
via the reaction sg → W
− + c and ¯sg → W+ +¯c,a s
illustrated in Fig. 59. Due to the high production rates at the
LHC, measurements of the W + c cross sections have for the
ﬁrst time, sufﬁcient precision to constrain the s-quark in the
PDFs at x ≈ 0.01. In the future, measurements of W + c
may also be able to help determine if there is a asymme-
try between the s and ¯s sea12 as suggested by the NuTeV
measurements [68,182,183].
Since the c-quark and the W have opposite charge, the
W+c production can be measured by subtracting events
with the same-sign charge from events with opposite-signed
charge. This subtraction will have no effect on the W− + c
process, but all other background such as W− + c¯c and
W− + b¯b are symmetric in same-sign and opposite-sign
events and will be removed. In the CMS analysis [ 184], the
12 In practice this is challenging since the cross-section asymmetry in
the ratio of W+ +c to W− +c production comes mainly from the d − ¯d
PDF asymmetry.
jets originating from a c-quark are selected in one of three
ways: a selection of a D± → K∓ π±π± decay by requir-
ing a displaced secondary vertex with three tracks and an
invariant mass which is consistent with D±, a selection of a
D0 → K∓ π± decay by requiring a displaced secondary ver-
tex with two tracks which is consistent withD0, and semilep-
tonic c-quark decay by requiring a muon matched to a jet. The
A TLAS analysis [185] selects W + c events by reconstruct-
ing the D± → K∓ π±π± and D∗± → D0π± decay modes
or by identifying jets with a semileptonic c-quark decay.
The A TLAS and CMS results both presented measure-
ments of the W + c cross sections, the cross-section ratio of
W++c to W− +c as well as the cross sections as a function of
the lepton η. As summarised in Fig. 60, the measured W + c
cross section in the A TLAS results is most consistent with
PDF sets with a relatively higher s-quark density, while the
CMS results are most consistent with PDF sets with a rela-
tively lower density. However, the precision of the measure-
ments is not sufﬁcient to make any deﬁnitive conclusions.
Overall for both the A TLAS and the CMS measurements,
there is good agreement between the experimental results
and the predictions.
In the A TLAS results, the ratio of the strange-to-down sea-
quark distribution, r
s = 0.5(s +¯s)/ ¯d, as a function of x is
treated as free parameter in the HERAPDF1.5 PDF ﬁts and all
other eigenvectors in the ﬁt are constrained within the uncer-
tainties from the HERA data. As seen in Fig. 61, the A TLAS
results support the hypothesis of an SU(3)-symmetric light-
quark sea and are consistent with the results from the A TLAS-
epWZ12 PDF ﬁts [ 143] where the A TLAS W and Z cross-
section measurements are included in addition to the HERA
data (see also Sect. 6.2).
123


--- Page 53 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 53 of 59 2916
 [pb]fid
OS-SSσ
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
CT10
MSTW2008
NNPDF2.3
HERAPDF1.5
ATLAS-epWZ12
NNPDF2.3coll
Wc-jet
aMC@NLO
ATLAS
-1
 Ldt = 4.6 fb∫
 = 7 TeVs
Data
 3.7 [pb]± 1.2 ±70.8
Stat
Stat+syst
(W + c) [pb]σ
02 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 0 1 2 0
 = 7 TeVs at-1L = 5.0 fbCMS
Total uncertainty
Statistical uncertainty
 CMS 2011
 4.9  (syst.) pb± 2.0  (stat.) ±84.1
MSTW08
 pb
 PDF -1.7 
 +1.4 78.7
CT10
 pb
 PDF -5.2 
 +6.2 87.3
NNPDF23
 pb PDF 3.3 ±78.2
collNNPDF23
 pb PDF 11.8±102.7
| < 2.5jetη > 25 GeV, |jet
Tp
| < 2.1lη > 35 GeV, |l
Tp
Predictions:
NLO MCFM + NNLO PDF
Fig. 60 Cross section of W +c for A TLAS [185]( left)a n dC M S[184]
(right), compared to four different PDF sets: MSTW2008, CTEQ10,
NNPDF23 and NNPDF23coll. The A TLAS results are also compared
to HeraPDF1.5 and HeraPDF1.5 but including the A TLAS W and
Z data, called ATLAS- epWZ12.T h e NNPDF23coll PDF set is like
NNPDF23 but excludes all ﬁxed target data. In the A TLAS ﬁgure, “OS-
SS” refers to the subtraction of events with opposite-signed charges and
same-sign charges. The predictions in the A TLAS results are made using
the a MC@NLO generator, while the predictions for the CMS results
use the MCFM generator
Fig. 61 A TLAS [185]: Ratio of strange-to-down sea-quark distribu-
tions as a function of x as obtained from the A TLAS-epWZ12 PDF set,
the ratio as assumed in the HERAPDF1.5 PDF set and the ratio obtained
from the HERAPDF1.5 PDF set but including the A TLAS W + c mea-
surements. The A TLAS-epWZ12 PDF set includes the A TLASW and
Z cross-section measurements in addition to the HERA data. The error
band on the ratio including the A TLAS measurements represents the
total uncertainty
In summary with the large LHC data sets, precision mea-
surements of differential cross sections of W and Z produc-
tion in association with heavy-ﬂavour quarks can be made for
the ﬁrst time. Measurements of the W + b-jet cross sections
have indicated that the jet pT spectra is not well modelled by
the predictions. In addition the predictions for the Z + b-jet
cross section are in tension both with the data and with each
other. Future measurements of the differential cross sections
are needed to resolve this. Finally, both measurements of
the W + c-jet production from A TLAS and CMS agree with
a wide range of PDF sets. Although the A TLAS and CMS
results tend to prefer PDFs with a different s-quark density,
additional measurements with more data are needed to study
this in greater detail.
7.6 Electroweak production of Z bosons
Z bosons in associations with jets can be produced not only
via the Drell–Y an process, but also via electroweak pro-
cesses, as illustrated in Fig. 62. Electroweak processes are
here deﬁned as all processes which lead to a ﬁnal state of
two leptons, two quarks and involve the exchange of elec-
troweak bosons in the t-channel. Of special importance is
the vector boson fusion process, shown in the ﬁrst diagram,
as it is an important input for Higgs boson studies and the
study of electroweak gauge couplings. In a full calculation
of the production cross section of process, which involves
all diagrams, large negative interference exists between the
pure vector boson fusion process, the bremsstrahlung and the
non-resonant (or multi peripheral) processes.
The experimental signature of the electroweak produc-
tion described above, is the typical Z boson topology of two
oppositely charged leptons close to the Z boson mass and in
addition two high energetic jets. As the momentum transfer
to the interacting initial partons caused by the electroweak
bosons in the t-channel is relatively small, these jets tend
to be produced in the forward region of the detector. The
dominant background is due to Drell–Y an production of the
Z boson in association with jets. Signiﬁcantly smaller back-
ground contributions are expected from the top-pair produc-
tion and di-boson processes such as WW , WZ and ZZ .
The CMS experiment has analysed the full 2011 data set
to measure the cross section of the electroweak production
of Z bosons [186]. In addition to a standard Z boson selec-
123


--- Page 54 ---
2916 Page 54 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
Fig. 62 Three contribution
Feynman diagrams for the
electroweak production of an
l+l− q ¯q ﬁnal state: vector boson
fusion (left), Bremsstrahlung
(middle), non-resonant
production (left)
V
V
W
W
Z
l
ll l
l
l
V
V
q
q
v
q
qq
q
Bremsstrahlung Non−ResonantVector Boson Fusion
Fig. 63 CMS [ 186]: The m jj distribution after selection cuts. The
expected contributions from the dominant Drell–Y an (labelled DY)
background and the electroweak (labelled EW) signal processes are
evaluated from a ﬁt, while the contributions from the small t ¯t and di-
boson backgrounds are estimated from simulation. The solid line with
the label “EW only”’ shows the distribution for the signal alone
tion in the electron and muon decay channels, further cuts
on two reconstructed jets within |η| < 3.6 are imposed in
order to reject the Drell–Y an background: The transverse
momenta of the two jets are required to bep
T > 65 GeV and
pT > 40 GeV, respectively. In addition, the Z boson rapid-
ity in the rest frame of the two jets has to fulﬁl |y∗| < 1.2.
These requirements lead to a signal efﬁciency of 0.06 and
to a signal over background ratio of S/B ≈ 0.1. This low
S/B ratio requires the usage of maximum likelihood ﬁts or
multivariate techniques for the cross-section determination.
Both approaches have been used in [ 186]. The distribution
of the invariant mass of both jets is shown in Fig. 63 for the
signal-and-background processes. It is the basis of a likeli-
hood ﬁt based on Poisson statistics where the normalisation
of the background distributions and the signal distributions
are kept as free parameters. The signal extraction via mul-
tivariate techniques uses a boosted decision tree approach,
which is based on kinematic variables of the jets and lep-
tons and their combinations. Both approaches lead to consis-
tent results, where the multivariate approach provides lower
uncertainties. The ﬁnal measured cross section within a ﬁdu-
cial phase space
13 is
σmeas.
EW ,Z = 154 ± 24(stat ) ± 46(syst ) ± 26(th) ± 3(lumi ) fb
and is in good agreement with the theoretical expectation of
σEW ,Z = 166fb. The dominating uncertainties are due to the
modelling of the background distributions and the jet energy
scale. A possible electroweak Z production can therefore be
observed with a 2 .6σ signiﬁcance already within the 2011
data set. The A TLAS experiment has also published a mea-
surement with improved systematic uncertainties based on
the 2012 data set at √
s = 8T e V [187], which conﬁrms the
observation of the electroweak production of Z above a 5σ
conﬁdence level. Measurements at a higher centre-of-mass
energy and even larger data samples than the √ s = 8T e V
sample will be needed to establish this cross-section mea-
surement with higher precision.
8 Summary and outlook
In the ﬁrst two years of the LHC physics program, a new
energy regime was investigated with high precision; in some
measurements, the experimental systematic uncertainties are
at the percent level and the statistical uncertainties are even
smaller. A similar precision was reached at previous colliders
usually after many years of running. Not only the highest
available collision energies and large luminosities provided
by the LHC, but also the remarkable performance of the two
general purpose detectors, A TLAS and CMS, are the basis
of this success.
This article is the ﬁrst comprehensive review of all major
results regarding the production of single heavy gauge bosons
at a collision energy of √
s = 7 TeV. Summaries, compar-
isons and interpretations of the available results have been
presented. All results are in agreement between the two main
experiments at the LHC and are furthermore consistent with
the presently available Standard Model predictions. This is
illustrated in Fig. 64, where the ratio between theoretical pre-
dictions and measured observables for both experiments are
shown.
Among the numerous measurements which have been pre-
sented in this review article, a few should be emphasised.
13 This is deﬁned by mll > 50 GeV, pT, jet > 25 GeV, |ηjet | < 4.0,
m jj > 120 GeV.
123


--- Page 55 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 55 of 59 2916
Fig. 64 Summary of cross
sections for inclusive W and
Z production and with
associated jets. Shown is the
ratio between data and
predictions. The grey bands
represent the theory
uncertainties, the light coloured
bands are the statistical
uncertainties and the dark
coloured bands the combined
statistical and systematic
uncertainties. Note that the
CMS W +jets and Z +jets results
are compared to
Sherpa predictions here
theo.σ/obsσ
0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
RatiosInclusiveW/Z + jetsW/Z + b jets
 Z) ATLAS→(ppσ W)/→(ppσ
 Z) CMS→(ppσ W)/→(ppσ
 +X) ATLASν l→ W→(ppσ
 +X) CMSν l→ W→(ppσ
+X) ATLAS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
+X) CMS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
 + 1 jet) ATLASν l→ W→(ppσ
 + 1 jet) CMSν e→ W→(ppσ
 + 1 jet) ATLAS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
 + 1 jet) CMS-e+ e→ Z→(ppσ
 + 2 jets) ATLAS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
 + 2 jet) CMS-e+ e→ Z→(ppσ
 + b, 1,2 jet) ATLASν l→ W→(ppσ
 + 2 b-jets) CMSν l→ W→(ppσ
 + b-jets) ATLAS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
 + b-jets) CMS
-
l+ l→ Z→(ppσ
Theo. Uncertainties
Stat. Uncertainties
Stat.+Sys Uncertainties
=7 TeVsComparison of ATLAS and CMS Results at 
The inclusive production cross sections ofW and Z bosons
were among the ﬁrst measurements of the LHC which made
use of the full detector potential and built the basis for many
subsequent physics analyses. By now, the experimental pre-
cision of the fully inclusive cross sections of both experi-
ments is below 2 % and hence comparable to the NNLO
QCD prediction uncertainties. The differential cross-section
measurement led to an improved understanding of the proton
structure functions. In particular, the strange-quark content
appears to be comparable to the ¯u and ¯d-quark content even
at low scales, i.e. before the QCD evolution.
Using the large data sets available from the LHC, our
understanding of W and Z production in association with
heavy-ﬂavour jets, in particular, has greatly improved. Recent
measurements of the W + b-jet cross section, which indicate
that generators such as MCFM and Alpgen predict a jet
p
T spectrum that is too soft compared to the data, are the
ﬁrst steps in resolving a long debate over the source of the
disagreement between the measured and predicted cross sec-
tion. Measurements of W + c production have for the ﬁrst
time the precision to constrain the s-quark in the PDFs at
x ≈ 0.01 and can help determine if there is an asymmetry
between the s and ¯s sea.
With the proton–proton data recorded in the year 2012
at a centre-of-mass energy of √ s = 8 TeV, the available
statistics increased by a factor of 4, corresponding to an
integrated luminosity of
∫
L dt dt ≈ 20–25 fb − 1. While
the increase in centre-of-mass energy has only a mild effect
on the expected cross section, 14 the increased data sample
14 The Standard Model production cross sections for W and Z bosons
are expected to increase by roughly 20 %.
allows for calibration of the detector to a higher precision.
This opens the possibility for the precision measurement of
electroweak observables such as the W boson mass. In addi-
tion, the measurements of multi-differential cross sections
and rare processes such as W and Z production in associa-
tion with heavy-ﬂavour quarks will become available.
The next signiﬁcant step forward will be the LHC run in
the years 2015 to 2018 at a centre-of-mass energy of √
s =
13–14 TeV. With this, the Standard Model predictions will
once again be tested in a new energy regime with the ultimate
hope to ﬁnd signs of ‘new physics’.
Acknowledgments It is our privilege to participate as members of the
A TLAS collaboration in the endeavour to investigate the new energy
regime opened by the LHC and to present the work of a collaborative
effort of both the A TLAS and the CMS experiments. We thank Alessan-
dro Tricoli for lively discussions over this text and Lutz Koepke and
Joey Houston for the detailed feedback on the ﬁrst drafts of this review
article. In addition, we thank the A TLAS and CMS working group con-
veners, Sasha Glazov, Alessandro Tricoli, Jeffrey Berryhill and Maxime
Gouzevitch for their input. Special thanks goes to V oica Radescu and
Elzbieta Richter-Was, who helped us in the prospects of PDF Fits and the
implementation of the studies regarding the QCD angular coefﬁcients,
respectively. Last, but not least, we would like to express our gratitude
to Dieter Haidt for his guidance and comments during the writing of
this review article. The contribution by Matthias Schott was supported
by the V olkswagen Foundation and the German Research Foundation
(DFG). The contribution by Monica Dunford was supported by the
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the
source are credited.
Funded by SCOAP
3 /L i c e n s eV e r s i o nC CB Y4 . 0 .
123


--- Page 56 ---
2916 Page 56 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
References
1. UA1 Collaboration, Experimental observation of isolated large
transverse energy electrons with associated missing energy at
s
∗∗(1/2) = 540-GeV . Phys. Lett. B122, 103–116 (1983)
2. UA1 Collaboration, Experimental observation of lepton pairs of
invariant mass around 95-GeV/c ∗∗2 at the CERN SPS Collider.
Phys. Lett. B 126, 398–410 (1983)
3. UA2 Collaboration, Observation of single isolated electrons of
high transverse momentum in events with missing transverse
energy at the CERN anti-p p collider. Phys. Lett. B 122, 476–
485 (1983)
4. UA2 Collaboration, Evidence for Z0 to e+ e- at the CERN anti-p
p Collider. Phys. Lett. B 129, 130–140 (1983)
5. ALEPH Collaboration, DELPHI Collaboration, L3 Collabora-
tion, OPAL Collaborations. LEP W branching fraction results for
the PDG Review of Particle Physics (2005)
6. ALEPH Collaboration, DELPHI Collaboration, L3 Collabora-
tion, OPAL Collaborations. A combination of results on charged
triple gauge boson couplings by the lep experiments (2005)
7. CDF Collaboration, A measurement of W boson production in
1.8 TeV ¯pp collisions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1005 (1989)
8. CDF Collaboration, Measurements of inclusive W and Z cross
sections in p anti-p collisions at s
∗∗(1/2) = 1.96-TeV . J. Phys. G
34, 2457–2544 (2007)
9. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of W and Z boson production
cross sections. Phys. Rev. D 60, 052003 (1999)
10. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the shape of the boson trans-
verse momentum distribution in p ¯p → Z/γ∗ → e+e− + X
events produced at √ s=1.96-TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 102002
(2008)
11. CDF Collaboration, Transverse momentum cross section of e+e−
pairs in the Z -boson region from p ¯p collisions at √ s = 1.96 TeV .
Phys. Rev. D 86, 052010 (2012)
12. CDF Collaboration, Precise measurement of the W -boson mass
with the CDF II detector. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 151803 (2012)
13. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the W boson mass with the
D0 detector. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 151804 (2012)
14. CDF Collaboration, Measurement of jet multiplicity in W events
produced in p ¯p collisions at √ s = 1.8− Tev. Phys. Rev. Lett.70,
4042–4046 (1993)
15. CDF Collaboration, Measurement of inclusive jet cross-sections
in Z/gamma∗(→ e+e−) + jets production in p ¯p collisions at √ s
= 1.96-TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.100, 102001 (2008)
16. CDF Collaboration, Measurement of the cross section for W−
boson production in association with jets in p ¯p collisions at √ s
= 1.96-TeV . Phys. Rev. D77, 011108 (2008)
17. D0 Collaboration, Studies of W boson plus jets production in p ¯p
collisions at √ s = 1.96 TeV . Phys. Rev. D88, 092001(2013)
18. D0 Collaboration, Measurements of inclusive W+jets production
rates as a function of jet transverse momentum in p ¯p collisions
at √ s = 1.96 TeV . Phys. Lett.705, 200–207 (2011)
19. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the ratios of the
Z/gamma∗+≥ n jet production cross sections to the total
inclusive Z /gamma∗ cross section in p anti-p collisions at
s∗∗(1/2) = 1.96-TeV . B658, 112–119 (2008)
20. CDF Collaboration, Observation of the production of a W boson
in association with a single charm quark. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110(7),
071801 (2013)
21. CDF Collaboration, First measurement of the b-jet cross section in
events with a W Boson in p anti-p Collisions at s ∗∗(1/2) = 1.96-
TeV. Phys. Rev. Lett.104, 131801 (2010)
22. CDF Collaboration, Measurement of cross sections for b jet pro-
duction in events with a Z Boson in p− anti-p Collisions at √ s =
1.96-TeV . Phys. Rev. D79, 052008 (2009)
23. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the ratio of the p ¯p → W+c−
jet cross section to the inclusive p ¯p → W+ jets cross section.
Phys. Lett. B 666, 23–30 (2008)
24. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the p ¯p → W +b+ X produc-
tion cross section at√ s = 1.96 TeV . Phys. Lett. B718, 1314–1320
(2013)
25. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the ratio of differential cross
sections σ(p ¯p → Z + bjet )/σ(p ¯p → Z + jet ) in p ¯p collisions
at √ (s) = 1.96 TeV . Phys. Rev. D87(9), 092010 (2013)
26. STAR Collaboration, Measurement of the W → eνand Z/γ∗ →
e+e− production cross sections at mid-rapidity in proton-
proton collisions at √ s = 500 GeV . Phys. Rev. D 85, 092010
(2012)
27. PHENIX Collaboration, Cross section and parity violating spin
asymmetries ofW± boson production in polarizedp+p collisions
at √ s = 500 GeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.106, 062001 (2011)
28. CMS Collaboration, Study of W boson production in PbPb and
pp collisions at √ sNN = 2.76 TeV . Phys. Lett. B 715, 66–87
(2012)
29. CMS Collaboration, Study of Z boson production in PbPb colli-
sions at nucleon-nucleon centre of mass energy = 2.76 TeV . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 106, 212301 (2011)
30. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of Z boson production in
Pb+Pb Collisions at√
sNN = 2.76 TeV with the A TLAS detector.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 022301 (2013)
31. J.R. Ellis, J. Gillies, M. Jacob, D.E. Plane, D. Treille, CERN: The
second 25 years. Phys. Rept. 403–404, 1–504 (2004)
32. G. Altarelli, L. Di Lella, Physics of the intermediate vector bosons.
Adv. Ser. Direct. High Energy Phys. 4, 177–224 (1989)
33. CDF Collaboration, Determination of the jet energy scale at the
collider detector at Fermilab. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 566, 375–
412 (2006)
34. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of dijet cross sections in
pp collisions at 7 TeV centre-of-mass energy using the A TLAS
detector. arXiv:1312.3524 (2013)
35. J. Beringer et al., Review of particle physics (RPP). Phys. Rev. D
86, 010001 (2012)
36. M. Kobayashi, T. Maskawa, CP violation in the renormalizable
theory of weak interaction. Prog. Theor. Phys.49, 652–657 (1973)
37. T. Nunnemann. V ector bosons in new phenomena searches. LMU
Munich (2007).
38. A. Buckley, J. Butterworth, S. Gieseke, D. Grellscheid, S. Hoche
et al., General-purpose event generators for LHC physics. Phys.
Rept. 504, 145–233 (2011)
39. T. Carli, D. Clements, A. Cooper-Sarkar, C. Gwenlan, G.P . Salam
et al., A posteriori inclusion of parton density functions in NLO
QCD ﬁnal-state calculations at hadron colliders: The APPLGRID
Project. Eur. Phys. J. C 66, 503–524 (2010)
40. T. Schorner-Sadenius, Jet physics in electron-proton scattering.
Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 2060 (2012)
41. J.D. Bjorken, E.A. Paschos, Inelastic electron proton and gamma
proton scattering, and the structure of the nucleon. Phys. Rev.185,
1975–1982 (1969)
42. J.C. Collins, D. Soper, G.F. Sterman, Factorization for short
distance hadron-hadron scattering. Nucl. Phys. B 261, 104
(1985)
43. C.D.F. Collaboration, Measurement of the Zp
T distribution in
¯pp collisions at √ s = 1.8 TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.67, 2937–2941
(1991)
44. C.D.F. Collaboration, Measurement of the W P(T) distribution in
¯pp collisions at √ s = 1.8 TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.66, 2951–2955
(1991)
45. D0 Collaboration, Measurement of the shape of the transverse
momentum distribution of W bosons produced in p ¯p collisions
at √ s = 1.8 TeV . Phys. Rev. Lett.80, 5498–5503 (1998)
123


--- Page 57 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 57 of 59 2916
46. D0 Collaboration, Differential production cross section of Z
bosons as a function of transverse momentum at √ s = 1.8T e V .
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2792–2797 (2000)
47. R.K. Ellis, W.J. Stirling, B.R. Webber, QCD and collider physics.
Camb. Monogr. Part. Phys. Nucl. Phys. Cosmol. 8, 1–435 (1996)
48. E. Gerwick, T. Plehn, S. Schumann, P . Schichtel, Scaling patterns
for QCD jets. JHEP 1210, 162 (2012)
49. M.L. Mangano, M. Moretti, F. Piccinini, R. Pittau, A.D. Polosa,
ALPGEN, a generator for hard multiparton processes in hadronic
collisions. JHEP 0307, 001 (2003)
50. F. Caravaglios, M.L. Mangano, M. Moretti, R. Pittau, A new
approach to multijet calculations in hadron collisions. Nucl. Phys.
B 539, 215–232 (1999)
51. R. Hamberg, W.L. van Neerven, T. Matsuura, A complete calcu-
lation of the order α − s
2 correction to the Drell-Y an K factor.
Nucl. Phys. B 359, 343–405 (1991)
52. W.L. van Neerven, E.B. Zijlstra, The O (α− s2) corrected Drell-
Ya n K factor in the DIS and MS scheme. Nucl. Phys. B 382,
11–62 (1992)
53. C. Anastasiou, L.J. Dixon, K. Melnikov, F. Petriello, High preci-
sion QCD at hadron colliders: electroweak gauge boson rapidity
distributions at NNLO. Phys. Rev. D 69, 094008 (2004)
54. E. Laenen, J. Smith, W.L. van Neerven, All order resummation
of soft gluon contributions to heavy quark production in hadron
hadron collisions. Nucl. Phys. B 369, 543–599 (1992)
55. U. Baur, O. Brein, W. Hollik, C. Schappacher, D. Wackeroth, Elec-
troweak radiative corrections to neutral current Drell-Y an pro-
cesses at hadron colliders. Phys. Rev. D 65, 033007 (2002)
56. G. Balossini, G. Montagna, C.M. Carloni Calame, M. Moretti,
M. Treccani, et al. Electroweak QCD corrections to Drell Y an
processes. Acta Phys. Polon. B 39, 1675 (2008)
57. A.B. Arbuzov, M. Awramik, M. Czakon, A. Freitas, M.W.
Grunewald et al., ZFITTER: A semi-analytical program for
fermion pair production in e+ e- annihilation, from version 6.21
to version 6.42. Comput. Phys. Commun. 174, 728–758 (2006)
5 8 . D . Y .B a r d i n ,P .C h r i s t o v a ,M .J a c k ,L .K a l i n o v s k a y a ,A .O l c h e v s k i
et al., ZFITTER v. 6.21: A semianalytical program for fermion
pair production in e+ e- annihilation. Comput. Phys. Commun.
133, 229–395 (2001)
59. A.A. Akhundov, D.Y . Bardin, T. Riemann, Electroweak one loop
corrections to the decay of the neutral vector boson. Nucl. Phys.
B 276, 1 (1986)
60. D.Y . Bardin, S. Riemann, T. Riemann, Electroweak one loop cor-
rections to the decay of the charged vector boson. Z. Phys. C 32,
121–125 (1986)
61. G. Degrassi, F. Feruglio, A. Vicini, S. Fanchiotti, and P .
Gambino. Two loop corrections for electroweak processes.
arXiv:hep-ph/9507286 (1995)
62. S. Brensing, S. Dittmaier, M. Kramer, A. Muck, Radiative
corrections to W
− boson hadroproduction: higher-order elec-
troweak and supersymmetric effects. Phys. Rev. D 77, 073006
(2008)
63. V .N. Gribov, L.N. Lipatov, Deep inelastic e p scattering in pertur-
bation theory. Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 15, 438–450 (1972)
64. Y .L. Dokshitzer, Calculation of the structure functions for deep
inelastic scattering and e+ e- annihilation by perturbation the-
ory in quantum chromodynamics. Sov. Phys. JETP 46, 641–653
(1977)
65. G. Altarelli, G. Parisi, Asymptotic freedom in parton language.
Nucl. Phys. B 126, 298 (1977)
66. V .V . Sudakov, V ertex parts at very high-energies in quantum elec-
trodynamics. Sov. Phys. JETP 3, 65–71 (1956)
67. P .M. Nadolsky, H. Lai, Q. Cao, J. Huston, J. Pumplin et al., Impli-
cations of CTEQ global analysis for collider observables. Phys.
Rev. D 78, 013004 (2008)
68. A.D. Martin, W.J. Stirling, R.S. Thorne, G. Watt, Parton distribu-
tions for the LHC. Eur. Phys. J. C 63, 189–285 (2009)
69. S. Alekhin, J. Blumlein, S. Klein, S. Moch, The 3, 4, and 5-ﬂavor
NNLO Parton from deep-inelastic-scattering data and at hadron
colliders. Phys. Rev. D 81, 014032 (2010)
70. M. Gluck, P . Jimenez-Delgado, E. Reya, Dynamical parton dis-
tributions of the nucleon and very small-x physics. Eur. Phys. J.
C 53, 355–366 (2008)
71. R.D. Ball, V . Bertone, L. Del Debbio, S. Forte, A. Guffanti et
al., Precision NNLO determination of α
s(MZ ) using an unbiased
global parton set. Phys. Lett. B 707, 66–71 (2012)
72. A.M. Cooper-Sarkar. PDF Fits at HERA. PoS. EPS-HEP2011 320
(2011)
7 3 . J .P u m p l i n ,D .S t u m p ,R .B r o c k ,D .C a s e y ,J .H u s t o ne ta l . ,U n c e r -
tainties of predictions from parton distribution functions. 2. The
Hessian method. Phys. Rev. D 65, 014013 (2001)
74. T. Sjostrand, M. van Zijl, A multiple interaction model for the
event structure in hadron collisions. Phys. Rev. D36, 2019 (1987)
75. R.D. Field, R.P . Feynman, A parametrization of the properties of
quark jets. Nucl. Phys. B 136, 1 (1978)
76. B. Andersson, G. Gustafson, G. Ingelman, T. Sjostrand, Par-
ton fragmentation and string dynamics. Phys. Rept. 97, 31–145
(1983)
77. R.D. Field, S. Wolfram, A QCD model for e+ e- annihilation.
Nucl. Phys. B 213, 65 (1983)
78. B.R. Webber, A QCD model for jet fragmentation including soft
gluon interference. Nucl. Phys. B 238, 492 (1984)
79. D. Amati, G. V eneziano, Preconﬁnement as a property of pertur-
bative QCD. Phys. Lett. B 83, 87 (1979)
80. D.J. Lange, The EvtGen particle decay simulation package. Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A 462, 152–155 (2001)
81. S. Jadach, Z. Was, R. Decker, J.H. Kuhn, The tau decay library
TAUOLA: V ersion 2.4. Comput. Phys. Commun. 76, 361–380
(1993)
82. P . Bartalini, L. Fano, Multiple partonic interactions at the LHC.
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop, MPI’08, Perugia,
Italy, October 27–31, 2008. (2010)
83. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of hard double-parton inter-
actions in W(→ lν)+2j e te v e n t sa t√
s=7 TeV with the A TLAS
detector. New J. Phys. 15, 033038 (2013)
84. T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, P .Z. Skands. PYTHIA 6.4 Physics and
Manual. JHEP 0605, 026 (2006)
85. T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, P .Z. Skands, A brief introduction to
PYTHIA 8.1. Comput. Phys. Commun. 178, 852–867 (2008)
86. G. Corcella, I.G. Knowles, G. Marchesini, S. Moretti, K. Oda-
giri et al., HERWIG 6: An Event generator for hadron emission
reactions with interfering gluons (including supersymmetric pro-
cesses). JHEP 0101, 010 (2001)
87. M. Bahr, S. Gieseke, M.A. Gigg, D. Grellscheid, K. Hamilton
et al., Herwig++ physics and manual. Eur. Phys. J. C 58, 639–707
(2008)
88. T. Gleisberg, S. Hoeche, F. Krauss, M. Schonherr, S. Schumann,
et al. Event generation with SHERPA 1.1. JHEP0902, 007 (2009)
89. J.M. Butterworth, J.R. Forshaw, M.H. Seymour, Multiparton
interactions in photoproduction at HERA. Z. Phys. C 72, 637–
646 (1996)
90. J. Alwall, M. Herquet, F. Maltoni, O. Mattelaer, T. Stelzer, Mad-
Graph 5: Going Beyond. JHEP 1106, 128 (2011)
91. S. Catani, F. Krauss, R. Kuhn, B.R. Webber, QCD matrix elements
+ parton showers. JHEP 0111, 063 (2001)
92. F. Krauss, Matrix elements and parton showers in hadronic inter-
actions. JHEP 0208, 015 (2002)
93. M.L. Mangano, M. Moretti, R. Pittau, Multijet matrix elements
and shower evolution in hadronic collisions: Wb ¯b + n jets as a
case study. Nucl. Phys. B 632, 343–362 (2002)
123


--- Page 58 ---
2916 Page 58 of 59 Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916
94. S. Frixione, B.R. Webber, Matching NLO QCD computations and
parton shower simulations. JHEP 0206, 029 (2002)
95. S. Frixione, P . Nason, C. Oleari, Matching NLO QCD compu-
tations with Parton Shower simulations: the POWHEG method.
JHEP 0711, 070 (2007)
96. S. Alioli, P . Nason, C. Oleari, E. Re, A general framework for
implementing NLO calculations in shower Monte Carlo pro-
grams: the POWHEG BOX. JHEP 1006, 043 (2010)
97. J.M. Campbell, R.K. Ellis, D.L. Rainwater, Next-to-leading order
QCD predictions for W +2j e ta n d Z + 2 jet production at the
CERN LHC. Phys. Rev. D 68, 094021 (2003)
98. C.F. Berger, Z. Bern, L.J. Dixon, F. Febres Cordero, D. Forde, et al.
An automated implementation of on-shell methods for one-loop
amplitudes. Phys. Rev. D 78, 036003 (2008)
99. R. Gavin, Y . Li, F. Petriello, S. Quackenbush, FEWZ 2.0: A code
for hadronic Z production at next-to-next-to-leading order. Com-
put. Phys. Commun. 182, 2388–2403 (2011)
100. C. Balazs, C.-P . Y uan, Soft gluon effects on lepton pairs at hadron
colliders. Phys. Rev. D 56, 5558–5583 (1997)
101. J.C. Collins, D. Soper, Angular distribution of dileptons in high-
energy hadron collisions. Phys. Rev. D 16, 2219 (1977)
102. E. Mirkes, J. Ohnemus, W and Z polarization effects in hadronic
collisions. Phys. Rev. D 50, 5692–5703 (1994)
103. E. Mirkes, J. Ohnemus, Angular distributions of Drell-Y an lepton
pairs at the Tevatron: order α − s
2 corrections and Monte Carlo
studies. Phys. Rev. D 51, 4891–4904 (1995)
104. E. Mirkes, Angular decay distribution of leptons from W
bosons at NLO in hadronic collisions. Nucl. Phys. B 387, 3–85
(1992)
105. C.S. Lam, W. Tung, A parton model relation sans QCD modiﬁ-
cations in lepton pair productions. Phys. Rev. D 21, 2712 (1980)
106. M. Chaichian, M. Hayashi, K. Y amagishi, Angular distributions
of high mass dileptons with ﬁnite transverse momentum in high-
energy hadronic collisions. Phys. Rev. D 25, 130 (1982)
107. J. Lindfors, Angular distribution of large q-transverse muon pairs
in different reference frames. Phys. Scripta 20, 19–22 (1979)
108. C.S. Lam, W. Tung, Structure function relations at large transverse
momenta in lepton pair production processes. Phys. Lett. B 80,
228 (1979)
109. L. Evans, P . Bryant, LHC machine. JINST 3, S08001 (2008)
110. A TLAS Collaboration, The A TLAS experiment at the CERN large
hadron collider. JINST 3, S08003 (2008)
111. CMS Collaboration, The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC.
JINST 3, S08004 (2008)
112. LHCb Collaboration, The LHCb detector at the LHC. JINST 3,
S08005 (2008)
113. ALICE Collaboration, The ALICE experiment at the CERN LHC.
JINST 3, S08002 (2008)
114. D. Fournier, Performance of the LHC, A TLAS and CMS in 2011.
EPJ Web Conf. 28, 01003 (2012)
115. S. van der Meer, Calibration of the effective beamheight in the
ISR. CERN CDS, CERN-ISR-PO-68-31 (1968)
116. C. Rubbia. Measurement of the luminosity of pp collider with a
(generalized) van der Meer method. Eur. Phys. J. CERN-pp-Note-
38 (1977).
117. A TLAS Collaboration, Performance of the A TLAS trigger system
in 2010. Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 1849 (2012)
118. A TLAS Collaboration, Electron performance measurements with
the A TLAS detector using the 2010 LHC proton-proton collision
data. Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 1909 (2012)
119. CMS Collaboration, Energy calibration and resolution of the CMS
electromagnetic calorimeter in pp collisions at Ãs = 7 TeV . JINST
8, P09009 (2013)
120. CMS Collaboration, Performance of CMS muon reconstruction
in pp collision events at √
s = 7T e V .J I N S T7, P10002 (2012)
121. A TLAS Collaboration, Preliminary results on the muon recon-
struction efﬁciency, momentum resolution, and momentum scale
in A TLAS 2012 pp collision data. A TLAS CONF Note, A TLAS-
CONF-2013-088 (2013)
122. S. Catani, Y .L. Dokshitzer, M.H. Seymour, B.R. Webber, Lon-
gitudinally invariant K
t clustering algorithms for hadron hadron
collisions. Nucl. Phys. B 406, 187–224 (1993)
123. A TLAS Collaboration, Jet energy measurement with the A TLAS
detector in proton-proton collisions at √ s = 7 TeV . Eur. Phys. J.
C 73, 2304 (2013)
124. CMS Collaboration, Particle-ﬂow event reconstruction in CMS
and performance for Jets, Taus, and MET. CMS, Analysis Sum-
mary, CMS-PAS-PFT-09-001 (2009)
125. CMS Collaboration, Determination of jet energy calibration and
transverse momentum resolution in CMS. JINST 6, P11002
(2011)
126. CMS Collaboration, Identiﬁcation of b-quark jets with the CMS
experiment. JINST 8, P04013 (2013)
127. CMS Collaboration, CMS preliminary electron performance
results. TWIKI-Site (2013)
128. S. Agostinelli et al., GEANT4: a simulation toolkit. Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A 506, 250–303 (2003)
129. G. D’Agostini, A multidimensional unfolding method based on
Bayes’ theorem. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 362, 487–498 (1995)
130. A. Hocker, V . Kartvelishvili, SVD approach to data unfolding.
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 372, 469–481 (1996)
131. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the inclusive W
± and
Z/gamma cross sections in the electron and muon decay channels
in pp collisions at √
s = 7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. Phys.
Rev. D 85, 072004 (2012)
132. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the inclusive W and Z pro-
duction cross sections in pp collisions at √ s = 7T e V .J H E P
1110, 132 (2011)
133. L. V acavant, I. Hinchliffe, Signals of models with large extra
dimensions in A TLAS. J. Phys. G 27, 1839–1850 (2001)
134. A. Leike, The phenomenology of extra neutral gauge bosons.
Phys. Rept. 317, 143–250 (1999)
135. J.R. Espinosa, C. Grojean, M. Muhlleitner, Composite Higgs
search at the LHC. JHEP 1005, 065 (2010)
136. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of inclusive W and Z boson-
production cross sections in pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 8 TeV .
arXiv:hep-ex/1402.0923
137. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the high-mass Drell-Y an
differential cross-section in pp collisions at √
s=7 TeV with the
A TLAS detector. Phys. Lett. B725, 223–242 (2013)
138. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the differential and double-
differential Drell-Y an cross sections in proton-proton collisions
at √ s = 7T e V .J H E P1312, 030 (2013)
139. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the electron charge asym-
metry in inclusive W production in pp collisions at √ s = 7T e V .
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 111806 (2012)
140. CMS Collaboration, Muon charge asymmetry in inclusive W pro-
duction at √ s = 7 TeV . CMS, Analysis Summary, CMS-PAS-
SMP-12-021 (2012)
141. R.D. Ball, et al. Parton distribution benchmarking with LHC data.
JHEP 1304, 125 (2013)
142. HERAFitter. http://projects.hepforge.org/hera (2013)
143. A TLAS Collaboration, Determination of the strange quark density
of the proton from A TLAS measurements of the W → ℓν and
Z → ℓℓ cross sections. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 012001 (2012)
144. LHCb Collaboration, Inclusive W and Z production in the forward
region at √ s = 7T e V .J H E P1206, 058 (2012)
145. R.D. Ball, V . Bertone, S. Carrazza, C.S. Deans, L. Del Debbio
et al., Parton distributions with LHC data. Nucl. Phys. B 867,
244–289 (2013)
123


--- Page 59 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2014) 74:2916 Page 59 of 59 2916
146. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the rapidity and transverse
momentum distributions of Z bosons in pp Collisions at √ s = 7
TeV. Phys. Rev. D85, 032002 (2012)
147. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum
distribution of Z /gamma∗ bosons in proton-proton collisions at√ s = 7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. Phys. Lett. B705, 415–434
(2011)
148. A. Banﬁ, S. Redford, M. V esterinen, P . Waller, T.R. Wyatt, Opti-
misation of variables for studying dilepton transverse momen-
tum distributions at hadron colliders. Eur. Phys. J. C 71, 1600
(2011)
149. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of angular correlations in
Drell-Y an lepton pairs to probe Z /gamma
∗ boson transverse
momentum at sqrt(s)=7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. Phys. Lett.
B 720, 32–51 (2013)
150. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum
distribution of W Bosons in pp Collisions at √
s = 7 TeV with
the A TLAS Detector. Phys. Rev. D85, 012005 (2012)
151. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the transverse momentum
distributions of Z Bosons decaying to dimuons in pp collisions at
sqrt(s)=8 TeV . CMS, Analysis Summary, CMS-PAS-SMP-12-025
(2013)
152. S. Alekhin, J. Blumlein, P . Jimenez-Delgado, S. Moch, E. Reya,
NNLO Benchmarks for gauge and Higgs boson production at TeV
hadron colliders. Phys. Lett. B 697, 127–135 (2011)
153. P . Renton, Updated SM calculations of σ
W /σZ at the Tevatron
and the W boson width. arXiv:0804.4779 (2008)
154. S. Schael et al., Precision electroweak measurements on the Z
resonance. Phys. Rept. 427, 257–454 (2006)
155. D. Haidt, A. Pullia, The weak neutral current—discovery and
impact. Riv. Nuovo Cim. 036(08), 335–395 (2013)
156. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the forward-backward
asymmetry of Z/gamma bosons decaying into electron and muon
pairs with the A TLAS detector at s=7 TeV . A TLAS CONF Note,
A TLAS-CONF-2013-043 (2013)
157. C.M. Carloni Calame, G. Montagna, O. Nicrosini, and M. Trec-
cani. Higher order QED corrections to W boson mass determina-
tion at hadron colliders. Phys. Rev. D 69, 037301 (2004)
158. CMS Collaboration, Forward-backward asymmetry of Drell-Y an
lepton pairs in pp collisions at √
s = 7 TeV . Phys. Lett. B 718,
752–772 (2013)
159. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the weak mixing angle with
the Drell-Y an process in proton-proton collisions at the LHC.
Phys. Rev. D 84, 112002 (2011)
160. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the polarisation of W
bosons produced with large transverse momentum in pp colli-
sions at √
s = 7 TeV with the A TLAS experiment. Eur. Phys. J.
C 72, 2001 (2012)
161. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the polarization of W bosons
with large transverse momenta in W+jets events at the LHC. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 021802 (2011)
162. D0 Collaboration, Measurements of differential cross sections
of Z/gamma
∗+jets+X events in proton anti-proton collisions at
s∗∗(1/2) = 1.96-TeV , Phys. Lett. B678, 45–54 (2009)
163. D0 Collaboration, Phys. Lett. Measurement of Z /gamma∗+jet+X
angular distributions in p anti-p collisions at s∗∗(1/2) = 1.96.TeV .
Phys. Lett. B 682, 370–380 (2010)
164. G.P . Salam, Towards jetography. Eur. Phys. J. C 67, 637–686
(2010)
165. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the production cross sec-
tion of jets in association with a Z boson in pp collisions at √ s =
7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. JHEP 1307, 032 (2013)
166. CMS Collaboration, Jet multiplicity and differential production
cross sections of Z+jets events in proton-proton collisions at 7
TeV . CMS, Analysis Summary, CMS-PAS-12-017 (2014)
167. C. Englert, T. Plehn, P . Schichtel, S. Schumann, Establishing jet
scaling patterns with a photon. JHEP 1202, 030 (2012)
168. CMS Collaboration, Jet production rates in association with W
and Z bosons in pp collisions at √
s = 7T e V .J H E P1201, 010
(2012)
169. A TLAS Collaboration, Study of jets produced in association with
a W boson in pp collisions at √ s = 7 TeV with the A TLAS
detector. Phys. Rev. D 85, 092002 (2012)
170. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the differential cross section
of W-bosons produced in association with jets in pp collisions at
7 TeV . CMS, Analysis Summary, CMS-PAS-12-023 (2014)
171. A. Denner, S. Dittmaier, T. Kasprzik, A. Muck, Electroweak cor-
rections to dilepton + jet production at hadron colliders. JHEP
1106, 069 (2011)
172. CMS Collaboration, Rapidity distributions in exclusive Z + jet
and γ + jet events in pp collisions at √
s=7 TeV . Phys. Rev. D88,
112009 (2013)
173. CMS Collaboration, Event shapes and azimuthal correlations in
Z +j e t se v e n t si npp collisions at √ s = 7T e V .P h y s .L e t t .B722,
238–261 (2013)
174. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of kT splitting scales in
W(→ lν) events at sqrt(s)=7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. Eur.
Phys. J. C 73, 2432 (2013)
175. S.A. Malik, G. Watt, Ratios of W and Z cross sections at large
boson pT as a constraint on PDFs and background to new physics.
JHEP 1402, 025 (2014)
176. A TLAS Collaboration, A measurement of the ratio of the W and
Z cross sections with exactly one associated jet in pp collisions
at √ s = 7 TeV with A TLAS. Phys. Lett. B 708, 221–240 (2012)
177. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the cross-section for W
boson production in association with b-jets in pp collisions at √ s
= 7 TeV with the A TLAS detector. JHEP 1306 084 (2013)
178. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the production cross section
for a W boson and two b jets in pp collisions at √ s =7T e V .
arXiv:hep-ex/1312.6608 (2013)
179. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the production cross sec-
tions for a Z boson and one or more b jets in pp collisions at√ s = 7T e V .arXiv:hep-ex/1402.1521 (2014)
180. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the cross-section for b−
jets produced in association with a Z boson at √ s = 7T e Vw i t h
the A TLAS detector. Phys. Lett. B 706, 295–313 (2012)
181. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the cross section and angular
correlations for associated production of a Z boson with b hadrons
in pp collisions at √
s =7T e V .J H E P1312, 039 (2013)
182. M. Goncharov et al., Precise measurement of dimuon production
cross-sections in muon neutrino Fe and muon anti-neutrino Fe
deep inelastic scattering at the Tevatron. Phys. Rev. D64, 112006
(2001)
183. R.D. Ball et al., Precision determination of electroweak param-
eters and the strange content of the proton from neutrino deep-
inelastic scattering. Nucl. Phys. B 823, 195–233 (2009)
184. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of associated W + charm pro-
duction in pp collisions at √
s =7T e V .J H E P1402, 013 (2014)
185. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the production of a W
boson in association with a charm quark in pp collisions at
sqrt(s)=7 TeV with the A TLAS detector (2014)
186. CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the hadronic activity in
events with a Z and two jets and extraction of the cross section for
the electroweak production of a Z with two jets in pp collisions at√
s =7T e V .J H E P1310, 101 (2013)
187. A TLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the electroweak produc-
tion of dijets in association with a Z-boson and distributions sen-
sitive to vector boson fusion in proton-proton collisions at √
s =
8 TeV using the A TLAS detector. JHEP 2014(4), 1–56 (2014)
123
