--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81:260
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09048-1
Regular Article - Theoretical Physics
Testing anomalous H − W couplings and Higgs self-couplings via
double and triple Higgs production at e+e− colliders
M. Gonzalez-Lopez1,2,a, M. J. Herrero1,2,b, P . Martinez-Suarez1,2,3,c
1 Departamento de Física Teórica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain
2 Instituto de Física Teórica (UAM/CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain
3 Present address: Institut de Física d’Altes Energies (IFAE) and Departament de Física, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 08193
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
Received: 11 December 2020 / Accepted: 11 March 2021 / Published online: 26 March 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract In the present work we study the implications at
the future e+e− colliders of the modiﬁed interaction vertices
WWH , WWHH , HHH and HHHH within the context
of the non-linear effective ﬁeld theory given by the Elec-
troweak Chiral Lagrangian. These vertices are given by four
parameters, a, b, κ
3 and κ4, respectively, that are independent
and without any constraint from symmetry considerations in
this non-linear effective Lagrangian context, given the fact
the Higgs ﬁeld is a singlet. This is in contrast to the Standard
Model, where the vertices are related byV
SM
WWH = vV SM
WWHH
and V SM
HHH = vV SM
HHHH , with v = 246 GeV . We investi-
gate the implications of the absence of these relations in the
Electroweak Chiral Lagrangian case. We explore the sensi-
tivity to these Higgs anomalous couplings in the two main
channels at these colliders: double and triple Higgs produc-
tion (plus neutrinos). Concretely, we study the access to a
and b in e
+e− → HH ν¯ν and the access to κ3 and κ4 in
e+e− → HHH ν¯ν. Our study of the beyond the Standard
Model couplings via triple Higgs boson production at e+e−
colliders is novel and shows for the ﬁrst time the possible
accessibility to the quartic Higgs self-coupling.
1 Introduction
One of the not yet fully explored pieces of the Standard
Model (SM) of Particle Physics is the Higgs boson poten-
tial, involving the triple and quartic Higgs self-couplings,
which are both given in terms of the λ parameter of the
potential by λSM
HHH = λSM
HHHH = λ, and whose strength
is related to the Higgs boson mass by m2
H = 2λv2, with
a e-mail: manuel.gonzalezl@uam.es (corresponding author)
b e-mail: maria.herrero@uam.es
c e-mail: paula.martinez.suarez@cern.ch
v = 246 GeV . The implementation of all the Higgs boson
interactions within the SM is done usually by setting the
Higgs boson as a component of a doublet, the simplest linear
realisation of the SU(2) × U(1) electroweak (EW) symme-
try. This linear realisation leads to some correlations among
the Higgs interaction vertices within the SM. In particular,
the triple and quartic self-interaction vertices are related by
V
SM
HHH = vV SM
HHHH . Similarly, there are also correlations
among other SM couplings in the bosonic sector, like the
Higgs interaction vertices with W gauge bosons, which are
also related by V SM
WWH = vV SM
WWHH . Deviations from these
correlations may lead to new signals of beyond the Stan-
dard Model (BSM) physics. Therefore, an important task at
future colliders will be the improvement in the measurement
of all these bosonic couplings and the test of their correla-
tions (for a recent review on measurements and constraints
on Higgs boson couplings at present and future colliders, see
for instance [1–9]).
In the present paper we study the sensitivity to these
particular four BSM Higgs interactions, WWH , WWHH ,
HHH and HHHH , and focus on future e
+e− colliders.
To explore the BSM predictions we work within the con-
text of an effective ﬁeld theory (EFT) for EW interactions
(for a recent review on EFTs for the SM see, for instance,
[10]). In particular, we choose the non-linear effective ﬁeld
theory given by the electroweak chiral Lagrangian (EChL).
This EChL, also called Higgs effective ﬁeld theory (HEFT)
in the literature, was prosed long ago [11–21] to describe the
BSM, SU(2)×U(1) gauge invariant interactions without the
explicit Higgs ﬁeld and using a non-linear realisation of the
EW chiral symmetry. In the last years, after the discovery of
the Higgs boson particle, the EChL has been renewed with
the incorporation of the Higgs ﬁeld. Consequently, the new
version of the EChL contains more effective operators that
now include also the Higgs boson [22–34].
123


--- Page 2 ---
260 Page 2 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
In the EChL, the Higgs ﬁeld has the peculiarity of being
a singlet under SU(2) × U(1), in clear contrast with the
SM case and other EFTs like the SM effective ﬁeld the-
ory (SMEFT). As a consequence, the previously mentioned
SM correlations between couplings involving two and three
Higgs bosons are not present, leading to singular signals in
multiple Higgs boson production. Thus, double and triple
Higgs productions may exhibit very different rates with
respect to the SM. In particular, we focus our studies here on
two production channels ate
+e− colliders, e+e− → HH ν¯ν
and e+e− → HHH ν¯ν, where the subprocesses initiated by
W− W+ scattering (WWS, also called vector boson fusion
(VBF) in the literature) play a very important role. Indeed,
at high energies, in the TeV range, these WWS subprocesses
are known to be the dominant ones (for a recent review on
VBF, see for instance [35,36].
Within the context of the EChL, the BSM Higgs cou-
plings to bosons we are interested in are parametrised by four
independent EChL coefﬁcients, a, b, κ
3 and κ4 (also called
anomalous couplings), one for each of the four BSM inter-
actions: WWH , WWHH , HHH and HHHH . Some of
the phenomenological consequences of these couplings via
WWS have been examined. The effects of a and b in dou-
ble Higgs production via WWS have been studied mostly for
the case of proton-proton collisions, focusing mainly on the
LHC and its future upgrades, both in energy and luminosity
[37], although the effects of b at e
+e− future colliders have
also been explored in [ 38]. The BSM effects of the triple
Higgs coupling, λHHH = κ3λ, at LHC via double Higgs
production from WWS have been studied in [39]. The high-
est sensitivity to κ3 in hadron colliders is reached, however,
via gluon gluon fusion (for a review, see for instance [ 4]).
The quartic Higgs self-coupling, λHHHH = κ4λ, and the
consequences of a BSM κ4, have barely been explored in
the literature. Its effects via radiative corrections have been
studied in [40–43], whereas the sensitivity toκ
4 in multi-TeV
muon colliders has been considered in [ 44]. The combined
effects of anomalous triple and quartic Higgs self-couplings
via radiative corrections in multiple Higgs boson produc-
tion at e
+e− colliders have been studied in [ 43] within the
context of the linear EFT approach. In that context, the corre-
lations among the anomalous couplings, the implementation
of gauge invariance and the dimensional counting and renor-
malisation program for the relevant operators are different
from that in the non-linear EFT context that we follow here.
The phenomenological implications in the two approaches,
linear and non-linear, are consequently also different. In the
present study we explore the sensitivity to the four EChL
coefﬁcients a, b,κ
3 andκ4 via these twoe+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν
processes in the context of the non-linear EFT approach. In
particular, we present a novel study of triple Higgs produc-
tion ate+e− colliders, that we compare with the better known
double Higgs production channel, which gives no access to
Table 1 Expected center of mass energies and integrated luminosities
in the different stages of both the ILC and CLIC
Collider √ s (GeV) Lint (ab−1)
ILC 250 2
350 0.2
500 4
1000 8
CLIC 380 1
1500 2.5
3000 5
the quartic Higgs couplings, and introduce a new proposal to
test both the triple and quartic Higgs self-couplings at once
via the e
+e− → HHH ν¯νprocess.
But the measurement of the Higgs self-couplings is not an
easy task, as the processes that depend on them involve multi-
ple Higgs production, which is difﬁcult to study and generally
suffers of low rates. In the current LHC, with proton-proton
collisions at a center of mass (CM) energy of 13 TeV , the SM
production cross section of two or more Higgs bosons lies
at the picobarn (pb) scale or below [ 4], and the luminosity
is not high enough to produce good statistics. Nevertheless,
the triple Higgs self-coupling has been constrained by the
ATLAS Collaboration [3]t o −2.3 <λ
HHH /λSM
HHH < 10.3
at the 95% CL, under the assumption that the possible new
physics affects only the triple Higgs coupling. The quartic
Higgs self-coupling λ
HHHH remains experimentally unac-
cessible at the moment. A more precise determination of the
triple Higgs self-coupling via double Higgs production is
one of the aims of several future projects, such as the high
luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) and its high energy upgrade (HE-
LHC) [5], the International Linear Collider (ILC) [6] and the
compact linear collider (CLIC) [ 7]. Much research on this
topic has already been carried out. The study of triple Higgs
production as a way to test new couplings of the Higgs boson
to SM particles has already been proposed for future proton-
proton colliders, such as the future circular collider (FCC)
[8,9]. In this work we will focus on the two electron-positron
colliders in the list: the ILC and CLIC. They will operate in
several stages with different values of the CM energy and
integrated luminosities, as it can be seen in Table 1.
This work is organized as follows: in Sect.2 we review the
relevant interactions within the EChL for the present work
(WWH , WWHH , HHH and HHHH ) and write them in
terms of the four relevant EChL coefﬁcients a, b, κ
3 and κ4.
In Sect. 3 we analyze the role of WWS in multiple Higgs
production at e+e− colliders. In Sect. 4 we present the com-
putation and results of the cross sections for the two relevant
WWS subprocesses, W− W+ → HH (H), in the BSM case.
We also compare these BSM results with the SM predictions,
123


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 3 of 33 260
and check how sensitive they are to variations of the Higgs
boson anomalous couplings. In Sect. 5, the corresponding
results for e+e− collisions are presented for the various col-
liders. Finally, Sect.6 explores the sensitivities to BSM cou-
plings in multiple b-jet events that are expected considering
the ﬁnal Higgs decays. The parameter space region accessible
at the future e
+e− colliders is also derived. The conclusions
are summarized in Sect. 7.
2 BSM Higgs couplings to bosons within the EChL
To explore the BSM predictions in this work we use the
non-linear EFT given by EChL, where the Higgs ﬁeld
is a singlet under both the EW gauge (local) symmetry,
SU(2)L × U(1)Y , and the EW chiral (global) symmetry,
SU(2)L × SU(2)R. This is in contrast to the usual linear
realisations, like the SM itself or other EFTs like the SMEFT,
where the Higgs ﬁeld is one component of an SU(2) dou-
blet. The Higgs singlet is usually introduced in the EChL
via polynomial functions, generically leading to uncorrelated
BSM Higgs couplings involving one or more Higgs particles,
while the three EW Goldstone bosons (GB) that arise from
the EW symmetry breaking are usually included in an expo-
nential representation and transform non-linearly under the
EW symmetry. We will assume here that the dynamics of
the Higgs, Goldstone and EW gauge bosons are given by the
EChL, while those describing fermions will be the same as in
the SM. The EChL follows a pattern and counting rules [31]
similar to those in the chiral Lagrangian for low energy QCD
[45]. It contains a tower of effective operators ordered by
their chiral dimension, providing predictions ordered in even
powers of momentum, p
n. It also provides well deﬁned pre-
dictions of observables beyond the tree level approximation,
i.e. including loop corrections which scale as ( p/(4πv))n,
such that the convergence of this momentum expansion is
ensured for low energies, say below 4 πv ∼ 3T e V .A si n
any other EFT of EW interactions, the predictions from the
EChL are model independent. The information on the partic-
ular ultraviolet theory and the corresponding cut-off that lead
to this EChL at low energies is encoded in the coefﬁcients of
the effective operators. Therefore, to access the BSM physics
via the EChL, the challenge is to ﬁnd sensitivity to the EChL
coefﬁcients at present and future experiments.
For our purposes, in this study of the BSM Higgs couplings
to bosons we work at the tree level approximation, so it is
enough to use the leading order EChL, which reads:
LEChL = v2
4
[
1 + 2a
( H
v
)
+ b
( H
v
) 2
+···
]
Tr
[
DμU† DμU
]
+ 1
2(∂μ H)(∂μ H) − 1
2 m2
H H2 − κ3λvH3 − κ4
1
4λH4
− 1
2g′2 Tr
[
ˆBμν ˆBμν
]
− 1
2g2 Tr
[
ˆWμν ˆWμν
]
+LGF + LFP. (1)
Here v = 246 GeV ,g and g′ are the EW gauge couplings,
H is the Higgs boson ﬁeld, and U is the 2 × 2 matrix that
contains the three GBs, ω1,2,3:
U = exp
( i ⃗ω ·⃗τ
v
)
, (2)
with τa being the Pauli matrices. The ﬁeld strengths and
covariant derivative are deﬁned as:
ˆBμν = ∂μ ˆBν − ∂ν ˆBμ,
ˆWμν = ∂μ ˆWν − ∂ν ˆWμ + i[ ˆWμ, ˆWν],
DμU = ∂μU + i ˆWμU − iU ˆBμ, (3)
where ˆBμ = g′ Bμτ3/2 and ˆWμ = gW a
μτa/2. The rotation
from the interaction basis to the physical gauge bosons given
by the weak angle θ
W is the same as in the SM, so the usual
tree level relations among gauge couplings and gauge boson
masses still hold. Similarly, the tree level relation m2
H =
2λv2 also holds here. The gauge ﬁxing Lagrangian, LGF,
and the Fadeev–Popov Lagrangian, LFP, do not enter in our
computation of cross-sections, since we work at the tree level
and choosing the unitary gauge.
In summary, the relevant interactions in this EChL for
the present study, working at the tree level and in the unitary
gauge, are given by the four verticesV
WWH , VWWHH , VHHH
and VHHHH collected in Fig. 1.
We see in this ﬁgure that the coefﬁcients a and b (yellow
and green dots respectively) control the so-called anomalous
couplings of the Higgs boson to W and Z bosons, while
the coefﬁcients κ
3 and κ4 (red and blue dots respectively)
control the so-called anomalous triple and quartic Higgs self-
couplings, respectively. The SM vertices are recovered when
a = b = κ
3 = κ4 = 1.
It is worth noticing that the correlations among these ver-
tices within the SM, V SM
WWH = vV SM
WWHH and V SM
HHH =
vV SM
HHHH , are not present within the EChL. Thus, exploring
deviations with respect to these correlations (which occur if
any of the EChL coefﬁcients differs from 1) is an interest-
ing way to access the BSM physics at colliders. Regarding
the experimental bounds on these EChL coefﬁcients from
present colliders, there are available constraints from the
LHC for a, b and κ
3, but not for κ4. The ATLAS Collab-
oration has set the following 95% C.L. bounds on each of the
Higgs couplings to gauge bosons using single and double
Higgs production:
123


--- Page 4 ---
260 Page 4 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 1 Feynman rules for Higgs couplings to bosons within the EChL
a ∈[ 0.97, 1.13][ 1] b ∈[ −0.76, 2.90][ 2]. (4)
The value of κ3 has also been constrained by the ATLAS
Collaboration, using combined information from single and
double Higgs production, but the sensitivity to this parameter
is lower in comparison, which leads to a much less restrictive
bound than the ones for a and b:
κ
3 ∈[ −2.3, 10.3][ 3] (5)
Again, we would like to emphasize that currently there are
no bounds for κ4.
For the forthcoming numerical analysis in the present
work we will explore the effects of BSM Higgs couplings
to gauge bosons and Higgs self-couplings by varying a, b,
κ3 and κ4 within the following theoretical intervals:
a ∈[ 0.9, 1.1], b ∈[ −2, 2],
κ3 ∈[ −10, 10],κ 4 ∈[ −10, 10]. (6)
Notice that although some of these values are outside the
experimental bounds, we believe that it is illustrative to study
the behaviour with these parameters when they vary in a
wider range. As we will show in the next section, there are
indeed further constraints on some of these parameters from
the potential violation of unitarity that may occur at high
energies for too large values of these coefﬁcients. Concretely,
a and b will be further restricted by unitarity, but κ
3 and κ4
will not. In the last part of this work, all these constraints are
taken into account.
3 The role of WWS in multiple Higgs production at
e+ e− colliders
These BSM Higgs couplings modify the predictions of dou-
ble and triple Higgs production at futuree+e− colliders with
respect to the SM predictions and can lead to testable depar-
tures. A ﬁrst indication of the size of such departures in the
particular e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν channels is provided by the
study of the subprocesses W− W+ → HH (H) for the case
of two (three) Higgs bosons, respectively. These WWS chan-
nels are known to be the dominant subprocesses at e+e−
colliders with energies at the TeV scale. In this section we
will illustrate the WWS dominance in the SM by performing
cross sections computations in MadGraph5 (MG5) [ 46].
We will then compare these results to those predicted by the
simpliﬁed effective W approximation (EW A). This approxi-
mation is very useful, but as we will see it does not provide
a sufﬁciently accurate prediction in all cases.
3.1 The dominance of WWS within the SM
Within the SM and neglecting the Yukawa couplings, there
are 8 diagrams that mediate the e
+e− → HH ν¯ν process: 4
of them are of the WWS type, while in the other 4 the neutrino
pair is produced via the Z boson. In the e+e− → HHH ν¯ν
process there are 50 diagrams in total, 25 of which are WWS
and 25 Z-mediated. We do not draw all these diagrams here,
for shortness, but the subset of diagrams that are mediated
by WWS are easily extracted from those of the correspond-
ing subprocess, which have been collected in the appendices.
MG5 takes into account all these diagrams, allowing to dis-
tinguish the different contributions when computing total
cross sections. In Fig. 2 we show these cross sections, tak-
123


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 5 of 33 260
Fig. 2 Predictions forσ(e+e− → HH ν¯ν)(left) andσ(e+e− → HHH ν¯ν)(right) in the SM as a function of the CM energy√ s. The corresponding
cross sections coming from just the Z-mediated subprocesses, σ(e+e− → ZHH → HH ν¯ν) and σ(e+e− → ZHHH → HHH ν¯ν),a r ea l s o
shown for comparison
ing into account all diagrams (dark blue lines) and only the
Z-mediated ones (light blue lines).
From Fig. 2 we learn that the dominant contribution
to σ(e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν) at low energies comes from
the associated production of two (three) H’s with a Z
boson which then goes to ν¯ν, denoted here as “σ(e+e− →
HH (H)ν¯ν)via ZHH (H)”. The cross section for this partic-
ular production mechanism can be computed as the cross sec-
tion of the process e+e− → ZHH (H) times the branching
ratio BR(Z → invisible) = 20%. As the energy increases,
the associated production of two (three) H’s with a Z boson
becomes subdominant, which suggests that HH (H)ν¯νpro-
duction at the TeV scale is dominated by the other diagrams
(WWS). However, to estimate the size of the WWS contribu-
tions one cannot naively extract these diagrams, since they
generically do not form a gauge invariant subset. Thus, a
different method must be used.
Figure 3 shows that the enhancement in σ(e
+e− →
HH (H)ν¯ν)at high energies actually comes fromσ(e+e− →
HH (H)νe ¯νe), that is, processes with electron neutrinos in
the ﬁnal state. This fact becomes clearer when we also rep-
resent the contribution ofσ(e
+e− → HH (H)νμ ¯νμ), which
decreases at high energies.1
The main difference between both processes is that
whereas e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe includes both types of dia-
grams, WWS and ZHH (H), this is not the case ine+e− →
HH (H)νμ ¯νμ where all diagrams are of ZHH (H) type.
Then, the contribution to σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) coming
1 For simplicity, we omitσ(e+e− → HH (H)ντ¯ντ), which is the same
as σ(e+e− → HH (H)νμ ¯νμ).
from WWS can be isolated using the following “theoretical
observable”:
σWWS = σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) − σ(e+e− → HH (H)νμ ¯νμ).
(7)
Therefore, this difference between the channels with elec-
tron and muon neutrinos quantiﬁes the weight of the WWS
diagrams in the full process without the need of separating
diagrams which, as mentioned above, is not the proper way
if one wishes to preserve gauge invariance. We also deﬁne
the related quantity R
WWS,
RWWS = σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) − σ(e+e− → HH (H)νμ ¯νμ)
σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) .
(8)
This is an adimensional quantity that clearly determines
how large is the contribution of WWS in the e+e− →
HH (H)νe ¯νe process. If RWWS is close to 1, the cross section
will be mostly dominated by WWS. The isolation of these
WWS contributions is of relevance for the present study,
since, as we will see next, they are indeed the most sensi-
tive ones to the anomalous Higgs couplings.
The importance of the WWS contribution in the two
processes, e
+e− → HH νe ¯νe and e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe,
is clearly illustrated in Fig. 4, where we have included
the predictions for σ(e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν), σ(e+e− →
HH (H)νe ¯νe) and σWWS as deﬁned in Eq. ( 7). Above the
O(1T e V) energies, σWWS clearly approaches σ(e+e− →
HH (H)νe ¯νe), which in turn approaches the totalσ(e+e− →
123


--- Page 6 ---
260 Page 6 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 3 Predictions for σ(e+e− → HH νe ¯νe) and σ(e+e− → HH νμ ¯νμ) (left) and σ(e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe) and σ(e+e− → HHH νμ ¯νμ) (right)
in the SM as a function of the CM energy √ s. The cross sections for e+e− → HH ν¯ν and e+e− → HHH ν¯ν from the previous ﬁgure are also
shown for comparison
Fig. 4 Double (left) and triple (right) Higgs production cross section in e+e− collisions with neutrinos in the ﬁnal state and the corresponding
contributions coming from HH (H)νe ¯νe and WWS. The prediction for σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) via WWS is deﬁned in Eq. (7)
HH (H)ν¯ν). Thus, we conclude on the dominance of WWS
in σ(e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν), via the particular channel with
electron neutrinos.
It is also important to notice that ZZ scattering (ZZS)
contributes to the ﬁnal stateHH (H)e+e− , which has a much
lower production cross section (the probability of producing
two or three Higgs bosons via ZZS is approximately ten times
lower). Therefore, this ZZS will not be relevant in this work.
Although the previous ﬁgures show separately the various
contributions from the different neutrino species,σ(e+e− →
HH (H)νi ¯νi), one must realize that in the experiment it is
only possible to measure their sum,σ(e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν).
However, the key point on studying such theoretical observ-
ables is to show, in a gauge invariant way, that WWS is indeed
the largest contribution at high energies. As a consequence,
the predictions for σ(e
+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν) will approxi-
mately follow the same behaviour at these large energies,
speciﬁcally that of σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe).
Comparing triple with double Higgs production in Figs.2,
3 and 4, we ﬁnd that they are roughly similar in shape, being
123


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 7 of 33 260
Fig. 5 Multiple Higgs production via WWS
the WWS enhancement in triple Higgs production displaced
to higher energies, since one extra particle is produced. This
causes ZHHH to be more relevant compared to HHH ν¯ν
than ZHH compared to HH ν¯ν, especially at energies below
2000 GeV . It is also important to note that the SM cross sec-
tions for triple Higgs production at the TeV energy scale are
typically three orders of magnitude below those for double
Higgs production, which is why it is not expected to measure
SM-like HHH production in future linear colliders. For this
reason, we will focus our attention on BSM scenarios.
3.2 The effective W approximation versus full MG5
simulations
Before exploring the effects of BSM Higgs couplings, it is
instructive to ﬁrst evaluate the validity of the so-called effec-
tive W approximation (EW A) [47] by comparing its predic-
tions to the full MG5 simulations. The EW A is a generalisa-
tion of the well known effective photon approximation, and
treats vector bosons, W ’s and Z’s, that are radiated from the
initial fermions, as if they were partons inside the fermions.
This allows to deﬁne distribution functions for these vector
bosons in a similar way as the PDFs of quarks and gluons
inside a proton. The EW A also assumes that the vector bosons
are radiated colinearly by the fermions, and then they scatter
on-shell in the subprocess.
This allows to employ factorisation, obtaining the total
cross section of the whole process by convoluting that of
the subprocess with the distribution functions of the vector
bosons, providing a more analytical and intuitive approach
to the computation than with MG5. The key point then is
that the EW A assumes that the WWS is the dominant sub-
process and, therefore, the validity of this approximation will
depend on how much accurate this assumption is. This pro-
cedure is much simpler than computing the full cross section
by a Monte Carlo method like MG5. In particular, the EW A
approximation has been used in the literature very often to
simplify the estimates of BSM physics in colliders, both for
e
+e− and pp collisions, via WWS. For the present case of
e+e− colliders the generic representation of the WWS partic-
ipating in the collision and producing multiple (two or three
in our case) Higgs bosons is drawn in Fig. 5.T h es i m p l e
formula displaying the mentioned factorisation is:
σ(s) =
∫
dx
1
∫
dx 2
∑
i, j
fi(x1) f j(x2) ˆσij (ˆs). (9)
Here, σ(s) = σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) is the total cross
section of the process of interest at a CM energy of √ s,
and ˆσij (ˆs) =ˆ σ(Wi W j → HH (H)) is the cross section
of the WWS subprocess at a CM energy of
√
ˆs. x1 and x2
are the momentum fractions carried by each W boson and
deﬁne the CM energy of the subprocess by ˆs = x1 x2s.T h e
subindices i, j refer to the polarization of theW bosons (lon-
gitudinal or transverse). Different polarizations must be taken
into account separately, as the probability of radiating a W
boson depends on whether it is longitudinally or transversely
polarized. Consequently, each polarized cross section is con-
voluted with the corresponding combination of distribution
functions f
i(x). Note that this formula assumes that WWS
is the dominant contribution to σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe),
so it is expected to work better at high energies. To compute
this cross section we write ˆσ
ij (ˆs) in terms of the polarized
amplitudes Mij , which we generate using FeynArts- 3.10
[48] and FormCalc- 9.6 [49], and then perform the integra-
tion using VEGAS [50] and a private PYTHON code. We do
it for both the HH νe ¯νe and HHH νe ¯νe channels, with the
corresponding phase space factors, which we omit here for
shortness. The analytical expressions we use for theW distri-
bution functions are taken from Ref. [47] and correspond to
the so-called improved EW A, that keeps corrections of order
m
2
W /E2, with E being the energy of the parent fermion radi-
ating the W . This improved EW A works better than the most
frequently used Leading Log Approximation (LLA) EW A,
which is only valid in the very high energy limit, E ≫ mW .
The formulas for the LLA-EW A can also be found in Ref.
[47]. The Feynman diagrams contributing to the scattering
amplitudes of theW− W+ → HH (H) subprocesses are col-
lected in the appendices. We omit the corresponding analyt-
ical expressions for shortness.
The numerical results of our estimates of the cross sec-
tions with the improved EW A and their comparison with the
MG5 results are presented next. In Fig. 6 we show the total
cross section of the two processes, e
+e− → HH νe ¯νe (left)
and e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe (right,) as a function of the e+e−
CM energy. We include the predictions from the improved
EW A and from MG5. We also include the predictions of the
contributions to the total cross section from WWS, σWWS ,
as deﬁned in Eq. (7). We see in this ﬁgure that at high ener-
gies the EW A predicts theHH production cross section with
good accuracy, while it fails in the predicted cross section in
more than a factor of 2 for theHHH case. The energies that
123


--- Page 8 ---
260 Page 8 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 6 MG5 and EW A predictions of the cross sectionsσ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) as a function of energy for double Higgs (left panel) and triple
Higgs (right panel) production. The predictions for σ(e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe) via WWS as deﬁned in Eq. (7) are also included
Fig. 7 Differential cross sections for e+e− → HH ν¯ν(left) and e+e− → HHH ν¯ν(right) at √ s = 3000 GeV with respect to the invariant mass
of the ﬁnal Higgs bosons, MHH (left) and MHHH (right). The predictions from both MG5 and the EW A are included for comparison
we are considering in this work seem to be too low for the
EW A to be a good approximation of triple Higgs production.
We have also checked that the dominant contribution to the
total cross section comes from longitudinally polarized W
bosons in both cases.
Another condition for the EW A to be a useful approxi-
mation is that it can reproduce the differential cross section
distributions. As an example, Fig. 7 shows the differential
cross section with respect to the invariant mass of the ﬁnal
state Higgs bosons, M
HH and MHHH respectively, which
is equivalent to
√
ˆs due to 4-momentum conservation. The
results for the SM case are again accurate for double Higgs
production, but not so satisfactory in the case of three Higgs
bosons. The good agreement of the EW A with the MG5 com-
putation in the double Higgs production channel also occurs
in the case of the BSM predictions. Indeed, the EW A works
even better for BSM than for the SM. This will be shown in
the next section.
From this brief analysis we conclude that the EW A is an
interesting alternative to compute our results in the double
Higgs case, but it is not accurate enough to study triple Higgs
production in the range of energies available at the e
+e−
colliders under consideration. For the ﬁnal analysis at e+e−
colliders in Sects.5 and 6, we will not use the EW A anymore,
and our results on total and differential cross sections will be
extracted from the full Monte Carlo simulation with MG5.
123


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 9 of 33 260
Fig. 8 Total cross sections of the W− W+ → HH subprocess in the
EChL, as a function of the CM energy, for different values of the param-
eters a and b. The upper left (right) panel shows positive (negative)
values of b. Smaller deviations of this parameter with respect to b = 1
are displayed on the lower left panel. In the lower right panel, the values
of a and b are determined by the relation b = a
2. The dashed yellow
lines correspond to the SM prediction (a = b = 1), except in the upper
right panel, where the SM case is not displayed
4 Deviations from BSM Higgs couplings in WWS
In this section we study the effects of the anomalous Higgs
couplings in double and triple Higgs production via WWS.
In particular, we consider the WWH , WWHH , HHH and
HHHH interactions, given by the EChL coefﬁcients a, b,
κ3 and κ4, and explore the departures with respect to the SM
predictions both in total cross sections and in some differ-
ential distributions. First, we study the effects of a and b in
W− W+ → HH and next we analyse the effects of κ3 and
κ4 in W− W+ → HH (H). To simplify the computations,
we take κ3,4 = 1 when exploring the sensitivity to a and b,
and a, b = 1 when studying the effects of κ3 and κ4.T h e
computations presented in this section have been performed
using FeynArts- 3.10 for the generation of diagrams in the
unitary gauge and FormCalc- 9.6 to perform the analytical
calculation of the corresponding amplitudes. In addition, we
use VEGAS to integrate numerically over the corresponding
phase space in order to obtain the corresponding cross sec-
tions. All these computations have been additionally checked
with MG5.
4.1 Effects of a and b in W
− W+ → HH
Here we present the effects in the W− W+ → HH sub-
process of the two anomalous Higgs couplings parametrised
by a and b, and compare them with the SM case, i.e, with
a = b = 1. Figure 8 shows how the total cross section
of this subprocess depends on the CM energy when vary-
ing the EChL parameters a and b. We restrict our study to
positive values of a but consider both positive and negative
values ofb. Although some values are outside the experimen-
tal bounds, we believe that at this initial stage it is illustrative
to show the effects of these parameters when they vary in a
wider range.
Some ﬁrst conclusions can be extracted from Fig. 8.I ti s
clear that the behaviour of the cross section with the energy
in the EChL is, in general, very different than that of the
SM prediction. While in the SM case (dashed yellow line in
the left plot), the behaviour is ﬂat with the energy at the TeV
region and above, in most cases wherea and/or b are different
from 1 the cross section grows very steeply. This growth
with the energy occurs typically in predictions from EFTs,
123


--- Page 10 ---
260 Page 10 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 9 Modulus of s-wave partial amplitudes, as a function of the CM
energy, for the WL WL → HH subprocess in the EChL, for different
values of the parameters a and b. The dashed yellow line corresponds
to the SM prediction (a = b = 1). Left panel shows positive values of
b whereas right panel displays negative values
due to the ultraviolet incompleteness of these theories. In
particular, the EChL provides predictions, as previously said,
that generically grow with powers of the external momenta.
In the SM case, the ﬂatness with the energy occurs because
there is a strong cancellation of the terms that grow with
the energy among the contributions from the various dia-
grams. If we consider the dominant contribution to this SM
cross section, that comes from the longitudinally polarized
W gauge bosons, it turns out that, at high energies (for√
ˆs ≫ mW , m H ), the contributions from the contact,t and u
channels to the scattering amplitudeM(WL WL → HH ) are
proportional to ˆs, whereas the contribution from the s chan-
nel has a constant behaviour with ˆs [39]. In this case, i.e for
a = b = 1, there is an exact cancellation of the terms growing
linearly with ˆs among the contact,t and u channels, and what
remain are just the terms having a constant behaviour withˆs.
However, this strong cancellation among diagrams does not
happen in the case of the EChL for arbitrary a and b values.
More concretely, this cancellation of the terms growing with
energy occurs in the SM because of the relation mentioned
previously among the two vertices, V
WWH = vVWWHH ,
which is not fulﬁlled in the EChL case. To get a similar can-
cellation of the terms growing linearly with ˆs in the EChL
amplitude one should restrict the parameters to the particular
setting given by b = a
2, which is obviously not necessar-
ily true in the general case. This can be seen in the lower
right panel of Fig. 8, which shows how the cross section
for the W− W+ → HH subprocess is practically constant
with the energy when enforcing the relation b = a2. Notice
also that this restriction on a and b is not required by any
symmetry argument (remember that the EChL is gauge and
chiral invariant for all a and b). Within the SM, the relation
VWWH = vVWWHH occurs as a consequence of the sym-
metry being linearly realised, i.e. because the Higgs ﬁeld is
placed into a doublet. But in the EChL, the Higgs ﬁeld is a
singlet under the gauge and chiral symmetries and a and b
can be arbitrary.
The plots in Fig. 8 also show that, the bigger the devia-
tions of a and b from 1, the bigger the cross section. Thus,
some possible BSM physics, given by the EChL parameters
departing from their SM values, would yield clear experi-
mental evidence, with much larger cross sections than those
predicted by the SM. For instance, at
√
ˆs = 3 TeV, and for the
considered values ofa and b in the upper left panel, the cross
section can be several orders of magnitude larger than in the
SM. For negative values of b (upper right plot), the depar-
ture with respect to the SM prediction can be even larger.
For instance, for a = 1, b =− 1 the cross section is about a
factor 1000 larger than that for a = b = 1. This is a remark-
able enhancement, produced by just changing the sign of b.
Notice that the variations chosen in these two plots forb with
respect to 1 are much bigger than for a, simply because the
experimental bounds existing ona are more restrictive, while
the constraints are looser for b. Considering smaller devia-
tions of these parameters reduces the size of the enhancement
in the cross section with respect to the SM prediction, but it
still produces important departures, as it can be seen in the
lower left plot in Fig.8. For instance, at
√
ˆs = 3 TeV, a devi-
ation in b of 20% (10%) enlarges the SM cross section by a
factor of 10 (4). If both a and b are slightly deviated from
1, with a variation in a of 10%, and in b of 20% (10%) the
corresponding enhancement factor is 40 (20).
This large increase of the cross sections when a and/or b
are not equal to 1 might indicate that unitarity is not guaran-
teed in the EChL predictions. In order to check if unitarity
is preserved, we plot, in Fig. 9, the energy dependence of
the longitudinally polarized s-wave partial amplitude for the
same values ofa and b as those chosen in the previous ﬁgure.
These results show that unitarity is, in fact, violated for some
parameter (a, b) values at high energies. Except in the SM
123


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 11 of 33 260
Fig. 10 Lowest partial wave amplitude for WL WL → HH within the EChL. Left panel shows the dependance on the b parameter, for different
values of a and a ﬁxed energy of
√
ˆs = 3 TeV . Right panel shows the dependance on the energy for several values ofa, with b determined by the
relation b = a2
case (which, as it is well known, perfectly respects unitar-
ity), the rest of the chosen values of the parameters render
partial wave amplitudes larger than 1 at energies of several
TeVs, which could be reachable at colliders. As it could be
anticipated, the further the departure from the SM, the sooner
unitarity is violated.
Focusing on one particular energy, it is also very illus-
trative to study the failure of unitarity as a function of the
parameters a and b. Figure 10 (left panel) shows the predic-
tions at
√
ˆs = 3 TeV for the lowest partial wave amplitude
as a function of b and for several values of the parameter
a. It can be seen that, at this energy, when a varies from its
SM value approximately a 10% (which, roughly speaking,
coincides with experimental bounds), b can depart from 1 a
50% at most, in order to obtain predictions which preserve
unitarity. Thus, for the case of CLIC with the largest planned
energy, we learn from this ﬁgure that by keeping a within
the experimentally allowed interval and by restricting the b
parameter in a rather conservative interval of b ∈[ 0.5, 1.5],
the predictions will respect unitarity. With this conservative
choice, unitarity will consequently be also preserved at other
colliders with lower energies.
Finally, to illustrate the effect of the EChL parameters on
the issue of unitarity violation when restricted by the relation
b = a
2,w es h o wi nF i g .10 (right panel) the predictions
for the lowest partial wave amplitude as a function of the
energy, for various values ofa (b is set here to a2). It is clear
from this plot that, at high energies (
√
ˆs ≫ mW , m H ), a
constant behaviour with the energy, similar to the one in the
SM, is obtained in the EChL when thea and b parameters are
restricted by b = a2. We also conclude from this ﬁgure that
all the displayed predictions respect the unitary bound, expect
for the extremely large value of a = 10, where the constant
prediction exceeds the unitary limit. Such large values of a
are totally out of the experimentally allowed interval, and
thus they will not be considered anymore in this work.
These results show that the cross section ﬂattens with the
energy for the speciﬁc choice of b = a2 (with consider-
ably lower rates than for the general case, b ̸= a2), indi-
cating a particular direction in the parameter space where
the cross section is minimum. To illustrate this correlation
more clearly, we show in Fig.11 (left plot) the contour lines
of constant cross section, σ(WW → HH ),i nt h e (a, b)
plane. We have also included the contour line corresponding
to b = a
2 for comparison (with the SM point marked on
top of it). We can see in this plot that the cross section con-
tour lines are parallel to the b = a
2 direction, and how the
cross section reaches the minimum values along this line,
growing very rapidly when separating from this line. It is
also worth mentioning that this correlation we ﬁnd between
a and b is not present in other combinations of the studied
EChL parameters. In particular, we have also explored the
cross section in the (a,κ
3) plane, not ﬁnding any interesting
correlation between these two parameters. This is shown in
Fig. 11 (right plot), where the contour lines are practically
parallel to the vertical axis; it can also be seen that the effect
of a is dominant, overwhelming that of κ
3. Thus, from now
on we will consider separately the two sets of parameters, a
and b on one hand,κ3 and κ4 on the other. This classiﬁcation
is basically motivated by the type of interactions affected by
each set of anomalous couplings, H − W and Higgs self-
interactions, respectively.
All in all, the results in this subsection clearly show that
the EChL predictions are way different than those of the
SM when varying the parameters a and b and provide quite
large cross sections for the W
− W+ → HH subprocess. We
will see in the following that this can lead to measurable
departures from the SM predictions at futuree+e− colliders.
And this is true even after including the restrictions on the
parameters a and b such that unitarity is respected in all the
predictions.
123


--- Page 12 ---
260 Page 12 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 11 EChL predictions for the total cross section of theW− W+ →
HH subprocess, at a center of mass energy of 3 TeV , in the(a, b) plane
(left panel) and the(a,κ3) plane (right panel). The dashed line in the left
panel corresponds to the direction b = a2. The white cross represents
the SM prediction (a = b = 1)
Fig. 12 Total cross section of the W− W+ → HH subprocess as a function of the CM energy
√
ˆs for different values of the parameter κ3, with
κ4 ﬁxed to 1, compared to the SM prediction (dashed line). Negative (positive) values ofκ3 are shown in the left (right) panel
4.2 Effects of κ3 and κ4 in W− W+ → HH (H)
In this section we analyse the WWS subprocesses and the
BSM deviations with respect to the SM predictions arising
from the anomalous triple and quartic Higgs self-couplings,
parametrised by κ3 and κ4 respectively. For this study we
explore channels of both double and triple Higgs production
and, for simplicity, we set a, b = 1. Since double Higgs
production is not sensitive at all toκ4, we focus here mainly
on the triple Higgs production case, which is the novel one,
and use the double Higgs case rather as a reference case
(better known) regarding the sensitivity to κ
3. For a more
devoted study on the effect ofκ3 in double Higgs production
see, for instance, Ref. [39].
123


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 13 of 33 260
Fig. 13 Total cross section of the W− W+ → HHH subprocess as
a function of the CM energy
√
ˆs for different values of the parameter
κ3,w i t hκ4 ﬁxed to 1, compared to the SM prediction (dashed line).
Negative (positive) values ofκ3 are shown in the left (right) panel. The
unitarity violating region is the shaded area displayed at the right upper
corner
Fig. 14 Total cross section of the W− W+ → HHH subprocess as a function of the CM energy
√
ˆs for different values of the parameterκ4,w i t h
κ3 ﬁxed to 1, compared to the SM prediction (dashed line). Negative (positive) values ofκ4 are shown in the left (right) panel
The results of our calculations are collected in Figs. 12,
13 and 14, in which we show the behaviour of the cross
section with the energy for different values ofκ3 and κ4, and
Figs. 15, 16 and 17, in which we display the cross section
variation with κ3 and κ4, independently, at ﬁxed energies.
Notice again that since double Higgs production does not
involve the quartic coupling (at least at tree level), the value
of κ
4 is not relevant for the predictions in that channel.
We can extract some ﬁrst conclusions by looking at these
plots. Starting from Fig. 12, that shows the double Higgs
production case, we observe that modifyingκ3 in the interval
[−10, 10] leads to a notable enhancement in the total cross
section with respect to the SM prediction, here represented
by the dashed line (κ
3 = 1). The maximum deviation occurs
slightly above the threshold energy 2m H , and it is larger for
negative values of κ3. In the most extreme case, κ3 =− 10,
the BSM prediction can deviate up to two orders of magnitude
with respect to the SM value in this close to threshold energy
region. Notice also that there are no regions disallowed by
unitarity in this ﬁgure. It can be checked from Ref. [39] that
123


--- Page 14 ---
260 Page 14 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 15 Total cross section of the W− W+ → HH subprocess as a
function of κ3,w i t hκ4 set to 1, for different values of the CM energy√
ˆs
for κ3 ∈[ − 10, 10] and for the energies considered here,√
ˆs ≤ 3 TeV , unitarity is preserved in all the predictions for
double Higgs production.
Figure 13 shows the case of triple Higgs production. Com-
paring this ﬁgure with the previous Fig. 12, we can see that
the consequences of modifying κ3, with κ4 ﬁxed to 1, are
similar in triple and double Higgs production, but now the
maximum appears slightly above the new threshold energy,
3m H . The deviations with respect to the SM prediction are
larger again for negative values of κ3, and can reach values
of up to ﬁve orders of magnitude larger than the SM in that
close to threshold energy region. On the other hand, we learn
from Fig. 14 that varying the value of κ
4 within the interval
[−10, 10], with κ3 ﬁxed to 1, does not modify the shape of
the cross section signiﬁcantly. However, it can also increase
its value by one or even two orders of magnitude with respect
to the SM prediction in the most extreme cases. The depen-
dence on the sign of κ
4 in triple Higgs production is very
mild, in contrast with the strong dependence on the sign of
κ
3 that has been found in both channels.
Coming back to W− W+ → HH ,F i g .15 shows the vari-
ation of the cross section withκ3 at a ﬁxed CM energy. Here
we see that there is a minimum in the region κ3 ∈[ 2, 5].
The greater the energy, the larger the value of κ3 that mini-
mizes the cross section. Deviations from the SM can reach
two orders of magnitude in the most extreme case, that is, for
κ
3 =− 10 at the lowest energy. The sensitivity to variations
of the κ3 parameter decreases with increasing energy; note
that far from the region of the minimum, the behaviour of
the cross sections is inverted, being higher at lower energies.
This is the reason for the appearance of the peak near the
threshold in Fig. 12, which does not appear in the SM case.
When reproducing this same plot for W
− W+ → HHH
as a function of κ3 (see Fig. 16) we ﬁnd a very different
picture. First of all, in the left plot in Fig. 16 we see that
the maxima at the extreme values of κ3 =± 10 are dis-
placed in energy and they are now reached around
√
ˆs = 500
GeV . This is in contrast to the double Higgs production case,
where these maxima are produced at the minimum energy of√
ˆs = 380 GeV . Second, the shape of the curve, especially
at low energies, exhibits two minima , in contrast to just one
minimum in HH . One of them is near the SM valueκ3 = 1,
and the other one appears at a positiveκ3 and is displaced to
higher values of this parameter as energy grows. The max-
imum deviations with respect to the SM are large in any
case, varying from two orders of magnitude at
√
ˆs = 3000
Fig. 16 Total cross section of theW− W+ → HHH subprocess as a function ofκ3 (with κ4 ﬁxed to 1) for different values of the CM energy
√
ˆs.
Right panel shows a closer view of the minima
123


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 15 of 33 260
GeV to even ﬁve orders of magnitude at
√
ˆs = 380 GeV .
One of the most interesting ﬁndings is that the cross sec-
tion σ(W
− W+ → HHH ) is signiﬁcantly more sensitive
to variations in the κ3 parameter than σ(W− W+ → HH ),
mainly at low energies. However, triple Higgs production has
the disadvantage that it leads to smaller cross sections than
double Higgs production, due to the obvious phase space
suppression.
Finally, Fig. 17 shows the dependence with theκ
4 param-
eter, ﬁxing κ3 = 1, for various values of the CM energy.
We see that, in this case, the predictions of the cross sec-
tions only exhibit one minimum for each energy. Besides,
the maximum deviations from the SM vary from one order
of magnitude at
√
ˆs = 3000 GeV up to three orders of mag-
nitude at
√
ˆs = 380 GeV .
Since triple Higgs production depends on both parame-
ters, κ3 and κ4, it is also interesting to check what happens
if we vary the two of them at the same time. In Fig. 18 we
represent the W− W+ → HHH cross section at three ﬁxed
energies,
√
ˆs = 500, 1000 and 3000 GeV , in the (κ3,κ4)
plane. The additional information that we can extract look-
ing at these plots is that variations in the cross section are
strongly dominated by deviations along theκ
3 direction, and
the higher values are reached whenκ3 approaches −10. The
dependence with κ4 is softer, and the maximum cross sec-
tion can be reached either at negative or positive values of
κ
4. For example, in the negative κ3 region, the cross sec-
tion tends to be higher around κ4 = 10, while in the pos-
itive κ3 region the trend can be this same or the opposite
one, depending on the energy. Note that at high energies
the combined effect of modifying both parameters at the
same time can lead to a notable increase of the cross sec-
tion, especially if they have opposite signs. For instance, at√
ˆs = 3000 GeV and for (κ3,κ4) near the corner (−10, 10),
the cross section exhibits large values of O(100) pb, to
be compared with the SM prediction of 3 .7 × 10−2 pb.
We also notice that the lowest values (darker region) are
approximately arranged along a line which does not coin-
cide with the κ3 = κ4 direction. This means that modifying
the Higgs self-couplings without altering their ratio, that is,
λHHH /λHHHH = λSM
HHH /λSM
HHHH = 1, can also produce
an enhancement in the cross section. The size of this darker
region is related to the depth of the minimum, and is smaller
for lower energies. Note that the SM prediction is contained
in this region, which is why we do not expect to measure
this triple Higgs production process if the self-couplings are
close to their SM values. In any case, what we are studying
here is the subprocess, which cannot be seen in a real exper-
iment, so to complete our analysis, in the next section, we
will study the full e
+e− process to understand how sensitive
it is to deviations in these parameters.
Regarding unitarity, we ﬁnd that the W− W+ → HHH
subprocess does not violate unitarity for the energies and
Fig. 17 Total cross section of the W− W+ → HHH subprocess as a
function of κ4 (with κ3 ﬁxed to 1) for different values of the CM energy√
ˆs
parameter values considered here, i.e. κ3,4 ∈[ −10, 10] and√
ˆs < 3 TeV . We also conﬁrm the good unitarity behaviour
in double Higgs production with respect toκ3, for these same
settings. It is worth mentioning that for triple Higgs produc-
tion, the unitarity check has been performed with a different
criterion than for double Higgs production. This difference
is because to study the unitarity bounds for a 2→ n process,
one cannot employ the usual partial waves expansion, since
the amplitude depends on a higher number of variables, other
than s, t and u. Following for instance Ref. [9], one way of
checking unitarity in a 2→ n process is to insert a complete
set of intermediate states into its left-hand side, separating
the elastic and the inelastic parts:
2Im [M
el(2 → 2)] =
∫
/Pi12
|Mel(2 → 2)|2
+
∑
n
∫
/Pi1n
|Minel(2 → n)|2. (10)
Here /Pi1n refers to the n-body phase space. In this case, the
following bound forσinel(2 → n) is obtained after introduc-
ing the partial wave expansion for Mel(2 → 2):
σinel(2 → n) ≤ 4π
s . (11)
This is the constraint that we have imposed to check the uni-
tarity of our predictions for σ(W− W+ → HHH ). Accord-
ing to this criterion, all our predictions for BSM physics com-
ing from deviations in κ
3 and κ4 are fully unitary for all the
energies considered in this work. Concretely, in the worst-
case scenario, i.e. for the largest energies considered here
(
√
ˆs = 3000 GeV), preservation of unitarity requires that:
123


--- Page 16 ---
260 Page 16 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 18 Contour levels for the total cross section of the W− W+ → HHH subprocess represented in the (κ3,κ4) plane for different values of the
CM energy
√
ˆs
ˆσ(W− W+ → HHH ) ≲ 540 pb, (12)
which is not reached even in the most extreme cases in Fig.18.
Thus, in contrast toa and b, which suffer of strong restrictions
from unitarity, the parameters κ3 and κ4 do not.
5 Deviations from BSM Higgs couplings in e+ e−
In this section we present the results for the effects of the
BSM Higgs couplings within the EChL parametrized by a,
b, κ3 and κ4 in double and triple Higgs production at the
real scattering processes e+e− → HH νe ¯νe and e+e− →
HHH νe ¯νe, respectively. We will explore these effects at the
planned e+e− colliders, and compare the BSM behaviour
with the SM predictions. Again, to simplify this study, we
take κ3,4 = 1 when exploring the sensitivity to a and b,
and viceversa. As in the SM case, the full computation of
the BSM rates is done with MG5 (we neglect the Yukawa
couplings to the electrons) and includes 8 contributing dia-
grams in e
+e− → HH νe ¯νe, 4 mediated by WWS and 4 by
Z, and 50 contributing diagrams ine+e− → HHH νe ¯νe,2 5
mediated by WWS and 25 by Z. We do not draw all of them
here, for shortness, but the ones mediated by WWS are easily
123


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 17 of 33 260
extracted from those of the corresponding subprocess, which
have been collected in the appendices.
5.1 Deviations from a and b in e+e− → HH νe ¯νe
The predictions for the cross section σ(e+e− → HH νe ¯νe)
within the EChL for different values of the parametersa and
b and of the e+e− CM energies are shown in Table 2.T h e
values of a and b are chosen in such a way that/Delta1a,/Delta1b ≤ 1,
with /Delta1a(b) ≡| a(b) − 1|. The corresponding predictions
for the SM case (i.e. for a = b = 1) are also included for
comparison. We present the results from both methods, the
full computation with MG5 and the approximate rates given
by the EW A.
From the results in this table we extract several conclu-
sions. First, we see from the predictions with MG5 that the
distortions introduced by a and b with respect to the SM can
be very large, leading to large enhancements in the cross sec-
tions. If we set one of the parameters to 1 and vary the other
one in a certain amount, the enhancement will be larger when
the variation is applied ona rather than onb (notice the differ-
ence between the cases a = 1, b = 1.5 and a = 1.5, b = 1).
This could be expected since thea parameter enters quadrat-
ically in the amplitude whereasb enters linearly. We also see
in this table that the size of the enhancements obtained for a
given/Delta1a and/Delta1b depends on the energy and grows in general
with it. The maximum departures from the SM are found for
the largest energies and/Delta1’s considered here, and can lead to
ratios of BSM cross section over SM cross section of up to
O(100). Second, from this table we also learn that the EW A
gives quite good predictions for high energies at and above
1 TeV , not only for the SM rates as we have already seen in
Sect. 3.2, but also for the BSM rates. Indeed, we see that the
accuracy of the EW A is even better for the BSM predictions
than for the SM ones, and this occurs because the dominance
of the WWS subprocess is more pronounced in the BSM
scenarios than in the SM case. This is illustrated by the ratio
R
WWS, deﬁned in Eq. ( 8), which clearly approaches one at
the highest energies, indicating that WWS largely dominates
the full BSM cross sections.
This WWS dominance can also be seen in the predictions
of the cross sections distributions with the invariant mass
M
HH , as it is shown in Fig. 19, where the collider energy
has been set to 3 TeV . We also see in this ﬁgure that the
prediction from the EW A is very close to the prediction from
MG5 for MHH above 1 TeV . All in all, we learn from Table2
and Fig.19 that the main features found in the predicted cross
sections for e+e− → HH νe ¯νe with respect to variations in
the a and b parameters follow a similar pattern as those found
previously at the WW → HH subprocess level in Sect.4.1.
The reason for this similarity is again the dominance of the
WWS subprocess, which is even more pronounced in the
BSM scenarios than in the SM case.
Table 2 Predictions of the cross sectionsσ(e+e− → HH νe ¯νe) (in pb)
within the EChL for different values of the parametersa and b and e+e−
CM energies. The SM case (a = b = 1) is also included for comparison.
The predictions from both MG5 and the EW A are displayed, as well as
the ratio R
WWS, deﬁned in Eq. ( 8), which quantiﬁes the relevance of
the WWS within the whole e+e− process
√ s (TeV) 0.5 1 3
SM a, b = 1
MG5 1 .3 × 10−5 8.0 × 10−5 8.0 × 10−4
EW A 7 .7 × 10−6 1.2 × 10−4 8.5 × 10−4
RWWS 0.3 0.9 0.997
a = 1.5, b = 1
MG5 1 .2 × 10−4 2.4 × 10−3 3.6 × 10−2
EW A 1 .4 × 10−4 2.6 × 10−3 3.2 × 10−2
RWWS 0.83 0.9921 0.99947
a = 0.5, b = 1
MG5 1 .5 × 10−5 3.0 × 10−4 7.1 × 10−3
EW A 7 .9 × 10−6 2.0 × 10−4 5.8 × 10−3
RWWS 0.65 0.9975 0.99985
a = 1, b = 1.5
MG5 1 .7 × 10−5 9.0 × 10−5 2.4 × 10−3
EW A 2 .7 × 10−6 6.6 × 10−5 2.0 × 10−3
RWWS 0.06 0.83 0.9975
a = 1, b = 0.5
MG5 1 .7 × 10−5 3.3 × 10−4 5.5 × 10−3
EW A 2 .0 × 10−5 3.8 × 10−4 5.0 × 10−3
RWWS 0.66 0.988 0.99944
a = 1, b = 0.9
MG5 1 .3 × 10−5 1.0 × 10−4 1.2 × 10−3
EW A 9 .5 × 10−6 1.6 × 10−4 1.2 × 10−3
RWWS 0.292 0.932 0.998
a = 1, b = 1.1
MG5 1 .3 × 10−5 2.5 × 10−4 6 × 10−4
EA 6 .1 × 10−6 9.1 × 10−5 6.6 × 10−4
RWWS 0.154 0.984 0.996
a = 0.9, b = 1
MG5 9 .3 × 10−6 2.9 × 10−5 4.7 × 10−4
EW A 2 .5 × 10−6 4.1 × 10−5 4.9 × 10−4
RWWS 0.04 0.741 0.995
a = 1.1, b = 1
MG5 2 .0 × 10−5 2.1 × 10−4 2.6 × 10−3
EW A 1 .8 × 10−5 2.9 × 10−4 2.6 × 10−3
RWWS 0.4 0.956 0.999
123


--- Page 18 ---
260 Page 18 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 19 Predictions of the cross section distributions fore+e− → HH νe ¯νe with respect to the Higgs pair invariant mass,MHH , within the EChL,
for different values of the parametersa and b. The collider energy is set to 3 TeV . The results from both MG5 and the EW A computations are shown
for comparison
Finally, we present the results by scanning both parameters
a and b together in the (a, b) plane and for various collider
energies. Figure 20 shows the cross section contour lines,
obtained with MG5, for e+e− collider energies of 500 GeV ,
1 TeV and 3 TeV .
The range for theb parameter in these plots,b ∈[ 0.5, 1.5],
is chosen such that unitarity is guaranteed for the three con-
sidered centre-of-mass energies. Although the range consid-
ered for a is larger than the one it is actually constrained
to, we wanted to display the same ranges for both param-
eters in order to obtain a global view. Notice that in these
plots we have also marked the region with a > 1, where the
so-called positivity constraint applies. According to Refs.
[51,52], some values in this region could yield a potential
problem due to violation of causality in this EFT. We include
in these plots a dotted region, that is theoretically disfavoured
by positivity, and and orange band that displays the experi-
mentally allowed region fora, within a 95% conﬁdence level.
We have checked that within this experimentally allowed
region for a unitarity is fully preserved.
The following plots ﬁnally provide solid conclusions on
the sensitivity of the e
+e− → HH νe ¯νe process to varia-
tions of the a and b EChL parameters. As both a and b are
modiﬁed simultaneously and in the same range, it is possible
to compare their role on the behaviour of the cross section.
Notice that the plots are not symmetrical with respect to the
(a, b) = (1, 1) point, which means that increasing any of the
parameters with respect to 1 in a certain amount is not equiv-
alent to diminishing it in the same amount. This happens for
both parameters: the plots do not exhibit any symmetry with
respect to the a = 1o r b = 1 axes. This means that the
cross section is sensitive to the sign ofa − 1 and b − 1. This
was already observed in Fig.19, and is now conﬁrmed. Also,
the plots are not symmetrical with respect to the a = b line:
equal variations ina and b are not equivalent. Clearlya is the
dominant parameter: cross sections grow faster when keep-
ing b constant and varying a than viceversa, which could be
expected due to the quadratic dependence on a in the ampli-
tude.
The most relevant conclusion that we learn from Fig.20 is
that the BSM rates are considerably larger than the SM ones,
especially for the higher energy colliders, even if we limit
ourselves to the region of the(a, b) parameter space allowed
by unitarity, positivity and present experimental constraints.
Thus, it is interesting to perform a more detailed analysis in
a collider framework, taking into account the Higgs bosons
decays. We will carry out such an analysis in Sect. 6.
5.2 Deviations from κ
3 and κ4 in e+e− → HH (H)νe ¯νe
As we have said, the cross section of e+e− → HH νe ¯νe is
only sensitive to κ3, whereas that of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe is
sensitive to both parametersκ3 and κ4. The behaviour of the
cross section with the energy for e+e− → HH νe ¯νe and for
123


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 19 of 33 260
Fig. 20 EChL predictions for contour lines of σ(e+e− → HH νe ¯νe)
(in pb) in the (a, b) parameter space, at a CM energy of 500 GeV (left
panel), 1 TeV (middle panel) and 3 TeV (right panel). The dotted region
is disfavoured by positivity, while the orange one shows the experimen-
tally allowed region fora. The white cross represents the SM prediction
(a = b = 1).
Fig. 21 Total cross section of e+e− → HH νe ¯νe as a function of the CM energy √ s for different values of the parameter κ3, with κ4 set to 1,
compared to the SM prediction (dashed line). Negative (positive) values ofκ3 are shown in the left (right) panel
different values of κ3 is shown in Fig. 21. The behaviour of
the cross section of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe for different values
of κ3 and κ4 is shown in Figs. 22 and 23, respectively. In
Fig. 24 the dependence with κ3 of σ(e+e− → HH νe ¯νe) at
various ﬁxed energies is represented. The dependence withκ3
and κ4 of σ(e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe) at various ﬁxed energies
is displayed in Figs. 25 and 26, respectively. In all cases we
include the SM prediction, corresponding to κ3 = κ4 = 1,
for comparison. In a ﬁrst look to all these plots we see clearly
that the main features found at the WWS subprocess level in
Sect. 4.2,f o r W
− W+ → HH and W− W+ → HHH ,a r e
again found here at the collider level, for e+e− → HH ν¯ν
and e+e− → HHH ν¯ν, respectively. In the following we
comment in more detail the results in each of these ﬁgures.
First, we start with the discussion of HH production in
Fig. 21. In these plots we can see how, in general, deviating
from κ3 = 1 causes an enhancement of the cross section
that is approximately constant with energy. The strongest
deviation occurs when κ3 =− 10, and it differs from the
SM prediction by two orders of magnitude. Another thing
that can be seen in HH production and will be more signif-
icant in HHH is that the bump near the threshold (2 m
H in
123


--- Page 20 ---
260 Page 20 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 22 Total cross section of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe as a function of the CM energy√ s for different values of the parameterκ3,w i t hκ4 ﬁxed to 1,
compared to the SM prediction (dashed line). Negative (positive) values ofκ3 are shown in the left (right) panel
Fig. 23 Total cross section of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe as a function of the CM energy√ s for different values of the parameterκ4, with κ3 ﬁxed to 1,
compared to the SM prediction (dashed line). Negative (positive) values ofκ3 are shown in the left (right) panel
HH and 3m H in HHH ), where the associatedZ subprocess
dominates, disappears when we deviate from the SM (dashed
lines).
Second, comparing the behaviour of HH to the HHH
case, which is presented in Fig. 22, we observe something
that we had already noticed in the previous section: triple
Higgs production is extremely sensitive to variations in the
κ
3 parameter, much more than double Higgs production,
reaching BSM deviations of even ﬁve orders of magnitude
with respect to the SM prediction in the most extreme case
(κ3 =− 10). We also learn from this Fig.22 that in theHHH
channel, similarly to the HH channel, the difference with
respect to the SM prediction is approximately constant with
energy. The bump that is dominated by the associatedZ pro-
duction subprocess disappears as we separate from κ3 = 1,
showing once more that the BSM deviations are clearly dom-
inated by WWS.
123


--- Page 21 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 21 of 33 260
Fig. 24 Total cross section of e+e− → HH νe ¯νe as a function of κ3,
with κ4 set to 1, for different values of the CM energy √ s
Figure 23 is the equivalent to Fig.22, this time ﬁxingκ3 to
1 and varying theκ4 parameter. The proﬁle of the deviations
due to κ4 is very similar to those corresponding to κ3,b u t
softer. The maximum deviation now occurs for κ4 =− 10,
this time yielding rates around two orders of magnitude above
the SM prediction. As we noted previously, BSM deviations
mediated by the ZHHH subprocess due toκ
4 ̸= 1 are much
smaller than the ones coming from WWS.
Third, we can now look at the dependence with theκ3 and
κ4 parameters at a ﬁxed CM energy. Starting with the HH
case shown in Fig. 24, the main difference that we see when
comparing this plot with the results for the subprocess in
Sect. 4 (see Fig. 15) is that in thee
+e− case the highest cross
section for all κ3 values is always achieved at the highest
collider energy. The second observation is that there is not
a large difference in the sensitivity to κ
3 depending on the
energy, conﬁrming, as stated above, that the deviations with
respect to the SM do not depend appreciably on the energy.
All the curves in Fig. 24 for the various energies experiment
a variation between one and two orders of magnitude with
respect to the SM, having the maximum at the extreme value
of κ3 =− 10, and they all have just one minimum at the
region κ3 ∈[ 0, 2] (the higher the energy, the larger the value
of κ3 at the dip).
In Fig. 25 we show the corresponding plot forHHH pro-
duction, where we see the dependence of the cross section
with κ
3, setting κ4 = 1, at various CM energies. Here we
ﬁnd again, similarly to the HH case, that the highest cross
section for all κ3 values is always achieved at the highest
collider energy. Also, the deviations with respect to the SM
prediction are practically insensitive to the energy, and the
largest BSM cross section is obtained again at κ3 =− 10,
reaching values of up to more than three orders of magni-
tude higher than the SM value. In contrast to the previous
HH case, the triple Higgs production shows a new feature,
namely, the appearance of two minima instead of one. These
two minima are obviously correlated with the two minima
already observed in Fig.16 at the W
− W+ → HHH subpro-
cess level, and they are more clearly visible at lower collider
energies. In particular, for√
s = 380 GeV , there is one mini-
mum aroundκ3 = 1 and the other one is betweenκ3 = 2 and
κ3 = 3. We also observe a deformation in the √ s = 1000,
Fig. 25 Total cross section of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe as a function of κ3 (with κ4 ﬁxed to 1) for different values of the CM energy √ s. Right panel
shows a zoom around the dip region
123


--- Page 22 ---
260 Page 22 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
1500 and 3000 GeV curves, in the region κ3 ∈[ 2, 6], apart
from the minimum around κ3 = 1. This deformation does
not appear (at least so clearly) in the curve √ s = 500 GeV ,
which only has one minimum aroundκ3 = 1. Finally, Fig.26
shows the dependence of σ(e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe) with κ4,
setting κ3 = 1, for various ﬁxed energies. As we already
commented, the deviations with respect to the SM are softer
in this case. In contrast with the previous plot, in this one the
curves exhibit only one minimum, which is around κ4 = 1.
The only curve in which this does not occur is the one corre-
sponding to √ s = 500 GeV . The cross section at this energy
is with difference the least sensible to variations in the κ4
parameter.
Now that we have seen the consequences of varying each
of the κ3 and κ4 parameters separately, we study next the
combined effect in triple Higgs production of varying both
parameters at the same time. For reasons that we will motivate
later, we will restrict ourselves in this study to the particular
case of √
s = 3000 GeV . The results of the contour lines for
σ(e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe) in the (κ3,κ4) plane are shown in
the left plot in Fig. 27. These results are consistent with the
observations made in the previous plots, and conﬁrm clearly
that the deviations in the cross section are much stronger in
the κ
3 direction than in theκ4 one. In addition, the sensitivity
to κ4 is larger at the central region of the exploredκ3 interval,
and the largest rates in this plot are obtained in the upper left
corner, i.e. for the extreme values of (κ
3,κ4) = (−10, 10).
Furthermore, if we look back to the subprocess plots in
Fig. 18, we notice that, qualitatively, the variations in the
cross section of thee+e− process at√ s = 3000 GeV behave
similarly to those of theW− W+ → HHH subprocess in the
region around
√
ˆs = 1000 GeV . This suggests that the ’effec-
tive energy’ for WWS ine+e− collisions at√ s = 3000 GeV
is approximately around
√
ˆs ∼ 1000 GeV .
Finally, we show in the right plot in Fig. 27 the corre-
sponding predictions for the expected number of events in
the (κ
3,κ4) plane in the most favourable case, namely, at the
last stage of CLIC with√ s = 3000 GeV andL = 5a b−1.A s
it can be seen in this plot, the expected number of HHH ν¯ν
events from BSM Higgs couplings can be sizeable in a large
region of the ( κ3,κ4) plane. Indeed, it is much higher than
in the SM case, which as we have seen produces negligible
event rates. This is true even if we stay within the experimen-
tal limits, κ
3 ∈[ −2.3, 10.3] at a 95% CL (remember again
that there are no present constraints on κ4).
Now that we have characterized both the W− W+ →
HH (H) subprocesses and the whole e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν
processes, we are close to being able to explore the ﬁnal sen-
sitivity to the EChL parameters. However, we still need to
study these processes in the framework of a collider, studying
the real ﬁnal state particles, namely, after the Higgs bosons
decays. In the following section we will perform such an anal-
ysis, motivating why 3 TeV is the optimal energy to obtain
the best BSM signals in double and especially triple Higgs
production.
6 Sensitivity to BSM couplings in multiple b-jet events
We will focus our forthcoming analysis in the two future lin-
ear colliders that are currently under study, the ILC and CLIC
(see Table 1). As we already mentioned in the introduction,
they are both e
+e− colliders, and will operate at energies
between a few hundreds of GeV and 3 TeV . Each of these
energy stages serves a different purpose, being the higher
energy conﬁgurations the ones oriented to measuring the
SM triple Higgs self-coupling viaHH production. In princi-
ple, none of them is expected to yield measurable signals of
HHH production, assuming SM rates. Therefore, our stud-
ies of BSM signals viaHHH production are very singular in
the sense that they will not have the SM as a competitor, since
it produces negligible rates (less than 1 event in all cases). On
the other hand, to obtain testable results in these e
+e− col-
liders via the processes of our interest,e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν,
it is necessary to analyze ﬁnal states where the Higgs bosons
have decayed. Here we will choose the Higgs main decay
channel, H → b¯b, yielding ﬁnal states with multiple b-jets,
arising from the ﬁnal b quarks, plus missing energy, associ-
ated to the ﬁnal neutrinos. Thus, we explore the sensitivity
to the EChL parameters is this type of multiple b-jet events:
1) a and b in events with missing transverse energy and four
b-jets from the decays of the two ﬁnal H’s; and 2)κ
3 and κ4
in events with missing transverse energy and six b-jets from
the decays of the three ﬁnal H’s. For the present study we
ignore potential backgrounds to multiple b-jets production
accompanied by missing energy, which a priori are expected
to be negligible in thise
+e− context. A more reﬁned analysis,
including realistic backgrounds and considering the peculiar-
ities of the planned detectors, is clearly beyond the scope of
the present work and is left for future studies.
6.1 Sensitivity to a and b in events with 4 b-jets and
missing transverse energy
We explore here the sensitivity to a and b in e
+e− →
HH ν¯ν → b¯bb ¯bν¯ν events. For this study we perform a
Monte Carlo simulation employing MG5: the same com-
putation that was already worked out, but including now the
decays of the Higgs bosons. Regarding the particular col-
lider project, we consider here three of them: (1) The ILC
with √
s = 500 GeV and L = 4a b−1; (2) The ILC with√ s = 1 TeV and L = 8a b−1; and (3) The CLIC with√ s =
3 TeV and L = 5a b−1.
In order to characterise the BSM signal arising from the
EChL anomalous couplings(a, b), we have ﬁrst to deﬁne the
ﬁnal state with particles that can be detected in the experi-
123


--- Page 23 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 23 of 33 260
Fig. 26 Total cross section of e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe as a function of κ4 (with κ3 ﬁxed to 1) for different values of the CM energy √ s. The plot on
the right shows a zoom around the dip region
Fig. 27 Left: contour levels for the total cross section of thee+e− → HHH νe ¯νe process represented in the(κ3,κ4) plane at a CM energy of 3000
GeV . Right: corresponding contour levels for the number ofe+e− → HHH νe ¯νe events expected at the last stage of CLIC with Lint = 5a b−1
ments. The events that we study here contain fourb-jets from
the hadronization of the ﬁnalb quarks, which are produced in
the Higgs decays, and missing energy corresponding to the
ﬁnal νand ¯νescaping detection. This characteristic missing
energy from the neutrinos and antineutrinos could allow to
differentiate the BSM signal from potential SM backgrounds,
like those of QCD origin. These channels exhibit multiple jets
in the ﬁnal state due to the hadronization of quarks and glu-
ons, but typically show no relevant missing energy. There-
fore, to explore the BSM signal we will implement some
cuts on the relevant variables of the ﬁnal particles. In par-
ticular, the b-jets will be required to have a minimum trans-
verse momentum in order to be detected, and also the missing
transverse energy will be required to be above a minimum
value. Besides, a cut in the polar angle θ, or equivalently,
a maximum pseudorapidity η
j ≡− log
(
tan θ
2
)
for the jets,
is required. Finally, in order to be detectable, the jets need
to exhibit a certain angular separation among them. This is
equivalent to stablishing a minimum value for the variable
/Delta1R
jj ≡
√
(/Delta1ηjj )2 + (/Delta1φjj )2, where /Delta1ηjj and /Delta1φjj are
the separations in pseudorapidity and azimuthal angle of the
two jets jj , respectively. The values chosen for all these cuts
in this work, which are similar to those taken in references
123


--- Page 24 ---
260 Page 24 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
[38,53], are summarised as follows:
p j
T > 20 GeV;| ηj| < 2; /Delta1R jj > 0.4; E/T > 20 GeV(13)
The decay of the two Higgs bosons will lead to a reduction
factor in the event rates of 0.582, due to the branching ratios
(BRs) of the decays to b quarks. Once the cuts on the ﬁnal
state are implemented, the signal event rates will obviously
suffer a further reduction. To estimate the effects of these cuts
in Eq. (13) we have evaluated the acceptance,A, given by the
ratio of the predicted b¯bb ¯bν¯νrates after applying these cuts
divided by the rates before cuts (the latter are the ones already
shown in Fig. 20). We have evaluated A in the (a, b) plane,
considering the region delimited by a and b in the interval
[0.5,1.5], as in Fig.20, and we have done it for the three ener-
gies chosen here, of 500 GeV , 1000 GeV and 3000 GeV . We
have found that A diminishes when increasing the collider
energy. For 500 GeV it varies approximately in the range
0.65–0.72, for 1 TeV in the range 0.55–0.65, and for 3 TeV
in the range 0.3–0.5. There is a qualitative difference between
the case of 500 GeV and the other two collider stages, with
1 TeV and 3 TeV respectively. The acceptance for 500 GeV
is maximal, above 0.7, at the region close to the SM point
(a, b) = (1, 1), whereas in the 1 TeV and 3 TeV cases it
is minimal in this region, with values around 0.55 and 0.3
respectively. This qualitative difference can be understood
from the fact that the kinematical conﬁguration of the ﬁnal
state particles in two cases of 1 and 3 TeV is driven from the
dominant WWS subprocess, which is not the case for the 500
GeV collider, where the Z-mediated diagrams dominate.
In order to conclude on the potential accesibility to these
a and b parameters at future e
+e− colliders, we also have to
take into account the efﬁciency in the detection of the four
b-jets. Thus, the computed rates must be reduced by an extra
factor of ϵ
4, where ϵ is the b-tagging efﬁciency factor. We
will assume here ϵ of an 80%, which is the value commonly
used in the literature, see for instance [ 37,38]. Taking into
account all the cuts shown above, the BRs of the decays, and
the efﬁciency reduction factors, we have ﬁnally computed
the b¯bb ¯bν¯ν event rates of our BSM signal for each choice
of the anomalous couplings a and b and for each selected
collider setup.
We display, in Fig.28, the contour lines for these predicted
number of events in the(a, b) plane for: ILC (500 GeV) with
4a b−1 (left plot), ILC (1TeV) with 8 ab −1 (middle plot),
and CLIC (3TeV) with 5 ab −1 (right plot). Notice that we
have adjusted the interval displayed for the parameter a so
as to coincide with its presently experimental allowed inter-
val, whereas for the b parameter we have displayed the full
interval [0.5,1.5], as in the previous ﬁgures. From this Fig.28
we can already extract some conclusions regarding the BSM
event rates compared to the SM ones. In the three plots shown
we ﬁnd areas (depicted in the lighter colors), where the ratio
BSM/SM is considerably larger than 1. Regarding the rel-
ative events statistics, the lowest collider energy provides
the smallest rates, and the highest collider energy the largest
ones, as expected. For ILC (500 GeV) with 4 ab
−1 we only
ﬁnd a few events, varying from less than 10 in the lower-left
part of the plot to around 22 in the lower-right corner. These
should be compared with the 9 events predicted in the SM.
For ILC(1TeV) with 8 ab
−1 we ﬁnd larger rates, around 50–
70 events in the region close and around b = 1 with a < 1,
and up to more than 750 events in the lower-right corner. The
SM predicts 100 events in this case. For CLIC (3TeV) with
5a b
−1 the largest rates are found, ranging from around 100
events in the region very close and aroundb = 1 with a < 1
to more than 8000 events in the lower-right corner. Therefore,
CLIC offers better rates than the other two explored projects
and seems to be the best option in order to be sensitive to the
(a, b) parameters.
Finally, to provide a more concrete conclusion on the
accessibility to these two anomalous couplings, we have eval-
uated the ratio R ≡ (N
BSM − NSM)/√ NSM, where N(B)SM
is the number of events in the (B)SM case. This quantity is
a way to measure the size of the deviation of the BSM sig-
nal with respect to the SM prediction. Since there are very
low statistics in the 500 GeV case, both for BSM and the
SM, we focus on the other two options. We show in Fig. 29
the accessibility regions in the (a, b) plane for the ILC (1
TeV) and CLIC (3 TeV) cases, deﬁned as R > 5 (purple
region bounded by solid contourline) in the most optimistic
case, and as R > 10 (purple region bounded by dashed con-
tourline) in the more conservative case. It is clear from this
plot that both options, ILC (1 TeV) and CLIC (3 TeV), will
offer a good accessibility to measure a and b beyond their
present experimental constraints from LHC. The best option
will be clearly CLIC (3 TeV) with 5ab
−1, where the unacces-
sible area (in white) shrinks around the SM point, especially
in the b direction, which is the worst explored at present.
The sizes of these unaccesible areas provide an approximate
estimate of the expected improvements on the constraints on
these anomalous couplings. Of course, in order to determine
more accurately the sensitivity to variations in a and b with
respect to their SM values, it would be necessary to analyze
the possible backgrounds as well. This is well beyond the
intention of this work and is left for future research.
Nevertheless, we believe that a more complete analysis
including backgrounds will not change the main conclusions
of this work, since a ﬁrst, order of magnitude estimate of the
main backgrounds already shows they can be dealt with eas-
ily. In particular, if we naively ignore the detection effects
and assume no cuts at all, we ﬁnd cross section rates for
the most relevant backgrounds (corresponding to those pro-
cesses with Z bosons instead of H bosons) which are com-
parable to our reference SM value. For instance, at 3 TeV ,
using MG5, we get the SM cross section reference value of
σ(e
+e− → νe ¯νe HH ; H → b¯b) = 0.54 fb. For the main
123


--- Page 25 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 25 of 33 260
Fig. 28 Contour lines for the expected number of events of the
e+e− → HH νe ¯νe → b¯bb ¯bνe ¯νe process in the (a, b) plane. The cuts
in Eq. (13) and the efﬁciency factors have already been implemented,
see text for details. Several collider stages are considered: ILC with 500
GeV and 4 ab−1 (left panel), ILC with 1 TeV and 8 ab−1 (middle panel),
and CLIC with 3 TeV and 5 ab−1 (right panel). The range chosen fora is
the present experimentally allowed region. The white cross represents
the SM prediction (a = b = 1)
Fig. 29 A c c e s s i b l er e g i o ni nt h e(a, b) plane to BSM scenarios via
e+e− → HH ν¯ν→ b¯bb ¯bν¯ν e v e n t s ,a tt h eI L Cw i t h√ s = 1000 GeV
and Lint = 5a b−1 (left panel) and at CLIC with √ s = 3000 GeV and
Lint = 5a b−1 (right panel). The criterion of accesibility assumed here
is by means of the quantityR ≡ (NBSM − NSM)/√ NSM), leading to the
purple area bounded by the solid (dashed) contourline for R ≥ 5(10)
backgrounds, we ﬁnd σ(e+e− → νe ¯νe HZ ; H, Z → b¯b) =
1.28 fb and σ(e+e− → νe ¯νe ZZ ; Z → b¯b) = 1.25 fb.
Presumably, these two processes involvingZ’s could be efﬁ-
ciently reduced by the action of proper cuts, in particular,
that on the b¯b invariant mass, requiring it to be close to the
Higgs mass value. Other possible backgrounds from QCD
(i.e., O(α
Sα2) at the amplitude level) are much smaller, since
we require neutrinos in the ﬁnal state. For instance, we get
σ(e+e− → b¯bb ¯bZ ; Z → ν¯ν)= 0.002 fb. Being the signal
rates for our BSM scenarios with anomalous(a, b) couplings
well above the SM rates, we expect all these backgrounds to
be treatable.
6.2 Sensitivity to κ3 and κ4 in events with 6 b-jets and
missing transverse energy
In this section we study the sensitivity to the anomalous
couplings κ3 and κ4 in e+e− → HHH ν¯ν → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯ν
events. Therefore, we consider the dominant decays of the
ﬁnal Higgs bosons leading tob-jets and take into account the
123


--- Page 26 ---
260 Page 26 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
missing energy left by the ﬁnal neutrinos and antineutrinos.
We perform our analysis in the most favourable scenario,
which is the last stage of CLIC, at a CM energy of 3000
GeV with an integrated luminosity of 5 ab
−1. In the pre-
vious sections we learnt that it is at that high energies and
luminosities where the channel with three Higgs bosons and
neutrinos can be most sensitive to variations of the Higgs
self-couplings. As we have said, it is just in triple, and not
double, Higgs production where there is a unique sensitivity
to the quartic Higgs coupling κ
4. Indeed, considering at the
same time deviations inκ3 and κ4 in triple Higgs production
plus neutrinos can boost the number of events from not more
than one in the SM (which does not yield a detectable sig-
nal) to tens, hundreds or even thousands in the most extreme
cases of BSM scenarios. Thus, in this section we will focus
on characterising these BSM signals from the triple Higgs
channel, with mainly 6 b-jets and missing transverse energy,
at the last stage of CLIC.
First, we investigate the main features of the kinemati-
cal conﬁguration in these multi-particle events for our BSM
signal with (κ
3,κ4) ̸= (1, 1) and compare it with the SM
case with (κ3,κ4) = (1, 1) . For this characterization, we
will generate a set of samples for different values of κ3
and κ4 and study some interesting event distributions. All
the events will be generated using MG5 and analyzed using
ROOT 6 [54]. Since the hadronization of the b quarks in the
ﬁnal state is a very expensive task, in order to deﬁne the b-
jets we will use a resolution criterion instead. Following the
reasoning in [38], we will consider an energy resolution of
/Delta1E/E = 5% and assume that two quarks with a small sep-
aration of /Delta1R
qq < 0.4 cannot be resolved individually. This
condition will be applied recursively until we converge to a
ﬁnal list of quarks that we will identify as the b-jets.
The plots in Figs. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35 show the
distributions with respect to several kinematic variables for
different values of (κ
3,κ4). Concretely, we chose: (1) the
invariant mass of the three Higgs bosonsMHHH , equivalent
to that of the six b-jets (Fig. 30); (2) the missing transverse
energy E/T , equivalent to that of the ﬁnal ν¯ν pair (Fig. 31);
(3) the realistic number ofb-jets in the events, Nb−jet, due to
the resolution criterion commented above (Fig. 32); (4) the
angular separation between two b-jets, /Delta1Rbb (Fig. 33); (5)
the transverse momentum of theb-jets, pb
T (Fig. 34), and (6)
the pseudorapidity of the b-jets, ηb (Fig. 35). For simplicity
we have only plotted deviations of either κ3 or κ4, with the
other one set to 1. Notice also that all the histograms are
normalized to unity (and not to the real number of events)
since we are interested now in comparing just their shape.
We will next comment some general features learnt from
these plots. First, we note that the invariant mass distribution
of the three Higgs bosons, which is equivalent to the energy
of the subprocess,
√
ˆs, conﬁrms the observation we made
when comparing Fig.27 with the corresponding plots for the
Fig. 30 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
invariant mass of the three Higgs bosons, that is, of the six b-jets, for
several values of the parameters κ3 and κ4
Fig. 31 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
transverse missing energy, for several values of the parameters κ3 and
κ4
W− W+ → HHH subprocess: we suggested that the ’effec-
tive energy’ for WWS in e+e− collisions at √ s = 3T e Vi s
approximately around
√
ˆs = 1 TeV. In fact, in the distribu-
tion for the SM case we see in Fig. 30 a maximum centered
around MHHH = 1000 GeV , while for other values ofκ3 and
κ4 the maximum is generally displaced to lower energies, and
123


--- Page 27 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 27 of 33 260
Fig. 32 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
number of b-jets, for several values of the parameters κ3 and κ4.N o t e
that the number of b-jets is not necessarily six due to the resolution
criterion
the peaks exhibit different shapes. From theE/T and pb
T plots,
we also see that both the neutrino-antineutrino pairs and the
b-jets tend to be produced with higher transverse momentum
in BSM scenarios than in the SM, which is consistent with a
smaller value of the pseudorapidity, as we see in the plot of
η
b. As a ﬁnal remark, we also notice that the realistic number
of b-jets appears to decrease as we deviate from the SM. This
is due to the b quarks being produced with smaller relative
angles, as can be seen in the distribution with respect to the
variable /Delta1R
bb. The area of this distribution in Fig. 33 with
larger rates is displaced to lower values of/Delta1Rbb in the BSM
cases than in the SM, meaning that the b-jets may not be
always identiﬁed individually, thus yielding in some cases
an apparently lower number of produced b-jets. Finally, for
the jet analysis, we need to take also into account the b-jet
identiﬁcation efﬁciency. As in the previous section, we will
adopt here a b-tagging efﬁciency of 80% [ 38]. This corre-
sponds to a misidentiﬁcation efﬁciency of 10% forc-jets and
1% for light ﬂavour jets.
Overall, considering the features learnt from all these dis-
tributions and the needed requirement of not loosing too
much signal, we will impose the following set of cuts, which
a r es i m i l a rt ot h o s ei n[38], but also requiring a minimum
value of the missing transverse energy:
|η
jet| < 2.72; Njet ≥ 6; pjet
T ≥ 20 GeV; (14)
Nb−jet ≥ 5; E/T ≥ 20 GeV.
Fig. 33 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
angular separation between b-jets, for several values of the parameters
κ3 and κ4
Fig. 34 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
transverse momentum of theb-jets, for several values of the parameters
κ3 and κ4
Some comments are in order. First, regarding the cut in
pseudorapidity we use here the value reported in [ 55]o f
|η|max = 2.72 for the particular case of CLIC. Notice that this
is slightly less restrictive than the one chosen in the previous
section of |ηj| < 2. Since the rates for triple Higgs produc-
tion are much lower than for double Higgs production, we
123


--- Page 28 ---
260 Page 28 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
Fig. 35 Distribution of e+e− → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯νevents with respect to the
pseudorapidity of the b-jets, for several values of the parametersκ3 and
κ4
relax this cut to avoid the loss of too many signal events.
Second, we require our events to include at least six jets.
We also impose that these jets have a minimum transverse
momentum of 20 GeV , since very lowp
T jets can be difﬁcult
to detect. Next, we want at least ﬁve jets to be identiﬁed as
b-jets. The reason why we do not require 6 taggedb-jets lies
on the efﬁciency. Assuming that all jets are equal, i.e., that
they are not sorted or classiﬁed in any way, the probability
of identifying ﬁve out of the six as b-jets is:
ε
5 = 6 × 0.85 × 0.2 + 0.86 = 0.66, (15)
while if we tag the six of them:
ε
6 = 0.86 = 0.26, (16)
so allowing ﬁve tagged jets is way more efﬁcient. It is also
important to note that since all b-jets come from on-shell
Higgs bosons, the three pairs should reconstruct the Higgs
invariant mass. Although the resolution will not be optimal
since we are treating with jets, this could be an additional cut
to reject backgrounds. We have computed the value of the
acceptance, A, for the BSM events after applying all these
cuts, and found that for the studied values of κ
3 and κ4 it is
between 0.44 and 0.51. In the SM case, with κ3 = κ4 = 1,
the acceptance is lower and drops to 0.34. Thus, in summary,
to ﬁnally compute the number of predicted BSM events, we
use the following reduction factors, considering the BRs to
b quarks, the b-tagging efﬁciencies, and the acceptance, A,
after applying all the cuts in Eq. (14):
N
events = N × 0.583 × (6 × 0.85 × 0.2 + 0.86) × 0.48,
where we use an approximation forA setting it to its average
value of 0.48 in all cases.
The ﬁnal results for the predicted event rates in the(κ3,κ4)
plane, after all the cuts and the efﬁciencies are taken into
account, are presented in Fig. 36.
As it can be clearly seen in this Fig. 36,t h eb¯bb ¯bb ¯b ν¯ν
event rates are very low in the region of the (κ3,κ4) plane
close to the SM point, leading to less than one event, therefore
yielding unobservable signals. Separating from this area, the
BSM event rates increase reaching values above 10, 100 and
even 1000 in the extreme cases withκ
3 near −10. We believe
that having this signal statistics as a starting point is very
promising and motivates a more complete study including
backgrounds, which we are neglecting here. As we already
stated, a detailed analysis taking into account all the back-
grounds and the characteristics of the particular detectors at
CLIC is beyond the scope of this work.
However, as in the case of double Higgs production, we
also believe that the dominant backgrounds to triple Higgs
production could be easely treated. Our naive estimate of the
main backgrounds, where the Higgs bosons are replaced by
Z’s, provides rates which, although above the SM reference
value, we still believe to be reasonable. For instance, at 3
TeV , using MG5 and without applying any cuts, we obtain
for the SM cross section σ(e
+e− → νe ¯νe HHH ; H →
b¯b) = 6 · 10−5 fb. For the main backgrounds, we ﬁnd
σ(e+e− → νe ¯νe HHZ ; H, Z → b¯b) = 5 · 10−4 fb,
σ(e+e− → νe ¯νe HZZ ; H, Z → b¯b) = 2 · 10−3 fb, and
σ(e+e− → νe ¯νe ZZZ ; Z → b¯b) = 3 · 10−3 fb. Again, our
signal rates from BSM scenarios with anomalous (κ3,κ4)
are clearly above the SM ones. Besides, we expect that the
proper cuts, in particular the one on the invariant mass of the
b¯b pairs being close to the Higgs mass, will be able to reduce
the backgrounds down to negligible rates.
Finally, we wish to conclude with our estimate of the
accessible region to the BSM anomalous couplings in the
(κ
3,κ4) plane. This is summarised in Fig.37,w h e r ew eh a v e
set the ’naive’ criterion for accessibility to a given(κ3,κ4) (in
absence of background) by requiring a minimum value of 10
events. Thus, we ﬁnd that the purple area in this Fig.37 leads
to more than 10 events (reaching large values of hundreds and
even thousands at the extreme values) and will give access to
values of the anomalous self-couplings which are at present
unconstrained. In particular, smaller values of|κ
3| inside the
presently allowed intervalκ3 ∈[ −2.3, 10.3] ( m a r k e db yt h e
red arrows in this plot) could be tested at CLIC. Regarding the
κ4 parameter, it is clear from Fig.37 that this HHH ν¯νchan-
nel opens the possibility to test the yet unexplored BSM quar-
tic Higgs self-coupling at CLIC. Concretely, if we assume
123


--- Page 29 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 29 of 33 260
Fig. 36 Contour lines for the expected number of e+e− →
b¯bb ¯bb ¯b νe ¯νe events (white dashed lines) after applying all the cuts and
efﬁciency factors, represented in the(κ3,κ4) plane. The corresponding
contours for the e+e− → HHH νe ¯νe cross section are also included
for comparison. Right shows a narrower range in the κ3 axis
BSM scenarios that are outside the unreachable white region
at the center of this plot (which contains the SM point), there
seems to be access to κ4 ∈[ −10, 10].
7 Conclusions
In this work we have explored the sensitivity at future e+e−
colliders to BSM Higgs physics induced by the WWH ,
WWHH , HHH and HHHH interaction vertices within
the context of the non-linear effective ﬁeld theory given by
the EChL. These interactions provide the BSM Higgs anoma-
lous couplings of our interest, which depend respectively on
the EChL parameters a, b, κ
3 and κ4. In this non-linear EFT
context, these coefﬁcients are independent and uncorrelated
by any symmetry argument, because the Higgs ﬁeld is a sin-
glet in the EChL. This is in contrast to the Higgs couplings in
the SM, where some relations among the interaction vertices,
such as V
SM
WWH = vV SM
WWHH and V SM
HHH = vV SM
HHHH ,a r e
derived from the Higgs being a component of a doublet.
We have shown that the double and triple Higgs produc-
tion channels, in particular e+e− → HH ν¯ν and e+e− →
HHH ν¯ν, provide the proper window to explore efﬁciently
these BSM Higgs couplings. Whereas double Higgs produc-
tion can access to a, b and κ3, the triple Higgs channel is the
only one that can access toκ4, a parameter which is at present
totally unconstrained. Our study here then provides a ﬁrst try
to test the BSM quartic Higgs self-coupling, which is so far
evading all experimental searches, at e
+e− colliders.
Fig. 37 Accessible region in the (κ3,κ4) plane to BSM scenarios via
e+e− → HHH ν¯ν → b¯bb ¯bb ¯bν¯ν events at CLIC, with √ s = 3000
GeV and Lint = 5a b−1. The criterion of accesibility assumed here is
requiring more than 10 signal events (purple area). The red arrows mark
the limits of the present bound from ATLAS [3]f o rκ
3,g i v e ni nE q .(5)
We have also understood why these two particular chan-
nels are so efﬁcient in the searches for BSM signals arising
from the anomalous Higgs couplings. The main reason is the
123


--- Page 30 ---
260 Page 30 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
fact that, at the TeV scale and above, they are dominated by
WWS mediated diagrams. It is in these conﬁgurations where
the largest enhancement due to BSM physics occurs. We also
conclude that the main features found in the WWS subpro-
cesses, W
− W+ → HH (H), are basically reproduced in the
corresponding e+e− → HH (H)ν¯ν processes. In our study
of the dominance of the WWS subprocesses, we also showed
that the improved EW A works remarkably well for the dou-
ble Higgs production case, but it fails in the predictions for
triple Higgs production. This is a new result, and convenient
to be aware of for future BSM searches. The conclusion in
this concern is that the EW A can be safely used forHH but
it should not be used for the HHH case.
Our ﬁnal study of a more realistic experimental scenario,
with multiple b-jets and missing transverse energy in the
ﬁnal state, shows that the sensitivity to these parameters will
indeed be improved considerably at the future e
+e− collid-
ers. The ﬁnal results in Figs. 28 and 37 summarise our main
conclusion on the accessibility region for these EChL param-
eters, a and b in Fig. 28, andκ
3 and κ4 in Fig. 37. These plots
also suggest that the best tests of these parameters will be pro-
vided by CLIC. In particular, triple Higgs production seems
to provide access to κ
4 in the latest stage of this collider,
with a luminosity of 5 fb−1. Of course, in order to obtain a
more accurate conclusion, a more complete study should be
performed, including realistic backgrounds and taking into
account the detector properties.
Acknowledgements We wish to thank Claudia Garcia-Garcia for her
participation in the early stages of the σ(W− W+ → HH ) com-
putation. This work is partially supported by the European Union
through the ITN ELUSIVES H2020-MSCA-ITN-2015//674896 and
the RISE INVISIBLESPLUS H2020-MSCA-RISE-2015//690575, by
the ‘Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación” (AEI) and the EU
“Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional” (FEDER) through the project
FPA2016-78022-P and from the grant IFT Centro de Excelencia Severo
Ochoa SEV-2016-0597. We also acknowledge partial ﬁnancial sup-
port from the National project with reference PID2019-108892RB-
I00/AEI/10.13039/501100011033.
Data A vailability Statement This manuscript has no associated data
or the data will not be deposited. [Authors’ comment: No datasets have
been generated, as this is a theoretical study.]
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you
give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indi-
cated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permit-
ted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Funded by SCOAP
3.
Fig. 38 Diagrams contributing to the W− W+ → HH subprocess in
the unitary gauge
Appendix A: Diagrams contributing to W− W+ → HH
There are 4 diagrams contributing to the scattering amplitude
of the W− W+ → HH subprocess in the unitary gauge: s
channel, contact channel, t channel and u channel. These are
drawn in Fig. 38. The anomalous couplings parametrized by
a, b and κ3 (depicted by yellow, green and red dots respec-
tively) enter in the vertices of these channels:a·κ3 in s chan-
nel, b in contact channel, a2 in t and u channels. We will
omit the analytical result of the corresponding amplitudes
for shortness.
Appendix B: Diagrams contributing to W− W+ →
HHH
There are 25 diagrams contributing to the scattering ampli-
tude of the W− W+ → HHH subprocess in the unitary
gauge. These have been generated using FeynArts- 3.10
and are displayed in Fig.39. The red and blue dots represent
the triple and quartic Higgs self-interactions, respectively.
We will omit the analytical result of the corresponding ampli-
tudes for shortness.
123


--- Page 31 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 31 of 33 260
Fig. 39 Diagrams contributing to the W− W+ → HHH subprocess in the unitary gauge
123


--- Page 32 ---
260 Page 32 of 33 Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260
References
1. ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Combined measurements of
Higgs boson production and decay using up to 80 fb−1 of proton-
proton collision data at √ s = 13 TeV collected with the ATLAS
experiment. Phys. Rev. D 101, 012002 (2020). arXiv:1909.02845
2. ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for the HH → b¯bb ¯b
process via vector-boson fusion production using proton-proton
collisions at √
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector. JHEP 07,
108 (2020). arXiv:2001.05178
3. ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS Collaboration, Constraints on
the Higgs boson self-coupling from the combination of single-
Higgs and double-Higgs production analyses performed with the
ATLAS experiment
4. J. Alison et. al., Higgs boson pair production at colliders: status
and perspectives in double Higgs production at colliders ed. by
B. Di Micco, M. Gouzevitch, J. Mazzitelli, C. Vernieri, p. 9 (2019).
arXiv:1910.00012
5. M. Cepeda et al., Report from Working Group 2: Higgs physics at
the HL-LHC and HE-LHC. CERN Yellow Rep. Monogr. 7, 221–
584 (2019). arXiv:1902.00134
6. ILC Physics, Detector Study Collaboration, J. Strube, Measure-
ment of the Higgs boson coupling to the top quark and the Higgs
boson self-coupling at the ILC. Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc. 273–275,
2463–2465 (2016)
7. CLICdp Collaboration, P. Roloff, U. Schnoor, R. Simoniello, B. Xu,
Double Higgs boson production and Higgs self-coupling extraction
at CLIC. arXiv:1901.05897
8. B. Fuks, J.H. Kim, S.J. Lee, Scrutinizing the Higgs quartic coupling
at a future 100 TeV proton–proton collider with taus and b-jets,
Phys. Lett. B 771, 354–358 (2017). arXiv:1704.04298
9. A. Belyaev, P. Schaefers, M. Thomas, Precise test of Higgs
boson properties via triple Higgs boson production in vector
boson fusion at future colliders. Phys. Rev. D 99, 015030 (2019).
arXiv:1801.10157
10. I. Brivio, M. Trott, The standard model as an effective ﬁeld theory.
Phys. Rep. 793, 1–98 (2019). arXiv:1706.08945
11. T. Appelquist, C.W. Bernard, Strongly interacting Higgs bosons.
Phys. Rev. D 22, 200 (1980)
12. A.C. Longhitano, Heavy Higgs bosons in the Weinberg–Salam
model. Phys. Rev. D 22, 1166 (1980)
13. M.S. Chanowitz, M.K. Gaillard, The TeV physics of strongly inter-
acting W’s and Z’s. Nucl. Phys. B 261, 379–431 (1985)
14. O. Cheyette, M.K. Gaillard, The effective one loop action in the
strongly interacting standard electroweak theory. Phys. Lett. B197,
205–212 (1987)
15. A. Dobado, M.J. Herrero, Phenomenological Lagrangian approach
to the symmetry breaking sector of the standard model. Phys. Lett.
B 228, 495–502 (1989)
16. A. Dobado, M.J. Herrero, Testing the hypothesis of strongly inter-
acting longitudinal weak bosons in electron–positron collisions at
Tev energies. Phys. Lett. B 233, 505–511 (1989)
17. A. Dobado, D. Espriu, M.J. Herrero, Chiral Lagrangians as a tool
to probe the symmetry breaking sector of the SM at LEP. Phys.
Lett. B 255, 405–414 (1991)
18. D. Espriu, M.J. Herrero, Chiral Lagrangians and precision tests of
the symmetry breaking sector of the Standard Model. Nucl. Phys.
B 373, 117–168 (1992)
19. F. Feruglio, The Chiral approach to the electroweak interactions.
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 8, 4937–4972 (1993). arXiv:hep-ph/9301281
20. M.J. Herrero, E. Ruiz Morales, The electroweak chiral Lagrangian
for the Standard Model with a heavy Higgs. Nucl. Phys. B 418,
431–455 (1994). arXiv:hep-ph/9308276
21. M.J. Herrero, E. Ruiz Morales, Nondecoupling effects of the SM
Higgs boson to one loop. Nucl. Phys. B 437, 319–355 (1995).
arXiv:hep-ph/9411207
22. R. Alonso, M. Gavela, L. Merlo, S. Rigolin, J. Yepes, The effective
chiral Lagrangian for a light dynamical “Higgs Particle”. Phys.
Lett. B 722, 330–335 (2013). arXiv:1212.3305. [Erratum: Phys.
Lett. B 726, 926 (2013)]
23. I. Brivio, T. Corbett, O. Éboli, M. Gavela, J. Gonzalez-Fraile, M.
Gonzalez-Garcia, L. Merlo, S. Rigolin, Disentangling a dynamical
Higgs. JHEP 03, 024 (2014). arXiv:1311.1823
24. D. Espriu, B. Yencho, Longitudinal WW scattering in light of
the “Higgs boson” discovery. Phys. Rev. D 87, 055017 (2013).
arXiv:1212.4158
25. D. Espriu, F. Mescia, B. Yencho, Radiative corrections to WL WL
scattering in composite Higgs models. Phys. Rev. D 88, 055002
(2013). arXiv:1307.2400
26. R.L. Delgado, A. Dobado, F.J. Llanes-Estrada, Light ‘Higgs’, yet
strong interactions. J. Phys. G41, 025002 (2014).arXiv:1308.1629
27. R.L. Delgado, A. Dobado, F.J. Llanes-Estrada, One-loop WL WL
and Z L Z L scattering from the electroweak Chiral Lagrangian with
a light Higgs-like scalar. JHEP 02, 121 (2014). arXiv:1311.5993
28. R. Delgado, A. Dobado, M. Herrero, J. Sanz-Cillero, One-loop
γγ → W+
L W−
L and γγ → ZL ZL from the Electroweak Chiral
Lagrangian with a light Higgs-like scalar. JHEP 07, 149 (2014).
arXiv:1404.2866
29. G. Buchalla, O. Cata, Effective theory of a dynamically bro-
ken electroweak Standard Model at NLO. JHEP 07, 101 (2012).
arXiv:1203.6510
30. G. Buchalla, O. Catà, C. Krause, Complete Electroweak Chiral
Lagrangian with a Light Higgs at NLO. Nucl. Phys. B880, 552–573
(2014). arXiv:1307.5017. [Erratum: Nucl. Phys. B 913, 475–478
(2016)]
31. G. Buchalla, O. Catá, C. Krause, On the power counting in effective
ﬁeld theories. Phys. Lett. B 731, 80–86 (2014). arXiv:1312.5624
32. G. Buchalla, O. Cata, A. Celis, C. Krause, Note on anomalous
Higgs-boson couplings in effective ﬁeld theory. Phys. Lett. B750,
298–301 (2015). arXiv:1504.01707
33. G. Buchalla, O. Cata, A. Celis, C. Krause, Fitting Higgs data
with nonlinear effective theory. Eur. Phys. J. C 76, 233 (2016).
arXiv:1511.00988
34. J. de Blas, O. Eberhardt, C. Krause, Current and future constraints
on Higgs couplings in the nonlinear effective theory. JHEP07, 048
(2018). arXiv:1803.00939
35. M. Rauch, Vector-boson fusion and vector-boson scattering.
arXiv:1610.08420
36. D.R. Green, P. Meade, M.-A. Pleier, Multiboson interactions at the
LHC. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035008 (2017). arXiv:1610.07572
37. F. Bishara, R. Contino, J. Rojo, Higgs pair production in vector-
boson fusion at the LHC and beyond. Eur. Phys. J. C77, 481 (2017).
arXiv:1611.03860
38. R. Contino, C. Grojean, D. Pappadopulo, R. Rattazzi, A. Thamm,
Strong Higgs interactions at a linear collider. JHEP02, 006 (2014).
arXiv:1309.7038
39. E. Arganda, C. Garcia-Garcia, M.J. Herrero, Probing the Higgs
self-coupling through double Higgs production in vector boson
scattering at the LHC. Nucl. Phys. B 945, 114687 (2019).
arXiv:1807.09736
40. W. Bizo´n, U. Haisch, L. Rottoli, Constraints on the quartic Higgs
self-coupling from double-Higgs production at future hadron col-
liders. JHEP 10, 267 (2019). arXiv:1810.04665
41. T. Liu, K.-F. Lyu, J. Ren, H.X. Zhu, Probing the quartic
Higgs boson self-interaction. Phys. Rev. D 98, 093004 (2018).
arXiv:1803.04359
42. S. Borowka, C. Duhr, F. Maltoni, D. Pagani, A. Shivaji, X. Zhao,
Probing the scalar potential via double Higgs boson production at
hadron colliders. JHEP 04, 016 (2019). arXiv:1811.12366
123


--- Page 33 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2021) 81 :260 Page 33 of 33 260
43. F. Maltoni, D. Pagani, X. Zhao, Constraining the Higgs
self-couplings at e+e− colliders. JHEP 07, 087 (2018).
arXiv:1802.07616
44. M. Chiesa, F. Maltoni, L. Mantani, B. Mele, F. Piccinini, X. Zhao,
Measuring the quartic Higgs self-coupling at a multi-TeV muon
collider. JHEP 09, 098 (2020). arXiv:2003.13628
45. S. Weinberg, Phenomenological Lagrangians. Phys. A 96(1–2),
327–340 (1979)
46. J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V . Hirschi, F. Maltoni, O. Mat-
telaer, H.S. Shao, T. Stelzer, P. Torrielli, M. Zaro, The automated
computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order differential
cross sections, and their matching to parton shower simulations.
JHEP 07, 079 (2014). arXiv:1405.0301
47. S. Dawson, The effective W approximation. Nucl. Phys. B 249,
42–60 (1985)
48. T. Hahn, Generating Feynman diagrams and amplitudes with
FeynArts 3. Comput. Phys. Commun. 140, 418–431 (2001).
arXiv:hep-ph/0012260
49. T. Hahn, M. Perez-Victoria, Automatized one loop calculations in
four-dimensions and D-dimensions. Comput. Phys. Commun.118,
153–165 (1999). arXiv:hep-ph/9807565
50. G. Lepage, A new algorithm for adaptive multidimensional inte-
gration. J. Comput. Phys. 27, 192 (1978)
51. R.L. Delgado, A. Dobado, F.J. Llanes-Estrada, Unitarity, analyt-
icity, dispersion relations, and resonances in strongly interacting
W
L WL , Z L Z L , and hh scattering. Phys. Rev. D91, 075017 (2015).
arXiv:1502.04841
52. C. Zhang, S.-Y . Zhou, Positivity bounds on vector boson scattering
at the LHC. Phys. Rev. D 100, 095003 (2019). arXiv:1808.00010
53. H. Abramowicz et al., Higgs physics at the CLIC electron–positron
linear collider. Eur. Phys. J. C 77, 475 (2017). arXiv:1608.07538
54. R. Brun, F. Rademakers, ROOT: an object oriented data analysis
framework. Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 389, 81–86 (1997)
55. CLICdp Collaboration, D. Arominski et. al., A detector for CLIC:
main parameters and performance. arXiv:1812.07337
123
