--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82:1084
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-022-11000-w
Regular Article - Experimental Physics
Performance of a convolutional autoencoder designed to remove
electronic noise from p-type point contact germanium detector
signals
Mark R. Anderson1,a , Vasundhara Basu1 , Ryan D. Martin 1 , Charlotte Z. Reed 1 , Noah J. Rowe1 ,
Mehdi Shaﬁee1,2,3 , Tianai Y e1
1 Department of Physics, Engineering Physics and Astronomy, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada
2 Present Address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
3 Present Address: Energetic Cosmos Laboratory, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
Received: 14 April 2022 / Accepted: 4 November 2022 / Published online: 1 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract We present a convolutional autoencoder to de-
noise pulses from a p-type point contact high-purity ger-
manium detector similar to those used in several rare event
searches. While we focus on training procedures that rely on
detailed detector physics simulations, we also present imple-
mentations requiring only noisy detector pulses to train the
model. We validate our autoencoder on both simulated data
and calibration data from an
241Am source, the latter of which
is used to show that the denoised pulses are statistically com-
patible with data pulses. We demonstrate that our denoising
method is able to preserve the underlying shapes of the pulses
well, offering improvement over traditional denoising meth-
ods. We also show that the shaping time used to calculate
energy with a trapezoidal ﬁlter can be signiﬁcantly reduced
while maintaining a comparable energy resolution. Under
certain circumstances, our denoising method can improve
the overall energy resolution. The methods we developed to
remove electronic noise are straightforward to extend to other
detector technologies. Furthermore, the latent representation
from the encoder is also of use in quantifying shape-based
characteristics of the signals. Our work has great potential to
be used in particle physics experiments and beyond.
1 Introduction
High-purity germanium (HPGe) detectors are used in the
search for rare events such as neutrinoless double-beta decay
(0νββ)[ 1–3], dark matter [ 4,5], and other beyond Stan-
dard Model physics [ 6–8]. HPGe detectors are a common
choice due to their intrinsic purity, good energy resolutions,
a e-mail: anderson.mark@queensu.ca (corresponding author)
and ability to be fabricated from material enriched in the
0νββcandidate isotope 76Ge. Some of the strongest limits
on the 0νββhalf-life have been set using HPGe detectors and
are in the range of 1025 yr − 1026 yr [1,2].
Due to the infrequent occurrence of signal events, extraor-
dinary measures are taken to reduce backgrounds associated
with particles that can deposit energy in the detectors, includ-
ing locating the experiments in ultra-clean laboratories deep
underground [ 9]. Further analytical background reduction
and discrimination techniques are still required as experi-
ments probe larger regions of the parameter space associated
with the processes that they are trying to detect.
An efﬁcient denoising algorithm can help advance searches
for rare event interactions. Noise reduction techniques can
allow one to identify low-energy signal events that would oth-
erwise be dominated by electronic noise. This is of direct rel-
evance to experiments using germanium detectors to search
for rare events at low energies, such as solar axions, violation
of the Pauli Exclusion Principle, and electron decay [10]. A
reduction in noise would also allow for better background
rejection techniques that are based on pulse shapes, such as
the rejection of slow energy-degraded pulses in germanium
detectors searching for signals at low energies [11,12].
Denoising could also provide more accurate measure-
ments of pulse amplitudes, leading to a better energy res-
olution. Many pulse height estimation algorithms [ 13,14]
use effective averaging windows with a given shaping time.
While an overall reduction in the energy resolution is difﬁ-
cult to achieve compared to these highly efﬁcient algorithms,
denoising the pulses beforehand can reduce the shaping time
required to obtain a comparable energy resolution. This can
allow for shorter traces to be collected (more efﬁcient data
123


--- Page 2 ---
1084 Page 2 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
storage), a smaller sampling period to be used (more detailed
pulses), and/or a higher data collection rate (lower energy
thresholds).
In this paper, we demonstrate the effectiveness of deep
learning to strongly reduce electronic noise in the charge
pulses from a p-type point contact (PPC) HPGe detector. We
conduct several studies on both real and simulated data to ver-
ify the performance of our deep learning-based model and
compare it to traditional noise reduction techniques. We also
show that an effective noise reduction model can be trained
using only noisy detector data . Since this method does not
require underlying clean pulses for training, our approach
can be implemented without detailed modelling and simula-
tions of the detector. Furthermore, our results are not limited
to PPC HPGe detectors; this efﬁcient and ﬂexible denoiser
which requires only detector data is widely applicable to the
particle astrophysics community and beyond.
Section 2 provides an overview of both traditional denois-
ing methods and autoencoders. In Sect. 3, we describe the
design of our neural network architecture. In Sect.4, we out-
line the experimental setup and datasets used for training
and evaluation, while in Sect. 5 we describe our methodol-
ogy. The results are presented in Sect.6, ﬁrst on simulations
to demonstrate both pulse shape preservation and improve-
ments over traditional methods, and then on real detector data
to further validate pulse shape preservation and to show the
impact of denoising on the energy resolution. We conclude
our results and emphasize the potential of our work for other
experiments in Sect. 7.
2 Autoencoders for denoising
2.1 Traditional denoising methods
We brieﬂy discuss non deep learning-based approaches to
denoise signals before introducing autoencoders. We focus
on a subset of techniques that were evaluated for compar-
ison with the autoencoder in Sect. 6.1.2. The ﬁrst one is a
moving average ﬁlter over w samples. The selection of w
requires a trade-off between the level of noise reduction and
the preservation of details such as edge sharpness in the pulse
shape. An extension to the moving average is the exponen-
tial ﬁlter [15], where the smoothed output of a given sample
is the weighted sum of the current sample and the previous
prediction. The algorithm is recursive and is deﬁned by the
smoothing constant α ∈ (0, 1).
We also consider the more advanced Savitzky–Golay ﬁl-
ter [16], which removes noise by ﬁtting a degree- p polyno-
mial to w adjacent samples centred about a given point of
the signal and evaluating the ﬁtted polynomial at this point.
The Savitzky–Golay ﬁlter can be implemented as a weighted
Table 1 Wavelet functions used for denoising in this work, including
the mother wavelet and order (where applicable)
Mother wavelet Order
Haar N/A
Daubechies 2–38
Coiﬂet 1–17
Symlet 2–19
Biorthogonal 1.1, 1.3, 1.5, 2.2, 2.6, 2.8, 3.1, 3.3, 3.5,
3.7, 3.9, 4.4, 5.9, 6.8
Reverse Biorthogonal 1.1, 1.3, 1.5, 2.2, 2.6, 2.8, 3.1, 3.3, 3.5,
3.7, 3.9, 4.4, 5.9, 6.8
Meyer N/A (ﬁnite impulse response
approximation)
moving average with coefﬁcients that depend on w and p
[16].
Another method we investigated applies thresholding
rules to the wavelet decomposition of the noisy signal [ 17].
Wavelet-based denoising requires a choice of mother wavelet
and order as well as thresholds for the wavelet coefﬁcients
[18]. Table 1 lists the set of mother wavelets that were
explored. Additionally, we tested two methods of threshold-
ing: VisuShrink [ 19], which applies a global threshold to
the wavelet coefﬁcients, and BayesShrink [20], which deter-
mines thresholds at each subband of the wavelet by minimiz-
ing Bayesian squared error risk. For each method, we consid-
ered hard thresholding (keeping the coefﬁcient if greater than
the threshold) and soft thresholding (shrinking the coefﬁcient
toward zero by the threshold).
The last technique examined in this work is the Kalman
ﬁlter [21], which relies on knowledge of an underlying model
of the data. Kalman ﬁltering provides an estimate of the true
value based on a model of the event itself and the measured
samples. By knowing the accuracy of the event modeling
technique as well as the measurement error, an interpolation
can be made between the two.
2.2 Autoencoders
An autoencoder is an unsupervised machine learning algo-
rithm used to encode data by learning from the data. The
idea of the autoencoder was introduced in 1986 to learn
an efﬁcient coding for orthogonal inputs [ 22]. The concept
was further explored in the mid to late 1980s; for exam-
ple, coupled hierarchical autoencoders were demonstrated
to converge much faster on encoding a representation than a
typical multi-hidden layer feedforward network at the time
[23]. Today, autoencoders are widely used for dimensionality
reduction, anomaly detection [24], and generative modelling
[25]. Autoencoders are also still frequently used for obtaining
useful features or representations for other tasks. In [26], for
123


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 3 of 16 1084
instance, an autoencoder was trained to learn a compressed
representation of pulses from germanium detectors, and the
encoded input was then used to train another network for
pulse shape discrimination.
An autoencoder has two main components: the encoder
is a function, f , that produces a latent representation of the
input, while the decoder is another function, g, which takes
the latent representation and generates a reconstruction of
the original input. Using x as the input, y as the internal rep-
resentation, and z as the reconstructed output, the encoder
transforms x to y by f
θ(x) = y and the decoder transforms
y to z by gθ′(y) = z. The optimal parameters θ and θ′ are
selected by minimizing the reconstruction errorL between x
and z. Typically, the encoder and decoder are connected and
trained as one model. In almost all references to autoencoders
in the literature, both f
θ and gθ′ are neural networks, and fur-
ther discussion herein will assume this. For a comprehensive
review of neural networks and deep learning, including the
core concepts of advanced architectures such as convolu-
tional networks, see [27] and [28].
2.3 Denoising autoencoders
Standard autoencoders can remove some of the input noise
if the latent representation is highly compressed, as the net-
work will be forced to extract only the most useful features.
For example, in [ 26], it was observed that the autoencoder
removed some of the noise from the inputs, despite not being
trained to do so. Denoising autoencoders take this a step fur-
ther and make the objective to remove noise explicit. With
denoising autoencoders, the input is instead an artiﬁcially
corrupted version of the clean signal, which we denote by
˜x. The encoder is thus a mapping f
θ(˜x) of the noisy sig-
nal to the latent representation, and the decoder a mapping
gθ′( fθ(˜x)) of the latent representation to a reconstruction of
the clean signal. As the output is the same, the reconstruction
error between x and z, L(x, z), is still minimized to train the
network. The basic concept of the denoising autoencoder is
illustrated in Fig. 1.
Denoising autoencoders were originally proposed to
extract robust features from the inputs [29,30]. The primary
goal was not to remove noise. Rather, denoising was used
as a criterion to produce encoded representations which per-
formed better on a variety of classiﬁcation tasks.
Autoencoders speciﬁcally for denoising purposes have
been successful in a variety of domains, although much of
the existing research focuses on denoising images rather than
one-dimensional signals. In [31], convolutional networks are
used to denoise images with both known and unknown Gaus-
sian noise levels, achieving comparable or superior perfor-
mance to state-of-the-art methods at the time. In [32], autoen-
coders are used for both denoising and removal of superim-
Fig. 1 Basic concept of denoising autoencoders. An input x is artiﬁ-
cially corrupted by some noise process qD to become ˜x. The encoding
portion of the autoencoder, fθ, produces a new representation y.T h e
decoder portion of the network, gθ′ , attempts to reconstruct the clean
input. Its estimate is given by z, and a loss function, L(x, z), quantiﬁes
the reconstruction. Notation is largely based off of ﬁgure from [29]
posed text on images, although a separate network is trained
for each noise level.
More recent works take advantage of modern advances
in deep learning to train convolutional networks to remove
Gaussian noise, as well as other tasks [ 33]. Convolu-
tional networks with noise estimation subnetworks have also
been applied to more complex noise models [ 34]. Further-
more, denoising convolutional autoencoders have now been
demonstrated to perform well on several practical applica-
tions in various ﬁelds, such as denoising medical images [35],
“repairing” images of corrupted printed circuit boards [ 36],
and speech enhancement [37].
2.4 Noise2Noise
The Noise2Noise procedure is an approach used to train a
denoising model without the need for clean target examples
[38], which, in our case, require detailed physics simulations.
Although we outline the method here, we refer the reader to
the original paper for details. The central idea is that the
mean of the target distribution minimizes the sum of squared
errors, or L
2 loss, between the target and the prediction. In
the simple case of point estimation, the L2 loss for a set of
measurements {xi} and prediction z is given by
L2 =
∑
i
∥z − xi∥2
2. (1)
The best estimate z that minimizes the L2 loss is simply
the mean, z = ∑
i xi . One can observe thatz is unchanged as
long as the mean of the measurements is unchanged. Given
inﬁnite data, the addition of zero-mean noise would pro-
duce the same estimate z. The same logic can be applied
to the denoising task of minimizing the L
2 loss between
the clean signals, xi , and the output of the autoencoder,
123


--- Page 4 ---
1084 Page 4 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
zi = gθ′( fθ( ˜xi)):
L2 =
∑
i
∥gθ′( fθ( ˜xi)) − xi∥2
2. (2)
If instead the target xi is replaced with corrupted versions
of itself, ˆxi , with samples drawn from a distribution or dis-
tributions with a mean of xi , then, the optimal estimate zi
remains unchanged. Put another way, the corruption of xi
with zero-mean noise will produce the same estimate, given
enough data. The loss function becomes
L2 =
∑
i
∥gθ′( fθ( ˜xi)) −ˆxi∥2
2, (3)
where ˆxi is a different noisy realization of the same under-
lying signal. By minimizing Eq. (3), the autoencoder should
learn to predict the mean of the distribution of noisy pulses.
Intuitively, the task of mapping one version of a noisy pulse to
another is impossible if the model is not over-parameterized,
and the best it can do is predict the mean. With ﬁnite data,
the above results are only approximately true. However, we
show in this paper that the Noise2Noise approach, with some
additions, can produce excellent results in practice.
3 Model
3.1 Inputs and outputs
Signals are collected from a PPC HPGe detector described in
Sect. 4.1. Each signal is a pulse that consists of M voltages
sampled at 8 ns intervals. M can technically be any number,
but is typically either 4096 or 8192 samples in our work.
Thus, the inputs and outputs of the models areM-long vectors
of voltage samples.
All data pulses are preprocessed to have unit amplitude
using a trapezoidal ﬁlter [ 13], as described in Sect. 5.2.A n
example of three preprocessed detector pulses with different
rise times – indicating different event positions in the detector
– and different signal-to-noise ratios is shown in Fig. 2.T h e
full length pulses are plotted and the rise region between
approximately 16 µs and 17 µs is highlighted in the inset.
3.2 Network architecture
3.2.1 Motivation
Our architecture is fully convolutional and thus beneﬁts from
superior computational and memory efﬁciency over fully
connected networks [28]. As well, the convolutional nature of
our model allows for a variable length input pulse, regardless
of the size of the pulses it was trained on.
The parameter sharing aspect of convolutional networks
is particularly important to our work as it forces the network
Fig. 2 Three example pulses from a germanium detector, each with a
substantially different rise time. All pulses are preprocessed such that
they have a baseline of zero and an amplitude of one. The black pulse
has apparently less noise because it was originally a higher amplitude
pulse, so that the electronic noise is smaller relative to its amplitude
to learn to remove noise in a consistent manner across the
entire pulse, emphasizing feature locality. It also ensures that
the network is equivariant to shifts on the time axis and thus
independent of the relative position of the pulse in the trigger
window. Finally, weight sharing greatly reduces the number
of parameters to train, effectively acting as a regularizer to
prevent overﬁtting.
3.2.2 Design
For a general one-dimensional convolution, the size of the
output O is given by
O = W − K + 2P
S + 1, (4)
where W is the input size, K is the ﬁlter or window size, S
is the stride length, and P is the padding. For a stride length
or window size greater than one, the size of the output of
the convolution may be different from the input, which has
consequences on the selection of layer parameters. While
the output size can be forced by padding the input, it is not
apparent how to pad the pulses. Prepending or appending a
constant value does not account for misalignment due to the
imperfect normalization. Padding also ignores the noise.
An alternative approach is to use transposed convolution
layers in the decoder to “undo” the size changes caused by
non-padded convolutions. The transposed convolution oper-
ation uses the transpose of the convolution matrix – a sparse
matrix containing elements of the ﬁlter for computing the
convolution using matrix multiplication – to switch the for-
ward pass with the backward pass [39]. This effectively acts
as a form of upsampling.
The architecture of our autoencoder is described in Table
2, with each layer consisting of its stride, window, and output
size. The ﬁrst element of the output is the temporal length
after the operation is applied, while the second element is the
number of ﬁlters. The batch size is not included in the output
123


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 5 of 16 1084
Table 2 Summary of the convolutional autoencoder architecture used
in this paper for a ﬁxed pulse size of 4096. Included in this table is the
type, strides length S, window size K , and output shapeO of each layer
Layer Stride Window Output
Input 4096, 1
Convolution 1 1 4096, 8
Convolution 1 9 4088, 16
Average pooling 2 2 2044, 16
Convolution 1 17 2028, 32
Average pooling 2 2 1014, 32
Convolution 1 33 982, 64
Average pooling 2 2 491, 64
Convolution 1 33 459, 32
Trans. convolution 1 33 491, 32
Upsampling 2 2 982, 64
Trans. convolution 1 33 1014, 64
Upsampling 2 2 2028, 64
Trans. convolution 1 17 2044, 32
Upsampling 2 2 4088, 32
Trans. convolution 1 9 4096, 16
Convolution (output) 1 1 4096, 1
Total number of parameters: 286,145
shape. For illustration, the table uses a ﬁxed input length of
4096 samples. A different input shape will only change the
temporal dimension of the output shape as the number of
ﬁlters does not depend on the input.
The network begins with an eight-ﬁlter convolution oper-
ation with a stride length and window size of one. This does
not change the temporal dimension of the input, but rather
acts as a sort of “preprocessing” layer that increases the over-
all dimensionality of the signal. The decoder also ends with a
convolution layer where the stride length, window size, and
number of ﬁlters are set to unity to recover the original shape
of the pulse.
Both the encoder and decoder have three blocks of layers.
A “block” consists of a convolution followed by a two-fold
average pooling operation or a two-fold upsampling oper-
ation followed by a transpose convolution for the encoder
and decoder respectively. The encoder compresses the orig-
inal input by a factor of approximately eight, due to both the
downsampling operation and Eq. (4). Every convolution and
transpose convolution layer except for the last is followed
by a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation function [40]. No
activation is applied to the ﬁnal convolution layer as pulses
can have values outside of the range (0, 1) or ( −1, 1), and
bounding the output was found not to be necessary.
The window sizes are chosen toincrease for each layer in
the encoder and decrease for each layer in the decoder. The
window sizes were all chosen to be smaller or approximately
the same size as a typical rise time. However, they are also
subject to some restrictions. This can be seen from Eq. ( 4),
which simpliﬁes to
O = W − K + 1( 5 )
for a stride length of one and no padding. IfW is even (odd),
K must be odd (even) in order for O to always be even. O
must be even to ensure that the size of the input to the subse-
quent downsampling layer is divisible by two. The window
size in each convolution layer, K , is selected such that this
condition is true for each layer in the network starting with an
input of 4096 samples. Conversely, pulses of variable length
are subject to this requirement for the chosen window sizes.
4 Experimental setup, data, and simulations
4.1 Detector
Detector pulses were collected from a 1 kg PPC HPGe detec-
tor manufactured by ORTEC/AMTEK [41]. The detector is
a cylinder with a radius of approximately 3 cm and 5 cm in
height. The detector was operated in a PopTop cryostat, and
preampliﬁer signals were recorded using a 16-bit 125 MHz
SIS3316 digitizer fabricated by Struck Innovative Systems
[42]. The detector depletion voltage is 2750 V and was oper-
ated at a bias of 3700 V, as recommended by the manufac-
turer. Data were stored and preprocessed with a custom C++
analysis suite that is based on CERN’s ROOT software [43].
4.2 Real data
4.2.1 241-Americium source
Data were collected from a 10 μCi
241Am encapsulated
source, which produces 60 keV gamma rays. At this energy,
electronic noise is a signiﬁcant component of the pulse. By
using a low energy collimated gamma source, the location of
the collimator can be used to infer the location of energy
depositions since Compton scattering is unlikely and the
gamma rays do not typically penetrate more than 1 mm in
the detector. Furthermore, the interactions of these gamma
rays in the detector are almost entirely single-site. Each trace
is 8192 samples in length. Data were collected in December
2021.
4.2.2 60-Cobalt source
Data were also collected from a
60Co source that produces
gamma rays with energies of 1173 keV and 1332 keV. In
practice, data were collected over energies ranging from
approximately 500 keV to 3 MeV, including events from
123


--- Page 6 ---
1084 Page 6 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
room backgrounds and the 60Co source. These data include
many multi-site events from gamma rays Compton scattering
in the detector. Each trace is 4096 samples in length. Data
were collected in June 2020 and October 2020.
4.2.3 Noise
A large number of noise traces were collected from the detec-
tor in order to train the models with realistic electronic noise.
These were obtained by randomly triggering the SIS3316
digitizer to read out signals from the PPC detector. Noise
data were collected at three different times over a period of
two and a half years: July 2019, January 2021, and Decem-
ber 2021. At each time point, the detector was under different
operating conditions, resulting in a diverse noise set. Traces
collected in December 2021 are 8192 samples in length,
while the remaining sets are 4096 samples in length.
Signals in the noise data were ﬁltered to remove any events
that occasionally occur in the same trigger window. This was
done by rejecting outliers based on the baseline and root
mean square (RMS) of the baseline, calculated over the ﬁrst
1000 samples of each trace. Similarly, pulses with outliers
in the minimal or maximal values from a trapezoidal ﬁlter
with a gap window of 1.8 µs and a rise window of 6µsw e r e
removed from this dataset.
4.3 Simulated data
4.3.1 Library pulses
A detailed physics-based simulation was used to create a set
of 1724 “library” pulses on a 1 mm×1 mm grid in radius and
height to represent pulses uniformly in the azimuthally sym-
metric PPC detector [44]. This position-dependent basis set
was created using the siggen simulation software which
models the propagation of charges in germanium detectors
[45]. The library pulses can be used to infer realistic clean sig-
nals underlying actual events in the detector using aχ
2 min-
imization between a normalized data pulse and every library
pulse in the basis set [44],
χ2 =
M∑
j
(
zk, j − xi, j
)2
σ2
i
, (6)
where xi, j is the jth sample of the ith data pulse, zk, j is the
jth sample of the kth library pulse in the basis set, and the
quantity is evaluated overM samples. σi represents the noise
level in the data pulse, which we take as the RMS of the noise
in the pre-trigger baseline.
Multiple sets of library pulses were generated with differ-
ent preampliﬁer time constants to further expand this dataset.
For a given position, this affects the rise time and the curva-
ture of the pulse. Using preampliﬁer time constants of 0–80 ns
Fig. 3 An example of a simulated PLS pulse (solid line) and library
pulse (dotted line), each with a rise time of 280 ns
in increments of 10 ns, the library pulse dataset was expanded
to 15,516 unique traces.
4.3.2 Piecewise linear smoothed pulses
A set of pulses that look similar to the library pulses was
generated by using piecewise mathematical functions. These
pulses mimic the shape of the library pulses without requiring
any complex physics simulation, and do not depend on the
details of a speciﬁc detector. Each pulse was composed of two
linear pieces connected at a varying ﬁxed point to mimic the
slow and fast portions of the rise. All pulses have an amplitude
of unity and a rise time between 25 samples and 125 samples.
The pulses were smoothed using a moving average with a
window size of 5% of the rise time. A total of 20,070 unique
traces were created using this procedure. We refer to these
signals as piecewise linear smoothed (PLS) pulses.
Figure 3 shows an example library pulse and PLS pulse,
each with a short rise time of 280 ns. The PLS pulses tend to
be noticeably sharper than the library pulses and only roughly
approximate their general shape.
5 Methodology
5.1 Datasets
The library and PLS simulated pulses described in Sect. 4.3
were used as distinct datasets to train and evaluate the per-
formance of the model. Pulses in these sets were padded to
have 4096 samples, which was found to be sufﬁcient for the
network to denoise the ﬂat regions of the pulses well without
distorting the important components of the pulses.
Data from the
241Am source were used to validate the
denoising algorithm by comparing denoised pulses to their
known shapes from simulations. Since data from the
60Co
source include a variety of high-energy, multi-site events,
they provided an ideal set of diverse pulses for training the
autoencoder with the Noise2Noise method.
123


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 7 of 16 1084
5.2 Data preprocessing
The baseline, deﬁned as the mean over the ﬁrst 1000 sam-
ples of a pulse, was calculated and subtracted from each
signal. The pulse amplitudes were calculated by applying a
trapezoidal ﬁlter to each trace [13], and the baseline-removed
pulses were then scaled by their amplitudes. Additionally, a
pole-zero correction was applied to each pulse to remove the
main component of the exponential decay from the resistive
feedback preampliﬁer that was used to read out the detector.
We refer to this entire preprocessing procedure as “amplitude
normalization”, noting that it includes the pole zero correc-
tion for data pulses (the simulated pulses do not have an
exponential decay). Because of the noise, the amplitude nor-
malized pulses roughly, but not exactly, range in height from
zero to one.
We also explored standardizing each pulse to have a mean
of zero and standard deviation of 0.5 after the pole-zero cor-
rection. A value of 0.5 was used to ensure that horizontally
centred pulses have an amplitude of roughly one. We refer
to this method of preprocessing as “standardization”, not-
ing again that it includes the pole zero correction for data
pulses. However, models trained with standardized pulses
were found to perform similarly or even slightly worse in
most circumstances. Additionally, these models were found
to depend heavily on the absolute position in the pulse where
the rise region begins. Due to the lack of robustness to hori-
zontal shifts, all models described in the results section can
be assumed to have been trained with amplitude normalized
pulses unless mentioned otherwise.
5.3 Data augmentation
5.3.1 Multi-site event generation
The set of library pulses form a basis of position-dependent
signals in the detector and thus contain only single-site
events. Similarly, the PLS pulses are simple mathematical
functions constrained by two points and are analogous to
single-site events in shape. To augment the training data,
artiﬁcial multi-site events are created by adding randomized
combinations of simulated pulses together, without mixing
between the library and PLS sets.
Events are generated with up to ﬁve sites. This upper
bound is chosen because for a Poisson process with an
expected rate of two, the probability of a number greater
than ﬁve is less than 2%. Furthermore, an equal number of
events are generated for each number of sites, rather than
being based on a physical distribution for the number of
Compton scatters. The number of multi-site events is thus
four times larger than the number of single-site events. We
found this to be optimal for ensuring that the network does
not smooth over multi-site events while also preserving the
shape of single-site events.
In order to generate an n-site event, n pulses are drawn
from a set of simulated pulses. A random amplitude is drawn
from a uniform distribution,∼ U(0, 1), for each pulse. Each
pulse is also horizontally shifted by a value drawn from a
discrete uniform distribution, ∼ U(0, 100), to account for
the possible drift times from different points in the detector.
The scaled and shifted pulses are then added together to create
an artiﬁcial multi-site event, and the result is rescaled to have
an amplitude of one.
5.3.2 Shifting and scaling
The process of amplitude normalization on detector signals
is imperfect due to noise. Simulated pulses, in contrast, are
noiseless and have perfect normalization. Preliminary results
showed that the network would overﬁt the beginning and
the end of the predicted pulses if the clean pulses started at
exactly zero and ended at exactly one. To combat this issue,
random shifting and scaling is applied to all simulated pulses
during training. This ensures that the network sees a variety
of imperfect normalizations and is able to better generalize
to real detector data while avoiding overﬁtting. This type of
artiﬁcial data augmentation can also help improve the overall
performance of the network by effectively providing more
data than is available. In order of application, the shifting
and scaling procedure consists of:
1. Amplitude scaling : Each pulse is rescaled to have
an amplitude drawn from the uniform distribution ∼
U(0.9, 1.1).
2. V ertical shifts: A random vertical shift, drawn from a
uniform distribution ∼ U(−0.
1, 0.1), is applied to each
pulse.
3. Horizontal shifts: For each pulse of length 4096 samples,
a number is drawn from a discrete uniform distribution
∼ U(1000, 3000), and the pulse is shifted such that the
rise begins at this randomly chosen sample.
While vertical scaling and shifting of ±10% of the pulse
amplitude is proportionally much larger than observed with
typical data pulses, we use such a wide range of random vari-
ations to further improve generalization of the autoencoder,
particularly to high noise pulses and outliers such as pile-up
events. As well, horizontal shifts only have a major effect
near the edges of an event due to the receptive ﬁeld of the
convolution layers. Thus, the unrealistic range of values used
in this procedure is primarily for data augmentation purposes.
We also veriﬁed that shifting and scaling parameters can be
selected differently to favour performance on outliers.
123


--- Page 8 ---
1084 Page 8 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
5.3.3 Noise addition
Noise collected from the detector is added to the clean pulses
after the previous data augmentation steps are applied. The
detector noise dataset is sufﬁciently large such that each clean
pulse has a unique, randomly chosen noise trace. Thus, noise
seen in training is not seen in the validation and test phases,
and noise pulses are not shared between datasets. All detector
noise pulses are standardized to have a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of σ.
In order to understand the effect of real detector noise,
zero-mean normally distributed noise with no covariance
over time,∼ N(0,σ) , is also used, separately, to create inde-
pendent datasets for comparison. For both noise types, σ is
drawn randomly for each trace from a uniform distribution,
∼ U(0, 0.2), to simulate the effect of varying the signal-to-
noise ratio.
5.4 Training procedures
Two training procedures are explored in this paper: a regular
training procedure which requires a noisy input and clean
output, and a procedure which does not require the clean
version of the noisy pulse. The latter procedure uses and
extends the Noise2Noise approach developed in [ 38] and
summarized in Sect. 2.4.
The networks are implemented using the Keras API from
TensorFlow [46,47]. Training, validation, and testing were
done using NVIDIA GeForce GTX Titan X and GeForce
RTX 3090 GPUs.
5.4.1 Regular training
The regular training procedure consists of applying the aug-
mentation recipe above to a set of simulated data d times,
resulting in N = d × 5N
0 pulses from an initial set of N0
clean, single-site pulses. This is done separately with library
and PLS pulses to understand whether detailed physics sim-
ulations are required for training the algorithm. The augmen-
tation procedure is also applied twice per simulated set using
Gaussian noise and real noise from the detector, for a total
of four distinct datasets. We setd = 45 for the library pulses
and d = 35 for the PLS pulses to ensure that the sizes of
each training set are comparable. A copy of the pulses after
the shifts and scales, but before the noise addition, is created
and used for the clean targets.
The network is then trained to map the noisy pulses to the
corresponding clean pulses. We use the Adam algorithm –
a stochastic gradient-based adaptive optimization procedure
[48] – with a learning rate of 3 · 10
−4 to minimize the mean
squared error between the true clean pulse and the denoised
pulse. We use a batch size of 128, which is large enough to
ensure that the network trains reasonably quickly while not
being so large as to affect the convergence of the network.
Training is conducted over 100 epochs.
For each of the augmented simulated datasets, 10% of the
data are withheld for testing. Of the remaining 90%, 10% of
that are withheld for validation and the remainder are used
for training. At every epoch of training, the network is run on
the validation set and the model at the epoch with the lowest
loss is saved. The validation set is also used to select the best
hyperparameters, including the batch size, learning rate, and
architecture details. The best model – as determined by the
validation set – is then run on the reserved test set. All results
shown in this paper are calculated only on the test set.
5.4.2 Noise2Noise training
Unlike the regular training procedure, the Noise2Noise
approach can be applied to both simulated and raw detector
data. The procedure follows the regular training procedure
with the amendment of adding noise to the target pulse as
well. For real detector data, where no clean underlying pulse
exists, we add noise to the already noisy signals. Of course,
the optimal solution to the minimization problem is then the
underlying noisy pulse rather than the true clean pulse. To
alleviate this issue, we add a simple penalty on the total vari-
ation of the denoised signal to the loss function L,
L = L
0 + λ
N
N∑
i
M−1∑
j
|zi, j+1 − zi, j|, (7)
where L0 is the original loss function (which in our case is
the L2 loss), zi, j is the jth sample of the ith denoised out-
put pulse, M is the number of samples in the pulse, N is the
size of the training set, and λ is a scaling factor. Minimiza-
tion of the total variation, with some criterion of similarity
to the original signal, was introduced as a method to denoise
signals in 1992 [ 49]. Total variation is particularly useful
in retaining the important components of a signal, includ-
ing sharp edges and discontinuities, while avoiding the over-
compensated smoothing present in many traditional denois-
ing techniques [50]. Since the true pulses are monotonically
increasing functions, the regularizer in Eq. ( 7) will evalu-
ate to the amplitude in the case of perfect denoising. If the
denoised pulse still contains components of the noise and is
very jagged, the penalty will become large.
The augmentation procedure for the simulated datasets is
the same, except that a different noise pulse is also added to
the target pulse. In the augmentation procedure for detec-
tor data, the artiﬁcial multi-site event generation step is
skipped as the
60Co dataset used in training already con-
tains multi-site events. As well, pulses are not horizontally
shifted because the network is already equivariant to such
shifts and because it is difﬁcult to handle the bounds. How-
ever, the remainder of the procedure is still applied because
123


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 9 of 16 1084
the 60Co dataset consists of primarily high energy events,
meaning that the shifts, scales, and noise are unrepresen-
tative of lower energy pulses and outliers. For the noise
addition, σ is instead drawn from the uniform distribution
∼ U(0.025, 0.25). These numbers are chosen so that at least
some noise is added to the data pulses, and to minimize cor-
related noise between the inputs and the targets.
The network is then trained to map one version of a noisy
pulse to another. We again use the Adam algorithm to min-
imize the loss in Eq. ( 7). We use the validation set of the
augmented library pulses with detector noise to select the
best model as the data pulses do not have a target pulse. We
speciﬁcally choose the model which minimizes the mean
squared error, not the total loss, as the total variation penalty
tends to dominate the validation loss. A batch size of 128 is
still used, although we set the learning rate to 10
−5 as the
learning rate in the regular training procedure was found to
be too large.
6 Results
6.1 Evaluation on simulated data
6.1.1 Comparison between data augmentation and training
procedures
We evaluate the performance of the denoising convolutional
autoencoder trained with several different datasets for the
two training procedures. For each model, we test its general-
ization on the four available simulated datasets. The results
are shown in Table 3. The ﬁrst three columns are related to
the training method and show the procedure, the dataset, and
the type of additional noise used in training, respectively.
The remaining columns show the mean squared error eval-
uated by denoising the simulated test datasets, containing
either Gaussian or real detector noise on single- and multi-site
events generated using either the library or the PLS pulses,
for which the clean target is known. All pulses in the test sets
were amplitude normalized and horizontally centred before
denoising and comparison.
Each model trained on simulated data tends to perform
best on the same class of pulses that it was trained on. Mod-
els trained with Gaussian noise tend to generalize slightly
worse to detector noise than the other way around. As well,
models trained using library and PLS simulated pulses have
similar performance. However, models trained using library
pulses tend to generalize better to PLS pulses than the other
way around. This is evidenced by the difference between the
performance on the test set of library and PLS pulses for a
given noise type; the gap is larger for the model trained on
PLS pulses.
The Noise2Noise models trained on simulated pulses per-
form nearly identically on the test set as the correspond-
ing regular models in most cases. Differences in the mean
squared error are typically on the order of 10
−7 − 10−6,
which is expected due to statistical ﬂuctuations in training.
No total variation penalty was used as it was not found to
improve the performance in the case of simulations. On sim-
ulated pulses with detector noise, neither Noise2Noise model
trained on pulses from the
60Co source outperforms any of
the models trained with simulated data, regardless of the pro-
cedure. However, the Noise2Noise model is still effective at
denoising and requires only noisy detector data. A larger set
of detector data, including from other high-energy sources
which produce multi-site events, could improve the perfor-
mance of this model.
Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of the
Noise2Noise model with and without a total variation penalty
and note that unlike the models trained on simulated data,
the total variation penalty has a non-negligible impact on the
denoising performance. We selected a penalty of λ = 10
−2
for Table 3 as it was found to have the best mean squared
error on the validation set, although using any penalty in
the range 10
−4 –1 0−1 produced similar results. The mean
squared error is approximately 30% lower by settingλin this
range.
Figure 4 shows an example library pulse multi-site event
that has been denoised by two different versions of the
autoencoder. The top panel shows the pulse denoised with
the regular library pulse model while the bottom panel shows
the denoised pulse using the Noise2Noise model trained with
60Co data with a total variation penalty.
Qualitatively, the regular library pulse model appears to
ﬁt the true underlying pulse the best, in line with the results
in Table 3. However, the differences are subtle, and the
Noise2Noise model appears to remove most of the noise
without much additional distortion, and can be suitable
for many physics applications that do not require highly
detailed shapes to be preserved. Furthermore, although not
shown here, visualization of the denoised pulses illustrates
the impact of including a total variation penalty for the
Noise2Noise method, as it removes much of the noise still
present in the pulse denoised without it.
We emphasize that while all methods perform well, only
the regular training procedure with library pulses required
careful simulations of the detector.
6.1.2 Comparison to traditional denoising methods
The denoising performance of the autoencoder was com-
pared to the traditional noise removal methods described in
Sect. 2.1. The mean squared error between the clean target
and denoised output was used as the metric and evaluated
on the simulated library pulse test set. The performance was
123


--- Page 10 ---
1084 Page 10 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
Table 3 Summary of the mean squared error on the test sets for different models. The procedure, dataset, and noise type used in the training are
given
Training procedure and data Mean squared error ( ×10−5)
Gaussian noise Detector noise
Procedure Data Noise Library PLS Library PLS
Regular Library Detector 4.12 4.72 3.76 4.21
Regular Library Gaussian 3.40 3.82 4.50 4.77
Regular PLS Detector 5.10 4.48 4.15 3.57
Regular PLS Gaussian 3.93 3.36 5.02 4.31
N2N (λ= 0) Library Detector 3.90 4.37 3.86 4.20
N2N (λ= 0) Library Gaussian 3.46 3.87 4.57 4.82
N2N (λ= 0) PLS Detector 5.11 4.48 4.14 3.55
N2N (λ= 0) PLS Gaussian 3.85 3.46 4.97 4.43
N2N (λ= 0) Detector Detector 6.54 6.30 7.78 7.40
N2N (λ= 10
−2) Detector Detector 4.17 4.54 5.04 5.26
Fig. 4 An example multi-site event from the library dataset. Included
in each plot is the simulated pulse with artiﬁcial noise (solid light line),
the clean underlying pulse (dotted line), and the corresponding denoised
pulse (solid dark line) from the regular library pulse model (top) and
Noise2Noise model (bottom)
evaluated over the entire pulse as well as over two distinct
sections of the pulse: the rise region and ﬂat region. The rise
region begins where the simulated pulse deviates from the
ﬂat baseline and ends where the pulse reaches its maximum
amplitude. The ﬂat region is deﬁned as the area outside of
the rise region. The example pulse in Fig.4 includes an illus-
tration of the region boundaries.
The mean squared error comparison between the tradi-
tional methods in Sect. 2.1 is shown in Fig. 5. The perfor-
mance of two autoencoder models trained with the regular
procedure (one using the library set and one using the PLS
set) and one model trained with the Noise2Noise procedure
(using the
60Co data) are included. Figure 5 contains two
variations of each traditional method: one using the opti-
mal parameter(s) for the rise region and one using the opti-
mal parameter(s) for the entire pulse, both optimized on the
validation set by minimizing the mean squared error. For
wavelet-based methods, we used VisuShrink to determine a
global threshold and soft thresholding to shrink the coefﬁ-
cients towards zero.
In addition to the four methods in Fig. 5, a Kalman ﬁlter
was implemented using the denoised output from the autoen-
coder as the underlying model and the baseline RMS of the
noisy pulse as the measurement error. The ﬁlter was opti-
mized by selecting the level of extrapolation between the
noisy data and the underlying model that resulted in the least
error. This process resulted in an optimized model with zero
extrapolation, representing a copy of the autoencoder model,
and so the Kalman ﬁlter was omitted from Fig. 5.
The autoencoder outperformed all traditional methods in
both the rise region and ﬂat region of the pulses. While the
method requires training to denoise a speciﬁc type of data, it
does offer improvements over traditional denoising, as eval-
uated using the mean squared error. The structural similar-
ity index measure (SSIM) [ 51] was also used to compare
the performance of the traditional denoising methods as it
is designed to quantify image degradation with reference to
human perception. However, the relative performance of each
method using SSIM is nearly identical to that using the mean
squared error, and so the corresponding SSIM comparison
ﬁgure is not shown.
123


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 11 of 16 1084
Fig. 5 Mean squared error comparison of different noise removal
methods inside and outside the rise region of the pulse (deﬁned in the
text and shown in Fig.4). The mean squared error inside the rise region
is indicated by the slanted line hatch while outside the rise region is indi-
cated by the dotted hatch. Solid ﬁll corresponds to the mean squared
error over the entire pulse
6.1.3 Energy resolution comparison
In this section, we use simulations to calculate the energy
resolution before and after denoising using the amplitude
normalized library pulse model. For a given pulse, the energy
is calculated from the amplitude of a trapezoidal ﬁlter with
a given gap and shaping time. The energy resolution is then
deﬁned as the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the
energy peak.
We use the set of library pulses and real detector noise, dis-
tinct from the training set, to create new sets of 172,400 noisy
single-site event pulses for evaluation. A dataset is created for
noise levels ranging from 0.02 to 0.2 in increments of 0.02.
The energy resolution as a function of the trapezoidal ﬁlter
shaping time on one such simulated dataset with a noise level
of 0.1 is shown in Fig. 6 with and without denoising. This
noise level is roughly the same as we observe with
241Am
gamma rays. For all datasets, the gap time in the trapezoidal
ﬁlter is ﬁxed at 1 .8 µs, which was found to be sufﬁciently
large for even the slowest rise times. Clean library pulses all
have an amplitude of unity before noise addition, and so the
“true energy” is one, meaning that the noise level and the
resolution in Fig. 6 can both be interpreted as a fraction of
the amplitude.
Figure 7 shows the relative improvement in the energy
resolution after denoising as a function of the noise level.
Each curve corresponds to a given shaping time, and each
Fig. 6 Energy resolution, deﬁned as the FWHM of the energy dis-
tribution, as a function of trapezoidal ﬁlter shaping time. Calculated
on library pulses with real detector noise with a baseline RMS of 0.1
before denoising (dotted line, circle markers) and after denoising with
the amplitude normalized model (solid line, triangle markers)Fig. 7 Relative improvement in the energy resolution from denoising
as a function of noise level on simulated pulses. Each curve corresponds
to a single trapezoidal ﬁlter shaping time
point on a given curve corresponds to a point from a plot
such as Fig. 6.
At every shaping time, the energy resolution on simulated
data is lower with denoising. This is particularly prominent
at shaping times less than 5 µs, where the improvement in
energy resolution exceeds 20% for all but the lowest noise
levels. At higher shaping times, the averaging window of the
trapezoidal ﬁlter is large enough to smooth out the noise,
and so the improvement is generally smaller. Overall, the
best improvement in energy resolution is obtained when the
pulses have a high level of noise and when the shaping time
used to calculate the energy is small. However, we observe
improvements in the energy resolution resolution at every
noise level and shaping time evaluated.
6.2 Evaluation on detector data
In this section, we evaluate the denoising performance using
data collected with the
241Am source, as it provides mono-
energetic pulses with a reasonable amount of noise to eval-
uate the autoencoder. We select events within±2 keV of the
60 keV peak associated with the source gamma rays, as seen
in Fig.8. The event energies are estimated using a trapezoidal
123


--- Page 12 ---
1084 Page 12 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
Fig. 8 Amplitude distribution (converted to energy) of the241Am data,
as calculated from the trapezoidal ﬁlter. Events in the dark region are
within ±2 keV of the peak and taken to be signal events from the
241Am
source, while events in the light region are taken to be backgrounds. Note
that the y-axis is logarithmic
ﬁlter. Pulses with outliers in the slopes on either the baseline
or end of the trace are removed from the dataset.
Furthermore, the 60 keV events from the source are essen-
tially all single site events for which the underlying true
shape is close to the ones simulated in the library dataset.
This allows us to infer a reasonable guess of the clean target
by selecting the library pulse that minimizes the χ
2 value
deﬁned in Eq. (6). Note that the basis set used here was gen-
erated with a preampliﬁer time constant of 20 ns as that was
found to best match our detector.
6.2.1 Qualitative evaluation
When evaluating the performance on real data, one does not
have a true clean signal with which to compare, as was the
case with simulated pulses. Instead, we conduct several stud-
ies to understand how the autoencoder affects the shape of
the denoised pulses. We start with a qualitative evaluation
on a data pulse. Figure 9 shows a single-site event from the
241Am source data that has been denoised by two versions of
our model. The top panel shows the pulse denoised with the
regular library pulse model while the bottom panel shows
the denoised pulse using the Noise2Noise model trained
with
60Co data with a total variation penalty. Each plot also
includes the library pulse with the lowest chi-squared value
as a best estimate of the true underlying pulse.
Qualitatively, we observe that the performance of all mod-
els on the single-site event are promising and tend to better
capture the shape of the pulse than the best ﬁt library pulse.
Furthermore, while not shown here, the denoising perfor-
mance of all models on the multi-site events present in the
set is also very good. As was observed with the results on
simulated data, the library pulse model tends to perform the
best. For the Noise2Noise models, the total variation penalty
is important as the model trained without it retains some of
the noise.
Fig. 9 An example single-site event from the241Am dataset. Included
in each plot is the noisy data pulse (solid light line), the best ﬁt library
pulse (dotted line), and the corresponding denoised pulse (solid dark
line) from the regular library pulse model (top) and Noise2Noise model
(bottom)
6.2.2 Chi-squared comparison
We compare the χ2 value between the data pulse and
denoised pulse for events in the 241Am dataset. Although
we do not know the true shape of the data pulses without
noise, we can use the χ2 distribution to determine if, sta-
tistically, the denoised pulses are consistent with their noisy
progenitors. It is important to use theχ
2 instead of the mean
or sum of squared errors to account for the signal-to-noise
ratio of the pulses.
Figure 10 shows the distribution of χ2 values between
the data pulses and corresponding denoised pulses using the
regular library noise removal model. It also includes the dis-
tribution of χ
2 values between the data pulses and corre-
sponding best matching library pulses as determined by the
χ2-minimization across all library pulses in the basis set.
The χ2 value for each pulse is computed from sample
3600–3800, meaning that the number of degrees of freedom
(NDF) is 200. This range is chosen because the pulses are
horizontally centred within this window and it is long enough
to capture the important components of the pulse for the
largest rise times. A modiﬁedχ
2 distribution for NDF= 200
expected from our detector noise is also overlayed on Fig.
10 for comparison. This distribution is calculated directly
on the detector noise, independent of any signal. Note that
since the detector noise is not Gaussian, the modiﬁed χ
2
distribution is shorter and wider than the trueχ2 probability
123


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 13 of 16 1084
Fig. 10 χ2 distribution computed between the data and both the
denoised pulse (slanted line hatch) and best ﬁt library pulse (dotted
hatch)
density function for NDF = 200 which assumes normally
distributed noise.
The results show that the denoised pulses ﬁt the data bet-
ter than the best matching library pulses, as indicated by the
lower mean and the better ﬁt of the distribution to theχ2 dis-
tribution expected from the detector noise. This could indi-
cate that there are not enough library pulses in the basis set, or
that some other parameter of the detector is being modelled
improperly. Additionally, while not shown here, the ﬁt is bet-
ter on all events, not just those in the energy range within the
60 keV peak, indicating that our model is properly denoising
multi-site events and low-energy events for which the pulse
ﬁtter fails to converge.
6.2.3 Energy resolution comparison
In this section, we compare the energy resolution of the
60 keV peak before and after denoising, similar to what was
done in Sect. 6.1.3 on simulated data. The results are shown
in Fig. 11, which illustrates the energy resolution on both the
original noisy and denoised pulses as a function of the trape-
zoidal ﬁlter shaping time. The gap time in the trapezoidal
ﬁlter is again ﬁxed at 1 .8 µs. The results for two denoising
models (both trained with the regular procedure and library
pulses) are included: one using amplitude normalized pulses
and the other using standardized pulses.
While denoising does not achieve a lower energy resolu-
tion overall, it does allow us to obtain a comparable energy
resolution with a lower shaping time. This is especially true
for the model trained with standardized pulses, where the
optimal energy resolution is achieved even at shaping times
under 2 µs. The discrepancy between the two denoised mod-
els at lower shaping times is surprising as the only difference
is the preprocessing of the pulses. However, all data pulses
are horizontally centred, meaning that the lack of robust-
ness to horizontal shifts for standardized pulse models is
not an issue here. We note that in general, models trained
with standardized pulses performed similarly in terms of both
Fig. 11 Energy resolution, deﬁned as the FWHM of the energy distri-
bution, as a function of trapezoidal ﬁlter shaping time. Calculated on
data from the
241Am source before denoising (dotted line, circle mark-
ers) and after denoising with the amplitude normalized model (solid line,
triangle markers) and standardized model (solid line, square markers)
mean squared error (on simulations) and χ2 (on data), and
the energy resolution is the only metric where a signiﬁcant
performance deviation is observed.
These results are important, as the optimal shaping time
required to obtain a reasonable energy resolution directly
affects data collection. Speciﬁcally, a longer shaping time
requires longer traces, which in turn occupies more disk space
and increases the chances of event pile-up. A lower shaping
time thus has many practical implications with regards to
easier/more efﬁcient data storage and analysis. This is also of
interest to higher rate applications of HPGe detectors, rather
than just in rare-event searches.
As shown in Sect.6.1.3, we expect an overall improvement
in the energy resolution from simulations under ideal condi-
tions. However, we do not observe this on the real
241Am data.
As well, the shape of the energy resolution curve is different;
speciﬁcally, it decreases as a function of the shaping time up
until the largest shaping time, which is limited by the length
of the noise traces. This is in contrast to Fig.11, where there
is a clear minimum at around 15 µs. A prominent imperfec-
tion with data is that there are multiple sources of exponen-
tial decay, while the pole zero correction only accounts for
one “effective” source. This results in visually imperceptible
changes to the ends of the pulses that broaden the energy
resolution, particularly at high shaping times. As the models
are not trained to remove this effect, it is still present to some
extent even after denoising. This was conﬁrmed by adding
multiple exponential decays and then applying only one cor-
rection to a simulated test set. However, as we do not know
the properties of the exponential decays present in our setup,
we have not accounted for this in the training data or removed
it from the real data.
6.2.4 Frequency spectra comparison
The frequency power spectrum of denoised pulses was ana-
lyzed for a subrun of the
241Am dataset described in Sect.4.2
123


--- Page 14 ---
1084 Page 14 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
Fig. 12 Comparison of the frequency spectra for simulated library
pulses, noisy pulses, pulses denoised with the autoencoder trained using
the regular procedure and library pulses, and pulses denoised with four
different traditional denoising methodsFig. 13 Comparison of the frequency spectra for simulated library
pulses, noisy pulses, and pulses denoised with four different autoen-
coder models
where the source was ﬁxed at roughly half the height of the
detector. The data were denoised with some of the traditional
denoising methods evaluated in Sect. 6.1.2,a sw e l la sw i t h
some of our autoencoder models. The discrete Fourier trans-
form was computed on these denoised data in addition to the
original noisy pulses in the subrun. In computing the discrete
Fourier transform, a Hanning window [52] was used in order
to remove discontinuities resulting from the step-like shape
of the pulses and to lessen spectral leakage.
The resulting frequency spectra, obtained by summing the
individual spectrum of each pulse for a given set of data,
are shown in Fig. 12 for the moving average, Savitzky–
Golay, and wavelet denoising methods (all using the opti-
mized parameters as in Fig.5). Figure13 shows the frequency
spectra comparisons for regular autoencoder models trained
with library and PLS simulated data and the Noise2Noise
model trained with real data. It also includes the regular
library pulse autoencoder trained with standardized pulses.
In each ﬁgure, the frequency spectra for the noisy data and
a clean simulated pulse at the position in the detector corre-
sponding to the location of the
241Am source are also shown
for comparison.
Of the methods evaluated, the pulses denoised by the
autoencoders have the closest frequency spectra to that of the
clean simulated pulse. In Fig. 12, both the moving average
and Savitzky–Golay method spectra have periodic artifacts
from their windows. Both wavelet denoising method spectra
tend to be overly aggressive in removing noise, speciﬁcally
at lower frequencies (up to approximately 0.02 GHz) and the
highest frequencies (greater than 0.05 GHz).
In Fig. 13, both regular autoencoder models trained with
library pulses and the Noise2Noise model have similar fre-
quency spectra. The Noise2Noise model has the smoothest
spectrum, but is less aggressive in removing noise at virtu-
ally all frequencies, particularly at frequencies larger than
0.04 GHz and around 0.06 GHz, indicating that it is fails to
remove some of the higher frequency noise. This is con-
sistent with visual observations of the denoised pulses. The
autoencoder trained with PLS pulses has the most divergent
spectrum and is removing some portion of the signal at the
mid-range of frequencies. It does, however, perform simi-
larly to the library pulse models at higher frequencies. This
could be due to the fact that the PLS pulse model is more
likely to distort and “smooth out” the pulse in and around
the rise region, while in principle it should denoise the ﬂat
regions just as well as the library pulse models. These results
are in agreement with those from Fig. 5, which shows that
while the Noise2Noise model is comparable or slightly bet-
ter at preserving features in the rise region, it is inferior at
denoising the overall pulse.
7 Conclusions
We have applied deep convolutional autoencoders to strongly
suppress electronic noise from one-dimensional signals col-
lected with a p-type point contact high purity germanium
detector, while demonstrating that the underlying pulse shape
is preserved to a high degree of accuracy. Comparisons with
simulated data, which allow for the underlying clean sig-
nal to be known, show that the autoencoder outperforms
various traditional denoising methods in this task. We also
showed the excellent performance of the autoencoder using
real detector data. We found that the denoised pulses are sta-
tistically consistent with the original noisy pulses collected
from an
241Am calibration source. Notably, the distribution
of chi-squared values made from the denoised pulses is in bet-
ter agreement with the expected distribution than that made
with the best ﬁtting simulated pulses obtained from detailed
physics simulations. We also showed that denoising allows
one to reach the optimal energy resolution with a trapezoidal
ﬁlter at signiﬁcantly reduced shaping times for low energy
pulses. This has practical implications on data collection,
storage, and analysis as it can allow for shorter traces to be
collected without loss in energy resolution. We expect that,
under certain circumstances, the energy resolution at low
energies can even be reduced with denoising, in particular
123


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084 Page 15 of 16 1084
if any residual exponential decays in the pulse shape can be
removed.
In addition to the excellent performance of the models
trained on library pulses, we have presented two methods
to train models that can perform well without the need for
detailed detector simulations. We created a set of pulses using
piecewise linear functions with smoothing that are qualita-
tively similar to the library pulses. Models trained with these
pulses performed almost as well as models trained with the
library dataset. Additionally, we used a modiﬁcation to an
existing procedure – the Noise2Noise method – to train an
autoencoder with no underlying clean pulse as a basis of
truth. Instead, the model only required data and noise col-
lected from the detector. While it did not outperform any of
the standard models trained with simulated pulses, it still out-
performed traditional denoising techniques such as wavelet-
based methods. The Noise2Noise method is most limited by
the amount and quality of data used to train it. More data,
particularly from different sources over a wider energy range,
would allow the network to see more variation in pulses and
presumably improve the model.
Although we demonstrate the performance of the convo-
lutional autoencoder on germanium detector data, there are
many applications that can beneﬁt from the removal of elec-
tronic noise in one-dimensional signals. We are beginning
to apply our methods to other detector technologies such
as gaseous proportional counters and bubble chambers with
promising results. Furthermore, denoising autoencoders can
be used to obtain a more robust latent representation of the
original input [29]. We are exploring the use of the encoder
portion of the network for other tasks, including clipping
restoration, peak ﬁnding, and single-site/multi-site event dis-
crimination (similar to the work in [26]). Our work has great
potential to be expanded upon, and the methods demonstrated
here are broadly applicable to not only the particle astro-
physics community, but any ﬁeld dealing with noisy one-
dimensional signals.
Acknowledgements This work was primarily supported by the Nat-
ural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, fund-
ing reference numbers SAPIN-2017-00023 and CGSD3-546735-2020.
We acknowledge the support of the Arthur B. McDonald Canadian
Astroparticle Physics Research Institute through the Highly Qualiﬁed
Personnel pooled funding opportunity, the Canada Foundation for Inno-
vation John R. Evans Leaders Fund, and the Walter C. Sumner Memorial
Fellowship. We also thank the NVIDIA corporation for their support
through their academic hardware grant program.
Data A vailability StatementThe datasets generated and analysed dur-
ing the current study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no competing interests to declare
that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you
give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indi-
cated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permit-
ted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Funded by SCOAP
3.S C O A P3 supports the goals of the International
Year of Basic Sciences for Sustainable Development.
References
1. S.I. Alvis et al., Search for neutrinoless double- β decay in 76Ge
with 26 kg yr of exposure from the Majorana Demonstrator .
P h y s .R e v .C100, 025501 (2019)
2. M. Agostini et al., Final results of Gerda on the search for neutri-
noless double-β decay. Phys. Rev. Lett.125, 252502 (2020)
3. N. Abgrall, et al. LEGEND-1000 preconceptual design report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11462 (2021)
4. C.E. Aalseth et al., CoGeNT: A search for low-mass dark mat-
ter using p-type point contact germanium detectors. Phys. Rev. D
88(1), 012002 (2013)
5. M. Agostini et al., First search for bosonic superweakly interacting
massive particles with masses up to 1 MeV/c
2 with Gerda.P h y s .
Rev. Lett. 125(1), 011801 (2020)
6. N. Abgrall et al., Search for Pauli Exclusion Principle violating
atomic transitions and electron decay with a p-type point contact
germanium detector. Eur. Phys. J. C 76(11), 1–5 (2016)
7. S.I. Alvis et al., First limit on the direct detection of lightly ionizing
particles for electric charge as low as e/1000 with the Majorana
Demonstrator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120(21), 211804 (2018)
8. S.I. Alvis et al., Search for trinucleon decay in the Majorana
Demonstrator. Phys. Rev. D 99(7), 072004 (2019)
9. N. Abgrall et al., The Majorana Demonstrator neutrinoless
double-beta decay experiment. Adv. High Energy Phys. 2014,
(2014)
10. N. Abgrall et al., New limits on bosonic dark matter, solar axions,
Pauli Exclusion Principle violation, and electron decay from the
Majorana Demonstrator . Phys. Rev. Lett. 118(16), 161801
(2017)
11. E. Aguayo et al., Characteristics of signals originating near the
lithium-diffused n+ contact of high purity germanium p-type point
contact detectors. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 701, 176–185 (2013)
12. C. Wiseman, A low energy rare event search with the Majo-
rana Demonstrator.J .P h y s .C o n f .S e r .1468, 012040 (2020).
IOP Publishing
13. V .T. Jordanov, G.F. Knoll, Digital synthesis of pulse shapes in
real time for high resolution radiation spectroscopy. Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A 345(2), 337–345 (1994)
14. M. Agostini et al., Improvement of the energy resolution via an
optimized digital signal processing in Gerda Phase I. Eur. Phys.
J. C 75(6), 1–11 (2015)
123


--- Page 16 ---
1084 Page 16 of 16 Eur. Phys. J. C (2022) 82 :1084
15. R.G. Brown, Exponential Smoothing for Predicting Demand
(Arthur D. Little Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States,
1956)
16. A. Savitzky, M.J. Golay, Smoothing and differentiation of data by
simpliﬁed least squares procedures. Anal. Chem.36(8), 1627–1639
(1964)
17. C. Taswell, The what, how, and why of wavelet shrinkage denois-
ing. Comput. Sci. Eng. 2(3), 12–19 (2000)
18. M. Shaﬁee, S.A.H. Feghhi, J. Rahighi, Analysis of de-noising
methods to improve the precision of the ILSF BPM electronic read-
out system. J. Instrum. 11(11), 12020 (2016)
19. D.L. Donoho, J.M. Johnstone, Ideal spatial adaptation by wavelet
shrinkage. Biometrika 81(3), 425–455 (1994)
20. S.G. Chang, B. Yu, M. Vetterli, Adaptive wavelet thresholding for
image denoising and compression. IEEE T. Image Process. 9(9),
1532–1546 (2000)
21. R.E. Kalman, A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction
problems. J. Basic Eng. 82(1), 35–45 (1960)
22. G. Hinton, D. Rumelhart, R. Williams, Learning internal represen-
tations by error propagation. Parallel Distrib. Process. 1, 318–362
(1986)
23. Ballard, D.H.: Modular learning in neural networks. In: Proceed-
ings of the Sixth National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 1, pp. 279–284. AAAI Press, Palo Alto, California, US (1987)
24. Sakurada, M., Yairi, T.: Anomaly detection using autoencoders
with nonlinear dimensionality reduction. In: Proceedings of the
MLSDA 2014 2nd Workshop on Machine Learning for Sensory
Data Analysis, pp. 4–11 (2014)
25. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational bayes. In:
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Learning
Representations (2014)
26. P. Holl, L. Hauertmann, B. Majorovits, O. Schulz, M. Schuster,
A. Zsigmond, Deep learning based pulse shape discrimination for
germanium detectors. Eur. Phys. J. C 79(6), 1–9 (2019)
27. Nielsen, M.A.: Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determina-
tion Press, San Francisco, California, United States (2015). http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com
28. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y ., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States (2016). https://
www.deeplearningbook.org
29. Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Lajoie, I., Bengio, Y ., Manzagol, P.-A.:
Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations
in a deep network with a local denoising criterion. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 11(Dec), 3371–3408 (2010)
30. Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y ., Manzagol, P.-A.: Extract-
ing and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders.
In: Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 1096–1103 (2008)
31. Jain, V ., Seung, S.: Natural image denoising with convolutional
networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 769–776 (2009)
32. Xie, J., Xu, L., Chen, E.: Image denoising and inpainting with deep
neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 341–349 (2012)
33. K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y . Chen, D. Meng, L. Zhang, Beyond a Gaussian
denoiser: residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising. IEEE
T. Image Process. 26(7), 3142–3155 (2017)
34. Guo, S., Yan, Z., Zhang, K., Zuo, W., Zhang, L.: Toward convolu-
tional blind denoising of real photographs. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 1712–1722 (2019)
35. Gondara, L.: Medical image denoising using convolutional denois-
ing autoencoders. In: 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on
Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pp. 241–246 (2016). IEEE
36. Khalilian, S., Hallaj, Y ., Balouchestani, A., Karshenas, H., Moham-
madi, A.: PCB defect detection using denoising convolutional
autoencoders. In: 2020 International Conference on Machine
Vision and Image Processing (MVIP), pp. 1–5 (2020). IEEE
37. Zezario, R.E., Huang, J.-W., Lu, X., Tsao, Y ., Hwang, H.-T., Wang,
H.-M.: Deep denoising autoencoder based post ﬁltering for speech
enhancement. In: 2018 Asia-Paciﬁc Signal and Information Pro-
cessing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA
ASC), pp. 373–377 (2018). IEEE
38. Lehtinen, J., Munkberg, J., Hasselgren, J., Laine, S., Karras, T., Ait-
tala, M., Aila, T.: Noise2Noise: Learning image restoration without
clean data. In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
Machine Learning, vol. 80, pp. 2965–2974 (2018)
39. V . Dumoulin, F. Visin, A guide to convolution arithmetic for deep
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07285 (2016)
40. X. Glorot, A. Bordes, Y . Bengio, Deep sparse rectiﬁer neural net-
works. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 315–323 (2011)
41. ORTEC/AMETEK (2020). https://www.ortec-online.com/
42. Struck Innovative Systems (2022). https://www.struck.de/
43. R. Brun, F. Rademakers, ROOT - an object oriented data analysis
framework. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 389(1–2), 81–86 (1997)
44. Vasundhara: Pulse ﬁtting for event localization in high purity ger-
manium point contact detectors. Master’s thesis, Queen’s Univer-
sity (2020)
45. D.C. Radford, siggen. GitHub (2017). https://github.com/
radforddc/icpc_siggen
46. F. Chollet, et al. Keras (2015). https://keras.io
47. M. Abadi, et al. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on
Heterogeneous Systems (2015). https://www.tensorﬂow.org/
48. D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
49. L.I. Rudin, S. Osher, E. Fatemi, Nonlinear total variation based
noise removal algorithms. Physica D 60(1–4), 259–268 (1992)
50. D. Strong, T. Chan, Edge-preserving and scale-dependent prop-
erties of total variation regularization. Inverse Probl. 19(6), 165
(2003)
51. Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, E.P. Simoncelli, Image quality
assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE T.
Image Process. 13(4), 600–612 (2004)
52. R.B. Blackman, J.W. Tukey, The measurement of power spectra
from the point of view of communications engineering - Part I.
Bell Syst. Tech. J. 37(1), 185–282 (1958)
123
