--- Page 1 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76:653
DOI 10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4466-1
Regular Article - Experimental Physics
Luminosity determination in pp collisions at √ s =8T e Vu s i n g
the ATLAS detector at the LHC
ATLAS Collaboration⋆
CERN, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
Received: 16 August 2016 / Accepted: 26 October 2016 / Published online: 28 November 2016
© CERN for the beneﬁt of the ATLAS collaboration 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The luminosity determination for the ATLAS
detector at the LHC during pp collisions at √ s = 8T e V
in 2012 is presented. The evaluation of the luminosity scale
is performed using several luminometers, and comparisons
between these luminosity detectors are made to assess the
accuracy, consistency and long-term stability of the results.
A luminosity uncertainty of δL/L =± 1.9% is obtained for
the 22.7f b−1 of pp collision data delivered to ATLAS at√ s = 8 TeV in 2012.
1 Introduction
An accurate measurement of the delivered luminosity is a
key component of the ATLAS [ 1] physics programme. For
cross-section measurements, the uncertainty in the delivered
luminosity is often one of the major systematic uncertain-
ties. Searches for, and eventual discoveries of, physical phe-
nomena beyond the Standard Model also rely on accurate
information about the delivered luminosity to evaluate back-
ground levels and determine sensitivity to the signatures of
new phenomena.
This paper describes the measurement of the luminosity
delivered to the ATLAS detector at the LHC inpp collisions
at a centre-of-mass energy of √ s = 8 TeV during 2012.
It is structured as follows. The strategy for measuring and
calibrating the luminosity is outlined in Sect. 2, followed in
Sect. 3 by a brief description of the detectors and algorithms
used for luminosity determination. The absolute calibration
of these algorithms by the van der Meer ( vdM) method [2],
which must be carried out under specially tailored beam con-
ditions, is described in Sect. 4; the associated systematic
uncertainties are detailed in Sect. 5. The comparison of the
relative response of several independent luminometers dur-
ing physics running reveals that signiﬁcant time- and rate-
dependent effects impacted the performance of the ATLAS
bunch-by-bunch luminometers during the 2012 run (Sect.6).
Therefore this absolutevdM calibration cannot be invoked as
⋆ e-mail: atlas.publications@cern.ch
is. Instead, it must be transferred, at one point in time and
using an independent relative-luminosity monitor, from the
low-luminosity regime of vdM scans to the high-luminosity
conditions typical of routine physics running. Additional cor-
rections must be applied over the course of the 2012 data-
taking period to compensate for detector aging (Sect.7). The
various contributions to the systematic uncertainty affecting
the integrated luminosity delivered to ATLAS in 2012 are
recapitulated in Sect. 8, and the ﬁnal results are summarized
in Sect. 9.
2 Luminosity-determination methodology
The analysis presented in this paper closely parallels, and
where necessary expands, the one used to determine the lumi-
nosity in pp collisions at √ s = 7T e V[3].
The bunch luminosity Lb produced by a single pair of
colliding bunches can be expressed as
Lb = μfr
σinel
, (1)
where the pile-up parameter μ is the average number of
inelastic interactions per bunch crossing, fr is the bunch rev-
olution frequency, andσinel is the pp inelastic cross-section.
The total instantaneous luminosity is given by
L =
nb∑
b = 1
Lb = nb ⟨Lb⟩= nb
⟨μ⟩ fr
σinel
.
Here the sum runs over the nb bunch pairs colliding at the
interaction point (IP), ⟨Lb⟩ is the mean bunch luminosity
and ⟨μ⟩ is the bunch-averaged pile-up parameter. Table 1
highlights the operational conditions of the LHC during Run
1 from 2010 to 2012. Compared to previous years, operat-
ing conditions did not vary signiﬁcantly during 2012, with
typically 1368 bunches colliding and a peak instantaneous
luminosity delivered by the LHC at the start of a ﬁll of
123


--- Page 2 ---
653 Page 2 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Table 1 Selected LHC parameters for pp collisions at √ s = 7T e V
in 2010 and 2011, and at √ s = 8 TeV in 2012. Values shown are rep-
resentative of the best accelerator performance during normal physics
operation
Parameter 2010 2011 2012
Number of bunch
pairs colliding (nb)
348 1331 1380
Bunch spacing (ns) 150 50 50
Typical bunch
population (1011
protons)
0.91 .21 . 7
Peak luminosity
Lpeak (1033 cm−2 s−1)
0.2 3.6 7.7
Peak number of
inelastic
interactions per
crossing
∼5 ∼20 ∼40
Average number of
interactions per
crossing
(luminosity
weighted)
∼2 ∼9 ∼21
Total integrated
luminosity
delivered
47 pb
−1 5.5f b−1 23 fb−1
Lpeak ≈ 6–8 × 1033 cm−2 s−1, on the average three times
higher than in 2011.
ATLAS monitors the delivered luminosity by measuring
μvis, the visible interaction rate per bunch crossing, with a
variety of independent detectors and using several different
algorithms (Sect. 3). The bunch luminosity can then be writ-
ten as
L
b = μvis fr
σvis
, (2)
where μvis = εμ, εis the efﬁciency of the detector and algo-
rithm under consideration, and the visible cross-section for
that same detector and algorithm is deﬁned byσvis ≡ εσinel.
Since μvis is a directly measurable quantity, the calibration
of the luminosity scale for a particular detector and algo-
rithm amounts to determining the visible cross-section σvis.
This calibration, described in detail in Sect. 4, is performed
using dedicated beam-separation scans, where the absolute
luminosity can be inferred from direct measurements of the
beam parameters [2,4]. This known luminosity is then com-
bined with the simultaneously measured interaction rateμ
vis
to extract σvis.
A fundamental ingredient of the ATLAS strategy to assess
and control the systematic uncertainties affecting the absolute
luminosity determination is to compare the measurements of
several luminometers, most of which use more than one algo-
rithm to determine the luminosity. These multiple detectors
and algorithms are characterized by signiﬁcantly different
acceptance, response to pile-up, and sensitivity to instrumen-
tal effects and to beam-induced backgrounds. Since the cal-
ibration of the absolute luminosity scale is carried out only
two or three times per year, this calibration must either remain
constant over extended periods of time and under different
machine conditions, or be corrected for long-term drifts. The
level of consistency across the various methods, over the
full range of luminosities and beam conditions, and across
many months of LHC operation, provides a direct test of the
accuracy and stability of the results. A full discussion of the
systematic uncertainties is presented in Sects. 5–8.
The information needed for physics analyses is the inte-
grated luminosity for some well-deﬁned data samples. The
basic time unit for storing ATLAS luminosity information
for physics use is the luminosity block (LB). The bound-
aries of each LB are deﬁned by the ATLAS central trigger
processor (CTP), and in general the duration of each LB is
approximately one minute. Conﬁguration changes, such as a
trigger prescale adjustment, prompt a luminosity-block tran-
sition, and data are analysed assuming that each luminosity
block contains data taken under uniform conditions, includ-
ing luminosity. For each LB, the instantaneous luminosity
from each detector and algorithm, averaged over the lumi-
nosity block, is stored in a relational database along with
a variety of general ATLAS data-quality information. To
deﬁne a data sample for physics, quality criteria are applied to
select LBs where conditions are acceptable; then the instanta-
neous luminosity in that LB is multiplied by the LB duration
to provide the integrated luminosity delivered in that LB.
Additional corrections can be made for trigger deadtime and
trigger prescale factors, which are also recorded on a per-
LB basis. Adding up the integrated luminosity delivered in
a speciﬁc set of luminosity blocks provides the integrated
luminosity of the entire data sample.
3 Luminosity detectors and algorithms
The ATLAS detector is discussed in detail in Ref. [ 1]. The
two primary luminometers, the BCM (Beam Conditions
Monitor) and LUCID (LUminosity measurement using a
Cherenkov Integrating Detector), both make deadtime-free,
bunch-by-bunch luminosity measurements (Sect.3.1). These
are compared with the results of the track-counting method
(Sect. 3.2), a new approach developed by ATLAS which
monitors the multiplicity of charged particles produced in
randomly selected colliding-bunch crossings, and is essen-
tial to assess the calibration-transfer correction from the
vdM to the high-luminosity regime. Additional methods have
been developed to disentangle the relative long-term drifts
and run-to-run variations between the BCM, LUCID and
track-counting measurements during high-luminosity run-
ning, thereby reducing the associated systematic uncertain-
123


--- Page 3 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 3 of 45 653
ties to the sub-percent level. These techniques measure the
total instantaneous luminosity, summed over all bunches,
by monitoring detector currents sensitive to average parti-
cle ﬂuxes through the ATLAS calorimeters, or by reporting
ﬂuences observed in radiation-monitoring equipment; they
are described in Sect. 3.3.
3.1 Dedicated bunch-by-bunch luminometers
The BCM consists of four 8 × 8m m
2 diamond sensors
arranged around the beampipe in a cross pattern at z =
±1.84 m on each side of the ATLAS IP.1 If one of the sensors
produces a signal over a preset threshold, a hit is recorded
for that bunch crossing, thereby providing a low-acceptance
bunch-by-bunch luminosity signal at |η|= 4.2 with sub-
nanosecond time resolution. The horizontal and vertical pairs
of BCM sensors are read out separately, leading to two lumi-
nosity measurements labelled BCMH and BCMV respec-
tively. Because the thresholds, efﬁciencies and noise levels
may exhibit small differences between BCMH and BCMV ,
these two measurements are treated for calibration and mon-
itoring purposes as being produced by independent devices,
although the overall response of the two devices is expected
to be very similar.
LUCID is a Cherenkov detector speciﬁcally designed to
measure the luminosity in ATLAS. Sixteen aluminium tubes
originally ﬁlled with C
4F10 gas surround the beampipe on
each side of the IP at a distance of 17 m, covering the pseudo-
rapidity range 5.6 < |η| < 6.0. For most of 2012, the LUCID
tubes were operated under vacuum to reduce the sensitivity
of the device, thereby mitigating pile-up effects and provid-
ing a wider operational dynamic range. In this conﬁguration,
Cherenkov photons are produced only in the quartz windows
that separate the gas volumes from the photomultiplier tubes
(PMTs) situated at the back of the detector. If one of the
LUCID PMTs produces a signal over a preset threshold, that
tube records a hit for that bunch crossing.
Each colliding-bunch pair is identiﬁed numerically by a
bunch-crossing identiﬁer (BCID) which labels each of the
3564 possible 25 ns slots in one full revolution of the nomi-
nal LHC ﬁll pattern. Both BCM and LUCID are fast detectors
with electronics capable of reading out the diamond-sensor
and PMT hit patterns separately for each bunch crossing,
thereby making full use of the available statistics. These
FPGA-based front-end electronics run autonomously from
the main data acquisition system, and are not affected by any
1 ATLAS uses a right-handed coordinate system with its origin at the
nominal interaction point in the centre of the detector, and the z-axis
along the beam line. The x-axis points from the IP to the centre of the
LHC ring, and they-axis points upwards. Cylindrical coordinates(r,φ)
are used in the transverse plane,φ being the azimuthal angle around the
beam line. The pseudorapidity is deﬁned in terms of the polar angle θ
as η=− ln tan(θ/2).
deadtime imposed by the CTP. 2 They execute in real time
several different online algorithms, characterized by diverse
efﬁciencies, background sensitivities, and linearity charac-
teristics [5].
The BCM and LUCID detectors consist of two symmetric
arms placed in the forward (“A”) and backward (“C”) direc-
tion from the IP, which can also be treated as independent
devices. The baseline luminosity algorithm is an inclusive
hit requirement, known as the EventOR algorithm, which
requires that at least one hit be recorded anywhere in the
detector considered. Assuming that the number of interac-
tions in a bunch crossing obeys a Poisson distribution, the
probability of observing an event which satisﬁes the Even-
tOR criteria can be computed as
P
EventOR (μOR
vis ) = NOR/NBC = 1 − e−μOR
vis . (3)
Here the raw event countNOR is the number of bunch cross-
ings, during a given time interval, in which at least one pp
interaction satisﬁes the event-selection criteria of the OR
algorithm under consideration, and NBC is the total num-
ber of bunch crossings during the same interval. Solving for
μ
vis in terms of the event-counting rate yields
μOR
vis =− ln
(
1 − NOR
NBC
)
. (4)
When μvis ≫ 1, event counting algorithms lose sensitivity
as fewer and fewer bunch crossings in a given time inter-
val report zero observed interactions. In the limit where
NOR/NBC = 1, event counting algorithms can no longer be
used to determine the interaction rate μvis: this is referred
to as saturation. The sensitivity of the LUCID detector
is high enough (even without gas in the tubes) that the
LUCID_EventOR algorithm saturates in a one-minute inter-
val at around 20 interactions per crossing, while the single-
arm inclusive LUCID_EventA and LUCID_EventC algo-
rithms can be used up to around 30 interactions per crossing.
The lower acceptance of the BCM detector allowed event
counting to remain viable for all of 2012.
3.2 Tracker-based luminosity algorithms
The ATLAS inner detector (ID) measures the trajectories of
charged particles over the pseudorapidity range |η| < 2.5
and the full azimuth. It consists [ 1] of a silicon pixel detec-
tor (Pixel), a silicon micro-strip detector (SCT) and a straw-
tube transition-radiation detector (TRT). Charged particles
are reconstructed as tracks using an inside-out algorithm,
2 The CTP inhibits triggers (causing deadtime) for a variety of reasons,
but especially for several bunch crossings after a triggered event to allow
time for the detector readout to conclude. Any new triggers which occur
during this time are ignored.
123


--- Page 4 ---
653 Page 4 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
which starts with three-point seeds from the silicon detectors
and then adds hits using a combinatoric Kalman ﬁlter [6].
The luminosity is assumed to be proportional to the num-
ber of reconstructed charged-particle tracks, with the vis-
ible interaction rate μvis taken as the number of tracks per
bunch crossing averaged over a given time window (typically
a luminosity block). In standard physics operation, silicon-
detector data are recorded in a dedicated partial-event stream
using a random trigger at a typical rate of 100 Hz, sampling
each colliding-bunch pair with equal probability. Although a
bunch-by-bunch luminosity measurement is possible in prin-
ciple, over 1300 bunches were colliding in ATLAS for most
of 2012, so that in practice only the bunch-integrated lumi-
nosity can be determined with percent-level statistical pre-
cision in a given luminosity block. During vdM scans, Pixel
and SCT data are similarly routed to a dedicated data stream
for a subset of the colliding-bunch pairs at a typical rate of 5
kHz per BCID, thereby allowing the bunch-by-bunch deter-
mination of σ
vis.
For the luminosity measurements presented in this paper,
charged-particle track reconstruction uses hits from the sili-
con detectors only. Reconstructed tracks are required to have
at least nine silicon hits, zero holes
3 in the Pixel detector
and transverse momentum in excess of 0.9 GeV . Further-
more, the absolute transverse impact parameter with respect
to the luminous centroid [7] is required to be no larger than
seven times its uncertainty, as determined from the covari-
ance matrix of the ﬁt.
This default track selection makes no attempt to distin-
guish tracks originating from primary vertices from those
produced in secondary interactions, as the yields of both
are expected to be proportional to the luminosity. Previous
studies of track reconstruction in ATLAS show that in low
pile-up conditions (μ ≤ 1) and with a track selection looser
than the above-described default, single-beam backgrounds
remain well below the per-mille level [8]. However, for pile-
up parameters typical of 2012 physics running, tracks formed
from random hit combinations, known as fake tracks, can
become signiﬁcant [9]. The track selection above is expected
to be robust against such non-linearities, as demonstrated by
analysing simulated events of overlaid inelastic pp interac-
tions produced using the PYTHIA 8 Monte Carlo event gen-
erator [10]. In the simulation, the fraction of fake tracks per
event can be parameterized as a function of the true pile-up
parameter, yielding a fake-track fraction of less than 0.2% at
μ = 20 for the default track selection. In data, this fake-track
contamination is subtracted from the measured track multi-
3 In this context, a hole is counted when a hit is expected in an active
sensor located on the track trajectory between the ﬁrst and the last hit
associated with this track, but no such hit is found. If the corresponding
sensor is known to be inactive and therefore not expected to provide a
hit, no hole is counted.
plicity using the simulation-based parameterization with, as
input, the ⟨μ⟩ value reported by the BCMH_EventOR lumi-
nosity algorithm. An uncertainty equal to half the correction
is assigned to the measured track multiplicity to account for
possible systematic differences between data and simulation.
Biases in the track-counting luminosity measurement can
arise from μ-dependent effects in the track reconstruction
or selection requirements, which would change the reported
track-counting yield per collision between the low pile-up
vdM-calibration regime and the high- μ regime typical of
physics data-taking. Short- and long-term variations in the
track reconstruction and selection efﬁciency can also arise
from changing ID conditions, for example because of tem-
porarily disabled silicon readout modules. In general, looser
track selections are less sensitive to such ﬂuctuations in
instrumental coverage; however, they typically suffer from
larger fake-track contamination.
To assess the impact of such potential biases, several
looser track selections, or working points (WP), are inves-
tigated. Most are found to be consistent with the default
working point once the uncertainty affecting the simulation-
based fake-track subtraction is accounted for. In the case
where the Pixel-hole requirement is relaxed from zero to no
more than one, a moderate difference in excess of the fake-
subtraction uncertainty is observed in the data. This work-
ing point, labelled “Pixel holes≤1”, is used as an alternative
algorithm when evaluating the systematic uncertainties asso-
ciated with track-counting luminosity measurements.
In order to all but eliminate fake-track backgrounds and
minimize the associated μ-dependence, another alternative
is to remove the impact-parameter requirement and use
the resulting superset of tracks as input to the primary-
vertex reconstruction algorithm. Those tracks which, after
the vertex-reconstruction ﬁt, have a non-negligible probabil-
ity of being associated to any primary vertex are counted to
provide an alternative luminosity measurement. In the simu-
lation, the performance of this “vertex-associated” working
point is comparable, in terms of fake-track fraction and other
residual non-linearities, to that of the default and “Pixel holes
≤1” track selections discussed above.
3.3 Bunch-integrating detectors
Additional algorithms, sensitive to the instantaneous lumi-
nosity summed over all bunches, provide relative-luminosity
monitoring on time scales of a few seconds rather than of a
bunch crossing, allowing independent checks of the linear-
ity and long-term stability of the BCM, LUCID and track-
counting algorithms. The ﬁrst technique measures the parti-
cle ﬂux from pp collisions as reﬂected in the current drawn
by the PMTs of the hadronic calorimeter (TileCal). This ﬂux,
which is proportional to the instantaneous luminosity, is also
monitored by the total ionization current ﬂowing through a
123


--- Page 5 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 5 of 45 653
well-chosen set of liquid-argon (LAr) calorimeter cells. A
third technique, using Medipix radiation monitors, measures
the average particle ﬂux observed in these devices.
3.3.1 Photomultiplier currents in the central hadronic
calorimeter
The TileCal [ 11] is constructed from plastic-tile scintilla-
tors as the active medium and from steel absorber plates. It
covers the pseudorapidity range |η| < 1.7 and consists of a
long central cylindrical barrel and two smaller extended bar-
rels, one on each side of the long barrel. Each of these three
cylinders is divided azimuthally into 64 modules and seg-
mented into three radial sampling layers. Cells are deﬁned in
each layer according to a projective geometry, and each cell
is connected by optical ﬁbres to two photomultiplier tubes.
The current drawn by each PMT is proportional to the total
number of particles interacting in a given TileCal cell, and
provides a signal proportional to the luminosity summed over
all the colliding bunches. This current is monitored by an
integrator system with a time constant of 10 ms and is sensi-
tive to currents from 0.1 nA to 1.2 µA. The calibration and
the monitoring of the linearity of the integrator electronics
are ensured by a dedicated high-precision current-injection
system.
The collision-induced PMT current depends on the pseu-
dorapidity of the cell considered and on the radial sampling
in which it is located. The cells most sensitive to luminosity
variations are located near |η|≈ 1.25; at a given pseudora-
pidity, the current is largest in the innermost sampling layer,
because the hadronic showers are progressively absorbed as
they expand in the middle and outer radial layers. Long-term
variations of the TileCal response are monitored, and cor-
rected if appropriate [ 3], by injecting a laser pulse directly
into the PMT, as well as by integrating the counting rate
from a
137Cs radioactive source that circulates between the
calorimeter cells during calibration runs.
The TileCal luminosity measurement is not directly cal-
ibrated by the vdM procedure, both because its slow and
asynchronous readout is not optimized to keep in step with
the scan protocol, and because the luminosity is too low
during the scan for many of its cells to provide accurate
measurements. Instead, the TileCal luminosity calibration
is performed in two steps. The PMT currents, corrected
for electronics pedestals and for non-collision backgrounds
4
and averaged over the most sensitive cells, are ﬁrst cross-
calibrated to the absolute luminosity reported by the BCM
during the April 2012 vdM scan session (Sect. 4). Since
these high-sensitivity cells would incur radiation damage at
the highest luminosities encountered during 2012, thereby
4 For each LHC ﬁll, the currents are baseline-corrected using data
recorded shortly before the LHC beams are brought into collision.
requiring large calibration corrections, their luminosity scale
is transferred, during an early intermediate-luminosity run
and on a cell-by-cell basis, to the currents measured in the
remaining cells (the sensitivities of which are insufﬁcient
under the low-luminosity conditions of vdM scans). The
luminosity reported in any other physics run is then com-
puted as the average, over the usable cells, of the individual
cell luminosities, determined by multiplying the baseline-
subtracted PMT current from that cell by the corresponding
calibration constant.
3.3.2 LAr-gap currents
The electromagnetic endcap (EMEC) and forward (FCal)
calorimeters are sampling devices that cover the pseudo-
rapidity ranges of, respectively, 1 .5 < |η| < 3.2 and
3.2 < |η| < 4.9. They are housed in the two endcap cryostats
along with the hadronic endcap calorimeters.
The EMECs consist of accordion-shaped lead/stainless-
steel absorbers interspersed with honeycomb-insulated elec-
trodes that distribute the high voltage (HV) to the LAr-ﬁlled
gaps where the ionization electrons drift, and that collect the
associated electrical signal by capacitive coupling. In order
to keep the electric ﬁeld across each LAr gap constant over
time, the HV supplies are regulated such that any voltage
drop induced by the particle ﬂux through a given HV sector
is counterbalanced by a continuous injection of electrical cur-
rent. The value of this current is proportional to the particle
ﬂux and thereby provides a relative-luminosity measurement
using the EMEC HV line considered.
Both forward calorimeters are divided longitudinally into
three modules. Each of these consists of a metallic absorber
matrix (copper in the ﬁrst module, tungsten elsewhere) con-
taining cylindrical electrodes arranged parallel to the beam
axis. The electrodes are formed by a copper (or tungsten)
tube, into which a rod of slightly smaller diameter is inserted.
This rod, in turn, is positioned concentrically using a heli-
cally wound radiation-hard plastic ﬁbre, which also serves to
electrically isolate the anode rod from the cathode tube. The
remaining small annular gap is ﬁlled with LAr as the active
medium. Only the ﬁrst sampling is used for luminosity mea-
surements. It is divided into 16 azimuthal sectors, each fed
by 4 independent HV lines. As in the EMEC, the HV system
provides a stable electric ﬁeld across the LAr gaps and the
current drawn from each line is directly proportional to the
average particle ﬂux through the corresponding FCal cells.
After correction for electronic pedestals and single-beam
backgrounds, the observed currents are assumed to be pro-
portional to the luminosity summed over all bunches; the
validity of this assumption is assessed in Sect.6. The EMEC
and FCal gap currents cannot be calibrated during avdM scan,
because the instantaneous luminosity during these scans
remains below the sensitivity of the current-measurement
123


--- Page 6 ---
653 Page 6 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
circuitry. Instead, the calibration constant associated with an
individual HV line is evaluated as the ratio of the absolute
luminosity reported by the baseline bunch-by-bunch lumi-
nosity algorithm (BCMH_EventOR) and integrated over one
high-luminosity reference physics run, to the HV current
drawn through that line, pedestal-subtracted and integrated
over exactly the same time interval. This is done for each
usable HV line independently. The luminosity reported in
any other physics run by either the EMEC or the FCal, sep-
arately for the A and C detector arms, is then computed as
the average, over the usable cells, of the individual HV-line
luminosities.
3.3.3 Hit counting in the Medipix system
The Medipix (MPX) detectors are hybrid silicon pixel
devices, which are distributed around the ATLAS detec-
tor [ 12] and are primarily used to monitor radiation con-
ditions in the experimental hall. Each of these 12 devices
consists of a 2 cm
2 silicon sensor matrix, segmented in
256 × 256 cells and bump-bonded to a readout chip. Each
pixel in the matrix counts hits from individual particle inter-
actions observed during a software-triggered “frame”, which
integrates over 5–120 s, depending upon the typical particle
ﬂux at the location of the detector considered. In order to
provide calibrated luminosity measurements, the total num-
ber of pixel clusters observed in each sensor is counted and
scaled to the TileCal luminosity in the same reference run as
the EMEC and FCal. The six MPX detectors with the highest
counting rate are analysed in this fashion for the 2012 running
period; their mutual consistency is discussed in Sect. 6.
The hit-counting algorithm described above is primar-
ily sensitive to charged particles. The MPX detectors offer
the additional capability to detect thermal neutrons via
6Li(n,α)3H reactions in a6LiF converter layer. This neutron-
counting rate provides a further measure of the luminosity,
which is consistent with, but statistically inferior to, the MPX
hit counting measurement [12].
4 Absolute luminosity calibration by the van der Meer
method
In order to use the measured interaction rateμ
vis as a luminos-
ity monitor, each detector and algorithm must be calibrated
by determining its visible cross-sectionσvis. The primary cal-
ibration technique to determine the absolute luminosity scale
of each bunch-by-bunch luminosity detector and algorithm
employs dedicated vdM scans to infer the delivered luminos-
ity at one point in time from the measurable parameters of
the colliding bunches. By comparing the known luminosity
delivered in the vdM scan to the visible interaction rateμvis,
the visible cross-section can be determined from Eq. (2).
This section is organized as follows. The formalism of the
van der Meer method is recalled in Sect. 4.1, followed in
Sect. 4.2 by a description of the vdM-calibration datasets
collected during the 2012 running period. The step-by-
step determination of the visible cross-section is outlined
in Sect. 4.3, and each ingredient is discussed in detail in
Sects. 4.4–4.10. The resulting absolute calibrations of the
bunch-by-bunch luminometers, as applicable to the low-
luminosity conditions of vdM scans, are summarized in
Sect. 4.11.
4.1 Absolute luminosity from measured beam parameters
In terms of colliding-beam parameters, the bunch luminosity
L
b is given by
Lb = fr n1n2
∫
ˆρ1(x, y) ˆρ2(x, y) dx dy, (5)
where the beams are assumed to collide with zero crossing
angle, n1n2 is the bunch-population product and ˆρ1(2)(x, y)
is the normalized particle density in the transverse ( x–y)
plane of beam 1 (2) at the IP. With the standard assump-
tion that the particle densities can be factorized into inde-
pendent horizontal and vertical component distributions,
ˆρ(x, y) = ρ
x(x)ρy(y),E q .(5) can be rewritten as
Lb = fr n1n2 /Omega1x(ρx1,ρx2)/Omega1y(ρy1,ρy2), (6)
where
/Omega1x(ρx1,ρx2) =
∫
ρx1(x)ρx2(x) dx
is the beam-overlap integral in the x direction (with an anal-
ogous deﬁnition in the y direction). In the method proposed
by van der Meer [2], the overlap integral (for example in the
x direction) can be calculated as
/Omega1x(ρx1,ρx2) = Rx(0)∫
Rx(δ)dδ, (7)
where Rx(δ)is the luminosity (at this stage in arbitrary units)
measured during a horizontal scan at the time the two beams
are separated horizontally by the distanceδ, andδ= 0 repre-
sents the case of zero beam separation. Because the luminos-
ity Rx(δ)is normalized to that at zero separation Rx(0),a n y
quantity proportional to the luminosity (such asμvis) can be
substituted in Eq. (7) in place of R.
Deﬁning the horizontal convolved beam size/Sigma1x [7,13]a s
/Sigma1x = 1√
2π
∫
Rx(δ)dδ
Rx(0) , (8)
123


--- Page 7 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 7 of 45 653
and similarly for /Sigma1y, the bunch luminosity in Eq. (6) can be
rewritten as
Lb = frn1n2
2π/Sigma1x/Sigma1y
, (9)
which allows the absolute bunch luminosity to be determined
from the revolution frequencyfr, the bunch-population prod-
uct n1n2, and the product /Sigma1x/Sigma1y which is measured directly
during a pair of orthogonal vdM (beam-separation) scans.
In the case where the luminosity curve Rx(δ) is Gaussian,
/Sigma1x coincides with the standard deviation of that distribution.
It is important to note that the vdM method does not rely
on any particular functional form ofRx(δ): the quantities/Sigma1x
and /Sigma1y can be determined for any observed luminosity curve
from Eq. (8) and used with Eq. (9) to determine the absolute
luminosity at δ= 0.
In the more general case where the factorization assump-
tion breaks down, i.e. when the particle densities [or more
precisely the dependence of the luminosity on the beam sep-
aration (δ
x,δy)] cannot be factorized into a product of uncor-
related x and y components, the formalism can be extended
to yield [4]
/Sigma1x/Sigma1y = 1
2π
∫
Rx,y(δx,δy) dδx dδy
Rx,y(0, 0) , (10)
with Eq. (9) remaining formally unaffected. Luminosity cal-
ibration in the presence of non-factorizable bunch-density
distributions is discussed extensively in Sect. 4.8.
The measured product of the transverse convolved beam
sizes /Sigma1x/Sigma1y is directly related to the reference speciﬁc lumi-
nosity:5
Lspec ≡ Lb
n1n2
= fr
2π/Sigma1x/Sigma1y
which, together with the bunch currents, determines the abso-
lute luminosity scale. To calibrate a given luminosity algo-
rithm, one can equate the absolute luminosity computed from
beam parameters using Eq. (9) to that measured according to
Eq. (2) to get
σ
vis = μMAX
vis
2π/Sigma1x/Sigma1y
n1n2
, (11)
where μMAX
vis is the visible interaction rate per bunch crossing
reported at the peak of the scan curve by that particular algo-
rithm. Equation (11) provides a direct calibration of the visi-
ble cross-section σvis for each algorithm in terms of the peak
5 The speciﬁc luminosity is deﬁned as the luminosity per bunch and
per unit bunch-population product [7].
visible interaction rate μMAX
vis , the product of the convolved
beam widths/Sigma1x/Sigma1y, and the bunch-population productn1n2.
In the presence of a signiﬁcant crossing angle in one of
the scan planes, the formalism becomes considerably more
involved [ 14], but the conclusions remain unaltered and
Eqs. (8)–(11) remain valid. The non-zero vertical crossing
angle in some scan sessions widens the luminosity curve by
a factor that depends on the bunch length, the transverse beam
size and the crossing angle, but reduces the peak luminosity
by the same factor. The corresponding increase in the mea-
sured value of /Sigma1
y is exactly compensated by the decrease in
μMAX
vis , so that no correction for the crossing angle is needed
in the determination of σvis.
4.2 Luminosity-scan datasets
The beam conditions during vdM scans are different from
those in normal physics operation, with lower bunch inten-
sities and only a few tens of widely spaced bunches circulat-
ing. These conditions are optimized to reduce various sys-
tematic uncertainties in the calibration procedure [7]. Three
scan sessions were performed during 2012: in April, July, and
November (Table 2). The April scans were performed with
nominal collision optics (β
⋆ = 0.6 m), which minimizes the
accelerator set-up time but yields conditions which are inad-
equate for achieving the best possible calibration accuracy.6
The July and November scans were performed using dedi-
cated vdM-scan optics with β⋆ = 11 m, in order to increase
the transverse beam sizes while retaining a sufﬁciently high
collision rate even in the tails of the scans. This strategy lim-
its the impact of the vertex-position resolution on the non-
factorization analysis, which is detailed in Sect.4.8, and also
reduces potential μ-dependent calibration biases. In addi-
tion, the observation of large non-factorization effects in the
April and July scan data motivated, for the November scan,
a dedicated set-up of the LHC injector chain [16] to produce
more Gaussian and less correlated transverse beam proﬁles.
Since the luminosity can be different for each colliding-
bunch pair, both because the beam sizes differ from bunch to
bunch and because the bunch populationsn
1 and n2 can each
vary by up to±10%, the determination of/Sigma1x and /Sigma1y and the
measurement ofμMAX
vis are performed independently for each
colliding-bunch pair. As a result, and taking the November
session as an example, each scan set provides 29 independent
measurements of σ
vis, allowing detailed consistency checks.
6 The β function describes the single-particle motion and determines
the variation of the beam envelope along the beam trajectory. It is cal-
culated from the focusing properties of the magnetic lattice (see for
example Ref. [15]). The symbol β
⋆ denotes the value of theβ function
at the IP.
123


--- Page 8 ---
653 Page 8 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Table 2 Summary of the main characteristics of the 2012 vdM scans
performed at the ATLAS interaction point. The nominal tranverse beam
size is computed using the nominal LHC emittance ( ϵ
N = 3.75 μm-
radians). The actual transverse emittance and single-beam size are esti-
mated by combining the convolved transverse widths measured in the
ﬁrst scan of each session with the nominal IP β-function. The values
of the luminosity/bunch and of μ are given for zero beam separation
during the ﬁrst scan. The speciﬁc luminosity decreases by 6–17% over
the duration of a given scan session
Scan labels I–III IV–IX X–XV
Date 16 April 2012 19 July 2012 22, 24 November 2012
LHC ﬁll number 2520 2855, 2856 3311, 3316
Total number of bunches per beam 48 48 39
Number of bunches colliding in ATLAS 35 35 29
Typical number of protons per bunch n
1,2 0.6 × 1011 0.9 × 1011 0.9 × 1011
Nominal β-function at the IP (β⋆) (m) 0 .61 1 1 1
Nominal transverse single-beam size σnom
b (µm) 23 98 98
Actual transverse emittance ϵN (µm-radians) 2 .33 . 23 . 1
Actual transverse single-beam size σb (µm) 18 91 89
Actual transverse luminous size σL (≈ σb/
√
2) (µm) 13 65 63
Nominal vertical half crossing-angle (μrad) ±145 0 0
Typical luminosity/bunch (μb−1 s−1) 0.8 0.09 0.09
Pile-up parameter μ (interactions/crossing) 5.2 0.6 0.6
Scan sequence 3 sets of centred x + y
scans (I–III)
4 sets of centred x + y
scans (IV–VI, VIII)
plus 2 sets of x + y
off-axis scans (VII,
IX)
4 sets of centred x + y
scans (X, XI, XIV ,
XV) plus 2 sets of
x + y off-axis scans
(XII, XIII)
Total scan steps per plane 25 25 (sets IV–VII) 25
17 (sets VIII–IX)
Maximum beam separation ±6σ
nom
b ±6σnom
b ±6σnom
b
Scan duration per step (s) 20 30 30
To further test the reproducibility of the calibration pro-
cedure, multiple centred-scan 7 sets, each consisting of one
horizontal scan and one vertical scan, are executed in the
same scan session. In November for instance, two sets of
centred scans (X and XI) were performed in quick succes-
sion, followed by two sets of off-axis scans (XII and XIII),
where the beams were separated by 340 and 200µm respec-
tively in the non-scanning direction. A third set of centred
scans (XIV) was then performed as a reproducibility check.
A fourth centred scan set (XV) was carried out approximately
one day later in a different LHC ﬁll.
The variation of the calibration results between individ-
ual scan sets in a given scan session is used to quantify the
reproducibility of the optimal relative beam position, the con-
volved beam sizes, and the visible cross-sections. The repro-
ducibility and consistency of the visible cross-section results
across the April, July and November scan sessions provide
a measure of the long-term stability of the response of each
detector, and are used to assess potential systematic biases
7 A centred (or on-axis) beam-separation scan is one where the beams
are kept centred on each other in the transverse direction orthogonal to
the scan axis. An offset (or off-axis) scan is one where the beams are
partially separated in the non-scanning direction.
in the vdM-calibration technique under different accelerator
conditions.
4.3 vdM-scan analysis methodology
The 2012 vdM scans were used to derive calibrations for
the LUCID_EventOR, BCM_EventOR and track-counting
algorithms. Since there are two distinct BCM readouts,
calibrations are determined separately for the horizontal
(BCMH) and vertical (BCMV) detector pairs. Similarly, the
fully inclusive (EventOR) and single-arm inclusive (EventA,
EventC) algorithms are calibrated independently. For the
April scan session, the dedicated track-counting event stream
(Sect. 3.2) used the same random trigger as during physics
operation. For the July and November sessions, where the
typical event rate was lower by an order of magnitude, track
counting was performed on events triggered by the ATLAS
Minimum Bias Trigger Scintillator (MBTS) [1]. Corrections
for MBTS trigger inefﬁciency and for CTP-induced deadtime
are applied, at each scan step separately, when calculating the
average number of tracks per event.
For each individual algorithm, the vdM data are analysed
in the same manner. The speciﬁc visible interaction rate
123


--- Page 9 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 9 of 45 653
μvis/(n1n2) is measured, for each colliding-bunch pair, as
a function of the nominal beam separation (i.e. the separa-
tion speciﬁed by the LHC control system) in two orthogonal
scan directions ( x and y). The value of μ
vis is determined
from the raw counting rate using the formalism described in
Sect. 3.1 or 3.2. The speciﬁc interaction rate is used so that
the calculation of/Sigma1
x and /Sigma1y properly takes into account the
bunch-current variation during the scan; the measurement of
the bunch-population product n1n2 is detailed in Sect. 4.10.
Figure 1 shows examples of horizontal-scan curves mea-
sured for a single BCID using two different algorithms. At
each scan step, the visible interaction rate μvis is ﬁrst cor-
rected for afterglow, instrumental noise and beam-halo back-
grounds as described in Sect.4.4, and the nominal beam sep-
aration is rescaled using the calibrated beam-separation scale
(Sect. 4.5). The impact of orbit drifts is addressed in Sect.4.6,
and that of beam–beam deﬂections and of the dynamic- β
effect is discussed in Sect. 4.7. For each BCID and each
scan independently, a characteristic function is ﬁtted to the
corrected data; the peak of the ﬁtted function provides a mea-
surement ofμ
MAX
vis , while the convolved width/Sigma1is computed
from the integral of the function using Eq. (8). Depending on
the beam conditions, this function can be a single-Gaussian
function plus a constant term, a double-Gaussian function
plus a constant term, a Gaussian function times a polynomial
(plus a constant term), or other variations. As described in
Sect. 5, the differences between the results extracted using
different characteristic functions are taken into account as a
systematic uncertainty in the calibration result.
The combination of one horizontal (x) scan and one ver-
tical ( y) scan is the minimum needed to perform a mea-
surement of σ
vis. In principle, while the μMAX
vis parameter is
detector- and algorithm-speciﬁc, the convolved widths /Sigma1x
and /Sigma1y, which together specify the head-on reference lumi-
nosity, do not need to be determined using that same detector
and algorithm. In practice, it is convenient to extract all the
parameters associated with a given algorithm consistently
from a single set of scan curves, and the average value of
μ
MAX
vis between the two scan planes is used. The correlations
between the ﬁtted values ofμMAX
vis , /Sigma1x and /Sigma1y are taken into
account when evaluating the statistical uncertainty affecting
σvis.
Each BCID should yield the same measured σvis value,
and so the average over all BCIDs is taken as the σvis mea-
surement for the scan set under consideration. The bunch-to-
bunch consistency of the visible cross-section for a given
luminosity algorithm, as well as the level of agreement
between /Sigma1values measured by different detectors and algo-
rithms in a given scan set, are discussed in Sect. 5 as part of
the systematic uncertainty.
Once visible cross-sections have been determined from
each scan set as described above, two beam-dynamical
effects must be considered (and if appropriate corrected
 [mm]XδHorizontal beam separation 
0.6− 0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4 0.6
]-2p)11 [(102n1 / n
vis
μ
6−10
5−10
4−10
3−10
2−10
1−10
1
10
ATLAS
Scan X
BCID 841
LUCID_EventOR
Signal
Signal bkg. subt.
Noise + afterglow
Beam halo
(a)
 [mm]XδHorizontal beam separation 
0.6− 0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4 0.6
]-2p)11 [(102n1 / n
vis
μ
6−10
5−10
4−10
3−10
2−10
1−10
1
10
ATLAS
Scan X
BCID 841
BCMH_EventOR
Signal
Signal bkg. subt.
Noise + afterglow
Beam halo
(b)
Fig. 1 Beam-separation dependence of the speciﬁc visible interaction
rate measured using the a LUCID_EventOR and b BCMH_EventOR
algorithms during horizontal scan X, before (red circles)a n da f t e r(pur-
ple squares) afterglow, noise and single-beam background subtraction.
The subtracted contributions are shown as triangles. The scan curves
are ﬁtted to a Gaussian function multiplied by a sixth-order polynomial,
plus a constant
for), both associated with the shape of the colliding bunches
in transverse phase space: non-factorization and emittance
growth. These are discussed in Sects.4.8 and 4.9 respectively.
4.4 Background subtraction
The vdM calibration procedure is affected by three distinct
background contributions to the luminosity signal: afterglow,
instrumental noise, and single-beam backgrounds.
As detailed in Refs. [ 3,5], both the LUCID and BCM
detectors observe some small activity in the BCIDs immedi-
ately following a collision, which in later BCIDs decays to
a baseline value with several different time constants. This
afterglow is most likely caused by photons from nuclear de-
excitation, which in turn is induced by the hadronic cascades
initiated by pp collision products. For a given bunch pat-
123


--- Page 10 ---
653 Page 10 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
tern, the afterglow level is observed to be proportional to the
luminosity in the colliding-bunch slots. DuringvdM scans, it
lies three to four orders of magnitude below the luminosity
signal, but reaches a few tenths of a percent during physics
running because of the much denser bunch pattern.
Instrumental noise is, under normal circumstances, a few
times smaller than the single-beam backgrounds, and remains
negligible except at the largest beam separations. However,
during a one-month period in late 2012 that includes the
November vdM scans, the A arm of both BCM detectors
was affected by high-rate electronic noise corresponding to
about 0.5% (1%) of the visible interaction rate, at the peak of
the scan, in the BCMH (BCMV) diamond sensors (Fig. 1b).
This temporary perturbation, the cause of which could not
be identiﬁed, disappeared a few days after the scan session.
Nonetheless, it was large enough that a careful subtraction
procedure had to be implemented in order for this noise not
to bias the ﬁt of the BCM luminosity-scan curves.
Since afterglow and instrumental noise both induce ran-
dom hits at a rate that varies slowly from one BCID to the
next, they are subtracted together from the raw visible inter-
action rateμ
vis in each colliding-bunch slot. Their combined
magnitude is estimated using the rate measured in the imme-
diately preceding bunch slot, assuming that the variation of
the afterglow level from one bunch slot to the next can be
neglected.
A third background contribution arises from activity cor-
related with the passage of a single beam through the detec-
tor. This activity is attributed to a combination of shower
debris from beam–gas interactions and from beam-tail parti-
cles that populate the beam halo and impinge on the luminos-
ity detectors in time with the circulating bunch. It is observed
to be proportional to the bunch population, can differ slightly
between beams 1 and 2, but is otherwise uniform for all
bunches in a given beam. The total single-beam background
in a colliding-bunch slot is estimated by measuring the single-
beam rates in unpaired bunches (after subtracting the after-
glow and noise as done for colliding-bunch slots), separately
for beam 1 and beam 2, rescaling them by the ratio of the
bunch populations in the unpaired and colliding bunches,
and summing the contributions from the two beams. This
background typically amounts to 2 × 10
−4 (8 × 10−4)o f
the luminosity at the peak of the scan for the LUCID (BCM)
EventOR algorithms. Because it depends neither on the lumi-
nosity nor on the beam separation, it can become comparable
to the actual luminosity in the tails of the scans.
4.5 Determination of the absolute beam-separation scale
Another key input to the vdM scan technique is the knowl-
edge of the beam separation at each scan step. The ability to
measure /Sigma1depends upon knowing the absolute distance by
which the beams are separated during the vdM scan, which
m]μx-position of luminous centroid [
400−
300−
200−
100−
0
100
ATLAS
*= 11 m β = 8 TeV  s
LHC Fill 2855 
 Data
 Fit
Beam-2 horizontal-bump amplitude [µm]
200− 100− 0 100 200
m]μData - Fit [
2−
1.5−
1−
0.5−
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Fig. 2 Length-scale calibration scan for the x direction of beam 2.
Shown is the measured displacement of the luminous centroid as a
function of the expected displacement based on the corrector bump
amplitude. The line is a linear ﬁt to the data, and the residual is shown
in the bottom panel. Error bars are statistical only
is controlled by a set of closed orbit bumps8 applied locally
near the ATLAS IP. To determine this beam-separation scale,
dedicated calibration measurements were performed close in
time to the April and July scan sessions using the same optical
conﬁguration at the interaction point. Such length-scale scans
are performed by displacing both beams transversely by ﬁve
steps over a range of up to±3σ
nom
b , at each step keeping the
beams well centred on each other in the scanning plane. The
actual displacement of the luminous region can then be mea-
sured with high accuracy using the primary-vertex position
reconstructed by the ATLAS tracking detectors. Since each
of the four bump amplitudes (two beams in two transverse
directions) depends on different magnet and lattice functions,
the length-scale calibration scans are performed so that each
of these four calibration constants can be extracted indepen-
dently. The July 2012 calibration data for the horizontal bump
of beam 2 are presented in Fig. 2. The scale factor which
relates the nominal beam displacement to the measured dis-
placement of the luminous centroid is given by the slope of
the ﬁtted straight line; the intercept is irrelevant.
Since the coefﬁcients relating magnet currents to beam
displacements depend on the interaction-region optics, the
absolute length scale depends on the β
⋆ setting and must
8 A closed orbit bump is a local distortion of the beam orbit that is
implemented using pairs of steering dipoles located on either side of
the affected region. In this particular case, these bumps are tuned to
offset the trajectory of either beam parallel to itself at the IP, in either
the horizontal or the vertical direction.
123


--- Page 11 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 11 of 45 653
Table 3 Length-scale calibrations at the ATLAS interaction point at√ s = 8 TeV . Values shown are the ratio of the beam displacement mea-
sured by ATLAS using the average primary-vertex position, to the nom-
inal displacement entered into the accelerator control system. Ratios are
shown for each individual beam in both planes, as well as for the beam-
separation scale that determines that of the convolved beam sizes in the
vdM scan. The uncertainties are statistical only
Calibration session(s) April 2012 July 2012 (applicable to November)
β⋆ 0.6 m 11 m
Horizontal Vertical Horizontal Vertical
Displacement scale
Beam 1 0 .9882 ± 0.0008 0 .9881 ± 0.0008 0 .9970 ± 0.0004 0 .9961 ± 0.0006
Beam 2 0 .9822 ± 0.0008 0 .9897 ± 0.0009 0 .9964 ± 0.0004 0 .9951 ± 0.0004
Separation scale 0 .9852 ± 0.0006 0 .9889 ± 0.0006 0 .9967 ± 0.0003 0 .9956 ± 0.0004
be recalibrated when the latter changes. The results of the
2012 length-scale calibrations are summarized in Table 3.
Because the beam-separation scans discussed in Sect. 4.2
are performed by displacing the two beams symmetrically
in opposite directions, the relevant scale factor in the deter-
mination of /Sigma1is the average of the scale factors for beam
1 and beam 2 in each plane. A total correction of −2.57%
(−0.77%) is applied to the convolved-width product /Sigma1x/Sigma1y
and to the visible cross-sections measured during the April
(July and November) 2012 vdM scans.
4.6 Orbit-drift corrections
Transverse drifts of the individual beam orbits at the IP dur-
ing a scan session can distort the luminosity-scan curves and,
if large enough, bias the determination of the overlap inte-
grals and/or of the peak interaction rate. Such effects are
monitored by extrapolating to the IP beam-orbit segments
measured using beam-position monitors (BPMs) located in
the LHC arcs [17], where the beam trajectories should remain
unaffected by thevdM closed-orbit bumps across the IP. This
procedure is applied to each beam separately and provides
measurements of the relative drift of the two beams during
the scan session, which are used to correct the beam separa-
tion at each scan step as well as between the x and y scans.
The resulting impact on the visible cross-section varies from
one scan set to the next; it does not exceed ±0.6% in any
2012 scan set, except for scan set X where the orbits drifted
rapidly enough for the correction to reach +1.1%.
4.7 Beam–beam corrections
When charged-particle bunches collide, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld generated by a bunch in beam 1 distorts the individ-
ual particle trajectories in the corresponding bunch of beam
2 (and vice-versa). This so-called beam–beam interaction
affects the scan data in two ways.
First, when the bunches are not exactly centred on each
other in the x–y plane, their electromagnetic repulsion
induces a mutual angular kick [18] of a fraction of a micro-
radian and modulates the actual transverse separation at the
IP in a manner that depends on the separation itself. The
phenomenon is well known from e
+e− colliders and has
been observed at the LHC at a level consistent with predic-
tions [17]. If left unaccounted for, these beam–beam deﬂec-
tions would bias the measurement of the overlap integrals in
a manner that depends on the bunch parameters.
The second phenomenon, called dynamic β [19], arises
from the mutual defocusing of the two colliding bunches:
this effect is conceptually analogous to inserting a small
quadrupole at the collision point. The resulting fractional
change in β
⋆, or equivalently the optical demagniﬁcation
between the LHC arcs and the collision point, varies with
the transverse beam separation, slightly modifying, at each
scan step, the effective beam separation in both planes (and
thereby also the collision rate), and resulting in a distortion
of the shape of the vdM scan curves.
The amplitude and the beam-separation dependence of
both effects depend similarly on the beam energy, the
tunes
9 and the unperturbed β-functions, as well as on the
bunch intensities and transverse beam sizes. The beam–beam
deﬂections and associated orbit distortions are calculated
analytically [13] assuming elliptical Gaussian beams that col-
lide in ATLAS only. For a typical bunch, the peak angular
kick during the November 2012 scans is about ±0.25 µrad,
and the corresponding peak increase in relative beam sepa-
ration amounts to ±1.7 µm. The MAD-X optics code [ 20]
is used to validate this analytical calculation, and to verify
that higher-order dynamical effects (such as the orbit shifts
induced at other collision points by beam–beam deﬂections
at the ATLAS IP) result in negligible corrections to the ana-
lytical prediction.
The dynamic evolution ofβ
⋆ during the scan is modelled
using the MAD-X simulation assuming bunch parameters
representative of the May 2011vdM scan [3], and then scaled
9 The tune of a storage ring is deﬁned as the betatron phase advance
per turn, or equivalently as the number of betatron oscillations over one
full ring circumference.
123


--- Page 12 ---
653 Page 12 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
using the beam energies, theβ⋆ settings, as well as the mea-
sured intensities and convolved beam sizes of each colliding-
bunch pair. The correction function is intrinsically indepen-
dent of whether the bunches collide in ATLAS only, or also at
other LHC interaction points [19]. For the November session,
the peak-to-peak β
⋆ variation during a scan is about 1.1%.
At each scan step, the predicted deﬂection-induced change
in beam separation is added to the nominal beam separa-
tion, and the dynamic-β effect is accounted for by rescaling
both the effective beam separation and the measured visible
interaction rate to reﬂect the beam-separation dependence
of the IP β-functions. Comparing the results of the 2012
scan analysis without and with beam–beam corrections, it is
found that the visible cross-sections are increased by 1.2–
1.8% by the deﬂection correction, and reduced by 0.2–0.3%
by the dynamic- β correction. The net combined effect of
these beam–beam corrections is a 0.9–1.5% increase of the
visible cross-sections, depending on the scan set considered.
4.8 Non-factorization effects
The original vdM formalism [2] explicitly assumes that the
particle densities in each bunch can be factorized into inde-
pendent horizontal and vertical components, such that the
term 1/2π/Sigma1
x/Sigma1y in Eq. (9) fully describes the overlap integral
of the two beams. If this factorization assumption is violated,
the horizontal (vertical) convolved beam width/Sigma1
x (/Sigma1y)i sn o
longer independent of the vertical (horizontal) beam separa-
tion δy (δx ); similarly, the transverse luminous size [7] in one
plane (σxL or σyL), as extracted from the spatial distribution
of reconstructed collision vertices, depends on the separation
in the other plane. The generalized vdM formalism summa-
rized by Eq. ( 10) correctly handles such two-dimensional
luminosity distributions, provided the dependence of these
distributions on the beam separation in the transverse plane
is known with sufﬁcient accuracy.
Non-factorization effects are unambiguously observed in
some of the 2012 scan sessions, both from signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in /Sigma1x (/Sigma1y) between a standard scan and an off-
axis scan, during which the beams are partially separated in
the non-scanning plane (Sect. 4.8.1), and from the δx (δy)
dependence of σyL (σxL) during a standard horizontal (ver-
tical) scan (Sect. 4.8.2). Non-factorization effects can also
be quantiﬁed, albeit with more restrictive assumptions, by
performing a simultaneous ﬁt to horizontal and verticalvdM
scan curves using a non-factorizable function to describe the
simultaneous dependence of the luminosity on the x and y
beam separation (Sect. 4.8.3).
A large part of the scan-to-scan irreproducibility observed
during the April and July scan sessions can be attributed
to non-factorization effects, as discussed for ATLAS in
Sect. 4.8.4 below and as independently reported by the LHCb
Collaboration [21]. The strength of the effect varies widely
across vdM scan sessions, differs somewhat from one bunch
to the next and evolves with time within one LHC ﬁll. Overall,
the body of available observations can be explained neither
by residual linearx–y coupling in the LHC optics [3,22], nor
by crossing-angle or beam–beam effects; instead, it points to
non-linear transverse correlations in the phase space of the
individual bunches. This phenomenon was never envisaged
at previous colliders, and was considered for the ﬁrst time
at the LHC [ 3] as a possible source of systematic uncer-
tainty in the absolute luminosity scale. More recently, the
non-factorizability of individual bunch density distributions
was demonstrated directly by an LHCb beam–gas imaging
analysis [21].
4.8.1 Off-axis vdM scans
An unambiguous signature of non-factorization can be pro-
vided by comparing the transverse convolved width mea-
sured during centred (or on-axis) vdM scans with the same
quantity extracted from an offset (or off-axis) scan, i.e. one
where the two beams are signiﬁcantly separated in the direc-
tion orthogonal to that of the scan. This is illustrated in
Fig. 3a. The beams remained vertically centred on each other
during the ﬁrst three horizontal scans (the ﬁrst horizontal
scan) of LHC ﬁll 2855 (ﬁll 2856), and were separated verti-
cally by approximately 340µm (roughly 4σ
b) during the last
horizontal scan in each ﬁll. In both ﬁlls, the horizontal con-
volved beam size is signiﬁcantly larger when the beams are
vertically separated, demonstrating that the horizontal lumi-
nosity distribution depends on the vertical beam separation,
i.e. that the horizontal and vertical luminosity distributions
do not factorize.
The same measurement was carried out during the Novem-
ber scan session: the beams remained vertically centred on
each other during the ﬁrst, second and last scans (Fig. 3b),
and were separated vertically by about 340 (200) µm dur-
ing the third (fourth) scan. The horizontal convolved beam
size increases with time at an approximately constant rate,
reﬂecting transverse-emittance growth. No signiﬁcant devia-
tion from this trend is observed when the beams are separated
vertically, suggesting that the horizontal luminosity distribu-
tion is independent of the vertical beam separation, i.e. that
during the November scan session the horizontal and vertical
luminosity distributions approximately factorize.
4.8.2 Determination of single-beam parameters from
luminous-region and luminosity-scan data
While a single off-axis scan can provide convincing evi-
dence for non-factorization, it samples only one thin slice
in the (δ
x , δy) beam-separation space and is therefore insuf-
ﬁcient to fully determine the two-dimensional luminosity
distribution. Characterizing the latter by performing an x–
123


--- Page 13 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 13 of 45 653
Geneva local time [hh:mm]
10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 22:00
m]μ [xΣ
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
ATLAS
6582lliF5582lliF
← scan
offset
→scan
offset
BCID 1
BCID 41
BCID 81
BCID 121
BCID 161
(a)
Geneva local time [hh:mm]
18:00 19:00 20:00 21:00 22:00 23:00
m]μ [xΣ
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
ATLAS
scans
offset
{
Fill 3311
BCID 1
BCID 41
BCID 81
BCID 121
BCID 161
(b)
Fig. 3 Time evolution of the horizontal convolved beam size /Sigma1x
for ﬁve different colliding-bunch pairs (BCIDs), measured using the
LUCID_EventOR luminosity algorithm during thea July andb Novem-
ber 2012 vdM-scan sessions
y grid scan (rather than two one-dimensional x and y scans)
would be prohibitively expensive in terms of beam time,
as well as limited by potential emittance-growth biases.
The strategy, therefore, is to retain the standard vdM tech-
nique (which assumes factorization) as the baseline calibra-
tion method, and to use the data to constrain possible non-
factorization biases. In the absence of input from beam–gas
imaging (which requires a vertex-position resolution within
the reach of LHCb only), the most powerful approach so far
has been the modelling of the simultaneous beam-separation-
dependence of the luminosity and of the luminous-region
geometry. In this procedure, the parameters describing the
transverse proton-density distribution of individual bunches
are determined by ﬁtting the evolution, duringvdM scans, not
only of the luminosity itself but also of the position, orienta-
tion and shape of its spatial distribution, as reﬂected by that
of reconstructed pp-collision vertices [23]. Luminosity pro-
ﬁles are then generated for simulated vdM scans using these
ﬁtted single-beam parameters, and analysed in the same fash-
ion as real vdM scan data. The impact of non-factorization
on the absolute luminosity scale is quantiﬁed by the ratio
R
NF of the “measured” luminosity extracted from the one-
dimensional simulated luminosity proﬁles using the standard
vdM method, to the “true” luminosity from the computed
four-dimensional (x, y, z, t) overlap integral [7] of the single-
bunch distributions at zero beam separation. This technique
is closely related to beam–beam imaging [7,24,25], with the
notable difference that it is much less sensitive to the vertex-
position resolution because it is used only to estimate a small
fractional correction to the overlap integral, rather than its
full value.
The luminous region is modelled by a three-dimensional
(3D) ellipsoid [7]. Its parameters are extracted, at each scan
step, from an unbinned maximum-likelihood ﬁt of a 3D Gaus-
sian function to the spatial distribution of the reconstructed
primary vertices that were collected, at the corresponding
beam separation, from the limited subset of colliding-bunch
pairs monitored by the high-rate, dedicated ID-only data
stream (Sect. 3.2). The vertex-position resolution, which is
somewhat larger (smaller) than the transverse luminous size
during scan sets I–III (scan sets IV–XV), is determined from
the data as part of the ﬁtting procedure [ 23]. It potentially
impacts the reported horizontal and vertical luminous sizes,
but not the measured position, orientation nor length of the
luminous ellipsoid.
The single-bunch proton-density distributionsρ
B(x, y, z)
are parameterized, independently for each beam B (B =1 ,
2), as the non-factorizable sum of up to three 3D Gaussian
or super-Gaussian [26] distributions (Ga, Gb, Gc) with arbi-
trary widths and orientations [27,28]:
ρB = waB×GaB+(1−waB)[wbB×GbB+(1−wbB)×GcB] ,
where the weightswa(b)B , (1− wa(b)B) add up to one by con-
struction. The overlap integral of these density distributions,
which allows for a crossing angle in both planes, is evaluated
at each scan step to predict the produced luminosity and the
geometry of the luminous region for a given set of bunch
parameters. This calculation takes into account the impact,
on the relevant observables, of the luminosity backgrounds,
orbit drifts and beam–beam corrections. The bunch parame-
ters are then adjusted, by means of aχ
2-minimization proce-
dure, to provide the best possible description of the centroid
position, the orientation and the resolution-corrected widths
of the luminous region measured at each step of a given set of
on-axis x and y scans. Such a ﬁt is illustrated in Fig.4 for one
of the horizontal scans in the July 2012 session. The good-
ness of ﬁt is satisfactory (χ
2 = 1.3 per degree of freedom),
even if some systematic deviations are apparent in the tails of
the scan. The strong horizontal-separation dependence of the
123


--- Page 14 ---
653 Page 14 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Horizontal beam separation [mm]
0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4
]-2p)11 [(102n1 / nvisμ
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
LHC Fill 2855
Data (Centred x-scan IV July 2012)
Simulated profile of each beam:
3-D double Gaussian
ATLAS
(a)
Horizontal beam separation [mm]
0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4
Horizontal luminous centroid position [mm]
0.02−
0.01−
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
LHC Fill 2855
Data (Centred x-scan IV July 2012)
Simulated profile of each beam:
3-D double Gaussian
ATLAS
(b)
Horizontal beam separation [mm]
0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4
Horizontal luminous width [mm]
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1 LHC Fill 2855
Data (Centred x-scan IV July 2012)
Simulated profile of each beam:
3-D double Gaussian
ATLAS
(c)
Horizontal beam separation [mm]
0.4− 0.2− 0 0.2 0.4
Vertical luminous width [mm]
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1 LHC Fill 2855
Data (Centred x-scan IV July 2012)
Simulated profile of each beam:
3-D double Gaussian
ATLAS
(d)
Fig. 4 Beam-separation dependence of the luminosity and of a sub-
set of luminous-region parameters during horizontal vdM scan IV . The
points represent a the speciﬁc visible interaction rate (or equivalently
the speciﬁc luminosity), b the horizontal position of the luminous cen-
troid, c, d the horizontal and vertical luminous widths σxL and σyL.
The red line is the result of the ﬁt described in the text
vertical luminous size (Fig.4d) conﬁrms the presence of sig-
niﬁcant non-factorization effects, as already established from
the off-axis luminosity data for that scan session (Fig. 3a).
This procedure is applied to all 2012 vdM scan sets,
and the results are summarized in Fig. 5. The luminosity
extracted from the standard vdM analysis with the assump-
tion that factorization is valid, is larger than that com-
puted from the reconstructed single-bunch parameters. This
implies that neglecting non-factorization effects in the vdM
calibration leads to overestimating the absolute luminos-
ity scale (or equivalently underestimating the visible cross-
section) by up to 3% (4.5%) in the April (July) scan session.
Non-factorization biases remain below 0.8% in the Novem-
ber scans, thanks to bunch-tailoring in the LHC injector
chain [16]. These observations are consistent, in terms both
of absolute magnitude and of time evolution within a scan
session, with those reported by LHCb [21] and CMS [29,30]
in the same ﬁlls.
4.8.3 Non-factorizable vdM ﬁts to luminosity-scan data
A second approach, which does not use luminous-region
data, performs a combined ﬁt of the measured beam-
separation dependence of the speciﬁc visible interaction rate
to horizontal- and vertical-scan data simultaneously, in order
to determine the overlap integral(s) deﬁned by either Eq. (8)
or Eq. (10). Considered ﬁt functions include factorizable or
non-factorizable combinations of two-dimensional Gaussian
or other functions (super-Gaussian, Gaussian times polyno-
mial) where the (non-)factorizability between the two scan
directions is imposed by construction.
The fractional difference between σ
vis values extracted
from such factorizable and non-factorizable ﬁts, i.e. the mul-
tiplicative correction factor to be applied to visible cross-
sections extracted from a standard vdM analysis, is consis-
tent with the equivalent ratioR
NF extracted from the analysis
of Sect. 4.8.2 within 0.5% or less for all scan sets. Com-
123


--- Page 15 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 15 of 45 653
Fig. 5 Ratio RNF of the
luminosity determined by the
vdM method assuming
factorization, to that evaluated
from the overlap integral of the
reconstructed single-bunch
proﬁles at the peak of each scan
set. The results are colour-coded
by scan session. Each point
corresponds to one
colliding-bunch pair in the
dedicated ID-only stream. The
statistical errors are smaller than
the symbols
Scan Set Number
NFR
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
I II III IV     V     VI    VIII X XI XIV   XV
BCID 1 - April
BCID 241 - April
BCID 2881 - April
BCID 3121 - April
BCID 1 - July
BCID 721 - July
BCID 1821 - July
BCID 1 - November
BCID 2361 - November
BCID 2881 - November
ATLAS  = 8 TeVs
Scan Set Number
I II III IV V VI VIII X XI XIV XV
 - 1 [ % ]XIV
visσ/visσ
5−
4−
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
5
All corrections
Excl. non-factorization
ATLAS =8 TeVs
Fill: 2520 2855 2856 3311 3316
Fig. 6 Comparison of vdM-calibrated visible cross-sections for the
default track-counting algorithm, with all corrections applied (black cir-
cles) and with all corrections except for non-factorization (red squares).
Shown is the fractional difference between the visible cross-section
from a given scan set, and the fully corrected visible cross-section from
scan set XIV . The LHC ﬁll numbers corresponding to each scan set are
indicated
bined with the results of the off-axis scans, this conﬁrms that
while the April and July vdM analyses require substantial
non-factorization corrections, non-factorization biases dur-
ing the November scan session remain small.
4.8.4 Non-factorization corrections and scan-to-scan
consistency
Non-factorization corrections signiﬁcantly improve the repro-
ducibility of the calibration results (Fig. 6). Within a given
LHC ﬁll and in the absence of non-factorization correc-
tions, the visible cross-section increases with time, as also
observed at other IPs in the same ﬁlls [ 21,29], suggest-
ing that the underlying non-linear correlations evolve over
time. Applying the non-factorization corrections extracted
from the luminous-region analysis dramatically improves
the scan-to-scan consistency within the April and July scan
sessions, as well as from one session to the next. The
1.0–1.4% inconsistency between the fully corrected cross-
sections (black circles) in scan sets I–III and in later scans,
as well as the difference between ﬁlls 2855 and 2856 in the
July session, are discussed in Sect. 4.11.
4.9 Emittance-growth correction
The vdM scan formalism assumes that both convolved beam
sizes /Sigma1
x , /Sigma1y (and therefore the transverse emittances of each
beam) remain constant, both during a single x or y scan and
in the interval between the horizontal scan and the associated
vertical scan.
Emittance growth within a scan would manifest itself by a
slight distortion of the scan curve. The associated systematic
uncertainty, determined from pseudo-scans simulated with
the observed level of emittance growth, was found to be neg-
ligible.
Emittance growth between scans manifests itself by a
slight increase of the measured value of /Sigma1from one scan to
the next, and by a simultaneous decrease in speciﬁc lumi-
nosity. Each scan set requires 40–60 min, during which
time the convolved beam sizes each grow by 1–2%, and
the peak speciﬁc interaction rate decreases accordingly as
1/(/Sigma1
x/Sigma1y). This is illustrated in Fig.7, which displays the/Sigma1x
and μMAX
vis /(n1n2) values measured by the BCMH_EventOR
algorithm during scan sets XI, XIV and XV . For each BCID,
the convolved beam sizes increase, and the peak speciﬁc
interaction rate decreases, from scan XI to scan XIV; since
scan XV took place very early in the following ﬁll, the cor-
responding transverse beam sizes (speciﬁc rates) are smaller
(larger) than for the previous scan sets.
123


--- Page 16 ---
653 Page 16 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
m]μ [xΣ
105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
BCMH_EventOR
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(a)
]-2 p)11) [(102 n1/(n
vis
MAXμ
0.035 0.045 0.055
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
BCMH_EventOR
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(b)
Fig. 7 Bunch-by-bunch a horizontal convolved beam size and b peak
speciﬁc interaction rate measured in scan sets XI, XIV , and XV for the
BCMH_EventOR algorithm. The vertical lines represent the weighted
average over colliding-bunch pairs for each scan set separately. The
error bars are statistical only, and are approximately the size of the
marker
If the horizontal and vertical emittances grow at identi-
cal rates, the procedure described in Sect. 4.3 remains valid
without any need for correction, provided that the decrease
in peak rate is fully accounted for by the increase in (/Sigma1x/Sigma1y),
and that the peak speciﬁc interaction rate in Eq. (11)i sc o m -
puted as the average of the speciﬁc rates at the peak of the
horizontal and the vertical scan:
μMAX
vis /n1n2 = (μMAX
vis /n1n2)x + (μMAX
vis /n1n2)y
2 .
The horizontal-emittance growth rate is measured from
the bunch-by-bunch difference in ﬁtted convolved width
between two consecutive horizontal scans in the same LHC
ﬁll, and similarly for the vertical emittance. For LHC ﬁll
3311 (scan sets X–XIV), these measurements reveal that the
horizontal convolved width grew 1.5–2 times faster than the
vertical width. The potential bias associated with unequal
horizontal and vertical growth rates can be corrected for by
interpolating the measured values of /Sigma1
x , /Sigma1y and μMAX
vis to a
common reference time, assuming that all three observables
evolve linearly with time. This reference time is in principle
arbitrary: it can be, for instance, the peak of the x scan (in
which case only /Sigma1
y needs to be interpolated), or the peak
of the y scan, or any other value. The visible cross-section,
computed from Eq. ( 11) using measured values projected
to a common reference time, should be independent of the
reference time chosen.
Applying this procedure to the November scan session
results in fractional corrections to σ
vis of 1.38, 0.22 and
0.04% for scan sets X, XI and XIV , respectively. The cor-
rection for scan set X is exceptionally large because opera-
tional difﬁculties forced an abnormally long delay (almost
two hours) between the horizontal scan and the vertical scan,
exacerbating the impact of the unequal horizontal and verti-
cal growth rates; its magnitude is validated by the noticeable
improvement it brings to the scan-to-scan reproducibility of
σ
vis.
No correction is available for scan set XV , as no other scans
were performed in LHC ﬁll 3316. However, in that case the
delay between the x and y scans was short enough, and the
consistency of the resulting σ
vis values with those in scan
sets XI and XIV sufﬁciently good (Fig. 6), that this missing
correction is small enough to be covered by the systematic
uncertainties discussed in Sects. 5.2.6 and 5.2.8.
Applying the same procedure to the July scan ses-
sion yields emittance-growth corrections below 0.3% in all
cases. However, the above-described correction procedure
is, strictly speaking, applicable only when non-factorization
effects are small enough to be neglected. When the factor-
ization hypothesis no longer holds, the very concept of sepa-
rating horizontal and vertical emittance growth is ill-deﬁned.
In addition, the time evolution of the ﬁtted one-dimensional
convolved widths and of the associated peak speciﬁc rates is
presumably more inﬂuenced by the progressive dilution, over
time, of the non-factorization effects discussed in Sect. 4.8
above. Therefore, and given that the non-factorization cor-
123


--- Page 17 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 17 of 45 653
Table 4 Systematic
uncertainties affecting the
bunch-population product n
1n2
during the 2012 vdM scans
Scan set number I–III IV–VII VIII–IX X–XIV XV
LHC ﬁll number 2520 2855 2856 3311 3316
Fractional systematic uncertainty (%)
Total intensity scale (DCCT) 0.26 0.21 0.21 0.22 0.23
Bunch-by-bunch fraction (FBCT) 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04
Ghost charge (LHCb beam–gas) 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.02
Satellites (longitudinal density monitor) 0.07 0.02 0.03 0.01 <0.01
Total 0.27 0.22 0.22 0.24 0.23
rections applied to scan sets I–VIII (Fig. 5) are up to ten
times larger than a typical emittance-growth correction, no
such correction is applied to the April and July scan results;
an appropriately conservative systematic uncertainty must be
assigned instead.
4.10 Bunch-population determination
The bunch-population measurements are performed by the
LHC Bunch-Current Normalization Working Group and
have been described in detail in Refs. [21,27,31–33]. A brief
summary of the analysis is presented here. The fractional
uncertainties affecting the bunch-population product (n
1n2)
are summarized in Table 4.
The LHC bunch currents are determined in a multi-step
process due to the different capabilities of the available
instrumentation. First, the total intensity of each beam is
monitored by two identical and redundant DC current trans-
formers (DCCT), which are high-accuracy devices but have
no ability to distinguish individual bunch populations. Each
beam is also monitored by two fast beam-current transform-
ers (FBCT), which measure relative bunch currents individ-
ually for each of the 3564 nominal 25 ns slots in each beam;
these fractional bunch populations are converted into abso-
lute bunch currents using the overall current scale provided
by the DCCT. Finally, corrections are applied to account for
out-of-time charge present in a given BCID but not colliding
at the interaction point.
A precision current source with a relative accuracy of
0.05% is used to calibrate the DCCT at regular intervals.
An exhaustive analysis of the various sources of system-
atic uncertainty in the absolute scale of the DCCT, including
in particular residual non-linearities, long-term stability and
dependence on beam conditions, is documented in Ref. [31].
In practice, the uncertainty depends on the beam intensity
and the acquisition conditions, and must be evaluated on a
ﬁll-by-ﬁll basis; it typically translates into a 0.2–0.3% uncer-
tainty in the absolute luminosity scale.
Because of the highly demanding bandwidth speciﬁca-
tions dictated by single-bunch current measurements, the
FBCT response is potentially sensitive to the frequency spec-
trum radiated by the circulating bunches, timing adjust-
ments with respect to the RF phase, and bunch-to-bunch
intensity or length variations. Dedicated laboratory mea-
surements and beam experiments, comparisons with the
response of other bunch-aware beam instrumentation (such
as the ATLAS beam pick-up timing system), as well as
the imposition of constraints on the bunch-to-bunch con-
sistency of the measured visible cross-sections, resulted in
a <0.04% systematic luminosity-calibration uncertainty in
the luminosity scale arising from the relative-intensity mea-
surements [27,32].
Additional corrections to the bunch-by-bunch population
are made to correct for ghost charge and satellite bunches.
Ghost charge refers to protons that are present in nomi-
nally empty bunch slots at a level below the FBCT thresh-
old (and hence invisible), but which still contribute to the
current measured by the more accurate DCCT. Highly pre-
cise measurements of these tiny currents (normally at most a
few per mille of the total intensity) have been achieved [27]
by comparing the number of beam–gas vertices recon-
structed by LHCb in nominally empty bunch slots, to that
in non-colliding bunches whose current is easily measur-
able. For the 2012 luminosity-calibration ﬁlls, the ghost-
charge correction to the bunch-population product ranges
from −0.21 to −0.65%; its systematic uncertainty is domi-
nated by that affecting the LHCb trigger efﬁciency for beam–
gas events.
Satellite bunches describe out-of-time protons present in
collision bunch slots that are measured by the FBCT, but
that remain captured in an RF bucket at least one period
(2.5 ns) away from the nominally ﬁlled LHC bucket. As
such, they experience at most long-range encounters with
the nominally ﬁlled bunches in the other beam. The best
measurements are obtained using the longitudinal density
monitor. This instrument uses avalanche photodiodes with
90 ps timing resolution to compare the number of infrared
synchrotron-radiation photons originating from satellite RF
buckets, to that from the nominally ﬁlled buckets. The correc-
tions to the bunch-population product range from −0.03 to
−0.65%, with the lowest satellite fraction achieved in scans
X–XV . The measurement techniques, as well as the associ-
123


--- Page 18 ---
653 Page 18 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
ated corrections and systematic uncertainties, are detailed in
Ref. [33].
4.11 Calibration results
4.11.1 Summary of calibration corrections
With the exception of the noise and single-beam back-
ground subtractions (which depend on the location, geom-
etry and instrumental response of individual subdetectors),
all the above corrections to thevdM-calibrated visible cross-
sections are intrinsically independent of the luminometer
and luminosity algorithm considered. The beam-separation
scale, as well as the orbit-drift and beam–beam corrections,
impact the effective beam separation at each scan step; the
non-factorization and emittance-growth corrections depend
on the properties of each colliding bunch-pair and on their
time evolution over the course of a ﬁll; and corrections to the
bunch-population product translate into an overall scale fac-
tor that is common to all scan sets within a given LHC ﬁll. The
mutual consistency of these corrections was explicitly ver-
iﬁed for the LUCID_EventOR and BCM_EventOR visible
cross-sections, for which independently determined correc-
tions are in excellent agreement. As the other algorithms (in
particular track counting) are statistically less precise during
vdM scans, their visible cross-sections are corrected using
scale factors extracted from the LUCID_EventOR scan anal-
ysis.
The dominant correction in scan sets I–VIII (Fig. 8)i s
associated with non-factorization; it is also the most uncer-
tain, because it is sensitive to the vertex-position resolution,
especially in scan sets I–III where the transverse luminous
size is signiﬁcantly smaller than the resolution. In contrast,
non-factorization corrections are moderate in scan sets X–
XV , suggesting a correspondingly minor contribution to the
systematic uncertainty for the November scan session.
The next largest correction in scan sets I–III is that of the
beam-separation scale, which, because of different β
⋆ set-
tings, is uncorrelated between the April session and the other
two sessions, and fully correlated across scan sets IV–XV
(Sect. 5.1.3). The correction to the bunch-population prod-
uct is equally shared among FBCT, ghost-charge and satellite
corrections in scan sets I–III, and dominated by the ghost-
charge subtraction in scans IV–XV . This correction is uncor-
related between scan sessions, but fully correlated between
scan sets in the same ﬁll.
Of comparable magnitude across all scan sets, and par-
tially correlated between them, is the beam–beam correc-
tion; its systematic uncertainty is moderate and can be calcu-
lated reliably (Sect. 5.2.3). The uncertainties associated with
orbit drifts (Sect. 5.2.1) and emittance growth (Sect. 5.2.6)
are small, except for scan set X where these corrections are
largest.
Scan Set Number
I II III IV V VI VIII X XI XIV XV
Fractional Correction [ % ]
4−
2−
0
2
4
6
8
10
Total correction
Non-factorization
Bunch-population product
Beam-beam
Beam evolution
Length scale
ATLAS =8 TeVs
Fig. 8 Luminometer-independent corrections to the visible cross-
sections calibrated by the van der Meer method, averaged over all col-
liding bunches and displayed separately for each scan set. The length–
scale, beam–beam, non-factorization and bunch–population corrections
are discussed in Sects.4.5, 4.7, 4.8 and 4.10, respectively. The orbit–drift
(Sect. 4.6) and emittance–growth (Sect. 4.9) corrections are combined
for clarity, and their cumulative effect is displayed as “beam evolution”.
The sum of all corrections is shown, for each scan set, by the red line
4.11.2 Consistency of vdM calibrations across 2012 scan
sessions
The relative stability of vdM calibrations, across scan sets
within a scan session and from one scan session to the next,
can be quantiﬁed by the ratio S
k
calib, j of the visible cross-
section for luminosity algorithm k (k = BCMH_EventOR,
BCMV_EventOR, LUCID_EventA,…) in a given scan setj
to that in a reference scan set, arbitrarily chosen as scan set
XIV:
Sk
calib, j = σk
vis, j/σk
vis, XIV .
The ratio Sk
calib, j is presented in Fig.9a for a subset of BCM,
LUCID and track-counting algorithms. Several features are
apparent.
• The visible cross-section associated with the LUCID_
EventA algorithm drops signiﬁcantly between the April
and July scan sessions, and then again between July and
November.
• For each algorithm separately, theσ
visvariation across scan
sets within a given LHC ﬁll (scan sets I–III, IV–VI and X–
XIV) remains below 0.5%, except for scan set X which
stands out by 1%.
• The absolute calibrations of the BCMH_EventOR and
track-counting algorithms are stable to better than±0.8%
across scan sets IV–VI and X–XV , with the inconsistency
being again dominated by scan set X.
123


--- Page 19 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 19 of 45 653
Scan Set Number
I II III IV V VI VIII X XI XIV XV
 - 1 [ % ]XIV
visσ/visσ
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 LUCID_EventA
BCMH_EventOR
BCMV_EventOR
Tracks (default)
 1)≤Tracks (Pixel holes 
ATLAS =8 TeVs
(a)
Scan Set Number
I II III IV V VI VIII X XI XIV XV
 (Tracks)] - 1 [ % ]XIV
visσ/visσ] / [XIV
visσ/visσ[ 2−
0
2
4
6
8
LUCID_EventA
BCMH_EventOR
BCMV_EventOR
 1)≤Tracks (Pixel holes 
ATLAS =8 TeVs
(b)
Fig. 9 a Stability of absolutely calibrated visible cross-sections across
scan sets, as quantiﬁed by the ratio of the visible cross-section in a given
scan set to that of the same luminosity algorithm in scan set XIV . b
Relative instrumental stability of different luminosity algorithms across
scan sets, as quantiﬁed by the ratio shown in a for a given algorithm,
divided by the same ratio for the default track-counting algorithm
• Between scan sets IV–VI and X–XV , the calibrations of the
track counting, BCMH_EventOR and BCMV_EventOR
algorithms drop on the average by 0.5, 0.6 and 1.7%
respectively.
• The calibrations of the BCM_EventOR (track-counting)
algorithm in scan sets I–III and VIII are lower by up to
1.4% (2%) compared to the other scan sets. This structure,
which is best visible in Fig. 6, is highly correlated across
all algorithms. Since the corresponding luminosity detec-
tors use very different technologies, this particular feature
cannot be caused by luminometer instrumental effects.
In order to separate purely instrumental drifts in the
ATLAS luminometers fromvdM-calibration inconsistencies
linked to other sources (such as accelerator parameters or
beam conditions), Fig. 9b shows the variation, across scan
sets j, of the double ratio
S
k
instr, j=Sk
calib, j/Strack counting
calib, j =
σk
vis, j/σk
vis, XIV
σtrack counting
vis, j /σtrack counting
vis, XIV
,
which quantiﬁes the stability of algorithmk relative to that of
the default track-counting algorithm. Track counting is cho-
sen as the reference here because it is the bunch-by-bunch
algorithm whose absolute calibration is the most stable over
time (Figs. 6 and 9a), and that displays the best stability rel-
ative to all bunch-integrating luminosity algorithms during
physics running across the entire 2012 running period (this is
demonstrated in Sect.6.1). By construction, the instrumental-
stability parameter S
k
instr, j is sensitive only to instrumental
effects, because the corrections described in Sects. 4.5–4.10
are intrinsically independent of the luminosity algorithm con-
sidered. The following features emerge.
• For each algorithm individually, the instrumental stability
is typically better than 0.5% within each scan session.
• The instrumental stability of both the “Pixel holes ≤1”
selection and the vertex-associated track selection (not
shown) is better than 0.2% across all scan sets.
• Relative to track counting, the LUCID efﬁciency drops
by 3.5% between the April and July scan sessions, and
by an additional 2.2% between July and November. This
degradation is understood to be caused by PMT aging.
• The BCMH_EventOR efﬁciency increases by about
0.7% with respect to that of track counting between the
April and July sessions, and then remains stable to within
0.2–0.4% across the July and November sessions. In con-
trast, the efﬁciency of the BCMV_EventOR algorithm
compared to that of track counting increases by about
1.3% from April to July, and drops back to its original
level by the November session. These long-term varia-
tions in the response of various subsets of diamond sen-
sors in the low-luminosity regime of vdM scans are pos-
sibly related to subtle solid-state physics effects arising
from the combination of radiation damage during physics
running [3,34] and of partial annealing during beam-off
and low-luminosity periods. Aging effects of comparable
magnitude are observed at high luminosity (Sect. 6).
• Given the 0.7% relative stability, between scan sets I–III
and IV–VI, of the track-counting and BCMH_EventOR
calibrations (Fig.9b), the 1.4–2.0% discrepancy, between
the April and July vdM-scan sessions, that affects the
absolute calibrations of both the BCMH_EventOR and
the track-counting algorithms (Fig.9a) cannot be primar-
ily instrumental in nature. The actual cause could not be
identiﬁed with certainty. Since the transverse luminous
size σ
L in the April session (Table 2) is approximately
three times smaller than the vertex-position resolution, a
plausible scenario is that a small error in the estimated
resolution biases the reconstructed luminous size in such
123


--- Page 20 ---
653 Page 20 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
a way as to underestimate the non-factorization correc-
tions RNF, and thereby the visible cross-sections, in scan
sets I–III.
• Similarly, the 1.3% discrepancy, between scan sets IV–
VI and scan set VIII, of the absolute calibrations of all
algorithms (Fig. 9a) cannot be instrumental either. Here
however, the luminous size is 1.5 times larger than the
resolution: resolution biases (if any) should be noticeably
smaller than in the April scan session. But as scan sets
IV–VIII were carried out in two consecutive LHC ﬁlls
under very similar beam conditions, such biases should
impact scan sets IV–VI and VIII in the same manner.
4.11.3 Final visible cross-sections for bunch-by-bunch
luminosity algorithms
The percent-level inconsistencies of the absolute calibrations
between April and July and within the July session itself, as
well as the excellent internal consistency of the November
results for all algorithms (Fig. 9a), suggest that the Novem-
ber calibrations are the most reliable. In addition, the calibra-
tions extracted from scan sets I–VIII are affected by several
large adjustments that in some cases partially cancel (Fig.8);
of these the most uncertain are the non-factorization cor-
rections, which affect the November scans much less. The
cumulated magnitude of the corrections is also smallest for
scan sets XI–XV (scan set X suffers from larger orbit-drift
and emittance-growth corrections because of the long delay
between the x and y scans).
The combination of these arguments suggests that the vis-
ible cross-sections, averaged over all colliding bunches in
each scan set and then averaged over scan sets XI–XV , should
be adopted as the best estimate
σvis of the absolute luminos-
ity scale at the time of, and applicable to the beam conditions
during, the November 2012vdM session. Table5 lists theσvis
values for the main luminosity algorithms considered in this
paper; the associated systematic uncertainties are detailed
in Sect. 5. Transferring the BCM and LUCID calibrations
to the high-luminosity regime of routine physics operation,
and accounting for time-dependent variations in luminome-
ter response over the course of the 2012 running period, is
addressed in Sect. 7.3.
5 van der Meer calibration uncertainties
This section details the systematic uncertainties affecting the
visible cross-sections reported in Table 5. The contributions
from instrumental effects (Sect.5.1) are comparable in mag-
nitude to those associated with beam conditions (Sect. 5.2),
while those from the bunch-population product (Sect. 5.3)
are about three times smaller. A summary is presented in
Table 6.
Table 5 Visible cross-sections averaged over scan sets XI–XV
Luminosity algorithm σvis (mb) Statistical
uncertainty
(%)
BCMH_EventOR 5.0541 0.05
BCMV_EventOR 5.0202 0.06
LUCID_EventOR 35.316 0.02
LUCID_EventA 23.073 0.02
LUCID_EventC 20.422 0.02
Track counting (Pixel holes ≤1) 243.19 0.14
Track counting (default) 241.27 0.14
Track counting (vertex-associated) 226.24 0.14
Table 6 Fractional systematic uncertainties affecting the visible cross-
section σvis averaged over vdM scan sets XI–XV (November 2012)
Source Uncertainty (%)
Reference speciﬁc luminosity 0.50
Noise and background subtraction 0.30
Length-scale calibration 0.40
Absolute ID length scale 0.30
Subtotal, instrumental effects 0.77
Orbit drifts 0.10
Beam-position jitter 0.20
Beam–beam corrections 0.28
Fit model 0.50
Non-factorization correction 0.50
Emittance-growth correction 0.10
Bunch-by-bunch σ
vis consistency 0.23
Scan-to-scan consistency 0.31
Subtotal, beam conditions 0.89
Bunch-population product 0.24
Total 1.20
5.1 Instrumental effects
5.1.1 Reference speciﬁc luminosity
For simplicity, the visible cross-section extracted from vdM
scans for a given luminometer utilizes the speciﬁc luminos-
ity measured by that same luminometer. Since this quantity
depends only on the convolved beam sizes, consistent results
should be reported by all detectors and algorithms for a given
scan set.
Figure 10 compares the L
spec values measured by two
independent luminosity algorithms in three consecutive scan
sets. Bunch-to-bunch variations of the speciﬁc luminosity are
typically 5–10% (Fig.10a), reﬂecting bunch-to-bunch differ-
123


--- Page 21 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 21 of 45 653
]-2 p)11 (10-1 s-2 cm27 [10specL
75 85 95 105 115 125
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
BCMH_EventOR
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(a)
)Lucid_EventOR(spec) / LBCMH_EventOR(specL
0.94 0.96 0.98 1 1.02 1.04
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(b)
Fig. 10 a Bunch-by-bunch speciﬁc luminosity for scan sets XI, XIV
and XV determined using the BCMH_EventOR algorithm. b Bunch-
by-bunch ratio of theLspec values reported by the BCMH_EventOR and
LUCID_EventOR algorithms. The vertical lines indicate the weighted
average over BCIDs for the three scan sets separately. The error bars
represent statistical uncertainties only
ences in transverse emittance also seen during normal physics
ﬁlls. A systematic reduction in Lspec can be observed from
scan XI to scan XIV , caused by emittance growth over the
duration of the ﬁll. Although the two algorithms appear sta-
tistically consistent for each bunch pair separately (Fig.10b),
their bunch-averaged ratio systematically differs from unity
by a small amount. The largest such discrepancy in scan sets
XI–XV among the BCM, LUCID and track-counting algo-
rithms amounts to 0.5% and is adopted as the systematic
uncertainty associated with the choice of reference speciﬁc-
luminosity value.
5.1.2 Noise and background subtraction
To assess possible uncertainties in the default subtraction
scheme, an alternative ﬁt is performed to data without apply-
ing the background-correction procedure of Sect. 4.4,b u t
interpreting the constant (i.e. separation-independent) term
in the ﬁtting function as the sum of instrumental noise
and single-beam backgrounds. The maximum difference
observed between these two background treatments, aver-
aged over scan sets XI–XV , amounts to less than 0.3%
(0.02%) for the BCMH_EventOR (LUCID_EventOR) algo-
rithm. A systematic uncertainty of ±0.3% is thus assigned
to the background-subtraction procedure during vdM scans.
5.1.3 Length-scale calibration
The length scale of each scan step enters the extraction
of /Sigma1
x,y and hence directly affects the absolute luminosity
scale. The corresponding calibration procedure is described
in Sect. 4.5. Combining in quadrature the statistical errors in
the horizontal and vertical beam-separation scales (Table 3)
yields a statistical uncertainty of±0.08% in the length-scale
product.
The residual non-linearity visible in Fig. 2, and also
observed in length-scale calibration scans performed in 2011,
could be caused either by the power converters that drive the
steering correctors forming the closed-orbit bumps, by the
response of the steering correctors themselves, or by mag-
netic imperfections (higher multipole components) at large
betatron amplitudes in the quadrupoles located within those
orbit bumps. The potential impact of such a non-linearity on
the luminosity calibration is estimated to be less than 0.05%.
Another potential source of bias is associated with orbit
drifts. These were monitored during each of the four length-
scale scans using the method outlined in Sect. 4.6, revealing
no signiﬁcant drift. Small inconsistencies in the transverse
beam positions extrapolated to the IP from the BPMs in the
left and right arcs are used to set an upper limit on the potential
orbit drift, during each scan, of the beam being calibrated,
resulting in an overall±0.4% uncertainty in the length-scale
product and therefore in the visible cross-section.
5.1.4 Absolute length scale of the inner detector
The determination of the beam-separation scale is based on
comparing the scan step requested by the LHC control sys-
tem with the actual transverse displacement of the luminous
centroid measured by ATLAS. This measurement relies on
123


--- Page 22 ---
653 Page 22 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
the length scale of the ATLAS inner detector tracking system
(primarily the Pixel detector) being correct in measuring dis-
placements of vertex positions away from the centre of the
detector. The determination of the uncertainty in this absolute
length scale is described in Ref. [3]; its impact amounts to a
systematic uncertainty of±0.3% in the visible cross-section.
5.2 Beam conditions
5.2.1 Orbit drifts during vdM scans
The systematic uncertainty associated with orbit drifts is
taken as half of the correction described in Sect.4.6, averaged
over scan sets XI–XV . It translates into a±0.1% systematic
uncertainty in
σvis. Because the sign and amplitude of the
orbit drifts vary over time, this uncertainty is uncorrelated
with that affecting the length-scale calibration.
5.2.2 Beam-position jitter
At each step of a scan, the actual beam separation may be
affected by random deviations of the beam positions from
their nominal settings, which in turn induce ﬂuctuations in
the luminosity measured at each scan point. The magni-
tude of this potential jitter was evaluated from the variation
between consecutive measurements, a few seconds apart, of
the relative beam separation at the IP extracted from single-
beam orbits measured by BPMs in the nearby LHC arcs and
extrapolated to the IP (Sect. 4.6). The typical jitter in trans-
verse beam separation observed during the November scan
session amounts to 0.75 µm RMS. The resulting systematic
uncertainty in σ
vis is obtained by random Gaussian smear-
ing of the nominal separation by this amount, independently
at each scan step, in a series of simulated scans. The RMS
of the resulting ﬂuctuations in ﬁtted visible cross-section
yields a±0.2% systematic uncertainty associated with beam-
position jitter.
5.2.3 Beam–beam corrections
For given values of the bunch intensity and transverse
convolved beam sizes, which are precisely measured, the
deﬂection-induced orbit distortion and the relative variation
of β
⋆ are both proportional to β⋆ itself; they also depend on
the fractional tune. Assigning a ±20% uncertainty to each
β-function value at the IP and a ±0.01 upper limit to each
tune variation results in a ±0.28% uncertainty in σvis.T h i s
uncertainty is computed with the conservative assumption
that β-function and tune uncertainties are correlated between
the horizontal and vertical planes, but uncorrelated between
the two LHC rings.
5.2.4 Fit model
The choice of the ﬁt function is arbitrary, but guided by
the requirement that the ﬁt provides faithful measurements
of the integral under the luminosity-scan curve and of the
rate at zero beam separation. The choice of functional form
therefore depends on the underlying shapes of the collid-
ing bunches, as manifested in the beam-separation depen-
dence of the luminosity. Scan sets I–VIII are best modelled
using a double Gaussian function plus a constant. The beam
shapes are different in scan sets X–XV [ 16]: here the best
ﬁt is obtained using a Gaussian function multiplied by a
sixth-order polynomial. Additional ﬁts are performed with
different model assumptions: a super-Gaussian function, and
a Gaussian function multiplied by a fourth-order polynomial
(plus a constant term in all cases). The maximum fractional
difference between the results of these different ﬁts, across
scan sets XI–XV and across the BCM, LUCID and track-
counting algorithms, amounts to 0.5%. This value is assigned
as the uncertainty associated with the ﬁt model.
5.2.5 Non-factorization correction
The non-factorization corrections extracted from the luminous-
region analysis (Sect.4.8.2) and the non-factorizablevdM ﬁts
(Sect. 4.8.3), are consistent to within 0.5% or less in all scan
sets. This value is chosen as the systematic uncertainty asso-
ciated with non-factorization biases in the November scans.
5.2.6 Emittance-growth correction
The uncertainty in the correction described in Sect. 4.9 is
estimated as the largest difference in the scan-averaged cor-
rection for extreme choices of reference times, and amounts
to ±0.1% in
σvis.
5.2.7 Consistency of bunch-by-bunch visible cross-sections
The calibratedσvis value associated with a given luminometer
and algorithm should be a universal scale factor independent
of beam conditions or BCID. The variation in σvis across
colliding-bunch pairs in a given scan set, as well as between
scan sets, is used to quantify the reproducibility and stability
of the calibration procedure during a scan session.
The comparison of Fig. 11a, b for scan sets XI, XIV and
XV suggests that some of the σ
vis variation from one bunch
pair to the next is not statistical in nature, but rather correlated
across bunch slots. The non-statistical component of this
variation, i.e. the difference in quadrature between the RMS
bunch-by-bunch variation ofσ
vis within a given scan set and
the average statistical uncertainty affecting a single-BCID
σvis measurement, is taken as a systematic uncertainty in the
calibration technique. The largest such difference across scan
123


--- Page 23 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 23 of 45 653
 [mb]visσLucid_EventOR  
34.7 34.9 35.1 35.3 35.5 35.7
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
 0.4% from mean±
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(a)
 [mb]visσBCMH_EventOR  
4.75 4.8 4.85 4.9 4.95 5 5.05 5.1 5.15
BCID
1
41
81
121
161
201
241
721
761
801
841
881
921
961
1581
1621
1661
1701
1741
1781
1821
2161
2201
2241
2281
2321
2361
2401
2881
Scan set XI
Scan set XIV
Scan set XV
 0.4% from mean±
ATLAS
 = 8 TeVs
(b)
Fig. 11 Bunch-by-bunch σvis values measured in scan sets XI, XIV ,
and XV for the a LUCID_EventOR and b BCMH_EventOR algo-
rithm. Theerror barsare statistical only. Thevertical linesrepresent the
weighted average over colliding-bunch pairs, separately for each scan
set. The shaded band indicates a ±0.4% variation from the average,
which is the sum in quadrature of the systematic uncertainties associ-
ated with bunch-by-bunch and scan-to-scan σ
vis consistency
sets XI–XV , evaluated using the measured LUCID_EventOR
visible cross-section, amounts to 0.23%. The RMS bunch-
by-bunch ﬂuctuation of the BCM cross-sections is, in all
cases but one, slightly smaller than the corresponding bunch-
averaged statistical uncertainty, indicating that the statistical
sensitivity of the BCM algorithms is insufﬁcient to provide
a reliable estimate of this uncertainty; the LUCID result is
therefore adopted as a measure of the σ
vis bunch-by-bunch
consistency.
5.2.8 Scan-to-scan reproducibility
The reproducibility of the visible cross-sections across the
selected November scan sets, as illustrated in Fig.9a, is used
as a measure of the residual inconsistencies potentially asso-
ciated with imperfect correction procedures and unidentiﬁed
sources of non-reproducibility. The largest such difference in
visible cross-section between scan sets XI–XV , as reported
by any of the BCM_EventOR, LUCID_EventOR or track-
counting algorithms, amounts to ±0.31%.
5.3 Bunch-population product
The determination of this uncertainty (±0.24%) is discussed
in Sect. 4.10 and summarized in Table 4.
5.4 Summary of van der Meer calibration uncertainties
The systematic uncertainties affecting the November 2012
vdM calibration are summarized in Table 6; they apply
equally to allvdM-calibrated luminosity algorithms. The sta-
tistical uncertainties, in contrast, are algorithm dependent
(Table 5), but small by comparison.
The uncertainties affecting the April and July 2012 cal-
ibrations have not been evaluated in detail. Most of them
would be of comparable magnitude to their November coun-
terparts, except for additional sizeable contributions from
the non-factorization effects and scan-to-scan inconsisten-
cies discussed in Sect. 4.11.
6 Consistency of relative-luminosity measurements
during physics running
The calibration of
σvis was performed at only a few points
in time (Table 2), and at values of μ low compared to the
pile-up levels routinely encountered during physics opera-
tion (Fig. 12). In this section, the stability of the luminos-
ity measurement over the 2012 high-luminosity data sam-
ple is characterized from two distinct viewpoints: time sta-
bility of the relative response of various luminosity algo-
rithms across the entire running period (Sect. 6.1), and lin-
earity of the calibrated luminosity values with respect to
the actual pile-up parameter μ (Sect. 6.2). The relative con-
123


--- Page 24 ---
653 Page 24 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
> per fillμPeak <
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
Physics fills
 calibration fillsvdMATLAS 
Fig. 12 History of the peak bunch-averaged pile-up parameter⟨μ⟩ dur-
ing 2012, restricted to stable-beam periods
sistency across all available luminosity detectors and algo-
rithms is used to assess the robustness of the results and to
quantify systematic variations in the response of the various
luminometers.
6.1 Relative stability of luminosity measurements over time
6.1.1 Consistency within individual luminometer
subsystems
Figure 13a illustrates the internal consistency of the lumi-
nosity values reported by independent bunch-by-bunch algo-
rithms during the 2012 running period, noise- and afterglow-
subtracted as described in Sect. 4.4, then summed over all
colliding bunches and integrated over the stable-beam period
in each ATLAS run. In order to better illustrate their rel-
ative time evolution, these run-integrated luminosity ratios
are shown anchored, i.e. normalized to the corresponding
ratio in a high-luminosity run close in time to the November
vdM-scan session.
During most of 2012, the ratio of the luminosity values
reported by the horizontal and vertical pairs of BCM sen-
sors is stable within a ±0.4% envelope, with the notable
exception of a sharp −0.6% step, lasting approximately
one month, during which the BCM was affected by elec-
tronic noise (Sect. 4.4). While during physics operation the
noise itself has a negligible impact on the measured lumi-
nosity, its onset was accompanied by step changes in the
response of individual diamond sensors; similar efﬁciency
shifts in the opposite direction were observed when the
noise disappeared, a few days after the November vdM
session.
The history of the luminosity ratio between the A and C
arms of LUCID exhibits two distinct bands, each with a peak-
to-peak scatter of up to±0.8% and separated by 1.5% on the
average. The step change in late June 2012 is associated with
turning off two PMTs in the C arm, which were drawing
excessive current. To mitigate the impact of this operational
change on the LUCID performance, the LUCID luminosity
before (after) this step change is determined using the April
(November) 2012 vdM calibrations.
While relative efﬁciency variations among individual
BCM sensors, or between the two LUCID arms, can be
monitored using such internal luminosity ratios, quantify-
ing the associated shifts in their absolute calibration requires
an external reference. This can be provided, for instance, by
the calorimeter- or MPX-based hit-counting luminosity algo-
rithms presented in Sect. 3.3. Among these, the best internal
performance is offered by the EMEC and the TileCal: in the
high-luminosity regime, both achieve an arm-to-arm con-
sistency better than ±0.4% across the 2012 running period
(Fig. 13b). The two FCal arms display a relative drift of about
1% which is highly correlated among all channels in each
arm. The run-to-run spread of the MPX luminosity ratios
(Fig. 13c) lies in the 2% range.
While calorimeter algorithms lack sensitivity in thevdM-
calibration regime, the track-counting method can be abso-
lutely calibrated with a precision comparable to that of
the BCM and LUCID algorithms (Table 5). As demon-
strated below, it also offers competitive precision for the run-
integrated luminosity
10 during physics operation, thereby
providing additional constraints on the performance of the
other bunch-by-bunch algorithms.
Figure 14 displays the history of the luminosity reported
by the two alternative track-counting working points intro-
duced in Sect. 3.2, normalized to that from the default WP.
In contrast to what is presented in Fig. 13, these ratios are
not anchored, but directly reﬂect the relative response of the
three algorithms as calibrated in the November 2012 vdM-
scan session. While the three working points are consistent
within 0.2% at the very beginning of the 2012 running period
(which corresponds to the April vdM-scan session), count-
ing vertex-associated tracks results, during most of the year,
in a luminosity value lower by about 1.3% compared to the
other two WPs. Comparison with the history of the mean
pile-up parameter (Fig. 12) suggests that this inconsistency
is not time-related but μ-dependent, as further discussed in
Sect. 6.2.
6.1.2 Consistency between luminometer subsystems
Figure 15 shows the ratio of the integrated luminosity per
ATLAS run as measured by a variety of luminosity algo-
10 Except for vdM-scan sessions, track–counting-based luminosity
measurements on shorter time scales (a few luminosity blocks), or on
a bunch-by-bunch basis, are statistically limited by the available data-
acquisition bandwidth.
123


--- Page 25 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 25 of 45 653
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
Luminosity Ratio
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
BCMH_EventOR/BCMV_EventOR
LUCID_EventA/LUCID_EventC
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(a)
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
Luminosity Ratio
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
FCal_A/FCal_C
EMEC_A/EMEC_C
TileCal_A/TileCal_C
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(b)
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
Luminosity Ratio
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
MPX1/MPX13
MPX2/MPX13
MPX3/MPX13
MPX4/MPX13
MPX5/MPX13
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(c)
Fig. 13 a History of the ratio of the integrated luminosi-
ties per run reported by the BCM inclusive–OR algorithms
(BCMV_EventOR/BCMH_EventOR) and by the LUCID single-arm
algorithms (LUCID_EventA/LUCID_EventC), during routine physics
operation at high luminosity.b History of the ratio of the integrated lumi-
nosities per run reported by the A and C arms of the electromagnetic
endcap (EMEC), hadronic (TileCal) and forward (FCal) calorimeters.
c History of the ratio of the integrated luminosities per run reported by
ﬁve of the six individual MPX sensors, to that reported by the sixth sen-
sor in the same run. In all ﬁgures,each point shows the ratio for a single
run relative to that in a reference run taken on November 25, 2012 (LHC
ﬁll 3323). Statistical uncertainties are negligible. The vertical arrows
indicate the time of the November 2012 vdM scan session
rithms, to that reported by the TileCal. Even though a sys-
tematic trend between the LAr and TileCal measurements is
apparent, the calorimeter algorithms are consistent to better
than ±0.7%. The TileCal luminosity is consistent with that
from the default track-counting algorithm to within ±0.4%
or less.
In contrast, both BCM and LUCID exhibit signiﬁcant
variations in response over the course of 2012, which vary
from channel to channel and are attributed to, respectively,
radiation-induced lattice defects and PMT aging. Among
these, the BCMH_EventOR algorithm exhibits the least
severe deviation from its response at the time of the Novem-
ber vdM-scan session. Its long-term drift is, however, large
enough to warrant a time-dependent response correction that
is based on one of the more stable relative-luminosity moni-
tors shown in Fig. 15, and that is described in Sect. 7.3.2.
6.2 µ dependence
As the pile-up response of a given luminosity algorithm
is determined by the instrumental characteristics of the
luminometer considered, the BCMH_EventOR and BCMV_
EventOR algorithms are expected to exhibit little μ-depen-
dence with respect to each other, even if both may be affected
by a common non-linearity with respect to the actual instan-
taneous luminosity. The same applies to ratios of luminosity
values reported independently by the A and C arms of FCal,
EMEC, LUCID and TileCal.
123


--- Page 26 ---
653 Page 26 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
DefaultL / L
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
1.005
1.01
1.015
1.02
 1 Pixel Holes≤
Vertex Associated
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
Fig. 14 History of the integrated-luminosity values reported by the two
alternative track-counting methods, normalized to that from the default
track selection, each as absolutely calibrated by thevdM method. Each
point represents the mean over a single ATLAS run. The error bars
reﬂect the systematic uncertainty associated with the simulation-based
fake-track subtraction. No track-counting data are available prior to the
ﬁrst vdM-scan session (16 April 2012)
In contrast, the track-counting luminosities obtained using
the three track selections deﬁned in Sect.3.2 exhibit a notice-
able relative non-linearity (Fig.16a). The pattern is consistent
with that observed in Fig.14.A tv e r yl o wμ, the three work-
ing points are fully consistent, as expected from having been
vdM-calibrated at μ ∼ 0.5. As μ increases, loosening the
pixel-hole requirement on the selected tracks results, after
fake-track subtraction, in a residual positive non-linearity
of at most 0.7% in the reported ⟨μ⟩ value. In contrast, the
vertex-associated track count exhibits, also after fake-track
correction, a negative non-linearity with respect to the default
WP, which peaks at−1.3% and then decreases in magnitude.
Even though the simulation should account for the pile-up
dependence of the fake-track fraction and of the track- and
vertex-reconstruction efﬁciencies, it fails to explain the rela-
tive μ-dependence observed in the data between the three
track-counting selections. The onset of the discrepancies
appears to lie in the range 2 <μ< 10. However, only
very limited data, all from a single run with a small number
of isolated bunches, are available in that μ range, so that no
ﬁrm conclusions can be drawn. A conservative approach is
therefore adopted: the observed discrepancy between track-
counting WPs is used as a data-driven upper limit on a poten-
tial bias affecting the absolute track-based luminosity scale in
the high-μ regime. The impact of this systematic uncertainty
is discussed in Sect. 7.3.1.
In the absence of any absolute linearity reference, poten-
tial pile–up-dependent biases in the high- μ regime can be
constrained by the relative μ-dependence of the luminos-
ity values reported by luminometers based on very different
technologies (Fig. 16b). The relative non-linearity between
the BCMH_EventOR and the TileCal (the default track-
counting) algorithm does not exceed ±0.3% (±0.5%) over
the⟨μ⟩ range accessible in this run; the root causes of the rela-
tiveμ-dependence between these three luminometers remain
under investigation. An extensive analysis of the more severe
LUCID non-linearity indicates that under typical physics
operating conditions, the large currents drawn by the LUCID
PMTs signiﬁcantly distort their response.
The run-averaged pile-up parameter changes from one run
to the next, because of variations both in the initial luminosity
and in the duration of LHC ﬁlls. Therefore, the larger the
relative μ-dependence between two algorithms, the larger
the ﬁll-to-ﬁll ﬂuctuations in the ratio of the run-integrated
luminosities reported by these two algorithms. This effect
contributes signiﬁcantly to the point-to-point scatter that is
apparent in Fig. 15.
7 Luminosity determination during physics running
To determine the integrated luminosity used in ATLAS
physics analyses, a single bunch-by-bunch algorithm is
selected as the baseline to provide the central value for
a certain time range (Sect. 7.1
). The corresponding vdM-
calibrated luminosity values are ﬁrst background-subtracted
(Sect. 7.2), and then corrected for rate- and time-dependent
biases that impact high-luminosity operation (Sect.7.3). The
consistency of the various ATLAS luminosity measurements
after all corrections is quantiﬁed in Sect. 7.4, together with
the associated systematic uncertainty.
7.1 Baseline luminosity algorithm
The choice of algorithm is determined in part by the repro-
ducibility and long-term stability of its absolute calibration.
Figure 9 shows that in this respect, the BCMH_EventOR
and track-counting algorithms perform noticeably better than
BCMV_EventOR and LUCID. Studies of relative stabil-
ity during physics running (Fig. 15) and of μ dependence
(Fig. 16b) lead to the same conclusion. As track count-
ing is active only during stable-beam operation and is sta-
tistically marginal at the luminosity-block level, it is not
suitable for use as a baseline algorithm, but it is retained
as a reference method to assess systematic biases. The
BCMH_EventOR algorithm supplies the absolute luminosity
during most of the 2012 running period; it is supplemented
by the LUCID_EventA algorithm during the few runs where
the BCM is not available, and which represent less than 1%
of the 2012 integrated luminosity.
7.2 Background subtraction
During high-luminosity physics running, instrumental noise
and single-beam backgrounds become negligible by com-
123


--- Page 27 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 27 of 45 653
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
-1 [%]TileCal/LAlgoL
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
FCal
EMEC
MPX
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(a)
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
-1 [%]TileCal/LAlgoL
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
BCMH_EventOR
BCMV_EventOR
Track Counting
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(b)
Day in 2012
Mar 01 May 01 Jul 01 Aug 31 Oct 31 Dec 31
-1 [%]TileCal/LAlgoL
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
LUCID_EventA
LUCID_EventC
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(c)
Fig. 15 History of the luminosity per run, compared to the value mea-
sured by TileCal, for a bunch-integrating, b BCM and track-counting,
and c LUCID algorithms, during routine physics operation at high lumi-
nosity. Each point shows for a single run the mean deviation from a ref-
erence run taken on November 25, 2012 (LHC ﬁll 3323). The EMEC,
FCal and TileCal values are computed using the average of the luminosi-
ties reported by the A and C arms of the corresponding calorimeter; the
MPX values reﬂect the average over the six sensors. The step in LUCID
response is moderate thanks to the use of the April calibration for the
LUCID data recorded before July. Thevertical arrowsindicate the time
of the November vdM scan session
parison to the luminosity; only afterglow remains as a sig-
niﬁcant background. With a 2012 bunch spacing of 50 ns
and typically over 1000 colliding bunches, it reaches a fairly
stable equilibrium after the ﬁrst few bunches in a train. It
is observed to scale with the instantaneous luminosity and
typically amounts to 0.2–0.5% of the luminosity signal.
The bunch-by-bunch noise- and afterglow-subtraction
procedure described in Sect. 4.4 is applied to all BCM and
LUCID luminosity determinations. Since the afterglow level
in the BCID immediately following a colliding-bunch slot
may differ from that in the second BCID after this slot (i.e. in
the next colliding-bunch slot), BCIDs at the end of a bunch
train were used to evaluate a possible bias in the method.
This study suggests that the subtraction over-corrects the
BCMH_EventOR luminosity by approximately 0.2%. A sys-
tematic uncertainty of ±0.2% is therefore assigned to the
afterglow correction.
7.3 Corrections to the absolute calibration in the
high-luminosity regime
Extrapolating the curves of Fig. 16bt ov e r yl o w⟨μ⟩ sug-
gests that for some algorithms, the vdM-based luminosity
scale may not be directly applicable in the pile-up regime
typical of physics operation. Percent-level corrections are
indeed required (Sect. 7.3.1) to transfer, at one point in
time, the absolute calibration of BCM and LUCID from
the low-luminosity regime of vdM scans (μ ∼ 0.5, L ∼
123


--- Page 28 ---
653 Page 28 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Default>μ<
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Default>μ> / <μ<
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
1.005
1.01
1.015
1.02
 1 Pixel Holes≤
Vertex Associated
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(a)
TileCalμ
10 15 20 25 30 35
 -1 [%]
TileCal
μ / 
Algo
μ
2−
1.5−
1−
0.5−
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
LUCID_EventC
BCMH_EventOR
FCal
Track counting
EMEC
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
LHC Fill 3296, Nov. 17, 2012
(b)
Fig. 16 a Ratio of the bunch-averaged pile-up parameter⟨μ⟩ reported
using different track-counting working points, to that from the default
WP, as a function of the ⟨μ⟩ value obtained using the default WP. The
data are averaged over all stable-beam runs.b Fractional deviation of the
bunch-averaged pile-up parameter ⟨μ⟩, obtained using different algo-
rithms, from the TileCal value, as a function of ⟨μ⟩TileCal, during a
physics run selected to cover the widest possible ⟨μ⟩ range. The data
are normalized such that all algorithms yield the same integrated lumi-
nosity in the run considered
2×1030 cm−2s−1) to that of routine physics operation (μ ∼
20–25, L > 1033 cm−2s−1). In addition, a time-dependent
correction (Sect. 7.3.2) must be applied to the luminosity of
the baseline algorithm to compensate for the long-term drifts
apparent in Fig. 15.
7.3.1 Calibration transfer from the vdM regime to physics
conditions
The history of the instantaneous-luminosity values reported
during part of the November vdM-scan session by the track-
counting and LUCID_EventA algorithms, relative to the
BCMH_EventOR algorithm and using the calibrations listed
in Table 5, is presented in Fig. 17a. The ratio of the default
track-counting (LUCID) luminosity integrated over several
hours immediately before and after scan set XV , to that from
the BCMH_EventOR algorithm, is consistent with unity
within 0.5% (0.4%). The run-integrated luminosity values
associated, in that same ﬁll, with the other two track selec-
tions (not shown) are consistent with the default track selec-
tion within less than one per mille.
However, at high luminosity these ratios differ from unity
by several percent (Fig. 17b), with all BCM (LUCID) algo-
rithms reporting a lower (higher) luminosity compared to
the track-counting method. In addition, the vertex-associated
track selection is no longer consistent with the other two, as
discussed in Sect. 6.
To provide consistent luminosity measurements, all algo-
rithms must be corrected to some common absolute scale
in the high-luminosity regime. As calorimeter-based lumi-
nometers lack sensitivity in thevdM-scan regime, only track
counting remains to quantify the relative shifts in response
of the BCM and LUCID algorithms between the vdM-scan
and high-luminosity regimes. First, the run-to-run ﬂuctua-
tions in Fig. 17b are smoothed by parameterizing the lumi-
nosity ratios as a linear function of the cumulative integrated-
luminosity fraction, used here as a proxy for calendar time.
Then, for each BCM algorithm and for a given track selec-
tion, the difference between the ﬁtted ratio in the high-
luminosity reference ﬁll where the calibration transfer is
performed (LHC ﬁll 3323), and the corresponding run-
integrated luminosity ratio under vdM conditions (LHC ﬁll
3316), quantiﬁes the shift in the BCM luminosity scale with
respect to track counting. The same procedure is applied to
LUCID.
The results are summarized in Table 7 for the default
track selection. The BCMH_EventOR efﬁciency drops by
2.5% with respect to track counting. Naively extrapolating
the relative μ-dependence of these two algorithms from the
high-μ regime (Fig. 16b) to μ ∼ 0.5 predicts a shift of
1.3%, about half of the effect observed.
11 Similarly, the
μ-dependence of LUCID_EventC predicts a 3% increase
in response when going from the vdM-scan regime to the
high-luminosity regime, while the measured step amounts to
+3.9%. These observations suggest that while the measured
relative μ-dependence of the three algorithms is consistent
with the signs of the calibration shifts and appears to account
for a large fraction of their magnitude, other effects also play a
role. For instance, studies of the CMS diamond sensors [34]
suggest that the response of the BCM may depend on the
11 Since the mechanisms driving the μ-dependence are neither well
characterized nor understood, and in the absence of sufﬁcient data link-
ing the μ range in routine physics operation (Fig. 16b) to that in the
vdM-scan regime (μ ∼ 0.5), such an extrapolation is indicative only:
it cannot be relied upon for a quantitative evaluation of the calibration-
transfer correction.
123


--- Page 29 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 29 of 45 653
Elapsed time [s]
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
BCMH_EventOR
Inst / LAlgorithm
InstL
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.1
1.12
Track Counting
LUCID_EventA
ATLAS
=8 TeV; LHC Fill 3316s
(a)
Cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction
0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
Reference / LTracksL
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
 1 Pixel Holes / BCMH_EventOR≤
Default / BCMH_EventOR
Vertex Associated / BCMH_EventOR
 1 Pixel Holes / LUCID_EventA≤
Default / LUCID_EventA
Vertex Associated / LUCID_EventA
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
vdM calibration
(b)
Fig. 17 a History of the ratio of the instantaneous luminosity reported
by the default track-counting and LUCID_EventA algorithms to that
from the BCMH_EventOR algorithm under vdM-scan conditions, dur-
ing LHC ﬁll 3316. The gap corresponds to scan set XV . Theerror bars
are statistical. b Evolution of the ratio of the integrated luminosity per
run reported by the three track-counting algorithms to that from the
BCMH_EventOR and LUCID_EventA algorithms, in the few weeks in
late 2012 during which the BCM response is approximately constant,
as a function of the cumulative delivered luminosity (normalized to the
2012 total). Each point shows the ratio for a single high-luminosity run.
The dashed lines are straight-line ﬁts to the data. The reference run
(LHC ﬁll 3323) took place the day following the November vdM-scan
session, which is indicated by the star
total instantaneous collision rate (i.e. on the product of ⟨μ⟩
and the total number of colliding bunches) through a polar-
ization mechanism associated with radiation-induced lattice
defects.
The track-counting results lie between BCM and LUCID,
and using the track scale as a proxy for the true scale is
consistent to within 0.5% with taking the average scale from
all the algorithms listed in Table 7. The choice of which
track selection to use as reference is somewhat arbitrary. The
default working point appears as the natural choice given that
Table 7 Measured fractional shift in luminosity scale between thevdM-
scan regime (LHC ﬁll 3316) and a nearby high-luminosity ATLAS
run (LHC ﬁll 3323), using the default track-counting algorithm as the
reference. The errors shown are statistical only; they are dominated by
track-counting statistics in the vdM-scan ﬁll, and are therefore fully
correlated across the four ratios
Luminosity algorithm Calibration shift w.r.t.
track counting (%)
BCMH_eventOR −2.5 ± 0.1
BCMV_eventOR −2.9 ± 0.1
LUCID_eventA +3.5 ± 0.1
LUCID_eventC +3.9 ± 0.1
it exhibits the smallest relativeμ-dependence with respect to
TileCal, suffers from the smallest uncertainty arising from the
simulation-based fake-track subtraction, and lies between the
extremes of the three track selections.
The systematic uncertainty in the calibration-transfer
corrections of Table 7 is estimated to be ±1.4%. It is
dominated by the 1.3% inconsistency (Figs. 16a, 17b)
between the default and the vertex-associated track selec-
tions. Additional contributions arise from the small incon-
sistency between the BCM-based and track-based luminos-
ity measurements during the vdM-scan ﬁll (0.5%), from a
small deadtime correction that affects the vdM-scan track-
counting data only (0.2%), and from the track-counting statis-
tics during the vdM-scan ﬁll (0.1%). The slight integrated-
luminosity (or time) dependence of the BCM to track-
counting luminosity ratio visible in Fig. 17b is accounted
for as part of the long-term drift correction, discussed
next.
7.3.2 Long-term drift correction
The second step in transferring the vdM-based calibrations
to an arbitrary high-luminosity physics run consists in cor-
recting for the long-term drifts apparent in Fig.15, using one
of the more stable monitors (EMEC, FCal, TileCal or track
counting) as a reference. The absolute luminosity scale of the
selected reference monitor is ﬁrst anchored to that of BCM
(or LUCID) in the high-luminosity reference run where the
calibration transfer is performed (LHC ﬁll 3323). The run-
by-run luminosity ratio of the considered bunch-by-bunch
algorithm to the chosen reference is then parameterized as
a function of the cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction.
This choice of variable, instead of calendar time, is inspired
by (but not dependent upon) the assumption that detector
aging increases smoothly with integrated radiation dose; it
also simpliﬁes the analysis by eliminating the gaps between
running periods (Fig. 15). A two-segment, piece-wise lin-
ear ﬁt is used to smooth the run-to-run ﬂuctuations, with
one segment covering the entire year except for the BCM
123


--- Page 30 ---
653 Page 30 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
Cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
-1 [%]TileCal/LAlgoL
1.5−
1−
0.5−
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
BCMH_EventORATLAS =8 TeVs
Reference LHC Fill 3323, Nov. 25, 2012
(a)
Cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
-1 [%]Track counting/LAlgoL
1.5−
1−
0.5−
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
BCMV_EventORATLAS =8 TeVs
Reference LHC Fill 3323, Nov. 25, 2012
(b)
Fig. 18 History of the fractional difference in integrated luminosity per
run a between the BCMH_EventOR and the TileCal algorithm, and b
between the BCMV_EventOR and the default track-counting algorithm.
Each point shows the mean difference for a single run compared to that
in the reference run (LHC ﬁll 3323) in which the calibration transfer is
performed. The lines represent the ﬁt discussed in the text. Thevertical
arrow indicates the time of the reference run
noise period, and the second, shorter segment accounting for
the gain shift during that same noise period (Fig. 18). This
empirical parameterization yields a satisfactory description
of the entire data set. It provides a run-by-run correction to the
instantaneous luminosity reported by each BCM or LUCID
algorithm: a positive (negative) value of the ﬁt function in
a given ATLAS run results in a downwards (upwards) lumi-
nosity adjustment for every luminosity block in that run. This
implies that the absolute luminosity scale in each LHC ﬁll is
effectively carried by the reference monitor, while the time-
and BCID-dependence of the luminosity during that same ﬁll
continues to be provided by the bunch-by-bunch algorithm
considered.
The net impact of this procedure on the integrated lumi-
nosity for the entire 2012 running period is documented in
Table 8. The TileCal- and track–counting-based corrections
are effectively indistinguishable; the former is chosen for the
central value because of the slightly smaller run-to-run scatter
of the BCM/TileCal luminosity ratio. The largest difference
between reference monitors amounts to 0.3%, and reﬂects
the relative slope between the FCal and TileCal algorithms
in Fig. 15a. This value is taken as the systematic uncertainty
in the long-term drift correction.
7.4 Consistency of ATLAS luminosity measurements after
all corrections
A global check of the consistency of the corrections described
in Sects. 7.2 and 7.3 is provided by the comparison of
the 2012 integrated-luminosity values reported by different
bunch-by-bunch algorithms. For high-luminosity runs (β
⋆ =
0.6 m and at least 1050 colliding bunches) under stable-beam
conditions, after background subtraction, calibration trans-
fer and long-term drift correction of the BCM and LUCID
data, the integrated luminosity reported by BCMV_EventOR
agrees with that from the BCMH_EventOR baseline within
0.01%. For the subset of such runs where both LUCID and
BCM deliver valid luminosity data, which corresponds to
about 91% of the 2012 integrated luminosity, both single-arm
LUCID algorithms agree with the BCMH_EventOR baseline
within 0.5%. It should be stressed, however, that these BCM-
and LUCID-based luminosity determinations are correlated,
because they were all drift-corrected to the same reference.
The internal consistency of the absolute luminosity mea-
surements at √
s = 8 TeV in the high-luminosity regime is
illustrated in Fig. 19. The run-to-run ﬂuctuations reﬂect the
combined impact of the relativeμ-dependence of the various
algorithms, of imperfectly corrected medium-term drifts and
of other sources of non-reproducibility. With the exception of
some of the LUCID data, they remain within a±0.5% band,
which provides a measure of the systematic uncertainty asso-
ciated with the run-to-run consistency of independent lumi-
nosity measurements.
8 Total luminosity uncertainty for the 2012 pp run
Table 9 regroups the contributions to the total uncertainty
in the luminosity values provided for physics analyses. The
vdM-calibration uncertainties are detailed in Tables 5 and 6.
The afterglow subtraction, the calibration transfer from the
vdM-scan to the high-luminosity regime and the long-term
drift correction applied to the bunch-by-bunch luminometers
are described in Sects. 7.2, 7.3.1 and 7.3.2 respectively. The
run-to-run consistency of the ATLAS luminosity measure-
ments is assessed in Sect.7.4. The resulting total uncertainty
amounts to ±1.9%.
123


--- Page 31 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 31 of 45 653
Table 8 Impact of the long-term drift correction on the 2012 integrated luminosity
Reference algorithm Fractional change in integrated luminosity [%]
BCMH_EventOR BCMV_EventOR LUCID_EventA LUCID_EventC
EMEC −0.59 −1.26 −0.70 −0.49
FCal −0.70 −1.36 −0.68 −0.52
TileCal −0.44 −1.09 −0.54 −0.26
Track counting −0.45 −1.12 −0.57 −0.34
Cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 -1 [%]TileCal / LAlgoL
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
EMEC
FCal
Track counting
BCMH_EventOR
BCMV_EventOR
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(a)
Cumulative integrated-luminosity fraction
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 -1 [%]TileCal / LAlgoL
3−
2−
1−
0
1
2
3
4
LUCID_EventA
LUCID_EventC
MPX
ATLAS
=8 TeVs
(b)
Fig. 19 History of the fractional difference in run-integrated luminos-
ity between the TileCal algorithm and the drift-correcteda BCM and b
LUCID and MPX algorithms. The results of the other possible reference
monitors (EMEC, FCal and track counting) are taken from Fig. 15 and
included here for comparison. Each point shows the mean difference
for a single run compared to that in the reference ﬁll indicated by the
arrow. The dashed horizontal lines delimit a ±0.5% window around
zero
9 Summary
The ATLAS luminosity scale for the 2012 LHC run has been
calibrated using data from dedicated beam-separation scans,
also known as van der Meer scans. The vdM-calibration
Table 9 Relative uncertainty in the calibrated luminosity scale, broken
down by source
Uncertainty source δL/L [%]
van der Meer calibration 1.2
Afterglow subtraction 0.2
Calibration transfer from
vdM-scan to high-luminosity regime
1.4
Long-term drift correction 0.3
Run-to-run consistency 0.5
Total 1.9
uncertainty is smaller than for the 2011 data set [ 3], thanks
to improved control of beam-dynamical effects (beam–beam
deﬂections, dynamic β, non-factorization) and to a reﬁned
analysis of the non-reproducibility of beam conditions (orbit
drift, emittance growth). The total systematic uncertainty in
the delivered luminosity is no longer dominated by vdM-
calibration uncertainties. The largest contribution arises from
instrumental effects that require the transfer of the abso-
lute luminosity scale from the low-rate vdM-scan regime to
the high-luminosity conditions of routine physics operation;
residual run-to-run and long-term inconsistencies between
independent luminosity measurements also contribute sig-
niﬁcantly.
The combination of these systematic uncertainties results
in a ﬁnal uncertainty of δL/L =± 1.9% in the luminosity
measured by ATLAS during pp collisions at √
s = 8T e V
for the 22.7 fb−1 of data delivered to ATLAS in 2012. This
uncertainty applies to the high-luminosity data sample and
any subset thereof, but not necessarily to a few special runs
taken under very low pile-up conditions, such as those dedi-
cated to elastic-scattering measurements: the latter require a
separate analysis tailored to their speciﬁc experimental con-
ditions.
Acknowledgements We thank CERN for the very successful opera-
tion of the LHC, as well as the support staff from our institutions with-
out whom ATLAS could not be operated efﬁciently. We acknowledge
the support of ANPCyT, Argentina; YerPhI, Armenia; ARC, Australia;
BMWFW and FWF, Austria; ANAS, Azerbaijan; SSTC, Belarus; CNPq
and FAPESP, Brazil; NSERC, NRC and CFI, Canada; CERN; CONI-
CYT, Chile; CAS, MOST and NSFC, China; COLCIENCIAS, Colom-
bia; MSMT CR, MPO CR and VSC CR, Czech Republic; DNRF and
123


--- Page 32 ---
653 Page 32 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
DNSRC, Denmark; IN2P3-CNRS, CEA-DSM/IRFU, France; GNSF,
Georgia; BMBF, HGF, and MPG, Germany; GSRT, Greece; RGC, Hong
Kong SAR, China; ISF, I-CORE and Benoziyo Center, Israel; INFN,
Italy; MEXT and JSPS, Japan; CNRST, Morocco; FOM and NWO,
Netherlands; RCN, Norway; MNiSW and NCN, Poland; FCT, Portu-
gal; MNE/IFA, Romania; MES of Russia and NRC KI, Russian Fed-
eration; JINR; MESTD, Serbia; MSSR, Slovakia; ARRS and MIZŠ,
Slovenia; DST/NRF, South Africa; MINECO, Spain; SRC and Wal-
lenberg Foundation, Sweden; SERI, SNSF and Cantons of Bern and
Geneva, Switzerland; MOST, Taiwan; TAEK, Turkey; STFC, United
Kingdom; DOE and NSF, United States of America. In addition, indi-
vidual groups and members have received support from BCKDF, the
Canada Council, CANARIE, CRC, Compute Canada, FQRNT, and the
Ontario Innovation Trust, Canada; EPLANET, ERC, FP7, Horizon 2020
and Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions, European Union; Investisse-
ments d’Avenir Labex and Idex, ANR, Région Auvergne and Fondation
Partager le Savoir, France; DFG and AvH Foundation, Germany; Her-
akleitos, Thales and Aristeia programmes co-ﬁnanced by EU-ESF and
the Greek NSRF; BSF, GIF and Minerva, Israel; BRF, Norway; Gen-
eralitat de Catalunya, Generalitat Valenciana, Spain; the Royal Society
and Leverhulme Trust, United Kingdom. The crucial computing sup-
port from all WLCG partners is acknowledged gratefully, in particular
from CERN, the ATLAS Tier-1 facilities at TRIUMF (Canada), NDGF
(Denmark, Norway, Sweden), CC-IN2P3 (France), KIT/GridKA (Ger-
many), INFN-CNAF (Italy), NL-T1 (Netherlands), PIC (Spain), ASGC
(Taiwan), RAL (UK) and BNL (USA), the Tier-2 facilities worldwide
and large non-WLCG resource providers. Major contributors of com-
puting resources are listed in Ref. [35].
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Funded by SCOAP
3.
References
1. ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN
Large Hadron Collider. JINST 3, S08003 (2008). doi: 10.1088/
1748-0221/3/08/S08003
2. S. van der Meer, Calibration of the effective beam height in the ISR.
CERN-ISR-PO-68-31 (1968). http://cds.cern.ch/record/296752
3. ATLAS Collaboration, Improved luminosity determination in pp
collisions at√ s = 7 TeV using the ATLAS detector at the LHC. Eur.
Phys. J. C 73, 2518 (2013). doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2518-3 ,
arXiv:1302.4393 [hep-ex]
4. C. Rubbia, Measurement of the luminosity of p p collider with a
(generalized) van der Meer Method. CERN-p p-Note-38 (1977).
http://cds.cern.ch/record/1025746
5. ATLAS Collaboration, Luminosity determination in pp collisions
at √ s = 7 TeV using the ATLAS detector at the LHC. Eur.
Phys. J. C 71 1630 (2011). doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1630-5 ,
arXiv:1101.2185 [hep-ex]
6. ATLAS Collaboration, Concepts, design and implementation of
the ATLAS new tracking (NEWT). ATL-SOFT-PUB-2007-007
(2007). http://cds.cern.ch/record/1020106
7. P. Grafström, W. Kozanecki, Luminosity determination at proton
colliders. Progr. Part. Nucl. Phys.81, 97–148 (2015). doi:10.1016/
j.ppnp.2014.11.002
8. ATLAS Collaboration, Charged-particle multiplicities in pp inter-
actions measured with the ATLAS detector at the LHC. New
J. Phys. 13 053033 (2011). doi:10.1088/1367-2630/13/5/053033 ,
arXiv:1012.5104 [hep-ex]
9. ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the atlas inner detector
track and vertex reconstruction in the high pile-up LHC envi-
ronment. ATLAS-CONF-2012-042 (2012).http://cdsweb.cern.ch/
record/1435196
10. T. Sjöstrand, S. Mrenna, P. Skands, A brief introduction to PYTHIA
8.1. Comput. Phys. Commun. 178, 852 (2008). doi:10.1016/j.cpc.
2008.01.036. arXiv:0710.3820 [hep-ph]
11. Tile Calorimeter Collaboration, Tile calorimeter technical design
report. CERN-LHCC-96-042 (1996). http://cds.cern.ch/record/
331062
12. A. Sopczak et al., MPX detectors as LHC luminosity monitor. IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci.62, 3225 (2015).http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/
stamp.jsp?arnumber=7349015
13. M. Venturini, W. Kozanecki, Out-of-plane deﬂections as a diagnos-
tic tool and application to PEP-II. SLAC-PUB-8700 (2001).http://
slac.stanford.edu/pubs/slacpubs/8500/slac-pub-8700.pdf
14. W. Herr, B. Muratori, Concept of luminosity. Yellow Report CERN
2006-002 (2006). http://cds.cern.ch/record/941318
15. H. Wiedemann, Particle accelerator physics, graduate texts
in physics. Springer, ISBN 9783319183169, 9783319183176
(2015). http://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319183169?wt_
mc=ThirdParty.SpringerLink.3.EPR653.About_eBook
16. H. Bartosik, G. Rumolo, Production of the single bunch for Van der
Meer scans in the LHC injector chain. CERN-ACC-NOTE-2013-
0008 (2013). http://cds.cern.ch/record/1590405
17. W. Kozanecki, T. Pieloni, J. Wenninger, Observation of beam-beam
deﬂections with LHC orbit data. CERN-ACC-NOTE-2013-0006
(2013). http://cds.cern.ch/record/1581723
18. P. Bambade et al., Observation of beam-beam deﬂections at the
interaction point of the SLAC linear collider. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,
2949 (1989). doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.62.2949
19. W. Herr, Beam-beam effects and dynamic β
∗.P r o c .L H CL u m i
Days (2012). http://indico.cern.ch/event/162948/contributions/
1417430/attachments/191879/269237/S3_WH.pdf
20. CERN Accelerator Beam Physics Group, MAD–Methodical
Accelerator Design. http://mad.web.cern.ch/mad/
21. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., Precision luminosity measure-
ments at LHCb. JINST9, P12005 (2014). doi:10.1088/1748-0221/
9/12/P12005, arXiv:1410.0149 [hep-ex]
22. S.M. White, Determination of the absolute luminosity at the
LHC. CERN-THESIS-2010-139 (2010).http://cds.cern.ch/record/
1308187
23. ATLAS Collaboration, Characterization of interaction-point beam
parameters using the pp event-vertex distribution reconstructed in
the ATLAS detector at the LHC. ATLAS-CONF-2010-027 (2010).
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1277659
24. V . Balagura, Notes on van der Meer scan for absolute luminosity
measurement. Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 654, 634–638 (2011).
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2011.06.007, arXiv:1103.1129 [physics.ins-
det]
25. LHCb Collaboration, R. Aaij et al., Absolute luminosity measure-
ments with the LHCb detector at the LHC. JINST7, P01010 (2012).
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/7/01/P01010 , arXiv:1110.2866 [hep-ex]
26. F.J. Decker, Beam distributions beyond RMS. SLAC-PUB-
95-6684 (1994). http://www.slac.stanford.edu/cgi-wrap/getdoc/
slac-pub-6841.pdf
27. C. Barschel, Precision luminosity measurement at LHCb with
beam-gas imaging. CERN-THESIS-2013-301 (2014). http://cds.
cern.ch/record/1693671
123


--- Page 33 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 33 of 45 653
28. S.N. Webb, Factorisation of beams in van der Meer scans and mea-
surements of the φ∗
η distribution of Z → e+e− events in pp colli-
sions at √ s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector. CERN-THESIS-
2015-054 (2015). http://cds.cern.ch/record/2020875
29. CMS Collaboration, CMS luminosity based on pixel cluster
counting—summer 2012 update. CMS-PAS-LUM-12-001 (2012).
http://cds.cern.ch/record/1482193
30. CMS Collaboration, CMS luminosity based on pixel cluster
counting—summer 2013 update. CMS-PAS-LUM-13-001 (2013).
http://cds.cern.ch/record/1598864
31. C. Barschel et al., Results of the LHC DCCT calibration studies.
CERN-ATS-Note-2012-026 PERF (2012). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/
record/1425904
32. G. Anders et al., Study of the Relative Bunch Populations
for Luminosity Calibration, CERN-ATS-Note-2012-028 PERF
(2012). http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1427726
33. A Boccardi et al., LHC luminosity calibration using the longitu-
dinal density monitor. CERN-ATS-Note-2013-034 TECH (2013).
http://cds.cern.ch/record/1556087
34. M. Guthoff et al., Radiation damage in the diamond based beam
condition monitors of the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN. Nucl. Instrum. Methods. A 730 168–
173 (2013). doi:10.1016/j.nima.2013.05.041
35. ATLAS Collaboration, ATLAS computing acknowledgements
2016–2017. ATL-GEN-PUB-2016-002 (2016).http://cds.cern.ch/
record/2202407
ATLAS Collaboration
M. Aaboud136d,G . A a d87, B. Abbott 114, J. Abdallah 65, O. Abdinov 12, B. Abeloos 118, R. Aben 108, O. S. AbouZeid 138,
N. L. Abraham150, H. Abramowicz 154, H. Abreu 153, R. Abreu 117, Y . Abulaiti 147a,147b, B. S. Acharya 164a,164b,a,
L. Adamczyk40a, D. L. Adams 27, J. Adelman 109, S. Adomeit 101, T. Adye 132, A. A. Affolder 76, T. Agatonovic-Jovin 14,
J. Agricola56, J. A. Aguilar-Saavedra 127a,127f, S. P. Ahlen 24, F. Ahmadov 67,b, G. Aielli 134a,134b, H. Akerstedt 147a,147b,
T. P. A. Åkesson83,A . V . A k i m o v97, G. L. Alberghi 22a,22b, J. Albert 169, S. Albrand 57, M. J. Alconada Verzini 73,
M. Aleksa32, I. N. Aleksandrov 67,C . A l e x a28b, G. Alexander 154, T. Alexopoulos 10, M. Alhroob 114, M. Aliev 75a,75b,
G. Alimonti93a, J. Alison 33, S. P. Alkire 37, B .M .M .A l l b r o o k e150, B. W. Allen 117, P. P. Allport 19, A. Aloisio 105a,105b,
A. Alonso38, F. Alonso 73, C. Alpigiani 139, M. Alstaty 87, B. Alvarez Gonzalez 32, D. Álvarez Piqueras 167,
M. G. Alviggi105a,105b, B. T. Amadio 16, K. Amako 68, Y . Amaral Coutinho 26a, C. Amelung 25, D. Amidei 91,
S. P. Amor Dos Santos127a,127c, A. Amorim 127a,127b, S. Amoroso 32, G. Amundsen 25, C. Anastopoulos 140, L. S. Ancu 51,
N. Andari109, T. Andeen 11, C. F. Anders 60b, G. Anders 32, J. K. Anders 76, K. J. Anderson 33, A. Andreazza 93a,93b,
V . Andrei60a, S. Angelidakis 9, I. Angelozzi 108, P. Anger 46, A. Angerami 37, F. Anghinolﬁ 32, A. V . Anisenkov 110,c,
N. Anjos13, A. Annovi 125a,125b, M. Antonelli 49, A. Antonov 99,*, F. Anulli 133a, M. Aoki 68, L. Aperio Bella 19,
G. Arabidze92,Y .A r a i68, J. P. Araque127a,A .T .H .A r c e47, F. A. Arduh73, J.-F. Arguin96, S. Argyropoulos65,M .A r i k20a,
A. J. Armbruster144,L .J .A r m i t a g e78, O. Arnaez32, H. Arnold50, M. Arratia30,O .A r s l a n23, A. Artamonov98, G. Artoni121,
S. Artz85,S . A s a i156, N. Asbah 44, A. Ashkenazi 154,B . Å s m a n147a,147b, L. Asquith 150, K. Assamagan 27, R. Astalos 145a,
M. Atkinson166, N. B. Atlay 142, K. Augsten 129, G. Avolio32,B . A x e n16, M. K. Ayoub118, G. Azuelos 96,d, M .A .B a a k32,
A. E. Baas60a, M .J .B a c a19, H. Bachacou 137, K. Bachas 75a,75b, M. Backes 32, M. Backhaus 32, P. Bagiacchi 133a,133b,
P. Bagnaia133a,133b,Y . B a i 35a, J. T. Baines 132, O. K. Baker 176, E .M .B a l d i n110,c, P. Balek 130, T. Balestri 149,
F. Balli137, W. K. Balunas 123, E. Banas 41, Sw. Banerjee 173,e, A. A. E. Bannoura 175, L. Barak 32, E. L. Barberio 90,
D. Barberis52a,52b, M. Barbero 87, T. Barillari 102, T. Barklow 144,N . B a r l o w30, S. L. Barnes 86, B. M. Barnett 132,
R. M. Barnett16, Z. Barnovska 5, A. Baroncelli 135a, G. Barone 25,A . J . B a r r121, L. Barranco Navarro 167,F . B a r r e i r o84,
J. Barreiro Guimarães da Costa35a, R. Bartoldus 144,A . E . B a r t o n74,P . B a r t o s145a, A. Basalaev 124, A. Bassalat 118,
R. L. Bates55, S. J. Batista 159, J. R. Batley 30, M. Battaglia 138, M. Bauce 133a,133b, F. Bauer 137,H . S . B a w a144,f,
J. B. Beacham112, M. D. Beattie74, T. Beau82, P. H. Beauchemin162, P. Bechtle23, H. P. Beck18,g, K. Becker121, M. Becker85,
M. Beckingham170, C. Becot 111, A. J. Beddall 20d, A. Beddall 20b, V . A. Bednyakov67, M. Bedognetti 108,C . P . B e e149,
L. J. Beemster108, T. A. Beermann 32, M. Begel 27, J .K .B e h r44, C. Belanger-Champagne 89, A .S .B e l l80, G. Bella 154,
L. Bellagamba22a, A. Bellerive 31, M. Bellomo 88, K. Belotskiy 99, O. Beltramello 32, N. L. Belyaev 99, O. Benary 154,
D. Benchekroun136a, M. Bender 101, K. Bendtz 147a,147b, N. Benekos 10, Y . Benhammou 154, E. Benhar Noccioli 176,
J. Benitez65, D. P. Benjamin 47, J. R. Bensinger 25, S. Bentvelsen 108, L. Beresford 121, M. Beretta 49, D. Berge 108,
E. Bergeaas Kuutmann165, N. Berger5, J. Beringer16, S. Berlendis57, N. R. Bernard 88, C. Bernius111, F. U. Bernlochner23,
T. Berry79,P . B e r t a130, C. Bertella 85, G. Bertoli 147a,147b, F. Bertolucci 125a,125b, I .A .B e r t r a m74, C. Bertsche 44,
D. Bertsche114,G .J .B e s j e s38, O. Bessidskaia Bylund147a,147b, M. Bessner44, N. Besson137, C. Betancourt50, S. Bethke102,
A. J. Bevan78,W .B h i m j i16, R. M. Bianchi 126, L. Bianchini 25, M. Bianco 32, O. Biebel 101, D. Biedermann 17, R. Bielski 86,
N. V . Biesuz125a,125b, M. Biglietti 135a, J. Bilbao De Mendizabal 51, H. Bilokon 49, M. Bindi 56, S. Binet 118, A. Bingul 20b,
C. Bini133a,133b, S. Biondi 22a,22b, D .M .B j e r g a a r d47, C .W .B l a c k151, J .E .B l a c k144, K. M. Black 24, D. Blackburn 139,
R. E. Blair6, J.-B. Blanchard137, J. E. Blanco79, T. Blazek145a, I. Bloch44, C. Blocker25,W .B l u m85,*, U. Blumenschein56,
S. Blunier34a, G. J. Bobbink 108, V . S. Bobrovnikov 110,c, S. S. Bocchetta 83, A. Bocci 47, C. Bock 101, M. Boehler 50,
123


--- Page 34 ---
653 Page 34 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
D. Boerner175, J. A. Bogaerts 32, D. Bogavac 14, A. G. Bogdanchikov 110, C. Bohm 147a, V . Boisvert 79, P. Bokan 14,
T. Bold40a, A. S. Boldyrev 164a,164c, M. Bomben 82, M. Bona 78, M. Boonekamp 137,A . B o r i s o v131, G. Borissov 74,
J. Bortfeldt101, D. Bortoletto 121, V . Bortolotto62a,62b,62c,K . B o s108, D. Boscherini 22a,M . B o s m a n13, J .D .B o s s i oS o l a29,
J. Boudreau126, J. Bouffard2, E. V . Bouhova-Thacker74, D. Boumediene36, C. Bourdarios118, S. K. Boutle 55, A. Boveia32,
J. Boyd32, I .R .B o y k o67, J. Bracinik 19, A. Brandt 8, G. Brandt 56, O. Brandt 60a, U. Bratzler 157,B . B r a u88, J .E .B r a u117,
H. M. Braun175,*, W. D. Breaden Madden 55, K. Brendlinger 123, A. J. Brennan 90, L. Brenner 108, R. Brenner 165,
S. Bressler172, T .M .B r i s t o w48, D. Britton 55, D. Britzger 44, F. M. Brochu 30, I. Brock 23, R. Brock 92, G. Brooijmans 37,
T. Brooks79, W. K. Brooks 34b,J . B r o s a m e r16,E . B r o s t 117, J. H Broughton 19, P. A. Bruckman de Renstrom 41,
D. Bruncko145b, R. Bruneliere 50, A. Bruni 22a, G. Bruni 22a, L. S. Bruni 108, BH Brunt 30, M. Bruschi 22a, N. Bruscino 23,
P. Bryant33, L. Bryngemark 83, T. Buanes15, Q. Buat 143, P. Buchholz142, A. G. Buckley 55, I. A. Budagov 67, F. Buehrer50,
M. K. Bugge120, O. Bulekov99, D. Bullock8, H. Burckhart32, S. Burdin76,C .D .B u r g a r d50, B. Burghgrave109, K. Burka41,
S. Burke132, I. Burmeister 45, E. Busato 36, D. Büscher 50, V . Büscher 85, P. Bussey 55, J. M. Butler 24, C. M. Buttar 55,
J. M. Butterworth80, P. Butti 108, W. Buttinger 27, A. Buzatu 55, A. R. Buzykaev 110,c, S. Cabrera Urbán 167, D. Caforio 129,
V. M . C a i r o39a,39b, O. Cakir 4a, N. Calace 51, P. Calaﬁura16, A. Calandri 87, G. Calderini 82, P. Calfayan101, L. P. Caloba26a,
D. Calvet36,S . C a l v e t36,T . P . C a l v e t87, R. Camacho Toro 33, S. Camarda 32, P. Camarri 134a,134b, D. Cameron 120,
R. Caminal Armadans166, C. Camincher 57, S. Campana 32, M. Campanelli 80, A. Camplani 93a,93b, A. Campoverde 142,
V . Canale105a,105b, A. Canepa160a, M. Cano Bret35e, J. Cantero115, R. Cantrill127a,T .C a o42, M. D. M. Capeans Garrido 32,
I. Caprini28b, M. Caprini 28b, M. Capua 39a,39b, R. Caputo 85, R. M. Carbone 37, R. Cardarelli 134a, F. Cardillo50,I . C a r l i130,
T. Carli32, G. Carlino 105a, L. Carminati 93a,93b, S. Caron 107, E. Carquin 34b, G. D. Carrillo-Montoya 32,J . R . C a r t e r30,
J. Carvalho127a,127c, D. Casadei 19, M. P. Casado 13,h, M. Casolino 13, D. W. Casper 163, E. Castaneda-Miranda 146a,
R. Castelijn108, A. Castelli 108, V . Castillo Gimenez167,N . F . C a s t r o127a,i, A. Catinaccio 32,J . R . C a t m o r e120, A. Cattai 32,
J. Caudron85, V . Cavaliere166, E. Cavallaro13, D. Cavalli93a, M. Cavalli-Sforza13, V . Cavasinni125a,125b, F. Ceradini135a,135b,
L. Cerda Alberich167,B . C . C e r i o47, A. S. Cerqueira 26b,A . C e r r i150, L. Cerrito 78, F. Cerutti16,M . C e r v32, A. Cervelli 18,
S. A. Cetin20c, A. Chafaq 136a, D. Chakraborty 109, S .K .C h a n 59, Y . L. Chan 62a, P. Chang 166, J. D. Chapman 30,
D. G. Charlton19, A. Chatterjee 51, C. C. Chau 159, C. A. Chavez Barajas 150,S . C h e112, S. Cheatham 74, A. Chegwidden 92,
S. Chekanov6, S. V . Chekulaev 160a, G .A .C h e l k o v67,j, M. A. Chelstowska 91, C. Chen 66, H. Chen 27, K. Chen 149,
S. Chen35c, S. Chen 156, X. Chen 35f, Y . Chen 69, H. C. Cheng 91, H. J Cheng 35a, Y . Cheng 33, A. Cheplakov 67,
E. Cheremushkina131, R. Cherkaoui El Moursli 136e, V . Chernyatin 27,*, E. Cheu 7, L. Chevalier 137, V . Chiarella 49,
G. Chiarelli125a,125b, G. Chiodini 75a, A. S. Chisholm 19, A. Chitan 28b, M. V . Chizhov67, K. Choi 63, A. R. Chomont 36,
S. Chouridou9, B .K .B .C h o w101, V . Christodoulou 80, D. Chromek-Burckhart 32, J. Chudoba 128, A. J. Chuinard 89,
J. J. Chwastowski41,L . C h y t k a116, G. Ciapetti 133a,133b, A .K .C i f t c i4a, D. Cinca 55, V . Cindro 77, I .A .C i o a r a23,
A. Ciocio16, F. Cirotto105a,105b,Z .H .C i t r o n172, M. Citterio93a, M. Ciubancan28b,A .C l a r k51,B .L .C l a r k59,M .R .C l a r k37,
P. J. Clark48,R .N .C l a r k e16, C. Clement147a,147b, Y . Coadou87, M. Cobal164a,164c, A. Coccaro51, J. Cochran66,L .C o f f e y25,
L. Colasurdo107,B . C o l e37, A. P. Colijn 108, J. Collot 57, T. Colombo 32, G. Compostella 102, P. Conde Muiño 127a,127b,
E. Coniavitis50, S. H. Connell 146b, I. A. Connelly 79, V . Consorti50, S. Constantinescu 28b, G. Conti 32, F. Conventi 105a,k,
M. Cooke16, B. D. Cooper 80, A. M. Cooper-Sarkar 121, K .J .R .C o r m i e r159, T. Cornelissen 175, M. Corradi 133a,133b,
F. Corriveau89,l, A. Corso-Radu 163, A. Cortes-Gonzalez 13, G. Cortiana 102,G . C o s t a93a, M .J .C o s t a167, D. Costanzo 140,
G. Cottin30,G . C o w a n79,B . E . C o x86, K. Cranmer 111,S . J . C r a w l e y55,G . C r e e31, S. Crépé-Renaudin 57, F. Crescioli 82,
W. A. Cribbs147a,147b, M. Crispin Ortuzar121, M. Cristinziani23, V . Croft107, G. Crosetti39a,39b, T. Cuhadar Donszelmann140,
J. Cummings176, M. Curatolo 49,J . C ú t h85, C. Cuthbert 151,H . C z i r r142, P. Czodrowski3,G . D ’ a m e n22a,22b,S . D ’ A u r i a55,
M. D’Onofrio76, M. J. Da Cunha Sargedas De Sousa 127a,127b,C . D a V i a86, W. Dabrowski 40a, T. Dado 145a,T . D a i91,
O. Dale15, F. Dallaire 96, C. Dallapiccola 88,M . D a m38, J. R. Dandoy 33, N. P. Dang 50, A .C .D a n i e l l s19, N .S .D a n n86,
M. Danninger168, M. Dano Hoffmann137,V .D a o50, G. Darbo52a,S .D a r m o r a8, J. Dassoulas3, A. Dattagupta63, W. Davey23,
C. David169, T. Davidek 130,M . D a v i e s154,P . D a v i s o n80,E . D a w e90,I . D a w s o n140, R. K. Daya-Ishmukhametova 88,
K. De8, R. de Asmundis 105a, A. De Benedetti 114,S . D e C a s t r o22a,22b, S. De Cecco 82, N. De Groot 107, P. de Jong 108,
H. De la Torre84, F. De Lorenzi 66,A . D e M a r i a56, D. De Pedis 133a, A. De Salvo 133a, U. De Sanctis 150, A. De Santo 150,
J .B .D eV i v i eD eR e g i e118, W. J. Dearnaley 74, R. Debbe 27, C. Debenedetti 138, D. V . Dedovich 67, N. Dehghanian 3,
I. Deigaard108, M. Del Gaudio 39a,39b, J. Del Peso 84, T. Del Prete125a,125b, D. Delgove 118, F. Deliot137, C. M. Delitzsch 51,
M. Deliyergiyev77, A. Dell’Acqua 32, L. Dell’Asta 24, M. Dell’Orso 125a,125b, M. Della Pietra 105a,k, D. della V olpe 51,
M. Delmastro5,P . A . D e l s a r t57, C. Deluca 108, D. A. DeMarco 159, S. Demers 176, M. Demichev 67, A. Demilly 82,
S. P. Denisov131, D. Denysiuk 137, D. Derendarz 41, J. E. Derkaoui 136d, F. Derue82,P . D e r v a n76, K. Desch 23, C. Deterre 44,
K. Dette45,P . O . D e v i v e i r o s32, A. Dewhurst132, S. Dhaliwal25, A. Di Ciaccio134a,134b, L. Di Ciaccio5, W .K .D iC l e m e n t e123,
C. Di Donato133a,133b, A. Di Girolamo 32, B. Di Girolamo 32, B. Di Micco 135a,135b, R .D iN a r d o32, A .D iS i m o n e50,
123


--- Page 35 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 35 of 45 653
R. Di Sipio159,D .D iV a l e n t i n o31, C. Diaconu87, M. Diamond159,F .A .D i a s48,M .A .D i a z34a, E. B. Diehl91, J. Dietrich17,
S. Diglio87, A. Dimitrievska 14, J. Dingfelder 23, P. Dita 28b, S. Dita 28b, F. Dittus 32,F . D j a m a87, T. Djobava 53b,
J. I. Djuvsland60a, M .A .B .d oV a l e26c, D. Dobos 32, M. Dobre 28b, C. Doglioni 83, T. Dohmae 156, J. Dolejsi 130,
Z. Dolezal130, B. A. Dolgoshein 99,*, M. Donadelli 26d, S. Donati 125a,125b, P. Dondero 122a,122b, J. Donini 36, J. Dopke 132,
A. Doria105a,M .T .D o v a73,A .T .D o y l e55, E. Drechsler56,M .D r i s10,Y .D u35d, J. Duarte-Campderros154, E. Duchovni172,
G. Duckeck101, O. A. Ducu 96,m, D. Duda 108, A. Dudarev 32, E. M. Dufﬁeld 16, L. Duﬂot 118, L. Duguid 79, M. Dührssen 32,
M. Dumancic172, M. Dunford 60a, H. Duran Yildiz 4a, M. Düren 54, A. Durglishvili 53b, D. Duschinger 46, B. Dutta 44,
M. Dyndal44, C. Eckardt 44, K .M .E c k e r102, R. C. Edgar 91, N. C. Edwards 48,T . E i f e r t32, G. Eigen 15, K. Einsweiler 16,
T. Ekelof165, M .E lK a c i m i136c, V . Ellajosyula87, M. Ellert 165, S. Elles 5, F. Ellinghaus 175, A. A. Elliot 169, N. Ellis 32,
J. Elmsheuser27, M. Elsing 32, D. Emeliyanov 132, Y . Enari156, O. C. Endner 85, M. Endo 119, J. S. Ennis 170, J. Erdmann 45,
A. Ereditato18,G . E r n i s175,J . E r n s t2,M . E r n s t27, S. Errede 166,E . E r t e l85, M. Escalier 118,H . E s c h45, C. Escobar 126,
B. Esposito49, A. I. Etienvre 137, E. Etzion 154, H. Evans 63, A. Ezhilov 124, F. Fabbri 22a,22b, L. Fabbri 22a,22b, G. Facini 33,
R. M. Fakhrutdinov131, S. Falciano 133a, R. J. Falla 80, J. Faltova 32, Y . Fang35a, M. Fanti 93a,93b, A. Farbin 8, A. Farilla 135a,
C. Farina126, T. Farooque13,S .F a r r e l l16, S. M. Farrington170, P. Farthouat32, F. Fassi136e, P. Fassnacht32, D. Fassouliotis9,
M. Faucci Giannelli79, A. Favareto 52a,52b, W. J. Fawcett 121, L. Fayard 118, O. L. Fedin 124,n, W. Fedorko 168, S. Feigl 120,
L. Feligioni87, C. Feng 35d, E. J. Feng 32, H. Feng 91, A. B. Fenyuk 131, L. Feremenga 8, P. Fernandez Martinez 167,
S. Fernandez Perez13, J. Ferrando 55, A. Ferrari 165, P. Ferrari 108, R. Ferrari 122a, D .E .F e r r e i r ad eL i m a60b, A. Ferrer 167,
D. Ferrere51, C. Ferretti 91, A. Ferretto Parodi 52a,52b, F. Fiedler 85, A. Filipˇ ciˇc77, M. Filipuzzi 44, F. Filthaut 107,
M. Fincke-Keeler169, K .D .F i n e l l i151, M .C .N .F i o l h a i s127a,127c,L . F i o r i n i167,A . F i r a n42, A. Fischer 2, C. Fischer 13,
J. Fischer175, W .C .F i s h e r92, N. Flaschel 44, I. Fleck 142, P. Fleischmann 91, G. T. Fletcher 140, R. R. M. Fletcher 123,
T. Flick175, A. Floderus 83, L. R. Flores Castillo 62a, M .J .F l o w e r d e w102, G. T. Forcolin 86, A. Formica 137,A . F o r t i86,
A. G. Foster19, D. Fournier 118,H . F o x 74, S. Fracchia 13, P. Francavilla 82, M. Franchini 22a,22b, D. Francis 32,
L. Franconi120, M. Franklin 59,M . F r a t e163, M. Fraternali 122a,122b, D. Freeborn 80, S. M. Fressard-Batraneanu 32,
F. Friedrich46, D. Froidevaux 32,J . A . F r o s t121, C. Fukunaga 157, E. Fullana Torregrosa 85, T. Fusayasu 103, J. Fuster 167,
C. Gabaldon57, O. Gabizon 175, A. Gabrielli 22a,22b, A. Gabrielli 16, G. P. Gach 40a, S. Gadatsch 32, S. Gadomski 51,
G. Gagliardi52a,52b, L. G. Gagnon 96, P. Gagnon 63, C. Galea 107, B. Galhardo 127a,127c, E. J. Gallas 121,B . J . G a l l o p132,
P. Gallus129, G. Galster 38,K . K . G a n112,J . G a o35b,87,Y . G a o48,Y . S . G a o144,f, F. M. Garay Walls 48, C. García 167,
J. E. García Navarro167, M. Garcia-Sciveres 16, R. W. Gardner 33, N. Garelli 144, V . Garonne 120, A. Gascon Bravo 44,
C. Gatti49, A. Gaudiello 52a,52b, G. Gaudio 122a, B. Gaur 142, L. Gauthier 96, I .L .G a v r i l e n k o97,C . G a y168, G. Gaycken 23,
E. N. Gazis10, Z. Gecse 168, C .N .P .G e e 132, Ch. Geich-Gimbel 23,M . G e i s e n85, M. P. Geisler 60a, C. Gemme 52a,
M. H. Genest57, C. Geng 35b,o, S. Gentile 133a,133b, S. George 79, D. Gerbaudo 13, A. Gershon 154, S. Ghasemi 142,
H. Ghazlane136b, M. Ghneimat 23, B. Giacobbe 22a, S. Giagu 133a,133b, P. Giannetti125a,125b, B. Gibbard 27,S . M . G i b s o n79,
M. Gignac168, M. Gilchriese 16, T. P. S. Gillam 30, D. Gillberg 31, G. Gilles 175, D .M .G i n g r i c h3,d, N. Giokaris 9,
M. P. Giordani164a,164c,F . M . G i o r g i22a,F . M . G i o r g i17, P .F .G i r a u d137, P. Giromini 59, D. Giugni 93a, F. Giuli 121,
C. Giuliani102, M. Giulini 60b, B. K. Gjelsten 120, S. Gkaitatzis 155, I. Gkialas 155, E. L. Gkougkousis 118, L. K. Gladilin 100,
C. Glasman84, J. Glatzer 50, P. C. F. Glaysher 48, A. Glazov 44, M. Goblirsch-Kolb 102, J. Godlewski 41, S. Goldfarb 91,
T. Golling51, D. Golubkov 131, A. Gomes 127a,127b,127d, R. Gonçalo 127a, J. Goncalves Pinto Firmino Da Costa 137,
G. Gonella50, L. Gonella 19, A. Gongadze 67, S. González de la Hoz 167, G. Gonzalez Parra 13, S. Gonzalez-Sevilla 51,
L. Goossens32, P. A. Gorbounov98, H. A. Gordon27, I. Gorelov106,B .G o r i n i32,E .G o r i n i75a,75b, A. Gorišek77, E. Gornicki41,
A. T. Goshaw47, C. Gössling45,M .I .G o s t k i n67, C. R. Goudet118, D. Goujdami136c, A. G. Goussiou139, N. Govender146b,p,
E. Gozani153, L. Graber 56, I. Grabowska-Bold 40a, P .O .J .G r a d i n57,P . G r a f s t r ö m22a,22b, J. Gramling 51,E . G r a m s t a d120,
S. Grancagnolo17, V . Gratchev124, P. M. Gravila 28e,H . M . G r a y32, E. Graziani 135a, Z. D. Greenwood 81,q,C . G r e f e23,
K. Gregersen80, I. M. Gregor 44, P. Grenier144,K . G r e v t s o v5,J . G r i f ﬁ t h s8, A. A. Grillo 138,K . G r i m m74, S. Grinstein 13,r,
Ph. Gris36,J . - F . G r i v a z118,S . G r o h85, J. P. Grohs 46, E. Gross 172, J. Grosse-Knetter 56, G. C. Grossi 81, Z .J .G r o u t150,
L. Guan91, W. Guan 173, J. Guenther 129, F. Guescini 51, D. Guest 163, O. Gueta 154, E. Guido 52a,52b, T. Guillemin 5,
S. Guindon2,U . G u l55, C. Gumpert 32,J . G u o35e,Y . G u o35b,o, S. Gupta 121, G. Gustavino 133a,133b, P. Gutierrez 114,
N. G. Gutierrez Ortiz80, C. Gutschow 46, C. Guyot 137, C. Gwenlan 121, C. B. Gwilliam 76, A. Haas 111, C. Haber 16,
H. K. Hadavand8, N. Haddad136e, A. Hadef87, P. Haefner23, S. Hageböck23, Z. Hajduk41, H. Hakobyan177,*, M. Haleem44,
J. Haley115, G. Halladjian 92, G. D. Hallewell 87, K. Hamacher 175, P. Hamal 116, K. Hamano 169, A. Hamilton 146a,
G. N. Hamity140, P. G. Hamnett 44,L . H a n35b, K. Hanagaki 68,s, K. Hanawa 156, M. Hance 138, B. Haney 123, P. Hanke 60a,
R. Hanna137, J. B. Hansen38, J. D. Hansen38, M. C. Hansen23, P. H. Hansen38,K .H a r a161,A .S .H a r d173, T. Harenberg175,
F. Hariri118, S. Harkusha 94, R. D. Harrington 48, P .F .H a r r i s o n170, F. Hartjes 108, N. M. Hartmann 101, M. Hasegawa 69,
Y. H a s eg aw a141,A . H a s i b114, S. Hassani 137, S. Haug 18, R. Hauser 92, L. Hauswald 46, M. Havranek 128, C .M .H a w k e s19,
123


--- Page 36 ---
653 Page 36 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
R. J. Hawkings32, D. Hayden92, C. P. Hays121, J. M. Hays78, H. S. Hayward76, S. J. Haywood132, S. J. Head19, T. Heck85,
V . Hedberg83, L. Heelan 8,S . H e i m123,T . H e i m16, B. Heinemann 16, J .J .H e i n r i c h101, L. Heinrich 111, C. Heinz 54,
J. Hejbal128, L. Helary 24, S. Hellman 147a,147b, C. Helsens 32, J. Henderson 121, R. C. W. Henderson 74, Y . Heng 173,
S. Henkelmann168, A. M. Henriques Correia 32, S. Henrot-Versille 118, G. H. Herbert 17, Y . Hernández Jiménez 167,
G. Herten50, R. Hertenberger 101,L . H e r v a s32,G . G . H e s k e t h80, N. P. Hessey 108, J. W. Hetherly 42, R. Hickling 78,
E. Higón-Rodriguez167, E. Hill169,J .C .H i l l30, K. H. Hiller44, S. J. Hillier19, I. Hinchliffe16, E. Hines123,R .R .H i n m a n16,
M. Hirose158, D. Hirschbuehl 175, J. Hobbs 149,N . H o d 160a, M. C. Hodgkinson 140, P. Hodgson 140, A. Hoecker 32,
M. R. Hoeferkamp106, F. Hoenig 101, D. Hohn 23, T .R .H o l m e s16, M. Homann 45, T. M. Hong 126, B. H. Hooberman 166,
W. H. Hopkins117,Y . H o r i i104, A .J .H o r t o n143, J-Y . Hostachy 57,S . H o u 152, A. Hoummada 136a,J . H o w a r t h44,
M. Hrabovsky116,I . H r i s t o v a17, J. Hrivnac 118, T. Hryn’ova 5, A. Hrynevich 95,C . H s u146c,P . J . H s u152,t,S . - C . H s u139,
D. Hu37,Q . H u 35b, Y . Huang 44, Z. Hubacek 129, F. Hubaut 87, F. Huegging 23, T. B. Huffman 121, E. W. Hughes 37,
G. Hughes74, M. Huhtinen 32, T .A .H ü l s i n g85,P . H u o149, N. Huseynov 67,b,J . H u s t o n92,J . H u t h59, G. Iacobucci 51,
G. Iakovidis27, I. Ibragimov 142, L. Iconomidou-Fayard 118, E. Ideal 176, Z. Idrissi 136e, P. Iengo 32, O. Igonkina 108,u,
T. Iizawa171,Y .I k e g a m i68, M. Ikeno68, Y . Ilchenko11,v, D. Iliadis155, N. Ilic144, T. Ince102, G. Introzzi122a,122b, P. Ioannou9,*,
M. Iodice135a, K. Iordanidou 37, V . Ippolito 59,M . I s h i n o70, M. Ishitsuka 158, R. Ishmukhametov 112, C. Issever 121,
S. Istin20a,F . I t o161, J. M. Iturbe Ponce 86, R. Iuppa 134a,134b, W. Iwanski 41, H. Iwasaki 68, J. M. Izen 43, V . Izzo 105a,
S. Jabbar3, B. Jackson123, M. Jackson76, P. Jackson1,V .J a i n2, K. B. Jakobi85, K. Jakobs50, S. Jakobsen32, T. Jakoubek128,
D. O. Jamin115,D .K .J a n a81, E. Jansen80, R. Jansky64, J. Janssen23, M. Janus56,G .J a r l s k o g83, N. Javadov67,b,T .J a v˚urek50,
F. Jeanneau137, L. Jeanty 16, J. Jejelava 53a,w, G. -Y . Jeng 151, D. Jennens 90, P. Jenni 50,x, J. Jentzsch 45,C . J e s k e170,
S. Jézéquel5,H . J i 173,J . J i a 149, H. Jiang 66, Y . Jiang 35b, S. Jiggins 80, J. Jimenez Pena 167,S . J i n 35a, A. Jinaru 28b,
O. Jinnouchi158, P. Johansson 140, K. A. Johns 7, W. J. Johnson 139, K. Jon-And 147a,147b, G. Jones 170, R. W. L. Jones 74,
S. Jones7, T. J. Jones76, J. Jongmanns60a, P. M. Jorge127a,127b, J. Jovicevic160a,X .J u173, A. Juste Rozas13,r, M. K. Köhler172,
A. Kaczmarska41, M. Kado 118, H. Kagan 112, M. Kagan 144, S. J. Kahn 87, E. Kajomovitz 47, C. W. Kalderon 121,
A. Kaluza85,S . K a m a42, A. Kamenshchikov131, N. Kanaya 156, S. Kaneti 30, L. Kanjir 77, V . A. Kantserov99, J. Kanzaki 68,
B. Kaplan111, L. S. Kaplan173, A. Kapliy33,D .K a r146c, K. Karakostas10, A. Karamaoun3, N. Karastathis10, M. J. Kareem56,
E. Karentzos10, M. Karnevskiy85,S .N .K a r p o v67, Z. M. Karpova67, K. Karthik111, V . Kartvelishvili74, A. N. Karyukhin131,
K. Kasahara161, L. Kashif 173,R . D . K a s s112, A. Kastanas 15, Y . Kataoka 156,C . K a t o156,A . K a t r e51, J. Katzy 44,
K. Kawagoe72, T. Kawamoto 156, G. Kawamura 56, S. Kazama 156, V . F. Kazanin 110,c, R. Keeler 169, R. Kehoe 42,
J. S. Keller44, J. J. Kempster 79, K. Kawade 104, H. Keoshkerian 159, O. Kepka 128, B. P. Kerševan 77, S. Kersten 175,
R. A. Keyes89, F. Khalil-zada 12, A. Khanov 115, A .G .K h a r l a m o v110,c, T. J. Khoo 51, V . Khovanskiy98, E. Khramov 67,
J. Khubua53b,y,S . K i d o69, H .Y .K i m 8,S . H . K i m161,Y . K . K i m33,N . K i m u r a155, O .M .K i n d17,B . T . K i n g76,
M. King167,S . B . K i n g168,J . K i r k132, A. E. Kiryunin 102, T. Kishimoto 69, D. Kisielewska 40a,F . K i s s50, K. Kiuchi 161,
O. Kivernyk137, E. Kladiva 145b, M. H. Klein 37, M. Klein 76, U. Klein 76, K. Kleinknecht 85, P. Klimek 147a,147b,
A. Klimentov27, R. Klingenberg 45, J. A. Klinger 140, T. Klioutchnikova 32, E. -E. Kluge 60a, P. Kluit 108,S . K l u t h102,
J. Knapik41, E. Kneringer 64, E. B. F. G. Knoops 87, A. Knue 55, A. Kobayashi 156, D. Kobayashi 158, T. Kobayashi 156,
M. Kobel46, M. Kocian 144, P. Kodys 130,T . K o f f a s31,E . K o f f e m a n108,T . K o i 144, H. Kolanoski 17,M . K o l b60b,
I. Koletsou5, A .A .K o m a r97,*, Y . Komori 156, T. Kondo 68, N. Kondrashova 44, K. Köneke 50, A. C. König 107,
T. Kono68,z, R. Konoplich 111,aa, N. Konstantinidis 80, R. Kopeliansky 63, S. Koperny 40a, L. Köpke 85, A .K .K o p p50,
K. Korcyl41, K. Kordas 155,A . K o r n80, A. A. Korol 110,c, I. Korolkov 13, E. V . Korolkova140, O. Kortner 102, S. Kortner 102,
T. Kosek130, V . V . Kostyukhin23,A . K o t w a l47, A. Kourkoumeli-Charalampidi 155, C. Kourkoumelis 9, V . Kouskoura27,
A. B. Kowalewska41, R. Kowalewski 169,T . Z . K o w a l s k i40a, C. Kozakai 156, W. Kozanecki 137, A. S. Kozhin 131,
V . A. Kramarenko100, G. Kramberger 77, D. Krasnopevtsev 99,M . W . K r a s n y82, A. Krasznahorkay 32, J. K. Kraus 23,
A. Kravchenko27,M . K r e t z60c, J. Kretzschmar 76, K. Kreutzfeldt 54, P. Krieger 159, K. Krizka 33, K. Kroeninger 45,
H. Kroha102,J . K r o l l123, J. Kroseberg 23, J. Krstic 14, U. Kruchonak 67, H. Krüger 23, N. Krumnack 66,A . K r u s e173,
M. C. Kruse47, M. Kruskal24, T. Kubota90, H. Kucuk80, S. Kuday4b, J. T. Kuechler175, S. Kuehn50, A. Kugel60c, F. Kuger174,
A. Kuhl138, T. Kuhl 44, V . Kukhtin67, R. Kukla 137, Y . Kulchitsky94, S. Kuleshov 34b, M. Kuna 133a,133b, T. Kunigo 70,
A. Kupco128, H. Kurashige 69, Y . A. Kurochkin94,V . K u s128, E. S. Kuwertz 169, M. Kuze 158, J. Kvita 116,T . K w a n169,
D. Kyriazopoulos140,A . L a R o s a102, J .L .L aR o s aN a v a r r o26d, L. La Rotonda 39a,39b, C. Lacasta 167, F. Lacava 133a,133b,
J. Lacey31, H. Lacker 17, D. Lacour 82, V . R. Lacuesta167, E. Ladygin 67, R. Lafaye 5, B. Laforge82, T. Lagouri176,S . L a i56,
S. Lammers63, W. Lampl7, E. Lançon137, U. Landgraf50, M. P. J. Landon78, V . S. Lang60a, J. C. Lange13, A. J. Lankford163,
F. Lanni27, K. Lantzsch23, A. Lanza122a, S. Laplace82, C. Lapoire32, J. F. Laporte137,T .L a r i93a, F. Lasagni Manghi22a,22b,
M. Lassnig32, P. Laurelli 49, W. Lavrijsen 16, A .T .L a w138, P. Laycock 76, T. Lazovich 59, M. Lazzaroni 93a,93b,B . L e 90,
O. Le Dortz82,E . L e G u i r r i e c87, E. P. Le Quilleuc 137, M. LeBlanc 169, T. LeCompte 6, F. Ledroit-Guillon 57,C . A . L e e27,
123


--- Page 37 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 37 of 45 653
S. C. Lee152,L . L e e1, G. Lefebvre 82, M. Lefebvre 169, F. Legger 101, C. Leggett 16, A. Lehan 76, G. Lehmann Miotto 32,
X. Lei7, W. A. Leight31,A .L e i s o s155,ab,A .G .L e i s t e r176,M .A .L .L e i t e26d, R. Leitner130, D. Lellouch172, B. Lemmer56,
K. J. C. Leney80, T. Lenz23, B. Lenzi 32, R. Leone 7, S. Leone 125a,125b, C. Leonidopoulos 48, S. Leontsinis 10, G. Lerner 150,
C. Leroy96, A .A .J .L e s a g e137,C . G . L e s t e r30, M. Levchenko 124, J. Levêque 5,D . L e v i n91, L .J .L e v i n s o n172,
M. Levy19,D . L e w i s78, A .M .L e y k o23,M . L e y t o n43,B . L i 35b,o,H . L i 149,H . L . L i33,L . L i 47,L . L i 35e,Q . L i 35a,
S. Li47,X . L i86,Y . L i142, Z. Liang 35a, B. Liberti 134a, A. Liblong 159, P. Lichard 32,K . L i e166, J. Liebal 23, W. Liebig 15,
A. Limosani151,S . C . L i n 152,ac,T . H . L i n 85, B. E. Lindquist 149, A. E. Lionti 51, E. Lipeles 123, A. Lipniacka 15,
M. Lisovyi60b, T .M .L i s s166, A. Lister 168, A. M. Litke 138,B . L i u 152,ad,D . L i u 152,H . L i u 91,H . L i u 27,J . L i u 87,
J. B. Liu35b,K . L i u 87,L . L i u 166,M . L i u 47,M . L i u 35b,Y . L . L i u35b,Y . L i u35b,M . L i v a n122a,122b,A . L l e r e s57,
J. Llorente Merino35a,S . L . L l o y d78,F . L o S t e r z o152, E. Lobodzinska 44, P. Loch7, W. S. Lockman138, F. K. Loebinger86,
A. E. Loevschall-Jensen38,K . M . L o e w25, A. Loginov 176,*, T. Lohse17, K. Lohwasser 44, M. Lokajicek 128, B .A .L o n g24,
J. D. Long166, R. E. Long 74, L. Longo 75a,75b, K. A. Looper 112, L. Lopes 127a, D. Lopez Mateos 59, B. Lopez Paredes 140,
I. Lopez Paz13, A. Lopez Solis 82, J. Lorenz 101, N. Lorenzo Martinez 63, M. Losada 21, P. J. Lösel 101,X . L o u 35a,
A. Lounis118, J. Love 6, P. A. Love 74,H . L u62a,N . L u91, H. J. Lubatti 139, C. Luci 133a,133b, A. Lucotte 57, C. Luedtke 50,
F. Luehring63, W. Lukas 64, L. Luminari 133a, O. Lundberg 147a,147b, B. Lund-Jensen 148, P. M. Luzi 82, D. Lynn 27,
R. Lysak128,E . L y t k e n83, V . Lyubushkin 67,H . M a 27,L . L . M a 35d,Y . M a 35d, G. Maccarrone 49, A. Macchiolo 102,
C. M. Macdonald140,B . M a ˇcek77, J. Machado Miguens 123,127b, D. Madaffari 87, R. Madar 36, H. J. Maddocks 165,
W. F. Mader46, A. Madsen 44, J. Maeda 69, S. Maeland 15, T. Maeno 27, A. Maevskiy 100, E. Magradze 56, J. Mahlstedt 108,
C. Maiani118, C. Maidantchik 26a, A .A .M a i e r102, T. Maier 101,A . M a i o127a,127b,127d,S . M a j e w s k i117, Y . Makida 68,
N. Makovec118, B. Malaescu 82, Pa. Malecki 41, V . P. Maleev124, F. Malek 57, U. Mallik 65, D. Malon 6, C. Malone 144,
S. Maltezos10, S. Malyukov32, J. Mamuzic167, G. Mancini49, B. Mandelli32, L. Mandelli93a, I. Mandi´c77, J. Maneira127a,127b,
L. Manhaes de Andrade Filho26b, J. Manjarres Ramos160b, A. Mann101, A. Manousos32, B. Mansoulie137, J. D. Mansour35a,
R. Mantifel89, M. Mantoani 56, S. Manzoni 93a,93b, L. Mapelli 32, G. Marceca 29, L. March 51, G. Marchiori 82,
M. Marcisovsky128, M. Marjanovic14,D .E .M a r l e y91, F. Marroquim26a, S. P. Marsden86, Z. Marshall16, S. Marti-Garcia167,
B. Martin92, T. A. Martin 170, V . J. Martin 48, B. Martin dit Latour 15, M. Martinez 13,r, S. Martin-Haugh 132,
V . S. Martoiu28b, A. C. Martyniuk 80,M . M a r x139, A. Marzin 32, L. Masetti 85, T. Mashimo 156, R. Mashinistov 97,
J. Masik86, A. L. Maslennikov 110,c, I. Massa 22a,22b, L. Massa 22a,22b, P. Mastrandrea 5, A. Mastroberardino 39a,39b,
T. Masubuchi156, P. Mättig 175, J. Mattmann 85, J. Maurer 28b, S. J. Maxﬁeld 76, D .A .M a x i m o v110,c, R. Mazini 152,
S. M. Mazza93a,93b, N. C. Mc Fadden 106, G. Mc Goldrick 159,S . P . M c K e e91, A. McCarn 91, R. L. McCarthy 149,
T. G. McCarthy102, L. I. McClymont 80, E. F. McDonald 90, K. W. McFarlane 58,*, J. A. Mcfayden 80, G. Mchedlidze 56,
S. J. McMahon132, R. A. McPherson 169,l, M. Medinnis 44, S. Meehan 139, S. Mehlhase 101, A. Mehta 76, K. Meier 60a,
C. Meineck101,B . M e i r o s e43, D. Melini 167, B. R. Mellado Garcia 146c,M . M e l o145a, F. Meloni 18, S. B. Menary 86,
A. Mengarelli22a,22b, S. Menke 102, E. Meoni 162, S. Mergelmeyer 17,P . M e r m o d51, L. Merola 105a,105b, C. Meroni 93a,
F. S. Merritt33, A. Messina 133a,133b, J. Metcalfe 6,A . S . M e t e163, C. Meyer 85, C. Meyer 123, J-P. Meyer 137, J. Meyer 108,
H. Meyer Zu Theenhausen60a, F. Miano 150, R. P. Middleton 132, S. Miglioranzi 52a,52b, L. Mijovi´ c23, G. Mikenberg 172,
M. Mikestikova128, M. Mikuž77, M. Milesi90, A. Milic64, D. W. Miller33, C. Mills48, A. Milov172,D .A .M i l s t e a d147a,147b,
A. A. Minaenko131, Y . Minami 156, I. A. Minashvili 67, A. I. Mincer 111, B. Mindur 40a, M. Mineev 67,Y . M i n g173,
L. M. Mir13, K. P. Mistry 123, T. Mitani 171, J. Mitrevski 101, V . A. Mitsou 167, A. Miucci 51, P. S. Miyagawa 140,
J. U. Mjörnmark83,T . M o a 147a,147b, K. Mochizuki 96, S. Mohapatra 37, S. Molander 147a,147b, R. Moles-Valls 23,
R. Monden70, M. C. Mondragon 92, K. Mönig 44, J. Monk 38, E. Monnier 87, A. Montalbano 149, J. Montejo Berlingen 32,
F. Monticelli73, S. Monzani 93a,93b, R. W. Moore 3, N. Morange 118, D. Moreno 21, M. Moreno Llácer 56, P. Morettini 52a,
D. Mori143,T . M o r i156,M . M o r i i59, M. Morinaga 156, V . Morisbak120, S. Moritz 85,A . K . M o r l e y151, G. Mornacchi 32,
J. D. Morris78, S. S. Mortensen 38,L . M o r v a j149, M. Mosidze 53b,J . M o s s 144, K. Motohashi 158, R. Mount 144,
E. Mountricha27, S. V . Mouraviev 97,*, E .J .W .M o y s e88, S. Muanza 87, R. D. Mudd 19, F. Mueller 102, J. Mueller 126,
R. S. P. Mueller101, T. Mueller 30, D. Muenstermann 74, P. Mullen 55, G. A. Mullier 18, F. J. Munoz Sanchez 86,
J. A. Murillo Quijada19, W .J .M u r r a y170,132, H. Musheghyan 56, M. Muškinja 77, A. G. Myagkov 131,ae, M. Myska 129,
B. P. Nachman144, O. Nackenhorst 51, K. Nagai 121, R. Nagai 68,z, K. Nagano 68, Y . Nagasaka61, K. Nagata 161, M. Nagel 50,
E. Nagy87, A .M .N a i r z32, Y . Nakahama 32, K. Nakamura 68, T. Nakamura 156, I. Nakano 113, H. Namasivayam 43,
R. F. Naranjo Garcia44, R. Narayan 11, D. I. Narrias Villar 60a, I. Naryshkin 124, T. Naumann 44,G . N a v a r r o21, R. Nayyar 7,
H. A. Neal91, P. Yu. Nechaeva 97, T .J .N e e p86,P . D . N e f144,A . N e g r i122a,122b,M . N e g r i n i22a, S. Nektarijevic 107,
C. Nellist118,A . N e l s o n163, S. Nemecek 128, P. Nemethy 111, A. A. Nepomuceno 26a, M. Nessi 32,af, M. S. Neubauer 166,
M. Neumann175, R .M .N e v e s111,P . N e v s k i27, P. R. Newman19, D. H. Nguyen 6, T. Nguyen Manh 96, R. B. Nickerson 121,
R. Nicolaidou137, J. Nielsen138, A. Nikiforov17, V . Nikolaenko131,ae, I. Nikolic-Audit82, K. Nikolopoulos19,J .K .N i l s e n120,
123


--- Page 38 ---
653 Page 38 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
P. Nilsson27, Y . Ninomiya156,A . N i s a t i133a, R. Nisius 102, T. Nobe 156, L. Nodulman 6, M. Nomachi 119, I. Nomidis 31,
T. Nooney78, S. Norberg 114, M. Nordberg 32, N. Norjoharuddeen 121, O. Novgorodova 46,S . N o w a k102, M. Nozaki 68,
L. Nozka116, K. Ntekas 10, E. Nurse 80,F . N u t i90, F. O’grady 7,D . C . O ’ N e i l143, A .A .O ’ R o u r k e44, V . O’Shea 55,
F. G. Oakham31,d, H. Oberlack 102, T. Obermann 23, J. Ocariz 82, A. Ochi 69, I. Ochoa 37, J. P. Ochoa-Ricoux 34a,
S. Oda72, S. Odaka 68, H. Ogren 63,A . O h 86,S . H . O h 47,C . C . O h m16, H. Ohman 165,H . O i d e32,H . O k a w a161,
Y . Okumura33, T. Okuyama 68,A . O l a r i u28b, L. F. Oleiro Seabra 127a, S. A. Olivares Pino 48, D. Oliveira Damazio 27,
A. Olszewski41, J. Olszowska 41, A. Onofre 127a,127e, K. Onogi 104, P .U .E .O n y i s i11,v, M. J. Oreglia 33,Y . O r e n154,
D. Orestano135a,135b, N. Orlando 62b, R .S .O r r159, B. Osculati 52a,52b, R. Ospanov 86, G. Otero y Garzon 29, H. Otono 72,
M. Ouchrif136d, F. Ould-Saada 120, A. Ouraou 137, K. P. Oussoren 108, Q. Ouyang 35a, M. Owen 55, R. E. Owen 19,
V . E. Ozcan20a, N. Ozturk 8, K. Pachal 143, A. Pacheco Pages 13, C. Padilla Aranda 13,M . P a g á ˇcová50, S. Pagan Griso 16,
F. Paige27,P . P a i s88, K. Pajchel 120, G. Palacino 160b, S. Palestini 32, M. Palka 40b, D. Pallin 36,A . P a l m a127a,127b,
E. St. Panagiotopoulou10, C. E. Pandini 82, J. G. Panduro Vazquez 79, P. Pani 147a,147b, S. Panitkin 27, D. Pantea 28b,
L. Paolozzi51, Th. D. Papadopoulou 10, K. Papageorgiou 155, A. Paramonov 6, D. Paredes Hernandez 176, A .J .P a r k e r74,
M. A. Parker30, K .A .P a r k e r140, F. Parodi 52a,52b, J. A. Parsons 37, U. Parzefall 50, V . R. Pascuzzi159, E. Pasqualucci 133a,
S. Passaggio52a,F r . P a s t o r e79, G. Pásztor 31,ag, S. Pataraia 175, J. R. Pater 86, T. Pauly 32, J. Pearce 169, B. Pearson 114,
L. E. Pedersen38, M. Pedersen120, S. Pedraza Lopez167, R. Pedro127a,127b, S. V . Peleganchuk110,c, D. Pelikan165, O. Penc128,
C. Peng35a, H. Peng 35b, J. Penwell 63, B. S. Peralva 26b, M. M. Perego 137, D. V . Perepelitsa 27, E. Perez Codina 160a,
L. Perini93a,93b, H. Pernegger 32, S. Perrella 105a,105b, R. Peschke 44, V . D. Peshekhonov67, K. Peters 44, R. F. Y . Peters86,
B. A. Petersen32, T. C. Petersen 38, E. Petit 57, A. Petridis 1, C. Petridou 155, P. Petroff 118, E. Petrolo 133a, M. Petrov 121,
F. Petrucci135a,135b, N. E. Pettersson 88, A. Peyaud 137, R. Pezoa 34b, P. W. Phillips132, G. Piacquadio 144,ah, E. Pianori 170,
A. Picazio88, E. Piccaro 78, M. Piccinini 22a,22b, M .A .P i c k e r i n g121, R. Piegaia 29, J. E. Pilcher 33, A. D. Pilkington 86,
A. W. J. Pin86, M. Pinamonti 164a164c,ai, J. L. Pinfold 3, A. Pingel 38,S . P i r e s82,H . P i r u m o v44, M. Pitt 172, L. Plazak 145a,
M.-A. Pleier27,V . P l e s k o t85, E. Plotnikova 67, P. Plucinski 92, D. Pluth 66, R. Poettgen 147a,147b, L. Poggioli 118, D. Pohl 23,
G. Polesello122a, A. Poley 44, A. Policicchio 39a,39b, R. Polifka 159, A. Polini 22a, C. S. Pollard 55, V . Polychronakos 27,
K. Pommès32, L. Pontecorvo 133a, B. G. Pope 92, G. A. Popeneciu 28c, D. S. Popovic 14, A. Poppleton 32, S. Pospisil 129,
K. Potamianos16, I .N .P o t r a p67, C .J .P o t t e r30, C .T .P o t t e r117, G. Poulard 32, J. Poveda 32, V . Pozdnyakov 67,
M. E. Pozo Astigarraga32, P. Pralavorio87, A. Pranko 16,S . P r e l l66,D . P r i c e86,L . E . P r i c e6,M . P r i m a v e r a75a, S. Prince 89,
M. Proissl48, K. Prokoﬁev 62c,F . P r o k o s h i n34b, S. Protopopescu 27, J. Proudfoot 6, M. Przybycien 40a, D. Puddu 135a,135b,
M. Purohit27,aj, P. Puzo 118,J . Q i a n91,G . Q i n55,Y . Q i n86, A. Quadt 56, W. B. Quayle 164a,164b, M. Queitsch-Maitland 86,
D. Quilty55, S. Raddum120, V . Radeka27, V . Radescu60b, S. K. Radhakrishnan149, P. Radloff117, P. Rados90, F. Ragusa93a,93b,
G. Rahal178, J. A. Raine 86, S. Rajagopalan 27, M. Rammensee 32, C. Rangel-Smith 165, M .G .R a t t i93a,93b, F. Rauscher 101,
S. Rave85, T. Ravenscroft 55, I. Ravinovich 172, M. Raymond 32, A. L. Read 120, N. P. Readioff 76, M. Reale 75a,75b,
D. M. Rebuzzi122a,122b, A. Redelbach 174, G. Redlinger 27, R. Reece 138,K . R e e v e s43, L. Rehnisch 17, J. Reichert 123,
H. Reisin29, C. Rembser32,H .R e n35a, M. Rescigno133a, S. Resconi93a, O. L. Rezanova110,c, P. Reznicek130, R. Rezvani96,
R. Richter102, S. Richter80, E. Richter-Was40b,O .R i c k e n23, M. Ridel82, P. Rieck17, C. J. Riegel175, J. Rieger56,O .R i f k i114,
M. Rijssenbeek149, A. Rimoldi 122a,122b, M. Rimoldi 18, L. Rinaldi 22a, B. Risti´c51, E. Ritsch 32,I . R i u13, F. Rizatdinova115,
E. Rizvi78, C. Rizzi13, S. H. Robertson89,l, A. Robichaud-Veronneau89, D. Robinson30, J. E. M. Robinson44, A. Robson55,
C. Roda125a,125b, Y . Rodina87, A. Rodriguez Perez 13, D. Rodriguez Rodriguez 167,S . R o e32, C. S. Rogan 59, O. Røhne 120,
A. Romaniouk99, M. Romano 22a,22b, S. M. Romano Saez 36, E. Romero Adam 167, N. Rompotis 139, M. Ronzani 50,
L. Roos82,E . R o s167, S. Rosati 133a, K. Rosbach 50,P . R o s e138, O. Rosenthal 142,N . - A . R o s i e n56, V . Rossetti147a,147b,
E. Rossi105a,105b, L. P. Rossi52a,J .H .N .R o s t e n30,R .R o s t e n139, M. Rotaru28b,I .R o t h172, J. Rothberg139, D. Rousseau118,
C. R. Royon137, A. Rozanov87, Y . Rozen153, X. Ruan146c, F. Rubbo144, M. S. Rudolph159, F. Rühr50, A. Ruiz-Martinez31,
Z. Rurikova50, N. A. Rusakovich67, A. Ruschke101, H. L. Russell139, J. P. Rutherfoord7, N. Ruthmann32, Y . F. Ryabov124,
M. Rybar166, G. Rybkin 118,S . R y u6, A. Ryzhov 131, G. F. Rzehorz 56, A. F. Saavedra 151, G. Sabato 108, S. Sacerdoti 29,
H. F.-W. Sadrozinski138, R. Sadykov 67, F. Safai Tehrani 133a, P. Saha 109, M. Sahinsoy 60a, M. Saimpert 137, T. Saito 156,
H. Sakamoto156, Y . Sakurai 171, G. Salamanna 135a,135b, A. Salamon 134a,134b, J. E. Salazar Loyola 34b, D. Salek 108,
P. H. Sales De Bruin139, D. Salihagic 102, A. Salnikov 144, J. Salt 167, D. Salvatore 39a,39b, F. Salvatore 150, A. Salvucci 62a,
A. Salzburger32, D. Sammel 50, D. Sampsonidis 155, A. Sanchez 105a,105b, J. Sánchez 167, V . Sanchez Martinez 167,
H. Sandaker120, R. L. Sandbach78, H. G. Sander85, M. Sandhoff175, C. Sandoval21, R. Sandstroem102, D. P. C. Sankey132,
M. Sannino52a,52b, A. Sansoni 49, C. Santoni 36, R. Santonico 134a,134b, H. Santos 127a, I. Santoyo Castillo 150, K. Sapp 126,
A. Sapronov67, J. G. Saraiva 127a,127d, B. Sarrazin 23, O. Sasaki 68, Y . Sasaki156, K. Sato 161, G. Sauvage 5,*, E. Sauvan 5,
G. Savage79,P . S a v a r d159,d, C. Sawyer 132, L. Sawyer 81,q, J. Saxon 33, C. Sbarra 22a, A. Sbrizzi 22a,22b, T. Scanlon 80,
D. A. Scannicchio163, M. Scarcella 151, V . Scarfone 39a,39b, J. Schaarschmidt 172, P. Schacht 102, B. M. Schachtner 101,
123


--- Page 39 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 39 of 45 653
D. Schaefer32, R. Schaefer44, J. Schaeffer85, S. Schaepe23, S. Schaetzel60b, U. Schäfer85, A. C. Schaffer118, D. Schaile101,
R. D. Schamberger149, V . Scharf 60a, V . A. Schegelsky 124, D. Scheirich 130, M. Schernau 163, C. Schiavi 52a,52b,
S. Schier138, C. Schillo 50, M. Schioppa 39a,39b, S. Schlenker 32, K. R. Schmidt-Sommerfeld 102, K. Schmieden 32,
C. Schmitt85, S. Schmitt 44, S. Schmitz 85, B. Schneider 160a, U. Schnoor 50, L. Schoeffel 137, A. Schoening 60b,
B. D. Schoenrock92, E. Schopf 23, M. Schott 85, J. Schovancova 8, S. Schramm 51, M. Schreyer 174, N. Schuh 85,
M. J. Schultens23, H. -C. Schultz-Coulon 60a, H. Schulz 17, M. Schumacher 50, B. A. Schumm 138, Ph. Schune 137,
A. Schwartzman144, T. A. Schwarz 91, Ph. Schwegler 102, H. Schweiger 86, Ph. Schwemling 137, R. Schwienhorst 92,
J. Schwindling137, T. Schwindt 23, G. Sciolla 25, F. Scuri 125a,125b, F. Scutti 90, J. Searcy 91, P. Seema 23, S. C. Seidel 106,
A. Seiden138, F. Seifert 129, J. M. Seixas 26a, G. Sekhniaidze 105a, K. Sekhon 91, S. J. Sekula 42, D. M. Seliverstov 124,*,
N. Semprini-Cesari22a,22b, C. Serfon 120, L. Serin 118, L. Serkin 164a,164b, M. Sessa 135a,135b, R. Seuster 169,H . S e v e r i n i114,
T. Sﬁligoj77, F. Sforza 32, A. Sfyrla 51, E. Shabalina 56, N. W. Shaikh 147a,147b, L. Y . Shan35a, R. Shang 166, J. T. Shank 24,
M. Shapiro16, P. B. Shatalov98, K. Shaw164a,164b, S. M. Shaw86, A. Shcherbakova147a,147b, C. Y . Shehu150, P. Sherwood80,
L. Shi152,ak, S. Shimizu 69, C. O. Shimmin 163, M. Shimojima 103, M. Shiyakova 67,al, A. Shmeleva 97, D. Shoaleh Saadi 96,
M. J. Shochet33, S. Shojaii93a,93b, S. Shrestha112, E. Shulga99, M. A. Shupe7, P. Sicho128, A. M. Sickles166, P. E. Sidebo148,
O. Sidiropoulou174, D. Sidorov 115, A. Sidoti 22a,22b, F. Siegert 46, Dj. Sijacki 14, J. Silva 127a,127d, S. B. Silverstein 147a,
V. S i m a k129,O .S i m a r d5,L j .S i m i c14, S. Simion118, E. Simioni85, B. Simmons80,D .S i m o n36,M .S i m o n85, P. Sinervo159,
N. B. Sinev117, M. Sioli 22a,22b, G. Siragusa 174, S. Yu. Sivoklokov100, J. Sjölin 147a,147b, T. B. Sjursen 15, M. B. Skinner 74,
H. P. Skottowe59, P. Skubic114, M. Slater 19, T. Slavicek129, M. Slawinska 108, K. Sliwa 162,R . S l o v a k130, V . Smakhtin172,
B. H. Smart5,L . S m e s t a d15,J . S m i e s k o145a, S. Yu. Smirnov 99,Y . S m i r n o v99, L .N .S m i r n o v a100,am,O . S m i r n o v a83,
M. N. K. Smith37, R. W. Smith37, M. Smizanska74,K .S m o l e k129, A. A. Snesarev97, S. Snyder27, R. Sobie169,l, F. Socher46,
A. Soffer154, D. A. Soh 152, G. Sokhrannyi 77, C. A. Solans Sanchez 32, M. Solar 129, E. Yu. Soldatov 99, U. Soldevila 167,
A. A. Solodkov131, A. Soloshenko 67, O. V . Solovyanov131, V . Solovyev124, P. Sommer 50, H. Son 162, H. Y . Song35b,an,
A. Sood16, A. Sopczak 129, V . Sopko 129, V . Sorin 13, D. Sosa 60b, C. L. Sotiropoulou 125a,125b, R. Soualah 164a,164c,
A. M. Soukharev110,c, D. South 44, B. C. Sowden 79, S. Spagnolo 75a,75b, M. Spalla 125a,125b, M. Spangenberg 170,
F. Spanò79, D. Sperlich 17, F. Spettel 102, R. Spighi 22a, G. Spigo 32, L. A. Spiller 90, M. Spousta 130, R. D. St. Denis 55,*,
A. Stabile93a,R . S t a m e n60a,S . S t a m m17, E. Stanecka 41, R. W. Stanek 6, C. Stanescu 135a, M. Stanescu-Bellu 44,
M. M. Stanitzki44, S. Stapnes 120, E. A. Starchenko 131, G .H .S t a r k33,J . S t a r k57, P. Staroba 128, P. Starovoitov 60a,
S. Stärz32, R. Staszewski 41, P. Steinberg 27, B. Stelzer 143, H. J. Stelzer 32, O. Stelzer-Chilton 160a, H. Stenzel 54,
G. A. Stewart55, J. A. Stillings23, M. C. Stockton89, M. Stoebe89, G. Stoicea28b, P. Stolte56, S. Stonjek102, A. R. Stradling8,
A. Straessner46, M. E. Stramaglia18, J. Strandberg148, S. Strandberg147a,147b, A. Strandlie120, M. Strauss114, P. Strizenec145b,
R. Ströhmer174,D . M . S t r o m117, R. Stroynowski 42, A. Strubig 107, S. A. Stucci 18, B. Stugu 15, N. A. Styles 44,D . S u144,
J. Su126, R. Subramaniam 81, S. Suchek 60a, Y . Sugaya 119, M. Suk 129, V . V . Sulin97, S. Sultansoy 4c, T. Sumida 70,
S. Sun59, X. Sun 35a, J. E. Sundermann 50, K. Suruliz 150, G. Susinno 39a,39b, M. R. Sutton 150, S. Suzuki 68,M . S v a t o s128,
M. Swiatlowski33, I. Sykora 145a, T. Sykora130,D . T a50, C. Taccini135a,135b, K. Tackmann44, J. Taenzer159,A . T a f f a r d163,
R. Taﬁrout160a, N. Taiblum154, H. Takai27, R. Takashima71, T. Takeshita141, Y . Takubo68, M. Talby87, A. A. Talyshev110,c,
K. G. Tan90, J. Tanaka 156, R. Tanaka 118, S. Tanaka 68, B. B. Tannenwald 112, S. Tapia Araya 34b, S. Tapprogge 85,
S. Tarem153, G. F. Tartarelli 93a,P . T a s130,M . T a s e v s k y128, T. Tashiro 70, E. Tassi 39a,39b, A. Tavares Delgado 127a,127b,
Y . Tayalati136d, A. C. Taylor 106, G. N. Taylor 90, P. T. E. Taylor90, W. Taylor160b, F. A. Teischinger32, P. Teixeira-Dias79,
K. K. Temming50, D. Temple 143,H . T e n K a t e32, P. K. Teng 152, J. J. Teoh 119, F. Tepel 175, S. Terada 68, K. Terashi 156,
J. Terron84, S. Terzo 102,M . T e s t a49, R. J. Teuscher 159,l, T. Theveneaux-Pelzer 87, J. P. Thomas 19, J. Thomas-Wilsker 79,
E. N. Thompson37, P. D. Thompson 19, A. S. Thompson 55, L .A .T h o m s e n176, E. Thomson 123, M. Thomson 30,
M. J. Tibbetts16, R .E .T i c s eT o r r e s87, V . O. Tikhomirov 97,ao, Yu. A. Tikhonov 110,c, S. Timoshenko 99, P. Tipton 176,
S. Tisserant87, K. Todome158, T. Todorov5,*, S. Todorova-Nova130,J . T o j o72, S. Tokár145a, K. Tokushuku68,E . T o l l e y59,
L. Tomlinson86, M. Tomoto104, L. Tompkins144,ap,K .T o m s106, B. Tong59, E. Torrence117,H .T o r r e s143, E. Torró Pastor139,
J. Toth87,aq, F. Touchard 87, D. R. Tovey 140, T. Trefzger 174, A. Tricoli 27, I. M. Trigger 160a, S. Trincaz-Duvoid 82,
M. F. Tripiana13, W. Trischuk159, B. Trocmé57,A .T r o f y m o v44, C. Troncon93a, M. Trottier-McDonald16, M. Trovatelli169,
L. Truong164a,164c, M. Trzebinski 41, A. Trzupek 41, J. C.-L. Tseng 121, P. V . Tsiareshka94, G. Tsipolitis 10, N. Tsirintanis 9,
S. Tsiskaridze13, V . Tsiskaridze 50, E. G. Tskhadadze 53a,K . M . T s u i62a, I .I .T s u k e r m a n98, V . Tsulaia 16, S. Tsuno 68,
D. Tsybychev149, A. Tudorache 28b, V . Tudorache 28b, A .N .T u n a 59, S. A. Tupputi 22a,22b, S. Turchikhin 100,am,
D. Turecek129, D. Turgeman 172,R . T u r r a93a,93b, A .J .T u r v e y42, P .M .T u t s37, M. Tyndel 132, G. Ucchielli 22a,22b,
I. Ueda156, R. Ueno 31, M. Ughetto 147a,147b,F . U k e g a w a161, G. Unal 32, A. Undrus 27, G. Unel 163, F .C .U n g a r o90,
Y . Unno68, C. Unverdorben 101, J. Urban 145b, P. Urquijo 90, P. Urrejola 85,G . U s a i8, A. Usanova 64, L. Vacavant 87,
V . Vacek129, B. Vachon89, C. Valderanis101, E. Valdes Santurio147a,147b, N. Valencic108, S. Valentinetti22a,22b, A. Valero167,
123


--- Page 40 ---
653 Page 40 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
L. Valery13, S. Valkar 130, S. Vallecorsa 51, J .A .V a l l sF e r r e r167, W. Van Den Wollenberg 108, P. C. Van Der Deijl 108,
R. van der Geer108, H. van der Graaf 108, N. van Eldik 153, P. van Gemmeren 6, J. Van Nieuwkoop 143, I. van Vulpen 108,
M. C. van Woerden32, M. Vanadia133a,133b, W. Vandelli32, R. Vanguri123, A. Vaniachine131, P. Vankov108, G. Vardanyan177,
R. Vari133a, E. W. Varnes7, T. Varol42, D. Varouchas82, A. Vartapetian8,K . E . V a r v e l l151, J. G. Vasquez176, F. Vazeille36,
T. Vazquez Schroeder89, J. Veatch56, L. M. Veloce159, F. Veloso127a,127c, S. Veneziano133a, A. Ventura75a,75b, M. Venturi169,
N. Venturi159, A. Venturini 25, V . Vercesi122a, M. Verducci 133a,133b,W . V e r k e r k e108, J. C. Vermeulen 108,A . V e s t46,ar,
M. C. Vetterli143,d, O. Viazlo 83, I. Vichou 166,*,T . V i c k e y140, O. E. Vickey Boeriu 140, G. H. A. Viehhauser 121,S . V i e l16,
L. Vigani121, R. Vigne 64, M. Villa 22a,22b, M. Villaplana Perez 93a,93b, E. Vilucchi49, M. G. Vincter 31, V . B. Vinogradov67,
C. Vittori22a,22b, I. Vivarelli 150, S. Vlachos 10,M . V l a s a k129, M. V ogel175, P. V okac129, G. V olpi125a,125b, M. V olpi90,
H. von der Schmitt102, E. von Toerne23, V . V orobel130, K. V orobev99,M .V o s167,R .V o s s32, J. H. V ossebeld76, N. Vranjes14,
M. Vranjes Milosavljevic14,V . V r b a128, M. Vreeswijk 108, R. Vuillermet 32, I. Vukotic 33, Z. Vykydal 129, P. Wagner 23,
W. Wagner175, H. Wahlberg 73, S. Wahrmund 46, J. Wakabayashi 104, J. Walder 74,R . W a l k e r101, W. Walkowiak 142,
V . Wallangen147a,147b, C. Wang35c, C. Wang35d,87, F. Wang173, H. Wang16, H. Wang42, J. Wang44, J. Wang151, K. Wang89,
R. Wang6, S. M. Wang 152, T. Wang 23, T. Wang 37, W. Wang 35b, X. Wang 176, C. Wanotayaroj 117, A. Warburton 89,
C. P. Ward30, D. R. Wardrope 80, A. Washbrook 48, P. M. Watkins 19,A . T . W a t s o n19,M . F . W a t s o n19, G. Watts 139,
S. Watts86, B. M. Waugh80, S. Webb85, M. S. Weber18, S. W. Weber174, J .S .W e b s t e r6, A. R. Weidberg121, B. Weinert63,
J. Weingarten56,C .W e i s e r50, H. Weits108, P. S. Wells32, T. Wenaus27, T. Wengler32, S. Wenig32,N .W e r m e s23, M. Werner50,
M. D. Werner66, P. Werner32, M. Wessels60a, J. Wetter162, K. Whalen117,N .L .W h a l l o n139, A. M. Wharton74, A. White8,
M. J. White1, R. White 34b, D. Whiteson 163, F. J. Wickens 132, W. Wiedenmann 173, M. Wielers 132, P. Wienemann 23,
C. Wiglesworth38, L. A. M. Wiik-Fuchs23, A. Wildauer102, F. Wilk86, H. G. Wilkens32, H. H. Williams123, S. Williams108,
C. Willis92, S. Willocq 88, J .A .W i l s o n19, I. Wingerter-Seez 5, F. Winklmeier 117,O . J . W i n s t o n150, B. T. Winter 23,
M. Wittgen144, J. Wittkowski101, S .J .W o l l s t a d t85, M .W .W o l t e r41, H. Wolters127a,127c,B . K . W o s i e k41, J. Wotschack32,
M. J. Woudstra86, K. W. Wozniak41,M . W u57,M . W u33,S . L . W u173,X . W u51,Y . W u91, T. R. Wyatt86, B. M. Wynne48,
S. Xella38,D . X u 35a,L . X u 27, B. Yabsley 151, S. Yacoob 146a, R. Yakabe 69, D. Yamaguchi 158, Y . Yamaguchi 119,
A. Yamamoto68, S. Yamamoto 156, T. Yamanaka156, K. Yamauchi 104, Y . Yamazaki69,Z . Y a n24, H. Yang 35e, H. Yang 173,
Y . Yang152, Z. Yang 15,W . - M . Y a o16,Y . C . Y a p82,Y . Y a s u68, E. Yatsenko 5, K. H. Yau Wong 23,J . Y e 42,S . Y e 27,
I. Yeletskikh67,A . L . Y e n59, E. Yildirim 85, K. Yorita 171, R. Yoshida 6, K. Yoshihara 123, C. Young 144, C. J. S. Young 32,
S. Youssef24,D .R .Y u16,J .Y u8,J .M .Y u91,J .Y u66, L. Yuan69,S .P .Y .Y u e n23, I. Yusuff30,as, B. Zabinski41, R. Zaidan35d,
A. M. Zaitsev131,ae, N. Zakharchuk 44, J. Zalieckas 15, A. Zaman 149, S. Zambito 59, L. Zanello 133a,133b, D. Zanzi 90,
C. Zeitnitz175, M. Zeman129,A .Z e m l a40a,J .C .Z e n g166, Q. Zeng144, K. Zengel25, O. Zenin131, T. Ženiš145a,D .Z e r w a s118,
D. Zhang91, F. Zhang173, G. Zhang 35b,an, H. Zhang 35c, J. Zhang 6, L. Zhang 50, R. Zhang 23, R. Zhang 35b,at, X. Zhang 35d,
Z. Zhang118, X. Zhao 42, Y . Zhao35d, Z. Zhao 35b, A. Zhemchugov 67, J. Zhong 121, B. Zhou 91, C. Zhou 47, L. Zhou 37,
L. Zhou42, M. Zhou149, N. Zhou35f,C .G .Z h u35d,H .Z h u35a,J .Z h u91,Y .Z h u35b, X. Zhuang35a, K. Zhukov97, A. Zibell174,
D. Zieminska63, N .I .Z i m i n e67, C. Zimmermann 85, S. Zimmermann 50, Z. Zinonos 56,M . Z i n s e r85, M. Ziolkowski 142,
L. Živkovi´c14, G. Zobernig173, A. Zoccoli22a,22b, M. zur Nedden17, G. Zurzolo105a,105b, L. Zwalinski32
1 Department of Physics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
2 Physics Department, SUNY Albany, Albany, NY, USA
3 Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
4 (a)Department of Physics, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey;(b)Istanbul Aydin University, Istanbul, Turkey;(c)Division
of Physics, TOBB University of Economics and Technology, Ankara, Turkey
5 LAPP, CNRS/IN2P3 and Université Savoie Mont Blanc, Annecy-le-Vieux, France
6 High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA
7 Department of Physics, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
8 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA
9 Physics Department, University of Athens, Athens, Greece
10 Physics Department, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou, Greece
11 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
12 Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
13 Institut de Física d’Altes Energies (IFAE), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain
14 Institute of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
15 Department for Physics and Technology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
16 Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
123


--- Page 41 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 41 of 45 653
17 Department of Physics, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany
18 Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics and Laboratory for High Energy Physics, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland
19 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
20 (a)Department of Physics, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey;(b)Department of Physics Engineering, Gaziantep
University, Gaziantep, Turkey;(c)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Istanbul Bilgi University, Istanbul,
Turkey;(d)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul, Turkey
21 Centro de Investigaciones, Universidad Antonio Narino, Bogotá, Colombia
22 (a)INFN Sezione di Bologna, Bologna, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, Bologna,
Italy
23 Physikalisches Institut, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
24 Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
25 Department of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
26 (a)Universidade Federal do Rio De Janeiro COPPE/EE/IF, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;(b)Electrical Circuits Department,
Federal University of Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, Brazil;(c)Federal University of Sao Joao del Rei (UFSJ), São
João del Rei, Brazil; (d)Instituto de Fisica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
27 Physics Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA
28 (a)Transilvania University of Brasov, Brasov, Romania;(b)National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering,
Bucharest, Romania; (c)Physics Department, National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular
Technologies, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;(d)University Politehnica Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania;(e)West University in
Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania
29 Departamento de Física, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
30 Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
31 Department of Physics, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
32 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
33 Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
34 (a)Departamento de Física, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile;(b)Departamento de Física,
Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso, Chile
35 (a)Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; (b)Department of Modern Physics,
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China;(c)Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Jiangsu,
China; (d)School of Physics, Shandong University, Shandong, China;(e)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai
Key Laboratory for Particle Physics and Cosmology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (also afﬁliated with PKU-CHEP),
Shanghai, China;
(f)Physics Department, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
36 Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Clermont Université and Université Blaise Pascal and CNRS/IN2P3,
Clermont-Ferrand, France
37 Nevis Laboratory, Columbia University, Irvington, NY, USA
38 Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
39 (a)INFN Gruppo Collegato di Cosenza, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Cosenza, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica,
Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy
40 (a)AGH University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, Kraków,
Poland; (b)Marian Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
41 Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków, Poland
42 Physics Department, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA
43 Physics Department, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA
44 DESY, Hamburg and Zeuthen, Germany
45 Lehrstuhl für Experimentelle Physik IV, Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
46 Institut für Kern–und Teilchenphysik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
47 Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
48 SUPA-School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
49 INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
50 Fakultät für Mathematik und Physik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, Germany
51 Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
52 (a)INFN Sezione di Genova, Genoa, Italy;(b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Genova, Genoa, Italy
123


--- Page 42 ---
653 Page 42 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
53 (a)E. Andronikashvili Institute of Physics, Iv. Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia;(b)High Energy
Physics Institute, Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
54 II Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany
55 SUPA-School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
56 II Physikalisches Institut, Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen, Germany
57 Laboratoire de Physique Subatomique et de Cosmologie, Université Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS/IN2P3, Grenoble, France
58 Department of Physics, Hampton University, Hampton, V A, USA
59 Laboratory for Particle Physics and Cosmology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
60 (a)Kirchhoff-Institut für Physik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany;(b)Physikalisches Institut,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany;(c)ZITI Institut für technische Informatik,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
61 Faculty of Applied Information Science, Hiroshima Institute of Technology, Hiroshima, Japan
62 (a)Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong;(b)Department of Physics,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong;(c)Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
63 Department of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
64 Institut für Astro–und Teilchenphysik, Leopold-Franzens-Universität, Innsbruck, Austria
65 University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
66 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
67 Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, JINR Dubna, Dubna, Russia
68 KEK, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization, Tsukuba, Japan
69 Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan
70 Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
71 Kyoto University of Education, Kyoto, Japan
72 Department of Physics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
73 Instituto de Física La Plata, Universidad Nacional de La Plata and CONICET, La Plata, Argentina
74 Physics Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
75 (a)INFN Sezione di Lecce, Lecce, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università del Salento, Lecce, Italy
76 Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
77 Department of Physics, Jožef Stefan Institute, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
78 School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
79 Department of Physics, Royal Holloway University of London, Surrey, UK
80 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London, UK
81 Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA, USA
82 Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et de Hautes Energies, UPMC and Université Paris-Diderot and CNRS/IN2P3, Paris,
France
83 Fysiska institutionen, Lunds universitet, Lund, Sweden
84 Departamento de Fisica Teorica C-15, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
85 Institut für Physik, Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany
86 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
87 CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
88 Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA
89 Department of Physics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
90 School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
91 Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
92 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
93 (a)INFN Sezione di Milano, Milan, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano, Milan, Italy
94 B.I. Stepanov Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, Minsk, Republic of Belarus
95 National Scientiﬁc and Educational Centre for Particle and High Energy Physics, Minsk, Republic of Belarus
96 Group of Particle Physics, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
97 P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the Russian, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
98 Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics (ITEP), Moscow, Russia
99 National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Moscow, Russia
123


--- Page 43 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 43 of 45 653
100 D.V . Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, M.V . Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
101 Fakultät für Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany
102 Max-Planck-Institut für Physik (Werner-Heisenberg-Institut), Munich, Germany
103 Nagasaki Institute of Applied Science, Nagasaki, Japan
104 Graduate School of Science and Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
105 (a)INFN Sezione di Napoli, Naples, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Napoli, Naples, Italy
106 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
107 Institute for Mathematics Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University Nijmegen/Nikhef, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
108 Nikhef National Institute for Subatomic Physics and University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
109 Department of Physics, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, USA
110 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia
111 Department of Physics, New York University, New York, NY, USA
112 Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
113 Faculty of Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan
114 Homer L. Dodge Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA
115 Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA
116 Palacký University, RCPTM, Olomouc, Czech Republic
117 Center for High Energy Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA
118 LAL, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS/IN2P3, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
119 Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
120 Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
121 Department of Physics, Oxford University, Oxford, UK
122 (a)INFN Sezione di Pavia, Pavia, Italy;(b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy
123 Department of Physics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
124 National Research Centre “Kurchatov Institute” B.P. Konstantinov Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, St. Petersburg,
Russia
125 (a)INFN Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica E. Fermi, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy
126 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
127 (a)Laboratório de Instrumentação e Física Experimental de Partículas-LIP, Lisbon, Portugal; (b)Faculdade de Ciências,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal;(c)Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal; (d)Centro de Física Nuclear da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal;(e)Departamento de Fisica,
Universidade do Minho, Braga, Portugal;(f)Departamento de Fisica Teorica y del Cosmos and CAFPE, Universidad de
Granada, Granada, Spain; (g)Dep Fisica and CEFITEC of Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal
128 Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic
129 Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
130 Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
131 State Research Center Institute for High Energy Physics (Protvino), NRC KI, Moscow, Russia
132 Particle Physics Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, UK
133 (a)INFN Sezione di Roma, Rome, Italy; (b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy
134 (a)INFN Sezione di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy;(b)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy
135 (a)INFN Sezione di Roma Tre, Rome, Italy;(b)Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università Roma Tre, Rome, Italy
136 (a)Faculté des Sciences Ain Chock, Réseau Universitaire de Physique des Hautes Energies-Université Hassan II,
Casablanca, Morocco; (b)Centre National de l’Energie des Sciences Techniques Nucleaires, Rabat, Morocco;(c)Faculté
des Sciences Semlalia, Université Cadi Ayyad, LPHEA-Marrakech, Marrakesh, Morocco;(d)Faculté des Sciences,
Université Mohamed Premier and LPTPM, Oujda, Morocco;(e)Faculté des , Sciences, Université Mohammed V, Rabat,
Morocco
137 DSM/IRFU (Institut de Recherches sur les Lois Fondamentales de l’Univers), CEA Saclay (Commissariat à l’Energie
Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives), Gif-sur-Yvette, France
138 Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
139 Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, W A, USA
123


--- Page 44 ---
653 Page 44 of 45 Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653
140 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK
141 Department of Physics, Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan
142 Fachbereich Physik, Universität Siegen, Siegen, Germany
143 Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada
144 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford, CA, USA
145 (a)Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia;(b)Department of
Subnuclear Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice, Slovak Republic
146 (a)Department of Physics, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa;(b)Department of Physics, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa;(c)School of Physics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa
147 (a)Department of Physics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden;(b)The Oskar Klein Centre, Stockholm, Sweden
148 Physics Department, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
149 Departments of Physics and Astronomy and Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
150 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
151 School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
152 Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
153 Department of Physics, Technion: Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
154 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
155 Department of Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
156 International Center for Elementary Particle Physics and Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
157 Graduate School of Science and Technology, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan
158 Department of Physics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
159 Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
160 (a)TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC, Canada;(b)Department of Physics and Astronomy, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
161 Faculty of Pure and Applied Sciences, and Center for Integrated Research in Fundamental Science and Engineering,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan
162 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States of America
163 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
164 (a)INFN Gruppo Collegato di Udine, Sezione di Trieste, Udine, Italy;(b)ICTP, Trieste, Italy;(c)Dipartimento di Chimica,
Fisica e Ambiente, Università di Udine, Udine, Italy
165 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden
166 Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA
167 Instituto de Fisica Corpuscular (IFIC) and Departamento de Fisica Atomica, Molecular y Nuclear and Departamento de
Ingeniería Electrónica and Instituto de Microelectrónica de Barcelona (IMB-CNM), University of Valencia and CSIC,
Valencia, Spain
168 Department of Physics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
169 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
170 Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
171 Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
172 Department of Particle Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
173 Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
174 Fakultät für Physik und Astronomie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität, Würzburg, Germany
175 Fakultät für Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften, Fachgruppe Physik, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Wuppertal,
Germany
176 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
177 Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
178 Centre de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucléaire et de Physique des Particules (IN2P3), Villeurbanne, France
a Also at Department of Physics, King’s College London, London, UK
b Also at Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
c Also at Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia
d Also at TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC, Canada
e Also at Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY , USA
123


--- Page 45 ---
Eur. Phys. J. C (2016) 76 :653 Page 45 of 45 653
f Also at Department of Physics, California State University, Fresno, CA, USA
g Also at Department of Physics, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland
h Also at Departament de Fisica de la Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
i Also at Departamento de Fisica e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciencias, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
j Also at Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia
k Also at Universita di Napoli Parthenope, Napoli, Italy
l Also at Institute of Particle Physics (IPP), Canada
m Also at National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering, Bucharest, Romania
n Also at Department of Physics, St. Petersburg State Polytechnical University, St. Petersburg, Russia
o Also at Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
p Also at Centre for High Performance Computing, CSIR Campus, Rosebank, Cape Town, South Africa
q Also at Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA, USA
r Also at Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, ICREA, Barcelona, Spain
s Also at Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
t Also at Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
u Also at Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University Nijmegen/Nikhef, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
v Also at Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
w Also at Institute of Theoretical Physics, Ilia State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
x Also at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
y Also at Georgian Technical University (GTU),Tbilisi, Georgia
z Also at Ochadai Academic Production, Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
aa Also at Manhattan College, New York, NY , USA
ab Also at Hellenic Open University, Patras, Greece
ac Also at Academia Sinica Grid Computing, Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
ad Also at School of Physics, Shandong University, Shandong, China
ae Also at Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology State University, Dolgoprudny, Russia
af Also at Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
ag Also at Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary
ah Also at Departments of Physics & Astronomy and Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY , USA
ai Also at International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy
aj Also at Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
ak Also at School of Physics and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
al Also at Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy (INRNE) of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria
am Also at Faculty of Physics, M.V . Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
an Also at Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
ao Also at National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Moscow, Russia
ap Also at Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
aq Also at Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics, Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
ar Also at Flensburg University of Applied Sciences, Flensburg, Germany
as Also at University of Malaya, Department of Physics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
at Also at CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
∗ Deceased
123
