arXiv:1104.3591v2  [hep-ph]  20 Apr 2011
Accurate estimate of the relic density and the kinetic decou pling in non-thermal dark
matter models
Giorgio Arcadi 1, ∗ and Piero Ullio 1, †
1SISSA, Via Bonomea 265, I-34136 Trieste, Italy and
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste, I-34136 Trieste, Italy
Non-thermal dark matter generation is an appealing alterna tive to the standard paradigm of
thermal WIMP dark matter. We reconsider non-thermal produc tion mechanisms in a systematic
way, and develop a numerical code for accurate computations of the dark matter relic density. We
discuss in particular scenarios with long-lived massive st ates decaying into dark matter particles,
appearing naturally in several beyond the standard model th eories, such as supergravity and su-
perstring frameworks. Since non-thermal production favor s dark matter candidates with large pair
annihilation rates, we analyze the possible connection wit h the anomalies detected in the lepton
cosmic-ray ﬂux by Pamela and Fermi. Concentrating on supers ymmetric models, we consider the
eﬀect of these non-standard cosmologies in selecting a pref erred mass scale for the lightest super-
symmetric particle as dark matter candidate, and the conseq uent impact on the interpretation of
new physics discovered or excluded at the LHC. Finally, we ex amine a rather predictive model, the
G2-MSSM, investigating some of the standard assumptions us ually implemented in the solution of
the Boltzmann equation for the dark matter component, inclu ding coannihilations. We question
the hypothesis that kinetic equilibrium holds along the who le phase of dark matter generation, and
the validity of the factorization usually implemented to re write the system of coupled Boltzmann
equation for each coannihilating species as a single equati on for the sum of all the number densities.
As a byproduct we develop here a formalism to compute the kine tic decoupling temperature in case
of coannihilating particles, which can be applied also to ot her particle physics frameworks, and also
to standard thermal relics within a standard cosmology.
PACS numbers: 95.35.+d, 98.80.Ft, 12.60.Jv
Keywords: Dark Matter, Cosmological Moduli, Reheating, Ki netic Decoupling
I. INTRODUCTION
The identiﬁcation of the dark matter (DM) component of the Univer se is one of the most pressing issues in Science
today. Cosmological and astrophysical observations give compellin g evidence for DM on a very wide range of scales;
on the other hand, from a particle physics perspective, these obs ervations have not provided any clear indications on
the relevant properties of DM particles, such as their mass and the interaction strength with ordinary matter (for a
recent review on the DM problem and its particle physics implications, s ee, e.g., [1]). Viable DM candidates proposed
in the literature include particles with a mass (close to) the Planck sca le that are only gravitationally interacting, see
e.g. [2], as well as ultra-light scalar particles possibly forming a conden sate, see e.g. [3]. The picture becomes more
constrained once a mechanism to generate the DM term is considere d. One of the most popular scenarios relies on a
very general and elegant argument: stable massive species have a n early-Universe thermal relic abundance scaling with
the inverse of their pair annihilation rate, matching the cosmologically measured DM density when the annihilation
cross section is about 3 · 10−26 cm3 s−1, a natural value for weak-force type couplings. This is the well-cele brated
WIMP (weakly-interacting massive particle) miracle, allowing to embed a DM candidate in most of the proposed
extensions to the standard model (SM) of particle physics, such a s with the lightest neutralino in R-parity conserving
supersymmetric (SUSY) extensions to the SM, or a heavy photon in T-parity conserving versions of Little Higgs
models [4]. One aspect which is particularly appealing is the fact that, in most of these examples, the existence of
such states and of the symmetry enforcing their stability are not p roperties introduced ad-hoc to address the DM
problem, but rather a byproduct of other features in the theory .
Although extremely successful and attractive, the WIMP scenar io faces also a few shortcomings. One the most
severe is the fact that the idea of thermal generation of DM is base d on the extrapolation of the properties of Universe
from the earliest epoch at which the standard model for cosmology is well-tested, the onset of the synthesis of light
elements (Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, BBN) at a temperature TBBN of about 1 MeV, to the much earlier epoch of
∗ Electronic address: arcadi@sissa.it
† Electronic address: ullio@sissa.it
2
WIMP thermal freeze-out, at the temperature Tt.f.o. of about one twentieth of the WIMP mass. The WIMP miracle
relies on three main assumptions: i) at freeze-out the Universe is in a radiation dominated phase with eﬀe ctive
number of relativistic degrees of freedom as inferred from the SM p article spectrum; ii) there is no entropy injection
intervening between Tt.f.o. andTBBN ; iii) there is no extra source of DM particles on top of the thermal comp onent.
There are particle physics models in which all these three hypothesis are actually strongly violated, such as in any
theory containing heavy states that are very weakly (e.g., gravita tionally) coupled to ordinary matter, such as the
gravitino or moduli ﬁelds in SUSY setups. These states do not therm alize in the early Universe, they may dominate
the Universe energy density, they are long-lived and potentially a co pious source of entropy and DM particles at decay.
The so-called cosmological gravitino or moduli problem refers to the very severe observational limits one encounters
when these phenomena intervene during or after the BBN; on the o ther hand they can be perfectly consistent with
available data if the lifetime of these ﬁelds is shorter than the age of t he Universe at the onset of BBN, about 1 s, or,
equivalently, if the Universe is reheated to a temperature TRH larger than TBBN , where the reheating temperature
TRH is deﬁned as the temperature at which the Universe starts evolving in according to a radiation dominated phase
after the ﬁeld decays.
The prediction for the relic density of DM in case of long-lived heavy ﬁe lds is generally very model dependent; there
are however a few deﬁnite pictures. One of the most appealing is, e.g ., the one pointed in Ref. [5] for SUSY DM in the
anomaly-mediated SUSY breaking framework: it foresees the exist ence of a heavy modulus driving the Universe into
a matter dominated phase and then decaying with a very large entro py production. The entropy injection reheats the
Universe to a TRH in the range between a few MeV and about 100 MeV, and dilutes therm al relics (and gravitinos); in
case the decay branching ratio into DM particles is unsuppressed, a very large number of DM particles is produced as
well but gets instantaneously reduced to level at which their pair an nihilation rate matches the value of the Universe
expansion rate at TRH. As a rule of thumb, the relic density of DM in this scenario turns out t o be approximately equal
to the result for thermal relic WIMPs scaled up by the ratio Tt.f.o. /T RH: to be in agreement with the cosmological
measurements of the DM density, the DM pair annihilation cross sect ion needs also to increase accordingly (this
solution to the moduli problem and the new match in the annihilation cro ss section appear naturally in some particle
physics frameworks and is sometimes referred to as a ’non-therma l WIMP miracle’ [6]; a more detailed discussion of
the framework and a list of relevant references is given below).
The interest in DM particles with large pair annihilation cross section ha s been recently triggered by the fact
that cross sections larger than the standard face-value for WIM P DM are needed to provide a DM positron source
accounting for the rise in the positron fraction in the local cosmic-r ays measured by the PAMELA detector [7].
The picture of non-thermal generation of DM has however a much b roader phenomenological impact, e.g., shifting
signiﬁcantly the mass scale for which a DM particle embedded in a SM ext ension is cosmologically relevant or excluded,
with a direct impact as well on the interpretation of new physics disco vered or excluded at the LHC.
In the paper we reexamine the issue of non-thermal generation of DM implementing a full numerical solution of the
relevant set of equations, including the equation of motion for the h eavy ﬁelds and the system of coupled Boltzmann
equation, and avoiding to introduce approximations such as instant aneous reheating and production of DM particles,
or others. The code is interfaced to an appropriately modiﬁed vers ion of the public available DarkSUSY package [8]
and allows, for any deﬁnite particle physics scenario, a very accura te computation of the relic abundance of the
DM particle. Examples of its applications are given in a sample of progre ssively reﬁned particle physics scenarios:
we ﬁrst consider a toy-model in which DM particles are schematically d eﬁned through the values of the mass and
a temperature-independent pair annihilation cross section. We exa mine then the impact of heavy long-lived ﬁelds
on the phenomenology of the most widely studied case for WIMP DM, i.e . the case of neutralino dark matter in
the minimal supersymmetric extension of the standard model (MSS M), focussing in particular on the framework
usually dubbed ”Split Supersymmetry” [9, 10], in which, since the sfer mion sector is not playing any relevant role,
the parameter space is sharply reduced compared to a general MS SM, but it is still general enough for our purpose.
Finally we examine in detail the G2-MSSM scenario [11], a particular class of theories with rather precise predictions
for the spectrum of low energy SUSY particles as well as of the grav itino and the moduli ﬁelds; in such a deﬁnite
framework it is interesting to test the validity of some of the approx imations that are usually given for granted in the
solution of the Boltzmann equation for DM: In this model the lightest neutralino is the lightest SUSY particle but it
also nearly degenerate in mass with a chargino; coannihilations, name ly the interplay between the two in the early
Universe, are usually treated by writing a single Boltzmann equation f or the sum of the two species, however for very
low reheating temperatures this approach may not be valid. We solve the full system of coupled Boltzmann equation
and address also the issue of energy losses for relativistic neutralin os and charginos injected by moduli decays. As
a byproduct and ﬁnal step, we develop here for the ﬁrst time the f ormalism to compute the DM kinetic decoupling
temperature for a system undergoing a low-temperature reheat ing and for which kinetic equilibrium is maintained in
a chain of coupled processes rather than by the elastic scattering of a single DM particle on thermal bath particles.
This is an important result since thermal kinetic decoupling, namely wh en DM scattering goes out of equilibrium
(as opposed to the thermal chemical decoupling mentioned above w hich refer to the departure from equilibrium of
3
the pair annihilation processes) determines the small-scale cutoﬀ in t he spectrum of matter density ﬂuctuations, see,
e.g.,[12, 13].
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we review the particle p hysics scenario and illustrate the approach
we follow to trace the evolution of the long-lived heavy ﬁelds and comp ute the relic density of DM particles. In
Section 3 we give a ﬁrst example of this procedure introducing a simple toy-model; for this model we cross check
various approximate scalings for the DM relic density discussed in the literature, and also derive, under diﬀerent
conﬁgurations, what range of reheating temperature would be ne eded to provide an explanation for the very large
annihilation cross section which may be inferred from the PAMELA pos itron excess. In Section 4, still within a
schematic treatment of the decaying heavy ﬁelds, we consider the case of split SUSY in the MSSM and discuss the
impact of low reheating temperatures on the cosmologically relevant portion of its parameter space. In Section 5, we
focus on the G2-MSSM, with the numerical treatment of the seque nce of steps induced by the set of heavy long-lived
ﬁelds present in the model; the treatment of this case is reﬁned in Se ction 6, where we also compute the DM kinetic
decoupling temperature for this model.
II. THE GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR NON-THERMAL DARK MATTER PRODU CTION
We consider a particle physics framework embedding three sets of b eyond-SM states: Let {χa} be a set of particles
sharing a conserved quantum number and having sizable couplings wit h SM particles; the ﬁrst property ensures that
the lightest of them, say χ 0, is stable, while the second guarantees thermalization at suﬃciently large temperatures.
We also require that χ 0 has zero electric and color charges, so that it can play the role of DM candidate. The
ﬁelds {Xi} in the second set, which we will refer to as cosmological moduli, are ins tead heavy states which are very
weakly interacting, out of thermal equilibrium in the early Universe an d long-lived; we assume they can condensate,
potentially dominate the Universe energy density at an intermediate stage in its evolution, and later decay producing
both SM particles, with a sharp increase in the entropy density, and χa ﬁelds. Finally the framework may contain also
additional long-lived states, say ψi, out of thermal equilibrium but with a subdominant contribution to th e energy
density, possibly sharing the quantum number protecting the stab ility of χ 0; these particles may also be produced in
the decay of the Xi states.
A typical scenario of this kind is provided by SUSY extensions of the S M. We will consider in particular cases
in which the states {χa} are the superpartners of SM particles within the MSSM, and R-parit y is the symmetry
protecting the stability of the lightest SUSY particle (LSP), which we will assume to be the lightest neutralino. For
what regards the moduli {Xi}, there are several possibilities. First of all, it is quite common, in SUSY theories, to
ﬁnd ﬁeld conﬁgurations for which the scalar potential is ﬂat; these conﬁgurations are referred as ’ﬂat directions’ and
can be described by a chiral superﬁeld. For our purposes, only the scalar component of these multiplets is relevant; we
will refer to this part with the term modulus. SUSY breaking can lift th e ﬂat directions inducing a mass term for the
moduli in the scalar potential. Further candidates for long-lived sta tes arise in supergravity theories. The gravitino
is not in thermal equilibrium in the early Universe, however, plays a diﬀe rent role compared to moduli ﬁelds; we will
restrict to the case when gravitinos are heavy and not the LSP (ot herwise the phenomenology would be very diﬀerent
from the one discussed in this paper), falling in the category of the ψi ﬁelds introduced above. Another possibility is
the Polonyi ﬁeld [14–16] which is introduced in many SUSY breaking sc hemes. Finally supergravity can be seen as a
low energy limit of string theory, in which scalar ﬁelds can appear in the compactiﬁcation of extra dimensions.
The impact on cosmology of the moduli can easily sketched under a fe w simplifying assumptions. Consider for
simplicity the cases of a single modulus X which decays when it dominates the Universe energy density; focus sing on
Planck suppressed interactions, its decay width can be written in th e form:
ΓX =DX
m3
X
M 2
Pl
, (1)
with DX some coeﬃcient depending on the speciﬁc model, mX the ﬁeld mass and MPl the reduced Planck mass.
Assuming instantaneous conversion of the energy density into rad iation, one usually deﬁnes the reheating temperature
TRH through the expression:
ΓX ≡
√
π 2geﬀ (TRH)
90
T 2
RH
MPl
, (2)
where geﬀ (TRH) is the eﬀective number of relativistic degrees of freedom at TRH. Inverting this expression, one ﬁnds
approximately that the onset of the standard radiation dominated phase happens at the temperature:
TRH
1 MeV ≃ 0. 62D1/ 2
X
[ 10. 75
geﬀ (TRH)
] 1/ 4( mX
10 TeV
)3/ 2
. (3)
4
To avoid spoiling predictions of the standard BBN, one needs to requ ire TRH >
∼ 4 MeV [17], which, for DX of order
one, translates into a lower limit on the mass of the cosmological modu lus of about 30 TeV.
At this level of approximation the evolution of the system would be fu lly speciﬁed by the X decay width (or TRH)
and the amount of energy density converted into dark matter par ticles (which, in the treatment above, was implicitly
assumed to be tiny compared to amount going into radiation). Having instead in mind to be able to treat a system
in which, for the full set of Xi ﬁelds, spectra, lifetimes and branching ratios in the decay are calcu lable in the given
particle scenario, we will not refer to instantaneous reheating, bu t rather follow more explicitly the evolution of the
moduli. In principle this could be done by studying a full set of coupled e quations of motion, having speciﬁed the
potentials for each ﬁeld [18, 19]. The result would be that, at early tim es, each ﬁeld stays frozen in a time dependent
minimum; when t−1 becomes of the order of the Xi mass, the equation of motion takes the form of the one for a
damped harmonic oscillator. The oscillations satisfy a pressureless e quation of state and hence the scalar ﬁeld behaves
like a condensate evolving as a matter ﬂuid; provided that enough en ergy is initially stored in Xi, the Universe enters
a phase of matter domination lasting until the ﬁeld decays, with the t ransition that needs to be treated as a continuos
process. In practice, even for models for which the physics relate d to the Xi ﬁelds is given in some detail, it is
diﬃcult to describe potentials and their temperature evolutions bey ond the toy model level; for our purposes it will
be suﬃcient to follow the evolution of the system starting from the p hase of coherent oscillations. Each state Xi is
then traced through an equation for its energy density:
dρXi
dt + 3HρXi = −ΓXiρXi, (4)
and in case of several moduli present at the same time, the single eq uations are included in the system at the time
t = 3/ 2H = mXi , assuming the energy density stored in the ﬁeld at this time is equal t o (1/ 2)m2
XiM 2
Pl [18–20]; we
will comment later on the fact that the ﬁnal density of dark matter is not sensitive to these assumptions.
The decay of the Xi particles produces SM particles, χa states cascading to the DM particle, and, eventually,
the long-lived ψi ﬁelds, in turn decaying into radiation and, possibly, DM particles. Fro m the ﬁrst principle of
thermodynamics, one can write an equation for the total energy d ensity and pressure associated to SM, χa and ψj
states, respectively, ρ and p, in an implicit form:
dρ
dt + 3H(ρ +p) =
∑
i
ΓXiρXi. (5)
This equation is treatable once separating ρ andp in components. Starting with the ψj particles, one can safely assume
that they are produced in given number at decays, get diluted and r edshifted by the Universe expansion without
interacting with other species and decay themselves (an eventual term associated to the production via inelastic
scattering oﬀ SM or χa particles is not introduced since such term becomes relevant only at large temperatures, while
we will only consider here the case of moderate to low TRH; also, we are not considering the possibility of a ψj particle
decaying into a lighter ψk state, since we will not encounter a case of this kind in explicit models a nd it would just
complicate the notation). The Boltzmann equation for the ψj number density is:
dnψ j
dt + 3Hnψ j =
∑
i
Bψ j,X i
mXi
ΓXiρXi − Γψ jnψ j, (6)
where Bψ j,X i is the mean number of particles ψj generated in the decay of the ﬁeld Xi, i.e. it is the product of the
branching ratio of decay into ψj times the mean multiplicity.
To trace the number density of the χa states, especially when two or more of these are nearly degenerat e in mass
(coannihilating particles), one should refer to a system of coupled B oltzmann equations describing: the source from
the decay of the Xi and ψj ﬁelds; their changes in number density due to pair production from a nd annihilation
into SM particles; the energy exchanges with SM thermal bath part icles through elastic scatterings processes; the
redistribution in the relative number density by inelastic scattering o f a given χa into a diﬀerent χb state; the decays
of χc into lighter χd particles and and of these to the lightest stable species. This is usua lly not done since it is a
system of coupled stiﬀ equations one needs to solve numerically; mor eover it is usually not necessary to do it, since
one is interested only in the number density of the lightest state aft er all heavy states have decayed into the stable
one. Rather than tracing the number density nχ a of the individual state χa, one usually solves a single equation
written for the sum of all the number densities, nχ =∑
anχ a , i.e. [21, 22]:
dnχ
dt + 3Hnχ = −⟨σeﬀv⟩
[
n2
χ − (neq
χ )2]
+
∑
i
BXi
mXi
ΓXiρXi +
∑
j
Bψ j Γψ jnψ j (7)
5
where BXi ≡∑
aBχ a,X i and Bψ j ≡∑
aBχ a,ψ j have been deﬁned in analogy to Bψ j,X i . In this equation neq
χ stands
for the sum of thermal equilibrium number densities, and the term pr oportional its square accounts for the production
of particles χa in pair annihilations of SM thermal bath particles, while the eﬀective th ermally averaged annihilation
cross section:
⟨σeﬀv⟩ =
∑
a,b
⟨σabvab⟩neq
χ a
neq
χ
neq
χ b
neq
χ
(8)
is written as a weighted sum over the thermally averaged annihilation c ross section of any χa-χb pair into SM particles;
the processes giving a sizable contribution to this sum are only those for which the mass splitting between a state χa
and the lightest state χ 0 are comparable to the thermal bath temperature T . There are two main assumptions which
allow to implement Eq. (7) to trace nχ . The ﬁrst is kinetic equilibrium for each species χa, namely that the scattering
processes on thermal bath particles are eﬃcient and make the pha se space densities for each particle trace the spectral
shape of the corresponding thermal equilibrium phase space densit y, namely fa(ka,t ) = C(t) ·feq
a (ka,t ) (with the
coeﬃcient C depending on time but not on momentum). Within this assumption, we t reat as instantaneous the energy
depletion from the relativistic regime when particles are injected fro m moduli or ψj decays to the non-relativistic
velocities in the low reheating temperature background plasma; it als o allows to factorize the number density out
of each thermally averaged annihilation cross section (which is deﬁne d in terms of thermal equilibrium phase space
densities). To implement the factorization of the individual terms in t he sum of Eq. (8) one needs also to assume
thatnχ a/n χ ≃neq
χ a/n eq
χ , a quantity which, in the Maxwell-Boltzmann approximation for the eq uilibrium phase space
densities, as appropriate for non-relativistic particles, is proport ional to the number of internal degrees of freedom
gχ a and is exponentially suppressed with the ratio between mass splitting and temperature; this approximation is
strictly valid only in case inelastic scatterings of χa particles are eﬃcient over the whole time interval in which the
pair annihilation term is relevant. Within the standard computation of the thermal relic density for WIMPs, the two
assumption are in general well justiﬁed, since the kinetic decoupling and the decoupling of inelastic scatterings usually
take place at a much lower temperature than chemical decoupling; w hile assuming that Eq. (7) is valid in the next
Sections, in Section 6 we study this issue in more details and, consider ing a speciﬁc particle physics scenario, address
the problem of kinetic decoupling in models with non-thermal generat ion of DM particles.
We keep track of the SM states only through their contribution to t he radiation energy density and pressure which,
using Eq. (5) and subtracting the contribution from ψj and χa ﬁelds, obey the equation:
dρR
dt + 3H(ρR +pR) ≃
∑
i
(
1 −
∑
jBψ j,X i ⟨Eψ j,X i ⟩ +BXimχ
mXi
)
ΓXiρXi +
∑
j
(
⟨Eψ j ⟩ −mχBψ j
)
Γψ jnψ j
+mχ ⟨σeﬀv⟩
[
n2
χ − (neq
χ )2]
. (9)
In this equation ⟨Eψ j,X i ⟩ is the mean energy of the particle ψj at injection from the decay of the modulus Xi:
⟨Eψ j,X i⟩ ≡
∫
dE′ dNψ j,X i
dE′ E′ (10)
with dNψ j,X i/dE ′ the energy spectrum from the decay normalized to 1; ⟨Eψ j ⟩ is instead the mean energy for ψj
particles:
⟨Eψ j ⟩(t)nψ j (t) ≡
∫ t
0
dt′∑
i
Bψ j,X i
mXi
ΓXiρXi (t′)
∫
dE′ dNψ j,X i
dE′
[
m2
ψ j + a2(t′)
a2(t) (E′2 −m2
ψ j )
] 1/ 2
· (11)
·a3(t′)
a3(t) exp
[
−Γψ j (t −t′)
]
.
Finally, in Eq. (9) we have assumed that the mean energy of the χa states is equal to the mass mχ of the lightest
state χ 0, neglecting, at this level, thermal corrections and mass splittings b etween the coannihilating states, as well
as the pressure term associated to χa.
Eqs. (4), (6), (7) and (9) deﬁne a system of coupled equations, c losed by Friedmann equation giving H. In its
numerical solution, it is more convenient to use as independent varia ble, rather than the time t, the rescaled scale
factor A ≡a/a I , with aI an arbitrary parameter with dimension of the inverse of an energy. Following [20], we will
use as dependent variables the dimensionless quantities:
ξXi ≡ ρXia3
Λ , N ψ j ≡nψ ja3 and Nχ ≡nχa3, (12)
6
with Λ an arbitrary energy scale, plus the temperature T , expressing ρR and pR in terms of the entropy density
through the standard deﬁnitions:
s(T ) = ρR(T ) +pR(T )
T ≡ 2π 2
45 heﬀ (T )T 3 and ρR(T ) ≡ π 2
30geﬀ (T )T 4 = 3
4
geﬀ (T )
heﬀ (T )Ts (T ), (13)
with geﬀ and heﬀ the eﬀective number of relativistic degrees of freedom. The values of aI and Λ are chosen in order
to guarantee the best numerical stability to the solution, a sample g uess being, respectively, T −1
RH and TRH, with the
approximate reheating scale as given through Eq. (2). After this c hange of variables the system becomes:
dξXi
dA = −A1/ 2a3/ 2
I
H ΓXiξXi (14)
dNψ j
dA = A1/ 2a3/ 2
I
H
(
Λ
∑
i
Bψ j,X i
mXi
ΓXiξXi − Γψ jNψ j
)
dNχ
dA = − ⟨σeﬀv⟩
A5/ 2a3/ 2
I H
[
N 2
χ − (Neq
χ )2]
+ A1/ 2a3/ 2
I
H

Λ
∑
i
BXi
mXi
ΓXiξXi +
∑
j
Bψ j Γψ jNψ j


dT
dA =
(
1 + T
4geﬀ
dgeﬀ
dT
)−1{
−heﬀ
geﬀ
T
A + heﬀ
3geﬀs(T )
1
A5/ 2a3/ 2
I H

∑
j
(
⟨Eψ j ⟩ −mχBψ j
)
Γψ jNψ j
+Λ
∑
i
(
1 −
∑
jBψ j,X i ⟨Eψ j,X i⟩ +BXimχ
mXi
)
ΓXiξXi + mχ ⟨σeﬀv⟩
A3a3
I
[
N 2
χ − (Neq
χ )2]
]}
where H is deﬁned from the Universe expansion rate, as:
H ≡ (aIA)3/ 2H =
(
Λ∑
iξXi +ρR(T )A3a3
I +mχNχ +∑
j⟨Eψ j ⟩Nψ j
3M 2
PL
)1/ 2
. (15)
The relic density of dark matter can be evaluated by evolving these e quations from an initial time, which we assume
to be the time when the heaviest modulus starts its coherent oscillat ions, up to the stage when the DM comoving
number density becomes constant.
III. NON-THERMAL DM PRODUCTION IN A TOY MODEL AND RELEV ANCE F OR P AMELA
We discuss ﬁrst a minimal framework with a single cosmological modulus X decaying into the DM particle χ .
Rather than detailing a speciﬁc particle physics scenario, in this ﬁrst example we deﬁne χ only through its mass
and pair annihilation rate into SM particles, whose thermal average is assumed not to depend on temperature, as
appropriate for S-wave annihilations. We also avoid dealing with event ual other states charged under the quantum
number protecting the stability of χ , assuming that they have a sizable mass splitting with respect to χ , and hence
have very short lifetimes and do not enter in the Boltzmann equation for χ . Under these hypotheses the system of
coupled equations reduces to three equations only: the ﬁrst for t he decaying modulus, the second for number density
of particle χ , sourced from the decay and depleted by pair annihilations, and the last for the temperature.
In this simpliﬁed picture, the main trends in the non-thermal DM prod uction can be illustrated even at the level
of approximate analytical formulae; we brieﬂy summarize here some of these features, as we will recover them in the
numerical solution of this model as well as in the more involved scenar ios we will consider later (for a more detailed
discussion, see, e.g., [23]). First of all, if the modulus decay induces a la rge increase in the entropy density and this
happens at a later stage with respect to the chemical decoupling fo rχ , the thermal relic density of χ is greatly diluted
and can be neglected, with the only relevant χ source being the particles produced in the decay itself. The entrop y
injection is a continuos process making the reheating phase last for an extended period during which one can show that
the temperature evolves as T ∝a−3/ 8 and the universe expansion rate as H ∝T 4 [20, 23]. A standard approximation
is however to treat the decay of the ﬁeld and the thermalization of t he products as instantaneous processes, and deﬁne
the reheating temperature TRH according to Eq. (2); depending on whether at TRH the dark matter pair annihilation
rate Γ = nχ ⟨σv ⟩ is larger or smaller than the expansion rate H, there are two distinct regimes determining the relic
density for χ [5, 24]. If Γ is much larger than H, pair annihilations are very eﬃcient and instantaneously decrease in
7
the number density of χ to the critical density level corresponding to Γ ≃H when the annihilations stop; such critical
density is then simply equal to:
nc
χ ≃ H
⟨σv ⟩. (16)
As usually done, we normalize the number density to the entropy den sity introducing the quantity Yχ =nχ/s , since
when annihilations become ineﬃcient, if there are no further entrop y injection phases, such ratio becomes constant
and can be used to estimate the relic density for χ :
ΩNT
χ = mχs(T0)
ρc(T0) Yχ (T0) = mχs(T0)
ρc(T0) Yχ (TRH) ∝ mχ
⟨σv ⟩TRH
, (17)
whereρc(T0) and s(T0) refer to the Universe critical density and entropy density at pre sent.The rule of thumb Γ ≃H
is the same criterium implemented for an approximate estimate of the relic density in the standard thermal decoupling
picture for WIMP dark matter, except that the reference tempe rature in this latter case is the thermal freeze-out
temperature Tt.f.o. ≃ mχ/ 20. Following the same steps, one ﬁnds that the thermal relic densit y Ω T
χ scales with the
inverse of Tt.f.o. , and hence that the relations of Ω NT
χ with Ω T
χ and the WIMP pair annihilation cross section are
approximately given by:
ΩNT
χ h2 ≃ Tt.f.o.
TRH
ΩT
χh2 ≃ mχ/ 20
TRH
· 3 · 10−26 cm3 s−1
⟨σv ⟩ . (18)
A particle χ whose thermal relic density is small compared to the DM density beca use the annihilation rate is too
large, may become a viable dark matter candidate for an appropriat e value of TRH. This simple rescaling holds
whenever the particles χ are copiously produced in the modulus decay and if the pair annihilation rate is suﬃciently
large; in the following, we refer this scenario as ’reannihilation regime’. If instead nχ (TRH) is lower than nc
χ (TRH),
the particles produced in the decay do not interact further and th eir number density per comoving volume is frozen,
being:
Yχ (TRH) = nχ (TRH)
s(TRH) ≃ BX
mX
ρX (TRH)
s(TRH) ≃ 3
4
BX
mX
TRH (19)
and hence giving a non-thermal relic density which is about (see also, e.g., [23]):
ΩNT
χ h2 ≃ 0. 2 · 104BX
10 TeV
mX
TRH
1 MeV
mχ
100 GeV (20)
Note that, in this case, the ﬁnal dark matter density depends on t he physics of moduli not only through its propor-
tionality to the reheating temperature but also through the ratio b etween the average number of particles χ produced
per decay and the modulus mass BX/m X . This non-thermal scaling applies to the cases in which either the pair
annihilation rate is small or the average number of particles χ produced per decay BX is small. 1
We are now ready to discuss numerical results within this simpliﬁed sce nario. As just outlined, the relevant
parameters for the relic density calculation are the particle mass an d pair annihilation cross section, as well as those
setting the eﬃciency in producing dark matter particles and the ene rgy density of the ﬁeld at decay; regarding the
latter we will treat as free parameters BX and the mass of the modulus mX , which in turns sets the decay width Γ X
and hence the reheating energy (we start with the assumption of g ravitational interactions in the decay, and comment
shortly on how to interpret results in case of a more general expre ssions for ΓX ). Since we are tracing the full evolution
of the ﬁeld X, we are not in the limit of instantaneous reheating and do not implemen t the deﬁnition of reheating
temperature as quoted in Eq. (2); the TRH we refer to when illustrating results is extrapolated from the numer ical
solution, matching the T ∝a−3/ 8 scaling obtained in the phase when the X decays act as a large source of entropy to
theT ∼a−1 scaling in the subsequent radiation dominated regime (this prescript ion of matching asymptotic solutions
is not totally rigorous since we should also take into account eventua l changes in the number of relativistic degrees
of freedom contributing to the entropy density; in practice, howe ver, since the transition between the two regimes is
1 Ref. [23] classiﬁes two extra scenarios, already studied, e .g., in Ref. [20], corresponding to the case in which the main source of χ particles
is pair production from SM background states; these applies essentially only in the limit of BX → 0 which we are not going to discuss,
although the method outlined here would be suitable for them as well.
8
 1e-16
 1e-14
 1e-12
 1e-10
 1e-08
 1e-06
 0.0001
 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10
Yχ
T[GeV]
BX=0.25
6 MeV
30 MeV
180 MeV
1 GeV
7 GeV
29 GeV
100 GeV
 1e-16
 1e-14
 1e-12
 1e-10
 1e-08
 1e-06
 0.0001
 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10
Yχ
T[GeV]
TRH=180 MeV
10-6
10-8
FIG. 1: The number density of the DM particles normalized the entropy density as a function of temperature, for few values
of the reheating temperature and BX ﬁxed to 0.25 (left panel), and for a sample TRH while varying BX (right panel). In the
left panel we also plot with dashed-dotted lines the quasi-e quilibrium density Y QSE
χ (T ) for each TRH, and with a dashed line
the critical density Y c
χ (T ) for the case TRH = 100 GeV in which reheating takes place before thermal freez e out. In the right
panel the dashed line shows Y c
χ (T ) for TRH = 180 MeV. Results refer to a DM particle with mass and pair ann ihilation cross
section being, respectively, 1 TeV and 5 · 10− 24 cm3 s− 1.
always rather sharp, the TRH found in this way is always very accurate in parametrizing the total e ntropy injection
from the X decay; note also that TRH is not used in any step of the numerical computation).
In Fig. 1 we consider a sample DM particle with heavy mass, mχ = 1 TeV, and large pair annihilation cross section,
⟨σv ⟩ = 5 · 10−24cm3s−1; the ratio Yχ of the DM number density to the entropy density is plotted as a func tion of T
(note that, since we want to compare directly TRH withT , rather than showing Yχ versus the inverse of temperature
as usually done, we plot it versus T and use a logarithmic scale which decreases from left to right). In th e left
panel we have ﬁxed BX to a sample value representative of the case when the branching ra tio of the decay into χ is
unsuppressed, and vary mX to select a few values of the reheating temperature; in the right pa nel, vice versa, we ﬁx
mX and vary BX . The system of equations is solved assuming the initial energy densit y in the modulus is equal to
1/ 2m2
XM 2
Pl and that the radiation energy density is at the same level [18, 25]. W henTRH is larger than the thermal
freeze-out temperature Tt.f.o. for this model (the case for TRH = 100 GeV in the plot), the temperature evolution
of Yχ is obviously the same as in a standard thermal WIMP framework: Yχ follows ﬁrst the thermal equilibrium
distribution along its Maxwell-Boltzmann tail, in a phase in which the main s ource of DM particles is pair production
by SM background particles and this is balanced by DM pair annihilations , and then at Tt.f.o. , when neq
χ becomes
smaller than nc
χ and pair annihilations become ineﬃcient, Yχ settles on a constant value. When TRH is reduced two
eﬀects intervene: ﬁrst of all, the thermal freeze out temperatu re tends to increase since the modulus contribution
to the Universe energy density increases H and hence nc
χ ; at the same time, the dominant source of DM particles
becomes the modulus decays rather than SM pair creation. If χ number density from the decay exceeds nc
χ , this source
term is balanced by DM pair annihilations and nχ tracks the quasi-static equilibrium (QSE) density, as deﬁned, e.g.,
in Ref [26]:
nQSE
χ ≡
(BX ΓXρX
mX ⟨σeﬀv⟩
)1/ 2
. (21)
For our sample DM model, this is the behavior we ﬁnd in all cases with larg e BX and TRH < Tt.f.o. : starting at
high T , Yχ follows ﬁrst Yeq
χ , then it becomes equal to YQSE
χ up to about TRH when the modulus DM source drops
exponentially,YQSE
χ crossesYc
χ and henceYχ gets frozen. Regarding the temperature scalings in the plot, in the phase
when the modulus dominates the energy density and is the main entro py source, we see that both YQSE
χ and Yc
χ are
proportional to T , except for a short low temperature phase in the examples for TRH = 30 and 6 MeV during which
the entropy injected but the modulus decay is still negligible compare d to the initial entropy and hence a ∝ T −1,
makingYQSE
χ andYc
χ rise as T −3/ 2. For small BX ,YQSE
χ becomes smaller than Yc
χ , DM annihilations are ineﬃcient
and nχ simply scales as BX ΓXρX/m X ·t, up to the reheating temperature when the modulus source drops and Yχ
becomes constant; for what concerns the behavior in temperatu re, once again, in the phase in which the decay injects
DM particles, the scaling just given translates into Yχ ∝ T , while for very small BX one can also see a transient in
which the amount of DM produced in the decay is small compared to th e thermal component and Yχ simply reﬂects
the entropy increase, decreasing faster than T .
9
 1e-06
 1e-05
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 1e-10  1e-08  1e-06  0.0001  0.01  1
Ω χh2
BX
mχ=1 TeV ,<σ v >=5 x 10-24 cm3s-1
6 MeV
30 MeV
180 MeV
1 GeV
7 GeV
29 GeV
100 GeV
 1e-06
 1e-05
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 1
 10
 100
 0.01  0.1  1  10  100
Ω χh2
TRH[GeV]
BX=10-5
< σ v >=10-22 cm3s-1
< σ v >=10-23 cm3s-1
< σ v >=10-24 cm3s-1
< σ v >=10-25 cm3s-1
< σ v >=10-26 cm3s-1
< σ v >=10-27 cm3s-1
FIG. 2: Left panel: scaling of the relic density with the para meter BX for the same sample DM model selected for Fig 1 and
for a few values of TRH . Right panel: relic density versus TRH , having ﬁxed BX = 10 − 5 and rescaling the value of ⟨σv ⟩. The
black horizontal lines represent the cosmological DM densi ty as extrapolated by the WMAP 7-year data [27].
In the example displayed, the speciﬁc set of initial conditions implemen ted to solve the system of equations has a
negligible impact on the ﬁnal comoving density of DM particles. In fact the latter is insensitive to the choice of the
initial energy density in the moduli and the relative weight with respec t to the initial radiation energy density provided
that the physical mechanism determining the DM relic density starts becoming eﬃcient at temperatures lower than
the temperature at which the scaling T ∼ a−3/ 8 begins. More precisely: in all cases considered in this paper, the
DM pair annihilation rate is large enough to guarantee, even in the non -standard cosmological scenarios considered
here, chemical equilibrium at T ≳ mχ ; the ﬁnal relic densities is then determined by the physics taking plac e between
the thermal freeze-out temperature and the reheating temper ature. If the T ∼a−3/ 8 scaling starts suﬃciently earlier
than TRH, the entropy production guarantees the suppression of the DM t hermal component and, at the same time,
variations in the entropy release with the ﬁeld energy density are co mpensated by a diﬀerent eﬃciency in the non
thermal production, leaving then the ﬁnal result unchanged. If, on the contrary, the DM thermal relic component
is not totally diluted, the T ∼ a−3/ 8 phase needs to start before the thermal freeze-out temperat ure, otherwise the
variation of dilution due to entropy release stemming from the initial c onditions has a direct impact on the relic
density as well.
In Fig. 2 we plot the relic densities for the χ state. In the left panel we refer to the same model introduced fo r
Fig. 1, select a few values for the reheating temperature and displa y results as a function of BX ; as expected from
the discussion above, one can see that Ω χ becomes essentially independent of BX in the limit of large BX , while it
scales linearly with BX when the modulus source function is too small to make nχ exceeds nc
χ . Also visible at large
BX is the scaling of the relic density with the inverse of TRH, as expected from the analytical estimate in Eq. (18).
When BX is small Ω χ is expected to scale with TRH/m X . In our approach TRH and mX are correlated; from the
instantaneous approximation, Eq. (2), one expects mX ∝T 2/ 3
RH giving Ω χ ∝T 1/ 3
RH , which is approximately the scaling
seen in the plot for very small BX . The dependence on the reheating temperature is shown more exp licitly in the
right panel of Fig. 2, where, having ﬁxed BX to an intermediate value, we let the annihilation cross section vary of
a few orders orders of magnitude around the value chosen for the plot on the left hand side; the relic density scales
with the inverse of ⟨σv ⟩ whenever reannihilation takes place, while evidently the solution does not depend on ⟨σv ⟩ in
case annihilation processes are ineﬃcient.
In most scenarios containing cosmological moduli it is hard to tune th e model in such a way that very tiny BX
are obtained, hence the framework we are discussing becomes inte resting mainly when χ is associated to a large
annihilation cross section, preventing the overproduction of DM wit h respect to the experimental bound. DM models
with a ⟨σv ⟩ which is two or three orders of magnitudes larger than in the standa rd thermal relic scenario would
be very interesting also from the point of view of indirect DM detectio n and have been invoked to address the
excess in the lepton cosmic ray ﬂux by Pamela and Fermi. In Fig. 3, cho osing a few sample values of TRH and two
representative cases for BX , we scan the parameter space ( ⟨σv ⟩ – mχ ) searching for conﬁgurations in which the χ
relic density matches the central value for the cosmological DM den sity as estimated from the WMAP 7-year data,
namely Ω χh2 = 0. 1123 ± 0. 0035 [27]. A curve corresponding to a given TRH becomes horizontal when TRH becomes
larger than Ts.f.o. , i.e. we recover the standard thermal result of the relic density be ing independent of mass for
S-wave annihilations; on the other hand it becomes vertical when an nihilations become ineﬃcient and hence Ω χ stops
10
 1e-26
 1e-25
 1e-24
 1e-23
 1e-22
 100  1000  10000
< σ v >[cm3s-1]
Mχ[GeV]
6 MeV
30 MeV
180 MeV
1 GeV
5 GeV
15 GeV
28 GeV
WMAP bound
Planck
Pamela best fit
Fermi best fit
 1e-26
 1e-25
 1e-24
 1e-23
 1e-22
 100  1000  10000
< σ v >[cm3s-1]
Mχ[GeV]
BX=10-5
6 MeV
30 MeV
180 MeV
1 GeV
5 GeV
15 GeV
28 GeV
WMAP bound
Planck
Pamela best fit
Fermi best fit
FIG. 3: Values of mX and ⟨σv ⟩ for which the relic density of the χ particles matches the cosmological DM density, for a few
values of TRH and two representative cases for BX . Also shown are the region in this plane compatible with the P amela and
Fermi electron/positron excesses in case of leptophilic DM [28], and the WMAP limit and Planck projected sensitivity [2 9, 30]
stemming from the impact of residual DM annihilations on rei onization.
depending on ⟨σv ⟩. In general going from large to small BX , keeping TRH ﬁxed, shifts the results to smaller ⟨σv ⟩
and larger mχ . In the same plot, supposing we are now referring to a leptophilic DM c andidate, namely annihilating
democratically into the three lepton species [28], we have superimpo sed the region in the parameter space which have
been found to be compatible with the Pamela and Fermi electron and p ositron data, as derived, e.g., in Ref. [28];
the comparison is meant to be qualitative since we are not considering here a detailed particle physics scenario, it
shows however what are the main trends that should be fullﬁlled to ﬁn d an agreement. Also shown is the bounds on
leptophilic models following from WMAP CMB data [29, 30]: the limit stems fr om the impact of residual (namely
much later than thermal decoupling) pair annihilations on reionization , and will be soon improved by the Planck
experiment in case of no signal.
The last issue we wish to discuss in this Section is an implicit dependence o n the modulus mass mX we have
ignored so far: As mentioned above we have been varying mX to retrieve diﬀerent values of TRH as extrapolated from
the numerical solution of the system of coupled equations; the und erlying assumption here is that we computed the
modulus decay assuming gravitational coupling and a two body ﬁnal s tate. Having in mind more general scenarios
like those, e.g., in Ref. [5, 31–35], we may consider replacing:
ΓX = 1
4π
m3
X
M 2
Pl
→ ΓX = m3
X
Λ 2
eff
, (22)
where now Λ eff encodes both the coupling of the eﬀective operator responsible fo r the decay and the kinematical
factors. From the approximation of instantaneous reheating one sees that, to keep TRH ﬁxed after this replacement,
one needs simply to approximately shift:
mX → mX ·
(
Λ 2
eff
4πM 2
Pl
)1/ 3
. (23)
The modulus mass however appears explicitly also in Eq. (7) when, in th e DM source function from modulus decays,
one converts from the modulus energy density to its number densit y. To compensate for this and use results displayed
in this and the next Sections, one then should also shift the values re ference values for BX as:
BX → BX ·
(
Λ 2
eff
4πM 2
Pl
)1/ 3
. (24)
IV. IMP ACT OF A TOY MODEL ON THE MSSM
In this Section, while still referring to the schematic picture with a sin gle cosmological modulus X parametrized
through its decay width Γ X and the DM yield BX , we introduce an explicit particle physics scenario for the {χa} ﬁelds,
11
considering neutralino DM in the MSSM. As already mentioned, a scena rio with DM production from cosmological
moduli can arise quite naturally in supergravity/superstrings theo ries. Some scenarios, such as gauge mediated
supersymmetry breaking are actually troublesome since the moduli tend to be light and decay after the onset of BBN,
see, e.g. [6, 36–38]; to solve this problem, one needs to invoke a mech anism of dilution of the moduli number density,
making these models not viable for non-thermal DM production.
In the MSSM there are four neutralinos, spin 1/2 Majorana fermion s obtained as the superposition of two neutral
gauginos, the Bino ˜B and the Wino ˜W 3, and the two neutral Higgsinos ˜H 0
1 and ˜H 0
2 :
˜χi =Ni1 ˜B +Ni2 ˜W +Ni3 ˜H 0
1 +Ni4 ˜H 0
2, (25)
where the coeﬃcients Nij are the elements of the matrix which diagonalizes the neutralino mass matrix, and are
mainly a function of the Bino and the Wino mass parameters M1 and M2, and of the Higgs superﬁeld parameter µ ,
while depend rather weakly on tan β , the ratio of the vacuum expectation values of the two neutral co mponents of the
SU(2) Higgs doublets, which appears in the oﬀ-diagonal terms of ne utralino mass matrix. The hierarchy between M1,
M2 andµ sets hence whether the lightest neutralino, which we are assuming a lso as lightest supersymmetric particle
(LSP) and stable, is mostly bino-, wino- or Higgsino-like. From the poin t of view of DM production in the early
Universe, pure Binos have pair annihilation cross sections dominated by SM fermion ﬁnal states, which are helicity
suppressed (S-wave annihilation cross sections proportional to t he square of the mass of the ﬁnal state fermion) and
scale approximately with the inverse of the forth power of the mass of the corresponding sfermions; given current
accelerator bounds on sfermion masses, Binos tend in general to h ave a too large annihilation cross section to be
thermal DM relics. On the other hand Winos and Higgsinos have unsup pressed annihilation cross sections into W
bosons and their annihilation cross section tends to be too large for thermal production unless one considers heavy
states, about 2.4 and 1.1 TeV, respectively, for a pure Wino and a pu re Higgsino, since, in this case, the annihilation
cross sections scales approximately with the inverse of the square of the neutralino mass (we will show results obtained
computing tree-level annihilation amplitudes; in case of TeV Winos and Higgsinos actually the result would change
slightly, shifting the masses to slightly larger values, when taking into account that, for such heavy states, the weak
interaction acts as a long-range attractive force which deforms t he wave function of the annihilating DM pair, an
eﬀect usually referred as Sommerfeld enhancement, see, e.g., [39] and references therein). Since we will be mainly
interested in discussing the shift on the mass scale for neutralino DM due to non-thermal eﬀects, we refer here to a
supersymmetric framework maximizing this dichotomy between unde rproduced and overproduced thermal states, the
so-called ”Split Supersymmetry” scenario [9, 10]. This indicates a gen eric supersymmetric extension to the SM in
which fermionic superpartners have a low mass spectrum (say at th e TeV scale or lower), while scalar superpartners
are heavy, with a mass scale which can in principle range from hundred s of TeV up to the GUT or the Planck scale
[9], a feature which can occur in a wide class of theories, see, e.g. [40 –42]. Leaving out of the discussion also gravitinos
which are assumed to be heavy and not produced in the modulus deca y, the system {χa} reduces to neutralinos and
charginos, whose annihilation and coannihilation eﬀects we treat inte rfacing the model the DarkSUSY package [8].
Finally for what regards the Higgs sector, the scenario has only one light state SM-like Higgs; the value of its mass, as
well as tan β have no sizable impact on the overall picture, hence we keep them ﬁx ed to sample values, respectively,
114. 4 GeV and 10.
In Fig. 4 we scan the parameter space M1,M2 andµ searching for models whose relic abundance matches the central
value from the 7-year WMAP estimate of the DM density in the Univers e. There are three pairs of plot in which we
vary two of the parameters, ﬁxing the third to a heavy scale; in eac h pair, one plot is for a large BX , while the other
is for a small but not negligible BX . As in the previous Section, we vary mX to change the reheating temperature
scale, assuming a two-body gravitational decay for the modulus. T he thick black solid line corresponds, in each
plot, to a reheating temperature exceeding the thermal freeze- out temperature for all models along the curve, namely
it gives the models matching the cosmological DM density we would also o btain in the standard picture without
non-thermal DM sources: In the M1-µ plane this happens, starting at small neutralino masses, close to th e diagonal
M1 =µ since it requires a tuning of the right amount of Higgsino and Bino comp onent in the LSP, suppressing the
large Higgsino annihilation cross section with the Bino one, which in Split S USY is extremely small. Would we have
allowed for lighter sfermions and other light Higgs states, this curve would have moved only slightly further away for
the diagonal, except when sfermion coannihilations or S-channel re sonant annihilations on a Higgs take over in setting
the eﬀective thermally averaged annihilation cross section, as happ ens, e.g., in portions of the mSUGRA parameter
space, see, e.g. [43] – we will not discuss these exceptions here. As already mentioned, at about 1.1 TeV a pure
Higgsino saturates the thermal relic density bound. Turning to the M2-µ plot, Winos have an even larger annihilation
cross section than Higgsinos and the thermal relic density curve ju st goes from a pure Higgsino to a heavier pure
Wino through a transient with large Higgsino-Wino mixing. Finally the beh avior in the M1-M2 plane is more peculiar
since from the structure of the neutralino mass matrix, Bino and Win o do not mix and, below the mass scale for
a pure Wino thermal relic candidate, the tuning here is between the m ass spitting between the Bino LSP and the
second lightest neutralino and the lightest chargino, which are Wino- like and and whose coannihilations in the early
12
 100
 1000
 100  1000
µ[GeV]
M1[GeV]
BX=0.25
TRH=120 GeV
TRH=81 GeV
TRH=37 GeV
TRH=20 GeV
TRH=6 GeV
TRH=2.5 GeV
TRH=1 GeV
 100
 1000
 100  1000
µ[GeV]
M1[GeV]
BX=10-5
TR=120 GeV
TRH=38 GeV
TRH=15 GeV
TRH=7 GeV
TRH=2.5 GeV
TRH=1 GeV
TRH=400 MeV
 100
 1000
 100  1000
µ[GeV]
M2[GeV]
BX=0.25
 100
 1000
 100  1000
µ[GeV]
M2[GeV]
BX=10-5
TRH=6 MeV
TRH=30 MeV
TRH=180 MeV
TRH=1 GeV
TRH=2.5 GeV
TRH=7 GeV
TRH=21 GeV
TRH=80 GeV
TRH=230 GeV
 100
 1000
 100  1000
M2[GeV]
M1[GeV]
BX=0.25
TRH=230 GeV
TRH=126 GeV
TRH=45 GeV
TRH=21 GeV
TRH=7 GeV
TRH=1 GeV
TRH=180 MeV
TRH=30 MeV
 100
 1000
 100  1000
M2[GeV]
M1[GeV]
BX=10-5
TR=126 GeV
TR=45 GeV
TR=21 GeV
TR=7 GeV
TR=1 GeV
TR=180 MeV
TR=30 MeV
FIG. 4: Models with relic density equal to the central value f rom the 7-year WMAP data analysis, i.e. Ω χ h2 = 0 . 1123, in
two-dimensional slices of the M1, M2, µ parameter space, corresponding to the limit in which the thi rd parameter is heavy (set
to 10 TeV in the numerical computation), for a few values of TRH as indicated in the plots, and two values of BX , namely 0.25
for left panels and 10 − 5 for right panels. The ﬁlled areas correspond to regions viol ating the LEP lower bound on the chargino
mass.
Universe set the thermal relic abundance of a Bino LSP (there are c hargino and neutralino coannihilations even for
pure Winos and Higgsinos, but with less dramatic eﬀects). Turning on the non-thermal component from the modulus
decays, when BX is large, essentially one just sees in the plots the scaling sketched in E q. (18), with Higgsinos and
Winos saturating the WMAP preferred value for Ω χ with a progressively larger ⟨σv ⟩ asTRH decreases, and hence for
a progressively smaller LSP mass, covering the whole parameter spa ce for Higgsinos lighter than 1.1 TeV and Winos
lighter than 2.4 TeV (as the Higgsino mass approaches the W boson threshold the cross section stops increasing;
13
this explains the shape of isolevel curves in that region). A detectio n at an accelerator of such LSP conﬁgurations,
hopefully combined with a DM detection signal, would indeed be an indicat ion of a non-standard cosmological phase
at DM generation, with non-thermal production as primary scenar io (there would also be further possibilities, such
as, e.g., the increase of the Universe expansion rate at freeze-ou t induced by a quintessence component [44, 45] or a
modiﬁcation of the gravity theory [46]). When BX is small, there is a smooth transition from the regions where the
scaling in Eq. (18) applies to those where annihilations stop playing a ro le and Eq. (20) applies instead; the latter
makes even pure Binos, which, we underline again, in our sample MSSM s etup have extremely small annihilation cross
sections, become cosmologically viable, another conﬁguration which , if singled out at accelerator and/or DM searches,
would point to a non-standard early Universe cosmological history ( in plots the ﬁlled region stands for the region in
which the LEP bound on the chargino mass mχ + > 103. 5 GeV is violated; Tevatron and the recent LHC constraints,
such as [47, 48], are not shown since we have made just schematic as sumptions on sfermions and not discussed at all
gluinos, the particles most critical for a early discovery at a hadron collider).
V. NON-THERMAL DM PRODUCTION IN THE G2-MSSM
As an example of framework in which we can make deﬁnite predictions f or the spectra of both the set of particles
{χa} and the cosmological moduli, we discuss the case of the G2-MSSM [11 , 19]. Within a speciﬁc class of string
M-theories, in this scenario the compactiﬁcation of extradimension s gives rise to a N = 1 supergravity in which SUSY
breaking, due to the dynamics of a hidden sector, is trasmitted to t he visible sector by a combination of gravity
(dominant contribution) and anomaly mediation. We brieﬂy summarize here the main features of the spectrum,
following Ref. [19]: In the G2-MSSM the visible sector can be described by a GUT theory broken into the MSSM
at the uniﬁcation scale Munif , at about 10 16 GeV, coinciding with the compactiﬁcation scale. The RGEs boundary
conditions are mainly functions of the gravitino mass m3/ 2, which can be estimated from the UV theory parameters to
lie in the range between ten and several hundred TeVs. The gaugino s are expected to be the lightest SUSY particles;
atMunif the gaugino masses are generated from a universal loop-suppres sed gravity mediation contribution combined
with a non-universal anomaly mediation term. The ratio of the gaugin o masses to the gravitino mass depends almost
linearly on the quantity δ that parametrizes a threshold correction to the uniﬁed gauge cou pling; in the following, δ
will be kept as a free parameter. The value of the masses at the elec troweak scale is computed following the RGE
evolution, including threshold corrections, such as the very large c orrection coming from higgs-higgisino loops, which
is proportional to µ [49]; whether the lightest neutralino is the Bino or the Wino depends on the sign and magnitude of
this latter correction. For µ> 0 and for δ in the range −10 ≤δ ≤ 0 the lightest neutralino is a pure Wino, with mass
in the range between about 100 and few hundred GeV (even the gluin o is fairly light, m˜g < 1 TeV, a feature implying
a rather rich phenomenology at LHC [50–52] and making the model te stable in the near future). Concerning the other
states in the MSSM spectrum, the Higgsino mass parameter µ and soft SUSY breaking term Bµ are generated by
a Giudice-Masiero mechanism and are heavy, of the order of m3/ 2. Sfermions are also heavy with a ﬂavor universal
contribution to their soft masses at Munif being about m3/ 2; RGEs aﬀect mostly the third generation of squarks with
the stops and the left handed sbottom becoming the lightest sferm ions at the Electroweak scale (the left-handed stop
mass becomes about 0 . 25 ·m3/ 2, the right handed stop and the left handed sbottom masses about 0. 5 ·m3/ 2). In the
Higgs sector tan β is ﬁxed by µ and Bµ through the electroweak symmetry breaking condition and takes a value of
order one; the light CP even Higgs is Standard Model like, while all the o ther Higgs bosons are heavy, again at about
them3/ 2 scale. In summary, the features relevant to discuss non-therma l DM production in this model are: The pure
Wino LSP as DM candidate, as enforced by the proper choice of δ (we will restrict to values δ <−3 since they are
theoretically favored [19]) and required to provide an annihilation cro ss section suﬃciently large for the model to ﬁt
into the scenario in which the branching ratio for the decay of the mo duli into the LSP is unsuppressed; A charged
Wino as next to lightest SUSY particle, with a tiny mass splitting with res pect to the LSP, about 200 MeV, due to
the one-loop electroweak corrections to the neutralino and charg ino masses [50]; The possibility for the moduli to
decay into gluinos and third-generation squarks. While other SUSY p articles do not play a role in our analysis, the
relevant part of the spectrum will be computed here implementing th e appropriate one-loop RGE running.
For what regards the moduli ﬁelds, as already mentioned, in a string framework like the G2-MSSM, they arise in the
eﬀective supergravity theory after the compactiﬁcation of the e xtra-dimensions. The theory predicts the presence of
a large number of moduli ﬁelds with mass of order or heavier than the gravitino mass. In our numerical computation
of the DM relic density, we follow the scenario outlined in Ref. [25]: The m odulus sector is composed by N + 1 ﬁelds
with N = O(50 − 100) including:
• 1 heavy modulus XN with mXN = 600m3/ 2;
• 1 meson ﬁeld Φ with mΦ = 1. 96m3/ 2;
14
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
 200  300  400  500  600  700
 150  200  250  300  350  400  450
Ω χh2
M3/2[TeV]
Mχ[GeV]
DXi
=4
DXi
=7
DXi
=10
DXi
=14
DXi
=16
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
 450
 500
 100  120  140  160  180  200  220  240  260  280  300
m3/2[TeV]
mχ[GeV]
δ>-3
DXi
=4
DXi
=7
DXi
=10
DXi
=14
DXi
=16
FIG. 5: Left panel : Wino relic density versus the gravitino mass m3/ 2 for a few sample values of DXi and δ = −3; the upper
horizontal scale shows the corresponding value of for mχ for this speciﬁc value of δ. The band gives the 1 − σ determination of
the DM relic density from the 7-year WMAP dataset. Right panel : models with relic density equal to the central value from
the WMAP data, in the plane mχ versus m3/ 2, obtained by varying δ in the range −10 < δ < −3 and few sample values of
DXi . The ﬁlled area marks the region violating the LEP lower limi t on the chargino mass; the region of the plane above the
dashed line would correspond to models with δ > −3.
• N-1 light moduli Xi with mXi = 1. 96m3/ 2.
Their decay rates can be written in the form given in Eq. (1), i.e. it is pr oportional to the mass of the modulus
to the third power and inversely proportional to the square of the reduced Planck mass. The constant in front can
be computed esplicitly [25] in the model; we keep DXN for the heavy modulus and DΦ for the meson ﬁxed to the
benchmark values of, respectively, 2 and 710, while DXi , which is one the quantities the LSP relic density is mostly
sensitive to, will be treated as a free parameter allowed to vary in th e range between 4 and 16 (preferred range in the
scenario considered here [25]). With this choice, the lifetimes for the three type of states is split to about: 10 −10 s
forXN , 10 −5 s for Φ and 10 −3 − 10−2 s for the light moduli. The branching ratios into SUSY particles of the d ecays
are also calculable in this theory, with the main channel being into squa rk pairs, mostly the lightest stop, which in
turn cascade down to the LSP and the chargino; in general, the bra nching ratio of decay of the light moduli into
Susy particles is 25% with on average two DM particles produced at th e end of the decay chain, giving BXi ∼ 0. 5.
Gravitinos are produced in the heavy modulus decay, while gravitino p air production in the decay of the meson
and the light moduli is kinematically forbidden for the given values of mφ and mXi , a choice quite natural for the
G2-MSSM but still not totally general [11]. We will comment further on this point below. Gravitinos are also long
lived:
Γ 3/ 2 = 1
288π
m3
3/ 2
M 2
Pl
(26)
producing one SUSY particle per decay, cascading again into one DM p article.
The system in Eq. (14) is solved numerically for this G2-MSSM setup, w ith the set of moduli just outlined and
having chosen N = 99 and including the gravitino as ψ ﬁeld. The quantities which are kept as free parameters in our
analysis are the gravitino mass, the parameter δ (allowing to shift the ratio between LSP and gravitino mass ) and
DXi . Except for gravitinos, all other decay products are, for the mo ment, treated as particles in kinetic equilibrium.
The system is evolved starting with the oscillations of the heavy modu lus, when its initial energy density 1 / 2m2
XNM 2
Pl
is equal to the radiation energy density, while the other moduli are in cluded in the system at the beginning of their
oscillations. For what regards the generation of DM, the relevant p roduction phase is only the one from the decays
of the light moduli, since the thermal DM component, as well as those from the decay of the heavy modulus and
the meson, get diluted in the entropy injection phases. The depend ence of DM comoving number density Yχ on
temperature in this scenario is perfectly specular to those shown in Fig. 1 for models whose number density follows
ﬁrst a phase of the quasi-static equilibrium and then reannihilation. G ravitinos play a marginal role: produced in the
heavy modulus decay, they get diluted and decay at a late stage (po ssibly after the end of the reannihilation phase
forχ ) when Y3/ 2 is tipically 3 to 4 orders of magnitude smaller than the ﬁnal Yχ , hence not contributing signiﬁcantly
to the DM relic density.
In left panel of Fig. 5 we plot the neutralino relic density versus m3/ 2, for a few values of DXi and a sample value
for δ, showing also on the upper horizontal scale the corresponding valu e of the Wino LSP mass for such given δ.
15
Given that the reannihilation regime applies, from Eq. (18) we expect Ωχ to be proportional to mχ and inversely
proportional to ⟨σv ⟩ andTRH, with the latter in turn approximately proportional to D1/ 2
Xi (m3/ 2)3/ 2, see Eq. (3) where
the scaling in the modulus masses has been replaced by the scaling in te rms of the gravitino mass. In the limit in
which the Wino pair annihilation cross section just scales with the inver se of the square of the Wino mass, one would
ﬁnd:
Ωχh2 ∝ [F (δ)]3(
m3/ 2
)3/ 2
D1/ 2
Xi
(27)
where the function F (δ) parametrizes the quasi-linear relation between mχ andm3/ 2. In the plot, the result of the full
numerical solution roughly conﬁrms these approximate scalings, ex cept for small mχ for which ⟨σv ⟩ is not inversely
proportional to m2
χ . To match the experimental value the DM abundance, lighter m3/ 2 and larger DXi are favored.
In the right panel of Fig. 5 we consider the plane mχ versusm3/ 2 and, varying δ and for a few values of DXi , we plot
models that have Ω χh2 equal to the mean value from the WMAP data; the plot illustrates the fact that, even in a
model as constrained as the G2-MSSM, there is still a rather large s ensitivity to the parameters setting the theory
at high energy. A relic density compatible with cosmological measurem ents is obtained for LSP lighter than about
300 GeV and for reheating temperatures in the range between abo ut 100 MeV and 1 GeV. The results of our analysis
are consistent, as an overall picture, with the results presented in Refs. [25, 52], although there are slight numerical
diﬀerences when comparing model by model; most likely these diﬀeren ces stem mainly from the determination of the
mass spectrum of the G2-MSSM which is probably less accurate in our work, although the more careful numerical
treatment implemented here for the relic density calculation may hav e some impact as well. As a ﬁnal remark, we
mention that we have also crosschecked the result that, to obtain a relic density compatible with the DM density
as measured by WMAP, it is necessary to forbid the decay of the light moduli into gravitinos; in case it is not, in
all G2-MSSM setups, gravitino decays become the main dark matter source, at a stage when reannihilations are
ineﬃcient, largely overproducing dark matter.
VI. KINETIC EQUILIBRIUM AND DECOUPLING IN THE G2-MSSM
In Section II we have emphasized that Eq. (7), tracing the evolutio n of the number density of the χa particles, has
been written assuming that kinetic equilibrium between the χa states and the thermal bath particles is maintained at
all stages over which the comoving number density changes. Wheth er this assumption is valid or not depends on the
eﬃciency of the scattering processes on thermal bath particles, an issue with is usually addressed invoking crossing
symmetry arguments relating the scattering to the annihilation cro ss section; in most explicit models however the
two processes are not related via crossing symmetry and one shou ld actually study this problem case by case. We
focus here on the G2-MSSM (a more general framework with non-t hermal Wino DM will be also considered at the
end) and discuss the steps which should be followed when relaxing the hypothesis of kinetic equilibrium, introducing
a more general set of Boltzmann equations.
The energy spectrum of SUSY particles produced in the decay of mo duli is usually very diﬀerent from the thermal
distribution; in particular in the G2-MSSM scenario, light particles are generated in the decay of very heavy ﬁelds.
The cascade process generally starts with the production a pair of squarks, followed by their decay into gluino and
quark, and with the gluino in turn decaying with a three body process into the LSP, the Wino-like chargino or the
Bino, with branching ratios depending on parameters in the model. As a last step, the Bino decays as well into the
chargino or the LSP, while the chargino, given the small mass splitting with respect to the LSP, has a longer lifetime.
The chargino decay occurs either through a two body process in wh ich a pion is produced together with the LSP, or
through a three-body in which a neutrino and an electron are produ ced; the rates of these processes are given by,
respectively, [53, 54]:
Γχ ± , 2b = 2f 2
πG2
F
π ∆ m2
χ
√
∆ m2
χ −m2
π and Γ χ ± , 3b = 2G2
F∆ m5
χ
15π 3 , (28)
where ∆ mχ is the chargino-neutralino mass splitting, fπ = 93 MeV is the pion decay constant and GF is the Fermi
constant. The two-body decay is dominant when kinematically allowed ; this is the case in the G2-MSSM, since the
minimum mass splitting between charged and neutral Wino, induced bu t electroweak radiative corrections to the two
masses is ∆ mχ ≃ 160 MeV [50] . We have studied the decay chain of the moduli with the p ackage PYTHIA [55] for a
few sample benchmark models in the G2-MSSM, assuming a stable Wino- like chargino, and found energy distributions
for the Wino-like neutralinos and charginos which are typically peaked at E/m χ ∼ 10 and with very broad tails up
to the kinematical threshold; among decay products, the number of charginos is typically about 3 times larger than
the number of neutralinos.
16
The injected ultra-relativistic particles lose energy via scattering o n thermal bath states. Were these processes
ineﬃcient, the non-thermal DM generation would give rise to a model of the Universe with warm or even hot DM, a
possibility which has been investigated, e.g., in Refs. [56, 57]. As a ﬁrst rule of thumb, the energy depletion is eﬃcient
whenever the relative energy loss rate times the time interval the o ver which the process is active, which we indicate
as ∆ τ, is larger than 1:
(
− 1
E
dE
dt
)
· ∆ τ >1. (29)
In our case this condition needs to hold from the relativistic regime do wn to the non-relativistic low-temperature
environments induced by the reheating phase. The expression for −dE/dt is in the form:
− dE
dt =
∫
dE′ (E −E′) dΓ
dE′ (E,E ′) (30)
where Γ(E) the scattering rate for the process under scrutiny, integrate d over the phase space distribution functions
of the thermal bath particles in the initial state and the phase spac e of the out-scattered particles. The expressions
we will report below are derived in the limit of small momentum transfer between the non-thermally produced states
and the thermal bath particles; the latter on average have energ ies equal to about 3 T . The small momentum transfer
approximation holds whenever the non-thermal particles are non- relativistic in the CM frame of the scattering process,
namely for [56]:
m2
χ ≳ 6TE. (31)
Assuming instantaneous production at reheating, this relation can be translated into:
TRH ≲ 1. 7 GeV
( mχ
100 GeV
)( 10
E/m χ
)
, (32)
a condition which is satisﬁed in the region of the G2-MSSM parameter s pace providing a viable DM candidate.
Charginos lose energy via electromagnetic interactions and their en ergy loss rate takes the form [58, 59]:
(
−dE
dt
)
χ ±
= πα 2T 2
3 Λ (33)
with Λ ∼ O(1). The elastic scattering of a Wino-like neutralino on a background lepton is very ineﬃcient, since
it proceeds via a Z boson or a slepton exchange and the corresponding amplitudes are suppressed, respectively, by
the tiny higgsino fraction in the LSP and by the slepton masses, which in the G2-MSSM are very heavy. Whenever
kinematically allowed, the dominant eﬀect is the inelastic scattering int o the charged Wino, which is mediated by a
W boson. There are then two eﬀects making a neutralino produced in t he decay of the modulus lose energy, namely
the energy loss in the inelastic scattering itself and the fact that th e produced chargino will eﬃciently lose energy. For
relativistic neutralinos, the inelastic scattering rate and the energ y loss rate in inelastic scatterings are, respectively,
given by:
Γχ 0→χ ± =
∑
(a,b )
2˜gWabG2
F
π 3 exp
(
−mχ ∆ mχ
2ET
)
T 4 E
mχ
(
6ET
mχ
+ ∆ mχ
)
(34)
(
−dE
dt
)
χ 0→χ ±
=
∑
(a,b )
16˜gWabG2
F
π 3 exp
(
−mχ ∆ mχ
2ET
)
T 5
( E
mχ
)3(
8ET
mχ
+ ∆ mχ
)
. (35)
where, considering the generic process in which the heat bath part iclea is scattered into the particle b via an interaction
vertex with a W boson, we have included in the coeﬃcient ˜ gWab the product of the number of internal degrees for a,
that for b, as well as a rescaling factor in case the coupling constant in the ver tex is diﬀerent from the SU(2) gauge
coupling g (e.g., for the scattering process χ 0 +e± →χ ± +νe, ˜gWab = 8); the sum goes over any ( a,b ) thermal bath
particle pairs.
In Fig. 6 we consider two of the G2-MSSM singled out in the previous Se ction as models embedding a viable DM
candidate, at the light and heavy ends of the mass range displayed in Fig. 5, i.e. two models with Wino masses,
respectively, of 103.5 and 300 GeV, obtained for DXi = 16, δ = −3. 5 and δ = −3 and gravitino masses of 107 and
460 TeV, and corresponding to scenarios with approximate reheat ing temperatures of 100 MeV and 900 MeV. For such
17
 1
 100
 10000
 1e+06
 1e+08
 1e+10
 1e+12
 1e+14
 0.001  0.01  0.1  1
Γ/H
T[GeV]
1/E (dE/dt)χ+/-
χ+/-+ν->χ0+e+/-
χ+/-->π+/-+χ0
χ0+e+/-->χ+/-+ν
(a) Case 1: mχ = 103. 5 GeV, TR = 100 MeV, E/m χ = 1. 005.
 1
 100
 10000
 1e+06
 1e+08
 1e+10
 1e+12
 1e+14
 0.001  0.01  0.1  1
Γ/H
T[GeV]
1/E (dE/dt)χ+/-
χ+/-+ν->χ0+e+/-
χ+/-->π+/-+χ0
χ0+e+/-->χ+/-+ν
1/E (dE/dt)χ0->χ+/-
(b) Case 2: mχ = 103. 5 GeV, TR = 100 MeV, E/m χ = 10.
 1
 100
 10000
 1e+06
 1e+08
 1e+10
 1e+12
 1e+14
 0.001  0.01  0.1  1
Γ/H
T[GeV]
1/E (dE/dt)χ+/-
χ+/-+ν->χ0+e+/-
χ+/-->π+/-+χ0
χ0+e+/-->χ+/-+ν
(c) Case 3: mχ = 300 GeV, TR = 900 MeV, E/m χ = 1. 005.
 1
 100
 10000
 1e+06
 1e+08
 1e+10
 1e+12
 1e+14
 0.001  0.01  0.1  1
Γ/H
T[GeV]
1/E (dE/dt)χ+/-
χ+/-+ν->χ0+e+/-
χ+/-->π+/-+χ0
χ0+e+/-->χ+/-+ν
1/E (dE/dt)χ0->χ+/-
(d) Case 4: mχ = 300 GeV, TR = 900 MeV, E/m χ = 10.
FIG. 6: Ratios between the eﬀective rate of energy loss rate −1/E · dE/dt (dashed lines), or of the scattering/decay rate Γ
(solid lines), to the Universe expansion rate H, for a few processes involving charginos and neutralinos. T he upper panels refer
to a G2-MSSM DM model with mχ = 103. 5 GeV and TRH = 100 MeV, while the lower panels to one with mχ = 300 GeV and
TRH = 900 MeV; the plots on the left hand-side refer to non-relati vistic particles, E/m χ = 1. 005, while those on the right-hand
side correspond to a sample relativistic case, E/m χ = 10.
models we plot ratios of scattering and decay rates Γ, or of relative energy loss rates −1/E ·dE/dt , to the Universe
expansion rate H; in the panels on the right-hand side, results are shown for relativis tic particles, E/m χ = 10, while
on the left-hand side the non-relativistic limit is considered, E/m χ = 1. 005. To sketch the eﬃciency of the chargino
energy losses, the appropriate timescale ∆ τ in Eq. (29) is the shortest between the chargino lifetime and the time scale
for back-scattering of the chargino into the neutralino, i.e. the ru le of thumb condition in Eq. (29) holds whenever
the curves in plots corresponding to the chargino energy loss lie abo ve the curves for the decay rate and the inelastic
scattering rate. More quantitatively, for the two processes, th ese ratios are:
(∆ E
E
)
χ ± , 1−life
≈ 1. 86 · 102Λ
(
1 − m2
π
∆ m2
χ
)−1/ 2( T
1 MeV
)2(160 MeV
∆ mχ
)3(100 GeV
mχ
)
(36)
(∆ E
E
)
χ ± , 1−scat.
≈ 6. 77 · 10−2Λ
(1 GeV
T
)3( mχ
100 GeV
)( 10
E/m χ
)3
, (37)
with the smallest of these being much larger than one in all cases exce pt for relativistic charginos injected at tem-
peratures of the order of 1 GeV or larger. The latter is however th e regime in which inelastic scatterings turning
a neutralino into a chargino and viceversa are extremely eﬃcient (as shown in the plots the rate for this process is
many orders of magnitude larger than H) and the energy loss rate via this process is also very large (the rele vant
18
timescale is now ∼ H −1). This shows that the relativistic charginos injected at any of the t emperatures of interest
in our model instantaneously thermalize. For what regards neutra linos, in the relativistic limit, the energy deple-
tion is guaranteed by inelastic scatterings and by chargino energy lo sses down to background temperatures of about
2 MeV; however when becoming non-relativistic and at low temperatu res, the rate for inelastic scatterings becomes
smaller than H and the assumption of kinetic equilibrium may not hold any more. To stu dy the evolution of the
system at low temperature and model kinetic decoupling, we follow th e approach of Bringmann and Hofmann [13]
(see also [60]) who have developed a formalism to treat kinetic decoup ling starting from the Boltzmann equation for
the phase-space distribution function of the WIMP DM candidate; w e extend here their treatment to the case of two
co-annihilating particles. Let fχ 0 (p,t ) and fχ ± (p,t ) be the phase space distribution functions for, respectively, the
neutral and charged Winos. We have just shown that charginos ar e kept into kinetic equilibrium at all temperatures of
interest for your problem, so we can assume that the shape of the chargino distribution traces the thermal distribution
function, namely:
fχ ± (p,t ) ∝feq
χ ± (p,t ). (38)
On the other hand, the distribution function of the neutralinos cou ld have a shape which is slightly diﬀerent from the
thermal one, since we have shown that energy losses may not be eﬃ cient in the non-relativistic regime; this departure
is parametrized deﬁning the temperature of neutralinos Tχ 0 through the second moment of the distribution function:
∫ d3p
(2π )3 gχ 0p2fχ 0 (p,t ) ≡ 3mχ Tχ 0 (t)nχ 0 (t). (39)
For neutralinos in kinetic equilibrium, Tχ 0 coincides with the thermal bath temperature; after kinetic decou pling the
neutralino temperature will scale instead as Tχ 0 ∝T 2.
The two distribution functions obey the system of coupled Boltzman n equations:
(∂t −Hp · ∇p)fχ 0 (p,t ) = 1
E
ˆCχ 0 [fχ 0,f χ ± ] (40)
(∂t −Hp · ∇p)fχ ± (p,t ) = 1
E
ˆCχ ± [fχ 0,f χ ± ],
where ˆC stands for the collisional operator, embedding all interactions invo lving neutralinos and charginos, namely
annihilation and scattering processes, as well as the production of neutralinos and chargino from moduli decays and
the neutralino source from chargino decays. Integrating these e quation over phase space one obtains two equations
for the time evolution of the neutralino and chargino number densitie s:
dnχ 0
dt + 3Hnχ 0 =
(
˜Γχ 0↔χ ± + Γχ ±
)[
gχ 0nχ ± −gχ ± nχ 0 exp
(
− ∆ mχ
T
)]
− ⟨σv ⟩χ 0χ 0
[
n2
χ 0 − (neq
χ 0 )2
]
(41)
−⟨σv ⟩χ 0χ ±
[
nχ 0nχ ± −neq
χ 0neq
χ ±
]
dnχ ±
dt + 3Hnχ ± =
(
˜Γχ 0↔χ ± + Γχ ±
)[
gχ ± nχ 0 exp
(
− ∆ mχ
T
)
−gχ 0nχ ±
]
− ⟨σv ⟩χ ± χ ±
[
n2
χ ± − (neq
χ ± )2
]
−⟨σv ⟩χ ± χ 0
[
nχ ± nχ 0 −neq
χ ± neq
χ 0
]
+
∑
i
BXi
mXi
ΓXiρXi.
In these equations, the ﬁrst term on the right hand sides account s for inelastic scatterings of neutralinos into charginos
and decays of charginos into neutralinos (as well as the inverse pro cesses); gχ 0 and gχ ± are the number of internal
degrees of freedom for the neutralino and chargino, while Γ χ ± is the chargino decay rate as obtained including the
two contributions in Eq. (28). For inelastic scatterings we have ass umed that: i) the diagram with W boson exchange
in the t-channel is the dominant one (since those with sfermion exch anged are highly suppressed); ii) the momentum
transfer in the t-channel is small and the collision term can be compu ted expanding in its powers, see also [13, 60];
iii) ∆ mχ and T are small with respect to mχ and only the lowest order terms in an expansion in ∆ mχ and T give
sizable contributions; under these assumptions, we ﬁnd:
˜Γχ 0↔χ ± =
∑
(a,b )
˜gWab 8G2
F
π 3 T 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)
, (42)
(some further details and a sketch of the derivation of this expres sion is given in Appendix (A)). When including pair
annihilation terms in Eq. (41) we have taken advantage of the fact t hat it involves non relativistic particles annihilating
19
mainly via S-wave processes and hence the cross section has a very mild dependence on momentum, allowing then us
to write an expression analogue to thermal case also when the neut ralino distribution function starts deviating from
the kinetic equilibrium value. Furthermore, since the relativistic part icles injected from the moduli decays mostly
lose energy as charginos, decaying afterwards into neutralinos, w e have simpliﬁed the treatment including these as
a source function of ”thermal” charginos only. Obviously, summing t he two equations one retrieves Eq. (7) with nχ
being the sum of the number density for the two coannihilating specie s.
Taking the second moment of the ﬁrst equation in the system in Eq. ( 40), one ﬁnds that the neutralino temperature
Tχ 0 obeys the relation:
dTχ 0
dt + 2HTχ 0 =
[ (
˜Γχ 0↔χ ± + Γχ ±
)
gχ 0
nχ ±
nχ 0
]
(T −Tχ 0 ) (43)
(the derivation of this equation is also sketched in the appendix).
The numerical solution of the problem proceeds now analogously to w hat done so far. After the appropriate change
of variables, the system in Eq. (41) replaces Eq. (7) in the system o f Eq. (14). The explicit solution for nχ 0 (t) and
nχ ± (t) are then implemented in Eq. (43) to ﬁnd Tχ 0 (t).
Our ﬁrst application is to the G2-MSSM models singled out in the previou s Section as cosmologically favored. As
we had guessed in the analysis we performed at the level of energy lo ss and scattering rates and shown graphically in
Fig. 6, the departure from kinetic equilibrium tends to be at a temper ature sensibly lower than the nominal reheating
temperatures for these models (which are of the order of 100 MeV or larger). The numerical solution indeed shows
that the ratio nχ ± /n χ 0 tends to follow very closely the ratio of the thermal equilibrium numbe r densities neq
χ ± /n eq
χ 0 over
the whole phase of DM production in the moduli decays, as well as at la ter times. The solution of the equation for
the neutralino temperature shows that kinetic equilibrium is maintaine d up to a temperature of the order of 10 MeV,
independently of the neutralino mass since, in the non-relativistic limit , the inelastic scattering rate (which together
with chargino electromagnetic interactions enforces the equilibrium ) depends only on the chargino-neutralino mass
splitting which is essentially the same over the whole range of selected models. The transition between Tχ 0 = T to
the regime Tχ 0 ∝T 2 takes place on relatively short timescales; since at 10 MeV non-ther mal production has become
irrelevant, we would have found the very same scaling when computin g the kinetic decoupling for a population of
thermal particles: the evolution of the number density ratio and of Tχ 0 for G2-MSSM DM models are those shown as
black lines in Fig. 7 and labelled, respectively, ’thermal distributions’ a nd ’standard decoupling’.
To illustrate the impact of non-thermal production and non-stand ard cosmologies on the kinetic decoupling process,
we allow then for a slight variant to the underlying particle physics fra mework, still referring to a pure Wino as DM
candidate but assuming now that the reheating temperature can b e reduced to values much closer to the bound from
BBN than in the G2-MSSM. In Fig. 7 one sees a modiﬁcation with respec t to the standard case when the gap between
reheating temperature and standard kinetic decoupling temperat ure is reduced, i.e. for TRH equal to about 20 MeV or
lower: The additional DM source makes the ratio nχ ± /n χ 0 diﬀer from the ratio of thermal distributions. The impact
on Tχ 0 is two folded: the chargino decays tend to populate the system with neutralinos that are on average more
energetic than for a thermal distribution, delaying the onset of th e regime Tχ 0 ∝T 2 and making the transition into
this regime to be less sharp; at the same time, if TRH is so low that reheating increases signiﬁcantly the expansion
rate of the Universe H at the time of kinetic decoupling ( TRH = 8 and 5 MeV in the plot) the departure from Tχ 0 =T
tends to be anticipated. This latter feature was already pointed in [6 1], showing that the non-thermal production
could induce higher kinetic decoupling temperatures compared to th e standard case; in case of Wino DM, however,
the production and decay or charginos in the moduli decay has alway s a larger impact. The kinetic decoupling
temperature is directly related to the minimum mass scale for struct ures in the Universe; we have shown here that
even in case of injection of particles with eﬃcient energy losses on th e thermal bath, the low-temperature non-thermal
production can leave an imprint on structure formation. The develo pment of a precise numerical treatment of the
kinetic decoupling is then a valuable tool to test this class of models.
Finally, in the examples considered here, we ﬁnd a marginal change in t he DM relic density when computing it in
the case when we trace the the number densities of the individual co annihilating species as opposed to the case when a
single equation for the sum of number densities is solved; this is due to the fact that the departure of the ratio nχ ± /n χ 0
from the ratio of thermal distributions takes place only when such q uantity is very small (moreover, in our examples,
the annihilation rates for each of the coannihilation channels are com parable). Considering however models for which
crossing symmetry arguments between annihilation and scattering cross sections are even more severely violated, one
should ﬁnd cases in which the standard thermal assumption is invalid a t higher temperatures, possibly even close to
the chemical freeze out temperature; in those cases there shou ld be a sizable change in the relic abundance as well
and the formalism we developed would be suitable for an accurate com putation of the relic density for such case.
20
 1e-30
 1e-25
 1e-20
 1e-15
 1e-10
 1e-05
 1
 0.001  0.01  0.1
nχ+/-/nχ0
T(GeV)
TR=5 MeV
TR=8 MeV
TR=10 MeV
TR=15 MeV
TR=20 MeV
thermal distribution
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  0.005  0.01  0.015  0.02
Tχ0/T
T[GeV]
TR=5 MeV
TR=8 MeV
TR=10 MeV
TR=15 MeV
TR=20 MeV
Standard decoupling
FIG. 7: Left panel: ratio of the chargino number density over the neutralino number density for several values of TRH . Right
panel: Ratio Tχ 0 /T as function of the temperature of the thermal bath for same va lues of TRH . Plots are obtained for a Wino
with mass equal to 200 GeV, however results depend only on the chargino-neutralino mass splitting which is about 160 MeV
in the scenario under consideration.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Non-thermal dark matter production is a viable alternative to the s tandard paradigm of WIMPs as thermal relics.
It is a well-motivated scenario arising naturally in several particle phy sics frameworks, including SUSY standard model
extensions within supergravity and superstring theories. Moreov er, an epoch of entropy injection at an intermediate
phase between the reheating at the end of inﬂation and the onset o f BBN dilutes dangerous long-lived relics, such
as gravitinos. We have reviewed how to introduce a system of diﬀere ntial equations to treat a generic case of non-
thermal dark matter generation and implemented an eﬃcient and ac curate numerical scheme for the computation;
such scheme has been interfaced to DarkSUSY numerical package and will be released together with an upcoming
version of the code. The interest in this scenario has been recently boosted by the fact that, generically, it favors
dark matter candidates with pair annihilation cross sections larger t han in the thermal WIMP framework, possibly
suggesting a connection with the very large annihilation rates which w ould be needed to explain with a dark matter
induced component recently detected anomalies in cosmic-ray lepto n ﬂuxes, such as the rise in the positron fraction
measured by the PAMELA detector; we have considered, within a to y model, what range of reheating temperatures
would follow from such identiﬁcation. Focussing on SUSY models, we ha ve discussed the impact of this non-standard
cosmology in selecting the preferred mass scale for the lightest SUS Y particle as dark matter candidate, an issue with
a direct impact, e.g., on the interpretation of new physics eventually discovered at accelerators including the LHC.
In the second part of the paper we have concentrated on a more p redictive model, the G2-MSSM, and questioned in
further details the underlying assumptions in the standard solution of the Boltzmann equation for the dark matter
component; in particular, we discussed how to verify whether kinet ic equilibrium holds along the whole phase of dark
matter generation, as well as the validity of the factorization usua lly implemented to rewrite a system of coupled
Boltzmann equation for each number density of a set coannihilating p articles as a single equation for the sum of all
the number densities. As a byproduct we developed here a formalism to compute the kinetic decoupling temperature
for a system of coannihilating species, which can be applied also to oth er particle physics frameworks, also in case
standard thermal relics within a standard cosmology.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bobby Acharya for discussions on the G2-MSSM , Yann Mambrini, Umberto De Sanctis
and Marco Nardecchia comments and suggestions, and Sfefano Pr ofumo for providing us ﬁts to the Pamela and Fermi
lepton excess reproduced in Fig. 3. We also would like to thank the Galile o Galilei Institute for Theoretical Physics
for hospitality during part of the time this work was developed.
21
Appendix A: Evaluation of the collisional operators
In this appendix we will sketch how to compute the operators ˆC as introduced in the system of coupled Boltzmann
equations (40). As a sample term we discuss how to deal with the con tribution to the neutralino collisional operator
coming from inelastic processes of the type:
χ 0(P ) +a(K) ↔χ ± (P ′) +b(K ′) (A1)
where a and b are thermal background particles, with four-momenta, respect ively, K ≡ (k, k) and K ′ ≡ (k′, k′),
while P ≡ (E, p) and P ′ ≡ (E′, p′) denote the four-momenta of neutralino and chargino. Summing ov er all avalaible
thermal bath pairs ( a,b ), such contribution to the collisional operator, normalized to the n eutralino energy E, takes
the form:
ˆCχ 0, is
E [fχ 0,f χ ± ] =
∑
(a,b )
˜gWabgχ ±
∫ d3k
(2π )32k
∫ d3k′
(2π )32k′
∫ d3p′
(2π )32E′
| ¯M |
2
ab
2E (2π )4δ4(P ′ +K ′ −P −K) ·
·
[
fb(k′)(1 −fa(k))fχ ± (p′) −fa(k)(1 −fb(k′))fχ 0 (p)
]
; (A2)
where | ¯M |2
ab is the modulus squared of the scattering amplitude, averaged over the initial spin states and summed over
the ﬁnal spin states. In the following we assume that a andb are massless and described by Fermi-Dirac distribution
functions fa(k,t ) and fb(k′,t ) (to shorten the notation the indices a and b will be dropped). The exchanged four-
momentum is indicated as (ω, q) ≡ (E −E′, p − p′); for kinematical reason, the transferred momentum is constra ined
to be of the order of the heat bath temperature and is small compa red to the initial energy and mass of the neutralino.
The ratio between the mass splitting chargino-neutralino and the ne utralino mass will be also assumed as a small
parameter. Furthermore we have initial conditions such that neut ralinos have nearly thermal distributions, implying
v ∼
√
T/mχ ≪ 1, being the neutralino velocity deﬁned as v ≡ p/E . Under such conditions, we can just take the
non-relativistic limit of the collision term and, in addition, expand it resp ect to the quantities T/m χ and ∆ mχ/m χ .
Using these informations we can eliminate the dipendece on p′ by Taylor expanding fχ ± (p′) as:
fχ ± (p′) ≃fχ ± (p) − q · ∇pfχ ± (p) + 1
2 (q · ∇p)2fχ ± (p) +... (A3)
This allows us to freely integrate over the three-momentum compon ent of the delta function in Eq. (A2). Using now
the relation:
f (k′)(1 −f (k)) = exp
(
−ω
T
)
f (k)(1 −f (k′)) ≃ exp
(
−ω
T
)
f (k) (A4)
with:
exp
(
−ω
T
)
≃ exp
(∆ mχ
T
)(
1 − ∆ mχv2
2T − q · v
T + q2
2mχT + (q · v)(q · v)
2T 2
)
(A5)
we need to compute:
ˆCχ 0, is[fχ 0 ]
E =
∑
(a,b )
˜gWabgχ ±
256π 5EE ′
∫ d3k
k f (k)
∫ d3k′
k′ | ¯M |2
abδ (E′ +k′ −E −k)
[ (
fχ ± (p)e
∆ mχ
T −fχ 0 (p)
)
−
(∆ mχv2
2T fχ ± (p) + q · v
v
dfχ ±
dp + q · v
T fχ ± (p)
)
e
∆ mχ
T
+
( q2
2mχTfχ ± (p) + (q · v)(q · v)
2T 2 fχ ± (p) + (q · v)(q · v)
vT
dfχ ±
dp + (q · v)(q · v)
2v2 ∆ pfχ ±
)
e
∆ mχ
T
+ 1
2
(q2
v − 3(q · v)(q · v)
v3
)dfχ ±
dp e
∆ mχ
T
]
(A6)
which is the analogous to the expression for the expansion of the co llisional operator obtained in [13]. As an example
we sketch the calculus of the ﬁrst term in the square bracket. The invariant amplitude takes the form:
| ¯M |
2
ab = 64G2
F ((PK )(P ′K ′) + (PK ′)(P ′K) − (mχ + ∆ mχ )mχKK ′) (A7)
22
At the leading order in T/m χ and ∆ mχ/m χ we can write:
∫ d3k
k f (k)
∫ d3k′
k′ | ¯M |2
abδ (E′ +k′ −E −k) =
∫ d3k
k f (k)
∫ d3k′
k′ δ(ω +
√
1 −v2∆ mχ − v · q) ·
·
[(
2(k − v · k)(k′ − v · k′) + 1
2 (ω 2 −q2)(1 −v2)
)
+
√
1 −v2
(
−k′ k · q
mχ
−k k′ · q
mχ
+ 2v · k v · k′ v · q
mχ
+
−kv · k′ ∆ mχ
mχ
−k′v · k ∆ mχ
mχ
)
+ 1
2
(
ω 2 −q2)(
−v2 ∆ mχ
mχ
+ (1 − 3
2v2) (v · q)
mχ
)]
(A8)
The ﬁrst step of the integration is an average over the directions o fv. It can be done by use of the following results:
∫ dΩ
4πδ(W − v · q) = 1
2vqθ(v2q2 −W 2) (A9)
∫ dΩ
4πδ(W − v · q)vi = 1
2vqθ(v2q2 −W 2)W
q2qi
∫ dΩ
4πδ(W − v · q)vivj = 1
2vqθ(v2q2 −W 2)
(W 2 −v2q2
2q2 δij + 3W 2 −v2q2
2q4 qiqj
)
∫ dΩ
4πδ(W − v · q)vivjvk = 1
2vqθ(v2q2 −W 2)
(v2q2W −W 3
2q4
(
qiδjk +qjδik +qkδij)
+ 5W 3 − 3v2q2W
2q6 qiqjqk
)
where we deﬁned W ≡ ω +
√
1 −v2∆ mχ . The further 3 integrals in Eq. (A8) are most easily performed in in th e
variables ω , q and k. Actually the last step, the integral in the variable k needs to be performed numerically; an
analitic expression, which traces rather accurately the numerical result, can be obtained by replacing the Fermi-
Dirac distribution f (k) with the exponential scaling exp ( −k/T ). At the ﬁrst order in T/m χ and ∆ mχ/m χ , also
remembering that, under our assumptions, p2/m 2
χ ≃T/m χ this gives:
∫ d3k
k f (k)
∫ d3k′
k′ | ¯M |2
abδ (E′ +k′ −E −k) =
[
4T 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)(
1 + ∆ mχ
mχ
)
+
−2∆ m2
χT 2 (∆ mχ + 2T ) p
mχ
+ 2
3T
(
∆ m4
χ + 3∆ m3
χT + 32∆ m2
χT 2 + 114∆ mχT 3 + 144T 4)p2
m2
χ
]
e
∆ mχ
T . (A10)
After computing all integrals, the inelastic scattering contribution s to the neutralino and chargino collision terms are
then found to be:
ˆCχ 0, is
[
fχ 0,f χ ±
]
E =
∑ 2G2
F˜gWabgχ ±
π 3
{[
4T 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)(
1 + ∆ mχ
mχ
)
−2∆ m2
χT 2 (∆ mχ + 2T ) p
mχ
+ 2
3T
(
∆ m4
χ + 3∆ m3
χT + 32∆ m2
χT 2 + 114∆ mχT 3 + 144T 4)p2
m2
χ
] (
fχ ± −fχ 0e−
∆ mχ
T
)
− 8
3 ∆ mχT 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)( p2
Tm 2
χ
fχ ± + p · ∇pfχ ±
mχ
)
+ 2
3T 3(
∆ m4
χ + 10∆ m3
χT + 60∆ m2
χT 2 + 240∆ mχT 3 + 480T 4)(
∆ pfχ ± + p · ∇pfχ ±
mχT + 3
mχTfχ ±
)
−2T 2∆ mχ
(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)p2
m2
χ
fχ ±
}
(A11)
23
ˆCχ ± , is
[
fχ 0,f χ ±
]
E =
∑ 2G2
F˜gWabgχ 0
π 3
{[
4T 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)(
1 − ∆ mχ
mχ
)
−2∆ m2
χT 2 (∆ mχ + 2T ) p
mχ
+ 2
3T
(
∆ m4
χ − 4∆ m3
χT − 10∆ m2
χT 2 + 30∆ mχT 3 + 144T 4)p2
m2
χ
] (
fχ 0e−
∆ mχ
T −fχ ±
)
+ 8
3 ∆ mχT 3(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)( p2
Tm 2
χ
fχ 0 + p · ∇pfχ 0
mχ
)
e−
∆ mχ
T
+ 2
3T 3(
∆ m4
χ + 10∆ m3
χT + 60∆ m2
χT 2 + 240∆ mχT 3 + 480T 4)(
∆ pfχ 0 + p · ∇pfχ 0
mχT + 3
mχTfχ 0
)
e−
∆ mχ
T
+2T 2∆ mχ
(
∆ m2
χ + 6∆ mχT + 12T 2)p2
m2
χ
fχ 0e−
∆ mχ
T
}
(A12)
The ordering of the terms is such that, when integrated over the m omentum p of the neutralino (ﬁrst equation) or
the chargino (second equation), the terms on the third and forth row of the two expressions cancel out while, for
what regards the others, it can be seen that once summing the two equations one obtains a term proportional to(
p2
m2
χ
− 3
)(
fχ 0e−
∆ mχ
T −fχ ±
)
which cancels out too. The Boltzmann equation in (42) are then obta ined after the
momentum integration p and using the fact that T/m χ, ∆ mχ/m χ ≪ 1 which allows to keep just the 0 th order terms
in both (A11) and (A12).
The equation for the neutralino temperature can be obtained from the second moment of the Boltzmann equation
in phase space:
∫ d3p
(2π )3 gχ 0p2 (∂t −Hp · ∇p)fχ 0(p) =
∫ d3p
(2π )3 gχ 0
p2
E
ˆCχ 0 [fχ 0 ] (A13)
The left hand side can be rewritten as:
3nχ 0
dTN
dt + 15HTχ 0nχ 0 + 3Tχ 0
dnχ 0
dt (A14)
For what regards the right-hand side, we have that the contribut ion from annihilations, can be computed using the
S-wave approximation. In this case in fact we can assume that the d ipendence of the pair annihilation cross section
on the momentum can be neglected and use the same factorization im plemented when assuming kinetic equilibrium,
i.e. :
∫ d3p1
(2π )3
d3p2
(2π )3g1g2 (σv ) (f1f2 −feq
1 feq
2 ) = ⟨σv ⟩(n1n2 −n1,eqn2,eq ) (A15)
with
⟨σv ⟩ =
∫
d3p1d3p2(σv )f1f2∫
d3p1d3p2f1f2
. (A16)
taking second moments of the distribution functions, one gets a th e term:
3Mχ 0Tχ 0
(
⟨σv ⟩χ 0χ 0
(
n2
χ 0 −n2
χ 0, eq
)
+ ⟨σv ⟩χ 0χ ±
(
nχ 0nχ ± −nχ 0, eqnχ ± , eq
))
(A17)
which cancels out against the term on the left hand-side proportion al to dnχ 0/dt .
[1] Particle dark matter , ed. by G. Bertone, Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[2] D. J. H. Chung, E. W. Kolb and A. Riotto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 4048 [arXiv:hep-ph/9805473].
[3] W. Hu, R. Barkana and A. Gruzinov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 1158 [arXiv:astro-ph/0003365].
[4] A. Birkedal, A. Noble, M. Perelstein and A. Spray, Phys. R ev. D 74 (2006) 035002 [arXiv:hep-ph/0603077].
[5] T. Moroi and L. Randall, Nucl. Phys. B 570 (2000) 455 [arXiv:hep-ph/9906527].
[6] B. S. Acharya, G. Kane, S. Watson and P. Kumar, Phys. Rev. D 80 (2009) 083529 [arXiv:0908.2430 [astro-ph.CO]].
[7] O. Adriani et al. [PAMELA Collaboration], Nature 458 (2009) 607 [arXiv:0810.4995 [astro-ph]].
[8] P. Gondolo, J. Edsjo, P. Ullio, L. Bergstrom, M. Schelke a nd E. A. Baltz, JCAP 0407 (2004) 008 [arXiv:astro-ph/0406204].
24
[9] N. Arkani-Hamed and S. Dimopoulos, JHEP 0506 (2005) 073 [arXiv:hep-th/0405159].
[10] G. F. Giudice and A. Romanino, Nucl. Phys. B 699 (2004) 65 [arXiv:hep-ph/0406088].
[11] B. S. Acharya, K. Bobkov, G. L. Kane, P. Kumar and J. Shao, Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 126010 [arXiv:hep-th/0701034].
[12] S. Profumo, K. Sigurdson and M. Kamionkowski, Phys. Rev . Lett. 97 (2006) 031301 [arXiv:astro-ph/0603373].
[13] T. Bringmann and S. Hofmann, JCAP 0407 (2007) 016 [arXiv:hep-ph/0612238].
[14] G. D. Coughlan, W. Fischler, E. W. Kolb, S. Raby and G. G. R oss, Phys. Lett. B 131 (1983) 59.
[15] M. Dine, W. Fischler and D. Nemeschansky, Phys. Lett. B 136, 169 (1984);
[16] J. R. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos and M. Quiros, Phys. Lett. B 174 (1986) 176.
[17] M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and N. Sugiyama, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 023506 [arXiv:astro-ph/0002127].
[18] M. Dine, L. Randall and S. D. Thomas, Nucl. Phys. B 458 (1996) 291 [arXiv:hep-ph/9507453].
[19] B. S. Acharya, K. Bobkov, G. L. Kane, J. Shao and P. Kumar, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 065038 [arXiv:0801.0478 [hep-ph]].
[20] G. F. Giudice, E. W. Kolb and A. Riotto, Phys. Rev. D 64 (2001) 023508 [arXiv:hep-ph/0005123].
[21] K. Griest and D. Seckel, Phys. Rev. D 43 (1991) 3191.
[22] J. Edsjo and P. Gondolo, Phys. Rev. D 56 (1997) 1879 [arXiv:hep-ph/9704361].
[23] G. B. Gelmini and P. Gondolo, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 023510 [arXiv:hep-ph/0602230].
[24] G. B. Gelmini, P. Gondolo, A. Soldatenko and C. E. Yaguna , Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 015010 [arXiv:hep-ph/0610379].
[25] B. S. Acharya, P. Kumar, K. Bobkov, G. Kane, J. Shao and S. Watson, JHEP 0806 (2008) 064 [arXiv:0804.0863 [hep-ph]].
[26] C. Cheung, G. Elor, L. J. Hall and P. Kumar, arXiv:1010.0 022 [hep-ph].
[27] E. Komatsu et al. , arXiv:1001.4538 [astro-ph.CO].
[28] D. Grasso et al. [FERMI-LAT Collaboration], Astropart. Phys. 32 (2009) 140 [arXiv:0905.0636 [astro-ph.HE]].
[29] S. Galli, F. Iocco, G. Bertone and A. Melchiorri, Phys. R ev. D 80 (2009) 023505 [arXiv:0905.0003 [astro-ph.CO]].
[30] F. Iocco, AIP Conf. Proc. 1241 (2010) 379 [arXiv:0912.1630 [astro-ph.CO]].
[31] S. Nakamura and M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Lett. B 638 (2006) 389 [arXiv:hep-ph/0602081].
[32] K. Kohri, M. Yamaguchi and J. Yokoyama, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 043522 [arXiv:hep-ph/0403043].
[33] M. Dine, R. Kitano, A. Morisse and Y. Shirman, Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 123518 [arXiv:hep-ph/0604140].
[34] M. Endo, K. Hamaguchi and F. Takahashi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 211301 [arXiv:hep-ph/0602061].
[35] T. Moroi, M. Yamaguchi and T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 342 (1995) 105 [arXiv:hep-ph/9409367].
[36] D. H. Lyth and E. D. Stewart, Phys. Rev. D 53 (1996) 1784 [arXiv:hep-ph/9510204].
[37] T. Asaka, J. Hashiba, M. Kawasaki and T. Yanagida, Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 083509 [arXiv:hep-ph/9711501].
[38] B. S. Acharya, G. Kane and E. Kuﬂik, arXiv:1006.3272 [he p-ph].
[39] A. Hryczuk, R. Iengo and P. Ullio, arXiv:1010.2172 [hep -ph].
[40] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G. F. Giudice and A. Rom anino, Nucl. Phys. B 709 (2005) 3 [arXiv:hep-ph/0409232].
[41] I. Antoniadis and S. Dimopoulos, Nucl. Phys. B 715 (2005) 120 [arXiv:hep-th/0411032].
[42] B. Kors and P. Nath, Nucl. Phys. B 711 (2005) 112 [arXiv:hep-th/0411201].
[43] J. Edsjo, M. Schelke, P. Ullio and P. Gondolo, JCAP 0304 (2003) 001 [arXiv:hep-ph/0301106].
[44] P. Salati, Phys. Lett. B 571 (2003) 121 [arXiv:astro-ph/0207396].
[45] S. Profumo and P. Ullio, JCAP 0311, 006 (2003) [arXiv:hep-ph/0309220].
[46] R. Catena, N. Fornengo, A. Masiero, M. Pietroni and F. Ro sati, Phys. Rev. D 70, 063519 (2004) [arXiv:astro-ph/0403614].
[47] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], arXiv:1101.1628 [hep-ex].
[48] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], arXiv:1103.6214 [hep-ex].
[49] D. M. Pierce, J. A. Bagger, K. T. Matchev and R. j. Zhang, N ucl. Phys. B 491 (1997) 3 [arXiv:hep-ph/9606211].
[50] J. L. Feng, T. Moroi, L. Randall, M. Strassler and S. f. Su , Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 1731 [arXiv:hep-ph/9904250].
[51] B. S. Acharya, P. Grajek, G. L. Kane, E. Kuﬂik, K. Suruliz and L. T. Wang, arXiv:0901.3367 [hep-ph].
[52] D. Feldman, G. Kane, R. Lu and B. D. Nelson, Phys. Lett. B 687 (2010) 363 [arXiv:1002.2430 [hep-ph]].
[53] C. H. Chen, M. Drees and J. F. Gunion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 2002 [arXiv:hep-ph/9512230].
[54] C. H. Chen, M. Drees and J. F. Gunion, Phys. Rev. D 55 (1997) 330 [Erratum-ibid. D 60 (1999) 039901]
[arXiv:hep-ph/9607421].
[55] T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna and P. Z. Skands, JHEP 0605 (2006) 026 [arXiv:hep-ph/0603175].
[56] J. Hisano, K. Kohri and M. M. Nojiri, Phys. Lett. B 505 (2001) 169 [arXiv:hep-ph/0011216].
[57] G. Gelmini and C. E. Yaguna, Phys. Lett. B 643 (2006) 241 [arXiv:hep-ph/0607012].
[58] E. Braaten and M. H. Thoma, Phys. Rev. D 44 (1991) 1298.
[59] M. H. Reno and D. Seckel, Phys. Rev. D 37 (1988) 3441.
[60] T. Bringmann, New J. Phys. 11 (2009) 105027 [arXiv:0903.0189 [astro-ph.CO]].
[61] G. B. Gelmini and P. Gondolo, JCAP 0810 (2008) 002 [arXiv:0803.2349 [astro-ph]].