VOLUME 53, NUMBER 20 PHYSICAL REVIE%' LETTERS 12 NOVEMBER 1984
Metallic Phase with Long-Range Orientational Order and No
Translational Symmetry
D. Shechtman and I. Blech
Department ofMaterials Engineering, Israel Institute of Technology T-echnion, 3200 Haifa, Israel
and
D. Gratias
Centre d'Etudes de Chimie Metallurgique, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiftque, F 94400-Vi try, France
and
J. W. Cahn
Center for Materials Science, National Bureau ofStandards, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20760
(Received 9 October 1984)
We have observed a metallic solid (Al —14-at. /o-Mn) with long-range orientationai order,
but with icosahedral point group symmetry, which is inconsistent with lattice translations. Its
diffraction spots are as sharp as those of crystals but cannot be indexed to any Bravais lattice.
The solid is metastable and forms from the melt by a first-order transition.
PACS numbers: 61.50.Em, 61.55.Hg, 64.70.Ew
We report herein the existence of a metallic solid
which diffracts electrons like a single crystal but has
point group symmetery rn35 (icosahedral) which is
inconsistent with lattice translations. If the speci-
men is rotated through the angles of this point
group (Fig. 1), selected-area electron diffraction
patterns clearly display the six fivefold, ten three-
fold, and fifteen twofold axes characteristic' of
icosahedral symmetry (Fig. 2). Grains up to 2 p, m
in size with this structure form in rapidly cooled al-
loys of Al with 10—14 at. '/0 Mn, Fe, or Cr. We will
refer to the phase as the icosahedral phase. Micro-
diffraction from many different volume elements of
a grain and dark-field imaging from various diffrac-
tion spots confirm that entire grains have long-
range orientational order. If the orientational order
decays with distance, its correlation length is far
greater than the grain size. We have thus a solid
metallic phase with no translational order and with
with long-range orientational order.
The remarkable sharpness of the diffraction spots
(Fig. 2) indicates a high coherency in the spatial in-
terference, comparable to the one usually encoun-
tered in crystals. The diffraction data are qualita-
tively well fitted by a model consisting of a random
packing of nonoverlapping parallel icosahedra at-
tached by edges. The invariance of the local orien-
tational symmetry from site to site and the finite
number of possible translations between two adja-
cent icosahedra seem to be sufficient for insuring
highly coherent interferences. Icosahedra are a
common packing unit in intermetallic crystals with
the smaller transition element at the center sur-
rounded by twelve larger atoms arranged like the
corners of an icosahedron. The symmetries of the
crystals dictate that the several icosqhedra in a unit
cell have different orientations and allow them to
be distorted, leaving the overall crystal consistent
with the well-known crystallographic point and
space groups. Even though icosahedral symmetry is
of great importance as an approximate site sym-
metry in crystals, it cannot survive the imposition
of lattice translations: Crystals cannot and do not
exhibit the icosahedral point group symmetry.
Elementary crystallography indicates that fivefold
FIG. 1. Stereographic projection of the symmetry ele-
ments of the icosahedral group m35.
1951


VOLUME 53, NUMBER 20 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 12 NOVEMBER 1984
63.43
t»» E
I 'll' *
I
e s:»
31.72 36
79.2 58.29 37.38
:KR
FIG. 2. Selected-area electron diffraction patterns taken from a single grain of the icosahedral phase. Rotations match
those in Fig. 1.
axes are inconsistent with translational order.
Crystals with an apparent fivefold axis do occur as
multiple twins. 5 Icosahedral symmetry could con-
ceivably occur by multiple t~inning, but at least
five twins are required in order to obtain an
icosahedral diffraction set from a conventional crys-
tal. Experiments in the electron microscope and
with x-ray diffraction contradict the twin hypoth-
esis:
(I) A set of dark-field images taken from any re-
flection reveals no twins and in all cases the whole
grain is illuminated.
(2) A convergent-beam diffraction pattern along
the fivefold zone taken from an area 20 nm in di-
arneter at any point of the grain displays all the re-
flections that appear in the selected-area diffraction
pattern. This is also true when the thickness of the
specimen is of the order of 10 nm.
(3) An x-ray diffraction pattern (Cu Ka source)
was taken from a single-phase sample of the materi-
al containing many grains of various orientations.
Had the phase consisted of a multiply twinned crys-
talline structure, it should have been possible to in-
dex the powder pattern regardless of the twins. The
pattern obtained from the icosahedral phase could
1952
not be indexed to any Bravais lattice.
On the basis of these experiments we conclude
that the icosahedral phase does not consist of multi-
ply t~inned regular crystal structures.
The icosahedral phase forms during rapid cooling
of the melt by a nucleation and growth mechanism.
This mechanism is characteristic of a first-order
transition because the two phases coexist along a
moving interface. Each particle nucleates at a
center and grows out from there. The atomic rear-
rangements that result in the orientational order of
the icosahedral phase occur at this interface, and
the two adjoining phases differ in entropy and, for
some alloys, in composition. If the transition were
higher order, ordering would occur everywhere in
the liquid instead of being confined to interfaces.
Our evidence for the first-order character is mor-
phological. We examined alloys with 10—14 at.%
Mn. Samples with 10% to 12% Mn showed many
nodular grains separated from each other by crystal-
line films of fcc Al. The grains were approximately
spherical in shape but were deeply indented with ra-
dial streaks composed of fcc Al crystals. The mor-
phology is similar to a commonly observed one in
rapid solidification in which crystals nucleate at


VOLUME 53, NUMBER 20 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 12 NOVEMBER 1984
many centers and grow until the remaining liquid
solidifies, except that instead of isolated crystals we
have isolated icosahedral grains embedded in solidi-
fied Al.
Another aspect of the first-order character of the
transition is that segregation accompanies the
growth of the icosahedral phase. In the 10%- and
12%-Mn samples the growing phase rejects Al into
the liquid. The indentations in the nodules are
characteristic of the cellular morphology caused by
an instability in the diffusion layer surrounding the
solid resulting from segregation during growth. In
the 14%-Mn alloys the icosahedral grains occupy al-
most all of the volume of the specimen. Only small
amounts of fcc A1 occur along some grain boun-
daries where the grains grew to impingement.
Some radial streaking still points to the nucleation
centers from which the grains grew. We conclude
that little segregation occurs in this alloy and that
the icosahedral phase contains 14'/o Mn.
The obvious cellular morphology indicates that
the growth of the icosahedral phase is slow enough
to permit diffusional segregation on the scale of 1
p, m. With the diffusion coefficient in the liqud of
order 10 m /s this indicates interface velocities of
order 10 m/s and formation times of 10 s.
This is 2 to 3 orders of magnitude slower than the
fastest known crystallization velocities of a metallic
liquid during rapid cooling, but it is a typical upper
limit of velocity of crystallization with composition
changes. 7 There is thus plenty of time for atomic
rearrangements to occur at the interface between
the melt and the icosahedral phase.
The icosahedral phase in rapidly solidified Al-Mn
alloys is remarkably resistant to crystallization. Pro-
longed heating of 6 h at 300 C and 1 h at 350'C
produced no detectable crystallization, but 1 h at
400'C caused crystallization to the stable A16Mn
phase. We conclude that the icosahedral phase is a
truly metastable phase which nucleates and grows
for a range of cooling rates which are slow enough
to permit its formation but rapid enough to prevent
crystallization, either from the melt or from the
icosahedral phase after its formation.
The icosahedral phase has symmetries intermedi-
ate between those of a crystal and a liquid. It
differs from other intermediate phases in that it is
both solid, like a metallic glass, and that it has
long-range orientational order. Many intermediate
phases do have orientational order, but usually it is
only local, and the transition to such phases is con-
tinuous. s 9 The possibility of an icosahedral phase
with long range order was inferred from a computer
simulation, ' " and a first-order liquid-to-icosa-
hedral phase transition has been predicted from a
mean-field theory. "'
We thank F. S. Biancaniello for spinning the al-
loys, C. R. Hubbard for x-ray experiments, and
B. Burton for a critical review of the manuscript.
This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency and the National Science
Foundation. This work was performed while one of
us {D.S.) was a guest worker at the National Bureau
of Standards and while another of us (D.G.) was at
the Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of
California at Santa Barbara.
tInternational Tables for Crystallography (Reidel, Hig-
ham, Mass. , 1983), Vol. A, p. 179.
20. Shechtman and I. Blech, to be published.
3F. C. Frank and J. S. Kasper, Acta Crystallogr. 11, 184
(1958), and 12, 483 (1959).
4M. J. Buerger, Elementary Crystallography (MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1978).
sG. Friedel, Lecon de Crystallographie (Masson, Paris,
1921).
6W. W. Mullins and R. F. Sekerka, J. Appl. Phys. 35,
444 (1963).
W. J. Boettinger, F. S. Biancaniello, G. Kalonji, and
J. W. Cahn, in Rapid Solidification Processing Il, edited by
R. Mehrabian et al. (Claitors, Baton Rouge, 1980), p. 50.
SD. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B 2&, 5515 (1983).
sJ. Sadoc, J. Phys. (Paris), Colloq. 41, C8-326 (1980).
&OP. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson and M. Rouchetti,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1297 (1981).
»P. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson and M. Rouchetti,
Phys. Rev. B 28, 784 (1983).
t2A. D. J. Haymet, Phys. Rev. B 27, 1725 (1983).
1953
