--- page 1 ---
Prepared for submission to JCAP
NORDITA 2021-064
Axion-photon conversion in strongly
magnetised plasmas
Alexander J. Millar, a,b Sebastian Baum,c Matthew Lawson,a,b M.C.
David Marsha
aThe Oskar Klein Centre for Cosmoparticle Physics, Department of Physics, Stockholm
University, AlbaNova, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden
bNordita, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, Hannes Alfv´ ens
v¨ ag 12, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
cStanford Institute for Theoretical Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
E-mail: alexander.millar@fysik.su.se, sbaum@stanford.edu,
matthew.lawson@fysik.su.se, david.marsh@fysik.su.se
Abstract. Axion dark matter can resonantly convert to photons in the magnetosphere of
neutron stars, possibly giving rise to radio signals observable on Earth. This method for
the indirect detection of axion dark matter has recently received signiﬁcant attention in the
literature. The calculation of the radio signal is complicated by a number of eﬀects; most
importantly, the gravitational infall of the axions onto the neutron star accelerates them
to semi-relativistic speed, and the neutron star magnetosphere is highly anisotropic. Both
of these factors complicate the calculation of the conversion of axions to photons. In this
work, we present the ﬁrst fully three-dimensional calculation of the axion-photon conversion
in highly magnetised anisotropic media. Depending on the axion trajectory, this calculation
leads to orders-of-magnitude diﬀerences in the conversion compared to the simpliﬁed one-
dimensional calculation used so far in the literature, altering the directionality of the produced
photons. Our results will have important implications for the radio signal one would observe
in a telescope.
arXiv:2107.07399v3  [hep-ph]  9 Nov 2021

--- page 2 ---
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Axion-photon conversion in aniostropic plasmas 3
3 Probability of conversion 9
4 Phase space distribution 11
5 Comparison with 1D calculations in the Goldreich-Julian Model 12
5.1 The Goldreich-Julian Model 13
5.2 Directionality of emitted photons 14
5.3 Integrated power 15
6 Conclusions 18
A Longitudinal component 19
B Stationary phase approximation 20
C Regulating divergences 22
1 Introduction
Axions comprise a class of hypothetical particles that were ﬁrst conceived as a consequence
of the ‘Peccei-Quinn’ solution to the strong CP-problem in particle physics [1–4]. Axions are
naturally produced in the early universe, and provide an increasingly popular candidate for
explaining dark matter [5–12]. 1 Testing the axion dark matter hypothesis is a central goal
of contemporary fundamental physics.
Any search for axion dark matter relies on the transfer of energy from the astrophysical
axions into Standard Model particles. One promising route to achieve this is through the
axion-photon coupling, which receives ‘universal’ contributions from axion-pion mixing, thus
providing a rather robust and model-independent target. Most experimental and observa-
tional ideas to search for axion dark matter are based on the axion-photon coupling.
Astronomical searches for axion dark matter via the axion-photon coupling seek to
leverage strong astrophysical magnetic ﬁelds to eﬀectively transfer energy from the axion
ﬁeld into photons (or vice versa). Particularly interesting are environments where plasma
eﬀects generate an eﬀective mass for the photon that allows the axion and photon dispersion
relations to intersect. In such a degenerate situation, dark matter axions can resonantly
convert into photons, enhancing the photon signal and possibly leading to signals detectable
with telescopes on Earth.
1For the purposes of this work, we indiscriminately refer to both QCD axions and axion-like particles
(ALPs) when we write ‘axion’. For our numerical results, we will assume a relation between the axion mass
and the axion-photon coupling as appropriate for a QCD axion, but in all of our equations we keep the axion
mass and its couplings as independent parameters allowing to apply our results to both QCD axions and
ALPs.
– 1 –

--- page 3 ---
Neutron stars are ideal astrophysical environments for converting dark matter axions
into photons [13, 14]: Neutron stars can host extremely strong magnetic ﬁelds (up to ∼
1015 G), and are surrounded by a plasma that admits resonant axion-photon conversion near
the surface of the star. Due to the plasma densities in the neutron star magnetospheres,
resonant conversion is most promising for axions in the neV–meV mass range, including the
perhaps best motivatedµeV–meV mass range for QCD axion dark matter. The corresponding
photon signal would be a narrow spectral line in the MHz–THz (radio) frequency range,
with its frequency set by the axion mass. Radio telescopes combine excellent spatial and
frequency resolution with sensitivity to very weak radio signals. For these reasons, axion-
photon conversion in neutron star magnetospheres has recently become a very active topic of
research, and signiﬁcant eﬀort has been devoted to characterising the possible signal [15–24],
and searching for it in radio data [25–28].
In order to calculate the radio signal from the conversion of dark matter axions into
photons in the magnetosphere of neutron stars, one must model a number of eﬀects. First, the
phase space of the axion dark matter evolves under the gravitational inﬂuence of the neutron
star. Second, in the region where the eﬀective photon mass approximately matches the axion
mass, one needs to solve the system of equations describing the axion-electrodynamics to
compute axion-photon conversion. Finally, one must propagate the electromagnetic modes
excited by the axion through the inhomogeneous magnetosphere to the observer far away from
the neutron star. Regarding the ﬁrst eﬀect, previous work has either assumed that axions are
on purely radial orbits (in the frame on the neutron star) as they cross the zone of resonant
conversion, or that the axion velocity distribution is isotropic at the conversion zone; neither
of these assumptions is correct. We discuss how to compute the appropriate axion phase-
space density under the inﬂuence of the gravitational ﬁeld of the neutron star for a neutron
star with speed relative to the rest frame of the dark matter distribution comparable to the
dark matter velocity dispersion, as one expects for a realistic neutron star. The main work in
this paper is to present a calculation of the resonant axion-photon conversion in the neutron
star magnetosphere (i.e., the second eﬀect above) which fully accounts for the anisotropic
plasma density in the magnetosphere. This fully three-dimensional calculation improves
over the simpliﬁed one-dimensional calculation previously used in the literature, and we will
discuss it in more detail in the following paragraph. We do not perform any calculation of
the third eﬀect, the propagation of the photons from the conversion zone to the observer at
inﬁnity, in this work. This eﬀect can be dealt with by ‘ray-tracing’ calculations, following the
electromagnetic modes through the anisotropic plasma of the neutron star magnetosphere,
see Refs. [20, 23, 24].
Let us now discuss the core of this work, the calculation of resonant axion-photon con-
version in highly magnetised anisotropic plasmas, e.g., in the magnetosphere of a neutron
star. A central assumption of essentially all previous studies of this problem is the use of an
eﬀectively one-dimensional formalism for calculating the conversion rate of axions into pho-
tons, based on the well known calculation for transverse modes [29]. 2 The one-dimensional,
linearised system can be expressed as a ‘Schr¨ odinger-like’ equation, with time replaced by
the spatial coordinate along the direction of propagation. The ‘conversion probability’ of ax-
ions into photons calculated from this equation can then be interpreted as the ﬂux transfer:
2An interesting partial exception is Ref. [19], which acknowledged the limitations of the one-dimensional
formalism and developed several results for a two-dimensional setting, but left the full three-dimensional
problem for further studies. Similarly, in Ref. [23] the change of media in other directions was taken as a
limiting factor in the conversion probability without solving the 3D equations.
– 2 –

--- page 4 ---
i.e. the ratio of energy densities of the transverse mode of the electric ﬁeld and the axion.
However, in this paper we show that the intuition built around transverse modes breaks down
in highly aniosotropic media, such as the magnetosphere of a neutron star. The anisotropy
causes a strong mixing between diﬀerent photon polarisations, so that propagating states are
no longer purely transverse or longitudinal. 3 It follows from this that the naive ‘conversion
probability’ no longer describes the physically interesting ﬂux transfer.
We revisit the classical problem of axion-photon mixing in anisotropic media, including
relativistic plasma eﬀects, and derive a new ‘Schr¨ odinger-like’ equation governing the evo-
lution of the Langmuir-O (LO) mode, which is the propagating mode in the plasma that
is excited by axion-photon conversion. Our calculation has several important implications.
First, the anisotropy of the neutron star magnetosphere results in the photon mode evolving
along a diﬀerent direction than that given by its momentum. This invalidates the one-
dimensional analysis used in previous work, and can lead to orders-of-magnitude change in
the axion-photon mixing for certain axion trajectories. Second, the ‘Schr¨ odinger-like equa-
tion’ now includes damping/growth terms, that can invalidate the unitary evolution of the
system. Third, the energy stored in the LO modes is not given by the transverse portion of
the ﬁeld only, and the full Hamiltonian must be used to calculate the ﬂux transfer. Con-
sequently, the ﬂux transfer is no longer identical to the ‘conversion probability’ calculated
from the Schr¨ odinger-like equation, so that a naive over-reliance on the quantum mechanical
analogue would lead to incorrect conclusions about axion-photon mixing.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. We begin by discussing axion-
photon conversion in an anistropic plasma and a magnetic ﬁeld in section 2, and derive
the new form of the ‘Schr¨ odinger-like’ equation. In section 3, we ﬁnd the relation between
the ‘axion-photon conversion probability’ and the ﬂux transfer. In section 4 we discuss the
calculation of the axion phase space in the neutron star magnetosphere for an neutron star
moving with arbitrary speed relative to the rest frame of the dark matter distribution. In
section 5 we present numerical results for our conversion calculation and compare them to
the results one would obtain in the simpler one-dimensional calculation. As we will see, the
conversion probability can diﬀer by orders of magnitude between our calculation that fully
accounts for the anisotropy of the plasma and the simpliﬁed one-dimensional calculation. We
conclude in section 6. Further technical details of our calculation of axion-photon conversion
can be found in the appendices.
2 Axion-photon conversion in aniostropic plasmas
We consider dark matter axions that are gravitationally accelerated towards a neutron star
and may convert to photons in its magnetosphere. Due to the large gravitational ﬁeld of
the neutron star, the axions will generally be mildly relativistic, a particularly complicated
regime from the point of view of calculating the axion-photon conversion. In such a regime,
medium eﬀects cannot be ignored, however the axion also has signiﬁcant momentum and so
the conversion has a strong directional dependence. Our calculation will focus on the regime
where the WKB approximation can be applied, i.e. where the axion has momentum larger
than the ﬁrst derivatives of the E-ﬁelds. As long as this condition holds, our calculation
will apply regardless of the relativistic (or not) nature of the axion. Axion-photon mixing is
maximised in regions satisfying the resonance condition, which is approximately given when
3While this has been noted in [23], the implications for how one calculates axion-photon conversion have
not yet been explored.
– 3 –

--- page 5 ---
the plasma frequency is equal to the axion mass ωp≃ ma. Since this condition is typically
fulﬁlled only in small regions, we solve the mixing problem in the ﬂat-space approximation,
neglecting gravity. This approximation is expected to be accurate for most (but not all)
possible trajectories of infalling axions.
The classical theory of axions coupled to electromagnetism is governed by the Klein-
Gordon equation and Maxwell’s equations, modiﬁed to include the axion-photon mixing.
Following common practice (see, for example, Refs. [14, 30, 31]) we can linearise the equa-
tions of motion in a background with the magnetic ﬁeld BNS, and restrict (without loss of
generality) to electromagnetic modes that oscillate with frequency ω:
ω2a +∇2a =m2
aa−gaγE· BNS (2.1)
−∇2E +∇(∇· E) =ω2D +ω2gaγaBNS, (2.2)
where we have set the relative permeability to µ = 1. The electric ﬁeld is denoted by E, and
the displacement ﬁeld by D. We would now like to solve these equations for dark matter
axions traversing a neutron star magnetosphere.
We must ﬁrst express the equations (2.1) and (2.2) in a convenient coordinate system
for any given axion. Two basis vectors can be deﬁned respectively by the direction of motion,
and the external magnetic ﬁeld, which generically are linearly independent. We denote the
axion’s direction of motion by ˆ z, so that k = kˆ z. This will also be the initial direction of
any produced photons, though the changing medium will result in the photon momentum
evolving over longer distance scales. We take BNS to lie in the (y,z )-plane at an angle θ(z)
with the positive z-axis. In the following, we assume θ̸={0,π} unless otherwise speciﬁed.
This deﬁnes ˆ y(z) and consequently also ˆ x(z) by ˆ x(z) = ˆ y(z)× ˆ z. We will see that the
conversion generally occurs over a small region, and so we will neglect gravity and assume
that the axion travels along a straight line and d
dzˆ z= 0. It then follows that d
dzˆ x∝ ˆ yand
d
dz ˆ y∝ ˆ x. The expressions for the diﬀerential operators ∇2 and∇(∇· E) in the (ˆ x, ˆ y,ˆ z) basis
are then identical to those in a ﬁxed Cartesian coordinate system. In general, θ varies due
to gravitational bending, the resulting photon refracting in the medium and the fact that
the magnetic ﬁeld itself changes. Again as the region where axion-photon conversion occurs
should be small, we take θ to be almost constant.
The electric displacement ﬁeld for a highly magnetised plasma is given by the constitu-
tive relation [32]
D =ϵijEj =


1 0 0
0 1−
⣨ ω2
p
γ3˜ω2
⟩
sin2θ
⣨ ω2
p
γ3˜ω2
⟩
cosθ sinθ
0
⣨ ω2
p
γ3˜ω2
⟩
cosθ sinθ 1−
⣨ ω2
p
γ3˜ω2
⟩
cos2θ

·


Ex
Ey
Ez

, (2.3)
where ϵij is the dielectric tensor with the plasma frequency ωp. One can see that the
anisotropy of the dielectric tensor mixes Ey andEz, so one is not in general left with purely
transverse of longitudinal propagating states. Here, we have assumed that the particles form-
ing the plasma are moving along the ﬁeld lines with speed v|| in the neutron star frame, and
deﬁne
˜ω =ω−k||v||, γ = 1√
1−v2
||
. (2.4)
We have also deﬁned
⟨...⟩≡
∑
i
∫ ∞
−∞
dp||...Fi
||(p||) (2.5)
– 4 –

--- page 6 ---
where Fi
|| is the distribution function of the species i in the plasma. Note that for an ultra-
relativistic plasma,⟨γ−3⟩≃⟨ γ⟩−1 [33]. In Refs. [14, 19, 20], the electrons in the plasma were
treated as non-relativistic, i.e. γ = 1. While we allow for relativistic electrons, we note that
infalling axions will be at most mildly relativistic. For mildly relativistic axions, one would
expect ˜ω≃ω, however, in principle the distinction between ˜ω and ω can lead to diﬀerences
for high momenta axions traveling through relativistic plasmas. For dark matter falling into
a neutron star, this will simply change the eﬀective ωp by a factor of ˜ω/ω which is trivial
compared to the signiﬁcant modelling uncertainties of neutron stars (discussed in section
5.1).
When the axions are decoupled from the system, one can solve for the propagating
electromagnetic states of the medium. Note that such states only apply locally: as one
moves through the medium, the eigenstates deform adiabatically. As noted in [23], the
relevant electromagnetic mode (i.e. the mode excited by axion-photon conversions) is the
so-called Langmuir-O (LO) mode, whose polarization has both longitudinal and transverse
components. As we discuss in Appendix A, in principle, the axion can also excite purely
longitudinal modes. However, such purely longitudinal modes are non-propagating and are
hence irrelevant for the electromagnetic signal observed far from the neutron star. The LO
mode, on the other hand, evolves adiabatically into a purely transverse vacuum mode as
it exits the neutron star atmosphere [33]. The speciﬁc form of the LO mode is found in
Appendix A to be
ˆELO = −1√
1 +
¯ω4p cos2θ sin2θ
(ω2−¯ω2p cos2θ)2
(
ˆ y− ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θˆ z
)
, (2.6)
where we have deﬁned an eﬀective relativistic plasma frequency ¯ω2
p =ω2⟨ω2
pγ−3/˜ω2⟩. In the
non-relativistic limit, as has been mostly considered in the literature, there is no distinction
between ¯ωp andωp. Our task is to calculate the conversion of axions into the LO mode. While
the modiﬁcation to the dispersion relation was noted in Ref. [23], the eﬀects of the mixing
of transverse and longitudinal modes on the conversion calculation and the implications for
how one deﬁnes a photon were not explored. As we will see, such eﬀects can change the
conversion probability for a given axion trajectory by orders of magnitude.
We can now write out the x,y,z components of equation (2.2). We will be considering
the case of axion photon mixing in a slowly varying plasma, so we can neglect second order
derivatives that do not involve the z-direction. In addition, Ex does not directly couple to
the axion as, by construction ˆx⊥BNS. While Ex can be generated by derivative terms, it is
suppressed when compared to Ey,z so we can also neglect it. At lowest order this leaves the
following coupled equations:
∂2Ez
∂z∂y ≃ (ω2− ¯ω2
p sin2θ)Ey + ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθEz + ∂2Ey
∂2z −ω2gaγaBNS sinθ, (2.7)
∂2Ey
∂z∂y ≃ (ω2− ¯ω2
p cos2θ)Ez + ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθEy +ω2gaγaBNS cosθ. (2.8)
Previous studies of axion-photon conversion near neutron stars have all neglected the left-
hand side of these equations, featuring mixedy- andz-derivatives.4 Neglecting mixed deriva-
4While it is noted that the full gradient needs to be dealt with in Ref. [19, 23], the conversion was not
calculated including mixing terms. All previous calculations including Ref. [14, 20] similarly neglect the mixed
derivatives.
– 5 –

--- page 7 ---
tives ignores the mixing between Ey and Ez and is equivalent to assuming that Ey only
evolves along z. This does not hold for general trajectories, and is only a good approxi-
mation if θ≃ π/2, i.e., when the axion happens to be traveling perpendicularly to BNS.
To simplify matters, we can eliminate Ez from the equations. This will allow us to solve
directly for the propagating mode, and neglect non-propagating contributions to Ez, which
are discussed in Appendix A. By substituting equation (2.8) into (2.7) and neglecting any
higher order derivatives that follow, we end up with a single partial diﬀerential equation for
Ey and a:
− ∂2Ey
∂2z − 2¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ
∂2Ey
∂z∂y − 2ω2¯ωp sinθ cosθ
(ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ)2
∂¯ωp
∂y
∂Ey
∂z − 2ω2¯ωp sinθ cosθ
(ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ)2
∂¯ωp
∂z
∂Ey
∂y
≃ ω2− ¯ω2
p
1−
¯ω2p
ω2 cos2θ
Ey− ω2 sinθ
1−
¯ω2p
ω2 cos2θ
gaγaBNS. (2.9)
We neglect also the derivatives of the axion driving term, as they will only have a small
impact on the evolution of Ey.
To attempt an analytic solution, we assume that the change in ¯ ωp, and so k, is small
and thus the direction of propagation stays the same. Of course, this is not true in gen-
eral: photon trajectories will bend in a changing medium. Assuming small changes in ¯ ωp, k
necessarily restricts us to solving over some ﬁnite region where the photon path is approxi-
mately constant. The region over which the majority of the generation of an axion-induced
E-ﬁeld occurs is referred to as the conversion zone. While one can estimate the radius of
curvature for the changing direction of the photon, such as was done in Ref. [23], our focus
in this work is not on the propagation of the converted photons. As most of the generation
of the propagating LO mode via the axion should be localised to a smaller region, separat-
ing propagation and conversion allows for an analytic approximation of the ﬁelds generated
by the axion, which could then be propagated numerically via ray tracing code such as in
Refs. [23, 24].
As long as we are treating the medium as slowly varying, we can write the ﬁelds as an
envelope term, denoted by a tilde, multiplying a plane wave,
Ey≡ ˜Ey(y,z )ei(ωt−kz), a ≡ ˜a(z)ei(ωt−kz). (2.10)
To move further, we will take the WKB approximation and assume that k ˜Ey(y,z ) ≫
∂ ˜Ey(y,z )/∂y,∂ ˜Ey(y,z )/∂z ≫ ∂2 ˜Ey(y,z )/∂z2. As we will see, the smaller the derivatives
the longer the length scales over which axions can resonantly convert, leading to higher con-
version probabilities. Thus a breakdown of the WKB approximation, which occurs when
the ﬁrst derivatives of the ¯ ωp vanish, corresponds to a region of enhanced axion-photon
conversion. The WKB approximation allows us to then simplify Eq. (2.9) to
2ik∂ ˜Ey
∂z + 2ik ¯ω2
pξ
ω2 tanθ
∂ ˜Ey
∂y ≃ (m2
a−ξ¯ω2
p−ikD) ˜Ey− ω2ξ
sinθgaγ˜aBNS, (2.11)
where we have used the on-shell relation for the axion, m2
a =ω2−k2, and deﬁned
ξ≡ sin2θ
1−
¯ω2p
ω2 cos2θ
. (2.12)
– 6 –

--- page 8 ---
The damping/growth term D appears as an artifact of assuming that the photon does not
experience any curvature, i.e., that it is well described as only having momentum in the
z-direction, and is given by
D≡ 2ωpξ2
ω2 tanθ sin2θ
∂¯ωp
∂y . (2.13)
The back-reaction on to the axion ﬁeld should be small, so we can treat ˜a as constant.
To progress, we can write a new diﬀerential operator
∂
∂s = ∂
∂z + ¯ω2
pξ
ω2 tanθ
∂
∂y . (2.14)
This operator allows us to ﬁnally write the axion-photon mixing equations as a Schr¨ odinger-
like equation
i∂ ˜Ey
∂s = 1
2k
(
m2
a−ξ¯ω2
p−ikD
) ˜Ey− 1
2k
ω2ξ
sinθgaγ˜aBNS, (2.15)
As∂/∂s is a function of ¯ωp andθ, and in general ¯ωp(s), any integration overs will in principle
be curvilinear. However, if we are only concerned with small regions, we can assume that ¯ωp
is only slowly varying and so s is constant with respect to y,z . Assuming a constant ¯ωp we
can write
ˆ s≃ 1√
1 +
¯ω4p cos2θ sin2θ
(ω2−¯ω2p cos2θ)2
(
¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ ˆ y+ ˆ z
)
. (2.16)
Comparing with Eq. (2.6) we see that ˆ sis actually perpendicular to ˆELO. In other words,
the propagating mode ELO is transverse with respect to the direction it evolves in, rather
than the direction of propagation. While the mode is not transverse, it evolves in a similar
manner to a transverse wave. Note that ∂/∂s is not deﬁned with unit norm for simplicity,
however that means one has to be slightly careful when talking about length scales associated
with s. For non-relativistic axions (¯ωp =ma), we can write down simple expressions
ˆBNS =− sinθ ˆ y+ cosθ ˆ z, (2.17a)
ˆELO≃− sinθ ˆ y+ cosθ ˆ z, (2.17b)
ˆ s≃ cosθ ˆ y+ sinθ ˆ z. (2.17c)
In this limit we can simply show the relationship between BNS, z, ELO and s, depicted in
Fig. 1. We can see in this limit that BNS||ELO: the LO mode couples perfectly to the axion
via E· B. For ultrarelativsitic axions with ω≫ ¯ωp, we see instead ˆE≃− ˆ y, ˆ s≃ ˆ zand
ξ≃ sin2θ giving back the usual mixing of an axion with a transverse photon [29].
Ignoring the overall phase, as shown in Appendix B, Eq. (2.15) can be solved in the
stationary phase approximation to give
˜Ey[s0 +L/2] =ω2
√ π
2k
⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
e
∫s0
0 ds′D/2gaγ˜aBNS, (2.18)
where ¯ω′
p =∂¯ωp/∂s, we have allowed for a small change in θ given by θ′ =∂θ/∂s and s0 is
given by solving for the resonance condition
¯ωp(s)2 = m2
aω2
m2a cos2θ +ω2 sin2θ. (2.19)
– 7 –

--- page 9 ---
Figure 1 . We show the various axes associated with axion-photon conversion in an anisotropic
medium. The axion propagates in the ˆ zdirection, which is at an angle θ from the magnetic ﬁeld
ˆBNS. The magnetic ﬁeld is deﬁned to lie in the ˆ z, ˆ yplane. In the non-relativistic limit, the E-ﬁeld
associated with the propagating LO mode, ˆELO, is given by ˆBNS, i.e., ˆELO is parallel to the B-ﬁeld.
The magnitude of ˆELO evolves along the perpendicular direction, denoted by ˆ s.
One can see how the LO mode extrapolates between longitudinal and transverse behaviour
as one varies θ. If θ =π/2, the dispersion relation is that of a regular transverse mode, with
a resonance given by ¯ωp = ma. If instead θ = 0, then the resonance condition is that for
an axion converting to a longitudinal plasmon with negligible spatial dispersion, ¯ωp =ω, as
for example studied in Ref. [34]. In the non-relativistic limit, ω→ ma, and the resonance
condition simply becomes ¯ωp = ma for any θ. The conversion length can be read oﬀ from
the exponent in the stationary phase approximation (similar to Ref. [19]), giving
L = sinθ
ξ
√ πk⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
≃ sinθ
√
πk
¯ωp|¯ω′p|, (2.20)
where the latter statement holds in the non-relativistic limit. To evaluate the damping term
in Eq. (2.18), we note that by assumption, the equation is only valid in a small region
around the conversion zone where higher order derivatives and the bending of photons can
be neglected. Assuming that ∂¯ωp/∂y =O(∂¯ωp/∂s), one can see that over the conversion
zone (s0±L/2) ∫ s0+L/2
s0−L/2
ds′D =O
( k
m2aL
)
≪ 1, (2.21)
thus, for simplicity, we will neglect this damping in the probability of conversion. We can
also include the longitudinal component of the LO mode, giving
˜Ey[s0 +L/2]≃gaγ˜aBNSω2
√ π
2k
⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
, (2.22)
˜Ez[s0 +L/2]≃gaγ˜aBNSω2 ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ
√ π
2k
⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
, (2.23)
Actually, as discussed in Appendix A, there are two contributions toEz. As we are concerned
with propagating modes that may exit the neutron star, here we only consider the longitudinal
component of the LO mode. There is also a term that directly comes from the axion- Ez
– 8 –

--- page 10 ---
mixing, however, it only persists in the region where the axion mixing is strong, and follows
the phase of the axion, rather than the LO mode. Thus, after a length L, this axion-mixing
term will dephase with the LO mode and not contribute to the E-ﬁelds exiting the neutron
star. If we then take ¯ωp =ω =ma, we get the simple expressions
˜Ey[s0 +L/2]≃gaγ˜aBNS
√
πm3a
2k|¯ω′p|, (2.24)
˜Ez[s0 +L/2]≃gaγ˜aBNS
m2
a cosθ sinθ
k2 +m2a sin2θ
√
πm3a
2k|¯ω′p|. (2.25)
We kept the factor of k2 in the denominator of Ez to avoid an unphysical divergence at
θ→{ 0,π}. Note that the Ez component can actually dominate the E-ﬁeld:
Ez
Ey
= m2
a cosθ sinθ
k2 +m2a sin2θ, (2.26)
which has a maximum at |Ez/Ey|≃ ma/2k for k≪ ma. Even for large k, Ey and Ez are
generically of similar magnitude.
3 Probability of conversion
When expressing the classical problem of axion-photon mixing as a Schr¨ odinger-like equation
(with time replaced by the spatial coordinatez ors), it is natural to make use of the language
and techniques originally developed within quantum mechanics to simplify calculations. The
most natural object to compute from the Schr¨ odinger equation is the ‘conversion probability’
(|Ay/a|2), i.e. the norm square of the transition amplitude of going from a pure axion state
(a = 1) into a pure photon state ( Ay). However, it is important to remember that this is
not actually a quantum mechanical calculation, for which one would have to use the correct
Schr¨ odinger equation (with time derivatives andℏ̸= 0), and carefully deﬁned wavefunctions.
In the vaccuum case, the ‘conversion probability’ calculated from the classical Schr¨ odinger-
like equation is of direct physical interest as it gives the ratio of the energy densities stored
in axion and electromagnetic ﬁelds [29]; this deﬁnition of conversion probability has been
used in Refs. [14, 19, 20, 23] in the context of axion-photon conversion near neutron stars.
However, as we discuss in this section, when taking into account the 3D complexity of the
neutron star magnetosphere and the correct deﬁnition of propagating modes in the plasma,
the naive ‘conversion probability’ is no longer the physically relevant object to compute. In
essence, such a deﬁnition does not include the fact that the Hamiltonian is modiﬁed by the
presence of matter, so would miscount the number of photons generated if interpreted as an
actual conversion probability.
The key point of this section is that the (time-averaged) energy density stored in the
propagating LO mode is no longer simply 1/4(1 + ¯ω2
p/ω2)|Ey|2, as is the case for an isotropic
non-relativistic plasma. To calculate the energy stored in the LO mode, we must consider
that the medium has both temporal dispersion, and is anisotropic, giving [35, 36]
U = 1
4
∂
∂ω (ωϵij)E∗
iEj + 1
4H∗
iHj. (3.1)
– 9 –

--- page 11 ---
While the H-ﬁeld terms are suppressed at order k2/ω2 relative to the E-ﬁeld terms, near
the neutron star surface, k can be relatively large compared to ω, meaning that signiﬁcant
energy can be stored in the H-ﬁelds. For a propagating state given by ELO, we ﬁnd
U =|Ey|2
(
2ω4−ω2¯ω2
p +
(
¯ω4
p− 3ω2¯ω2
p
)
cos(2θ) + ¯ω4
p
)
8
(
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ
)2 +|Ey|2 k2
4ω2. (3.2)
Equation (3.2) reduces to 1/4(1+ ¯ω2
p/ω2)|Ey|2 in the non-relativistic limit and whenθ =π/2,
and reduces further to|Ey|2/2 forω = ¯ωp, and it is only in this case that the naive conversion
probability (|Ay/a|2) gives the ratio of energy densities stored in the electromagnetic and
axion ﬁelds. Notably, the energy stored in the propagating mode is enhanced for B-ﬁelds
almost aligned with the direction of propagation. In the absence of medium losses, the energy
stored in the photon ﬁeld should be conserved: when propagated through a slowly changing
medium the propagation state will adiabatically deform, but maintain stored energy. Thus,
taking only the transverse component of the stored energy into account, as done in previous
studies, neglects a signiﬁcant part of the stored energy, or in other words, miscounts the
number of photons that are converted.
For a simple expression, we can ﬁnally write the ratio of the energy densities of the
electromagnetic propagating mode and the axion ﬁeld in the non-relativistic limit ( ma≫k)
as
R = 2U
ω2|˜a|2 =
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
A2
y
a2
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
[(
2ω4−ω2¯ω2
p +
(
¯ω4
p− 3ω2¯ω2
p
)
cos(2θ) + ¯ω4
p
)
4
(
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ
)2 + k2
2ω2
]
≃ g2
aγB2
NS
2k|¯ω′p|
πm5
a
(k2 +m2a sin2θ)2 sin2θ. (3.3)
As the system is considered here to be time independent, a single axion should convert
to a single photon with energy ω and so the ratio of energy densities should correspond
to the ratio between the axion and photon ﬂuxes. Note that this ﬂux transfer is distinct
from the ‘conversion probability’ (|Ay/a|2) calculated from the Schr¨ odinger-like Eq. (2.15),
essentially reweighting it via the Hamilitonian. However, if one did a full quantum mechanical
calculation, the expectation value of the conversion probability of axions to LO photons
should agree with this ﬂux transfer [37].
Unlike the result of Ref. [14], no propagating photon is generated from a non-relativistic
axion in a longitudinal B-ﬁeld (i.e., for BNS∥ˆz). However, we should stress that θ ={0,π}
is a special condition and the order of limits matters. For purely longitudinal conversion one
should perform a dedicated calculation (i.e., solve Eq. (2.8) directly or perform an analysis
in the vein of Ref. [34]). We should note that Eq. (3.3) breaks down under more extreme
conditions. If |¯ω′
p| = 0, in other words, if ¯ ωp is constant along s, the conversion length
becomes inﬁnite. To regulate such divergences, one must cut-oﬀ L when it is competitive
compared to other limiting scales, such as the radius of curvature of the photon trajectory
or that over which second derivatives are relevant [23], cf. Appendix B.
Our ratio can be contrasted with the ‘conversion probability’ calculated when the non-
trivial Hamiltonian and the mixing of transverse and longitudinal modes are neglected,
P 1D
a→γ = π¯ωp
2k|∂¯ωp/∂z|g2
aγB2
NS sin2θ. (3.4)
– 10 –

--- page 12 ---
If we take θ =π/2 so that ˆs = ˆz, reducing back to a purely one dimensional problem, then
we see that both expressions agree, as one would expect
R→P 1D
a→γ
(
θ = π
2
)
= π¯ωp
2k|¯ω′p|g2
aγB2
NS. (3.5)
We have now derived in Eq. (3.3) an analytic expression for axion-photon conversion in
highly aniosotropic systems. In cases where the axion is traveling at a non-trivial angle to
the external B-ﬁeld there can be signiﬁcant alterations to the ﬂux transfer. To see what
impact the 3D calculation has in a neutron star, we must consider a speciﬁc neutron star
model.
4 Phase space distribution
In this section, we discuss the phase space distribution of the axions at the conversion surface.
An excellent discussion of the change of the phase space distribution of collisionless particles
under the inﬂuence of the gravitational ﬁeld of an astrophysical object such as a neutron
star can be found in Ref. [38]. We will assume that far away from the neutron star, the
velocity distribution of the axions in the galactic rest frame is given by a Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution with velocity dispersion σv truncated at the Galactic escape velocity vesc as in
the Standard Halo Model [39–41],
˜f∞
v (v) = 1
Nesc
( 1
2πσ2v
) 3
2
e
− v2
2σ2vH (vesc−v) , (4.1)
where H(x) is the Heaviside step function, and the normalization factor is given by
Nesc = Err
( vesc√
2σv
)
−
√
2
π
vesc
σv
e
−v2esc
2σ2v . (4.2)
We can shift this distribution into the frame of the neutron star,
f∞
v (v) = ˜f∞
v (v− vNS), (4.3)
where vNS is the velocity of the neutron star relative to the galactic rest frame. The six-
dimensional phase space density far away from the neutron star is then
f∞
6 (v) =n∞
a f∞
v (v) = ρ∞
a
ma
f∞
v (v), (4.4)
where n∞
a (ρ∞
a ) are the axion number (mass) density far away from the neutron star.
Liouville’s theorem states that the phase space density is conserved along trajectories.
Hence, at some point rNS in spherical coordinates centered on the neutron star, the phase
space density is given by
f6(rNS, v) =f∞
6 (v∞), (4.5)
where v∞ = v∞(rNS, v) is the velocity at inﬁnity for an orbit with velocity v at rNS. To
distinguish from our axion-centric frame as used in the previous sections, we use NS as a
subscript; in other words, the position vector is given by ˆ rNS = (rNS,θ NS,φ NS) in spherical
coordinates. Let us stress here that Liouville’s theorem states only that the phase space
density is conserved along trajectories, it does not make any immediate statements about
– 11 –

--- page 13 ---
the relation of the functional form of the phase space density at diﬀerent r. In order to
obtain that functional form, one must compute v∞(rNS, v). For a Newtonian potential,
energy, angular momentum, and the Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector of a particle moving in the
potential are conserved, such that [38]
v∞(rNS, v) = v2
∞v +v∞ (GMNS/rNS) ˆrNS−v∞v (v· rNS)
v2∞ + (GMNS/rNS)−v∞ (v· rNS) , (4.6)
with v∞ =
√
v2− 2GMNS/rNS, the gravitational constant G, the mass of the neutron star
MNS, and ˆrNS = rNS/rNS.
It is interesting to note that due to the symmetry of the system, if the velocity and
mass distribution of the axions is homogeneous and isotropic (in the frame of the neutron
star) far away from the neutron star, i.e. vNS = 0 in Eq. (4.3), the velocity distribution will
be isotropic at any rNS. In this case, one can immediately compute [20]
f6(rNS, v) = ρ∞
a
ma
1
Nesc
( 1
2πσ2v
)2
e
GMNS
rNSσ2ve
− v2
2σ2vH
(√
v2− 2GMNS/rNS−vesc
)
. (4.7)
With Eqs. (4.4)–(4.6), the dark matter number density at rNS can be obtained by
integrating over all kinematically allowed velocities, v ≳
√
2GMNS/rNS
na(rNS) = ρa(rNS)
ma
=
∫
v>
√
2GMNS/rNS
d3vf 6(rNS, v). (4.8)
For an homogeneous and isotropic (in the frame of the neutron star) axion phase space
distribution far away from the neutron star and vesc≫ σv, one can ﬁnd an approximate
closed solution for na(rNS), see Ref. [20]. We stress that their solution [and Eq. (4.7)] is only
applicable if, far away from the neutron star, both the axion density and velocity distributions
are both homogeneous and isotropic (in the frame of the neutron star) and if vesc≫σv. A
typical neutron star moves with speed vNS of order σv relative to the Galactic rest frame,
breaking the assumption of an isotropic velocity distribution in the frame of the neutron star.
While the full six dimensional phase space contains all relevant information, for any
realistic conversion location,
√
2GMNS/rNS ≫ {σv,v esc}. Hence, almost the entirety of
the axion’s speed comes from the infall. Thus, the distribution over v can approximately
be treated as a delta-function δ(v−
√
2GMNS/rNS). In other words, we care about the
distribution of incoming angles, rather than the distribution over incoming speeds. This
allows us to deﬁne
f5(rNS,θv,φv) = f6(rNS,
√
2GMNS/rNS,θv,φv)∫
dΩ′vf6(rNS,
√
2GMNS/rNS,θ′v,φ′v)
. (4.9)
Thus armed, we can calculate the ﬂux transfer for general axion distributions, including
non-vanishing speeds of the neutron star relative to the galaxy.
5 Comparison with 1D calculations in the Goldreich-Julian Model
It is clear that for speciﬁc values θ there can be signiﬁcant variation between the 3D and
1D versions of the axion-photon conversion. As the plasma is generated and shaped by
the neutron star magnetic ﬁeld, the changes in ωp are driven by the changing B-ﬁeld, and
– 12 –

--- page 14 ---
so may also be correlated with θ. Here we explore what inﬂuence a more complete axion-
photon conversion calculation has under realistic conditions. After a brief discussion of the
Goldreich-Julian neutron star model in section 5.1, we will compare results for the axion-
photon conversion in our full 3D calculation with results in the conventional 1D calculation
in sections 5.2–5.3.
5.1 The Goldreich-Julian Model
To consider a realistic scenario, we turn to an analytic description of a neutron star. One
commonly used model is the Goldreich-Julian (GJ) model [42]. The GJ model gives a simple
analytic solution by requiring a charge density to satisfy the conditionE·B = 0 at the surface
of the neutron star in the presence of a strong, rotating dipole magnetic ﬁeld given by
BrNS =B0
( r0
rNS
)3
[cosθm cosθNS + sinθm sinθNS cos(Ωt)] ,
BθNS = B0
2
( r0
rNS
)3
[cosθm sinθNS− sinθm cosθNS cos(Ωt)] ,
BφNS = B0
2
( r0
rNS
)3
sinθm sin(Ωt), (5.1)
whereB0 is the magnetic ﬁeld strength at the surface of the neutron star (which is at located
at r0), and θm is the misalignment angle between BNS and Ω. The rotation vector of the
neutron star is given by Ω = Ωˆ zNS with Ω = 2π/T and T the neutron star spin period. We
denote the polar angle of a given location with respect to the rotation axis zNS to be θNS.
The charge density is given by
nGJ(rNS) = 2Ω· BNS
e
1
1− Ω2r2 sin2θNS
. (5.2)
While we consider all charges to be electrons for simplicity, such that nGJ simply gives the
number of electrons, our conversion calculation still applies to more complicated plasmas.
The plasma frequency of an electron plasma is ωp≃
√
4παne/me, giving
ωp(rNS) =
√
eBNS· ˆ zNS
4π
meT
1
1− Ω2r2 sin2θNS
, (5.3)
with
BNS· ˆ zNS = B0
2
( r0
rNS
)3[
3 cosθNS ˆ m· ˆ rNS− cosθm
]
, (5.4)
Similarly to Ref. [14] we have also deﬁned
ˆ m· ˆ rNS = cosθm cosθNS + sinθm sinθNS cos(Ωt). (5.5)
It should be noted that it is unlikely that the GJ model holds over the entirety (or any)
of the neutron star. The nature of neutron star atmospheres is highly uncertain, due to both
the diﬃculty in modeling such large electromagnetic systems and the lack of observational
data [43–46]. Asides from possible higher multipole components of the magnetic ﬁeld [47],
pair creation cascades at the poles may lead to signiﬁcantly higher electron densities, as well
as highly boosted electrons [45, 48, 49]. Our formalism allows for both γ≫ 1 and ne̸=nGJ,
however, for speciﬁc examples we will remain within the GJ model.
– 13 –

--- page 15 ---
-7.75
-7.25
-6.75
-6.25
-5.75
-5.25
Figure 2. Left panel: Flux transfer R as a function of incoming axion angles θv,φv for the full 3D
calculation. The neutron star has B0 = 1014 G, θm = 0.4 and T = 1 s, and the ratio is calculated at
the conversion zone located at θNS = 0.5,φ NS = 0.6π in the neutron star frame. We assume an axion
mass of 25µeV with a coupling strength gaγ = 10−14 GeV−1. Right panel: ‘Probability’ of axion to
photon conversionP 1D
a→γ as a function of incoming axion angles θv,φv for a 1D calculation. The same
neutron star and axion values are used. The black dashed line indicates the slice θv =π/3 that is the
focus of Fig. 3.
5.2 Directionality of emitted photons
To see the impact of a 3D formalism, we can take the simplest example and ask: how does the
ﬂux transfer change for diﬀerent incoming axion trajectories? As we are considering the GJ
model, for all cases γ = 1, meaning that ¯ωp =ωp. In section 3 we derived the ﬂux transfer R
in a frame centered around the axion’s velocity (ˆ z) and the direction of theB-ﬁeld. However,
as discussed above, the properties of the plasma are usually described in the frame of the
neutron star, typically in spherical coordinates. To write down our ˆ xand ˆ ydirections in
terms of the incoming axion direction ˆ zand magnetic ﬁeld ˆB we can use
ˆ x= 1
sinθ
ˆBNS× ˆ z, (5.6a)
ˆ y= ˆ z×ˆ x (5.6b)
For an example, we consider a neutron star withB0 = 1014 G,θm = 0.4 andT = 1 s. Taking
some point on the sphere, θNS = 0.5,φ NS = 0.6π, we can compare the ﬂux transfer at the
axion conversion surface as a function of the incoming axion angles, denoted by θv,φv in the
neutron star coordinate frame. Due to the dependence of the LO mode dispersion relation
onθ andk, Eq. (2.19) indicates that the radius of conversion actually is slightly diﬀerent for
diﬀerent incoming axion angles. However, the change in ﬂux transfer due to small changes
in conversion radius is subdominant compared to the impact of including aniosotropic eﬀects
of the medium. For a benchmark, we take the axion to have mass ma = 25µeV and coupling
gaγ = 10−14 GeV−1. Raising or lowering ma changes where the conversion zone is located:
higher mass axions convert closer to the neutron star where magnetic ﬁelds are larger, usually
– 14 –

--- page 16 ---
leading to greater ﬂux transfers. If the axion mass is too large, however, it is greater than
the plasma frequency everywhere outside the surface of the neutron star and no resonant
conversion can occur. As the plasma frequency is set by the magnetic ﬁeld strength of
the neutron star, for each star, there will be a maximum ma which will allow for resonant
axion-photon conversion.
We plot the results of the 3D calculation, [the relativistic version of Eq. (3.3)], and of
the 1D calculation, Eq. (3.4), in the right and left panels of Fig. 2, respectively. To avoid
divergences when the WKB approximation breaks down, we use a simple cut-oﬀ estimated
by the typical lengths scales over which the second order derivatives should come into play,
derived in Appendix C
Rcut-oﬀ =g2
aγB2
NS
( πr2
c
¯ωpv2c
)2/3
. (5.7)
We see that the number of photons generated on a given trajectory can diﬀer between the
3D and the 1D formalism by several orders of magnitude. Furthermore, regions that were
highly disfavoured in the 1D calculation can turn out to have maximal photon production
when the aniosotropic nature of the medium is taken into account.
To understand better the underlying physics behind the regions of enhanced and sup-
pressed conversion, we can take a single slice of θv,φv space. In Fig. 3, we show a slice of
constantθv, in particular, θv =π/3. The top panel of Fig. 3 shows the ‘conversion probabil-
ity’ for the 1D calculation and the ﬂux transfer calculated with 3D eﬀects, with the regulating
cut-oﬀ ﬂux transfer [Eq. (5.7)] shown by the gray dashed line. In the middle panel, we show
the ratioR/P 1D
a→γ: up to three orders of magnitude enhancement can occur for speciﬁc axion
trajectories. The bottom panel shows the relevant derivatives for each calculation, ∂¯ωp/∂z
in the 1D case and ∂¯ωp/∂s for the 3D calculation. The order-of-magnitude discrepancies be-
tween the 1D and 3D calculations of the ﬂux transfer occur when ∂¯ωp/∂z̸=∂¯ωp/∂s. While
there are still diﬀerences caused by correctly calculating the energy stored in the LO mode
and the correct angular dependence, the primary diﬀerence between calculations comes from
the diﬀerence between ˆ sand ˆ z: when ∂ωp/∂s≃ ∂ωp/∂z, the answers are similar up to the
diﬀerent angular dependence. The divergences in R,Pa→γ (which are regulated by the cut-
oﬀ) occur when ∂ωp/∂(s,z ) = 0, as indicated by the gray dashed line in the bottom panel
of Fig. 3. In these examples, θ′ is negligible and so the cut-oﬀ is a stronger regulator. Note
that the relationship between ˆ sand ˆ zdoes not depend on ma: even for very non-relativistic
axions which could convert far out from the NS there would still be signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
the ﬂux transfer in a given direction.
We can see that treating the LO mode as essentially a transverse mode (possibly with
diﬀerent dispersion, as in [23]) leads to a signiﬁcant miscalculation of the axion-photon ﬂux
transfer. To have a reliable calculation of the axion-photon ﬂux transfer for a given axion
trajectory, one must take into account both the full energy stored in the LO mode, and,
more importantly, the distinction between the direction of the axion’s momentum, ˆ z, and the
direction over which the energy density evolves, ˆ s.
5.3 Integrated power
Asides from the directional dependence of the photons emitted from a given point, one
may also be concerned with the total power emitted over some portion of the neutron star.
Studies of ray-tracing suggest that the photons bend relatively quickly as plasma frequency
drops [23, 24]. The momentum acquired by the photon as it transitions to vacuum must
– 15 –

--- page 17 ---
10-8
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
0.1
1
10
100
1000
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Figure 3. Top panel: Axion-photon ﬂux transferR as a function of incoming axion azimuthal angle
φv for the full 3D calculation (green) and 1D calculation (blue). For the 1D calculation we use the
‘conversion probability’ instead of the ﬂux transfer. Middle panel: Ratio of the full 3D axion-ﬂux
transferR to the 1D conversion probability. The ﬂux is enhanced by up to three orders of magnitude
with resepect to the 1D calcuation. Bottom panel: Rate of change of the plasma frequency ωp
with respect to s (green) and z (blue). Axion photon conversion diverges when ∂ωp/∂(z,s ) = 0, the
gray dashed line. The neutron star has B0 = 1014 G, θm = 0.4 and T = 1 s, and the quantities are
calculated at the conversion zone located at θNS = 0.5,φ NS = 0.6π in the neutron star frame. We
assume an axion mass of 25 µeV with a coupling strength gaγ = 10−14 GeV−1 and incoming polar
angle θv =π/3.
come from the gradient of the medium, so photons that begin mildly relativistic would
become approximately parallel to the change in ¯ωp. Because of this, one can make a rough
estimate that the total power exiting the neutron star will end up on the same trajectory,
determined by∇¯ωp. We stress however that the axion can be reasonably relativistic, and so
one should do a full ray-tracing calculation for reliable results.
– 16 –

--- page 18 ---
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 4. Axion photon conversion integrated over axion phase space,RW , as a function of incoming
neutron star polar angle θNS for 3D (green) and 1D (blue) calculations. The 3D calculation uses the
full ﬂux transfer of axions to photons, whereas the 1D case only considers the ‘conversion probability’
interpreted from a ‘Schr¨ odinger-like’ equation. We choose a neutron star withB0 = 1014 G,θm = 0.4
and T = 1 s. The functions are calculated at the conversion zone located at an azimuthal angle
φNS = π in the neutron star frame. We assume an axion mass of 25 µeV with a coupling strength
gaγ = 10−14 GeV−1 as well as an isotropic velocity distribution of the axions. We mark the region
where the conversion radius would be less than the neutron star radius r0 with the red dashed lines
labeled ‘Inside NS’.
To calculate the power radiated from a given point on the neutron star rNS, we must
integrate over the incoming axion angles θv,φv, weighted with an appropriate phase space
distribution. To focus on the diﬀerence caused by properly treating the aniostropy of the
medium, we will neglect the small diﬀerences in conversion radii for diﬀerent axion trajectories
and use a single radius of conversion given by the transverse photon dispersion, ma = ωp.
The variation due to choosing diﬀerent radii seems to be at most a factor of 2 when one
considers the longitudinal photon dispersion ( ω = ωp) instead, and does not change the
general relationship between the two calculations. Similarly, we neglect contributions from
θ′, which again gives a subdominant contribution for the cases we consider. The distribution-
weighted axion-photon ﬂux transfer RW is given by
RW (rNS) =
∫
dΩvf5(rNS,θv,φv)R(rNS,θv,φv), (5.8)
wheref5 is the ﬁve dimensional phase space deﬁned in Eq. (4.9). For the 1D case we use the
1D ‘conversion probability’, Eq. (3.4) instead of R.
We can now showRW for a slice along the neutron star conversion surface assuming an
isotropic axion distribution. We keepφNS ﬁxed atπ and varyθNS to derive Fig. 4. The struc-
ture generated in a slice through θNS is in general behaviour independent of the speciﬁcally
chosenφNS. Integrating over all photon directions generally smooths out diﬀerences between
the 3D and 1D calculations. However, there are still noticeable diﬀerences. Overall, the 3D
calculation leads to more energy stored in the EM ﬁelds, leading to more photons radiated
from the neutron star. As the 1D calculation neglected energy stored in the non-transverse
components of the Hamiltonian, we would naturally expect to see additional ‘conversion’ just
from correctly counting the number of photons generated. This enhancement is particularly
– 17 –

--- page 19 ---
noticeable around the neutron star ‘throat’, i.e. the region where the conversion radius van-
ishes as Ω· BNS→ 0, just outside the red boarders in Fig. 4. Inside the neutron star itself,
the plasma density no longer follows the GJ model; given the extreme densities inside a neu-
tron star the plasma frequency is much larger than the axion masses of interest everywhere
inside a neutron star. Thus, no propagating photons can be produced from axion-photon
conversion inside a neutron star. One would expect that issues of photon curvature, as ex-
plored in Ref. [23], as well any concerns about gravity bending the axion path would be most
pronounced in the throats, making this region generally unreliable. One would likely need
to do numerical calculations for a robust solution including a gravitationally bending axion
trajectory.
Having a similar total conversion rate for isotropic dark matter infall is not surprising,
as ultimately the length scales and magnetic ﬁelds that give the general order of conversion
are the same. However, where the axions are converted, and in what directions the pho-
tons emerge, is signiﬁcantly impacted. The plasma eﬀectively lenses the outgoing photons,
which when combined with the limited line of sight and Doppler shifting of light can give a
complicated, time dependent signal. Thus any aspect which changes the location and direc-
tion of conversion will impact axion searches signiﬁcantly. Because of this we focus on the
changes to the power and directionality of a given point on the neutron star, as the total
power radiated from a neutron star is not usually relevant to an individual observation of an
individual neutron star. In addition, for compact clumps of axions, such as axion stars [50–
55] or miniclusters [56–61], one would expect a much stronger dependence in the resulting
signal depending at what angle the compact object hits the neutron star. Thus, changes
to the production location and direction can have a disproportionate eﬀect on observational
constraints.
6 Conclusions
The axion is one of the premier candidates for dark matter. It displays unique wavelike
phenomenology requiring both novel techniques in the lab and astrophysical searches. Reso-
nant conversion to photons in the atmospheres of neutron stars is one such possible method
for discovering the axion. Neutron stars are complicated systems and therefore calculating
the projected signal is extremely challenging. Here we have focused on one piece of the
larger puzzle, and together with recent advances in ray-tracing help lay the road to a robust
prediction for what might be observed on Earth.
To this end, we have calculated the production of photons via axions in strongly mag-
netised, anisotropic environments. The prototypical example of such an environment is a
neutron star, but our calculation is generic. Previous calculations have not explored the
anisotropic nature of the medium and have focused only on the transverse part of pho-
ton modes. We show, however, that the mixing of transverse and longitudinal modes into
Langmuir-O modes causes the direction over which the amplitude of the electromagnetic
ﬁelds evolve to be diﬀerent from the direction of the axion. We ﬁnd that rather than evolv-
ing in the direction of propagation, the waves evolve also in the transverse direction. This
directional diﬀerence can lead to orders of magnitude change in the ﬂux transfer R in a given
direction.
Furthermore, taking only the transverse component of the stored energy into account
neglects a signiﬁcant part of the stored energy, or in other words, miscounts the number
of photons that are converted. Taking only the transverse component essentially confuses
– 18 –

--- page 20 ---
a classical, Schr¨ odinger-like solution with the quantum mechanical conversion probability.
We show that taking both features into account signiﬁcantly modiﬁes the probability of
conversion over a given axion-trajectory. While a truly complete solution would require
numerically solving the equations of motion in a varying medium, we provide simple analytical
formulae which can be used to estimate the radio signals generated in neutron stars by axions.
This will allow the robustness of axion limits to be increased in the case of non-observation,
such as Refs. [25–28], or allow one to estimate the neutron star and axion properties in the
case of a discovery.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Alice Harding, Wynn Ho and Anna Watts for helpful discussions on
neutron star magnetospheres. The authors also thank Thomas Edwards and Sam Witte
for helpful discussions, and Dion Noordhuis for pointing out a sign error. AM, DM and
ML are supported by the European Research Council under Grant No. 742104 and by the
Swedish Research Council (VR) under Dnr 2019-02337 “Detecting Axion Dark Matter In
The Sky And In The Lab (AxionDM)”. DM is further supported by the Swedish Science
Council through grant 2018-03641. SB acknowledges support by NSF Grant PHY-1720397,
DOE HEP QuantISED award #100495, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation Grant
GBMF7946, and Simons Investigator Award 824870.
A Longitudinal component
In the main text, we solve the axion-Maxwell equations by eliminating the longitudinal terms
from the equations. However, this does not mean that the longitudinal modes do not exist.
To solve for the longitudinal component excited by the axion, we can rewrite Eq. (2.8) to
ﬁnd
Ez =
∂2Ey
∂z∂y − ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθEy−ω2gaγaBNS cosθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ . (A.1)
First we should consider the case without an axion to ﬁnd the normal electromagnetic modes
of the system. In the absence of the axion, for a homogeneous medium one ﬁnds that
Ez =
∂2Ey
∂z∂y − ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ Ey, (A.2)
allowing us to deﬁne the propagating Langmuir-O (LO) mode, which becomes an ordinary
transverse wave whenθ =π/2 and longitudinal when θ = 0 in the non-relativistic limit [33],
ˆELO = −1√
1 +
¯ω4p cos2θ sin2θ
(ω2−¯ω2p cos2θ)2
(
ˆ y− ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θˆ z
)
, (A.3)
where we have inserted a factor of −1 so that ˆELO = ˆBNS in the non-relativistic limit.
Including the axion current, and knowing that we will solve for Ey directly, we can neglect
the subdominant derivative terms to ﬁnd
˜Ez≃− ¯ω2
p cosθ sinθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θ
˜Ey− ω2 cosθ
ω2− ¯ω2p cos2θgaγBNS˜a. (A.4)
– 19 –

--- page 21 ---
The ﬁrst term is just the longitudinal component of the LO mode, with the second cor-
responding to direct axion mixing. In the limit of a perfectly aligned magnetic ﬁeld with
θ ={0,π} Eq. (A.4) reduces to the expression for a pure longitudinal excitation in a lossless
plasma [31, 62],
˜Ez =−gaγBNS˜a
1−
¯ω2p
ω2
. (A.5)
We can see that the two diﬀerent terms in Ez have very diﬀerent propagation behaviour.
After some distance (given by the conversion length L) ˜Ey will be out of phase with ˜ a.
Notice that the terms proportional to ˜a are not generally propagating: as soon as the axion
mixing goes away, so to does this contribution to Ez.
Thus, for the purpose of solving for an outgoing radio signal from the neutron star, the
mode that the axion couples to is the LO mode, which will adiabatically transform into a
transverse mode as it exits the system [33].
B Stationary phase approximation
To provide an analytic expression for axion-photon conversion, in Eq. (2.15) in the main text
we derived a Schr¨ odinger-like equation
i∂ ˜Ey
∂s = 1
2k
(
m2
a−ξ¯ω2
p−ikD
) ˜Ey− 1
2k
ω2ξ
sinθgaγ˜aBNS. (B.1)
which has solution
iEy(s) =−
∫ s
0
ds′ 1
2k
ω2ξ
sinθgaγ˜aBNSe−
∫s′
0 ds′′D/2e−i
∫s′
0 ds′′ 1
2k(m2
a−ξ¯ω2
p). (B.2)
Rather than a numeric solution, we can use the stationary phase approximation to ﬁnd
an analytic solution. The premise of the stationary phase approximation is that highly
oscillatory integrands tend to cancel when integrated over many oscillation periods, and
that the dominant contribution therefore often comes from stationary points, say s0, where
the phase, f(s), is locally constant, i.e. f′(s0) = 0. In the standard form of the stationary
phase approximation, the non-oscillatory factor of the integrand, sayg(s), is approximated as
constant arounds0, and the phase is expanded to quadratic order:f(s)≈f(s0)+ 1
2f′′(s0)(s−
s0)2, and the limits of integration are taken to±∞. For s>s 0, this gives the approximation,
∫ s
0
dsg (s)eif(s)≈g(s0)eif(s0)
∫ ∞
−∞
dse
if ′′(s0)
2 (s−s0)2
=g(s0)eif(s0)+sign[f ′′(s0)]iπ/4
√
2π
|f′′(s0)|.
(B.3)
The quality of the stationary phase approximation of course depends on the accuracy
of the assumptions that it relies on. It’s convenient to deﬁne a (squared) ‘conversion length’
as
L2 = π
|f′′(s0)|. (B.4)
In the limit where
√
|f′′(s0)| is larger than all other scales in the problem, the conversion
length is small, and the stationary phase approximation is expected to be very accurate.
However, in many physical situations there are no large hierarchies of scales, and one needs
to consider corrections to the standard stationary phase formula. Moreover, extending the
– 20 –

--- page 22 ---
integration range to ±∞ is not always justiﬁed, and the full integral that one wants to
evaluate may only be well-deﬁned in a small region around the stationary point, such as for
our Eq. (B.2).
In the context of relativistic axion-photon conversion, these issues were recently dis-
cussed in Ref. [63], where corrections to Eq. (B.3) were derived from considering a ﬁnite in-
tegration range, and accounting for contributions neglected in the standard stationary phase
approximation. For the purpose of our analysis, the main point is that when one considers
the integration range [s0− ∆s,s 0 + ∆s], the stationary phase approximation gives
∫ s
0
dsg (s)eif(s)≈g(s0)eif(s0)
∫ s0+∆s
s0−∆s
dse
if ′′(s0)
2 (s−s0)2
(B.5)
=g(s0)eif(s0)+sign[f ′′(s0)]iπ/4√
2L Err
(√
−iπ/2∆s
L
)
, (B.6)
where Err denotes the error function. The norm of the error function grows linearly with
∆s
L for small arguments, and performs slowly damped oscillations around unity for ∆s
L > 1.
This in particular implies that the standard formula only applies when it is justiﬁed to take
∆s≫ L. Equation (B.6) applies for any ratio of ∆ s/L, but simpliﬁes considerably when
∆z <L, and the integral becomes
⏐⏐⏐
∫ s
0
dsg (s)eif(s)
⏐⏐⏐ = 2|g(s0)|∆z, (B.7)
up to corrections to cubic order in ∆z/L. This implies that the formula (B.3) can be regulated
and modiﬁed in a very simple way, by replacing L→
√
2∆z, when it is justiﬁed to consider
∆z < L, for example when the WKB approximation breaks down, or the assumption of
constant θ fails. For a more detailed discussion of how to evaluate also the contributions
from|z|> ∆z, see Ref. [63].
The most important factor comes from f′′(s0). While we have so far considered θ to be
constant, if it is slowly changing the largest impact will be felt in the conversion length [23]
as the impact of dephasing the axion and photon is much greater than the small changes to
the deﬁnition of ˆ y. We can then see that
∂
∂s
( 1
2k
[
m2
a−ξ¯ω2
p
])
=− ¯ωp¯ω′
p sin2θ
k
(
1−
¯ω2p
ω2 cos2θ
)2− ¯ω2
p(ω2− ¯ω2
p)θ′ sinθ cosθ
ω2k
(
1−
¯ω2p
ω2 cos2θ
)2 . (B.8)
We now apply the standard stationary phase approximation of Eq. (B.3) to the electric
ﬁeld of Eq. (B.2), which gives
˜Ey[s0 +L/2] =ω2
√ π
2k
⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
e
∫s0
0 ds′D/2gaγ˜aBNS, (B.9)
where we have neglected an overall phase and where ¯ ω′
p = ∂¯ωp/∂s. This is the analytical
form of axion-induced Ey that we will use in our subsequent analysis. The stationary point
condition (cf. f′(s0) = 0) translates into the ‘resonance condition’:
¯ωp(s)2 = m2
aω2
m2a cos2θ +ω2 sin2θ. (B.10)
– 21 –

--- page 23 ---
In the non-relativistic limit, ω→ma, and the resonance condition simply becomes ¯ωp =ma.
The conversion length evaluates to
L = sinθ
ξ
√ πk⏐⏐⏐¯ωp¯ω′p +
ω2−¯ω2p
ω2 tanθ ¯ω2pθ′
⏐⏐⏐
. (B.11)
For most axion trajectories, this conversion length is smaller than the length scales associated
with the gravitational curvature of the axion trajectory, the curvature of the photon path
due to the anisotropic medium, and the scale over which the magnetic ﬁeld changes. When
this is the case, the standard stationary phase approximation applies. However, this is not
always the case, and in some cases the conversion length can get signiﬁcantly enhanced, as
we now discuss.
C Regulating divergences
The ﬂux transfer R, given by Eq. (3.3), was calculated assuming the WKB approximation
holds: i.e., that the axion momentum is much larger than the ﬁrst derivatives of˜Ey, which are
larger than the second derivatives. However, R diverges in the limit that the ﬁrst derivative
vanishes (i.e., the conversion length becomes inﬁnite). Such a divergence must be regulated
for two reasons. The ﬁrst is the breakdown of the WKB approximation, and the second is
the breakdown of the assumption that the conversion happens over length scales smaller than
other relevant ones in the neutron star, for example the radius of photon bending due to the
changing media.
In the ﬁrst case, it is evidently untrue that the vanishing ﬁrst derivatives are larger
than the second derivatives. Rather than attempting to solve the full 3D equations by hand
with higher derivatives, as Ex,Ey and Ez all appear with their second derivatives, we can
use a simple estimate to institute a cut oﬀ on the diverging ﬂux transfers. In the 1D case, it
was shown in Ref. [14] that an order-of-magnitude estimate could be obtained by using the
simple formula
R≃ B2
NSg2
aγL2
v2c
, (C.1)
where L is the conversion length. The assumption of coherent conversion requires that the
change in phase between two locations is small. Thus, we can estimate L by checking the
distance over which k changes. We can approximate k changing over some length L by
writing
k(L) =k0 +k1L +k2L2, (C.2)
where destructive interference occurs whenδk =k−k0 satisﬁesδkL≃π (as the phase enters
viaei(kL−ωt). As we are concerned with the case where k1L ≲k2L2, we can neglect the linear
term and see that
L3≃π/k2. (C.3)
As the only change in k comes from the changing plasma frequency ¯ ωp, in the limit of
vanishing ﬁrst derivativeskk2 = ¯ωp¯ωp,2, where similarly
¯ωp(L)≃ ¯ωp,0 + ¯ωp,2L2. (C.4)
To get a conservative estimate for L, we can use that at second order, all directions may
play a role. Thus while the second derivatives with respect to some directions might be small
– 22 –

--- page 24 ---
or vanishing, we know that the radial direction will have a power law dependence. Thus,
assuming that the ˆr direction is the relevant one will give a fairly conservative estimate for
the total conversion probability. We stress that this is not a full solution of the 3D Maxwell
equations, but rather a conservative way of regulating our WKB formalism. Taking the
power law dependence of ¯ωp, we then ﬁnd that
L =
(πvcr2
c
¯ωp
)1/3
. (C.5)
Putting in some typical numbers, we see that the typical conversion length should increase by
about an order of magnitude, when compared to purely radial estimates of Ref. [14], leading
to a hundredfold increase in the conversion probability.
The second case relates to the overall trajectory of photons in the medium, for example,
that the photon bends and so dephases with the axion, or other curvature eﬀects of the
medium [23]. While such a constraint may provide a more stringent limit, particularly in
the neutron star throat, to calculate such eﬀects in full requires ray tracing calculations [20,
23, 24], which are beyond the scope of this work. When these eﬀects are considered, one
should use the stricter of the two cut-oﬀs. As we are only interested in demonstrating the
inﬂuence of a 3D, aniosotropic calculation of the ﬂux transfer rather than a start to ﬁnish
signal calculation for observational purposes, we can simplify matters and just use a cut-oﬀ
based on the second derivatives of the E-ﬁeld,
Rcut-oﬀ =g2
aγB2
NS
( πr2
c
¯ωpv2c
)2/3
. (C.6)
References
[1] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons , Phys. Rev.
Lett. 38 (1977) 1440.
[2] R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, Constraints Imposed by CP Conservation in the Presence of
Instantons, Phys. Rev. D 16 (1977) 1791.
[3] S. Weinberg, A New Light Boson? , Phys. Rev. Lett. 40 (1978) 223.
[4] F. Wilczek, Problem of Strong P and T Invariance in the Presence of Instantons , Phys. Rev.
Lett. 40 (1978) 279.
[5] J. Preskill, M. B. Wise and F. Wilczek, Cosmology of the Invisible Axion , Phys. Lett. B 120
(1983) 127.
[6] L. Abbott and P. Sikivie, A Cosmological Bound on the Invisible Axion , Phys. Lett. B 120
(1983) 133.
[7] M. Dine and W. Fischler, The Not So Harmless Axion , Phys. Lett. B 120 (1983) 137.
[8] L. D. Duﬀy and K. van Bibber, Axions as Dark Matter Particles , New J. Phys. 11 (2009)
105008 [0904.3346].
[9] P. Arias, D. Cadamuro, M. Goodsell, J. Jaeckel, J. Redondo and A. Ringwald, WISPy Cold
Dark Matter, JCAP 06 (2012) 013 [ 1201.5902].
[10] I. G. Irastorza and J. Redondo, New Experimental Approaches in the Search for Axion-Like
Particles, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 102 (2018) 89 [ 1801.08127].
[11] Y. K. Semertzidis and S. Youn, Axion Dark Matter: How to Detect it? , 2104.14831.
– 23 –

--- page 25 ---
[12] F. Chadha-Day, J. Ellis and D. J. E. Marsh, Axion Dark Matter: What is it and Why Now? ,
2105.01406.
[13] M. S. Pshirkov and S. B. Popov, Conversion of Dark Matter Axions to Photons in
Magnetospheres of Neutron Stars , J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 108 (2009) 384 [ 0711.1264].
[14] A. Hook, Y. Kahn, B. R. Safdi and Z. Sun, Radio Signals from Axion Dark Matter Conversion
in Neutron Star Magnetospheres , Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 241102 [ 1804.03145].
[15] D. Lai and J. Heyl, Probing Axions with Radiation from Magnetic Stars , Phys. Rev. D 74
(2006) 123003 [ astro-ph/0609775].
[16] F. P. Huang, K. Kadota, T. Sekiguchi and H. Tashiro, Radio Telescope Search for the Resonant
Conversion of Cold Dark Matter Axions from the Magnetized Astrophysical Sources , Phys. Rev.
D 97 (2018) 123001 [ 1803.08230].
[17] B. R. Safdi, Z. Sun and A. Y. Chen, Detecting Axion Dark Matter with Radio Lines from
Neutron Star Populations , Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) 123021 [ 1811.01020].
[18] T. D. P. Edwards, M. Chianese, B. J. Kavanagh, S. M. Nissanke and C. Weniger, Unique
Multimessenger Signal of QCD Axion Dark Matter , Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 (2020) 161101
[1905.04686].
[19] R. A. Battye, B. Garbrecht, J. I. McDonald, F. Pace and S. Srinivasan, Dark Matter Axion
Detection in the Radio/mm-Waveband , Phys. Rev. D 102 (2020) 023504 [ 1910.11907].
[20] M. Leroy, M. Chianese, T. D. P. Edwards and C. Weniger, Radio Signal of Axion-Photon
Conversion in Neutron Stars: A Ray Tracing Analysis , Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020) 123003
[1912.08815].
[21] J. H. Buckley, P. S. B. Dev, F. Ferrer and F. P. Huang, Fast Radio Bursts from Axion Stars
Moving Through Pulsar Magnetospheres , Phys. Rev. D 103 (2021) 043015 [ 2004.06486].
[22] S. Nurmi, E. D. Schiappacasse and T. T. Yanagida, Radio Signatures From Encounters Between
Neutron Stars and QCD-Axion Minihalos Around Primordial Black Holes , 2102.05680.
[23] S. J. Witte, D. Noordhuis, T. D. P. Edwards and C. Weniger, Axion-Photon Conversion in
Neutron Star Magnetospheres: The Role of the Plasma in the Goldreich-Julian Model ,
2104.07670.
[24] R. A. Battye, B. Garbrecht, J. I. Mcdonald and S. Srinivasan, Radio Line Properties of Axion
Dark Matter Conversion in Neutron Stars , 2104.08290.
[25] J. W. Foster, Y. Kahn, O. Macias, Z. Sun, R. P. Eatough, V. I. Kondratiev, W. M. Peters,
C. Weniger and B. R. Safdi, Green Bank and Eﬀelsberg Radio Telescope Searches for Axion
Dark Matter Conversion in Neutron Star Magnetospheres , Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 (2020) 171301
[2004.00011].
[26] J. Darling, New Limits on Axionic Dark Matter from the Magnetar PSR J1745-2900 ,
Astrophys. J. Lett. 900 (2020) L28 [ 2008.11188].
[27] J. Darling, Search for Axionic Dark Matter Using the Magnetar PSR J1745-2900 , Phys. Rev.
Lett. 125 (2020) 121103 [ 2008.01877].
[28] R. A. Battye, J. Darling, J. McDonald and S. Srinivasan, Towards Robust Constraints on
Axion Dark Matter Using PSR J1745-2900 , 2107.01225.
[29] G. Raﬀelt and L. Stodolsky, Mixing of the Photon with Low Mass Particles , Phys. Rev. D 37
(1988) 1237.
[30] P. Sikivie, Experimental Tests of the Invisible Axion , Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 1415.
[Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett. 52, 695 (1984)].
[31] A. J. Millar, J. Redondo and F. D. Steﬀen, Dielectric Haloscopes: Sensitivity to the Axion
Dark Matter Velocity, JCAP 10 (2017) 006 [ 1707.04266]. [Erratum: JCAP 05, E02 (2018)].
– 24 –

--- page 26 ---
[32] A. V. Gurevich, V. S. Beskin and Y. N. Istomin, Physics of the Pulsar Magnetosphere .
Cambridge University Press, 1993, 10.1017/CBO9780511564673.
[33] M. Gedalin, D. B. Melrose and E. Gruman, Long Waves in a Relativistic Pair Plasma in a
Strong Magnetic Field , Phys. Rev. E 57 (1998) 3399.
[34] A. Caputo, A. J. Millar and E. Vitagliano, Revisiting Longitudinal Plasmon-Axion Conversion
in External Magnetic Fields , Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020) 123004 [ 2005.00078].
[35] A. Bers, Space-Time Evolution of Plasma Instabilities - Absolute and Convective , 1983.
[36] A. Bers, Note on Group Velocity and Energy Propagation , American Journal of Physics 68
(2000) 482.
[37] G. Raﬀelt, G. Sigl and L. Stodolsky, Quantum Statistics in Particle Mixing Phenomena , Phys.
Rev. D 45 (1992) 1782.
[38] M. S. Alenazi and P. Gondolo, Phase-space Distribution of Unbound Dark Matter Near the
Sun, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 083518 [ astro-ph/0608390].
[39] A. K. Drukier, K. Freese and D. N. Spergel, Detecting Cold Dark Matter Candidates , Phys.
Rev. D 33 (1986) 3495.
[40] J. D. Lewin and P. F. Smith, Review of Mathematics, Numerical Factors, and Corrections for
Dark Matter Experiments Based on Elastic Nuclear Recoil , Astropart. Phys. 6 (1996) 87.
[41] K. Freese, M. Lisanti and C. Savage, Colloquium: Annual Modulation of Dark Matter , Rev.
Mod. Phys. 85 (2013) 1561 [ 1209.3339].
[42] P. Goldreich and W. H. Julian, Pulsar Electrodynamics, Astrophys. J. 157 (1969) 869.
[43] C. Kalapotharakos, D. Kazanas, A. Harding and I. Contopoulos, Toward a Realistic Pulsar
Magnetosphere, Astrophys. J. 749 (2012) 2 [ 1108.2138].
[44] B. Cerutti and A. Beloborodov, Electrodynamics of Pulsar Magnetospheres, Space Sci. Rev.
207 (2017) 111 [ 1611.04331].
[45] A. A. Philippov and A. Spitkovsky, Ab-Initio Pulsar Magnetosphere: Particle acceleration in
Oblique Rotators and High-energy Emission Modeling , Astrophys. J. 855 (2018) 94
[1707.04323].
[46] M. G. Baring, Z. Wadiasingh, P. L. Gonthier, A. K. Harding and K. Hu, The Mysterious
Magnetospheres of Magnetars , PoS HEASA2019 (2021) 036 [ 2012.10815].
[47] A. V. Bilous, A. L. Watts, A. K. Harding, T. E. Riley, Z. Arzoumanian, S. Bogdanov, K. C.
Gendreau, P. S. Ray, S. Guillot, W. C. G. Ho and D. Chakrabarty, A NICER View of PSR
J0030+0451: Evidence for a Global-scale Multipolar Magnetic Field , The Astrophysical Journal
887 (2019) L23.
[48] T. Erber, High-Energy Electromagnetic Conversion Processes in Intense Magnetic Fields , Rev.
Mod. Phys. 38 (1966) 626.
[49] A. K. Harding and D. Lai, Physics of Strongly Magnetized Neutron Stars , Reports on Progress
in Physics 69 (2006) 2631.
[50] D. J. Kaup, Klein-Gordon Geon, Phys. Rev. 172 (1968) 1331.
[51] R. Ruﬃni and S. Bonazzola, Systems of Selfgravitating Particles in General Relativity and the
Concept of an Equation of State , Phys. Rev. 187 (1969) 1767.
[52] I. I. Tkachev, On the Possibility of Bose Star Formation , Phys. Lett. B 261 (1991) 289.
[53] P.-H. Chavanis, Mass-Radius Relation of Newtonian Self-Gravitating Bose-Einstein
Condensates with Short-Range Interactions: I. Analytical Results , Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011)
043531 [1103.2050].
– 25 –

--- page 27 ---
[54] L. Visinelli, S. Baum, J. Redondo, K. Freese and F. Wilczek, Dilute and Dense Axion Stars ,
Phys. Lett. B 777 (2018) 64 [ 1710.08910].
[55] A. Prabhu and N. M. Rapidis, Resonant Conversion of Dark Matter Oscillons in Pulsar
Magnetospheres, JCAP 10 (2020) 054 [ 2005.03700].
[56] C. J. Hogan and M. J. Rees, Axion Miniclusters, Phys. Lett. B 205 (1988) 228.
[57] E. W. Kolb and I. I. Tkachev, Axion Miniclusters and Bose Stars , Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993)
3051 [hep-ph/9303313].
[58] E. W. Kolb and I. I. Tkachev, Nonlinear Axion Dynamics and Formation of Cosmological
Pseudosolitons, Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 5040 [ astro-ph/9311037].
[59] E. W. Kolb and I. I. Tkachev, Large Amplitude Isothermal Fluctuations and High Density Dark
Matter Clumps, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994) 769 [ astro-ph/9403011].
[60] B. Eggemeier, J. Redondo, K. Dolag, J. C. Niemeyer and A. Vaquero, First Simulations of
Axion Minicluster Halos , Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 (2020) 041301 [ 1911.09417].
[61] T. D. P. Edwards, B. J. Kavanagh, L. Visinelli and C. Weniger, Transient Radio Signatures
from Neutron Star Encounters with QCD Axion Miniclusters , 2011.05378.
[62] M. Lawson, A. J. Millar, M. Pancaldi, E. Vitagliano and F. Wilczek, Tunable Axion Plasma
Haloscopes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 (2019) 141802 [ 1904.11872].
[63] M. C. D. Marsh, J. H. Matthews, C. Reynolds and P. Carenza, The Fourier Formalism for
Relativistic Axion-Photon Conversion, with Astrophysical Applications , 2107.08040.
– 26 –