--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:1312.3415v2  [astro-ph.CO]  7 May 2014
Testing Local Anisotropy Using the Method of Smoothed Resid uals I - Methodology
aStephen Appleby, a,bArman Shaﬁeloo
aAsia Paciﬁc Center for Theoretical Physics, Pohang, Gyeonb uk 790-784, Korea
bDepartment of Physics, POSTECH, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784 , Korea
(Dated: June 26, 2018)
We discuss some details regarding the method of smoothed res iduals, which has recently been
used to search for anisotropic signals in low-redshift dist ance measurements (Supernovae). In this
short note we focus on some details regarding the implementa tion of the method, particularly the
issue of eﬀectively detecting signals in data that are inhom ogeneously distributed on the sky. Using
simulated data, we argue that the original method proposed i n Colin et al. [1] will not detect spurious
signals due to incomplete sky coverage, and that introducin g additional Gaussian weighting to the
statistic as in [2] can hinder its ability to detect a signal. Issues related to the width of the Gaussian
smoothing are also discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
The possible existence of anisotropic signals in low red-
shift cosmological data sets, most notably type Ia Super-
nova (SN) data [3–5], has recently gained some interest in
the literature [6–10]. Increasingly precise measurements
and improved understanding of systematics has made de-
tecting local bulk velocities of order Vbulk ∼ 300kms−1
up to redshifts z ∼ 0.1 possible (albeit with weak sig-
niﬁcance). A number of methods have been proposed
to detect anisotropic signals of both cosmological [11–
18] and local origin [1, 2]. Cosmological anisotropy is
severely restricted by the uniformity of the distance to
last scattering on the sky [19–21], however a local bulk
ﬂow would introduce an anisotropic signal at low red-
shifts exclusively.
An open question regards the scale of any potential
bulk velocity - whether there is coherent motion amongst
the data or local ﬂows in the vicinity of large overden-
sities. In the former case, the eﬀect of the bulk velocity
on observables can be calculated theoretically, and the
resulting model directly compared to the data. However
local bulk ﬂows due to inhomogeneous matter distribu-
tions are diﬃcult to model. Model independent tests of
the isotropic hypothesis are therefore particularly useful,
since one can obtain information regarding the magni-
tude of Vbulk, its direction on the sky and the scale over
which it acts.
In this work we would like to discuss some techni-
cal issues related to one particular approach to studying
anisotropy - the use of the so called ‘method of smoothed
residuals’. We begin by reviewing the original method,
outlined in [1]. We also review a slightly modiﬁed form
of the method, proposed in a recent paper [2]. Whilst
the two approaches are similar, there are important dif-
ferences that we would like to highlight. We focus on
the use of both methods when the data is not homo-
geneously distributed on the sky, and how the original
method avoids spurious detections of anisotropy in di-
rections that are oversampled.
The note will proceed as follows. In section II we dis-
cuss the original method of residuals, applied to a SN
sample (although the arguments that we make through-
out apply generally to the method). We also explain a
slightly modiﬁed variant of the method, used in [2]. In
section III A-III C we discuss some details, and clarify is-
sues related to inhomogeneous data sets, width of Gaus-
sian smoothing and the nature of the hypothesis tests
being performed. We conclude in section IV. In the ap-
pendix we provide a brief order of magnitude calculation
of the signal and noise expected in current surveys.
II. METHOD OF SMOOTHED RESIDUALS
We begin with a review of the original method pro-
posed in [1]. We apply it to a Supernova data sample,
however it should be considered as a general method for
detecting anisotropic signals in data on the sky. The
analysis involves the following steps:
First we calculate a global best ﬁt value assuming
a model (here ﬂat ΛCDM with parameters H0 and
Ωm0)[26], by minimizing the χ2 statistic using the dis-
tance moduli µi for the i = 1, N data points. Using these
parameters, we construct the error-normalised diﬀerence
of the data from the model [22–24],
qi(zi, θi, φi) = µi(zi, θi, φi) − ˜µ(zi)
σi
, (1)
where σi is the error on the i th data point. We denote the
best-ﬁt distance modulus as ˜ µ(z, H0). Here, ( θi, φi) are
the positions of the i data point on the sky Henceforth
we work with these residuals, qi(zi, θi, φi) and consider
their angular distribution on the sky.
Next, we deﬁne a measure Q(θ, φ) on the surface of a
sphere of unit radius using these residuals:
Q(θ, φ) =
N∑
i=1
qi(zi, θi, φi)W (θ, φ, θi, φi) , (2)
where N is the number of SNe Ia data points and
W (θ, φ, θi, φi) is a window function that represents a two
dimensional smoothing over the surface of a sphere. We
deﬁne the window function using a Gaussian distribution:


--- Page 2 ---
2
W (θ, φ, θi, φi) = 1√
2πδ
exp
[
− L(θ, φ, θi, φi)2
2δ2
]
, (3)
where δ is the width of smoothing and L(θ, φ, θi, φi) is
the distance on the surface of a sphere of unit radius
between two points with spherical coordinates ( θ, φ) and
(θi, φi). The Gaussian window function is not unique; for
example one could instead opt for a top hat proﬁle [25].
However we found no signiﬁcant change to our results
when repeating our analysis using this diﬀerent function.
Any anisotropy in the data will translate to Q(θ, φ)
signiﬁcantly deviating from zero. Note that the expec-
tation value of Q(θ, φ) is non-zero even when we ﬁt the
‘correct’ model to the data, but its value will have no
statistical signiﬁcance in this case.
Finally we adopt a value for δ, calculate Q(θ, φ) over
the whole surface of the sphere and ﬁnd the minimum
and maximum of this quantity, Qmin = Q(θmin, φmin)
and Qmax = Q(θmax, φmax). Our statistical measure of
anisotropy is based on the diﬀerence
∆Q = Q(θmax, φmax) − Q(θmin, φmin), (4)
i.e. a large value of ∆ Qdata relative to ∆ Q obtained from
ﬁducial mock data sets implies signiﬁcant anisotropy. In
this work, we will use ∆ Q when calculating the signiﬁ-
cance of any bulk velocity detection. However when we
plot the direction of any detection of anisotropy on the
sky we always use the direction associated with Qmax,
since this should be aligned with the bulk velocity in our
simulations.
The function Q(θ, φ) constitutes a map of the data over
the whole sky, and as such contains signiﬁcantly more
information that one can extract just using ∆ Q. One
could contruct any number of diﬀerent measures to test
various hypotheses, however in this work we concentrate
exclusively on ∆ Q by virtue of its simplicity and its clear
ability to discriminate anisotropic signals [1].
To calculate the signiﬁcance of the ∆ Q value obtained
from the data, one must construct a distribution of ∆ Q
values obtained by simulating Nreal data sets based upon
the null hypothesis being tested. In the original method,
Nreal = 10 3 realisations were simulated, with the same
positions, redshifts and errors as the data. The distance
modulus of each point µi was taken to be the data best ﬁt
value ˜µ(z, H0) plus a contribution drawn from a Gaussian
of width σi. The ∆ Q value obtained from the data is
compared to the resulting distribution of ∆ Q from the
Nreal simulations, to test the signiﬁcance of the result.
There are two important points that must be stressed.
The ﬁrst is that if there is no bulk velocity or anisotropy
in the data and systematics are under control, then one
can expect that every residual will be drawn from a sym-
metric distribution, and this is true regardless of the po-
sitions of the data points. This is the null hypothesis that
the original method was designed to test. The second is
that the simulated data has the same distribution on the
sky as the actual data.
A variant of the method was discussed in [2]. There,
the approach followed the original to a large degree. The
best ﬁt cosmology is calculated by minimizing χ2, and
the data residuals are calculated by subtracting ˜ µ from
the data values. A modiﬁed quantity was introduced,
which we call ¯Q, deﬁned as
˜Q(θ, φ) =
∑N
i=1 qi(zi, θi, φi)W (θ, φ, θi, φi)
∑N
j=1 W (θ, φ, θj , φj)
, (5)
that is, Q obtained from the original method weighted
by the sum of the window function at that point. ∆ ˜Q =
˜Qmax − ˜Qmin is similarly deﬁned.
To ﬁnd the signiﬁcance of the magnitude of ∆ ˜Q, one
must construct a distribution based upon the hypothesis
being tested. In [2], the authors create a distribution of
∆ ˜Q by taking the N residuals and redistributing them
randomly amongst the data point positions Nreal = 5000
times, each time calculating ∆ ˜Q.
We call these two methods A and B respectively. In
the following section we discuss how the two methods
diﬀer. Before continuing we stress that this note is not
a criticism of the main results of [2] - here we make no
claim as to the direction or magnitude of the local bulk
ﬂow in actual supernova data. A thorough analysis us-
ing the method of smoothed residuals applied to various
available data sets will follow this work. Here we are
simply discussing the method and its application.
III. DISCUSSION
Methods A and B represent slightly diﬀerent imple-
mentations of the method of smoothed residuals, and
in this section we discuss some of the diﬀerences. In
what follows we will support our arguments by calculat-
ing distributions of ∆ Q for simulated data sets. For the
simulations we use a background ΛCDM cosmology with
h0,d = 0.7, Ω m0,d = 0.27. In each simulation we add sta-
tistical noise to the distance modulus data, δµG, drawn
from a Gaussian of width σµ = 0 .13. For any given dis-
tribution of points we create two sets of Nreal ∼ 103 mock
data, one with a non-zero global bulk velocity ˜ v of mag-
nitude Vbulk = 250kms −1 and a ﬁducial ΛCDM case with
Vbulk = 0. The bulk velocities direction is chosen arbi-
trarily as ( l, b) = (30 , 120). Unless stated otherwise, we
use N = 300 data points, which we distribute between
z = (0.015, 0.1) with a ﬂat prior.
A. Spurious Signals due to Inhomogeneous Data
The main point of this note is to refute the sugges-
tion that the original method A will detect spurious
anisotropic signals if the data is inhomogeneously dis-
tributed. We do not expect this to be the case, due to
the fact that one compares the observed value of ∆ Q


--- Page 3 ---
3
from the data with the distribution of ∆ Q values ob-
tained from mock data with the same data positions on
the sky for each realisation. Therefore any eﬀect on ∆ Q
due to the distribution of points will be observed in both
the realisations and data. In this respect, there is no
need to weight the original ∆ Q function as in method B
- in fact in certain data distributions weighting the ∆ Q
function might reduce the signiﬁcance of a signal relative
to the noise.
The statistical signiﬁcance of any anisotropic signal
obtained with method A is based upon the ΛCDM,
Vbulk = 0 realisations drawn from the same point dis-
tribution on the sphere. As such the distribution does
not play a signiﬁcant role - the variance of the statisti-
cal noise from the realisations will be a function of the
number of data points in a given region.
We discuss a small number of sample cases. The sim-
plest - an isotropic distribution of N data on the sky -
is optimal for detecting a bulk ﬂow, both in terms of the
signiﬁcance of the magnitude of ∆ Q and in correctly lo-
cating the direction ( θmax, φmax). This can be seen by
examining the residuals. If we make the simplifying as-
sumptions that the bulk velocity has a small perturbative
eﬀect on the Hubble parameter and the data is located at
small z ≪ 1 [27], then we can write the sum of residuals
as
N∑
i=1
qi(zi, θi, φi) ≃
N∑
i=1
(
δµG,i + A0
˜v.ˆni
czi
)
+ A0N δH (6)
where δH = H0,th/H0d − 1, with H0,th being the best
ﬁt H0 value obtained by χ2 minimization, and H0,d is
the ‘true’ value used in the simulations. Here A0 is an
unimportant constant of order unity. If we make the
further simplifying assumption that the sum of residuals
is zero (this is not exactly the case) then one can estimate
δH as
δH ∼ − 1
N
N∑
i=1
( δµG,i
A0
+ ˜v.ˆni
czi
)
(7)
The sum of the Gaussian noise can be considered as a
single variable drawn from a Gaussian of zero mean, and
for an isotropic distribution the sum ∑
i ˜v.ˆni/zi will have
expectation value zero regardless of the magnitude Vbulk.
This data distribution will yield a set of residuals that
is symmetrically distributed around the ‘true’ underly-
ing cosmological model. Let us compare this case to one
which might naively be expected to yield a stronger sig-
nal in ∆ Q. We now take N = 200 points isotropically
distributed on the sky and Npatch = 100 points densely
located in a region l = (20 , 40), b = (110 , 130) (that is,
in the direction of the simulated bulk velocity). In such
a case, δH will acquire a non-zero expectation value of
order
⟨δH ⟩ ∼ − Npatch
N
Vbulk
c¯z (8)
where ¯z is the average redshift of the data points in the
patch (this is an order of magnitude approximation only).
We see that increasing the number of points in the direc-
tion of the anisotropy has the eﬀect of shifting the best ﬁt
cosmological model away from the underlying one. De-
spite this, increasing the number of points in the speciﬁc
direction of the bulk velocity will generically have the ef-
fect of increasing the signal, despite the penalty in shift-
ing the best ﬁt function. While it is intuitively obvious
that increasing the number of data points in the direc-
tion of the bulk ﬂow will increase the signiﬁcance of the
detection, it is also clear that the signal per data point
will decrease for an inhomogeneous distribution. Hence
an isotropic distribution is optimal if we make no prior
assumptions regarding the direction of the bulk velocity.
To conﬁrm our reasoning, we resort to simulations.
We create six sets of Nreal = 10 3 mock data contain-
ing N = 300 points. In two simulations we distribute the
three hundred data isotropically on the sky, two sets are
created with a subset of Npatch = 100 points distributed
equally in two patches θ = (20 , 40), φ = (110 , 130) and
θ = ( − 20, − 40), φ = (290 , 310) (that is, in the direc-
tion of the bulk velocity and its dipole) and in the ﬁnal
two we have Npatch = 100 points distributed in a patch
in an arbitrary direction, taken to be θ = ( − 50, − 70),
φ = (30 , 50). For each of the three distributions, one
set of simulations has Vbulk = 250kms −1 and the other
Vbulk = 0. For each realisation we calculate ∆ Q. If
there is a bulk velocity, then ∆ Q should be signiﬁcantly
larger than its value when Vbulk = 0. As a null test of
both methods, we performed simulations of an isotropic
cosmological model with the third distribution described
above. We found no statistically signiﬁcant spurious sig-
nals, as expected.
In table I we exhibit the number of Vbulk = 250kms −1
simulations that have a ∆ Q that is larger than 99% of
the Vbulk = 0 realisations ∆ Q values. In other words,
these are the Vbulk = 250kms −1 simulations which can
correctly exclude the zero bulk velocity hypothesis at
99% conﬁdence. We compare the number of success-
ful discriminations between an isotropically distributed
data set and one containing a patch of data at an arbi-
trary location. The isotropic data distribution provides
a more reliable test of anisotropy, in the sense that more
isotropic realisations are excluded than when we have an
inhomogeneous distribution in an arbitrary direction.
For the case where we have a patch of data in the
same direction as the bulk velocity, one can argue that
introducing the weighting in method B actually scatters
the direction of Qmax, and hence reduces the utility of
the method. For method A the signal will clearly be the
largest in the direction of the bulk velocity - the signal
grows roughly linearly with the number of points in a
given direction and this is true regardless of δH correc-
tions to the signal. Since method B uses ¯Q deﬁned in


--- Page 4 ---
4
(5), it divides by the sum of the window function at each
point. Since this weighting will be largest in the location
of the overdense patch (by virtue of it having the largest
number of points), at best method B can ﬁnd the location
of the bulk velocity as well as method A. However in actu-
ality the method will introduce additional scatter in the
detection. This is exhibited in ﬁg.1 - the black points cor-
respond to the ∆ Q values that rule out Vbulk = 0 to 99%
conﬁdence for method B, and the red points method A.
There are considerably fewer black points than red, indi-
cating that the actual signiﬁcance of the signal is reduced
by dividing out the window function. Note that both
methods will pick out the correct direction here, since
we are using a unique inhomogeneous data set where the
overdense data region is aligned with ˜ v.
Some additional comments. Although method B is in-
ferior to method A when the inhomogeneous data patch
is aligned with the bulk velocity, this is not a generic
statement. One can create scenario’s where the converse
is true. This highlights two issues. One - the question
of accurate directional detection is complicated consid-
erably by a non-trivial distribution of data. There is no
single variant of the Q function that will optimally detect
the bulk velocity direction for an arbitrary distribution.
Given a distribution an optimal weighting could be con-
structed, however this would require extensive simula-
tions. In this respect, one should consider the smoothed
residual method as it was originally intended; as a null
test of the isotropic hypothesis. Two - method A will
not detect spurious bulk velocity signals due to inhomo-
geneities in the data distribution, since we are compar-
ing data and realisations with the same positions on the
sky. It is a reasonable to state that the sensitivity of the
method will be reduced for an inhomogeneous distribu-
tion relative to homogeneous data. However this problem
is not necessarily ameliorated by dividing out the window
function at each point.
Distribution
Nexc (method A) Nexc (method B)
Isotropic 404 406
Anisotropic I 239 212
Anisotropic II 838 189
TABLE I: Number of Vbulk = 250kms −1 realisations that ex-
cludes the Vbulk = 0 hypothesis to 99% conﬁdence. We per-
form N = 10 3 realisations in total for each case. Isotropic
is the case where we have N = 300 data points isotropically
distributed on the sky, Anisotropic I is for N = 200 points
isotropically distributed and Npatch = 100 points densely
packed in the vicinity ( θ, φ) = ( −60, 40) (arbitrarily chosen),
and Anisotropic II is N = 200 points isotropically distributed
and Npatch = 100 points equally distributed in two patches
in the vicinity of the bulk velocity ( θ, φ) = (30 , 120) and its
dipole ( θ, φ) = ( −30, 300). One can see that the two methods
perform comparably in the ﬁrst two cases, and method A is
clearly more discriminatory when we have many data points
in the direction of the signal. This is due to the fact that the
signal is cumulative in the original method.
B. Width of Gaussian Smoothing
The second important point that we wish to make is
that the window function contains a free parameter, δ,
which is the scale of the Gaussian smoothing. The sensi-
tivity of the method to diﬀerent anisotropic signals will
depend on δ. For example, if we are searching for a global
bulk velocity in the SN data, then δ = π/2 will be opti-
mal in detecting the signal. However, if we are searching
for local anisotropies, δ = π/2 will not necessarily be ef-
ﬁcient in detecting them. Ideally, one should choose the
value of δ to be the size of the angle on the sky over
which the anisotropic signal is expected to be signiﬁcant.
If we have no prior knowledge of the anisotropic signal,
one should perform an analysis for multiple δ values and
compare the signiﬁcance of the resulting ∆ Q to mock
data in each case. Finding the value of δ that yields the
maximal signiﬁcance in ∆ Q will give us additional infor-
mation regarding the distribution of bulk velocities in the
data (that is, whether the bulk velocity is global or lo-
cal, and if local on what typical scale it is present). This
information is important, as it would be very diﬃcult to
construct a theoretical model of local bulk velocities that
we can use to directly confront with the data.
In the left panel of ﬁg.2 we exhibit the realisations of
Vbulk = 250kms −1 data that preclude the Vbulk = 0 re-
alisations to ∼ 99% conﬁdence for an N = 300 isotropic
data distribution and a global velocity. The green points
denote a smoothing scale of δ = π/2 and the blue dia-
monds δ = π/9. We use the original method A exclu-
sively in this subsection. There are clearly fewer success-
ful discriminations in the smaller δ smoothing, reﬂecting
the fact that on smaller scales we pick up a smaller cu-
mulative signal. For a global bulk velocity the signal will
be coherent over an entire hemisphere.
Contrast this to the right panel of ﬁg.2, where we now
distribute N = 500 points isotropically on the sky, and
provide a local bulk velocity Vbulk = 600kms −1 to the
points that fall in the range θ = (20, 40), φ = (100, 140).
Note that here we are exaggerating both the magnitude
of the bulk velocity and the number of data points to
detect the signal - a local bulk velocity is considerably
harder to detect than a global bulk ﬂow. We repeat our
analysis with δ = π/2 (green points) and δ = π/9 (blue
diamonds). We now plot the realisations that exclude
the isotropic hypothesis to 95% signiﬁcance, hence the
increased scatter. One can see that there are fewer suc-
cessful detections of the velocity compared to the global
bulk velocity (left panel). This is a reﬂection of the re-
duced signal associated with a local ﬂow. However, it
is clear that the value of δ that encompasses the local
patch, δ = π/9, performs better than the δ = π/2 scale.
This is due to the fact that when we use δ = π/2, we
increase the number of points in a patch (and hence the
noise) but not the signal, which is restricted to a small
region of the sky.


--- Page 5 ---
5
-90
-60
-30
 0
 30
 60
 90
 0  45  90  135  180  225  270  315  360
FIG. 1: The realisations of simulated Vbulk = 250kms −1 mock data that exclude the isotropic Vbulk = 0 simulations to 99%
conﬁdence. Both sets of data are for N = 200 points isotropically distributed on the sky, and Npatch = 100 points equally
populated in the vicinity of the bulk velocity ( θ, φ) = (30 , 120) and its dipole ( θ, φ) = ( −30, 300). The red triangles ( Nexc = 838)
denote the Qmax statistic used in method A, and the black dots ( Nexc = 189) the modiﬁed ¯Qmax statistic of method B. The
yellow square denotes the actual direction of the bulk veloc ity. The discriminatory nature of the test is reduced when we divide
out the window function for reasons discussed in the text.
-90
-60
-30
 0
 30
 60
 90
 0  45  90  135  180  225  270  315  360
-90
-60
-30
 0
 30
 60
 90
 0  45  90  135  180  225  270  315  360
FIG. 2: [Left Panel] Realisations that discriminate betwee n a global bulk velocity Vbulk = 250kms −1 and Vbulk = 0 at 99%
conﬁdence. The green triangles are for a window function wit h δ = π/2 and the blue diamonds are δ = π/9. There are fewer
points as we decrease the smoothing scale, reﬂecting the fac t that for a global velocity, the bulk ﬂow signal is cumulativ e over
an entire hemisphere. [Right Panel] Realisations that disc riminate between a local bulk velocity that only aﬀects poin ts in the
range θ = (20, 40), φ = (100, 140). We are now using N = 500 data points and Vbulk = 600kms −1. The increased scatter is due
to the fact that we are now looking at the 95% conﬁdence limit. The green triangles represent the Gaussian smoothing δ = π/9
and the blue δ = π/2. Now the converse is true - the local bulk velocity is prefer entially selected by the narrow smoothing
scale. Enlarging δ now has the eﬀect of increasing the noise with no gain in signa l. Note however that it is much more diﬃcult
to detect a local bulk velocity than global - there are consid erably fewer successful discriminations compared to the gl obal bulk
velocity case.


--- Page 6 ---
6
C. Hypothesis Testing
We make an additional comment on the actual statis-
tical tests being used in [1] and [2]. In both methods, the
quantity ∆ Q (or ∆ ¯Q) is obtained from the data in the
same way. However the distributions that they are then
tested against are diﬀerent, and hence the hypotheses be-
ing tested in the two cases are distinct. In method A, the
realisations are drawn from an isotropic ΛCDM Universe
with Gaussian statistical errors and Vbulk = 0. Method B
takes the residuals obtained from the data and resamples
them in random data point directions (keeping the data
point locations ﬁxed). One can think of this roughly as
drawing residuals from their empirical distribution func-
tion constructed from the data. The method does not
assume that these are Gaussian distributed around the
best ﬁt model, and they will generically not be. If there
is an underlying bulk velocity and the data is not isotrop-
ically distributed on the sky, then one can say that while
the residuals might sum to the value that minimizes χ2,
the distribution will not necessarily be symmetric around
this value.
Therefore one can state the hypothesis being tested
in method B as ‘The value of ∆ Q obtained from the
data is consistent with the data residuals being randomly
distributed amongst the data point positions’. This is not
the hypothesis of method A, which can be stated as - ‘The
value of ∆ Q obtained from the data is consistent with
Gaussian statistical ﬂuctuations in an isotropic Universe’.
The two are mathematically equivalent only when the
bulk velocity is zero.
Both hypotheses are tests of isotropy, but they are dis-
tinct. In eﬀect, there are actually two tests of isotropy
involved here - whether the residuals are distributed
symmetrically around the model that minimizes χ2 and
whether the positions of the residuals on the sky are un-
correlated (the ∆ Q value essentially tests the directional
relationship between the residuals). If either of these as-
sumptions are violated, method A will pick up a signal
in ∆ Q, whereas method B can only distinguish poten-
tial correlations in the residual’s positions. In practice
the distinction might be small, however upcoming sur-
veys will yield unprecedented constraints on the distance
measurements, making the distribution of the residuals
an additional discriminant when searching for a bulk ve-
locity.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
To conclude, in this short note we have discussed a
number of issues relating to the method of smoothed
residuals. The main point is to state that the original
method [1] does not require modiﬁcation to avoid spu-
rious detections due to inhomogeneous sampling. Any
sampling eﬀect is taken into account when we compare
the ∆ Q value to mock data sets with the same distribu-
tion on the sky. If we have a patch of the sky containing
more data, then the mean of the residuals in this patch
should still be zero if there is no bulk velocity. The sta-
tistical noise has a higher probability of being large in
this region, but this is not relevant as the same elevated
noise will be present in the Vbulk = 0 simulations against
which we test the signiﬁcance. If there is a non-zero
bulk velocity, then the additional points might shift the
detected direction of the bulk ﬂow away from the true
direction. However the method is intended as a null hy-
pothesis test - we are primarily interested in determining
the existence of a bulk velocity. In this respect introduc-
ing an additional weighting actually hinders the method,
as the signal would no longer be cumulative.
It is important to stress that the ability of either
method A or B to detect a signal in the data depends
sensitively on the distribution of data on the sky. One
should test the signiﬁcance of the magnitude of the ∆ Q
value by comparing the observed value against Vbulk = 0
simulations. To test the reliability of the directional de-
tection one should additionally perform simulations with
a non-zero bulk ﬂow Vbulk ̸= 0. Only by performing this
additional test can one deduce the eﬀect of the distri-
bution of data on the detected direction. The original
method was intended as a null test of the isotropic hy-
pothesis, and if we treat it as such then one need only
test the magnitude of the ∆ Q function. Obtaining fur-
ther information requires more care and utilising a second
independent method, as in [1, 2], is extremely prudent.
The second important point is that the question as to
whether the bulk ﬂow is global and acts on all SN data
points coherently, or only in a local patch on the sky,
should be addressed by varying the parameter δ. The
signal to noise ratio in current data sets is marginal - the
advantage of using δ is that one can maximize the signal
to noise expected for a given bulk velocity. For example
using δ = π/2 will collect a signal over an entire hemi-
sphere, making it useful for studying velocities containing
a coherent signal over these scales. Varying δ will yield
additional information regarding the distribution of ˜ v.
Signiﬁcant detection of a bulk velocity in low redshift
data remains an open challenge, and near-future data
sets will allow us to deﬁnitively answer the question as
to whether the bulk ﬂow is local or coherent over the
whole sky. Model independent tests such as the method
of smoothed residuals will play a central part in answer-
ing this question. However when using inhomogeneous
data one must be cautious in applying the method. The
original method is optimal to test the isotropic hypothesis
- extracting further information such as the magnitude
Vbulk, direction and scale of any bulk velocity requires
a much more detailed analysis. Testing the results ob-
tained from the data by using extensive simulations, tak-
ing maximally isotropic subsamples of the data and using
alternative methods as a means of independent veriﬁca-
tion is imperative.


--- Page 7 ---
7
Appendix - Signal to Noise
We include here a brief discussion of the size of the
signal expected in current Supernova surveys. Let us
consider how the signal and noise varies as we vary the
size of a patch on the sky. Increasing the area of the patch
will increase the number of data points, increasing both
the signal and the variance of the noise. Here we assume
an isotropic distribution of data over the whole sky, and
a global bulk velocity ˜v of magnitude Vbulk. The residual
of the ith data point can be approximately written as
qi ≃ 1
σi
[
A0
˜v.ˆni
czi
+ δµG,i
]
(9)
where δµG,i is drawn from a Gaussian distribution of
width σi. For simplicity we calculate the sum of residuals
in a patch on the sky containing Npatch points, neglecting
the window function W (θ, φ, θi, φi)
qpatch =
Npatch∑
i=1
qi (10)
The function W (θ, φ, θi, φi) will modify the overall Q
value, however here we are solely interested in the ra-
tio of signal to noise (the ﬁrst and second terms on the
right hand side of (9) respectively), and W (θ, φ, θi, φi)
weights both equally. As in the main body of this work,
we take σi to be the same for all of the data points.
The sum of Npatch Gaussian contributions δµG,i is itself
a single variable drawn from a Gaussian of mean zero
and variance σ2 = Npatchσ2
i . Therefore the standard
deviation of the statistical noise grows like ∼
√
Npatch.
The signal does not grow linearly with Npatch due to the
angular dependence of ˜v.ˆni.
Let us take a spherical patch on the sky that subtends
an angle 2 θ on the sky, and is centered in the direction
of the bulk velocity (so θ = 0 at ˜ v.ˆn = Vbulk). For an
isotropic distribution of points, one can ﬁnd a relation-
ship between the number of points and the area of the
patch, given by θ. If there are Ntot points on the whole
sphere, then the variance of the noise grows like
σ2 = Ntot
2 (1 − cos[θ]) σ2
i (11)
and the signal
Npatch∑
i=1
˜v.ˆn
czi
∼ NtotVbulk
4c⟨z⟩
(
1 − cos2[θ]
)
(12)
where again θ denotes half the angle subtended by the
spherical patch. One can see that the signal increases
at a faster rate than the noise close to the direction of
the bulk velocity ( θ ∼ 0), but slower at the hemisphere
(θ ∼ π/2), as one might expect. For a given survey one
can use order of magnitude calculations such as this to
obtain the optimal Gaussian width that we should use to
detect a bulk velocity of particular magnitude Vbulk and
characteristic scale. Such an approach will be utilized in
a forthcoming publication.
Acknowledgements
S.A.A and A.S wish to acknowledge support from the
Korea Ministry of Education, Science and Technology,
Gyeongsangbuk-Do and Pohang City for Independent Ju-
nior Research Groups at the Asia Paciﬁc Center for The-
oretical Physics. The authors would like to thank Eric
Linder and Ewan Cameron for helpful discussions.
[1] J. Colin, R. Mohayaee, S. Sarkar and A. Shaﬁeloo, Mon.
Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 414, 264 (2011) [arXiv:1011.6292
[astro-ph.CO]].
[2] U. Feindt, M. Kerschhaggl, M. Kowalski, G. Aldering,
P. Antilogus, C. Aragon, S. Bailey and C. Baltay et al. ,
arXiv:1310.4184 [astro-ph.CO].
[3] A. G. Riess et al. [Supernova Search Team Collabora-
tion], Astron. J. 116, 1009 (1998) [astro-ph/9805201].
[4] S. Perlmutter et al. [Supernova Cosmology Project
Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999)
[astro-ph/9812133].
[5] R. Amanullah, C. Lidman, D. Rubin, G. Aldering,
P. Astier, K. Barbary, M. S. Burns and A. Conley et al. ,
Astrophys. J. 716, 712 (2010) [arXiv:1004.1711 [astro-
ph.CO]].
[6] T. S. Kolatt and O. Lahav, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
323, 859 (2001) [astro-ph/0008041].
[7] C. Bonvin, R. Durrer and M. Kunz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
191302 (2006) [astro-ph/0603240].
[8] C. Gordon, K. Land and A. Slosar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99,
081301 (2007) [arXiv:0705.1718 [astro-ph]].
[9] D. J. Schwarz and B. Weinhorst, Astron. Astrophys. 474,
717 (2007) [arXiv:0706.0165 [astro-ph]].
[10] S. Gupta, T. D. Saini and T. Laskar, Mon. Not. Roy.
Astron. Soc. 388, 242 (2008) [astro-ph/0701683].
[11] S. A. Appleby and E. V. Linder, Phys. Rev. D 87, 023532
(2013) [arXiv:1210.8221 [astro-ph.CO]].
[12] T. Koivisto and D. F. Mota, JCAP 0806, 018 (2008)
[arXiv:0801.3676 [astro-ph]].
[13] T. S. Koivisto, D. F. Mota, M. Quartin and T. G. Zlosnik,
Phys. Rev. D 83, 023509 (2011) [arXiv:1006.3321 [astro-
ph.CO]].


--- Page 8 ---
8
[14] M. Blomqvist, E. Mortsell and S. Nobili, JCAP 0806,
027 (2008) [arXiv:0806.0496 [astro-ph]].
[15] A. R. Cooray, D. E. Holz and R. Caldwell, JCAP 1011,
015 (2010) [arXiv:0812.0376 [astro-ph]].
[16] S. Gupta and T. D. Saini, arXiv:1005.2868 [astro-ph.CO ].
[17] R. Cooke and D. Lynden-Bell, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc. 401, 1409 (2010) [arXiv:0909.3861 [astro-ph.CO]].
[18] I. Antoniou and L. Perivolaropoulos, JCAP 1012, 012
(2010) [arXiv:1007.4347 [astro-ph.CO]].
[19] L. Campanelli, P. Cea and L. Tedesco, Phys. Rev. D 76,
063007 (2007) [arXiv:0706.3802 [astro-ph]].
[20] L. Campanelli, P. Cea and L. Tedesco, Phys. Rev. Lett.
97, 131302 (2006) [Erratum-ibid. 97, 209903 (2006)]
[astro-ph/0606266].
[21] S. Appleby, R. Battye and A. Moss, Phys. Rev. D 81,
081301 (2010) [arXiv:0912.0397 [astro-ph.CO]].
[22] L. Perivolaropoulos and A. Shaﬁeloo, Phys. Rev. D 79,
123502 (2009) [arXiv:0811.2802 [astro-ph]].
[23] A. Shaﬁeloo and L. Perivolaropoulos, AIP Conf. Proc.
1241, 287 (2010)
[24] A. Shaﬁeloo, T. Clifton and P. G. Ferreira, JCAP 1108,
017 (2011) [arXiv:1006.2141 [astro-ph.CO]].
[25] B. Kalus, D. J. Schwarz, M. Seikel and A. Wiegand, As-
tron. Astrophys. 553 (2013) A56 [arXiv:1212.3691 [astro-
ph.CO]].
[26] Our results will be only weakly dependent upon the un-
derlying model chosen, since we are exclusively using a
low redshift data set.
[27] Neither of these assumptions are made when we perform
our numerical calculations - they are made purely to sim-
plify the analytic results and relaxing them does not alter
our conclusions
