--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:astro-ph/0609755v2  27 Mar 2007
An Alternative Approach to Holographic Dark Energy
Fergus Simpson 1, 2, ∗
1Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingle y Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA
2Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh,
Royal Observatory, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ
(Dated: July 12, 2018)
Here we consider a scenario in which dark energy is associate d with the apparent area of a surface
in the early universe. In order to resemble the cosmological constant at late times, this hypothetical
reference scale should maintain an approximately constant physical size during an asymptotically
de-Sitter expansion. This is found to arise when the particl e horizon - anticipated to be signiﬁcantly
greater than the Hubble length - is approaching the antipode of a closed universe. Depending on
the constant of proportionality, either the ensuing inﬂati onary period prevents the particle horizon
from vanishing, or it may lead to a sequence of “Big Rips”.
I. INTRODUCTION
The acceleration of our universe is now a well es-
tablished phenomenon, and numerous theoretical ap-
proaches have attempted to provide an explanation. The
cosmological constant is arguably the strongest candi-
date, although it has a number of well-documented issues,
particularly with regard to its size. One of the more at-
tractive methods of attaining such a small number is by
relating it to a cosmological length scale.
The holographic principle speculates that all informa-
tion stored within some volume is represented on the
boundary of that region. A cosmological variation of the
holographic principle was originally proposed by Fischler
& Susskind [1]. In this scenario the cosmological hori-
zon acts as a surface which obeys the Bekenstein bound,
limiting the entropy of the enclosed volume, such that
S ≤ A
4G . (1)
This concept has been extended by Bousso [2] into a co-
variant and more general conjecture.
Cohen et al. [3] took a slightly diﬀerent approach,
whereby the dark energy density is proportional to the
inverse square of some cosmological length. This arises
when constraining the energy in some volume to be less
than a black hole of the same size.
L3ρΛ ≲ LM 2
P (2)
The most natural choices for L are the particle horizon,
and the Hubble length. However Hsu [4] has shown that
under adiabatic conditions, neither exhibit the equation
of state necessary to mimic dark energy. One could en-
force w = − 1, by permitting energy exchange between
the dark matter and dark energy, however this approach
has not proved particularly successful [5].
∗Electronic address: frgs@roe.ac.uk
Li [6] produced a model of holographic dark energy
based on Cohen’s approach, which has subsequently been
explored in further detail [7, 8, 9, 10] and is compatible
with current observational constraints [11]. By identify-
ing L as the future event horizon, the required equation
of state could emerge without invoking energy exchange.
For a saturated inequality, the energy density is given by
ρΛ = 3d2M 2
p L− 2. (3)
The value d = 1 is usually adopted for the reasons
outlined in [6] - in particular, d ≥ 1 ensures the en-
tropy doesn’t decrease. However, within Li’s model
there remain two areas of concern. First of all, for self-
consistency, there is the requirement that all forms of
energy must decay at some time in the future. And sec-
ondly, the initial condition of a preset future event hori-
zon appears a little unusual, raising the issue of causality.
Here we take a rather diﬀerent approach, ﬁnding that a
more natural form of dark energy may arise when consid-
ering the particle horizon. We argue that its associated
area may possess greater physical signiﬁcance than the
length scale itself. In Section II we explore the conse-
quences of attributing an energy density to the area of
the particle horizon within a closed universe. Section III
establishes the equation of state, and explores diﬀerent
values of the constant of proportionality d. In some cases
this may lead to a “Big Rip” scenario. Section IV sum-
marises the current and future observational constraints
on the model. We speculate on the possible physical in-
terpretations in Section V.
II. P AR TICLE HORIZON
Here we consider the consequences of ascribing an en-
ergy density to the apparent area of the particle horizon
(which represents the intersection of our past light cone
with a particular point in time prior to inﬂation). Our
parameterisation of the proportionality constant, 12 πd2,
retains the close relationship with (3) and will simplify
our analysis in the following section.


--- Page 2 ---
2
FIG. 1: The spread of the particle horizon RP across a closed
universe, with the radius of curvature RC and corresponding
angle θ also labelled. Whilst the comoving area shrinks once
beyond the half-way point, the physical area of the particle
horizon never decreases provided d ≥ 1. The residual distance
is eﬀectively the future event horizon.
ρΛ = 12πd2M 2
p
A (4)
The area A associated with our past light cone in a closed
universe is given by
A = 4πR2
C sin2 θ, (5)
where θ = RP /RC, as illustrated in Fig. 1, and the
particle horizon RP is
RP = a(t)
∫ t
0
dt′
a(t′) , (6)
and RC = R0a = H − 1Ω− 1/2
k is the radius of curvature.
The vanishing particle horizon within a closed universe
has caused some concern [1, 12] but since we are attribut-
ing its (inverse) size to the dark energy density, we ﬁnd
that this may produce cosmic acceleration, so the reces-
sion is strongly suppressed, and the entropy bound is
protected (provided d ≥ 1).
III. THE EQUATION OF STATE
Taking the time derivative of (4), and utilising the re-
lations
˙ρ = − 3 ˙a
a ρ(1 + w) (7)
and
˙RP = 1 + HR P (8)
which arose from diﬀerentiating (6), we ﬁnd that the
equation of state can be expressed as a function of
ΩΛ = ρΛ/ρc.
w = − 1
3 + 2
3
√ ΩΛ
d cos θ. (9)
This clariﬁes the behavior of w as the particle horizon
traverses the closed universe. In the following subsections
we explore the signiﬁcance of d, assuming that it exhibits
no signiﬁcant time-variation.
A. The case d = 1: De Sitter
For the scenario in which d = 1 there are three distinct
regimes
w = + 1
3 (ΩΛ = 1, RP ≪ RC ) (10)
w = − 1
3 (ΩΛ = 0) (11)
w = − 1 (Ω Λ = 1, RP ≃ πRC ) (12)
Both (10) and (11) will ultimately converge to (12).
For this limiting case, we have |Ωk| ≪ 1, and the particle
horizon is in close proximity to the observers antipode.
Then our expression for the energy density (4) simpliﬁes
to
ρΛ = d2
(πRC − RP )2 (13)
for RP /RC ≃ π. This leads to
w = − 1
3 − 2
3
√
ΩΛ. (14)
Note that having set d = 1, the evolution of the equa-
tion of state matches that of Li’s approach, since the
particle horizon is identiﬁed with the future event hori-
zon (see Fig. 1). While the future event horizon was
a free parameter in Li’s model, here it is dictated by
global geometry, which in turn was determined by the
suppression of Ω k during inﬂation. Once inﬂation has
been established, the particle horizon is frozen in at some
fraction of the radius of curvature. Further growth of θ


--- Page 3 ---
3
occurs during radiation and matter domination, scaling
as a and √
a respectively.
Given an observational ﬁt of the form w = w0 + wa(1−
a), and taking Ω Λ = 0.75, one expects
w ≃ − 0.9 + 0.2(1 − a). (15)
B. The case d > 1: Decay
For greater values of d, there is initially a higher energy
density, and thus acceleration arises earlier. This ensures
θ < π is sustained, although we still ﬁnd θ converging to
π for all values of d. The only signiﬁcant diﬀerence from
the d = 1 case is the gradual decay of the vacuum energy.
Again, for small Ω k we have
w = − 1
3 − 2
3
√ ΩΛ
d . (16)
C. The case d < 1: Big Rips
We can see from (9) that d < 1 may result in a phantom
cosmology, characterised by w < − 1. This leads to a
divergence in the energy density, destroying all galactic
and atomic structure within a ﬁnite time [13]. In this
context, the value of the Hubble parameter is initially
too low, so the particle horizon is not prevented from
vanishing. Let us take d = 0 .5 as an illustration. This
provides an equation of state asymptotically approaching
w = − 5/3, and so ρΛ ∝ a2. The unusual scenario here
is that at some point - which we take to be the Planck
density - we pass θ = π, and there is a radical transition
in behaviour. The area of the particle horizon begins to
increase in size once more, returning to its point of origin,
and we ﬁnd w = 1. We can then establish a series of “Big
Rips”, each taking much longer than its predecessor, and
with the number of e-folds dictated by d. For instance,
with d = 0.5 a present-day value of ρΛ ∼ 10− 120 implies a
further ∼ 140 e-folds until the Planck density is reached.
If d = 0 .8, then ρΛ ∝ √
a, so a further ∼ 550 e-folds are
required. Note that d < 0.5 appears to be forbidden on
the grounds that this could lead to an unphysical value
of w > 1.
D. Entropy
Could the particle horizon still obey the constraint
given by (1)? As explored by Fishler & Susskind, the
most natural way to count the entropy enclosed within a
given area is that which has passed though the past light
cone. The most important consequence of this is that we
bypass the vast volume of the particle horizon associated
with inﬂation, as we need only consider the light cone
after reheating. Thus one could potentially reconcile a
large universe with the constraint given by (1). This
bound is eventually violated when considering the d < 1
models. However, the signiﬁcance of this is questionable,
since a simple model of a collapsing universe would also
lead to a violation.
E. Theoretical Issues
One of the problems associated with dark energy is the
question of coincidence. Why are we around at the time
of transition from matter to dark energy domination?
There are few scenarios which can genuinely address this
problem. One is where recent events - such as the for-
mation of structure - are directly related to cosmological
kinetics. Eﬀorts to explain dark energy via the gravi-
tational inﬂuence of nonlinearities have thus far proved
unsuccessful. The second is one in which the lifetime of
the universe is restricted. If either recollapse or the big
rip occurs within the next ∼ 1012 years then we are no
longer unusually close to the time of transition. This
makes studying cosmologies with w < − 1 particularly
attractive, despite the diﬃculty in interpreting the ther-
modynamics.
The standard cosmological constant also runs into dif-
ﬁculty when we try to establish why the energy density
appears so small. Conversely, here we must wonder why
the energy density is not even smaller . If there were a
few extra e-folds of inﬂation this would generate a much
larger volume within which we would be more likely to
exist. This could be alleviated if other important factors,
such as the magnitude of primordial density perturba-
tions, were also correlated with the number of e-folds of
inﬂation.
IV. OBSER V ATIONAL CONSTRAINTS
Since the equation of state with small Ω k, given by
(16), matches earlier studies using the future event hori-
zon, we can utilise constraints on d from Chang et al.
[14]. They ﬁnd an equation of state of the form (16) re-
mains compatible with current observational data from
supernovae, the CMB, and large scale structure. There
is however a preference for d < 1, a value which as we
have seen leads to some intriguing behaviour. They also
highlight how constraints are particularly sensitive to the
Hubble parameter, with a lower h favouring higher d.
Recently, it has been suggested that the controversial
Heidelberg-Moscow claim of neutrinoless double beta de-
cay [15] provides an indication of a phantom-like dark
energy, with w < − 1 [16, 17]. However, it should be
noted that even if the neutrino result is veriﬁed, the con-
stant w parameterisation can provide misleading results
[18, 19], with an evolving equation of state mimicking the
phantom behaviour. This leaves us with the unusual sit-
uation whereby evidence for w < − 1 could still suggest
w(z) > − 1.


--- Page 4 ---
4
V. PHYSICAL MOTIV ATION
A potential relationship between cosmological length
scales and dark energy has received a great deal of atten-
tion, with limited physical justiﬁcation. Here we assess
the possible interpretations and motivations for associ-
ating the particle horizon with the vacuum energy. At
ﬁrst glance, the area of the particle horizon simply corre-
sponds to the surface of inﬁnite redshift surrounding us.
However this may take on greater physical signiﬁcance if
there was a critical change in the underlying physics in
the very early universe. This would correspond to a par-
ticular point in time prior to inﬂation. We would then
sample this ‘horizon’ surface which intersects our past
light cone, in much the same way as our view of the last
scattering surface samples a preferential scale. Proper-
ties of the present day universe may then be inﬂuenced
by this reference length scale. This could be related to
the proposal by Padmanabhan [20] in which vacuum ﬂuc-
tuations within ﬁnite regions of space are responsible for
the cosmological constant.
This work was also partly motivated by the following
prospect. If the universe is found to be slightly closed,
with Ω k ∼ 0.01, we would be pushed deeper into the
coincidence problem. There appears little reason to be-
lieve the curvature should be comparable to the mat-
ter and dark energy density. However if there was some
relationship between the global curvature and the dark
energy, this would partly alleviate the problem. Unfor-
tunately we cannot make quantitative predictions on Ω k
here, since it present value will depend on the nature of
inﬂation.
VI. DISCUSSION
An energy density associated with the size of the par-
ticle horizon within a closed universe has been shown to
demonstrate a negative equation of state. Precise be-
haviour depends on the constant of proportionality, d.
Whilst d = 1 is the most natural choice, imitating the
cosmological constant at late times, current observational
constraints slightly prefer d < 1. This corresponds to
a cosmology with a sequence of “rips”, as the particle
horizon repeatedly traverses the closed universe. Such a
model has the advantage of addressing the coincidence
problem, and has a simple mechanism for lowering the
equation of state at late times. We have also established
a robust lower bound of d > 0.5, which must be satisﬁed
in order to ensure w < 1 in the early universe.
For the case d = 1 we ﬁnd cosmic evolution equivalent
to the model put forward by Li, which was based on as-
sociating the dark energy density with the future event
horizon. However by using the particle horizon, this ap-
proach is causal, does not require the decay of matter,
and has a natural reference scale - the radius of curva-
ture.
As with other holographic models, this approach is
rather speculative, but does feature a number of attrac-
tive properties. Given the close relationship predicted
between Ω Λ and w, data from future dark energy sur-
veys such as SNAP should be capable of distinguishing
this model from the cosmological constant.
[1] W. Fischler and L. Susskind, Holography and cosmology
(1998).
[2] R. Bousso, JHEP 9907, 004 (1999).
[3] A. G. Cohen, D. B. Kaplan, and A. E. Nelson, Physical
Review Letters 82, 4971 (1999).
[4] S. D. H. Hsu, Physics Letters B 594, 13 (2004).
[5] P. Wang and X. he Meng, Classical and Quantum Grav-
ity 22, 283 (2005).
[6] M. Li, Physics Letters B 603, 1 (2004).
[7] M. R. Setare and S. Shafei, JCAP 0609, 011 (2006).
[8] Y. Gong and Y.-Z. Zhang, Classical and Quantum Grav-
ity 22, 4895 (2005), hep-th/0505175.
[9] Q.-G. Huang and M. Li, Journal of Cosmology and Astro-
Particle Physics 8, 13 (2004), astro-ph/0404229.
[10] S. Nojiri and S. D. Odintsov, General Relativity and
Gravitation 38, 1285 (2006), hep-th/0506212.
[11] X. Zhang and F.-Q. Wu, Physical Review D 72, 043524
(2005).
[12] N. Kaloper and A. Linde, Physical Review D 60, 103509
(1999).
[13] R. R. Caldwell, M. Kamionkowski, and N. N. Wein-
berg, Physical Review Letters 91, 071301 (2003), astro-
ph/0302506.
[14] Z. Chang, F.-Q. Wu, and X. Zhang, Physics Letters B
633, 14 (2006).
[15] H. V. Klapdor-Kleingrothaus, I. V. Krivosheina, A. Di-
etz, and O. Chkvorets, Physics Letters B 586, 198 (2004).
[16] A. de la Macorra, A. Melchiorri, P. Serra, and R. Bean,
The impact of neutrino masses on the determination of
dark energy properties (2006).
[17] S. Hannestad, Physical Review Letters 95, 221301
(2005).
[18] I. Maor, R. Brustein, J. McMahon, and P. J. Steinhardt,
Phys. Rev. D 65, 123003 (2002).
[19] F. Simpson and S. Bridle, Phys. Rev. D 73, 083001
(2006), astro-ph/0602213.
[20] T. Padmanabhan, Classical and Quantum Gravity 22,
L107 (2005).
