--- Page 1 ---
Published by
aanda.org


--- Page 2 ---
 Worldwide astronomical 
and astrophysical research
Astronomy & Astrophysics (A&A) is an 
international, peer-reviewed journal that 
publishes original research in astronomy 
and astrophysics. Its mission is to:
 Publish important original work  
that stimulates high-quality  
scientific discourse
 Safeguard scientific reproducibility 
and ethical best practices
 Educate early-career astronomers  
on scientific writing
With a consistently strong Impact Factor, A&A is one of 
the leading original research journals in Astronomy and 
Astrophysics.
Editors
Associate Editors
S. Campana (Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera, Italy)
F. Combes (Observatoire de Paris, France)
Z. Han (Yunnan Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China)
A. Koch-Hansen (University of Heidelberg, Germany)
R. Kotak (Tuorlan observatorio, Finland)
E. Lellouch (Observatoire de Paris, France)
D. Mouillet (Observatoire de Grenoble, France)
B. Noyelles (University of Franche-Comté, France)
V. Pavlidou (FORTH and University of Crete, Greece)
L. Pentericci (Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Italy)
M. Salaris (Liverpool John Moores University, United Kingdom)
E. Schinnerer (Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, Germany)
S. Shore (Universitá di Pisa, Italy)
M. Tafalla (Observatorio Astronomico Nacional, Spain)
Y. Zouganelis (European Space Agency, Spain)
 Owned by the scientific community and governed 
by a board of member countries.
 Indexed in all major databases including Science 
Citation Index and Scopus (Quartile 1).
 Wide dissemination: Articles read in over 210 
countries around the world.
 Publication of important special issues online and, 
by agreement, in print. For example, Planck, Gaia, 
H.E.S.S., Rosetta, Solar Orbiter, LOFAR.
 More than 50 years of publishing excellence 
including Nobel Prize laureates.
 Language editing service: Clarity and excellence 
of language editing to match the high-quality 
science.
Key Points
Thierry Forveille
Editor-in-Chief
Astronomer at the Observatory of Grenoble. 
His main area of research is the observational study of 
brown dwarfs and extrasolar planets.
David Elbaz
Managing Editor
Scientific Director of the Astrophysics Department of CEA.
His primary research interest is to understand how 
galaxies formed and evolved during cosmic time.
João Alves
Letters Editor-in-Chief:
Professor of Stellar Astrophysics at the University of Vienna. 
He investigates the formation of stars and planets  
and is also interested in Astrobiology.
2023 Journal  
Impact Factor™
5.4
Journal Citation 
Reports™ Clarivate, 2024
CiteScore 
2023
10.2
Scopus


--- Page 3 ---
  Championing Open Science
  Subscribe to Open (S2O)
A&A is now published under a Subscribe to Open model (S2O). S2O is an alternative open access 
model which enables libraries to use their budgets to support open access publishing. Every year, if 
libraries renew their subscriptions, A&A will publish that year’s content in full open access. 
If support is insufficient, the content from that year will be published behind a paywall. Authors 
wishing or required to publish in open access can then choose the Open Access Option or publish 
under one of the existing transformative agreements if eligible.
See the FAQs for more information – aanda.org/subscribe-to-open-faqs
Encourage your library to subscribe to A&A to support its publication in open access. Contact: subscribers@edpsciences.org
  Other Key Features
 Article formats
A&A offers an extended range of formats (PDF, HTML, etc.). This allows reading of scientific 
articles on most specialized e-readers and tablets (e-Pub, Kindle). 
 Mobile version
The A&A website is available in a mobile-optimized format.
 BibTeX
A&A BibTeX style includes “eprint” commands to enable authors to add links to the ASCL 
(Astrophysics Source Code Library) and arXiv records.
 Rich-media in A&A articles
This important tool for researchers offers the possibility of publishing multimedia and 3D models.
 Author names using non-Latin alphabets
A&A authors may choose to include names in their own language as well as in English.
 Links from arXiv
Once a paper has been published online, links can be automatically added from arXiv to the 
published paper.
 Database linking
The A&A publishing platform features direct links between published articles and the 
corresponding datasets at the CDS and ESO telescopic bibliography.


--- Page 4 ---
 Dedicated to authors
 Scientific Writing for Young Astronomers (SWYA)
A school, created by A&A, that helps PhD students present their results and  
explains the major aspects of scientific writing and publishing.
 Press releases and Highlights
Services that showcase articles selected by the A&A editors. Weekly Highlights are also freely available by 
e-mail. Sign-up via aanda.paris@obspm.fr
 Technical tools
Authors benefit from services such as Altmetric data, FundRef, CrossRef, ORCID, etc.
 Editorial office and language editing
Experienced and permanent editorial office (aanda.paris@obspm.fr) and a specialist team of language editors 
support the journal.
 Tables of contents by e-mail
Never miss another issue of A&A. Sign up for the free e-mail alert service on aanda.org.
 Sections
l Letters
l Astrophysical processes
l Cosmology (including clusters of galaxies)
l Extragalactic astronomy
l Galactic structure, stellar clusters, and
populations
l Interstellar and circumstellar matter
l Stellar structure and evolution
l Stellar atmospheres
l The Sun and the Heliosphere
l Planets and planetary systems
l Celestial mechanics and astrometry
l Atomic, molecular, and nuclear data
l Astronomical instrumentation
l Catalogs and data
l Numerical methods and codes
Alongside original research articles, A&A publishes Letters to the Editor, which are short 
papers reporting on ground-breaking results or ideas (with fast-track publication).
ISSN: 0004-6361 • e-ISSN: 1432-0746
Help and information:  
Please contact EDP Sciences via edpsciences.org
Follow us! 
@AandA_journal
200 300 400 500 600
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
RA [J2000]
DEC [J2000]
Musca, Herschel 250 -m
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
Singularity exponents
Front:  
Leo A – one of the most  
puzzling local dwarf galaxies  
(Leščinskaitė, A., et al., 2022,  
A&A, 660, A79) 
1. Molecular-cloud origin from atomic-shell 
compression (Bracco, A., et al., 2020, A&A, 644, A5)
2. Complexity of filamentary structures in Musca
(
Yahia, H., et al., 2021, A&A, 649, A33)
3. The Yutu-2 Rover that measured the in-situ lunar phase curves
(Jiang, T., et al., 2021, A&A, 646, A2)
4. Hot solar coronal loops: How do they originate?
(
Chitta, L. P., et al., 2020, A&A, 644, A130)
5. Expanding ejecta curtain of SCI crater on Ryugu
(
Wada, K., et al., 2021, A&A, 647, A43)
1
2
3
4
5
