A&A 388, 741{757 (2002)
DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361:20020548
c⃝ESO 2002
Astronomy&Astrophysics
The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
P. Valageas1,R .S c h a e  e r1, and J. Silk 2
1 S e r v i c ed eP h y s i q u eT h eorique, CEN Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2 Astrophysics, Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK
Received 28 November 2001 / Accepted 5 April 2002
Abstract. We investigate the behaviour of cosmological baryons at low redshifts z< 5 after reionization, through
analytic means. In particular, we study the density-temperature phase-diagram that describes the history of the
gas. We show how the location of the matter in this ( ;T ) diagram expresses the various constraints implied by
usual hierarchical scenarios. This yields robust model-independent results that agree with numerical simulations.
The IGM is seen to be formed via two phases: a \cool" photo-ionized component and a \warm" component
governed by shock-heating. We also brieﬂy describe how the remainder of the matter is distributed over galaxies,
groups and clusters. We recover the fraction of matter and the spatial clustering computed by numerical sim-
ulations. We also check that the soft X-ray background due to the \warm" IGM component is consistent with
observations. We nd in the present universe a baryon fraction of 7% in hot gas, 24% in the warm IGM, 38% in
the cool IGM, 9% within star-like objects and, as a still un-observed component, 22% of dark baryons associated
with collapsed structures, with a relative uncertainty no larger than 30% on these numbers.
Key words. cosmology: theory { large-scale structure of Universe { galaxies: intergalactic medium
1. Introduction
As is well known, the mass of baryons embedded within
stars or galactic disks in the current universe is quite small
since it yields a baryonic parameter Ω gal  0:002−0:006
(e.g., Fukugita et al. 1998) while standard nucleosynthesis
calculations give Ω
b ’0:045 (e.g., Tytler et al. 2000).
Therefore, most of the baryonic matter should lie in the
intergalactic medium. This agrees rather well with the fact
that at higher redshift one observes a large amount of mass
in the Lyman- forest which consists of moderate density
ﬂuctuations ionized by the background UV ﬂux emitted
by distant galaxies. Thus, one gets Ω Ly  0:01−0:05 at
z  3 (e.g., Fukugita et al. 1998). However, as noticed
in Cen & Ostriker (1999) the mass within the Lyman- 
forest decreases with time and at z = 0 summing over all
observed contributions one obtains Ωb < 0:011 which falls
short of the required total baryonic mass. Hence at z =0
a large part of the baryons must lie in a new intergalactic
component beyond the usual Lyman-  forest clouds. As
argued in Cen & Ostriker (1999) and Dave et al. (2001)
this could be part of a \warm" phase of the intergalactic
medium (IGM), with temperatures in the range 10
5 <
T< 107 K.
The latter conclusion was reached from numerical sim-
ulations. In this article, we reconsider this problem in
Send oprint requests to : P. Valageas,
e-mail: valageas@spht.saclay.cea.fr
order to derive the properties of the IGM by analytic
means. In particular, we wish to investigate whether one
can understand this behaviour in a quantitative manner
from robust, model-independent, arguments.
First, in Sect. 2 we study the ( ;T ) phase-diagram
of cosmological baryons. While the Lyman- forest is de-
scribed by a well-dened Equation of State the \warm"
IGM component shows a broad scatter (e.g., Dave et al.
1999; Dave et al. 2001) since its temperature depends
through shock-heating on the neighbouring gravitational
potential which is a stochastic eld. Nevertheless, we show
that it is constrained to lie in a well-dened domain in
the (;T ) plane, and determine its average location in
this plane, which may be considered as the \Equation of
State" of the \warm" IGM. We also give the location in
this diagram of galaxies, groups and clusters.
Next, in Sect. 3 we use our results to compute the red-
shift evolution of the fraction of matter enclosed within
the dierent phases. Then, in Sect. 4 we estimate the
two-point correlation function and the clumping factor
of the \warm" IGM. Finally, in Sect. 5 we check that
the X-ray background emitted by the \warm" component
agrees with observations.
2. The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
In this section we investigate the evolution of the physi-
cal properties of the baryons at moderate redshifts z< 5,
Article published by EDP Sciences and available at http://www.aanda.org or http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20020548
742 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
as gravitational clustering builds up. To do so, we study
the distribution of matter in a density-temperature plane
and determine the (;T ) phase-diagram. Indeed, as we de-
scribe below baryons are located within specic regions in
this (;T ) plane which reﬂect the various processes (cool-
ing, radiative heating, shock-heating, gravitational clus-
tering, ...) which take place in the universe. We display
our results in Fig. 1. Note that we use the overdensity
1+ ==
 rather than the density in the gures, where
 is the mean density of the universe.
In this article, all our numerical results are obtained
with the following cosmological parameters. We consider a
low-density ﬂat universe with Ω
m =0:4a n dΩ =0:6. The
baryonic density parameter is Ωb =0:0473 and the Hubble
constant is H0 =6 5k ms −1/Mpc. The CDM power-
spectrum of the linear density ﬂuctuations is normalized
by8 =0:8.
2.1. Temperature-scale relations
We consider two processes for the possible heating of the
gas. First, the gas temperature may be governed by a lo-
cal shock-heating due to gravitational processes. Thus, as
large-scale structures build up we expect tidal eects and
virialization processes to heat the gas within and in the
neighbourhood of collapsed halos and laments up to the
virial temperature of the underlying gravitational poten-
tial well. The latter scales as G R
2, which denes the
characteristic scale R, hence we write:
local heating: kT = 8
9 mpGR2; (1)
where mp is the mean molecular weight of the gas and
mp the proton mass.
Second, the gas temperature may be set by an external
heating source, like a UV background radiation. Then, the
temperature is no longer given by Eq. (1) since it is not
xed by gravitational energy. However, the pressure of the
gas erases the baryonic density ﬂuctuations over a scaleR
given by:
external heating: R =t
HCs =tH
s
γkT
mp
; (2)
where Cs is the sound velocity and γ=5=3. This is sim-
ply the distance over which sound waves can travel in a
Hubble time and build pressure equilibrium. Therefore,
the gas sees the dark matter density eld smoothed over
this scale R.
There is a characteristic density 
c at which shock
heating starts to play a role, that is where Eq. (1) is to
be used in place of Eq. (2). It is expected to correspond
to a density contrast of a few units at least. The detailed
discussion of the relation between the two regimes around

c may be found in Sect. 2.4 below.
2.2. Exclusion constraints
First, we note that the distribution of matter in the (;T )
plane is strongly constrained by the existence of some ex-
clusion regions where no particles can be found. The ad-
vantage of such conditions is that they are very robust in
the sense they do not depend on the detailed history of
the baryons. They apply to any hierarchical scenario of
structure formation and provide the rst guideline for the
properties of baryons. We discuss these various constraints
in the sections below. For sake of clarity, we turn within
the diagrams shown in Fig. 1 in counter-clockwise order.
2.2.1. Cooling constraint
The dashed-line on the far-right with an inclined \V-
shape" is the familiar cooling constraint (see also Rees &
Ostriker 1977; Silk 1977). It expresses the fact that high-
density ionized hot gas ( T> 10
4 K) cools very rapidly.
Thus, baryons cannot remain for long in regions located
to the right of this dashed-line. More precisely, we dene
the \eective" cooling time t
c;ef set by atomic physics as:
de
dt

cooling+UV
=−e
tcool
+ e
theat
−e
tc;ef
; (3)
where e =3 =2nbkT is the specic energy and nb is
the baryon number density. The cooling time tcool de-
scribes collisional excitation, collisional ionization, recom-
bination, molecular hydrogen cooling, bremsstrahlung and
Compton cooling or heating (e.g., Anninos et al. 1997).
The heating time t
heat is the radiative heating time
due to a UV background radiation of the form J /
−1. As usual, we normalize the UV ﬂux by its value
J21 at the HI ionization threshold (912 A) in units of
10−21 erg s−1 Hz−1 cm−2 sr−1. The values we choose for
J21 are given in Table 1 as a function of redshift. They are
consistent with observations (e.g., Giallongo et al. 1996;
Cooke et al. 1997; Vogel et al. 1995) and are the same
as the ones used for modeling the evolution of Lyman- 
clouds Valageas et al. (1999). Then, the cooling curve
shown in Fig. 1 is given by the condition:
cooling: t
c;ef =tH: (4)
Note that in Eq. (4) we neglected shock-heating due to
gravitational processes (e.g., virialization) and possible
adiabatic cooling due to the expansion of the ﬂuid ele-
ments. However, these processes are governed by the time
t
H which measures the expansion rate of the universe and
the time-scale over which new non-linear structures form.
Therefore, they do not modify the form of Eq. (4): they
may only change the ratio between both sides of Eq. (4)
(which we set equal to one) by a factor of order unity.
Moreover, we have t
c;ef ’tcool as radiative heating does
play a strong role here. Hence this constraint (4) is actu-
ally quite robust. Then, the regions located to the right of
the cooling curve have a cooling time which is less than
the Hubble time. As a consequence, no particle can re-
main in this part of the ( ;T ) plane for a Hubble time.
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 743
Table 1. Redshift evolution of the background UV ﬂuxJ21(z)
used in this article.
z = 0 12345
J21 = 0.05 0.5 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1
This process is actually at the origin of galaxy formation
as this gas cools and falls to the center of the gravitational
well to form a disk and stars (see Sect. 2.7 and Valageas &
Schaeer 1999). This means that the matter which entered
this region at some time should accumulate on the lower
branch of the cooling curve (atT 10
4 K) under the form
of high-density cool gas which evolves on a Hubble time
(but some of this gas also turns into stars). Note that this
accumulation of baryons along the lower branch is clearly
seen in the numerical simulations displayed in Fig. 11 in
Dave et al. (1999) and in Fig. 9 in Springel & Hernquist
(2001).
2.2.2. High-density ﬂuctuations
A second constraint is set by the properties of the dark
matter density eld itself. Indeed, at a given scale R be-
yond some threshold +(R) large densities have a negli-
gible probability and only involve a very small amount of
matter. In the linear regime for instance, at large scalesR,
the probability distribution function (pdf) P(R)o ft h e
density contrast R over a spherical cell of radius R is
a Gaussian of variance (R). Here we note as usual (R)
the rms linear density ﬂuctuation and we assume Gaussian
initial density ﬂuctuations. In the non-linear regime, for
highly non-Gaussian probabilities, the analogue of this
upper threshold can also be calculated. It is given in
Appendix A where we detail our model for the pdfP(
R),
where R =1 + R is the overdensity. The high-density
cuto dened by Eq. (A.8) obeys the asymptotic be-
haviour (A.10) in the quasi-linear and highly non-linear
regimes. Note that this asymptotic behaviour actually is
model-independent. Indeed, in the limit
  1w er e -
cover the Gaussian cuto implied by the initial conditions
(where =h2
Ri). On the other hand, in the limit 1w e
recover the fact that most of the matter is enclosed within
high-density halos of density contrast R   which oc-
cupy a small fraction of the volume (1=) of the universe.
Therefore, the constraint given by the high-density cuto
of the pdfP(R)i nt h e(;T ) plane is quite robust and it
applies to all hierarchical scenarios of structure formation.
We assume that the baryon density b scales as the
dark matter density through
b = Ω b
Ω m
: (5)
This is valid even in the cooling region discussed above
in Sect. 2.2.1 if we consider also the cold baryons. We
then can obtain an upper cuto for the baryon over-
density 
+(R)a ta n yg i v e ns c a l eR. It will turn out to
be convenient to express this cuto +(R) in terms of a
density-temperature relation, in order to draw its conse-
quences for the phase-diagram ( ;T ) of the IGM. To do
so we simply need the relation T (;R ).
Substituting Eq. (1) into the relation +(R) derived
in Eq. (A.8) we obtain a curve +;loc(T ). The subscript
\loc" in the overdensity cuto+;loc refers to the fact that
this is a \local" heating process. It is due to the gravita-
tional interaction with neighbouring structures. This high-
density cuto 
+;loc(T ) corresponds to the dot-dashed
curve shown in the diagrams in Fig. 1 which runs from
 5u pt o  104 and which crosses the cooling curve.
Substituting Eq. (2) into the relation +(R) obtained
from Eq. (A.8) we get a curve+;ext(T ). This corresponds
in Fig. 1 to the short branch which runs upward from
the curve +;loc(T )a t  10. Indeed, we note that for
 > 10 the gas is located close to non-linear structures
so that local shock-heating must be taken into account.
However, for large densities we have T
loc >T ext since
Eq. (2) yields Text G R2. In this case external heating
plays no role. This is why we only plot the curve+;ext(T )
up to the characteristic density contrast whereTloc =Text.
At higher densities the threshold +;ext(T ) becomes irrel-
evant. In fact, we see in Fig. 1 that the curve +;ext(T )
due to external heating plays no role since at moderate
densities   it is repelled to quasi-linear scales (see
Sect. 2.2.3).
Then, the region to the upper-right of the curves
+;loc(T )a n d+;ext(T )i nt h e(;T ) plane shown in Fig. 1
corresponds to rare high-density ﬂuctuations which are lo-
cated in the tail of the pdfP(
R). Therefore, there should
be very few particles beyond these lines. Thus, this denes
a second exclusion region.
Note that at z = 0 this constraint yields an upper
bound T+  107:3 K’1:7 keV. Of course, there exist
some halos with a larger temperature: massive X-ray clus-
ters. However, these are rare objects which only contain a
small fraction of the baryonic matter content of the uni-
verse (typically 10%) and they indeed correspond to the
high-mass tail of the mass function. This is obviously con-
sistent with the description of the baryonic matter which
is worked out in this article, see Sect. 2.7.
2.2.3. Transition to non-linearity
A characteristic scale which enters the problem we in-
vestigate here is set by the transition to the non-linear
regime. At a given epoch, we dene this scale R0(z)b y
the relation:
(R0;z ) 1: (6)
Thus, scales larger than R0 are still within the linear
regime. Then, there can be no shock-heating due to grav-
itational clustering on these large scales which have not
turned non-linear yet. Using Eq. (1) we obtain a charac-
teristic temperature T
nl():
transition to non-linearity: kTnl = 8
9 mpGR2
0; (7)
744 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
which describes the transition to non-linear scales (which
lie at TTnl()). This is shown by the straight dashed-
line (Tnl / ) plotted in Fig. 1. Besides, we note that
known sources of external heating (e.g., the UV back-
ground radiation) cannot heat the IGM up to such high
temperatures. Therefore, no ﬂuid element can be located
in the region to the upper-left of the curve Tnl()s i n c e
no physical process which is active on these large scales
can heat the gas to these high temperatures. This yields
a third exclusion region.
2.2.4. Low-density ﬂuctuations
Finally, a fourth constraint on the distribution of matter
is given by the low-density cuto of the pdf P(R)o ft h e
dark matter density eld. This is the analog of the high-
density cuto discussed in Sect. 2.2.2. The low-density
cuto 
−(R) is derived in Appendix A, from Eq. (A.8).
It obeys the asymptotic behaviours (A.11). In the quasi-
linear regime we again recover the usual Gaussian cut-
o 
−−. In the highly non-linear regime the small
overdensity − 
−=2
 1 expresses the formation
of extreme underdensities on small scales. Contrary to
the high-density cuto it is somewhat model-dependent
through the exponent  but this has no strong eect on
the (;T ) phase-diagram (we typically have  0:8). As
in Sect. 2.2.2 we need a relation T (R) in order to derive
a condition of the form −(T ). We again consider both
cases of local and external heating, described by Eqs. (1)
and (2). This yields the curves −;loc(T )a n d −;ext(T )
shown by the two steep parallel dashed-lines in Fig. 1, at
R 10−1. The curve associated with external heating is
the left one (i.e. lower densities or higher temperature),
as can be seen from Eqs. (1) and (2). Thus, this denes a
fourth exclusion region to the left of these curves.
2.3. Equation of State of the Lyman-  forest
Thus, so far we have obtained constraints on the distribu-
tion of matter in the ( ;T ) plane by drawing four exclu-
sion regions. This already gives quite useful information
about the properties of the IGM which are very robust.
Now, we investigate a dierent point, seeking the location
of the gas in the ( ;T ) plane. This amounts to deriving
an equation of State for this component.
As shown in Hui & Gnedin (1997) the low-density
photo-ionized IGM exhibits such an equation of State as
the gas follows a specic relationT() with a rather small
scatter. This was derived in Hui & Gnedin (1997) from the
Zel’dovich approximation (Zel’dovich 1970) which applies
up to the moderately non-linear regime (  < 1). Here we
reconsider this problem and we show that this Equation
of State is rather robust with respect to the past his-
tory of the gas and applies independently of the validity
of the Zel’dovich approximation. First, we assume photo-
ionization equilibrium (we restrict ourselves toz< 5a f t e r
reionization) and we only take into account hydrogen.
Therefore, the ionization equilibrium reads:
Γ n
HI =(T )nHIIne; (8)
where Γ is the photo-ionization rate and (T )i st h er e -
combination rate. They are given by:
Γ=
Z
4JHI
d
h =3:08 10−12 J21(z)s−1 (9)
and:
(T )= J
T
TJ
−(−1)
; (10)
where we dened:
 =1:7; J =1:2310−13 cm3 s−1;T J =5:8104 K: (11)
The temperatureTJ we introduced in Eq. (11) is the char-
acteristic temperature reached by the gas through the
heating due to the UV background radiation ﬂux. It is
given by:
kTJ
R 4JHI(h−hHI)d
hR 4JHI d
h
(’5e V ); (12)
where hHI =1 3:6 eV is the hydrogen ionization thresh-
old. Note that this temperatureTJ does not depend on the
amplitudeJ21 of the UV background. Moreover, it is xed
by atomic physics, independently of cosmological param-
eters. Next, the temperature T of a given ﬂuid element
evolves as:
1
T
dT
dt = 2
3
1

d
dt + 1
theat
(13)
where d=dt is the Lagrangian time derivative. The heating
timetheat is given by:
3=2nbkT
theat
=
Z
4JHInHI(h−hHI)d
h
= kTJnHIΓ; (14)
where we takenb =2b=mp since we approximate the gas
as fully ionized hydrogen. The evolution Eq. (13) is the
same as Eq. (3), except that we neglect cooling (which
is justied here since we consider here moderate densities
and temperatures) and gravitational shock-heating which
is irrelevant. On the other hand, the term d=dt represents
the pressure work, which takes into account the expansion
of the ﬂuid element. Substituting Eq. (14) into Eq. (13)
we obtain:
1
T
dT
dt = 2
3
1

d
dt + 1
t10

J
T
TJ
−
; (15)
w h e r ew ed e  n e :
J =3 Ω m
Ω b
mp
Jt10
’1:1 10−28 gc m−3 (16)
and:
t10 =1 010 years: (17)
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 745
In Eq. (15) we used the fact that hydrogen is almost en-
tirely ionized at the low redshifts which we consider here
(z< 5, after reionization), as shown by the Gunn-Peterson
test. Next, it is convenient to introduce the adiabatK de-
ned as the exponential of the specic entropy s. More
precisely, we deneK and s by:
K T
TJ
 
J
−2=3
;s  lnK: (18)
Then, Eq. (15) may be written:
K−1 dK
dt = 1
t10
 
J
1−2=3
: (19)
Here we note that 1 −2=3’−0:13 is a small number.
Therefore, the specic entropy of the ﬂuid shows a weak
dependence on the evolution of its density . Hence we
approximate the solution of Eq. (19) by:
K
 ’
 
J
1−2=3 t
t10
; (20)
where is the density at the time t we consider. In terms
of the temperature-density relation, this yields:
T()= TJ

 t
t10

J
1=
; (21)
where we used Eq. (18). Thus, the expression (21) gives
the rst-order term for the expansion of ln T in terms of
the small parameter (1−2=3)(d ln=dl nt). From Eq. (16)
we note that at z < 5w eh a v eJ and tHt10 hence
the temperature of the photo-ionized IGM will be of order
TJ 104 K.
Note that Eq. (21) is independent of the normaliza-
tion of the UV ﬂux J. Indeed, the eciency of radiative
heating is proportional toJnHI but the density of neutral
hydrogen scales as 1=J (at ionization equilibrium for al-
most fully ionized gas) so that J cancels out. Therefore,
the result (21) is quite robust since it does not depend
on the value of the UV ﬂux. In particular, Eq. (21) still
holds even if the UV background is inhomogeneous: we
only need to assume local ionization equilibrium. This ex-
plains why there is only a very small scatter around the
equation of State (21) since the actual physical conditions
within these small clouds are almost independent of the
actual history of each ﬂuid element (i.e. the evolution of
its density and local UV ﬂux). This indeed agrees with the
results of numerical simulations (e.g., Dave et al. 1999).
We display in Fig. 1 the equation of State (21) as
the solid line which runs through T  10
4 Ka t  =0 .
Beyond the overdensity c dened in Eq. (22) below, we
plot this line as a dashed-line, until it enters the cooling
region described in Sect. 2.2.1. Indeed, as we explained in
Sect. 2.2.2 at large densities the \virial temperature" Tloc
becomes larger than the temperature Text due to some
external energy source (here photo-ionization heating by
the UV background radiation). This means that for these
regions, which have already reached the non-linear regime
as > c  5 (see Eq. (22)), shock-heating due to the
gravitational dynamics can no longer be neglected and
it actually becomes dominant. Therefore, for high densi-
ties with >
c the gas should no longer fall onto the
curve (21). Nevertheless, since shock-heating can only in-
crease the temperature of the gas the relation (21) now
provides a lower bound to the temperature T . Hence, the
region below the curve (21) is excluded in the ( ;T )d i -
agram. This holds until we enter the cooling region dis-
cussed in Sect. 2.2.1. On the low-density side, as described
in Sect. 2.2.4 we are constrained by the low-density cuto

−;ext(T ).
Therefore, we predict that we should have two phases
for the IGM. A rst \cool" phase is described by
the Equation of State (21) with intermediate densities
−;ext << c. It is photo-ionized gas heated up to
T  104 K by the background UV ﬂux. This corre-
sponds to the moderate density ﬂuctuations which form
the Lyman- forest. A second \warm" phase is made
of higher-density regions which have already experienced
some shock-heating due to the building of gravitational
structures but which have not entered the cooling region
yet. These particles should be located in the ( ;T )p l a n e
above the curve (21) and within the constraints described
in the previous sections.
2.4. Warm IGM
Thus, the previous discussion shows that a \warm" com-
ponent of the IGM should no longer follow the equation
of state (21). It however remains constrained by the ex-
clusion regions obtained in Sect. 2.2. This leaves a closed
allowed region in the (;T ) plane. Since the temperature
of the gas should be governed by the shock-heating due to
the gravitational dynamics we can expect a rather large
scatter. Indeed, the history of these particles depends on
the properties of their neighbouring dark matter density
eld. This introduces a stochastic component which gives
rise to a wide variety of possible histories so that there
is no longer a unique temperature-density relation. This
agrees well with Fig. 11 in Dave et al. (1999) which shows
indeed a broad cloud of points in the ( ;T ) plane within
the allowed region we obtained in the previous sections.
Note also that at z = 0 some of the gas which has been
shock-heated to T> 10
4 K actually lies at low density
contrasts< 0 in the numerical simulation. This is consis-
tent with our results shown in Fig. 1. This simply means
that on small non-linear scales even regions with  < 0
have experienced shell-crossing and gravitational shock-
heating (this also implies that they are not just described
by a collapse dynamics).
However, the distribution of matter obtained in Dave
et al. (1999) from numerical simulations does not ll en-
tirely this allowed region (note indeed that this is not im-
plied by our previous considerations) and it is not uniform.
Hence it would be convenient to derive a curve in the
(;T ) plane which would describe the \mean" behaviour
746 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
Fig. 1. The phase-diagram of the IGM from z =3d o w nt oz = 0. The straight solid line T shows the Equation of State of the
\cool" IGM (Lyman- forest). The curved solid line Tgh shows, as a mean trend, the \Equation of State" of the \warm" IGM
which is shock-heated through the building of non-linear gravitational structures. The dashed curves draw exclusion regions
around the allowed domain for this \warm" IGM. In counter-clockwise order, starting from the right side, they correspond to
1) a fast-cooling region where the gas cannot remain over a Hubble time, 2) a high-density and high-temperature domain within
the exponential tail of the pdf P(
R) which only contains very rare massive halos, 3) large linear scales where gravitational
shock-heating has not appeared yet, 4) a low-density region within the tail of the pdf P(R) which is associated with very rare
voids and 5) a lower-bound for the temperatureT set by radiative heating from the UV background. The vertical dotted line is
the density threshold vir of just-virialized halos. The points show the results of numerical simulations from Dave et al. (1999)
(Fig. 11).
of this warm phase of the IGM. To this purpose, we rst
compute the gas temperature associated with a given halo
of mass M which forms at redshift z. As noticed above,
this does not apply to low-density regions with < 0 but
this model should provide a useful estimate for the higher
density regions which actually contain most of the mass.
Gravitational heating is eective in the collapsing phase
of the halo which may be set at > c. One expects c to
be of the order of a few units. We set it to
1+ c =6 a n d c =( 1+ c); (22)
which is close to the value given by the spherical collapse
dynamics at turn-around. We consider this not to be an
accidental coincidence. Indeed, the kinetic energy of the
underlying overdense large-scale structure is not thermal-
ized during its expansion phase and it only provides an
energy source for the heating of the gas within the collapse
stage. Even for an expanding cloud which is not perfectly
spherical, such a phase of maximum expansion is reached,
where the kinetic energy in the collective motion is small.
Afterwards, the cloud enters a collapse phase where shocks
develop. As is usual for shocks, the latter transform col-
lective large-scale kinetic energy into small-scale thermal
energy. The collective kinetic energy per particlev
2 in the
collapse phase (i.e. the squared velocity of the inﬂow) is of
order v2  [GM=R−v2
0] where the constant term v2
0 ex-
presses the fact that at turn-aroundv2 = 0. Then, this ki-
netic energy is locally transformed into heat in the shocked
regions. The temperature reached thereTgh is of the order
of this kinetic energy since it is set by the inﬂow velocityv
through the matching conditions at the interface between
the inner warm shocked region and the outer collapsing
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 747
region. We thus obtain a relation between the small-scale
temperature (which applies to the small shocked regions)
and the large-scale kinetic energy per particle. This yields
(for a large-scale structure of mass M):
T
ghTc
"
c
1=3
−1
#
; (23)
with
Tc = 2
3
4
3
1=3
mpGM2=31=3
c : (24)
Of course, the characteristic temperature Tc depends on
the mass M of the collapsing cloud. The subscript \gh"
refers to the fact that the temperature Tgh is governed by
\gravitational heating". This provides an estimate Tgh()
of the location of the warm spots in the ( ;T )p l a n e ,f o r
ﬂuid elements parameterized by the mass M of the un-
derlying larger-scale structure which is collapsing. Here
we assumed that the density within the shocked regions
scales as the overall density of the collapsing structure
(note that a strong shock only increases the density by a
f a c t o r4a tm o s t ) .
Now, seeking an average location of these warm spots,
we estimate the typical mass M
0(z) which collapses at
each redshift z by:
(M0;z ) 1: (25)
This also yields the scale R0(z)d e  n e di nE q .( 6 ) ,w i t h
M0 =4=3R3
0.A m o n ga l lt h eTgh() relations (23) which
have been seen to depend on the halo massM,w ec a nt h e n
nd a \mean" locus by taking a characteristic temperature
T
c, Eq. (24), calculated with the mass M0.
The mass M0 and the scale R0 characterize the non-
linear structures which just turned non-linear. For in-
stance, at z =0w e h a v e R0  9 Mpc. At virial-
ization when the density contrast reaches the threshold

vir  200 this yields a radius Rvir  1:3M p ca sf o r
large clusters. On the other hand, the shocked regions, at
temperatureTgh, correspond to much smaller scales. Their
sizeR can be estimated by using approximate hydrostatic
equilibrium within the laments along the transverse di-
rection1. As a consequence, the Eq. (1) still holds, up to
factors of order unity, if R is taken to be the thickness of
the lament. This is a natural result since the inﬂow and
the shock actually are at the origin of the lament. Also,
the thicknessR of the laments turns out, as a rule, to be
much smaller thanR
0. For instance, atz = 0 we nd it is
of order of a few hundred kpc, see Sect. 4 below. Note that
1 Indeed, the pressure beyond the shock is of orderPTgh
while the velocity drops. The Euler equation then yieldsP=
 where  is the local gravitational potential well associated
with the lament. Note that we do not need exact hydrostatic
equilibrium within this shocked region: e.g. there may be a non-
zero ﬂow along the axis of the lament. We only use the fact
that the kinetic energy associated to the transverse collective
velocity is small as compared to the local pressure because the
shock converts the infall velocity into thermal energy.
the same processes are at work for the dark matter density
eld, except that shocked regions now correspond to ar-
eas where shell-crossing governs the dynamics and builds a
large velocity dispersion. Therefore, we can again assume
that the gas follows the dark matter density eld and the
gravitational potential is dominated by the dark matter.
Our ndings agree with the results of numerical simula-
tions which show that the shocked regions are associated
with the laments which appear in the dark matter den-
sity eld. Thus, as shown by the simulation map in Fig. 3
in Dave et al. (2001), the \warm" IGM is an intricate
network of laments which extends over a few Mpc (the
scale R
0) but the thickness of the laments (the scale R)
is much smaller than this global scale. In Sect. 4 we will
see in addition that the scaleR of the warm regions shows
up as a small-scale cuto for the \warm" IGM two-point
correlation function. We obtain a length of a few hundred
kpc at z = 0 which is much smaller than the few Mpc
which characterize the underlying global structure which
is collapsing. This also agrees with the numerical simula-
tions of Dave et al. (2001).
Therefore, the \warm" IGM component is described by
the curve (23) in the ( ;T ) plane, together with Eq. (1)
which yields the local sizeR of the clouds (or the thickness
of the laments). Our model relies on three major points:
1) there is a critical overdensity associated to the \warm"
IGM which reﬂects the turn-around of patches just going
non-linear, 2) shock-heating locally transforms into heat
the collective kinetic energy and 3) the scale of the shocked
regions is given by local approximate hydrostatic equilib-
rium at the latter temperature. This yields 1) the locus in
parameter space (;T ) where the \warm" IGM appears,
2) the size of the non-linear network of shocked regions
(lament network) which is the scaleR
0 just turning non-
linear and 3) the thickness R of the laments which ap-
pears to be much smaller than the previous scale.
We also see that at the beginning of the cloud collapse
the shocked regions are predicted to have low tempera-
tures correlated with a rather small spatial extension. As
the overall collapse proceeds their temperature and their
size increase and the highest temperatures are reached
when the cloud is being virialized with scales of the or-
der of the radius of the halo. This is more or less what
could be expected to occur. Thus, we model the mean
trend of the \warm" IGM by Eq. (23) which appears as
a curved solid line labeled \ T
gh" in Fig. 1. It starts from
the end-point of the \Cool" IGM (at  5) and it goes
towards larger densities and temperatures until it reaches
the cooling region (atz> 3) or the density threshold vir
(at low z). Indeed, beyond this point we consider that
we have cooled objects (galaxies) or hot virialized halos
(clusters) which are not part of the \warm" IGM.
As seen from Fig. 1, at low z gravitational heating
rapidly dominates over the UV heating, for densities close
toc and temperatures aroundTc =T(c). On the other
hand, the \warm" IGM clouds are not the same as the UV
heated objects which form the \cool" component. Note
that the curve (23) used with the mass (25) only reﬂects
748 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
the average trend. Indeed, the stochastic character of the
dark matter density eld leads to a broad variety of masses
which are just collapsing, and hence of (;T ) trajectories.
Moreover, the local properties of the shocks also provide
for some additional scatter. This induces a (rather large)
dispersion of the points of the \warm" IGM in the ( ;T )
plane, which agrees with numerical simulations (e.g., Dave
et al. 2001). However the \warm" IGM should remain en-
closed within the allowed region dened by the constraints
discussed in the previous sections. Indeed, we must point
out that the validity of Eq. (1) ensures that the constraints
obtained in Sects. 2.2.2{2.2.4 still hold.
2.5. The dierent phases of the IGM
In the previous sections we have shown that one can distin-
guish two components in the IGM and we have determined
their location in the (;T ) phase-diagram. Our results are
displayed in Fig. 1.
Firstly, there is a \cool" IGM phase (T 103−104 K)
which corresponds to the Lyman- forest. These are mod-
erate density ﬂuctuations ( < c) of photo-ionized gas.
They are described by the Equation of State (21) which
arises from the heating of the gas by the UV background
and the cooling due to the expansion (i.e. pressure work).
Thus, this component lies on a well-dened curve in the
(;T ) plane. This curve is bounded towards low densities
by the cuto of the pdf P(
R), which expresses the fact
that the dark matter density eld arising from Gaussian
initial conditions exhibits a nite range of densities which
occur with a signicant probability. Note that this lower
bound indeed agrees with the points obtained from nu-
merical simulations shown in Fig. 1. On the other hand,
the high-density bound 
c is due to gravitational shock-
heating which becomes the dominant energy source for
dense regions.
Secondly, there is a \warm" IGM phase ( T 
10
4−107 K) which describes the gas heated by shocks
arising from the gravitational energy of just collapsing
objects. Because of the stochastic character of this en-
ergy source there is a broad scatter for this component
around the \Equation of State" we have derived. This
gas is restricted to a specic allowed region in the ( ;T )
phase-diagram. This expresses cooling and heating con-
straints as well as the properties of the underlying dark
matter density eld. We nevertheless obtained a curve,
Eq. (23), which follows the mean trend of this \warm"
phase. Its low density bound is set by the transition near

c with the \cool" IGM phase dominated by radiative
heating from the UV background. The high-density bound
is given by the intersection with the cooling curve (where
bremsstrahlung cooling becomes dominant) or the den-
sity threshold vir (beyond this point we have groups or
clusters of galaxies). Note that these results are consistent
with the calculations of (Nath & Silk 2001) based on the
Zel’dovich approximation.
We can note that our results shown in Fig. 1 agree
reasonably well with the outcome of numerical simula-
tions as displayed in Fig. 11 in Dave et al. (1999) (also
shown by the points in our Fig. 1) and Fig. 9 in Springel
& Hernquist (2001). There is a small oset at low redshift
for the normalization of the equation of state (21) of the
\cool" IGM and for the cooling region dened in Eq. (4).
Note that the latter could be remedied by adjusting the
ratiot
c;ef=tH which we simply set equal to unity in Eq. (4).
Similarly, we could obtain a better t to the numerical re-
sults for the \warm" IGM by tuning the r.h.s. in Eq. (25)
which denes the mass M
0. However, our goal is not to
get the best t to a specic numerical simulation (which
would be of little value) but to explain the physics of the
IGM. Moreover, Fig. 1 shows that the simple procedure
detailed in the previous sections already provides a good
qualitative and quantitative description which should be
sucient for most purposes. Besides, as explained above
it should be quite robust. In particular, it could be readily
used with any cosmological parameters.
2.6. Redshift evolution
Finally, the four diagrams displayed in Fig. 1 show the
evolution with redshift of the properties of the IGM, from
z =3d o w nt o z = 0. We can see that the pattern does
not evolve much qualitatively although the curves exhibit
a quantitative shift with z. The characteristic tempera-
ture of the \cool" IGM decreases slightly with time, in
agreement with Eq. (21) since the density declines faster
than 1=t
H. Indeed, the cooling rate due to the expan-
sion of the universe scales as 1 =tH while the recombina-
tion rate (which yields the density of neutral hydrogen in-
volved in radiative heating) scales as. On the other hand,
the cooling constraint dened by tc;ef = tH in Sect. 2.2.1
does not evolve much with time. In particular, its lower
branch at T 104 K is set by the atomic physics of hy-
drogen ionization. Next, the characteristic temperature of
the curve +;loc(T ) associated with shock-heating due to
gravitational clustering grows with time. This expresses
the fact that the virial temperature associated with larger
scales which turn non-linear later is higher. For instance,
the velocity dispersion associated with galaxies is of or-
der200 km s
−1 while for clusters it is 1000 km s−1.
Following this evolution, the mean curve Tgh()w h i c h
describes the \warm" IGM enters the cooling region at
high z while at low z it rst crosses the high-density
threshold vir. This actually expresses the fact that at
highz the collapsed halos built by gravitational clustering
form galaxies since the gas undergoes a very ecient cool-
ing, while at lowz typical just-virialized halos are clusters
which remain hot over a Hubble time and are still strong
X-ray emitters (e.g., Valageas & Schaeer 2000).
2.7. The IGM versus virialized halos
As explained in the previous sections, we restrict the
\mean equation of state" of the \warm" IGM to density
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 749
Fig. 2. The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons at z =3a n d z =0 .A si nF i g .1t h ec u r v e sa t< vir(z)a r et h ee q u a t i o n s
of state of the \cool" and \warm" phases of the IGM. The dashed curve with a vertical part at  vir(z) 200 and a branch
towards higher  and T corresponds to galaxies. The two upper parts of the vertical line at  vir(z) are groups (solid line at
z = 0) and rare clusters (dotted line). The upper right dot-dashed line corresponds to the cool cores of groups and clusters
where cooling has had time to develop.
contrasts below the threshold  vir.I n d e e d ,w ec o n s i d e r
that larger densities correspond to galaxies or clusters,
that is virialized halos which are not part of the diuse
IGM. We display in Fig. 2 the location in the (;T ) phase-
diagram of these collapsed objects and of the IGM at red-
shiftsz =3a n d z =0 .
Let us rst consider the right panel, obtained forz =0 .
The dashed line at   0 is the \cool" IGM while the
solid curve at 
c << vir is the \warm" IGM. The
equations of state of these two components were derived
in the previous sections and these curves are identical to
those shown in Fig. 1. For clarity we do not plot in Fig. 2
the boundaries discussed in Fig. 1 which constrain the
large scatter of the \warm" IGM phase.
Next, the vertical line at  =
vir(z)  200 shows
the overall density contrast associated with just-virialized
objects. We divide this line into three parts.
The rst is in the low temperatures T  105 Kr e -
gion. These objects with  = vir are located within
the cooling region shown in Fig. 1. Hence their cooling
timetc;ef is smaller than the Hubble time tH, see Eq. (4).
Therefore, within these halos the gas undergoes a very ef-
cient cooling which leads to the formation of stars. As
a consequence, these objects are small galaxies which are
just being formed. This part of the vertical line  =
vir
which is enclosed within the cooling region is shown by
the lower vertical dashed line in Fig. 2.
The remaining high temperature region may still be
subdivided. The halos at  = vir which have a higher
temperature do not cool over a Hubble time since they
obey tc;ef >t H (except in their center). Hence they cor-
respond to groups or clusters which still contain hot gas
which can be observed through its X-ray emission. One
may divide this part into two components: groups versus
clusters. We identify groups with the low temperature
halos located below the cuto +;loc shown in Fig. 1.
Therefore, they correspond to the typical just-virialized
halos which form atz = 0. On the other hand, we identify
clusters with the high temperature halos located above
the cuto 
+;loc. Hence they are rare massive objects
which probe the high-density tail of the pdf P(R). In
other words, they correspond to the high-mass tail of the
mass function. Thus, our distinction between groups and
clusters is only based on the abundance of these objects
(whether they correspond to rare or typical density ﬂuc-
tuations). However, we shall explain in a future paper
(Valageas et al. 2002) that this subdivision also marks the
boundary between objects which, depending on the depth
of their gravitational potential, are aected or not by a
preheating of the gas through the gravitational processes
which yield the IGM. Groups (resp. clusters) are shown in
Fig. 2 by the vertical solid (resp. dotted) line. Thus, these
three parts of the vertical line at  =
vir describe the
location of small galaxies, groups and clusters.
For completeness, we must point out that the lower
part of the line at  = vir with T < 2 105 Kd o e s
not give all galaxies. Indeed, it is clear that there are
some galaxies with a higher temperature. As discussed in
Valageas & Schaeer (1999) these objects must still satisfy
a somewhat stronger cooling constraint:
tc;ef =tH(zform); (26)
wherezform is the redshift of formation of the object. Halos
with  = vir(z)s i m p l yh a v ezform = z (i.e. they are
just being virialized) while higher density contrasts corre-
spond to older objects which collapsed at earlier times.
The constraint (26) ensures that cooling was very e-
cient when these halos formed so that their gas was able
750 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
to condense fast enough in order to be left unperturbed
by the next generation of forming structures. This al-
lows these objects to retain their individuality, stars and
possibly a gaseous disk, even if they become embedded
within larger structures (e.g., laments or clusters) at later
times. The condition (26) at   
vir is shown by the
dashed line in Fig. 2, where we used the approximation
t
H(zform)= tH
p
(1 + vir)=(1 +) (i.e. tH(zform) scales
as the dynamical time of the halo). Thus, we are led to
consider that the properties of these galactic halos (mass
and size) do not evolve much after they form and reach
the virialization density contrast  =
vir. This method
yields predictions for the properties of galaxies (luminos-
ity function, masses, metallicity, ...) which agree with ob-
servations. Therefore, galaxies are dened by the dashed
line which shows a rst vertical part at  =
vir and
T < 2 105 K (small galaxies which are being formed)
and a second part at higher densities and temperatures
(older and more massive galaxies). We can check that we
obtain at T =1 0
6 K a radius R 50 kpc which is indeed
the typical size of present galaxies. By contrast, a halo
with the same virial temperature at  = vir would give
as i z e300 kpc (and a mass1013 M) which is uncom-
fortably large for a galaxy. This actually corresponds to a
small group of galaxies.
Finally, we note that the upper part of the cooling
curve (4) shown in Fig. 1 at > vir describes the cool
cores of groups and clusters. Indeed, it corresponds to
high-density regions which have had time to cool today.
This yields the core radius of present groups and clusters
where cooling has just had time to come into play and
possibly induce cooling ﬂows. For instance, at T =1 0
7 K
we obtain a radius Rcool  150 kpc, which agrees with
observations, while the virial radius is Rvir 1M p c .W e
display this curve as the dot-dashed line in Fig. 2. Note
that this assumes that baryons follow the dark matter.
However, at low z this is not necessarily the case since
some \preheating" may modify the physics of the gas
in low-temperature clusters (i.e. groups), see for instance
Valageas & Silk (1999) and Valageas & Schaeer (2000).
This is not important for our purpose here which is mainly
to describe the physics of the IGM. A specic study de-
voted to this problem and the entropy of the gas in the
light of the results described in this paper is presented in
Valageas et al. (2002).
Note that for these collapsed objects (galaxies, groups,
clusters and cool cores) the density contrast  and the
temperature T shown in Fig. 2 only refer to the mean
density contrast and virial temperature of the halo over
the relevant radius R (which may be dierent from the
virial radius for galaxies and cool cores). At the center of
the halo the gas density is larger. Moreover, for galaxies
and cool cores the gas temperature can be signicantly
smaller since cooling is very ecient (and we should take
into account feedback from supernovae). Therefore, con-
trary to the IGM where the location in the ( ;T ) phase-
diagram directly gave the properties of the gas, here the
(;T ) plane only shows the overall properties of the dark
matter halos associated with each object. Finally, we must
point out that these classes of objects are not exclusive of
each other. Indeed, cooled cores are obviously embedded
within groups and clusters while galaxies can be found
within laments, groups and clusters. Therefore, some of
the mass associated with galaxies or cool cores is counted
within the matter attached to laments, groups or clus-
ters (this can be handled using the methods of Valageas &
Schaeer 1997, see Valageas & Schaeer 1999 for galaxies
and Valageas & Schaeer 2000 for clusters).
Thus, as explained above the (;T ) diagram shown in
Fig. 2 describes the physics of cosmological baryons and
their distribution between dierent phases.
The redshift evolution up to z = 3 can be easily de-
rived from Fig. 1 and for illustration we show in the left
panel in Fig. 2 our result at z = 3. The location of the
various curves evolves as explained in Sect. 2.6 but we
can also note some qualitative changes. Firstly, with our
denitions we see that there are no more groups. This
means that the typical objects which collapse at z =3
form galaxies as they exhibit ecient cooling. To be more
precise, one can still nd clusters along  =
vir,a th i g h
temperatures where cooling is not very ecient. However,
they are located within the far tail of the mass function
and they correspond to extremely rare events. Secondly,
we note that the curve which describes the mean \equation
of state" of the \warm" IGM stops below 
vir.I n d e e d ,a s
seen in Fig. 1 its high-density end-point is now given by
the intersection with the cooling region. This is merely an-
other consequence of the fact that we typically form galax-
ies and not groups (this feature coincides with the \disap-
pearance" of groups). At an even higher redshiftz’4t h e
\warm" IGM component almost disappears as the equa-
tion of state of the \cool" IGM extends up to the cooling
region. However there still remains a \warm" phase be-
cause the allowed region in the ( ;T ) plane has not van-
ished
2. At these high redshifts most of the mass is within
a roughly uniform \cool" phase. We still have some rare
collapsed halos which correspond to galaxies and some
non-linear structures where gravitationally induced shocks
heat the gas but these latter regions are severely restricted
by the high eciency of cooling processes.
3. Distribution of matter
3.1. Mass fraction within dierent phases
Thus, in Sect. 2 we have discussed how the properties of
cosmological baryons could be seen through a (;T ) phase-
diagram. In particular, we distinguished a \cool" and a
\warm" IGM phase. In this section, we derive the fraction
of matter enclosed within these various components.
Let us rst discuss the \cool" IGM phase. As described
in Sect. 2.3 this corresponds to the Lyman-  forest, that
2 These objects are not yet virialized and still in their col-
lapse phase: their gas is still expected to undergo shocks which
lead to the \warm" IGM, but the latter then rapidly cools, so
its physics is rather dierent.
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 751
is moderate density ﬂuctuations governed by the ioniza-
tion and the heating due to the UV background. Since its
temperature is not zero this gas probes the dark matter
density eld over the scale R dened in Eq. (2), which
describes the length-scale over which pressure can ho-
mogenize the baryonic matter distribution. Note that this
length depends on the temperature since R/
p
T. Then,
we wish to express the fraction of matter within the \cool"
IGM in terms of the pdfP(R)o v e rt h es c a l e sR associated
with these clouds. To do so, we rst note that these scales
are within the non-linear regime as shown by the curve
T
nl() in Fig. 1 which marks the transition to the linear
regime. Then, as discussed in Valageas & Schaeer (1997),
in the highly non-linear regime the pdf P(R)s h o w st h e
scaling:
P(R)= 1

2 h(x) with x = R
 ; (27)
which denes the scaling functionh(x). This holds for den-
sities larger than the low-density cutos −discussed in
Sect. 2.2.4. Note that if the stable-clustering ansatz is valid
this function h(x) does not depend on redshift, as long as
one remains in the highly non-linear regime. Then, the
fraction of matter enclosed within spherical cells of ra-
diusR with a density between the thresholds1 and2 is:
Fm =
Z 2
1
dR RP(R)=
Z x2
x1
dx
x x2h(x): (28)
The advantage of the scaling variable x is that the last
term in Eq. (28) still provides an estimate of the fraction
of matter Fm associated with a curve (;R ) which is not
necessarily at constant radius, as discussed in Valageas
& Schaeer (1997). This prediction is compared with nu-
merical simulations in Valageas et al. (2000) where we
investigate the two cases of a constant density and a con-
stant radius. Therefore, in order to estimate the fraction
of matter associated with the Lyman-  forest we use the
variablex and we write:
F
m’
Z dx
x x2h(x;R;z ); (29)
with
x2h(x;R;z )2
RP(R;R;z ); (30)
whereP(R;R;z ) is the value of the pdfP(R)a ts c a l eR
and redshiftz and the integral is taken along the relevant
curve (;R ). The pdf P(R) is obtained from Eq. (A.2)
where the parameter which enters Eq. (A.5) is computed
at the relevant scale R. Thus, the expression (29) would
be exact within the framework described in Appendix A.1
if the Lyman- forest were dened by a constant scale R.
The use of the variable x in Eq. (29) is only meant to
handle the fact that R actually varies with . In particu-
lar, we must point out that our procedure (29) with the
denition (30) does not assume that the stable-clustering
ansatz is valid nor that we consider highly non-linear
scales. Indeed, the approximation (29) merely expresses
Fig. 3. The distribution of baryonic matter. The dashed line
which increases with redshift is the fraction of matter within
the \cool" IGM phase, as computed from Eqs. (29) and (21).
The dot-dashed line gives the mass fraction associated with the
\warm" IGM component. The solid line is the fraction of mat-
ter within collapsed objects. The lled symbols show the results
of the numerical simulations from Dave et al. (2001) (panel D2
in Fig. 1) for the \cool" IGM (squares), the \warm" IGM (tri-
angles) and condensed gas (circles). The empty squares show
the results of the simulation presented in Dave et al. (1999) for
the \cool" IGM phase (Fig. 12).
the mass fraction associated with certain clouds of size R
and density R in terms of the pdf P(R;R;z ) measured
at this point (R;R ).
As described in Appendix A.1 our approximation for
the pdf applies both to the linear and non-linear regimes.
Moreover, this formalism does not imply that these clouds
are virialized objects which have reached an equilib-
rium state. The \extended" function h(x;R;z ) dened in
Eq. (30) depends on scale and redshift. It is merely an-
other way to write the pdf P(
R;R;z ) (which goes over
to the one relevant for the highly non-linear regime in this
limit and is thus used by analogy). An important point of
Eq. (29) is that it yields the mass fraction associated with
various objects from the pdfP(
R) of the non-linear den-
sity eld. This is a strong advantage since, as described
in Valageas & Schaeer (1997), one can show that in the
highly non-linear regime, assuming the stable-clustering
ansatz is valid, the cloud-in-cloud problem can be han-
dled in a satisfactory way. We can expect this property
to extend to the regime we consider here. Note also that
Eq. (29) allows us to count objects which are not neces-
sarily dened by a constant density contrast.
Thus, the integration of Eq. (29) along the Equation
of State (21) yields the fraction of matter F
m;cool within
the \cool" IGM phase. Next, we could try to use the same
method for the \warm" IGM, that is to integrate Eq. (29)
along the mean \equation of state" (23). However, this
procedure is not satisfactory since the laments and large
non-linear structures also contain galaxies and groups
which should be subtracted. As a consequence we rather
752 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
compute the mass fraction associated with virialized halos
at  = vir. That is, we integrate Eq. (29) along the ver-
tical line at  vir shown in Fig. 2, starting from the lower
point which is given by the lower intersection with the
cooling curve. This yields the mass fraction Fm;vir associ-
ated with virialized halos (galaxies, groups and clusters).
Then, we simply dene the mass fraction Fm;warm within
the \warm" IGM by:
Fm;warm 1−Fm;cool−Fm;vir; (31)
so that the sum is unity. This provides the distribution of
matter within these three components: the \cool" IGM,
the \warm" IGM and collapsed halos.
We show our results in Fig. 3. The Lyman-  forest
corresponds to the dashed line which grows at larger red-
shift. Indeed, at higher z gravitational clustering was less
advanced so that a smaller fraction of matter had been
shock-heated to high temperatures or embedded within
collapsed objects through the building of large scale struc-
tures. Note that the fractions of matter within collapsed
halos and the \warm" IGM are of the same order. Indeed,
both components are related to the formation of non-
linear gravitational structures. As noticed in Sect. 2.7 we
obtain F
m;warm =0a t z> 4. This actually means that
the mass fraction within the \warm" IGM is very small
and within the inaccuracy of our computation.
We can check that our results agree with the out-
come of the numerical simulations described in Dave et al.
(1999) and Dave et al. (2001). The mass fractions we ob-
tain for the \warm" IGM and virialized objects are also
in reasonable agreement with simulations although it is
dicult to make a detailed comparison. Indeed, our sep-
aration between dierent components is not exactly the
same as in the simulations
3 and the predictions of the
various simulations exhibit a signicant scatter as shown
by the comparison between the lled and empty squares
in Fig. 3 (see also the various panels in Fig. 1 in Dave
et al. 2001).
3.2. Temperature distribution of the warm phase
We have shown in Fig. 3 the fraction of matter within the
\warm" IGM. It is also of interest to consider more pre-
cisely the temperature distribution within this \warm"
IGM. As we explained in Sect. 3.1, the mass function
which describes the \warm" IGM cannot be obtained by
directly integrating Eq. (29) along the mean \equation of
state" (23) because the regions which are about to collapse
also contain smaller virialized halos (galaxies, groups).
3 We dene, in what we consider a somewhat more logical
way, the various components according to their equation of
state in the phase-diagram, which is easily recognizable for
the \cool" or \warm" IGM, or for the virialized halos. This
denition, as expected, changes accordingly with redshift. In
the simulations, on the other hand, a simple temperature cut-
o is used. For the components containing a small fraction of
the baryons, this may introduce some dierence.
Fig. 4.The temperature distribution(T ) of the \warm" IGM
component at redshiftsz =2a n dz = 0 (normalized to unity).
The mean temperature grows with time as larger scale struc-
tures form.
Thus, we rst need to subtract these substructures which
yields Eq. (31) for the mass fraction. This subtraction is
more dicult when we consider the detailed temperature
distribution within the \warm" IGM but we shall assume
that it can be described by a simple overall renormaliza-
tion. This would be exact if the fraction of matter enclosed
within such virialized objects would be the same for all
\warm" IGM regions (i.e. laments). In fact, we can ex-
pect some correlation between these substructures and the
larger-scale laments but this procedure can be seen as a
zeroth-order approximation. As a consequence, following
Eq. (28) we write the fraction of matter(T )dT=T within
the range [T;T +dT ]a s :
(T )dT
T /x2h(x)dx
x ; (32)
which we compute along the curve (23) which describes
the mean \equation of state" of the \warm" IGM. In
Eq. (32) and in the following we do not write explicitly
the time and scale dependence of h(x;R;z ). The nor-
malization constant in Eq. (32) is set by the constraintR
(T )dT=T = F
m;warm, which is the total mass fraction
within the \warm" IGM derived in Sect. 3.1.
We display our result normalized to unity in Fig. 4.
Of course, we recover the fact that the mean temperature
increases with time as larger non-linear structures build
up. This could also be seen from Fig. 1. In particular,
the mean trend curve of the \warm" IGM in Fig. 1 at
z = 0 is very steep because the characteristic tempera-
ture of the non-linear structures which collapse at that
time is of order T
col  2 107 K which is much larger
than the temperature reached by radiative heating from
the UV background T  5 103 K. Therefore, gravita-
tional shock-heating easily heats the gas up toT > 106 K.
However, note that there is still a signicant fraction of
the matter at lower temperaturesT< 106 K, in agreement
with Dave et al. (2001). Although the procedure (32) is
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 753
only a simple approximation, the comparison of Fig. 4
with Fig. 5 in Dave et al. (2001) shows that it captures
the main trend. Of course, as explained in Sect. 2.4 the
\warm" IGM shows a broad scatter in the (;T )p l a n es o
that the actual boundaries of the temperature distribution
are not as sharp as in Fig. 4. On the other hand, note that
in our description we also have some matter atT> 10
7 K
but we associate this gas with massive X-ray clusters. In
any case, our result displayed in Fig. 4 appears to provide
a reasonable description of the \warm" IGM properties.
4. Warm IGM two-point correlation
Another check on our description of the \warm" IGM com-
ponent is provided by its two-point correlation function

w(r) which measures its spatial clustering. Hence in this
section we evaluate w(r), which is dened by:
1+ w(r)hw(r1)w(r1 +r)i
hwi2 ; (33)
where w(r) is the density of the \warm" IGM compo-
nent at point r. In Eq. (33) the averages h:::i are over
the realizations of the density elds or over space (assum-
ing ergodicity). First, following the procedure described in
Sect. 3.2 we can write the mean \warm" IGM density as:
hwi =N
Z dx
x x2h(x) 
MV =Fm;warm (34)
where M, R and V are the mass, the radius and the vol-
ume associated with the point (;T ) in the phase-diagram.
The normalization constantN is dened by:
N
Z dx
x x2h(x)Fm;warm: (35)
Note that we always havehwi< since the \warm" IGM
component does not contain all the baryonic matter. Next,
the second-order moment is given by:
hw(r1)w(r1 +r)i =N
Z dx1
x1
x2
1h(x1)w(r;x1) (36)
where w(r;x1) is the mean \warm" IGM density at dis-
tancer from a point embedded within the \warm" IGM
component with the parameter x1. Then, as in Valageas
et al. (2001a), we writew(r;x1)a st h es u mo v e rt w oc o n -
tributions. First, there is a probability F(r=R1)t h a tt h e
second point atr1 +r belongs to the same region of thick-
ness R1 of the \warm" IGM. Assuming spherical regions
we have:
r<R 1: F =1−3r
2R1
+ r3
2R3
1
;r>R 1:F =0: (37)
This gives the rst contribution(1)
w (r;x1)a s(1)
w (r;x1)=
1F(r=R1). Second, we write the contribution (2)
w (r;x1)
to w(r;x1) of other regions of the \warm" IGM compo-
nent with parameter x2 as:
(2)
w (r;x1)=[ 1 −F(r=R1)]N
Z dx2
x2
x2
2h(x2)
 [1 +b(x1)b(x2)(r)]: (38)
Fig. 5. The \warm" IGM two-point correlation w(r)a tr e d -
shift z = 0 (dashed line). The solid line shows the two-point
correlation(r) of the dark matter density eld.
Here (r) is the two-point correlation of the underlying
dark matter density eld whileb(x1)b(x2) is the bias asso-
ciated with the regions x1 and x2. This bias is computed
from the generating function introduced in Eq. (A.2)
as described in Bernardeau & Schaeer (1992) (see also
Valageas et al. 2001b for a comparison with observations).
Thus, we write the second-order moment as:
h
w(r1)w(r1 +r)i =N 2
Z dx1
x1
x2
1h(x1)

R1F(r=R1)
+( 1−F(r=R1))N
Z dx2
x2
x2
2h(x2)[ 1 +b(x1)b(x2)(r)]


(39)
This yields the \warm" IGM two-point correlation w(r)
through Eq. (33).
We show our result at z = 0 in Fig. 5. On large scales
the \warm" IGM correlation closely follows the dark mat-
ter correlation because i) we assumed that baryonic mat-
ter follows the dark matter density eld smoothed over
the scale R which describes the processes at work ( R is
set by the location on the (;T ) plane) and ii) the \warm"
IGM component is mainly made of typical density ﬂuctu-
ations. This is seen by the fact that, by denition, most of
its matter is within the allowed region in the (;T ) phase-
diagram, below the high-density cuto
+;loc(T ). This im-
plies that the biases which enter the expression (39) are
close to unity since we do not select rare high densities
or voids by looking at the \warm" IGM phase. In fact, as
seen from Fig. 5 we obtain a mean bias which is slightly
smaller than unity. However, this does not take into ac-
count the broad scatter in the (;T ) plane of the \warm"
IGM component.
On the other hand, at small scalesr< 300 kpc the two-
point correlation function 
w(r) ﬂattens and it reaches a
nite limit at r = 0. This expresses the fact that the non-
zero temperature of the gas reached by radiative heat-
ing and shock-heating (T> 104 K) gives rise to pressure
754 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
eects which homogenize the baryonic distribution over
some scale R. A lower limit to this length R is set by the
scale Rc associated with the critical point ( c;T c)i nt h e
phase-diagram. Indeed, as shown by the curved solid line
in Fig. 1, at redshift z = 0 the length scales associated
with the \warm" IGM run from Rc up to scales of order
R0 which are turning non-linear. This sets the knee of the
two-point correlationw(r)a tr 300 kpc atz =0 .A sn o -
ticed in Sect. 2.4, the result displayed in Fig. 5 shows that
the characteristic thickness of the laments which build
the \warm" IGM is of order 300 kpc at z = 0. We nd
this, at a given redshift, to be indeed much smaller than
the scale which is just turning non-linear, in agreement
with numerical simulations.
The value atr = 0 yields the clumping factorC
w which
we dene by:
Cw h2
wi
hwi2 =1+ w(0): (40)
We obtainCw’160 at z = 0. Finally, we can check that
our results agree with the outcome of the numerical sim-
ulations described in Dave et al. (2001) (see their Fig. 7).
In particular, we recover the knee at r 300 kpc and a
reasonable value for the clumping factor Cw.N o t eh o w -
ever that the dispersion in the ( ;T ) phase-diagram may
actually lead to a slightly higher value.
5. Soft X-ray background
Finally, we check in this section whether the soft
X-ray background emitted by the \warm" IGM
in our model is consistent with observations.
Experiments show that the extragalactic soft X-ray
background ﬂux in the 0 :1−0:4 keV band is of order
20−35 keV cm
−2 s−1 sr−1 keV−1 (e.g., Warwick &
Roberts 1998). However, most of this ﬂux is due to AGN
so that the contribution from diuse gas should obey
the constraint F < 4 keV cm−2 s−1 sr−1 keV−1 in this
frequency range (e.g., see the discussion in Wu et al.
2001). Using the Press-Schechter formalism (Press &
Schechter 1974), assuming that the X-ray emitting gas
is embedded within just-virialized halos with a density
contrast 
c(z) > 177, some previous studies obtained
a ﬂux which is higher than this upper bound (e.g.,
Pen 1999; Wu et al. 2001). This led these authors to infer
that a non-gravitational heating source is needed to
unbind the gas from groups and small clusters in order to
reduce their contribution to the soft X-ray background.
However, the diuse \warm" IGM component is made of
lamentary structures with density contrasts lower than

c(z). This gives a smaller X-ray background since the
X-ray emission is proportional to the squared density
of the gas. Moreover, the fraction of matter within this
\warm" diuse phase is smaller than 30%, see Fig. 3. As
argued in Dave et al. 2001 this reduced X-ray background
could then be consistent with observational constraints.
This conclusion also agrees with the outcome of numerical
simulations (Croft et al. 2001; Phillips et al. 2001).
Therefore, we compute here the soft X-ray background
due to the diuse \warm" IGM phase, in the 0:1−0:4k e V
band. Note that the X-ray background due to resolved
sources (AGN, clusters, cooling galaxies) was already
studied in Valageas & Schaeer (2000) from an analytic
model similar to the one used here to describe the un-
derlying dark matter density eld. The X-ray ﬂux F
1−2
within this frequency band can be written:
F1−2 =7:13 10−34 keV cm−2 s−1 sr−1

Z
dzc dt
dz (1 +z)2N (z)
Z dx
x x2h(x)(1 +)T1=2


e−h1(1+z)=(kT)−e−h2(1+z)=(kT)

; (41)
where the temperature T is in Kelvin units. Here we
used again Eq. (32) with the normalization N (z)d e -
ned in Eq. (35). The factor (1 + ) in Eq. (41) comes
from the fact that the X-ray emission is proportional to
the squared density n2
e. The integral over x in Eq. (41)
follows the curve Tgh(), from Eq. (23), in the ( ;T )
phase-diagram. Then, our calculation gives an X-ray back-
ground ﬂux F1−2 =0 :07 keV cm−2 s−1 sr−1 in the
0:1−0:4 keV band. This yields a mean dierential ﬂux
F =0:25 keV cm−2 s−1 sr−1 keV−1 in this band. Thus,
we can check that our result is consistent with observa-
tions. Note that the scatter of the \warm" IGM in the
(;T ) plane should lead to a slightly larger ﬂux. Therefore,
this component might be observable through its X-ray
emission in the near future.
6. Conclusion
In this article we have shown that the ( ;T ) phase-
diagram of cosmological baryons can be understood in
very simple terms. It is strongly model-independent since
the relevant scales are set by atomic physics (hydrogen
ionization) and the basic cosmological setting (the rate of
expansion and the scale which marks the transition to the
non-linear regime). Building a bridge between the model-
ing of galaxies, groups and clusters, as well as Lyman- 
absorbers, we have constructed in this paper a phase-
diagram which includes also the IGM, and thus provides
a phase-diagram of all baryons . In this diagram, all these
objects form well-dened populations.
Firstly, we have distinguished a \cool" IGM phase cor-
responding to the Lyman- forest. It follows a well-dened
equation of state on the (;T ) plane. We have shown that
the properties of this gas do not depend much on its pre-
vious history because of the form of the recombination
coecient. This explains why the scatter of this compo-
nent obtained in numerical simulations is quite small. The
fraction of baryons in this components, as well as its evo-
lution with redshift is seen to be consistent with earlier
modelling of the frequency of occurrence of the Lyman- 
lines. We however obtain (consistently with the numeri-
cal simulations) 38% of the baryons in the cool IGM at
z = 0. This may be a little high with a mass fraction closer
to 30% being consistent with observations. This must be
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 755
considered as being within the error bars of our analytical
calculation (and the error bars of the simulations!).
Secondly, we nd that a \warm" IGM phase is formed
by the gas which has been shock-heated to larger temper-
atures T 104−107 K as non-linear gravitational struc-
tures appear. The dependence on the stochastic gravita-
tional potential entails a broad scatter in the (;T )p l a n e .
However, we have explained that robust constraints only
allow a closed region in the ( ;T ) phase-diagram for this
component. We have also dened a simple curve which
represents its mean behaviour and plays the role of the
\warm" IGM Equation of State. The latter is found to
be consistent with the outcome of numerical simulations
(Dave et al. 2001), but diers from the simple power-law
t of a mean curve done there. This is because its locus
is based on physical considerations, which we have thor-
oughly justied. The \warm" IGM is seen to be due to
large structures on their way of collapsing under the ac-
tion of gravity. The quite simple picture behind this model
is that the collapse of an object turning non-linear (that
is with average overdensity above 5) induces shocks which
heat patches of much smaller size, to a temperature of the
order of the locally available kinetic energy of the collapse,
creating local conditions within hot spots close to hydro-
static equilibrium. We are able to estimate this size, as
well as the temperature of the latter, and to show they
are in agreement with the simulations. Denitely, these
objects are not just Lyman-  absorbers at larger densi-
ties. The hot gas which lies within clusters and galactic
halos, on the other hand, corresponds to the high-density
\continuation" (e.g., > 200) of the \warm" IGM curve,
in a region of phase-space where virialization insures that
all the available gas has been gravitationally heated.
Next, we nd two quite dierent regimes for the
\warm" IGM. At high redshift, some of the \warm" com-
ponent enters the cooling region of the ( ;T ) plane: this
gives rise to galactic disks and stars. Some of the baryonic
matter, also, should lie on the low temperature branch of
this cooling region, in agreement with the results of nu-
merical simulations (Dave et al. 1999). At low redshift, the
\warm" IGM no longer goes into the cooled region, and
it provides the origin of the hot gas in clusters. The evo-
lution with redshift of the baryon phase-diagram provides
a natural conrmation that at high z collapsed halos form
galaxies while at low redshift they build groups or clusters .
The warm phase occupies 24% of the baryon fraction at
z = 0 in our analytic model.
Then, we have checked that our results for the frac-
tion of matter enclosed within the various phases and the
two-point correlation function of the \warm" IGM com-
ponent agree with numerical simulations (e.g., Dave et al.
1999 and Dave et al. 2001). This conrms the validity of
our analysis. Note however that the latter relies on simple
physical considerations and it is independent of the nd-
ings of the former. Besides, the soft X-ray background due
to the \warm" IGM is consistent with the upper bound
set by observations. Our prediction actually is not far from
the observational limit: this oers the prospect of measur-
ing this X-ray emission in future observations.
We predict that approximately 60% of the baryons are
accounted for atz = 0 in the cool/warm phases of the in-
tergalactic medium. The remaining baryons (i.e. 40%) are
in collapsed structures. With a total of Ω
b  0:045, this
amonts to Ω bcoll  0:018. The observed luminous com-
ponent of the baryons (stars, remnants and gas) is esti-
mated to be about Ω gal 0:004, as noted in the introduc-
tion, and the hot gas in clusters represents Ω ghot 0:003.
Therefore, there remains an \unidentied" or dark baryon
component, Ω bdm  0:011. This is at least twice the
stellar-like component but only about 1/4 of the \iden-
tied" baryons (IGM, stellar components and very hot
gas). In our model this dark baryonic matter corresponds
to (cool?) gas within galactic halos and groups, which has
not been observed yet.
Acknowledgements. We thank R. Dave for providing us with
some of the data published in Dave et al. 1999.
Appendix A: Dark matter density eld
In this appendix we describe the analytic procedure we
use to model the dark matter density eld. Our method
provides a simple means to estimate the pdf of the density
contrast from the quasi-linear up to the highly non-linear
regime, parameterized by only one variable (the skewness).
This should be sucient for our purpose which is merely
to obtain the main properties of the IGM. Note that by
construction the variance and the skewness of the pdf we
obtain below agree with the results of numerical simula-
tions, in both the quasi-linear and the highly non-linear
regimes.
A.1. The pdfP(R) of the overdensity at scale R
First, we note  the moment of order two of the density
contrastR over a spherical cell of radiusR and volumeV .
It can be expressed in terms of the two-point correlation
function(x1;x2)= (jx1−x2j)a s :
h2
Ri =
Z
V
dx1dx2
V 2 (x1;x2): (A.1)
The two-point correlation (x) is the Fourier transform
of the non-linear power-spectrumP(k) which we compute
from the linear power-spectrum PL(k) using the analytic
formulae obtained by Peacock & Dodds (1996) from ts
toN-body simulations. Of course, in the quasi-linear limit
! 0w eh a v e = 2. Then, it is convenient to intro-
duce the generating function ’(y) dened by the inverse
Laplace transform:
P(R)
Z +i1
−i1
dy
2i e[Ry−’(y)]=; (A.2)
whereP(R) is the pdf of the overdensity over a cell of
radiusR:
R 1+ R: (A.3)
756 P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons
The advantage of the generating function ’(y)i st h a ti t
reaches a nite limit in the quasi-linear regime   1.
Moreover, in this regime one can derive ’(y) in a rigor-
ous manner from the equations of motion (Bernardeau
1992, 1994; Valageas 2002). On the other hand, in the
highly non-linear regime  1 the generating function
’(y) should also reach a nite (astonishingly close to the
former, but seemingly not identical) limit if the stable-
clustering ansatz is valid (Balian & Schaeer 1989). This
is seen to agree reasonably well with the results of nu-
merical simulations (e.g., Valageas et al. 2000). Therefore,
hereafter we use the following simple parameterization for
the generating function ’(y):
8
><
>:
 =−y
0()
’(y)= y ()+ 2
2
(A.4)
with:
()

1+ 

−
: (A.5)
This yields a family of functions ’(y) which depends only
on the parameter .
Such a relationship arises naturally in the exact deriva-
tion of ’(y) in the quasi-linear limit (Bernardeau 1992,
1994; Valageas 2002). Besides, it also appears in the non-
linear regime within the framework of the \minimal tree-
model" (Bernardeau & Schaeer 1992; Schaeer 1985). It
can be seen that the phenomenological form (A.5) for()
also yields reasonable results.
As in Bernardeau & Valageas (2000), we choose the
parameter  which enters Eq. (A.5) so as to recover the
skewnessS
3h3
Ric=
2
predicted by HEPT (Scoccimarro
& Frieman 1999) in the non-linear regime. More precisely,
we use:
< 0:1:S3 = 34
7−(n +3 ); > 10:S3 = 3(4−2n)
1+2n+1 (A.6)
and we interpolate between both values in the range
0:1 < < 10. Here we note n the slope of the linear-
power spectrum at the scale of interest. Note that this
procedure was seen in Bernardeau & Valageas (2000) to
match the results of numerical simulations with respect to
weak gravitational lensing eects. Therefore, it should be
quite sucient for our present purpose which is mainly to
investigate the main trends of the IGM properties.
A.2. High and low density cutos (R)
Now, we can estimate the high and low density cutos
(R)o ft h ep d fP(R) as follows. To each overdensityR
we associate the Laplace variable yc(R)( a n dc through
Eq. (A.4)) dened as the saddle-point of the exponent in
E q .( A . 2 ) .T h i sc a nb ew r i t t e n :
R’0(yc)= (c); (A.7)
where we used Eq. (A.4) to derive the last equality.
Note that R and the pair ( yc;c) are of opposite signs.
The reason for the introduction of yc is that for extreme
overdensitiesR!1 orR! 0, that is in the tails of the
pdfP(R), the integral (A.2) is dominated by the contri-
bution from y’yc (e.g., Balian & Schaeer 1989). Then,
it is clear that the density cutos of the pdf are given by
the points  where the argument of the exponential in
Eq. (A.2) at the saddle-point is of order unity and negative
(note that it is zero at the mean overdensity h
Ri =1 ) .
Indeed, for larger jRj the argument becomes more neg-
ative than −1 which leads to the exponential fallos of
P(R). Therefore, we dene the high and low density cut-
os by the condition:
y−’(y)
 =−1; (A.8)
where y = yc() as given by Eq. (A.7). This relation
can be most conveniently written in terms of the variable
which yields:
 =
q
2 (A.9)
where we used Eq. (A.5). In the highly non-linear regime
Eq. (A.9) yields + −1. However, as discussed in
Bernardeau & Schaeer 1992 the implicit system (A.4)
is singular at a nite value
s =−=(2 +)w h i c hl e a d st o
an exponential tail for the pdf P(R) e−R=(xs). Hence
for−
p
2< s we take + = s and + = xs.T h u s ,w e
obtain for the high-density cuto +(R):
 1:+ =1+
q
2;  1:+ =xs (A.10)
and for the low-density cuto −(R):
 1:−=1−
q
2;  1:−
−=2
: (A.11)
Note that in the quasi-linear regime we recover jjp
 = as required for Gaussian initial conditions. Then,
the density cutos are close to the mean: hRi =
1f o r   1. On the other hand, in the highly non-
linear regime the cutos are displaced to very low den-
sities (− 1: rare voids) and high densities ( +  1:
collapsed halos).
References
Anninos, P., Zhang, Y., Abel, T., & Norman, M. L. 1997,
N e w A ,2 ,2 0 9
Balian, R., & Schaeer, R. 1989, A&A, 220, 1
Bernardeau, F. 1992, ApJ, 392, 1
Bernardeau, F. 1994, A&A, 291, 697
Bernardeau, F., & Schaeer, R. 1992, A&A, 255, 1
Bernardeau, F., & Valageas, P. 2000, A&A, 364, 1
Cen, R., & Ostriker, J. P. 1999, ApJ, 514, 1
Cooke, A. J., Espey, B., & Carswell, R. F. 1997, MNRAS, 284,
552
Croft, R. A. C., di Matteo, T., Dave, R., et al. 2001, ApJ, 557,
67
Dave, R., Hernquist, L., Katz, N., & Weinberg, D. H. 1999,
ApJ, 511, 521
P. Valageas et al.: The phase-diagram of cosmological baryons 757
Dave, R., Cen, R., Ostriker, J. P., et al. 2001, ApJ, 552, 473
Fukugita, M., Hogan, C. J., & Peebles, P. J. E. 1998, ApJ, 503,
518
Giallongo, E., Cristiani, S., D’Odorico, S., Fontana, A., &
Savaglio, S. 1996, ApJ, 466, 46
Hui, L., & Gnedin, N. Y. 1997, MNRAS, 292, 27
Nath, B. B., & Silk, J. 2001, MNRAS, submitted
[astro-ph/0107394]
Peacock, J. A., & Dodds, S. J. 1996, MNRAS, 280, L19
Pen, U.-L. 1999, ApJ, 510, L1
Phillips, L. A., Ostriker, J. P., & Cen, R. 2001, ApJ, 554, L9
Press, W. H., & Schechter, P. 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
Rees, M. J., & Ostriker, J. P. 1977, MNRAS, 179, 541
Scoccimarro, R., & Frieman, J. A. 1999, ApJ, 520, 35
Schaeer, R. 1985, A&A, 144, L1
Silk, J. 1977, ApJ, 211, 638
Springel, V., & Hernquist, L. 2001, MNRAS, submitted
[astro-ph/0111016]
Tytler, D., O’Meara, J. M., Suzuki, N., & Lubin, D. 2000, Phys.
Scr. T, 85, 12
Valageas, P. 2002, A&A, 382, 412
Valageas, P., & Schaeer, R. 1997, A&A, 328, 435
Valageas, P., & Schaeer, R. 1999, A&A, 345, 329
Valageas, P., & Schaeer, R. 2000, A&A, 359, 821
Valageas, P., & Silk, J. 1999, A&A, 350, 725
Valageas, P., Schaeer, R., & Silk, J. 1999, A&A, 345, 691
Valageas, P., Lacey, C., & Schaeer, R. 2000, MNRAS, 311,
234
Valageas, P., Balbi, A., & Silk, J. 2001a, A&A, 367, 1
Valageas, P., Schaeer, R., & Silk, J. 2001b, A&A, 366, 363
Valageas, P., Schaeer, R., & Silk, J. 2002, in preparation
Vogel, S. N., Weymann, R., Rauch, M., & Hamilton, T. 1995,
ApJ, 441, 162
Warwick, R. S., & Roberts, T. P. 1998, Astron. Nachrichten,
319, 59
Wu, K. K. S., Fabian, A. C., & Nulsen, P. E. J. 2001, MNRAS,
324, 95
Zel’dovich, Ya. B. 1970, A&A, 5, 84