Cosmology-friendly time-varying neutrino masses via the sterile neutrino portal
Guo-yuan Huang,1,∗ Manfred Lindner, 1,† Pablo Mart´ ınez-Mirav´ e,2,‡ and Manibrata Sen 1,§
1Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Kernphysik, Saupfercheckweg 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
2Departament de F´ ısica Te´ orica, Universitat de Val` encia,
and Instituto de F´ ısica Corpuscular, CSIC-Universitat de Val` encia, 46980 Paterna, Spain
We investigate a consistent scenario of time-varying neutrino masses, and discuss its impact on
cosmology, beta decay, and neutrino oscillation experiments. Such time-varying masses are assumed
to be generated by the coupling between a sterile neutrino and an ultralight scalar ﬁeld, which in
turn aﬀects the light neutrinos by mixing. Besides, the scalar could act as an ultralight dark matter
candidate. We demonstrate how various cosmological bounds, such as those coming from Big Bang
nucleosynthesis, the cosmic microwave background, as well as large scale structures, can be evaded
in this model. This scenario can be further constrained using multiple terrestrial experiments. In
particular, for beta-decay experiments like KATRIN, non-trivial distortions to the electron spectrum
can be induced, even when time-variation is fast and it gets averaged. Furthermore, the presence
of time-varying masses of sterile neutrinos will alter the interpretation of light sterile neutrino
parameter space in the context of the reactor and gallium anomalies. In addition, we also study the
impact of such time-varying neutrino masses on results from the BEST collaboration, which have
recently strengthened the gallium anomaly. If conﬁrmed, we ﬁnd that the time-varying neutrino
mass hypothesis could give a better ﬁt to the recent BEST data.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ever since its ﬁrst detection in 1956 [1, 2], the elusive neutrinos remain to be the least known fermion in the
Standard Model (SM) [3, 4]. Though the early beta-decay data suggest neutrino mass to be either vanishing or
extremely small compared to the electron mass [5–12], the discovery of neutrino oscillation phenomenon has ﬁrmly
established the fact that neutrinos are massive. To weigh those massive neutrinos in a model-independent manner
is the major task of modern beta-decay experiments [13–19].
It remains a mystery as to why the absolute scale of neutrino masses is more than six orders of magnitude
smaller than its charged lepton partner. This is often ascribed to some new physics at very high energy scales in
the spirit of the seesaw mechanism [20–36], whose experimental test is extremely challenging. Alternatively, an
interesting possibility is to attribute the origin of neutrino masses to the dark sectors, for example, dark energy
(DE) [37, 38] and dark matter (DM) [39]. As the persistent direct detection searches of weakly interacting massive
particles (WIMPs) come out with null signals so far, there has been increasing attention to other DM candidates,
such as the ultralight DM [40, 41]. The ultralight DM candidate, due to its tiny mass m <O(eV), acts as a
delocalized classical-number ﬁeld. Such a scenario could be responsible for addressing generic studies of varying
physical constants. One particular class of ultralight DM, the fuzzy dark matter with a mass mφ ≳ 10−22 eV, can
also help to alleviate the small-scale structure issues existing between cosmological observations and simulations
[42–45].
Such an ultralight scalar ﬁeld, coupled to neutrinos, can give rise to intriguing phenomenological consequences.
Neutrinos coupled to the scalar will naturally get a contribution to their masses, in analogy to the Higgs mechanism.
As the classical DM ﬁeld oscillates, the generated mass term for the neutrinos becomes time-varying. There have
been various attempts of studying the phenomenology of a coupling between neutrinos and the ultralight ﬁeld in
the literature [46–71]. A simple realization of this possibility is to couple a classical scalar ﬁeld (Φ) to neutrinos
via the operator ννΦ, which generates a time-varying neutrino mass term. In a UV-complete model, this can be
achieved by directly coupling Φ to the lepton doublet ℓL≡ (ν,e )L, as in the type-II seesaw [32–35]. However,
stringent constraints arise because of the accurate determination of electron properties.
A more feasible way to couple light neutrinos to the scalar ﬁeld is by mixing with gauge singlets, such as a
right-handed sterile neutrino N. It is also natural to have a considerable Yukawa coupling between the sterile
component and the scalar ﬁeld. Motivated by this, our working Lagrangian consistent with gauge symmetries is
described as,
−L⊃ yDℓL˜hN + 1
2(mN +gΦ)NcN + 1
2κℓL˜h˜hTℓc
L + 1
2
y
ΛΦ2NcN + h.c. +··· , (1)
∗ guoyuan.huang@mpi-hd.mpg.de
† manfred.lindner@mpi-hd.mpg.de
‡ pamarmi@iﬁc.uv.es
§ manibrata@mpi-hd.mpg.de
arXiv:2205.08431v2  [hep-ph]  26 Jan 2023
2
where Φ represents the ultralight DM ﬁeld,h is the SM Higgs, the active Majorana neutrino mass termmν≡κv2/2
and the Dirac massmD =yDv/
√
2 will be generated after Higgs takes the vacuum expectation valuev/
√
2≡⟨˜h⟩ =
174 GeV, and mN is the Majorana mass term of the sterile neutrino. On top of that, the Yukawa interaction
gΦNcN with a coupling constant g generates a time-varying mass term to the sterile neutrino. In addition, there
might be a dimension-ﬁve eﬀective interaction with a coupling constanty and the cutoﬀ scale Λ [49, 72, 73], similar
to the Weinberg operator generating light neutrino masses.
In general, the Majorana mass terms mν and mN can be vanishing by imposing additional symmetries such as
lepton number conservation (then the remaining Lagrangian will look similar to the singlet Majoron model [74–
80]). In the most economical case, one can even generate small neutrino masses, with a minimal interaction form
yDℓL˜hN +gΦNcN, but the number of sterile neutrinos should be extended to at least two in order to explain the
oscillation data. Note that even though we assume Majorana neutrinos in this work, the generalization to Dirac
neutrinos is not diﬃcult. An alternative scenario is the one in which right-handed neutrinos have no vacuum mass
(mN = 0) but get a tiny Majorana mass from their coupling to the scalar ﬁeld. This can give rise to ultralight
scalar-induced Pseudo-Dirac neutrinos [71]. The framework explored in this work is diﬀerent from the earlier
discussions about the mass-varying neutrinos, where the tiny neutrino mass is hypothetically generated from the
coupling to the dark energy (e.g., acceleron [38], quintessence [81], etc.). In that case, neutrino masses are constant
over any observable laboratory time scales and one cannot distinguish the induced mass from the vacuum mass
by looking for the time-varying signals. Late-time neutrino mass generation can also arise in models having a
late-time cosmic phase transition [82], or models having an anomaly due to a gravitational −θ term [83]. In fact,
Ref. [82] analyzed redshift dependent neutrino masses in the light of recent Planck data, and reported a preference
for models of late-time neutrino masses. This was further analyzed in a follow-up work [84], where additional data
from Type-Ia supernovae, as well as structure formation was used. More recently, it was demonstrated that a
detection of the diﬀuse supernova neutrino background could shed light on whether neutrino masses turned on at
later redshifts [85].
With the renormalizable terms in Eq. (1), the equation of motion of the scalar in our local galaxy is
(∂2 +m2
φ)Φ = g
2
(
NcN +NN c)
. (2)
where the addition of Hubble dilution term, 3 H ˙Φ with H being the Hubble expansion rate, is necessary if we
consider the scalar evolution over cosmological time scales in the expanding Universe. In the absence of the source
term in the right-hand side, the scalar ﬁeld evolves freely in the Universe after production. Because the scalar is
assumed to be produced coherently 1 and its occupation number is very high, it is more appropriate to consider
Φ as a classical ﬁeld instead of a quantum state. Neglecting possible spatial variations (arising from structure
formation), which are usually suppressed by the DM velocity vφ∼ 10−3 in our Milky Way, the ﬁeld evolution
simply follows,
Φ(t) =φ sinmφt. (3)
Here the timet is calibrated such that Φ(0) = 0, andφ =√2ρ/mφ denotes the ﬁeld strength, which is approximately
φ⊙ = 2.15× 1015 eV· (10−18 eV/mφ) with the dark matter energy density ρ≈ 0.3 GeV· cm−3 in our local galaxy.
It is worthwhile to setup the magnitude of the couplingg by noting thatgφ⊙≈ 2.15 eV·(g/10−15)·(10−18 eV/mφ).
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we use the capital Φ to denote the complete time-varying ﬁeld and φ for its amplitude.
Through the Yukawa coupling to Φ, the sterile neutrino develops an eﬀective time-varying mass term. One may
worry about energy-momentum conservation within such a setup. Let us consider a closed system formed only by
the scalar and the sterile neutrino. The total Lagrangian explicitly possesses a temporal translation symmetry,
so the energy of the entire system must be conserved according to Noether’s theorem. Furthermore, because the
Lagrangian with only the neutrino part preserves spatial translation symmetry, the neutrino momentum must be
invariant under the time-varying scalar potential. But the neutrino energy might be perturbed by the scalar ﬁeld.
When the neutrino energy evolves with E2
N =
√
p2
N + (gφ sinmφt)2, the energy of the scalar system Eφ will also
change accordingly due to the feedback eﬀect from N source term as in Eq. (2), such that EN +Eφ = const.
In the absence of the scalar potential, diagonalization of Eq. (1) leads to light mass eigenstates νi (fori = 1, 2, 3)
and a heavy oneν4. If the vacuum mass m4 is too large compared to the potentialgφ, only the eﬀective coupling by
mixing gij
ν Φνiνj will be relevant at low energies, with i and j being the indices of light neutrino mass eigenstates.
1 The misalignment mechanism serves as such an example, where a complex scalar ﬁeld Φ picks up the expectation value associated
with a broken global symmetry, resulting in a massless pseudo Nambu-Goldstone boson. The boson mass, which tilts the Mexican
hat, can be generated by some phase transition.
3
FIG. 1. The scalar mass scale relevant for various probes including DUNE-like, KATRIN-like, and BEST-like experiments.
The corresponding time scales are indicated on the top axis. The mass ranges for which mφ >H atTγ = 1 MeV (for BBN)
and Tγ = 0.3 eV (for CMB) are also given for comparison.
However, as has been realized, such a scenario faces inevitable constraints from the observation of cosmic microwave
background (CMB) [46–48, 68]. The growth of φ with the redshift will render cosmic neutrinos non-relativistic
in the early Universe, which is in contradiction with the free-streaming property of relativistic neutrinos from the
CMB observation. Sensitivities of most of the laboratory searches are not even comparable to the CMB constraint
in the order of magnitude.
The situation is diﬀerent in the other regime, when the sterile neutrino mass m4 is smaller than gφ. In this
case, as we go back to the dense early Universe ( gφ≫ m4), the potential induced for light neutrinos νi will be
suppressed bym2
D/(gφ). This is very similar to the seesaw mechanism which naturally generates the small neutrino
masses with the suppression of heavy degrees of freedom. The details for this observation are given in Appendix A.
The sterile neutrino can be as light as O(eV), which is relevant for short baseline anomalies [86–91]. A general
issue with the light sterile neutrino is the possibility of its thermalization in the early Universe, leading to an
increase in ∆Neﬀ [92–95]. In fact, the parameter space suggested by the short-baseline anomalies is almost ruled
out by the ∆Neﬀ constraints from Big Bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) and CMB [96, 97]. As has also been noticed
previously [49, 56], the framework with a time-varying DM ﬁeld coupled to sterile neutrino can provide a bonus to
suppress the production of light sterile neutrinos in the early Universe.
In this work, we systematically explore the consequences of a time-varying mass of sterile neutrinos in the early
Universe, outlining the impact on BBN and CMB. Furthermore, we discuss the possibility of current generation beta
decay experiments like KATRIN to probe the time-varying sterile neutrino hypothesis. Finally, we also highlight
how short-baseline neutrino experiments fare in light of such a hypothesis. The mass range of the scalar relevant
for various probes is illustrated in Fig. 1, including the neutrino oscillation experiment DUNE, the beta-decay
experiment KATRIN, the short-baseline experiment BEST, as well as the equivalence time scales in the early
Universe. The corresponding time scales are indicated on the top axis. It is worth mentioning that black hole
superradiance constraints exists in several mass ranges for the ultralight scalar mass [98, 99].
The structure of the rest of the work is as follows. In Sec. II, we separate the time-varying masses via the
sterile neutrino portal into two diﬀerent scenarios. In Sec. III, we investigate the cosmological consequences if
the ultralight DM interacts with the sterile neutrino, including both heavy and light sterile neutrino scenarios.
In Sec. IV, we explore the distortion eﬀect induced by the time-varying potential in beta-decay spectrum, taking
KATRIN experiment as an example. We proceed in Sec. V to discuss the impact of a time-varying light sterile
neutrino on the short-baseline experiments. Finally, we discuss our results, and conclude in Sec. VI.
II. GENERATING TIME-VARYING ACTIVE NEUTRINO MASSES FROM STERILE NEUTRINOS
In the limit that the sterile neutrino is very heavy compared to the scalar potential, i.e., m4 ≫ gφ, the light
neutrinos will receive an eﬀective mass in addition to the original vacuum one (see Appendix A),
˜mi(t)≈mi + sin2θgφ sinmφt. (4)
The active-sterile mixing angle θ can simply be absorbed by redeﬁning gν≡ sin2θ·g such that the neutrino mass
correction reads as gνφ sinmφt. In such a case, it is technically indistinguishable whether active neutrinos couple
4
m1 =0.1 eV,m 4 =3 eV,θ=π/12
0 π/2 π 3π/2 2π
0.01
0.1
1
t(1/m ϕ )
m
L (eV)
gϕ=100m 4
gϕ=0.1m 4
gϕ=0.2m 4
FIG. 2. The time-varying neutrino mass ˜mL via the sterile neutrino portal as a function of time t. The vacuum parameters
have been chosen as m1 = 0.1 eV, m4 = 3 eV and sin 2 2θ = 0.25. The value of the potential, gφ, has been taken to be
gφ = 0.1m4 (black curve), 0.2m4 (dotted red curve) and 100 m4 (dashed blue curve), respectively.
directly to the scalar ﬁeld or by mixing with the sterile neutrino, and the discussion will be reduced to the usual
scenario explored in the literature [46–48, 50–55, 57, 58, 60–70].
This potential is highly testable in neutrino oscillation experiments, provided the DM oscillation cycle, whose
period is given by 2π/mφ, is at least of the same order as the neutrino time of ﬂight (i.e., the DM ﬁeld is not rapidly
oscillating ). If the DM ﬁeld is oscillating with a period of the order of the experimental running time, i.e. few days
to years, the neutrino mass eigenstates can develop oscillation phases continuously with constant eﬀective masses
during the ﬂight [46, 48, 62]. This would manifest as a time modulation of the signal. For shorter DM cycles, the
modulation eﬀect will be averaged, but not vanishing. This averaged eﬀect imprints non-trivial distortions to the
original neutrino oscillation probability as a function of the neutrino energy. Moreover, it was recently pointed out
that even in the rapidly oscillating (dynamical and beyond) regime, the neutrino ﬂavor transition induced by the
scalar ﬁeld is still possible but with a decreased impact [62].
Even though the time-varying analysis of neutrino oscillation experiments itself is interesting and very rich in
phenomenology, the available model parameters are severely constrained from cosmology. In fact, a reasonable
cosmological scenario, without ﬁne-tuning the DM evolution, might rule out all the parameter space to which
neutrino oscillations are sensitive. Irrespective of whether the scalar ﬁeld accommodates all the DM abundance or
not, its ﬁeld strength averaged over space in the early Universe as a function of redshift z will read as
φ(z)2 =φ(0)2· (1 +z)3 , (5)
up to the time when the Hubble expansion rate becomes comparable to the scalar mass, i.e., H≈mφ. To see how
an experimentally testable coupling is disfavored by cosmology, we take gνφ⊙ =
√
∆m2
21≈ 8.7× 10−3 eV, where
the local DM overdensity is approximately φ2
⊙≈ 105φ(0)2 [48, 49]. During the era of matter-radiation equality
(zeq≈ 3000), we obtain gνφ(zeq) = 4.5 eV, which exceeds the neutrino temperature at that time Tν ≈ 0.5 eV
by almost one order of magnitude. As a result, neutrinos become nonrelativistic, and do not free-stream at the
speed of light before recombination, thereby spoiling CMB observations. The above conclusion is actually rather
conservative and requires DM particles to be populated just before the matter-radiation equality. On the other
hand, if the DM production is not ﬁne-tuned and takes place early before BBN at Tν≈ 1 MeV (corresponding
to zBBN≈ 6× 109) such as the misalignment production of QCD axions, a severe limit gνφ⊙ < 7× 10−7 eV can
be obtained by conservatively requiring gνφ(zBBN) < 1 MeV. The allowed tiny local eﬀective time-varying mass
clearly rules out all the possibility of realistic laboratory searches.
The above picture changes if m4 < gφ(z) during the photon decoupling and/or neutrino decoupling era. In
Fig. 2, we show the lighter eﬀective neutrino mass ˜mL≡ Min{˜m1,˜m4} within a DM oscillation period for diﬀerent
gφ. It is important to note that when the gφ sinmφt =−m4−m1 is satisﬁed, it is possible for ˜mL to swap from
˜m1 to ˜m4 due to the resonance encountered. We choose the lighter eigenstate mL, because the lighter neutrino
is deﬁned to have a dominant overlap with active neutrino, providing the active-sterile mixing is small. For the
case of gφ = 100 m4, the lighter mass ˜mL is given by ˜m1 for gΦ >−m1−m4 and ˜m4 for gΦ <−m1−m4.
Previous analyses simply assume an ad hoc sinusoidal variation, e.g., Eq. (4), in the active neutrino mass or mixing
parameters, which need not necessarily to be the case. As shown in Fig. 2 and is clear from Eq. (A2), the variation
of light neutrino parameters can have a more complicated form, especially when gφ is large compared to the sterile
neutrino mass. In the limit of 0 eV < m4≪ gΦ, the mass-variation is instead given by (see Appendix A for a
5
m1 =0 eV,m 4 =3 eV,θ=π/12
10-2 10-1 1 10 102 103 10410-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
gϕ(eV)
〈m
L 〉(eV)
gϕ=m 4
FIG. 3. The lighter neutrino mass average⟨ ˜mL⟩ as a function of the scalar potential, gφ. The vacuum parameters have been
chosen as m1 = 0 eV, m4 = 3 eV and sin 2 2θ = 0.25. The turning point around gφ =m4 is marked as the dashed vertical
line.
derivation)
˜m1≃ m1 +m4− (m4−m1) cos 2θ
2 − (m4−m1)2 sin2 2θ
4gΦ , (6)
˜m4≃ m1 +m4 + (m4−m1) cos 2θ
2 +gΦ. (7)
In the extreme case of m4≪gΦ and sinθ≪ 1, a constant shift∼m4 sin2θ with a time variation with magnitude
∼ m2
4 sin2θ/(gΦ) in the neutrino mass will be induced. In this case, we do not expect a large eﬀective neutrino
mass in the very early Universe as long as m4 sin2θ is chosen to be small.
III. COSMOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF TIME-VARYING STERILE NEUTRINO MASSES
A. Neutrino decoupling and Big Bang nucleosynthesis
The measurements of primordial helium and deuterium abundances agree very well with the theoretical predictions,
assuming standard electroweak interactions with massless neutrinos. The weak interaction rates are expected to be
altered if neutrinos are very massive at the redshift of decoupling, e.g., if ˜mi(zBBN)∼Tν. A severe constraint can
be imposed on gφ⊙ if ultralight DM particles are assumed to be populated before the BBN era. This can translate
into a constraint on the eﬀective neutrino mass for increasing values of gφ as described by Eq. (5).
Fig. 3 shows the average of the lighter neutrino mass ⟨˜mL⟩ as a function of the potential gφ. The vacuum mass
and mixing angle have been taken as m1 = 0 eV, m4 = 3 eV and θ = π/12. We observe that starting from very
small ﬁeld strength withgφ<m 4, the average mass⟨˜mL⟩ increases linearly withgφ. At the point around gφ =m4,
the average mass⟨˜mL⟩ stops growing as expected from Eq. (A11). The turning point around gφ =m4 is the key
to alleviate the tension between testable time-varying signals and BBN.The maximum of ⟨˜mL⟩, which is given by
⟨˜mL⟩max≈ m4 sin2θ, is under control no matter how gφ changes in the early Universe. Hence, in order not to
spoil the BBN observations with a large potential, the sterile neutrino parameter should stay within the range
m4 sin2θ≪ 1 MeV.
Light sterile neutrinos (lower than the neutrino decoupling temperature, i.e.,m4 < 1 MeV) have an additional risk
of thermalization and increasing the amount of extra radiation in the early Universe, measured by ∆Neﬀ [100, 101].
It has been noticed that such a risk can be evaded by introducing secret interactions among sterile neutrinos.
An eﬀective potential suppressing the active-sterile mixing will hence be induced in the presence of just a small
background of sterile neutrinos [102–106]. The spirit is similar in our scenario. In the presence of a DM potential,
sterile neutrino production will be strongly suppressed. In the following, we numerically investigate this possibility
by directly solving for ∆Neﬀ.
In a simpliﬁed two-neutrino setup, the evolution equation of the sterile neutrino phase-space distribution fN is
6
10-13 10-11 10-9 10-7 10-5 10-310-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
0.1
1
gϕ⊙(eV)
ΔN eff
FIG. 4. Contribution of sterile neutrinos to the eﬀective number of neutrinos, ∆ Neﬀ, around the time of BBN as a function
of gφ. The mass splitting and mixing for the sterile neutrino are chosen to be ∆ m2
41 = 10 eV2 and sin2 2θ = 0.25.
given by [107]
dfN
dTν
=− Γ
4HTν
sin2 2˜θm (fνa−fN) . (8)
whereTν is the neutrino temperature, fνa is the active neutrino phase-space distribution, and Γ∝T 5
ν/m4
W encodes
the net neutrino interaction rate. Here, ˜θm is the eﬀective mixing angle in matter,
sin2 2˜θm = ⟨˜∆2⟩⟨sin2 2˜θ14⟩
⟨˜∆2⟩⟨sin2 2˜θ14⟩ + Γ2/4 +
(
⟨˜∆⟩⟨cos 2˜θ14⟩− VT
)2 , (9)
where ˜∆ = (˜m2
4−˜m2
1)/(2E) gives the vacuum oscillation frequency arising from the mass diﬀerence between active
and sterile species, and ⟨⟩ denotes the time-averaging operation. Here VT∝ (T 5
ν/m4
W ) is a measure of the forward
scattering thermal potential experienced by the neutrinos. The scattering term in the denominator encodes the
Quantum Zeno eﬀect, where the ﬂavor conversion is suppressed for a large scattering rate. Furthermore, the
self-scattering process 2N → 2N may freeze-in and become relevant post BBN, leading to a scattering-induced
decoherent population of sterile neutrinos [104]. However, note that this eﬀect is proportional to the coupling g,
and is sub-dominant in our case with an extremely small coupling.
In the limit where fνa can be approximated by a Fermi-Dirac function (or any generic function of p/Tν), Eq. (8)
can be solved approximately to obtain the contribution of sterile neutrinos around the time of BBN [108],
∆NBBN
eﬀ = fN
fνa
≃ 1− exp
[
−2× 103
4√g∗ ⟨sin2 2˜θ14⟩⟨˜m4⟩
eV
]
, (10)
whereg∗ is the eﬀective number of relativistic degrees of freedom. In Fig. 4, we illustrate the dependence of ∆ Neﬀ
on the local DM potential gφ⊙ for a given sterile neutrino parameter choice ∆ m2
41 = 9 eV 2 and sin 2 2θ = 0.25.
Notably, the presence of just a tiny potential, e.g., gφ⊙ ≳ 10−7 eV, is able to reduce ∆ Neﬀ to a negligible level,
i.e., ∆Neﬀ ≲ 0.01. Increasing the potential gφ⊙ will further reduce ∆Neﬀ, thereby making this scenario safe from
primordial abundance constraints. One might worry if the presence of the light scalar Φ itself can act as extra
radiation, and run into trouble with BBN predictions. This is again prevented in our scenario due to tiny coupling
g considered, i.e., according to the relation gφ⊙≈ 2.15× 10−7 eV· (g/10−22)· (10−18 eV/mφ).
Sterile neutrinos with masses in the keV range and produced through such a freeze-in mechanism can also act as
possible dark matter candidates, as was pointed out by Dodelson and Widrow [107]. However, such a mechanism
is in tension with the non-observation of X-rays originating from the decay of sterile neutrino dark matter [109].
Nonetheless, in a scenario such as ours, the sterile neutrino need not be a DM candidate, or can only be a tiny
fraction of the DM density of the Universe. As a result, all the X-ray bounds will be rescaled by the fractional
density of sterile neutrinos in the DM energy budget, and hence, not be relevant for our scenario [110]. Interestingly,
introducing new interactions among the sterile neutrinos, as well as the active neutrinos have been a popular way
to relax these X-ray bounds on these models [111, 112].
7
0 π/2 π 3π/2 2π
10-2
10-1
1
10
102
t(1/m ϕ )
m
1 orm
4 (eV)
gϕoryϕ 2 /Λ=20 eV
gϕ
yϕ2 /Λ
ϕ(t)=ϕ·sin(mϕ t)m
4 (t)
m
1 (t)
sin2 θ
m1 =0.1 eV,m 4 =3 eV,θ=π/12
0 π/2 π 3π/2 2π
10-2
10-1
1
10
102
t(1/m ϕ )
m
1 orm
4 (eV)
gϕoryϕ 2 /Λ=2 eV
FIG. 5. The evolution of ˜m1 (solid curves) and ˜m4 (dotted curves) as functions of time, within one DM cycle. The DM
potential is taken to be gφ = 20 eV (blue curves) or yφ2/Λ = 20 eV (red curves) for the left panel. Vacuum neutrino
parameters are ﬁxed as m1 = 0.1 eV, m4 = 3 eV and θ =π/12. Conventions are the same for the right panel except that
we take gφ = 2 eV or yφ2/Λ = 2 eV.
B. Cosmic microwave background and large scale structure
After decoupling around Tν = 1 MeV, neutrinos evolve freely without scattering in our scenario. However, the
neutrino masses will keep varying with the background scalar ﬁeld, and can be possibly large during the recombi-
nation epoch. Meanwhile, the CMB and large scale structure (LSS) observations are very sensitive to the absolute
scale of neutrino masses. In fact, a world-leading constraint on the sum of neutrino masses has been set, i.e.,
Σimi < 0.12 eV using the dataset Planck TT, TE, EE + lowE + lensing + BAO [113]. Recently, stronger lim-
its, ∑mν < 0.09 eV at 95% C.L. were derived [114, 115] One of the key eﬀects of large neutrino masses during
recombination is to reduce the free-streaming length λfs compared to the massless neutrino case. Free-streaming
neutrinos can damp all the perturbation modes for distances less than λfs, which is well consistent with the current
cosmological data. Hence, any eﬀect which reduces the neutrino free-streaming length λfs during recombination
can be constrained from CMB data.
This scenario is diﬀerent from the BBN epoch, where neutrinos scatter very rapidly before decoupling. In this
case, it is important to ﬁgure out how a free neutrino mass or ﬂavor eigenstate propagates within the oscillating
scalar ﬁeld. To demonstrate this idea, we plot in Fig. 5 the two mass eigenvalues˜m1 and ˜m4 described by Eqs. (A2)
and (A3), within one DM oscillation cycle. Other parameters are taken as m1 = 0.1 eV, m4 = 3 eV and θ =π/12.
The solid curves stand for the mass ˜m1, which coincides with the vacuum value when φ is vanishing. On the other
hand, the dotted curves are for the ˜m4. As Φ(t) oscillates, we note a non-trivial evolution pattern for gφ = 20 eV
(left panel, in blue). At t = π/(2mφ), the neutrino masses reach their local maximal value. The lighter neutrino
mass is just around ˜m1≈ 0.3 eV. After t>π/m φ, Φ(t) becomes negative, and ˜m1 continuously grows to∼ 10 eV,
which is around the original ˜m4 value. Note that the mixing sin 2θ (in gray, unitless) also reaches values around
one, implying that the corresponding relations of ﬂavor and mass eigenstates are swapped. The other eigenvalue
˜m4 follows an opposite behavior.
During recombination, if these two mass eigenstates evolve adiabatically as Φ(t) oscillates, we would expect the
neutrino ﬂavors, being a linear combination of the mass eigenstates, to be relativistic half of the time, and non-
relativistic the other half. This is equivalent to setting neutrino velocity to O(0.5c), which will hence reduce the
free-streaming lengthλfs by a factor of around two. However, we notice that two eigenvalues also critically hit each
other at the point of gΦ(t) =−m4, enforcing a non-adiabatic transition. As a consequence, each time a neutrino
state, say|˜ν1⟩, reaches this point, there will be a certain probability for it to transit to|˜ν4⟩, and vice versa. The net
eﬀect is to reduce the neutrino free-streaming length, by at most a factor of two. We do not investigate numerically
the details about the energy-momentum conservation in the scenario where the scalar, active neutrinos and sterile
neutrinos form a highly entangled system, but instead give our remarks. As in the case with only sterile neutrino
and scalar, the momentum of neutrinos must be always conserved because of spatial translation symmetry. When
|˜ν1⟩ transits to|˜ν4⟩, the energy of each neutrino state is increased by approximately gφ if p≪ gφ. However, we
notice that|˜ν4⟩ at t ≳π/mφ has more overlap with the sterile state |N⟩, hence increasing the contribution of the
source term in Eq. (2). This feedback eﬀect should balance the energy between the neutrino and scalar systems.
Even though such a scenario, to our knowledge, has never been strictly investigated with cosmological simulations,
one might get an intuition from the neutrino mass limit. The neutrino mass information one can extract depends
8
on the redshift. Firstly, the quoted limit from Planck ∑
imi < 0.12 eV is derived from the data of all available
redshifts (from z = 0 to z = 3000). Because the scalar ﬁeld strength is heavier in the dense early Universe, we are
more interested in the consequence at higher redshifts. There are ﬁts using the CMB and LSS data by allowing
neutrino masses to vary with the redshift, which ﬁnd the mass limit derived from the data at z >1100 can only
be Σimi < 0.40 eV at 95% CL [84]. This can be translated it into a constraint on neutrino velocity, ⟨vν⟩> 0.97c,
by using the temperature Tν(z = 1100)≈ 0.18 eV and the relation⟨pν⟩≈ 3Tν. Even without a dedicated analysis,
it indicates that the scenario with ⟨vν⟩> 0.5c is in tension with CMB observations, if gφ is too large in the early
Universe.
However, the above estimate is too stringent, because the impact on CMB perturbation due to a smaller free-
streaming is only one of the eﬀects of ﬁnite neutrino masses. The inclusion of more eﬀects, such as background
evolution eﬀect, should lead to a more conservative limit on the neutrino velocity, which can only be obtained with
a more detailed analysis. Furthermore, it is important to note that while the scalar ﬁeld keeps oscillating with
the frequency mφ/(2π), the overall ﬁeld strength decreases with Eq. (5) as the Universe expands. At certain point
when gφ < m4 the two neutrino mass eigenvalues start to separate. This is demonstrated in the right panel of
Fig. 5, where we show the eigenstates for a smaller value of gφ = 2 eV (blue curve).
The neutrino velocity is reduced in the large gφ case due to the conversion between the lower and upper mass
eigenstates when gΦ(t) =−m4. However, such an issue does not arise if the mass-variation is due to the higher
dimensional term, governed by yφ2/Λ case with y >0. This is demonstrated via the red curves in Fig. 5. In this
case, no matter how large the potential becomes, the eigenstate with ˜m1, which has dominant mixing with active
neutrinos, always stays below m4 sin2θ. The threats from cosmological observations can thus be removed by this
higher-dimensional operator. In such a case, the local potentialyφ2/Λ can be large without spoiling BBN, CMB and
LSS to have observable time-varying eﬀect for active neutrinos at laboratories. Note that our only requirement here
ism4 sin2θ< 0.40 eV, where the sterile neutrino mass can actually be heavy, e.g.,m4 = 1 TeV withθ = 10−7. This
requirement is well compatible with the current collider searches of heavy right-handed neutrinos. For instance, the
ATLAS and CMS collaborations at LHC have set constraints |VµN|2,|VeN|2 ≲ 10−3 [116–118] at m4 = 100 GeV,
corresponding to a very loose result m4 sin2θ< 0.1 GeV.
In this section, we explored the eﬀects of either gφ or yφ2/Λ term in the early Universe, by keeping the other
subdominant. In principle, we can simultaneously have these two eﬀects, where yφ2/Λ is suppressed by some cutoﬀ
scale. However, as we go to the early Universe, the eﬀective term, yφ2/Λ, growing faster might dominate over
the gφ term, and save the model from cosmological bounds. In the remaining part of the work, we will explore
the consequences of a time-varying neutrino mass on beta decays and light sterile neutrino phenomenology. For
these analyses, we shall ignore the higher dimensional operator, and focus on the renormalizable interaction gΦ for
simplicity.
IV. TRITIUM BETA DECAYS
A time-varying mass of the sterile neutrino can also leave potentially observable imprints in beta-decay experiments,
depending on the mass of the sterile neutrino, as well as the mass and amplitude of the scalar ﬁeld Φ. When the
sterile neutrino is heavy (e.g., m4 > MeV), larger than gφ and decoupled from the energy scale of beta-decay
experiments, the scalar potential can only aﬀect the beta-decay spectrum by mixing with active ones [67]. In the
standard 3ν scenario, beta-decay experiments, such as Mainz [119], Troisk [120, 121] and KATRIN [15, 17], measure
the eﬀective neutrino mass mβ≡
√∑3
i=1|Uei|2m2
i , which receives incoherent contributions from three generations
of neutrinos. By analyzing the electron spectrum from tritium beta decays, stringent limits have been set, e.g.,
mβ < 0.8 eV from the combination of the ﬁrst and second campaign of KATRIN (KNM1 + KNM2) [17].
In order to show the eﬀect of a time-varying scalar on beta-decay spectrum, we consider a simpliﬁed modiﬁcation
to the eﬀective neutrino mass, in the limit gφ<m 4, as
˜mβ(φ)≈mβ +gνφ sinmφt, (11)
wheregν≡ sin2θ14·g represents the eﬀective neutrino coupling suppressed by the active-sterile mixing angle. For
Eq. (11), a uniform mixing of the sterile neutrino to three generations of neutrinos has been assumed, such that
˜Uei(φ) = Uei and ˜mi(φ) = mi +gνΦ (for i = 1, 2, 3) hold, thereby leading to the simpliﬁed relation in Eq. (11).
In general, the diagonalization of the sum of vacuum mass matrix and DM-induced mass matrix will result in
complex dependence on the scalar ﬁeld. For the accuracy of current beta-decay experiments, the major observable
is ascribed to a single mass parameter ˜mβ. Diﬀerent coupling patterns are assumed to not aﬀect much the overall
magnitude of modiﬁcations.
9
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
mβ2 (eV2)
gν ϕ(eV)
FIG. 6. Allowed regions in the m2
β−gνφ plane at 68% and 95% C.L. using data from KATRIN’s ﬁrst campaign (KNM1)
and in the limit in which m4 is very heavy and ˜m2
β exhibits a time modulation as in Eq. (11).
The beta spectrum with the eﬀective neutrino mass ˜mβ(φ) can be parameterized as
Rβ(Ee,˜mβ) = G2
F
2π3|Vud|2(
g2
V + 3g2
A
)m3He
m3H
F (Z,Ee)×Ee
√
E2e−m2eH(Ee,˜mβ), (12)
with the spectral function
H(Ee,˜mβ) =
√
(Kend,0−Ke)2−˜m2
β×
(
Kend,0−Ke
)
. (13)
Here, GF is the Fermi coupling constant, Vud is the weak mixing matrix element, gV = 1 and gA = 1.247 are
the vector and axial-vector weak coupling constants of Tritium and the function F (Z,Ee) is the ordinary Fermi
function describing the spectral distortion in the atomic Coulomb potential. Throughout this work, we use Ee
and Ke to distinguish the total and kinematic electron energies and Kend,0 is the electron endpoint energy in the
massless neutrino limit. The step function, which is necessary to make the square root real, is not explicitly shown.
The ultralight scalar may manifest itself as a modulation eﬀect to the beta spectrum, if the DM cycle can
be covered by KATRIN runs, and also be resolvable for the duration of KATRIN spectrum scans. If the above
condition is not satisﬁed, one can also look for the distortion eﬀect by averaging over the DM oscillations. In this
circumstance, we investigate analytically how the averaged scalar ﬁeld modiﬁes the beta spectrum. For the current
KATRIN sensitivity, it is a good approximation to keep up to the ﬁrst order of perturbative expansions on ˜m2
β
(unless gνφ is very large) in the spectral function, namely,
H(Ee,˜mβ)∝ (Kend,0−Ke)−
˜m2
β
2(Kend,0−Ke) . (14)
The square of eﬀective neutrino mass as in Eq. (11) averaged over one DM cycle reads
⟨
˜m2
β
⟩
=m2
β + (gνφ)2
2 . (15)
Hence, in such a case the presence of the scalar ﬁeld directly adds a constant term to the square of eﬀective neutrino
mass. For the sensitivity of ﬁrst KATRIN campaign, the averaged scalar eﬀect is degenerate with a usual neutrino
mass, but it leads to large neutrino mass cosmology [122]. This degeneracy is non-linear and obvious from Fig. 6,
where we have ﬁtted the parameter space of m2
β andgφ using the KATRIN data from the ﬁrst campaign (KMN1).
Following the analysis strategy from the KATRIN Collaboration, we allow m2
β to become negative during the ﬁt.
10
mβ =0, 0.4, 0.7, 1 eV
gνϕ=1 eV, only active
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
0.1
1
Count rate(cps)
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
Ke -K end,0 (eV)
Difference
m4 =3 eV, sin 22θ=0.25
gϕ=10 eV, sterile
gϕ=50 eV, sterile
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
0.1
1
Count rate(cps)
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
Ke -K end,0 (eV)
Difference
FIG. 7. The beta-decay spectra for various scenarios including: the standard beta decays with mβ ={0, 0.4, 0.7, 1} eV (gray
curves from right to left), the heavy sterile neutrino case as in Eq. (11) with an eﬀective potential gνφ = 1 eV (left panel,
blue curve), a benchmark choice of light sterile neutrino with m4 = 3 eV and sin 2 2θ = 0.25 (right panel, black dashed
curve), and the addition of scalar potentials gφ = 10 eV (red dashed curve) and 50 eV (red dotted curve) upon the light
sterile case. Note that we assume mβ = 0 for all the cases with non-zero scalar potentials.
From Fig. 6 and Eq. (15), one can see that in this scenario, the eﬀective neutrino mass measured, ⟨˜m2
β⟩ is always
larger than the true m2
β and hence, the upper limits derived when assuming gφ = 0 are conservative.
Up to this point, we limited the discussion to the case in which the sterile neutrino is heavy. However, when the
sterile neutrino is light enough, additional emission channel of beta decays will be open. In the (3 + 1) ν scenario,
we can split the 3ν and sterile neutrino contributions as [123]
R(3+1)ν
β (Ee) =
(
1−
⏐⏐⏐˜Ue4(φ)
⏐⏐⏐
2)
Rβ(Ee,˜mβ) +
⏐⏐⏐˜Ue4(φ)
⏐⏐⏐
2
Rβ(Ee,˜m4), (16)
with|˜Ue4| = sin ˜θ. The φ(t)-dependent mixing angle ˜θ as well as masses ˜mβ and ˜m4 can be calculated from
Eqs. (A2), (A3) and (A4), respectively. For simplicity, we assume that theφ(t) dependence in ˜mβ is approximately
that of ˜m1. This is well justiﬁed in light of the current KATRIN sensitivity to the eﬀective neutrino mass.
For a general light sterile neutrino, one has to integrate the exact spectral function over DM modulations. A
generic numerical treatment can be performed in the analysis without making approximations. Aiming to provide
a deeper comprehension of the experimental signatures, we show in the upper panel of Fig. 7 the beta-decay spectra
for diﬀerent scenarios, with a conﬁguration similar to the ﬁrst KATRIN campaign. The lower panel demonstrates
the diﬀerence of rates of various scenarios with respect to the standard one with mβ = 0 eV. The region where
KATRIN can obtain most information about neutrino masses is slightly above the beta-decay endpoint. The
statistics are very limited close to the endpoint, while far above the endpoint the beta-decay rate is too large and
hence, insensitive to very small distortions. A ﬁnite neutrino mass will induce not only kink structure, but also
provide a constant shift to the beta-decay spectrum away from the endpoint. This is illustrated in Fig. 7 for four
diﬀerent values ofmβ ={0, 0.4, 0.7, 1} eV, which correspond to the four gray lines, from right to left. However, the
kink structure is still unresolvable given the sensitivity of current generation of beta-decay experiments, resulting
in the current limit of m2
β < 0.9 eV from KATRIN’s second campaign [17].
A light sterile neutrino will induce a second kink in the decay spectrum. Such spectral feature, which is expected
around Ke−Kend,0 ≲ m4, can be well separated from a normal neutrino mass term providing the kink is away
from the endpoint, as shown by black dashed curve. The size of the distortion is related to the size of the mixing
|Ue4|2. Consequently, beta-decay experiments set limits to the sterile neutrino mass and mixing [124, 125]. Red
curves in Fig. 7 illustrate how adding large scalar potentials to the sterile neutrino will smooth these distortions,
mainly because the averaged mixing will be suppressed by the potential. Consequently, this scenario allows to open
up the sterile neutrino parameter space in the context of short-baseline anomalies, as we will discuss later in Fig. 9.
The case in which the sterile neutrino is heavy is given by the the blue curve. We have shown that the eﬀect of
the scalar is degenerate with the mass term (see Fig. 6).
11
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time since 14:02 on 05 July 2019(d)
Inner target rate(d -1 )
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time since 14:02 on 05 July 2019(d)
Outer target rate(d -1 )
FIG. 8. The neutrino reaction rate at BEST for inner (left panel) and outer (right panel) targets, starting from 14:02 on 05
July 2019. The event rates with error bars (in red) are taken from Ref. [129]. The purple band is the original rate expectation
without any deﬁcits, and the gray one is the best-ﬁt scenario with a constant neutrino ﬂux deﬁcit. A sterile neutrino with
the time-varying potential generates the blue curves. To be more speciﬁc, the parameters are chosen as m4 = 3 eV,θ =π/5,
gφ = 4.2 eV and mφ = 6.6× 10−22 eV.
V. IMPACT ON GALLIUM AND REACTOR ANOMALIES
Until now, we have discussed the impact of a consistent scenario of time-varying neutrino masses on cosmology
and beta decay experiments. If the sterile neutrino is light today, it will also have important consequences for the
long-standing gallium and reactor anomalies. We address these issues in this section. First, we will focus on the
case where the DM cycle matches the time scale of the experiment, giving rise to a signal of time modulation. We
use the latest BEST experiment as a case study. Second, we move to higher scalar masses in the rapidly oscillating
regime and discuss its impact on the parameter space of light sterile neutrinos.
A. Time modulation and the gallium anomaly results
Solar neutrino detectors GALLEX [126] and SAGE [127] have used gallium to measure the neutrino emission rate
from radioactive 51Cr and 37Ar sources, and found the rates to be lower than the prediction. This is known as the
gallium anomaly, which can be, in principle, explained by adding an eV-mass light sterile neutrino to the SM. This
anomaly has been recently strengthened by the BEST collaboration, which detects νe from a 51Cr source kept in
a two-volume detector, ﬁlled with gallium [128, 129]. BEST provides high statistics real-time data of the event
rates in the inner as well as outer detectors. The purpose of this subsection is to illustrate that the type of signal
predicted by the time-varying scenario could manifest as anomalous experimental results like the one reported by
BEST, and the time modulation probed would correspond to the ultralight scalar mass range of interest. To do
so, we performed a simple ﬁt of the available data considering m4, θ14 and gφ as free parameters.
Our results are shown in Fig. 8, which depicts the neutrino reaction rate at inner and outer targets, starting
from 14:02 on 05 July 2019. The event rates with error bars, shown in red, are taken directly from Ref. [129].
The purple band is the original prediction without any electron neutrino disappearance. The gray band represents
the best-ﬁt scenario with a constant neutrino ﬂux deﬁcit. The model with time-varying sterile neutrino mass
generates the blue curve, which clearly shows a periodic behaviour in addition to a reduction in the expected νe
ﬂux. To generate this curve, we use the best-ﬁt values, m4 = 3 eV, θ = π/5, gφ = 4.2 eV and a DM mass
mφ = 6.6× 10−22 eV (corresponding to a cycle of 73 days), which is right in the fuzzy DM regime. We ﬁnd that
the original ﬁt with constant ﬂux deﬁcit gives a global χ2≈ 32, while the time-varying scenario can reduce it to
χ2≈ 18. Then, it might seem that the time-varying massive sterile neutrino scenario provides a better explanation
of the BEST results than the vanilla sterile neutrino case. Note that the procedure followed did not account for
possible time-dependent systematics. Besides that, in order to actually claim the existence of a time modulation
in data, a more sophisticated analysis is required in order to address if the periodic behaviour in data is spurious
(for instance, due to statistical ﬂuctuations) and its statistical signiﬁcance. Finally, in order to actually conclude
whether this scenario provides a better ﬁt to the data, one would need to perform a proper Monte-Carlo statistical
analysis which allows to interpret consistently the meaning of the lower χ2 obtained.
Apart from that, the interpretation of the anomaly in terms of a time-varying sterile neutrino is in conﬂict with
solar neutrino data and other active neutrino oscillation experiments. The active to sterile oscillation will lead to
12
1
10
102
103
104
m42 (eV2)
Gallium+reactor
KATRIN
ΔNeff >0.25
Solar data
gϕ=0 eV gϕ=3 eV
10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 1
1
10
102
103
sin2θ
m42 (eV2)
gϕ=10 eV
10-3 10-2 10-1 1
sin2θ
gϕ=50 eV
FIG. 9. The light sterile neutrino parameter space in the presence of the rapidly oscillating DM potential. From top left to
bottom right, we have set gφ = 0 eV, 3 eV, 10 eV and 50 eV. The lightest neutrino is ﬁxed to zero. Black curves enclose
the region favored by the global analysis of reactor and gallium data. Several regions are excluded from solar neutrino data
(in brown) and KATRIN (in red). The parameter space excluded based on ∆ Neﬀ < 0.25 [91, 113] from Planck TT, TE, EE
+ lowE + lensing + BAO is shown in gray, while for the other three cases the resultant ∆ Neﬀ is vanishingly small.
a deﬁcit in the solar neutrino ﬂux as well [130, 131]. The original BEST ﬁt is already in tension with the solar
neutrino data, which cannot be saved by simply adding a modulation, unless there is a large overdensity of DM
inside the Sun (e.g., ten times of that on the Earth). Furthermore, by mixing, the active neutrino masses will
unavoidably receive time-varying corrections. However, no modulation pattern or averaged eﬀect have been found
in existing oscillation experiments [132, 133] so far. In particular, modulations with an amplitude larger than 10%
are excluded by solar data for modulation periods ranging fromO(10 minutes) toO(10 years) [134–136]. It remains
to be seen whether the modulation pattern persists or not in future data collections. Should the modulation pattern
be caused by other uncontrolled time-dependent systematics rather than time-varying sterile neutrinos, we may
leave it for a future analysis. Nevertheless, this serves as an illustrative example of how an experiment like BEST
could constrain the time-varying neutrino mass.
13
B. Reinterpretation of light sterile neutrino parameter space
The gallium anomaly is further strengthened by the presence of the reactor antineutrino anomaly – a series of reactor
experiments which observed a deﬁcit of the electron antineutrino ﬂux as compared to some predictions (see [87, 137]
for recent reviews). In this subsection, we will discuss how the light sterile neutrino parameter space changes in
connection with the gallium as well as the reactor anomalies under the oscillating scalar potential hypothesis. Note
that a typical reactor neutrino experiment baseline is small, e.g., baselines are of the order 0.01-1 km, and therefore
is sensitive to DM modulations driven by a mass (or equivalently frequency) mφ≈ 10−7− 10−9 eV.
For simplicity, we will focus on the scenario where the DM oscillates very rapidly during the neutrino ﬂight from
the source to the detector, such that all the time-varying information is eﬀectively lost. Since the DM potential
encountered by the neutrinos changes rapidly, neutrinos in ﬂight do not have enough time to develop any non-
trivial phases due to this interaction. The Hamiltonian relevant for active-sterile neutrino oscillations is reduced
to a vacuum term and a time-dependent one, namely H =H0 +HI(t) with
H0 = 1
2p
[
m2
ν +m2
D mD(mν +mN)
mD(mν +mN) m2
D +m2
N
]
, (17)
HI(t) = 1
2p
[
0 mDgΦ
mDgΦ 2mNgΦ + (gΦ)2
]
. (18)
In the event of rapid DM oscillations, any terms in the Hamiltonian proportional to single powers of gΦ will be
averaged to zero. On the other hand, the quadratic term will be averaged to ( gφ)2/2. This constant term behaves
similar to a matter potential, causing a shift in the dispersion relations; see Appendix B for further details.
Fig. 9 shows the impact of a rapidly oscillating DM, coupled to sterile neutrinos, on the diﬀerent types of
constraints existing in the sterile neutrino parameter space for four diﬀerent benchmark potential values, gφ = 0,
gφ = 3 eV, gφ = 10 eV and gφ = 50 eV (from top left to bottom right). The red shaded regions indicate our
KATRIN limits. The constraint from the ∆Neﬀ requirement [91] is shown as the gray region in the top-left panel,
while there are no such constraints for the other three cases. The black dashed lines show the region favored by
gallium and reactor data [138], while the brown shaded region indicate the solar neutrino constraint [139]. For
convenience, the active neutrino masses have been ﬁxed to zero in all the cases. We ﬁnd that as gφ increases,
the favored parameter space from the global analysis of gallium and reactor data shrink to the top-right corner.
This is due to the fact that for gφ≫ m4, the active-sterile mixing will be severely suppressed, and one needs to
go to larger vacuum mixings to have the same eﬀective parameters. Similar trends are seen for the solar bounds
as well. Regarding KATRIN, for increasing values of gφ, larger values of the mixing become allowed for masses
below 10 eV. The bumpy structure present in the vanilla sterile neutrino constraint (top-left panel), which arises
as a consequence of statistical ﬂuctuations, is kept approximately in all cases. The analysis has been limited to the
case of mβ = 0 eV. Including this parameter in the ﬁt should smooth the displayed curves. As a related issue, one
can see that for non-zero gφ, maximal mixing is not allowed for sterile neutrino masses of O(50− 100eV). That
region of parameter space corresponds to the limit in which sterile neutrinos are integrated out and only the time
modulation aﬀecting active neutrinos can manifest in beta-decay experiments. In that case, there is a degeneracy
between gφ and m2
β (see discussion in Section IV), so it is likely that in a more general analysis by including
m2
β as a free parameter, the constraint in that region will be relaxed. As discussed before, for neutrino oscillation
experiments, only (gφ)2 term exists when we average over the rapidly oscillating scalar ﬁeld. As a result, the mixing
angle suppression goes as ˜θ∼θ·˜m2
4/(gφ)2. On the other hand, for beta-decay experiments, the suppression to the
mixing angle is much milder ˜θ∼θ·m4/(gφ) because the oscillating scalar ﬁeld is not averaged at the Hamiltonian
level as in the neutrino oscillation experiment.
There are additional constraints in the parameters space of light sterile neutrinos coming from oscillation exper-
iments (see Ref. [140] for a recent review and references therein for a detailed description of existing limits). We
leave the study of the rich phenomenology expected in that case to a future work.
VI. CONCLUSION
The ultralight DM, as an alternative DM candidate, can develop large interactions with the invisible neutrinos.
Such interactions have triggered studies at various neutrino experiments like oscillations, beta decays and 0 νββ
decays. However, active neutrinos and charged leptons form doublets in the SM, and hence caution should be taken
when we couple neutrinos to the exotic ﬁelds. One of the safest ways is to introduce a SM singlet, e.g., sterile
neutrino, which can share the exotic forces with light neutrinos by mixing.
14
In that spirit, we have systematically explored the time-varying neutrino masses by assuming that the sterile
neutrino couples to an ultralight scalar ﬁeld. The original time-varying neutrino masses, if testable in neutrino
oscillation experiments, are actually in severe tension with the neutrino mass constraints from Big Bang nucle-
osynthesis, cosmic microwave background, and large scale structures. We demonstrate that the coupling with light
sterile neutrinos can provide time-varying signals in active neutrinos while being in accordance with cosmological
observations. However, to evade the constraints from CMB and LSS, it might be necessary to introduce higher-
dimensional operators. If the sterile neutrino is light, there are additional concerns about producing extra radiation
prior to BBN, as measured by ∆ Neﬀ. We study this scenario, and show that the BBN constraint on light sterile
neutrinos can be safely avoided in this case. Additional thermal production of the light DM is not of concern due
to tiny couplings in our scenarios. This allows us to provide a cosmology-friendly scenario of time-varying masses
of active neutrinos.
We show that the coupling of the ultralight scalar to neutrinos can manifest at beta-decay experiments like
KATRIN. We perform a dedicated analysis of the impact of such time varying neutrino masses in KATRIN. We
ﬁnd that in the presence of additional light sterile neutrinos, the limits set by KATRIN change considerably.
Furthermore, we also study the impact of such models on light sterile neutrino searches, with emphasis on the
results from reactor and gallium experiments, as well as solar data. We ﬁnd that as the value of the DM mass
increases, the region favoured by gallium and reactor data shrink to larger values of sterile neutrino mass and mixing
angles. This is due to the large suppression of active-sterile mixing angle, leading to the necessity of large vacuum
mixing angles and masses to satisfy the data. Additionally, in the latest gallium data from the BEST collaboration,
we ﬁnd that the time-varying neutrino mass can give rise to signatures in the direction of the observed anomalous
results, with the hypothesis, giving a lower χ2 value, ∆χ2 =−14, with respect to the original ﬁt. However, such
a scenario turns out to be in conﬂict with other neutrino oscillation experiments, pointing to other possible origin
of the modulation pattern.
Such a framework of time-varying neutrino masses can not only be tested against cosmological observations,
but also provide observable signatures in beta decay experiments like KATRIN. Furthermore, it also holds potent
consequences for short baseline anomalies that plague neutrino physics these days.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pedro Machado and Yue Zhang for insightful comments on the draft and Sergio Pastor for useful
discussion. PMM is grateful for the kind hospitality of Particle and Astroparticle Division of the Max-Plank-
Institut f¨ ur Kernphysik (Heidelberg) during the early stages of this work. GYH is supported by the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation. PMM is supported by FPU18/04571 and the Spanish grant PID2020-113775GB-I00 (AEI
/ 10.13039/501100011033).
Appendix A: Eﬀective neutrino masses and mixing with a time-varying scalar
In the two-ﬂavor (activeνa and sterileN) frame, starting from Eq. (1), we derive the eﬀective neutrino masses and
mixings in the presence of the scalar potential gΦ. In the absence of gΦ, the diagonalization of the mass matrices
leads to a vacuum mixing matrix U, and two masses m1 and m4, which dominantly mix with active and sterile
neutrinos, respectively. The addition of the scalar potential leads to a mass matrix in the ﬂavor basis ( νa,N c) as
˜Mν =U†
(
m1 0
0 m4
)
U∗ +
(
0 0
0 gΦ
)
= ˜U†
(
˜m1 0
0 ˜m4
)
˜U∗ , (A1)
where the eigenvalues satisfy the sum rule ˜m1 +˜m4 =m1 +m4 +gΦ. The eﬀective neutrino mass and mixing in
the presence of ultralight scalar have the following strict expressions
2˜m1 =m1 +m4 +gΦ−
[
(m4−m1)2 + (gΦ)2 + 2(m4−m1)gΦ cos 2θ14
]1/2
, (A2)
2˜m4 =m1 +m4 +gΦ +
[
(m4−m1)2 + (gΦ)2 + 2(m4−m1)gΦ cos 2θ14
]1/2
, (A3)
tan 2˜θ14 = (m4−m1) sin 2θ14
(m4−m1) cos 2θ14 +gΦ . (A4)
15
When|gΦ|≪ m4 cos 2θ14, we have the approximation
˜m1≃m1 + sin2θ14·gΦ, (A5)
˜m4≃m4 + cos2θ14·gΦ, (A6)
tan 2˜θ14≃ tan 2θ14 , (A7)
which usually applies to the case with heavy sterile neutrinos. In the early Universe, we often have |gΦ|≫ m4,
which will lead to another useful approximation depending on the sign of gΦ. In the case of gΦ≫m4 > 0 eV, we
have the approximation
˜m1≃ m1 +m4− (m4−m1) cos 2θ14
2 − (m4−m1)2 sin2 2θ14
4gΦ , (A8)
˜m4≃ m1 +m4 + (m4−m1) cos 2θ14
2 +gΦ, (A9)
tan 2˜θ14≃ (m4−m1) sin 2θ14
gΦ . (A10)
Whereas, in the case of gΦ≪−m4 < 0 eV, we instead have
˜m1≃− m1 +m4 + (m4−m1) cos 2θ14
2 +|gΦ|, (A11)
˜m4≃ m1 +m4− (m4−m1) cos 2θ14
2 − (m4−m1)2 sin2 2θ14
4gΦ , (A12)
tan 2˜θ14≃ (m4−m1) sin 2θ14
gΦ . (A13)
WhengΦ switches sign, the expressions for ˜m1 and ˜m4 are also swapped, but note that the active neutrino always
has dominant overlap with the lighter eigenstate. The above results are analogous to the analytical observations of
standard MSW eﬀect. In the absence of light sterile neutrino, active neutrinos will develop large eﬀective masses
in the early Universe because φ scales as (1 + z)3/2 with z being the redshift. This signiﬁcantly constrains the
eﬀect which can be probed in laboratory. The introduction of a light sterile neutrino is very intriguing in avoiding
the CMB limit. From Eq. (A11), one can observe that the contribution of large gΦ to the eﬀective active neutrino
mass is negligible, contrary to the case in Eq. (A5). This can be understood as the fact that the mixing between
active and sterile neutrinos is severely suppressed when gΦ becomes extremely large, whereas gΦ only acts on the
sterile component. Such a scenario can also be a key to suppress the production of sterile neutrino in the early
Universe [141].
Appendix B: Neutrino oscillations with rapidly oscillating scalar potential
The scenario with slowly oscillating scalar ﬁeld (compared to the neutrino time of ﬂight) is trivial. Here we explore
the scenario with rapid potential alternation during the neutrino time of ﬂight. Let us focus on the scenario with
two neutrino ﬂavors as before, i.e., νa and Nc. Suppose an active left-handed neutrino component νa,L is emitted
from the source. We need to ﬁgure out how the time-varying neutrino mass alters the prediction of standard
neutrino oscillation picture. The analysis present below should also be applicable to time-varying masses of active
neutrinos only.
We start by explaining that neutrino-antineutrino oscillation, e.g., νa,L → νa,R, is always negligible in our
scenario. Since we are interested in light sterile neutrinos here, all mass terms are tiny in comparison to the
neutrino beam energy Eν ≳ 1 MeV. We further assume that the scalar potential is also negligible compared to
Eν, such that neutrinos are always ultra-relativistic during the ﬂight. This guarantees that a left-helicity state
is always dominantly composed of the left-handed ﬁeld. In the mean time, during the propagation the neutrino
helicity is a conserved quantum number, because the addition of the time-varying potential Φ( t) does not aﬀect
the spatial translation symmetry (conserving three momentum) and isotropy (conserving angular momentum). To
see it more explicitly, we write down the quantum mechanical Hamiltonian driving the two-component spinors in
the basis of (νa,L,ν c
a,L,N c,N ):
H(t) =


iσ·∂ mν 0 mD
mν −iσ·∂ mD 0
0 mD iσ·∂ mN +gΦ
mD 0 mN +gΦ −iσ·∂

. (B1)
16
The helicity operator is given by ˆp· Σ with ˆp being the momentum direction vector and Σ =σ⊗ 14×4. One can
easily check that [H, ˆp· Σ] = 0 by noticing [ ˆp·σ,σ·∂] = 0. As a consequence, the neutrino produced from the
source, which is dominantly left-helicity, will project mainly into the left-handed ﬁeld operator at the detector.
The right-handed component is always negligible providing that all the mass terms and scalar potential are small
compared to the neutrino beam energy. We have also veriﬁed the behavior numerically.
Hence, in the following we shall conﬁne the discussion to the ﬂavor conversion between ﬁelds with the same
handness (say, left handness). In the ﬂavor basis, the approximated Hamiltonian for a plane wave reads
H(t) =p + MνM†
ν(t)
2p . (B2)
The Hamiltonian relevant for active-sterile neutrino oscillations is reduced to a vacuum term and a time-dependent
one, namely H =H0 +HI with
H0 = 1
2p
[
m2
ν +m2
D mD(mν +mN)
mD(mν +mN) m2
D +m2
N
]
, (B3)
HI(t) = 1
2p
[
0 mDgΦ
mDgΦ 2mNgΦ + (gΦ)2
]
. (B4)
The evolution of neutrino state |ν⟩t =Ca|νa⟩ +CN|Nc⟩ is governed by the equation
i∂
∂t (Ca,CN)T =H(t)(Ca,CN)T . (B5)
Here,|Ca|2 gives the survival probability ofνa. When HI is tiny compared toH0, one may consider to perturbatively
analyze the eﬀect of gφ by treating HI as a small parameter. However, we note that neutrino oscillation is an
accumulative eﬀect over a macroscopic baselineL, and small terms accumulated over L are not always appropriate
to be treated as perturbations. In a general circumstance, exact calculation should be invoked to derive the
oscillation probability.
For a rapidly oscillating scalar ﬁeld with mφ≫ ∆m2/(2E), neutrinos feel an averaged potential during propaga-
tion. This does not mean that the scalar eﬀect is vanishing. In fact, the average of HI(t) generates a non-vanishing
contribution
⟨HI(t)⟩ = 1
2p
[
0 0
0 (gφ)2/2
]
, (B6)
which aﬀects neutrino oscillations by modifying the eﬀective mass-squared diﬀerence and mixing angle. The
ultimate eﬀective Hamiltonian will be H0 +⟨HI(t)⟩. The above results should also be valid for decoherent scalar
ﬁeld with random phases, just as the normal matter eﬀect works for an assemble of random microscopic particles.
[1] C. L. Cowan, F. Reines, F. B. Harrison, H. W. Kruse, and A. D. McGuire, “ Detection of the free neutrino: A
Conﬁrmation,” Science 124 (1956) 103–104.
[2] F. Reines and C. L. Cowan, “ Detection of the free neutrino ,” Phys. Rev. 92 (1953) 830–831.
[3] M. S. Athar et al., “Status and perspectives of neutrino physics ,” Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 124 (2022) 103947,
arXiv:2111.07586.
[4] Particle Data Group, P. A. Zyla et al., “Review of Particle Physics ,” PTEP 2020 (2020) no. 8, 083C01.
[5] E. Fermi, “ An attempt of a theory of beta radiation. 1. ,” Z. Phys. 88 (1934) 161–177.
[6] E. Fermi, “ Trends to a Theory of beta Radiation. (In Italian) ,” Nuovo Cim. 11 (1934) 1–19.
[7] F. Perrin, “ Possibility of emission of neutral particles with zero intrinsic mass in beta radioactivity. (In French) ,”
Comptes Rendus 197 (1933) 1625.
[8] R. G. H. Robertson, T. J. Bowles, G. J. Stephenson, D. L. Wark, J. F. Wilkerson, and D. A. Knapp, “ Limit on
anti-electron-neutrino mass from observation of the beta decay of molecular tritium ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991)
957–960.
[9] E. Holzschuh, M. Fritschi, and W. Kuendig, “ Measurement of the electron-neutrino mass from tritium beta decay ,”
Phys. Lett. B 287 (1992) 381–388.
[10] H. Kawakami et al., “New upper bound on the electron anti-neutrino mass ,” Phys. Lett. B 256 (1991) 105–111.
[11] H. Sun et al. CJNP 15 (1993) 261.
[12] W. Stoeﬄ and D. J. Decman, “ Anomalous Structure in the Beta Decay of Gaseous Molecular Tritium ,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75 (1995) 3237–3240.
17
[13] C. Kraus et al., “Final results from phase II of the Mainz neutrino mass search in tritium beta decay ,” Eur. Phys. J.
C 40 (2005) 447–468, arXiv:hep-ex/0412056.
[14] Troitsk, V. N. Aseev et al., “An upper limit on electron antineutrino mass from Troitsk experiment ,” Phys. Rev. D
84 (2011) 112003, arXiv:1108.5034.
[15] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “Improved Upper Limit on the Neutrino Mass from a Direct Kinematic Method by
KATRIN,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 (2019) no. 22, 221802, arXiv:1909.06048.
[16] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “Analysis methods for the ﬁrst KATRIN neutrino-mass measurement ,” Phys. Rev. D 104
(2021) no. 1, 012005, arXiv:2101.05253.
[17] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “Direct neutrino-mass measurement with sub-electronvolt sensitivity ,” Nature Phys. 18
(2022) no. 2, 160–166, arXiv:2105.08533.
[18] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “KATRIN: Status and Prospects for the Neutrino Mass and Beyond ,” arXiv:2203.08059.
[19] Project 8, A. A. Esfahani et al., “The Project 8 Neutrino Mass Experiment ,” in 2022 Snowmass Summer Study . 3,
2022. arXiv:2203.07349.
[20] E. Ma, “ Pathways to naturally small neutrino masses ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1171–1174,
arXiv:hep-ph/9805219.
[21] Y. Cai, J. Herrero-Garc´ ıa, M. A. Schmidt, A. Vicente, and R. R. Volkas, “From the trees to the forest: a review of
radiative neutrino mass models ,” Front. in Phys. 5 (2017) 63, arXiv:1706.08524.
[22] Y. Cai, T. Han, T. Li, and R. Ruiz, “ Lepton Number Violation: Seesaw Models and Their Collider Tests ,” Front. in
Phys. 6 (2018) 40, arXiv:1711.02180.
[23] H. Fritzsch, M. Gell-Mann, and P. Minkowski, “ Vector - Like Weak Currents and New Elementary Fermions ,” Phys.
Lett. 59B (1975) 256–260.
[24] T. P. Cheng, “ Lepton Number Nonconservation Eﬀects in the Vector-Like Weak Interaction Theory ,”.
[25] H. Fritzsch and P. Minkowski, “ Vector-Like Weak Currents, Massive Neutrinos, and Neutrino Beam Oscillations ,”
Phys. Lett. 62B (1976) 72–76.
[26] P. Minkowski, “µ→eγ at a Rate of One Out of 109 Muon Decays?,” Phys. Lett. 67B (1977) 421–428.
[27] T. Yanagida, “ Horizontal Symmetry and Masses of Neutrinos ,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 64 (1980) 1103.
[28] M. Gell-Mann, P. Ramond, and R. Slansky, “ Complex Spinors and Uniﬁed Theories ,” Conf. Proc. C790927 (1979)
315–321, arXiv:1306.4669.
[29] R. N. Mohapatra and G. Senjanovic, “ Neutrino Mass and Spontaneous Parity Nonconservation ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 44
(1980) 912. [,231(1979)].
[30] R. N. Mohapatra and G. Senjanovic, “ Neutrino Masses and Mixings in Gauge Models with Spontaneous Parity
Violation,” Phys. Rev. D23 (1981) 165.
[31] G. Lazarides, Q. Shaﬁ, and C. Wetterich, “ Proton Lifetime and Fermion Masses in an SO(10) Model ,” Nucl. Phys.
B181 (1981) 287–300.
[32] W. Konetschny and W. Kummer, “ Nonconservation of Total Lepton Number with Scalar Bosons ,” Phys. Lett. 70B
(1977) 433–435.
[33] M. Magg and C. Wetterich, “ Neutrino Mass Problem and Gauge Hierarchy ,” Phys. Lett. 94B (1980) 61–64.
[34] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle, “ Neutrino Masses in SU(2) x U(1) Theories ,” Phys. Rev. D22 (1980) 2227.
[35] T. P. Cheng and L.-F. Li, “ Neutrino Masses, Mixings and Oscillations in SU(2) x U(1) Models of Electroweak
Interactions,” Phys. Rev. D22 (1980) 2860.
[36] R. Foot, H. Lew, X. G. He, and G. C. Joshi, “ Seesaw Neutrino Masses Induced by a Triplet of Leptons ,” Z. Phys.
C44 (1989) 441.
[37] J. A. Frieman, C. T. Hill, A. Stebbins, and I. Waga, “ Cosmology with ultralight pseudo Nambu-Goldstone bosons ,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 2077–2080, arXiv:astro-ph/9505060.
[38] R. Fardon, A. E. Nelson, and N. Weiner, “ Dark energy from mass varying neutrinos ,” JCAP 10 (2004) 005,
arXiv:astro-ph/0309800.
[39] H. Davoudiasl, G. Mohlabeng, and M. Sullivan, “ Galactic Dark Matter Population as the Source of Neutrino
Masses,” Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) no. 2, 021301, arXiv:1803.00012.
[40] E. G. M. Ferreira, “ Ultra-light dark matter ,” Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 29 (2021) no. 1, 7, arXiv:2005.03254.
[41] L. A. Ure˜ na L´ opez, “Brief Review on Scalar Field Dark Matter Models ,” Front. Astron. Space Sci. 6 (2019) 47.
[42] B. Moore, “ Evidence against dissipationless dark matter from observations of galaxy haloes ,” Nature 370 (1994) 629.
[43] R. A. Flores and J. R. Primack, “ Observational and theoretical constraints on singular dark matter halos ,”
Astrophys. J. Lett. 427 (1994) L1–4, arXiv:astro-ph/9402004.
[44] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, “ A Universal density proﬁle from hierarchical clustering ,” Astrophys.
J. 490 (1997) 493–508, arXiv:astro-ph/9611107.
[45] A. A. Klypin, A. V. Kravtsov, O. Valenzuela, and F. Prada, “ Where are the missing Galactic satellites? ,” Astrophys.
J. 522 (1999) 82–92, arXiv:astro-ph/9901240.
[46] A. Berlin, “ Neutrino Oscillations as a Probe of Light Scalar Dark Matter ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) no. 23,
231801, arXiv:1608.01307.
[47] V. Brdar, J. Kopp, J. Liu, P. Prass, and X.-P. Wang, “ Fuzzy dark matter and nonstandard neutrino interactions ,”
Phys. Rev. D 97 (2018) no. 4, 043001, arXiv:1705.09455.
[48] G. Krnjaic, P. A. N. Machado, and L. Necib, “ Distorted neutrino oscillations from time varying cosmic ﬁelds ,” Phys.
Rev. D 97 (2018) no. 7, 075017, arXiv:1705.06740.
[49] Y. Zhao, “ Cosmology and time dependent parameters induced by a misaligned light scalar ,” Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017)
18
no. 11, 115002, arXiv:1701.02735.
[50] J. Liao, D. Marfatia, and K. Whisnant, “ Light scalar dark matter at neutrino oscillation experiments ,” JHEP 04
(2018) 136, arXiv:1803.01773.
[51] F. Capozzi, I. M. Shoemaker, and L. Vecchi, “ Neutrino Oscillations in Dark Backgrounds ,” JCAP 07 (2018) 004,
arXiv:1804.05117.
[52] M. M. Reynoso and O. A. Sampayo, “ Propagation of high-energy neutrinos in a background of ultralight scalar dark
matter,” Astropart. Phys. 82 (2016) 10–20, arXiv:1605.09671.
[53] G.-Y. Huang and N. Nath, “ Neutrinophilic Axion-Like Dark Matter ,” Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) no. 11, 922,
arXiv:1809.01111.
[54] S. Pandey, S. Karmakar, and S. Rakshit, “ Interactions of Astrophysical Neutrinos with Dark Matter: A model
building perspective,” JHEP 01 (2019) 095, arXiv:1810.04203.
[55] Y. Farzan and S. Palomares-Ruiz, “ Flavor of cosmic neutrinos preserved by ultralight dark matter ,” Phys. Rev. D 99
(2019) no. 5, 051702, arXiv:1810.00892.
[56] Y. Farzan, “ Ultra-light scalar saving the 3 + 1 neutrino scheme from the cosmological bounds ,” Phys. Lett. B 797
(2019) 134911, arXiv:1907.04271.
[57] K.-Y. Choi, J. Kim, and C. Rott, “ Constraining dark matter-neutrino interactions with IceCube-170922A ,” Phys.
Rev. D 99 (2019) no. 8, 083018, arXiv:1903.03302.
[58] S. Baek, “ Dirac neutrino from the breaking of Peccei-Quinn symmetry ,” Phys. Lett. B 805 (2020) 135415,
arXiv:1911.04210.
[59] S.-F. Ge and H. Murayama, “ Apparent CPT Violation in Neutrino Oscillation from Dark Non-Standard
Interactions,” arXiv:1904.02518.
[60] K.-Y. Choi, E. J. Chun, and J. Kim, “ Neutrino Oscillations in Dark Matter ,” Phys. Dark Univ. 30 (2020) 100606,
arXiv:1909.10478.
[61] K.-Y. Choi, E. J. Chun, and J. Kim, “ Dispersion of neutrinos in a medium ,” arXiv:2012.09474.
[62] A. Dev, P. A. N. Machado, and P. Mart´ ınez-Mirav´ e, “Signatures of ultralight dark matter in neutrino oscillation
experiments,” JHEP 01 (2021) 094, arXiv:2007.03590.
[63] S. Baek, “ A connection between ﬂavour anomaly, neutrino mass, and axion ,” JHEP 10 (2020) 111,
arXiv:2006.02050.
[64] M. Losada, Y. Nir, G. Perez, and Y. Shpilman, “ Probing scalar dark matter oscillations with neutrino oscillations ,”
arXiv:2107.10865.
[65] A. Y. Smirnov and V. B. Valera, “ Resonance refraction and neutrino oscillations ,” arXiv:2106.13829.
[66] G. Alonso- ´Alvarez and J. M. Cline, “ Sterile neutrino dark matter catalyzed by a very light dark photon ,”
arXiv:2107.07524.
[67] G.-y. Huang and W. Rodejohann, “ Tritium beta decay with modiﬁed neutrino dispersion relations: KATRIN in the
dark sea,” arXiv:2110.03718.
[68] G.-y. Huang and N. Nath, “ Neutrino meets ultralight dark matter: 0νββ decay and cosmology,” arXiv:2111.08732.
[69] E. J. Chun, “ Neutrino Transition in Dark Matter ,” arXiv:2112.05057.
[70] M. M. Reynoso, O. A. Sampayo, and A. M. Carulli, “ Neutrino interactions with ultralight axion-like dark matter ,”
Eur. Phys. J. C 82 (2022) no. 3, 274, arXiv:2203.11642.
[71] A. Dev, G. Krnjaic, P. Machado, and H. Ramani, “ Constraining Feeble Neutrino Interactions with Ultralight Dark
Matter,” arXiv:2205.06821.
[72] A. Anisimov, “ Majorana Dark Matter ,” in 6th International Workshop on the Identiﬁcation of Dark Matter ,
pp. 439–449. 12, 2006. arXiv:hep-ph/0612024.
[73] A. Anisimov and P. Di Bari, “ Cold Dark Matter from heavy Right-Handed neutrino mixing ,” Phys. Rev. D 80 (2009)
073017, arXiv:0812.5085.
[74] Y. Chikashige, R. N. Mohapatra, and R. D. Peccei, “ Spontaneously Broken Lepton Number and Cosmological
Constraints on the Neutrino Mass Spectrum ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 (1980) 1926.
[75] Y. Chikashige, R. N. Mohapatra, and R. D. Peccei, “ Are There Real Goldstone Bosons Associated with Broken
Lepton Number?,” Phys. Lett. B 98 (1981) 265–268.
[76] G. B. Gelmini and M. Roncadelli, “ Left-Handed Neutrino Mass Scale and Spontaneously Broken Lepton Number ,”
Phys. Lett. B 99 (1981) 411–415.
[77] K. Choi and A. Santamaria, “ 17-KeV neutrino in a singlet - triplet majoron model ,” Phys. Lett. B 267 (1991)
504–508.
[78] A. Acker, A. Joshipura, and S. Pakvasa, “ A Neutrino decay model, solar anti-neutrinos and atmospheric neutrinos ,”
Phys. Lett. B 285 (1992) 371–375.
[79] H. M. Georgi, S. L. Glashow, and S. Nussinov, “ Unconventional Model of Neutrino Masses ,” Nucl. Phys. B 193
(1981) 297–316.
[80] J. Schechter and J. W. F. Valle, “ Neutrino Decay and Spontaneous Violation of Lepton Number ,” Phys. Rev. D 25
(1982) 774.
[81] A. W. Brookﬁeld, C. van de Bruck, D. F. Mota, and D. Tocchini-Valentini, “ Cosmology of mass-varying neutrinos
driven by quintessence: theory and observations ,” Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 083515, arXiv:astro-ph/0512367.
[Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 76, 049901 (2007)].
[82] C. S. Lorenz, L. Funcke, E. Calabrese, and S. Hannestad, “ Time-varying neutrino mass from a supercooled phase
19
transition: current cosmological constraints and impact on the Ωm-σ8 plane,” Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) no. 2, 023501,
arXiv:1811.01991.
[83] G. Dvali and L. Funcke, “ Small neutrino masses from gravitational θ-term,” Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) no. 11, 113002,
arXiv:1602.03191.
[84] C. S. Lorenz, L. Funcke, M. L¨ oﬄer, and E. Calabrese, “Reconstruction of the neutrino mass as a function of
redshift,” Phys. Rev. D 104 (2021) no. 12, 123518, arXiv:2102.13618.
[85] A. de Gouvˆ ea, I. Martinez-Soler, Y. F. Perez-Gonzalez, and M. Sen, “The diﬀuse supernova neutrino background as a
probe of late-time neutrino mass generation ,” arXiv:2205.01102.
[86] S. Gariazzo, C. Giunti, M. Laveder, Y. F. Li, and E. M. Zavanin, “ Light sterile neutrinos ,” J. Phys. G 43 (2016)
033001, arXiv:1507.08204.
[87] C. Giunti and T. Lasserre, “ eV-scale Sterile Neutrinos ,” Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 69 (2019) 163–190,
arXiv:1901.08330.
[88] A. Diaz, C. A. Arg¨ uelles, G. H. Collin, J. M. Conrad, and M. H. Shaevitz, “ Where Are We With Light Sterile
Neutrinos?,” Phys. Rept. 884 (2020) 1–59, arXiv:1906.00045.
[89] S. B¨ oser, C. Buck, C. Giunti, J. Lesgourgues, L. Ludhova, S. Mertens, A. Schukraft, and M. Wurm, “Status of Light
Sterile Neutrino Searches,” Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 111 (2020) 103736, arXiv:1906.01739.
[90] S. Gariazzo, “ Light Sterile Neutrinos ,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2156 (2021) no. 1, 012003, arXiv:2110.09876.
[91] M. Archidiacono and S. Gariazzo, “ Two Sides of the Same Coin: Sterile Neutrinos and Dark Radiation, Status and
Perspectives,” Universe 8 (2022) no. 3, 175, arXiv:2201.10319.
[92] R. Barbieri and A. Dolgov, “ Neutrino oscillations in the early universe ,” Nucl. Phys. B 349 (1991) 743–753.
[93] K. Enqvist, K. Kainulainen, and J. Maalampi, “ Refraction and Oscillations of Neutrinos in the Early Universe ,”
Nucl. Phys. B 349 (1991) 754–790.
[94] B. H. J. McKellar and M. J. Thomson, “ Oscillating doublet neutrinos in the early universe ,” Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994)
2710–2728.
[95] G. Sigl and G. Raﬀelt, “ General kinetic description of relativistic mixed neutrinos ,” Nucl. Phys. B 406 (1993)
423–451.
[96] S. Hannestad, I. Tamborra, and T. Tram, “ Thermalisation of light sterile neutrinos in the early universe ,” JCAP 07
(2012) 025, arXiv:1204.5861.
[97] S. Gariazzo, P. F. de Salas, and S. Pastor, “ Thermalisation of sterile neutrinos in the early Universe in the 3+1
scheme with full mixing matrix ,” JCAP 07 (2019) 014, arXiv:1905.11290.
[98] H. Davoudiasl and P. B. Denton, “ Ultralight Boson Dark Matter and Event Horizon Telescope Observations of
M87*,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 (2019) no. 2, 021102, arXiv:1904.09242.
[99] R. Brito, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani, “ Superradiance: New Frontiers in Black Hole Physics ,” Lect. Notes Phys. 906
(2015) pp.1–237, arXiv:1501.06570.
[100] R. Barbieri and A. Dolgov, “ Bounds on Sterile-neutrinos from Nucleosynthesis ,” Phys. Lett. B 237 (1990) 440–445.
[101] A. D. Dolgov and F. L. Villante, “ BBN bounds on active sterile neutrino mixing ,” Nucl. Phys. B 679 (2004) 261–298,
arXiv:hep-ph/0308083.
[102] B. Dasgupta and J. Kopp, “ Cosmologically Safe eV-Scale Sterile Neutrinos and Improved Dark Matter Structure ,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) no. 3, 031803, arXiv:1310.6337.
[103] S. Hannestad, R. S. Hansen, and T. Tram, “ How Self-Interactions can Reconcile Sterile Neutrinos with Cosmology ,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) no. 3, 031802, arXiv:1310.5926.
[104] A. Mirizzi, G. Mangano, O. Pisanti, and N. Saviano, “ Collisional production of sterile neutrinos via secret
interactions and cosmological implications,” Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) no. 2, 025019, arXiv:1410.1385.
[105] F. Forastieri, M. Lattanzi, G. Mangano, A. Mirizzi, P. Natoli, and N. Saviano, “ Cosmic microwave background
constraints on secret interactions among sterile neutrinos ,” JCAP 07 (2017) 038, arXiv:1704.00626.
[106] M. Archidiacono, S. Gariazzo, C. Giunti, S. Hannestad, and T. Tram, “ Sterile neutrino self-interactions: H0 tension
and short-baseline anomalies ,” JCAP 12 (2020) 029, arXiv:2006.12885.
[107] S. Dodelson and L. M. Widrow, “ Sterile-neutrinos as dark matter ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 17–20,
arXiv:hep-ph/9303287.
[108] T. D. Jacques, L. M. Krauss, and C. Lunardini, “ Additional Light Sterile Neutrinos and Cosmology ,” Phys. Rev. D
87 (2013) no. 8, 083515, arXiv:1301.3119. [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 88, 109901 (2013)].
[109] C. Dessert, N. L. Rodd, and B. R. Safdi, “ The dark matter interpretation of the 3.5-keV line is inconsistent with
blank-sky observations,” Science 367 (2020) no. 6485, 1465–1467, arXiv:1812.06976.
[110] C. Benso, V. Brdar, M. Lindner, and W. Rodejohann, “ Prospects for Finding Sterile Neutrino Dark Matter at
KATRIN,” Phys. Rev. D 100 (2019) no. 11, 115035, arXiv:1911.00328.
[111] A. Berlin and D. Hooper, “ Axion-Assisted Production of Sterile Neutrino Dark Matter ,” Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017)
no. 7, 075017, arXiv:1610.03849.
[112] A. De Gouvˆ ea, M. Sen, W. Tangarife, and Y. Zhang, “Dodelson-Widrow Mechanism in the Presence of
Self-Interacting Neutrinos,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 (2020) no. 8, 081802, arXiv:1910.04901.
[113] Planck, N. Aghanim et al., “Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters ,” Astron. Astrophys. 641 (2020) A6,
arXiv:1807.06209. [Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)].
[114] N. Palanque-Delabrouille, C. Y` eche, N. Sch¨ oneberg, J. Lesgourgues, M. Walther, S. Chabanier, and E. Armengaud,
“Hints, neutrino bounds and WDM constraints from SDSS DR14 Lyman- α and Planck full-survey data ,” JCAP 04
(2020) 038, arXiv:1911.09073.
20
[115] E. Di Valentino, S. Gariazzo, and O. Mena, “ Most constraining cosmological neutrino mass bounds ,” Phys. Rev. D
104 (2021) no. 8, 083504, arXiv:2106.15267.
[116] ATLAS, G. Aad et al., “Search for heavy Majorana neutrinos with the ATLAS detector in pp collisions at √s = 8
TeV,” JHEP 07 (2015) 162, arXiv:1506.06020.
[117] CMS, V. Khachatryan et al., “Search for heavy Majorana neutrinos in e±e± + jets and e±µ± + jets events in
proton-proton collisions at√s = 8 TeV,” JHEP 04 (2016) 169, arXiv:1603.02248.
[118] CMS, A. M. Sirunyan et al., “Search for heavy neutral leptons in events with three charged leptons in proton-proton
collisions at√s = 13 TeV,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) no. 22, 221801, arXiv:1802.02965.
[119] C. Kraus, A. Singer, K. Valerius, and C. Weinheimer, “ Limit on sterile neutrino contribution from the Mainz
Neutrino Mass Experiment ,” Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) no. 2, 2323, arXiv:1210.4194.
[120] A. I. Belesev, A. I. Berlev, E. V. Geraskin, A. A. Golubev, N. A. Likhovid, A. A. Nozik, V. S. Pantuev, V. I.
Parfenov, and A. K. Skasyrskaya, “An upper limit on additional neutrino mass eigenstate in 2 to 100 eV region from
’Troitsk nu-mass’ data,” JETP Lett. 97 (2013) 67–69, arXiv:1211.7193.
[121] A. I. Belesev, A. I. Berlev, E. V. Geraskin, A. A. Golubev, N. A. Likhovid, A. A. Nozik, V. S. Pantuev, V. I.
Parfenov, and A. K. Skasyrskaya, “The search for an additional neutrino mass eigenstate in the 2–100 eV region
from ‘Troitsk nu-mass’ data: a detailed analysis ,” J. Phys. G 41 (2014) 015001, arXiv:1307.5687.
[122] J. Alvey, M. Escudero, N. Sabti, and T. Schwetz, “ Cosmic neutrino background detection in large-neutrino-mass
cosmologies,” Phys. Rev. D 105 (2022) no. 6, 063501, arXiv:2111.14870.
[123] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “Bound on 3+1 Active-Sterile Neutrino Mixing from the First Four-Week Science Run of
KATRIN,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 (2021) no. 9, 091803, arXiv:2011.05087.
[124] C. Giunti, Y. F. Li, and Y. Y. Zhang, “ KATRIN bound on 3+1 active-sterile neutrino mixing and the reactor
antineutrino anomaly,” JHEP 05 (2020) 061, arXiv:1912.12956.
[125] KATRIN, M. Aker et al., “Improved eV-scale sterile-neutrino constraints from the second KATRIN measurement
campaign,” Phys. Rev. D 105 (2022) no. 7, 072004, arXiv:2201.11593.
[126] F. Kaether, W. Hampel, G. Heusser, J. Kiko, and T. Kirsten, “ Reanalysis of the GALLEX solar neutrino ﬂux and
source experiments,” Phys. Lett. B 685 (2010) 47–54, arXiv:1001.2731.
[127] SAGE, J. N. Abdurashitov et al., “Measurement of the solar neutrino capture rate with gallium metal. III: Results
for the 2002–2007 data-taking period ,” Phys. Rev. C 80 (2009) 015807, arXiv:0901.2200.
[128] V. V. Barinov et al., “Results from the Baksan Experiment on Sterile Transitions (BEST) ,” arXiv:2109.11482.
[129] V. V. Barinov et al., “A Search for Electron Neutrino Transitions to Sterile States in the BEST Experiment ,”
arXiv:2201.07364.
[130] J. Kopp, P. A. N. Machado, M. Maltoni, and T. Schwetz, “ Sterile Neutrino Oscillations: The Global Picture ,” JHEP
05 (2013) 050, arXiv:1303.3011.
[131] M. Dentler, A. Hern´ andez-Cabezudo, J. Kopp, P. A. N. Machado, M. Maltoni, I. Martinez-Soler, and T. Schwetz,
“Updated Global Analysis of Neutrino Oscillations in the Presence of eV-Scale Sterile Neutrinos ,” JHEP 08 (2018)
010, arXiv:1803.10661.
[132] Daya Bay, D. Adey et al., “Search for a time-varying electron antineutrino signal at Daya Bay ,” Phys. Rev. D 98
(2018) no. 9, 092013, arXiv:1809.04660.
[133] Borexino, S. Appel et al., “Independent determination of the Earth’s orbital parameters with solar neutrinos in
Borexino,” arXiv:2204.07029.
[134] Super-Kamiokande, J. Yoo et al., “A Search for periodic modulations of the solar neutrino ﬂux in
Super-Kamiokande I,” Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 092002, arXiv:hep-ex/0307070.
[135] SNO, B. Aharmim et al., “A Search for periodicities in the B-8 solar neutrino ﬂux measured by the Sudbury neutrino
observatory,” Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 052010, arXiv:hep-ex/0507079.
[136] SNO, B. Aharmim et al., “Searches for High Frequency Variations in the 8B Solar Neutrino Flux at the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory,” Astrophys. J. 710 (2010) 540–548, arXiv:0910.2433.
[137] C. Giunti, Y. F. Li, C. A. Ternes, and Z. Xin, “ Reactor antineutrino anomaly in light of recent ﬂux model
reﬁnements,” Phys. Lett. B 829 (2022) 137054, arXiv:2110.06820.
[138] J. M. Berryman, P. Coloma, P. Huber, T. Schwetz, and A. Zhou, “ Statistical signiﬁcance of the sterile-neutrino
hypothesis in the context of reactor and gallium data ,” JHEP 02 (2022) 055, arXiv:2111.12530.
[139] K. Goldhagen, M. Maltoni, S. E. Reichard, and T. Schwetz, “ Testing sterile neutrino mixing with present and future
solar neutrino data ,” Eur. Phys. J. C 82 (2022) no. 2, 116, arXiv:2109.14898.
[140] M. A. Acero et al., “White Paper on Light Sterile Neutrino Searches and Related Phenomenology ,”
arXiv:2203.07323.
[141] S. Hagstotz, P. F. de Salas, S. Gariazzo, M. Gerbino, M. Lattanzi, S. Vagnozzi, K. Freese, and S. Pastor, “ Bounds on
light sterile neutrino mass and mixing from cosmology and laboratory searches ,” Phys. Rev. D 104 (2021) no. 12,
123524, arXiv:2003.02289.