--- page 1 ---
Visualising energy landscapes through manifold learning
Ben W. B. Shires 1,∗ and Chris J. Pickard 1, 2,†
1Department of Materials Science & Metallurgy, University of Cambridge,
27 Charles Babbage Road, Cambridge CB3 0FS, United Kingdom
2Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba, Sendai, 980-8577, Japan
(Dated: November 16, 2021)
Energy landscapes provide a conceptual framework for structure prediction, and a detailed under-
standing of their topological features is necessary to develop eﬃcient methods for their exploration.
The ability to visualise these surfaces is essential, but the high dimensionality of the correspond-
ing conﬁguration spaces makes this diﬃcult. Here we present Stochastic Hyperspace Embedding
and Projection (SHEAP), a method for energy landscape visualisation inspired by state-of-the-
art algorithms for dimensionality reduction through manifold learning, such as t-SNE and UMAP.
The performance of SHEAP is demonstrated through its application to the energy landscapes of
Lennard-Jones clusters, solid-state carbon, and the quaternary system C+H+N+O. It produces
meaningful and interpretable low-dimensional representations of these landscapes, reproducing well
known topological features such as funnels, and providing fresh insight into their layouts. In partic-
ular, an intrinsic low dimensionality in the distribution of local minima across conﬁguration space
is revealed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Potential (and free) energy surfaces (PESs) provide
a conceptual and mathematical framework for describ-
ing the structures, kinetics and thermodynamics of sys-
tems of interacting atoms [1–4]. The exploration of these
surfaces forms the basis for the ﬁeld of (computational)
structure prediction, where the central task is the loca-
tion of low-lying minima [5]. In order to develop eﬃcient
methods for their exploration, the ability to visualise
these landscapes is crucial, enhancing our understand-
ing of their complex topologies and providing insight into
how we can improve techniques for structure prediction
and global optimisation. However, the potential energy
of a system of atoms varies with the relative positions of
all of its nuclei, meaning that for all but the simplest of
systems the true surface cannot be depicted in the three
spatial dimensions that we can easily visualise.
There are many successful approaches to structure
prediction, from minima/basin-hopping [6–8], particle
swarm [9, 10], and evolutionary algorithms [11, 12], to
ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS) [13, 14].
These methods generate a diverse range of structures for
any given system, and AIRSS, in particular, emphasises a
broad sampling of the energy landscape. This approach
has been successful in identifying novel and interesting
phases of crystalline systems, particularly at high pres-
sures [15–17]. Such a random search for local minima
produces meaningful samples of conﬁguration space, re-
lating directly to the underlying distribution of the basins
of attraction. However, these samples are generated in
huge quantities (around 100,000 for modern application),
and the resulting data-sets can be hard to fully compre-
hend, making it diﬃcult to determine how a given search
∗ bs511@cam.ac.uk
† cjp20@cam.ac.uk
might be improved. A means to extract and depict infor-
mation contained in these large data-sets of local minima,
such that insight into the landscape being searched can
be obtained, would be valuable.
The desire to visualise high-dimensional objects is not
restricted to energy landscapes. A similar challenge is
encountered for loss functions deﬁning other optimisa-
tion tasks, such as statistical regression schemes [18],
and machine learning algorithms for classiﬁcation, clus-
tering, and neural networks [19–22]. For any such cost
function surface, it would be revealing if an approximate
low-dimensional representation could be produced which
preserves as faithfully as possible the key features of
the landscape, such as the location of stationary points.
For the PESs sampled by methods for structure predic-
tion, the important features include the relative layout of
the local minima, the connectivity of the corresponding
basins of attraction, the relative volumes of the basins,
and the presence of “super-basins”, or funnels [2, 3, 23–
27]. Here we propose a method for energy landscape
visualisation which captures these features.
PES visualisation can be viewed as a data science task
in which we would like to project a high-dimensional
source data-set (consisting of vectors describing struc-
tures in the conﬁguration space of interest) into one, two
or three Euclidean dimensions. We base our approach on
state-of-the-art algorithms for dimensionality reduction
for visualisation, such as t-Distributed Stochastic Neigh-
bour Embedding (t-SNE) [28] and Uniform Manifold Ap-
proximation and Projection (UMAP) [29, 30], drawing
inspiration from their increasing application to data-sets
arising in physics [31–33], materials science [34, 35], and
cell biology [36–39]. We call this approach SHEAP -
Stochastic Hyperspace Embedding And Projection.
There are a number of existing tools which allow the
depiction of certain features of high-dimensional PESs
in lower dimensions, including (metric) disconnectivity
graphs [27, 40–43], and sketch-maps [44–46]. These ap-
arXiv:2111.07843v1  [physics.comp-ph]  15 Nov 2021

--- page 2 ---
2
proaches do not focus on faithfully preserving the spatial
layout of minima on the true PES, but rather on under-
standing the system dynamics.
Disconnectivity graphs display the connectivity of lo-
cal minima in terms of minimum energy pathways be-
tween them, illustrating which structures are likely to
be accessible and interchangeable at a given temperature
[27, 40, 41]. They do not indicate the proximity of min-
ima in the conﬁguration space according to some deﬁned
distance metric, which basins are actually adjacent on
the PES, or give a clear indication of the relative basin
volumes [42].
Metric disconnectivity graphs retain some structural
information about the minima by arranging them along
one or two metric axes [42, 43]. However, since they
use one of the two or three plot dimensions to represent
the energies of the structures depicted, there is one fewer
dimension which can be used to represent the relative
positions of the minima on the surface. Furthermore,
techniques such as t-SNE and UMAP have been demon-
strated to outperform the dimensionality reduction meth-
ods considered for metric disconnectivity graphs in the
context of visualisation [28, 29].
Sketch-map follows a similar framework to the state-of-
the-art methods that we build on here to produce SHEAP
(see Section II). The algorithmic choices made within
this framework deal with issues speciﬁc to the high-
dimensional data produced in molecular dynamics tra-
jectories, such as poor sampling at the transition states,
and the high-dimensional nature of thermal ﬂuctuations.
Sketch-map ensures that data-points from the same basin
are close, and separates clusters of structures from dif-
ferent basins [44, 46]. However, it puts less emphasis on
accurately reproducing the distances between the struc-
tures from diﬀerent basins. Thus, the approach is less
suited to dealing with other forms of structural data,
such as the minima produced from a structure search,
for which there are no thermal ﬂuctuations (although
sketch-map has been applied to this type of data with
success [47]).
In the next section we introduce dimensionality reduc-
tion in the context of visualisation, focusing on manifold
learning approaches. This is followed by an outline of our
method, SHEAP, designed for PES visualisation. We ex-
plore the performance of SHEAP by applying it ﬁrst to
model systems of atoms interacting through a Lennard-
Jones (LJ) pair potential, then to structures of solid-state
carbon, as well as the quaternary system C+H+N+O.
We show that SHEAP yields meaningful low-dimensional
representations of these landscapes, for example repro-
ducing well known topological features such as funnels,
using only the structural information contained in min-
ima data obtained from random structure searches. Fur-
thermore, and importantly, we reveal an intrinsic low di-
mensionality to the distribution of minima across these
surfaces.
FIG. 1. Illustrates data dimensionality reduction by manifold
learning. (A) shows a 3-dimensional data-set that is close to
lying on a 2-dimensional surface which is embedded withinR3.
(B) shows the projection of the source data onto this embed-
ded manifold, which is folded into a swiss roll in the original
3D space. (C) shows the distribution of the data across the
embedded manifold, providing a 2D visual representation of
the source data.
II. DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION BY
MANIFOLD LEARNING
Dimensionality reduction refers to the mapping of a
high-dimensional data-set into a space of lower dimen-
sionality [48]. Here we refer to a source data-set X =
{x1, x2,..., xN}⊂ RD and a low-dimensional represen-
tation Y ={y1, y2,..., yN}⊂ Rs, where N is the num-
ber of data points, and D and s are the dimensionalities
of the corresponding spaces. If the dimensionality of the
map is low enough ( s≤ 3), the so-called “map points”
can be visualised in a scatter plot. The aim is to pre-
serve latent features of the source data in the reduced
representation.
Manifold learning is a nonlinear approach to dimen-
sionality reduction which assumes that the source data
lies on, or close to, some low-dimensional manifold
embedded within the original high-dimensional space
[49, 50]. The idea is to produce a low-dimensional rep-
resentation of the source data by deducing its projected
layout across the manifold - this principle is illustrated in
Fig. 1. This has advantages over linear methods such as
principal component analysis (PCA) [51] in that it allows
the manifold onto which the data is projected to adopt
a folded geometry within the original space, making no
assumptions about this geometry. The faithfulness of
the projection depends on how close the source data is
to actually lying on some embedded manifold of the de-
sired dimension, how good the cover of the source data
across this manifold is, and how well the given algorithm

--- page 3 ---
3
is able to capture the key features of the manifold from
the spread of the source data.
There are many manifold learning algorithms, gener-
ally diﬀering in the geometrical properties of the under-
lying manifold that they seek to preserve. Some aim to
maintain distances or similarities across the entire data-
set, e. g. Isomap [52] or kernel PCA [53]. Others priori-
tise the preservation of local proximities, e. g. Sammon
mapping [54], Locally Linear Embedding (LLE) [55], or
Laplacian Eigenmaps [56]. For source data that is non-
linear, it is usually more important to keep the low-
dimensional representations of similar points close to-
gether, rather than trying to accurately reproduce a given
metric at all length-scales [28]. The t-SNE [28], LargeVis
[57], and UMAP [29] algorithms also follow this principle,
but are able to patch together the local representations
in such a way that global features are captured more
faithfully than with other local methods [28, 29]. These
approaches proceed by constructing a weighted graph de-
scribing the structure of the source data, then projecting
this into a space of fewer dimensions through the optimi-
sation of a non-convex cost function. SHEAP is formu-
lated within the same framework, the outline of which is
provided next, followed by a discussion of the motivation
for the development of SHEAP.
A. Manifold learning through weighted graph
matching
A weighted graph is constructed, consisting of sim-
ilarities pij between each pair of data-points i and j,
corresponding to a measure of how close they are in
the original space RD according to some distance met-
ric d : X× X → R. It is usually beneﬁcial to the
speed and scalability of a given algorithm to only com-
pute weights to the points in the region local to each
data-point (e. g. thek nearest neighbours), with all other
weights being set to zero - this is exploited in LargeVis
[57], UMAP [29], and accelerated (approximate) imple-
mentations of t-SNE [58, 59]. An initial distribution of
N data-points is then produced in a space Rs of many
fewer dimensions (typically 2 or 3). This may be gen-
erated at random, possibly according to some bias(es)
and/or constraint(s), or through the application of some
more primitive algorithm for dimensionality reduction,
such as PCA or random projection (see Appendix C).
Another graph of weights qij is then constructed for the
nodes deﬁned by these map points, Y , possibly taking
a diﬀerent functional form to those deﬁned between the
high-dimensional points. The low-dimensional represen-
tation of the data is then computed by adjusting the
layout of the map points such that the faithfulness with
which the weights qij model each pij is optimised. This
is achieved by minimising some cost function C(Y ;X)
designed to penalise any mismatch. For a non-convex
cost function, local optimisation schemes are necessary.
Since there is usually some element of randomness in the
initialisation of the map points and/or the optimisation
of the cost function, diﬀerent local minima can be ob-
tained. Hence, these methods are considered stochastic.
Note that the resulting projection is not associated with
any physically meaningful set of axes (unlike PCA, for
example) - it is only the relative positioning and cluster-
ing of the mapped data that is signiﬁcant.
Because there are numerous stages at which there is
scope for diﬀerent possible and justiﬁable algorithmic
choices, many algorithms are possible. These choices in-
clude: how the weighted graphs describing the connec-
tivity in the high and low dimensions are constructed,
what cost function is optimised, how the map points are
initialised, and what optimisation scheme is used.
B. Motivation for SHEAP
t-SNE has become perhaps the most widely used man-
ifold learning algorithm for visualisation. However, in
many test cases the more recent methods LargeVis (2016)
and UMAP (2018) appear to oﬀer improvements in terms
of the quality of the visualisation, run-time speed, and
scalability [29, 57]. Approximate implementations, such
as Barnes-Hut-SNE [58] and Fast Fourier Transform ac-
celerated Interpolation-based t-SNE (FIt-SNE) [59] dra-
matically accelerate the computation of t-SNE, though
these too appear inferior to UMAP for many test data
sets [29].
Here we focus on the relative visualisation qualities
of these algorithms, leaving speed and scaling to future
work. As demonstrated in Ref. [29], UMAP produces a
local structure that is comparable to the projections of t-
SNE (and LargeVis), but appears able to provide a more
faithful global representation. This is likely a result of
a better cost function - UMAP’s choice provides a more
sophisticated treatment of the repulsive contribution to
the interaction between map points during optimisation
by introducing greater dependency on the layout of the
source data. This is addressed further in Section III, and
discussed in detail in Appendix A.
However, UMAP does not truly optimise the cost
function it deﬁnes. Rather, the algorithm relies on its
speciﬁc choice for the optimisation procedure, an ap-
proximate implementation of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) which uses probabilistic edge sampling and nega-
tive sampling [29, 57], to de-exaggerate the repulsive part
of the cost function gradient. This is somewhat unsat-
isfactory, and limits the ﬂexibility of the algorithm. For
example, UMAP’s reliance on SGD makes it incompat-
ible with our approach to incorporating basin volumes
into the maps - this involves representing the structures
in the map as hard spheres/circles, rather than single
points (see Section III B), and is straightforward to in-
corporate within t-SNE. Thus, we develop SHEAP, a hy-
brid of UMAP and t-SNE which captures some of the
advancements made by UMAP, whilst still producing an
algorithm that: (1) truly optimises a well deﬁned and

--- page 4 ---
4
theoretically justiﬁed cost function, and (2) is compati-
ble with the hard sphere scheme we introduce in Section
III B.
III. STOCHASTIC HYPERSP ACE EMBEDDING
AND PROJECTION (SHEAP)
In SHEAP, the weighted graph in the high-dimensional
space is constructed according to the same scheme as in
t-SNE. Following Ref. [28], the weightpij between source
data-points i and j is deﬁned as
pij = pj|i +pi|j
2N , (1)
where
pj|i = exp
(
−d(xi, xj)2/2σ2
i
)
∑
k̸=i exp (−d(xi, xk)2/2σ2
i ) . (2)
Here,d(xi, xj) is some metric for computing the distance
between xi and xj in the high-dimensional space. t-SNE
uses the ℓ2-norm: d(xi, xj) =||xi− xj||2. The value of
σi is chosen such that the so called perplexity of Pi takes
some desired value, where Pi is the conditional probabil-
ity of all other data-points given xi. The perplexity of
Pi, Perp(Pi), is computed as
Perp(Pi) = 2H(Pi) , (3)
where
H(Pi) =−
∑
j
pj|i log2pj|i . (4)
The perplexity Perp( Pi) can be interpreted as a
smooth measure of the eﬀective number of neighbours of
i, and is set to the same value for all data-points. It can
be thought of as deﬁning how far each point “looks out”
to describe its local environment. A smaller perplexity
favours a faithful representation of the local connectiv-
ity of the data, whilst a larger value favours the global
distribution. A “good” choice for this parameter results
from a compromise between these two competing goals.
A potential drawback arises in that the perplexity is a
global parameter; there may be no single value that is
suitable for all source data points and their local regions.
It may be the case that a range of perplexities must be
explored in order to gain the greatest insight from these
projections. Which single perplexity value leads to the
the most complete picture can then be assessed.
Given a user input perplexity, each σi is computed us-
ing a straightforward binary search. Because the distri-
butions of any two data-points i andj will likely require
diﬀerentσ’s in order to correspond to the same perplex-
ity, the conditional probabilities pj|i andpi|j will in gen-
eral be diﬀerent. To obtain a symmetric measure for
the weight pij between the pair of data-points, the joint
probability of pj|i and pi|j is computed, as in Eqn. (1).
In the low-dimensional space, the weight betweeni and
j is computed according to a Student t-distribution, sim-
ilarly to in t-SNE, but using a diﬀerent normalisation:
qij =
(
1 +||yi− yj||2
2
)−1
N(N− 1) . (5)
As outlined in Ref. [28], the use of a heavier-tailed distri-
bution for the low-dimensional weights allows moderate
distances in the high-dimensional space to be faithfully
represented by much larger distances in the projection,
encouraging (larger) gaps to form in the low-dimensional
map between the natural clusters present in the source
data, alleviating the so called crowding problem.
The key diﬀerence of the SHEAP algorithm from t-
SNE is the choice of the cost function:
C =
∑
i,j
pij log
(pij
qij
)
+ (1−pij) log
(1−pij
1−qij
)
. (6)
This is the fuzzy set cross-entropy between the two sets
of weights, as in UMAP, rather than KL divergence
(Eqn. A2), used in t-SNE. Recall that we attributed the
improved global structure in UMAP’s projections over
t-SNE’s to this choice of the cost function, due to a bet-
ter treatment of the repulsive contribution to the inter-
action between the map points (see Appendix A). In t-
SNE, this repulsion arises due to the constraint that all
of the weights qij sum to 1, providing a uniform repul-
sion between the map points. In UMAP, the repulsive
contribution arises directly from the second, additional
term in the cost function, and is much more dependent
on the structure of the source data. This also allows
us to discard the computationally costly normalisation
appearing in the weights qij in t-SNE, which must be
recomputed at every step during optimisation. The con-
stant normalisation factor that replaces this here is cho-
sen such that weights qij are consistent with the weights
pij in limit that all data-points lie on top of one an-
other in both the source data and the projection, giving
pij =qij = 1
N (N−1) for all i and j.
Given the above choices, the cost function gradient in
SHEAP is given by:
∂C
∂yi
= 4N(N− 1)
∑
j
(
pij−qij
(1−pij)
(1−qij)
)
qij(yi− yj).
(7)
Optimisation of the low-dimensional layout is achieved
using the two-point steepest descent (TPSD) scheme of
Barzilai and Borwein [60], and the option of early exag-
geration is also implemented, as in t-SNE [28, 61]. We
can replace the use of early exaggeration with an initial
use of SGD, though this does not appear to improve per-
formance.
The layout of map points is initialised with an al-
gorithm for random projection - see Appendix C. This
tremendously accelerates the cost function optimisation,
relative to initialising with a random (conﬁned) distribu-
tion of points.

--- page 5 ---
5
Here we produce low-dimensional depictions of energy
landscapes by applying this algorithm to sets of struc-
tures in the relevant conﬁguration space. Primarily, we
consider data-sets containing only local minima, obtained
through random structure searching (RSS) [14, 15] to
promote broad sampling of the space. In Section IV we
demonstrate that this is suﬃcient for capturing the PES
features of interest in the context of structure prediction.
In Section IV B we also explore the projection of unre-
laxed structures obtained through random sampling.
A. Representing structural data
The conﬁguration of a system of atoms can be repre-
sented in terms of a structure descriptor - a vector of
real valued functions of the atomic coordinates which de-
scribes their relative arrangement [62]. To allow com-
parisons between structures, a good descriptor is invari-
ant with respect to permutations of equivalent atoms, as
well as global translations, rotations and reﬂections, and
uniquely determines the structure up to these symme-
tries.
Two descriptors are considered here. The ﬁrst is a
sorted list of the pairwise distances between atoms. It is
known that this is not a complete descriptor [62]. How-
ever, for the simple systems of LJ particles considered (for
which the energy depends only on pairwise distances), we
ﬁnd this to capture a suﬃcient proportion of the struc-
tural information/variation.
The second descriptor considered is the smooth overlap
of atomic positions (SOAP) [62]. SOAP encodes relative
nuclear geometry in the neighbourhood of a given atom
using an atomic density ﬁeld, represented by 3D atom-
centred Gaussian functions expanded in a basis of spheri-
cal harmonics and radial basis functions. A global SOAP
descriptor for a given structure can be computed by tak-
ing the average SOAP ﬁngerprint between all atomic
environments [63]. When multiple species are present,
one can either compute a single average incorporating all
species, or average separately for each species and then
concatenate the species-speciﬁc averaged vectors [64] -
here we adopt the former approach. Recent work by
Cheng et al. [64] has found success in pairing SOAP de-
scriptors with kernel PCA to produce low-dimensional
maps for a wide variety of structural data-sets.
The distance metric d used here is the ℓ2-norm, as in
t-SNE [28]. This implicitly assumes that the source data
is locally linear on the underlying manifold [28]. The
SHEAP map produced from a given set of structures is
expected to depend on both the chosen descriptor and
distance metric. Here we explore the the former through
a comparison of SHEAP maps produced from sorted lists
of distances and from SOAP, for a single LJ system. An
investigation into other distance metrics will be the sub-
ject of future work.
B. Basin volumes conserved using hard spheres
A shortcoming of using only the spread of local minima
to depict a PES is that this gives no sense of how large
each of the basins of attraction are. To address this, we
extend the methodology outlined in Sections II A and III
by representing each local minimum in the map as a hard
n-sphere (n = s− 1), rather than a point, with volume
(area in 2D) proportional to the (approximate) volume
of its basin.
The number of times that structure i is located in a
search is labelledci. We consider structures to be equiva-
lent if the distance between their descriptor vectors falls
below an appropriate similarity threshold. For a suit-
ably large search, these counts should give representative
estimates for the relative volumes of the corresponding
basins. We represent each structure in the map by a
sphere of radius
Ri = (ci)
1
sR0 , (8)
such that the volume Vi ∝ Rs
i is proportional to the
countci. The quantity R0 is the minimum sphere radius
appearing in the map, taken by any structure that has
been found just once - the choice of this parameter is
important, and is discussed in detail in Appendix B1.
The hard spheres are incorporated into the framework
outlined in Section II A through the addition of an extra
term to the cost function. This hard sphere potential is
deﬁned as:
UHS = 1
2γHS
∑
i
∑
j̸=i
α2
ij , (9)
where γHS is the hard core strength, and
αij =
{
Ri+Rj−||yi−yj||
2 if||yi− yj||<R i +Rj
0 otherwise. (10)
For a suﬃciently large value ofγHS, the repulsion between
any overlapping spheres (when present) will be the dom-
inant contribution to the gradient, meaning the layout
will be forced to contain no overlaps.
The inclusion of the hard sphere potential from the
start of the optimisation is problematic. The spheres be-
come jammed as they try to move across one-another,
particularly for densely packed spheres, resulting in con-
vergence being drastically slow or not attainable at all.
This can be avoided by allowing the spheres to ac-
cess additional dimensions during the optimisation, using
the geometry optimisation of structures from hyperspace
(GOSH) method [65]. Alternatively, an eﬃcient solu-
tion is to initially run the optimisation without the hard
sphere contribution, switching it on only when the algo-
rithm is close to convergence. With this, convergence
is more easily attained if the hard spheres are intro-
duced at a fraction of their ﬁnal value, and expanded
over the course of a few hundred optimisation steps. In

--- page 6 ---
6
this scheme, the hard spheres have minimal impact on
the optimisation, essentially just distorting the optimal
layout once it has already been reached.
Again we point out that this approach is incompati-
ble with the SGD optimisation scheme relied on by the
UMAP algorithm - large overlaps between spheres are
produced due to the omission of certain contributions to
the gradient, resulting in instability in the optimisation.
A similar problem is encountered with the use of hard
spheres at the same time as early exaggeration, though
this issue can straightforwardly be circumvented by en-
suring that the hard sphere interaction is not switched
on until after the exaggeration period has ended.
C. Energy represented with colour
Energy is depicted across our plots through the
colouration of the circles/spheres representing each struc-
ture. In Sections IV we also demonstrate that insight can
be gained by illustrating the variation of other quantities
across the projected conﬁguration space.
IV. RESUL TS
The results of applying SHEAP to various systems are
now presented. First, we consider the PESs deﬁned by
LJ clusters, with pairwise interactions governed by:
vLJ(r) = 4ϵLJ
(σ12
LJ
r12− σ6
LJ
r6
)
, (11)
where ϵLJ is the depth of the potential energy well for
a given particle pair, and σLJ is the ﬁnite distance at
which the inter-particle potential is equal to zero. We
set ϵLJ = 1 and σLJ = 2 throughout. Clusters of 13, 38
and 55 atoms are considered.
For each data-set of LJ clusters, structures are repre-
sented as a sorted list of all pairwise distances between
atoms, unless explicitly stated otherwise. In Appendix E
we also explore the use of a sorted list of inverse pairwise
distances for LJ 13.
Following the study of these model systems, data-
sets of realistic solid state systems, modelled by ﬁrst-
principles density-functional theory (DFT) calculations,
are addressed.
The examples considered illustrate the applicability of
dimensionality reduction by manifold learning to minima
data obtained from RSS, and demonstrate the insight
that can be gained from the resulting maps. A key ﬁnding
is the intrinsic low-dimensionality in the distributions of
minima across the corresponding PESs.
Computational details
SHEAP is implemented in an OpenMP paral-
lelised Fortran package, available under the GPL2
FIG. 2. Labelled 2D SHEAP map produced from a set of
1,108 distinct minima on the LJ 13 PES, located with RSS,
described by sorted lists of all pairwise distances. The pro-
jection was made using a perplexity of 30, with a minimum
sphere radiusR0 = 0.005. The circles representing each struc-
ture are coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-
Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes are
represented by the area of each circle. Labels (a)-(g) denote
clusters of structures of similar energy and conﬁguration; rep-
resentative structures from each are shown. Structures in (h)
are less obviously clustered, and tend to be comprised of less
ordered packings of atoms.
licence at https://bitbucket.org/bshires/sheap/
src/master/. Also implemented in this package are the
t-SNE algorithm, as well as a simpliﬁed version of UMAP
- the qualitative performance of SHEAP on standard
data-sets is compared against these in Appendix D. The
maps presented in this work are plotted with Ovito, the
Open Visualization Tool [66]. The structural data pre-
sented in each map is generated using the AIRSS struc-
ture prediction package [13, 14]. SOAP vectors are com-
puted using the implementation in ASAP [64].
SHEAP is stochastic, so the ﬁnal map diﬀers for in-
dependent projections of the same source data-set, even
for identical parameters. However, we ﬁnd that for an
appropriately chosen parameter set, distinct runs consis-
tently provide qualitatively equivalent results in all cases
- for each data-set we present the map for a single random
seed.
A. LJ 13
LJ13 has a relatively simple energy landscape. It is
described as having a “single funnel” topology, meaning
there is a general decrease in the energy of local minima
with increasing structural similarity to the global mini-
mum. This ground state structure is a ﬁlled 12-vertex
icosahedron, and all local minima are within three rear-
rangements of it [67].

--- page 7 ---
7
FIG. 3. 2D SHEAP map produced from 50 ,000 unrelaxed,
randomly sampled structures on the LJ 13 PES, described by
sorted lists of all pairwise distances. The projection was
made using a perplexity of 30, with a minimum sphere ra-
dius R0 = 0 .01. The circles representing each structure
are coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-Jones
units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure.
1. Relaxed vs. unrelaxed structures
Fig. 2 shows a 2D SHEAP map produced from local
minima on the LJ 13 PES. The search, which comprised
of 50,000 samples, used a conﬁnement sphere of radius
5.0σLJ for the initial random structures, with an imposed
minimum separation of 2.0 σLJ. Structures were relaxed
to nearby local minima using TPSD [60], resulting in a
data-set of 1,108 distinct minima.
The funnelled structure of the landscape is apparent,
with minima energies correlating well with their distance
from the global minimum (a) in the map. In addition,
SHEAP has clustered together structures of similar en-
ergies and arrangements. For example, the structures
labelled (b) all result from one external atom of the icosa-
hedron being moved from its ground state position to a
diﬀerent surface site. Structures in the cluster labelled
(c) result from two external atoms from the icosahedron
being moved to diﬀerent surface sites.
The success observed in the application of SHEAP to
the data-set of minima is in stark contrast to the map
presented in Fig. 3, which displays the 2D SHEAP pro-
jection of the 50,000 unrelaxed structures. Fig. 3 contains
no obvious clustering. The structures are arranged in a
featureless, elongated “blob”, roughly ordered according
to energy. Similar results are observed when projecting
into 3D.
The disparity between Figs. 2 and 3 is striking. It sug-
gests that the PES itself is truly high dimensional, and
one cannot produce a meaningful representation of the
landscape from a projection of points drawn randomly
from it. In the language of Sec. II, the randomly sam-
pled points do not appear to lie on or close to any low-
dimensional manifold. The distribution of minima on this
surface, on the other hand, does appear to have some
inherent low dimensionality, according to the choice of
structure descriptor and distance metric.
2. Projecting relaxed and unrelaxed structures together
The question then is, where do these unrelaxed struc-
tures lie relative to the minima? One might intuitively
predict that they should fall into the gaps between the
minima, but this is not what is observed using SHEAP.
Fig. 4 shows a 2D SHEAP map constructed from a
data-set comprised of local minima and unrelaxed struc-
tures on the LJ 13 PES. The data-set contains the same
relaxed structures that are presented in Fig. 2, as well
as a series of unrelaxed random structures generated ac-
cording to diﬀerent constraints. These are: (1) a spec-
iﬁed number of symmetry operations, from 2 up to 5,
with a ﬁxed conﬁnement sphere radius of 5 .0 σLJ, and
(2) no symmetry constraints, with varying conﬁnement
sphere radius, from 3.0 σLJ up to 5.0 σLJ in increments
of 0.5 σLJ. There are 1 ,000 structures included for each
set of constraints. Note that the distribution of minima
is distorted by the addition of the unrelaxed structures.
We attribute this to a reduced sensitivity in the relations
between the minima, due to having to represent similar-
ities to structures not on the manifold occupied by the
minima. A lower perplexity was found to alleviate this
somewhat.
The majority of unrelaxed structures lie well away from
the minima in a single, elongated cluster. As with Fig. 3,
these unrelaxed structures are arranged roughly accord-
ing to energy. Here, we also see that denser packings
(smaller conﬁnement sphere radius) tend to lie towards
the low-energy end of the cluster, closest to the minima,
whilst the higher-symmetry packings tend to lie towards
the edges. Interestingly, a few of the unrelaxed struc-
tures actually cluster with the minima, despite being of
signiﬁcantly higher energies. Each of these structures is
found to possess 5 symmetry operations, and all contain
at least 11 atoms that are close to the ideal icosahedral
close-packing. This result demonstrates one aspect of the
AIRSS philosophy - that sensible random structure gen-
eration does much of the work in eﬃciently locating local
minima.
3. Projecting a steepest descent pathway
In order to reveal the connection between the pre-
relaxed structures and the central layout of local min-
ima in Fig. 4, a SHEAP map was produced for a source
data-set consisting of the same set of minima, plus se-
lected structures visited along the pathway of steepest
descent from an unrelaxed structure generated without
symmetry constraint, down to the global minimum. The
resulting projection is provided in Fig 5.
We observe that this pathway traverses the space in
the map between the unrelaxed structures and the min-
ima, and passes by many local minima on its way to the
icosahedral ground-state. The presence of the descent
pathway leads to slight distortions in the distribution of
minima in the map, relative to Fig. 2, likely due to over-

--- page 8 ---
8
FIG. 4. 2D SHEAP map constructed from a data-set of minima and unrelaxed structures on the LJ 13 PES, described by sorted
lists of all pairwise distances. The projection was made using a perplexity of 8. Circles in the main ﬁgure are coloured according
to energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units, given by the colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Minima (all in the bottom-left cluster)
are faded, with basin volumes represented by the area of each circle, using a minimum sphere radius R0 = 0.005. Circles
representing unrelaxed structures have been enlarged to highlight them. The ﬁgure inset provides diﬀerent colourations of the
top cluster, which contains only unrelaxed structues. Colouring is according to (a) energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units, (b)
the conﬁnement radius in Lennard-Jones units, and (c) the number of imposed symmetry operations - see corresponding colour
bars to right of inset. The few unrelaxed structures that cluster with the minima (all possessing 5 symmetry operations) have
been labelled with their energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units, alongside 2 perpendicular perspectives of their conﬁguration.
sampling of the regions on the PES visited during the
relaxation.
These SHEAP maps for LJ 13 provide an interesting
perspective on the structure of its energy landscape.
They suggest that the surface consists of clusters of min-
ima which all sit very close to one another, with the
unrelaxed structures predominantly residing outside the
region occupied by these minima. Furthermore, they im-
ply the existence some inherent low dimensionality in the
distribution of these minima across the surface.
B. LJ 38
In previous work, LJ 38 has been described as hav-
ing an archetypal double funnel energy landscape; this
is depicted clearly in disconnectivity graphs, such as in
Ref. [68]. The 38 atom system stands out in the context
of LJ clusters due to its octahedral global minimum -
most other cluster sizes exhibit ground-states based on
icosahedra [69]. Whilst the octahedron is the lowest en-
ergy arrangement for LJ 38, there is an icosahedral meta-
stable conﬁguration that is only very slightly higher in
energy. These two minima reside at the bottom of the
two separate “funnels” in the landscape, with the funnel
corresponding to the icosahedral structure being much
broader than that corresponding to the global minimum,
i. e. containing many more minima [70]. For this reason,
LJ38 is well known to be a relatively diﬃcult test for
structure searching algorithms.
1. Two-dimensional map of minima data
Fig. 6 (A) shows a 2D SHEAP map produced from
minima on the LJ38 PES. The search consisted of 100,800
samples, and used the same parameters and relaxation
scheme as for the 13 atom system, resulting in a data-set
of 89,464 distinct minima.
LJ38 has many more degrees of freedom than LJ 13,
leading to a far more complex landscape topology, with
many more local minima. This is reﬂected in the
searches, with almost 90 times more distinct minima be-
ing located for the larger cluster from little over twice as
many samples, and a much lower disparity between the
largest and smallest basin volumes. The map for LJ38 ex-

--- page 9 ---
9
FIG. 5. 2D SHEAP map produced from a data-set consisting
of local minima on the LJ13 PES, plus selected structures vis-
ited along the pathway of steepest descent from an unrelaxed
structure generated without symmetry constraint, down to
the global minimum. Structures are described by sorted lists
of all pairwise distances. The projection used a perplexity
of 30. Circles are coloured according to energy per atom in
Lennard-Jones units, given by the colour bar at top of ﬁgure.
For the minima, basin volumes are represented by the area of
each circle, with a minimum hard sphere radius R0 = 0.005.
Circles representing structures visited during the relaxation
have been enlarged to highlight them.
hibits greater connectivity than that for LJ 13, with the
former showing much less clear-cut clustering of struc-
tures, and a more continuous variation in the energy. We
attribute this to the vastly greater number of minima
compared to LJ 13, with the variation between minima
being much more incremental for the larger system. For
example, starting with the global minimum and mov-
ing one atom from its ground state position to a surface
site leads to a relatively much greater deviation from the
ground state structure for LJ 13 than for LJ 38.
The standout features in Fig. 6 (A) are the large
“brain-like” cluster of minima (mostly low-symmetry,
amorphous structures), and the strands of minima lead-
ing away from this with progressively decreasing energies.
With regards to the latter, there is an obvious connec-
tion to be drawn to the supposed funnels. We ﬁnd that
the octahedral global minimum and the icosahedral low-
est meta-stable minimum reside at the ends of two of
these diﬀerent strands, labelled (a) and (d), respectively.
Preceding them are closely related structures, e. g. those
labelled (g), which all result from a single external atom
of the icosahedral structure being relocated to a diﬀerent
surface site. Satisfyingly, the existence of these “fun-
nels” has arisen purely from an analysis of the minima,
through the structural information captured in the de-
scriptor vectors. In the construction of the correspond-
ing disconnectivity graph, funnelling is inferred through
an examination of transition state data, and an evalua-
tion of minima connectivity in the context of minimum
energy pathways via these transition states. Although,
note that one can construct approximate disconnectivity
graphs based solely on the structural relationships be-
tween minima (using ﬁngerprint distances), circumvent-
ing the expensive transition state calculations by com-
puting estimates for the energy barriers in the system
[71].
The following question arises: what are the remaining
branches of structures appearing in the SHEAP map?
In Fig. 6, the most apparent of these additional strands
of structures are labelled (b) and (c), alongside illustra-
tions of the lowest energy structure residing in each. We
propose these to be previously unreported funnels in the
LJ38 PES, both of which could potentially be considered
sub-funnels of a super-funnel also containing (a) - they
appear to be part of the same branch, eventually sepa-
rating oﬀ to comprise independent funnels.
2. Other colour schemes
To better interpret the layout of structures across the
map, two further schemes for colouring the circles are
considered, in addition to the energy per atom. These
are the convex hull volume of the structure per atom,
and the number of contacts in each structure per atom,
provided in Figs. 6 (B) and (C), respectively.
The convex hull volume shows a very similar distribu-
tion to the energy, both in the main cluster of structures
(albeit with slightly less variation), and in the funnels.
We attribute this to the LJ energy being entirely depen-
dent on the pairwise distances between atoms; there are
no 3-body or higher terms. Hence, the energy is expected
to be closely correlated to the packing density within the
structures, which in turn should correlate well with the
map position.
In order to produce Fig. 6 (C), a contact is deﬁned as
any pairwise separation that is less than 2 .3 σLJ, 2.5%
above the minimum separation in the LJ pair potential.
We observe that the funnels in the map correspond to
regions of very high numbers of contacts per atom, and
the number of contacts steadily reduces with increasing
separation from these funnels, roughly from bottom to
top of the main cluster.
3. Projecting into the third dimension
So far SHEAP maps have only been presented for two
map dimensions. However, we ﬁnd that often there is a
non-negligible improvement in the quality of visualisation
by accessing an extra dimension and projecting into 3D.
To illustrate this, in Fig. 7 we present three perpendicular
perspectives of a 3D SHEAP map produced for the same
data-set of LJ 38 minima. Note that the axis system is
arbitrary.

--- page 10 ---
10
FIG. 6. (A) shows a 2D SHEAP map for 89 ,464 minima on the LJ 38 PES, generated with RSS, described by sorted lists of all
pairwise distances. The projection was made using a perplexity of 30, with a minimum sphere radius R0 = 0.008. The circles
representing each structure are coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure.
Basin volumes are represented by the area of each circle. (a)-(d) label proposed funnels in the LJ 38 PES; structures shown
alongside correspond to the lowest energy minima residing in each. (a) contains the octahedral global minimum; (b) and (c)
could be considered sub-funnels of this. (d) contains the icosahedral lowest meta-stable structure. (e) labels a small island of
structures occupying the space between (a)-(c) and (d). (f) and (g) label low-energy minima residing in funnel (d), and are
closely related to icosahedral structure. (h), (i) and (j) label representative structures from the large, “brain-like” cluster of
minima which contains the majority of structures - these are predominantly of low-symmetry. (B) and (C) depict the same
SHEAP map as in (A), but coloured according to diﬀerent physical parameters. Circles in (B) are coloured according the
convex hull volume of each cluster. Circles in (C) are coloured according to number of contacts per atom in each cluster (see
main text for details). Corresponding colour bars are provided below these sub-ﬁgures.

--- page 11 ---
11
FIG. 7. Three perpendicular perspectives of a 3D SHEAP
map produced from the same set of LJ 38 minima that are
presented in Fig. 6. The projection was made using a per-
plexity of 30, with a minimum sphere radiusR0 = 0.008. The
spheres representing each structure are coloured according to
energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units; see colour bar at
top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes are represented by the volume
of each sphere. Each viewpoint looks down one of the axes
displayed at the bottom right of the ﬁgure; the axes have no
other physical meaning.
The 3D map is qualitatively very similar to that in
2D; the 2D map looks almost identical to a projection
of the 3D distribution onto the x-y plane. However, one
can see from the other two perspectives that this is not
the full picture, and there are features protruding out of
this plane that are not represented faithfully in 2D. Most
notably, the separation between the icosahedral funnel
(d) and the 3 other large (sub-) funnels (a)-(c) is more
pronounced with the extra dimension. The classiﬁcation
of (a)-(c) as sub-funnels of a single, larger “super-funnel”
is also more obvious in this projection.
4. Using a diﬀerent descriptor: SOAP
The distance based descriptor employed so far is ap-
propriate for LJ systems, since their energy is determined
entirely by pairwise separations. However, the picture
of an energy landscape obtained with SHEAP should be
qualitatively robust to the choice of descriptor, as long as
the relevant structural information is captured. To test
this, we compare the above results for LJ 38, which use
sorted lists of distances, with the use of SOAP vectors
[62].
Unlike the sorted list of distances (for which the only
parameter is the cut-oﬀ distance), the SOAP vector for a
given structure is dependant on many parameter choices:
rcut speciﬁes the distance beyond which neighbour atoms
are not taken into account, nmax speciﬁes the number of
radial basis functions to be used for each local descrip-
tor, lmax speciﬁes the maximum degree of the spherical
harmonics, and σ speciﬁes the standard deviation of the
Gaussians. This level of freedom can be beneﬁcial, al-
lowing the descriptor to be tailored to better suit a given
system, but it demands more input on the part of the
user. The choice of radial basis functions is also impor-
tant, but is not addressed in detail here. By default,
ASAP uses spherical Gaussian type orbitals [72], rather
than the original polynomial radial basis set [62], allow-
ing much faster analytic computation [73].
Fig. 8 shows 2D SHEAP maps for a subset of the LJ 38
data-set studied in Section IV B, described by SOAP vec-
tors using a range of parameters. A reduced data-set
(10,000 structures) is used to lessen the computational
cost.
ASAP permits up to 15 radial and 9 spherical harmonic
SOAP basis functions. Fig. 8 (A) illustrates the eﬀect of
varyingσ andrcut for these values ofnmax andlmax. Note
that no structure in the data-set contained a separation
greater then 10.0. There are no maps for rcut = 2.5 (as
with other nmax and lmax considered), since this cut-oﬀ
is too low relative to the number of radial basis func-
tions, preventing normalisation of the latter. Whilst the
exact structure of the map varies with each set of pa-
rameters, there is a broad range (inside the bold, dashed,
red perimeter) for which the key features are consistent
with the maps produced using sorted lists of distances.
Within this range of parameters, the large cluster of low-
symmetry structures that is present in Figs. 6 and 7 is
clear, the largest funnel, (d) in Fig. 6, is clearly revealed,
and at least two other funnels are also discernible. For
σ values too large, the deﬁnition of the map diminishes,
and the funnels are absorbed into the main cluster. For
σ values too small, the smooth variation in energy across
the cluster of low-symmetry structures is lost.
Figs. 8 (B) and (C) depict results using fewer basis
functions: nmax,l max = 12, 6 and 8, 4, respectively. Com-
paring these to Fig. 8 (A), we see that the band of suitable
σ shifts to lower values with lower nmax and lmax. We
also observe that the scope of acceptable parameters is
of similar size for Figs. 8 (A) and (B), but is signiﬁcantly
restricted in (C), for which only the mid-range rcut is
able to produce the expected map features for any σ.
In general, the funnels labelled (a) and (b) in Fig. 6
are not as well separated in the maps of Fig. 8. We at-
tribute this to the smaller sample size used for these pro-
jections - 2D and 3D maps produced using SOAP from
the full data-set, Fig. 9 (which use rcut = 10.0, nmax =
15, lmax = 9, σ = 0.3), provide clear separation of these
funnels.
We conclude that, with the right choice of SOAP pa-
rameters, the picture of the LJ 38 energy landscape ob-
tained through SHEAP is qualitatively equivalent for the
two descriptors. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the range of
safe/suitable SOAP parameters is relatively broad, and
easy to identify for this system, via a scan of possible
values, visualised through SHEAP.

--- page 12 ---
12
FIG. 8. 2D SHEAP maps for 10 ,000 minima (prior to similarity check) on the LJ 38 PES, described using SOAP with various
parameters. (A), (B), and (C) show results for nmax,l max = 15, 9, 12, 6, and 8, 4, respectively. rcut is consistent across each
row, values given on the far left. σ is consistent across each column, values given at the bottom. Projections were made using
a perplexity of 15, with R0 computed by Eqn. B1. The circles representing each structure are coloured according to energy per
atom in Lennard-Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes are represented by the area of each circle. Maps
in the bold, dashed, red perimeters represent “suitable” SOAP parameter choices, producing the same key features as Fig. 6.
Maps in the faded, dashed, red perimeters also show these features, but less clearly.
C. LJ 55
LJ55 is referred to as a “structure seeker”, meaning it
has a very distinct global minimum that is easily located
in a structure search, with no competing morphologies
separated by high barriers [74]. Here we present a repre-
sentation of this landscape obtained with SHEAP, high-
lighting its contrast to that of LJ 38.
Fig. 10 shows 2D and 3D SHEAP maps produced from
minima on the LJ 55 PES. The search consisted of 50,000
samples and used the same parameters and relaxation
scheme as the above LJ systems, giving 49 ,813 distinct
minima.

--- page 13 ---
13
FIG. 9. 2D and 3D SHEAP maps for produced from the same set of LJ 38 minima that are presented in Fig. 6, described using
SOAP with parametersrcut = 10.0,nmax,l max = 15, 9, andσ = 0.3. The projections were made using a perplexity of 30, with a
minimum sphere radius R0 = 0.006 for the 2D map, and R0 = 0.01 for 3D. The circles/spheres representing each structure are
coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes are represented
by the area/volume of each sphere/circle. Each viewpoint of 3D map looks down one of the axes displayed, as labelled; the axes
have no other physical meaning. (a)-(d) in the 2D map label proposed funnels in the LJ 38 PES, analogous to those labelled in
Fig. 6, with the same low-energy minima residing at the ends.
There is clearly a funnelled structure to the arrange-
ment of minima, terminating with the icosahedron and
closely related conﬁgurations, such as those labelled (b),
which all have the structure of the I h groundstate but
with one external atom moved to a diﬀerent surface site.
However, the maps also suggest that describing the land-
scape as a single funnel would be an oversimpliﬁcation.
There is a second strand of structures which branches
oﬀ from the funnel to the global minimum, leading to a
relatively low-energy D 5h conﬁguration. This structure
is related to the I h conﬁguration via a twist about the
5-fold axis [2]. It stands out in the corresponding dis-
connectivity graph due to its relatively low energy and
high barrier for transition to the global minimum [67];
this picture is complemented by the detail in the struc-
tural similarity and sub-funnel arrangement provided by
SHEAP.
Another band of (sub-)funnels is present, well sepa-
rated from those leading to the I h and D5h structures in
the 3D map (in a similar manner to the separation of (d)
from (a), (b) and (c) in Fig. 6). However, these are all of
relatively high energy (unlike (d) in Fig. 6), and so are
not competetive with the global minimum.
Despite some similarities, it is apparent from the
SHEAP maps why LJ 55 is a more straightforward prob-
lem than LJ 38 in terms of global optimisation. With
LJ55, the competing funnel(s)/strand(s) are shallow com-
pared to that of the global minimum, and there are no
similarly low-energy structures outside of the main funnel
- the D5h structure exceeds the global minimum by∼ 0.1ϵ
per atom. With LJ 38, competing funnels are deep and
terminate with structures similar in energy to the global
minimum (only∼ 0.01ϵ per atom higher). Furthermore,
for LJ38 the most voluminous funnel is not the one con-
taining the global minimum, and the maps also possesses
a region of low-energy structures within the amorphous
bulk of conﬁgurations, which is not the case for LJ 55.

--- page 14 ---
14
FIG. 10. 2D and 3D SHEAP maps for 49 ,813 minima on the LJ 55 PES, generated with RSS, described by sorted lists of all
pairwise distances. Projections were made using a perplexity of 30, with a minimum sphere radius 0.01. The circles representing
each structure are coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes
are represented by the area of each circle. (a)-(f) label selected structures in the landscape: (a) I h, global minimum; (b) C s,
all have one surface atom relocated relative to global minimum, (c) D 5h, lowest energy structure in funnel branching oﬀ from
that to global minimum; (d) C 1, one atom relocated relative to D 5h; (e) C 5v and (f) C 5, high symmetry structures outside the
main (sub-)funnels to I h and D5h. Each viewpoint of 3D map looks down one of the axes displayed, as labelled; the axes have
no other physical meaning.
D. Carbon
To demonstrate the applicability of SHEAP to realistic
periodic systems, we consider a data-set of solid-state car-
bon structures, taken from the Materials Cloud Archive
[75]. The set contains 11 ,370 structures obtained with
AIRSS performed at 10 GPa for a range of cell sizes (up
to 24 atoms), with 2 to 4 symmetry operations imposed
on the pre-relaxed structures. All structures are based on
sp/sp2/sp3 hybridised carbon, but they exhibit a wide
range of topologies. The interactions in this system con-
tain signiﬁcant 3-body contributions [77], meaning the
sorted list of pairwise distances is not a suitable struc-
ture descriptor. Hence, we use SOAP, which is capable
of describing these relationships completely [62].
As demonstrated with LJ 38, the SOAP descriptor has
a number of parameters which eﬀect the appearance of a
SHEAP map. With that model system, we were able to
obtain suitable values relatively easily via a scan of the
parameter space. However, it would of course be prefer-
able to have a systematic way to obtain good parameter
choices for any given system. For systems of real atoms,
we ﬁnd a satisfying solution is the heuristic approach of
Cheng et al. [64], providing a set of so called “universal”
parameters. These come in 3 ﬂavours; “smart”, which
computes a suitable set of parameters by considering the
typical and minimum bond lengths of each of the species
involved, “minimal”, which is similar to smart, but uses
fewer basis functions, and “longrange”, which again is
similar to smart, but aims to capture more of the long-
range structure. For the “smart” and “longrange” cases,
two sets of SOAP parameters are computed, at slightly
diﬀerent length scales. A single structure descriptor is
constructed by concatenating the global SOAP vectors
for each set. Here, we provide a SHEAP map for the
above carbon data set produced using the “smart” pa-
rameters - see Fig. 11.
Most structures lie within a single, elongated arrange-
ment. Several have distinctly large basins; most of these
are low-energy and lie towards the edge of the distribu-
tion. Many of these correspond to well known carbon
arrangements, including diamond (a) and graphite (g),
which reside at opposite ends of the map, as well as lons-
daleite (b), and the chiral framework structure (d) of
Ref. [76]. These and other standout clusters have been
labelled to provide a representative picture of the distri-
bution of structures.
Comparing the SHEAP map for carbon to those for
the LJ systems highlights key diﬀerences in their energy
landscapes. With the LJ systems, neighbouring minima

--- page 15 ---
15
FIG. 11. 2D SHEAP map for 11 ,370 structures of solid-state carbon, obtained with AIRSS at 10 GPa for a range of cell sizes
- data-set taken from Materials Cloud Archive [75]. Structures in the source-data represented as concatenated global SOAP
vectors using universal “smart” parameters: rcut,n max,l max,σ = {2.4, 8, 4, 0.3}, {2.0, 8, 4, 0.25}. The projection was made
using a perplexity of 30, with R0 = 0.0147, as computed by Eqn. B1. The circles representing each structure are coloured
according to their energy per atom in eV; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes are represented by the area of each
circle. (a)-(n) label selected structures, including: (a) diamond, (b) lonsdaleite, (d) the chiral framework structure of [76], (g)
graphite, (h) graphene layers with non-graphite packing. Inset shows the same map, coloured according to volume per atom in
˚A
3
; see colour bar at top of inset.
tend to be close in energy. With carbon, there is a large
degree of “mixing” between high- and low-energy struc-
tures; basins of high-energy minima are often surrounded
by those of much lower energy, and vice versa. Further-
more, the variation in the energy of minima across the
carbon map shows less clear long-range trends than for
the LJ clusters. Whilst the LJ landscapes possess clear
funnels of minima, such features do not appear to be
prevalent in the carbon PES. Through this comparison,
it is easy to see why LJ landscapes lend themselves very
well to structure prediction algorithms such as simulated
annealing [78] and basin-hopping [6, 7], which utilise the
presence of funnels to locate progressively lower energy
minima, whilst the study of carbon has required more
heuristic approaches, such as in Ref. [79].
As illustrated in the inset of Fig. 11, in contrast to
the energy variation, the volume per atom of each car-
bon structure follows a clear global trend across the map.
This demonstrates the additional complexity in the en-
ergy landscape resulting from 3-body interactions, lead-
ing to less correlation between the energy and density
than is seen for a simple pairwise interaction.
E. C+H+N+O
As a ﬁnal demonstration of SHEAP, we present results
obtained for a data-set of structures containing multi-
ple species. The set considered consists of 50 ,000 solid-
state structures containing carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen
and oxygen (the four most common elements in organic
chemistry and biology) at varying stoichiometries, which
reduced to 21,239 distinct structures following a similar-
ity check. These conﬁgurations, taken from a larger set
on the Materials Cloud Archive [75], were generated with
AIRSS performed at 1 GPa. Structures in the source
data-set are represented as concatenated global SOAP
vectors, using the “smart” universal parameters, includ-
ing the crossover terms between diﬀerent species. Pre-
sented in Fig. 12 are 2D and 3D SHEAP maps for this
system.
The 2D map contains four distinct corners, each cor-
responding to arrangements of one of the four elements,
as labelled. One can easily identify clusters of basins
corresponding to low-energy conﬁgurations of binary
molecules, most notably H 2O, CO 2, and NH 3. Intu-
itively, each of these molecular structures resides clos-
est to the corner corresponding to the element it con-
tains with the highest stoichiometry. The edges of the

--- page 16 ---
16
FIG. 12. 2D and 3D SHEAP maps for 21 ,239 structures containing carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen at varying
stoichiometries, obtained with AIRSS performed at 1 GPa, taken from the Materials Cloud Archive [75]. Structures in
the source-data represented as concatenated global SOAP vectors using “smart” universal parameters: rcut,n max,l max,σ =
{2.7, 8, 4, 0.33}, {2.0, 8, 4, 0.25}. Projections were made using a perplexity of 30, withR0 computed by Eqn. B1. Circles/spheres
representing each structure are coloured according to their formation energy per atom in eV; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure.
Basin volumes are represented by the area/volume of each sphere/circle. Each viewpoint of the 3D map looks down one of
the axes displayed, as labelled; the axes have no other physical meaning. Clusters/regions containing polymorphs of various
molecular species are labelled in the 2D map.
map represent structures containing predominantly the
elements of the adjacent corners, also in agreement with
intuition. The same is true for the structures occupying
the regions between opposite corners (H, N and C, O).
The lowest energy structures containing each element in
equal stoichiometry correspond to polymers of isocyanic
acid (O=C=NH), which reside close to the centre of the
map, as labelled. A few other standout clusters/basins
have been labelled, according to the molecule(s) whose
polymorphs are are mapped there, to provide a represen-
tative picture of the distribution of structures and stoi-
chiometries.
The 3D map also contains a distinct corner for each
of the 4 elements. However, the extra dimension facili-
tates the emergence of an edge between every pair, and
provides clearer separation of diﬀerent stoichiometries,
particularly for structures residing towards the centre of
the 2D map. The result resembles an irregular tetra-
hedron, with slight outwards curvature of the faces and
edges. This is reminiscent of a quaternary convex hull
plot [80]; it is striking that the similarities to this con-
struction have emerged naturally from our projection of
the energy landscape.
Both maps depict a higher density of structures at
the edges (and between opposite corners in 2D), where
the binary (and unary) conﬁgurations reside. This
demonstrates that SHEAP is able to highlight any non-
uniformity or biasing in the sampling of a conﬁguration
space.
F. Cost vs. dimensionality
In Sections IV B, IV C and IV E we demonstrated that
the visualisation quality produced by SHEAP can be im-
proved by projecting into three dimensions, rather than
two. How do we know that there are no important fea-
tures in a given minima distribution that would be re-
vealed if we were able to view a projection into higher
dimensions? We address this by considering the opti-
mal cost (in the absence of the hard sphere interaction)
achieved by projections into a range of map dimension-
alities.
This analysis was conducted for data-sets of 10,000 lo-
cal minima of each of the systems studied above, as well
as data-sets consisting of 10,000 points drawn uniformly
at random inside the unit hypercubes of 2 to 6 dimen-
sions. For the structural data, 10 independent SHEAP
projections were carried out, without switching on the
hard sphere interaction, for 1 to 6 map dimensions, s.

--- page 17 ---
17
FIG. 13. Lowest cost obtained through SHEAP projections
(without hard-sphere interactions) of data-sets of 10,000 local
minima for ﬁve systems, plotted against the number of map
dimensions. Also shown are (lowest) cost vs. map dimension
plots for 10,000 points drawn uniformly at random inside the
unit hypercubes of 2-6 dimensions, on a single set of axes.
Each SHEAP projection used a perplexity of 30.
For the points inside hypercubes, SHEAP projections
were conducted for up to 8 dimensions. The lowest cost
obtained at each map dimension, for each data-set, is
plotted against s in Fig. 13.
Note that the cost is restricted from approaching zero
as s−→D (and beyond) by the use of diﬀerent func-
tional forms for the weights in the high and low dimen-
sions; there is an inherent cost associated with the use of
diﬀerent distributions, even when s≥D.
For all data-sets of structural minima, we observe a
dramatic reduction in the (lowest) relative cost in going
from 1D to 2D. We also see a non-negligible reduction
from increasing the map dimensionality from two to three
(except in the case of carbon), which is most pronounced
for C+H+N+O. However, it appears that in each case
there is nothing of signiﬁcance to be gained in going be-
yond 3D.
We compare to the plots for uniformly drawn random
points within hypercubes of varying dimensionality. Ac-
cording to SHEAP, in order to faithfully represent the
distribution of points in the hypercube of dimensionality
D (which must contain long-range D-dimensional fea-
tures), at least s =D map dimensions are required. For
each cube, using fewer than D dimensions in the map
leads to a penalty in the optimal cost that is obtained,
which increases with decreasing map dimensionality.
These results suggest that the distribution of minima
on the landscapes we have considered are inherently low
dimensional (according to the given combination of struc-
ture descriptor and distance metric), providing validation
for our approach to producing visual representations of
high-dimensional PESs.
V. DISCUSSION
The striking observation of local minima being ap-
proximately distributed across low-dimensional mani-
folds within conﬁguration space could have profound con-
sequences for structure prediction. The ability to sample
directly from this manifold would be a highly eﬃcient
means of searching for stable structures. Unfortunately,
SHEAP (as with all algorithms in the same family) does
not yield a transformation matrix between the original
and reduced spaces, and the latter is not deﬁned with
respect to a meaningful set of axes. Thus, there is no
clear way to generate new structures on the manifold
learned by SHEAP. However, our ﬁndings are promis-
ing for the use of other machine learning methods such
variational auto-encoders [81] (VAEs) and generative ad-
versarial networks [82] (GANs) in structure prediction for
generating candidate structures (see Ref. [83]), and sug-
gest that learning from previously located minima would
be an eﬀective strategy. This could be achieved by pair-
ing with a non-learning based approach such as AIRSS.
SHEAP could be deployed to illuminate diﬀerences in the
sampling of a given surface by diﬀerent approaches, or by
diﬀerent parameter choices within a given approach.
Other pioneering work in developing a greater under-
standing of energy landscapes through visualisation is
Ref. [3], which also analyses similarities between local
minima to reveal topological features. Oganov and Valle
employ a ﬁngerprint structure descriptor based on pair-
wise separations of atoms [84], and compute the similar-
ities between ﬁngerprints with a cosine distance metric.

--- page 18 ---
18
They use this similarity measure to construct plots of
energy vs. distance to the global minimum for local min-
ima on a given landscape, as well as mappings of the
minima distributions which aim to produce “distances
between points in the graph that are maximally close
to the distances between the corresponding ﬁngerprints”
(see multi-dimensional scaling [85]). Their analysis re-
veals funnels in the landscapes of crystalline systems of
few atoms per unit cell. Whilst Ref. [3] does not focus
on the quality of the mapping between their description
of a given PES and the low-dimensional space it is visu-
alised in, and only deals with relatively small sample sizes
(a few thousand structures), the tools developed there
have been demonstrated to facilitate improved structure
searching [86]. Dimensionality reduction by SHEAP fur-
thers the potential of such an approach.
In this work we have represented real crystalline sys-
tems using SOAP. However, it is important to note that
the development of good structure descriptors is an active
ﬁeld, and there are numerous justiﬁable choices we could
have made for the descriptor-metric pairing. Of course,
the entire form of a map is dependent on the choice of
descriptor and distance metric, and a map’s features can-
not be interpreted without knowledge of the descriptor-
metric pair used. With SOAP, a global reprentation of
a given structure is constructed by averaging the local
ﬁngerprints of each atomic environment. As with any
instance of averaging, this step introduces a loss of struc-
tural information, which becomes severe for large unit
cells. A potential solution is to build on the work of
Ref. [87]. Rather than comparing averaged SOAP de-
scriptors via a Euclidean distance metric, one could use
the Hungarian algorithm to best match the atomic envi-
ronments in a pair of structures, summing over the in-
dividual distances between matching environments. Any
such, more sophistocated approach would need to be as-
sessed with regard to the balance between increased ﬁ-
delity of the map versus the computational cost of the
algorithm.
VI. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, SHEAP enables us to produce mean-
ingful and interpretable low-dimensional representations
of a range of PESs, requiring only the structural infor-
mation contained in minima data obtained from random
structure searches as input, providing fresh insight into
their topologies. The maps presented contain distribu-
tions and clusters of structures that we have been able
to rationalise, and reveal long range topological features,
including funnels (or the lack thereof).
By evaluating the costs at higher map dimensionali-
ties, we have assessed the validity of SHEAP projections
into the low number of dimensions that we can compre-
hend. In doing so, we have revealed an intrinsic low-
dimensionality to the distributions of minima, as repre-
sented by the descriptors/metrics considered, across both
model PESs, and those corresponding to realistic, solid-
state systems. We observe that with all systems studied,
no more than three map dimensions are required to rep-
resent all of the structural variation captured in our de-
scriptions of the local minima, with two map dimensions
also enabling useful projections.
We have demonstrated that SHEAP has the potential
to be a useful tool in the ﬁeld of structure prediction
(and beyond), providing a convenient and concise way
to visually represent and compare the large quantities of
data that are generated in structure searches. The in-
sight gained from these projections could provide inspi-
ration for approaches to improving/optimising sampling
of a given landscape for a desired purpose.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Daan Frenkel, Joseph Nelson, and Bonan
Zhu for useful discussions. BS acknowledges the EPSRC
CDT in Computational Methods for Materials Science
for funding under grant number EP/L015552/1. CJP
has been supported by the Royal Society through a Royal
Society Wolfson Research Merit award. This work was
performed using resources provided by the Cambridge
Service for Data Driven Discovery (CSD3), operated by
the University of Cambridge Research Computing Ser-
vice (www.csd3.cam.ac.uk).
Appendix A: UMAP vs. t-SNE
For algorithms that follow the framework outlined in
Section II A, the optimisation procedure is usually dic-
tated by a cost-function gradient that can be separated
into a sum of attractive and repulsive pairwise interac-
tions between map points;
dC
dY =
∑
i
∑
j>i
Fatt.(yi, yj)−Frep.(yi, yj). (A1)
The t-SNE algorithm exploits this with its use of early ex-
aggeration to accelerate the optimisation [28]; this tech-
nique works by the temporary enhancement of the at-
tractive contribution to the gradient, achieved through
multiplying these terms by some positive scalar α > 1
for the ﬁrst few hundred iterations of optimisation, pro-
moting the formation of clusters in the projected data.
In t-SNE, the cost function measuring the faithfulness
with which the probabilities qij model their correspond-
ing pij is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of the
former distribution from the latter [28]:
Ct-SNE =
∑
i,j
pij log
(pij
qij
)
. (A2)
The attractive contribution to the gradient in t-SNE is a
direct result of the form of the cost function, and is what

--- page 19 ---
19
drives the algorithm to accurately reproduce the local
connectivity of the source data in the projected map.
The repulsive contribution is a result of the constraint
that the low-dimensional weights qij sum to 1. This can
be incorporated either through the treatment of the opti-
misation with an additional Lagrangian multiplier term,
or directly in the deﬁnition of the weights. Without this
constraint, the KL-divergence would be minimised by all
points in the map collapsing onto one another.
UMAP chooses to minimise the fuzzy set cross-entropy
between the two distributions [29]:
CUMAP =
∑
i,j
pij log
(pij
qij
)
+ (1−pij) log
(1−pij
1−qij
)
.
(A3)
The ﬁrst term is identical to the KL-divergence used by
t-SNE, and produces the attractive contribution to the
gradient. In UMAP, this acts only between map points
that are considered to be nearest neighbours in the source
data, meaning pij = 0 for all pairs of points i and j for
which neither is considered one of the kth nearest neigh-
bours (k is a user-speciﬁed hyperparameter) of the other,
according to the deﬁned distance metric. The second, ad-
ditional term introduces a repulsion between every pair
of map points that is greater the further apart the cor-
responding points are in the source data. This choice
of cost function is the key reason that UMAP is able to
provide improved performance over t-SNE.
Firstly, in t-SNE the repulsive term in the gradient
appears only because of the constraint that the low-
dimensional weights qij sum to one, which requires the
re-normalisation of all of these weights at each iteration
of the optimisation procedure. In UMAP, the cost func-
tion introduces a repulsive contribution to the gradient
without the need for this constraint, meaning the costly
normalisation step can be avoided.
Secondly, the repulsive term contribution to the gra-
dient in UMAP is more dependent on the actual data
than that in t-SNE. Thus, UMAP tends to do a better
job than t-SNE in producing a faithful representation of
the global structure of the source data.
Finally, the removal of the need to normalise the
weightsqij means that the cost function is amenable to
optimisation via SGD, which replaces the true gradient
with an estimate that requires only a stochastically cho-
sen subset of the components to be evaluated. UMAP im-
plements an eﬃcient approximate SGD algorithm which
makes use of probabilistic edge sampling and negative
sampling [29]. The improvements in speed and scalling
achieved by UMAP over t-SNE are largely a result of the
use of SGD, rather than some other full gradient descent
method.
However, a fairly subtle caveat arises with UMAP’s
implementation of SGD. The repulsive part of the in-
teraction between map points is treated with negative
sampling [88]. Whilst this vastly reduces the number of
repulsive interactions that need to be evaluated, it also
has the eﬀect of de-exaggerating the repulsion between
the map points, relative to their interaction as described
by the true cost function. We ﬁnd that this is crucial
to UMAP producing a meaningful projection. Because
of this, UMAP’s optimisation scheme does not actually
minimise the deﬁned cost function, and the algorithm
only “converges” because the step size is forced to go to
zero. Thus, whilst UMAP is very eﬃcient, and produces
low-dimensional projections that appear to improve on
those by the t-SNE algorithm, it is rather unsatisfactory
in that the cost function deﬁned within the algorithm is
not truly minimised in the construction of the ﬁnal map.
Appendix B: Choosing R 0
The choice of the minimum sphere/circle radius R0 is
critical. If, in the absence of the hard spheres, the sepa-
ration between a given pair of map points is smaller than
the sum of their hard sphere radii, then the introduction
of the hard sphere interaction will force these structures
apart. Thus, if R0 is large enough for this to be the
case for a single pair of structures, the introduction of
hard spheres results in a distortion of the layout of the
map. On the other hand, if R0 is too small relative to the
spread of data in the map, some (or all) of the spheres
may be barely visible. Hence, a good choice for R0 com-
promises between ensuring that all of the structures in
the map are clearly visible, whilst minimising the distor-
tion of the layout of structures.
By default, the value of R0 is computed in the same
iteration at which the hard sphere interaction is switched
on, as a fraction of the average separation of the map
points from their centre of mass:
R0 = 2s
10
(
N∑N
i=1ci
)1/s
⟨||yi− yCoM||⟩HS , (B1)
where
⟨||yi− yCoM||⟩HS = 1
N
N∑
i=1
||yi− yCoM||HS , (B2)
and the pre-multiplying factor was selected by empirical
investigation, and may be altered in future. Alterna-
tively, the value ofR0 can be input by the user, allowing
interactive feedback.
Appendix C: Random projection
Random projection relies on the Johnson-
Lindenstrauss lemma [91], which states that any
set of N points in a high-dimensional Euclidean space
can be embedded into a k ≥ Olog(N/ϵ2) dimensional
Euclidean subspace without distorting the distances
between any pair of points by more than a factor of
1±ϵ, for any 0 < ϵ <1. It can be proven that if the

--- page 20 ---
20
FIG. 14. Projections of the COIL-20 [89] and MNIST [90] data-sets made by our implementations of the t-SNE, UMAP, and
SHEAP algorithms. The legend at the top of the ﬁgure labels distinct objects in the COIL-20 data-set; the legend at the
bottom labels distinct digits in the MNIST data-set.
k-dimensional subspace is constructed by the generation
of k random but mutually orthogonal and normalised
vectors in the high-dimensional space, then the this
will be achieved with high probability. Furthermore,
it is found that in practice, even if embedding into a
low-dimensional space of dimension s <<O log(N/ϵ2),
one can often still obtain something useful from a
random projection. In our implementation of random
projection, a source data-point x existing in the original
D-dimensional space is projected onto an s-dimensional
subspace by transformation via a s×D matrix R whose
s rows are orthonormal vectors in the original space, to
produce the projected data-point:
yRP =Rx. (C1)
In addition, because our descriptor vectors contain only
positive entries (they are pairwise distances), we know
that all of the data-points exist in the positive orthant
of the D-dimensional hyperspace, meaning only a 1 /2d
fraction of the total space is accessible. Hence, we actu-
ally choose the row vectors comprising R to contain only
positive entries.
Appendix D: Qualitative comparison of SHEAP to
t-SNE and UMAP
The visualisation quality of SHEAP is compared
against our implementations of t-SNE and UMAP on
two standard image data-sets: COIL-20 [89], and MNIST
[90]. In general, the improvements oﬀered by UMAP over
t-SNE are maintained with SHEAP.
The COIL-20 [89] data-set contains 1, 440 images, pro-
duced by individually placing 20 objects on a motorised
turn-table (against a black background) and photograph-
ing them at 5◦ intervals, up to a complete rotation. Each
image is grey-scale, containing 128 × 128 pixels, and is
treated as a 16,384-dimensional vector. This data-set is
expected to contain well deﬁned clusters, corresponding
to the sets of images of each object. Furthermore, the
sub-manifold on which each cluster lies should have a
relatively intuitive form - objects containing no symme-
try about the axis of rotation are expected correspond
to a closed loop of points, with consecutive images of
a given object neighbouring one another. In Fig. 14,
both UMAP and SHEAP do a better job than t-SNE at

--- page 21 ---
21
FIG. 15. Labelled 2D SHEAP map produced from local min-
ima on the LJ 13 PES (the same set as depicted in Fig. 2),
described by sorted lists of inverse pairwise distances. The
projection was made using a perplexity of 30, with a minimum
sphere radius R0 = 0.01. The circles representing each struc-
ture are coloured according to energy per atom in Lennard-
Jones units; see colour bar at top of ﬁgure. Basin volumes
are represented by the area of each circle. Groups of struc-
tures are labelled according to their clustering in Fig. 2; the
dashed line encloses structures collectively labelled (h). Also
shown is a plot of the lowest cost (without hard sphere inter-
actions) obtained by projections of a subset of this data-set
into a range of map dimensionalities.
forming the clusters corresponding to each object, and
keep more of the loops intact. The biggest diﬀerence be-
tween the UMAP and SHEAP projections is that SHEAP
produces larger/more frequent distortions of these closed
loops - we argue that these distortions make intuitive
sense, occurring when there exist symmetries in the ob-
jects being imaged.
The MNIST [90] (training) data-set contains 60 ,000
grey-scale 28 × 28 images of handwritten digits (0 to
9), each treated as a 784-dimensional vector. A given
data-point is expected to be neighboured by other writ-
ings of the same digit, and the data-set should contain
well-deﬁned clusters corresponding to the distinct digits.
These are expected to be arranged such that similar digits
reside close together, and dissimilar ones are well sepa-
rated (a handwritten 3 is often hard to distinguish from
an 8, but never mistaken for a 4). In Fig. 14, all three
algorithms do a good job of clustering the images cor-
responding to each digit. However, UMAP and SHEAP
capture more of the global relationships between the clus-
ters, providing much clearer separations between them,
and grouping together clusters of similar digits (3,5,8,
and 4,7,9) in similar layouts. A noticeable diﬀerence be-
tween UMAP and SHEAP’s projections is that the latter
seems to contain thinner, denser bands of points in clus-
ters that are particularly elongated. Nonetheless, the two
plots are qualitatively very similar.
Appendix E: LJ 13 described with inverse distances
Fig. 15 shows a 2D SHEAP map for the same set of
LJ13 minima as considered in Section IV A. The diﬀer-
ence here is that, rather than describing structures with
sorted lists of all distances between pairs of atoms, we
use sorted lists of all inverse distances. We observe simi-
lar clustering of structures as in Fig. 2; groups of struc-
tures in Fig. 15 are labelled according to the correspond-
ing cluster in Fig. 2. However, the map obtained from
inverse distances does not result in a consistent global
layout of the minima, failing to reproduce the expected
single funnel distribution across all minima. We specula-
tively attribute this to the emphasis the descriptor places
on the shortest distances in the structures, resulting in a
poorer representation of global information.
Also in Fig. 15 is a plot of the lowest cost (in the ab-
sence of hard sphere interactions) achieved with projec-
tions into a range of map dimensionalities, similar to the
plots in Fig. 13. Again, this analysis was conducted for a
reduced data-set of 10,000 minima, with 10 independent
SHEAP projections carried out for each number of map
dimensions. As with the other structural data-sets con-
sidered, no more than 3 map dimensions are required for
convergence. However, here, 3 map dimensions does not
produce a lower cost than 2, whereas a slight reduction
was observed with the sorted list of distances descriptor
for the same system. This is likely due to the less well
represented global features of the landcape.
[1] M. Born and R. Oppenheimer, Zur quantentheorie der
molekeln, Annalen der Physik 389, 457 (1927).
[2] D. J. Wales, Energy Landscapes: Applications to Clus-
ters, Biomolecules and Glasses (Cambridge University
Press, 2003).
[3] A. R. Oganov and M. Valle, How to quantify energy land-
scapes of solids, The Journal of Chemical Physics 130,
104504 (2009).
[4] D. J. Wales, Decoding the energy landscape: Extract-
ing structure, dynamics and thermodynamics, Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 370, 2877 (2012).
[5] A. R. Oganov, C. J. Pickard, Q. Zhu, and R. J. Needs,
Structure prediction drives materials discovery, Nature
Reviews Materials 4, 331 (2019).
[6] Z. Li and H. A. Scheraga, Monte carlo-minimization ap-
proach to the multiple-minima problem in protein fold-
ing, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences84,
6611 (1987).
[7] D. J. Wales and J. P. Doye, Global optimization by basin-
hopping and the lowest energy structures of lennard-jones
clusters containing up to 110 atoms, The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry A 101, 5111 (1997).
[8] M. Amsler and S. Goedecker, Crystal structure predic-

--- page 22 ---
22
tion using the minima hopping method, The Journal of
Chemical Physics 133, 224104 (2010).
[9] Y. Wang, J. Lv, L. Zhu, and Y. Ma, Crystal structure
prediction via particle-swarm optimization, Physical Re-
view B 82, 094116 (2010).
[10] Y. Wang, J. Lv, L. Zhu, and Y. Ma, Calypso: A method
for crystal structure prediction, Computer Physics Com-
munications 183, 2063 (2012).
[11] A. R. Oganov and C. W. Glass, Crystal structure predic-
tion using ab initio evolutionary techniques: Principles
and applications, The Journal of Chemical Physics 124,
244704 (2006).
[12] C. W. Glass, A. R. Oganov, and N. Hansen, Us-
pex—evolutionary crystal structure prediction, Com-
puter Physics Communications 175, 713 (2006).
[13] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, High-pressure phases of
silane, Physical Review Letters 97, 045504 (2006).
[14] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, Ab initio random struc-
ture searching, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
23, 053201 (2011).
[15] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, Structure of phase iii of
solid hydrogen, Nature Physics 3, 473 (2007).
[16] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, Highly compressed am-
monia forms an ionic crystal, Nature materials 7, 775
(2008).
[17] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, Aluminium at terapascal
pressures, Nature materials 9, 624 (2010).
[18] D. G. Kleinbaum, L. L. Kupper, K. E. Muller, and
A. Nizam, Applied Regression Analysis and Other Multi-
variable Methods, Vol. 601 (Duxbury Press Belmont, CA,
1988).
[19] A. K. Jain, M. N. Murty, and P. J. Flynn, Data cluster-
ing: A review, ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 31, 264
(1999).
[20] C. C. Aggarwal, Data Classiﬁcation: Algorithms and Ap-
plications (CRC press, 2014).
[21] M. A. Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning ,
Vol. 25 (Determination press San Francisco, CA, USA:,
2015).
[22] S. R. Chitturi, P. C. Verpoort, A. A. Lee, and D. J. Wales,
Perspective: New insights from loss function landscapes
of neural networks, Machine Learning: Science and Tech-
nology 1, 023002 (2020).
[23] F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, Packing structures and
transitions in liquids and solids, Science 225, 983 (1984).
[24] J. P. K. Doye and C. P. Massen, Characterizing the net-
work topology of the energy landscapes of atomic clus-
ters, The Journal of chemical physics122, 084105 (2005).
[25] C. P. Massen and J. P. K. Doye, Power-law distributions
for the areas of the basins of attraction on a potential
energy landscape, Physical Review E 75, 037101 (2007).
[26] J. D. Bryngelson, J. N. Onuchic, N. D. Socci, and P. G.
Wolynes, Funnels, pathways, and the energy landscape of
protein folding: A synthesis, Proteins: Structure, Func-
tion, and Bioinformatics 21, 167 (1995).
[27] O. M. Becker and M. Karplus, The topology of multidi-
mensional potential energy surfaces: Theory and appli-
cation to peptide structure and kinetics, The Journal of
Chemical Physics 106, 1495 (1997).
[28] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, Visualizing data us-
ing t-sne, Journal of Machine Learning Research 9, 2579
(2008).
[29] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, Umap: Uniform
manifold approximation and projection for dimension re-
duction, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 (2018).
[30] L. McInnes, J. Healy, N. Saul, and Großberger, Umap:
Uniform manifold approximation and projection, Journal
of Open Source Software 3, 861 (2018).
[31] T. F¨ osel, P. Tighineanu, T. Weiss, and F. Marquardt, Re-
inforcement learning with neural networks for quantum
feedback, Physical Review X 8, 031084 (2018).
[32] X. Li, O. E. Dyck, M. P. Oxley, A. R. Lupini, L. McInnes,
J. Healy, S. Jesse, and S. V. Kalinin, Manifold learning
of four-dimensional scanning transmission electron mi-
croscopy, npj Computational Materials 5, 5 (2019).
[33] V. Spiwok and P. Kˇ r´ ıˇ z, Time-lagged t-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) of molecular sim-
ulation trajectories, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02505
(2020).
[34] B. Olsthoorn, R. M. Geilhufe, S. S. Borysov, and A. V.
Balatsky, Band gap prediction for large organic crystal
structures with machine learning, Advanced Quantum
Technologies 2, 1900023 (2019).
[35] C. Royse, S. Wolter, and J. A. Greenberg, Emergence and
distinction of classes in xrd data via machine learning,
in Anomaly Detection and Imaging with X-Rays (ADIX)
IV, Vol. 10999 (International Society for Optics and Pho-
tonics, 2019) p. 109990D.
[36] M. Ghandi, F. W. Huang, J. Jan´ e-Valbuena, G. V.
Kryukov, C. C. Lo, E. R. McDonald, J. Barretina, E. T.
Gelfand, C. M. Bielski, H. Li, et al. , Next-generation
characterization of the cancer cell line encyclopedia, Na-
ture 569, 503 (2019).
[37] C.-A. Dutertre, E. Becht, S. E. Irac, A. Khalilnezhad,
V. Narang, S. Khalilnezhad, P. Y. Ng, L. L. van den
Hoogen, J. Y. Leong, B. Lee, et al., Single-cell analysis of
human mononuclear phagocytes reveals subset-deﬁning
markers and identiﬁes circulating inﬂammatory dendritic
cells, Immunity 51, 573 (2019).
[38] S. Hemmers, M. Schizas, E. Azizi, S. Dikiy, Y. Zhong,
Y. Feng, G. Altan-Bonnet, and A. Y. Rudensky, Il-2 pro-
duction by self-reactive cd4 thymocytes scales regulatory
t cell generation in the thymus, Journal of Experimental
Medicine 216, 2466 (2019).
[39] E. Becht, L. McInnes, J. Healy, C.-A. Dutertre, I. W.
Kwok, L. G. Ng, F. Ginhoux, and E. W. Newell, Dimen-
sionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using
umap, Nature biotechnology 37, 38 (2019).
[40] R. Czerminski and R. Elber, Reaction path study of con-
formational transitions in ﬂexible systems: Applications
to peptides, The Journal of Chemical Physics 92, 5580
(1990).
[41] D. J. Wales, The energy landscape as a unifying theme
in molecular science, Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineer-
ing Sciences 363, 357 (2004).
[42] G. J. Rylance, R. L. Johnston, Y. Matsunaga, C.-B. Li,
A. Baba, and T. Komatsuzaki, Topographical complex-
ity of multidimensional energy landscapes, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 103, 18551 (2006).
[43] L. C. Smeeton, M. T. Oakley, and R. L. Johnston, Vi-
sualizing energy landscapes with metric disconnectivity
graphs, Journal of Computational Chemistry 35, 1481
(2014).
[44] M. Ceriotti, G. A. Tribello, and M. Parrinello, Simplify-
ing the representation of complex free-energy landscapes
using sketch-map, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 108, 13023 (2011).

--- page 23 ---
23
[45] G. A. Tribello, M. Ceriotti, and M. Parrinello, Us-
ing sketch-map coordinates to analyze and bias molec-
ular dynamics simulations, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (2012).
[46] M. Ceriotti, G. A. Tribello, and M. Parrinello, Demon-
strating the transferability and the descriptive power of
sketch-map, Journal of chemical theory and computation
9, 1521 (2013).
[47] E. A. Engel, A. Anelli, M. Ceriotti, C. J. Pickard, and
R. J. Needs, Mapping uncharted territory in ice from ze-
olite networks to ice structures, Nature Communications
9, 2173 (2018).
[48] L. van der Maaten, E. Postma, and J. van den Herik,
Dimensionality reduction: A comparative review, J Mach
Learn Res 10, 13 (2009).
[49] J. A. Lee and M. Verleysen, Nonlinear Dimensionality
Reduction (Springer Science & Business Media, 2007).
[50] T. Lin and H. Zha, Riemannian manifold learning, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence 30, 796 (2008).
[51] H. Hotelling, Analysis of a complex of statistical vari-
ables into principal components, Journal of Educational
Psychology 24, 417 (1933).
[52] J. B. Tenenbaum, V. De Silva, and J. C. Langford, A
global geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality
reduction, science 290, 2319 (2000).
[53] B. Sch¨ olkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. M¨ uller, Nonlinear
component analysis as a kernel eigenvalue problem, Neu-
ral computation 10, 1299 (1998).
[54] J. W. Sammon, A nonlinear mapping for data struc-
ture analysis, IEEE Transactions on Computers 100, 401
(1969).
[55] S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul, Nonlinear dimensionality
reduction by locally linear embedding, science 290, 2323
(2000).
[56] M. Belkin and P. Niyogi, Laplacian eigenmaps and spec-
tral techniques for embedding and clustering, inAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (2002) pp.
585–591.
[57] J. Tang, J. Liu, M. Zhang, and Q. Mei, Visualizing large-
scale and high-dimensional data, in Proceedings of the
25th international conference on world wide web (Inter-
national World Wide Web Conferences Steering Commit-
tee, 2016) pp. 287–297.
[58] L. van der Maaten, Barnes-hut-sne, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3342 (2013).
[59] G. C. Linderman, M. Rachh, J. G. Hoskins, S. Steiner-
berger, and Y. Kluger, Eﬃcient algorithms for t-
distributed stochastic neighborhood embedding, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.09005 (2017).
[60] J. Barzilai and J. M. Borwein, Two-point step size gradi-
ent methods, IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis 8, 141
(1988).
[61] G. C. Linderman and S. Steinerberger, Clustering with
t-sne, provably, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02582 (2017).
[62] A. P. Bart´ ok, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´ anyi, On representing
chemical environments, Physical Review B 87, 184115
(2013).
[63] S. De, A. P. Bart´ ok, G. Cs´ anyi, and M. Ceriotti, Compar-
ing molecules and solids across structural and alchemical
space, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 18, 13754
(2016).
[64] B. Cheng, R.-R. Griﬃths, S. Wengert, C. Kunkel,
T. Stenczel, B. Zhu, V. L. Deringer, N. Bernstein,
J. T. Margraf, K. Reuter, et al., Mapping materials and
molecules, Accounts of Chemical Research , 12697 (2020).
[65] C. J. Pickard, Hyperspatial optimization of structures,
Physical Review B 99, 054102 (2019).
[66] A. Stukowski, Visualization and analysis of atomistic
simulation data with ovito–the open visualization tool,
Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and En-
gineering 18, 015012 (2009).
[67] J. P. K. Doye, M. A. Miller, and D. J. Wales, Evolu-
tion of the potential energy surface with size for lennard-
jones clusters, The Journal of Chemical Physics 111,
8417 (1999).
[68] D. J. Wales, Perspective: Insight into reaction coordi-
nates and dynamics from the potential energy landscape,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 142, 130901 (2015).
[69] R. H. Leary, Global optima of lennard-jones clusters,
Journal of Global Optimization 11, 35 (1997).
[70] J. P. Neirotti, F. Calvo, D. L. Freeman, and J. D. Doll,
Phase changes in 38-atom lennard-jones clusters. i. a par-
allel tempering study in the canonical ensemble, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 112, 10340 (2000).
[71] B. Schaefer and S. Goedecker, Computationally eﬃcient
characterization of potential energy surfaces based on ﬁn-
gerprint distances, The Journal of Chemical Physics145,
034101 (2016).
[72] M. O. J¨ ager, E. V. Morooka, F. F. Canova, L. Himanen,
and A. S. Foster, Machine learning hydrogen adsorption
on nanoclusters through structural descriptors, npj Com-
putational Materials 4, 1 (2018).
[73] L. Himanen, M. O. J. J¨ ager, E. V. Morooka, F. Fed-
erici Canova, Y. S. Ranawat, D. Z. Gao, P. Rinke, and
A. S. Foster, Dscribe: Library of descriptors for machine
learning in materials science, Computer Physics Commu-
nications 247, 106949 (2020).
[74] M. Sicher, S. Mohr, and S. Goedecker, Eﬃcient moves for
global geometry optimization methods and their applica-
tion to binary systems, The Journal of Chemical Physics
134, 044106 (2011).
[75] C. J. Pickard, Airss data for carbon at 10GPa and the
C+N+H+O system at 1GPa, Materiials Cloud Archive
10.24435/materialscloud:2020.0026/v1 (2020).
[76] C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, Hypothetical low-energy
chiral framework structure of group 14 elements, Physical
Review B 81, 014106 (2010).
[77] V. L. Deringer and G. Cs´ anyi, Machine learning based in-
teratomic potential for amorphous carbon, Physical Re-
view B 95, 094203 (2017).
[78] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, Optimiza-
tion by simulated annealing, science 220, 671 (1983).
[79] X. Shi, C. He, C. J. Pickard, C. Tang, and J. Zhong,
Stochastic generation of complex crystal structures com-
bining group and graph theory with application to car-
bon, Physical Review B 97, 014104 (2018).
[80] J. A. Flores-Livas, L. Boeri, A. Sanna, G. Profeta,
R. Arita, and M. Eremets, A perspective on conven-
tional high-temperature superconductors at high pres-
sure: Methods and materials, Physics Reports (2020).
[81] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, Auto-encoding variational
bayes, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
[82] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu,
D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Ben-
gio, Generative adversarial nets, in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (2014) pp. 2672–2680.
[83] S. Kim, J. Noh, G. H. Gu, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and Y. Jung,

--- page 24 ---
24
Generative adversarial networks for crystal structure pre-
diction, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01396 (2020).
[84] M. Valle and A. R. Oganov, Crystal structures classi-
ﬁer for an evolutionary algorithm structure predictor, in
2008 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (IEEE, 2008) pp. 11–18.
[85] W. S. Torgerson, Multidimensional scaling: I. theory and
method, Psychometrika 17, 401 (1952).
[86] A. O. Lyakhov, A. R. Oganov, and M. Valle, How to pre-
dict very large and complex crystal structures, Computer
Physics Communications 181, 1623 (2010).
[87] L. Zhu, M. Amsler, T. Fuhrer, B. Schaefer, S. Faraji,
S. Rostami, S. A. Ghasemi, A. Sadeghi, M. Grauzinyte,
C. Wolverton, and S. Goedecker, A ﬁngerprint based met-
ric for measuring similarities of crystalline structures,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 144, 034203 (2016).
[88] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado,
and J. Dean, Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality, inAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (2013) pp. 3111–3119.
[89] S. A. Nene, S. K. Nayar, and H. Murase, Columbia object
image library (COIL-20), Technical Report CUCS-005-
96, Columbia University (1996).
[90] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haﬀner,
Gradient-based learning applied to document recogni-
tion, Proceedings of the IEEE 86, 2278 (1998).
[91] W. B. Johnson and J. Lindenstrauss, Extensions of lips-
chitz mappings into a hilbert space, Contemporary Math-
ematics 26, 1 (1984).