--- Page 1 ---
Non-Abelian Topological Order on the Surface of a 3D Topological Superconductor
from an Exactly Solved Model
Lukasz Fidkowski1, Xie Chen2, Ashvin Vishwanath2
1. Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3800, USA. and
2. Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
Abstract
Three dimensional topological superconductors (TScs) protected by time reversal (T) symmetry are characterized by gapless
Majorana cones on their surface. Free fermion phases with this symmetry (class DIII) are indexed by an integerν, of which
ν = 1 is realized by the B-phase of superﬂuid3He. Previously it was believed that the surface must be gapless unless time
reversal symmetry is broken. Here we argue that a fully symmetric and gapped surface is possible in the presence of strong
interactions, if a special type of topological order appears on the surface. The topological order realizesT symmetry in an
anomalous way, one that is impossible to achieve in purely two dimensions. Forodd ν TScs, the surface topological order must
be non-Abelian. We propose the simplest non-Abelian topological order that contains electron like excitations,SO(3)6, with
four quasiparticles, as a candidate surface state. Remarkably, this theory has a hiddenT invariance which however is broken
in any 2D realization. By explicitly constructing an exactly soluble Walker-Wang model we show that it can be realized at the
surface of a short ranged entangled 3D fermionic phase protected byT symmetry, with bulk electrons trasforming as Kramers
pairs, i.e.T 2 =−1 undert time reversal. We also propose an Abelian theory, the semion-fermion topological order, to realize
an even ν TSc surface, for which an explicit model is derived using a coupled layer construction. We argue that this is related
to the ν = 2 TSc, and use this to build candidate surface topological orders forν = 4 and ν = 8 TScs. The latter is equivalent
to the three fermion state which is the surface topological order of aZ2 bosonic topological phase protected byT invariance.
One particular consequence of this is that aν = 16 TSc admits a trivially gappedT-symmetric surface.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently it was pointed out that there exist exotic va-
rieties of insulators and superconductors which form dis-
tinct phases of matter. This distinction is based on topo-
logical properties and hence falls outside the Ginzburg-
Landau-Wilson symmetry based classiﬁcation. On the
other hand, these distinctions are often present only in
the presence of certain symmetries, (e.g. time rever-
salT ), leading to the terminology “symmetry protected
topological phases” (SPTs). Many such phases can be
realized at the level of non-interacting fermions [1–3] and
several experimental realizations now exist. Their hall-
mark signature is the existence of gapless edge or surface
modes. The best known example is the three dimen-
sional topological insulator, which is protected by charge
conservation and time reversal symmetry and has a sin-
gle Dirac cone on its two dimensional surface. Another
example is the three dimensional topological supercon-
ductor. Here, time reversal symmetry protects gapless
Majorana cones at the surface. Within a free fermion
(quadratic Hamiltonian) description, diﬀerent topologi-
cal phases are labeled by an integerν. The gaplessness
of these surfaces is protected by the symmetry.
While a fairly complete picture exists of free fermion
topological phases [4, 5], less is known about topological
phases in the presence of interactions. Even if we restrict
attention to SPTs (which may be adiabatically connected
to a trivial gapped phase in the absence of symmetry),
the qualitatively new phenomena that occur when strong
interactions are present are only now beginning to be
studied. Two advances in this general area include the
result that the free fermion classiﬁcation of SPT phases
may be reduced in the presence of interactions, as shown
for a class of 1D topological superconductors[6–9] and a
class of 2D topological superconductors withZ2 or reﬂec-
tion symmetry [10–13], and the discovery of SPT phases
of bosons in diﬀerent dimensions, that necessarily require
interactions for their realization[5, 14–20].
An important lesson that emerged from studying in-
teracting bosonic SPT phases is that the surface of a
3D phase can be gappedwithout breaking the symmetry
(either spontaneously or explicitly) if the surface devel-
ops topological order. In other words, the system must
have deconﬁned anyons at the gapped, symmetric sur-
face. Moreover, the anyons transform under the symme-
tries in a way that is disallowed in a strictly two dimen-
sional system[18]. Explicit examples of such symmetric
topologically ordered surfaces have been constructed for
3D bosonic SPT phases [20–22]. The simplest example is
a bosonic version of the 3D topological superconductor
protected by time reversal symmetry. In a conventional
surface termination, time reversal symmetry is broken at
the surface, leading to a gap. Domain walls between time
reversed domains carry chiral edge modes with net chiral
edge central chargec− = 8, and so each domain is associ-
ated with half that chiral central charge. However it was
realized that the surface can be gapped while retaining
time reversal symmetry if it acquires the 3-fermion [5]
Z2 gauge theory topological order[18]. If this topological
order were realized in 2D, it would always breakT sym-
metry, since it is associated with chiral edge states with
c− = 4 (exactly half the value associated with the surface
domain walls) . However, when realized on the boundary
of a 3D system, no edge is present, and the theory can
remain time reversal symmetric. Explicit constructions
of such surface phases were given in [21, 22].
While 3D SPT phases of bosons remain to be ex-
perimentally realized, it is interesting to consider the
analogous topologically ordered surface states for the
1
arXiv:1305.5851v4  [cond-mat.str-el]  12 Oct 2013


--- Page 2 ---
3D fermionic topological insulators and superconductors,
which we know are realized in Nature. The topologi-
cally ordered surface states provide a rare example of a
qualitatively new phenomenon that lies beyond the free
fermion description of these phases. Moreover, as we will
see shortly, we will require non-Abelian topological order
in some cases. This is a rare example where preserving
symmetry requires not just topological order, but also
particles with non-abelian statistics, and may eventually
help in realizing these exotic excitations.
In this paper we propose gapped, topologically or-
dered,T -invariant terminations for 3D topological super-
conductors (topological insulators will be discussed in a
seperate publication). In terms of the free fermion classi-
ﬁcation these correspond to class DIII, where one has aZ
classiﬁcation [4, 23]; theν = 1 member of this class is the
Balian-Werthamer (BW) [24, 25] state of theB phase of
liquid 3He, whose single Majorana cone describing the
surface dispersion is protected by time reversal in the
non-interacting setting. A principal feature of this sur-
face is that a domain wall between regions of opposite
T breaking is associated with a single chiral Majorana
mode, which has chiral central chargec− = 1
2. Hence
each domain may be associated to c− = 1
4, something
that is impossible in a purely 2d fermionic system with-
out topological order, wherec− is quantized in units of
1
2. One strategy is then to look for patterns of fermionic
2d topological order (i.e. those that contain a fundamen-
tal fermion that has trivial braiding statistics with every
other excitation and can be identiﬁed with the electron),
and attempt to ﬁnd a theory with both c− = 1
4 mod
1
2 andT symmetry. Fortunately this approach turns out
to be fruitful, because 2d fermionic topological orders are
extremely constrained.
First, we can rule out abelian theories, for the fol-
lowing reason: the fusion/braiding universality class of
any fermionic abelian topological order can be realized
in aK-matrix formulation, which has integral chiral cen-
tral charge. Adding in layers of p + ip superconductor
- which does not change the anyon spectrum - can only
change this chiral central charge in integer multiples of
1
2, and can never generatec− = 1
4 mod 1
2. A well known
non-Abelian example is the Moore-Read Pfaﬃan state
[26], but it is neitherT -invariant nor has the correctc−
[46]. However, the Pfaﬃan, with12 quasiparticle types,
is not the simplest non-Abelian fermionic theory. Indeed,
from a classiﬁcation standpoint, the smallest such theory
contains only 4 quasiparticle types: in addition to the
trivial particle and the electron, there is a self-semion
s and its time reversed partner ˜s. This is the integral
spin sub-theory ofSU (2)6, equivalent toSO(3)6 [27, 28].
Serendipitously, SU (2)6 has c− = 9
4 = 1
4 mod 1
2, and the
braiding and fusion rules of its integral spin sub-theory
are invariant under aT symmetry which exchangess and
˜s. A strict 2d realization of this phase should breakT
as we argue below, based on the nontrivial edge chiral
central charge c− = 9
4 in one realization. However, it
is conceivable that it may appear as aT invariant sur-
face state of a 3D bulk, based on the statistics of the
excitations. In that case one cannot interrogate the edge
content, and hence a hiddenT symmetry may exist. We
substantiate this claim by explicitly constructing a 3D
T symmetric model whose surface displays theSO(3)6
topological order.
Our central tool is the Walker-Wang (WW) construc-
tion [29, 30], which, in essence, converts a given surface
topological order into a prescription for the bulk wave
function (similar to the connection, one dimension lower,
between quantum Hall wave functions and edge confor-
mal ﬁeld theories). The construction also provides an ex-
actly soluble model to realize this wave function and sur-
face topological order - so we know explicitly that it can
be realized at the surface of an appropriate 3D system.
Moreover in the case of fermionic topological phases it al-
lows us to ﬁx the transformation law for fermions under
the protecting symmetry. Here we will see that the elec-
trons must transform projectively, i.e. withT 2 =−1 un-
der time reversal symmetry. For constructing the exactly
soluble 3D models, one is given the surface topological or-
der, speciﬁed in terms of quasiparticle labels and fusion
and braiding rules, collectively denotedB (mathemati-
cally, a premodular unitary category). When the only
particle that braids trivially with everything inB is the
identity - the so-called modular case - the WW models
realize a conﬁned 3+1 dimensional phase, with topologi-
cal orderB on the surface. Although the bulk is trivial,
these models sometimes naturally allow for an incorpora-
tion of symmetry that can protect the surface topological
order and hence result in a non-trivial 3D bosonic SPT
[22]. This strategy was successfully applied to construct
WW models that realize the 3 fermion surface topolog-
ical order with time reversal symmetry, which realizes a
3D bosonic SPT phase [22]. In the present case, however,
the inputB = SO(3)6 contains the electron, which has
trivial braiding statistics with all other excitations. We
will see that this leads to a 3D WW model whose only
bulk deconﬁned excitation is aT 2 =−1 fermion - the
electron - and whose surface realizesSO(3)6. We note
a minor caveat here. Since it is convenient to work en-
tirelyintermsofabosonicWWmodel, ratherthanintro-
ducing fundamental fermions (electrons), the deconﬁned
bulk fermions carryZ2 gauge charge, and realize theZ2
gauged 3D topological superconductor. Ungauging this
theory by suppressing Z2 ﬂux loops is straightforward
and yields the topological superconductor.
Finally, we discuss Abelian topological orders which
are candidates for surfaces of evenν topological super-
conductors. Speciﬁcally, we propose three such topo-
logical orders - the semion-fermion model, the doubled
semion-fermion model, and the fermionization of the
bosonic SPT. The semion-fermion model is simplyU(1)2
times{1, f} where f is the electron; however, time re-
versal acts in a non-trivial way, exchanging the semions
with sf. We argue that this theory cannot be realized in
2D withT symmetry, but can appear on the surface of
a 3D topological phase. In addition to a Walker-Wang
2


--- Page 3 ---
model, we provide a coupled layer construction of this
phase. An important point is that there are two varieties
of the semion-fermion model, distinguished by the action
ofT 2. These two are opposite to each other in the sense
that placing one on top of the other allows one to con-
dense everything and yields a trivialT -symmetric theory,
i.e. one corresponds toν and the other to−ν. However,
two copies of the same variety yield the double semion-
fermion model. Two copies of the latter yield the three
fermion Z2 gauge theory discussed above in the context
of the bosonic SPT, times{1, f}. We argue that this
fermionic theory cannot be realized in2D withT sym-
metry either, but two copies of it can be. It has been con-
jectured previously (Kitaev [31]) that the non-interacting
Z classiﬁcation of 3D topological superconductors breaks
down to Z16; if the SO(3)6 and semion-fermion topo-
logical superconductors we construct adiabatically con-
nect to free fermion topological superconductors, then
the three Abelian topological orders must correspond to
ν = 2 mod 4, ν = 4 mod 8, and ν = 8 mod 16. Taken
together, these would then give topological terminations
for all free fermion topological superconductors.
This paper is organized as follows. In SectionII we
treat the SO(3)6 topological order, corresponding to
ν = 1 mod 2. An intuitive discussion of why it can be
realized at the surface of a 3DT SPT of electrons is pre-
sented in subsection IIB, and the Walker Wang is dis-
cussed in the following two subsections. Next, in Section
III, the abelian topological orders are discussed, starting
with the semion-fermion state, for which we also provide
a coupled layer construction. We provide an argument
for the semion-fermion state being realized at the surface
of a ν = 2 mod 4 TSc, and then derive the abelian topo-
logical orders corresponding toν = 4 mod 8, and ν = 8
mod 16. The Conclusions connect our results with the
classiﬁcation of fermionic TScs and comment on future
directions; the appendices contain a construction of a 2D
Z2 gauge theory in whichT exchanges theZ2charge e and
the Z2ﬂux m particles, and a discussion of the stability
of bosonic SPT phases protected byT , in the presence
of fundamental electrons.
II. SO(3)6 TOPOLOGICAL ORDER AND
W ALKER-W ANG CONSTRUCTION OF THE
3D PHASE
A. SO(3)6 T opological Order of Surface State
Before delving into the construction of the Walker-
Wangmodel, letusdescribethefusionandbraidingprop-
erties of SO(3)6. A useful viewpoint on this phase is to
begin with the well known topological order SU(2)6 [32],
which is a bosonic Read-Rezayi state [28, 33] with six
quasiparticles labeled by spinsj∈{ 0, 1
2 , 1, 3
2 , 2, 5
2 , 3},
and is described by the SU(2)k=6 Wess-Zumino-Witten
chiral edge theory with chiral central chargec− = 9
4. The
topological spins of the quasiparticles areθj = ei2π j(j+1)
8 .
Thus j = 1 and j = 2 particles are self-semions, with
topological spins±i, while thej = 3 particle is a fermion.
However, the fermion has mutual statistics with the half-
integer spin particles. The latter can be eliminated if we
introduce fundamental fermions (electrons) into the the-
ory and condense the bound state of thej = 3 particle
and the electron. This bound state can be condensed
since it is a self-boson. However, since it has mutual
statistics with the half-integer spin particlesj = 1
2 , 3
2 , 5
2,
they are conﬁned, and one is left with just the integer
spin particles. Of these, the fourth particle j = 3 has
trivial braiding statistics with the remaining excitations,
and is identiﬁed as the electron (note that this results in
a non-modular theory, as in any topological order that
contains fundamental fermions). Since only the integer
representations of the spins remain in the ﬁnal theory,
we call it SO(3)6 topological order [47]. The conden-
sation process that converts the SU(2)6 to SO(3)6 does
not change the edge central charge and hence the ﬁnal
theory is also expected to havec− = 9
4. We henceforth
denote the two self-semions bys, ˜s, and the fermion by
e:{0, 1, 2, 3}→{ 1, s, ˜s, e}. Their fusion rules and topo-
logical spins are shown in Fig. 1.
In our analysis we will need more information about
thefusionandbraiding, however: thedatathatentersthe
WW Hamiltonian requires theF and R symbols, which
describe associativity of fusion (a quantum analogue of
Clebsch-Gordon coeﬃcients) and exchange of an arbi-
trary pair of quasiparticles, respectively, and uniquely
determine SO(3)6 as a premodular category [28]. For
the deﬁnition of the F symbols, see Fig. 2, which also
contains some of their symmetries. All of the non-trivial
F symbols (i.e. those not equal to 1) can be obtained
from those in Fig. 1 by using compositions of these sym-
metries, together with their invariance up to sign under
s↔ ˜s. A representative set ofF-symbols which change
sign under this exchange are also shown in Fig. 1.
B. Time Reversal Symmetry and SO(3)6 T opolog-
ical Order
We ﬁrst elaborate on the question of time reversal sym-
metry and theSO(3)6 topological order. As discussed in
the overview, since this topological order is obtained by
condensing particles in theSU (2)6 theory, which is mod-
ular and has an edge central chargec− = 9
4, we expect
the same edge central charge in at least some realiza-
tions of this phase. Could one potentially realize the
same SO(3)6 topological order with a trivial edge? We
now argue that it is impossible to realize this topological
order in 2D without a chiral edge mode. This guaran-
tees that it cannot be realized in a 2D system withT
symmetry, and thus, if realized on the surface of a 3DT
symmetric system, deﬁnes a 3D topological phase. For
modular topological orders, where all non-trivial quasi-
particles have non-trivial braiding statistics with at least
oneotherparticle, apowerfulformularelatesthetopolog-
3


--- Page 4 ---
s × s =˜ s × ˜s =1+ s +˜ s
s × ˜s = e + s +˜ s
s × e =˜ s ˜s × e = s
e × e =1
d1 = de =1 ,d s = d˜s =1+
√
2
θ1 =1 ,θ e = − 1, θs = i, θ ˜s = − i
￿
F
e, ˜s,s
s
￿
s, ˜s
=
￿
F
e,s, ˜s
s
￿
˜s, ˜s
= − 1
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
1,s
=
￿
F
s,s,s
s
￿
1,˜s
=
￿
F
s,s, ˜s
˜s
￿
1,s
=
￿
F
s, ˜s, ˜s
s
￿
e,s
=
￿
F
˜s,s, ˜s
s
￿
e,s
=
￿
F
˜s, ˜s, ˜s
˜s
￿
1,˜s
=( 1+
√
2)
−
1
2
￿
F
s,s,s
s
￿
s,s
=
￿
F
˜s,s, ˜s
s
￿
s,s
=
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
˜s,s
=( 2+
√
2)
− 1
￿
F
˜s,s,s
s
￿
s,s
=
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
s,s
= − 1/
√
2
R
s,s
0
= e
− πi/ 2
R
s,s
˜s
= e
πi/ 4
R
˜s, ˜s
s
= e
− πi/ 4
R
s,s
s
= R
s, ˜s
˜s
= e
3πi/ 4
R
s, ˜s
s
= R
˜s, ˜s
˜s
= e
− 3πi/ 4
R
s, ˜s
e
= R
˜s, ˜s
1
= e
πi/ 2
R
s,e
˜s
= R
e,e
1
= − 1
￿
F
e,s, ˜s
˜s
￿
˜s,s
,
￿
F
e, ˜s,s
˜s
￿
s,s
,
￿
F
s,s,s
s
￿
1,s
,
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
1,s
,
￿
F
s,s,s
s
￿
1,˜s
,
￿
F
s,s, ˜s
˜s
￿
1,s
,
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
s,s
,
￿
F
˜s, ˜s,s
s
￿
s,s
Fusion rules :
R symbols :
R
b,c
a
= R
c,b
a
F symbols :
F symbols that change sign
under s ↔ ˜s :
and all partners under s ↔ ˜s.
and
Quantum dimensions and topological spins :
Figure 1: Braiding statistics and fusion data forSO(3)6.
=
￿
F
j 1 ,j 2 ,j 3
j
￿
j 12 ,j 23
j1 j2 j3
j12
j
j23
j1 j2 j3
j
￿
F
j 1 ,j 2 ,j 3
j
￿
j 12 ,j 23
=
￿
F
j 2 ,j 1 ,j
j 3
￿
j 12 ,j 23
=
￿
F
j1 ,j,j 3
j2
￿
j23 ,j 12
=
￿
dj12
dj23
dj2
dj
￿
F
j1 ,j 12 ,j 3
j23
￿
j2 ,j
Figure 2: Graphical deﬁnition of F symbol, together with
some identities satisﬁed byF.
ical properties to the chiral edge central chargec− mod 8
[5]:
1
D
∑
a
d2
aθa = ei2πc−/8 (1)
where da (D) are the individual (total) quantum dimen-
sions of the quasiparticles. Unfortunately, we cannot di-
rectly apply this formula since we have a non-modular
theory (the electron has trivial braiding with all quasi-
particles). In fact we can easily see that the edge central
charge can be changed by units ofc− = 1
2 without aﬀect-
ing the topological order, simply by putting the electrons
in a p± ip topological superconductor phase. This sug-
gests that the edge ofSO(3)6 is necessarily chiral. This
result can be further argued as follows. Imagine that
there was also a realization of the same topological order
with a c− = 0 edge, and consider it in conjunction with
the existing c− = 9
4 realization. Then, we could perform
a reﬂection on the ﬁrst phase and combine it with the
second. In this way we will have realized a quantum dou-
ble model, which can always be conﬁned by condensing
a bosonic quasiparticle. In this process the edge central
charge will not change and will remainc− = 9
4. However,
wenowhaveeliminatedalltopologicalorder. Afermionic
system with no topological order must have half integer
quantized edge central charge, so we have arrived at a
contradiction. Therefore there cannot be a 2D system
with SO(3)6 topological order and without a chiral edge
state.
Let us now consider time reversal purely at the level of
fusionandbraidingrules. Anexaminationofthetopolog-
icalspinsinourtheory(Fig. 1)suggeststhatitistimere-
versal invariant under the exchanges↔ ˜s. Indeed, such
an exchange together with complex conjugation gives a
set of F and R symbols which must be gauge equivalent
to the original ones, becauseSO(3)6 is the unique theory
with these topological spins and fusion rules. However,
T -invariance of the WW Hamiltonian (constructed in the
next section) requires more: we will need a time rever-
4


--- Page 5 ---
sal transformation law which leaves theF and R symbols
exactly invariant, not just invariant up to gauge transfor-
mation. Quick examination of
[
Fs,s,s
e
]
˜s,˜s and
[
F ˜s,˜s,˜s
e
]
s,s
shows that there is no gauge in which such a transforma-
tion law takes the simple forms↔ ˜s followed by complex
conjugation - this is because these twoF symbols diﬀer
by a sign in our gauge and transform by complex conju-
gate phases under a gauge transform, so they cannot be
complex conjugates in any gauge. However, the follow-
ing more generalT transformation law does work, and
in fact forcesT 2 =−1 on the electrons: we deﬁneT as
the operation that exchangess↔ ˜s, complex conjugates,
and multiplies by certain phase factorsαa,b
c (see below)
associated to the fusion spacesVa,b
c in our anyon theory
[48]. It is thisT transformation which commutes with
all of the F and R symbols; link invariants (i.e. braid-
ing amplitudes) computed in the corresponding picture
calculus are then invariant under it.
The phase factorsαa,b
c are deﬁned as follows. For ver-
tices of type(s, ˜s, e), αa,b
c is±i depending on the sign of
the permutation that takes (s, ˜s, e) to (a, b, c). Speciﬁ-
cally,
αs,˜s
e = α˜s,e
s = αe,s
˜s = i,
αs,e
˜s = αe,˜s
s = α˜s,s
e =−i.
For vertices at which one or more ofa, b, c is the trivial
anyon 1, we set αa,b
c = 1. The remaining vertices have
all a, b, c either s or ˜s. We take
αs,s
s = α˜s,˜s
˜s = i
and αa,b
c =−i when (a, b, c) consists of some permutation
of two s’s and one˜s or vice versa.
With this deﬁnition,T commutes withF. Since in our
gauge the F symbols are all real, this reads:
αj,k
n αi,n
l
[
Fi,j,k
l
]
m,n =
[
F
˜i,˜j,˜k
˜l
]
˜m,˜nαi,j
m αm,k
l (2)
where i→ ˜i is just the permutation that ﬁxesi = 1 , e
and exchanges i = s, ˜s.T also commutes withR:
αj,i
k (Ri,j
k )∗ = R
˜i,˜j
˜k αi,j
k (3)
These two relations are suﬃcient to show that Wilson
lines computed in the corresponding picture calculus are
invariant underT . Note that
(
α
˜i,˜j
˜k
)(
αi,j
k
)∗
= 1 for all
vertex types except those where(i, j, k) is a permutation
of (s, ˜s, e), for which
(
α
˜i,˜j
˜k
)(
αi,j
k
)∗
= −1. This means
thatT 2 ﬁxes all particle types, and gives minus signs to
(s, ˜s, e) vertices. In any string net that respect the fu-
sion rules there are an even number of such vertices, so
T 2 acts as the identity on them. In the exactly solved
Walker-Wang model of the next section, this fact trans-
lates to the many body ground state being invariant un-
derT , withT 2 = 1. However, string-net conﬁgurations
of the Walker-Wang model also include fusion-rule vio-
lating vertices such as(1, 1, e); a consistent deﬁnition of
timereversalthatincludesthesewillrequirethemtohave
T 2 =−1, which will necessitate decorating the Walker-
Wang model with additional spin 1/2’s (Kramers dou-
blets). In the next section we will see how to do this
by binding Haldane chains to thee links of the model.
Ultimately, this ensures that the fundamental fermions
in the theory (the electrons) must transform under time
reversal asT 2 =−1. Since this is a important point, we
elaborate on its origin in a more intuitive way below.
e	  
 e	  
Ψ	   i	  Ψ*	  
e	  
Φ	  
e	  
-­‐i	  Φ*	  
T
2
=   1
T
T
˜s
˜s
˜s
˜s
s
s
s
s
Figure 3: (color online) Origin ofT 2 =−1 in Walker Wang
models of SO(3)6 surface topological order. The additional
phase factor shown in red depends on the orientation of the
vertices and is required to ensure time reversal symmetry.
This leads toT 2 =−1 for fermions in this model.
Emergence of T 2 =−1 for fermions in the Walker-
Wang model: Let us brieﬂy review the idea behind the
Walker-Wang construction in order to make this point.
The Hilbert space, deﬁned on the links of the 3D lattice
model, contains a state for each quasiparticle in the the-
ory - in this case there are four states per link, labeled
by the four particle types. The ground state wave func-
tion is a quantum superposition of loops labeled by these
four indices (or four colors). At the vertices (we consider
a trivalent lattice for simplicity - it is always possible to
deform a lattice such as a cubic lattice into a trivalent one
by splitting vertices), the loops are allowed to branch and
combine according to the fusion rules. The amplitudes
for these loop conﬁgurations are determined by imagin-
ing them as space-time Wilson loops of the2+1 D TQFT
representing the surface topological order, and calculat-
ing the quantum amplitudes within that theory. Thus:
Ψ3D(C) = ⟨W (C)⟩2+1TQFT. In practice, these ampli-
tudes are implemented by writing down a parent Hamil-
tonian. Considerapartofthegroundstatewavefunction
as shown in the top-left of Figure 3. Thes and ˜s parti-
cles of the theory, which have semion and “anti”-semion
5


--- Page 6 ---
self statistics, fuse to give the electrone. Say this has
an associated amplitude Ψ. Then, in order to preserve
time reversal symmetry, one needs to not only complex
conjugate this amplitude, but also multiply by a phase
factor±i. Only then does the transformation commute
with theR moves, and produce a time reversal symmet-
ric wave function. The choice of phase factor is ﬁxed
by the orientation of the vertex - eg. if we choosei for
the vertex where the{e, ˜s, s} appear on going around
anti clockwise, we must choose−i for the vertex of the
opposite sense shown on the bottom left. Since time re-
versal exchanges s and ˜s, and hence these two vertices,
we have the sequenceΨ
T
→ iΨ∗ T
→− i(iΨ∗)∗ =−Ψ and
thusT 2 =−1. Since this vertex results in the creation of
a fermion, we will ultimately associate this transforma-
tion law to the fermions in the theory. Note that in the
Walker Wang models clockwise/counterclockwise orien-
tations are ﬁxed since the projection of the 3D lattice on
the 2D plane is ﬁxed a priori in order to deﬁne the model.
Hence, one can imagine that a crystal axis is picked in
deﬁning the models, and the remaining sense along the
axis, required to deﬁne a spinning particle, is provided
by the permutation of the three labels.
The time reversal symmetry described above assigns a
phase factor that depends jointly on the state of three
bonds that meet at a vertex. Such a non-on-site trans-
formation, i.e. one that does not act independently on
the physical variables that reside at links, is not a fully
satisfactory implementation of symmetry. This is readily
ﬁxed by attaching additional link variables that are put
into a ‘Haldane chain’ phase protected by time reversal
symmetry, along the e strings. When these strings end
(for example by splitting into ans, ˜s pair, as in the ﬁg-
ure 3 ), the spin 1/2 excitation generated at the ends au-
tomatically provides the requisite phase factors to keep
the state invariant under time reversal. Furthermore,
the vertex term violating conﬁgurations mentioned pre-
viously are also made time reversal symmetric by this
construction.
Variants of T action on SO(3)6: Another important
point is that ifSO(3)6 indeed corresponds to some odd
ν topological superconductor, then one would expect its
parity conjugate - i.e. a ﬂipped version ofSO(3)6 - to
be distinct, and correspond to−ν. We address this is-
sue for the (easier) Abelian semion-fermion theory in the
following section, but leave the case ofSO(3)6 to future
work.
C. Review of Standard W alker-W ang construc-
tion
We now construct our exactly soluble model. First we
review the standard Walker-Wang construction [29, 30],
for the speciﬁc case of the premodular category B =
SO(3)6. This model will haveSO(3)6 topological order
on the surface and its only deconﬁned bulk excitation will
be a fermion. Then we describe how to extend it by “glu-
Figure 4: Trivalent resolution of the cubic lattice [29].
a
a’
p
p’
q
q’ b
b’c
c’
r
r’uu’
d
d’
v
v’w
w’
s
Figure 5: Plaquette term in Walker-Wang model (taken from
[29]).
ingHaldanechains”[34]tothe e-lines; theresultingmodel
will beT -invariant under a natural on-siteT symmetry,
with the bulk deconﬁned fermion - the electron - carrying
T 2 =−1.
Informally, the states in the WW model are string-nets
obeying the fusion rules ofB. The Hamiltonian is engi-
neered in such a way that the ground state consists of a
superposition of such string nets with amplitudes equal
to their evaluation in the picture calculus ofB. It is
important to note that the WW models work with a par-
ticular planar projection of the 3D lattice, yielding a nat-
ural choice of framing. The only deconﬁned strings cor-
respond to the so-called symmetric centerZ(B): quasi-
particles inB which have trivial braiding with all other
quasiparticles. In our case, these are just the electrons.
Furthermore, the statistics of the bulk deconﬁned exci-
tations are just those ofZ(B), so our bulk deconﬁned
quasiparticle is indeed a fermion [29] [49].
In order to explicitly describe the Walker-Wang model,
we closely follow [29] and refer the reader there for fur-
ther details. We start with a planar projection of a triva-
lent resolution of the cubic lattice, as in Fig. 4. The
links are labeled with the quasiparticle types ofSO(3)6.
The Hamiltonian enforces fusion rules at the vertices,
and contains some plaquette terms. For any quasipar-
ticle s and plaquette P (Fig. 5), there is a term in
the Hamiltonian which acts on the links of that plaque-
6


--- Page 7 ---
tte, labeled in Fig. 5. This term can change the la-
bels of these links, and can also depend on the labels
of adjoining links, which have primes on them (but can-
not change these). Explicitly, the matrix element be-
tween a state with plaquette links(a b c d p q r u v w) and
(a′′b′′c′′d′′p′′q′′r′′u′′v′′w′′) is
(Bs
P )a,...,w
a′′,...,w′′ =
Rq′b
q
(
Rc′r
c
)∗(
Rq′b′′
q′′
)∗
Rc′r′′
c′′
[
Fa′′,s,p
a′
]
a,p′′
[
Fp′′,s,q
p′
]
p,q′′
[
Fq′′,s,b
q′
]
q,b′′
[
Fb′′,s,c
b′
]
b,c′′
[
Fc′′,s,r
c′
]
c,r′′
[
Fr′′,s,u
r′
]
r,u′′
[
Fu′′,s,d
u′
]
u,d′′
[
Fd′′,s,v
d′
]
d,v′′
[
Fv′′,s,w
v′
]
v,w′′
[
Fw′′,s,a
w′
]
w,a′′.
(4)
The intuition behind this complicated looking term is
that it fuses in the loops to the skeleton of the plaque-
tte using multipleF moves, but in the process of doing
so must use R symbols to temporarily displace certain
links (c′ and q′ in Fig. 5). The Hamiltonian then con-
tains a sum of all these plaquette terms, weighted by the
quantum dimensions ds. It is possible to check that all
of these terms commute, and the result is a model that
satisﬁes the properties described above - again we refer
the interested reader to [29] and [30] for more details.
We have thus constructed an exactly solved model which
explicitly realizes theSO(3)6 theory on its surface.
D. Improved W alker W ang Model - Onsite T sym-
metry and ungauging the bulk topological order.
1. Exactly soluble model with onsite T -symmetry
One way to make the model of Sec. IIC time reversal
invariant is by deﬁning theT operator to act by s↔
˜s on link labels and the phase factorsαi,j
k on vertices.
As discussed in IIB, this commutes with theF and R
symbols, and hence with the Walker-Wang Hamiltonian.
However, in order to interpret this as the time reversal
invariance of theZ2-gauged topological superconductor,
we have to vary this deﬁnition slightly.
To see why, note that in the Walker Wang model, one
has to make some choice about how it will act on vertices
that violate the fusion rules. For example, consider a
conﬁguration of an electron string which terminates at a
(1, 1, e) fusion-rule violating vertex on one end, and at an
(s, ˜s, e) fusion-rule respecting vertex on the other. This is
certainly not a low energy state with respect to the vertex
or plaquette terms, but it is an allowed Hilbert space
conﬁguration. Unless we make the(1, 1, e) vertex into a
Kramers pair, which requires introducing extra spin-1/2
degrees of freedom not present in the original Walker
Wang model, we will haveT 2 =−1 on this conﬁguration
(from the one (s, ˜s, e) vertex). But this cannot happen
in a ﬁnite Z2 gauged topological superconductor, where
the odd charge sector has been projected out. Hence we
e
e
e
1
s
s
s
˜s
˜s
Figure 6: Sample spin conﬁguration in the decorated Walker-
Wang model. Black dots represent spin 1/2’s, and blue el-
lipses represent spin singlets. The leftmost vertex has a coun-
terclockwise (e, s, ˜s) ordering of labels, and so prefers a down
spin, whereas at the rightmost vertex the counterclockwise
label ordering is(e, ˜s, s) and an up spin is preferred (red).
are forced to introduce some additional spin-1/2 degrees
of freedom in order to have aT symmetry consistent with
that of aZ2-gauged topological superconductor - this is
another argument for the introduction of additional spin
1/2 degrees of freedom.
Speciﬁcally, we proceed as follows: decorate each link
with four extra states, to be thought of as two spin1/2’s,
one associated with each of the two vertices adjacent to
the link. Then add a termHV to the Hamiltonian that
projects these into a singlet, unless the link is labeled
with an e, in which case it forces the two spin1/2’s into
singlets with spin 1/2’s from other e lines adjacent to
those vertices. If there are none (or if a total of3 e lines
meet at the vertex) there will be an unpaired spin1/2
there. This is very similar to the construction in [34],
and has the eﬀect of binding Haldane chains to the e
lines. At a (s, ˜s, e) vertex we also add a term to HV
that energetically prefers either the up spin or the down
spin depending on the sign of the permutation that takes
(s, ˜s, e)intoacounter-clockwiselabelingofthethreelinks
adjoining the vertex. Finally, we modify the plaquette
terms in the original WW Hamiltonian in such a way
that they move between low energy spin conﬁgurations -
for details, see Appendix V.
The Hamiltonian constructed in Appendix V com-
mutes with a global symmetryT which acts on the spin
1/2’s in the usual way by complex conjugation followed
by multiplication byσy (note the extra factor ofi in our
deﬁnition - it can be eliminated by a gauge transform
if desired, it is onlyT 2 =−1 that is important), and
on the Walker-Wang labels by exchangings↔ ˜s, and
applying the phase factorsαa,b
c on vertices at which all
of the a, b, c are either s or ˜s. Although this is not a
true onsite action, it can be made so by a suitable gauge
transformation [50]. In this system, all endpoints of e
lines eﬀectively contribute a minus sign toT 2, and since
the number of such endpoints is even in any conﬁgura-
7


--- Page 8 ---
tion, the Hilbert space hasT 2 = 1.
2. Ungauging the bulk Z2 topological order.
A second point has to do with the nature of the bulk
phase in the WW model, when the surface topological
order contains an electron, i.e. a fermion with trivial
braiding statistics with all other excitations. In this case
the fermionic excitation is deconﬁned in the bulk. How-
ever, note that all the degrees of freedom entering the
microscopic WW model are bosonic, since they simply
consist of local ‘qbits’ deﬁned on the links of the lattice.
Hence, in order to produce fermionic excitations in the
bulk, one must have bulk topological order. This is read-
ily seen as arising by ‘gauging’ the fermion parity. That
is, the microscopic symmetry that is always present for
physical fermion - the conservation of their number mod-
ulo 2 - here is attributed to theirZ2 gauge charge. Thus
one has an emergentZ2 gauge theory in the bulk. Ad-
ditionally, there are Z2 ﬂux loops in the bulk that are
gapped. Fermions circling these ﬂux lines pick up a π
phase shift - indicating that the fermion parity has been
gauged. However this bosonic theory is readily related to
the free fermion topological phases by the following slave
particle construction: say we decompose the physical bo-
son destruction operator into a pair of fermionic partons,
br = fr↑fr↓. Time reversal is assumed to act projec-
tively on the fermionsf↑
T
→ f↓; f↓
T
→− f↑. The fermions
are then governed by a mean ﬁeld Hamiltonian in a
topological phase: H = ∑
ij
(
tijf†
i fj + ∆ijfifj + h.c.
)
(here i refers to both space and spin index). To ‘un-
gauge’ the Z2 symmetry one simply introduces funda-
mental fermionscrσ in the model and condenses the pair
amplitude⟨∑
σ c†
rσfrσ⟩. Now, the Z2 ﬂux loops are con-
ﬁned since they have nontrivial mutual statistics with the
condensate. Hence the bulk topological order is removed,
and one realizes the short range entangled topological
phase in the bulk.
III. ABELIAN SURF ACE TOPOLOGICAL OR-
DERS AND THE SIXTEEN FOLD W A Y
A. The Semion-F ermion State and Time reversal
symmetry
So far, we have been discussingSO(3)6, a non-abelian
theory which we propose to be a candidate for theT -
symmetric surface termination of aν = 1 (mod 2) topo-
logical superconductor. Now let us consider evenν. In
this section, we introduce an Abelian fermionic theory,
which we call the semion-fermion theory, which turns
out to also have an anomalous realization ofT . The
theory is the product ofU(1)2, which describes the uni-
versality class of bosonic fractional quantum Hall sys-
tems at 1/2 ﬁlling and has quasiparticle content{1, s},
with s a semion (θs = i), and the trivial fermionic the-
ory, with quasiparticle content{1, f}, f being a fermion.
Letting ˜s = sf, we obtain the quasiparticles{1, s, ˜s, f}
with topological spins{1, i,−i,−1} (labeled Z
1
2
2 × Z1
2 in
the notation of Ref. [28]). Potentially, one could imag-
ine that this theory may be time reversal symmetric if
T exchanged s and ˜s. However, this is not possible in
a 2d system. This time the simple chiral central charge
argument does not work. Instead, we argue as follows:
First, consider gauging theZ2 fermion parity symme-
try; when this is done, the resulting theory isbosonic,
and the electron carriesZ2 gauge charge. It is hence de-
scribed by a unitary modular tensor category, called a
modular extension of the original fermionic theory. Note
that a modular extension is not unique: indeed, the triv-
ial theory{1, f}, which has no anyons, has16 possible
modular extensions [5]. These result from the fact that
even a trivial theory can have non-trivial behavior ofπ
ﬂuxes - e.g. a p + ip superconductor is trivial in that
it has no anyons, but its modular extension - the Ising
theory{1, σ, f} - is diﬀerent from the modular extension
{1, e, m, f} of the trivial 2D fermionic state.
Now consider the sixteen modular extensions of
{1, s, ˜s, f}, obtained by taking the product of(1, s) with
Kitaev’s sixteen modular extensions of{1, f}; these have
chiral central charges j/2 (mod 8), j = 0 , . . . ,15, and
j = 0 could potentially beT -invariant. Since U(1)2 has
chiral central charge 1, this j = 0 theory is the prod-
uct of U(1)2 and the ν =−2 theory of [5]; the latter
has quasiparticles{1, a, ¯a, f} with aa = ¯a¯a = f, and
θa = θ¯a = eπi/4. Let us show that there is no way thatT
could act and be consistent with the fusion rules. First,
note thatT has to ﬁx 1, f and exchange s, sf. On the
remaining quasiparticles it must do one of two things:
either a↔ sa and ¯a↔ s¯a, or ¯a↔ sa and a↔ s¯a. In
the ﬁrst case, sf = a(sa) goes to (sa)a = sf underT ,
which is inconsistent, and in the second case it also goes
to (s¯a)¯a = sf, again an inconsistency.
This argument shows that the original fermionic
{1, s, ˜s, f} theory cannot exist in a 2D T -symmetric
system, assuming that the above theories exhaust the
modular extensions of{1, s, ˜s, f}. The following argu-
ment establishes that this is so: given any realization
of{1, s, ˜s, f}, and forgettingT , we can continuously de-
formtheHamiltoniantoanyotheroneinthisuniversality
class. In particular, we can choose a special one, which
is eﬀectively a bosonic fractional quantum Hall layer in
parallel with somep + ip superconductor; we know that
gauging this will yield one of our 16 modular extensions.
Since the type of modular extension one obtains after
gauging is a discrete object, it cannot change under con-
tinuous deformation. Hence, gauging any fermionic real-
ization of{1, s, ˜s, f} - including the putativeT -invariant
one we started with - must yield one of the 16 above
theories, none of which areT -invariant. Hence we have
reached a contradiction.
However, itispossibletorealizethistheoryina T sym-
metric way on the surface of a 3D topological phase. Just
8


--- Page 9 ---
as for the case of SO(3)6, we can deﬁne aT symmetry
that exchanges s↔ ˜s and acts with appropriate phase
factors on the fusion vertices. We once again ﬁnd that
demandingT to commute withF and Rsymbols requires
T 2 =−1 on the (s, ˜s, f) vertices.
Walker-Wang model:
Once again, we can build a Walker-Wang model based
on the semion-fermion theory. Because the theory is
Abelian, we can actually use a simpliﬁed cubic lattice
instead of the original trivalent one here [30]. The deﬁ-
nition ofT -symmetry also follows as in theSO(3)6 case:
Haldane chains are bound to thef lines, so that f be-
comes a deconﬁned bulk fermion withT 2 = −1: the
electron. The Walker-Wang model once again describes
the Z2-gauged version of the topological superconduc-
tor. For completeness, note that theF and R symbols
of the semion-fermion theory are just products of those
of the{1, f} theory, in which the only non-trivial symbol
is Rf,f
1 =−1, and the{1, s} theory, deﬁned byRs,s
1 = i
and [Fs,s,s
s ]1,1 =−1.
Coupled Layer construction of the Semion-Fermion Surface
Topological Order:
We provide a coupled layer construction of a 3D topo-
logical superconductor with a surface termination that
realizes the semion-fermion Abelian topological order
{1, f}× U(1)2 = {1, s, ˜s, f} with time reversal sym-
metry. The building blocks are (i) aZ2 toric code topo-
logical order with 4 quasiparticles,{1, e, m, ψ}, in which
time reversal exchanges the two bosonic particles . This
is only possible if the fermion transforms projectively
under time reversal symmetry as discussed in the Ap-
pendix, Sec.IV. (ii) a doubled semion topological order
also with 4 quasiparticles,{1, S, S′, b} where time re-
versal exchanges the semion and anti-semion. Collecting
together the action of time reversal on these excitations:
e
T
↔ m, S
T
↔ S′, ψ
T 2
↔− ψ (5)
Consider a layered structure where in each layer, a
topological state of each of these two types is present
(see Figure 7). We deﬁne a unit cell to consist of pairs of
these layers, and unit cellj will be consisting of layers2j
and 2j+1. Now consider the four bosonic operators asso-
ciated with every unit cell (we suppress the coordinates
that represent the spatial position in the plane):
Ej+ = e2jS2jm2j+1S′
2j+1 (6)
Mj+ = m2jS′
2je2j+1S2j+1 (7)
e
 m
 ψ
s'	  
s	  
 b	  
m
 e
 ψ
s	  
s'	  
 b	  
2j	  
e
 m
 ψ
s'	  
s	  
 b	  
m
 e
 ψ
s	  
s'	  
 b	  
2j+1	  
2j-­‐1	  
2j-­‐2	  
SURFACE	  
Mj+	   Ej+	  
Mj-­‐	  Ej-­‐	  
Figure 7: Coupled layer construction of semion-fermion topo-
logical order on the surface of a 3D topological superconduc-
tor (with evenν). Each layer has a double-semion model and
aZ2 gauge theory. The composite excitations enclosed by
the brackets can be condensed simultaneously after which the
only deconﬁned excitations in the bulk are electronsc = bψ
shown by the dashed green boxes. At the surface, two addi-
tional excitations emerge - shown by the dashed green lines
-which are exchanged byT. A key ingredient is that the two
bosons (electric and magnetic charges) of theZ2 gauge the-
ory are exchanged byT which requiresT 2 =−1 acting on
electrons.
Ej− = e2jS2jm2j−1S′
2j−1 (8)
Mj− = m2jS′
2je2j−1S2j−1 (9)
It is readily seen that this set of four operators are
bosonic and commute with one another. Hence they can
be simultaneously ‘condensed’. The resulting state will
conﬁne any excitation that has nontrivial mutual statis-
tics with these objects. In a system with periodic bound-
aryconditions, theonlyexcitationthathastrivialmutual
statistics with these four condensates is the bound state
fk = ψkbk in each layer. This is the deconﬁned fermion
in the bulk of the system. It is readily veriﬁed that all
other anyon excitations are conﬁned in the bulk.
If however a surface is present, one can identify anyonic
excitations that are deconﬁned within the surface. Con-
sider a semi-inﬁnite system with layers indexed byj =
0, 1, . . .∞. Therefore, the condensates Ej=0−, M j=0−
are absent. Then, the surface excitations that are now
liberated (Fig:7) are s0 = e0S′
0, and ˜s = m0S0. Their
combination s0˜s0 = e0s′
0m0s0 = ψ0b0 = f0 is just the
fermion in the theory. Also, note using Eqn. 5, that
under time reversal symmetry:
s0
T
↔ ˜s0 (10)
This is exactly the surface topological order that we
sought. Moreover it transforms under time reversal in
exactly the way we require.
9


--- Page 10 ---
We note a couple of important points that have been
alluded to while discussing the alternate Walker-Wang
construction. First, as discussed in the Appendix, the
transformation law for fermionsψ and hence forf require
thatT 2 =−1 when acting on these objects. Second, we
note that the models used here are entirely bosonic -
i.e. they do not contain microscopic fermion excitations
with trivial statistics with all other particles, that can be
identiﬁed with electrons. Although there are fermionic
excitations f that are deconﬁned in the bulk, these are
emergent fermions, and hence have mutual statistics with
a Z2 ﬂux loop excitation. This leads to bulkZ2 topolog-
ical order. To rectify this and produce a fermionic model
free of bulk topological order, we introduce electron op-
erators cσ that transform as Kramers pairs under time
reversal symmetry. Then, one can condense the combi-
nation c†f which is a boson that transforms trivially un-
der time reversal symmetry, since both components are
Kramers pairs. As a consequence, ﬂux excitations in the
bulk of the system are conﬁned since they have mutual
statistics with this condensate, and there is no remain-
ing bulk topological order. Now, thef fermion may be
interpreted as the physical electron.
B. Connecting the Abelian Semion-F ermion State
to free fermion TScs
In this section we discuss a physical argument that
links the Abelian semion fermion state with the free
fermion ν = 2 TSc, with a pair of Majorana cones on
the surface. Our key idea is to exploit a larger sym-
metry that is allowed by this problem - a U(1) symme-
try that emerges on allowing for rotations between the
fermions in the pair of Majorana modes, to constrain the
surface topological order. One may then constrain a can-
didate surface topological order by requiring it to satisfy
a number of physical criteria. The resulting topologi-
cal order (that respects the additional U(1) symmetry)
that we conjecture is the same as the T-Pfaﬃan which
was discussed in the context of Topological Insulator (TI)
surface topological order. However, here, there are im-
portant diﬀerences from the case of TIs, since time re-
versal is combined diﬀerently with charge conservation.
While in the case of TIs, the charge is left invariant un-
derT , here the charge will change sign under time re-
versal. Therefore ‘charge’ here should be viewed more
appropriately as a component of spin (e.g.Sz). Techni-
cally, this means that for the case of the insulators, the
symmetry is U(1) ⋊T while here it isU(1)×T . On de-
stroying the artiﬁcial U(1) symmetry by condensing an
appropriate excitation, we are left with the the Abelian
semion-fermion model, which provides evidence for our
assertion of the connection with theν = 2 TSc. A more
systematic derivation of the connection to free fermion
TScs will appear in a forthcoming publication.
Consider the free fermion surface state of aν = 2 topo-
logical superconductor:
H =
2∑
a=1
χT
a (pxσx + pyσz) χa (11)
Here χT
a =
(
χ↑
a, χ↓
a
)
are two component Majorana ﬁelds
and σ are the Pauli matrices in the usual representation,
which act on the Majorana indices. The ﬂavor index
a = 1, . . . ν. That is, there areν ‘right handed’ Majorana
cones on the 2D surface.
The time reversal symmetry transformation is:
χ↑
a
T
− →χ↓
a and χ↓
a
T
− →−χ↑
a (12)
which leaves the Hamiltonian in Eqn. 11 invariant. The
O(2) = U(1) symmetry is obtained by rotating between
the two ﬂavors, so the complex fermions:
ψσ = χσ
1− iχσ
2 (13)
transform as: ψσ→ eiϕψσ under the U(1) rotation. In
these variables, the Hamiltonian 11 is:
H = ψ† (pxσx + pyσz) ψ (14)
where the Pauli matrices act on the spinσ indices, which
aresuppressed. ThisisexactlythedispersionoftheDirac
surface state of a TopologicalInsulator. The important
diﬀerence though is the transformation under time rever-
sal symmetry. Under time reversal,
ψ↑
T
− →ψ†
↓ and ψ↓
T
− →−ψ†
↑. (15)
Thus the U(1) charge is reversed underT . Moreover,
the Cooper pair operator, deﬁned as eiΦCooper = ψ†
↑ψ†
↓,
transforms under time reversal symmetry asΦCooper→
ΦCooper + π. This implies that a Cooper pair condensate
automatically breaks time reversal symmetry in this case.
Thus there are no gapping terms for this surface at the
quadratic level that preserveT , as expected for the TSc
surface.
Since with U(1) symmetry theν = 2 TSc maps to the
single Dirac cone surface state, we can use our knowl-
edge of the topological insulator surface topological or-
der (STO) to guess the relevant state. The charge con-
serving STO, when realized purely in a 2D system must
breakT symmetry and haveσxy = 1/2 and κxy/T = 1/2
as argued for the TI surface state, by appropriately
gapping the single Dirac cone with aT breaking mass
term. Furthermore, given the presence of Majorana
fermions in vortices on the surface when superconduc-
tivity is induced, we expect Ising topological order to be
involved. The simplest such theory that has a chance
of beingT symmetric at the level of statistics is the T-
Pfaﬃan[35, 36], a 12 particle topological order which is a
subset of Ising× U(1)−8, where the latter is the Laugh-
lin νQH =−1/8 of charge 2e Cooper pairs. TheU(1)−8
leads, in a 2d system with the same topological order, to
10


--- Page 11 ---
X↓ k→ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
I +1 +i +1 +i
σ 1 -1 -1 1
ψ -1 -i -1 -i
Charge 0 e/4 e/2 3e/4 e 5e/4 3e/2 7e/4
Table I: Topological spins and charges of the T-Pfaﬃan State
with U (1)×T symmetry. Time-reversal reverses the charge
q → −q (mod 8). This state is compatible with a surface
electronic structure which is a Dirac cone (orν = 2 Majorana
cones). The electron is identiﬁed asψ4 and has charge ‘e’ and
T 2 =−1. On condensing the boson I4 (which breaks U(1)
symmetry since it carries charge ‘e’ but preservesT since
T 2 = +1) one obtains the Abelian semion-fermion state, the
proposed topological order for the surface of aν = 2 TSc.
a Hall conductance ofσxy =− 1
2
e2
h . Also, on combining
with the neutral sector of the Ising theory, a simple count
of all edge modes revealsκxy/T =− 1
2, as required. The
Ising×U(1)−8, theory has 24 particles. However, an elec-
tron like excitation with charge ‘e’ is identiﬁed and this
particle is required to have trivial statistics with all other
particles, reducing the number of quasiparticles to 12.
The quasiparticles are labeled Xq where X∈{ I, σ, ψ}
is the Ising part andq = 0, . . . , 7 is theU(1)−8 part, and
they carry a charge2eq
8. The electron is identiﬁed asψ4,
and locality of this excitation restricts q to be even in
{Iq, ψq} particles and q odd in the{σq}. Note, here the
charge is reversed underT , i.e. q→− q underT .
The excitations left invariant by time reversal sym-
metry then are I0, ψ 0, I 4, ψ 4, which can be assignedT 2
values. In addition, I2, ψ 2 are mapped to ψ6, I 6 under
T , which diﬀer from the ﬁrst pair by an electron, which
is a local excitation, allowing for assignment ofT 2 value
to the pair. Indeed,T is fermionic when acting on the
pair (I2,ψ6), and thereforeT 2 =±i(−1)F; details of this
projective representation of fermion parity and time re-
versal symmetries are worked out in detail in the next
section, in the context of the semion-fermion model. Fi-
nally, since σk → σ−k, no assignment ofT 2 values is
possible for them.
Note that ψ0 hasT 2 =−1 because it is a bound state
of I2 and ψ6, which are mutual semions that are ex-
changed byT [51]. On the other hand, since I4 is a
bound state of a pair ofI2 (or ψ2), it will haveT 2 = +1
(T 2 = (T1T2)(T1T2) =−T 2
1T 2
2 =−(i)(i) = 1, whereT1/2
are the fermionic local actions ofT near the two copies
of I2. This is elaborated in the following section.). Thus
I4 is a charge e boson withT 2 = +1. Since ψ4 diﬀers
from I4 by ψ0, it must haveT 2 =−1, consistent with its
identiﬁcation as an electron.
We can now consider breaking the U(1) charge con-
servation to obtain a simpler STO forν = 2 TSc. Con-
sider condensing I4. The consequence is that theσk are
conﬁned. The remaining theory containsψ2˜k, I 2˜k where
˜k = 0, 1. (the particles with˜k = 2, 3 are obtained from
these by combining withI4, which is condensed). This is
just the Abelian semion-fermion theory{1, s}{1, f} dis-
cussed above. The two possibilitiesν =±2 are naturally
associated with theT 2 assignments of the semion (which
is possible since it diﬀeres from the antisemion by a lo-
cal excitation, the electron - see the next section). Here,
those two assignments are related to the corresponding
transformation law forI2. This argument links the sur-
face of a ν =±2 TSc with the Abelian semion-fermion
state.
C. Remaining Abelian topological orders and the
sixteen-fold way
One subtlety that we have glossed over for the semion-
fermion theory is the value ofT 2 for s and ˜s. At ﬁrst
one might think that there should not be a well deﬁned
value forT 2 for these anyons, since they are not ﬁxed un-
derT . However, because they only diﬀer by an electron,
which is a local (albeit fermionic) degree of freedom, we
should really think ofs and ˜s as odd and even sectors of
the same deconﬁned quasiparticle. ThenT 2 = eiφ(−1)F
must hold locally for this quasiparticle, whereφ is some
phase. It is easy to see that sinceT anti-commutes with
(−1)F, we must haveφ =±π, i.e.T 2 =±i on s and ˜s.
In other words, the value ofT 2 is equal to the value of
the topological spin on (s, ˜s) up to a sign η =±1 that
does not depend on whether we are acting on s or ˜s.
Thus the two possibilitiesη =±1 correspond to two dis-
tinct theories. Indeed, ﬂipping the theory corresponding
to η = 1 (i.e. taking the parity conjugate) gives the the-
ory corresponding to η =−1, since such a ﬂip reverses
the topological spin but does not change theT 2 eigen-
value. The theories with η =±1 thus correspond to ν
and−ν respectively, for some even integerν (argued to
be congruent to2 mod 4 in the next section).
Two copies of Semion-Fermion Theory: Consider now
taking two copies of the η = 1 semion-fermion theory.
The result is (two copies ofU(1)2 times{1, f}) with time
reversal again exchangings1↔ s1f and s2↔ s2f, where
s1 and s2 are the two semions, both with the same topo-
logical spin. Thens1s2 is a fermion withT 2 = 1. To see
this, letT1 andT2 be the local actions of time reversal
near s1 and s2 respectively. They are both fermionic op-
erators, i.e. they anti-commute with fermion parity and
hence with themselves. ThenT =T1T2 is a local action
of time reversal ons1s2. We then have
T 2 = (T1T2)(T1T2) =−T 2
1T 2
2 =−(i)2 = 1
Thus this state has particles
{1, f, s 1, s 2, s 1f, s 2f, B, F }, where the fermion
F = s1s2 transforms asT 2 = +1 and the the boson
B = s1s2f transforms asT 2 =−1.
Had we taken a copy ofη = 1 with a copy ofη =−1,
s1s2 would have been a fermion withT 2 =−1 and we
wouldhavebeenabletocondense s1s2f withoutbreaking
T , and get rid of all the topological order, as expected.
However, in the present case we cannot do this, and in
fact the double semion-fermion theory cannot be realized
11


--- Page 12 ---
Label Topological Order T action on anyons T 2 action on anyons
ν = 1 (mod 2) {1,S,Sf, f} S→S f
ν =±2 (mod 8) {1, s}{1, f} s→ sf T 2 =±i acting on s;
T 2 =∓i acting on sf
ν =±4 {1, s 1}{1, s 2}{1, f} s1, 2→ s1, 2f T 2 =±i acting on s1, s2;
T 2 =∓i acting on s1f, s2f;
T 2 = +1 acting on s1s2
ν = 8 {1, F 1, F 2, F 3}{1, f} Fi→ Fi T 2 = +1 acting on Fi
Table II: Summary of Surface Topological Orders of TScs: The ﬁrst row is the non-AbelianSO(3)6 topological order corre-
sponding to the oddν TSc, whereS to represents the nonabelian excitation with semionic topological spin. The second row
is the Abelian semion-fermion theory which we have argued is related to theν =±2 TSc. The third is two copies of the
semion-fermion. Finally, the last row is four copies of the semion-fermion theory, which corresponds (modulo the electron) to
the three fermion topological order which is also the surface topological order of a purely bosonic topological phase with a
Z2 classiﬁcation. Thus 8 copies of the semion-fermion topological order are trivial, i.e. realizable in a purely two dimensional
system withT, which implies that interactions unravel theν = 16 TSc connecting it to the trivial phase, consistent with [37].
The fermion f transforms asT 2 =−1.
in 2D withT symmetry. Based on the arguments above
we identify this topological order with the surface of a
TSc with ν =±4.
Three fermion topological order: Although we could
argue the nontrivialness of the double semion-fermion
theory directly, we proceed by taking two copies of this
theory, and showing that the result cannot be realized in
2D withT symmetry. This is a stronger result that in
particular implies that the double semion fermion theory
cannot be realized in 2D withT either. In this theory,
s1s2s′
1s′
2 is aT 2 = 1 boson and can be condensed. The
non-trivial particles in the resulting theory are the bilin-
ears{ss2 = s′
1s′
2, s1s′
1 = s2s′
2, s1s′
2 = s2s′
1}, times{1, f}.
The bilinears are all fermions and mutual semions, which
shows that this is the three fermionZ2 topological order,
times{1, f}. We can label the bilinears{e, m, ε}; the fu-
sion and associativity rules are then the same as the toric
code. Also,T 2 = 1 for e, m, ε. It was argued in [22] that
the three fermion theory can be realized at the surface of
an interacting bosonic SPT withT symmetry. In fact, we
can argue that its fermionized version also corresponds
to a non-trivialT -invariant topological superconductor,
as follows:
Supposing for a contradiction that the fermionized ver-
sion could be realized in 2D in aT -invariant way, we
could gauge fermion parity symmetry to end up with
a modularT -invariant theory. This would have to be
the product of{1, e, m, ε} with a modular extension of
{1, f}; because the result is assumedT -invariant, it must
be non-chiral, forcing the modular extension of {1, f}
to be another copy{1, e′, m′, f} of the three-fermionZ2
topological order. Since T 2 =−1 on f, we must have
T 2 =−1 on one of the other non-trivial particles - saye′
- whileT 2 = 1 on m′. But then we could condense the
T 2 = 1 boson mm′ while maintainingT -invariance. The
particlesthatremainafterthiscondensationare T 2 =−1
self-bosons E≡ ee′ = εf, M≡ ef = εe′, and theT 2 = 1
fermion Σ≡ m = m′. But this is just the toric code
{1, E, M, Σ} with the E and M bosons being Kramers
doublets. This was argued to be impossible to realize in
a time reversal invariant way purely in 2D in [18], which
argued that instead this topological order should be re-
alized as the surface of the within-cohomology bosonic
T SPT (see Appendix IV for more details). Hence the
{1, e, m, ε} three fermion theory, times{1, f}, cannot be
realized in a 2D fermionic system withT symmetry.
The sixteen fold way: However, two identical copies
of the “three fermion” times{1, f} theory can be con-
densed into the trivial phase without breakingT . We
have argued that the semion-fermion theory corresponds
to ν = 2 mod 4, which puts the three fermion theory
at ν = 8 mod 16, and shows thatν = 0 mod 16 should
be trivial, and hence correspond to a trivial topologi-
cal superconductor. This is consistent with the recent
result of Kitaev, showing that the free fermion classiﬁca-
tion of 3D topological superconductors breaks down to
Z16 [37]. Combining the Abelian topological orders we
have constructed in this section withSO(3)6 allows us
to construct a gappedT -symmetric surface termination
for any free fermion topological superconductor. These
results are summarized in Table IIIC
IV. CONCLUSION
We have provided several examples of time reversal
symmetric topological orders, realized on the surface of
3D gapped fermionic systems, that are impossible to re-
alize in a purely 2D system with time reversal symme-
try. This immediately implies that these phases are 3D
fermionic SPT phases protected byT . In particular, it is
impossible to conﬁne the surface states without breaking
symmetry or closing an energy gap. If it were possible
to do so, then one can eliminate the surface state on one
face of a slab, and be left with the ‘impossible’ 2D topo-
logical order on the other. Since the slab can then be
deformed into a 2D system, this leads to a contradiction.
It is natural to identify these phases with the free fermion
topological superconductors protected byT . However,we
note that we have not proved this equivalence,e.g. by
12


--- Page 13 ---
demonstrating that the free fermion Majorana cone edge
states can annihilate one of our surface topological or-
ders. Ifthiscouldbeshown, itwouldeliminatethelogical
possibility that the phases we are describing are some yet
unknown topological superconductor of fermions which is
only realized in the presence of interactions. Potentially,
a classiﬁcation of interacting SPT phases of fermions in
3D could resolve this question, but that is also currently
unavailable (Ref. [38] attempts to study this question
in some other symmetry classes). These are important
directions for future work.
However, there are several pieces of evidence that link
the surface topological orders we mention with the free
fermion topological superconductors. First, our topolog-
ical orders are only possible if the electrons transform
asT 2 =−1. This is also a requirement to realize the
class DIII free fermion topological phases. Next, it is well
known that odd ν topological superconductors have an
odd number of chiral Majorana modes bound to surface
domain walls between domains of oppositeT breaking.
Indeed this is what we would ﬁnd for theSO(3)6 sur-
face if the topological order is removed while breakingT .
Imagine placing a 2D realization of the same topological
order on the surface to obtain a quantum double model
that can be conﬁned to completely destroy topological
order. Of course, in this process one breaksT symmetry
by the choice of the 2D topological order. If this is done
in opposite ways, at the domain wall one expects an odd
number of Majorana modes since the edge central charge
of SO(3)6 is c− =±2 1
4. The diﬀerence between these
two opposite values is consistent with the odd number
of Majorana modes at the surface domain wall. Given
the simple nature of the topological order in this case, it
is tempting to attribute this toν = 1, although a proof
of this requires a way to bridge these diﬀerent descrip-
tions. Similarly, if the semion-fermion topological order
describes a 3D free fermion topological superconductor,
it must correspond to evenν, since it is compatible with
a gapped edge when realized in 2D. According to the
arguments above, it corresponds toν = 2 mod 4. Sim-
ilarly the double semion-fermion theory corresponds to
ν = 4 mod 8, and the “three fermion” times{1, f} the-
ory to ν = 8 mod 16. Taken together, these would then
generate topological terminations for all possible 3D free
fermionT -invariant topological superconductors.
Onecanalsodiscussanalogoussurfaceterminationsfor
topological insulators. Shortly after this work appeared,
several papers proposing such terminations were submit-
ted to the arXiv [35, 36, 39, 40]. In the future we hope
to connect our work on topological surface terminations
with other non-perturbative deﬁnitions of the surface of
fermionic SPT phases. Finally, we wish to emphasize the
remarkable fact that in some cases fermionic SPT phase
provides a guarantee of non-Abelian topological order -
if the surface of a ν = 1 topological superconductor is
found to be gapped andT symmetric, it must contain
non-Abelian excitations.
Acknowledgments
XC is supported by the Miller Institute for Basic Re-
search in Science at UC Berkeley. XC thanks discus-
sions with A. Kitaev, Z. Wang, F. Burnell, P. Bonderson,
T. Senthil, C. Wang and A. Potter. AV thanks A. Ki-
taev and P. Bonderson for insightful discussions, and is
supported by ARO MURI grant W911NF-12-0461. LF
thanks Z. Wang, M.P. Fisher, and M. Metlitski for useful
discussions.
Appendix A: Z2 topological order in which time re-
versal exchanges electric and magnetic charges.
Consider the toric code model with theZ2 topological
order, leading to 4 particles{1, e, m, ψ}, where the ﬁrst
particle is the identity,the next two are bosons (electric
and magnetic charges) and the last is a fermion. The
last three particles all have mutual semionic statistics
with one another. Consider the action of time reversal
symmetryT . The quasiparticles can transform projec-
tively, and we can choose a pair of them to transform
asT 2 =−1. Let one of these particles be the fermion
ψ. The ψ fermions are gapped in this topological phase.
Consider modifying their dispersion so that they undergo
a quantum phase transition into a topological supercon-
ductor (class DIII) of which there is aZ2 classiﬁcation in
2D. Now, we can investigate how the excitations trans-
form under time reversal symmetry. The fermionsψ still
transform asT 2 =−1. The electric and magnetic par-
ticles can both be interpreted asπ ﬂux for the fermions.
If we choose the electric particle, we can label the object
thatisobtainedbyattachingittothefermionasthemag-
netic particle i.e. we use the fusion ruleψ×e = m. In the
language of the free fermion topological superconductor,
if we call theπ ﬂux the electric particle, then the mag-
netic particle has the opposite fermion parity. Now, it is
readily seen that under time reversal symmetry:e
T
↔ m.
This is related to the fact that fermion parity and time
reversal anti commute[41] when acting on a π ﬂux in
this phase
[
T (−1)Nf =−(−1)NfT
]
. This can be seen
by considering the class DIII topological superconductor
as a tensor product of up spin and down spin electrons
in apx + ipy and apx− ipy state respectively. Since time
reversal exchanges these two systems they remain invari-
ant. But aπ ﬂux inserted through both superconductors
will trap a pair of Majorana zero modesγ↑,↓. Under time
reversal we have: γ↑
T
↔ γ↓ and γ↓
T
↔− γ↑. This ensures
that the fermion parityiγ↑γ↓ for the vortex changes sign
under time reversal symmetry.
We note that although this symmetry transformation
can be achieved in 2D, it cannot be described by the
K-matrix formulation of Abelian topological orders, de-
spite the underlying topological order being an abelian
one, speciﬁcally that of theZ2 toric code. Indeed, in a
recent classiﬁcation of Symmetry Enhanced Topological
13


--- Page 14 ---
orders, using the K-matrix technique, this state was not
produced[42]. Here, time reversal symmetry exchanges
the electric and magnetic particles, which have mutual
statistics. In general it can be shown that when time re-
versal symmetry is implemented within the K-matrix, it
cannot exchangeanyonswith nontrivial mutual statistics.
The proof is as follows. Consider the K matrix of a
time reversal invariant state. This is an even dimensional
(2N× 2N) symmetric matrix which can be diagonalized
and brought into the form:
K =
N∑
α=1
λα
[
LαLT
α− RαRT
α
]
(16)
Since this is a symmetric matrix, the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors are real. The pairing of eigenvalues results
from the fact that the sign of the eigenvalues λ refer
to the chirality of edge modes which should be coupled
into time reversal symmetric nonchiral pairs. Hence for
every left mover there must be a right mover which is
related by time reversal Lα
T
↔ Rα . Now consider a
quasiparticle represented by the integer vectorl and its
time reversed partner˜l. Now expanding them in terms
of the eigenstates:
l =
N∑
α=1
[aαLα + bαRα]
where the coeﬃcients are real numbers. Using the trans-
formation of eigenvectors under time reversal symmetry,
we can write the time reversed partner as:
˜l =
N∑
α=1
[bαLα + aαRα]
Now, it is readily veriﬁed that the two quasiparticles have
trivial mutual statistics since:
lT K−1˜l = 0
Appendix B: Stability of 3D Bosonic SPT phases
in the presence of fermions
Recently, symmetry protected topological phases of
bosons were classiﬁed - for example, with just time re-
versalT symmetry (the bosonic analog of the class DIII
systems discussed here), it was found that there were
three nontrivial phases composed together in aZ2× Z2
structure. The nontrivial phases are generated by (i) a
group cohomology state and another state (ii) based on
Kitaev’s E8 state that lies outside the ‘group cohomol-
ogy’ classiﬁcation.
When discussing bosonic SPT phases one assumes that
the bosons are fundamental particles. However, we could
consider the possibility that the bosons are composites
(like spins or Cooper pairs) of fermions. In this case there
will also be gapped fermions in addition to the bosonic
degrees of freedom. Sometimes, the bosonic topological
phase can be unwound in the presence of fermions, or can
be related to one of the free fermion topological phases.
Several instances of this type were discussed in the con-
text of interacting fermionic SPT phases in 2D. Here we
will discuss the 3D systems, with special reference to the
topological superconductors.
A useful tool to discuss this question in the 3D case, is
the topologically ordered surface termination of the 3D
bosonic SPT phases. Based on this we will argue that
the Z2× Z2 classiﬁcation of bosonic SPTs is reduced to a
single Z2 in the presence of fermions. Let us begin by dis-
cussing the surface topological orders for the two Bosonic
SPT states are (i) the three fermion state, with quasipar-
ticles{1, f 1, f 2, f 3}where the three fermion have mutual
semionic statistics and transform with T 2 = +1 under
time reversal, and (ii) theZ2 toric code topological or-
der{1, v 1, v2, f}wherethetwobosonicexcitations v1, v 2
both transform asT 2 =−1 Kramers doublets.
We argue that this classiﬁcation collapses to a sin-
gle Z2 in the presence of fermionsψ which transform as
T 2 =−1. To see this consider putting together this fun-
damental fermion{1, ψ} with these topological orders.
In each case we obtain:
Table III: The group cohomology state surface topological or-
der with v1,2 that transform asT 2 =−1 attached to elec-
trons.The± value is the action ofT 2 on that quasiparticle.
Label 0 1 2 3
B 1 + v1− v2− f ψ−
F ψ− v1ψ + v2ψ + f +
Table IV: The beyond group cohomology state and related
three fermion surface topological order, attached to electrons.
The± value is the action ofT 2 on that quasiparticle.
Label 0 1 2 3
B 1 + f1ψ− f2ψ− f3ψ−
F ψ− f1 + f2 + f3 +
Clearly the two tables above are identical - we can
represent the particles as B0 . . . B3, F 0 . . . F3 and they
have identical self and mutual statistics and transforma-
tion laws under time reversal. Therefore these topolog-
ical orders are identical in the presence of fundamental
fermions which transform under time reversal symmetry
asT 2 =−1. That is, some of the bosonic SPT phases
‘unwind’ in the presence of fundamental fermions[52].
14


--- Page 15 ---
V. APPENDIX C: HAMIL TONIAN FOR DECO-
RA TED W ALKER W ANG MODEL
In this section we describe in detail the Hamiltonian
for our exactly solved model of an SPT realizing a gapped
surface with SO(3)6 topological order. As discussed in
section IID, this is a decorated bosonic Walker-Wang
model, and is conjectured to describe the universality
class of the ν = 1 topological superconductor, after Z2
fermion parity has been gauged. Although we ultimately
want such a bosonic model to be built out of Kramers
singlets, we ﬁrst introduce auxilliary degrees of freedom
which are Kramers doublets - i.e. spin1/2’s, and write a
Hamiltonian for this model. As described in IID, there
will be two spin1/2’s per link, one associated with each
endpoint vertex - together these form a 4 dimensional
Kramers singlet Hilbert spaceHspin
l , where l labels the
link. Thus the total Hilbert space associated to each link
isHWW
l ⊗H spin
l ; the Hilbert space of the model is the
tensor product of these spaces over all links.
The Hamiltonian has the general form
H = Hconst + Hplaq.
The ﬁrst term is
Hconst = Vfusion + Vlinks + Vspins + Vvert
where Vfusion is the fusion rule enforcing vertex potential
energy term present in the standard Walker Wang model,
Vlinks is a potential energy term preferring singlets along
links not labeled withe, Vspins is an energetic preference
for spin up or down at a(s, ˜s, e) vertex, depending on the
sign of the permutation that takes(s, ˜s, e) into a counter-
clockwise labeling of the three links adjoining the vertex,
and Vvert is a term which acts on any vertex adjoined by
exactlytwo elinesbyforcingthespin 1/2’scorresponding
to the e’s into a singlet. All of these terms will give an
energy penalty of the same orderV to conﬁgurations that
violate the constraints.
Below we will describe the plaquette terms Hplaq,
which move between diﬀerent string net and spin conﬁgu-
rations. These terms will be modiﬁcations of the Walker
Wang plaquette terms; in particular they will be deﬁned
to act as 0 on conﬁgurations which violate any of the
constraints in Hconst in a neighborhood of the plaquette
in question (i.e. on any of the links and vertices in Fig.
5). Furthermore, they will commute with each other and
with all the terms inHconst. We will construct a state
which satisﬁes all of the constraints, and is the lowest
eigenvalue state of all of the plaquette terms - this will
be our ground state, and will have the form described in
Section IID, as desired. Furthermore, any other ground
state must also satisfy all of the constraints, and since
the spin part of a conﬁguration which satisﬁes all the
Hconst constraints is uniquely determined by the anyon
labels, this model must have the same ground state de-
generacy as the original Walker Wang model - i.e. it is
non-degenerate, according to arguments along the lines
of [22].
It remains to constructHplaq. We have
Hplaq =∑
P ˜Bs
P ,
where the sum is over plaquettesP, and ˜Bs
P is an “im-
proved” Walker-Wang plaquette term. To describe it,
ﬁrst recall the original Walker-Wang plaquette termBs
P
deﬁned in Eq. 4, which gives its matrix elements be-
tween fusion rule respecting string net conﬁgurations (by
deﬁnition it is0 when acting on non-fusion rule respect-
ing string net conﬁgurations). Now, ˜Bs
P will by deﬁni-
tion be 0 unless all fusion rules and all constraints in
Hconst are satisﬁed; when they are, we know that the
spin part of the wavefunction is uniquely determined by
the string net labeling (we have to choose a ﬁxed sign
convention for all of the spin singlets), so we can deﬁne
˜Bs
P to have nonzero matrix elements precisely between
those states. The operators ˜Bs
P so deﬁned automatically
commute with all the constraints - because they act non-
trivially only on conﬁgurations that satisfy them, and
move them to other conﬁgurations that satisfy them -
and they commute among each other for diﬀerent pla-
quettes P, for the same reason that the Bs
P do. The
ground state of the original Walker-Wang model, with
the unique spin conﬁguration slaved to it via the above
constraints, is then also the lowest eigenvalue state of all
of the ˜Bs
P, as desired.
[1] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane. Colloquium: Topological
insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys., 82(4):3045–, 2010.
[2] Xiao-Liang Qi and Shou-Cheng Zhang. Topological in-
sulators and superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. , 83(4):
1057–1110, 2011.
[3] M. Zahid Hasan and Joel E. Moore. Three-dimensional
topological insulators. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys., 2(1):55–78, 2011.
[4] Andreas P. Schnyder, Shinsei Ryu, Akira Furusaki, and
Andreas W. W. Ludwig. Classiﬁcation of topological in-
sulators and superconductors in three spatial dimensions.
Phys. Rev. B , 78:195125, Nov 2008.
[5] A. Kitaev. Anyons in an exactly solved model and be-
yond. Annals of Physics , 321:2–111, 2006.
[6] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen. Classiﬁcation of
gapped symmetric phases in one-dimensional spin sys-
tems. Phys. Rev. B , 83(3):035107, January 2011.
[7] Lukasz Fidkowski and Alexei Kitaev. Topological phases
of fermions in one dimension.Phys. Rev. B , 83:075103,
Feb 2011.
[8] Ari M. Turner, Frank Pollmann, and Erez Berg. Topo-
logical phases of one-dimensional fermions: An entangle-
ment point of view.Phys. Rev. B , 83:075102, Feb 2011.
[9] Evelyn Tang and Xiao-Gang Wen. Interacting one-
15


--- Page 16 ---
dimensional fermionic symmetry-protected topological
phases. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 109:096403, Aug 2012. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.096403. URL http://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.096403.
[10] X.L.Qi. Anewclassof (2+1)-dtopologicalsuperconduc-
tor with Z8 topological classiﬁcation. arXiv:1202.3983,
2012.
[11] S. Ryu and S. C. Zhang. Interacting topological phases
and modular invariance. arXiv:1202.4484v1 [cond-
mat.str-el], 2012.
[12] Hong Yao and S. Ryu. Interaction eﬀect on topologi-
cal classiﬁcation of superconductors in two dimensions.
arXiv:1202.5805v1 [cond-mat.str-el], 2012.
[13] Z. C. Gu and M. Levin. The eﬀect of interactions on 2d
fermionic symmetry-protected topological phases with z2
symmetry. arXiv:1304.4569 [cond-mat.str-el], 2013.
[14] Xie Chen, Zheng-Cheng Gu, Zheng-Xin Liu, and Xiao-
Gang Wen. Symmetry-protected topological orders in
interacting bosonic systems. Science, 338(6114):1604–
1606, 2012.
[15] Xie Chen, Zheng-Cheng Gu, Zheng-Xin Liu, and Xiao-
Gang Wen. Symmetry protected topological orders and
the group cohomology of their symmetry group. Phys.
Rev. B, 87:155114, 2013.
[16] M. Levin and Z.-C. Gu. Braiding statistics approach to
symmetry-protected topological phases.Phys. Rev. B, 86
(11):115109, 2012.
[17] Yuan-Ming Lu and Ashvin Vishwanath. Theory and clas-
siﬁcation of interacting integer topological phases in two
dimensions: A chern-simons approach.Phys. Rev. B , 86
(12):125119–, 2012.
[18] Ashvin Vishwanath and T. Senthil. Physics of three-
dimensional bosonic topological insulators: Surface-
deconﬁned criticality and quantized magnetoelectric ef-
fect. Phys. Rev. X , 3:011016, Feb 2013.
[19] Cenke Xu. Three dimensional Symmetry Protected
Topological Phase close to Antiferromagnetic Neel order.
ArXiv e-prints 1209.4399 , 2012.
[20] M. Metlitski, C. L. Kane, and M. P. A. Fisher. Bosonic
topological insulator in three dimensions and the statis-
tical Witten eﬀect. ArXiv e-prints 1302.6535 , February
2013.
[21] C. Wang and T. Senthil. Boson topological insulators:
A window into highly entangled quantum phases.ArXiv
e-prints 1302.6234, 2013.
[22] F. J. Burnell, X. Chen, L. Fidkowski, and A. Vish-
wanath. Exactly Soluble Model of a 3D Symmetry Pro-
tected Topological Phase of Bosons with Surface Topo-
logical Order. ArXiv e-prints 1302.7072 , February 2013.
[23] A. Kitaev. Periodic table for topological insulators and
superconductors. In V. Lebedev and M. Feigel’Man, ed-
itors, American Institute of Physics Conference Series ,
volume 1134, pages 22–30, May 2009.
[24] R. Balian and N. R. Werthamer.Phys. Rev., 131:1553,
1963.
[25] G.E. Volovik. The Universe in a Helium Droplet . Inter-
national Series of Monographs on Physics. OUP Oxford,
2009. ISBN 9780199564842.
[26] Gregory Moore and Nicholas Read. Nonabelions in the
fractional quantum hall eﬀect. Nuclear Physics B , 360:
362 – 396, 1991.
[27] Z. Wang. personal communication.
[28] P. Bonderson. Non-Abelian anyons and interferome-
try. PhD thesis, PhD Thesis, 2007, 2007. URL http:
//thesis.library.caltech.edu/2447/.
[29] K. Walker and Z. Wang. (3+1)-TQFTs and topological
insulators. Frontiers of Physics, 7:150–159, April 2012.
[30] C. W. von Keyserlingk, F. J. Burnell, and S. H. Simon.
Three-dimensional topological lattice models with sur-
face anyons. Phys. Rev. B , 87:045107, Jan 2013.
[31] A. Kitaev. unpublished
(http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/topomat11/kitaev/),
.
[32] Edward Witten. Quantum Field Theory and the Jones
Polynomial. Commun.Math.Phys., 121:351, 1989.
[33] N. Read and E. Rezayi. Beyond paired quantum hall
states: Parafermions and incompressible states in the
ﬁrst excited landau level. Phys. Rev. B , 59:8084–8092,
Mar 1999.
[34] X. Chen, Y.-M. Lu, and A. Vishwanath. Symmetry pro-
tected topological phases from decorated domain walls.
ArXiv e-prints 1303.4301 , March 2013.
[35] P. Bonderson, C. Nayak, and X.-L. Qi. A Time-Reversal
Invariant Topological Phase at the Surface of a 3D Topo-
logical Insulator. ArXiv e-prints, June .
[36] X. Chen, L. Fidkowski, and A. Vishwanath. Symmetry
Enforced Non-Abelian Topological Order at the Surface
of a Topological Insulator.ArXiv e-prints, June .
[37] A. Kitaev. unpublished
(http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/topomat11/kitaev/),
.
[38] Z. C. Gu and X.-G. Wen. Symmetry-protected topologi-
cal orders for interacting fermions – fermionic topological
non-linear sigma-models and a group super-cohomology
theory. ArXiv e-prints 1201.2648 , 2012.
[39] M. A. Metlitski, C. L. Kane, and M. P. A. Fisher. A
symmetry-respecting topologically-ordered surface phase
of3delectrontopologicalinsulators. ArXiv e-prints, June
2013.
[40] C. Wang, A. C. Potter, and T. Senthil. Gapped Symme-
try Preserving Surface-State for the Electron Topological
Insulator. ArXiv e-prints, June 2013.
[41] Xiao-Liang Qi, Taylor L. Hughes, S. Raghu, and Shou-
Cheng Zhang. Time-reversal-invariant topological su-
perconductors and superﬂuids in two and three dimen-
sions. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 102:187001, 2009. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.102.187001. URL http://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.187001.
[42] Y.-M. Lu and A. Vishwanath. Classiﬁcation and Proper-
ties of Symmetry Enriched Topological Phases: A Chern-
Simons approach with applications to Z2 spin liquids.
ArXiv e-prints 1302.2634 , 2013.
[43] P. Etingof, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik. Fusion categories
and homotopy theory.Quantum Topol., 1(3):209, 2010.
[44] Vladimir Drinfeld, Shlomo Gelaki, Dmitri Nikshych, and
Victor Ostrik. On braided fusion categories i. Selecta
Mathematica, 16(1):1–119, 2010. ISSN 1022-1824.
[45] S. Doplicher and J. Roberts. A new duality for compact
groups. Inventiones Mathematicae, 98:157–218, 1989.
[46] Although a related theory, where one reverses the direc-
tion of the Majorana mode, can be madeT invariant.
Since this may have application to 3D topological insu-
lators, it will be discussed in a separate publication.
[47] Sometimes, only theories with k = 0 mod 4 are labeled
SO(3)k, since otherwise they are non-modular. Since we
are speciﬁcally interested in theories which contain the
electron, which are necessarily non-modular, we will not
make this distinction.
16


--- Page 17 ---
[48] This structure is reminiscent of the notion ofG action in
a braided G-crossed category [43, 44]
[49] It is actually known that the symmetric centerZ(C) of
any braided fusion categoryC comes in two types [45]:
either it consists entirely of bosons and is isomorphic to
the set of representations of some ﬁnite groupG, in which
case the bulk forms a (possibly twisted)G-gauge theory,
or a supersymmetric version of this, where G contains
someoddelementsandthecorrespondingrepresentations
have even and odd sectors, corresponding to bosons and
fermions respectively.
[50] Indeed, if we take a gauge transformation to act by phase
factor βa,b
c on the fusion space V a,b
c , then any choice
which satisﬁes βs,s
s β ˜s,˜s
˜s = i, βs,s
˜s β ˜s,˜s
s = −i,βs,˜s
s β ˜s,s
˜s =
−i,β ˜s,s
s βs,˜s
˜s =−i and sets the other βa,b
c to be trivial,
does the trick. The action ofTis then truly onsite.
[51] A pair of particles that are interchanged byTand have
mutual statisticsη =±1 will, when fused together, carry
T 2 = η. This may be understood by regarding the action
ofT 2 as taking one particle around the other.
[52] Related results have been obtained by C. Wang, A. Pot-
ter and T. Senthil (to appear) in the context of topolog-
ical insulators.
17
