--- Page 1 ---
1  
  
Nernst effect of high-mobility Weyl electrons in NdAlSi 
enhanced by a Fermi surface nesting instability   
Rinsuke Yamada1,*, Takuya Nomoto2, Atsushi Miyake3, Toshihiro Terakawa1, 
Akiko Kikkawa4, Ryotaro Arita2,4, Masashi Tokunaga3, Yasujiro Taguchi4, 
Yoshinori Tokura1,4,5, Max Hirschberger1,4,*  
1Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan  
2Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Komaba,  
Tokyo 153-8904, Japan  
3The Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa 277-8581, Japan  
4RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan  
5Tokyo College, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan  
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: ryamada@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp or hirschberger@ap.t.u-
tokyo.ac.jp  
  
Abstract  
   The thermoelectric Nernst effect of solids converts heat flow to beneficial electronic 
voltages. Here, using a correlated topological semimetal with high carrier mobility μ in 
presence of magnetic fluctuations, we demonstrate an enhancement of the Nernst effect 
close to a magnetic phase transition. A magnetic instability in NdAlSi modifies the carrier  
relaxation time on ‘hotspots’ in momentum space, causing a strong band filling 
dependence of μ. We quantitatively derive electronic band parameters from a novel two -
band analysis of the Nernst effect Sxy, in good agreement with quantum oscillation 
measurements and band calculations. While the Nernst response of NdAlSi behaves much 
like conventional semimetals at high temperatures, an additional contribution ΔSxy from 
electronic correlations appears just above the magnetic transition. Our work demonstrates 


--- Page 2 ---
2  
  
the engineering of the  relaxation time , or the momentum -dependent self energy,  to 
generate a large Nernst response independent of a material’s carrier density, i.e. for metals, 
semimetals, and semiconductors with large μ.  
  
Main text  
Introduction  
Thermoelectric effects convert temperature gradients to useful electric power, and are broadly 
classified into two categories: First, the Seebeck effect, where a voltage is induced parallel to 
the heat gradient, and secondly the Nernst effect, where the vo ltage appears in a direction 
perpendicular to the heat flow. While both the Seebeck and Nernst effect of narrow -gap 
semiconductors have been intensively studied in the context of energy saving technology for 
more than two decades [1-3], the further technological potential of Nernst-type phenomena was 
pointed out recently [4]. The two most well-known contributions to this thermoelectric response 
are the normal Nernst effect from orbital motion of electrons, and the anomalous Nernst effect 
that appears in the  ground state of magnetic materials, which is typically proportional to the 
magnetization [5 -8]. Here, we highlight a magnetic enhancement of the former effect in a 
semimetal with high carrier mobility, a consequence of electronic correlations that has bee n 
rather little explored so far.  
   Thermoelectric phenomena are generally known to be very sensitive to details of the electronic 
structure in vicinity of the Fermi energy EF, which separates occupied from unoccupied quantum 
states in a solid [9,10]. Specifically, the normal Nernst effect contains terms proportional to the 
filling-dependent change in carrier density, dn/dE, and terms proportional to the change in carrier 
relaxation (scattering) time, dτ/dE (see Methods). The dn/dE term drives a large thermoelectric 
response only in materials with a low number of carriers, such as narrow -gap semiconductors, 


--- Page 3 ---
3  
  
but the latter effect may largely enhance the thermoelectric response even in good metals [11 -
18]. One particularly well-established way to enhance band-filling dependence of the relaxation 
time, dτ/dE, is by electron correlations, especially close to ‘hot spots’, or regions of enhanced 
scattering, on the electronic Fermi surface [11,19]. Meanwhile, a quantitative demonstration of 
enhanced Nernst signals from such hot spots has remained an open challenge, largely due to the 
low carrier mobility of many available correlated materials. To address this issue, we study the 
Nernst response of the topological semimetal NdAlSi with elevated carrier mobility [20-22] and 
hot spots of scattering at a Fermi surface nesting instability (Fig. 1). The results indicate that 
Nernst effects from d τ/dE become large and dominant in clean systems with highly mobile 
charge carriers coupled to collective modes, such as lattice waves or – our focus here – magnetic 
fluctuations.  
   Topological semimetals, where crystalline or time -reversal symmetries enforce degeneracies 
of electronic bulk bands and associated surface states in solids [17, 20-25], are suitable to 
demonstrate the proposed Nernst effect from dτ/dE: They have large carrier mobilities μ due to 
protected band crossings, where the effective band mass approaches zero. Furthermore, their 
physical behaviour can be designed based on symmetry principles, and electron correlations can 
be introduced by chemical alloying while leaving crystal symmetries and related band crossings 
intact. Third and finally, transport properties can be studied quantitatively in such materials due 
to a low number of Fermi surface sheets with high carrier mobility, generating transport 
behaviour that is conveniently nonlinear as a function of magnetic field.  
   We choose the polar magnetic Weyl semimetals RAlSi/RAlGe (R = rare earth) as promising 
materials for our proof -of-principle study, where high -mobility Weyl electrons coexist with 
complex magnetic order at low temperatures [ 20-22].  In these materials, Weyl fermions [2 3], 
that is singly degenerate linear band crossing points, are present due to breaking of inversion 
symmetry in the body-centered tetragonal space-group I41md [Fig. 1(a)]. Contrary to inversion 


--- Page 4 ---
4  
  
symmetric materials, where magnetic order may generate Weyl fermions and other band 
degeneracies [24], the electronic structure in polar and chiral topological semimetals forms a 
robust backdrop for the study of correlation phenomena, being changed but little at the magnetic 
transition point [20,21].   
   Here, we demonstrate that the thermoelectric response of a prototypical magnetic Weyl 
semimetal, NdAlSi, can be enhanced in vicinity of a magnetic instability. This correlation 
phenomenon benefits from the high carrier mobility of quasi-relativistic Weyl electrons, 
demonstrated here by a thorough analysis of the Nernst effect Sxy in the high-temperature 
regime. Semiclassical transport theory, ignoring electron-electron scattering, also well 
reproduces Sxy at the base temperature of our experiment. Meanwhile, an additional Nernst 
contribution ΔSxy appears and is strongly enhanced just above the transition to long-range 
magnetic order at TN = 7 K, where magnetic fluctuations are coupled to the Fermi surface of 
the electron gas. Through ab-initio calculations of the electronic structure, as well as careful 
evaluation of the experimental profile ΔSxy(T) and its magnitude, we conclude that the 
additional term originates from the band-filling (energy) derivative of the carrier relaxation 
time, dτ/dE, due to a magnetic nesting instability between high-mobility Weyl electrons. 
Finally, the results are placed in the wider context of thermoelectric materials with relaxation 
time contributions.  
  
Results   
Electric transport and high mobility charge carriers  
   The electronic band structure of NdAlSi is composed of several Fermi surfaces; Fig. 1(c) 
shows the result of our ab-initio band theory calculations, combined with the present electric 
transport experiments (see Supplementary Information). The Fermi surface includes two 


--- Page 5 ---
5  
  
Weyl-type sheets (β, Σ) with linear band dispersions, and two trivial pockets (γ, δ) with rather 
quadratic bands. Only the δ-pocket has electron-like transport characteristics; all others are 
hole-like (Figs. S2 and S3). In this work, we observe strong thermoelectric anomalies due to a 
Fermi surface nesting instability [26-28] towards a periodically modulated, helimagnetic state 
with ordering vector Q = (2/3, 2/3, 0) [Fig. 1(b), 22]. The ordering vector, shown as a fat 
yellow arrow in Fig. 1(d), causes strong magnetic scattering of high-mobility Weyl carriers in 
the Σ-pockets above the magnetic ordering temperature. Meanwhile, signatures of charge 
carriers in the other bands can also be clearly identified in our transport experiments.  
   We first construct band-theoretical models of the electronic structure in NdAlSi by electrical 
transport measurements. Here, electric current Jx, magnetic field Bz, and the transverse (Hall) 
electric field Ey define a right-hand Cartesian frame along the x-, z-, and y-axes, respectively; 
this is shown in Fig. 2(a), inset. The Hall conductivity relates them according to Jx = σxy Ey. 
Field-dependent traces of σxy show a dispersive shape with a sharp maximum around 2 Tesla, 
accompanied by pronounced Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. Our two-carrier Drude fit, 
shown by black dashed lines in Fig. 2(a), well reproduces σxy up to room temperature (see 
Methods). Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show electronic band parameters derived from the fit: n1 and 
n2 are positive, reaching values of 6.5×1019 cm-3 and 2.5×1019 cm3 at low temperature; this 
indicates coherent metallic conduction. Similar transport parameters are also obtained from the 
two-carrier fit of σxx (see Supplementary Information). The carrier mobilities μ1 and μ2 rise 
monotonically upon cooling towards 2,000 cm2/Vs and 6,000 cm2/Vs at 8 K, high values 
among magnetic topological semimetals [29] that are testament to the low defect concentration 
in our single-crystalline samples.  
   It is helpful to consider the Hall effect in the context of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations, 
which serve as a caliper for the Fermi surface cross-sectional area [30]. From the oscillation 


--- Page 6 ---
6  
  
analysis, and consistent with Ref. [22], the carrier densities of the trivial γ Fermi surface 
pocket, and of β with linear Weyl-dispersion, are estimated as 6.6×1019 cm-3 and 1.0×1019 cm3, 
close to n1 and n2 from the Hall effect (see Supplementary Information). We conclude that the 
electrical Hall effect in NdAlSi is dominated by two hole-type Fermi surfaces, the trivial γ 
pocket with carrier density n1, and the low-mass Weyl electrons of β with carrier density n2 
and exceedingly high carrier mobility μ2. Our main point of interest, the Weyl fermions in the 
Σ-pocket, may also represent a minority contribution to n2 and μ2, but their fingerprints appear 
much more clearly in the thermoelectric response. All Fermi surface segments shown in Fig. 
1(c) are clearly observed in quantum oscillation experiments that are well consistent with 
density functional theory calculations (Table S1).  
  
Thermoelectric phenomena: Seebeck effect  
   Having established a basic understanding of electric transport in NdAlSi, we move on to the 
thermoelectric effects. Applying a temperature gradient (-∂xT) to the sample, voltages appear 
both along the x- and y-axes; these define the thermoelectric Seebeck and Nernst effects Sxx = -
Ex / |-∂xT | and Sxy = Ey / |-∂xT |. In Fig. 2(b), Sxx is divided by temperature, a common way to 
correct for the reduced ability of electrons to carry entropy upon cooling. The Seebeck effect 
is positive – consistent with the sign of the Hall effect – and Sxx/T is nearly independent of 
temperature above 50 K; a pronounced enhancement appears below 50 K, with maximum 
around Tmax = 15 K. Excluding the phonon-drag effect (Fig. S5), we proceed to interpret the 
thermoelectric phenomena in NdAlSi in terms of a thermally induced drift of charge carriers, 
using semiclassical transport theory. The Seebeck-enhancement at Tmax is closely related to the 
correlation-driven Nernst effect of Weyl electrons discussed in the following sections. Our 


--- Page 7 ---
7  
  
focus here on the Hall and Nernst response of NdAlSi is motivated mostly by their enhanced 
sensitivity to high-mobility conduction electrons.  
  
Extracting band parameters from the Nernst effect  
 It is well established that the thermoelectric effects Sxx and Sxy are much more sensitive to 
details of the electronic structure in close vicinity of the Fermi energy, as compared to 
electrical transport [9]. The Nernst effect is then a sensitive probe for the energy derivative of 
electronic band parameters in vicinity of the Fermi edge, such as dn/dE for the carrier density 
and dτ/dE for the carrier relaxation time [10-17]. To separate the correlation-driven Nernst 
signal ΔSxy originating from sizable dτ/dE in NdAlSi, we derive expressions for the 
thermoelectric response as a sum of various Fermi surface pockets. This kind of multi-band 
analysis of the thermoelectric effect has been attempted in the literature only rarely, e.g. for 
specific limiting cases in Ref. [31-34]. First, it is useful to normalize the Nernst effect by the 
electric resistivity ρxx; the experimental data at high and low temperatures are then well 
described by two terms, attributed to two Fermi surfaces γ and β  
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = 𝐴1
′ 𝐹(𝜇1, 𝐵)+ 𝐴2
′ 𝐺(𝜇2, 𝐵),                 (1) 
with prefactors A1’ and A2’, carrier mobilities μ1 and μ2, and dimensionless functions F and G 
for the γ- and β-pockets of the Fermi surface, respectively. Like the Hall conductivity, F, G 
have pronounced maxima at intermediate magnetic fields if the carrier mobility is high. Our 
analysis shows that only at intermediate temperatures, an additional term ΔSxy related to dτ/dE 
from correlations on the Σ pocket appears on top of this well-defined background; more details 
are given in Methods.  


--- Page 8 ---
8  
  
   The background specified by Eq. (1), however, contains a lot of valuable information in 
itself, going far beyond what can be extracted from the Hall effect. Being highly nonlinear as a 
function of magnetic field, the Nernst signal in Fig. 3 gives the reasonable four fit parameters 
of Eq. (1) already at high temperature T > 40 K (see also Fig. S1). A good description of the 
data can be obtained even when fixing the ratios A1’/A2’ =7.0 and μ2/μ1 = 3.1 for the entire 
dataset, independent of temperature; the corresponding fit is shown by black dashed lines in 
Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). Encouragingly, the extracted carrier mobilities are close to the values in 
Fig. 2(c). The prefactors A1’ and A2’ meanwhile are directly related to dn/dE, that is to the 
effective band mass mγ of γ and Fermi velocity vβ of β; these cannot be extracted from the Hall 
effect alone. Figures 3(i) and 3(j) show mγ and vβ to be nearly independent of temperature, 
taking values of 0.25 m0 (m0 being the free electron mass) and 6.0×105 m/s, respectively, in 
quantitative agreement with our analysis of quantum oscillations at low temperatures (Figs.  
S2, S3; Table S1).   
   We further demonstrate that Eq. (1), without additional ΔSxy, well describes the experimental 
observations at the lowest temperatures, deep in the magnetically ordered state. The ΔSxy term 
found in the temperature range 10 K to 30 K appears to be absent at the lowest temperatures. 
Extrapolating the band parameters A1’, A2’, μ1, μ2 as in Methods, we find an excellent, 
parameter-free description of the experimental data at T = 2 K, see Fig. 3(h). It is emphasized 
that, although the curve at the low temperature in Fig. 3(h) shows a sharp, step-like anomaly, 
this is not attributed to an anomalous Nernst effect from spin-orbit interactions [35], but it can 
be explained by conventional two carrier model. Instead, the semiclassical Lorenz force acting 
on drifting, high-mobility charge carriers in a magnetic field quantitatively explains the data. 
Significant deviations from Eq. (1) appear below 30 K, shown by red shaded areas in Figs. 
3(c)-3(g), with the implication of an additional contribution ΔSxy originating from relaxation 
time effects (dτ/dE), strongly enhanced just above the Néel transition at TN = 7.4 K.  


--- Page 9 ---
9  
  
 
Nernst effect by scattering from magnetic fluctuations  
 Why should the additional term ΔSxy be ascribed to dτ/dE, and thus to a magnetic instability 
driven by correlations of the electron gas in NdAlSi? We offer five pieces of evidence based 
on the profiles of ΔSxy/ρxxT in Fig. 4, viewed in the context of ab-initio band theory 
calculations.  First, the field-dependent profile ΔSxy (B) is suppressed with increasing the field 
beyond 3-5 T. Such a signal cannot arise from the anomalous Nernst effect that is in 
proportion to the bulk magnetization [4-8]. Second, our analysis shows that ΔSxy (B) is not 
likely due to additional enhancement of A1’ or A2’, since no anomaly appears in the carrier 
density and mobility around TN [Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)]. Third, the fact that ΔSxy drops sharply at 
low temperature indicates that a potential change of the electronic band dispersion, e.g. due to 
zone-folding in the magnetically ordered state, cannot be its root cause. Also, this suppression 
suggests that a contribution from the anomalous Nernst effect due to Berry curvature of the 
topological band structure is unlikely [35].  Fourth, a scaling analysis of the Nernst effect as a 
function of magnetization in Fig. S4 rules out a competing scenario, where ΔSxy is driven by 
the emergent magnetic field of spin fluctuations with left- or right-handed spin chirality [36-
39]. Fifth and finally, we are well able to describe ΔSxy in semiclassical theory by the 
expression  
∆𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = 𝐵3 (±2𝜇3𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻(1 − (𝜇3𝐵)2)
(1 + (𝜇3𝐵)2)2 ).                     (2) 
where μ3, tanθH = ρyx/ρxx, and B3 ∝ dτ/dE are the carrier mobility, the (total) Hall angle, and a 
prefactor independent of the magnetic field, respectively (see Methods). Fits of ΔSxy to Eq. (2) 
are shown as black dashed lines in Figs. 4(a)-4(c). On a quantitative level, we find μ3/μ2 = 0.6, 


--- Page 10 ---
10  
  
consistent with the calculated ratio of Fermi velocities vΣ and vβ of the two Weyl-type Fermi 
surfaces illustrated in Fig. 1(c).   
Figure 4(e) shows the temperature-dependent profile of dτ/dE obtained from B3, with a sharp 
maximum at Tmax = 15 K, implying characteristic broadening of the Fermi-Dirac distribution 
of 3.8kBTmax ~ 3 milli-electron V olt (meV), see Fig. S6. Figure 1(d) demonstrates consistency 
between this observation and the calculated band-filling dependence of the Weyl-type Σ 
pocket, where the Fermi contour at EF = -3 meV just barely touches the yellow nesting plane, 
a hotspot of electron scattering introduced by the (fluctuating) magnetic order. Note that the 
sign dτ/dE > 0 indicates enhanced of scattering of charge carriers below the Fermi energy.  
  
Discussion   
   We argue above that the additional signal ΔSxy, appearing in a limited window of 
temperature, should be ascribed to charge carrier correlations and suppressed carrier relaxation 
time in proximity to a Fermi surface nesting instability. More quantitatively, the total 
relaxation rate of electrons is a sum of various terms according to Matthiessen’s rule [9], with 
τ -1(k) = τ0-1+ τph-1+ τel-el-1+ τel-m-1(k) +… where τ0, τph, and τel-el represent scattering from lattice 
defects, lattice vibrations, and electron-electron interaction respectively (see Supplementary 
Information). We assume for simplicity that only scattering of conduction electrons from 
magnetic fluctuations τel-m depends on the position k of an electronic state in momentum 
space. Then, the energy derivative that enters the formula for the Nernst effect is written as 
dτ/dE= dτ/dk× dk/dE, and the latter factor is proportional to the inverse Fermi velocity vF. 
The derivative, and hence ΔSxy, become large when scattering from fluctuations constitutes a 
sizable portion of τ -1(k), i.e. in clean materials with high carrier mobility. Figure 4(d) 
illustrates contour lines of the relaxation time τ(k) in momentum space, with a hot-spot of τ(k) 


--- Page 11 ---
11  
  
that can be driven by magnetic fluctuations with propagation vector Q ≈ (2/3, 2/3, 0) in 
NdAlSi.   
   Essential ingredients for large Nernst signals in the present mechanism are then (a) strong or 
at least moderately strong coupling between the electron gas and other (collective) degrees of 
freedom, impacting the carrier relaxation time and (b) the presence of conducting carriers with 
high mobility μ. Although (b) is not exclusive to Weyl- or Dirac-electrons, or even to 
topological semimetals as a material class, the Σ pocket in NdAlSi can well serve as a toy 
model system, where relaxation time effects enhance the thermoelectric Nernst voltage.   
   Cooling below Tmax = 15 K, all Weyl electrons of the Σ pocket are now removed from the 
nesting hot-spot by more than the width of the Fermi-Dirac distribution. These electrons 
cannot participate in enhanced scattering from magnetic correlations – see Fig. 1(d) – and ΔSxy 
begins to drop rapidly. The effect of dτ/dE on the thermoelectric Seebeck effect has been 
suggested in some recent work [11-18], while related phenomena in the Nernst effect remain 
largely unexplored. The existing literature is summarized in Table 1, which highlights the 
present Weyl semimetal NdAlSi’s unique combination of high carrier mobility and sizable 
dτ/dE. Sharp features in Nernst signal Sxy(B) of NdAlSi thus reveal a small minority of high-
mobility Weyl electrons, exposed to electron correlations by a Fermi surface nesting 
instability.  
   Recent insights into the materials engineering of topological matter have led to the 
identification of chiral and polar materials with robust linear band crossing points [21,25]. To 
these, correlations can be introduced via chemical composition tuning, while leaving intact the 
fundamental symmetries of the crystalline space group – and maintaining band degeneracies. 
The resulting high-mobility, correlated semimetals represent a family of weakly coupled 
materials that stand apart from the more established copper-oxide and iron-based 


--- Page 12 ---
12  
  
superconductors [40-44], from layered chalcogenides with charge-density wave instabilities 
[45], or from heavy-fermion compounds [46]. For example, in the much more strongly 
correlated copper oxides, the interpretation of the thermoelectric Nernst effect [47-49] and the 
notion of hotspots of relaxation time on the Fermi surface [42] remain controversial. In 
contrast, NdAlSi and its relatives likely realize the weak-coupling scenario of Ruderman-
Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida [26-28], where the momentum dependent self energy, or relaxation time 
τ(k), is calculated in first-order perturbation theory ~∫d3q G(q) χ(k-q) from the electronic 
Green’s function G and the magnetic susceptibility χ(q). However, the present mechanism of 
an enhanced Nernst effect based on relaxation time engineering is generally applicable, 
providing a stimulus to investigate thermoelectric effects in as-yet less explored metallic 
materials, including clean systems with nesting instabilities such as elemental Cr or the RTe3 
layered CDW systems (R = rare earth). In fact, we found an enhanced Nernst signal due to the 
relaxation time effect in another high-mobility semimetal, GdPtBi (see Supplementary 
Information), suggesting that enhancements of the thermoelectric response commonly appear 
in various correlated materials due to magnetic fluctuations close to the magnetic transition 
temperature. Even for the anomalous Nernst effect, previous work suggests a correlation of 
magnetic entropy (fluctuations) and the amplitude of the signal [50]. The present enhanced 
Nernst effect is particularly pronounced in crystals with high carrier mobility and low impurity 
concentration, criteria that are often fulfilled for large single-crystalline grains; yet even some 
polycrystalline materials can have very high carrier mobilities as well as large thermoelectric 
responses [51-53]. In addition, the relaxation time effect dτ/dE also has an impact not only on 
the Nernst effect but also on the Seebeck effect, which can be operated without the application 
of the magnetic field. In this way, thermoelectric phenomena generated via the relaxation time 
of charge carriers open a window onto the fundamental physics of electron correlation – but 


--- Page 13 ---
13  
  
may also find real-world applications in energy harvesting using highly conductive metals, 
where conduction electrons are coupled to collective spin, orbital, or lattice fluctuations.  
Add note: After submission of our manuscript, we became aware of a related work focused on 
quantum oscillations in RAlSi (R = rare earth) [54]. 
Methods  
Sample preparation and characterization  
   Single-crystalline samples of NdAlSi were prepared by the Al flux method. Elemental Nd, 
Si, and Al elements were inserted into an Al2O3 crucible and sealed inside a quartz tube in 
vacuum. The starting composition (Nd:Si:Al) is 1:1:10. The tube was placed in a box furnace, 
heated from room temperature to 1000 ℃ in 5 hours, and kept there for 12 hours.  
Subsequently, it was slowly cooled to 700 ℃ in 50 hours (-6 ℃/h) and kept for 12 hours. The 
crucible was quickly removed from the furnace and centrifuged. Millimeter-sized, plate like 
crystals with the c-axis normal to the sample plane and the a-axis parallel to the plate’s edges 
were obtained, which are characterized by sharp Laue x-ray diffraction patterns.  
 
Thermoelectric measurements  
   Thermoelectric measurements on NdAlSi were performed in high vacuum (<1 × 10−4 Torr) 
using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The sample was 
fixed by Ag paste (Dupont) to a Cu block which serves as a heat sink. The Cu block is 
attached to the sample pack by using low-temperature adhesive (GE varnish). Thermal 
gradients were applied by applying current to a 1 kΩ chip resistor and temperature gradients 
on the rectangular-shaped sample (about 0.5 K/mm) were read by Nickel-
Chromium/Constantan thermocouples. The thermocouples were attached to a thick gold wire 


--- Page 14 ---
14  
  
by Stycast 2850FT epoxy and the thick Au wire in turn was attached to the side of the sample 
by silver paste. The thermoelectric voltage drop was measured through phosphor bronze wires 
(40 μm in diameter) attached to the side of the sample. The entire setup was covered by a 
copper tube to prevent radiative heating from outside.  
 
Ab-initio band calculations   
We perform spin density functional theory calculations in the ferromagnetic state of NdAlSi 
using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package [55]. We employ the exchange-correlation 
functional proposed by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof [56], pseudopotentials with the 
projector augmented wave basis [57, 58], and use the experimental lattice parameters a = 
4.1972Å and c = 14.4915Å [22]. The Hubbard U correction with U = 6.0 eV for Nd-4f states 
and spin-orbit interactions are taken into account. A 163 Monkhorst-Pack k-grid and 500 eV as 
a plane-wave cutoff are used for the self-consistent calculations. Then, we construct a tight-
binding model using the Wannier90 package [59]. Here, 144 Bloch states are evaluated on a 83 
uniform k-grid. The trial orbitals are set to be Nd-f and d, Al-s and p, as well as Si-s and p 
orbitals. Fermi surface calculations are performed using a 2403 uniform k-grid based on the 
abovementioned tight-binding model. 
 
Mott relation and energy derivative of carrier relaxation time 
   The electric and thermoelectric conductivity tensors define a material’s current Ji = σij Ej and 
Ji = αij (-∂jT) in response to an applied electric field Ej and to a temperature gradient ( -∂jT), 
respectively. Expressions for σij, αij in a magnetic field are derived using semi -classical 
Boltzmann theory (9):  


--- Page 15 ---
15  
  
− 𝜕𝑓0
𝜕𝜀 [(𝜕𝜁
𝜕𝐱 + 𝜀 − 𝜁
𝑇
𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝐱)∙ 𝐯 − 𝑒𝐄 ∙ 𝐯] + 𝜕𝑔𝐤
𝜕𝐤 ∙ (𝐯 × 𝐁)= − 𝑔𝐤
𝜏 .                  (3) 
Here, gk corresponds to a distortion of the equilibrium probability for occupying each quantum 
state, described by the Fermi -Dirac distribution function f0. Further, ε, ζ, v, and τ are the 
electronic band dispersion, chemical potential, Fermi velocity, and carrier relaxation time, 
respectively. The magnetic field B is applied along z and the electric field E is parallel to x. We 
neglect any spatial dependence of gk, as well as Berry phase contributions. Integrating over all 
Fermi surface sheets, we derive the electric and thermoelectric currents as 
𝐉el = 𝑒2 ∑ ∫ 𝑑3𝐤
(2𝜋)3 (𝜕𝑓0
𝜕𝜀 )[(
𝐯 − 𝑒𝜏
𝑚 𝐯 × 𝐁
1 + (𝑒𝜏
𝑚)
2
𝐵2
) ∙ 𝐄] 𝜏𝐤𝐯
𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠
                                      (4) 
𝐉th−el = 𝑒 ∑ ∫ 𝑑3𝐤
(2𝜋)3 (𝜕𝑓0
𝜕𝜀 )(𝜀 − 𝜁
𝑇 )[(
𝐯 − 𝑒𝜏
𝑚 𝐯 × 𝐁
1 + (𝑒𝜏
𝑚)
2
𝐵2
) ∙ 𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝐱] 𝜏𝐤𝐯 
𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠
                       (5) 
The latter expression is further approximated by the crucial insight of Mott, who reduced the 
energy factor (𝜀 − 𝜁) in Eq. (5) to an energy derivative over the other integrands [9]. The final 
expression depends both on the energy derivative of the carrier density, i.e. of the partial density 
of states (PDOS), as well as the energy derivative of τk. The latter is the main focus of the present 
work. Note that the assumption of a unique value of τk for Σ is a necessary but crude 
approximation, in case of the hotspot scenario discussed in the main text.  
  
Normal Nernst effect for more than one electronic band  
   Consider the electric field E caused by the diffusion of charge carriers in a thermal gradient 
∇T along x and a magnetic field B along z. The sign of the Nernst effect is then fixed by the 
convention that diffusion of superconducting vortices causes a positive Sxy, Sxy = Ey/|∇T|  


--- Page 16 ---
16  
  
[17,47]. Generally, the Nernst effect can have contributions from the orbital motion of carriers, 
from spin-orbit interactions in conjunction with the net magnetization M of the solid, and from 
higher order terms; for example from the spin chirality Si∙(Sj×Sk). These are dubbed normal, 
anomalous, and topological Nernst effects, respectively. In the semi-classical regime and using 
the relaxation time approximation with isotropic τ, the normal Nernst signal is expressed as,  
𝑆𝑥𝑦 = − 𝜋2
3
𝑘B
2
𝑒 𝑇𝜌𝑥𝑥𝜎𝑥𝑥
𝜕 tan𝜃𝐻
𝜕𝜀 .                                             (6) 
Here, tanθH = σxy/σxx is the Hall angle. Further consider the Drude expressions for multi -band 
conduction, σxx = Σi e|ni|μi/[1+(μiB)2] and σxy = Σi eniμi2B/[1+(μiB)2], with carrier densities ni and 
carrier mobilities μi = e τi/mi; e>0 and mi are the fundamental charge and the effective band 
masses, respectively. By transposing T and ρxx to the left side, and transforming the remaining 
right hand side of Eq. (6), we derive  
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = ∑ [𝐴𝑖 (±𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻
1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2 )+ 𝐵𝑖 (±2𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻(1 − (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)
(1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)2 )]
𝑖
.         (7) 
The upper and lower sign notation describes hole- and electron-type carriers, respectively. Here, 
Ai = -π2kB2μi/3 ∙ dni/dE and Bi = -π2kB2ni/3 ∙ dμi/dE are the contributions from the energy 
derivatives of the carrier density and of the carrier mobility. Furthermore, by decomposing 
contributions from quadratic bands (EiQ = ℏ2ki2/2mi) and linear bands (EiL = ℏkivi, while replacing 
mi →EFi/vFi2 in the expression for the mobility), the following relation can be derived 
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = ∑ [𝐴𝑖
Q (±𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻
1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2 )+ 𝐵𝑖
Q (±2𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻(1 − (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)
(1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)2 )]
𝑖:Quad
+ ∑ [𝐴𝑖
L (±𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻
1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2 )
𝑖: Line
+ (𝐴𝑖
L
3 + 𝐵𝑖
L)(±2𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻(1 − (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)
(1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)2 )].          (8) 


--- Page 17 ---
17  
  
Here, the coefficients for quadratic bands are AiQ = ±gsgdkB2μimiki/6ℏ2 and BiQ = -gsgdekB2ki3/18mi 
∙ dτi/dE; the coefficients for linear bands are  AiL = ±gsgdkB2μiki2/6ℏvi, BiL = -gsgdekB2viki2/18ℏ ∙ 
dτi/dE, where gs and gd are spin and orbital degeneracy of each Fermi surface pocket, 
respectively. 
   In the specific case of NdAlSi, the Nernst effect at high and low temperatures is well described 
by parallel conduction of a trivial hole pocket γ (Eγ = ℏ2kγ2/2mγ) and a Weyl-type hole pocket β 
(Eβ = ℏkβvβ). At intermediate temperatures, additional contributions to Sxy that are not from the 
energy-dependent carrier density are summarized in the term ΔSxy/ρxxT, 
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = 𝐴𝛾 (±𝜇𝛾𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻
1 + (𝜇𝛾𝐵)
2 ) + 𝐴𝛽 (
±𝜇𝛽𝐵 (5 + 3(𝜇𝛽𝐵)
2
)− 2 tan𝜃𝐻 (2 + 1(𝜇𝛽𝐵)
2
)
3 (1 + (𝜇𝛽𝐵)
2
)
2 )
+ ∆𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇,                                                                                                               (9) 
where the coefficients are Aγ = ±gsgdkB2μγmγkγ/6ℏ2 and Aβ = ±gsgdkB2μβkβ2/6ℏvβ. Here, we define 
Aγ’ = Aγ/μγ and Aβ’ = Aβ/μβ. We set the spin and orbital degeneracies of γ (β) to gs = 2 (gs = 1) 
and gd = 4 (gd = 4), respectively, for the analysis at high temperatures; this is consistent with the 
large spin-orbit splitting of β in the nonmagnetic state of polar NdAlSi.  
   We obtain an excellent description of Sxy by Eq. (9) with four free parameters (Aγ’, Aβ’, μγ, and 
μβ) at high temperatures above 40 K. However, features in Sxy become less sharp at T > 70 K, so 
that a reduction in the number of free parameters was found to be helpful to stabilize the fit. We 
fixed the ratios Aγ’/Aβ’ ~7.0 and μβ/μγ ~3.1 independent of T, retaining a very good description 
of the experimental data. In particular, all parameters extracted from the semiclassical model of 
Sxy have distinct physical meaning and can be cross -referenced with Hall effect and quantum 
oscillation experiments.  


--- Page 18 ---
18  
  
We extend the analysis according to Eq. (9) to T < 40 K by extrapolating the band parameters 
Aγ’, Aβ’, μγ, and μβ as follows. Firstly, Aβ’ = ±gsgdkB2ℏkβ2/vβ is set to be 0.45 independent of 
temperature, as changes of the electronic structure are moderate in this regime [see Figs. 2(b) 
and 3(j)]. Also, the carrier mobilities are extrapolated to low T, being proportional to the 
longitudinal conductivity σxx. Furthermore, we assume that the spin degeneracy ( gs) of the γ 
pocket smoothly changes from unity at 2 K to gs = 2 at 40 K, considering that the exchange 
splitting of electronic bands is enhanced at low temperatures. Meanwhile, gs of β is set to be 
unity at all temperatures, reflecting its small Fermi surface volume and large spin-orbit splitting 
even in the paramagnetic state. In this way, we estimated the first and second term in Eq. (9), 
and isolated ΔSxy at intermediate temperatures.  
  
Two carrier fit of the Hall conductivity  
   We model the Hall conductivity σxy with a two-carrier Drude expression as [9]  
𝜎𝑥𝑦 = 𝑛1𝑒𝜇1
𝜇1𝐵
1 + (𝜇1𝐵)2 + 𝑛2𝑒𝜇2
𝜇2𝐵
1 + (𝜇2𝐵)2.                          (10) 
Here, n1 and n2 (μ1 and μ2) are the carrier densities (carrier mobilities). The resulting carrier 
densities n1 and n2 show good agreement with quantum oscillations of the γ and β pockets, as 
discussed in the main text.  
 
Data availability  
The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors 
upon reasonable request.  
  


--- Page 19 ---
19  
  
Acknowledgements  
We acknowledge H. Isobe, K. Ueda, N. Nagaosa, and T. -h. Arima for fruitful discussion. This 
work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Nos. JP21K13877, JP22H04463, JP22K20348, 
JP23H05431, and 23K13057 as well as JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR1874 and 
JPMJCR20T1 (Japan) and JST FOREST JPMJFR2238 (Japan) and JST-PREST JPMJPR20L7. 
The authors are grateful for support by the Fujimori Science and Technology Foundation, the 
New Materials and Information Fo faundation, the Murata Science Foundation, the Mizuho 
Foundation for the  
Promotion of Sciences, the Yamada Science Foundation, the Hattori Hokokai Foundation, the 
Iketani Science and Technology Foundation, the Mazda Foundation, the Casio Science  
Promotion Foundation, the Takayanagi Foundation, the Foundation for Promotion of Material  
Science and Technology of Japan (MST Foundation), and Yashima Environment Technology 
Foundation.  
  
Author contributions  
R.A., Y .Ta, Y .To., and M.H. conceived and supervised the project. R.Y . and A.K. synthesized 
and characterized the single-crystals. R.Y ., T.T. and M.H. carried out and analyzed the electrical 
and thermoelectric transport measurements. R.Y . , A.M. and M.T. conducted tunnel diode 
oscillator (TDO) measurements under high magnetic fields. T.N. and R.A. performed ab -initio 
calculations. R.Y . and M.H. wrote the manuscript, with the support of T.N. and R.A. All authors 
discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.  
  
Competing interests  


--- Page 20 ---
20  
  
The authors declare no competing interests.  
 
References  
1. Y . S. Hor, A. Richardella, P. Roushan, Y . Xia, J. G. Checkelsky, A. Yazdani, M. Z. Hasan, 
N. P. Ong, and R. J. Cava, p-type Bi2Se3 for topological insulator and low temperature 
thermoelectric applications. Physical Review B 79, 195208 (2009)  
2. L.-D. Zhao, G. Tan, S. Hao, J. He, Y . Pei, H. Chi, H. Wang, S. Gong, H. Xu, V . P. Dravid, 
C. Uher, G. J. Snyder, C. Wolverton, M. G. Kanatzidis, Ultrahigh power factor and 
thermoelectric performance in hole-doped single-crystal SnSe. Science 351, 141-144 
(2015)  
3. T. C. Harman, J. M. Honig, S. Fischler, A. E. Paladino, and M. Jane Button, Oriented 
single-crystal bismuth Nernst-Ettingshausen refrigerators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 4, 77–79 
(1964)  
4. M. Mizuguchi and S. Nakatsuji, Energy-harvesting materials based on the anomalous 
Nernst effect. Science and Technology of Advanced Materials 20, 262-275 (2019)  
5. M. Ikhlas, T. Tomita, T. Koretsune, M.-T. Suzuki, D. Nishio-Hamane, R. Arita, Y . Otani 
and S. Nakatsuji, Large anomalous Nernst effect at room temperature in a chiral 
antiferromagnet. Nature Physics 13, 1085–1090 (2017)   
6. A. Sakai, Y . P. Mizuta, A. A. Nugroho, R. Sihombing, T. Koretsune, M.-T. Suzuki, N. 
Takemori, R. Ishii, D. Nishio-Hamane, R. Arita, P. Goswami and S. Nakatsuji, Giant 
anomalous Nernst effect and quantum-critical scaling in a ferromagnetic semimetal.  
Nature Physics 14, 1119-1124 (2018)  
7. A. Sakai, S. Minami, T. Koretsune, T. Chen, T. Higo, Y . Wang, T. Nomoto, M. Hirayama, 
S. Miwa, D. Nishio-Hamane, F. Ishii, R. Arita and S. Nakatsuji, Iron-based binary 
ferromagnets for transverse thermoelectric conversion.  Nature 581, 53–57 (2020).   
8. Y . Pan, C. Le, B. He, S. J. Watzman, M. Yao, J. Gooth, J. P. Heremans, Y . Sun and C. 
Felser, Giant anomalous Nernst signal in the antiferromagnet YbMnBi2. Nature Materials 
21, 203–209 (2022)  
9. J. M. Ziman, Principles of the theory of solids. Cambridge University Press (1972)  
10. K. Behnia, What is measured when measuring a thermoelectric coefficient? Comptes 
Rendus. Physique 23, 25-40 (2022)  
11. K. Behnia, M.-A. Méasson, and Y . Kopelevich, Nernst effect in semimetals: The effective 
mass and the figure of merit. Physical Review Letters 98, 076603 (2007)  
12. P. Sun, B. Wei, J. Zhang, J. M. Tomczak, A.M. Strydom, M. Søndergaard, B. B. Iversen, 
and F. Steglich, Large Seebeck effect by charge-mobility engineering. Nature 
Communications 6, 7475 (2015)  


--- Page 21 ---
21  
  
13. P. Sun and F. Steglich, Nernst Effect: Evidence of local Kondo scattering in heavy 
Fermions. Physical Review Letters 110, 216408 (2013)  
14. H. Xie, X. Su, T. P. Bailey, C. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Uher, X. Tang, and M. G. Kanatzidis, 
Anomalously large Seebeck coefficient of CuFeS2 derives from large asymmetry in the 
energy dependence of carrier relaxation time. Chemistry of Materials 32, 2639-2646 
(2020)  
15. H. Sakai, K. Ikeura, M. S. Bahramy, N. Ogawa, D. Hashizume, J. Fujioka, Y . Tokura, 
Shintaro Ishiwata, Critical enhancement of thermopower in a chemically tuned polar 
semimetal MoTe2. Science Advances 2, e1601378 (2016)  
16. Y . Fujishiro, N. Kanazawa, T. Shimojima, A. Nakamura, K. Ishizaka, T. Koretsune, R. 
Arita, A. Miyake, H. Mitamura, K. Akiba, M. Tokunaga, J. Shiogai, S. Kimura, S. Awaji, 
A. Tsukazaki, A. Kikkawa, Y . Taguchi and Y . Tokura, Large magneto-thermopower in 
MnGe with topological spin texture, Nature Communications 9, 408 (2018) 
17. T. Liang, Q. Gibson, J. Xiong, M. Hirschberger, S. P. Koduvayur, R.J. Cava, and N.P. 
Ong, Evidence for massive bulk Dirac fermions in Pb1-xSnxSe from Nernst and 
thermopower experiments. Nature Communications 4, 2696 (2013)  
18. M. Zebarjadi, S. Emad Rezaei, M. Sabbir Akhanda, and K. Esfarjani, Nernst coecient 
within relaxation time approximation, Physical Review B 103, 144404 (2021) 
19. K. K. Gomes, A. N. Pasupathy, A. Pushp, S. Ono, Y . Ando and A. Yazdani, Visualizing 
pair formation on the atomic scale in the high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ. Nature 
447, 569–572 (2007)  
20. S.-Y . Xu, N. Alidoust, G. Chang, H. Lu, B. Singh, I. Belopolski, D. S. Sanchez, X.  
Zhang, G. Bian, H. Zheng, M.-A. Husanu, Y . Bian, S.-M. Huang, C.-H. Hsu, T.-R.  
Chang, H.-T. Jeng, A. Bansil, T. Neupert, V . N. Strocov, H. Lin, S. Jia and M. Z. Hasan, 
Discovery of Lorentz-violating type II Weyl fermions in LaAlGe. Science Advances 3, 
e1603266 (2017)   
21. G. Chang, B. Singh, S.-Y . Xu, G. Bian, S.-M. Huang, C.-H. Hsu, I. Belopolski, N. 
Alidoust, D. S. Sanchez, H. Zheng, H. Lu, X. Zhang, Y . Bian, T.-R. Chang, H.-T. Jeng, A. 
Bansil, H. Hsu, S. Jia, T. Neupert, H. Lin, and M. Z. Hasan, Magnetic and 
noncentrosymmetric Weyl fermion semimetals in the RAlGe family of compounds  
(R=rare earth). Physical Review B 97, 041104(R) (2018)  
22. J. Gaudet, H.-Y . Yang, S. Baidya, B. Lu, G. Xu, Y . Zhao, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, C. M. 
Hoffmann, D. E. Graf, D. H. Torchinsky, P. Nikolić, D. Vanderbilt, F. Tafti and C. L.  
Broholm, Weyl-meditated helical magnetism in NdAlSi. Nature Materials 20, 1650-1656 
(2021)  
23. N. P. Armitage, E. J. Mele, and Ashvin Vishwanath, Weyl and Dirac semimetals in three 
dimensional solids. Review Modern Physics 90, 015001 (2018)  
24. X. Wan, A. M. Turner, A. Vishwanath, and S. Y . Savrasov, Topological semimetal and  
Fermi-arc surface states in the electronic structure of pyrochlore iridates, Physical Review 
B 83, 205101 (2011)  


--- Page 22 ---
22  
  
25. G. Chang, B. J. Wieder, F. Schindler, D. S. Sanchez, I. Belopolski, S.-M. Huang, B. 
Singh, D. Wu, T.-R. Chang, T. Neupert, S.-Y . Xu, H. Lin and M. Z. Hasan, Topological 
quantum properties of chiral crystals, Nature Materials 17, 978–985 (2018)  
26. M. A. Ruderman, C. Kittel, Indirect exchange coupling of nuclear magnetic moments by 
conduction electrons. Physical Review 96, 99–102 (1954)  
27. T. Kasuya, A theory of metallic ferro- and antiferromagnetism on Zener's model. Progress 
of Theoretical Physics 16, 45–57 (1956)  
28. K. Yosida, Magnetic properties of Cu-Mn alloys. Physical Review 106, 893–898 (1957)  
29. M. Tanaka, Y . Fujishiro, M. Mogi, Y . Kaneko, T. Yokosawa, N. Kanazawa, S. Minami, T. 
Koretsune, R. Arita, S. Tarucha, M. Yamamoto, and Y . Tokura, Topological Kagome 
magnet Co3Sn2S2 thin flakes with high electron mobility and large anomalous Hall effect. 
Nano Letters 20, 7476-7481 (2020)  
30. D. Shoenberg, Magnetic oscillations in metals (1st Ed.). Cambridge Monographs on 
Physics (1984)  
31. Z. Zhu, X. Lin, J. Liu, B. Fauqué, Q. Tao, C. Yang, Y . Shi, and K. Behnia, Quantum 
Oscillations, Thermoelectric coefficients, and the Fermi surface of semimetallic WTe2, 
Physical Review Letters 114, 176601 (2015)  
32. Y . Kajikawa, Multi-band analysis of temperature-dependent transport coefficients 
(conductivity, Hall, Seebeck, and Nernst) of Ni-doped CoSb3, Journal of Applied Physics, 
119, 055702 (2016)  
33. Y . Kajikawa, Analyses of low-temperature transport and thermoelectric properties of 
polycrystalline undoped n-ZrNiSn, AIP Advances 11, 055108 (2021) 
34. I. Leahy, Electrical, magnetic, and thermoelectric properties of semimetals, Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Colorado Boulder (2021) 
35. T. Liang, J. Lin, Q. Gibson, T. Gao, M. Hirschberger, M. Liu, R. J. Cava, and N. P. Ong, 
Anomalous Nernst effect in the Dirac semimetal Cd3As2. Physical Review Letters 118, 
136601 (2017)  
36. W. T. Hou, J. X. Yu, M. Daly, and J. Zang, Thermally driven topology in chiral magnets, 
Physical Review B 96, 140403 (2017)  
37. J. X. Yu, M. Daly, and J. Zang, Thermally driven topology in frustrated systems. Physical 
Review B 99, 104431 (2019)  
38. W. Wang, M. W. Daniels, Z. Liao, Y . Zhao, J. Wang, G. Koster, G. Rijnders, C.-Z. Chang, 
D. Xiao, and W. Wu, Spin chirality fluctuation in two-dimensional ferromagnets with 
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Nature Materials 18, 1054–1059 (2019)  
39. K. K. Kolincio, M. Hirschberger, J. Masell, S. Gao, A. Kikkawa, Y . Taguchi, T.-h. Arima, 
N. Nagaosa, and Y . Tokura, Large Hall and Nernst responses from thermally induced spin 
chirality in a spin-trimer ferromagnet. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
118, e2023588118 (2021)  


--- Page 23 ---
23  
  
40. B. Keimer, S. A. Kivelson, M. R. Norman, S. Uchida and J. Zaanen, From quantum 
matter to high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxides. Nature 518, 179–186 
(2015)  
41. G. Sharma, C. Liu, K. Seo, J. D. Sau, and S. Tewari, Normal-state Nernst effect from 
bidirectional bond density wave state in high-Tc cuprates. Physical Review B 92, 155114 
(2015)  
42. G. Grissonnanche, Y . Fang, A. Legros, S. Verret, F. Laliberté, C. Collignon, J. Zhou, D. 
Graf, P. A. Goddard, L. Taillefer, and B. J. Ramshaw, Linear-in temperature resistivity 
from an isotropic Planckian scattering rate. Nature 595, 667-672 (2021)  
43. M. Breitkreiz, P. M. R. Brydon, and C. Timm, Transport in multiband systems with hot 
spots on the Fermi surface: Forward-scattering corrections. Physical Review B 89, 
245106 (2014)  
44. A. E. Koshelev, Magnetotransport of multiple-band nearly antiferromagnetic metals due 
to hot-spot scattering. Physical Review B 94, 125154 (2016)  
45. Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, and M. S. Strano, Electronics and 
optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nature 
Nanotechnology 7, 699–712 (2012)  
46. Q. Si and F. Steglich, Heavy fermions and quantum phase transitions, Science 329, 1161 
(2010)   
47. Z. A. Xu, N. P. Ong, Y . Wang, T. Kakeshita and S. Uchida, V ortex-like excitations and the 
onset of superconducting phase fluctuation in underdoped La2-xSrxCuO4, Nature 406, 486–
488 (2000)  
48. Y . Wang, L. Li, and N. P. Ong, Nernst effect in high-Tc superconductors, Physical Review 
B 73, 024510 (2006)   
49. J. Chang, N. Doiron-Leyraud, O. Cyr-Choinière, G. Grissonnanche, F. Laliberté, E. 
Hassinger, J-Ph. Reid, R. Daou, S. Pyon, T. Takayama, H. Takagi, and L. Taillefer,  
Decrease of upper critical field with underdoping in cuprate superconductors, Nature 
Physics 8, 751–756 (2012)   
50. K. Geishendorf, P. Vir, C. Shekhar, and C. Felser, J. I. Facio, J. van den Brink, and K. 
Nielsch, A. Thomas, and S. T. B. Goennenwein, Signatures of the Magnetic Entropy in the 
Thermopower Signals in Nanoribbons of the Magnetic Weyl Semimetal Co3Sn2S2, Nano 
Lett. 20, 303-305 (2020) 
51. S. Ishiwata, Y . Shiomi, J. S. Lee, M. S. Bahramy, T. Suzuki, M. Uchida, R. Arita, Y . 
Taguchi, and Y . Tokura, Extremely high electron mobility in a phonon-glass semimetal, 
Nature Materials 12, 512–517 (2013) 
52. C. Fu, S. N. Guin, S. J. Watzman, G. Li, E. Liu, N. Kumar, V . Süβ, W. Schnelle, G. 
Auffermann, C. Shekhar, Y . Sun, J. Gooth, and C. Felser, Large Nernst power factor over 
a broad temperature range in polycrystalline Weyl semimetal NbP, Energy and 
Environmental Science 11, 2813-2820 (2018) 


--- Page 24 ---
24  
  
53. T. Feng, P. Wang, Z. Han, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, Q. Liu, and W. Liu, Large Transverse and 
Longitudinal Magneto-Thermoelectric Effect in Polycrystalline Nodal-Line Semimetal 
Mg3Bi2, Advanced Materials 34, 2200931 (2022) 
54. Q.-X. Dong, J.-F. Wang, L.-B. Zhang, J.-L. Bai, Q.-Y . Liu, J.-W. Cheng, P.-Y . Liu, C.-D. 
Li, J.-S. Xiang, Z.-A. Ren, P.-J. Sun, and G.-F. Chen, Large power factor, anomalous 
Nernst effect, and temperature-dependent thermoelectric quantum oscillations in the 
magnetic Weyl semimetal NdAlSi, Physical Review B 108, 205143 (2023) 
55. G. Kresse and J Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy 
calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Physical Review B 54, 11169 (1996).  
56. J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made 
Simple, Physical Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996).  
57. P. E. Blöchl, Projector augmented-wave method, Physical Review B 50, 17953 (1994).  
58. G. Kresse and D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented 
wave method, Physical Review B 59, 1758 (1999).  
59. A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, Y . -S. Lee, I. Souza, D. Vanderbilt, and N. Marzari, wannier90: 
A tool for obtaining maximally-localised Wannier functions, Computer Physics 
Communications 178, 685 (2008).   


--- Page 25 ---
25  
  
Main Text Figures   
  
Figure 1. Fermi surface nesting of Weyl points in NdAlSi. (a) Crystal structure of NdAlSi, 
with polar c-axis. (b) Spin texture in the ab-plane (plane I) with the magnetic ordering vector 
Q ≈ (2/3, 2/3, 0) along the [110] direction, as revealed in Ref. [22]. (c) The electronic structure 
in NdAlSi; one octant of the Brillouin Zone is shown. There are four types of Fermi surfaces: 
a high-mobility Weyl β pocket (brown), a Weyl Σ pocket subject to Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-
Yosida (RKKY) interactions (red), a hole γ pocket with quadratic electronic band dispersion 
(pink), and an electron δ pocket with heavy electron mass (blue). In the Hall and Nernst 
effects, only the former three contribute dominantly (below). White solid lines indicate the 
extremal cross-sections of electron orbits observed experimentally when a magnetic field is 
applied along the a-axis. (d) Two-dimensional cuts of Fermi surfaces at kz = 0, where traces 



--- Page 26 ---
26  
  
corresponding to EF = -4, -3, and 0 meV are shown. Yellow lines and a shaded region indicate 
the nesting plane with ordering vector Q. Illustration: Weyl cones in the electronic band 
structure of Σ.


--- Page 27 ---
27  
  
   
Figure 2. High mobility electrons from Weyl and trivial Fermi surface pockets in NdAlSi, 
detected by electrical transport. (a) Hall conductivity σxy at various temperatures. The black 
dashed lines indicate fitting to a two -carrier model. Inset (top left): Sample geometry, where 
magnetic field B and electric current J are applied along the c-axis and a-axis, respectively.  
Inset (bottom) shows the two components of the fit individually. (b) Carrier density of two Fermi 
surface sheets, estimated by two carrier fitting (left axis). The parameters μ1, n1 are assigned to 
a trivial ( γ) and μ2, n2 to a Weyl -type ( β) Fermi surface sheet, respectively. Right axis: 
Temperature dependence of the Seebeck effect divided by temperature, with enhancement 
above TN likely due to electron correlations on Σ. (c) Carrier mobility of the trivial γ and Weyl 
β bands as a function of temperature.      



--- Page 28 ---
28  
  
   
Figure 3. Two carrier analysis of thermoelectric Nernst effect in NdAlSi . (a-h) Magnetic 
field dependence of Nernst effect Sxy normalized by resistivity and temperature. Two -carrier 
decomposition of the Nernst effect is shown by black dotted lines; this represents a fit to Eq. 
(1) at T ≥35 K and a calculated curve according to Eq. (1), with extrapolated model parameters, 
at lower temperatures. An excess Nernst signal ΔSxy, beyond Eq. (1), appears at intermediate 
temperatures T = 10 - 30 K, marked by pale red shading between the data and the semiclassical 



--- Page 29 ---
29  
  
calculation. Inset: Sample geometry for thermoelectric measurements, where magnetic field 
and temperature gradient are applied along the crystallographic c- and a-axes, respectively. (i,j) 
Temperature dependence of effective mass and Fermi velocity for γ and β pockets with 
quadratic and linear band dispersions, respectively. Corresponding electronic structure 
parameters estimated from quantum oscillation (QO) experiments are also shown as  
green dotted lines in Figs. 3(i) and 3(j).      


--- Page 30 ---
30  
  
   
 
Figure 4. Enhancement of thermoelectric Nernst effect due electron correlations from a 
magnetic Fermi surface instability. (a-c) Magnetic field dependence of excess Nernst signal 
ΔSxy, normalized by temperature and longitudinal resistivity ρxx, at 30 K, 12 K, and 2 K. A fit 
to Eq. (2) is indicated by the black line. (d) Illustration: Contour lines of relaxation time τ(k) in 
momentum space with a hot -spot of τ(k), such as can be driven by magnetic ordering with 
propagation vector Q ≈ (2/3, 2/3, 0) in NdAlSi, c.f. Fig. 1. The arrows indicate a k-space 
gradient of the relaxation time. For a given electron or hole on the Fermi surface, the effective 
energy dependence of τ is a product of this gradient and the inverse Fermi velocity, d τ/dE = 
dτ/dk ∙ dk/dE. (e) Energy derivative of carrier relaxation time d τ/dE, derived from ΔSxy and 
attributed to correlations on the Σ pocket. Yellow shading and a vertical dashed li ne mark the 
regime of strong fluctuations and the transition to long -range magnetic order at TN = 7.4 K, 
respectively.     



--- Page 31 ---
31  
  
  
Material 
μ 
(cm2/Vs) 
|dln(τ)/dE|  
(eV-1) 
|dln(EF)/dE| 
(eV-1) Sxx Sxy References 
NdAlSi, β 6,000 - 7 〇 〇 this work 
NdAlSi, Σ 3,500 33 12 〇 〇 this work 
PbSnSe 100,000 - 20 〇 〇 [17] 
Co0.999Ni0.001Sb3 200 650 - 〇 〇 [12] 
CeCu2Si2 80 150 - 〇 〇 [13] 
CuFeS2 60 680 - 〇 × [14] 
Mo0.92Nb0.08Te2 40 110 - 〇 × [15] 
MnGe ~5 10 - 〇 × [16] 
Table 1. Carrier mobility μ and energy derivative of the carrier relaxation time τ for 
correlated materials with lifetime enhancement of the thermoelectric effect. The energy 
derivative of μ~τ/EF has two components, from the relaxation time and the Fermi energy, shown 
in the third and fourth column, respectively [12 -17]. Materials with small Fermi surfaces and 
high carrier mobility, such as PbSnSe, have sizable filling dependence of μ even in absence of 
correlations. Among correlated materials with unconventional Nernst responses, NdAlSi shows 
exceedingly high mobility, which enables us to perform quantitative analysis of |dln(τ)/dE| with 
resolution in momentum space. Circles (〇) and crosses (×) represent if the Seebeck and Nernst 
effect are measured in the reference or not.   
  


--- Page 32 ---
32  
  
 
Supplementary Information for 
 
Nernst effect of high-mobility Weyl electrons in NdAlSi enhanced  
by a Fermi surface nesting instability 
Rinsuke Yamada et al.  
 
*Corresponding author. Email: ryamada@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp or hirschberger@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp  
 
 
 
 
 
This PDF file includes: 
 
Supplementary Text 
Figures S1 to S21 
Tables S1 and S2 
Supplementary References S1-S14  


--- Page 33 ---
33  
  
Supplementary Text 
Raw data of the Nernst effect 
   Raw data of the Nernst effect divided by temperature (Sxy/T) at various temperatures is shown 
in Fig. S1. The Nernst signal Sxy for B || c follows a non-linear trend versus magnetic field, which 
enables us to perform a quantitative analysis. The field -dependence of Sxy/T has a clear 
resemblance to Sxy/ρxxT in Figs. 3(a)-(h), including an enhancement around Tmax~15 K. Thus we 
exclude the possibility that the anomaly in Sxy/ρxxT originates from an anomaly in ρxx. The raw 
data of the Nernst effect at 3 T indeed shows an enhancement around 15 K in temperature 
dependence (see Fig. S1(i)). Also, the Seebeck effect (Sxx/T) shows a similar enhancement around 
15 K (see Figs. 2(b) and S1(j)). Hence, the signal we extracted in Fig. 4(e) is likely robust and 
not qualitatively dependent on the details of the analysis. 
Quantum oscillations and Fermi surface volume 
   To confirm the consistency of our analysis of the Nernst effect, we extracted band parameters 
such as carrier density and Fermi velocity from quantum oscillations in the Nernst effect Sxy [Fig. 
S2(a)]. We calculate a fast Fourier transformation (FFT) of the oscillatory component SxyOsci. 
after subtracting a smooth polynomial background SxyBG [Fig. S2(b)]. The spectra show peaks at 
three frequencies: 51 T, 67 T, and 128 T [Fig. S2(c), Table S1], which are assigned, respectively, 
to the Σ, β, and γ pockets in Ref. [S1].  
   We estimate the carrier density n of each pocket by using the elliptical approximation  n = 
gsgdkFakFbkFc/6π2, where gs and kFα (α=a, b, c) are spin degeneracy and Fermi momenta, 
respectively. The parameter gd, termed orbital degeneracy in the following, counts the number 
of symmetry-equivalent Fermi surface pockets in the first Brillouin zone. The carrier density of 
β (γ) at low temperature is estimated to be 1.0×10 19 cm-3 (6.6×1019 cm-3) by considering the kF-
anisotropy from the band calculation and by setting gs = 1 ( gs = 2) and gd = 4 ( gd = 4). The 
extracted carrier densities from quantum oscillation analysis show a good agreement with those 
estimated by fitting σxy with a Drude-type semiclassical model (Fig. 2). 
   From the temperature dependence of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations in the magnetoresistance, 
we extract the effective masses for Σ and β pockets as 0.15 m0 and 0.11 m0, respectively (Fig. 
S15(a)). This is in good agreement with Ref. [S1], which also determined the effective mass of 
γ to be 0.2 m0. By utilizing the relation mvF = ℏkF, the Fermi velocity of β is estimated as 4.8×105 
m/s. These parameters from quantum oscillations show an excellent agreement with those from 
our Sxy analysis (Figs. 3(i) and 3(j)). 
 
Electron-type carriers in NdAlSi in tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) measurements 
   We measured the field -dependent change of a tunnel diode oscillator’s (TDO) resonant 
frequency to precisely detect quantum oscillations in pulsed magnetic fields up to 60 Tesla at the 
Institute for Solid State Physics (ISSP, The University of Tokyo) [S2]. The TDO is based on an 
LC-tank circuit powered by a tunnel diode that is biased in the negative resistance region of its 
current-voltage characteristic. A coil of about 5 turns and diameter of 1 mm is turned from copper 
wire. A NdAlSi single crystal is fixed inside the coil by Apiezon-N grease. The coil’s axis and 
the crystallographic a-axis of NdAlSi are set perpendicular and in parallel to the magnetic field 
direction, respectively. We approximate the circuit’s resonant frequency as f ~ 1/2π√𝐿𝐶 with 


--- Page 34 ---
34  
  
inductance L and capacitance C, typically lying in the MHz range. The measurement principle 
is as follows: The skin depth of a metallic sample is given by d = √𝜌/𝜋𝜀0𝑓, where ρ and ε0 are 
the sample resistivity and the permittivity of the vacuum. Therefore, resistivity variations of the 
sample result in a change of LC-circuit conductance 2rsΔd/R2, where rs, R, and Δd are the sample 
mean diameter, the coil diameter, and the skin depth variation. This means any change in f is 
proportional to the variation in sample resistivity, at least to the leading order.  
   The LC-circuit’s resonance frequency shows a variation Δf as a function of the magnetic field, 
with pronounced oscillations [Fig. S3(a)]. This quantum oscillation is discerned more clearly in 
the second derivative of Δf, shown in Fig. S3(b). We perform separate fast Fourier 
transformations (FFTs) in the low-B regime (12-25 T) and in the high-B regime (25–60 T), after 
subtracting a polynomial background from Δf. The FFT spectra in each regime are shown in Figs. 
S3(c,d). At low fields, two frequencies 61 T and 104 T are observed, which are assigned to the 
Σ and β pockets, respectively  (B // a). Oscillations with large r frequency (321 T and 125 T) 
appear at elevated fields, which we denote as δ1 and δ2 and which correspond to two different 
carrier orbits around different projections of symmetry-equivalent, electron-like δ surfaces [Fig. 
S3(d), Fig. 1(c), Table S1]. The axis of the oscillation orbit is always perpendicular to the a-axis 
in this experiment. We  further analyze the attenuation of the  high-field oscillation amplitude 
against temperature to extract the e ffective mass of δ [Fig. S3(e)]. The masses m(δ1) and m(δ2) 
are found to be 1.74 m0 and 1.14 m0, respectively, one order of magnitude larger than the reported 
masses for the hole pockets β, Σ, and γ [S1]. The high mass  of δ is well consistent with band 
calculations and in accord with the observation that electron -like carriers, with large effective 
mass and low carrier mobility, do not contribute significantly to the Nernst and Hall effects.  
 
Change in Hall resistivity across the magnetic transition  
We show the raw data of the Hall resistivity at various temperatures in Fig. S7. The Hall 
resistivity increases with decreasing temperature down to 50 K, however, it becomes nearly 
temperature independent at low temperatures below 30 K [Figs. S7(a) and S7( b)]. The absence 
of clear anomaly in temperature evolution of the Hall resistivity at low temperatures suggests 
that the change in electronic structure at magnetic transition is not significant. 
Furthermore, we investigated the possible signature of the anomalous Hall effect by analysis 
of the field profile of 𝜌𝑦𝑥 at 2 K [Fig. S8]. Although the field dependence of magnetization shows 
a jump at 0 T due to the flipping of the c-component of magnetic moment between two 
ferrimagnetic states (up-up-down and up-down-down), a clear jump is not observed around 0 T 
in the Hall resistivity. At the critical field around 6 T, a small step appears in the Hall resistivity. 
However, the normal Hall effect is much larger than this anomaly due to the small carrier density 
in the present compound. 
 
Fixing the ratio of mobilities (μβ/μγ) and coefficients (Aγ’/Aβ’)  
Here we explain in detail how we constrained the parameters to obtain reasonable fitting 
results for the Nernst effect Sxy(B). At high temperatures above 40 K , Sxy is fitted by the two -
carrier model in the semiclassical picture described in Eq. (9) in the main text. Out of four free 
parameters in Eq. ( 9), the first constraint is applied by fixing the ratio of mobilities ( μβ/μγ), 
considering the fact that the ratio of mobilities from the analysis of Hall conductivity ( μ2/μ1) is 
nearly constant against temperature [see Figs. S9(a) and S9(b)].  


--- Page 35 ---
35  
  
The next constraint is the ratio of the coefficients Aγ’/Aβ’. We calculated the ratio Aγ’/Aβ’ by 
using the coefficients Aγ’ and Aβ’ obtained from the analysis of the Nernst effect under the 
condition of μβ/μγ = 3.1 [Figs. S9(c) and S9(d)]. Since the ratio Aγ’/Aβ’ shows little temperature 
dependence from 40 K to 100 K, we fix Aγ’/Aβ’ = 7.0 for the final analysis of the Nernst effect, 
to reduce the number of free parameters in our model. We note that Aγ’/Aβ’ deviates from 7.0 at 
200 K and 300 K; this is likely another local minimum in the fit, caused by the weak field 
dependence of the Nernst effect due to reduced mobility at very high temperatures. In Figs. S9(e) 
and S9(f), we show a multi-band fit of the Nernst effect Sxy(B) at 300 K, without and with fixing 
the ratio Aγ’/Aβ’. In both cases, the Nernst effect is well explained by the two-carrier model, so 
we prefer to fix the ratio Aγ’/Aβ’ to obtain consistency between 300 K and the lower temperature 
data.  
 
Extrapolation of the mobility and Nernst amplitude coefficient toward low temperatures  
We explain how the two-carrier analysis was extrapolated towards low temperatures. Figure 
S10 shows the two free parameters obtained from the two-carrier fit of the Nernst effect at high 
temperatures above 40 K with Eq. (9), fixing the ratio of mobilities and coefficients as discussed 
above. We fix the value of Aγ’ to 3.2 when extending the analysis toward low temperatures, 
assuming that smooth evolution of the mobility and scattering time as a function of temperature 
and no strong electronic structure changes at the phase transition into the ordered state. The 
assumption (b) is motivated by the good agreement of the calculated and experimentally 
observed Nernst effect at T = 2 K. Moreover, the thermopower Sxx/T in zero magnetic field shows 
an enhancement around TN (Fig. 2, akin to the Δ𝑆𝑥𝑦 in Fig. 4), before returning to a comparable 
value as at high temperature. 
Next, we discuss the robustness of the extrapolated parameters for the T = 2 K data. We have 
calculated the sum of square deviation between the data at T = 2 K and our model, 
|𝜒|2 = ∑ |
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑦𝑥𝑇 (𝐵𝑖)𝑠𝑖𝑚 −
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑦𝑥𝑇 (𝐵𝑖)𝑜𝑏𝑠|
2
𝑁
𝑖=0 /𝑁                      (S1) 
where N is a number of data points of the magnetic field [ Fig. S11]. Here, we vary the two 
extrapolated parameters while the ratios μβ/μγ, Aγ’/Aβ’ remain fixed, as for the high-temperature 
fits. We indicate the extrapolated value by an orange star and the optimal fit to the low -
temperature data by a white circle. Besides the reasonable match of these two, we note that there 
are no secondary minima in the space of these two parameters. 
 
Fitting of the Nernst signal by the two-carrier model with four free parameters 
We show the obtained parameters from the fitting of the Nernst effect by the two -carrier 
model with four free parameters (Aβ, Aγ, μβ, and μγ) in Fig. S12. Naturally, at high temperatures 
this model gives results that are equivalent to the analysis presented in the main text (the number 
of adjustable parameters at each temperature has been increased in this fitting with four free 
parameters). However, at low temperatures below 30 K, sharp anomalies in the parameters A1, 
A2, and μ2 indicate inadequacies of this model with four free parameters. As discussed in the 


--- Page 36 ---
36  
  
main text, this inadequacy of the four -band fit is well resolved by including the d τ/dE term for 
Sxy.  
In this analysis and also the analysis in the main text, we neglect the energy dependence of τ 
due to scattering processes that have uniform behavior in momentum space. Electron -electron 
and electron-phonon scattering rates at high temperatures are proportional to the total density of 
states (D), which is more stable (Fig. S13) as compared to the dni/dE of each individual band.     
Also, for elastic scattering from charge-neutral impurities (limit of strong screening in a good 
conductor), τ has weak energy dependence [S3-S6]. This argument can be supported at a 
quantitative level. The magnitude of dlnD/dE in our NdAlSi crystal is estimated to be 3 eV-1 (Fig. 
S13), which is one order of magnitude smaller than dlnni/dE (e.g., dlnnβ/dE~21 eV-1). Also, our 
estimation of dlnτ/dE (~33 eV-1) of the Σ pocket is one order of magnitude larger than dlnD/dE 
[see Table 1 in the main text], indicating that the relaxation time contribution is enhanced when 
the scattering has large a k-dependence due to the nesting properties of the Fermi surface. 
 
Analysis of longitudinal conductivity to check for consistency  
As a further crosscheck of our two-carrier analysis of the Hall conductivity, we perform a fit 
to the longitudinal conductivity at various temperatures [Fig. S14(a)]. The experimental data are 
well described by the two-carrier Drude model as follows: 
𝜎𝑥𝑥 = 𝑛1𝑒𝜇1
1 + (𝜇1𝐵)2 + 𝑛2𝑒𝜇2
1 + (𝜇2𝐵)2.                      (S2) 
Here, n1 and n2 (μ1 and μ2) are carrier densities (carrier mobilities). The carrier mobilities (μ1 and 
μ2) from σxx show good agreement with those from σxy [Fig. S14(c)]. n1 and n2 at 8 K are 
estimated to be 8.0×1019 cm-3 and 4.7×1019 cm-3 from the fitting of σxx, while those from σxy are 
6.5×1019 cm-3 and 2.6×10 19 cm-3, respectively. The observed difference in carrier densities, 
especially for n2, may originate from a sum contribution of the  β and Σ pockets. The effective 
parameters ni and μi of the Drude model are expected to capture contributions from several Fermi 
surface segments, with slightly different carrier mobility. As mentioned in the main text, the 
Weyl fermions in the Σ-pocket, may also represent a minority contribution to n2 and μ2. Such a 
sum of contributions from β and Σ is weighted slightly differently in σxx and σxy, possibly 
explaining the discrepancy in the n2. A second possibility is the experimental uncertainty of 
sample geometry measurement, which is inevitable for contacts made with Ag paste, which have 
a width of about a few hundred μm. We assess the typical error bar of 10% due to shape 
measurement for ρxx and ρyx; this carries over to σxx and σxy, and the relative error can be on the 
order of 20%. 
 
Mass analysis of quantum oscillations for the investigation of change in electronic structure at 
the magnetic transition  
In order to  discuss the possibility that the d n/dE term may explain the enhanced 
thermoelectric responses in Sxx and Sxy, we perform the mass analysis of quantum oscillations. 


--- Page 37 ---
37  
  
The energy derivative of carrier density for quadratic dispersion and for linear band dispersion 
in three-dimensional materials is described as 
𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝐸 ∝ 𝑚∗𝑘F,          and               𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝐸 ∝ 𝑘F
2
𝑣F
,          (S3) 
respectively. A strong change in dn/dE with temperature is therefore directly associated with a 
change of the effective mass m*, or the Fermi velocity vF. A change of dn/dE can occur and result 
in a change in thermoelectric responses, even if n itself remains relatively stable over a given 
temperature window. 
Figure S15 shows T-dependent SdH oscillations, based on our own analysis (left) and on 
measurements in a previous report [ S1]. The SdH oscillations of the β, Σ, and γ pockets are all 
observed below and above TN, and especially in the regime of 10-15 K that is important for our 
discussion. The smooth, T-dependent decay of the oscillation amplitude suggests that any change 
of the effective masses (mβ and mγ) is weak between the low-T ferromagnetic regime (suppressed 
fluctuations) and the higher-T paramagnetic regime (with fluctuations). Therefore, it is unlikely 
that dn/dE term alone explains the enhanced thermoelectric responses in Sxx and Sxy. 
 
On the need for dτ/dE to describe the Nernst effect at TN < T < 40 K 
We estimate the effect of a reasonable change of the electronic structure on d n/dE, and the 
resulting change of the Nernst effect. We calculate the two-carrier decomposition of the Nernst 
effect from Eq. (S4), which is equivalent to Eq. (1) of the main text: 
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = 𝐴𝛾
′ 𝐹(𝜇𝛾, 𝐵)+ 𝐴𝛽
′ 𝐺(𝜇𝛽, 𝐵).                 (S4) 
The contributions of γ and β to the Nernst effect at T = 11.6 K are shown in Fig. S16 as green 
and purple dotted lines, respectively (simulation without the effect of n2); the blue solid line 
represents their sum. Considering the possible change in the carrier density n2 of the Weyl β 
pocket by about 15 % [Fig. 2], we here assume a change of Aβ’ by 20% and calculate the resulting 
change of Sxy(B), to exaggerate the effect. When adjusting Aβ’ by 20 %, we obtain the red dashed 
line, only marginally different from the previous estimate and far away from explaining the large 
enhancement of Sxy just above TN (black curve), which is the focus of our work. More generally, 
we note that the observed Sxy is considerably much larger than each individual component to Eq. 
(S4); the signal enhancement cannot be explained even if Aβ’ and Aγ’ show some more drastic 
variation around Tmax. We conclude that our anal ysis of Sxy is not qualitatively changed by the 
reduction in carrier density n2 or by moderate changes in Aβ’, Aγ’. 
 
Extraction of relaxation time of each Fermi surface 
We focus on three relatively light, hole -like carrier pockets of NdAlSi: trivial γ and Weyl β 
& Σ pockets, where only the latter (Σ) is close to the nesting condition in RKKY theory. In Fig. 
S17, we present the carrier relaxation times τ extracted from the mobilities, together with the 


--- Page 38 ---
38  
  
relaxation time τΣ of the Σ pocket as obtained from the fit to Δ𝑆𝑥𝑦(𝐵) according to the last term 
in Eq. (8). A clear anomaly at Tmax ~15 K appears for Σ. We caution that the quantitative value 
of τΣ of the Σ-pocket is more sensitive to details of the analysis than τβ or τγ.  
To support Fig. S17(a), we also estimated the quantum scattering time τQ of the Weyl β pocket 
from an analysis of the dominant Shubnikov -de Haas (SdH) oscillation frequency. A fit to the 
Lifshitz-Kosevich formula is shown in Fig. S 17(c) [S7]. At 8 K we find τQ = 1.2×10-13 s [Fig. 
S17(c)], reproducing τβ from transport experiments within a factor of 3. Note that quantum 
lifetimes are almost always reduced as compared to transport carrier relaxation times, being 
equally sensitive to both small- and large angle scattering [S8].  
The values of τβ, τγ, and τΣ are scattered within a factor of 2, consistent with moderate or 
weak correlations in NdAlSi. Even for Σ, the change of τΣ due to magnetic fluctuations is a mild 
effect on the order of 1 5% – which, however, significantly affects the thermoelectric response, 
as dτΣ/dE is more sensitive to the correlation effect than τΣ itself. While τβ and τγ monotonically 
increase toward low temperature, τΣ shows a dip around Tmax ~ 15 K, in good agreement with our 
scenario. As the RKKY interaction couples electronic states separated by the ordering vector Q 
in momentum space, it is natural that the Weyl Σ pocket is affected more strongly than β and γ 
[Figs. 1(c) and 1(d) of the main text].  
     More quantitatively, we can cross-check our estimate for dτΣ/dE shown in Fig. S17(b) [same 
as Fig. 4(e) in the main text]  using the temperature -induced change of τΣ in Fig. S17(a). The 
maximal reduction max(|ΔτΣ|) at Tmax=12 K is estimated to be approximately 5×10 -14 s as 
compared to a smooth background of the same shape as τβ(T). In our analysis, we found that the 
maximum dτΣ/dE appears at 15 K, and assumed that this is when the minimum of τ(E) is just at 
the HWHM of the Fermi-Dirac distribution centered around EF (Fig. S6). Therefore, we calculate 
2 × HWHM × max(dτΣ/dE) to estimate the maximum change of τΣ at the perfect nesting 
condition: 2×3 meV×(1.2×10 -14 s/meV) = 7.2×10 -14 s, which is close to two times the size of 
max(|ΔτΣ|). 
 
Fitting of the field dependence of the excess Nernst signal 
Here we explain in detail how we attribute the excess Nernst signal (ΔSxy) to the Σ pocket 
close to the nesting condition. The field dependence of the additional component in Sxy is fitted 
by 
𝛥𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑇 = ∑ 𝐵𝑖 (±2𝜇𝑖𝐵 − tan𝜃𝐻(1 − (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)
(1 + (𝜇𝑖𝐵)2)2 )
𝑖
,                          (S5) 
which contains the contributions from the energy dependence of the relaxation time ( Bi = -
gsgdekB2ki3/18mi ∙ dτi/dE). The upper and lower sign notation describes hole - and electron-type 
carriers, respectively. By fitting ΔSxy assuming the contributions of hole-type and electron-type 
carriers (see Figs. 4(a-c) and S18(a-c)), we estimate the relaxation time τi = μimi/e for each case, 
and plot them against temperature in Fig. S18(d). When we assume that ΔSxy originates from 
electron-type δ pocket, the relaxation time is estimated to be 1.3 ×10-12 s. This value is not 
physically reasonable because it is more than three times larger than that for the Weyl β pocket 


--- Page 39 ---
39  
  
with a small effective mass (~4×10-13 s). Therefore, we choose hole-type carrier contributions as 
the solution for the fitting of ΔSxy. 
Furthermore, the temperature dependence of the relaxation time of hole contributions τhole 
(black) is suppressed around 15 K, although τβ (pink) and τγ (light brown) monotonically increase 
toward the lowest temperature (see Fig. S18(d)). It is true that the estimation of τhole may contain 
a large error bar, the difference in the temperature dependence suggests that ΔSxy comes from the 
pocket other than β or γ pocket, i.e. from the Σ pocket.  
 
Observation of a lifetime-driven Nernst effect in magnetic Weyl semimetal GdPtBi 
RAlSi and RPtBi (R = rare earth) both break inversion and time-reversal symmetries in their 
long-range ordered magnetic state. Both compounds show strong magnetic fluctuations above 
TN~7-9 K, and both have elevated carrier mobilities (~ 1,000-5,000 cm 2/Vs). A particular 
advantage of GdPtBi is its simple electronic structure, namely its low carrier concentration, its 
quadratic band touching at the 𝛤-point of the first Brillouin zone, and its Fermi energy tunability 
with small amounts of Au/Pt doping.   
We report the Nernst effect of two samples of GdPtBi with different band filling, controlled 
by Au-doping: Stoichiometric GdPtBi (Sample S01) and Au -doped GdPt0.985Au0.015Bi (Sample 
S02), where the magnetic field was applied along the (111) direction and the heat current was // 
(110). We show the low-field slope of the Nernst effect divided by temperature in Figs. S19(e) 
and S19(f).  
At base temperature, GdPtBi with quadratic band touching is dominated by a single carrier 
type, implying that the normal Nernst effect should vanish due to Sondheimer cancellation. At 
high temperatures,  thermally activated carriers  appear, resulting in a strong temperature 
dependence of the Nernst effect  (~dn/dE). This differs from semimetallic NdAlSi, where the 
carrier density is much larger and the normal Nernst effect (~dn/dE) shows weak temperature 
dependence; thermally activated carriers play a lesser role in NdAlSi, and both el ectron- and 
hole-type carriers are present at all temperatures [no Sondheimer cancellation, see Fig. S19(d)]. 
There are key similarities between the two materials, however: akin to NdAlSi, the Nernst signal 
of GdPtBi shows an anomaly close to the Curie-Weiss temperature TCW, around 30 K.  
In order to separate the contribution s of d n/dE and d τ/dE, we fitted the temperature 
dependence of the Nernst effect of GdPtBi, focusing on the low field regime (μB≪1). Here, the 
Nernst effect for the two-carrier model can be derived from Eq. (9) in the main text as 
𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝐵𝑇 =
(3𝜋2)
1
3𝑘𝐵
2
3ℏ2𝑒2
𝑚1
𝜌𝑥𝑥2 (1 + 1
𝑏)
1
𝑏 𝑛1
1
3𝑛2 + 𝑛2
1
3𝑛1
(𝑛1 + 1
𝑏 𝑛2)
3 + ∆𝑆𝑥𝑦
𝜌𝑥𝑥𝐵𝑇,                          (S6) 
where n1, n2, m1, m2, µ1, and µ2, are the carrier density, effective mass, and mobility of carrier 1 
(holes) and 2  (electrons), respectively. The first term in Eq. ( S6) originates from the energy 
derivative of carrier density dn/dE, while the second term represents the additional contribution 
including the relaxation time effect. We introduce a constant “b” as the ratio of carrier masses (b 
= m2/m1). 


--- Page 40 ---
40  
  
To fit the temperature dependence, we eliminate some of these parameters, making 
reasonable assumptions: First, given the quadratic band touching and obeying Luttinger's rule, 
we enforce constant n1-n2 at all temperatures and set the electron density n2 to be activated with 
an activation barrier Ea. Second, we use the same relaxation time for both carriers. Third, we set 
the mass ratio to b = 0.25, based on band structure calculations and prior experimental work [S9]. 
This means the electrons are significantly much lighter than the holes. 
Blue lines in Fig s. S19(g)-(i) show fits following the  contribution from d n/dE at high 
temperatures with three adjustable parameters: For hole -type S01 (slightly electron -type S02), 
we obtain Ea = -15 meV (+7 meV) defining the activation -type behavior at low T as measured 
from the band-touching point, and m1= 0.7~1.3 me from the overall signal amplitude. 
A deviation from the model for dn/dE appears at low temperatures, see red highlights in Figs. 
S19(g)-(i). For B // (111), as here, the heat current is moving in planes of triangular lattice 
arrangement of Gd ions in the half-Heusler structure, precluding a contribution from scalar spin 
chirality fluctuations. Therefore, as in NdAlSi, we attribute the  additional Nernst signal that 
onsets close to the Curie-Weiss temperature TCW to magnetic fluctuations and the relaxation time 
effect. We conclude that  such thermoelectric phenomena should appear ubiquitously in  
correlated topological semimetals, and beyond.  
 
Details on the Nernst effect measurements 
    The Hall effect and Nernst effect data are anti-symmetrized Hall effect and Nernst effect data 
with respect to the magnetic field, to eliminate the contribution of the Seebeck effect due to the 
misalignment of the voltage terminals (see Fig s. S20(a) and (b) ). Furthermore, we confirmed 
that the voltage drops of the thermocouples, thermopower, and Nernst terminals show a linear 
dependence against the heater power (P = RI2, with heater resistance R and current to the heater 
I) as shown in Fig. S20(c) , which suggests that  the thermal gradient is assessed to be  
homogeneous within the measured region of our sample. 
 
Reproducibility of the enhanced Nernst effect 
    We measured two samples to confirm the reproducibility of our results on the enhanced Nernst 
effect. The Nernst effect divided by temperature (Sxy/T) for the 2nd sample (sample 2) is shown 
in Fig. S21(a). With decreasing temperature from 52 K, Sxy/T increases down to 14.4 K, 
accompanied by clear quantum oscillations. Sxy/T decreases at further lower temperatures and 
the overall field dependence of sample 2 is similar to that of the 1 st sample (sample 1), which is 
discussed in the main text. Both samples show the enhanced Nernst signal around 15 K (see Fig. 
S1(i) and S21(b)). We note here that the absolute value of Sxy/T differs between the two samples 
(~30%). The difference in absolute signal amplitude likely originates from uncertainties in the 
measurement of the sample geometry, i.e. in the measurement of the distance betw een voltage 
terminals. We also confirmed that the temperature dependence of the Seebeck coefficient and 
thermal conductivity of sample 2 reproduce the results of sample 1 (Fig. S21(c) and (d)). 
 


--- Page 41 ---
41  
  
Comparison of quantum oscillation frequencies between experiment and density functional 
theory  
Table S1 summarizes the cross -sectional areas of Fermi surfaces from the experiment and 
DFT calculations. The DFT calculations well reproduce the frequencies observed in the 
experiment, without a need to significantly shift the energy from the value determined by DFT. 
Specifically, the characteristic frequencies of Σ, β, and γ surfaces show good agreement when 
setting the Fermi energy to 0 meV, while δ requires a shift to EF= -0.7 meV for a reasonable 
agreement. Please note that the calculated δ-pocket has a narrow neck at EF = 0, and its 
characteristic oscillation frequency changes rapidly even with a small shift in EF (Fig. S3, inset). 
As compared to a previous study, our work provides a more thorough characterization of 
oscillation frequencies with the magnetic field along the a-axis [S1]. 
 
Calculation of the Seebeck effect from band parameters  
As for the Seebeck effect Sxx, compensation between the electron and hole pockets occurs  
according to Eq. (S2). In the Drude approximation, at zero magnetic field, the Seebeck effect Sxx 
is expressed as 
𝑆𝑥𝑥 ≡ 𝐴 𝜕 ln𝜎𝑥𝑥
𝜕𝜀 = 𝐴𝑒2 𝜕
𝜕𝜀ln∑ 𝑛𝑖
𝑚𝑖𝑖
,                     (S7) 
where A=-π2kB2/3e, by ignoring the relaxation time contribution.  Here, we assume that the 
scattering time (at high temperature) is identical for all Fermi surfaces, and independent of 
momentum. By considering carriers with quadratic dispersion (E = ℏ2kF2/2m*, n = gsgdkF3/6π2) 
or linear dispersion (E = ℏvFkF, n = gsgdkF3/6π2), we derive 
𝑆𝑥𝑥 = − 𝜋2
3
𝑘𝐵
2
𝑒
∑ [± 1
2𝜋2ℏ2 𝑔𝑠
𝑖𝑔𝑑
𝑖 𝑘𝐹
𝑖 ]𝑖:Quad + ∑ [± 1
3𝜋2ℏ2 𝑔𝑠
𝑖𝑔𝑑
𝑖 𝑘𝐹
𝑖 ]𝑖:Line
∑ [ 1
6𝜋2ℏ 𝑔𝑠
𝑖𝑔𝑑
𝑖 𝑘𝐹
𝑖 2
𝑣𝐹
𝑖 ]𝑖:Quad + ∑ [ 1
6𝜋2ℏ 𝑔𝑠
𝑖𝑔𝑑
𝑖 𝑘𝐹
𝑖 2
𝑣𝐹
𝑖 ]𝑖:Line
,      (S8) 
where gs, gd, kF, and vF are spin degeneracy, orbital degeneracy, Fermi momentum, and Fermi 
velocity, respectively. The upper and lower sign s (±) denote hole- and electron-type carriers, 
respectively.  
Firstly, we calculate Sxx/T to be 0.38 μV/K2 from Eq. (S8) assuming parallel conduction of 
the γ, β, Σ pockets with hole type carriers, but without taking into account the δ electron pocket. 
We use kF and vF of these three pockets from the analysis of quantum oscillations, while gs and 
gd are set to the values used in the Nernst analysis. The calculated value of Sxx is one order of the 
magnitude larger than the experimental observation (Fig. 2(b)); as compared to the longitudinal 
conductivity, carrier compensation leads to a highly sensitive behavior of the thermopower on 
band parameters in this multi-band system. A reasonable agreement between the experiment and 
calculation is obtained by assuming a moderately small  spin splitting  and reduced spin 
degeneracy of the δ electron pocket even in zero magnetic field, due to spin -orbit interactions 
and the noncentrosymmetric crystal structure of NdAlSi [Table S2]. 
 


--- Page 42 ---
42  
  
Estimation of the magnitude of the life-time contribution to the thermoelectric effects 
We estimate the size of the relaxation time contribution to the thermoelectric effects in Table 
1 as follows. In the case of NdAlSi,  |dln(τ)/dE| is calculated by using the extracted d τ/dE from 
the analysis of Sxy and the relaxation time τ. |dln(τ)/dE| of GdPtBi and GdPt0.985Au0.015Bi are 
estimated to be 15 eV-1 and 54 eV -1, respectively, which are on the same magnitude as that of 
NdAlSi. |dln(τ)/dE| of other compounds in Table 1 are estimated by assuming that the observed 
Seebeck effect originates only from the relaxation time contribution, i.e. 𝑆𝑥𝑥 = −
𝜋2
3
𝑘B2
𝑒 𝑇
𝜕 ln 𝜏
𝜕𝜀 .  
 
  


--- Page 43 ---
43  
  
 
Fig. S1. Raw data of the Nernst effect of NdAlSi. (a)-(h) The Nernst effect divided by 
temperature (Sxy/T) from 100 K to 2 K. Nernst signal Sxy for B || c shows non-linear behavior as 
a function of the magnetic field, which enables us to perform a quantitative analysis. The 
overall field dependence resembles the data shown in Figs. 3(a)-3(h). (i, j) Temperature 
dependence of Sxy/T and Sxx/T at 3 T. The red curve in (b) is the guide to the eye. An 
enhancement around 15 K is observed in Sxy/T and Sxx/T at 3 T, which is similar to the 
enhanced Seebeck effect at 0 T around 15 K (see Fig. 2(b)).  
 
  



--- Page 44 ---
44  
  
 
Fig. S2. Quantum oscillations in the Nernst effect. a, Nernst effect Sxy at 2 K for B || c. We 
focus on quantum oscillations in the field-aligned ferromagnetic phase above the critical field 
Bth, where Nd spins are coaligned. The blue line represents the background from a non-
oscillatory component SxyBG. b, Oscillatory component SxyOsci. as a function of 1/B, obtained by 
subtracting SxyBG from Sxy. c, A fast Fourier transformed spectrum of SxyOsci.. Three frequencies 
of 51, 67, and 128 T are observed, which were assigned, respectively, to the Σ, β, and γ pockets 
first identified in Ref. [S1]. The grey shaded area indicates the ferrimagnetic regime. 
 
  



--- Page 45 ---
45  
  
 
Fig. S3. Quantum oscillations of NdAlSi in tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) measurements in 
pulsed magnetic fields.  a, Isotherm of the resonant frequency Δf of a tank circuit whose 
inductance is sensitive to changes in the sample’s penetration depth for MHz electromagnetic 
fields (tunnel diode oscillator, TDO measurement). b, Second derivative of Δf with respect to 
magnetic field, demonstrating clear quantum oscillations. c,d, Fourier spectra of the oscillatory 
part of Δf in the low field (10 -20 T) and high field (25 to 60 T) regions. e, Temperature 
dependence of the Fourier amplitude, and estimation of the effective mass for two orbits on the 
heavy-electron δ pocket in the high -B regime. The inset to a shows the two cyclotron orbits of 
the δ pocket for B || a. 
  



--- Page 46 ---
46  
  
 
Fig. S4. The excess Nernst signal ΔSxy in NdAlSi does not scale with the bulk magnetization. 
Excess Nernst effect divided by temperature ΔSxy/T plotted against magnetization M. Clear 
scaling behaviour onto a universal curve is not observed, in contrast to materials with a 
thermoelectric Nernst effect from spin-chirality driven Berry phases [S10-S13]. Even while the 
magnetization is still far from saturation and magnetic fluctuations are expected to persist, the 
present ΔSxy nearly vanishes. Instead, the signal is well described by Eq. (2). Note that, w hen 
focusing on individual square net layers of Nd ions in NdAlSi, scalar spin chirality of magnetic 
fluctuations is expected to cancel between neighbouring squares. 
  



--- Page 47 ---
47  
  
 
Fig. S5. Thermal conductivity κxx and absence of phonon drag in NdAlSi.  Smoothly 
decreasing towards the lowest temperatures below 50 K, the longitudinal thermal conductivity 
does not show a pronounced peak around 15 K – unlike the Seebeck effect in Fig. 2(b). Combined 
with temperature-independent behaviour of Sxx/T above 35 K, this data is consistent with the 
near-absence of phonon drag contributions to the thermoelectric properties, where lattice 
vibrations couple to charge carriers and enhance the thermoelectric Seebeck or Nernst effects 
[S14]. 
  



--- Page 48 ---
48  
  
 
Fig. S6. Fermi -Dirac distribution function ( fFD) and its half width at half maximum 
(HWHM). From the energy derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function fFD = 1/(exp((E-
EF)/kBT) +1) at 15 K, the HWHM is about 3 meV. 
  



--- Page 49 ---
49  
  
 
Fig. S7 Hall resistivity at various temperatures. Hall resistivity 𝜌𝑦𝑥(𝐵) of NdAlSi (a) at high 
temperatures and (b) at low temperatures. The change of the Hall resistivity across the magnetic 
transition temperature is very hard to quantify, and even up to 15 K, where we observed the 
enhanced Nernst signal, we could not observe a clear change. In panel (b), the critical field at 2 
K is denoted by dashed lines.  
  



--- Page 50 ---
50  
  
 
Fig. S8 Hall effect of NdAlSi at low temperature. (a) Magnetization and (b) Hall resistivity 
of NdAlSi at 2 K for B || c. The inset shows the magnified view around 0 T without clear 
signatures of anomalous Hall effect. The solid and dashed lines indicate increasing and 
decreasing magnetic field (they mostly overlap precisely). The signal is mostly dominated by 
the normal (field-linear) Hall effect.  



--- Page 51 ---
51  
  
 
Fig. S9. How the number of free parameters was constrained in our model. (a) Temperature 
dependence of mobilities of the γ-pocket (μ1) and β-pocket (μ2) extracted from two carrier fitting 
of the Hall conductivity, without constraint. (b) The ratio of the mobilities ( μ2/μ1) is nearly 
constant against temperature. (c) The coefficients in Eq. (9) of the contribution from the γ-pocket 
(Aγ’) and β-pocket (Aβ’). (d) The ratio of the two coefficients (Aγ’/Aβ’) and the dashed line, which 
corresponds to the assumption in the (constrained) fit of the Nernst effect. (e, f) Nernst effect at 
300 K is fitted by the two -carrier model (e) without constraints on the coefficients A1’ and A2’, 
and (f) by fixing the ratio A1’/ A2’. The field dependence of the Nernst coefficient can be well 
described in both cases, however, we chose the results of (f), because small number of free 
parameters are required. 
  



--- Page 52 ---
52  
  
 
Fig. S10. Extrapolation of the analysis toward low temperatures . (a) The coefficient Aγ’ 
obtained from the fitting of the Nernst effect. We fixed the value of Aγ’ as 3.2 when extending 
the analysis toward low temperatures, as discussed in the text. (b) Mobility μβ extracted from the 
fitting of the Nernst effect (symbols) and μ2 obtained from the analysis of σxy (dotted line, 
multiplied by a factor of 0.68). To extrapolate μβ in the Nernst effect to low temperature, we 
followed this dashed line. 
  



--- Page 53 ---
53  
  
 
Fig. S11. Robustness of the extrapolated parameters . The square deviation of the simulated 
curve from the experimental data at 2 K (| χ|2) plotted as a function of μβ and Aγ’ under the 
condition that the ratio of mobilities and prefactors are fixed as μβ/μγ = 3.1 and Aγ’/Aβ’ = 7.0. (b) 
A magnified view of Fig. S11(a) with the expanded color scale. The orange symbol and white 
circle indicate the parameters we chose and those show a local minimum, respectively.  
  



--- Page 54 ---
54  
  
 
Fig. S12. Fitting of the Nernst effect by the two -carrier model with four free parameters  
and without dτ/dE term. Extracted (a) mobility μ and (b) coefficients A’ from the two-carrier 
fitting. The calculated mobilities show an anomalous decrease below 30 K, indicating that the 
two-carrier model is unreliable in this low -temperature regime. Dotted lines are adapted from 
Fig. S10, for the model presented in the main text.  



--- Page 55 ---
55  
  
 
Fig. S13. Density of states of NdAlSi from DFT calculations . The total density of states of 
NdAlSi in the ferromagnetic state, with a local minimum around E = 0 eV . 
  



--- Page 56 ---
56  
  
 
Fig. S14. Two-carrier Drude fitting of the longitudinal conductivity σxx. (a) Longitudinal 
electrical conductivity σxx at various temperatures. The black dashed lines indicate fitting to a 
two-carrier Drude model. (b) Two components of the fit, depicted individually. (c) Carrier 
mobility of the trivial γ and Weyl β bands as a function of temperature. Open (filled) symbols 
denote mobilities derived from the longitudinal electrical conductivity (from the Hall 
conductivity), respectively. 
  



--- Page 57 ---
57  
  
 
Fig. S15 Change in electronic structure across the magnetic transition . Temperature 
dependence of the FFT amplitude of SdH oscillations  (a) in magnetoresistance measured up to 
14 T in our work and (b) in magnetoresistance up to 35 T adapted from Ref. S1. The temperature 
dependence of each pocket can be fitted with a single effective mass across the Néel temperature, 
indicating that the change of electronic structure is not significant between the field -aligned 
ferromagnetic and the high-temperature, thermally fluctuating states. 
  



--- Page 58 ---
58  
  
 
Fig. S16. Modeling the Nernst effect of NdAlSi above TN by Drude theory. (a) Magnetic field 
dependence of the Nernst effect Sxy normalized by resistivity and temperature at T = 11.6 K, 
close to Tmax (black curve). The blue line represents a two -carrier decomposition of the Nernst 
effect calculated according to Eq. (9). The contributions from trivial γ and Weyl-type β pockets 
are shown as purple (1st) and green (2nd) dotted lines. The red line is the revised two -carrier 
calculation of Sxy, where a 20% change of the parameter Aβ for the Weyl -type β pocket is 
considered. (b) Magnified view of (a), with expanded vertical axis. 
  



--- Page 59 ---
59  
  
 
Fig. S17. Comparison of relaxation time and energy derivative of relaxation time in NdAlSi. 
(a) The blue, black, and red points correspond to the relaxation times of the trivial γ pocket, the 
Weyl β pocket, and the Weyl Σ pocket, respectively. The former two are calculated from the Hall 
conductivity, and the latter is calculated from a fit to Δ𝑆𝑥𝑦 according to Eq. (8) in the main text. 
The Σ-pocket is close to the nesting condition in NdAlSi and shows a dip of τ around Tmax ~ 15 
K. (b) Energy derivative of carrier relaxation time d τΣ/dE, derived from ΔSxy and attributed to 
correlations of electrons on the Σ Fermi surface. (c) (b) Cross-check of relaxation time estimate 
τQ using Dingle plot for Shubnikov -de Haas (SdH) oscillation of the Weyl β pocket, showing 
ln[Δρxx / ρxxB sinh(x)] versus 1/B at 8 K together with a linear fit (blue line). Here, Δρxx represents 
the oscillatory amplitude, x = 2π2kBT/ℏωc, and TD is the Dingle temperature. 
  



--- Page 60 ---
60  
  
 
Fig. S18. Analysis of the field dependence of the excess Nernst signal ( ΔSxy). (a-c) Fitting of 
ΔSxy assuming the contribution of electron -type carriers at several temperatures. (d) Extracted 
scattering time plotted against temperature from the analysis of ΔSxy and the Hall conductivity.  
  



--- Page 61 ---
61  
  
 
Fig. S19. Low-field Nernst effect originating from the relaxation time contribution in 
magnetic topological semimetals NdAlSi and GdPtBi . (a -c) ρ-T curves of semi -metallic 
NdAlSi, semi -metallic GdPtBi, and semi -conducting GdPt 0.985Au0.015Bi. (d -f) Temperature 
dependence of the low-field slope of the Nernst effect divided by temperature for three samples, 
with B || [111] for GdPtBi and B // [001] for NdAlSi. (g-i) Temperature dependence of the low-
field slope of Sxy, divided by resistivity and temperature. The blue dotted lines indicate the 
contribution from the energy derivative of carrier density d n/dE. The dn/dE of GdPtBi and 
GdPt0.985Au0.015Bi are calculated by considering thermally activated carriers around the band -
touching point (see text), while that of NdAlSi is estimated by taking the low -field slope of the 
two-carrier fitting at 0 T (following Fig. 3 of the main text). The red shaded area is attributed to 
the relaxation time contribution of the Nernst effect  (ΔSxy), which is enhanced just above the 
Néel temperature (TN) denoted by a black triangle. The Curie-Weiss temperature (TCW) is shown 
by a black dashed line. Note that the low -T increase in panel (g) is due to a rapid decrease of 
resistivity in the low -temperature ordered state, and that fluctuations persist down to lower 
temperatures in GdPtBi. 
  



--- Page 62 ---
62  
  
 
Fig. S20. Details on the Nernst effect  measurements. (a, b) Field dependence of the Nernst 
effect divided by temperature (Sxy/T) at 11.6 K and 2.2 K, respectively. The blue and red curves 
show the raw data and the data anti -symmetrized to the magnetic field.  (c) Heater power 
dependence of the voltage drop  of the thermocouples (T.C.), thermopower (T.P.), and Nernst 
terminals (N.E.) at 2 K and 9 T . The linear fits are shown to demonstrate the linearity to the 
heater power. We used the heater power of 40 μW for the measurement at 2 K.  
  



--- Page 63 ---
63  
  
 
Fig. S21. Reproducibility of the enhanced Nernst effect. (a) Magnetic field dependence of the 
Nernst effect divided by temperature ( Sxy/T) at various temperatures for sample 2. (b) 
Temperature dependence of Sxy/T at 3 T for the sample 2. (c, d) Temperature dependence of the 
Seebeck effect divided by temperature and thermal conductivity for sample 2. 
  



--- Page 64 ---
64  
  
Table S1. Comparison of quantum oscillation frequencies between experiment and density 
functional theory. Characteristic frequencies of Σ, β, and γ pockets show good agreement when 
setting the Fermi energy to 0 meV , while δ requires a shift to EF= -0.7 meV for a reasonable 
agreement. Note that δ has a narrow neck at EF = 0, and its characteristic oscillation frequency 
changes rapidly even with a small shift in EF (Fig. S3, inset). 
 
  



--- Page 65 ---
65  
  
Table S2. The estimation of thermopower at 0 T. The Seebeck effect divided temperature Sxx/T 
simulated by assuming parallel conduction of the γ, β, Σ pockets with hole type carriers without 
δ electron pocket and with δ electron pocket of spin degeneracy gs = 1, 1.5, and 2, respectively. 
The experimental value at 0 T and 50 K is also shown. Good agreement between the experiment 
and calculation requires the small splitting of the δ electron pocket. 
 
 
 
  



--- Page 66 ---
66  
  
Supplementary References 
S1. J. Gaudet, H.-Y. Yang, S. Baidya, B. Lu, G. Xu, Y. Zhao, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, C. M. 
Hoffmann, D. E. Graf, D. H. Torchinsky, P. Nikolić, D. Vanderbilt, F. Tafti, and C. L. 
Broholm, "Weyl-mediated helical magnetism in NdAlSi," Phys. Rev. Mater. 20, 1650-
1656 (2021). 
S2. L. Drigo, F. Durantel, A. Audouard, and G. Ballon, "Tunnel diode oscillator-based 
measurement of quantum oscillations amplitude in pulsed high magnetic fields: a 
quantitative field-dependent study," Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 52, 10401 (2010). 
S3. J. M. Ziman, Principles of the theory of solids. Cambridge University Press (1972) 
S4. M. Lundstrom, Fundamentals of carrier transport. Cambridge University Press (2000) 
S5. H. Sakai, K. Ikeura, M. S. Bahramy, N. Ogawa, D. Hashizume, J. Fujioka, Y . Tokura, 
Shintaro Ishiwata, "Critical enhancement of thermopower in a chemically tuned polar 
semimetal MoTe2," Science Advances 2, e1601378 (2016)  
S6. Y . Fujishiro, N. Kanazawa, T. Shimojima, A. Nakamura, K. Ishizaka, T. Koretsune, R. 
Arita, A. Miyake, H. Mitamura, K. Akiba, M. Tokunaga, J. Shiogai, S. Kimura, S. Awaji, 
A. Tsukazaki, A. Kikkawa, Y . Taguchi and Y . Tokura, "Large magneto-thermopower in 
MnGe with topological spin texture," Nature Communications 9, 408 (2018) 
S7. D. Shoenberg, Magnetic Oscillations in Metals (1st Ed.), Cambridge Monographs on 
Physics (1984). 
S8. J. P. Harrang, R. J. Higgins, R. K. Goodall, P. R. Jay, M. Laviron, and P. Delescluse, 
"Quantum and classical mobility determination of the dominant scattering mechanism in 
the two-dimensional electron gas of an AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunction," Phys. Rev. B 32, 
8126 (1985). 
S9. C. Schindler, S. Galeski, W. Schnelle, R. Wawrzyńczak, W. Abdel-Haq, S.N. Guin, J. 
Kroder, N. Kumar, C. Fu, H. Borrmann, C. Shekhar, C. Felser, T. Meng, A.G. Grushin, Y. 
Zhang, Y. Sun, and J. Gooth, "Anisotropic electrical and thermal magnetotransport in the 
magnetic semimetal GdPtBi," Phys. Rev. B 101, 125119 (2020) 
S10. W. T. Hou, J. X. Yu, M. Daly, and J. Zang, "Thermally driven topology in chiral 
magnets," Phys. Rev. B 96, 140403 (2017). 
S11. J. X. Yu, M. Daly, and J. Zang, "Thermally driven topology in frustrated systems," 
Phys. Rev. B 99, 104431 (2019). 
S12. W. Wang, M. W. Daniels, Z. Liao, Y. Zhao, J. Wang, G. Koster, G. Rijnders, C.-Z. 
Chang, D. Xiao, and W. Wu, "Spin chirality fluctuation in two-dimensional ferromagnets 
with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy," Nature Mater. 18, 1054–1059 (2019). 
S13. K. K. Kolincio, M. Hirschberger, J. Masell, S. Gao, A. Kikkawa, Y. Taguchi, T.-h. 
Arima, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, "Large Hall and Nernst responses from thermally 
induced spin chirality in a spin-trimer ferromagnet," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, 
e2023588118 (2021). 
S14. H. Xie, X. Su, T. P. Bailey, C. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Uher, X. Tang, and M. G. 
Kanatzidis, "Anomalously large Seebeck coefficient of CuFeS2 derives from large 


--- Page 67 ---
67  
  
asymmetry in the energy dependence of carrier relaxation time," Chem. Mater. 32, 2639-
2646 (2020).
