--- Page 1 ---
ARTICLE OPEN
Auxetic two-dimensional transition metal selenides and halides
Jinbo Pan 1,2,5, Yan-Fang Zhang 1,2,5, Jingda Zhang 3, Huta Banjade 1, Jie Yu 1, Liping Yu 4, Shixuan Du 2, Adrienn Ruzsinszky 1,
Zhenpeng Hu 3 ✉ and Qimin Yan 1 ✉
Auxetic two-dimensional (2D) materials provide a promising platform for biomedicine, sensors, and many other applications at the
nanoscale. In this work, utilizing a hypothesis-based data-driven approache, we identify multiple materials with remarkable in-plane
auxetic behavior in a family of buckled monolayer 2D materials. These materials are transition metal selenides and transition metal
halides with the stoichiometry MX (M = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Cu, Zn, Ag, and X = Se, Cl, Br, I). First-principles calculations reveal that the
desirable auxetic behavior of these 2D compounds originates from the interplay between the buckled 2D structure and the weak
metal–metal interaction determined by their electronic structures. We observe that the Poisson ’s ratio is sensitive to magnetic order
and the amount of uniaxial stress applied. A transition from positive Poisson ’s ratio (PPR) to negative Poisson ’s ratio (NPR) for a
subgroup of MX compounds under large uniaxial stress is predicted. The work provides a guideline for the future design of 2D
auxetic materials at the nanoscale.
npj Computational Materials           (2020) 6:154 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00424-1
INTRODUCTION
As a fundamental mechanical property, Poisson ’s ratio (PR)
describes the negative ratio of transverse strain to longitudinal
strain. Most materials host positive Poisson ’s ratio (PPR), which
means that they undergo a transverse contraction (expansion)
when stretched (compressed). In contrast, materials with negative
Poisson’s ratio (NPR), i.e., the so called auxetic materials
1, expand
laterally when stretched and contract laterally when compressed.
This unusual mechanical behavior has attracted signi ﬁcant
attentions owing to its intriguing properties for both fundamental
research and potential applications in biomedicine 2, fasteners 3,
sensors4, national security and defense 5, and other ﬁelds6–8.
Over the past decades, auxetic effects have been identi ﬁed in
molecules, crystals, or particular structures of macroscopic
matters1,9–12. In general, NPR is induced by some speci ﬁc
microstructure morphologies, including re-entrant structure 9,12,
polymetric structure 1,10, chiral structure 11, star-shape structure 11,
and so on. Very recently, two-dimensional (2D) crystalline auxetic
materials have attracted great attention, and auxetic effects have
been reported in various existing or predicted 2D materials
13–20.I n
most of the predicted auxetic 2D materials, the NPR is due to pure
geometric effect. For example, black phosphorous
13 and boron
pentaphosphide (BP 5)20 exhibit the out-of-plane NPR owing to a
puckered atomic structure, whereas single-layer graphene nanor-
ibbon has been predicted to possess the NPR owing to the
warping of its edge
17.
Although the deformation mechanism of 2D materials with
both positive and negative PR has been demonstrated in the
literature, the intrinsic driving force, on the electronic structure
level, for the auxetic behavior remains unknown in most cases. In
our recent study
19, it is proposed that the auxetic effect in group-
VI 1T-type monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) is
related to the gradually ﬁlling d-orbitals, which in turn determine
the p-d bonding interactions. This observation indicates that the
auxetic effect in 2D materials originates from the interplay of
geometric and electronic structure effects. Unfortunately,
although some metastable 1T-type structures have also been
synthesized21,22, most TMD compounds that are predicted to host
the NPR in the 1 T phase actually favor the 1H phase thermo-
dynamically, which hinders experimental veri ﬁcation and
demonstration.
In this article, based on the geometric evolution mechanism of
2D structures with a buckled square lattice, we propose a feasible
approach to realize the NPR in a large class of 2D materials. Out of
over 800 layered materials identi ﬁed from the ICSD database
23,
motivated by a symmetry-based hypothesis, we identify a family
of buckled square monolayer structures in the p4mm plane group
that can host auxetic behaviors. Sharing the same stoichiometry of
MX, these 2D materials are p4mm-type transition metal selenides
and halides. Among them, monolayer compounds with d
10 cations
tend to host in-plane NPR, whereas others usually exhibit PPR with
small strain (<2%). This trend can be understood by analyzing the
interactions between neighboring transition metal atoms up to
the next-nearest neighboring (NNN) level. Experimental realization
is called for this class of auxetic 2D compounds, as the bulk
materials of several MX compounds considered in this work have
been successfully synthesized
24–27.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Design rule of 2D NPR materials in a square lattice
Our hypothesis is that the NPR effect in 2D materials can be
achieved through a geometric evolution under strain in one of the
simplest 2D geometric structures: the square lattice. Taking the
planar p4mm-type structure as an example, as shown in Fig. 1a, a
tensile strain along x-direction will give rise to an increasing
distance between the two nearest neighboring (NN) atoms, thus
inducing a downward (upward) resultant force for M
3 (M4) atom. A
transverse contraction along y-direction thus occurs, leading to a
PPR. Obviously, a compressive strain along x-direction results in
the upward (downward) movement of M 3 (M4) atom, leading to a
PPR as well.
1Department of Physics, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 2Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 3School of Physics, Nankai
University, Tianjin 300071, China.4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA.5These authors contributed equally: Jinbo Pan, Yan-Fang Zhang.
✉email: zphu@nankai.edu.cn; qiminyan@temple.edu
www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;


--- Page 2 ---
Next, we illustrate that the NPR can originate from a more
complicated structure by introducing an extra atom above/below
the xy-plane, as shown in Fig. 1b, which has strong bonding
interactions with its four neighboring atoms. Under a tensile strain
along x-direction, the X atom moves downward owing to the
attractive interaction with M
1 and M 2 atoms. If the NNN
interactions between M atoms are negligible in comparison with
the interaction between M and X atoms, the repulsive forces on
M
3 and M 4 atoms from X atom dominates and an auxetic effect
(NPR) thus occurs. However, if the NNN M-M interactions are not
negligible, the M
3 and M 4 atoms would be subject to repulsive
forces from the X atom and attractive forces from M 1 and M 2
atoms simultaneously. The resultant force induces a clockwise
(counter-clockwise) rotation for the bond between M 3 (M4) and X
atom in the yz-plane that moves M 3 and M 4 atoms downward
relative to M1 and M2 atoms. In this case, the tensile strain along x-
direction induces a transverse contraction of the structure in xy-
plane (PPR). We expect that the electronic structure of host
materials (such as the electronic states of metal atoms) plays a
major role in the NNN interaction among M atoms, thus affecting
the PRs of this set of 2D materials.
Poisson’s ratios of 2D p4mm-type MX materials
Based on the above hypothesis that the auxetic effect can be
realized through the interplay of atomic geometry and electronic
structure in a 2D buckled square lattice, we identify 2D
compounds with square lattice and buckled geometric structures
through a plane group symmetry-based data mining process from
over 800 layered materials identi ﬁed from the ICSD database
23.
The symmetry-based screening process is shown in Supplemen-
tary Figure 1. A family of compounds, sharing the MX
stoichiometry (M: V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ag; X: Se, Cl, Br, I)
turn out to be the most promising candidates within the p4mm
plane group. As shown in Fig. 2a, this family of 2D compounds
exhibit buckled structures with a layer of metal cations (M: V, Cr,
Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ag) sandwiched between two layers of
anions (X: Se, Cl, Br, I). Each cation M and its four neighboring
anions X form a quasi-regular tetrahedron. Taking the X anion as a
central point, a fourfold rotational symmetry is present in the xy-
plane and two mirrors are along x- and y-directions, which
effectively place this class of 2D compounds in the p4mm plane
group. The optimized lattice constants, band gaps, and elastic
stiffness of the whole family obtained by HSE06 are illustrated as
Supplementary Table 1.
The calculated PRs under small strain are shown in Fig. 2b. Note
that the PRs along x- and the y-directions are equivalent, owing to
the fourfold rotational symmetry. A striking observation is that the
MX compounds with d
10 transition metal cations generally exhibit
NPR, where AgCl has the most NPR at −0.18. The only exceptions
are ZnSe and CuBr, which have PRs that are close to zero. On the
other hand, except for CrSe under antiferromagnetic (AFM) state,
the selenide compounds with d
3–d9 transition metal elements
exhibit PPRs that are not sensitive to the magnetic con ﬁgurations.
Fig. 1 Geometric evolution under strain. Geometric evolution of ( a) a planar lattice, and ( b) a buckled lattice under a uniaxial strain along
x-direction.
Fig. 2 Structure and Poisson ’sr a t i o .a Top view, side view, and
polyhedral view of monolayer MX compounds. b Poisson’sr a t i o so f
MX compounds under small strain along x-direction, presented with
other geometric parameters including M-M distances ( dM-M), M-X-M
angles along longitudinal direction (∠MXM), and M-X distances (bM-X).
J. Pan et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2020)   154 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;


--- Page 3 ---
An inverse correlation is observed between the PR and the distance
between two nearest-neighboring M atoms dM-M as well as the
M-X-M bond angles ∠MXM, especially for the non-magnetic
compounds, indicating an important role of metal –metal interac-
tions in the deformation mechanism of MX compounds. Note that
the metal–metal distance d
M-M is controlled dominantly by atomic-
level constraints including the ionic radii of cation M and anion X
(which largely determines the M-X bond length dM-X)a sw e l la st h e
amount of charge transfer from cations to anions (which affects the
bond angle ∠MXM, as shown in Supplementary Figure 4). On top of
that, the metal –metal interaction induces further variation in dM-M
as well as the M-X-M angle ∠MXM (as shown in Fig. 2b). Therefore, a
monoclinic relationship between the PR and the metal –metal
distance (or the M-X-M bond angle) is not expected, although there
is an indirect correlation between them.
Electronic structure origin of NPR
To elucidate the interactions between neighboring M cations, we
take VSe, CuI, and AgI as examples and explore their electronic
structures in different magnetic con ﬁgurations. As shown in Fig. 3,
the M cation and its four surrounding X anions form a quasi-
regular tetrahedron, and the crystal ﬁeld generates lower-energy
doubly degenerate states with e (d
xy, dz2 ) symmetry and higher-
energy triply degenerate states with t2 (dx2 /C0 y2 , dxz, dyz) symmetry.
Among all these ﬁve orbitals, only the dxy orbital lobes point to the
neighboring M atoms. The NNN interactions among M atoms are
thus dominated by the d
xy–dxy interactions.
For the ferromagnetic (FM) con ﬁguration of VSe, the α spin
channel of the dxy orbital is lower in energy by U (on-site Coulomb
repulsion) than the β spin channel of the dxy orbital, as shown in
the projected density of states (PDOS) and the inset interaction
diagram in Fig. 3a. Only the orbitals with the same spin interact
with each other, which results in bonding states at lower energies
and antibonding states at higher energies. The calculated partial
charge densities shown in the inset of Fig. 3a con ﬁrm the
formation of bonding and antibonding d
xy states. At an electron
energy site ~ −2.5 eV, most of the charge density is located in the
region between the two V atoms that are connected by two Se
atoms through the edge sharing of two tetrahedra, indicating
the bonding d
xy–dxy interaction. At an energy ~1.5 eV, a dxy* state
character is observed on individual V atom but almost no charge
density is located in the region between any two neighboring V
atoms. Note that the Fermi energy is set at zero in the ﬁgure. It is
known that bonding states result in attractive interactions while
the occupation of antibonding states induces repulsive interac-
tions. As can be seen in the PDOS of V atoms on d
xy orbitals, only
the bonding states with α spin are fully occupied, whereas all the
other dxy states remain empty. This speci ﬁc occupation of dxy
states therefore leads to strong attractive interactions between
neighboring V atoms.
For the AFM con ﬁguration of VSe, the dxy orbitals of V atom in
the A-sublattice ( α spin) in the α spin channel are lower in energy
by U than those in the β spin channel, whereas the opposite is
true for those in the B-sublattice ( β spin). The density of states and
the interaction diagram can be seen in Fig. 3b. The solid and
dashed curves correspond to the PDOS of V atoms on dxy orbital at
the A-sublattice and B-sublattice, respectively. The V atom at the
A-sublattice mainly contribute to the bonding states for α spin and
antibonding states for β spin, whereas the V atoms at the B-
sublattice mainly contribute to the antibonding states for α spin
and bonding states for β spin. The bonding states are fully
occupied in both spin channels, whereas antibonding states are
unoccupied. Apparently, the state occupations under FM and
AFM con ﬁgurations are different, which may lead to a variation
in the interaction strength between neighboring metal atoms.
Fig. 3 Electronic structures of VSe, CuI, and AgI. Projected density of states (PDOS) and partial charge densities of VSe, CuI, and AgI. The
PDOS of VSe in FM ( a) and AFM ( b) phases show a dramatic difference as explained schematically by the insets of the two ﬁgures. Electronic
structures of CuI ( c) and AgI ( d) are characterized by the occupation of both bonding and antibonding dxy states.
J. Pan et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)   154 


--- Page 4 ---
For instance, it is claimed in previous work that the strength of the
orbital interaction between the two spin sites is proportional to
the hopping integral t for the FM arrangement, but to t2/U for the
AFM arrangement 28. Strong attractive interactions between
neighboring V atoms are present under both FM and AFM
conﬁgurations, resulting in PPR for VSe. The relatively weak
metal–metal interaction and the presence of NPR in CrSe is
correlated with the occupation of antibonding dxy orbitals, which
is discussed in more detail in the Supplementary Note 1 and
Supplementary Figure 5. Related discussions on magnetic proper-
ties of MX selenides under strain are included in the Supplemen-
tary Note 2 and Supplementary Figure 6. For the MX compounds
with d10 cations, because both bonding states and antibonding
states are fully occupied, as shown in Fig. 3c, d, the interaction
between two neighboring M atoms is relatively weak, leading to
NPR or near-zero PR. This set of d10 2D MX compounds therefore
offers a promising material platform for the experimental
realization of auxetic effects.
Poisson’s ratios under strain
Different from bulk compounds, 2D materials can undergo a large
amount of strain without destroying their atomic structures 29,30.
Speciﬁcally, the buckled structure of MX compounds is an
important geometric origin of material ﬂexibility. For a buckled
structure, a tensile strain along x-direction induces the increase of
both bond angle ∠M1XM2 and bond length M 1X (and M2X). Taking
AgI as an example, the AgI bond length along the direction of
strain increases by only 6.6% under a 25% tensile strain, indicating
great material ﬂexibility under strain.
Beyond the linear response regime, it is expected that the
metal–metal distances are considerably larger and the dxy–dxy
interactions between neighboring metal atoms become weaker,
which introduce nonlinear effects and varying PRs under different
strain condition. For AgBr, AgI, CuCl, CuBr, and CuI, the PRs
decrease by as much as 0.25 as a response to a 5 –30% uniaxial
strain (Fig. 4). Interestingly, a transition from small PPR to large
NPR in CuCl is observed. In the extremely large strain regime
(>20%), the PRs of CuBr and CuI reach their minima slowly,
whereas those of CuCl, AgCl, AgBr, and AgI increase after reaching
the minima.
To understand the mechanical behavior of MX halides under
large strain, we study the changes in lattice constants, M-X bond
lengths, and M-X-M bond angles under large strain as shown in
Supplementary Figure 7). The change in lattice constant along y-
direction, and thus the PR, is determined by two competitive
geometric effects: the change in M
3-X (M4-X) bond length and the
change in M 3-X-M4 angle ∠M3XM4. Under a tensile strain along x-
direction, the increase in metal –metal distance induces a weaker
metal–metal interaction, which endows the buckled 2D systems
less positive or more negative PRs. On the other hand, in the
extreme case that the ∠MXM is close to 180° under very large
tensile strain, the buckled MX system will collapse to a fully planar
structure. In this case, there is no further room for any change of
bond angle ∠M
3XM4 and the lattice constant along y-direction
would decrease under a tensile strain along x-direction, leading to
a positive PR.
Considering these two boundary conditions, it is therefore
expected that the PRs of all the 2D MX halides would reach their
own minima and then increase with even larger tensile strain
along x-direction. The strain under which PR reaches its minimum
is thus correlated with the bond angle. The critical angles when
the PR reaches the minimum for Ag-based compounds are
estimated to be close to 140°, whereas those for Cu-based
compounds are ~132° (as shown in the inset of Fig. 4), which
supports the above analysis. Note that the M-X interaction and its
important role in the deformation mechanism of 2D compounds
have been pointed out in the study of cation –anion interactions in
the quasi-planar tetra-coordinated bonding environment of
auxetic 2D titanium mononitride
31.
Exfoliation energies and stabilities of MX compounds
To evaluate the feasibility of experimental synthesis of MX
monolayer structures, exfoliation energies are computed by using
bilayer systems and considering the van der Waals interlayer
interactions. The computational details are included in the
Supplementary Methods and the results are shown in Supple-
mentary Figure 8. For all the MX compounds we studied, the
interlayer interactions (estimated by the exfoliation energies) are
rather weak (ranging from 0.2 to 20 meV/Å
2) in comparison with
those of existing monolayer 2D systems (as large as 30 meV/Å 2)32,
which is encouraging for the experimental realization of mono-
layer MX systems from their bulk structures.
Next, we perform phonon calculations and ab initio molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations to evaluate the dynamical and thermal
stability of MX compounds. The results on phonon spectra and
MD simulations are shown in Supplementary Figures 9 –11. Ten
out of the 14 compounds (except NiSe, CuCl, CuI, and AgCl) exhibit
no imagery frequency in their phonon spectra, indicating
dynamical stability. For those compounds that host NPRs at
equilibrium lattice constants or under small strain, CuBr, AgBr, and
AgI exhibit promising dynamical stability. For one of the most
promising candidate systems with NPRs, AgI, the MD simulations
show its good thermal stability at room temperature.
In summary, based on a material discovery hypothesis for NPR,
we perform a structure data mining and identify a family of
monolayer 2D MX materials with buckled structures within the
p4mm plane group. Using ﬁrst-principles calculations based on
density functional theory and a hybrid functional, we propose that
a set of compounds in this family, including CrSe, CuCl, CuI, AgCl,
AgBr, and AgI, exhibit auxetic mechanical behaviors while others
have more-usual and PPRs. We show that the fundamental
difference in their mechanical behavior originates from electronic
structure and can be interpreted by analyzing the bonding/
antibonding interactions between a subset of d states of transition
metal atoms at the next-nearest-neighboring level. When bonding
states dominate the metal –metal interaction, PPR occurs. The
electron occupation of antibonding states induces a weaker
metal–metal interaction, which eventually leads to a NPR. The
nonlinear strain response in these MX compounds is system-
atically studied. A strong variation in PR under large strain is
observed and explained by a speci ﬁc deformation mechanism in
the large strain regime. We anticipate this set of material
Fig. 4 Poisson’s ratio of metal halides under large tensile uniaxial
strain along x-direction. The general trend is that the Poisson ’s ratio
becomes more negative with larger strain along x-direction until
reaching a minimum. In the extremely large strain regime, the
further increase of uniaxial strain leads to an increase in the
Poisson’s ratio. The estimated critical M
1-X-M2 angles at which
the Poisson’s ratios reach the minima are shown in the inset.
J. Pan et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2020)   154 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences


--- Page 5 ---
predictions in the 2D MX family will promote experimental
synthesis efforts as well as the continued development of
nanoscale 2D auxetic materials for mechanical applications and
beyond.
METHODS
Density functional theory calculations
Lattice constant and geometric relaxations of 2D MX compounds are
performed using density functional theory within projector-augmented
wave (PAW) potentials 33,34 and the screened hybrid functional of Heyd,
Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE06) 35,36 as implemented in the Vienna ab initio
simulation package (VASP) code 37,38. A vacuum slab of 20 Å is selected and
a plane-wave basis set with an energy cutoff of 600 eV is used. We use a
10 × 10 × 1 Monkhorst−Pack k-point set to sample the Brillouin zone. The
structures studied here are fully relaxed until energy and force are
converged to 10
−7 eV and 0.001 eV/Å, respectively. Such a high criterion is
required due to the sensitivity of in-plane elastic properties to small
structure change and the existence of interactions between next-nearest-
neighboring atoms. For the calculations of magnetic MX compounds with
transition metal elements, primitive cells are used and the monolayer
structures are fully optimized with a given magnetic con ﬁguration (either
FM or AFM).
Mechanical properties calculations
To investigate the mechanical properties of monolayer MX structures, we
employ a least-squares method 39–41 with the formula ES ¼ a1ε2
x þ a2ε2
y þ
a3εx εy under small strain (<2.0%). The PR is calculated by ν ¼ a3=2a1. The
details of the ﬁtting process are given in the Supplementary Information
(Supplementary Figures 2 and 3). In the large strain regime, we apply a
tensile strain along x-direction and relax the lattice constant along
y-direction (Fig. 4). The PR v is calculated by v = −Δy/Δx, where Δx (Δy)i s
the deviation of lattice constant along x-(y-) direction from the
equilibrium value.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The authors declare that the main data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are
available within the paper and its supplementary ﬁles. Other relevant data are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Received: 21 April 2020; Accepted: 22 September 2020;
REFERENCES
1. Evans, K. E. Auxetic polymers: a new range of materials. Endeavour 15, 170 –174
(1991).
2. Scarpa, F. Auxetic materials for bioprostheses [In the Spotlight]. IEEE Signal Pro-
cess. Mag. 25, 128 –126 (2008).
3. Choi, J. & Lakes, R. Design of a fastener based on negative Poisson ’s ratio foam.
Cell. Polym. 10, 205 –212 (1991).
4. Avellaneda, M. & Swart, P. J. Calculating the performance of 1 –3 piezoelectric
composites for hydrophone applications: an effective medium approach. J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 103, 1449 –1467 (1998).
5. Liu, Q. Literature review: materials with negative Poisson ’s ratios and potential
applications to aerospace and defence. Air Vehicles Division Defence Science and
Technology Organisation (Victoria, Australia, 2006).
6. Lowe, A. & Lakes, R. Negative Poisson ’s ratio foam as seat cushion material. Cell.
Polym. 19, 157 –168 (2000).
7. Smith, W. A. In optimizing electromechanical coupling in piezocomposites using
polymers with negative Poisson ’s ratio. IEEE 1991 Ultrasonics Symposium . 661–666
(1991).
8. Prawoto, Y. Seeing auxetic materials from the mechanics point of view: a struc-
tural review on the negative Poisson ’s ratio. Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 140 –153
(2012).
9. Kolpakov, A. On the determination of the averaged moduli of elastic gridworks.
Prikl. Mat. Mekh. 59, 969 –977 (1985).
10. He, C. et al. Toward negative Poisson ratio polymers through molecular design.
Macromolecules 31, 3145 –3147 (1998).
11. Prall, D. & Lakes, R. Properties of a chiral honeycomb with a Poisson ’s ratio of —1.
Int. J. Mech. Sci. 39, 305 –314 (1997).
12. Gibson, I. & Ashby, M. F. The mechanics of three-dimensional cellular materials.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A Math. Phys. Sci. 382,4 3 –59 (1982).
13. Jiang, J.-W. & Park, H. S. Negative poisson ’s ratio in single-layer black phosphorus.
Nat. Commun. 5, 4727 (2014).
14. Du, Y. et al. Auxetic black phosphorus: a 2D material with negative Poisson ’s ratio.
Nano Lett. 16, 6701 –6708 (2016).
15. Wang, Y. et al. Semi-metallic Be 5C2 monolayer global minimum with quasi-planar
pentacoordinate carbons and negative Poisson ’s ratio. Nat. Commun. 7, 11488
(2016).
16. Qian, S. et al. Two-dimensional Be 2C with octacoordinate carbons and negative
Poisson’s ratio. J. Phys. Chem. C. 122, 7959 –7967 (2018).
17. Jiang, J.-W. & Park, H. S. Negative poisson ’s ratio in single-layer graphene ribbons.
Nano Lett. 16, 2657 –2662 (2016).
18. Gao, Z. et al. Novel two-dimensional silicon dioxide with in-plane negative
Poisson’s ratio. Nano Lett. 17, 772 –777 (2017).
19. Yu, L. et al. Negative Poisson ’s ratio in 1T-type crystalline two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Commun. 8, 15224 (2017).
20. Wang, H. et al. BP 5 monolayer with multiferroicity and negative Poisson ’s ratio: a
prediction by global optimization method. 2D Mater. 4, 045020 (2017).
21. Eda, G. et al. Coherent atomic and electronic heterostructures of single-layer
MoS2. ACS Nano 6, 7311 –7317 (2012).
22. Lin, Y.-C. et al. Atomic mechanism of the semiconducting-to-metallic phase
transition in single-layered MoS 2. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 391 (2014).
23. Hellenbrandt, M. The inorganic crystal structure database (ICSD) —present and
future. Crystallogr. Rev. 10,1 7 –22 (2004).
24. Tsubokawa, I. On the magnetic properties of vanadium sul ﬁde and selenide. J.
Phys. Soc. Jpn. 14, 196 –198 (1959).
25. Hsu, F.-C. et al. Superconductivity in the PbO-type structure α-FeSe. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 14262 –14264 (2008).
26. Hull, S. & Keen, D. High-pressure polymorphism of the copper (I) halides: a
neutron-diffraction study to ∼ 10 GPa. Phys. Rev. B 50, 5868 (1994).
27. Moore, M. & Kasper, J. Crystal structure of AgI at 3 kbar. J. Chem. Phys. 48,
2446–2450 (1968).
28. Xiang, H. et al. Magnetic properties and energy-mapping analysis. Dalton Trans.
42, 823 –853 (2013).
29. Pe ́rez Garza, H. H. et al. Controlled, reversible, and nondestructive generation of
uniaxial extreme strains (>10%) in graphene. Nano Lett. 14, 4107 –4113 (2014).
30. Androulidakis, C. et al. Tailoring the mechanical properties of 2D materials and
heterostructures. 2D Mater. 5, 032005 (2018).
31. Zhou, L. et al. Computational dissection of two-dimensional rectangular titanium
mononitride TiN: auxetics and promises for photocatalysis. Nano Lett. 17, 4466
(2017).
32. Mounet, N. et al. Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computa-
tional exfoliation of experimentally known compounds. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13,
246–252 (2018).
33. Blöchl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
34. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector
augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
35. Heyd, J. et al. Hybrid functionals based on a screened Coulomb potential. J. Chem.
Phys. 118, 8207 –8215 (2003).
36. Krukau, A. V. et al. In ﬂuence of the exchange screening parameter on the per-
formance of screened hybrid functionals. J. Chem. Phys. 125, 224106 (2006).
37. Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Ef ﬁcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy
calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
38. Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Ef ﬁciency of ab-initio total energy calculations for
metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Compt. Mater. Sci. 6,
15–50 (1996).
39. Topsakal, M. et al. The response of mechanical and electronic properties of
graphane to the elastic strain. Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 091912 (2010).
40. Yue, Q. et al. Mechanical and electronic properties of monolayer MoS 2 under
elastic strain. Phys. Lett. A 376, 1166 –1170 (2012).
41. Liu, K. et al. Elastic properties of chemical-vapor-deposited monolayer MoS 2,W S2,
and their bilayer heterostructures. Nano Lett. 14, 5097 –5103 (2014).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported as part of the Center for Complex Materials from First
Principles (CCM), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department
of Energy (DOE), Of ﬁce of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Award DE-
SC0012575. L. Yu was supported by the US Department of Energy (DOE) under Award
DE-SC0021127. It bene ﬁtted from the supercomputing resources of the National
Energy Research Scienti ﬁc Computing Center (NERSC), a US Department of Energy
Ofﬁce of Science User Facility operated under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
J. Pan et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)   154 


--- Page 6 ---
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.P. and Y.Z. contributed equally to this work. Q.Y. conceived and coordinated the
research project. J.P., Y.Z., Q.Y., and Z.H. wrote the paper. Calculations were
performed by J.P. and Y.Z. The results were analyzed with contributions of all authors.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-020-00424-1.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Z.H. or Q.Y.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2020
J. Pan et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2020)   154 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
