ARTICLE OPEN
Encoding reprogrammable properties into magneto-
mechanical materials via topology optimization
Zhi Zhao 1 and Xiaojia Shelly Zhang 1,2 ✉
The properties of materials and structures typically remain ﬁxed after being designed and manufactured. There is a growing interest
in systems with the capability of altering their behaviors without changing geometries or material constitutions, because such
reprogrammable behaviors could unlock multiple functionalities within a single design. We introduce an optimization-driven
approach, based on multi-objective magneto-mechanical topology optimization, to design magneto-active metamaterials and
structures whose properties can be seamlessly reprogrammed by switching on and off the external stimuli ﬁelds. This optimized
material system exhibits one response under pure mechanical loading, and switches to a distinct response under joint mechanical
and magnetic stimuli. We discover and experimentally demonstrate magneto-mechanical metamaterials and metastructures that
realize a wide range of reprogrammable responses, including multi-functional actuation responses, adaptable snap-buckling
behaviors, switchable deformation modes, and tunable bistability. The proposed approach paves the way for promising
applications such as magnetic actuators, soft robots, and energy harvesters.
npj Computational Materials            (2023) 9:57 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-00980-2
INTRODUCTION
Stimuli-responsive materials with actuation and phase-changing
capabilities have gained increasing interest due to their potential
to enable advanced functionalities in various disciplines
1–5.
Among them, magneto-responsive materials, allowing untethered,
rapid, and wireless actuation under magnetic ﬁelds, have been
widely studied recently in the areas of robotics 6–10, biomedi-
cine11–13, metamaterial 14,15, vibration mitigation 16,17, sensing 18,19,
and more. Hard-magnetic soft material, achieved by embedding
high-coercivity magnetic particles (e.g., neodymium iron boron
alloy) into a soft matrix (e.g., rubber), has gained popularity 4,20–22.
The hard-magnetic soft material possesses enhanced program-
mability because both its geometry and the magnetization
distribution of the embedded hard-magnetic particles can be
programmed23. Under external magnetic ﬁelds, the pre-
magnetized hard-magnetic particles produce torques to deform
their surrounding soft matrix to align with the applied magnetic
ﬁeld, leading to complex yet programmable shape transforma-
tions4,21–23. In addition to complex shape transformation, the
programmability of hard-magnetic soft materials is further
explored to enable programmable properties by capitalizing the
nonlinear interaction between the magnetic ﬁeld and another
stimulus, such as mechanical loading. In particular, researchers
demonstrate that it is possible to enable switchable and tunable
properties in those materials, which is typically challenging to
achieve under single stimuli. Those properties include varying
auxetic behavior (e.g., Poisson ’s ratio) 15, tunable buckling 24, and
reprogrammable force-displacement response 14.
To design for programmable and tunable properties, the hard-
magnetic soft material offers an enlarged design space containing
both the geometry and magnetization pattern of the embedded
hard-magnetic particles. To explore the design space, recent
studies have established optimization-guided 9,25,26 and machine
learning-driven27–31 design approaches to enable computational
design for mechanical or other stimulus-responsive materials (e.g.,
hard-magnetic soft materials). Topology optimization 32,33 is a
promising generative approach for the rational design of
magnetic soft materials because of its ultimate capability to
generate free-form designs by exploring the entire design space
of geometry and magnetization patterns to optimize user-de ﬁned
objectives under functional constraints. While topology optimiza-
tion has been explored by few studies
23,34 for the computational
design of hard-magnetic soft materials for shape morphing and
actuation performance under external magnetic ﬁelds, it has not
been developed for designing multi-functional materials and
structures with adaptable and reprogrammable properties under
both magnetic and mechanical stimuli.
To enable the capability of altering behaviors without changing
geometries or material constitutions for materials and structures,
here we develop a multi-objective topology optimization frame-
work to encode reprogrammable properties into magneto-
mechanical metamaterials and metastructures. These metamater-
ials and metastructures possess optimized geometry and
embedded magnetization to enable properties that are seamlessly
reprogrammed by switching on and off the external stimuli ﬁelds.
The framework is built upon the design space parameterization
scheme in ref.
23. By simultaneously optimizing both geometries
and remnant magnetization patterns, the generated designs are
capable of realizing different programmed behaviors under purely
mechanical load and simultaneous magneto-mechanical load with
the magnetic ﬁeld serving as a “switch” to alter those behaviors. To
validate the performance of the optimized magneto-mechanical
designs with switchable properties, we fabricate a representative
design and conduct an experimental study. The complete
procedure of the design process, fabrication, and experimental
validation are described in Supplementary Videos 1, 2.
Notably, the proposed optimization-driven computational
approach facilitates a systematic and automated discovery of
programmable magneto-mechanical metamaterials and struc-
tures, whose properties can be reprogrammed and adapted by
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. 2Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. ✉email: zhangxs@illinois.edu
www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
external magnetic ﬁelds. The obtained designs exhibit optimized
geometry and magnetization patterns, and some of them are
challenging to acquire by intuition. With programmable and
adaptable properties, we can enable multiple functionalities
within a single design for various relevant applications, such as
adaptable actuators, programmable metamaterials, and adjustable
energy absorbers. Although the focus in this work is on the
magneto-mechanical materials, we remark that our multi-
objective and multi-physics topology optimization framework is
sufﬁciently general and could be extended to design reprogram-
mable and adaptable stimuli-responsive systems considering
other or more physics stimuli (e.g., thermo-mechanical
35–38 and
thermo-magneto-mechanical39).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Overview of the optimization-driven design approach
The proposed optimization-driven computational design
approach and experimental validation are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Given a design domain and prescribed multiple performance
targets (i.e., desired functionalities) under purely mechanical and
simultaneous magneto-mechanical loads, the proposed genera-
tive approach simultaneously optimizes both geometry and
material magnetization distributions to produce magneto-
mechanical material and structural designs to achieve the
prescribed targets. Under prescribed applied magnetic ﬁelds, the
magnetic torques are induced to align the materials with
magnetization directions with the applied magnetic ﬁeld
direction, leading to programmed actuation at the desired
locations. The readers are referred to the Methods section below
and Supplementary Methods for detailed descriptions of the
mathematical optimization formulation.
We employ the proposed design approach to discover three
multi-functional magneto-mechanical metamaterials and struc-
tures and experimentally validate one of the obtained designs (as
shown in Fig. 1). Each of them can achieve multiple distinct yet
switchable responses (summarized in Supplementary Note 1)
under purely mechanical and simultaneous magneto-mechanical
loads, respectively.
Multi-functional magnetic actuators
We ﬁrst deploy the optimization-driven design approach to
discover multi-functional magnetic actuators with both optimized
actuation and maximized structural stiffness. The purpose is to
design a multi-functional device, with suf ﬁcient structural stiffness
to carry loads under mechanical load alone, and can be
transformed into an actuator when switching on the external
magnetic stimuli. As shown in Fig. 2a, we consider a rectangular
(40 mm × 10 mm) design domain which is ﬁxed on both sides and
discretized by 300 × 75 quadrilateral ﬁnite elements. In the load
case of purely downward mechanical force ( F = 0.0125 N shown in
Fig. 2), we use the downward displacement at the top middle
point of the actuator to characterize its structural stiffness. The
variable u
ðFÞ
α indicates the evaluated displacement at the αth
degree of freedom (DOF), which ranges from 1 to ND (we set
► Matrix ► Magnetization
Optimize
Design variables
Design target
Load
Response
Switch
 ON
Switch
 ON
ON
Switch
OFF
Swi
tch
OFF
Sw
Mode 1 Mode 2
Magnetic actuators with sufficiently high stiffness 
Sufficiently high stiffness Actuation
Switch ON
Switch
 ON
N
Switch OFF
witch
 OFF
Sw
Magneto-active metamaterials with distinct deformation modes
Magneto-active metastructures with adaptable snap buckling
Delayed buckling
Displacement
Force
Ensured snap buckling
Helmholtz coil
Mold
Hard-magnetic soft material
Programmed actuation
Optimized design
Torque
Switch ON
OFFSwitch
Delayed buckling
OFF
Switch
Switch
 ON
Switch OFFOFF
Switch ONSwitch ON
Switch
Fig. 1 Overview of the optimization-guided computational design approach and experimental validation for magneto-mechanical multi-
functional metamaterials and structures. Given design domain and targets (top left), the proposed approach can optimize the three sets of
design variables (middle left) to generate magneto-mechanical multi-functional metamaterials and structures (right), whose properties can be
seamlessly reprogrammed by switching on and off the external stimuli. Fabrication and experimental validation (bottom) are developed to
physically demonstrate the target reprogrammable behaviors are accurately achieved.
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
2
npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
ND = 1 for this design problem). The variable uðFÞ
α with a smaller
magnitude indicates a higher structural stiffness. In the load case
of switching on the external upward magnetic ﬁeld (while keeping
the downward mechanical load), we use the upward displacement
(u
ðF;Ba Þ
α ) to represent the actuation performance. The variable uðF;Ba Þ
α
with larger magnitude indicates better actuation performance.
Given the above setting, we formulate a weighted-sum objective
function J(⋅) (see Eq. 6 in Methods section for the detailed
optimization formulation) to maximize both structural stiffness
and actuation performance:
Jðu
ðFÞ; uðF;Ba ÞÞ¼/C0
XND
α ¼ 1
w1uðFÞ
α þ w2uðF;Ba Þ
α
/C16/C17
; (1)
where u(F) and uðF;Ba Þ are the displacement vectors of the design
under the purely mechanical load case and simultaneous
magneto-mechanical load case, respectively. Both u(F) and uðF;Ba Þ
take positive values in the upward direction. The parameters w1
and w2 are the weighting factors that can be tuned to generate
whether a device with high structural stiffness (possessing small
downward displacement), a magnetic actuator design (possessing
large upward displacement), or a design combining both
functionalities. The soft matrix is modeled by the compressible
Ogden model (see Section Methods for more details) with initial
elastic modulus E = 1 MPa and Poisson ’s ratio ν = 0.499. We
consider a total of N
m = 8 candidate magnetization vectors with
uniform orientation space of 45 ∘ and the same magnitude of
100 mT. The applied magnetic ﬁeld Ba is prescribed to be 50 mT
pointing upward.
As shown in Fig. 2b, we vary the weighting factors, w1 and w2,
under the same prescribed allowable total structural volume (i.e,
30% of the volume of the design domain) and generate three
representative designs (i.e., Scenarios 1 –3) with different targets.
For Scenario 1, we set w1 = 1 and w2 = 0 to only maximize
structural stiffness under the purely mechanical load case. The
total volume usage ratio is 0.3. The obtained design resembles a
conventional compliance-minimized design 40 whose structural
geometry (topology) enables ef ﬁcient load paths to achieve a high
structural stiffness. Because this scenario considers purely
mechanical response, no optimized magnetization pattern is
obtained for the design. Hence, this design does not exhibit
actuation performance when the magnetic ﬁeld is applied (i.e,
uðF;Ba Þ
1 = uðFÞ
1 = − 0.18 mm). For Scenario 2, we set w1 = 0 and
w2 = 1 to only focus on maximizing the actuation performance
under simultaneous magneto-mechanical load case. Compared to
Scenario 1, with the total volume usage ratio of this design is 27%
(which is slightly smaller than the one in Scenario 1), thinner
structural members appear to form a more compliant structural
system, which leads to a larger actuated upward displacement (
w1
Scenario 1
x
y
F
(a) (b)
Scenario 3
Scenario 2
w1
x
y10 mm
u1
(F)
High performace on both structural stiffness and actuation
F
Functionality 1: high stiffness
under mechaincal load
Functionality 2: large actuation
under magneto-mechanical load
Prescribed applied
magnetic field
Candidate
magnetizations 
w2
w2
| Br | = 100 mT | Ba | = 50 mT
w1 = 1; w2 = 0
w1 = 0.7; w2 = 0.3
w1 = 0; w2 = 1
40 mm
u1
(F)  = 
-0.18 mm
u1
(F, Ba)  = 
-0.18 mm
u1
(F)  = 
-0.29 mm
u1
(F, Ba)  = 
2.81 mm
u1
(F)  = 
-1.99 mm
u1
(F, Ba)  = 
7.56 mm
u1
(F, Ba)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225° 270° 315°
Switch
 ONOFF
Switch
 ON
 ON
OFF
J(·) = - ∑ (w1 uα
(F) + w2 uα
(F, Ba))
Min. downward disp.
Max. upward disp.
α = 1
ND OFF
 ON
OFF
Fig. 2 Multi-functional magnetic actuators. a Design setup and target functionalities, i.e., high structural stiffness under mechanical load and
large actuation performance under magneto-mechanical load; b Three optimized designs obtained by varying the weighting factors in Eq. 1.
Notably, the design of Scenario 3 performs well in both target functionalities, i.e., structural stiffness and magnetic actuation.
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 
uðF;Ba Þ
1 ¼ 7:56 mm). However, the increased compliance of
the design signi ﬁcantly reduces the structural stiffness under the
purely mechanical load case — the induced displacement at the
top middle point uðFÞ
1 is −1.99 mm, which is 10 times larger than
the design from Scenario 1.
For Scenario 3, the weighting factors are set to be w1 = 0.7 and
w2 = 0.3 to generate a multi-functional device having both high
structural stiffness and optimized magnetic actuation perfor-
mance. The total volume usage ratio is 0.3. The obtained design
has an overall geometry similar to that of the design from Scenario
1, enabling a relatively stiff structural performance under the
purely mechanical load case (i.e., u
ðFÞ
1 = − 0.29 mm). Additionally,
the thinner structural members on both sides (a feature similar to
the design from Scenario 2), along with the optimized magnetiza-
tion distribution, induce considerable bending deformations
under the magnetic ﬁeld to promote a large actuated upward
displacement ( u
ðF;Ba Þ
1 ¼ 2:81 mm) at the top middle point under
simultaneous magneto-mechanical load case. Compared to other
designs, this optimized actuator design showcases a balanced
performance between both functionalities of high structural
stiffness and large magnetic actuation, having the potential to
be applied in wireless actuation devices that also require certain
stiffness. The magnetic ﬁeld, serving as a ‘switch’, can enable the
alternation between those two functionalities.
Magneto-active metastructures with adaptable snap buckling
Using the proposed optimization-driven design approach, we now
focus on generating magneto-active metastructures with variable
yet controllable snap-buckling behavior. As demonstrated in
Fig. 3a, we consider a square (200 mm × 200 mm) design domain
which is ﬁxed on three sides and discretized by a 150 × 150 FE
mesh. Displacement loadings are applied vertically at different
locations in three design scenarios (see Fig. 3a). We denote the
magnitude of applied displacement as D and the total force
associated with the applied displacement as F. The sign of the
force is taken to be positive in the same direction of the applied
displacement and negative otherwise.
To enable snap-buckling control through the external magnetic
ﬁeld, we ﬁrst introduce a force constraint in the optimization
formulation (see Eq. 6 in Methods section for more details). This
constraint enforces that the total forces F under both pure
mechanical and simultaneous ma gneto-mechanical load cases are
larger than the prescribed positive lower bounds (denoted by F
ðFÞ
min
and FðF;Ba Þ
min respectively) at a smaller a pplied displacement level
 Design setup
Control points
x
y
200 mm
Candidate 
magnetizations
| Br | = 250 mT 
Prescribed applied
magnetic field
| Ba | = 60 mT (Scenario 1)
Scenario 1: Single-stage buckling design 
with compressive load at the top
Scenario 2: Single-stage buckling design 
with tensile load at the top
Load of 
Scenarios 1&2
Load of
Scenario 3
Optimized design
Optimized design
50 (D2)403020 (D1)100
-10
-5
0
5
10F (10 N)
D (mm)
No snap buckling
Snap buckling
-3
-1.5
0
1.5
3
50403020100
D (mm)
F (10 N)
No snap buckling
Mechanical load
Magneto-mechanical load
Scenario 3: Multi-stage buckling design with compressive load at the center
01 0 2 03 04 05 0
-15
-10
-5
5
10
15
0
F (10 N)
D (mm)
Snap buckling 
only on lower members
Magnetic torque
Optimized design
(a)
(b) (c) 
(d)
Mechanical load
Magneto-mechanical load
Mechanical load
Magneto-mechanical 
load
Snap buckling on
upper and lower members
or 40 mT (Scenarios 2&3) 
Switch ON
OFFSwitch
200 mm
D1 D2
D1 ̵D2̶
Switch
 ON
Swi
tch
 O
N
h
Sw
Switch
OFF
Swit
ch
OF
OF
FF
FF
Switch
 ON
Switch
 O
N
h
Sw
Switch
OFF
Swit
ch
OF
FF
Switch
 ON
Sw
itc
h
 O
N
h
SSwitch
OFF
Sw
itch
OF
FF
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
Snap buckling
Fig. 3 Magneto-controllable buckling-induced metastructures with reprogrammable behaviors. a Design setup. Metastructures with
switchable buckling behaviors enabled by magnetic stimuli under b compressive load; and c tensile load. d Metastructure with switchable
multi-stage buckling behaviors under compressive load. Note: the deformed con ﬁgurations at the circled locations on the FD curves
demonstrate the ensured snap buckling through ‘switching on ’ the magnetic ﬁeld.
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
4
npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
D1
41,42. With this force constraint, we ensure the structure does not
experience snap buckling at applied displacement level D1 under
both load cases. We then formulate the objective function J(⋅)
(incorporated in the formulation Eq.6 in Methods section) as follows:
JðuðFÞ; uðF;Ba ÞÞ¼ max /C0 FðuðFÞjD ¼ D2 Þ; FðuðF;Ba ÞjD ¼ D2 Þ
no
: (2)
Intuitively, this objective function aims to promote designs that
experience snap buckling at applied displacement level D2 under
simultaneous magneto-mechanical load case (by minimizing
Fðu
ðF;Ba ÞjD ¼ D2 Þ) and, at the same time, to prevent it from snap
buckling under pure mechanical load case (by maximizing
FðuðFÞjD ¼ D2 Þ). By changing the values of D1 and D2, the
optimization formulation can generate various designs with
distinct yet tunable snap-buckling displacements.
The matrix material is modeled by the compressible Ogden
model with initial elastic modulus E = 0.25 MPa and Poisson ’s ratio
ν = 0.45. We consider a total of N
m = 8 candidate internal
magnetization vectors with uniform orientation space of 45 ∘ and
the same magnitude of 250 mT. The external applied magnetic
ﬁeld Ba is prescribed to be 60 mT (Scenario 1) or 40 mT (Scenarios
2–3) pointing upward. We note that to accurately capture the
snap-through and snap-back buckling behaviors of the obtained
designs, we employ the arc-length method
43 to simulate the
force-displacement (FD) curves. The maximized applied displace-
ment for all the Scenarios is set as 50 mm.
Figure 3b–d show optimized structures obtained for the three
Scenarios. The optimized design for Scenario 1 (with the volume
being 15% of the design domain volume), which is obtained by
applying compressive displacement and setting F
ðFÞ
min ¼ FðF;Ba Þ
min ¼
30 N, D1 = 20 mm, and D2 = 5 0 m m ,i ss h o w ni nF i g .3b. Under the
purely mechanical load case, this optimized structure maintains
positive stiffness and does not experience snap buckling before the
applied displacement levelD
2 = 50 mm. In contrast, when switching
on the magnetic ﬁeld while keeping the mechanical load, this
structure buckles around applied displacement level D = 30 mm.
Notably, we remark that such adaptable buckling behavior of the
optimized structure is achieved by leveraging the nonlinear
coupling between the mechanical behavior of a two-leg topology
and magnetically-induced deform ations. Under applied magnetic
ﬁeld, the optimized magnetization pattern produces magnetic
torques in the two side members of the structure, which in turn
induces ﬁnite rotations
23 and promotes their snap buckling.
Figure 3c shows the optimized design for Scenario 2 (with the
volume being 15% of the design domain volume), which is obtained
by applying tensile displacement and setting F
ðFÞ
min ¼ FðF;Ba Þ
min ¼ 7N ,
D1 = 18 mm, and D2 = 42 mm. Similar to the optimized design in
Scenario 1, the optimized metastructure does not experience snap
buckling under the purely mechanical load case whereas achieves
snap buckling under the simultaneous magneto-mechanical load
cases with the magnetic ﬁeld ‘switched on’.
Both optimized metastructures in Scenarios 1 and 2 possess
single-stage snap behavior. In Scenario 3, we aim to obtain a
magneto-active metastructure with an adaptable multi-stage snap-
buckling behavior. We use an initial design whose geometry
combines the features of the optimized structures from Scenarios 1
and 2 (i.e., we ﬂip the geometry of Scenario 2 and place it on top of
the design from Scenario 1). The optimized design for Scenario 3
(with the volume being 30% of the design domain volume) is shown
in Fig. 3d. The minimal forces for both mechanical and magneto-
mechanical load cases at D
1 = 16 mm are set to be the same, i.e.,
FðFÞ
min ¼ FðF;Ba Þ
min ¼ 40 N. The resultant forces at D2 = 40 mm under
the two load cases, FðuðFÞjD ¼ D2 Þ and FðuðF;Ba ÞjD¼D2 Þ are simulta-
neously maximized and minimized, respectively, by the optimization
formulation. From simulated FD responses of the optimized
structure, we observe that under the purely mechanical load case,
only the two lower members of the structure experience snap
buckling after applied displacement reachesD = 40 mm. In contrast,
under the simultaneous magneto-mechanical load case, both lower
and upper members of the structure experience snap buckling
before applied displacement reaches D = 32 mm. In addition, the
lower members experience snap buckling ﬁrst around D = 16 mm,
followed by the upper members buckling around D = 32 mm. We
note that the three designs reported in this section do not contain
members connecting to the bottom side of the design domain,
which also has ﬁxed-end support. When evaluated by an arc-length
solver, the three designs show both snap-through buckling and
snap-back buckling behaviors. Through the above-mentioned
multiple design scenarios, we demonstrate the feasibility of using
the magnetic ﬁeld as a “switch” to reprogram the snap-buckling
behavior of magneto-active metastructures and showcase the
potential of the proposed optimization-driven approach to discover
those metastructures, which could be promising in the applications
of adaptable energy absorption and dissipation devices that
leverage elastic buckling.
Magnetic metamaterials with reprogrammable deformation
modes
Next, we aim to design magneto-active metamaterials that can
switch between distinctive deformation modes under purely
mechanical and magneto-mechanical loads. We optimize designs
at the unit-cell level and then assemble the optimized unit design
into periodic metamaterials to achieve similar switchable deforma-
tion modes. As shown in Fig. 4a, we consider a unit-cell (20
mm × 20 mm) design domain with its four corners ﬁxed. Bilinear
quadrilateral ﬁnite elements (150 × 150) are employed to discretize
the domain. In addition, four springs are attached to the loading
and control DOFs of the unit cell to account for the stiffness
interactions between unit cells in the assembled metamaterial. We
consider two load cases and aim to optimize unit designs that
achieve reprogrammable deformation modes under these two load
cases. In the ﬁrst load case, purely mechanical loads (prescribed
displacements denoted by Δ with a negative value indicating
tension) are applied horizontally to induce the ﬁrst deformation
mode, which mimics the material behavior of positive Poisson ’s
ratio. In the second load case, in addition to the mechanical load, we
simultaneously ‘switch on’the magnetic ﬁeld, aiming to reprogram
the deformation mode to a distinctive one that mimics the material
behavior of negative Poisson ’s ratio. To achieve this optimization
goal, we simultaneously maximize or minimize a total of N
D control
displacement DOFs (with uðFÞ
α and uðF;Ba Þ
α , respectively, denoting the
αth control DOF under purely mechanical and simultaneous
magneto-mechanical loads) via a min-max objective function 32,
J(⋅), incorporated in the proposed formulation Eq. 6 in Methods
section:
JðuðFÞ; uðF;Ba ÞÞ¼ max
α2f1; ¼ ;ND g
/C0 uðFÞ
α ; uðF;Ba Þ
α
/C16/C17
: (3)
We note that, in the above objective function, the sign
convention of both uðFÞ
α and uðF;Ba Þ
α needs to be de ﬁned
appropriately to accommodate the desired target deformation
modes. In this example, we de ﬁne both u
ðFÞ
α and uðF;Ba Þ
α to be
positive in the deformation modes of mimicking “positive
Poisson’s ratio ” for both tensile and compressive loading
scenarios. These control displacement DOFs are associated with
the vertical displacements on the top middle and bottom middle
of the design domain (i.e., N
D = 2). To quantify the actuation
performance of the optimized design, we also denote the
displacement at the bottom control DOF as D (with a
positive value corresponding to upward displacement). Given
that we apply symmetric constraint
44 and min-max formulation,
the displacement at the top control DOF has the same magnitude
and points to the opposite direction of the bottom DOF. The
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 
matrix material is modeled by the compressible Ogden model
with initial Young ’s modulus E = 0.25 MPa and Poisson ’s ratio
ν = 0.499. We consider a total of Nm = 8 candidate magnetization
vectors with uniform orientation space of 45 ∘ and the same
magnitude of 250 mT. The applied magnetic ﬁeld Ba is set as
50 mT pointing upward.
The optimized designs under the two loading scenarios and
their realized switchable deformation modes are presented in
Fig. 4b, c, respectively. The volumes of the optimized designs for
these two scenarios are set as 20% and 30% of the unit-cell
volume, respectively. For Scenario 1, we apply a tensile displace-
ment ( Δ = −2 mm) horizontally and optimize the unit design to
achieve two distinct deformation modes under purely mechanical
and simultaneous magneto-mechanical load cases, respectively.
From the optimized unit design (Fig. 4b), we observe that the
optimized unit design produces a vertically contracting deforma-
tion ( D = 1.84 mm) under purely mechanical load. By ‘switching
on’ the magnetic ﬁeld, its deformation mode is reprogrammed
into a vertically expanding ( D = −1.28 mm) one, primarily through
the magnetically-actuated bending deformations of the four
members in the center. Furthermore, when assembling the
optimized unit design into a 3 × 3 metamaterial, the behavior of
switchable deformation modes remains, as shown on the right
side of Fig. 4b. Under the applied tensile displacement of
Δ = −3 mm, the assembled metamaterial exhibits contracting
and expanding deformation modes with D = 3.68 mm and
(b)
(a)
∆ Displacement loadControl points
x
y
20 mm
20 mm
1 mm
Candidate 
magnetizations
| Br | = 250 mT 
Prescribed applied
magnetic field
| Ba | = 50 mT 
Unit
(c)
3×3 Assembly
Unit 3×3 Assembly
D = 1.84 mm
D = -2.26 mm
D = -1.28 mm
∆ = -2 mm
∆ = -2 mm
∆ = 2 mm
∆ = 2 mm
∆ = -3 mm D = -5.94 mm
D = 4.8 mm
∆ = 3 mm
∆ = 3 mm
∆ = -3 mm D = 3.68 mm
D = -5.6 mm
D = 13 mm
∆∆ ∆∆
Switch ON
OFFSwitch
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Switch ON
Switch ON
OFFSwitch
OFFSwitch
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
Fig. 4 Magneto-active metamaterial unit and assembly with reprogrammable deformation modes. a Design setup; b, c Two optimized
units and their 3 × 3 assemblies under tensile and compressive mechanical loads, respectively.
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
6
npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
D = −5.94 mm under mechanical and magneto-mechanical load
cases, respectively.
For Scenario 2, we change the horizontal applied displacement
to compression (i.e., Δ = 2 mm). Figure 4c shows the optimized
unit design and the two distinct deformation modes realized
under purely mechanical and magneto-mechanical loads, respec-
tively. Under horizontal applied compressive displacement
(Δ = 2 mm), the optimized unit design exhibit a vertically
expanding deformation mode ( D = −2.26 mm). With the magnetic
ﬁeld simultaneously ‘switched on ’, the magnetic torques, which
are generated by the interaction between the optimized
magnetization pattern and the external magnetic ﬁeld, bend the
four middle structural members (members with blue and red
colors in Fig. 4c) to achieve a vertically contracting deformation
mode ( D = 4.8 mm) which is similar to the auxetic behavior of
negative Poisson ’s ratio. After assembling the optimized unit
design into a 3 × 3 metamaterial, the behavior of reprogrammed
distinct deformation modes is still realized. Under compression
(Δ = 3 mm), the assembled metamaterial achieves expanding
(D = −5.6 mm) and contracting ( D = 13 mm) deformation modes
under purely mechanical and magneto-mechanical load cases,
respectively. It is worth remarking that, for the scenario of
compressive loading (Scenario 2), the displacement magnitudes of
the contracting deformation mode are considerably larger than
those of other deformation modes, which is due to buckling of the
top and bottom members under the simultaneous magneto-
mechanical load case.
To support the numerical ﬁndings, we fabricate the optimized
unit design in Scenario 2 using a hybrid 3D printing and casting
approach
45,46 (shown in Fig. 5a) and experimentally validate its
switchable deformation modes under compression. The fabrica-
tion approach, material property characterization, and experiment
setup are detailed in Supplementary Methods. Both the numerical
and experimental designs use the dimensions of 60 mm × 60
mm × 8 mm, the applied magnetic ﬁeld ∣B
a∣ = 25 mT, and
boundary conditions as shown in Fig. 5. The simulation results
are provided on the top row of Fig. 5b. Under purely mechanical
compression ( Δ = 12 mm), the unit design (undeformed con ﬁg-
uration shown in Stage I-1) produces a vertically expanding
deformation mode (Stage I-2) with a displacement of
D = −11.4 mm. We de ﬁne this deformation mode as the ﬁrst
stable state. On the other hand, under the purely magnetic ﬁeld
(without mechanical loading), the optimized design experiences a
displacement of D = 6.2 mm. By ﬁxing the magnetic ﬁeld and then
applying a horizontal compression simultaneously ( Δ = 12 mm),
we observe that the unit design is reprogrammed into another
deformation mode, namely, the top and bottom sides each
contract D = 14.2 mm (Stage II-2). Interestingly, when removing
the magnetic ﬁeld while maintaining the compression force, the
contracting deformation recovers slightly from D = 14.2 mm to
Undeformed
I-1
Mechanical loading
1st stable
state 
D =
-11.4 mm 
Apply mechanical load
D = 14.2 mm 
Remove magnetic field
2nd stable
state 
D = 13.6 mm Calibration
reference
Loading 
frame
Glued onto
the side
Experimental demonstration Numerical simulation
D = -11.5 mm D = 13.9 mm D = 13.2 mm Baseline
Hard-magnetic soft materials 
Experiment setup
3D-printing
PDMS with magnetic particles
Mixing Degassing
Glue over interfaces
Loading frame
Fabricated sample
PVA Mold PLA frame
Helmholtz coil
Optimized design
Sample assembly
Pour
Cure and magnetize
(a)
(b)
Apply magnetic field
II-1
D = 6.2 mm 
D = 6.6 mm 
I-2 II-2 II-3
Fig. 5 Numerical analysis and experimental validation of the bistability and reprogrammable deformation modes in the optimized
magneto-active metamaterial unit design. a Illustrations of fabrication approach and experimental setup; b Comparison of numerical and
experimental results.
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 
D = 13.6 mm. However, due to the locking of the four buckled
members under compressive load, the unit design remains in a
stable contracting deformation state, which we de ﬁne as the
second stable state (Stage II-3). The above-mentioned bistable
behavior of the unit-cell enabled by the magneto-active design
agrees with the ﬁndings of experimental investigations of
magneto-actuated bistable designs
47. It is noted that although
bistability is not ensured with the objective function ( 3), one could
tune the design domain, boundary conditions, and passive zones
to promote such type of bistable designs. The experimental results
are shown in the bottom row of Fig. 5b. By repeating the same
loading sequence as in the simulation, we observe that the
fabricated unit design realizes the ﬁrst stable state under purely
mechanical loading, and achieves the different second stable state
by ﬁrst applying and then removing the magnetic ﬁeld while
maintaining the mechanical loading. The recorded displacements
(through image tracking) at different loading stages show good
agreement with the ones obtained from the numerical simulation
with less than 7% of relative errors. Supplementary Video 1 shows
the deformation of the tested specimen and simulation. Hence,
the experiment results agree with our numerical ﬁndings both
qualitatively and quantitatively, validating that the optimized
metamaterial unit design possesses bistability that can be
‘switched’ on and off by the external magnetic ﬁeld.
To probe the origin of the bistable behavior of the unit design
and understand how this behavior is in ﬂuenced by ‘switching on’
the applied magnetic ﬁeld as well as varying its magnetic
magnitude, we simulate the FD response and the energy landscape
of this unit design. With the prescribed displacement on both sides
held constant, we load the displacement at the top and bottom
control DOFs simultaneously to deform the unit design to achieve
the same contracting and expanding deformation modes as we
observe in Fig. 5, under both mechanical and magneto-mechanical
loads, respectively. The prescribed displacements of the bottom
control DOF together with the associated forces (negative value
corresponds to upward force) and the total Helmholtz free energy
are evaluated and plotted in Fig. 6. We note that the total energy is
computed by summing up the element-wise Helmholtz free energy
(see Eq. 5) on the voxel-based mesh for the optimized design with
the values of design variables being either 0 or 1.
From the FD curve under pure mechanical load (i.e., the solid
line in Fig. 6a, c), we observe that the design undergoes snap
buckling. Stages I-2 and II-3 correspond to two stable states with
the forces being zero and their energy landscapes forming two
valleys (shown on the solid line in Fig. 6b, d). At D = 0 mm, the
bottom force is positive (downward at the bottom control DOFs),
and the energy landscape has a positive slope, indicating that the
metamaterial unit prefers to expand vertically under purely
mechanical load. By ‘switching on ’ magnetic ﬁelds with different
magnitudes, both the FD relations and energy landscapes are
changed accordingly, as shown in Fig. 6. For the applied magnetic
ﬁeld with ∣B
a∣ = 25 mT, the bottom force becomes negative (i.e.,
upward force at the bottom control DOFs) at D = 0 mm, and the
energy has a negative slope around D = 0 mm, implying that the
unit design prefers the contracting mode (i.e., Stage II-2) to attain
an energy valley. Going from this contracting mode at Stage II-2,
we can ‘switch off ’ the applied magnetic ﬁeld, and the FD and
energy landscape curves return back to the solid lines in Fig. 6,
implying that the metamaterial unit goes to the nearest energy
valley, which the second stable state at Stage II-3. Remarkably, we
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10Helmholtz free energy W (10-3 J)
Bottom displacement D (mm)
Energy valley
Switch
 ON
Switch
OFF
II-3
Energy
valley
Energy
valley II-2
Energy
valleyI-2
Energy landscape
Energy
valley
Energy valley 
disappears
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15
Bottom displacement D (mm)
Bottom reaction 
F (10-1 N)
2
0
-2
-4
4
-6
Switch
OFF
Switch
 ON
II-3
II-2
I-2
Force-displacement relation
Disp. load from top and 
bottom with unchanged 
prescribed disp. on sides
Apply disp. 
D and compute 
reaction F
Mechanical load (|Ba| = 0 mT)
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 25 mT) 
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 55 mT) 
Mechanical load (|Ba| = 0 mT)
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 25 mT) 
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 55 mT) 
Not pass the 
zero-force line
Bottom displacement D (mm)
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15
-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15Bottom displacement D (mm)
0
20
40
60
0
20
40
60
|Ba|  (mT) |Ba|  (mT)
Bottom reaction  F (10-1 N)
5
0
-5
-10
-15
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-5
0
5
10
-10
-15
-20
-25
5
0
-5
-15
-20
-25
Force-displacement relation under various |Ba| Energy landscape under various |Ba| 
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Mechanical load (|Ba| = 0 mT)
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 25 mT) 
Magneto-mechanical load (|Ba| = 55 mT) 
Mechanical load 
(|Ba| = 0 mT)
Magneto-mechanical load 
(|Ba| = 25 mT) 
Magneto-mechanical load 
(|Ba| = 55 mT) 
Energy
valley Energy valley
Energy
valley
Energy
valley
Energy
valley
Helmholtz free energy W (10-3 J)
Fig. 6 Force-displacement responses and energy landscapes to understand the underlying behavior of bistability. a Boundary condition
illustration and force-displacement responses; b Energy landscapes; c, d 3D contour plots of force-displacement relations and energy
landscapes, respectively (as functions of the bottom displacement and the magnitude of applied magnetic ﬁeld).
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
8
npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
still observe the ﬁrst energy valley (the one close to Stage I-2) with
a magnetic ﬁeld of ∣Ba∣ = 25 mT (the dashed lines in 6b, d),
indicating that if we apply this magnetic ﬁeld at Stage I-2, the
metamaterial unit will get trapped at the expanding deformation
mode and not go to the contracting one. However, this energy
valley disappears by applying larger magnetic ﬁelds, e.g.,
∣B
a∣ = 55 mT (the dash-dotted line in Fig. 6b, d). Additionally, the
force no more passes through the zero-force line, indicating that
no stable state exists for the expanding deformation mode.
Therefore, if we apply the magnetic ﬁeld of ∣B
a∣ = 55 mT at Stage I-
2, the metamaterial unit will deform into the contracting
deformation mode.
To conclude, we introduce a multi-objective, magneto-
mechanical topology optimization approach for the systematic
and rational design of metamaterials and metastructures with
reprogrammable properties. Through the proposed approach, we
present several magneto-active metamaterials and metastructures
that realize a wide range of multi-functionalities and reprogram-
mable behaviors, including simultaneously-maximized actuation
and structural stiffness, adaptable snap buckling, switchable
deformation modes, and tunable bistability. The optimized
magnetic soft material designs possess both organic geometries
and magnetization distributions, some of which are challenging to
design via intuition-based processes. Through numerical studies,
we demonstrate that the external magnetic ﬁeld can serve as a
wireless ‘switch’to reprogram the behaviors and functionalities of
those magneto-active metamaterials and structures without the
need of changing their geometries or magnetization patterns.
To validate the proposed computational approach, we fabricate
the optimized design and perform an experimental study to
physically demonstrate the target switchable behaviors are
accurately achieved. Furthermore, we study the energy landscapes
of the optimized magneto-active metamaterials with switchable
deformation modes and reveal how their multi-stability can be
reprogrammed by varying the external magnetic ﬁeld. We envision
that the proposed optimization-driven computational design
approach could facilitate and accelerate the systematic discovery
of multi-functional metamaterials and metastructures, which hold
great potential for various applications, such as wireless actuators,
soft robotics, and adaptable energy dissipation devices.
METHODS
We present the proposed multi-objective topology optimization
framework (including parameterization, interpolation of the
energy function, and optimization formulation) in this section
with details discussed in Supplementary Methods. The nonlinear
modeling of hard-magnetic soft material and the experimental
setup for the fabricated specimens are described in Supplemen-
tary Methods, respectively. The features of the discovered
magneto-mechanical metamaterials and structures are summar-
ized in Supplementary Note 1. Supplementary Videos 1, 2
document the design process, fabrication, and experimental
validation of a representative optimized design.
Parameterization of matrix and magnetization distributions
The distribution of matrix characterizes the spatial occupancy of
material through a density-based approach
32. The matrix distribu-
tion is associated with the density variable ρ with ρe for the eth
element. We apply the density ﬁlter48,49 and the Heaviside
projection operator 50 on the density variable to obtain the
physical density variables ρ.
The residual magnetic ﬂux density at each location of the
design is selected from a set of Nm pre-deﬁned candidate residual
magnetic ﬂux densities, Bð1Þ
r ; ¼ ; BðNm Þ
r , each pointing at one
direction. The magnetization distribution is associated with the
design variable ξ with ξðjÞ
e for the eth element and jth residual
magnetic ﬂux density. Next, we introduce a physical design
variable ﬁeld, m, to parameterize the magnetization distributions.
We ﬁlter48,49 and project 50 the design variable ξ to the physical
variable m. Formally, we de ﬁne the residual magnetic ﬂux density
in element e as
Br;e ¼
XNm
j ¼ 1
mðjÞ
e
/C16/C17 pm
BðjÞ
r : (4)
where mðjÞ
e ¼ 1 means the jth candidate residual magnetic ﬂux
density BðjÞ
r is selected, and mðjÞ
e ¼ 0 means the jth candidate
residual magnetic ﬂux density BðjÞ
r is not selected. A penalization
power, pm, is introduced to penalize the mixture of candidate
magnetizations and to promote the convergence of the physical
magnetization variables mðjÞ
e to either 1 or 0. To promote discrete
magnetization distribution and allow non-magnetized regions to
appear in the design, the physical magnetization variables need to
satisfy the following two constraints: (1) P
Nm
j ¼ 1 mðjÞ
e /C20 1 and (2)
mðjÞ
e /C21 0; 8j. We adopt the Hypercube-to-Simplex Projection (HSP)
approach51,52 to de ﬁne mðjÞ
e , which can satisfy the above-
mentioned constraints (1) and (2) by construction. Through
updating the variable ﬁeld m, the magnetization at each location
is selected by the optimization formulation from the set of
candidate magnetization vectors to minimize/maximize the
objective function.
Interpolation of the Helmholtz free-energy function
Based on the modeling of hard-magnetic soft material
20,w e
introduce the following interpolation of the Helmholtz free-energy
function from the physical variables
ρ and mðjÞ; j ¼ 1; ¼ ; Nm to
describe the magneto-mechanical behaviors of the parameterized
designs. The interpolated free-energy W
e of element e is given by
We ρe; mð1Þ
e ; ¼ ; mðNm Þ
e ; uL
e
/C16/C17
¼ ϵ þð 1 /C0 ϵÞðρeÞpρ½/C138 WE uL
e ; ρe
/C0/C1
þð ρeÞpρ WM uL
e ; Br;eðmð1Þ
e ; ¼ ; mðNm Þ
e Þ
/C16/C17
;
(5)
where uL
e is the displacement vector in element e under
mechanical load (L = (F)) or magneto-mechanical load (L = (F, Ba));
ϵ = 10−5 is a small value to avoid singular stiffness; pρ is the
penalization parameter to promote a nearly discrete design.
Additionally, the energy interpolation scheme
53 depending on ρe
is applied to the stored-energy WE to address the numerical
instabilities of low stiffness regions.
Optimization formulation
With the introduced design space parameterization and free-
energy interpolation schemes, we now present the topology
optimization formulation to generate multi-functional metamater-
ial and structural designs under mechanical and magneto-
mechanical loads, respectively. Formally, we formulate the
topology optimization problem as:
min
ρ;ξð1Þ ; ¼ ;ξðNm Þ
J uðFÞ; uðF;Ba Þ/C0/C1
;
s:t: : vT ρ
jΩh j /C20 vmax;
FðuLÞ/C21 FL
min; L 2½ ðFÞ; ðF; BaÞ/C138;
PNe
e ¼ 1
wσ ðρe Þ
ve
R
Ωh;e
σVMðσEðuLÞÞdX
hi pn
/C26/C27 1=pn
/C20 σL
max; L 2½ ðFÞ; ðF; BaÞ/C138;
rðρ; mð1Þ; ¼ ; mðNm Þ; uLÞ¼ 0; L 2½ ðFÞ; ðF; BaÞ/C138;
0 /C20 ρ /C20 1;
0 /C20 ξðjÞ /C20 1; j ¼ 1; ¼ ; Nm;
(6)
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
9
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 
where the mesh Ωh is composed of Ne elements, uL is the
converged displacement vector under mechanical load (L = (F)) or
magneto-mechanical load (L = (F, Ba)); v is the element volume
vector with ve being the volume of element e; Ne is the number of
elements; vmax is the assigned maximum volume for matrix
materials. We note that the force constraint 41,42 is used for
designing magneto-active structures with adaptable snap buck-
ling, with F being the summation of force at target degree of
freedoms (DOFs) and FL
min being the prescribed minimum force. In
addition, the above optimization formulation incorporates von-
Mise stress constraints applied individually on the deformation
state uL with the upper bound σL
max. To prevent the singularity
issue in the stress-constrained topology optimization 54–56,w e
adopt the relaxation approach and de ﬁne wσ ðρeÞ¼ ϵ þð 1 /C0
ϵÞρ
qρ
e with qρ < 1. The stress constraint is handled by the p-norm
approach55 with the power of pn. We emphasize that the stress
constraints, as a numerical technique, are effective to prevent thin
members and hinge-like connections from appearing in the
optimized design as well as to restrict the level of local
deformations
23,57.
The proposed formulation ( 6) is solved by a gradient-based
update algorithm. In this work, we adopt the method of moving
asymptotes (MMA)58. The sensitivities information of objective and
constraint functions with respect to the design variables are
derived by the adjoint method
32.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data generated during the current study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The code generated during the current study is available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
Received: 14 August 2022; Accepted: 14 February 2023;
REFERENCES
1. Wu, B. et al. High-performance phosphorene electromechanical actuators. npj
Comput. Mater. 6,1 –7 (2020).
2. Wang, Y., Ning, J., Lu, L., Bosman, M. & Simpson, R. E. A scheme for simulating
multi-level phase change photonics materials. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1 –10 (2021).
3. Zhang, N. & Asle Zaeem, M. Nanoscale self-healing mechanisms in shape memory
ceramics. npj Comput. Mater. 5,1 –8 (2019).
4. Kim, Y. & Zhao, X. Magnetic Soft Materials and Robots. Chem. Rev. 122,
5317–5364 (2022).
5. Zhang, X. et al. Multi-objective parametrization of interatomic potentials for large
deformation pathways and fracture of two-dimensional materials. npj Comput.
Mater. 7, 113 (2021).
6. Zhang, C. et al. 3D Printing of Functional Magnetic Materials: From Design to
Applications. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2102777 (2021).
7. Sun, B. et al. Magnetic Arthropod Millirobots Fabricated by 3D-Printed Hydrogels.
Adv. Intell. Syst. 4, 2100139 (2022).
8. Wang, L., Guo, C. F. & Zhao, X. Magnetic soft continuum robots with contact
forces. Extreme Mech. Lett. 51, 101604 (2022).
9. Lum, G. Z. et al. Shape-programmable magnetic soft matter. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 113, E6007 –E6015 (2016).
10. Kim, Y., Parada, G. A., Liu, S. & Zhao, X. Ferromagnetic soft continuum robots. Sci.
Robot. 4, eaax7329 (2019).
11. Ceylan, H. et al. 3D-Printed Biodegradable Microswimmer for Theranostic Cargo
Delivery and Release. ACS Nano 13, 3353 –3362 (2019).
12. Zhou, C. et al. Ferromagnetic soft catheter robots for minimally invasive bio-
printing. Nat. Commun. 12, 5072 (2021).
13. Wang, L., Kim, Y., Guo, C. F. & Zhao, X. Hard-magnetic elastica. J. Mech. Phys. Solids
142, 104045 (2020).
14. Chen, T., Pauly, M. & Reis, P. M. A reprogrammable mechanical metamaterial with
stable memory. Nature 589, 386 –390 (2021).
15. Ma, C. et al. Magnetic Multimaterial Printing for Multimodal Shape Transforma-
tion with Tunable Properties and Shiftable Mechanical Behaviors. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 13, 12639 –12648 (2021).
16. Li, Y., Li, J., Li, W. & Du, H. A state-of-the-art review on magnetorheological
elastomer devices. Smart Mater. Struct. 23, 123001 (2014).
17. Kang, S. S., Choi, K., Nam, J.-D. & Choi, H. J. Magnetorheological Elastomers:
Fabrication, Characteristics, and Applications. Materials 13, 4597 (2020).
18. Gao, L. et al. Magnetically induced micropillar arrays for an ultrasensitive ﬂexible
sensor with a wireless recharging system. Sci. China Mater. 64, 1977–1988 (2021).
19. Zhao, X. et al. Soft ﬁbers with magnetoelasticity for wearable electronics. Nat.
Commun. 12, 6755 (2021).
20. Zhao, R., Kim, Y., Chester, S. A., Sharma, P. & Zhao, X. Mechanics of hard-magnetic
soft materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 124, 244 –263 (2019).
21. Wu, S., Hu, W., Ze, Q., Sitti, M. & Zhao, R. Multifunctional magnetic soft compo-
sites: a review. Multifunct. Mater. 3, 042003 (2020).
22. Lucarini, S., Hossain, M. & Garcia-Gonzalez, D. Recent advances in hard-magnetic
soft composites: Synthesis, characterisation, computational modelling, and
applications. Compos. Struct. 279, 114800 (2022).
23. Zhao, Z. & Zhang, X. S. Topology optimization of hard-magnetic soft materials. J.
Mech. Phys. Solids 158, 104628 (2022).
24. Yan, D., Pezzulla, M., Cruveiller, L., Abbasi, A. & Reis, P. M. Magneto-active elastic
shells with tunable buckling strength. Nat. Commun. 12,1 –9 (2021).
25. Wu, S. et al. Evolutionary Algorithm-Guided Voxel-Encoding Printing of Func-
tional Hard-Magnetic Soft Active Materials. Adv. Intell. Syst. 2, 2000060 (2020).
26. Wang, L. et al. Evolutionary design of magnetic soft continuum robots. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2021922118 (2021).
27. Lloyd, P. et al. A Learnt Approach for the Design of Magnetically Actuated Shape
Forming Soft Tentacle Robots. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5, 3937 –3944 (2020).
28. Schmidt, J., Marques, M. R. G., Botti, S. & Marques, M. A. L. Recent advances and
applications of machine learning in solid-state materials science. npj Comput.
Mater. 5,1 –36 (2019).
29. Lookman, T., Balachandran, P. V., Xue, D. & Yuan, R. Active learning in materials
science with emphasis on adaptive sampling using uncertainties for targeted
design. npj Comput. Mater. 5,1 –17 (2019).
30. Ma, C. et al. Accelerated design and characterization of non-uniform cellular
materials via a machine-learning based framework. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1 –8
(2020).
31. Kumar, S., Tan, S., Zheng, L. & Kochmann, D. M. Inverse-designed spinodoid
metamaterials. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1 –10 (2020).
32. Bendsoe, M. P. & Sigmund, O. Topology Optimization: Theory, Methods, and
Applications (Springer Science & Business Media, 2003).
33. Wang, C., Zhao, Z., Zhou, M., Sigmund, O. & Zhang, X. S. A comprehensive review
of educational articles on structural and multidisciplinary optimization. Struct.
Multidiscipl. Optim.
64, 2827 –2880 (2021).
34. Tian, J. et al. Conformal topology optimization of multi-material ferromagnetic
soft active structures using an extended level set method. Comput. Methods Appl.
Mech. Eng. 389, 114394 (2022).
35. Zhang, Y., Velay-Lizancos, M., Restrepo, D., Mankame, N. D. & Zavattieri, P. D.
Architected material analogs for shape memory alloys. Matter 4, 1990 –2012
(2021).
36. Liu, K., Hacker, F. & Daraio, C. Robotic surfaces with reversible, spatiotemporal
control for shape morphing and object manipulation. Sci. Robot. 6, eabf5116
(2021).
37. Liu, K., Wu, J., Paulino, G. H. & Qi, H. J. Programmable deployment of tensegrity
structures by stimulus-responsive polymers. Sci. Rep. 7,1 –8 (2017).
38. Han, M. et al. Submillimeter-scale multimaterial terrestrial robots. Sci. Robot. 7,
eabn0602 (2022).
39. Zhang, J., Guo, Y., Hu, W. & Sitti, M. Wirelessly actuated thermo-and magneto-
responsive soft bimorph materials with programmable shape-morphing. Adv.
Mater. 33, 2100336 (2021).
40. Buhl, T., Pedersen, C. B. & Sigmund, O. Stiffness design of geometrically nonlinear
structures using topology optimization. Struct. Multidiscipl. Optim. 19,9 3 –104
(2000).
41. Bhattacharyya, A., Conlan-Smith, C. & James, K. A. Design of a Bi-stable Airfoil with
Tailored Snap-through Response Using Topology Optimization. Comput. Aided
Des. 108,4 2 –55 (2019).
42. Deng, H., Cheng, L., Liang, X., Hayduke, D. & To, A. C. Topology optimization for
energy dissipation design of lattice structures through snap-through behavior.
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 358, 112641 (2020).
43. Leon, S. E., Lages, E. N., De Araújo, C. N. & Paulino, G. H. On the effect of constraint
parameters on the generalized displacement control method. Mech. Res. Com-
mun. 56, 123 –129 (2014).
44. Vatanabe, S. L., Lippi, T. N., de Lima, C. R., Paulino, G. H. & Silva, E. C. Topology
optimization with manufacturing constraints: a uni ﬁed projection-based
approach. Adv. Eng. Softw. 100,9 7 –112 (2016).
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
10
npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
45. Li, W., Wang, F., Sigmund, O. & Zhang, X. S. Digital synthesis of free-form multi-
material structures for realization of arbitrary programmed mechanical respon-
ses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119, e2120563119 (2022).
46. Montgomery, S. M. et al. Magneto-Mechanical Metamaterials with Widely Tun-
able Mechanical Properties and Acoustic Bandgaps. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31,
2005319 (2021).
47. Crivaro, A., Sheridan, R., Frecker, M., Simpson, T. W. & Von Lockette, P. Bistable
compliant mechanism using magneto active elastomer actuation. J. Intell. Mater.
Syst. Struct. 27, 2049 –2061 (2016).
48. Bourdin, B. Filters in topology optimization. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 50,
2143–2158 (2001).
49. Sigmund, O. Morphology-based black and white ﬁlters for topology optimization.
Struct. Multidiscipl. Optim. 33, 401 –424 (2007).
50. Wang, F., Lazarov, B. S. & Sigmund, O. On projection methods, convergence and
robust formulations in topology optimization. Struct. Multidiscipl. Optim. 43,
767–784 (2011).
51. Zhou, Y., Nomura, T. & Saitou, K. Multi-component topology and material
orientation design of composite structures (MTO-C). Comput. Methods Appl. Mech.
Eng. 342, 438 –457 (2018).
52. Zhang, X. S., Chi, H. & Zhao, Z. Topology optimization of hyperelastic structures
with anisotropic ﬁber reinforcement under large deformations. Comput. Methods
Appl. Mech. Eng. 378, 113496 (2021).
53. Wang, F., Lazarov, B. S., Sigmund, O. & Jensen, J. S. Interpolation scheme for
ﬁctitious domain techniques and topology optimization of ﬁnite strain elastic
problems. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 276, 453 –472 (2014).
54. Cheng, G. & Jiang, Z. Study on topology optimization with stress constraints. Eng.
Optim. 20, 129 –148 (1992).
55. Duysinx, P. & Bendsøe, M. P. Topology optimization of continuum structures with
local stress constraints. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 43, 1453 –1478 (1998).
56. Bruggi, M. On an alternative approach to stress constraints relaxation in topology
optimization. Struct. Multidiscipl. Optim. 36, 125 –141 (2008).
57. Li, W., Wang, F., Sigmund, O. & Zhang, X. S. Design of composite structures with
programmable elastic responses under ﬁnite deformations. J. Mech. Phys. Solids
151, 104356 (2021).
58. Svanberg, K. The method of moving asymptotes –a new method for structural
optimization.
Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 24, 359 –373 (1987).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award (CMMI-2047692) and the U.S. Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Young Faculty Award (N660012314013). The
information provided in this paper is the sole opinion of the authors and does not
necessarily re ﬂect the view of the sponsoring agency. The authors acknowledge the
use of facilities and instrumentation at the Materials Research Laboratory Central
Research Facilities, University of Illinois, partially supported by NSF through the
University of Illinois Materials Research Science and Engineering Center DMR-
1720633.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.S.Z. and Z.Z. conceived the research. Z.Z. and X.S.Z. developed the topology
optimization design approach and generated the magneto-mechanical designs of
metamaterials and structures. Z.Z. and X.S.Z. experimentally demonstrated one of the
optimized designs. Z.Z. and X.S.Z. wrote the paper.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-00980-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Xiaojia Shelly
Zhang.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Z. Zhao and X.S. Zhang
11
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)    57 