ARTICLE OPEN
Transferable equivariant graph neural networks for the
Hamiltonians of molecules and solids
Yang Zhong1,2, Hongyu Yu 1,2, Mao Su 1,2, Xingao Gong 1,2 and Hongjun Xiang 1,2 ✉
This work presents an E(3) equivariant graph neural network called HamGNN, which can ﬁt the electronic Hamiltonian matrix of
molecules and solids by a complete data-driven method. Unlike invariant models that achieve equivariance approximately through
data augmentation, HamGNN employs E(3) equivariant convolutions to construct the Hamiltonian matrix, ensuring strict adherence
to all equivariant constraints inherent in the physical system. In contrast to previous models with limited transferability, HamGNN
demonstrates exceptional accuracy on various datasets, including QM9 molecular datasets, carbon allotropes, silicon allotropes,
SiO
2 isomers, and Bi xSey compounds. The trained HamGNN models exhibit accurate predictions of electronic structures for large
crystals beyond the training set, including the Moiré twisted bilayer MoS 2 and silicon supercells with dislocation defects,
showcasing remarkable transferability and generalization capabilities. The HamGNN model, trained on small systems, can serve as
an ef ﬁcient alternative to density functional theory (DFT) for accurately computing the electronic structures of large systems.
npj Computational Materials           (2023) 9:182 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01130-4
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays machine learning (ML) has a wide range of applications
in molecular and materials science, including the direct prediction
of various properties of materials
1– 3, the construction of machine
learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) with quantum mechanical
precision
4– 7, the high-throughput generation of molecular and
crystal structures 8– 10, and the construction of more precise
exchange-correlation functionals11,12. However, the determination
of materials’ electronic structure still heavily relies on calculations
based on density functional theory (DFT). Unfortunately, these
methods require a signi ﬁcant amount of time to get the electronic
Hamiltonian matrices through self-consistent iterations and exhibit
poor scalability with respect to system sizes. Semi-empirical tight-
binding (TB) approximations
13, such as the Slater-Koster method 14,
can reduce a lot of computation compared to the DFT methods.
However, this approach often directly uses the existing or manually
ﬁne-tuned TB parameters and thus cannot accurately reproduce the
electronic structure of general systems. Developing truly transfer-
able, fully data-driven TB models that can be applied across various
materials, geometries, and boundary conditions can reconcile
accuracy with speed but is rather challenging.
Hegde and Brown ﬁrst used kernel ridge regression (KRR) to learn
semi-empirical tight-binding Hamiltonian matrices
15. They success-
fully ﬁtted the Hamiltonian matrix of the Cu system containing only
rotation invariant s orbitals and the diamond system consisting only
of s and p orbitals. Similarly, Wang et al. designed a neural network
model to obtain semi-empirical TB parameters by ﬁtting the band
structures calculated by DFT 16. An important feature of the
Hamiltonian matrix is that its components transform equivariantly
with the rotation of the coordinate system. However, none of these
approaches deals with the rotational equivariance of the Hamilto-
nian matrix. Moreover, the two methods are limited to ﬁtting the
empirical model Hamiltonian matrices rather than the true ab initio
tight-binding Hamiltonian matrices generated by the self-consistent
iteration of ab initio tight-binding methods such as OpenMX
17,18
and Siesta19,20.
Because of the spherical harmonic part of the atomic basis
functions, the TB Hamiltonian matrix must satisfy two fundamental
constraints: rotational equivariance and parity symmetry. Due to the
presence of periodic boundary conditions, the tight-binding
Hamiltonian matrix for solids also e xhibits translational invariance.
The fundamental symmetry constraints satisﬁed by the tight-binding
Hamiltonian matrix belong to the E(3) group. The notation E(3)
denotes the Euclidean group in three-dimensional (3D) space, i.e., the
group of rotations, translation s, and inversion in 3D space. If a
mapping L(q) is E(3) equivariant, then the following equivariant
condition is satisﬁed for any rotation or inversion operation^g 2 Oð3Þ
and translation operation: Lð^g /C14 q þ tÞ¼ ^g /C14 LðqÞ,w h e r et is the
translation vector. In other words, the mappingL(q) remains invariant
under translation while being equivariant under rotation and
inversion. The tight-binding Hamiltonian matrixH({τ
i}) can be viewed
as a function of the atomic positions {τi} of the system. Here we take
the rotational equivariance of theHamiltonian matrix as an example.
When a rotation ^Q 2 SOð3Þ is applied to the system, the equivariance
between the rotated and original Hamiltonian matrices can be
expressed asHðfτ
0i gÞ ¼ Dð^QÞHðfτi gÞDð^QÞ
y
,w h e r efτ0i g is the set of
the rotated atomic positions, and D is the Wigner D matrix21,22.I ti s
crucial for the mapping of atomic coordinates to the Hamiltonian
matrix to satisfy equivariance. If equivariance is not achieved in the
mapping, the Hamiltonian matrix may undergo an unphysical
transformation, resulting in Hðfτ
0i gÞ ≠ Dð^QÞHðfτi gÞDð^QÞ
y
when the
system undergoes any rotation. Non-equivariant models necessitate
a substantial amount of training data to approximately achieve
equivariance by learning how to predict the Hamiltonian matrix in all
possible directions of the system. Non-equivariant models often
struggle with transferability, especially when encountering structures
or conﬁgurations that differ signiﬁcantly from the training set. As a
consequence, they may lack generalization capabilities when applied
to new or complex materials. In contrast, equivariant models possess
a more robust ability for complex s tructures due to their ability to
capture and preserve symmetries.
1Key Laboratory of Computational Physical Sciences (Ministry of Education), Institute of Computational Physical Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, and
Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. 2Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai 200030, China. ✉email: hxiang@fudan.edu.cn
www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
Zhang et al. 23 and Nigam et al. 24 proposed a method to predict
the ab-initio TB Hamiltonians of small molecules and simple solid
systems by constructing an equivariant kernel in Gaussian Process
Regression (GPR) to parameterize the Hamiltonian matrices. Due
to the ﬁxed kernel and representation used in GPR
25– 28, its training
accuracy and multi-element generalization ability are typically
inferior to those of deep neural networks like message-passing
neural networks (MPNNs) 29– 34 when a suf ﬁcient number of
training samples are available. Hence, the development of graph
neural networks (GNNs) with the capability to predict the
Hamiltonian matrix of both general periodic and aperiodic
systems emerges as the most favorable approach.
However, traditional GNNs are limited to predicting rotation-
invariant scalars such as energy, band gap, and the like. To predict
equivariant directional properties, GNNs need to encode the
directional information of the system suitably. To make the
predicted Hamiltonian matrices satisfy the rotational equivariance,
Schütt et al. designed the SchNorb neural network architecture by
embedding the direction information of the bonds into the
message-passing function
35. This network constructs the TB
Hamiltonian of molecules from the directional edge features of
atom pairs. However, SchNorb needs to learn the rotational
equivariance of the Hamiltonian matrix through data augmenta-
tion, which greatly increases the amounts of training data and
redundant parameters of the network. Unke et al. proposed the
PhisNet model
36, which achieved SE(3) equivariant parameteriza-
tion of TB Hamiltonian matrix using GNN based on SO(3)
representations. Their model demonstrated high accuracy on
the Hamiltonian matrices of small molecules such as water and
ethanol. However, it should be noted that the PhisNet model
cannot be considered a universal representation of Hamiltonian
matrices due to its neglect of parity symmetry, which can lead to
signiﬁcant issues in predicting periodic systems.
Recently, Li et al. proposed a GNN model named DeepH to predict
the TB Hamiltonian matrix by constructing local coordinate systems
in a crystal
37. DeepH successfully predicted the TB Hamiltonian
matrices of some simple periodic systems such as graphene and
carbon nanotubes. Their original i ntention of introducing the local
coordinate system is to solve the rotation equivariance problem of
the Hamiltonian, but DeepH still embeds the local directional
information of interacting atom pairs in the invariant message
passing function, which will undoubtedly increase the number of
redundant parameters of the network but may require less data
augmentation than a fully invariant model without local coordinate
systems. In addition, the hopping distance between two interacting
atoms far exceeds the typical lengths of chemical bonds. Taking the
smallest hydrogen atom as an example, the cutoff radius of the
numerical atomic orbital of the hydrogen atom used by OpenMX is 6
Bohr, so the furthest hopping between any two atomic bases used by
OpenMX in periodic systems can exceed at least 12 Bohr (~6.4 Å), a
distance that even exceeds the lattice parameters of certain crystals.
Therefore, it is dif ﬁcult to describe such long hopping in a well-
deﬁned local coordinate system.
In this work, we developed a general framework to parametrize
the Hamiltonian matrix by decomposing each block of the
Hamiltonian matrix into a vector coupling of equivariant
irreducible spherical tensors
38 (ISTs) with appropriate parity
symmetry. The parametrized Hamiltonian matrix strictly adheres
to rotational equivariance and parity symmetry, and can be further
extended to a parameterized Hamiltonian that satis ﬁes SU(2) and
time-reversal equivariance to accurately ﬁt the Hamiltonian matrix
with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects. Based on this universal
parametrized Hamiltonian, we designed the E(3) equivariant
HamGNN model for predicting the TB Hamiltonian matrices of
molecules and solids. HamGNN has demonstrated its universality
for the Hamiltonian matrix, showcasing exceptional accuracy
across various datasets, including QM9 molecular datasets, carbon
allotropes, silicon allotropes, SiO
2 isomers, and Bi xSey compounds.
The trained HamGNN model can predict the Hamiltonian matrices,
energy bands, and wavefunctions of the structures not present in
the training set. The powerful ﬁtting and generalization ability
exhibited by HamGNN enables researchers to ef ﬁciently compute
the electronic structures of large-scale crystal systems that were
previously deemed challenging or inaccessible.
RESULTS
E(3) equivariant parametrized Hamiltonian
The core of the electronic structure problem in DFT is to solve the
Kohn-Sham equation for electrons. If the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian
is represented by numerical atomic orbitals centered on each
atom, such as those de ﬁned in packages like OpenMX and Siesta,
then the Kohn-Sham equation can be formulated as a generalized
eigenvalue problem:
H
ðkÞψnk ¼ εnk SðkÞψnk (1)
where HðkÞ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
¼P
nc eik/C1 Rnc HðRnc Þ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
and SðkÞ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
¼P
nc
eik/C1 Rnc SðRnc Þ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
are the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian and overlap
matrices at the point k in the reciprocal space. HðkÞ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
and
SðkÞ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
are obtained by Fourier transform of the real-space TB
Hamiltonian matrix HðRnc Þ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
¼h ϕni li mi ðr /C0 τi Þj^Hjϕnj lj mj ðr /C0 τj /C0
Rnc Þi and overlap matrix SðRnc Þ
ni li mi ;nj lj mj
¼h ϕni li mi ðr /C0 τi Þjϕnj lj mj ðr /C0 τj
/C0 Rnc Þi, respectively, in the basis of atomic orbitals ϕni li mi at the
site τi and ϕnj lj mj at the site τj + Rnc, where Rnc is the shift vector of
the nc-th periodic image cell. Therefore, once we have obtained
the Hamiltonian matrix and overlap matrix in real space, we can
further solve the electronic structure in the whole reciprocal space.
Due to the spherical symmetry of the atomic potential, the
atomic orbital bases as its eigenfunctions not only satisfy the
rotational equivariance under the operation Q ∈ SO (3) but also has
a certain parity symmetry under the inversion operation g ∈ {E, I}.
Under a rotary-inversion operation gQ ∈ O (3), the TB Hamiltonian
matrix element H
ni li mi ;nj lj mj in real space becomes (we omit the
notation Rnc for convenience in the following discussion):
H0
ni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼h gQϕni li mi j^HjgQϕnj lj mj i (2)
The irreducible representation of gQ is σp(g)⊗D(Q), where D(Q)i s
the Wigner D matrix and σp(g) is the scalar irreducible representa-
tion of the inversion operation, which is de ﬁned as follows
σpðgÞ¼ 1; g ¼ E
p; g ¼ I
/C26
(3)
Substitute the irreducible representation of gQ into Eq. ( 2), we
can get
H0
ni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼ σpi pj ðgÞ
X
μi μj
Dðli Þ
mi μi
ðQÞDðlj Þ
mj μj ðQÞHni li μi ;nj lj μj (4)
where σpi pj ðgÞ¼ σpi ðgÞσpj ðgÞ. We further write the right-hand side
of Eq. ( 4) in the form of matrix-vector multiplication:
H0
ni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼ σpi pj ðgÞ
X
μi μj
½Dli ðQÞ/C10 Dlj ðQÞ/C138 mi mj ;μi μj
Hni li μi ;nj lj μj (5)
It can be seen from the above equation that each sub-block
Hni li μi ;nj lj μj (jμi j/C20 li , jμj j/C20 lj ) of the TB Hamiltonian matrix based on
atomic orbitals can be regarded as a spherical tensor 22,38 Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj /C17
Hni li μi ;nj lj μj with the parity pi pj , which is rotationally equivariant
according to the generalized Wigner D matrix Dl
μmðQÞ¼
Dli
μi mi ðQÞDlj
μj mj ðQÞ, where l /C17ð li ; lj Þ, μ /C17ð μi ; μj Þ, m /C17ð mi ; mj Þ.
Y. Zhong et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
According to the angular momentum theory 21,22, Dli ðQÞ/C10
Dlj ðQÞ is a reducible representation and can be further decom-
posed into the direct sum of several irreducible Wigner D matrices:
Dli /C10 Dlj ¼ Djli /C0 lj j /C8 Djli /C0 lj jþ1 /C8/C1/C1/C1/C8 Dli þlj (6)
Combining the parity of the Hamiltonian matrix block ðni li ; nj lj Þ,
we can get
σpi pj ðgÞDli ðQÞ/C10 Dlj ðQÞ¼
Xli þlj
L¼jli /C0 lj j
/C8 σpi pj ðgÞDLðQÞ (7)
According to Eq. ( 7), Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj is reducible and the coupled
irreducible spherical tensor Tni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m in each order L ¼j li /C0 lj j;
/C1/C1/C1 ; li þ lj can be obtained by the vector coupling of Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj :
Tni li ;nj lj
L; pi pj ;m ¼
Xli
μi ¼/C0 li
Xlj
μj ¼/C0 lj
CLli lj
mμi μj Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj (8)
where CLli lj
mμi μj is the vector coupling coef ﬁcient, namely the
Clebsch-Gordan coef ﬁcient. Each IST Tni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m has the parity
symmetry of pi pj and satisﬁes the rotational equivariance of order
L. By inverse linear transformation of Eq. ( 8), Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj can be
constructed from ISTs Tni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m:
Tni li ;nj lj
μ;pi pj ¼
Xli þlj
L¼jli /C0 lj j
XL
m¼/C0 L
Cli lj L
μi μj mTni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m (9)
Therefore, as long as we ﬁnd all ISTs corresponding to each
block of the Hamiltonian matrix, we can construct the entire
Hamiltonian matrix in a block-wise manner through Eq. ( 9). We
construct two O(3) equivariant vectors Ω
on
i and Ωoff
ij by the direct
summation of all the ISTs required by the on-site ( i ¼ j)
Hamiltonian and the off-site ( i ≠ j) Hamiltonian respectively:
Ωon
i ¼
X
ni li
X
n0 i l0 i
Xli þl0 i
L¼jli /C0 l0 i j
/C8½ Tni li ;n0 i l0 i
L;pi p0 i ;m/C138 /C0 L/C20m/C20L (10)
Ωoff
ij ¼
X
ni li
X
nj lj
Xli þlj
L¼jli /C0 lj j
/C8½ Tni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m/C138
/C0 L/C20m/C20L (11)
The prediction of the Hamiltonian matrix is transformed into the
prediction of Ωon
i and Ωoff
ij , which can be obtained by mapping
from the equivariant features of the nodes and the pair
interactions, respectively. The ﬁnal parameterized Hamiltonian
can be expressed as:
~Hni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼
~H
on
ni li mi ;n0 i l0 i m0 i ¼ Pli þl0 i
L¼jli /C0 l0 i j
PL
m¼/C0 L
Cli ;l0 i ;L
mi ;m0 i ;mTni li ;n0 i l0 i
L;pi p0 i ;m i ¼ j
~H
off
ni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼ Pli þlj
L¼jli /C0 lj j
PL
m¼/C0 L
Cli ;lj ;L
mi ;mj ;mTni li ;nj lj
L;pi pj ;m i ≠ j
8
>>
>
>
<
>>
>>:
(12)
The above formula is O(3) equivariant. Since GNN naturally has
translational symmetry, the parameterized Hamiltonian repre-
sented by Ω
on
i and Ωoff
ij obtained from GNN has E(3) equivariance.
When the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects are considered, the
real-space Hamiltonian matrices are complex-valued and can be
divided into four sub-blocks ^H
si sj (si ; sj ¼" or #) by the spin degree.
In this case, the complete Hamiltonian matrices satisfy the
following SU(2) rotational equivariance:
hgQðϕni li mi si Þj^HjgQðϕnj lj mj sj Þi ¼ σpi pj ðgÞ
Xli
μi ¼/C0 li
Xlj
μj ¼/C0 lj
X1=2
s0 i ¼/C0 1=2
X1=2
s0 j ¼/C0 1=2
ðDðli Þ
mi μi
ðQÞDðlj Þ
mj μj ðQÞ
Dð1=2Þ/C3
si s0 i ðQÞDð1=2Þ
sj s0 j ðQÞhϕni li μi s0
i j^Hjϕnj lj μj s0
j iÞ (13)
Although each subblock ^Hsi sj satisﬁes the O(3) rotational
equivariance, they are coupled to each other under the rotational
operations. Therefore, the four subblocks predicted independently
with the O(3) equivariant parameterized Hamiltonian cannot be
used to construct the complete SU(2) equivariant Hamiltonian with
the SOC effect. In addition, the real and imaginary parts of the
SU(2) equivariant Hamiltonian matrices are also coupled during
rotation, so the complete Hamiltonian cannot be constructed by
using the independently predicted real and imaginary parts. These
methods not only rely on a large number of ﬁtting parameters but
also can not make the constructed Hamiltonian matrices strictly
meet the SU(2) equivariance. To ensure that the SOC effect learned
by the network complies with the physical rules and SU(2)
equivariance, we explicitly express the complete Hamiltonian as
the sum of the spin-less part and the SOC part:
^H ¼ ^H /C10 I
2 þ ^HSOC (14)
where ^HSOC ¼ 1
2 ξðrÞ^L /C1 ^σ ¼ 1
2 ξðrÞð^Lx ^σx þ ^Ly ^σy þ ^Lz ^σz Þ, which satis-
ﬁes SU(2) rotational equivariance and time-reversal equivariance.
ξ(r) is an invariant coef ﬁcient describing the strength of the SOC
effects39. According to the above equation, we can get the
following parameterized Hamiltonian matrices with SOC effect in
the atomic orbitals
39,40:
~H
SOC
ni li mi si ;nj lj mj sj ¼
~Hni li mi ;nj lj mj þ 1
2 ξni li ;nj lj hϕni li mi j^Lz jϕnj lj mj i si ¼"; sj ¼"
1
2 ξni li ;nj lj ðhϕni li mi j^Lx jϕnj lj mj i/C0 ihϕni li mi j^Ly jϕnj lj mj iÞ si ¼"; sj ¼#
1
2 ξni li ;nj lj ðhϕni li mi j^Lx jϕnj lj mj iþ ihϕni li mi j^Ly jϕnj lj mj iÞ si ¼#; sj ¼"
~Hni li mi ;nj lj mj /C0 1
2 ξni li ;nj lj hϕni li mi j^Lz jϕnj lj mj i si ¼#; sj ¼#
8
>>
>
>><
>>
>>>
:
(15)
Since the matrix representation of the angular momentum
operator hϕni li mi j^Lαjϕnj lj mj i¼h ϕni li mi ðri Þj^Lαjϕnj lj mj ðrj /C0 τji Þi under
the atomic orbital basis can be directly calculated analytically,
the only learnable parameters in Eq. ( 15) are ~Hni li mi ;nj lj mj and ξni li ;nj lj .
~Hni li mi ;nj lj mj can be directly expressed by Eq. ( 12), and ξni li ;nj lj is an
invariant scalar coef ﬁcient that can be mapped from the features
of atom pairs ij.
Network Implementation
As can be seen from the above discussion, each Hamiltonian matrix
block satisﬁes the rotational equivariance and has a de ﬁnite parity
under the inversion operation, so we designed an E(3) equivariant
HamGNN model based on MPNN to ﬁt TB Hamiltonian matrix. This
framework directly captures t he electronic structure without
expensive self-consistent iterations by constructing local equivariant
representations of each atomic orbit. The network architecture of
H a m G N Ni ss h o w ni nF i g .1a. HamGNN can achieve a direct mapping
from atomic species {Zi}a n dp o s i t i o n s{ri} to TB Hamiltonian matrix.
Based on the equivariant parameterized Hamiltonian matrix
introduced in this work, the prediction of the Hamiltonian matrix is
converted to predicting two reducible equivariant tensors:Ω
on
i for on-
site Hamiltonians and Ωoff
ij for off-site Hamiltonians. These tensors
satisfy the rotation and inversion equivariance of the O(3) group,
therefore we need to construct them in the representation of the O(3)
group. HamGNN utilizes equivariant atomic features that are
constructed by the direct sum of O(3) representations with different
rotation orders l. The O(3) representations of rotation order l can
characterize atomic orbitals with angular quantum numberl,a st h e y
possess the same rotational equi variance. The atomic features are
Y. Zhong et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 
reﬁned through orbital convoluti o nl a y e r s( s h o w ni nF i g .2b), which
update the atomic features by aggregating equivariant messages
constructed from local chemical environments. After re ﬁned by T
orbital convolution layers, the atomic features are used to construct
equivariant pair interaction features via the pair interaction layer
(shown in Fig. 2c). Ω
on
i and Ωoff
ij are obtained by representation
transformation of atomic features and pair interaction features,
respectively. The Hamiltonian matrix isﬁnally constructed using Ω
on
i
and Ωoff
ij via Eq. (12).
HamGNN ﬁrst encodes elements, inter-atomic distances, and
relative directions as initial graph embeddings. The atomic
numbers Z
i are encoded as one-hot vectors and are subsequently
transformed into initial atomic features through a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) layer. The distance between atom i and its
neighboring atom j within the cutoff radius rc is expanded using
the Bessel basis function 41:
Bðjrij jÞ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2
rc
r
sinðnπjrij j=rcÞ
jrij j f cðjrij jÞ (16)
where fc is the cosine cutoff function 42, which guarantees physical
continuity for the neighbor atoms close to the cutoff sphere. The list
of atomic neighbors is determined by the cutoff radius of each
atom’s orbital basis. The interatomic distance is expanded by a set
of Bessel functions with n ¼ 1; 2; /C1/C1/C1 ; Nb½/C138 ,w h e r eNb is the number
of Bessel basis functions. In this work, Nb is set to 8. The directional
information between atom i and atom j is embedded in a set of real
spherical harmonics fYlf
mf ð^rijÞg, which will be used to construct the
rotation-equivariantﬁlter43 in the equivariant convolution functions.
The atomic feature tensor V ¼ Vl0 /C8 Vl1 /C8/C1/C1/C1/C8 Vlmax in
HamGNN is represented as a direct sum of different irreducible
representations of the O(3) group up to a maximum rotation order
l
max. The features corresponding to each order can characterize the
atomic orbitals with distinct angular quantum numbers. If the
input structure is rotated, the atomic features will be transformed
by the direct sum of the Wigner D matrix, which is represented as a
block diagonal matrix D ¼ D
l0 /C8 Dl1 /C8/C1/C1/C1/C8 Dlmax . Vi;t
li ;pi ;ci ;mi
denotes
the tensor element of the equivariant features of atom i in the
orbital convolution layer t, where li ≤ lmax is the rotation order of
the O(3) irreducible representation, pi 2f 1; /C0 1g denotes the
parity of the equivariant components of the order li, /C0 li /C20 mi /C20 li
is the index of each projection of the equivariant representation, ci
is the channel index (the dimension of the features). We use T
Fig. 1 HamGNN architecture and the illustration of its subnetworks. a The overall architecture of HamGNN. This neural network
architecture predicts the Hamiltonian matrix through ﬁve steps. The prediction starts from the initial graph embedding of the species,
interatomic distances, and interatomic directions of molecules and crystals. The atomic orbital features with angular momentum l in the local
environment are included in the l-order components of the E(3) equivariant atom features and are re ﬁned through T orbital convolution
blocks. In the third step, pair interaction features ωij
l;p;c;m of atomic orbitals are constructed by pair interaction blocks. In the fourth step, the IST
representations of on-site and off-site Hamiltonian matrices are constructed by passing the features of atomic orbitals and pair interactions
through the on-site layer and off-site layer, respectively. The ﬁnal step is to construct the on-site and off-site Hamiltonian matrices block-by-
block via the parameterized Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( 12). b Orbital convolution block. The equivariant atomic features that include the
features of atomic orbitals of each angular momentum l are re ﬁned by the equivariant message passing and update functions. c Pair
interaction block. This block is used to construct the pair interaction features between the orbitals of two adjacent atoms by equivariant
tensor product. d On-site layer. The equivariant features of atoms are transformed into ISTs of on-site blocks Ω
on
i by the on-site layer. e Off-site
layer. The pair interaction features between atomic orbitals are transformed into ISTs of the off-site block Ωoff
ij by the off-site layer. f Residual
block. The residual block is used in the on-site layer and off-site layer to perform a nonlinear equivariant transformation of input features.
Y. Zhong et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
orbital convolution layers to construct the equivariant features of
the atomic orbits in the local environment. In each orbital
convolution layer, the input atomic feature tensor is updated by
aggregating the equivariant messages from neighboring atoms.
Each equivariant message is generated through the coupling of
the feature tensor of neighboring atom j and the convolution
ﬁlters in an equivariant manner. The rotation equivariant convolu-
tion ﬁlters are constrained to be a product of learnable radial
functions and spherical harmonic functions:
F
l
mðrij Þ¼ Sðjrij jÞYlf
mf ð^rij Þ (17)
where the radial function Sðjrij jÞ ¼ MLP½Bðjrij jÞ/C138 is a mapping that
transforms the radial basis Bðjrij jÞ into the rotation-invariant scalar
weights through a multilayer perceptron. The tensor product
between the feature tensor of the neighboring atom j and the
convolution ﬁlter is used to generate the equivariant messages
sent to atom i. A tensor product of representations is a
mathematical operation for combining two given representations
x
ðl1 Þ 2 l1 and yðl2 Þ 2 l2 to form another equivariant feature
xðl1 Þ /C10 yðl2 Þ. The tensor product xðl1 Þ /C10 yðl2 Þ is reducible and can
be expanded into a direct sum of irreducible representations. The
value for the irreducible representation of rotation degree l 2
fjl1 /C0 l2j; /C1/C1/C1 ; l1 þ l2g in the direct sum representation of the
tensor product xðl1 Þ /C10 yðl2 Þ is given by
ðx /C10 yÞl
m ¼
Xl1
m1 ¼/C0 l1
Xl2
m2 ¼/C0 l2
Cl;l1 ;l2
m;m1 ;m2 xl1
m1 yl2
m2 (18)
where Cl;l1 ;l2
m;m1 ;m2 are Clebsch-Gordan coef ﬁcients. Finally, the atomic
features in each orbital convolution layer are updated by
aggregating the equivariant messages of neighboring atoms
using the following formulas:
m
ij;t
li ;pi ;c;mi
¼
Xlf
mf ¼/C0 lf
Xlj
mj ¼/C0 lj
Cli ;lf ;lj
mi ;mf ;mj Sli ;pi ;c
lf ;pf ;lj ;pj
ðjrij jÞYlf
mf ð^rij ÞVj;t/C0 1
lj ;pj ;c;mj (19)
Vi;t
li ;pi ;c;mi
¼ Vi;t/C0 1
li ;pi ;c;mi
þ
X
j2NðiÞ
mij;t
li ;pi ;c;mi (20)
The invariant scalar features of the interatomic distances are used
to scale the equivariant output of each rotation order. Sli ;pi ;c
lf ;pf ;lj ;pj
ðjrij jÞ
is a learnable scalar weight for each ﬁlter-feature tensor product
path ðlf ; pf Þ/C10ð lj ; pj ; cÞ!ð li ; pi ; cÞ. To respect the parity equivar-
iance, each ﬁlter-feature tensor product path ðlf ; pf Þ/C10ð lj ; pj ; cÞ!
ðli ; pi ; cÞ satisﬁes the parity selection rule: pi ¼ pf pj . Equation (20)i s
the update function, which aggregates equivariant messages from
neighboring atoms to update the input atomic features. The
updated atomic features are passed to a nonlinear gate activation
function
44, which scales the input features equivariantly with the
invariant ﬁeld (l ≠ 0) of the input features as the gate.
The pair interaction features, which are utilized to construct the off-
site Hamiltonian, are generated by the pair interaction layer. The pair
interaction features are the sum of two parts. Theﬁrst part is the tensor
product between the features of two interacting atoms i and j:
ðl
i ; pi ; cÞ/C10ð lj ; pj ; cÞ!ð l; p; cÞ, where l and p denote the rotation
order and the parity of the pair interaction features, respectively. The
second part is the tensor product between the mixed features of atom
pairs ij and the convolution ﬁlters: ðl0; p0; cÞ/C10ð l
f ; pf Þ!ð l; p; cÞ,
where l′ and p′ denote the rotation order and the parity of the mixed
features of atom pairsij, respectively. The pair interaction features are
ﬁnally constructed by the following equation:
ωij
l;p;c;m ¼
Xli
mi ¼/C0 li
Xlj
mj ¼/C0 lj
Cli ;lj ;l
mi ;mj ;mSl;p;c
li ;pi ;lj ;pj
ðjrijjÞ
X
c0
Wi
li ;pi ;c;c0Vi;T
li ;pi ;c0;mi
 ! X
c0
Wj
lj ;pj ;c;c0Vj;T
lj ;pj ;c0;mj
 !
þ
Xlf
mf ¼/C0 lf
Xl0
m0¼/C0 l0
Cl0;lf ;l
m0;mf ;mSl;p;c
lf ;pf ;l0;p0ðjrijjÞYlf
mf ð^rijÞVij
l0;p0;c;m0 (21)
where Wi
li ;pi ;c;c0 and Wj
lj ;pj ;c;c0 are learnable weight matrices used to
linearly couple the equivariant features from different channels,
Vij
l0;p0;c;m0 ¼P
c0 W0i
l0;p0;c;c0Vi;T
l0;p0;c0;m0 þP
c0 W0j
l0;p0;c;c0 Vj;T
l0;p0;c0;m0 is the
mixed feature tensor of the atomic features Vi;T
li ;pi ;ci ;mi
and Vj;T
lj ;pj ;cj ;mj
.
The on-site layer and off-site layer are used to convert the node
features Vi;T
li ;pi ;ci ;mi
and pair interaction features ωij
l;p;c;m into the
direct sums Ωon
i and Ωoff
ij of the ISTs required to construct on-site
and off-site Hamiltonian blocks, respectively. We add shortcut
connections in the on-site layer and off-site layer and use a norm
activation function that scales the modulus of the irreducible
representations of each order nonlinearly to increase the non-
linear ﬁtting ability of the network. In the last step, the network
uses the ISTs in Ω
on
i and Ωoff
ij to construct the on-site and off-site
Hamiltonian blocks through Eq. ( 12). The ﬁnal predicted Hermitian
Hamiltonian is obtained by the following symmetrization:
Hni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼
Hon
ni li mi ;n0i l0i m0i ¼ð ~H
on
ni li mi ;n0i l0i m0i þ ~H
on/C3
n0i l0i m0i ;ni li mi Þ =2i ¼ j
Hoff
ni li mi ;nj lj mj ¼ð ~H
off
ni li mi ;nj lj mj þ ~H
off /C3
nj lj mj ;ni li mi Þ =2i ≠ j
8
<
:
(22)
Tests and applications
To assess the accuracy and transferability of HamGNN, we trained
and tested HamGNN on the Hamiltonian matrices and electronic
Fig. 2 Application of HamGNN on molecules in the QM9 dataset. a The comparison between the Hamiltonian matrix elements predicted by
HamGNN and those calculated by OpenMX on the QM9 test set. b Comparison of the orbital energies predicted by HamGNN and those
calculated by OpenMX for four molecules randomly selected from the QM9 test set.
Y. Zhong et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 
structures for the periodic and aperiodic systems, including
various molecules, periodical solids, a nanoscale dislocation
defect, and a Moiré superlattice. Previously reported models such
as SchNorb 35, PhiSNet 36, and DeepH 45 are trained and tested on
the slightly perturbed structures from only one con ﬁguration each
time. Since HamGNN is based on the universal parameterized
Hamiltonian proposed in this work, our model can be trained and
tested on structures with the same atomic species but different
conﬁgurations in the same way as MLIPs.
Molecules. The QM9 dataset
46,47 contains 134k stable small
organic molecules made up of CHONF. These small organic
molecules are important candidates for drug discovery. The
development of general ML models for rapid screening of the
electronic structure properties of drug molecules is bene ﬁcial for
understanding the mechanisms of drugs and shortening the cycle
of drug development. We calculated the real-space TB Hamilto-
nian matrices using OpenMX for 10,000 randomly selected
molecules from the QM9 dataset. We divided the whole dataset
into the training, validation, and test set with a ratio of 0.8: 0.1: 0.1.
As shown in Fig. 2a, the predicted values exhibit a high degree of
agreement with the DFT-calculated values of the Hamiltonian
matrices for various con ﬁgurations in the test set. The mean
absolute error (MAE) of the Hamiltonian matrix element predicted
by the trained HamGNN model on the test set is only 1.49 meV.
Please note that all MAEs mentioned in our manuscript refer to the
mean absolute errors between predicted values and ground truth
(DFT values), unless otherwise stated. Each of the orbital energy
calculated by diagonalizing the predicted Hamiltonian matrix
coincides almost exactly with each DFT-calculated orbital energy
(see Fig. 2b), showing high precision and transferability. The
orbital energies calculated by HamGNN and OpenMX for the four
molecules shown in Fig. 2b are listed in Supplementary Table 1.
We also trained HamGNN on the Hamiltonians of several speci ﬁc
small molecules generated by ab initio molecular dynamics (MD)
and compared the accuracy of HamGNN with two recently reported
models, PhiSNet
36 and DeepH45. The Hamiltonian matrices of these
molecules were calculated by OpenMX and divided into the
training, validation, and test sets in the same way as PhiSNet in
ref.
36. The MAEs of the Hamiltonian matrices predicted by DeepH
are from ref. 45. As can be seen from Table 1, HamGNN achieves the
highest accuracy among the three models. The error of HamGNN as
a function of training epochs on both the training and validation
sets is highly consistent (see Supplementary Discussion 1). The
prediction error of DeepH is higher than that of PhiSNet and
HamGNN because the local coordinate system used by DeepH is not
strictly equivariant. Although SE(3) equivariant PhiSNet shows high
accuracy in predicting the molecules, it is not a universal equivariant
model because it does not satisfy the parity symmetry of the
Hamiltonian matrix strictly. Our tests have revealed that neglecting
parity symmetry can signi ﬁcantly impair its ﬁtting ability for solid
materials (see Supplementary Discussion 2).
Periodic solids. We have collected 426 carbon allotropes from the
Samara Carbon Allotrope Database (SACADA)
48 and 30 silicon
allotropes from Materials Project 49, each containing no more than
60 atoms in its unit cell. We have also collected 221 SiO 2 isomers
from the Materials Project, each containing no more than 80
atoms in its unit cell. We have perturbed each of the collected SiO
2
isomers three times, resulting in 663 perturbed SiO 2 structures
with a random atomic displacement of 0.1 Å. We performed DFT
calculations using OpenMX to obtain the ab initio TB Hamiltonian
matrices for these carbon allotropes, silicon allotropes, and
perturbed SiO
2 isomers. The Hamiltonian matrices in each dataset
were divided into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of
0.8:0.1:0.1. Three separate HamGNN models were trained on the
carbon allotropes, silicon allotropes, and perturbed SiO
2 isomers,
respectively.
The MAEs of the Hamiltonian matrix predicted by HamGNN for
the structures in the test set of carbon allotropes, silicon
allotropes, and SiO 2 isomers are 1.55 meV, 2.01 meV, and
2.29 meV, respectively. There are tiny variations in model accuracy
for the HamGNN models trained with different initial random
network weights (see Supplementary Discussion 3), indicating the
high stability of HamGNN. The MAE of HamGNN on the carbon
allotropes is even lower than the error (2.0 meV) of DeepH on the
training dataset of only the graphene structures
45. Most impor-
tantly, the HamGNN model trained on the carbon allotropes is
transferable and can ﬁt the Hamiltonian matrices of the carbon
allotropes with arbitrary sizes and con ﬁgurations beyond the
training set. Achieving transferable predictions for the DeepH
model that utilizes local coordinate systems is dif ﬁcult, as
discussed in Supplementary Discussion 4.
We used pentadiamond 50, Moiré twisted bilayer graphene
(TBG), Si (MP-1199894), and SiO 2 (MP-1257168) to test the
accuracy and transferability of the HamGNN models trained on
the three datasets. The test structures are shown in Fig. 3a-d.
Pentadiamond is a three-dimensional carbon foam constructed
from carbon pentagons and contains 88 carbon atoms in the unit
cell
50. There are 1084 carbon atoms in the twisted bilayer
graphene with a Moiré angle θ ≈ 3.48°. The interlayer spacing of
TBG is about 4.0 Å. The carbon atoms within each layer are
connected by strong covalent bonds, while the layers are stacked
by the weak van der Waals forces. The Si structure labeled MP-
1199894 contains 82 atoms in the unit cell and crystallizes in the
monoclinic C2/c space group. The SiO
2 structure labeled MP-
1257168 is characterized by the complex porous structures built
by SiO4 tetrahedra and has 180 atoms in the unit cell. The MAE of
the Hamiltonian matrix elements predicted by HamGNN for the
pentadiamond, TBG, Si (MP-1204046), and SiO
2 (MP-667371) is
only 1.54 meV, 3.23 meV, 1.39 meV, and 1.67 meV, respectively.
The high accuracy can be seen in the scatter plots of the predicted
Hamiltonian matrices versus the DFT calculated Hamiltonian
matrices shown in Fig. 3e-h. Although our carbon allotropic
dataset does not contain any bilayer graphene structures,
HamGNN automatically learns van der Waals interactions from
this dataset and successfully predicts the Hamiltonian matrix of
TBG. The energy bands obtained by diagonalizing the predicted
Hamiltonians closely align with those from the DFT calculations, as
shown in Fig. 3i-l.
Dislocation defect . In general, point defects only induce local
structural distortions, so the supercell used for point defect
simulation does not need a very large size and can be calculated
directly using the DFT method
51,52. However, as one-dimensional
line defects, edge dislocations induce elastic stress ﬁelds in their
surroundings53– 55, resulting in signi ﬁcantly greater lattice distor-
tions compared to point defects. Simulating an isolated edge
dislocation necessitates the utilization of a large supercell to
mitigate the strong elastic interactions between the dislocation
and its periodic image. The high density of dislocations in small
Table 1. Comparison of the MAEs of the Hamiltonian matrices
predicted by HamGNN, DeepH, and PhiSNet for the molecule
structures from molecular dynamics trajectories.
Dataset PhiSNet (meV) DeepH (meV) HamGNN (meV)
Water 0.808 1.048 0.760
Ethanol 0.288 0.601 0.195
Malondialdehyde 0.340 0.547 0.270
Uracil 0.487 0.470 0.264
The lowest MAE among the considered models for each subsystem is
displayed in bold.
Y. Zhong et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
supercells may lead to unrealistic lattice distortion and inaccurate
electronic structures. However, the computational complexity of
the large supercells required to simulate the edge dislocations is a
great challenge for DFT methods. HamGNN enables the direct
mapping from structure to the Hamiltonian matrix, providing the
possibility to compute electronic structures of dislocation defects
in large supercells.
In this work, we take an isolated edge dislocation in a large
silicon supercell as an example to demonstrate the high ef ﬁciency
of the HamGNN model to simulate nanoscale defects in large
systems. Crystalline silicon has a diamond-type crystal structure,
whose most favorable slip system belongs to the type ½ 〈110〉
{111}. Taking the {111} plane of silicon as the slip plane, we
constructed an isolated edge dislocation with Burgers vector 1/
Fig. 3 The prediction of HamGNN on several periodic solids that are not present in the training sets. a –d Crystal structures of
pentadiamond, Moiré twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), Si (MP-1199894), and SiO 2 (MP-1257168). e–h Comparison of the Hamiltonian matrix
elements predicted by HamGNN and those calculated by OpenMX for pentadiamond, TBG, Si (MP-1199894), and SiO 2 (MP-1257168).
i–l Comparison of the energy bands predicted by HamGNN (solid line) and those (dashed line) calculated by OpenMX for pentadiamond, TBG,
Si (MP-1199894), and SiO 2 (MP-1257168).
Y. Zhong et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 
2 < 110 > , as shown in Fig. 4a. There are 4284 atoms in this
supercell containing an isolated edge dislocation. We utilized the
HamGNN model, which was trained on Si allotropes, to predict the
Hamiltonian matrix of this supercell. Subsequently, we computed
its band structure and charge density of valence band maximum
(VBM) using the predicted Hamiltonian matrix.
The defect energy bands introduced by the dislocation defect
appear within the band gap, as shown in Fig. 4b, which
signiﬁcantly narrows the band gap of bulk Si. The predicted
valence band maximum (VBM) at the Gamma point is located on
an occupied defect energy band. The VBM wave function shown
in Fig. 4a is mainly distributed in the dislocation core, indicating
that this occupied band is caused by the hanging bonds and
structural distortion in the core. The predicted electronic structure
in the dislocation core is analogous to that obtained from the DFT
simulation for a non-periodical dislocation model containing only
358 atoms
56. However, the dangling bonds at the boundaries of
the non-periodical supercell are saturated by hydrogens 56, which
may introduce unrealistic electronic states from hydrogens. We
use HamGNN to directly compute the electronic structures of
dislocations in large periodic supercells, thus overcoming the
potential issues arising from the use of small or non-periodic
supercells. With the ability to establish a shortcut from structure to
ab initio Hamiltonian matrix, HamGNN enables direct calculation
of electronic structures for large supercells without the costly SCF
iterations. HamGNN demonstrated exceptional speed and ef ﬁ-
ciency, taking only 36 seconds to calculate the Hamiltonian matrix
of the silicon supercell containing 4284 atoms on a node
equipped with 80 Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6248 CPU cores. To verify
the reliability of the trained HamGNN model in predicting the
electronic structures for silicon dislocation defects, we constructed
a small silicon supercell containing an edge dislocation defect and
compared the Hamiltonian matrix, energy bands, and the wave
function predicted by HamGNN with those calculated by OpenMX
(see Supplementary Discussion 5).
Moiré superlattice of bilayer MoS
2. MoS 2 is a 2D transition metal
dichalcogenide (TMD) that has attracted much attention because
it is an excellent semiconductor with a wide range of applications
in the ﬁeld of electronics and optoelectronics
57– 60. Different from
monolayer or untwisted bilayer MoS 2, the twisted bilayer MoS 2
with Moiré angles has been found to have ﬂat bands and shear
solitons57,61– 63, which may lead to some interesting physical
phenomena, such as superconducting states, quantum Hall
insulators, Mott-insulating phases. However, the electronic struc-
ture calculation of Moiré twisted bilayer MoS
2 by DFT is relatively
expensive due to its large size. To demonstrate the accuracy and
efﬁciency of HamGNN in replacing DFT for calculating the
electronic structure of Moiré twisted two-dimensional materials,
we conducted a quantitative comparison between the HamGNN
prediction and the DFT calculation for twisted bilayer MoS 2 with a
Moiré angle of 3.5°. Before predicting the electronic structure of
the Moiré twisted bilayer MoS
2 superlattice, we trained a HamGNN
model using a dataset consisting of 500 untwisted bilayer MoS 2
structures, each containing 54 atoms. Each MoS 2 bilayer structure
in the dataset has a random interlayer sliding distance of up to 2
angstroms along a random direction. The layer spacing of each
MoS2 bilayer structure in the dataset was randomly shifted by a
maximum of 0.5 angstroms. We used OpenMX to calculate the
Hamiltonian matrices for the untwisted MoS
2 bilayer structures,
and divided the dataset into training, validation, and test sets with
a ratio of 0.8: 0.1: 0.1. The MAE of the trained HamGNN on the test
set is only 0.82 meV.
We used OpenMX and the trained HamGNN model to calculate
the Hamiltonian matrix of the twisted bilayer MoS
2 with a Moiré
angle of 3.5°, which contains 1626 atoms in a unit cell. HamGNN
and OpenMX performed the calculations on a node with 80
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6248 CPU cores. HamGNN only took about
21 s, while OpenMX required approximately 73,000 s to complete
this task. This indicates that HamGNN signi ﬁcantly improves the
efﬁciency of electronic structure calculations. The MAE between
the Hamiltonian matrix predicted by HamGNN and that calculated
by OpenMX is only 0.89 meV. The energy bands, obtained by
diagonalizing the Hamiltonian matrices from HamGNN and
OpenMX, are shown in Fig. 5a. The predicted bands show a high
level of agreement with those computed by OpenMX. Besides, the
appearance of ﬂat bands at the valence band edge and the Dirac
cone at the K point agrees well with the energy bands calculated
by VASP in ref.
61. The spatial distribution of the predicted VBM
wave function, as illustrated in Fig. 5b, exhibits a high degree of
localization around the Moiré patterns, which is consistent with
the computational results obtained from VASP calculations under
LDA and PBE functionals
61.
Through the quantitative comparisons, we demonstrate that
HamGNN models trained on small systems can serve as an
efﬁcient alternative to DFT for accurately calculating the electronic
structure of large systems. After being trained on the Hamiltonian
matrices of small untwisted bilayer structures, the HamGNN model
can effectively predict the electronic structure of small-angle
twisted materials, which is computationally expensive for DFT
calculations. The high accuracy and ef ﬁciency of HamGNN
demonstrate its immense potential in accelerating the electronic
structure calculations for small-angle twisted bilayers of various
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). In Supplementary
Fig. 4 The electronic structure prediction on silicon dislocation. a Atomic structure and charge density of the valence band maximum
(VBM) of an isolated dislocation in silicon. The atoms on the dislocation plane are colored red. b The energy bands of the dislocation model
along G(0.0, 0.0, 0.0) to Z(0.0, 0.0, 0.5).
Y. Zhong et al.
8
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Discussion 6, we have discussed the computational scalability of
HamGNN with respect to system sizes and also compared its
computational ef ﬁciency with OpenMX for bilayer MoS 2 slabs of
varying twist angles.
BixSey quantum materials . Bi and Se have multiple chemical
valences and can form a set of binary compounds Bi xSey with
various stoichiometric ratios 64,65. Bi is a heavy element whose d
electrons have strong SOC effects. A total of 19 Bi xSey compounds
can be found on Materials Project 49. The compound Bi 8Se7 (id: MP-
680214) shown in Fig. 6a, which contains 45 atoms in the unit cell,
was used to test the transferability and accuracy of HamGNN. The
remaining 18 Bi
xSey compounds, which contain no more than 40
atoms in the unit cell, were used to generate the training set for
the network. To increase the size of the training set, we applied a
random perturbation up to 0.02 Å to the atoms of each Bi xSey
structure to generate 50 perturbed structures and obtained 900
structures in total. These structures were randomly divided into
the training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 0.8: 0.1: 0.1.
The MAE of the real part of the SOC Hamiltonian predicted by the
trained model for Bi
8Se7 is 1.29 meV, and the MAE of the
imaginary part of the SOC Hamiltonian is only 5.0 × 10 −7 meV. As
the SOC effect primarily manifests in the imaginary component of
the Hamiltonian matrix, such a low MAE for the imaginary part
indicates that our parameterized SOC Hamiltonian has a strong
ﬁtting ability across various structures. As shown in Fig. 6b, the
predicted energy bands of Bi
8Se7 are in good agreement with
those calculated by OpenMX. Although the training set does not
contain any compounds with a stoichiometric ratio of Bi 8Se7, the
HamGNN model still accurately predicted the SOC Hamiltonian
Fig. 6 The electronic structure prediction on the Bi xSey quantum materials. a The crystal structure of Bi 8Se7. b Comparison of the energy
bands predicted by HamGNN (solid line) with those calculated by DFT (dashed line) for Bi 8Se7. c Schematic representation of the layered
crystal structure of Bi 2Se3. d Comparison between the energy gaps at G point predicted by HamGNN with those calculated by DFT for the
Bi2Se3 slab models with various quintuple layers (QLs). e Comparison of the energy bands predicted by HamGNN (solid line) with those
calculated by DFT (dashed line) for Bi 2Se3 slab with 6 QLs. f The predicted spin textures of two unoccupied states near the conduction band
minimum (CBM).
Fig. 5 The electronic structure prediction for the twisted bilayer MoS 2 with a Moiré angle of 3.5°. a Comparison of the energy bands
predicted by HamGNN and those calculated by OpenMX for the Moiré twisted bilayer MoS 2. b The spatial distribution of VBM wave function in
the Moiré twisted bilayer MoS 2.
Y. Zhong et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 
matrix and energy bands of this structure, demonstrating its high
transferability.
Bi2Se3 is a widely recognized 3D topological insulator material,
which serves as an exceptional platform for exploring quantum
phenomena related to the effects of spin-orbit coupling
(SOC)
66– 70. Bulk Bi2Se3 is stacked by quintuple layers (QLs) through
the van der Waals (vdW) interaction, as is shown in Fig. 6c. Each QL
layer is composed of ﬁve atomic layers of Se-Bi-Se-Bi-Se combined
by strong covalent bonds. As shown in Fig. 6d, the G-point band
gaps predicted by HamGNN exhibit a high degree of agreement
with those obtained from DFT calculations for Bi 2Se3 slabs
comprising 1 to 7 QLs. As shown in Fig. 6e, the addition of more
QL layers results in a gradual decrease of the G-point band gap
and a tendency towards linear band dispersion at the G point,
ultimately forming a Dirac cone. The spin textures of the lowest
unoccupied states, located 0.07 eV and 0.23 eV above the
conduction band minimum (CBM), were computed using the
Hamiltonian matrix predicted by HamGNN, as illustrated in Fig. 6f.
The predicted spin textures are in good agreement with the
features of the Dirac cone, which is a topological surface state
protected by time-reversal symmetry and characterized by spin-
momentum locking.
DISCUSSION
DFT methods are now widely used to calculate various properties
of molecules and materials. However, successful implementation
of DFT calculations on large systems remains infrequent due to
the signi ﬁcant computational resources and running time
required. A typical DFT calculation often requires tens to hundreds
of self-consistent iterations to obtain the ﬁnal Hamiltonian and
wave function, with the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix
performed on a dense k-point grid at each iteration step. This
process takes up most of the running time of DFT calculations and
can not be circumvented. The emergence of deep learning in
recent years has enabled ef ﬁcient atomic simulations with DFT
accuracy, as evidenced by the widespread use of machine
learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) that offer quantum
mechanical precision to accelerate long-time molecular dynamics
simulations for large systems. As potential energy is just an
invariant scalar, the implementation of transferable MLIP models is
relatively straightforward. However, due to the rotational equiv-
ariance and parity symmetry of the Hamiltonian matrix, develop-
ing a transferrable model for directly predicting the Hamiltonian
matrix is highly challenging.
In this work, we propose an analytical E(3) equivariant
parameterized Hamiltonian matrix that explicitly takes into
account rotation equivariance and parity symmetry. Furthermore,
we extend it to a parameterized Hamiltonian matrix satisfying
SU(2) and time-reversal equivariance to ﬁt the Hamiltonian matrix
with SOC effects. Based on this parameterized Hamiltonian matrix,
we develop an E(3) equivariant deep neural network called
HamGNN to ﬁt the Hamiltonian matrix of various molecules and
solids. Previously reported models were trained and tested on the
datasets consisting of slightly perturbed molecules or crystals
from the same con ﬁguration. To demonstrate the accuracy and
transferability of our parameterized Hamiltonian matrix, we used
the trained HamGNN model to predict the electronic structures of
the molecules, periodic solids, the silicon dislocation defect, Moiré
twisted bilayer MoS
2, and Bi xSey quantum materials. The results of
actual tests demonstrate that our model exhibits a high level of
accuracy in comparison to DFT, while also demonstrating a
signiﬁcant degree of transferability similar to that of MLIPs. These
performances provide a crucial foundation for the extensive
implementation of electronic structure methods in machine
learning. Since our model can establish a direct mapping from
the structure to the self-consistent Hamiltonian matrix without the
time-consuming self-consistent iterations in DFT, it can be used to
accelerate the electronic structure calculation of large systems and
other costly advanced calculations, such as the electron-phonon
coupling matrix via the automatic differentiation ability of the
neural network.
METHODS
Hamiltonian datasets and DFT calculation details
QM9 structure set and the molecules in Table 1 are available from
http://quantum-machine.org/datasets/, SACADA structure set is
available from https://www.sacada.info/sacada_3D.php, and the
structures of Si allotropes, SiO
2 isomers, and Bi xSey crystals are
downloaded from the Materials Project site 49. To prepare the
training set of untwisted bilayer MoS 2, a random perturbation of
up to 0.02 Å is applied to each atom, and a slip of up to 2 Å is
performed in a random direction within the XY plane. The layer
spacing of the bilayer MoS 2 was randomly shifted by a maximum
of 0.5 angstroms. We performed DFT calculations on the structures
in the above datasets to obtain TB Hamiltonian matrices via
OpenMX
17, a software package for nano-scale material simulations
based on norm-conserving pseudopotentials and pseudo-atomic
localized basis functions. The PBE (Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof)
71
functional is employed for all OpenMX calculations presented in
this study. H6.0- s2p1, C6.0-s2p2d1, N6.0-s2p2d1, O6.0-s2p2d1, F6.0-
s2p2d1, Si7.0- s2p2d1, Mo7.0- s3p2d2, Bi8.0- s3p2d2, and Se7.0-
s3p2d2 pseudoatomic orbitals (PAOs) were used as the basis for
the calculations. The truncation radius of the atomic orbits of H, C,
N, O, and F is 6.0 Bohr, the truncation radius of the atomic orbits of
Si, Mo, and Se is 7.0 Bohr, the truncation radius of the atomic
orbits of Bi is 8.0 Bohr. The cutoff energy and K-point grid used by
OpenMX in the calculation of the Hamiltonian matrices for each
dataset are listed in Supplementary Table 6. The Si dislocation
model was built by Atomsk
72 and relaxed by GPUMD 73 with a
force criterion of 0.1 eV ∙ Å−1. The VASP 74,75 results of Moiré
superlattice of bilayer MoS 2, which serve to validate the accuracy
of our HamGNN predictions, are referenced from Naik et al. ‘s
work61. They utilized LDA and PBE functionals to calculate the
electronic structure of twisted bilayer MoS 2 with a Moiré angle of
3.5°. For the OpenMX calculation on the Moiré twisted bilayer
MoS
2, we used a cutoff energy of 150 Ry and a 4 × 4 × 1 k-point
mesh to sample the Brillouin zone.
Hamiltonian construction details
The majority of computational time in DFT calculations is
dedicated to self-consistent iterations aimed at obtaining the
self-consistent charge density ρ, which is used to determine the
ﬁnal Hamiltonian matrix and wave functions. The Kohn-Sham
Hamiltonian can be written as H ¼ T þ V
eff , where
Veff ¼P
l Vecðr /C0 τl Þþ Vscf ½ρ/C138 . Vec ðr /C0 τl Þ is the Coulomb potential
of the core charges of each atom l, Vscf ½ρ/C138¼ δEee
δρ þ δExc
δρ denotes the
sum of the potentials that arise from the electron-electron
interaction energy Eee½ρ/C138 and the exchange-correlation energy
Exc ½ρ/C138 . The matrix elements of the kinetic energy operator
hϕni li mi ðr /C0 τi Þj^Tjϕnj lj mj ðr /C0 τj /C0 Rnc Þi and the Coulomb potential
of the atomic cores hϕni li mi ðr /C0 τi ÞjP
l Vec ðr /C0 τl Þjϕnj lj mj ðr /C0 τj /C0
Rnc Þi are not functionals of the self-consistent charge density and
can be calculated analytically without SCF iterations. The complete
Hamiltonian can be obtained by the sum of the SCF-independent
matrices calculated analytically from the atomic coordinates and
the SCF-dependent matrix V
scf ½ρ/C138 that can be ﬁtted by the
equivariant neural networks. The general parameterized Hamilto-
nian proposed in this work can be applied to all tight-binding
Hamiltonian matrices calculated using various exchange-
correlation functionals (see Supplementary Discussion 7).
Y. Zhong et al.
10
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Network and training details
The Pytorch-1.11.076, PyG-2.0.477, Pymatgen78, Nequip-0.5.333, and
e3nn-0.5.079 libraries are used to implement HamGNN. All models
used in this work have ﬁve orbital convolution layers, a pair
interaction layer, an on-site layer, and an off-site layer. The edge
distances between each atom and its neighbors are expanded by
eight Bessel function bases. The spherical harmonic functions with
a maximum degree L
max = 4 are used to embed the directions of
the edges. The O(3) representations used for the atom features
and pair interaction features have N
fea channels with a maximum
degree Lmax and parities p = ±1. The number of feature channels
Nfea and the maximum degree Lmax for each dataset are listed in
Supplementary Table 7. A two-layer MLP with 64 neurons is used
to map the invariant edge embeddings to the weights of each
tensor product path in Eqs. ( 19) and ( 21). Shifted softplus
31
function is used as the activation function in the MLP. The gate
activation function scales the input features ð/C8
i
uð0Þ
pi Þ/C8ð /C8
j
vð0Þ
p0j Þ/C8
ð/C8
j
wðlj >0Þ
pj Þ with its invariant ﬁeld ð/C8
i
uð0Þ
pi Þ and ð/C8
j
vð0Þ
p0j Þ as the gate.
The output equivariant features of gate nonlinearity are
½/C8
i
ϕ1
pi
ðuð0Þ
pi Þ/C138 /C8 ½/C8
j
ϕ2
p0j
ðvð0Þ
p0j Þwðlj Þ
pj /C138 , where ϕ1
pi
and ϕ2
p0j
are the
activation functions that vary with the parity of the scalar input,
deﬁned as follows 33:
ϕ1
pi
ðxÞ¼
sspðxÞ¼ lnð0:5 ´ ex þ 0:5Þ pi ¼ 1
tanhðxÞ¼ ex /C0 e/C0 x
ex þe/C0 x pi ¼/C0 1
(
(23)
ϕ2
p0 j
ðxÞ¼
sspðxÞ¼ lnð0:5 ´ ex þ 0:5Þ p0
j ¼ 1
jxj p0
j ¼/C0 1
(
(24)
ϕ1
pi
ðxÞ has the same parity as the input scalar x, while ϕ2
p0j
ðxÞ
always has even parity. This ensures that the parity of the output
features of the Gate activation function is equivariant.
To increase transferability and avoid over ﬁtting, we include the
error of the calculated energy bands as a regularization term in
the loss function:
L ¼k ~H /C0 Hkþ
λ
Norb ´ Nk
XNk
k¼1
XNorb
n¼1
k~εnk /C0 εnk k (25)
where the variables marked with a tilde refer to the correspond-
ing predictions and λ denotes the loss weight of the band
energy error. λ equals 0.001 in our training. When the training of
the network has not converged, the error of the predicted
Hamiltonian is large, resulting in poor or even divergent
prediction values of the energy bands. Adding the band loss
value at the beginning of training may cause the total loss value
to diverge. Therefore, we train the network in two steps. First,
only the mean absolute error of Hamiltonian matrices is used as
the loss value to train the network until the network weights
converge. The parameters were optimized with AdamW
80,81
optimizer using an initial learning rate of 10 −3. Then the mean
absolute error of each band calculated at Nk random points in
the reciprocal space is added to the loss function and starts the
training at an initial learning rate of 10
−4.W h e nt h ea c c u r a c yo f
the model on the validation set is not improved after successive
Npatience epochs, the learning rate will be reduced by a factor of
0.5. When the accuracy of the model on the validation set is not
improved after successive N
stop epochs or the learning rate is
lower than 10 −6, the training will be stopped and the model that
has the best accuracy on the validation set will be used on the
test set. The values of some key network and training
parameters on each dataset are listed in Supplementary Table
7. All models were trained on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The pre-trained models and the test examples are available on Zenodo ( https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8147631). The training datasets are available on Zenodo
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8157128).
CODE AVAILABILITY
The HamGNN code used in the current study is available on GitHub ( https://
github.com/QuantumLab-ZY/HamGNN).
Received: 24 March 2023; Accepted: 14 September 2023;
REFERENCES
1. Choudhary, K. et al. High-throughput density functional perturbation theory and
machine learning predictions of infrared, piezoelectric, and dielectric responses.
npj Comput. Mater. 6, 64 (2020).
2. Liu, Y. T., Zhou, Q. & Cui, G. L. Machine learning boosting the development of
advanced lithium batteries. Small Methods 5, 2100442 (2021).
3. Zhang, N. et al. Machine learning in screening high performance electrocatalysts
for CO
2 reduction. Small Methods 5, 2100987 (2021).
4. Manzhos, S. & Carrington, T. Jr Neural network potential energy surfaces for small
molecules and reactions. Chem. Rev. 121, 10187 – 10217 (2021).
5. Choudhary, K. et al. Uni ﬁed graph neural network force- ﬁeld for the periodic
table: solid state applications. Digit. Discov. 2, 346 – 355 (2023).
6. Cheng, Z. et al. Building quantum mechanics quality force ﬁelds of proteins with
the generalized energy-based fragmentation approach and machine learning.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 24, 1326 – 1337 (2022).
7. Unke, O. T. et al. SpookyNet: Learning force ﬁelds with electronic degrees of
freedom and nonlocal effects. Nat. Commun. 12, 7273 (2021).
8. Cheng, G. J., Gong, X. G. & Yin, W. J. Crystal structure prediction by combining
graph network and optimization algorithm. Nat. Commun. 13, 1492 (2022).
9. Ganea, O. et al. GeoMol: torsional geometric generation of molecular 3D con-
former ensembles. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst . 34, 13757 – 13769 (2021).
10. Xie, T., Fu, X., Ganea, O.-E., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Crystal diffusion variational
autoencoder for periodic material generation. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR, 2019).
11. Kirkpatrick, J. et al. Pushing the frontiers of density functionals by solving the
fractional electron problem. Science 374, 1385 – 1389 (2021).
12. Nagai, R., Akashi, R. & Sugino, O. Machine-learning-based exchange correlation
functional with physical asymptotic constraints. Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 013106 (2022).
13. Goringe, C. M., Bowler, D. R. & Hernandez, E. Tight-binding modelling of materials.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 60, 1447 – 1512 (1997).
14. Papaconstantopoulos, D. A. & Mehl, M. J. The Slater-Koster tight-binding method:
a computationally ef ﬁcient and accurate approach. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 15,
R413– R440 (2003).
15. Hegde, G. & Bowen, R. C. Machine-learned approximations to density functional
theory Hamiltonians. Sci. Rep. 7, 42669 (2017).
16. Wang, Z. F. et al. Machine learning method for tight-binding Hamiltonian para-
meterization from ab-initio band structure. npj Comput. Mater. 7, 11 (2021).
17. Ozaki, T. Variationally optimized atomic orbitals for large-scale electronic struc-
tures. Phys. Rev. B 67, 155108 (2003).
18. Ozaki, T. & Kino, H. Numerical atomic basis orbitals from H to Kr. Phys. Rev. B 69,
195113 (2004).
19. Artacho, E. et al. The SIESTA method; developments and applicability. J. Phys. 20,
064208 (2008).
20. Garcia, A. et al. Siesta: recent developments and applications. J. Chem. Phys. 152,
204108 (2020).
21. Morrison, M. A. & Parker, G. A. A guide to rotations in quantum-mechanics. Aust. J.
Phys. 40, 465 – 497 (1987).
22. Weinert, U. Spherical tensor representation. Arch. Ration. Mech. 74, 165 – 196
(1980).
23. Zhang, L. et al. Equivariant analytical mapping of ﬁrst principles Hamiltonians to
accurate and transferable materials models. npj Comput. Mater. 8, 158 (2022).
24. Nigam, J., Willatt, M. J. & Ceriotti, M. Equivariant representations for molecular
Hamiltonians and N-center atomic-scale properties. J. Chem. Phys. 156, 014115
(2022).
25. Unke, O. T. & Meuwly, M. A reactive, scalable, and transferable model for mole-
cular energies from a neural network approach based on local information. J.
Chem. Phys. 148, 241708 (2018).
Y. Zhong et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 
26. Christensen, A. S., Bratholm, L. A., Faber, F. A. & Anatole von Lilienfeld, O. FCHL
revisited: Faster and more accurate quantum machine learning. J. Chem. Phys.
152, 044107 (2020).
27. Faber, F. A., Christensen, A. S., Huang, B. & von Lilienfeld, O. A. Alchemical and
structural distribution based representation for universal quantum machine
learning. J. Chem. Phys. 148, 241717 (2018).
28. Bartok, A. P., Kondor, R. & Csanyi, G. On representing chemical environments.
Phys. Rev. B 87, 184115 (2013).
2 9 . G i l m e r ,J . ,S c h o e n h o l z ,S .S . ,R i l e y ,P .F . ,V i n y a l s ,O .&D a h l ,G .E .N e u r a lm e s s a g ep a s s i n g
for quantum chemistry.P r o c .3 4 t hI n t .C o n f .M a c h .L e a r n .70, 1263– 1272 (2017).
30. Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an
accurate and interpretable prediction of material properties. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
145301 (2018).
31. Schutt, K. T., Sauceda, H. E., Kindermans, P. J., Tkatchenko, A. & Muller, K. R. SchNet -
A deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. J. Chem. Phys. 148,
241722 (2018).
32. Choudhary, K. & DeCost, B. Atomistic line graph neural network for improved
materials property predictions. npj Comput. Mater. 7, 185 (2021).
33. Batzner, S. et al. E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-ef ﬁcient and
accurate interatomic potentials. Nat. Commun. 13, 2453 (2022).
34. Wang, Z. et al. Heterogeneous relational message passing networks for molecular
dynamics simulations. npj Comput. Mater. 8, 53 (2022).
35. Schutt, K. T., Gastegger, M., Tkatchenko, A., Muller, K. R. & Maurer, R. J. Unifying
machine learning and quantum chemistry with a deep neural network for
molecular wavefunctions. Nat. Commun. 10, 5024 (2019).
36. Unke, O. et al. SE(3)-equivariant prediction of molecular wavefunctions and
electronic densities. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34, 14434 – 14447 (2021).
37. Li, H. C., Collins, C., Tanha, M., Gordon, G. J. & Yaron, D. J. A density functional tight
binding layer for deep learning of chemical Hamiltonians. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 14, 5764 – 5776 (2018).
38. Grisa ﬁ, A., Wilkins, D. M., Csanyi, G. & Ceriotti, M. Symmetry-adapted machine
learning for tensorial properties of atomistic systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 036002
(2018).
39. Jones, M. D. & Albers, R. C. Spin-orbit coupling in an f-electron tight-binding
model: Electronic properties of Th, U, and Pu. Phys. Rev. B 79, 045107 (2009).
40. Hemstreet, L. A., Fong, C. Y. & Nelson, J. S. First-principles calculations of spin-
orbit splittings in solids using nonlocal separable pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter 47, 4238 – 4243 (1993).
41. Klicpera, J., Groß, J. & Günnemann, S. Directional message passing for molecular
graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR, 2019).
42. Unke, O. T. & Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A neural network for predicting energies,
forces, dipole moments, and partial charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15,
3678– 3693 (2019).
43. Thomas, N. et al. Tensor ﬁeld networks: Rotation- and translation-equivariant
neural networks for 3D point clouds. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1802.08219 (2018).
44. Weiler, M., Geiger, M., Welling, M., Boomsma, W. & Cohen, T. S. 3d steerable cnns:
Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst . 31, 10381 – 10392 (2018).
45. Li, H. et al. Deep-learning density functional theory Hamiltonian for ef ﬁcient ab
initio electronic-structure calculation. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 367 – 377 (2022).
46. Ruddigkeit, L., van Deursen, R., Blum, L. C. & Reymond, J. L. Enumeration of 166
billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database GDB-17. J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 52, 2864 – 2875 (2012).
47. Ramakrishnan, R., Dral, P. O., Rupp, M. & von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum chemistry
structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Sci. Data 1, 140022 (2014).
48. Hoffmann, R., Kabanov, A. A., Golov, A. A. & Proserpio, D. M. Homo citans and
carbon allotropes: for an ethics of citation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 10962– 10976
(2016).
49. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach
to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).
50. Fujii, Y., Maruyama, M., Cuong, N. T. & Okada, S. Pentadiamond: a hard carbon
allotrope of a pentagonal network of sp2 and sp3 C atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
016001 (2020).
51. Puska, M. J. Point defects in silicon, ﬁrst-principles calculations. Comput. Mater.
Sci. 17, 365 – 373 (2000).
52. McCluskey, M. D. & Janotti, A. Defects in semiconductors. J. Appl. Phys. 127,
190401 (2020).
53. Blumenau, A. T. et al. Dislocations in diamond: Dissociation into partials and their
glide motion. Phys. Rev. B 68, 014115 (2003).
54. Li, Z. & Picu, R. C. Shuf ﬂe-glide dislocation transformation in Si. J. Appl. Phys. 113,
083519 (2013).
55. Das, S. & Gavini, V. Electronic structure study of screw dislocation core energetics
in Aluminum and core energetics informed forces in a dislocation aggregate.
J. Mech. Phys. Solids 104, 115 – 143 (2017).
56. Wang, J. W., Xu, W. W., Wang, R., Laref, A. & Wu, X. Z. Structural and electronic
properties of 90 degrees dislocations in silicon nanorods: A ﬁrst-principles cal-
culation. Comput. Mater. Sci. 149, 243 – 249 (2018).
57. Wu, F., Lovorn, T., Tutuc, E., Martin, I. & MacDonald, A. H. Topological insulators in
twisted transition metal dichalcogenide homobilayers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122,
086402 (2019).
58. Li, X. & Zhu, H. Two-dimensional MoS 2: Properties, preparation, and applications.
J. Mater. 1,3 3 – 44 (2015).
59. Conley, H. J. et al. Bandgap engineering of strained monolayer and bilayer MoS 2.
Nano. Lett. 13, 3626 – 3630 (2013).
60. Xu, K. et al. The role of Anderson ’s rule in determining electronic, optical and
transport properties of transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 30351 – 30364 (2018).
61. Naik, M. H. & Jain, M. Ultra ﬂatbands and shear solitons in Moiré patterns of
twisted bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 266401
(2018).
62. Devakul, T., Crepel, V., Zhang, Y. & Fu, L. Magic in twisted transition metal
dichalcogenide bilayers. Nat. Commun. 12, 6730 (2021).
63. Liu, Y. et al. Moiré superlattices and related Moiré excitons in twisted van der
Waals heterostructures. Chem. Soc. Rev. 50, 6401 – 6422 (2021).
64. Majhi, K. et al. Emergence of a weak topological insulator from the Bi xSey family.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 162102 (2017).
65. Goncalves, P. H. R. et al. Formation of Bi xSey phases upon annealing of the
topological insulator Bi 2Se3: Stabilization of in-depth bismuth bilayers. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 9, 954 – 960 (2018).
66. Yazyev, O. V., Moore, J. E. & Louie, S. G. Spin polarization and transport of surface
states in the topological insulators Bi 2Se3 and Bi 2Te3 from ﬁrst principles. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 266806 (2010).
67. Zhang, Y. et al. Crossover of the three-dimensional topological insulator Bi 2Se3 to
the two-dimensional limit. Nat. Phys. 6, 584 – 588 (2010).
68. Crowley, J. M., Tahir-Kheli, J. & Goddard, W. A. 3rd accurate ab initio quantum
mechanics simulations of Bi 2Se3 and Bi2Te3 topological insulator surfaces. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 6, 3792 – 3796 (2015).
69. Mazumder, K. & Shirage, P. M. A brief review of Bi 2Se3 based topological insulator:
From fundamentals to applications. J. Alloy. Compd. 888, 161492 (2021).
70. Shirali, K., Shelton, W. A. & Vekhter, I. Importance of van der Waals interactions for
ab initio studies of topological insulators. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 33, 035702
(2020).
71. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made
simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 – 3868 (1996).
72. Hirel, P. Atomsk: A tool for manipulating and converting atomic data ﬁles.
Comput. Phys. Comm. 197, 212 – 219 (2015).
73. Fan, Z. et al. GPUMD: A package for constructing accurate machine-learned
potentials and performing highly ef ﬁcient atomistic simulations. J. Chem. Phys.
157, 114801 (2022).
74. Kresse, G. & Furthmuller, J. Ef ﬁciency of ab-initio total energy calculations for
metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comp. Mater. Sci. 6,
15– 50 (1996).
75. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector
augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 – 1775 (1999).
76. Paszke, A. et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst . 32, 8026 – 8037 (2019).
77. Fey, M. & Lenssen, J. E. Fast graph representation learning with pytorch geo-
metric. In Workshop of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR,
2019).
78. Ong, S. P. et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source
python library for materials analysis. Comp. Mater. Sci. 68, 314 – 319 (2013).
79. Geiger M. et al. e3nn/e3nn: 2022-04-13 (0.5.0) . Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.6459381 (2022).
80. Loshchilov, I. & Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (2021).
81. Reddi, S. J., Kale, S. & Kumar, S. On the convergence of adam and beyond.
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1904.09237 (2019).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr. Hongli Guo for providing the structure of the Moiré superlattice of
bilayer MoS 2. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Ministry of Science and
Technology of the People´s Republic of China (No. 2022YFA1402901), NSFC (grants
No. 11825403, 11991061, 12188101), and the Guangdong Major Project of the Basic
and Applied Basic Research (Future functional materials under extreme
conditions– 2021B0301030005).
Y. Zhong et al.
12
npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
H.J.X. and X.G.G. supervised the project. Y.Z. and H.J.X. proposed the parameterization
framework of Hamiltonian. Y.Z. coded the framework and carried out the
experiments with the help of H.Y.Y. and M.S. Y.Z. and H.J.X. prepared the manuscript.
All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01130-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Hongjun Xiang.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Y. Zhong et al.
13
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2023)   182 