ARTICLE OPEN
Ensemble learning-iterative training machine learning for
uncertainty quanti ﬁcation and automated experiment in
atom-resolved microscopy
Ayana Ghosh 1,2, Bobby G. Sumpter 1, Ondrej Dyck 1, Sergei V. Kalinin 1 ✉ and Maxim Ziatdinov 1,2 ✉
Deep learning has emerged as a technique of choice for rapid feature extraction across imaging disciplines, allowing rapid
conversion of the data streams to spatial or spatiotemporal arrays of features of interest. However, applications of deep learning in
experimental domains are often limited by the out-of-distribution drift between the experiments, where the network trained for
one set of imaging conditions becomes sub-optimal for different ones. This limitation is particularly stringent in the quest to have
an automated experiment setting, where retraining or transfer learning becomes impractical due to the need for human
intervention and associated latencies. Here we explore the reproducibility of deep learning for feature extraction in atom-resolved
electron microscopy and introduce work ﬂows based on ensemble learning and iterative training to greatly improve feature
detection. This approach allows incorporating uncertainty quanti ﬁcation into the deep learning analysis and also enables rapid
automated experimental work ﬂows where retraining of the network to compensate for out-of-distribution drift due to subtle
change in imaging conditions is substituted for human operator or programmatic selection of networks from the ensemble. This
methodology can be further applied to machine learning work ﬂows in other imaging areas including optical and chemical imaging.
npj Computational Materials           (2021) 7:100 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-021-00569-7
INTRODUCTION
Electron and scanning probe microscopies have emerged as
primary techniques for explorin g the micro-, nano-, and atomic-
scale worlds
1–3. Multiple examples of the imaging of materials
classes ranging from metals and semiconductors to biological
and macromolecular systems are abound, with the microscopic
tools becoming the linchpins of academic and industrial
laboratories throughout the world
1,4–6.T h i sr a p i dp r o g r e s si n
imaging techniques have further transformed many imaging
areas from largely qualitative to q uantitative. Traditionally, in
atomically resolved scanning tr ansmission electron microscopy
(STEM) or scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) the attention of
the researcher has been focused on the presence of large-scale
m o r p h o l o g i c a lf e a t u r e ss u c ha ss u r f a c e sa n di n t e r f a c e s ,l o c a l i z e d
or extended defects, with the c onclusions on the physics and
chemistry of materials driven by these qualitative observations.
Comparatively, the progress in high-resolution imaging allowed
quantitative information on the materials structure to be
obtained, including the positions of the atomic nuclei in STEM,
the center of mass of electronic density of states in STM, etc.
This information in turn is related to the fundamental physics
and chemistry of materials, and several examples of quantitative
studies of materials physics fro m atomically resolved quantita-
tive observations are now avai lable, including mapping of
polarization ﬁelds
7–12, octahedra tilts 13–16,a n ds t r a i n si n( S )
TEM17,18 and surface distortions in STM 19.
However, this progress necessitates rapid analysis of the
individual images, as well as dynamic data sets obtained during,
e.g., temperature 20,21, environment 22–24, or beam-induced trans-
formations25–29 of solids. The goal of such analysis is to transform
the data stream from the microscope, ex situ or in situ, into the
coordinates and trajectories of speci ﬁc features 30. These features
can be atoms and molecules in the atomically resolved
techniques, or larger scale objects such as nanoparticles and
nanorods, cells, etc., in mesoscale imaging. Once established,
these features can be used for exploring relevant physics, e.g.,
strain mapping, visualization of order parameter ﬁelds such as
polarization or octahedra tilts, and subsequently deriving gen-
erative physical models. The need for such analysis necessitates
two additional aspects. The ﬁrst is uncertainty quanti ﬁcation, i.e.,
ascribing ‘a degree of trust ’ to the experimental results. The
second is the latency (time necessary to make decision) of the
analysis, a consideration that becomes particularly important in
conjunction with autonomous experimentation
31–33 and electron
beam atomic fabrication 27,28,34–37.
Traditionally, this analysis has been implemented using a
broad variety of image analy sis tools, ranging from simple
maxima ﬁnding to correlative ﬁlters to Hough transform-based
t e c h n i q u e s ,w i t he a c hd o m a i na r e ae v o l v i n gas p e c iﬁcs e to f
tools. Most of these methods required extensive tuning of the
hyperparameters in the beginn ing of the analysis cycle, and
often require operator input t hroughout the process. As such,
analysis of more than several i mages has been unusual. The
breakthrough in this area, as in many other areas of computer
vision, is the broad implementation and availability of deep
learning (DL) networks, pioneered by AlexNet
38 and evolving to
the large families of ResNets 39,U - N e t s40,e t c .I nS T M ,t h e
application of DL for image analysis was pioneered by Ziatdinov
et al. for molecular resolved imaging
41 and Wolkow for
atomically resolved imaging 42, and in STEM by Ziatdinov
et al. 43. This initial effort has grown exponentially in recent
years44–46.
However, applications of DL for atomically resolved imaging, or,
equivalently, the discovery of a large number of similar objects,
1Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA. 2Computational Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA. ✉email: sergei2@ornl.gov; ziatdinovma@ornl.gov
www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
have signi ﬁcant differences from the classical DL applications.
Traditionally, DL methods are optimized to perform feature
ﬁnding on a large number of possible classes, such as 10 digits
in the MNIST database or 10 image categories in CIFAR databases,
with multiple examples in each class. Similarly, these are
associated with large variability within the class. Comparatively,
atomic and particle ﬁnding problems typically necessitate ﬁnding
(almost) identical objects, whereas the imaging conditions can
vary between dissimilar experiments or between simulations and
experiments. Consequently, the applications of DL in experimental
data analysis have to deal with signi ﬁcant out-of-distribution
effects. Retraining of the network for a different parameter set is
time consuming, both on the labeling and training sides. This
aspect is particularly limiting for an automated experiment where
the analysis must rapidly adapt to changes in imaging conditions.
At the same time, a model trained to account for a broad
distribution of experimental parameters may fail to recognize
multiple subtle atomic features within a single experimental
dataset. In addition, the scienti ﬁc applications of DL require
meaningful uncertainty estimates, which has been a challenge for
applications of classical DL to real-world data
47.
Here, we introduce an iterative DL work ﬂow that surpasses
these limitations. This approach utilizes the heavily degenerate
nature of high-resolution microscopy, in which a relatively small
number of feature classes are possible, and even within a single
image multiple realizations of the class are present. We also utilize
the fact that in a deep learning a model ’s ﬁnal state can be very
sensitive to random initialization of weights and shuf ﬂing of
training mini-batches. These two effects are harnessed in a
workﬂow combining ensemble learning (EL) by multiple neural
networks, allowing for selection of artifact-free features and pixel-
wise uncertainty maps, and iterative training (IT) where the
discovered features are used to retrain the network, focusing its
attention on features present in the (heavily degenerate) data and
thus increasing the detection limit of the network on the dataset
(s) of interest. This allows revealing previously unrecognized
features, and to compensate for out-of-distribution drift during
the experiments.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
ELIT work ﬂow
The classical DL work ﬂow consists of preparing a single labeled
training set, selecting appropriate neural network architecture,
splitting the prepared training set into 2 (train + test) or 3 (train +
test + ‘holdout’) parts, and tuning the training parameters until
the optimal performance on the test and/or ‘holdout’ set is
achieved. Once trained, the neural network is expected to
generalize to new, previously unseen data. In the experimental
sciences, where the labeling process typically requires an in-depth
domain expertise and as a result, the availability of labeled data is
usually very limited, one can sometimes use ab initio simulations
to prepare a training set. The common challenge for real-world
applications of DL (that is, application to a stream of new
unﬁltered data beyond the test and ‘holdout’sets) are the out-of-
distribution effects such as changes in data acquisition and
processing (inside of an instrument) parameters. An example is
the failure of state-of-the-art DL models trained to detect
pneumonia in chest X-ray data to provide accurate results on
new hospital’s data due to the small variations of instrumental and
data acquisition parameters
48.
To set the context we consider the application of DL to
experimental imaging of atoms. For DL-based image analysis, the
labeling of training data can be performed on the level of
individual images (image0001 is ‘structure A ’, image0002 is
‘structure B ’, … ., image6999 is ‘structure B ’) or individual pixels
(a pixel at coordinate ( i
1, j1) belongs to ‘structure A ’, a pixel at
coordinate ( i2, j2) belongs to ‘structure B ’, etc.). The latter is
referred to as a DL-based semantic segmentation and will be the
focus of our work. Here we explore a very common scenario when
there is no labeled experimental data, and one must train a DL
model using simulated or synthetic data. The trained model is
then used to obtain predictions for the experimental data that
typically contain structures and distortions not (fully) considered
in the simulations. A similar approach can be applied to situations
where the DL model(s) are trained on data from one experiment
and applied to new previously unseen experimental images
obtained under different conditions.
Our goal is to categorize every pixel in an image as belonging to
an atom (or a particular type of atom) or to a background. In this
case, the semantic segmentation of experimental atom-resolved
images removes all the noise and returns a set of well-de ﬁned
blobs (corresponding to atoms) on a uniform background where
the centers of the segmented blobs correspond to atomic
positions. The overall approach is summarized in Algorithm 1
represented by Fig. 1 and schematically depicted in Fig. 2a. It
starts with using simulated data to train an ensemble of models
instead of just a single model. Recent works have demonstrated
that classical and Bayesian EL can lead to improved robustness of
DL models and provide meaningful uncertainty quanti ﬁcation
under dataset shift and (potentially) for out-of-distribution
data
49,50. Here, we combined classical EL 51, where each new
model is trained with different random initialization of weights
and different random shuf ﬂing of training data, with a stochastic
weight averaging (SWA) procedure
52, which averages multiple
points along the trajectory of stochastic gradient descent at the
end of training. This approach is similar to multi-SWA and multi-
SWA-Gaussian approaches described by Wilson et al.
50, but uses a
constant learning rate and early stopping instead of a cyclic
learning rate. Generally, we found that for simulation-to-real-
world-transitions (i.e., model trained on simulated data is applied
to experimental data), the role of EL is to identify an artifact-free
model or a subset of models, that is, a model or models that do
not ‘ﬁnd’ unphysical features in experimental data or at least a
portion of experimental data. For experiment-to-experiment
transitions (i.e., model trained on a subset of experimental data
is applied to the remaining data), the EL can be used for improved
robustness and for providing uncertainty estimates of predicted
values for each point (pixel).
Fig. 1 Pseudocode for training models the ELIT framework. First
(Line 1) an ensemble of models is trained on simulated data
followed by applying each trained ensemble model (Line 2) to
experimental data. The best (artifact-free) model or a subset of the
best (artifact-free) models is then chosen (Line 3) and training data
from a ‘good’ portion of predictions from the best model(s) is
generated. The new training data is used for training a new
ensemble of models and make predictions on the experimental data
using the newly trained ensemble (Lines 4 – 8), which in turn is used
to reﬁne the experimental training set for iterative re-training of the
ensemble. As optional steps (Line 9, 10), a multi-class training set
can be generated and used to train a new ensemble of models for
multi-class classi ﬁcation.
A. Ghosh et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;
Each trained ensemble model is then applied to experimental
data and the best (artifact-free) model(s) is selected by a human
operator (a domain expert). For experimental data with high
variability within the xy plane (single image) and/or along the time
dimension (movie), there usually tend to be a portion of data for
which the selected model(s) shows a suf ﬁciently high detection
rate (percentage of identi ﬁed atoms). This portion of data (with
additional pre-processing if necessary) is utilized to generate a
new training set, this time from experimental data, that is used to
train a new ensemble of models. This process can be repeated
multiple times until the detection rate becomes suf ﬁciently high
for the entire dataset. Interestingly, we found that the addition of
a small amount of arti ﬁcial noise and distortions to the training
data helps increase the detection rate of the retrained models on
the remaining portion of experimental data, especially for
dynamic data when there are signi ﬁcant structural changes
between the ﬁrst and the last movie frames.
H e r e ,w eh a v ec h o s e nt w os p e c iﬁc cases to showcase the
efﬁcacy of the ELIT framework for atom identi ﬁcation: (i) A
dynamically evolving 2D graphe ne system and (ii) Lanthanum
strontium manganite with embedded islands of nickel oxide
(NiO-LSMO). The graphene movie contains multiple image
frames, accounting for the dyna mic nature of the structural
evolution occurring in the g raphene system with point
impurities, whereas the NiO-LSMO image is a single image
showing the presence of multiple types of atoms and phases.
ELIT on graphene
We start by training an ensemble of 20 models using the multi-
SWA method for a U-Net
40 model architecture. The training data
represent 2D images with atoms as two-dimensional Gaussians
and corresponding circular masks of the ﬁxed radius. Alternatively,
the Multislice method 53 can be used for image simulations,
although we did not ﬁnd any signi ﬁcant differences within the
context of the DL applications to 2D systems. The images and
masks are generated using coordinates produced by ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations performed on a graphene
supercell at 300 K (more details in the “Materials and methods ”
section). During each run of MD simulation, carbon atoms are
removed one by one until a few (10) are left in the supercell. Once
created, the images and masks are augmented via random
cropping, application of Gaussian and Poisson noises with random
scales, blurring, varying contrast levels, and zooming-in randomly
in the range between 1x and 2x. The augmentation is used to help
generalize to real experimental data. Examples of a few snapshots
of AIMD simulations and how images/masks are augmented are
shown in the Supplementary Materials.
The results of applying several selected models from the trained
ensemble to the experimental data are shown in Fig. 3 in a form of
semantically segmented maps corresponding to the ﬁnal layer of
individual DL networks. We note that the accompanying
interactive Jupyter notebook allows applying all the models in
the ensemble to any experimental movie frame. Interestingly, we
found a very signi ﬁcant variation in predictions on the experi-
mental data despite that all the models showed nearly the same
prediction accuracy (73.7 ± 0.3%) on the simulated test data (see
Supplementary Table I). This stark contrast in behavior on the
theoretical test data and on real-world data is due to the fact that
the former comes from the same distribution while the latter is
almost always from a different distribution simply because it is
impossible to account for all the instrumental parameters when
preparing simulated data. One can see that the ﬁrst (Fig. 3d–f) and
second (Fig. 3g–i) models appear to be capable of avoiding the
amorphous regions even though the ensemble models were not
speciﬁcally trained to do so (there was no amorphous phase in the
training set). Notice, however, that the second model shows
additional ‘foggy’ features in the extended regions of the
graphene lattice, which do not have a direct physical interpreta-
tion and are considered an artifact. The third model (Fig. 3 j–i)
does not automatically ﬁlter out the amorphous parts but tends to
provide more clear results around point impurities. Finally, all the
models in the ensemble start producing unphysical features inside
the growing hole in graphene (Fig. 3e, f, h, i, k, l), which means
that none of the current ensemble models can be used to analyze
the entire dataset. We also note that one cannot simply use an
averaged ensemble prediction at this stage, as is common in
classical DL, since it will average together both ‘physical’ and
‘unphysical’features in predictions. By the same token, calculating
the dispersion in the ensemble predictions, that is, obtaining
uncertainty estimates for each point, is meaningless at this stage.
Next, we select the best, or one of the best, ensemble models
(as de ﬁned by a domain expert) and create a new training set
using the artifact-free subset of predictions on the experimental
data. Alternatively, one can use an average prediction from a
subset of the best ensemble models. For the graphene dataset,
the subset of predictions used to create the new training data set
is a portion of the movie ( ﬁrst six frames) without a hole. We use
the third model from Fig. 3 as our ‘baseline’ model for the IT
because it has a higher detection rate for point impurities. The
features associated with the amorphous parts in the model output
are removed via a patch-based Gaussian mixture model (GMM)
analysis, where one ﬁrst forms a stack of small image patches
(here, we used a 48 × 48 patch size) around each identi ﬁed ‘atom’
acting as local descriptors and then applies a two-class GMM to
the formed stack (see the Supplementary Materials and the
accompanying notebook). Due to drastic differences in local
neighborhoods of features associated with graphene and those
associated with the amorphous part, the GMM unmixing easily
separates a class corresponding to the graphene lattice and a class
corresponding to the amorphous regions. The features associated
with the latter are discarded during the new training set
preparation. The new training dataset is augmented by random
cropping of experimental image frames and a constructed mask
Fig. 2 ELIT framework. High-level schematic of the ELIT approach is
shown in ( a). b In a classically trained network, the training set must
be broad enough to allow suf ﬁcient variability to detect classes 1
and 2 present in the system. However, a suf ﬁciently broad training
set will also potentially misidentify physically impossible class 3,
leading to the classical balance between over- and under ﬁtting. In
the ELIT workﬂow, the multiple trained networks are used to identify
the features present in the system, and retrain the network using
these features. This allows ‘focusing’ the attention of the network on
the classes present in the system, thus dramatically improving the
recognition.
A. Ghosh et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 
into 224 × 224 patches. In addition, we applied random ±90 0
rotations, horizontal and vertical ﬂips, small scale jittering, and
Gaussian noise with a randomly chosen magnitude. No contrast,
blurring, or other types of noise/distortions were applied to
training data. The new ensemble of models can be trained using
the best model from the previous ensemble as a baseline, which
can speed up the computation, or entirely from scratch. For the
datasets studied in the current work, both strategies produced
comparable results.
A new ensemble of model trained on the (augmented) subset
of experimental data is then applied to the entire dataset. This
time, since both training and test/validation data come from the
same distribution, the variation in predictions of different
ensemble models is much smaller and we can use a mean
ensemble prediction instead of predictions of individual models,
which as in the case of classical DL ensembles provides a more
accurate prediction. The results for the frames from the middle
and end of the movie are shown in Fig. 4a, b. Comparison of these
results with the results of the models trained on simulated data
(Fig. 3) shows a signi ﬁcant improvement in the quality of
predictions after just a single ELIT iteration. We can further add
multiple channels to our training masks to allow for DL-based
identiﬁcation of both positions and types of atoms. Here, we used
a simple binary threshold for separating intensities extracted at
the atomic positions from the mean ensemble prediction but
more advanced methods such as mean-shift clustering can also be
applied. The resultant masks have two classes: graphene atoms
and point impurities (here, the ‘impurity’ is an atom with an
intensity higher than C). These masks and the corresponding
experimental images are used to train another ensemble of
models, now using randomly sampled patches from all the frames
and applying the same augmentation procedures as in the
previous iteration. Here, we changed the ﬁnal layer of the initial U-
net architecture so that it has three outputs instead of only one
(and, correspondingly, the sigmoid activation was changed to the
softmax one). For the remaining layers, the weights learned in
the previous ELIT can be used as a baseline to speed up the
convergence (since atoms remain atoms) although we found that
retraining from scratch generally leads to a similar result.
The mean predictions of the ensemble of multi-class segmenta-
tion models are shown in Fig. 4c, d. The multi-class ensemble can
be re-used on similar experimental data, that is, data obtained
under similar experimental conditions with roughly the same
feature scale (approximate number of pixels per atom) as we show
in Supplemental Fig. 4.
Next, we demonstrate that ELIT framework can provide
meaningful uncertainty estimates on the level of individual pixels.
In Fig. 5, we show the mean ensemble predictions for two sample
regions and the corresponding uncertainty for each class
computed as a standard deviation of ensemble predictions for
each pixel. The larger uncertainty values at the boundaries of
predicted blobs are expected as the ( ﬁxed) size of ‘atoms’ in the
mask is chosen somewhat arbitrary. At the same time, the
presence of ‘doubling’ (dumbbell-like structures) in uncertainty
Fig. 3 Application of ensemble models trained on simulated data to real data. Predictions in a form of semantically segmented maps from
different ensemble models for frames 1 ( a, d, g, j), 50 ( b, e, h, k), and 90 ( c, f, i, l) of the experimental movie from 2D graphene with impurities.
A. Ghosh et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
maps for impurities is interesting and can be related to unstable
atoms jumping between different lattice sites during the scan.
Note that this information cannot be captured by a single DL
model, which would assign an atom to one of the positions
without providing the uncertainty maps. We found that about 6 –8
SWA models in the ensemble are typically enough for the
meaningful pixel-level uncertainty estimation.
ELIT on NiO-LSMO
Finally, we show that the same approach can be used for ﬁnding
and classifying (nearly) all the atoms in a single image using STEM
data from a LSMO system with embedded NiO nano islands as an
example (Fig. 6a). Here, a ﬁrst ensemble of models is trained using
a generic training set from a simple cubic lattice with random
atomic displacements. When applied to real experimental data its
Fig. 5 Estimation of uncertainty in ensemble predictions on the level of individual pixels. a , e Experimental sub-images from frames 95
and 90. b, f Mean ensemble prediction. ( c, g) and ( d, h) show normalized uncertainty maps calculated as a standard deviation of ensemble
predictions in each pixel for graphene atoms ( c, g) and impurity atoms ( d, h). See the accompanying notebook for uncertainty maps on the
full images. The higher intensity in color in ( c, d) and ( g, h) correspond to higher uncertainty associated with the atoms identi ﬁed in those
speciﬁc locations.
Fig. 4 Mean ensemble predictions after re-training with subsets of experimental data. a , b Mean DL prediction (semantically segmented
map) from the ensemble after the ﬁrst re-training using only frames from the beginning of the movie. c, d Prediction (semantically segmented
map) after second retraining using multi-class segmentation masks with training data randomly sampled from the entire movie.
A. Ghosh et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 
models mostly fail to identify the second (NiO) structure and tend
to ‘ﬁnd’some unphysical features (Fig. 6b). Here we ﬁrst used the
best ensemble model to retrain an ensemble of models on the
same simulated data using the weights of the best model as a
baseline. This allowed for uncertainty estimation in the model ’s
prediction that was used to select only the robust atomic features
in the prediction, i.e., features associated with high variance in
uncertainty maps were ﬁltered out. The atomic positions
associated with the remaining low-variance features were used
to construct a new training set from the experimental data, which
provided a signi ﬁcant improvement in the quality and rate of
atomic segmentation/detection (Fig. 6c). Next, one may continue
re-training a single class model until achieving a nearly perfect
detection rate (Fig. 6d) or switch to a multi-class classi ﬁcation as
described earlier to categorize multiple sublattices in the system
(Fig. 6e).
In summary, we have developed the ELIT framework for the
iterative identi ﬁcation of features and corresponding pixel-wise
uncertainty maps from high-resolution STEM images and demon-
strated its application for several systems. We found that when
applying model(s) trained on simulated data to real experimental
data the EL can be used for selecting a subset of ‘physical’
(artifact-free) models. These models can be iteratively retrained on
‘good’ portions of experimental data in which case the new
ensembles can be used for improving the robustness of
predictions and providing meaningful uncertainty estimations
on the level of individual pixels. The method can be extended to
other than U-Net deep learning architectures as well as to
different imaging techniques.
This approach allows for two signi ﬁcant advances in DL
applications to experiments. The ﬁrst is the potential of
ensemble-based uncertainty quanti ﬁcation. For the cases
explored here and in the author ’s experience, uncertainties
are often associated with unusual phenomena and can serve as
a ﬂag for unexpected behaviors. Perhaps even more impor-
tantly, this approach enables rapid correction for out of
distribution drift during automated experiments where the
imaging conditions change compared to the training set.
Namely, it enables substituting the slow labeling/retraining of
the network to rapid human-based deselection of the network
from an ensemble.
METHODS
Samples preparation
Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (AP-CVD) was used to
grow graphene on Cu foil 54. A coating of poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) was spin coated over the surface to protect the graphene and
form a mechanical stabilizer during handling. Ammonium persulfate
dissolved in deionized (DI) water was used to etch away the Cu foil. The
remaining PMMA/graphene stack was rinsed in DI water and positioned on
a TEM grid and baked on a hot plate at 150 °C for 15 min to promote
adhesion between the graphene and TEM grid. After cooling, acetone was
used to remove the PMMA and isopropyl alcohol was used to remove the
acetone residue. The sample was dried in air and baked in an Ar-O
2
atmosphere (10% O 2) at 500 °C for 1.5 h to remove residual contamina-
tion55. Before examination in the STEM, the sample was baked in vacuum
at 160 °C for 8 h.
The LSMO-NiO VAN and the single-phase LSMO and NiO ﬁlms were
grown on STO (001) single-crystal substrates by PLD using a KrF excimer
laser (λ = 248 nm) with ﬂuence of 2 J/cm 2 and a repetition rate of 5 Hz. All
ﬁlms were grown at 200 mTorr O 2 and 700 °C. The ﬁlms were post-
annealed in 200 Torr of O 2 at 700 °C to ensure full oxidation, and cooled
down to room temperature at a cooling rate of 20 °C/min. For out-of-plane
transport measurements, the ﬁlms were grown on 0.5% Nb-doped STO
(001) single-crystal substrates. The ﬁlm composition was varied by using
composite laser ablation targets with different compositions.
STEM imaging
The plan-view STEM samples of NiO-LSMO were prepared using ion
milling after mechanical thinning and precision polishing. In brief, a thin
ﬁlm sample was ﬁrstly ground, and then dimpled and polished to a
thickness <20 μm from the substrate side. The sample was then
transferred to an ion milling chamber for further substrate-side thinning.
Fig. 6 Application of ELIT to a single image. a Experimental STEM image of NiO-LSMO. b Result (semantically segmented map) from
ensemble of models trained on simulated data. c Prediction (semantically segmented map) after the ﬁrst ELIT re-training. d, e Predictions
(semantically segmented maps) after the second ELIT retraining for a single class ( d) and multiple classes ( e).
A. Ghosh et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
The ion beam energy and milling angle were adjusted towards lower
values during the thinning process, which was stopped when an open
hole appeared for STEM characterization. The STEM used for the
characterization was a Nion UltraSTEM200 operated at 200 kV. The
beam illumination half-angle was 30 mrad and the inner detector half-
angle was 65 mrad. Electron energy-loss spectra were obtained with a
collection half-angle of 48 mrad.
For graphene imaging, a Nion UltraSTEM 200 was used, operated at
100 kV accelerating voltage with a nominal beam current of 20 pA and
nominal convergence angle of 30 mrad. Images were acquired using the
high-angle annular dark- ﬁeld detector.
Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD)
Details on AIMD simulations for the graphene movies: Ab initio quantum-
mechanical MD simulations were performed using the projector augmen-
ted plane-wave (PAW) method and PAW-PBE potential
56 as implemented
in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 57,58.
A graphene supercell of 199 atoms with lattice parameters a = b =
24.68 Å, c = 8.60 Å with α = β = 90°, γ = 59.99° was considered for
performing the simulations. All computations were carried out with a
400-eV plane-wave cutoff energy with appropriate Monkhorst Pack
59 k-
point meshes, at 300 K temperature with 2000 timesteps of 1 fs each.
Atoms were randomly removed from the supercell one-by-one and the MD
simulation was repeated until 10 atoms remained in the supercell. The ﬁnal
converged coordinates for every timestep as produced by all the
simulations were then used to prepare training set for building ensemble
of models.
For NiO-LSMO, a generic square lattice with random displacements was
utilized to simulate the trajectories, and used for training an ensemble of
models in the ﬁrst step.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data used for all analysis are available through the Jupyter notebooks located at
https://github.com/aghosh92/ELIT.
CODE AVAILABILITY
All the deep learning routines were implemented using a home-built open-source
software package AtomAI ( https://github.com/pycroscopy/atomai) and all data are
readily available via an interactive Jupyter notebook at https://github.com/aghosh92/
ELIT.
Received: 12 February 2021; Accepted: 10 June 2021;
REFERENCES
1. Pennycook, S. J. & Nellist, P. D. (eds) Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy:
Imaging and Analysis (Springer, 2011).
2. Krivanek, O. L. et al. Atom-by-atom structural and chemical analysis by annular
dark-ﬁeld electron microscopy. Nature 464, 571 –574 (2010).
3. Gerber, C. & Lang, H. P. How the doors to the nanoworld were opened. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 1,3 –5 (2006).
4. Mannhart, J. & Schlom, D. G. Oxide interfaces-an opportunity for electronics.
Science 327, 1607 –1611 (2010).
5. Moler, K. A. Imaging quantum materials. Nat. Mater. 16, 1049 –1052 (2017).
6. Keimer, B. & Moore, J. E. The physics of quantum materials. Nat. Phys. 13,
1045–1055 (2017).
7. Jia, C. L., Urban, K. W., Alexe, M., Hesse, D. & Vrejoiu, I. Direct observation of
continuous electric dipole rotation in ﬂux-closure domains in ferroelectric Pb(Zr,
Ti)O3. Science 331, 1420 –1423 (2011).
8. Jia, C. L. et al. Unit-cell scale mapping of ferroelectricity and tetragonality in
epitaxial ultrathin ferroelectric ﬁlms. Nat. Mater. 6,6 4 –69 (2007).
9. Chisholm, M. F., Luo, W. D., Oxley, M. P., Pantelides, S. T. & Lee, H. N. Atomic-scale
compensation phenomena at polar interfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 197602 (2010).
10. Borisevich, A. Y. et al. Interface dipole between two metallic oxides caused by
localized oxygen vacancies. Phys. Rev. B 86, 140102 (2012).
11. Yadav, A. K. et al. Observation of polar vortices in oxide superlattices. Nature 530,
198–201 (2016).
12. Nelson, C. T. et al. Spontaneous vortex nanodomain arrays at ferroelectric het-
erointerfaces. Nano Lett. 11, 828 –834 (2011).
13. Jia, C. L. et al. Oxygen octahedron reconstruction in the SrTiO 3/LaAlO3 hetero-
interfaces investigated using aberration-corrected ultrahigh-resolution transmis-
sion electron microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 79, 081405 (2009).
14. Borisevich, A. Y. et al. Mapping octahedral tilts and polarization across a
domain wall in BiFeO
3 from Z-contrast scanni ng transmission electron
microscopy image atomic column shape analysis. ACS Nano 4, 6071 –6079
(2010).
15. Borisevich, A. Y. et al. Suppression of octahedral tilts and associated changes in
electronic properties at epitaxial oxide heterostructure interfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett.
105, 087204 (2010).
16. He, Q. et al. Towards 3D mapping of BO 6 octahedron rotations at perovskite
heterointerfaces, unit cell by unit cell. ACS Nano 9, 8412 –8419 (2015).
17. Kim, Y. M. et al. Probing oxygen vacancy concentration and homogeneity in
solid-oxide fuel-cell cathode materials on the subunit-cell level. Nat. Mater. 11,
888–894 (2012).
18. Kim, Y. M. et al. Direct observation of ferroelectric ﬁeld effect and vacancy-
controlled screening at the BiFeO 3/LaxSr1-xMnO3 interface. Nat. Mater. 13,
1019–1025 (2014).
19. Lin, W. Z. et al. Local crystallography analysis for atomically resolved scanning
tunneling microscopy images. Nanotechnology 24, 415707 (2013).
20. Sang, X. H. et al. In situ edge engineering in two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenides. Nat. Commun. 9,1 –7 (2018).
21. Sang, X. H. et al. In situ atomistic insight into the growth mechanisms of single
layer 2D transition metal carbides. Nat. Commun. 9,1 –9 (2018).
22. Taheri, M. L. et al. Current status and future directions for in situ transmission
electron microscopy. Ultramicroscopy 170,8 6 –95 (2016).
23. Mehdi, B. L. et al. In-situ electrochemical transmission electron microscopy for
battery research. Microsc. Microanal. 20, 484 –492 (2014).
24. Abellan, P. et al. Probing the degradation mechanisms in electrolyte solutions for
Li-ion batteries by in situ transmission electron microscopy. Nano Lett. 14,
1293–1299 (2014).
25. Ishikawa, R. et al. Direct observation of dopant atom diffusion in a bulk semi-
conductor crystal enhanced by a large size mismatch. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 155501
(2014).
26. Yang, Z. Q. et al. Direct observation of atomic dynamics and silicon doping at a
topological defect in graphene. Angew. Chem. -Int. Ed. 53, 8908 –8912 (2014).
27. Susi, T., Mayer, J. C. & Kotakoski, J. Manipulating low-dimensional materials down
to the level of single atoms with electron irradiation. Ultramicroscopy 180,
163–172 (2017).
28. Dyck, O., Kim, S., Kalinin, S. V. & Jesse, S. Placing single atoms in graphene with a
scanning transmission electron microscope. Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 113104 (2017).
29. Mishra, R., Ishikawa, R., Lupini, A. R. & Pennycook, S. J. Single-atom dynamics in
scanning transmission electron microscopy. MRS Bull. 42, 644 –652 (2017).
30. Maksov, A. et al. Deep learning analysis of defect and phase evolution during
electron beam-induced transformations in WS 2. Npj Comput. Mater. 5,1 –8 (2019).
31. Krull, A., Hirsch, P., Rother, C., Schiffrin, A. & Krull, C. Arti ﬁcial-intelligence-driven
scanning probe microscopy. Commun. Phys. 3,1 –8 (2020).
32. Kalinin, S. V., Sumper, B. G. & Archibald, R. K. Big-deep-smart data in imaging for
guiding materials design. Nat. Mater. 14, 973 –980 (2015).
33. Kalinin, S. V. et al. Big, deep, and smart data in scanning probe microscopy. ACS
Nano 10, 9068 –9086 (2016).
34. Kalinin, S. V., Borisevich, A. & Jesse, S. Fire up the atom forge. Nature 539, 485–487
(2016).
35. Dyck, O., Jesse, S. & Kalinin, S. V. A self-driving microscope and the Atomic Forge.
MRS Bull. 44, 669 –670 (2019).
36. Dyck, O. et al. Building structures atom by atom via electron beam manipulation.
Small 14, 1801771 (2018).
37. Jesse, S. et al. Direct atomic fabrication and dopant positioning in Si using
electron beams with active real-time image-based feedback. Nanotechnology 29,
255303 (2018).
38. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. ImageNet classi ﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. 25, 1097–1105 (2017).
39. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. "Deep ResidualLearning for Image Recognition."
2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016,
pp. 770 –778, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
40. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. & Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
image segmentation. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv 9351,2 3 4–241
(2015).
41. Ziatdinov, M., Maksov, A. & Kalinin, S. V. Learning surface molecular structures via
machine vision. Npj Comput. Mater. 3,1 –9 (2017).
42. Rashidi, M. & Wolkow, R. A. Autonomous scanning probe microscopy in situ tip
conditioning through machine learning. ACS Nano 12, 5185 –5189 (2018).
43. Ziatdinov, M. et al. Deep learning of atomically resolved scanning transmission
electron microscopy images: chemical identi ﬁcation and tracking local transfor-
mations. ACS Nano 11, 12742 –12752 (2017).
A. Ghosh et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 
44. Gordon, O. M., Hodgkinson, J. E. A., Farley, S. M., Hunsicker, E. L. & Moriarty, P. J.
Automated searching and identi ﬁcation of self-organized nanostructures. Nano
Lett. 20, 7688 –7693 (2020).
45. Horwath, J. P., Zakharov, D. N., Mégret, R. & Stach, E. A. Understanding important
features of deep learning models for segmentation of high-resolution transmis-
sion electron microscopy images. Npj Comput. Mater. 6,1 –9 (2020).
46. Lee, C.-H. et al. Deep learning enabled strain mapping of single-atom defects in
two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides with sub-picometer precision.
Nano Lett. 20, 3369 –3377 (2020).
47. Ovadia, Y. et al. Can you trust your model ’s uncertainty? Evaluating predictive
uncertainty under dataset shift. Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. 33, 13991 –14002
(2019).
48. Zech, J. R. et al. Variable generalization performance of a deep learning model to
detect pneumonia in chest radiographs: a cross-sectional study. PLoS Med. 15,
e1002683 (2018).
49. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A. & Blundell, C. Simple and scalable predictive
uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. 31,
6405–6416 (2017).
50. Wilson, A. G. & Izmailov, P. Bayesian deep learning and a probabilistic perspective
of generalization. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.08791.pdf (2020).
51. Fort, S., Hu, H. & Lakshminarayanan, B. Deep Ensembles: A Loss Landscape Per-
spective. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/pdf/1912.02757.pdf (2019).
52. Izmailov, P., Wilson, A. G., Podoprikhin, D., Vetrov, D. & Garipov, T. Averaging
weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. UAI 2, 876 –885 (2018).
53. Barthel, J. Dr. Probe: A software for high-resolution STEM image simulation.
Ultramicroscopy 193,1 –11 (2018).
54. Vlassiouk, I. et al. Large scale atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition of
graphene. Carbon 54,5 8 –67 (2013).
55. Dyck, O., Kim, S., Kalinin, S. V. & Jesse, S. Mitigating e-beam-induced hydrocarbon
deposition on graphene for atomic-scale scanning transmission electron micro-
scopy studies. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 36, 011801 (2017).
56. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector
augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
57. Kresse, G. & Furthmuller, J. Ef ﬁcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy
calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
58. Kreese, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev. B
47, 558 (1993).
59. Monkhorst, H. & Pack, J. D. Special points for Brillouin-zone integrations. Phys. Rev.
B
13, 5188 (1976).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This effort (machine learning) is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE), Of ﬁce of Science, Of ﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences Data, Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning at DOE Scienti ﬁc User Facilities (A.G., S.V.K., B.G.S.)
and was also supported (STEM experiment) by the DOE, Of ﬁce of Science, Basic
Energy Sciences (BES), Materials Sciences and Engineering Division (O.D.), and was
performed and partially supported (M.Z., B.G.S.) at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory’s Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS), a DOE Of ﬁce of
Science User Facility. Dr. Matthew Chisholm (ORNL) is gratefully acknowledged for
the STEM data on Ni-LSMO used in this work.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.V.K. and M.Z. conceived the project. A.G. prepared training data from simulations,
trained ELIT models, and implemented all the associated work ﬂows in Jupyter
notebooks. A.G. and B.G.S. ran the MD simulations. O.D. obtained STEM data on
graphene. M.Z. realized the ELIT framework via AtomAI and PyTorch libraries. M.Z., S.
V.K., and A.G. wrote the drafts of the manuscript while B.G.S. and O.D. contributed to
the writing.
COMPETING INTERESTS
S.V.K. is a member of the Editorial Board for npj Computational Materials. S.V.K. was
not involved in the journal ’s review of, or decisions related to, this manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-021-00569-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.V.K. or M.Z.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the U.S.; foreign
copyright protection may apply 2021
A. Ghosh et al.
8
npj Computational Materials (2021)   100 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences