arXiv:cond-mat/0009106v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  7 Sep 2000
From the zero-ﬁeld metal-insulator transition in two dimen sions to the quantum Hall
transition: a percolation-eﬀective-medium theory
Yigal Meir
Department of Physics, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva 8 4105, ISRAEL
and
The Ilse Katz Center for Meso- and Nanoscale Science and Tech nology,
Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84105, ISRAEL
Eﬀective-medium theory is applied to the percolation descr iption of the metal-insulator transition
in two dimensions with emphasis on the continuous connectio n between the zero-magnetic-ﬁeld tran-
sition and the quantum Hall transition. In this model the sys tem consists of puddles connected via
saddle points, and there is loss of quantum coherence inside the puddles. The eﬀective conductance
of the network is calculated using appropriate integration over the distribution of conductances,
leading to a determination of the magnetic ﬁeld dependence o f the critical density. Excellent quan-
titative agreement is obtained with the experimental data, which allows an estimate of the puddle
physical parameters.
PACS numbers: 71.30.+h,73.40.Hm,72.15.Rn,73.50.-h
Extensive experimental and theoretical eﬀort has been
invested in the attempt to understand and characterize
the observation of metallic-like behavior in two dimen-
sions [1]. One of the intriguing experimental ﬁndings
[2] is that this zero-magnetic-ﬁeld ”transition” is contin-
uously connected with the integer quantum Hall tran-
sition. In previous publications [3] I presented a simple
non-interacting electron model, combining local quantum
transport and global classical percolation, which treated
the zero ﬁeld transition and the quantum Hall transition
on the same footing. Numerical calculations showed be-
havior qualitatively similar to that observed experimen-
tally. In the present paper I present an analytic approach,
based on the eﬀective-medium theory of percolation [4],
that allows quantitative comparison with the experiment.
This comparison also allows determination of physical
properties of the underlying electronic state. The impli-
cations on transport in the quantum Hall regime due to
this continuous connection to the zero-ﬁeld transition are
discussed and shown to be in agreement with experimen-
tal observations in the quantum Hall regime.
The model is based on two assumptions: (a) the po-
tential ﬂuctuations due to the disorder deﬁne density
puddles, connected via saddle points, or quantum point-
contacts (QPCs), and (b) The electron wavefunction to-
tally dephases in the puddles, i.e. the time the parti-
cle spends in the puddle is larger that the dephasing
time. Each saddle point is characterized by its critical
energy ǫc, such that the transmission through it is given
by T (ǫ) = Θ( ǫ − ǫc), where quantum tunneling has been
neglected. Thus the conductance through each QPC is
given by the Landauer formula,
G(µ, T ) = 2e2
h
∫
dǫ
(
− ∂fF D(ǫ)
∂ǫ
)
T (ǫ)
= 2e2
h
1
1 + exp[(ǫc − µ)/kT ] , (1)
where µ is the chemical potential, and fF D is the Fermi-
Dirac distribution function.
The system is now composed of classical resistors,
where the resistance of each one of them is given by (1),
with random QPC energies. Eﬀective medium theory for
such random resistor network has been developed many
years ago [4], and it agrees with exact solution of this
network on an inﬁnite lattice (Cayley tree). The result-
ing equation for the eﬀective conductance σ of the total
network is given by
0 =
∫
dGf (G) G − σ
G + (z − 2)σ , (2)
where f (G) is the distribution function of the conduc-
tances in the network, and z is the coordination number
of the lattice.
In the present case, the conductance through a point
contact, given by (1), depends on the the threshold en-
ergy of the quantum point contact and the chemical po-
tential in the puddles that are connected by it. At zero
temperature it reduces to G(µ, T = 0) = 2 e2/h × Θ( µ −
ǫc), where Θ( x) is the Heaviside step function. For an
arbitrary distribution of the threshold energies fthr(ǫc),
the equation for the eﬀective conductance of the network
reads
0 = If
1 − σ
1 + (z − 2)σ + (1 − If ) −σ
(z − 2)σ , (3)
with If ≡ ∫ µ
−∞ fthr(ǫc)dǫc. Solving for σ, one ﬁnds
σ(µ) = σ0 × (µ − µc), (4)
with σ0 (of the the order of e2/h) and µc nonuniversal
constants, depending on the distribution function and
the lattice. The conductance vanishes below a critical
chemical potential (density) and grows linearly above it.
1
The mean-ﬁeld critical conductance exponent was found
to be unity (compared to ≃ 1.3 in two dimensions).
In the presence of a ﬁnite perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld
B the situation becomes more complicated. Landau lev-
els form in the puddles (see inset to Fig. 1), and the
chemical potential in each puddle oscillates with mag-
netic ﬁeld, as it is stuck in the highest occupied Landau
level in the puddle. If a puddle is modeled by potential
parabolic well, characterized by it depth, ǫ0, and by its
conﬁning energy, ¯hω0 (which also deﬁnes its characteris-
tic size), then the chemical potential is given by
µ(µ0, ǫ0, ω0, B) = ǫ0 + ¯hω/2 + ¯hω
[ µ0 − ¯hω0/2 − ǫ0
¯hω
]
int
,
(5)
where [ ] int denotes the integer part, ω ≡
√
ω2
0 + ω2c ,
and wc(B) is the cyclotron energy. The parameter µ0
is the zero-ﬁeld chemical potential (density). For large
ﬁeld the chemical potential is ǫ0 + ¯hω/2, the energy of
the lowest Landau level. As magnetic ﬁeld is reduced,
there will be a ﬁrst jump in the chemical potential for
µ0 − ¯hω0/2 − ǫ0 ≃ ¯hω, which deﬁnes ﬁlling factor ν = 1.
In Fig. 1 a typical magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the chem-
ical potential in two puddles is depicted. The two puddles
diﬀer only in the value of ǫ0, the depth of the potential.
magnetic field
chemical potential
hω
µc
0ω0ε
ε
Fig. 1: The magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the chemical po-
tential in two diﬀerent puddles. The chemical potential is
stuck to the topmost occupied Landau level, which leads to
the observed oscillations. The two puddles diﬀer only in the ir
depth. Inset: the parameters characterizing a puddle and a
neighboring point contact.
Transport through a single QPC in perpendicular ﬁeld
has been studied experimentally in detail [5]. In accor-
dance with the above picture, one ﬁnds that the critical
gate voltage (density) oscillates with magnetic ﬁeld due
to the depopulation of Landau levels.
The system consists of many puddles, each having its
own characteristic physical parameters. Consequently,
the integral over the distribution of the conductances
in (2), which depends on the distribution of the local
puddle parameters through the local chemical potential,
µ(µ0, ǫ0, ω0, B), has to appropriately performed. Then
Eq.(4) turns into
σ(B, µ0) = σ0 × [
µ(µ0, B) − µc] , with
µ(µ0, B) =∫
dǫ′
0 fǫ0(ǫ′
0)
∫
dω′
0fω0(ω′
0) [ µ(µ0, ǫ0, ω0, B) − ¯hω/2] , (6)
where fǫ0 and fω0 are the distribution functions of the re-
spective puddle parameters. In the following these were
assumed to be uniform distributions around characteris-
tic energy scales ǫ0 and ω0, respectively, with respective
widths ∆ ǫ0 and ∆ ω0. The energy of the lowest Landau
level, ¯hω/2, was subtracted, as it does not contribute to
the kinetic energy of the electrons (or holes) [6].
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
magnetic field (T)
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6critical density (10
10
)
    data [Ref.2]
theory
Fig. 2: Comparison of the experimental data [2] for the criti -
cal density to the prediction of eﬀective medium theory. The
excellent agreement between theory and experiment allows
determination of the puddle potential distribution (see te xt).
Note that if the magnetic ﬁeld is changed for a ﬁxed den-
sity (e.g. n = 1 .15 × 1010 along the broken line), there will
be a ﬁnite region of magnetic ﬁelds where conductance, in
the zero-temperature limit, will be non-zero, in contradic tion
with the quantum-phase-transition description of the quan -
tum Hall eﬀect.
The magnetic ﬁeld dependence of the critical density
µ0(B) is now determined by the relation
2
µ(µ0, B) = µc. (7)
For large ﬁelds ( ν ≤ 1) the chemical potential in each
puddle varies linearly with magnetic ﬁeld (see Fig. 1).
Thus it is clear that the averaged chemical potential will
also vary linearly with ﬁeld at large ﬁelds. As the ﬁeld is
reduced there will be a discontinuous jump in the chemi-
cal potential of each puddle at it respective integer ﬁlling
factors. One might expect that after averaging only the
largest jump, at ν = 1, may survive, and will be replaced
by a smooth rapid increase. This has indeed been seen
experimentally [2]. Fig. 2 depicts the experimental data,
compared to the predictions of the eﬀective-medium the-
ory, Eqs.(6,7). The parameters ǫ0 and ω0 determine the
value of the magnetic ﬁeld where the rapid increase in
the critical density occurs (around ν = 1), and the sat-
uration value at zero magnetic ﬁeld. The width of the
puddle potential distribution ∆ ω0 determines the rate of
increase of the critical density near ν = 1. The excellent
agreement between the experimental data and theory is
evident, and allows a determination of the physical char-
acteristics of the puddle distribution. One ﬁnds that the
typical conﬁning energy in the puddle is 0 .5meV, (with
about 10% dispersion), leading to a typical puddle size
of 25 nm.
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
filling factor
10
1
0.1             resistance (h/e
2
)
5 10 15
density (arbitrary units)
1.5
1
theory (zero field)
data [Ref. 8]
Fig. 3: The exponential dependence of the resistance on den-
sity, experiment [8] vs. theory (at zero ﬁeld). The magnetic
ﬁeld, according to the theory only shifts the transition. As
pointed out in [3], the “temperature independent point” in
the model has nothing to do with the critical point, which,
in this case, is n = 1 .05, way oﬀ the scale. Thus all the re-
gion depicted in the ﬁgure is on the metallic side, which migh t
explain why the Hall resistance remains quantized, as the de n-
sity crosses this “temperature independent point” [15].
The experimentally demonstrated connection between
the quantum Hall transition and the zero-ﬁeld transition
indicates that both stem from the same physical pro-
cess. The fact that the quantum Hall transition, at least
in these systems, is driven by percolation-like behavior
and cannot be described by the usual theory of quantum
phase transition is demonstrated by the fact that the ex-
perimental data in Fig. 2 shows that for as the magnetic
ﬁeld changes a ﬁxed density, n (e.g. n = 1 .15 × 1010
along the broken line in the ﬁgure), there is a ﬁnite (and
substantial) range in magnetic ﬁelds, where the zero-
temperature limit of the conductance remains nonzero.
This is in contradiction with the usual theory of quan-
tum phase transition that predicts, at zero temperature,
a single point where transport is dissipative. Such data
has already been reported in the past [7], and the den-
sity and temperature dependence of the longitudinal re-
sistance was well described by the relation ρxx(n, T ) =
ρ1 exp[(n − nc)/(αT + β)], where nc is the critical density
and ρ1, α and β some constants (note the ﬁnite resistivity
when extrapolated to zero temperature). This behavior
looks remarkably like the one reported for the zero-ﬁeld
transition [8], ρ(n, T ) = ρ0 + ρ1 exp[(n − nc)/(αT ). In
order to check this functional dependence, the eﬀective-
medium equation (2) was solved for ﬁnite temperatures,
where a uniform distribution of critical energies ǫc was
assumed for simplicity. The resulting eﬀective resistance
is depicted in Fig. 3, and compared to the experimental
observation in the quantum Hall regime [8]. Similarly to
the experimental data, the theory shows that there is a
wide range in temperature (a high-temperature regime
in the theory) where the eﬀective resistance displays ex-
ponential temperature dependence [9].
The fact that the quantum Hall transition, at least in
some of the reported observations, stems from the same
mechanism that leads to the metallic behavior in zero
magnetic ﬁeld is further supported by the fact that the
reported current-voltage duality across the quantum Hall
transition [10] was also reported for the zero-ﬁeld tran-
sition [11]. The relevance of percolation to the quantum
Hall transition has already been established experimen-
tally [12], where it was shown that the transition occurs
when the metallic phase percolates through the system,
and not at a ﬁxed ﬁlling factor, as expected from the
quantum-phase-transition scenario.
The relevance of the underlying puddle structure and
the ﬁnite dephasing rate to these observations in the
quantum Hall regime has already been pointed out and
elaborated upon by Shimshoni and coworkers [13]. Also,
Pryadko and Auerbach have claimed [14] that the ﬁnite
quantized value of the Hall conductance reported in the
insulating regime [15] can only be explained when ﬁnite
dephasing is taken into account, and the Hall resistance
should be inﬁnite in a truly quantum coherent Hall in-
sulator. It should be noted though, that as pointed out
in [3] the identiﬁcation of the “temperature independent
point” with the critical point is questionable, and within
the model it lies well within the metallic phase. In this
picture the fact that the Hall conductance remains quan-
tized through the “transition” is a trivial issue, as this
3
point is not the true transition point to the insulator. For
the parameters corresponding to the curves depicted in
Fig. 3, the critical point occurs at n = 1 .05, thus all the
points in the ﬁgure lie deep in the metallic phase, and no
change in the quantized Hall resistance is expected.
To conclude, the excellent agreement with the exper-
imental data, in addition to previously demonstrated
quantitative agreement with temperature and parallel
magnetic ﬁeld data is a further validation of the relevance
of the theory to the description of this phenomenon. The
theory further predicts that when the conductance is
measured in a mesoscopic piece of the system, the con-
ductance will show abrupt changes, as a function of the
density, as point contacts open with increasing density.
Such mesoscopic jumps in the conductance in the quan-
tum Hall regime have indeed recently observed [16].
The author would like to thank D. Shahar and his
group for valuable discussions and for making their data
available to him. This work was supported by the Israel
Science Foundation - Centers of Excellence Program, and
by the German Ministry of Science.
[1] For a recent review of experimental data and theoreti-
cal approaches, see E. Abrahams, S. V. Kravchenko and
M. P. Sarachik, cond-mat/0006055.
[2] Y. Hanein et al., Nature 400, 735 (1999).
[3] Y. Meir, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3506 (1999); Phys. Rev. B
61, 16470 (2000).
[4] S. Kirkpatrick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 1722 (1971);
R. B. Stinchcombe, J. Phys. C 7 , 179 (1974).
[5] See, e.g., B. J. van Wees, Phys. Rev. B43, 12431 (1991).
[6] H. A. Fertig and B. I. Haleprin, Phys. Rev. B 36 , 7969
(1987).
[7] M. Hilke et al., Phys. Rev. B 56 , R15545 (1997); D.
Shahar et al., Solid State Comm 107, 19 (1998).
[8] V. M. Pudalov, JETP Lett. 66, 175 (1997); Y. Hanein et
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1288 (1998).
[9] It should be noted, though, that the resistance change in
the data is much larger than that in the theory.
[10] D. Shahar et al., Science 274, 589 (1996); E. Shimshoni
et al., Phys. Rev. B 55 , 13730 (1996).
[11] D. Simonian, S. V Kravchenko and M. P. Sarachik, Phys.
Rev. B 55 , R13421 (1997).
[12] A. A. Shashkin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3141 (1994);
V. T. Dolgapolov et al., JETP Lett. 62, 162 (1995);
I. V. Kukuskin et al., Phys. Rev. B53, R13260 (1996).
[13] E. Shimshoni and A. Auerbach, Phys. Rev. B 55 , 9817
(1997); E. Shimshoni, A. Auerbach and A. Kapitulnik,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3352 (1998). E. Shimsoni, Phys.
Rev. B 60 , 10691 (1999)
[14] L. P. Pryadko and A. Auerbach, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
1253 (1999).
[15] M. Hilke et al., Nature 395, 675 (1998).
[16] D. Shahar, unpublished.
4