 
 
Title: Ultrafast Generation and Control of an Electron Vortex Beam  
via Chiral Plasmonic Near Fields 
Authors:  G. M. Vanacore1,*,†, G. Berruto1,*, I. Madan1, E. Pomarico1, P. Biagioni2, R. J. 
Lamb3, D. McGrouther3, O. Reinhardt4, I. Kaminer4, B. Barwick5, H. Larocque6, V. Grillo7,                   
E. Karimi6, F. J. García de Abajo8,9, and F. Carbone1 
Affiliations: 
1Institute of Physics, Laboratory for Ultrafast Microscopy and Electron Scattering (LUMES), 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 
2Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133  Milano, Italy 
3SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK 
4Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Solid State Institute, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel 
5Ripon College, 300 W. Seward St., Ripon, WI 54971, United States 
6Department of Physics, University of Ottawa, 25 Templeton St., Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5 
Canada 
7CNR-Istituto Nanoscienze, Centro S3, Via G Campi 213/a, I-41125 Modena, Italy 
8ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08860 
Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain 
9ICREA-Institucío Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Ava nçats, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 
Barcelona, Spain 
*Authors contributed equally. 
†Correspondence to: giovanni.vanacore@epfl.ch 
 
Introductory paragraph: Vortex-carrying matter waves, such as chiral electron beams, are of 
significant interest in both applied and fundamental science. Continuous wave e lectron vortex 
beams are commonly prepared via passive phase masks imprinting a transverse phase modulation 
on the electron’s wave function. Here, we show  that femtosecond chiral plasmonic near fields 
enable the generation and dynamic control on the ultrafast timescale of an electron vortex beam. 
The vortex structure of the resulting electron wavepacket is probed in both real and reciprocal 
space using ultrafast transmission electron microscopy. This method  offers a high degree of 
scalability to small length scales and a highly efficient manipulation of the electron vorticity with 
attosecond precision. Besides the direct implications in the investigation of nanoscale ultrafast 
processes in which chirality plays a major role, we further discuss the perspectives of using this 
technique to shape the wave function of charged composite particles, such as protons, and how it 
can be used to probe their internal structure. 
Main Text: The quantum wave nature of both light and matter has enabled several tools to shape 
them into new wave structures defined by exotic non-trivial spatio-temporal properties (1). Among 
these techniques , the impartment of a vortex onto their transverse phase profile is showing a 
 
 
significant impact in both applied and fundamental science. Vortices are stagnant points at which 
the phase is undefined, while along a contour around them it varies by an integer multiple m of 2π. 
The magnitude and sign of the quantization number  m, also known as the topological charge, 
indicate the amount and the handedness, respectively, of the phase cycles surrounding the vortex 
(2). If the singularity is located along the wave’s central axis z, it is simply accounted for by a 
phase factor exp(𝑖𝑚𝜙) in the wave function , where 𝜙 is the azimuthal angle. Provided that the 
modulus of the wave is circularly symmetric, then the presence of this term causes the wave to 
carry orbital angular momentum (OAM), as it effectively become s an  eigenstate of the z 
component of the OAM operator with eigenvalue 𝑚ℏ, where ℏ is the reduced Planck constant. 
Vortices have been extensively studied in optical waves within the  context of classical and 
quantum communications (3 -5), optical trapping (6,7), quantum entanglement (8,9) , and 
nanostructured plasmonic devices (10). Vortices in electron waves have also become increasingly 
present in modern science, especially in electron microscopy (11-14). Combining the OAM of the 
vortex beam with the charge of the electrons  results in an increased sensitivity to local magnetic 
properties (15,16). Both optical and electron beams that carry OAM can be produced by means of 
passive devices that directly modify the ir wave structure, such as spiral phase plates ( 17), along 
with amplitude (18) and phase holograms ( 19,20). The electron’s charge also allows obtaining a 
vortex by other methods, such as magnetic needles (21), programmable electrostatic displays (22), 
and tunable electrostatic phase devices (23) . Alternative approaches  relying on the discrete 
exchange of OAM between interacting relativistic electrons and optical electromagnetic waves 
have also been theoretically proposed (24,25). However, all the experimental implementations 
have been so far limited only to continuous wave vortex electron beams , restricting the range of 
possible applications mainly to the investigation of ground-state processes, whereas a huge amount 
of information resides in the exploration of the non-equilibrium dynamics. 
In this Letter, we experimentally show that ultrafast vorticity can be imparted to charged 
particles by the interaction with strong local electromagnetic fields sustained by collective 
electronic modes. This is achieved by having ultrashort single-electron wavepackets interacting 
with an optically -excited femtosecond chiral plasmonic near field. This interaction induce s an 
azimuthally varying phase shift on the electron’s wave  function, as mapped via ultrafast 
transmission electron microscopy ( 26,27). With respect to static approaches using passive phase 
masks, this method offers a higher degree of scalability to small length scales and a highly efficient 
dynamic phase control, as inherited from the ability to manipulate the ultrafast plasmonic field. 
We demonstrate such level of phase manipulation using a sequence of two phase -locked light 
pulses to coherently control the properties of the vortex beam with attosecond precision . Our 
experimental results are described by means of a general theoretical framework that can be applied 
also to other charged particles, and thus potentially to other matter waves, such as proton beams. 
The ability to add OAM onto the latter could have fundamental implications on open questions in 
hadronic physics, where OAM -carrying protons could be used to address the origin of their spin 
(proton spin puzzle) (28). 
Several recent studies have shown that a strong longitudinal phase modulation of the 
electron wave function can be achieved by the interaction with intense optical fields (29-31). Given 
that OAM impartment relies on the modulation of an electron’s transverse phase profile, a crucial 
aspect for the experimental realization is the ability  to synthesize an optical field with a well -
defined chirality that would extend over the transverse plane  and be efficiently confined on the 
length scale defined by the electron coherence (on the order of ~ 1 μm for fs- electron pulses). The 
usually adopted configurations are however not suitable for this task since the spin of the photon, 
 
 
as defined by its circular polarization, cannot be directly mapped into the OAM of the e lectron in 
a simple electron-photon interaction process, such as in inverse transition radiation. To fulfill these 
requirements the interaction needs to rely on the interruption of light propagation by a scattering 
object, or for example be mediated by a spatially-confined OAM-carrying optical field . This 
condition can be generated by the excitation of chiral surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs) (32-34), 
which relies on the spin -to-OAM conversion from circula rly-polarized light  in non -paraxial 
scattering and is a clear manifestation of the strong spin-orbit coupling of light when confined to 
subwavelength scales  (33,34). When a  circularly-polarized light beam encounters a properly 
designed nanoscale cavity, it is able to scatter into in-plane SPPs with a nonzero topological charge 
and helical phase distribution (33). For a cylindrically-symmetric structure, the conservation of the 
total angu lar momentum quantum number  restricts the plasmon  OAM to be only +ℏ or −ℏ 
according to the helicity of the incident light plane-wave. Arbitrarily large values of plasmon OAM 
are instead possible by using incident light with high vorticity (e.g., Bessel beams). 
We generate a chiral plasmonic field by illuminating a nanofabricated hole  in a Ag-film 
deposited on a Si 3N4 membrane (diameter ~ 0.8 μm) with circularly or partially-circularly 
polarized light carrying  energy of  ℏ𝜔 = 1.57 eV per photon (see Fig. 1 a). Surface-plasmon 
polaritons are generated at the hole edge and radially propagate away within the Ag/Si3N4 interface 
with a phase distribution that can be directly mapped by means of a nonlocal holographic method 
(35). The latter  directly draws from a recently developed approach used to homogeneously 
modulate the phase of the electron wave function by means of a semi-infinite light field obtained 
when a nearly-plane-wave light beam is reflected from a continuous Ag layer (opaque to the light 
but semi-transparent to the electrons)  (31). In the presence of a nanostructure , this effect would 
generally coexist with electron scattering from the local field of the photo-excited SPPs propagated 
at the Ag/Si3N4 interface, which are nonetheless phase locked with the light field reflected at the 
Ag surface . Despite the two fields being localized at different positions along the z axis, the 
electron wave-packet, while propagating through the structure, can interact with both of them at a 
temporal separation which is smaller than its longitudinal temporal coherence.  The resulting 
position-dependent interference between the propagating light field and the SPP field gives rise to 
a spatially oscillating field amplitude that directly translates into a modulation of the electron wave 
function that can be imaged in real space  (see Fig. 1b). This nonlocal interference thus allows us 
to directly access the phase distributi on of the plasmon fiel d itself. This is realized by energy-
filtered imaging, where we selectively collect only th ose electrons that have exchanged energy 
with the optical fields.  
The resulting measured image for an elliptically polarized optical illumination  when 
electron and light wavepackets are in temporal coincidence,  is shown in Fig. 1c and displays the 
characteristic spiral phase pattern of a chiral SPP . This patter n is in agreement with the  finite-
difference-time-domain (FDTD) simulations shown in Fig. 1e (further details are given in section 
S3 of the SI). The simulated phase profile of the electric field along the z-axis (Fig. 1e) exhibits a 
clear spiral distribution that resembles the experimental image. Moreover, the simulations clearly 
show that the SPP field displays in the center of the hole a phase singularity of topological charge 
𝑚 = 1. This suggests that a 2𝜋 phase shift can be imprinted onto the electron’s wave  function, 
provided that it coherently encloses the hole upon propagating through the device. 
Further insight s can be obtained through a semi -analytical theory. Upon propagation 
through the plasmon -supporting struct ure, the incident electron wave  function 𝜓𝑖𝑛𝑐(𝑅, 𝜙, 𝑧, 𝑡) 
gains inelastically scattered components: 
 
 
𝜓ℓ(𝑅, 𝜙, 𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝜓inc(𝑅, 𝜙, 𝑧, 𝑡)𝐽ℓ(2|𝛽|)exp(𝑖ℓ arg{−𝛽} + 𝑖ℓ𝜔(𝑧/𝑣 − 𝑡)), (1) 
labeled by the integer  ℓ, which corresponds to the number of plasmons absorbed/emitted by a 
single electron. A detailed, self-contained derivation of this expression is given in Ref. (31). Here, 
𝑅 and 𝜙 are the transverse cylindrical coordinates centered at the hole, 𝑣 is the electron velocity, 
and 𝐽ℓ is the ℓth-order Bessel function of the first kind. All of these scattered components are fully 
described in terms of a single complex function 𝛽(𝑅, 𝜙), which captures the interaction of the 
electron with the light and SPP fields. As detailed in section S2 of the SI, the interaction strength 
is determined by the electric field component along the z axis (31), which in our case can be written 
as 𝛽 ~ 𝐴 + 𝐵exp(𝑖𝑘𝑆𝑃𝑃𝑅), where the first term represents the interaction of the electrons with the 
semi-infinite light field (reference), while the second term defines the interaction with the SPP 
field propagating with a wave  vector 𝑘𝑆𝑃𝑃 (signal). Direct comparison between theory and 
experiment can be obtained for the real-space intensity distribution 𝐼inelastic(𝑅, 𝜙) = ∑ |𝜓ℓ|2+∞
|ℓ|=1  
shown in Fig. 1d, which nicely reproduces the experimental data. 
This one -to-one correspondence between the complex optical field of the SPP  and the 
transverse distribution of the electron wave function is further evidenced in Fig. 2 by comparing 
experiments and FDTD simulations  for both circularly -polarized and linea rly-polarized light 
illumination. In Fig. 2 a and 2f we show the energy -filtered images of the inelastically scattered 
electron distribution inside the hole for both polarization states. These directly correlate with the 
simulated spatial distribution of the modulus of 𝛽 reported in Fig. 2b and 2g. A zero-field region 
with cylindrical or mirror symmetry is visible inside the hole when circularly- or linearly-polarized 
light is used, respectively. The spatially oscillating pattern measured outside the hole for the two 
polarizations (Fig. 2c and 2h) is instead a direct representation of  the spatial distribution of the 
phase of 𝛽 within the xy plane (see simulations in Fig. 2 d and 2i). Because the plasmon order ℓ 
also strongly defines the degree of interaction  with the SPP field , the spatial distribution of the 
scattered electrons can be significantly modulated by ℓ. This can be clearly seen in the space-
energy maps shown in Fig. 2e and 2j for circular and linear polarizations, respectively, where the 
zero-field region spreads in size with an increasing number of absorbed/emitted SPPs. 
We note that, for incident light with circular or partially-circular polarization, the phase of 
the interaction strength 𝛽 evolves nearly linearly with 𝜙 (i.e., arg{𝛽} ∝ 𝜙, see Fig. S3 in the SI). 
This linear dependence translates into an overall phase factor exp(±𝑖ℓ𝜙) in the wave function 𝜓ℓ, 
which therefore carries an OAM of ±ℓℏ (see also schematics in Fig. 3a). On a fundamental level, 
the transfer of the above phase profile relies on the impinging light field creating plasmons with 
OAM of ±𝑚ℏ. In our case 𝑚 is equal to 1 due to the axial symmetry of the circular hole and to 
the ±ℏ units of the spin angular momentum carried by the circularly polarized Gaussian beam 
illuminating it. In a general case, the exchange of ℓ plasmons with the electron would thereafter 
result in a net transfer of ±ℓ𝑚ℏ units of OAM.  The use of non -axially-symmetric structures 
sustaining chiral SPPs with arbitrarily large values of 𝑚, such as spiral plasmonic lenses 
(33,36,37), is therefore a promising route to create high-OAM vortex electron beams. Because of 
the linearity of the interaction, our approach works at any value of the incident light intensity, and 
thus it is intrinsically robust with respect to the external parameters. Naturally, the efficiency of 
the process (i.e., the maximum ℓ that can be efficiently reached ) might be different according to 
the extent of the photoexcitation.  
 
 
To further verify the OAM transfer, we also monitored the far-field images of the electron 
beam in the transversal-momentum space (𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦), and determined the changes produced by the 
presence of illumination. This is shown in Fig. 3c and 3i for a circularly polarized light beam  in 
combination with  a sample orientation that vanishes  the electron-light interaction while 
maintaining a significant electron -plasmon coupling ( see section S 2 of the SI ). Comparison 
between the reciprocal-space map measured under these conditions (Fig. 3 c and 3 i) and that 
acquired be fore optical illumination (Fig. 3 b and 3 e) reveals a characteristic destructive 
interference region at the electron beam center , which attests the presence of a phase singularity 
in its transverse phase profile. We attribute the origin of this behavior to the chiral near field created 
at the hole, which dominates the coupling with the electron wavepacket (see Fig. S6 in the SI) and 
imprints on it a 2𝜋ℓ phase shift as inherited by the circularly -polarized optical illumination . To 
confirm that the reciprocal-space distribution of the electron beam is indeed determined by the 
phase profile of the optical field at the hole, we have  performed additional experiments using a 
linearly-polarized light beam. This is shown in Fig. 3 d and 3 j, where a characteristic 2-lobed 
electron beam (38) is formed as a result of the uniform π phase shift generated across the hole (see 
Fig. 2i). 
Within this scenario, the momentum-resolved electron wave function Ψℓ(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦) can be 
calculated as the Fourier transform of the real-space wave function 𝜓ℓ(𝑅, 𝜙): 
Ψℓ(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦) = ∫ 𝑑𝜙
𝜋
−𝜋
∫ 𝑅𝑑𝑅
+∞
0
exp(−𝑖𝒌⊥ ⋅ 𝑹)𝜓ℓ(𝑅, 𝜙) (2) 
where 𝒌⊥ =  (𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦). Here, 𝜓ℓ(𝑅, 𝜙) is given by Eq. (1), where the incident  wave function 
𝜓inc(𝑅, 𝜙) has a lateral extension determined by the electron transverse coherence  (~ 0.7-1 μm), 
and the interaction strength 𝛽 originated at the hole is extracted from FDTD simulations where the 
actual spatial distribution of the near field is considered (see Fig. S6 in the SI). The total Fourier-
plane intensity is then obtained as: 𝐼𝐹(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦) = ∑ |Ψℓ(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦)|
2+∞
ℓ=−∞ . The calculated maps, where 
a small momentum broadening  is also included to take into account the experimental resolution,  
are shown in Fig. 3e-g and correctly reproduce the doughnut-shaped and the 2-lobed probability 
distribution observed in the experiment as induced by the chiral and linear transverse phase 
modulation, respectively. Our experimental and theoretical results are also in excellent agreement 
with standard electron vortex beam calculations (see details in section S 4 of the SI). In the latter 
case, the effect of the chiral near field on the electron wave function is simulated by the interaction 
of a plane wave with a spatially -confined spiral phase plate of order ℓ, whose extension is 
determined by the hole diameter (see Fig. S8 in the SI). 
An extremely interesting feature of o ur approach is the ability to dynamically control the 
vortex beam properties. This is possible thanks to the high degree of tunability of the optical field, 
which allows to coherently modulate the longitudinal and transverse phase profile of the electron 
wave function. This is achieved by manipulating the phase distribution of the plasmonic near field 
with attosecond precision using a sequence of two phase -locked 55-fs light pulses with a relative 
delay, 𝛥𝑡, between them varied in steps of 334 as (see also Ref. (31)). As schematically depicted 
in Fig. 4a, this three -pulse scheme allows us  to finely control the relative phase of the two 
optically-excited plasmons. In the first implemented configuration, we have used two  elliptically 
polarized light pulses with parallel major axes. The initial delay was set to 𝛥𝑡∗ = 85 fs, longer than 
their cross-correlation, in order to minimize the optical interference between the two pulses, which 
 
 
remained nevertheless below a 5 x 10-2 level. When varying the delay time between the two optical 
pulses, the observed time -dependent evolution  of the plasmonic pattern is a  sequence of 
constructive and destructive interference between the optically-generated plasmons propagating at 
the Ag/Si3N4 interface (see Fig. 4b-d). The result is a coherent modulation of the intensity and of 
the spatial periodicity of the plasmonic fringes with a temporal period given by the optical cycle 
of ~ 2.67 fs (see Fig. 4e-f, Supplementary Movie S1, and calculations in Fig. S4 in the SI). This 
effect, which cannot be related to a simple optical interference within the incident light field, can 
be understood as the coherent interaction between two spatially- and temporally-localized plasmon 
wavepackets. In a second configuration,  the elliptical polarization of the two light pulses is 
arranged such that their major axes are perpendicular to each other . In this way, we effectively 
have a dynamic handle on the helicity of the phase singularity created at the center of the 
nanofabricated hole. This is shown in Fig. 4g-i and in the Supplementary Movie S2 (see also 
calculations in Fig. S5 in the SI), where the handedness of the spiral plasmonic phase distribution 
is observed to switch from clockwise to counter-clockwise within each optical cycle when varying 
𝛥𝑡. The observed periodic modulation of the helicity of the plasmonic pattern is shown in Fig. 4j, 
and shows the ability to control with attosecond precision the sign of the topological charge of the 
electron vortex beam created by electron-plasmon interaction. 
With respect to commonly adopted methods using passive phase masks to produce electron 
vortex beams, our approach is intrinsically scalable to smaller length scales in the subwavelength 
regime (see Fig. S7 in SI). This is extremely interesting in situations where only a partial transverse 
coherence of the beam can be achieved (such as in the case of ultrashort electron pulses). This is 
even more crucial when our laser-based method for transferring OAM is extended to pulsed beams 
of heavier elementary and composite charged particles, where the constraint on the lateral 
coherence becomes stricter and limited to less than few tens of nanometers . In particular, OAM 
impartment in composite particles could be of interest for analyzing their internal structure (39). 
When considering a proton, by shaping its wave  function in a manner similar to that 
demonstrated here for electrons, the proton can acquire OAM -dependent density functions that 
will reflect its internal properties on the transverse spatial distribution. One would expect the 
OAM-carrying proton to behave differently in experiments whose outcome can conventionally be 
interpreted based only on its fixed  agglomeration of partons (quark and gluons).  Recently, 
increasing efforts have been devoted to gaining an understanding of the proton spin in terms of its 
constituent particles ( 28). Therefore, the perspective of adding OAM to the proton partons, in 
conjunction with relativistic spin-orbit effects in matter waves, could be of potential use to these 
studies (11,40). One such study we can now envisage would involve measurements of the magnetic 
dipole moment for an OAM -carrying proton. This quantity could be approximated based on a 
semi-classical current density obtained from the proton internal charge density and from the 
probability current density of its OAM-carrying wave function. As quantitatively described in Fig. 
S9 in the SI, the more the transverse component of the proton wave function approaches its internal 
charge density, the more the proton internal structure affects its magnetic moment. In the opposite 
limit, when the transverse extension of the wave  function significantly exceeds  the scale of  the 
internal features of the proton, the influence of the internal charg e density quickly averages out, 
thereby yielding a magnetic  moment equal to ℓ𝜇𝑁 typical of a point -like particle with nuclear 
magneton 𝜇𝑁. Several schemes could be used to measure such a quantity, including a Stern -
Gerlach-like approach ( 41) or devices  that couple the OAM of a charged particle with its spin 
(42,43). The latter would be extremely valuable for probing the proton internal spin dynamics by 
 
 
means of OAM impartment, thus potentially unraveling the role played by the OAM of its inner 
constituents in the determination of its total spin.  
 
Methods 
The sample sustaining surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs) was made of a 43 nm-thick (±5 nm) Ag 
thin film sputtered on a 30 nm Si3N4 membrane. A nanofabricated hole (diameter ~ 0.8 μm) was 
milled in the Ag layer using a raster-scanned focused-ion beam (FEI Nova Nanolab 200 focused 
ion beam/scanning electron microscope) with typical beam currents of about 10 pA at 30 kV 
voltage. The bilayer was supported by a Si TEM window with a 80 × 80 µm2 aperture, which was 
in turn mounted onto a double -tilt sample holder that ensured rotation around the x -axis by an 
angle α over a ±35◦ range (see also Fig. 1a in the main text). 
The experiments are performed using an ultrafast transmission electron microscope as sketched in 
Fig. S1 in the SI and also detailed in Ref. (26) and (27). Femtosecond electron pulses are generated 
by photoemission from a UV-irradiated LaB6 cathode, accelerated to an energy E0 = 200 keV along 
the z axis and then directed onto the specimen surface with parallel illumination. The sample is 
simultaneously illuminated with femtosecond laser pulses of ħω = 1.57 eV central energy and 
variable duration, intensity, and polarization state. For the experiments presented in the main text 
we used a peak amplit ude of light field of about 8 x 10 7 V/m.  The light pulses are focused onto 
the sample surface in a spot size of ∼ 58 µm (FWHM). The direction of propagation of light lies 
within the y-z plane and forms an angle δ ∼ 4.5° with the z-axis, as shown in Fig. 1a of the main 
text. The delay between electrons and photons is varied via a computer -controlled delay line. For 
the three-pulse experiment, we implemented a Michelson-like interferometer along the optical path 
of the near-infrared beam, incorporating a computer-controlled variable delay stage along one arm.  
The transmission electron microscope was also equipped with a Gatan Imaging Filter camera for 
energy-filtered real-space and reciprocal -space imaging and spectro scopy. Energy-filtered real-
space images presented in this work are acquired by monitoring the depletion of the zero-loss peak, 
following the inelastic scattering of electrons from the optically-excited plasmonic near fields (see 
also further details in Ref. (44)). High-dispersion diffraction (HDD) experiments have been 
performed at a camera length of 80 m  on a retractable CCD camera before the electron energy 
spectrometer. In the reciprocal -space maps shown in Fig. 3  the transverse momentum is defined 
as 2π/distance, and the scale bar has been calibrated by static electron diffraction through a square 
silicon grating with lateral period of 463 nm. Both real-space images (Fig. 1, 2 and 4) and far-field 
images (Fig. 3) presented in the main text have been acq uired in temporal coincidence between 
the maxima of electrons and light wave packets.  During the HDD experiments we have used a 
micrometer-sized circular aperture (projected radius of 7.5 μm) placed in close proximity to  the 
image plane and centered around  the hole. This procedure, together with the low electron 
transmissivity (~ 0.013) through the continuous metal film surrounding the hole, guarantees that a 
significant portion (~ 30%) of the electrons reaching the detector at small diffraction angles has 
indeed interacted with the chiral field in the hole (see also section S4 in SI for further details).  
 
 
 
 
 
References and Notes: 
1. H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop et al., Journal of Optics 19, 013001 (2017). 
2. A. M. Yao and M. J. Padgett, Advances in Optics and Photonics 3, 161-204 (2011). 
3. G. Gibson et al., Optics Express 12, 5448-5456 (2004). 
4. N. Bozinovic et al., Science 340, 1545–1548 (2013). 
5. A. Sit et al., Optica 4, 1006 (2017). 
6. D.G. Grier, Nature 424, 810–816 (2003). 
7. M. J. Padgett, R. Bowman, Nat. Photon. 5, 343–348 (2011). 
8. A. Mair, A. Vaziri, G. Weihs, A. Zeilinger, Nature 412, 313–316 (2001). 
9. J. Leach et al., Science 329, 662–665 (2010). 
10. P. Zilio, E. Mari, G. Parisi, F. Tamburini, F. Romanato, Opt. Lett. 37, 3234 (2012) 
11. K.Y. Bliokh, Y. P. Bliokh, S. Savel’ev, F. Nori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 190404 (2007) 
12. K.Y. Bliokh et al., Physics Reports 690, 1–70 (2017). 
13. S. M. Lloyd, M. Babiker, G. Thirunavukkarasu, J. Yuan, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035004 
(2017). 
14. H. Larocque et al., Contemporary Physics 59, 126-144 (2018). 
15. A. Edström, A. Lubk, J. Rusz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 127203 (2016). 
16. V. Grillo et al., Nature Communications 8, 689 (2017). 
17. M. Uchida, A. Tonomura, Nature 464, 737–739 (2010). 
18. J. Verbeeck, H. Tian, P. Schattschneider, Nature 467, 301–304 (2010). 
19. B.J. McMorran et al., Science 331, 192–195 (2011). 
20. E. Mafakheri et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 093113 (2017). 
21. A. Béché, R. Van Boxem, G. Van Tendeloo, J. J. Verbeeck, Nat. Phys. 10, 26–29 (2014). 
22. J. Verbeeck et al., Ultramicroscopy 190, 58–65 (2018). 
23. G. Pozzi, P.-H. Lub, A. H. Tavabi, M. Duchamp, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Ultramicroscopy 
181, 191–196 (2017). 
24. J. Handali, P. Shakya and B. Barwick, Optics Express 23, 5236–5243 (2015). 
25.  W. Cai, O. Reinhardt, I. Kaminer, F. J. García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. B 98, 045424 (2018) 
26.  L. Piazza et al., Chem. Phys. 423, 79 (2015). 
27.  G. M. Vanacore, A. W. P. Fitzpatrick, and A. H. Zewail, Nano Today 11, 228 (2016). 
28. C.A. Aidala, S.D. Bass, D. Hasch, G.K. Mallot, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 655–691 (2013). 
29. K. E. Priebe et al., Nat. Photon. 11, 793–797 (2017). 
30. Y. Morimoto and P. Baum, Nat. Phys. 14, 252–256 (2018). 
 
 
31. G. M. Vanacore et al.,Nat. Commun. 9, 2694 (2018). 
32. G. Spektor et al., Science 355, 1187–1191 (2017). 
33. Y. Gorodetski, A. Niv, V. Kleiner, and E. Hasman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 043903 (2008);  
34. K. Y. Bliokh, F. J. Rodríguez-Fortuño, F. Nori, A. V. Zayats, Nat. Photon. 9, 796-808 (2015) 
35. I. Madan, G. M. Vanacore, E. Pomarico, G. Berruto, R. J. Lamb, D. McGrouther, T. T. A. 
Lummen, T. Latychevskaia, F. J. García de Abajo, F. Carbone , arXiv:1809.10576 (2018). 
36. T. Ohno and S. Miyanishi, Opt. Express 14, 6285 (2006). 
37. S.-W. Cho, J. Park, S.-Y. Lee, H. Kim, and B. Lee, Opt. Express 20, 10083 (2012). 
38. G. Guzzinati, A. Béché, H. Lourenço-Martins, J. Martin, M. Kociak, and J. Verbeeck,  Nat. 
Commun. 8, 14999 (2017). 
39. H. Larocque, I. Kaminer, V. Grillo, R. W. Boyd, and E. Karimi, Nat. Phys. 14, 1 (2018). 
40. K. Y. Bliokh, M. R. Dennis, and F. Nori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 174802 (2011). 
41. T. R. Harvey, V. Grillo, and B. J. McMorran, Phys. Rev. A 95, 021801 (2017). 
42. E. Karimi, L. Marrucci, V. Grillo, and E. Santamato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 044801 (2012). 
43. V. Grillo et al., Nature Communications 8, 15536 (2017). 
44. E. Pomarico et al., ACS Photonics  5, 759-764 (2018). 
 
Acknowledgments: The LUMES laboratory acknowledges support from the NCCR  MUST. 
G.M.V. is partially supported by the EPFL-Fellows-MSCA international fellowship (grant 
agreement n. 665667). R.J.L. and D.M. gratefully acknowledge the funding support of 
R.J.L. by an EPSRC DTG studentship.  I.K. is supported by the Azrieli Foundation, and 
was partially supported by the FP7-Marie Curie IOF under grant no. 328853-MC-BSiCS. 
V.G. is supported by the Q-SORT European project under grant agreement No. 766970.  
H.L. and E.K. acknowledge the Canada Research Chair (CRC) and Early Researcher 
Award (ERA). F.J.G.d.A. acknowledges support from the ERC (Advanced Grant 789104-
eNANO), the Spanish MINECO (MAT2017 -88492-R and SEV2015 -0522), and the 
Catalan CERCA and Fundació Privada Cellex. B.B. acknowledges support on this material 
by the NSF under Grant No. (1759847). 
Author contribution: G.M.V., together with F.C., F.J.G.d.A. and E.K., conceived and designed 
the research; G.M.V., G.B., I.M., and E.P. conducted experiments and analyzed data; R.J.L. 
and D.M. fabricated samples; F.J.G.d.A. developed  the semi -analytical theory and 
performed calculations;  P.B. performed the FDTD simulations; V.G. performed the 
electron vortex beam calculations; H.L. and E.K. performed the proton vortex beam  
calculations; G.M.V., G.B., I.M. , O.R., I.K., B.B.,  V.G., E.K.,  F.J.G.d.A. and F.C. 
interpreted the results; all authors have contributed to writing the article, and read and 
approved the final manuscript. 
Data availability:  All data files ar e available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 . Generation and detection of chiral surface -plasmon polaritons. a A schematic 
representation of the experimental geometry. Ultrashort 200-keV electron pulses  (propagating 
along the z-axis) impinge on a Ag/Si 3N4 thin film perforated by a nanofabricated hole in the Ag 
layer (diameter ~ 1 μm). Light pulses propagate with their wavevector in the 𝑦𝑧 plane forming an 
angle 𝛿 = 4.5° with the electron beam direction. The sample can rotate around the x-axis by an 
angle 𝛼. An electron energy -momentum analyzer allows us to measure the transverse profile of 
the electron wave function in both the real and the reciprocal space. b A schematic representation 
of the nonlocal holographic method used to image surface -plasmon polariton s (SPPs) radially 
propagating at the Ag/Si 3N4 interface away from the hole. c Experimentally measured energy-
filtered real-space map of inelastically -scattered electrons as a result of the  electron-plasmon 
interaction. The image is acquired with electrons and light wave packets in temporal coincidence. 
The sample is tilted by an angle 𝛼 = 𝛿 to achieve normal light incidence. The image reveals the 
spiral phase pattern typical of a chiral plasmon gener ated by illumination with an elliptically 
polarized light field (the scale bar is 2 μm). d Calculated real-space electron intensity distribution 
using the semi-analytical theory developed in the text (scale bar is 2 μm). e Simulated phase map 
of the z component of the total electric field at the Ag/Si 3N4 interface obtained from finite -
difference-time-domain (FDTD) simulations (the scale bar is 1 μm). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. One-to-one correspondence between the complex SPP optical field and the transverse 
distribution of the electron wave function.  a,f Energy-filtered images of the inelastically 
scattered electron distribution inside the hole for circularly-polarized (a) and linearly-polarized (f) 
optical illumination. b,g Simulated spatial distributions of the interaction strength |𝛽| for the two 
polarization states. A zero-field region with cylindrical - or mirror-symmetry is visible inside the 
hole when circularly - or linearly -polarized light is used, respectively. c,h Spatially oscillating 
pattern measured outside the hole for the two polarizations . d,i Simulated spatial distribution of 
the phase of 𝛽 within the xy plane. e,j Space-energy maps measured for the two polarization states 
(i.e., (e) circular and (j) linear) showing the modulation of the spatial distribution of the scattered 
electrons as a function of the number ℓ of absorbed/emitted SPPs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Generation and detection of an ultrafast electron vortex beam via interaction with a 
chiral plasmonic near field. a A schematic representation of the OAM transfer to electrons: the 
interaction between a pulsed electron plane  wave synchronized with a chiral plasmonic field 
creates an OAM-carrying electron wavepacket. b-d Experimentally measured far field images of 
the electron beam in the transversal-momentum space before the laser illumination  (b) or in 
presence of circularly-polarized light (c) and linearly-polarized light (d) (the scale bar is 4 μm-1). 
The images are acquired with electrons and light wave packets in temporal coincidence. Here, the 
experimental geometry (and in particular the angle 𝛼) is chosen such that the  interaction of the 
electrons with the incident and reflected light beam s vanishes while maintaining a significant 
coupling with the plasmonic near field . e-g Calculated reciprocal space intensity distribution of 
the electron beam using the analytical theory and the FDTD simulations described in the text  for 
both circular ( f) and linear ( g) light polarization states . The momentum -resolved electron wave 
function Ψℓ(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦) is obtained as the Fourier transform of the real-space wave function 𝜓ℓ(𝑅, 𝜙) 
given by Eq. (1), where the interaction strength 𝛽 originated at the hole is extracted from the FDTD 
simulations (the scale bar is 4 μm-1). In panel e, 𝛽 = 0 is considered to mimic the absence of 
illumination. In panel f and g, the total intensity map is shown as obtained by incoherently adding 
all the contributions with different values of ℓ’s. A small momentum broadening is also included 
 
 
to take into account the experimental resolution. h-j Vertical and horizontal line profiles across the 
central part of the far-field images shown in panels b-d (experiment) and e-g (theory). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Dynamic phase control of the electron/chiral-plasmon interactions. a A sketch of the 
two phase-locked light pulses with independent polarization states and variable relative delay time 
𝛥𝑡 used to coherently launch two interfering chiral SPPs at the edge of the hole. Here, the sample 
is tilted to have normal light incidence (𝛼 = 𝛿). b-f Experimentally measured energy-filtered real-
space maps (panels b-d) of inelastically-scattered electrons as a function of 𝛥𝑡 (varied in steps of 
334 as) when the  two light pulses are elliptically polarized with parallel major axes  and initially 
separated by 𝛥𝑡 = 85 fs (the scale bar is 2 μm).  The plots show the difference between the maps 
acquired at 𝛥𝑡∗ = 94 fs and at 𝛥𝑡 > 𝛥𝑡∗. The result is a coherent modulation of the intensity (panel 
e) and of the spatial periodicity (panel f) of the plasmonic fringes with a temporal period of ~ 2.67 
fs. g-j Experimentally measured energy-filtered real-space maps (panels g-i) of inelastically -
scattered electrons as a function of 𝛥𝑡  when using two elliptically polarized light pulses with major 
axes perpendicular to each other  and initially separated by 𝛥𝑡 = −12 fs (the scale bar is 2 μm).  
 
 
The plots show the real -space maps acquired at 𝛥𝑡′ = −4.35 fs and at 𝛥𝑡 > 𝛥𝑡′. In this 
configuration, the sign of the topological charge (helicity) of the phase singularity created at the 
hole is observed to switch from positive to negative within each optical cycle. 
 
Supplementary Materials: 
Electron energy loss spectrum for electron/chiral-plasmon interaction. 
Analytical theory of electron-plasmon interaction. 
Finite-difference time-domain simulations and numerical determination of β. 
Electron vortex beam calculations. 
Parton density function of an OAM-carrying proton. 
Figures S1-S9. 
Movies S1-S2. 
 