Integrating Graphene into Semiconductor Fabrication Lines 
Daniel Neumaier1, Stephan Pindl2, Max C. Lemme1,3 
1AMO GmbH, Otto-Blumenthal-Straße 25, 52074 Aachen, Germany 
2Infineon Technologies AG, Wernerwerkstraße 2, 93049 Regensburg, Germany 
3Chair for Electronic Devices, RWTH Aachen University, 52062 Aachen, Germany 
 
Electronic and photonic devices based on the two-dimensional material graphene have unique 
properties, leading to outstanding performance figures-of-merit. Mastering the integration of 
this new and unconventional material into an established semiconductor fabrication line 
represents a critical step for pushing it forward towards commercialization. 
 
Silicon has remained the dominating material in microelectronics for more than five decades. Although 
many semiconductors like Ge, GaAs or InP possess higher charge carrier mobilities, favourable optical 
properties or other advantages compared to silicon , the simpler production and processing  of the 
latter make it by far the most convenient and cost effective material for large markets.  
This lesson applies equally well to graphene, the two-dimensional allotrope of carbon that moved into 
the focus of research [1] because of several outstanding intrinsic properties, such as a very high carrier 
mobility [2], broadband optical absorption covering the far-infrared (IR) to ultra-violet (UV) range [3] 
or extremely high surface to volume ratio . On a single device level t hese intrinsic properties have 
already been utilized for realizing high performing devices , including infrared photodetectors [4,5], 
Hall-effect magnetic field sensors [6], pressure sensors [7] and gas sensors [8], which all outperform 
their counterparts based on established semiconductors.  Sensing may therefore be a promising 
application space; yet entry to this market — currently dominated by silicon  and silicon MEMS 
(microelectromechanical systems) technology for magnetic field, pressure or gas sensors in large  
volume automotive and consumer electronics, and by other more expensive semiconductors like 
InGaAs for infrared detectors and imaging systems in smaller markets such as scientific 
instrumentation, security or defence — is still hampered by the lack of a scalable device manufacturing 
process. The development of a reliable large -scale production process may not only unleash the 
potential of graphene in the sensors competition, but may also help triggering other key applications, 
where the unique properties of this material make a difference.  
In this respect , graphene integration into conventional silicon -based fabrication line s can be  a 
promising direction, as it allows banking on widespread and well -established processing steps with 
relatively low engineering effort compared to the development of entirely new production lines from 
scratch. In particular, 3D integration on top of the silicon CMOS (Complementary Metal -Oxide-
Semiconductor) platform may enable the combination of high performance graphen e devices with 
established CMOS readout circuitry at production costs similarly low as for conventional silicon 
technology. The first proof of concept demonstrations of such 3D integrated graphene sensors systems 
were magnetic field sensors [9] and infrared image sensor arrays [10].   
Beyond graphene, other layered two -dimensional materials like transition metal dichalcogenides 
(TMDCs), black phosphorus and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) as well as their heterostructures have 
also raised great interest in basic and applied research due to their intriguing properties [1 1]. These 
2D materials have different application scenario s than graphene, as shown in Fig.1, but face similar  
challenges related to growth, processing and integration into semiconductor fabri cation lines. Thus 
graphene can be considered as a model system for 2D materials when it comes to semiconductor fab 
integration, and the lessons learned from graphene may directly be applied to other 2D materials. 
Here we provide an outline on how the integration of graphene can be managed, using a silicon CMOS 
platform as an exemplary case study . We notice that the specific process steps and the integration 
scheme will differ depending on the specific application technology developed — for instance, 
membrane based pressure sensors or microphones are expected to  require different fabrication 
processes than infrared photodetectors. Such a diversity in the manufacturing process is also known 
as the “MEMS law” for the case of silicon MEMS technology, where near ly every product requires a 
specific and unique fabrication technology. For the sake of generality, we will focus our discussion on 
the major optimization challenges occurring in the most common microelectronics fabrication steps 
and their possible solutions. 
  
 
Fig. 1 Applications for two-dimensional materials. Potential application  fields for graphene and 
related two-dimensional materials where wafer-scale integration is required. Applications addressed 
mainly by graphene are coloured light red, and applications addressed by TMDCs are coloured green.  
Front end of line vs. back end of line integration 
Semiconductor manufacturing [12] is typically separated into the front end of line (FEOL) and the back 
end of line (BEOL), which not only defines the status in the production line, but also sets the boundary 
conditions for the process step s involved and thus affects how new materials can be integrated into 
the entire process. In general, FEOL includes the first steps in integrated circuit fabrication, which are 
mainly related to transistor / device fabrication. BEOL processing essentially involves the fabrication 
of the metal interconnects, corresponding dielectric layers and diffusion barriers.  A schematic cross-
sectional view of a typical silicon CMOS structure indicating the FEOL and BEOL parts is shown in figure 
2a. This distinction and the choice between FEOL and BEOL is very important, as it defines the process 
parameter space for the integration. 
If graphene is integrated during  the BEOL steps, it will be relatively far away from the active silicon 
devices. At that level, there are significantly fewer restrictions regarding metal contamination 

compared to the FEOL, as int egrated diffusion barriers prevent damage to the silicon devices. 
Furthermore, the typical processing temperatures reached during the BEOL stages are relatively 
modest, below ~450 °C or even below ~150 °C , meaning that thermal stress and corresponding 
degradation is expected to be minimal. However, this implies that the integration of graphene may not 
involve any high temperature process steps , which damages the underlying layers. One should also 
keep in mind that the materials in the BEOL are not crystalline, but with the surfaces being of 
amorphous nature or consisting of polymers. The absence of crystalline surfaces and the strict 
temperature limit are the main reasons why BEOL-compatible growth of semiconductors like Ge, GaAs 
or InP is not available. This is instead a crucial advantage and opportunity for graphene, as it can be 
grown on amorphous surfaces or transferred on them after being grown on a separate substrate.  
In contrast, at the FEOL, when the transistors are built, all integrated materials need to sustain high 
temperatures, as dopant activation requires heating the wafers up to ~1000 °C. In addition, the 
integration of new materials must not introduce contamination especially from me tals like copper, 
gold or silver, which are highly mobile atoms in silicon and cause deep trap states that affect the 
performance of transistors [12]. This is an additional challenge for graphene transferred from metallic 
growth substrates, as complete abs ence of any potential contaminant from its surface must be 
ensured.  
Integration of graphene devices with silicon CMOS logic circuits that can be used for controlling, data 
readout and data processing, require an all-BEOL integration scheme (Figs.2b-f) to avoid affecting the 
silicon transistors fabrication and performance thereof. Hence in the following sections we will focus 
the discussion on BEOL integration  as one possible examples. We expect that different applications 
will require different solutions for the involved process steps, but the basic problems and challenges 
will be very similar and thus the discussion can be applied in a broader context.     
Current status and challenges  
The first step for graphene integration is its growth which, as mentioned above, can directly occur on 
the target surface, or performed on a separate substrate with subsequent transfer to the target 
surface.  
Direct growth of graphene on an amorphous surface at BEOL -compatible temperatures has been 
demonstrated, for instance by plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition ( PECVD) [13], but the 
resulting layers are quite defective . As such,  devices using these materials  will hardly provide 
outstanding performance. Another option is  the deposition of a metal catalyst layer on top of the 
substrate, followed by graphene growth and subsequent metal removal [14]. However, this method 
requires high temperatures, that are not compatible with BEOL.   
Graphene grown on a separate template and then transferred to the target surface is a very elegant 
solution, as it decouples the growth process from the final substrate. Consequently, high temperatures 
may be used for growth, and the underlying substrate may be  optimized with respect to catalytic 
activity and crystalline orientation, which are the main parameters defining the graphene quality. The 
CVD growth of graphene on copper and platinum  [15] is well developed and scalable to a size 
compatible with state-of-the-art Si technology  (300 mm wafers) , or even larger. Carrier m obilities 
exceeding 100.000 cm²/Vs have been reported at room temperature for CVD grown single crystalline 
graphene islands [16], while polycrystalline layers reach lower mobility values on the order of ~10.000 
cm²/Vs [17]. A promising combination of both  methods is the growth of merged single crystalline 
graphene islands having the same orientation, leading to quasi single crystalline and continuous films 
with carrier mobility up to ~15.000 cm²/Vs [18,19].  
While the CVD growth of graphene on metal surfaces is well developed and enables carrier mobilities 
close to the theoretical phonon limit, the transfer process is presently the limiting step for the device 
performance. Transfer includes delaminating graphene from the metal, handling and depositing it on 
a silicon wafer. The available wafer scale transfer processes [ 20] use either polymers to handle the 
graphene and/or wet chemistry for releasing the graphene from the metal surface. This typically leads 
to a contamination from polymer residues or other involved chemicals, degrading device performance. 
Even though substantial efforts have been invested to improve post-process cleaning, it is challenging 
to completely restore graphene performance to intrinsic values. Conventional cleaning methods such 
as oxygen plasma exposure cannot be applied, as this would etch graphene entirely.  In addition, the 
handling of the graphene layer during transfer can introduce mechanical damage or excessive stress, 
which also reduce device performance or even cause complete device failure.  
The highest mobility values for CVD grown graphene have been obtained by mechanically delaminating 
it from an oxidized copper surface via van- der- Waals forces with a hBN flake and placing it onto 
another hBN flake [16], taking advantage of their atomically flat and clean surfaces. With this van- der- 
Waals bonding transfer several degradation mechanisms are avoided: graphene is not exposed to any 
chemicals like acids, H2O or polymers, so that its surface is kept clean. In addition, mechanical damage 
or stress during transfer is suppressed. The main limitation of the van- der- Waals bonding process is 
the small size of the transferred graphene, typically on the order of 100 µm. This limit is set by the size 
of the single graphene crystals grown on copper surfaces and, even more so, by the size of the hBN 
flakes. While templated growth of single crystals at predefined locations or quasi -single crystalline 
growth offers a workaround to the size limitation for graphene, it is desirable yet challenging to replace 
micromechanically exfoliated micron-scale hBN by large area counterparts. In addition, it is still unclear 
how this mechanical delamination of graphene from the metal surface would work on wafer scale. 
Dielectric interfaces and encapsulation are further integration aspects that have not been solved on 
wafer scale yet. The  above-described strategy leading to a graphene layer embedded between two 
multilayer hBN dielectrics layers at present results in devices with the highest performance in terms of 
mobility and residual charge carrier concentration , but wafer-scale van-der-Waals substrates or thin 
films with similar quality are not available yet. Alternatively, conventional oxides or nitrides, which can 
be grown on wafer scale, are also widely studied as dielectrics. These systems can be used in pristine 
or functionalised form, with the optimal amount of covalent bonds at the interfa ce to graphene 
resulting from a trade -off between the electronic performance of graphene and its adhesion to the 
substrate, which is key to prohibit delamination during subsequent processing. Carrier mobilities in 
graphene around ~10.000 cm²/Vs have been demonstrated using large-scale transfer on conventional 
surfaces like SiO2 [19]. Even though this is still far below the theoretical and experimental record values 
for CVD graphene, it is sufficient for several promising device applications, giving outstanding 
performance in infrared photodetectors, pressure sensors, gas sensors or electro optical modulators.  
Electrical contacts to graphene are essential for any electronic, photonic and sensor device [ 21]. As a 
general rule, the contact resistance is consid ered acceptable if it does not significantly contribute to 
the total device resistance. For example, a typical Hall sensor has a n intrinsic resistance of 2 k Ω and 
the contact leads are 20 -100 µm wide. This means that a width -specific contact resistance below 1 
kΩµm would be sufficient as it would contribute less than 5% to the total device resistance. For sub -
micrometre scale devices like transistors or electro-optical modulators, the specific contact resistivity 
should be 100 Ωµm or less in order to ful ly exploit their performance potential.  In the past years 
significant efforts have been devoted to develop low -ohmic contacts to graphene , and there are 
several options available that provide sufficiently low contact resistances for most applications. The 
most straight-forward option is depositing a metal on top of the graphene (top-contact configuration), 
which has led to with specific contact resistances down to 50-100 Ωµm [21]. However, if the graphene 
is encapsulated before the contact fabrication, contact holes are required. This is challenging, because 
stopping the etching process on top of monoatomic graphene layers is nearly impossible. Thus one -
dimensional edge contacts have been developed for encapsulated devices, which provide specific 
contact resistances on the order of 200 -300 Ωµm [2]. The lowest contact resistance  so far has been 
achieved with a combination of edge and top contacts, that is top contacts on perforated graphene, 
with values down to 23 Ωµm [22]. The choice of contact metal is also crucial for the contact resistance, 
and there are only certain metals available that are compatible with silicon technology including Al, W, 
Cu, Ni, Ti and Ta. Good electrical contacts  for graphene have been obtained with Ni or Ti [ 21], two 
metals that are readily available in a conventional fab. Other metals like Au or Pt could generally be 
introduced at the BEOL, but this would require changes in the standard line. In contrast to graphene, 
ohmic contacts to semiconducting TMDCs are still an open issue. In fact, most metals form non-ohmic 
Schottky junctions to the TMDC layer, resulting in relatively high and bias -dependent contact 
resistances [23]. This problem is well known in silicon technology and the solution is heavy doping of 
the silicon in the contact area. However, such doping techniques cannot be directly applied to TMDCs 
and thus further research will be needed to solve the contact problem in these materials.  An 
alternative route for the formation of ohmic contacts to TMDCs may be offered by controlled phase 
transformation from the semiconducting to the metallic phase [24]. 
Step Critical Parameter Possible solutions / approaches 
Growth Nucleation density Seeded growth using predefined nucleation points; reduction of 
process gas pressure and/or concentration. 
Defect Density Reduction of process gas flow; optimal growth temperature; 
specific O2 gas flow.  
Transfer Delamination from 
growth substrate 
Water or ion intercalation and mechanical peeling off; removal 
of growth substrate by wet-chemical etching.  
Handling during 
transfer 
Coating with handling polymer; lamination with handling foil (e.g. 
thermal release tape); deposition of (van -der-Waals) dielectric 
on top; using sacrificial layer in -between polymer (or foil) and 
graphene. 
Removal of handling 
material 
Using wet-chemical solvents (in case of polymers) plus removal 
of any sacrificial layer wet -chemically; using the top (van -der-
Waals) dielectric as functional layer in the device; releasing the 
foil by light, temperature or other method. 
Dielectric 
Environment 
Substrate surface Polishing; defined surface termination using functionalization 
(e.g. oxygen plasma, deposition of self assembl ed monolayers); 
pure van-der-Waals substrate surface (e.g. hBN). 
Adhesion on Substrate Pure van-der-Waals substrate surface (e.g. hBN); defects in the 
graphene (at predefined locations) for  sp 3 bonds; partial 
graphene coverage and clamping by contacts or encapsulation.  
Interfacial control Graphene lamination under controlled environment (e.g. 
vacuum); in-situ substrate functionalization. 
Deposition of dielectric 
on top 
Graphene surface functionalization followed by ALD; deposition 
of seed layer followed by ALD; lamination of van -der-Waals 
dielectric (e.g. hBN); direct deposition of polymeric dielectric. 
Electric 
Contacts 
Metal deposition Deposition on -top of graphene avoiding interfacial 
contamination; one -dimensional edge contacts; sandwich 
contacts avoiding interfacial contamination; combination of 
these contacts schemes. 
Work function control Proper selection of the metal (e.g. Ni, Au, Pd, etc.). 
Table 1: Critical process  steps, parameters and possible solutions  for the integration of graphene into a 
semiconductor manufacturing line. 
 
In general, solutions exist for all major process steps  required for the integration of graphene with a 
BEOL compatible process flow , although none are ready for production today. Table 1 summarize s 
these main steps, the ir critical parameters and potential technological solutions. As previously 
discussed the most critical ones for the final device performance are related to the graphene growth, 
the transfer process and the dielectric interface of the graphene. While for the graphene growth there 
are already very promising solutions available, which enable mobilities close to the intrinsic limits, the 
transfer process and the dielectric interfaces are the major challenges to be solve in order to unlock 
the full performance of graphene based devices. Ideally the transfer process should completely avoid 
wet chemistry and polymers, while the dielectric interfaces to the graphene layer need to be as inert 
and as smooth as possible.  In contrast , electrical contacts are already rather well developed  and 
sufficient solutions are available at least for micron scale devices. 
An example of a feasible process flow for the BEOL integration on a typical silicon CMOS structure  is 
illustrated in figure 2. Such a process could be used e.g. for the fabrication of graphene -based Hall-
Sensors or similar devices. The main challenges ahead towards applications are device reproducibility, 
fabrication yield and reliability. While these aspects are not in the focus at an early research stage 
where hero devices drive progress, large -scale production absolutely depends on statistical data on 
the above. The low reprod ucibility and rather low yield of graphene devices originate mostly from 
manual or semi -automated handling, which is significantly less reproducible compared to fully 
automated manufacturing. Thus moving on to a fully automated process line will be a big s tep ahead 
in this respect. The challenge here is the transfer of the graphene to the target substrate, for which 
new tools need to be developed. In parallel, device stability and reliability need to be studied in-depth, 
including wafer scale device measure ments and data analysis. Investigations of the relevant failure 
mechanisms are required to understand how to provide stable operation during the typical life -time 
of a product, which may be several years for consumer electronics or more than 20 years for 
automotive applications.  
System design with graphene is currently a chicken -egg problem. There are plenty of device models  
that allow in principle designing circuits and systems  [25], but, as discussed, devices lack the 
reproducibility and stability. Thus, early design concepts cannot be generalized and standardized. We 
propose to employ a material-device-circuit co -design approach [26] in which experts in materials 
synthesis and device fabrication engage with the electronic circuits and systems communities to take 
into account circuit and system level requirements since the earliest stage of technology development. 
Feedback loops need to be established that enable material and design changes based on circuit-level 
figures of merit.  
 
 
Fig. 2 Flow chart for BEOL integration. a, Cross sectional schematic of the CMOS chip before 
graphene integration, indicating the FEOL and BEOL parts . b, Transfer of the graphene onto the 
entire wafer . c, Patterning of the graphene layer using oxygen plasm a. d, Encapsulation of the 
graphene using a dielectric layer. e, Via etching through the top dielectric layer by means of dry 
etching techniques. f, Filling of the vias by metal providing edge contacts to the graphene.  After 
step (f) further interconnect layers can be fabricated in order to connect the graphene layer to the 
Si CMOS devices. This integration schematic can be used e.g. for integrating graphene Hall-Sensors 
on wafers containing Si CMOS logic. 
 
Outlook 
Compared to other semiconductors like Ge, GaAs or InP, graphene offers the key advantage of being 
compatible with BEOL processing and integration. This provides a unique opportunity to extend the 
functionality of silicon CMOS circuits with the integration of different electronic, photonic or sensor 
devices based on graphene, without requiring a compromise or significant changes at the CMOS level. 
In addition, the basic process steps can be ad apted for the specific needs of other application 
technologies. Even though challenges remain, there is no fundamental road-block towards the waver-
scale processing of  graphene devices. However, engineering problems such as reproducibility, 
variability, fabrication yield and durability of the devices must be addressed. A  major step towards 
statistically relevant data sets is expected to happen, once processing is performed on wafer scale and 
fully automated. Afterwards, improvements will result from continuous learning processes, similar to 

what happened in the last five decades in silicon technology. It is further expected that graphene 
devices will not suddenly pop up as performance boosters in CMOS systems, but that the market 
penetration will start from niche applications like the quantum Hall resistance standard  [27], where 
standalone graphene devices offer a unique  and significant advantage. Such niche applications can 
already be addressed with the current state of production and will allow an organic growth of the 
whole ecosystem. Next, medium sized markets are expected to emerge, where devices are no longer 
manually manufactured and hand-selected, yet production costs will still be higher than stand -alone 
silicon-based systems; these will however be justified by boosts in functionality obtained thanks to the 
use of g raphene. Examples of these developments could be IR imaging systems or ultra -high speed 
optical communication links. We expect this second market penetration to happen in the upcoming 
two to eight years. Finally, once a basic ecosystem and supply chain are established, large volume 
production can be expected. Nevertheless, it is still rather early to predict which graphene -based 
device will make it there first, or if other 2D materials will surpass graphene in that respect.  
References 
[1] Geim, A. K. and Novoselov, K. S. The rise of graphene. Nature Materials 6, 183 (2007). 
[2] Wang, L. et al. One-Dimensional Electrical Contact to a Two-Dimensional Material. Science 342, 614 
(2013). 
[3] R. R. Nair et al. Fine structure constant defines visual transparency of graphene. Science 320, 1308 
(2008). 
[4] Konstantatos, G. et al. Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors with ultrahigh gain. Nature 
Nanotech. 7, 363 (2012). 
[5] D. Schall et al.  Record high bandwidth integrated graphene photodetectors for communication 
beyond 180 Gb/s, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, pp. M2I.4, 2018. 
[6] Dauber, J. et al. Ultra -sensitive Hall sensors based on graphene encapsulated in hexagonal boron 
nitride. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 193501 (2015). 
[7] Smith, A. D. et al. Electromechanical Piezoresistive Sensing in Suspended Graphene Membranes. 
Nano Lett. 13, 3237 (2013). 
[8] Wang, T. et al. A Review on Graphene -Based Gas/Vapor Sensors with Unique Properties and 
Potential Applications. Nano-Micro Lett. 8, 95 (2016).  
[9] Huang, L. et al. Graphene/Si CMOS Hybrid Hall Integrated Circuits. Scientific Reports 4, 5548 (2014). 
[10] Goosens, S. et al. Image sensor array based on graphene-CMOS integration. Nature Photonics  11, 
366 (2017).  
[11] Novoselov, K.S., Mishchenko, A., Carvalho, A., Castro Neto, A. H. 2D materials and van der Waals 
heterostructures. Science 353, 9439 (2016). 
[12] Geng, H. Semiconductor Manufacturing Handbook, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017. 
[13] Li, M. et al. Controllable Synthesis of Graphene by Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition 
and Its Related Applications. Adv. Sci. 3 1600003 (2016). 
[14] Gao, L. et al. Face-to-face transfer of wafer-scale graphene films. Nature 505, 190 (2013). 
[15] Zhang, Y., Zhang, L. and Zhou, C. Review of Chemical Vapor Deposition of Graphene and Related 
Applications. Chem. Res. 46, 2329 (2013). 
[16] Banszerus, L. et al. Ultrahigh -mobility graphene devices from chemical vapor deposition on 
reusable copper. Science advances 1, e1500222 (2015). 
[17] Gannett, W., et al. Boron Nitride Substrates for High Mobility Chemical Vapor Deposited 
Graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 242105 (2011).  
[18] Xu, X. et al. Ultrafast epitaxial growth of metre-sized single-crystal graphene on industrial Cu foil. 
Science Bulletin 62, 1074 (2017). 
[19] Vlassiouk, I. V. et al. Evolutionary selection growth of two-dimensional materials on polycrystalline 
substrates. Nature Mat. 17, 318 (2018). 
[20] Chen, M., Haddon, R. C. Yan, R. and Beky arova, E. Advances in transferring chemical vapour 
deposition graphene: a review. Mater. Horiz. 4, 1054 (2017). 
[21] Giubileoa, F. and Di Bartolomeo, A. The role of contact resistance in graphene field-effect devices. 
Progress in Surface Science 92, 143 (2017). 
[22] Anzi, L. et al. Ultra -low contact resistance in graphene devices at the Dirac point.  2D Mater. 5, 
025014 (2018). 
[23] Das, S., Chen, H. -Y., Penumatcha, A. V. and Appenzeller, J.  High Performance Multilayer MoS 2 
Transistors with Scandium Contacts. Nano Lett. 13, 100 (2013).  
[24] Allain, A., Kang, J., Banerjee, K.  and Kis, A. Electrical contacts to two-dimensional semiconductors. 
Nature Mat. 14, 1195 (2015).  
[25] Iannazzo, M. et al. Optimization of a Compact I -V Model for Graphene FETs: Parameter 
Scalability for Large Signal Circuit Design. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices  62, 3870 (2015).  
[26] Agarwal, T. et al. Material-Device-Circuit Co-Design of 2-D Materials-Based Lateral Tunnel FETs. 
IEEE Journal of the Electron Devices Society 6, 979 (2018). 
[27] Janssen, T. J. B. M et al. Precision comparison of the quantum Hall effect in graphene and gallium 
arsenide. Metrologia 49, 294 (2012). 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
All authors acknowledge funding from the European Union H2020 Graphene Flagship Project (grant 
agreement No. 785219).  
Authors contributions 
All authors conceived this work and collaborated equally in the writing of the text. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 