Chirality driven topological electronic structure of DNA-
like materials
Yizhou Liu∗, Jiewen Xiao∗, Jahyun Koo, Binghai Yan†
Department of Condensed Matter Physics,Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Topological aspects of the geometry of DNA and similar chiral molecules have received a lot
of attention, while the topology of their electronic structure is less explored. Previous exper-
iments have revealed that DNA can efﬁciently ﬁlter spin-polarized electrons between metal
contacts, a process called chiral-induced spin-selectivity (CISS). However, the underlying cor-
relation between chiral structure and electronic spin remains elusive. In this work, we reveal
an orbital texture in the band structure, a topological characteristic induced by the chirality.
We ﬁnd that this orbital texture enables the chiral molecule to polarize the quantum orbital.
This orbital polarization effect (OPE) induces spin polarization assisted by the spin-orbit in-
teraction from a metal contact and leads to magnetorestistance and chiral separation. The
orbital angular momentum of photoelectrons also plays an essential role in related photoemis-
sion experiments. Beyond CISS, we predict that OPE can induce spin-selective phenomena
even in achiral but inversion-breaking materials.
In chemistry and biochemistry, chirality is the geometric asymmetry of a large group of
molecules with a non-superposable mirror image, either left- or right-handed. Chirality plays a
prominent role in chemistry and biology 1 for example in enantioselective catalysis and drug design.
In physics, chirality usually refers to the locking of spin and motion, for example in Weyl fermions2.
Although chirality represents seemingly unrelated characters in different ﬁelds, experiments 3 have
revealed an unexpected correlation between chiral geometry and electron spin. When transmitted
through DNA and similar chiral molecules, electrons becomes highly spin-polarized, and their
polarization depends on the chirality of the molecule. This effect is called chiral-induced spin
selectivity (CISS) 4, 5, where a large spin polarization is induced and manipulated in unexpected
ways.
1
arXiv:2008.08881v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  24 Dec 2020
Practically, the application potential of the CISS effect for spintronic devices ,chiral elec-
trocatalysis and enantiomer selectivity has been demonstrated. 4, 5 For instance, chiral molecules
were found to adsorb on a ferromagnetic substrate with different speeds that depend on both the
chirality and the substrate magnetization, leading to efﬁcient separation of enantiomers 6. When
contacting to magnetic leads, the chiral molecule exhibits magnetization-dependent resistivity, i.e.
magnetoresistance (MR)7, 8. However, the physical origin of CISS, that is the relationship between
the chiral structure and the electron spin, is still debated.
The ﬁrst characteristic feature of CISS experiments is their robustness at room temperature.
The second feature is that they are dynamical phenomena that usually involve electron tunneling
or electron transfer in a non-equilibrium process. Chiral molecules like DNA exhibit zero spin
polarization in the ground state, and the CISS effect vanishes in equilibrium. For example, chiral
separation disappears after the substrate and molecules reach thermodynamic equilibrium after a
sufﬁcient amount of time. 6 Another feature that usually attracts little attention is related transport
experiments commonly have electrodes that are heavy metals (e.g., Au) or materials with strong
spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In contrast, photoemission experiments on CISS use both heavy- (e.g.,
Au) 3, 9 and light-element (e.g., Al and Cu) 10, 11 substrates.
Many theories have been developed to understand the CISS effect but no consensus has been
reached so far 5. The developed models aim to generate the spin-polarization via the chiral molecule
to interpret both the transport and photoemission experiments. Most models consider the chiral
molecule as a spin ﬁlter and require an effective spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in the molecule to couple
the electron motion and spin. However, it is known that the experimentally measured SOC is no
larger than a few meV in related organic systems. Thus it is challenging to rationalize the robustness
of CISS at room temperature (26 meV), even though several scenarios were proposed to enhance the
spin polarization12–19. Alternatively, Ref. 20 proposed that the substrate provides strong SOC and
the chiral molecule ﬁlters the orbital angular momentum (OAM), to induce the spin polarization.
The chiral electronic structure of Weyl semimetals21, 22 inspires us to explore the band structure
2
(c)(i)(ii)
(iii)
Chirality (no SOC)
SOC
SOC
Orbital / Spin Polarizer
Orbital / Spin Filter
SOC SOC
(a)(b)
Lz(ħ)0.4
–0.4
0
Figure 1: The orbital polarization and the orbital texture. (a) The ab initio band structure of
the right-handed peptide 310 helix with orbital texture. The orbital texture refers to the parallel
or anti-parallel relation between orbital polarizationLz and the momentum. The inset shows the
atomic structure the 310 helix where gray, blue, red, and white spheres represent C, N, O, and H
atoms. (b) The band structure of a tight-binding model of the helix. The helix has a three-fold
screw rotation (see inset), same as the 310 helix. (c) Illustration of the orbital polarization effect in
transport. (i) The helix (small black spheres) connects two leads that are linear atomic chain (large
black spheres). The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) exists only in leads but not in the chiral helix. At
given energy, the orbital gets polarized to +Lz as the electron transmits through the chiral molecule.
The oribtal texture leads to the orbital polarization effect (OPE), in which the chiral molecule plays
roles as both an orbital ﬁlter and an orbital polarizer. (ii) The orbital polarizer. When electrons run
into the right lead where SOC exists, the orbital polarization induces spin polarization. The half
circles with arrows represent the±Lz orbital. Thin arrows represent the spin. The larger orbital and
spin stand for the orbital and spin polarization, respectively, are in the right lead. (iii)The orbital
ﬁlter. The chiral molecule ﬁlters the +Lz state but suppresses the−Lz state injected from the left
lead. The yellow curves illustrate the scattering trajectory with arrows. If the spin is pre-locked to
the orbital in the left lead, transmitted electrons become spin-polarized due to the orbital ﬁltering.
We note that the multiple-mode leads allow the emergence of spin polarization in the two-terminal
conductance despite the presence of the time-reversal symmetry.
3
topology of DNA and similar chiral molecules. In this work, we reveal an ubiquitous topological
orbital texture in the chiral lattice and propose a mechanism that the chiral molecule acts as an orbital
polarizer and an orbital ﬁlter, rather than a spin ﬁlter, in the CISS effect. The orbital polarization
effect (OPE) does not require SOC from the molecule and is robust against temperature ﬂuctuations.
The orbital refers to the orbital angular momentum (OAM) of the wave function. By calculations
with the Landauer-B¨uttiker formalism, we demonstrate that electrons become orbital-polarized after
transmission through the chiral molecule, and the polarization depends on the chirality. The OPE
means that the chiral molecule act as both an orbital polarizer and an orbital ﬁlter, as illustrated
in Figure 1c. The former is usually stronger than the latter. The orbital polarizer occurs when
electrons transmit from the chiral molecule into the lead. The orbital-polarization induces spin
polarization in the lead because of SOC . The orbital ﬁlter happens when electrons propagate from
the lead into the molecule. The chirality ﬁlters the orbital and subsequently selects the spin (similar
to the mechanism in Ref.20), because orbital and spin are pre-locked by SOC in lead. Furthermore,
when the lead is magnetic (spin-polarized), it is also orbital-polarized because of SOC. The electron
tunneling is affected by whether the orbital polarization of the lead matches that of the molecule,
leading to chirality and magnetization dependent MR. This also induces different adsorbance /
desorbance speeds, which depend on the charge transfer efﬁciency of molecules with opposite
chirality on the magnetic substrate, resulting in chiral separation. We rationalize CISS-induced
transport phenomena (e.g., MR and the magnetic chiral selection) without requiring the presence of
SOC in the molecule. We point out that the heavy metal lead plays the role of a spin-orbit translator
that converts the orbital polarization into the spin polarization. For photoemission experiments,
we propose that the measured magnetization corresponds to the global OAM besides the spin of
photoelectrons, to rationalize the insensitivity to the substrate SOC. Furthermore, we predict that the
OPE can lead to spin-selective effects in achiral but non-centronsymmetric molecules and solids.
Topological Orbital Texture The band structure of a chiral lattice exhibits a topological feature
that we call the orbital texture. We take a periodic chain of the right-handed peptide 310 helix as
an example. It is a typical secondary structure found in proteins and polypeptides, which has also
been studied in a CISS experiment 23. The helix exhibits a three-fold screw rotation around the
4
z-axis. This symmetry induces Dirac-like band crossings at the zone center (Γ) and boundary(±Z),
as shown in the ab initio band structure in Figure 1a. It always sticks three bands together as a
general consequence of a nonsymmorphic symmetry in the band structure topology 24. Thus, the
nature of a chiral band structure involves multiple bands, beyond the one-band description. Here,
SOC is ignored in the band structure since it is negligibly small.
A salient feature in the band structure is the orbital polarization Lz. The Lz refers to the
atomic OAM. It is worth stressing that the OAM represents the self-rotation of the wave functions
around atomic centers and is not a conserved quantity. To respect time-reversal symmetry (TRS),
Lz exhibits opposite signs at thekz and−kz points, as shown in Figure 1a. Similar to the chirality
of Weyl fermions,Lz andkz are always parallel or anti-parallel, which depends on the molecule
chirality. Different from the Weyl point that exhibits inﬁnitely large polarization, theLz vanishes
to zero at Γ and±Z because of TRS. According to the symmetry analysis, we point out that such
an orbital texture is ubiquitous for a chiral lattice with and without a helix structure. Even when
the screw rotational symmetry vanishes in a non-helical structure, the orbital texture still preserves
because of the IS-breaking. Because of the orbital texture, oppositely propagating electrons carry
opposite orbital polarization, resulting in the OPE discussed in the following.
Orbital Polarization Effect in Transport Previous theoretical studies 12–15, 17, 19 usually map the
dynamic CISS process to a transmission problem between two achiral leads through a chiral
molecule that exhibits effective SOC. The spin polarization of the transmitted electrons is evaluated
as evidence of the CISS. In this work, we adopt the same transmission model but remove SOC from
the chiral molecule. As illustrated in Figure 2a, we add a linear part with atomic SOC between
the chiral molecule and both leads, to simulate the fact that chiral molecules commonly contact to
the noble metal substrate. Both leads and the chiral molecule have no SOC. Achiral linear chains
represent leads and the SOC part. The tight-binding Hamiltonian of the whole system (both leads
and the center region) is constructed with atomicp-orbitals (px,py,pz) and the hopping parameters
in the same way as the band structure calculation in Figure 1c.
5
We calculated the conductance (G) using the Landauer-B¨uttiker formulism 25. The spin and
orbital-polarized conductances of transmitted electrons are represented byGSz andGLz, respectively
(please refer to the Methods section). Corresponding spin and orbital polarization ratios are
PSz = GSz/G and PLz = GLz/G, respectively. To demonstrate the CISS, we will show that
electrons go through the chiral molecule and get spin-polarized, which is caused by OPE. The
existence of the two-terminal MR, i.e.GL→R(+M)̸=GL→R(−M), requires the dephasing to leak
electrons into virtual leads 26. Here GL→R(+M) represents the conductance from the left to the
right leads, where the leads’ magnetization is+M.
The orbital texture induces the OPE as electrons move through the chiral molecule. The chiral
molecule acts as both an orbital ﬁlter and an orbital polarizer. If we approximateLz as conserved,
thenLz does not ﬂip when traveling through the molecule. We can regard the chiral channel as
an orbital ﬁlter that only allows a givenLz to pass, as illustrated in Figure 1c. The orbital ﬁlter is
essential at the interface between the chiral molecule and the left lead, where the incident orbitals
are ﬁltered. However,Lz is not a conserved quantity in the molecule and will ﬂip in the transmission.
TheGLz also includes substantial orbital-ﬂip contribution due to the transmission fromp− andpz
states at left lead to p+ at right (see the channel-speciﬁc conductance in SM). It is interesting to
see that the chiral channel can even polarize the|Lz = 0⟩ state. The orbital polarizer is vital when
electrons run from the molecule into the right lead. These emitting electrons can induce intense
orbital polarization in the right lead. (see more in the supplementary Figs. S7 and S8)
The chiral molecule exhibits preferred transmission for electrons with the orbital polarization
parallel or anti-parallel, which is determined by the chirality with respect to the transmitting direction
at a speciﬁc energy. Our conductance calculations conﬁrm the OPE, as indicated by the nonzero
GLz in Figure 2b. We turn off the SOC in the whole device and observe no spin polarization in the
conductance since the motion and spin do not separate. We recall that the linear chain exhibits no
orbital texture. The OPE is only due to the orbital texture in the chiral region.
With SOC from the contact, the OPE eventually leads to the spin polarization. We turn on
6
Chiral
molecule
λSOC λSOC
scatterLeft lead Right lead
λSOC=0 λSOC=1
η
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 2: Orbital polarization and spin polarization in the conductance. (a) The transport
model includes two linear leads and the chiral molecule with two helical units long. The SOC is only
added to the intermediate site between the chiral molecule and the lead. (b) The orbital polarization
GLz exists while the spin conductanceGSz = 0 forλSOC = 0.G is the total conductance. (c)(e)&(f)
GSz and the spin polarization ratePSz increases as turning on SOC. TheGSz (peak value around 1.8
eV) dependence on the dephasing termη is shown in the inset of (c). The SOC translates the orbital
polarization to the spin polarization. If reversing the chirality of the molecule, the orbital texture
gets inverted, and thus, the spin polarization can be ﬂipped. (d) Peaks of PSz [noted in (f)] increase
quickly as increasing the length of the chiral molecule and get almost saturated after the number of
atoms is 7 [the same length as the model shown in (a)]. We note thatN = 1, 2 are actually achiral
segments and thus correspondingPSz is zero. No dephasing is included in calculations except the
inset of (c).
7
the atomic SOC (λSOC ) in the short linear chains. For simplicity, we attach the SOC to both leads
to make them symmetric. As shown in Figure 2, the spin polarization (PSz) increases as λSOC
increases. At givenλSOC , one ﬁnds thatGSz is roughly proportional toGLz. Increasing the atomic
number (N) in the chiral chain, the calculated PSz ﬁrst increases and soon gets nearly saturated
afterN = 7. In reality, the critical length depends on the material details. The region of increasing
PSz can be used to interpret the length-enhanced spin polarization in the experiment 3, 8.
The OPE is a robust effect compared to the temperature because the order of magnitude of
the orbital texture is comparable to the bandwidth (e.g.∼ 0.5 eV for the 310 helix in Figure 1a)
and thus is much larger than room temperature. Given that SOC in the heavy metal lead is also
of a similar magnitude, the resultant spin polarization in CISS becomes a robust phenomenon in
ambient conditions.
Magnetoresistance and Magnetic Chiral Separation The orbital polarization can also be used
to rationalize magnetoresistance (MR) experiments 7, 8, 27, 28and chiral separation by the magnetic
substrate 6, 29. In MR experiments, a gold nanoparticle was included between one lead and the chiral
molecule and the other lead is a magnetic element such as nickel. Switching the lead magnetization
induces the change of resistance. For chirality selection, the substrate is a ferromagnetic Co ﬁlm
covered by a thin layer (several nanometers) of gold. Molecules with opposite chirality get adsorbed
to the substrate at different speeds, leading to the separation of chiral enantiomers. In the transient
state when the molecule approaches to the metal surface, charge redistribution occurs between the
molecule and the substrate23. The speed of the effective charge transfer, which is a quantity similar
to the conductance, characterizes the speed of the adsobance. Therefore, we expect to gain useful
insights both for the adsorbance and MR from the conductance calculations.
When injecting spin-polarized electrons from the substrate, the gold regime becomes spin-
polarized and also orbital polarized because of SOC. Then the orbital direction is locked with the
magnetization direction. If this orbital matches the following OPE in the chiral molecule, the total
conductance is large but is small otherwise. Consequently, different chirality and magnetization
8
Chiral
molecule
λSOC λSOC
scatterLeft lead Right lead
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
±M
 ±M
M=1
η
ΔG
Figure 3: Magnetoresistance with magnetic leads. (a) The device model with two magnetized
(±M) leads. We employ the same two-terminal model and add an exchange ﬁeld (M) along the
z-direction to the spin components in both leads. The intermediate SOC regime mimics the noble
metal part in experiment. (b) The total conductance varies when ﬂipping the lead magnetization. (c)
The change of the conductance ∆G =G(−M)−G(+M) increases as increasing the magnitude
of M and the dephasing termη. The inset of the lower panel shows theη-dependence of ∆G (the
peak at about 1.8 eV) in a larger scale. (d) As ﬂipping M from + to –, GSz changes sign in the
general energy window, leading to changes of GLz. The increase (decrease) of GLz induces the
enhancing (suppressing) of G. Here, we include a ﬁnite dephasing parameter. In the coherent
two-terminal measurement (η = 0), the reciprocity theorem requires GL→R(M) = GL→R(−M)
(∆G = 0). However, the virtual lead (iη) releases this constrain, resulting in nonreciprocal MR. If
the dephasing is too large, electrons are completely incoherent and feel no OPE in the transport. This
explains the decreasing of MR for large dephasing. We note that the global Onsager’s reciprocal
relation, GL→R(M) = GR→L(−M) always holds (see SM). We set λSOC = 0.5 in all these
calculations.
9
can lead to different MR and speed of adsorbance. The MR is shown in Figure 3. The total
conductance changes when switching the sign of magnetization and exhibits a unidirectional
feature (or nonreciprocal MR) at given chemical potential. Here the dephasing is necessary. The
nonreciprocal MR is consistent with the fact that the differential conductance changes when
reversingM in experiment.
The unidirectional conductance can also rationalize the chiral separation. We note that the
adsorbance and desorbance correspond to opposite charge transfer directions between the substrate
and the chiral molecule. According to the unidirectional conductance, a chiral molecule releases
slower (faster) from the surface if it adsorbs faster (slower). Both adsorbance and desorbance
guarantees that a substrate with certain magnetization attracts one chirality faster than the opposite
chirality.
It has been argued 6, 30–32 that the exchange interaction between the molecule and the substrate
induces the selective adsorbance by considering a transient chirality-dependent spin polarization
in the molecules. However, Refs. 6, 30, 31 have pointed out that the transient spin polarization is
induced by the charge redistribution among the molecule and the substrate, which we call the charge
transfer. We state that the charge transfer is already chirality-dependent as the driving force of the
chiral selection. Compared to the charge transfer, the spin polarization and exchange coupling are
higher-order effects if they exist.
Discussion
Unidirectional Conductance and Electric Magnetochiral Anisotropy In the CISS-induced MR,
as discussed above, the lead magnetization and the chirality together pick up one direction, along
which the current ﬂow is favored in the device. The conductance ( G) and resistance (R) can be
10
described to the leading order as,
G(M, I) =G0 +GχM· I (1)
R(M, I) =R0−RχM· I (2)
whereR0 = 1/G0,Rχ =Gχ/(G0)2, M stands for the magnetization in the lead, I for the current,
Gχ for the chirality (χ) determined conductance (Gχ =−G−χ). G0 is the ordinary conductance
whileGχ characterizes the unidirectional conductance. For the I-V relation, we obtain
I =G0V/(1−GχMV )≈G0V +G0GχMV 2 (3)
where the sign of M can be±. It indicates that the CISS-induced MR can be probed by a two-
terminal measurement in the nonlinear regime. Equation 3 agrees with the nonlinear MR discussed
in Refs.17, 33 which are based on a symmetry analysis without considering the microscopic
mechanism of CISS. Equation 3 agrees with the general nonlinear I-V proﬁle and explains the MR
due to ﬂipping the lead magnetization in experiments. However, it shows an asymmetric feature
between±V while experiments are approximately symmetric, which deserves future investigations.
In addition, the unidirectional conductance can lead to current rectiﬁcation, which can be applied
for photon-detection or energy-harvesting.
The nonreciprocal conductance described by Eqs. 1 & 2 is reminiscent of the electrical
magnetochiral anisotropy (EMChA) discussed in literature34, 35. Corresponding resistance change
(∆R) of a chiral conductor (chiralityχ =±1) subject to a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeldB is expressed
as ∆R = R0χB· I. This effect was heuristically derived by generalizing Onsager’s reciprocal
theorem into the nonlinear regime 34. Our work reveals an unambiguous link between EMChA and
the CISS-induced nonreciprocal MR. The EMChA refers to the conductor regime where both the
TRS- and IS-breaking occur. In comparison, the CISS-induced MR is induced by the IS-breaking
in the conductor but the TRS-breaking in leads. By generalizing this symmetry condition in a
two-terminal device, we can distribute the IS- and TRS-breaking to any of three regimes, including
two leads and the conductor, to induce the nonreciprocity. We note that the magnetic leads can also
be antiferromagnetic since some noncollinear antiferromagnets can also generate spin-polarized
11
current 36. Also, the OPE provides one possible microscopic scenario for EMChA by revealing the
role of the quantum orbital and SOC.
CISS in Photoemission The detectable spin polarization induced by chirality requires three ingre-
dients: SOC, TRS-breaking and chirality-induced inversion-breaking. As discussed above, the
required SOC comes from heavy metal leads. TheλSOC dependence in contacts can be examined to
verify our OPE theory in transport experiments. However, some photoemission experiments include
negligible SOC in the substrate or the molecule (except in the Mott polarizer). In this case, the
missing SOC excludes that photoelectrons are spin-polarized
Under intense light irradiation, the substrate ejects electrons into the vacuum through a layer of
chiral molecules. In general, OAM provides the essential ingredient for CISS-induced phenomena.
But OAM behaves differently in photoemission and transport systems. The OAM is quantized for
photoelectrons in vacuum but not conserved for transport electrons in the lattice. The OAM can
be directly measured in the photoemission detector. However, it ﬁrst needs converting into spin by
SOC and then probing by MR.
We ﬁrst assume the substrate has negligible SOC and then ignore the spin of electrons. After
being scattered by chiral molecules, the outgoing photoelectrons (free electrons) are not a simple
plane wave (eikz) but carry a global OAM, which can be expressed aseikzeilφ, wherel represents
the OAM andφ is the azimuthal angle. The global OAM represents the self-rotation of the free-
electron wave packet and is a quantized value (l =±1,±2,... )37, different from the local OAM
(non-quantzied, bounded to the atomic potential) in the lattice discussed above. In the ﬁeld of
electron vortices 38, this OAM has been extensively studied. For example, experiments found that
an electron plane wave obtains quantized OAM after it passes through a spiral phase plate formed
by stacking graphite thin ﬁlms 39. In CISS, chiral molecules play the same role as a spiral phase
plate for photoelectrons.
In a Mott polarizer, the relativistic effect generates an effective magnetic ﬁeld and detects
12
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Lx
 0.3
-0.3
Figure 4: The orbital and spin polarization in an achiral system. (a) The device structure. The
center region represents a molecule that has reﬂection symmetry but breaks inversion symmetry. (b)
Corresponding band structure withLx orbital polarization. (c) The conductance is both orbital and
spin-polarized when leads are nonmagnetic. The spin-polarization is along thex direction rather
than thez axis. (d) It also exhibits magnetoresistance (the dephasingη = 0.005) as switching on
the magnetization from the +x to−x directions in leads.
13
the total magnetic moment of photoelectrons. The total magnetic moment includes both the OAM
and spin. Its sign is determined by the OAM, because the amplitude of l is larger than spin 1/2.
Therefore, the polarization measured in the detector is less sensitive to the possible spin polarization
induced by the substrate SOC, compared to transport experiments. Furthermore, we propose that
experiments should measure the OAM by using similar techniques employed in the vortex electron
beam studies.
Beyond the Chiral Structure We point out that the OPE can also generate nontrivial spin-transport
phenomena in non-helical and even non-chiral systems. The OPE is caused by orbital texture, which
only requires the IS-breaking if TRS exists. The chiral structure represents a strong case of the
IS-breaking. Furthermore, the induced orbital polarization may differ from the current direction,
depending on the way of IS-breaking.
Take an achiral chain for example, see Figure 4a. It is periodic along the z axis and has
mirror reﬂection forx (point groupC2v). The mirror symmetry forces orbitals Lz,Ly to vanish but
allows for the existence ofLx. In the band structure, the orbital texture refers to the locking between
Lx andkz (see Figure 4b). If leads are nonmagnetic, OPE induces nonzero GSx rather thanGSz in
the presence of SOC from the contact. If leads exhibit magnetization along thex direction, OPE
induces the MR by reversing the magnetization. This model shows that the spin polarization does
not necessarily align with the current ﬂow. For a general noncentrosymmetric material (chiral or
achiral), the orbital polarization depends on the speciﬁc symmetry. Therefore, we can engineer the
geometric atomic structure to tailor the direction and magnitude of the spin-polarization.
Outlook
Our orbital polarization effect (OPE) brings a missing block, the orbital degree of freedom, to
understand the consequence of chiral atomic structures. We rationalize transport and photoemission
experiments with the local orbital angular momenetum (OAM) and global OAM, respectively. In
transport, the orbital polarization effect circumvents the weak spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in organic
14
molecules and explains the robustness of the CISS-induced phenomena, by the intense orbital
texture in the molecule and the large SOC in the lead. The orbital texture provides an insightful
quantity in the band structure to estimate the CISS effect for real materials. Additionally, we point
out that dephasing is required to induce the magnetoresistance and magnetic chiral selection. The
nonreciprocal conductance can lead to current rectiﬁcation and may be applied for photodetection
or energy harvesting. From the OPE, we can deduce the electrical magnetochiral anisotropy
independently, which refers to the nonreciprocal magnetoresistance observed in the solid-state
materials. Beyond helical molecules and even beyond the chiral structure, the OPE paves a way to
manipulate the spin polarization by engineering the atomic structure in general noncentrosymmetric
materials. Since chirality is a common feature of many chemical and most biochemical systems,
the scope of OPE may be larger than one can imagine from the CISS, which calls for further
investigations. For photoemission, we pointed out that the CISS polarization can be dominated by
the global OAM of photoelectrons, insensitive to the SOC in substrate. Our work may provide a
topological perspective to understand the fundamental role of chirality in biological and chemical
systems.
Methods
(i) Density-functional theory. We calculate the band structure of 310 helix and α-helix by the
density-functional theory within the generalized gradient approximation40 using the the Vienna Ab
initio Simulation Package (V ASP)41. The orbital moment Lz is extracted from the phase-dependent
atomic-orbital projection of the Bloch wave function. Information for the transport calculations can
be found in the SM.
(ii) Tight-binding model and orbital texture. Without loss of generality, the OAM operator ˆLz
in thepx,y,z basis, is known to be,
ˆLz =


0 −i 0
i 0 0
0 0 0


15
, where we omit the index for atomic sites. It has three eigen statesp±≡ (px±ipy)/
√
2,pz with
Lz =±1, 0, respectively. Because of the inversion symmetry(IS)-breaking, the Bloch wave function
is allowed to exhibit nonzero OAM at the ﬁnite momentum. The screw rotation constrains that
the OAM aligns along thez direction, i.e.Lz. Additionally, we note that the orbital texture in the
band structure is conceptually different from the net orbital magnetization which is strictly zero at
equilibrium because of TRS.
The topological orbital texture originates in the anisotropic hopping of the chiral orbital along
the chiral chain. For generality, we consider a right-hand helical chain with then-fold screw rotation,
in which the sitei has two nearest neighbors,i + 1 along +z andi− 1 along−z. We set two bases,
p±, at each site, and set the hopping integral as the simple Slater-Koster type42. Among the same
orbital (p+ orp−), the hoppings fromi toi± 1 are the same. From p+ top−, however, the hopping
fromi toi+ 1is different from that fromi toi− 1 by a phase factore−i4π/n. If the chirality reverses,
the phase−4π/n also changes its sign. Take a helix with n = 4, for example. The inter-orbital
hopping is different by a “–” sign between the up and down directions. It means thatp+ prefers a
certain direction in hopping, whilep− prefers the opposite direction. Consequently, the anisotropic
inter-orbital hopping induces the orbital texture in the band structure. It also indicates that the
orbital texture is as robust as the hopping integral’s energy scale, i.e., the bandwidth.
Different from the band structure, the energy level of a ﬁnite-size molecule exhibits no
dispersion. Nevertheless, we can still use insights from the band structure and regard the molecule
wave function as the superposition of the right and left movers from the band structure. Since right
and left movers exhibit opposite Lz, the molecule displays no orbital polarization at the ground
state. When an electron tunnels through the molecule from left to right, it transmits through the
right mover channel, as illustrated in Figure 1c.
We adopt a right-handed helix model to represent a chiral chain in Figure 1. The helix
includes three sites in the primitive unit-cell and exhibits the same three-fold screw rotation as the
310 helix. We set threep-orbitals (px,y,z) on each site and consider the nearest neighboring hopping
16
in a tight-binding model (see more details in the Methods section and SM). As shown in Figure 1b,
its band structure also exhibits the same band degeneracy and orbital texture. For a linear chain,
in contrast, the orbital polarization is strictly zero at allk-points because of the presence of both
inversion symmetry and TRS.
(iii) Spin- and orbital-polarized conductance. We calculate the scattering matrixSnm from the
left (L) to the right (R) lead by the scattering theory and obtain the conductance by the Landauer-
B¨uttiker formula 25,
GL→R = e2
h
∑
n∈R,m∈L
|Snm|2, (4)
whereSnm is the transmission amplitude fromm-th eigenstate in the left lead to then-th eigenstate
in the right lead (see more details in the SM). In the following discussion, we will useG forGL→R
if it is not noted speciﬁcally.
In both leads, the spin (Sz =↑↓) and the orbital (Lz =±, 0) are conserved quantities because
of the disappearance of SOC and the axial rotational symmetry, respectively. Thus, one can classify
the conductance into eachSz orLz channels. Given the non-polarized injection state from the left
lead, we estimate the spin and orbital, respectively, polarized conductance of transmitted electrons
in the right lead by,
GSz =GL→R↑−GL→R↓ (5)
GLz =GL→R+−GL→R−, (6)
where GL→RSz(Lz) represents the conductance from the L lead to the Sz(Lz) channel of the R
lead. Here, GL→R Lz=0 is omitted because the Lz = 0 state does not contribute to the total
polarization. Corresponding spin and orbital polarization ratios are PSz = GSz/G and PLz =
GLz/G, respectively. To demonstrate the CISS, we will show that electrons go through the chiral
molecule and get spin-polarized, which is caused by the orbital polarization effect, by calculating
GSz andGLz.
In Figure 2 , the existence of spin polarization does not require extra dephasing in our
17
calculations. This is because we have three modes in each lead. We ﬁnd that the spin conductance
GSz is insensitive to the moderate dephasing with strong SOC and turns to decrease when the large
dephasing violates the coherence (see Figure 2c and SM). If single-mode leads are employed, we
verifyGSz = 0 without dephasing (see SM).
We have performed all conductance calculations by our program and veriﬁed them with
the quantum transport package Kwant43. Related model parameters can be found in the SM. Our
transport codes in Matlab can be download from https://github.com/BinghaiYan/Chirality.
(iv) The dephasing related to the inelastic process was frequently discussed as a necessary
condition 12–14, 17, 33 to generate CISS. The single-mode leads employed in these models prohibit
the spin current in the presence of TRS 44. The existence of multiple modes in our leads allows the
emergence of spin current without introducing the extra dephasing. We note that multiple modes
represent the more realistic condition of the transition metal contact, compared to the single-mode
model. However, the existence of the two-terminal MR, i.e.GL→R(+M)̸=GL→R(−M), requires
the dephasing to leak electrons into virtual leads. Otherwise, the charge conservation forces the
reciprocity regardless of the mode number in leads. Therefore, the spin current generation and the
MR have distinct relations to the dephasing in CISS, as discussed in the following sections. In
calculations, we introduce the dephasing parameter iη as the B ¨uttiker virtual probe26 equally to
each site of the chiral molecule. The dephasing also includes the lifetime effect of quasiparticles
due to scattering by the electron-electron interaction and/or disorders. As long as the dephasing
exists, we ﬁnd that the nonreciprocal MR manifests the CISS effect in a two-terminal device. The
dephasing term accounts for the dephasing in the linear transport regime and the inelastic relaxation
in the nonlinear regime. The dephasing commonly exists due to the energy dissipation and inelastic
effects in experiment.
18
Supplementary Materials
Section S1. Tight-binding model of the helical chain.
Section S2 and Figure S1. Anisotropic hopping along the chiral chain
Section S3 and Figure S2. Model parameters for the transport calculations.
Section S4 Scattering Matrix Method.
Figure S3. Band structures of the lead, the SOC region and the chiral molecule.
Figure S4. Band structures of the chiral molecule with a constant life time.
Figure S5. Band structure and transport calculations for brokenpx/y/z degeneracy.
Figure S6. The total, orbital and spin conductance for chiral molecules with different length of
units.
Figure S7. The comparison of the orbital ﬁlter effect and orbital polarization effect.
Figure S8. The comparison of the orbital ﬁlter effect and orbital polarization effect with different
parameters.
Figure S9. Orbital channel-speciﬁc conductance of the chiral chain.
Figure S10. Veriﬁcation of the global Onsager’s reciprocal relation.
Figure S11. Inﬂuence of dephasing parameter η on spin conductance.
Figure S12. Orbital channel-speciﬁc conductance of the achiral chain.
Figure S13. The orbital conserved lead and non-conserved lead in the achiral chain device.
Section S4 and Figure S14. The ab intio band structure of the chiral materials
References and Notes
Acknowledgements: We thank gratefully advice, discussions and help from Ady Stern and Yuval
Oreg. We also acknowledge inspiring discussions with Ron Naaman, Yossi Paltiel, Zhong Wang,
ChiYung Yam, Lukas Muechler, Tobias Holder, Raquel Queiroz, Karen Michaelia, Leeor Kronik,
B.J. van Wees, Xu Yang, Shuichi Murakami, Eugene J. Mele and Claudia Felser. B.Y . honors
the memory of Shoucheng Zhang who inspired him to investigate chirality in both physics and
19
biology. B.Y . acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by the Willner Family Leadership Institute for the
Weizmann Institute of Science, the Benoziyo Endowment Fund for the Advancement of Science,
Ruth and Herman Albert Scholars Program for New Scientists, the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant No.
815869).
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are
present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may
be requested from the authors.
Author Contributions: B.Y . conceived and supervised the project. Y .L. and J.X. performed tight-
binding and transport calculations. J.K. preformed DFT calculations. B.Y ., Y .L. and J.X. wrote the
manuscript. All authors discussed and analysed results.
∗ These two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Email of correspondence: binghai.yan@weizmann.ac.il
1. Siegel, J. S. Homochiral imperative of molecular evolution. Chirality 10, 24–27 (1998).
2. Weyl, H. Gravitation and the electron. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 15, 323 (1929).
3. Gohler, B. et al. Spin Selectivity in Electron Transmission Through Self-Assembled Monolayers
of Double-Stranded DNA. Science 331, 894 – 897 (2011).
4. Naaman, R. & Waldeck, D. H. Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity Effect. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 3, 2178–2187 (2012).
5. Naaman, R., Paltiel, Y . & Waldeck, D. H. Chiral molecules and the electron spin. Nature
Reviews Chemistry 3, 250–260 (2019). URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41570-019-0087-1.
6. Banerjee-Ghosh, K. et al. Separation of enantiomers by their enantiospeciﬁc interaction with
achiral magnetic substrates. Science 360, 1331–1334 (2018).
20
7. Xie, Z. et al. Spin speciﬁc electron conduction through DNA oligomers. Nano letters 11,
4652–5 (2011).
8. Kettner, M. et al. Spin Filtering in Electron Transport Through Chiral Oligopeptides. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 119, 14542–14547 (2015).
9. Ray, K., Ananthavel, S. P., Waldeck, D. H. & Naaman, R. Asymmetric Scattering of Polarized
Electrons by Organized Organic Films of Chiral Molecules. Science 283, 814–816 (1999).
10. Mishra, D. et al. Spin-dependent electron transmission through bacteriorhodopsin embedded
in purple membrane. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 14872–14876
(2013).
11. Kettner, M. et al. Chirality-Dependent Electron Spin Filtering by Molecular Monolayers of
Helicenes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 9, 2025–2030 (2018).
12. Guo, A.-M. & Sun, Q.-f. Spin-Selective Transport of Electrons in DNA Double Helix. Physical
Review Letters 108, 218102 (2012). 1201.4888.
13. Gutierrez, R., D´ıaz, E., Naaman, R. & Cuniberti, G. Spin-selective transport through helical
molecular systems. Phys. Rev. B 85, 081404 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.081404.
14. Matityahu, S., Utsumi, Y ., Aharony, A., Entin-Wohlman, O. & Balseiro, C. A. Spin-dependent
transport through a chiral molecule in the presence of spin-orbit interaction and nonunitary
effects. Physical Review B 93, 075407 (2016).
15. Michaeli, K. & Naaman, R. Origin of Spin-Dependent Tunneling Through Chiral Molecules.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 123, 17043–17048 (2019).
16. Dalum, S. & Hedeg ˚ard, P. Theory of Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity. Nano Letters 19,
5253–5259 (2019).
17. Yang, X., Wal, C. H. v. d. & Wees, B. J. v. Spin-dependent electron transmission model for
chiral molecules in mesoscopic devices. Physical Review B 99, 024418 (2019). 1810.02662.
21
18. Geyer, M., Gutierrez, R. & Cuniberti, G. Effective Hamiltonian model for helically constrained
quantum systems within adiabatic perturbation theory: Application to the chirality-induced spin
selectivity (CISS) effect. The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 214105 (2020). 2002.08052.
19. Zoellner, M. S., Varela, S., Medina, E., Mujica, V . & Herrmann, C. Insight into the Origin of
Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity from a Symmetry Analysis of Electronic Transmission.Journal
of Chemical Theory and Computation 16, 2914–2929 (2020).
20. Gersten, J., Kaasbjerg, K. & Nitzan, A. Induced spin ﬁltering in electron transmission through
chiral molecular layers adsorbed on metals with strong spin-orbit coupling. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 139, 114111 (2013). 1306.4904.
21. Yan, B. & Felser, C. Topological Materials: Weyl Semimetals. Annu. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys.
8, 337 – 354 (2017). URL http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/
annurev-conmatphys-031016-025458.
22. Armitage, N. P., Mele, E. J. & Vishwanath, A. Weyl and Dirac semimetals in three-dimensional
solids. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015001 (2018).
23. Tassinari, F. et al. Chirality Dependent Charge Transfer Rate in Oligopeptides. Advanced
Materials 30, 1706423 (2018).
24. Parameswaran, S. A., Turner, A. M., Arovas, D. P. & Vishwanath, A. Topological order and
absence of band insulators at integer ﬁlling in non-symmorphic crystals. Nature Physics 9, 299
– 303 (2013).
25. B¨uttiker, M. Four-terminal phase-coherent conductance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1761–1764 (1986).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.1761.
26. B¨uttiker, M. Role of quantum coherence in series resistors. Physical Review B 33, 3020–3026
(1986).
22
27. Zwang, T. J., H ¨urlimann, S., Hill, M. G. & Barton, J. K. Helix-Dependent Spin Filtering
through the DNA Duplex. Journal of the American Chemical Society 138, 15551–15554
(2016).
28. Liu, T. et al. Linear and nonlinear two-terminal spin-valve effect from chirality-induced spin
selectivity. ACS Nano 14, 15983–15991 (2020).
29. Metzger, T. S. et al. The Electron Spin as a Chiral Reagent. Angewandte Chemie International
Edition 59, 1653–1658 (2020).
30. Santra, K., Zhang, Q., Tassinari, F. & Naaman, R. Electric-Field-Enhanced Adsorption of
Chiral Molecules on Ferromagnetic Substrates. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 123,
9443–9448 (2019).
31. Ziv, A. et al. AFM-Based Spin-Exchange Microscopy Using Chiral Molecules. Advanced
Materials 31, 1904206 (2019).
32. Dianat, A. et al. The Role of Exchange Interactions in the Magnetic Response and Inter-
Molecular Recognition of Chiral Molecules. Nano Letters 20, 7077–7086 (2020).
33. Yang, X., van der Wal, C. H. & van Wees, B. J. Detecting chirality in two-terminal electronic
nanodevices. Nano Letters 20, 6148–6154 (2020).
34. Rikken, G. L. J. A., F ˜A¶lling, J. & Wyder, P. Electrical Magnetochiral Anisotropy. Physical
Review Letters 87, 236602 (2001).
35. Tokura, Y . & Nagaosa, N. Nonreciprocal responses from non-centrosymmetric quantum
materials. Nature Communications 9, 3740 (2018).
36. Zelezny, J., Zhang, Y ., Felser, C. & Yan, B. Spin-Polarized Current in Noncollinear Antiferro-
magnets. Physical review letters 119, 187204 (2017).
37. Bliokh, K. Y ., Bliokh, Y . P., Savelaev, S. & Nori, F. Semiclassical Dynamics of Electron Wave
Packet States with Phase V ortices.Physical Review Letters 99, 190404 (2007).
23
38. Lloyd, S. M., Babiker, M., Thirunavukkarasu, G. & Yuan, J. Electron vortices: Beams with
orbital angular momentum. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035004 (2017). URL https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.89.035004.
39. Uchida, M. & Tonomura, A. Generation of electron beams carrying orbital angular momentum.
Nature 464, 737–739 (2010).
40. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Physical Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996).
41. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨uller, J. Efﬁcient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations
using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B 54, 11169 (1996).
42. Slater, J. C. & Koster, G. F. Simpliﬁed lcao method for the periodic potential problem. Phys.
Rev. 94, 1498–1524 (1954). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.
94.1498.
43. Groth, C. W., Wimmer, M., Akhmerov, A. R. & Waintal, X. Kwant: a software package for
quantum transport. New Journal of Physics 16, 063065 (2014).
44. Bardarson, J. H. A proof of the Kramers degeneracy of transmission eigenvalues from anti-
symmetry of the scattering matrix. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 41,
405203 (2008).
24