--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 11 January 2018
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00119
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119
Edited by:
Florentin Wörgötter,
University of Göttingen, Germany
Reviewed by:
Alexander Gail,
German Primate Center (LG),
Germany
Si Wu,
Beijing Normal University, China
*Correspondence:
Tjeerd V . olde Scheper
tvolde-scheper@brookes.ac.uk
Received: 05 August 2016
Accepted: 22 December 2017
Published: 11 January 2018
Citation:
olde Scheper TV , Meredith RM,
Mansvelder HD, van Pelt J and
van Ooyen A (2018) Dynamic Hebbian
Cross-Correlation Learning Resolves
the Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity
Conundrum.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11:119.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00119
Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation
Learning Resolves the Spike Timing
Dependent Plasticity Conundrum
Tjeerd V . olde Scheper1, 2*, Rhiannon M. Meredith 1, Huibert D. Mansvelder 1,
Jaap van Pelt 1 and Arjen van Ooyen 1
1 Department of Integrative Neurophysiology, Center for Neur ogenomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2 Department of Computing and Communication Technologies, F aculty of Technology,
Design and Environment, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford , United Kingdom
Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity has been found to assume many different forms. The
classic STDP curve, with one potentiating and one depressin g window, is only one of
many possible curves that describe synaptic learning using the STDP mechanism. It
has been shown experimentally that STDP curves may contain m ultiple LTP and LTD
windows of variable width, and even inverted windows. The underlying STDP mechanism
that is capable of producing such an extensive, and apparent ly incompatible, range of
learning curves is still under investigation. In this paper , it is shown that STDP originates
from a combination of two dynamic Hebbian cross-correlatio ns of local activity at the
synapse. The correlation of the presynaptic activity with t he local postsynaptic activity is
a robust and reliable indicator of the discrepancy between the presynaptic neuron and the
postsynaptic neuron’ s activity. The second correlation is between the local postsynaptic
activity with dendritic activity which is a good indicator o f matching local synaptic and
dendritic activity. We show that this simple time-independent learning rule can give rise to
many forms of the STDP learning curve. The rule regulates syn aptic strength without the
need for spike matching or other supervisory learning mecha nisms. Local differences
in dendritic activity at the synapse greatly affect the cros s-correlation difference which
determines the relative contributions of different neural activity sources. Dendritic activity
due to nearby synapses, action potentials, both forward and back-propagating, as well
as inhibitory synapses will dynamically modify the local ac tivity at the synapse, and the
resulting STDP learning rule. The dynamic Hebbian learning rule ensures furthermore,
that the resulting synaptic strength is dynamically stable , and that interactions between
synapses do not result in local instabilities. The rule clea rly demonstrates that synapses
function as independent localized computational entities , each contributing to the global
activity, not in a simply linear fashion, but in a manner that is appropriate to achieve local
and global stability of the neuron and the entire dendritic s tructure.
Keywords: spike timing-dependent plasticity, dynamic syste ms, synaptic stability, network stability,
computational modeling


--- Page 2 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
1. INTRODUCTION
Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) (
Bi and Poo, 1998 )
is regarded as a major progression toward understanding the
problem of how learning is achieved in biological neuronal
networks. Because STDP gives a synapse-speciﬁc, non-tetanic
means of regulating synaptic plasticity, learning in biologic al
neuronal networks seems reduced to a simple time dependent
rule (
Song et al., 2000 ). As is so often the case, biological
experimental results have shown that STDP appears to be
more complex than initially assumed. It has been shown that
STDP takes diﬀerent forms during development (
Wittenberg and
Wang, 2006 ), and that there are variations within brain regions
and species (Buchanan and Mellor, 2010; Testa-Silva et al., 2010).
It is frequency, and location dependent ( Sjöström et al., 2001;
Froemke et al., 2010 ). Inhibition appears to invert the STDP
curve, which seemingly contradicts the Hebbian nature of ST DP
(Lamsa et al., 2010 ). Even the existence of STDP as a valid
learning mechanism has been questioned ( Lisman and Spruston,
2010). Diﬀerent reviews of STDP have emphasized the possible
variations and forms of STDP ( Morrison et al., 2008; Sjöström et
al., 2008; Buchanan and Mellor, 2010 ), but so far no satisfactory
explanation has been proposed how these diﬀerent forms may
arise.
We have deﬁned a novel dynamic framework which can
address the STDP conundrum by considering the synapse as an
independent Hebbian entity. It relates the synaptic strength to
the presynaptic and postsynaptic activity as the result of localized
independent postsynaptic dynamics, which is founded on
experimental results (
Makino and Malinow, 2011). The localized
dynamics are formed by the presynaptic input, the postsynaptic
response to the input and the presence of postsynaptic activity
due to other processes, such as other synapses and action
potentials. This Dynamic Hebbian Learning model (dynHebb)
demonstrates the cardinal role of local dynamics to synaptic
learning beyond global neural behavior. The dynHebb model
shows that both Hebbian and anti-Hebbian learning depend on
several contributing factors, namely spike timing, the amou nt
of postsynaptic activity, and adaptation by postsynaptic action
potentials as well as inhibitory input. The mechanism of STDP
learning takes on several dimensions of complexity simply due to
local dynamic interactions, and the relevance of speciﬁc act ivities
and inhibition to the input. Synapses can learn and contribute
to the global neuronal behavior but are also subject to local
rules that determine the eﬀective individual synaptic streng th
independently.
The dynHebb model is based on the causal cross-correlation
between pre- and postsynaptic activity as expressed by a
phenomenological activity measure. The model is based on the
following three guiding principles. Firstly, a distinction i s made
between local postsynaptic activity at the synapse (hencefort h
denoted as Ppost), directly resulting from the presynaptic
activity (denoted as Ppre), and local dendritic activity resulting
from all activity sources in the local dendrite (denoted as
Pd). Secondly, the cross-correlation between presynaptic Ppre
and local postsynaptic activity Ppost determines the potential
for synaptic eﬃcacy. This cross-correlation reﬂects synapti c
depression due to presynaptic activity if little or none local
postsynaptic activity is present. Thirdly, the cross-correlat ion
of the local postsynaptic activity of the synapse Ppost with the
dendritic activity Pd, which has been shown to be essential
for STDP (
Kampa et al., 2007 ). The dendritic activity is
formed by all contributing factors that form this activity, such
as Back-propagating Action Potentials (BAPs), and activitie s
of other nearby synapses (including the local postsynaptic
activity). The interaction between local postsynaptic activi ties
are directly responsible for diﬀerent forms of STDP learning
(
Lamsa et al., 2010 ). In the dynHebb model, the three principles
are contributing parts of an autonomous (time-independent)
learning rule from which time dependent STDP learning
emerges. Due to its dynamic nature, the autonomous learning
rule responds in a simple feed-forward manner to the synaptic
input, eliminating the need to go back in time and adjust synaptic
strengths such as is required for the standard STDP model
(
Song et al., 2000 ). The relation between the dynamics of a
single synapse and the postsynaptic dynamics in the dendrite
becomes apparent by diﬀerent emerging learning behavior. The
presence of BAPs and synaptic inhibition changes the shape of the
single STDP learning rule. The dendritic activity formed by other
sources than the synapse makes a signiﬁcant contribution to t he
learning rule, and can control the synaptic dynamics complete ly.
Because the model also describes the relation between the
presynaptic activity and the local postsynaptic activity caused
by the synapse, as well as other dendritic activity due to near by
competing synapses, the mechanism enables the synapse to
respond to input as well as compete with other synapses and tune
itself to the global neuronal activity.
2. METHODS
In this section, we describe the underlying model of the Dyna mic
Hebbian Learning Rule, and its basic properties. In the Results
section 3, we will elaborate in detail on the consequences of th e
methods, in particular, the dynamic interactions that permit the
emergence of the learning rules.
2.1. Dynamic Hebbian Learning Rule
We construct a speciﬁc learning rule (dynHebb) based on
the comparison between the local postsynaptic activity Ppost
of a given synapse directly resulting from presynaptic activit y
Ppre, and the global postsynaptic activity resulting from the
combination of all local sources in the local dendrite Pd
(including the Ppost of a given synapse). The negated causal
cross-correlation of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity, Ppre
and Ppost, is scaled by the dendritic activity Pd which ensures
stability of the synaptic strength. This represents the direc t
eﬀectiveness of the synapse by relating the presynaptic activit y
with the ﬁltered postsynaptic response it has generated. Hence,
the negated causal cross-correlation causes synaptic depres sion
and this can only be overcome by the potentiation due to
a robust postsynaptic response. This response is based on
the postsynaptic activity generated by the synapse and the
cross-correlation of this activity with the dendritic activ ity. If
suﬃciently large postsynaptic activity is present when the synapse
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 3 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
is active (i.e., when the cross-correlation terms are not ze ro),
the synapse becomes potentiating by overcoming the initial
synaptic depression. To avoid unnecessary confusion regardi ng
the biological interpretation of the activity term, it suﬃce s to
consider it an abstraction similarly to the postsynaptic poten tial
in functionality.
2.2. Synaptic Activity Model
The change in synaptic weight W in the Synaptic Activity Model
(SAM) is described by the following equations
Fi
dyn(t) = aPprePpost
(
1 + dPd
) + bPpost + cPpostPd (1)
d Wi(t)
d t = Fi
dyn(t) − eWi(t) (2)
where Wi(t) is the synaptic weight of synapse i, Fi
dyn the dynamic
cross-correlation learning rule for the same synapse, Ppre is the
presynaptic activity, Ppost the resulting local postsynaptic activity
of the synapse and Pd the local dendritic activity.
To encapsulate the contribution of the localized memory that
each synapse contributes to the global dynamics, the second
term in Equation (1) represents the linear local response of th e
postsynaptic activity. This term may be considered to provide a
linearly scaled direct response to the input, allowing local a ctivity
to remain after input has died away. To provide suitable functions
for the cross-correlation terms, the synaptic activity is fo rmed
by a descriptive decay function, based on the alpha function
(
Koch, 1999 ) commonly used to model neural potentials. Here,
the activity function uses a set of two second order diﬀerenti al
equations, which allows adaptive response to local activity
patterns instead (
olde Scheper et al., 2012). Each of the Ppre, Ppost,
and Pd terms are described by Px in
d P x
d t = α Q2 + β Px2 (3)
d Q
d t = φ Q2 + W γ I (4)
where α = 1, β = − 1, φ is in the range [− 2, 0⟩, γ ≥ 1, W is the
synaptic strength in case of the Ppre, I is the input, Q is the input
variable and P represents the synaptic activity.
The choice of parameter values a = − 1, b = 0.3, c =
0.1 and e = − 0.001 is not critical, but reﬂects the relative
contribution of the three terms. Where appropriate, these can
be modiﬁed to study speciﬁc dynamics, similarly as the α decay
term in the alpha-function. In particular, the parameters a and
c and the decay parameter e can be modiﬁed to suit speciﬁc
learning rates. The advantages of the SAM approach are that
the autonomous model does not require speciﬁc detection of a
neural spike and can be modiﬁed with parameter W in a feed-
forward manner. Contributing postsynaptic activities can al so be
added and scaled, if necessary (
olde Scheper et al., 2012 ). The
SAM is used to connect suitable spiking membrane models, such
as the Hindmarsh-Rose model (
Hindmarsh and Rose, 1984 ) or
the Morris-Lecar model ( Izhikevich, 2004 ), by providing scaled
input I to the pre-synaptic activity Ppre (Equation 4) for which
the weight is unity. Then the post-synaptic local activity Ppost
is determined based on the same spiking model but weighted
Wi, also according to Equation (4). In this paper, we used the
Morris-Lecar model, which is described by
C d V
d t = Is − gL(V − VL) − gcam∞ (V)(V − Vca)
− gKn(V − VK) (5)
d n
d t = λ (V)(n∞ (V) − n) (6)
where
m∞ = 1
2
{
1 + tanh
( (V − V1)
V2
)}
(7)
n∞ = 1
2
{
1 + tanh
( (V − V3)
V4
)}
(8)
λ (V) = ¯λ cosh
( (V − V3)
2V4
)
(9)
with C = 20 µF/ cm2, gL = 2 mS/ cm2,VL = − 50 mV, gCa =
4 mS/ cm2, Vca = 100 mV, gK = 8 mS/ cm2, VK = − 70 mV,
V1 = 0 mV, V2 = 15 mV, V3 = 10 mV, V4 = 10 mV,
¯λ = 0.1 s − 1, and Is is the applied scaled input Is = KsPd (with
Ks = 60 a.u.).
This post-synaptic dendritic activity Pd is determined based
on the weighted sum of the post-synaptic local activities ( Ppost),
reﬂecting the relative contributions from each synapse to the total
dendritic activity, so
Pd =
∑
i
Gi Pi
post (10)
where Gi = [0, 1]. The cross-correlation terms in Equation (1)
are therefore causally related, due to the fact that Ppost is
produced by the same spiking model as Ppre, but weighted. If the
weight is such that the cross-correlation PprePpost is high, this will
depress the synapse, unless the post-synaptic cross-correlation
term PpostPd, and the local linear Ppost itself can overcome this
eﬀect. Similarly, the post-synaptic dendritic activity is cau sally
related to the post-synaptic activities forming the second cr oss-
correlation term. Therefore, the entire dynamic behavior o f the
synapse is a direct causal function of its input, in relation to
its output contribution to the local neuronal activity. The po st-
synaptic spiking neuron model can then be activated based on
the scaled Pd. Scaling is necessary due to the fact that the spiking
models are based on speciﬁc assumptions for their parameter
values. Finally, the weight for the synapse is calculated bas ed on
Equations (1, 2). Note that all equations are ﬁrst order diﬀerential
non-linear equations. These can be simulated using standard
numerical integration methods, where the exact methodology
used is not critical, taking care to minimize numerical erro r.
To clarify the function of the Dynamic Hebbian Learning rule,
in Figure 1 are shown the response of the learning rule due to
a single spiking event at time zero. In Figure 1A is shown the
activity Ppre (black) and Ppost (green) and the negative cross-
correlation of the two (blue, cf. term one in Equation 3). In
Figure 1B is shown the same Ppost as in Figure 1A (green) as well
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 4 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 1 | (A) Presynaptic activity in black due to a spiking event at time z ero, this leads to a local postsynaptic activity (light gree n). In dark blue is shown the
negated cross-correlation of these two activities. (B) Postsynaptic activity in light green (same as in A) with dendritic activity in gold and cross-correlation of t hese two
in dark green. (C) The negative ﬁrst cross-correlation in dark blue, the positi ve second cross-correlation in dark green and the learning f unction F(t) in red. The pink
shading indicates the relative contributions of depressio n vs. potentiation. (D) The synaptic weight W(t) in time, due to the decay term − e Wi(t) the synaptic strength is
slowly decreasing. (E) Function F(t) over the entire simulation period of 600 s. (F) Synaptic weight W(t) derived from F(t) in (E).
as the Pd (gold), resulting in the cross-correlation of these two
activities (dark-green, cf. term three in Equation 3). In Figure 1C
is shown the two cross-correlation terms from Figures 1A,B
(blue and dark green), which results in the learning functio n F(t)
(red). The synaptic weight Wi(t) is then shown in Figure 1D, in
this case, the input leads to a synaptic strengthening. Even though
each individual spiking event has an eﬀect on the model, it does
not necessarily by itself cause a change in synaptic strength ,
unless the synapse is in a critical state where previous events
have driven the dynamic system toward the change. A critical
state indicates that the system is near a change in dynamic st ate,
such as one stable state to another, or to a periodic oscillati on.
This is comparable to the recognized critical properties of
neural architectures (
Abbott and Rohrkemper, 2007 ). In fact,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 5 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
this property increases the robustness of the system, by not on ly
depending on speciﬁc events, but on those events that contribu te
to a change in state, which makes those events relevant to learning
in the synapse.
Finally, in Figure 1 are shown a single sample run of the
changes in the learning function F(t) ( Figure 1E), and the
synaptic weight Wi(t) ( Figure 1F) over an entire extended
simulation period, demonstrating the adaptation of the synapt ic
weight due to temporal sensitivity to cross-correlated input.
2.3. Synaptic Conﬁgurations
The dynHebb rule can be applied to synapses in diﬀerent spatial
conﬁgurations. Commonly, two synapses are targeted on the
same postsynaptic compartment (illustrated in Figure 2B) and
are driven singularly to demonstrate the eﬀect of learning in
a single synapse, or by paired periodic pulses with diﬀerent
frequencies. For example, a typical pair of periods are 200
and 201 ms for at least 60 s. This will introduce a beat into
the frequencies (a diﬀerence between the two frequencies),
such that every phase diﬀerence between the two periods is
contained within the total simulation time. This allows for
convenient analysis of the STDP properties. The dynHebb
learning rule combines the relative contributions of the sy napse
and postsynaptic dendrite where the relative diﬀerence betwee n
the periods determines the time lag. It is more convenient to
use a systematic, rather than a stochastic approach; the schem e
does not need to have repeated ﬁxed stimulation pairs, as is
required in an experimental setup. The determinism of the
function (Equation 1) ensures that a single event will cause
a very small chance in the synaptic strength. If the learning
strength parameters are chosen suitably small, this will not
be noticeable, unless the stimulation is repeated conform an
experimental approach. A diﬀerent synaptic conﬁguration is
shown in Figure 7A of a conﬁguration with two excitatory
synapses and one inhibitory synapse. The three synapses are at
diﬀerent distances from the soma, but close enough to each other
to inﬂuence the local dendritic activity. Synapse A is furthe st
away, followed by B, and C the nearest to the soma. In subsequent
simulations the ﬁrst synapse from presynaptic neuron A is
located on the left branch of the “Y , ” the second synapse from
presynaptic neuron B is located on the right branch. The third
synapse is located on the base of the “Y , ” with the location of t he
soma at the bottom. These synapses will then compete to become
the most relevant synapse to cause a postsynaptic activity spike .
The synapses will not simply reach the limit of the neuron, due
to the relative contribution each makes to the total dendrit ic,
and thus somatic activity. To demonstrate the dynamic natur e
of the STDP function, we will compare the eﬀects of the diﬀerent
locations of the sole inhibitory synapse. In other words, we m ake
synapse A, B, and C inhibitory in turn, with the other two
excitatory.
2.4. Determination of Relative Spike Timing
To calculate the resulting STDP curves, a standard experimen tal
approach is used (
Verhoog et al., 2013 ), where the timing
of peak of the presynaptic activity Ppre at sample time t is
subtracted from the timing of the resulting postsynaptic acti vity
Ppost to provide the relative diﬀerence ( Ppost(t) − Ppre(t)), and
the corresponding amplitude change between the activity event s
provides the relative change in synaptic strength due to this
activity /Delta1Wi(t) = Wi(t) − Wi(t − 1), where the value of
Wi is constant between spiking events. The potential eﬀect of
cumulative increases due to a residual memory (state) in the
synaptic strength at each increase in the phase diﬀerence can
easily be mitigated by providing suﬃcient time between input
pulses to allow transients to die out. The dynHebb learning
rule is not aﬀected by the current state of the synaptic weight
itself, as can be seen from the synaptic rule function Fi
dyn(t). The
linear decay − eWi(t) in Equation (2) slowly decreases the weight,
which can be overcome by occasional activity of the synapse.
Alternatively, this term can be set to zero, if desired, with out
compromising the inherent properties of the rule allowing more
persistent activity.
The use of the continuous stimulation protocol with the beat,
does not change the properties of the model. Each individual
stimulus causes a small change in the synaptic strength, whic h
will persist and become signiﬁcant if suﬃcient stimuli occur
before this change decays over time. Therefore, the stimula tion
pattern is not responsible for the learning eﬀect, but the dynHebb
rule, and this may be a useful approach for experimentalist as
well.
There is therefore no cumulative increase or decrease in the
synaptic strength caused by the previous input, unless transie nt
activity causes the cross-correlation terms to be non-zero . This is
one of the main features of the dynHebb rule, allowing activi ty
patterns to inﬂuence synapses only when they are active. When
they are inactive, the presence of dendritic activity does not aﬀect
the rule as such, which guarantees the synaptic stability and
prevents the occurrence of synaptic degradation associated w ith
high neural activity that may occur with linear and non-line ar
learning rules.
3. RESUL TS
To demonstrate the dynHebb learning rule, we used a protocol
independent mechanism to determine the relative contributi on
of each spiking event to the local dynamics of the synapse.
Synapses were stimulated with an input pulse driving a
modiﬁed Morris-Lecar model (
Izhikevich, 2004) together with a
postsynaptic dendritic pulse at appropriate varying time delays.
The resulting change in weight for both synapses mirrors the
standard STDP curve for the ﬁrst synapse and the inverse
curve for the second synapse ( Figure 2C, explained in detail
in the section Synaptic Competition). This can be compared
with the reproduced experimental data from
Bi and Poo (1998)
(Figure 2A). Additionally are shown, the exponential curves that
are commonly used to describe STDP learning (continuous lines)
as a non-autonomous decay model ( Song et al., 2000 ). These
exponential functions are ﬁtted by /Delta1W± = A± exp
( /Delta1t
τ ±
)
with
A± = 0.86, − 0.25 and τ ± = 19, –34 (Bi, 2002). In Figures 2C,D
are shown the eﬀect of the dynHebb model of the simple
experimental protocol by
Bi and Poo (1998) , where the synapse
is activated by a 1 Hz frequency with a 1 ms beat. The STDP
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 6 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 2 | Results from the dynHebb model. (A) STDP in hippocampal experiments demonstrating the standar d STDP form (revisualized in blue, after Bi and Poo,
1998). The black lines are ﬁtted exponential functions for compar ison (redrawn after Bi, 2002). (B) Scheme of simulation model where two synapses project onto t he
same compartment, the presynaptic activity ( Ppre) generates local postsynaptic activity ( Ppost) which contributes to the dendritic activity ( Pd). (C) STDP of 1 Hz
stimulated single synapse model. The low change of weight is due to the low activation pattern. (D) Synaptic weight of the 1 Hz stimulated model over time, showi ng
four distinct stimulation events, and the subsequent chang e in weights. (E) The dynHebb learning of competing synapses 1 (blue) and 2 (gr een). (F) Synaptic strength
of both synapses over one entire simulation period, driven b y 5 Hz periodic signal with 1 ms beat. Note that the synapses ar e stimulated every 200 and 201 ms
respectively which results in the thickness of these curves .
diagram in Figure 2C shows the classic STDP curve, without
any further adjustment, although the change in weight is ver y
small, due to the large gaps between each subsequent activati on.
In Figure 2D is shown the synaptic weight change due to the four
stimulations causing small changes in the weight. To demonstrate
the eﬀect of more closely related activation patterns, two nea rby
synapses were simulated at 5 Hz with a period diﬀerence of
1 ms. The dynHebb learning rule response dynamically to the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 7 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
change in conﬁguration, as is shown by synapse 1 (Figure 2E blue
line), which contains data points that cause depression, as we ll
as potentiation. The synaptic strengths of both synapses do not
change when the two synapses are out of phase and the cross-
correlation terms are zero. The synapses change their relati ve
strengths when both input and additional dendritic activity are
present due to non-zero cross-correlations. In Figure 2F at about
40s is shown the pre- and postsynaptic activity to become in
phase, resulting in the increase of synaptic strength.
3.1. Synaptic Competition
Synaptic competition is a cardinal feature of STDP learning th at
is associated with synaptic pruning. This has been shown to occur
due to repetitive LTD induction in rat hippocampal neurons
(
Shinoda et al., 2010 ) . It has also been demonstrated that, for
short time windows, spines may compete for L-LTP expression
(
Govindarajan et al., 2011 ) and competition was found for
diﬀerent signaling molecules ( Gerkin et al., 2007 ). It is therefore
expected that any functional learning rule will show input speciﬁc
responses for plasticity rules ( Feldman, 2000 ) between nearby
synapses on the basis of postsynaptic activity interactions.
To demonstrate competition in our model, two synapses are
simulated and driven with two periodic signals of 5 Hz (200
ms period) and 4.975 Hz (201 ms period), resulting in a beat
frequency of 0.025 Hz and a total stimulation period of 40 s. No
further dendritic activity exists apart from the activity ge nerated
by either of the synapses 1 and 2. Competition can be found
in this situation as interacting synaptic strengths over an e ntire
simulation period ( Figure 2F). The second synapse increases in
strength before the ﬁrst synapse due to the diﬀerence in phase of
the beat.
The subsequent change in phase diﬀerence causes the ﬁrst
synapse to increase in strength and the second synapse to weaken
again (at 42 s). Finally, the ﬁrst synapse will weaken and both
synapses return to their equilibrium state. From this simula tion,
the STDP curve can be determined by calculating the time
diﬀerences for individual inputs with the postsynaptic response .
The resulting STDP curves of both synapses show that the ﬁrst
synapse ( Figure 2C blue) has the traditional Hebb type STDP
learning curve and the second synapse 2 ( Figure 2C green) has
an anti-Hebbian shape due to the fact that the ﬁrst synapse has
a slightly higher frequency and over time is more often activ e.
This shows that competing synapses may have diﬀerent STDP
learning curves simply due to the diﬀerence in timing induced
by the presence of postsynaptic activity of other synapses.
3.2. Frequency Dependence
The dynamic interactions that emerge from the dynHebb
learning rule, contribute to more complex behavior of the
synapse. Because ﬁring rate and timing as well as correlation
have been shown to contribute to cortical plasticity (
Sjöström
et al., 2001 ), diﬀerent input frequencies are expected to
modify the resulting STDP curve. We demonstrate this in the
dynHebb model by driving the two synapses with diﬀerent
input frequencies in the absence of further postsynaptic activ ity
than generated by the synapses themselves. Given an input
frequency of 10 and ∼ 9.9 Hz respectively (with 1 ms diﬀerence),
the resulting STDP ( Figure 3A) is already diﬀerent from the
previously described results, where the input frequency was 5
Hz ( Figure 2C), due to a signiﬁcant shift of the STDP curve.
Subsequently, driving the same two synapses with a frequency
of 10 and ∼ 9.8 Hz (2 ms diﬀerence), causes a larger shift of
the STDP curve ( Figure 3B). Finally, driven by 10 and ∼ 9.7
Hz (3 ms diﬀerence), the two STDP curves have shifted further
(Figure 3C), which demonstrates the eﬀect of relative timing.
This is summarized in Figure 3D where the STDP curves of the
ﬁrst synapse alone are plotted together. Notice that the STDP
curve of the ﬁrst synapse has changed due to the diﬀerence with
the input period of the second synapse. This nicely illustrates
the importance of the postsynaptic dynamics for the synapse and
how a synapse adapts its own dynamics by relating its received
input with the local postsynaptic dynamics.
3.3. Action Potentials
Another important contribution to the emerging STDP curve
is the presence of postsynaptic action potentials. For this paper,
no particular distinction is made between the diﬀerent source s
or directions of the action potential, merely the eﬀect such an
event has on the local dendritic activity and, subsequently , on
the local synapse. The insensitivity of the synapse to the sourc e
of the action potential illustrates the relative independence of
the synapse. It only knows about local observable events, but
is inﬂuenced by other events further away which aﬀect the
postsynaptic activity to which the synapse adjusts itself. Using
the same conﬁguration as used previously, two synapses are
driven with slightly diﬀerent frequencies but also an additio nal
independent postsynaptic activity is added with a separate
related frequency. To demonstrate the relative contributio n
of an action potential to the shape of the STDP curve, the
simulated action potential had a frequency that was slightly
higher or lower than the input frequency to either of the two
synapses.
For the ﬁrst case, synapse 1 was driven with a frequency of
10 Hz, synapse 2 with a frequency of ∼ 9.9 Hz (1 ms diﬀerence)
and the action potential was driven by a frequency of ∼ 10.1
Hz (99 ms). When the simulated action potential has a slightly
higher frequency than the two synapses ( Figure 4A), there are
several additional LTP windows for either of the two STDP curves
corresponding to the two synapses. Synapse 1 has an additional
LTP maximum at ≈+ 18 ms and synapse 2 has several additional
LTP maxima, at ≈− 3 ms, ≈− 58 ms and ≈+ 44 ms. When the
action potential frequency is equal to that from synapse one,
the shape of the STDP curve of synapse 1 has not changed,
compared to the simple competition between two synapses
without an additional action potential. The only diﬀerence is
that the amplitude of the STDP curve has increased somewhat
(not shown). The STDP curve for synapse 2 has an additional
LTP peak at ≈− 4 ms. This gives the appearance that the LTP
window of the STDP curve for synapse 2 is wider than when
the action potential has a higher frequency. Interestingly, when
the frequency of the action potential is further decreased an d
becomes the same as that of synapse 2, the resulting STDP curve
is not much diﬀerent from the STDP curve without an action
potential, apart that the amplitude of the STDP curve is higher
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 8 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 3 | Frequency dependence of two synapses, STDP curve plots with varying input frequencies for synapse 1 (blue) and synapse 2 (green). (A) Input
frequencies of 10 and ∼ 9.9 Hz (1 ms difference). (B) Input frequencies of 10 and ∼ 9.8 Hz (2 ms difference). (C) Input frequencies of 10 and ∼ 9.7 Hz (3 ms difference).
(D) STDP curves of the ﬁrst synapse receiving 10 Hz input drawn fro m (A–C), changes are solely due to the postsynaptic dynamics induce d by the second synapse.
From left to right, second synapse input is ∼ 9.9, ∼ 9.8, and ∼ 9.7 Hz.
(not shown). This is due to the fact that both synapses provide
postsynaptic activity and the action potential coincides withthese
two activities which does not contribute much to the learnin g
needed of either synapse. Lastly, when the frequency of the action
potential is lowered such that it is smaller than either of the two
synapses at ∼ 9.8 Hz ( Figure 4B), the STDP curve for synapse
1 has two additional LTP maxima, at ≈− 58 and ≈+ 48 ms.
Synapse 2 has now two additional LTD minima at ≈− 82 and
≈+ 23 ms.
3.4. Inhibition
The dynHebb learning rule employs cross-correlation to combine
the input activity with the local postsynaptic dynamics. Synapt ic
inhibition aﬀects the amount of postsynaptic activity and
therefore will inﬂuence the STDP curve depending on the
timing of the inhibitory input. Additionally, the occurrenc e
of a simultaneous action potential can modify the STDP
curve further. To demonstrate these interacting activitie s, a
diﬀerent conﬁguration has been used. In a single compartment,
one excitatory synapse is driven using a ﬁxed frequency.
A nearby inhibitory synapse is driven using a diﬀerent
frequency. An optional postsynaptic action potential can also
be included, and subsequently, the resulting STDP curves
are determined ( Figure 5). The excitatory synapse is driven
using a frequency of 5 Hz (200 ms) and the inhibitory
synapse with a frequency of ∼ 4.98 Hz (201 ms) ( Figure 5A–C
left column). Alternatively, the excitatory synapse can be
driven by a frequency of ∼ 4.98 Hz (201 ms) and the
inhibitory synapse by 5 Hz (200 ms) ( Figure 5D–F right
column).
We ﬁrst regard the STDP curves of the excitatory synapse
without any further postsynaptic activity, such as an action
potential, but with inhibition ( Figures 5A,D). The presence of
the inhibitory activity causes the curve to be shifted, wide ned
and inverted. The normally Hebbian STDP curve has become
an anti-Hebbian curve and the LTP window is larger. Similarl y,
the presence of inhibition has caused the anti-Hebbian curve
to become inverted as well, also the LTP window has widened
and the curve has shifted ( Figure 5D). If the postsynaptic action
potential is included when the excitatory synapse has a higher
frequency than the inhibitory synapse, the shape of the STDP
curve changes yet again. When the action potential occurs at a
frequency of ∼ 5.025 Hz (199 ms), a second LTP window appears
at ≈+ 12 ms (Figure 5B). If the frequency of the action potential
is changed to ∼ 4.95 Hz (202 ms), the single LTP maximum has
signiﬁcantly increased but is less wide ( Figure 5C). Adding a
postsynaptic action potential when the inhibitory synapse has
a higher frequency than the excitatory synapse, a similar but
mirrored STDP curve is found. A second LTP window may also
appear at ≈− 6 ms ( Figure 5E). This second LTP window may
disappear again with the lower frequency of the action potentia l
in that case (Figure 5F).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 9 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 4 | Effect of postsynaptic action potential on synapses. (A) STDP curve with postsynaptic action potential with frequen cy ∼ 10.1 Hz (99 ms) and two
competing synapses, synapse 1 has an input frequency of 10 Hz (100 ms) and synapse 2 has an input frequency of ∼ 9.9 Hz (101 ms). (B) STDP curve with
postsynaptic action potential with frequency ∼ 9.8 Hz (102 ms) and two competing synapses, synapse 1 has an in put frequency of 10 Hz (100 ms) and synapse 2 has
an input frequency of ∼ 9.9 Hz (101 ms). (C) STDP plot, revisualized after Wittenberg and Wang (2006) , showing a shifted LTP window and two LTD windows,
stimulation frequency was 5 Hz. (D) Single compartment simulation of two synapses, one stimula ted at 5Hz, one at 4.9 Hz and a BAP at 4.78 Hz. It results in a shift ed
LTP window and two LTD windows in the STDP curve. Also shown ar e two harmonic peaks at + 43.35 and − 47.3 ms that are not in the experimental data.
3.5. Changing Shape of Postsynaptic
Activity during Development
During development, due to the changing properties of channel
dynamics such as NMDA-channels, the shape of the postsynaptic
EPSP changes (
Quinlan et al., 1999; Wittenberg and Wang, 2006;
Meredith et al., 2007; Sjöström et al., 2008 ). In particular, the
width of the EPSP becomes smaller, probably due to a change in
decay times. We will use the competing synapse conﬁguration to
study the eﬀect of diﬀerent widths of the EPSP by changing the
decay rate such that in the young neuron simulation, the EPSP is
higher than in the mature neuron simulation. Subsequently, w e
will add input noise onto the synaptic inputs and compare the
results.
For the simulation of a mature neuron, the STDP window
has fairly narrow windows ( Figure 6A). The comparable STDP
curve for the young neuron simulation, with halved decay rat es,
has much higher STDP windows ( Figure 6B). It is immediately
obvious that wider EPSPs will lead to larger cross-correlati on
windows and therefore to a higher STDP window. The increase
in amplitude is caused by the overall higher activity in the
postsynaptic compartment. We subsequently add a 20% input
noise onto the adult and young neuron simulations. This resu lts
in a signiﬁcant number of event that are mis-timed and the STDP
window becomes less well deﬁned as the cross-correlation is less
relevant for the adult neuron ( Figure 6C). Lastly, we also add a
20% input noise onto the young neuron simulation. In this case ,
the STDP windows are still fairly eﬀective and can successfully be
used to train the neuron on noisy input which results in a stable
network (Figure 6D).
3.6. Competing Synapses at the Local
Dendrite
To demonstrate the inherent stability of the dynHebb learni ng
rule, we simulate three synapses ( Figure 7A), which are all
excitatory. Each synapse has its own frequency, and the resul ting
postsynaptic activity is therefore a combination of the cross -
correlated inputs. In Figure 7B is shown the resulting dynamic
synaptic strength. The synapse furthest from the soma shows
the least variability (green) due to the relative independen ce of
this particular synapse. The synapse nearest, on the other hand ,
may vary a lot when the other two have a relatively strong
(or weak) eﬀect on its own cross-correlation (red). Changing
the input frequencies will not cause the synapses to explode or
disappear over time. The resulting postsynaptic activity is show n
in Figure 7C, which shows a simple regular output pattern. This
can be readily compared to the presynaptic input activities in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 10 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 5 | Inhibition and the STDP curve. A single excitatory synapse an d a single inhibitory synapse interact by modifying the post synaptic activity. A postsynaptic
action potential causes further adaptation. Shown is the ST DP curve from the excitatory synapse. Left column (A–C) STDP curve of excitatory synapse driven by 5 Hz
(200 ms) input with ∼ 4.98 Hz (201 ms) inhibitory input. In (A,D) no further postsynaptic activity. In (B,E) an additional postsynaptic action potential at ∼ 5.025 Hz
(199 ms); in (C,F) the action potential has a frequency of ∼ 4.95 Hz (202 ms).
Figure 7D, where the raster plot shows the correlation patterns
of the three input synapses and the postsynaptic activity.
Conversely, in Figures 8A–C (left column), is shown the
resulting post-synaptic voltage of the Morris-Lecar neuron wh en
the sole inhibitory synapse is A ( Figure 8A), B ( Figure 8A),
and C ( Figure 8C). As expected, based on the relative distance,
inhibitory synapse A is too far away to aﬀect the excitatory
activity patterns of B and C. Similarly, inhibitory synapse B
suppresses the entire post-synaptic neuron, where A is not strong
enough to compensate for B. Lastly, the proximal inhibitory
synapse C suppresses the activity, except when distal excitator y
synapses A and B correlate to overcome the inhibition. In all
cases the synapses where activated with the same frequency,
independent of their inhibitory or excitatory nature (A = 5 Hz,
B = 5.025 Hz, and C = 4.9 Hz). In Figure 8D–F (right column)
are shown the corresponding changes in synaptic weight due to
the competition in the three synapses. Here, synapse A is shown
blue, B is green and C is gold.
4. DISCUSSION
Donald Olding Hebb’s thesis on synaptic plasticity can be
explicitly expressed as the change in synaptic eﬃcacy in
proportion to the degree of correlation between pre- and
postsynaptic activity (
Hebb, 1949). The Hebbian learning rule has
been demonstrated in computer simulations to be reliable and
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 11 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 6 | Change in EPSP shape during development of two competing syn apses. (A) STDP curves for relative shorter EPSP shape, comparable to a dult, without
noise. (B) STDP curves with relative wider EPSP shape, comparable to yo ung neuron, without noise. (C) STDP curves for relative shorter EPSP shape with added
20% input noise. (D) STDP curves for relative longer EPSP shape with added 20% inp ut noise.
eﬀective in determining synaptic strengths and appears to have
a solid foundation in experimental biology (
Bi and Poo, 1998;
Meredith et al., 2007 ). However, beyond curve ﬁt models of the
STDP rule, commonly expressed as two exponential decay curves
(
Song et al., 2000 ), it has not been demonstrated that the causal
correlation property of synaptic plasticity is valid, and is eﬀec tive
as a learning mechanism as may have been assumed. Indeed, the
focus on spiking models and synaptic STDP models based on
curve ﬁt approximations has detracted from this cardinal aspec t
of learning. A lot of eﬀort has been put into ephemeral problems
associated with the modeling rather than the STDP mechanism
itself and its relevance to learning in biology (
Morrison et al.,
2008). In particular, extensive spike sorting algorithms have been
deﬁned to resolve the issue of timing relevance of pre-after- post
vs. post-after-pre spiking patterns which are, in eﬀect, an STDP
version of supervised learning. Biochemical synaptic process es
are autonomous and dynamically complex, from which time
based activity emerges (
olde Scheper, 2008). The dynHebb model
eliminates explicit time which makes it possible to determine t he
relative temporal contributions of synapses to network learn ing
in a consistent and independent manner. The independence of
the model, with regards to explicit time windows, allows grea ter
ﬂexibility and adaptability for simulating diﬀerent synaptic input
types, if wishing to simulate their STDP curve ranges. The
lack of an explicit time window does not force the synapse to
behave to discrete pairing windows but rather works on the
causal correlation of synaptic activity in a dynamic manner.
Therefore, the model clearly demonstrates that time dependent
processes do not require an intrinsic clock or event detection
but are sensitive to temporal codes simply due to deterministi c
autonomous dynamic behavior.
The development of a phenomenological learning rule
appears to be somewhat contrary to current interpretations
of synaptic plasticity modeling. In particular, various model s
have been published to attempt to explain STDP in terms of
biochemical processes (e.g.,
Sjöström et al., 2001; Graupner
and Brunel, 2012 ). In this paper, we do not claim to explain
the biophysics of STDP , but attempt to provide a mechanistic
approach, which is not simplistic, but powerful enough to address
the main criticisms that STDP modeling attracts (
Shouval et
al., 2010 ). Speciﬁcally, the dynHebb model allows a minimal
model with suﬃcient, and necessary, complexity to allow
comprehension of the key concepts, without speciﬁc biochemical
interpretations that form the basis of many arguments about
interpretation.
4.1. The Dynamic Hebbian
Cross-Correlation rule
The dynamic Hebbian cross-correlation learning rule is a
conceptual activity measure that is not bound to any biophysic al
feature beyond the implied causality imposed by the synaptic
chemical organization. Even though diﬀerent interpretation s
have been given to speciﬁc roles and functions of biophysical
elements, such as calcium and neurotransmitter receptors
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 12 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 7 | Synaptic competition at the dendrite. (A) Three simulated synapses compete to activate the postsynap tic neuron. Each of the synapses can be chosen to
be excitatory or inhibitory, here is shown the conﬁguration w ith the distal synapses as excitatory. The distances dA, dB, and dC indicate the relative attenuation of the
activation for each contributing synapse. (B) Synaptic strength variation due to three competing excitat ory synapses a small distance from each other. (C) Detail of the
postsynaptic response due to three excitatory inputs. The r esponse is dynamically stable. (D) Raster plot of the three presynaptic input patterns (A, B, an d C) where all
are excitatory, and the resulting postsynaptic response. N otice that the resulting post-synaptic pattern is dynamica lly stable and not merely the sum of the inputs.
(Clopath et al., 2010; Graupner and Brunel, 2012 ), the relative
importance of those speciﬁc elements to the entire complex
system is still contentious. We argue, therefore, that the s ynaptic
learning is based on dynamic nonlinear interactions betwee n
biophysical systems and that attributing speciﬁc STDP properties
to chosen biophysical elements is an over-interpretation of t he
available data. To encompass the entire dynamics, it is more
suitable to a phenomenological interpretation that allows th e
high level STDP dynamics to be described. Similar approaches
have been previously employed extensively in neuromodeling
(
Koch, 1999 ), indeed the classical STDP model curve is a
phenomenological curve ﬁtted to the data ( Song et al., 2000).
The interaction between the depression due to input and
potentiation due to postsynaptic activity dynamically determ ines
the amplitude and width of the STDP windows. For a single
synapse, with no further postsynaptic activities than the dendritic
pulse it generated, the emerging shape is the well known Hebbian
STDP learning window. As we will show, variations in timing,
amplitude and width of the STDP curve are solely due to the
relative diﬀerence in cross-correlation timing pre-synaptically vs.
post-synaptically. Electrical properties of individual synapses and
morphological properties of dendrites may result in diﬀerent
variations of the STDP window. If other synapses are near
enough to aﬀect the local dendritic activity near the synapse
under investigation, they can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the
STDP curve of that synapse. Additionally, other waves of activity,
such as Back-propagating Action Potentials (BAP) and dendrit ic
activities, will also aﬀect the postsynaptic activity of the syna pse.
This can be determined by examining well known properties of
STDP as described below.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 13 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
FIGURE 8 | Effect of different relative locations of the inhibitory sy napse in relation to two excitatory synapses. (A) The post-synaptic voltage of the Morris-Lecar
neuron when synapse A is inhibitory. (B) Post-synaptic voltage when synapse B is inhibitory. (C) Post-synaptic voltage when synapse C is inhibitory. (D) Synaptic
strengths over time when synapse A is inhibitory. (E,F) Same for synapses B and C.
4.2. Synaptic Competition
The apparent change in STDP learning rule induced by the
diﬀerence in external input timings has also been reported
to occur experimentally in CA1 pyramidal neurons where the
external input timing at local synapse determines the sign of
STDP learning (
Kwag and Paulsen, 2009 ). The competition of
the synapses illustrates an important feature of the dynHebb
model and its implications for STDP learning. The crux is the
interaction between the local dynamics of the synapse itself w ith
the global or wider local dynamics of nearby synapses and the
neuronal local state as expressed by an action potential in the
dendrite.
It has been suggested that diﬀerent STDP windows may be
speciﬁc for diﬀerent cell types, such as in the dorsal cochlear
nucleus (
Tzounopoulos et al., 2004 ) where Hebbian and anti-
Hebbian type STDP windows have been found for diﬀerent
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 14 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
cell types. In such cases, postsynaptic activity may induce
both Hebbian and anti-Hebbian STDP windows depending on
the local postsynaptic dynamics due to interactions of variou s
sources of activity. Multi-synaptic activation can readily sk ew
the expected results depending on the local ﬂow of currents.
This can be seen in the example of the competing synapses
where synapse 2 ( Figure 2C green line) has an anti-Hebbian
STDP window due to the competing activity of synapse 1. It
was also shown experimentally that the location of synapses
within the dendritic tree is relevant to the form of the STDP
learning rule (
Froemke et al., 2010 ). This is predicted by
the dynHebb learning rule, as in more distal areas of the
dendritic tree, more complex postsynaptic interactions are
possible when BAPs contribute signiﬁcantly less to the STDP
learning rule. The proximal synapse is therefore still largel y
inﬂuenced by the relatively strong contribution of the BAP t o
the postsynaptic activity. Experimental results that describ e the
loss of temporal contrast due to dopaminergic modulation of
STDP (
Zhang et al., 2009 ) can thus be explained by changes
in the responsiveness of the competing cross-correlation base d
depression and potentiation. Furthermore, it has been shown that
integration of synaptic input is governed by local recruitmen t of
NMDA receptor channels ( Larkum et al., 2009 ), demonstrating
the importance of local interaction at the postsynaptic site fo r
learning.
4.3. Frequency Dependence
The results on frequency dependence show that the dynHebb
correlation learning rule also applies to harmonics. For the i nput
frequencies around 10 Hz, the shape of the STDP curve at
± 100 ms (e.g., Figure 3A) is comparable to the curve around
the origin. It is possible for the harmonic curves to have
somewhat diﬀerent shapes due to diﬀerences in timing of the
harmonic input with the postsynaptic activity. This has alread y
been shown in both simulations as well as experimental data
(
Meredith et al., 2007; Clopath et al., 2010 , supplement) and it
has been suggested that resonance may have a functional role in
neuronal communication (Izhikevich et al., 2003). The oscillatory
control of STDP in mushroom bodies in the locust may well
be a fundamental facet of neuronal network function in many
species (
Kwag and Paulsen, 2009 ). Additionally, the importance
of harmonics in STDP is relevant to the reported variability o f
STDP learning rules whose synaptic location on the dendrite
modiﬁes the STDP curve (
Letzkus et al., 2006; Froemke et al.,
2010).
The existence of heterosynaptic plasticity has been shown
in various experiments ( Morrison et al., 2007; Abraham, 2008 ).
In particular, the change in one synapse appears to prevent
a corresponding change in other synapses (
Abraham, 2008 )
and depends on conditioning frequencies ( Wang and Wagner,
1999), which cause a signiﬁcant shift of the STDP window in
heterosynaptic plasticity. This is comparable to the apparent shift
in the STDP window in the model of two competing synapses
where the activity of one synapse prevents the second synapse
to become potentiated at the same timings and the diﬀerence
in input frequency causes a temporal shift of the STDP window
(
Verhoog et al., 2013).
Additionally, the dendritic organization of cortical input in
vivo has been shown to be organized locally which allows
the integration of spatially distributed input ( Jia et al., 2010 ).
The dynHebb model demonstrates that local interactions of
competing synapses can readily result in this type of integrati on
by combining temporal information from spatially separate
synapses.
4.4. Action Potentials
The frequency and relative timing dependent nature of the
contribution of the action potential to STDP has been shown
to occur widely (
Sjöström et al., 2008 ). A typical example is
the malleability of the CA1-CA3 synapse, as has been shown by
Wittenberg and Wang (2006) (Figure 4C) . They demonstrated
that with increased timing diﬀerences of the BAP other than
1 ms, varying amounts of plasticity can be shown, including
multiple LTD windows. Without the quantitative data, we can
only compare qualitatively these experimental results, to a
simulation of the single compartment model with two synapses
and an action potential ( Figure 4D), which is the provided
interpretation of the experiment (
Wittenberg and Wang, 2006 ).
They result in a STDP curve with a single time shifted LTP
window with two LTD windows and two additional resonance
peaks. It was produced with one synapse stimulated at 5 Hz, one
synapse stimulated at 4.9 HZ (204 ms) and an action potential
at 4.78 Hz (209.1 ms). It may be concluded that the interactio n
of the diﬀerent sources of activity can readily result in diﬀer ent
STDP curves where local synaptic properties determine the exac t
shape of the curve in combination with the timing diﬀerences of
those sources at the synapse.
These results illustrate the need for synapses to receive globa l
input from the neuron itself to scale the synaptic input and to
receive input from other synapses but not to be overwhelmed
by the total postsynaptic activity. Interaction between syna pses
via the postsynaptic activity generated by other synapses and
action potentials permits a wide range of possible behaviors ofthe
STDP learning curve. Using local synaptic rules which integr ate
the information from other sources ensures stability of bot h the
neuron and the network (
Marder and Goaillard, 2006; Sjöström
et al., 2008).
4.5. Inhibition
The clear eﬀect of the interaction of the synaptic inhibition w ith
the STDP learning rule is that the associated excitatory inpu t
in the synapse should be weakened, rather than strengthened,
whenever the inhibitory input occurs after the excitatory in put.
Additionally, the synapse should be strengthened whenever
the inhibitory input precedes the excitatory input. Synaptic
inhibition, therefore, not only controls the activity leve l of the
neuron, but also directs the type of learning of nearby excita tory
synapses in the target neuron. Experimental results of STDP in
the striatum demonstrate the existence of a switch from anti-
Hebbian to Hebbian type STDP learning curves in the presence
of GABA-ergic blockers (
Fino et al., 2005, 2009, 2010; Pawlak and
Kerr, 2008). This ﬁnding has been suggested to be a more generic
property of neuronal networks than previously has been assumed
and may readily explain the function of inhibition in synaptic
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 15 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
integration and spike timing found in CA1 ( Lamsa et al., 2010 ).
Furthermore, synaptic pruning due to repetitive LTD induction
found in rat hippocampal neurons (
Shinoda et al., 2010 ) could
well be explained by this dynamic role of inhibition on alread y
existing synaptic connectivity.
4.6. Activity during Development
We suggest that the functional role of the changing EPSPs is
related to the relative unreliability of input in the young ne uron.
The young network has lower discerning resolution but has better
reliability in terms of the correct response due to spike timin g.
The younger neuron can still be trained even with a high level
of input noise. In the mature neuron, the more narrow EPSPs
result in STDP learning with higher resolution because of th e
increased reliability of the input due to the training of the e ntire
network. This mechanism could be seen as a reliable biologica l
mechanism for annealing the network into stable and functio nal
networks with high resolution. A similar phenomenon has been
observed in dissociated cortex cultures, where wide bursti ng
proﬁles are predominant in the early stages of growth, and afte r
3–4 weeks show a short onset, resulting in increased timing
precision of the synchronization between neurons (
van Pelt et al.,
2004).
4.7. Local Dendritic Competition
The dynHebb synaptic model can be employed to investigate
interactions between locally competing synapses at the dendr ite.
This type of localized competition is most important for
local computation at the dendritic level (
olde Scheper, 2008 ).
Furthermore, this concept is essential to maintain stabilit y of
the network, preventing synapses from “exploding” due to large
increases in synaptic weight, a common issue in modeling
using the classic STDP function. Using a simulation of three
interacting synapses we show the functional dynamic response
over time of competing synapses with and without inhibition at
diﬀerent distances from each other. The resulting postsynapti c
activity is not the sum of all inputs, as the cross-correlation
of each synapse interacts with the other synapses at the local
level. If all synapses are excitatory, this could readily resu lt in
inherently unstable dynamic states, when each of the synapse s
increases the synaptic strength of the other synapses. In the
dynHebb model, this is not possible, because synapses without
input do not change their state, and they are limited in the
sense that for even higher synaptic weight, the local state of the
synapse needs to match the local dendritic activity, which ha s
naturally a maximum. If we also consider the possibility of adding
inhibitory synapses to this concept, the number of possible
interactions increase even further. When an inhibitory syn apse
reduces the local dendritic activity, the excitatory synaps es will
gain greater sensitivity to changes. Extending the number o f
synapses, the distances between the synapses and the type of
synaptic activity will make this system show more complex and
interesting behaviors. In particular, the ability to match c ross-
correlation patterns for diﬀerent inputs and local activities of
diﬀerent parts of the dendritic tree. The dynHebb model ensure s
that the synapses remain functional, are attuned to their inpu t,
and will not degrade over time, unless negative input correlat ion
occurs.
4.8. Model Comparison
Although the aim of this paper is not to perform an extensive
comparison of the various models of STDP , but rather to
emphasize the importance of dynamic models, it would be
appropriate to mention some cardinal diﬀerences between the
dynHebb model and selected popular models. Firstly, models like
Shouval et al. (2002) and Graupner and Brunel (2012) emphasize
speciﬁc biophysical properties to the manifestation of STDP , such
as NMDA receptors and intracellular Calcium signaling. Neithe r
paper suggests that these are the sole mechanisms involved in
a complex biochemical process, yet by deliberately choosing a
single aspect, the impression is given that the other biophysica l
interactions are of secondary importance. By creating a mode l
that focusses on the dynamic behavior, the dynHebb model
avoids this issue, but still allows expansion of the model with
each of those biophysical aspects in subsequent work. Secondl y,
the stability of each of these two models is not ensured when
synapses interact, or when there is a large amount of current
injected, e.g., due to coinciding activities of nearby syna pses.
Both models only regard single model synapses, with speciﬁc
parameter choices to ensure stability. The dynHebb model is
inherently robust, self-limiting, and allows complex synapti c
interactions. Lastly, both models are based on non-autonomo us
equations (i.e., dependent on explicit time), which requires
spike selecting and ﬁxed responses of the synapse based on the
chosen time parameter constants. The dynHebb model causes the
emergence of STDP from the timings of the activity functions,
where diﬀerent activity functions cause diﬀerent time respons es.
4.9. Experimental Implications
Speciﬁc STDP learning rules are often experimentally determined
by experimental protocols (
Testa-Silva et al., 2010 ). These
rules would otherwise not be readily visible in the resultin g
experimentally determined synaptic behavior. This is indeed
a sensible requirement when dealing with a noisy, inexact
measurement of a relatively small change in the excitatory
postsynaptic potential. However, the concept relies on several
premises for which there is only scant evidence. Firstly, the
extracellular or presynaptic neural stimulation activates an
unknown number of synapses whose combined postsynaptic
response is assumed to be negligible at the level of the synapse
under investigation. As can be seen from our model results, th is
is certainly not the case, nor is this desirable for each indi vidual
synapse. Secondly, the exact timings in experiments are still
tentative given the relatively large margin of error needed to
ensure proper response timings, that are not obscured by the
experimental protocol itself. Lastly, results are obtained fr om
many diﬀerent synapses, often in diﬀerent but identical type
of neurons with no consideration for the huge variability th at
must exist for the local dynamics due to diﬀerent morphologies
and other local properties of the neuron. It is to the skill and
persistence of the experimenter that we must attribute that results
are found at all, despite the large number of obstacles that nee d
to be overcome.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 16 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
Obviously, there is no ready made solution that can easily
simplify the process, however by assuming a methodology
that is more in line with the natural process of synaptic
transmission, rather than adhering to a steady-state approac h,
the likelihood of determining signiﬁcant results can be gre atly
increased. The deterministic nature of the dynHebb rule all ows
the emergence of the small relative contribution of individ ual
learning events without the stochastic background noise th at
can obscure the event in probability based learning rules. In
our simulations, we employ a continuous stimulation protocol
that does not require instantaneous updates and highlights t he
dynamic nature of STDP learning. We can replicate a standard
experimental protocol by activating a speciﬁc model synapse
directly and generate a postsynaptic action potential at the so ma.
Or, we can activate nearby model synapses to demonstrate the
dynamic interaction at the synaptic level of the postsynaptic
activity induced by diﬀerent synapses. This will allow further
development of the STDP model using experimental results to
guide the speciﬁc interpretation of the Hebbian learning.
5. CONCLUSION
The Dynamic Hebbian Learning model demonstrates that only
local autonomous non-linear interactions govern the STDP
learning rules. The dynamic interactions at the postsynaptic site
modify the default Hebbian STDP curve into many possible
experimentally observed forms. More detailed modeling of the
constraints that determine the shape of the learning curve,
such as local dendritic morphology, networks of neurons,
current ﬂow within the dendrite and second messenger
signaling, will provide a systematic understanding of the ST DP
learning mechanism. Awareness of the dynamic cross-correlation
principle will greatly facilitate the interpretation of data a nd
may lead to the discovery of novel mechanisms involved in
tuning the STDP curve of individual synapses within the
network.
Furthermore, it has been shown that the self-organizing
nature of stable cortical networks itself requires ﬂuctuat ing
synaptic strengths which results in a purely additive STDP
mechanism. This is based on observed patterns of synaptic
strength in the dynamics of dendritic spines of the rat
hippocampus (
Zheng et al., 2013 ). The robustness imposed
by the dynHebb rule allowing additive dynamics to form the
stable STDP learning which will ensure a stable network due t o
ﬂuctuations in the local synaptic dynamics supports this conce pt
completely.
6. FUTURE WORK
Firstly, using the dynHebb rule, further work in dendritic
computation and interaction between neurons has become
possible. We are particularly interested in the robustness of
developing neural networks (
van Pelt et al., 2005 ). The stability
introduced in the network due to the causal learning rule
ensures that developing networks remain stable, even in the
presence of large amount of input and network noise. We will
show that for small networks, due to computational limitatio ns,
the dynHebb model will result in stable networks that have
similar properties as observed experimentally, and are capable
of self-calibration of their relative weights when connect ivity
changes over time. Secondly, the dynHebb model is purely
phenomenological, which then begs the question how the
mechanism of Hebbian learning is functionally employed in
the biophysical synapse. The model does not preclude the
elaboration of speciﬁc mechanisms, such as calcium signalin g,
or other relevant mechanisms. Indeed, one proposal would
be to replace the dendritic cross-correlation term with one
based on calcium waves, or to replace the depressing cross-
correlation term with biophysical interpretations. Lastly, it
would be extremely interesting to test the predictions and
results of the dynHebb model in an experimental setup. We
consider the continuous stimulation method to be very useful
for the experimenter to provide a more robust framework to
determine STDP. At the moment, we are exploring diﬀerent
avenues that would allow us to do this in the near future.
By publicly demonstrating the capabilities of the dynHebb
model, we envision an invigorating discussion on the relativ e
merits of models vs. experimental results, ensuring that
potential viewpoints from both experimental and theoretical
understanding are valued to further our understanding of ne ural
computation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Model design, implementation and analysis were performed
by TVoS. RM, and AvO were involved in the design and
interpretation of the results. All authors were involved in
improving the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by European Union BIO-ICT project
Self-Constructing Computing Systems (SECO) (216593).
REFERENCES
Abbott, L. F., and Rohrkemper, R. (2007). A simple growth model
constructs critical avalanche networks Progr. Brain Res. 165, 13–19.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)65002-4
Abraham, W. C. (2008). Metaplasticity: tuning synapses and
networks for plasticity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9:387. doi: 10.1038/nr
n2356
Bi, G. Q., and Poo, M. M. (1998). Synaptic modiﬁcations in culture d hippocampal
neurons: Dependence on spike timing, synaptic strength, and postsy naptic cell
type. J. Neurosci. 18, 10464–10472.
Bi, G. Q. (2002). Spatiotemporal speciﬁcity of synaptic plasticity: cellular rules and
mechanisms. Biol. Cybern. 87, 319–332. doi: 10.1007/s00422-002-0349-7
Buchanan, K. A., and Mellor, J. R. (2010). The activity requiremen ts for spike
timing-dependent plasticity in the hippocampus. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2:11.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00011
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 17 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
Clopath, C., Büsing, L., V asilaki, E., and Gerstner, W. (2010). Connectivity reﬂects
coding: a model of voltage-based STDP with homeostasis Supplement. Nat.
Neurosci. 13, 344–352. doi: 10.1038/nn.2479
Feldman, D. E. (2000). Timing-based LTP and LTD at vertical inputs
to layer II/III pyramidal cells in rat barrel cortex. Neuron 27, 45–56.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00008-8
Fino, E., Glowinski, J., and Venance, L. (2005). Bidirectiona l activity-
dependent plasticity at corticostriatal synapses. J. Neurosci. 25:11279.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4476-05.2005
Fino, E., Paille, V., Deniau, J. M., and Venance, L. (2009). Asymmetric spike-timing
dependent plasticity of striatal nitric oxide-synthase interneurons. Neuroscience
160, 744–754. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.015
Fino, E., Venance, L., and Neuroscience, S. (2010). Spike-timi ng
dependent plasticity in the striatum. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2:6.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00006
Froemke, R. C., Letzkus, J. J., Kampa, B. M., Hang, G. B., Stuart, G. J.,
and Surmeier, D. J. (2010). Dendritic synapse location and neocort ical
spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2, 1–14.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00029
Gerkin, R. C., Lau, P. M., and Nauen, D. (2007). Modular competiti on driven by
NMDA receptor subtypes in spike-timing-dependent plasticity.J. Neurophysiol.
97, 2851–2862. doi: 10.1152/jn.00860.2006
Govindarajan, A., Israely, I., Huang, S. Y., and Tonegawa, S. (20 11). The
dendritic branch is the preferred integrative unit for protein synthe sis-
dependent LTP. Neuron 69, 132–146. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.
12.008
Graupner, M., and Brunel, N. (2012). Calcium-based plasticity model e xplains
sensitivity of synaptic changes to spike pattern, rate, and dendri tic location.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 3991–3996. doi: 10.1073/pnas.11093
59109
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. New York, NY: Wiley.
Hindmarsh, J. L., and Rose, R. M. (1984). A model of neuronal burst ing using
three coupled ﬁrst order diﬀerential equations. Proc R Soc Lond. 221, 87–102.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1984.0024
Izhikevich, E. M., Desai, N. S., Walcott, E. C., and Hoppensteadt , F. C.
(2003). Bursts as a unit of neural information: selective communic ation
via resonance. Trends Neurosci. 26, 161–167. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(03)
00034-1
Izhikevich, E. M. (2004). Which model to use for cortical spikin g neurons? IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. 15, 1063–1070. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2004.832719
Jia, H., Rochefort, N. L., Chen, X., and Konnerth, A. (2010). Dend ritic
organization of sensory input to cortical neurons in vivo. Nature 464, 307–1312.
doi: 10.1038/nature08947
Kampa, B. M., Letzkus, J. J., and Stuart, G. J. (2007). Dendritic me chanisms
controlling spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity. Trends Neurosci. 30,
456–463. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2007.06.010
Koch, C. (1999). Biophysics of Computation: Information Processing in Single
Neurons. Computational Neuroscience series. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Kwag, J., and Paulsen, O. (2009). The timing of external input con trols the sign
of plasticity at local synapses. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1219–1221. doi: 10.1038/n
n.2388
Lamsa, K. P., Kullmann, D. M., and Woodin, M. (2010). Spike-timing
dependent plasticity in inhibitory circuits. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2:8.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00008
Larkum, M. E., Nevian, T., Sandler, M., Polsky, A., Schiller, J. (20 09).
Synaptic integration in tuft dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal neurons:
a new unifying principle. Science 325, 756–760. doi: 10.1126/science.11
71958
Letzkus, J. J., Kampa, B. M., and Stuart, G. J. (2006). Learning rule s for spike
timing-dependent plasticity depend on dendritic synapse location. J. Neurosci.
26, 10420–10429. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2650-06.2006
Lisman, J., and Spruston, N. (2010). Questions about STDP as a
General Model of Synaptic Plasticity. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2:140.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00140
Makino, H., and Malinow, R. (2011). Compartmentalized versus Global Synaptic
Plasticity on Dendrites Controlled by Experience. Neuron 72, 1001–1011.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.036
Marder, E., and Goaillard, J. M. (2006). V ariability, compensation a nd
homeostasis in neuron and network function. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 563–574.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1949
Meredith, R. M., Holmgren, C. D., Weidum, M., Burnashev, N., and Mansvelder, H.
D. (2007). Increased threshold for spike-timing-dependent plastic ity is caused
by unreliable calcium signaling in mice lacking fragile X gene FMR1. Neuron
54, 627–638. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.04.028
Morrison, A., Aertsen, A., and Diesmann, M. (2007). Spike-timing- dependent
plasticity in balanced random networks. Neural Comput. 19, 1437–1467.
doi: 10.1162/neco.2007.19.6.1437
Morrison, A., Diesmann, M., and Gerstner, W. (2008). Phenomenolo gical models
of synaptic plasticity based on spike timing. Biol. Cybern. 98, 459–478.
doi: 10.1007/s00422-008-0233-1
olde Scheper, T. V., Mansvelder, H. D, and van Ooyen, A. (2012). Sh ort
term depression unmasks the ghost frequency. PLoS ONE 7:e50189.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050189
olde Scheper, T. (2008). “The Spike Generation Processes: A Case f or Low Level
Computation, ” inMathematical Modeling of Biological Systems. Vol. 2, eds A.
Deutsch, R. B. de la Parra, R. J. de Boer, O. Diekmann, P. Jagers, E. Kisdi, M.
Kretzschmar, P. Lansky, and H. Metz (Boston, MA: Birkhauser), 265 –276.
Pawlak, V., and Kerr, J. N. (2008). Dopamine receptor activation is required for
corticostriatal spike-timing-dependent plasticity. J. Neurosci. 28, 2435–2446.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4402-07.2008
Quinlan, E. M., Olstein, D. H, and Bear, M. F. (1999). Bidirection al,
experience-dependent regulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor su bunit
composition in the rat visual cortex during postnatal development.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 12876–12880. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.22.
12876
Shinoda, Y., Tanaka, T., Tominaga-Yoshino, K., Ogura, A. (201 0). Persistent
synapse loss induced by repetitive LTD in developing rat hippocampal neurons.
PLoS ONE 5:e10390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010390
Shouval, H. Z., Bear, M. F., and Cooper, L. N. (2002). A uniﬁed mode l
of NMDA receptor-dependent bidirectional synaptic plasticity. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 10831–10836. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1523
43099
Shouval, H. Z., Wang, S. S.-H., and Wittenberg, G. M. (2010). Spik e timing
dependent plasticity: a consequence of more fundamental learning rules. Front.
Comput. Neurosci. 4:19. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2010.00019
Sjöström, P. J., Turrigiano, G. G., and Nelson, S. B. (2001). Rate, timing,
and cooperativity jointly determine cortical synaptic plasticity. Neuron 32,
1149–1164. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00542-6
Sjöström, P. J., Rancz, E. A., Roth, A., and Häusser, M. (2008).
Dendritic excitability and synaptic plasticity. Physiol. Rev. 88, 769–840.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00016.2007
Song, S., Miller, K. D., and Abbott, L. F. (2000). Competitive Hebb ian learning
through spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 919–926.
doi: 10.1038/78829
Testa-Silva, G., Verhoog, M. B., Goriounova, N. B., Loebel, A., Hjorth, J.,
Baayen, J. C., et al. (2010). Human synapses show a wide temporal
window for spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 2:12.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00012
Tzounopoulos, T , Kim, Y., Oertel, D., and Trussell, L. O. (2004). Cell-speciﬁc , spike
timing dependent plasticities in the dorsal cochlear nucleus. Nat. Neurosci. 7,
719–725. doi: 10.1038/nn1272
van Pelt, J., Wolters, P. S., Corner, M. A., Rutten, W. L. C., and R amakers, G.
J. A. (2004). Long-term characterization of ﬁring dynamics of spon taneous
bursts in cultured neural networks. IEEE Trans. Bio Med. Eng. 51, 2051–2062.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2004.827936
van Pelt, J., V ajda, I., Wolters, P. S., Corner, M. A., and Ramaker s, G. J. (2005).
Dynamics and plasticity in developing neuronal networks in vitro. Progr. Brain
Res. 147, 173–188. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(04)47013-7
Verhoog, M. B., Goriounova, N. A., Obermayer, J., Stroeder, J., H jorth, J. J.,
Testa-Silva, G., et al. (2013). Mechanisms underlying the rules for associative
plasticity at adult human neocortical synapses. J. Neurosci. 33, 17197–17208.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3158-13.2013
Wang, H., and Wagner, J. J. (1999). Priming-induced shift in syn aptic
plasticity in the rat hippocampus. J. Neurophysiol. 82, 2024–2028.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1999.82.4.2024
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119


--- Page 18 ---
olde Scheper et al. Dynamic Hebbian Cross-Correlation Resolves STDP
Wittenberg, G. M., and Wang, S. S. H. (2006). Malleability of spike -timing-
dependent plasticity at the CA3-CA1 synapse. J. Neurosci. 26, 6610–6617.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5388-05.2006
Zhang, J. C., Lau, P. M., and Bi, G. Q. (2009). Gain in sensitiv ity
and loss in temporal contrast of STDP by dopaminergic modulation at
hippocampal synapses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13028–13033.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900546106
Zheng, P., Dimitrakakis, C., and Triesch, J. (2013). Network self -Organization
explains the statistics and dynamics of synaptic connection stre ngths
in cortex. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1002848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.10
02848
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 olde Scheper, Meredith, Mansvelder, van Pelt an d van Ooyen.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms o f the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or repro duction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor a re credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordanc e with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitte d which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 January 2018 | Volume 11 | Article 119
