--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2021.616748
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748
Edited by:
Yoram Burak,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Reviewed by:
Mirko Klukas,
Numenta Inc., United States
Yuanyuan Mi,
Chongqing University, China
*Correspondence:
Louis Kang
louis.kang@riken.jp
Received: 13 October 2020
Accepted: 11 March 2021
Published: 08 April 2021
Citation:
Kang L, Xu B and Morozov D (2021)
Evaluating State Space Discovery by
Persistent Cohomology in the Spatial
Representation System.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 15:616748.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2021.616748
Evaluating State Space Discovery by
Persistent Cohomology in the Spatial
Representation System
Louis Kang 1,2*, Boyan Xu 3 and Dmitriy Morozov 4
1 Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, University o f California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States, 2 Neural
Circuits and Computations Unit, RIKEN Center for Brain Scien ce, Wako, Japan, 3 Department of Mathematics, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States, 4 Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley Natio nal Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA, United States
Persistent cohomology is a powerful technique for discover ing topological structure
in data. Strategies for its use in neuroscience are still und ergoing development. We
comprehensively and rigorously assess its performance in s imulated neural recordings
of the brain’ s spatial representation system. Grid, head di rection, and conjunctive
cell populations each span low-dimensional topological st ructures embedded in
high-dimensional neural activity space. We evaluate the ab ility for persistent cohomology
to discover these structures for different dataset dimensi ons, variations in spatial tuning,
and forms of noise. We quantify its ability to decode simulat ed animal trajectories
contained within these topological structures. We also ide ntify regimes under which
mixtures of populations form product topologies that can be detected. Our results
reveal how dataset parameters affect the success of topolog ical discovery and suggest
principles for applying persistent cohomology, as well as p ersistent homology, to
experimental neural recordings.
Keywords: topological data analysis, neural manifold, dimens ionality reduction, neural decoding, spatial
representation, grid cells, medial entorhinal cortex
1. INTRODUCTION
The enormous number of neurons that constitute brain circui ts must coordinate their ﬁring
to operate eﬀectively. This organization often constrains neu ral activity to low-dimensional
manifolds, which are embedded in the high-dimensional phase s pace of all possible activity
patterns (
Gao and Ganguli, 2015; Gallego et al., 2017; Jazayeri and Afr az, 2017; Saxena and
Cunningham, 2019 ). In certain cases, these low-dimensional manifolds exhib it non-trivial
topological structure ( Curto, 2016 ). This structure may be imposed externally by inputs that are
periodic in nature, such as the orientation of a visual stimulus or the direction of an animal’s head. It
may also be generated internally by the network itself; for example, the grid cell network constructs
periodic representations of physical space which outperform non -periodic representations in
several ways ( Fiete et al., 2008; Sreenivasan and Fiete, 2011; Mathis et al ., 2012; Stemmler et al.,
2015; Wei et al., 2015; Sanzeni et al., 2016; Mosheiﬀ et al., 20 17). In either case, detecting and
interpreting topological structure in neural data would provi de insight into how the brain encodes
information and performs computations.


--- Page 2 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
One promising method for discovering topological features in
data is persistent cohomology ( Edelsbrunner and Harer, 2010;
de Silva et al., 2011; Edelsbrunner and Morozov, 2017 ). By
tracking how the shape of the data changes as we examine
it across diﬀerent scales—thickening data points by growing
balls around them—persistent cohomology detects prominent
topological features in the data, such as loops and voids. This
knowledge helps to identify the low-dimensional manifolds
sampled by the data, and in particular to distinguish between
tori of diﬀerent intrinsic dimensions. Furthermore, it enab les
parametrization of the data and navigation of the underlying
manifolds.
FIGURE 1 | Pipeline for simulations and data analysis. (A) We generate activities for multiple neural populations alo ng an experimentally recorded rat trajectory. For
each population, we plot activity maps as a function of posit ion (left) and direction (right) for one example neuron. (B) Then we choose neurons for topological analysis
and form a high-dimensional vector of their ﬁring rates at eac h timepoint along the trajectory. For computational tracta bility, we eliminate the most redundant points
using a geometric subsampling algorithm. (C) We compute persistent cohomology on these subsampled timep oints to identify low-dimensional topological structure.
We characterize how persistent cohomology can discover
topological structure in neural data through simulations of
the brain’s spatial representation system. This system conta ins
several neural populations whose activity exhibits non-trivia l
topology, which we term periodic neural populations (Figure 1A).
Grid cells ﬁre when an animal reaches certain locations in it s
environment that form a triangular lattice in space (
Hafting
et al., 2005 ). In each animal, grid cells are partitioned into 4–
10 modules ( Stensola et al., 2012 ). Within each module, grid
cells share the same scale and orientation but their lattice s have
diﬀerent spatial oﬀsets. Modules appear to increase in scale by
a constant ratio and exhibit diﬀerences in orientation (
Stensola
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 3 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
et al., 2012; Krupic et al., 2015 ). Head direction cells ﬁre when
an animal’s head is oriented in a certain direction relative to its
environment (Taube et al., 1990). They respond independently of
the animal’s position. Finally, conjunctive grid × head direction
cells respond when an animal is located at the vertices of a
triangular lattice and is oriented in a certain direction (
Sargolini
et al., 2006 ). Like grid cells, conjunctive cells are also believed to
be partitioned into modules.
We also consider neural populations whose activity exhibits
trivial topology, which we will term non-periodic neural
populations (Figure 1A). Place and non-grid spatial cells are part
of the spatial representation system, and they ﬁre in one or
multiple regions of the environment (
O’Keefe and Dostrovsky,
1971; Diehl et al., 2017; Hardcastle et al., 2017 ). These two
populations are found in diﬀerent brain regions, and the
former tend to have sharper spatial selectivity compared to the
latter. Finally, we simulate neurons with irregular activi ty that
exhibits no spatial tuning. We imagine these random cells may
be responding to non-spatial stimuli or representing internal
brain states.
Persistent cohomology, as well as the closely related technique
persistent homology, has recently been applied to experimental
neural recordings within the spatial representation system.
It was used to discover topological structure (
Chaudhuri
et al., 2019; Rybakken et al., 2019 ) and decode behavioral
variables ( Rybakken et al., 2019 ) from head direction cells. It
was also used to do the same for grid cell recordings ( Gardner
et al., 2021 ), and researchers have demonstrated topological
discovery in simulated grid cell data ( Chaudhuri et al., 2019 ).
These works have improved our understanding of the large-
scale organization of spatial representation circuits throu gh
persistent cohomology.
In contrast to the research described above, we aim
to comprehensively explore the capabilities of persistent
cohomology for simulated datasets. With complete control ove r
the data, we can identify features that improve topological
discovery and features that disrupt it. We can also freely
generate datasets with varied quantities and proportions of
diﬀerent neural populations. A greater number of neurons
embeds underlying activity manifolds in higher dimensions ,
which can strengthen the signal. However, experimental
limitations impose bounds to this number. Our simulations
allow us to evaluate persistent cohomology in regimes curren tly
accessible by experiments, as well as in regimes that may soon
become experimentally tractable due to advances in recordin g
technology (
Jun et al., 2017).
2. RESUL TS
2.1. Overview of Methods and Persistence
Diagrams
In this work, we simulate neural populations within the
spatial representation system, prepare the simulated data for
topological analysis, and compute persistent cohomology to
discover topological structure within the data ( Figure 1). We
will now brieﬂy describe each of these three stages; a complete
explanation is provided in the Methods section.
To generate neural recordings, we deﬁne tuning curves as a
function of position and direction. For each grid module, we
ﬁrst create a triangular lattice in space. Each grid cell has pea ks
in its positional tuning curves at a randomly chosen oﬀset fro m
each lattice point. Its directional tuning curve is uniform. Head
direction cells have peaks in their directional tuning curve s at
a randomly chosen angle and have uniform positional tuning
curves. Conjunctive cells have positional tuning curves like grid
cells and directional tuning curves like head direction cell s. We
describe tuning curves for the non-periodic neural population s
in the Methods section.
These tuning curves are applied to an experimentally extracted
trajectory of a rat exploring its circular enclosure, producin g
an activity, or ﬁring rate, for each neuron at 0.2 s intervals.
This simulates the simultaneous recording of a large number
of neurons from the medial entorhinal cortex and the binning
of their spikes into ﬁring rates. The time series spans 1,000
s, or 5,000 data points. Figure 1A shows examples of these
time series data mapped back onto spatial coordinates. Next,
we choose a subset of these neurons and pre-process it for
topological data analysis (Figure 1B). We form a vector of neural
activities at each timepoint, which produces a point cloud in
high-dimensional phase space. We wish to subsample it for
computation tractability while maintaining as much evidence
of topological structure embedded within it. To do so, we use
a geometric subsampling algorithm that roughly eliminates th e
most redundant points, reducing the 5,000 timepoints down
to 1,000.
Finally, we apply persistent cohomology to this subsampled
point cloud (Figure 1C). We describe this technique colloquially
here, in terms of its dual, persistent homology. Both produce the
same persistence diagrams, but we use cohomology throughout
the paper both because it is faster to compute and because it
allows us to parameterize the data. See the Methods section
for a precise description. From the point cloud, we form a
Vietoris–Rips ﬁltration, which is a nested sequence of simplici al
complexes. Each complex consists of all cliques in the near-
neighbor graph, which contains all edges between points at
distance at most r apart. As the threshold r increases, more
edges enter the graph, and more cliques enter the Vietoris–Rips
complex. Throughout this process, cycles (e.g., 1-dimensional
loops) appear and get ﬁlled in the complex ( Figure 2A). There
is a unique way to pair the distance thresholds at which cycles a re
born and die.
All such birth and death distances are collected into a
persistence diagram ( Figure 2B). The points farthest from the
diagonal correspond to the most persistent cycles that appear
for the longest range of distance thresholds. They recover
topological structure in the space sampled by the point cloud,
which corresponds to the processes underlying the data—in our
case, the spatial representation networks and external inputs.
Persistent (co)homology is stable: the persistent points will
remain in the diagram if we make small changes to the data,
such as selecting slightly diﬀerent timepoints or perturbing t heir
values by a small amount of noise. The points closest to the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 4 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
FIGURE 2 | Persistence diagrams for periodic neural populations. (A–C) Interpreting persistence diagrams. (A) Persistent (co)homology involves generating a ﬁltration
of a dataset in which we connect points within ever-expandin g distances. One-dimensional loops will be born and then die at various distances. (B) These values are
plotted in a persistence diagram where each point correspon ds to a single loop. The points located farthest from the diag onal are the most persistent and correspond
to signiﬁcant topological features. (C) This process can be performed for features of arbitrary dime nsion k. (D–F) Persistence diagrams for periodic neural populations
(top) and identiﬁed topological spaces (bottom). We compare the number of persistent k-(co)cycles to the k-th Betti numbers β k of different topological spaces to infer
the underlying topological structure of the dataset. (D) Grid cells from module 1 exhibit one persistent 0-cocycle, t wo persistent 1-cocycles, and one persistent
2-cocycle, which corresponds to a torus. (E) Head direction cells exhibit one persistent 0-cocycle, one persistent 1-cocycle, and no persistent 2-cocycles, which
corresponds to a circle. (F) Conjunctive cells exhibit one persistent 0-cocycle, three persistent 1-cocycles, and three persistent 2-cocycles, w hich corresponds to a
3-torus.
diagonal would appear even if the processes underlying the data
lack topological structure, and they are usually interpreted as
noise.
The process we described above keeps track of cycles of
diﬀerent dimensions ( Figure 2C). Besides loops (1-dimensional
cycles), it tracks connected components (0-dimensional
cycles), voids (2-dimensional cycles), and higher-dimens ional
topological features, which lack a colloquial name. The
number of independent k-cycles is called the k-th Betti
number and is a topological invariant of a space. We can
infer the topology of a dataset by comparing the number of
persistent k-(co)cycles to the k-th Betti numbers of conjectured
ideal spaces, such a circle or a torus. Note that for every
dataset, the 0-(co)cycle corresponding to the entire point
cloud will never die, so we consider its death distance to
be inﬁnity.
2.2. Persistent Cohomology for Periodic
Neural Populations
Each periodic neural population spans a particular topological
space. We recover these relationships when we compute
persistent cohomology of our simulated data ( Figures 2D–F).
Each grid cell is active at one location in a unit cell that
is tiled over 2D space. Grid cells within a single module
share the same unit cell but diﬀer in their active location,
so each grid module spans a torus, which is periodic
in two directions (
Curto, 2016 ). Similarly, head direction
cells span a circle and each conjunctive cell module spans
a 3-torus. The correspondence between our results and
predicted topological spaces validates the basic capabilities of
our methods.
The ability of persistent cohomology to discover topological
structure depends on the number of neurons in the dataset,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 5 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
or equivalently, the dimension of the time series embedding .
Using the grid cell population as an exemplar, we form
multiple datasets with randomly selected neurons to measure the
success rate of persistent cohomology as a function of neuron
count ( Figure 3A). To measure success, we only use the ﬁrst
cohomology group H1, which contains 1-cocycles. We deﬁne
successful discovery of the grid cell torus as a persistence diagram
with two persistent 1-cocycles, and we deﬁne what it means
to be persistent precisely using the commonly used largest-gap
heuristic. We calculate the lifetime of each cocycle, which is the
diﬀerence between its death and birth and corresponds to the
vertical distance to the diagonal of its point in the persisten ce
diagram (Figures 3A,B). We ﬁnd the largest gap in the lifetimes
and consider points above this gap to be persistent ( Figure 3B).
Figure 3C shows that reliable discovery of the torus using this
heuristic can be achieved with≈ 20 simulated, idealized grid cells.
It also shows that increasing the number of grid cells improve s
the success rate. This occurs because topological discovery relies
on having enough grid cells such that their ﬁelds provide a
suﬃciently uncorrelated coverage of the unit cell. Instead of
using data spanning the full 1,000 s-long trajectory, which
corresponds to 5,000 timepoints, we extract portions spanning
various lengths. Discovery of the torus requires enough sam ples
of its manifold structure, which is achieved in this case sta rting at
100 s (Figure 3D). Thus, persistent cohomology generally thrives
in the large-dataset limit with long neural recordings of ma ny
neurons.
Persistent cohomology can succeed for mixed signals.
Separation of raw electrode recordings into single-neuron s pike
trains may not always be possible or desired. To address this
scenario, we form multi-neuron units by linearly combining
time series of neural activity across diﬀerent grid cells.
The mixing coeﬃcients are drawn from a uniform random
distribution and then normalized. Example activity maps of
these multi-neuron units as a function of position are shown
in Figure 4A. The combination of many neurons destroys the
classic responses exhibited by individual grid cells. Yet, mul ti-
neuron units retain topological information associated wit h the
grid module that can be recovered by persistent cohomology
(Figure 4B). The success rate for discovering toroidal topology
is remarkably independent of the number of grid cells in
each unit. Successful recovery from randomly mixed signals is
not entirely unexpected. The preservation of distances under
random projections has been studied extensively in statistic s
[cf. Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma (
Johnson and Lindenstrauss,
1984)].
Persistent cohomology can also succeed in the presence of
spiking noise. To simulate such noise, we use our generated
activity as a raw ﬁring rate that drives a Poisson-like rando m
process (see Methods). We construct this process to have
diﬀerent Fano factors, which is the variance in the random
process for a given ﬁring rate divided by the ﬁring rate.
When the Fano factor is 1, the random process is Poisson.
Figure 4C shows activity time series for two grid cells that
FIGURE 3 | Success rates of persistent cohomology for grid cells. (A) As the number of grid cells increases, two persistent 1-cocy cles emerge. T o deﬁne persistence
precisely, we consider the persistence lifetime of each 1-c ocycle, which is the difference between its birth and death d istances (length of the magenta line). (B) We
identify the largest gap in persistence lifetimes and deﬁne p ersistent cocycles as those above this gap. (C) Since a grid module has a toroidal topology for which
β 1= 2, we deﬁne success as a persistence diagram with two persiste nt 1-cocycles. We determine success rates by generating 100 replicate datasets. Success rate
increases with the number of grid cells. (D) Success rates for different durations extracted from the fu ll simulated recording. T opological discovery beneﬁts from longer
recording durations and more neurons.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 6 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
FIGURE 4 | Robustness of persistent cohomology for grid cells. (A,B) Linearly combining activities from multiple neurons befor e applying persistent cohomology. (A)
Example positional activity maps for multi-neuron units. (B) The success rate is largely independent of the number of neur ons per multi-neuron unit. (C,D) Introducing
Poisson-like spiking noise with different amounts of varia bility, as measured by the Fano factor. (C) For each Fano factor, time series for two grid cells with very similar
offsets (left) and positional activity map of the ﬁrst (right ). (D) Persistent cohomology requires more neurons to achieve suc cess with higher Fano factors. (E–K)
Success rates across many different grid cell variables wit h insets depicting example values. See Methods section 4.1. 7 for a complete description of each variable.
(E) Introducing a square enclosure at various lattice orientati ons. (F) Changing the lattice scale factor, which is grid scale divid ed by enclosure diameter. (G) Changing
the ﬁeld size factor, which is grid ﬁeld diameter divided by gri d scale. (H) Stretching triangular grids to various aspect ratios. (I) Jittering the position of each ﬁeld by
random vectors multiplied by grid scale. (J) Introducing variability in shape and overall activity acros s grid ﬁelds. (K) Introducing variability in lattices across grid cells.
have very similar tuning curves and thus very similar raw
ﬁring rates, which can be seen in the noise-free condition
(top left). Higher Fano factors lead to more variability bot h
across time for each neuron and across neurons. Persistent
cohomology can still recover the toroidal topology of the gri d
module, though more neurons are required for higher Fano
factors ( Figure 4D). In the mammalian cortex, Fano factors lie
around∼ 0.5–1.5 (
Shadlen and Newsome, 1998; Burak and Fiete,
2009). Applying this regime to our simulations implies that
≈ 80 grid cells are required for reliable topological discover y,
but we acknowledge the large diﬀerences between simulated
and experimental data which may substantially increase this
number.
We further test the robustness of persistent cohomology
across wide ranges of properties associated with grid cells
(Figures 4E–K). Using a trajectory extracted from an animal
exploring a square enclosure does not meaningfully change th e
success rate (Figure 4E). Grid modules have been shown to favor
a lattice orientation of 7.5◦ relative to square enclosures (
Stensola
et al., 2015 ), but this orientation does not aﬀect topological
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 7 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
discovery. Similarly, persistent cohomology is not strongl y
aﬀected by the aspect ratio of the triangular grid ( Figure 4H).
Changes in grid dimensions can have a stronger eﬀect. Persist ent
cohomology fails when the grid scale exceeds the size of the
enclosure, which makes sense because the grid module unit cel l
can no longer be fully sampled ( Figure 4F). When the scale does
not change but the size of each ﬁring ﬁeld is decreased, more
grid cells are required to produce toroidal structure in the d ata
since each neuron covers less of the unit cell ( Figure 4G). Under
various forms of variability within grid cell tuning curves , the
success of persistent cohomology can be maintained if more
neurons are recorded, up to a degree ( Figures 4I–K). Beyond
critical values, however, variability appears to catastrophi cally
disrupt topological discovery in a way that cannot be overcome
with more grid cells. The extra heterogeneity conveyed by an
additional neuron overwhelms its contribution to topologic al
structure. Thus, an assessment of tuning curve variability may be
a crucial component in the application of persistent cohomology
to neural data.
2.3. Animal Trajectory Decoded Through
T opological Coordinates
Persistent cohomology can not only discover topological
structure in neural data, but it can also decode information
embedded within this structure. Recall that a grid module deﬁnes
a triangular lattice in physical space with ﬁelds of each grid ce ll
oﬀset in the rhombic unit cell ( Figure 5A). The periodicities
of this unit cell along the two lattice vectors are detected b y
persistent cohomology as two persistent 1-cocycles belongin g
to a torus (as seen in Figure 2D). We can assign circular
coordinates (
de Silva et al., 2011; Perea, 2018) for these 1-cocycles
(Figure 5B). These coordinates describe the topological space of
the torus and should map back onto the rhombic unit cell that
tiles physical space. To explore this relationship, we project th e
entire time series of neural activities onto these coordina tes. For
each neuron, we ﬁnd the data points for which that neuron is the
most active within the population. These points are clustered and
deﬁne ﬁring ﬁelds in topological space ( Figure 5C). The center
of masses of these clusters are used to evaluate distances be tween
grid cells; these topological distances are highly correlat ed with
the physical distances between grid oﬀsets within the rhombi c
unit cell ( Figure 5D). Thus, the topological coordinates deﬁned
in neural activity space indeed capture the organization of gr id
cells in physical space.
Furthermore, persistent cohomology can leverage the
mapping between physical and topological spaces to decode
trajectories in the former by trajectories in the latter ( Figure 5E).
To do so, we trace the circular coordinates depicted in Figure 5C
through time to form a raw trajectory through topological
space. We then unshear it by 60 ◦ and unfold this trajectory by
identifying large jumps with wrapping through the boundary
to produce a reconstructed segment. These steps do not require
knowledge of the animal’s true trajectory (although some
general expectations about the animal’s motion are required
for unshearing; see Methods section 4.5 for details). We ﬁnd
that this reconstruction can be translated, rotated, reﬂec ted,
and/or uniformly scaled to match the true trajectory very well .
Without spiking noise, almost all reconstructions deviate fr om
the true trajectory by<4 cm averaged across time, which is much
less than the enclosure’s diameter of 180 cm ( Figures 5F ,G).
This error decreases with more neurons or more timepoints
in the simulated recording. Similar trends are observed wit h
the introduction of Poisson noise that mimics spiking noise,
but more neurons are required, more outliers with poor ﬁt are
observed, and geometric subsampling cannot be used to improve
computational tractability (Figures 5H,I).
2.4. Persistent Cohomology for Mixtures of
Neural Populations
Persistent cohomology can discover topological structure i n
mixtures of neural populations. When neurons are recorded
from a periodic neural population and a non-periodic neural
population, the latter adds additional dimensions to the point
cloud embedding, but the topological structure contained wi thin
the former may persist. We test if persistent cohomology can
recover this information in mixed datasets with neurons fro m
both a periodic population (either grid or conjunctive) and a
non-periodic population (either non-grid spatial or random).
Reliable discovery of the torus formed by grid cells is possible
when the number of spatial or random cells is less than twice
the number of grid cells ( Figures 6A,B). Detection of the 3-torus
formed by conjunctive cells requires more neurons, but it canalso
be reliably achieved in the presence of non-periodic population s
(Figures 6C,D). Thus, persistent cohomology demonstrates
robustness to the inclusion of non-periodic populations. The size
of the non-periodic population that can be tolerated increases
with the size of the periodic population.
When neurons are recorded from multiple periodic neural
populations, their structures are preserved within projected
subspaces of high-dimensional activity space. We explore
persistent cohomology in this scenario by forming mixed
datasets with neurons from two periodic populations. When
the two populations respond to unrelated signals, such as
grid and head direction cells—the combined topological space
should be the Cartesian product of those of the separate
populations. Indeed, that persistent cohomology can discover the
resultant 3-torus at intermediate mixing ratios ( Figures 7A,B).
If one population contributes many more neurons—and thus
embedding dimensions—than the other, we instead detect the
corresponding single-population structure (Figure 7B).
When the two populations respond to related signals, such as
grid and conjunctive cells—the activity space of one is conta ined
in the activity space of the other. Grid cells and conjunctive c ells
from the same module encode position with the same toroidal
structure; they both tile space with the same rhombic unit cell of
neural activity. In addition, the conjunctive population enc odes
direction with a circular topology. Thus, the mixed dataset should
span a 3-torus, which can be detected by persistent cohomology
(Figure 7C). For reliable discovery, at least ≈ 120 conjunctive
cells and at least ≈ 240 total neurons are required. However,
discovery of the product topology is disrupted if the number of
grid cells exceeds the number of conjunctive cells by more tha n
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 8 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
FIGURE 5 | Correspondence between spatial and topological coordinat es for grid cells. (A) Positional activity maps. A grid module tiles physical spac e with a rhombic
unit cell (black dashed lines) with a different offset for ea ch grid cell. (B) Schematic of circular coordinates (color) for the two persi stent 1-cocycles of a grid module
that deﬁne a topological space (left) and their mapping onto p hysical space (right). (C) Firing ﬁelds in the topological space of neural activities. A ll timepoints (gray) and
those for which a grid cell is the most active in the populatio n (color). (D) T opological distances between ﬁring ﬁelds depicted in (C) are correlated with physical
distances between grid offsets depicted in (A). Each point represents distances between two grid cells. (E) Reconstructing a segment of animal trajectory in the
topological space of neural activities and ﬁtting it to the tr ue trajectory segment. (F ,G)Reconstructions for grid cells without spiking noise. (F) Sample reconstruction
ﬁts. (G) Mean reconstruction error is the distance between reconstr ucted and actual positions averaged over timepoints. For ea ch condition, we generate 10 replicate
datasets, shown as violin plots with points representing in dividual values. Error generally decreases with increasin g grid cell number and trajectory duration. (H,I)
Same as (F ,G)but for grid cells generated with Poisson spiking noise and e rror plotted on a logarithmic scale. Geometric subsampling was not performed. Persistent
cohomology can achieve low reconstruction error with large enough grid cell number and trajectory duration.
a factor of ≈ 1.5. Thus, persistent cohomology can best detect
product topologies when the mixed dataset is not dominated by
one population.
Finally, we consider the case of mixing grid cells from multiple
modules. Grid modules have diﬀerent rhombic unit cells with
diﬀerent scales and orientations, so they map the same physica l
space onto diﬀerent topological coordinates. Thus, a mixed
dataset from two diﬀerent modules should exhibit the product
topology of two 2-tori, which is the 4-torus. However, we are
unable to reliably discover this structure using the grid mod ules
illustrated in Figure 1A; they are too sparse. To produce a point
cloud that embeds the toroidal structure for one grid module ,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 9 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
FIGURE 6 | Persistent cohomology in combinations of periodic and non- periodic neural populations. Success is deﬁned by observing the number of persistent
1-cocycles expected from the periodic population, which is two for grid cells and three for conjunctive cells. (A) Grid cells from module 1 and non-grid spatial cells. (B)
Grid cells from module 1 and random cells. (C) Conjunctive cells from module 1 and non-grid spatial cells. (D) Conjunctive cells from module 1 and random cells.
the animal trajectory should densely sample its rhombic unit
cell. This is achieved since the enclosure contains many uni t
cells. However, to produce a point cloud that embeds the 4-toru s
formed by two grid modules, the animal trajectory should densely
sample all combinations of unit cells. This is not achieved by
the grid modules illustrated in Figure 1A because the enclosure
contains too few rhombic unit cells for them to overlap in many
diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
Thus, we generate two grid modules separated by the
same scale ratio as in Figure 1A, but with one-fourth of its
scale ( Figure 7D). In addition, we explore diﬀerent relative
orientations between the modules by generating diﬀerent
orientations for module 2. Notably, these scale ratios and
orientation diﬀerences are not chosen such that the two rhomb ic
unit cells would share a simple geometric relationship with
each other (
Kang and Balasubramanian, 2019 ), which would
limit their possible overlap conﬁgurations and collapse the
expected 4-torus structure to a 2-torus. As we include more
neurons from both modules into our dataset, we see that
four persistent 1-cocycles eventually emerge from the points
close to the diagonal that represent sampling noise ( Figure 7E).
The success of persistent cohomology is independent of the
orientation diﬀerence between the two modules ( Figure 7F).
Note that if we obtained independent activity samples from
each module, combined datasets formed from the original gri d
modules with larger scales should exhibit 4-torus structur e.
However, samples taken from a single animal trajectory are
not independent across modules, so smaller grid scales (or
equivalently, larger environments) are required to fully sam ple
the 4-torus structure.
3. DISCUSSION
We demonstrate that persistent cohomology can discover
topological structure in simulated neural recordings with a s few
as tens of neurons from a periodic neural population ( Figure 3).
From this structure, it can decode the trajectory of the anim al
using only the time series of neural activities ( Figure 5). It can
also discover more complex topological structures formed by
combinations of periodic neural populations if each population
is well-represented within the dataset ( Figure 7).
By comprehensively adjusting a wide range of parameters
related to grid cells, we ﬁnd that persistent cohomology gener ally
behaves in three diﬀerent ways with respect to parameter
variation. First, topological discovery can be unaﬀected by
some manipulations, such as combining grid cells into multi-
neuron units and changing global geometric features, such
as enclosure geometry and lattice aspect ratio ( Figure 4).
Second, topological discovery may be impeded in a way that
is counteracted by increasing neuron number. Spiking noise,
small ﬁeld sizes, and inclusion of non-periodic populations are
examples of parameters that exhibit this behavior ( Figures 4,
6). Third, topological discovery can fail catastrophically in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 10 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
FIGURE 7 | Persistent cohomology in combinations of periodic neural p opulations. Success is deﬁned by observing the number of pers istent 1-cocycles expected
from the product topology. (A,B) Discovering the 3-torus for grid cells from module 1 and head direction cells. (A) Success rates. (B) Example persistence diagrams. If
one population contributes many more neurons than the other , persistent cohomology detects the topology of the predomi nant population. (C) Success rates for
discovering the 3-torus for grid cells and conjunctive cell s, both from the same module 1. (D–F) Combining grid cells from two modules with smaller scales. (D)
Positional activity maps for example neurons from module 1 a nd four different orientations of module 2. (E) Example persistence diagrams. (F) Success rates for
discovering the 4-torus.
certain parameter regimes without the possibility of recover y
by including more neurons. This happens if tuning curves are
inherently too variable or if discovery of product topologies
are desired when one neural population vastly outnumbers the
other ( Figures 4, 7). These conclusions can help researchers
understand and overcome obstacles to topological discovery with
persistent (co)homology and may guide its use across a variet y of
neural systems.
We have characterized the capabilities of persistent
cohomology using simple simulated data, but our results
may generalize to real neural data. A key requirement
for generalization is the separation of two timescales. The
macroscopic timescale at which topological structures are
explored—here, the time required to traverse a rhombic
unit cell of a grid module or 360 ◦ of head direction—must
be much longer than the microscopic timescale at which
neuronal activity is generated. This enables us to coarse-g rain
over spikes and describe the activity by a ﬁring rate. Indeed,
the inputs to our analysis pipeline are ﬁring rates over 0.2 s
time bins, which averages over many neurophysiological
processes, including major neural oscillations found in the
hippocampal region (
Lisman and Jensen, 2013). Similar forms of
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 11 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
coarse-graining were used by Rybakken et al. (2019) , Chaudhuri
et al. (2019) , and Gardner et al. (2021) to successfully apply
persistent (co)homology to experimental recordings in the
spatial representation system.
For comparison, we attempt to modify manifold
learning algorithms to enable discovery and interpretation
of topological structure ( Supplementary Material and
Supplementary Figure 1). We ﬁnd that Isomap (
Tenenbaum
et al., 2000 ) followed by Independent Components Analysis
(ICA) ( Hyvärinen, 1999 ) can successfully identify and decode
from toroidal structure with modiﬁed grid cells whose tunin g
curves exhibit a square lattice. Unlike persistent cohomolog y,
it does not work for triangular lattices and does not conside r
topological features with dimensionality >1. UMAP ( McInnes
et al., 2018 ) can be used to embed grid cell data directly into
a 2-dimensional space with a toroidal metric, but we ﬁnd that
its coordinates do not correspond well to the physical grid
periodicity. In short, persistent cohomology performs better
and requires adjusting fewer parameters for topological data
analysis compared to these alternative methods, which were n ot
designed for such analysis. Note that
Chaudhuri et al. (2019)
formulate an alternative method for decoding topologically
encoded information; they also use persistent homology for
discovery of topological structure.
The application of persistent (co)homology to neuroscience
data is still in its developing stages. In addition to the rese arch
on spatial representation circuits described above (
Chaudhuri
et al., 2019; Rybakken et al., 2019; Gardner et al., 2021 ), notable
lines of work include: simulations of hippocampal place cells
in spatial environments with non-trivial topology (
Dabaghian
et al., 2012; Spreemann et al., 2015; Babichev et al., 2018, 20 19;
Chowdhury et al., 2018); analysis of EEG signals, for classiﬁcation
and detection of epileptic seizures ( Piangerelli et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2018 ) and for construction of functional networks in
a mouse model of depression ( Khalid et al., 2014 ); inferring
intrinsic geometric structure in neural activity ( Giusti et al.,
2015); and detection of coordinated behavior between human
agents ( Zhang et al., 2020 ). There is potential for persistent
(co)homology to provide insight to a wide range of neural
systems. Topological structures generally can be found wher ever
periodicities exist. These periodicities can take many forms , such
as the spatial periodicities in our work, temporal regularitie s
in neural oscillations, motor patterns, and neural responses to
periodic stimuli.
The toolbox of topological data analysis has more methods
beneﬁcial to the analysis of neural data. The methods descri bed
in this paper, including geometric subsampling, are sensitive
to outliers. This problem can be addressed within the same
framework of persistent cohomology by using the distance-to -
a-measure function (
Chazal et al., 2011 ). In practice, this would
translate into a slightly more elaborate construction ( Guibas
et al., 2013 ) of the Vietoris–Rips complex. Furthermore, our
analysis pipeline beneﬁts from having neural activity embedd ed
in a high dimensional space, i.e., from having many more
neurons than the intrinsic dimensions of the recovered tori .
It is possible to adapt this technique to the regime of limited
neural recordings (even to a single neuron) by using time-de lay
embeddings (
Takens, 1981 ). However, for spatial populations,
such a technique would require control over the smoothness o f
the animal’s trajectory, which may not be feasible in practic e.
Also, the method we present cannot make inferences on network
topology. If connectivity information were present in neural
activities, they should appear on fast timescales related to
synaptic integration, action potential propagation, and synapt ic
delay. By averaging neural activity into 0.2 s time bins, we destroy
this information, but it is possible that a modiﬁed method may
access it.
Our results also suggest research directions in topological
data analysis. Throughout the paper, we relied on 1-dimensional
persistent cohomology to infer whether we recovered a particular
torus. But that is a relatively weak method: many topological
spaces have cohomology groups of the same dimension.
Although the trajectories that we recover via circular coor dinates
serve as a convincing evidence that we are indeed recovering
the tori, it is possible to conﬁrm this further by exploiting cup
product structure in cohomology, which is a particular kind
of a topological operation that turns cohomology into a ring.
Computing a “persistent cup product” would provide additional
evidence about the structure of the recovered spaces.
4. METHODS
4.1. Generating Neural Recordings
4.1.1. Animal Trajectory
We simulate the simultaneous recording of neurons from a rat as
it explores a circular enclosure of diameter 1.8 m. We use 1,000 s
from a trajectory extracted from an experimental animal (
Hafting
et al., 2005; Burak and Fiete, 2009 ). This trajectory is provided
as velocities sampled at 0.5 ms intervals along with the initia l
position. We average these to positions and directions at 0.2 s
intervals as follows: the position of the animal is simply the
average position within each 0.2 s time bin, and the direction
of the animal is the circular mean of the velocity vector angl e
within each 0.2 s time bin. We ignore the distinction between
body direction and head direction.
4.1.2. Periodic Neural Populations
We generate tuning curves as a function of position and/or
direction for each neuron. These localized tuning curves ar e
based on a shifted and truncated cosine function:
f (z)=



1+ cosπ z
2 |z|< 1
0 |z|≥ 1.
(1)
For each grid module, we set a scale l and an orientation φ .
This deﬁnes a transformation matrix from the space of phases
[
− 1
2 , 1
2
)
×
[
− 1
2 , 1
2
)
to the rhombic unit cell of the grid module in
physical space:
A= l
( cosφ cos
(
φ+ π
3
)
sinφ sin
(
φ+ π
3
)
)
. (2)
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we use l= 40 cm and φ = 0. The
inverse of this matrix A− 1 maps the rhombic unit cell onto the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 12 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
space of phases. We also deﬁne ∥·∥ as the vector norm and
⟨a⟩m≡ (a+ m mod 2m)− m as the shifted modulo operation.
The tuning curve of a grid cell as a function of position x is then
sgrid(x; b)= f
(
1
0.45l

A⟨A− 1x− b⟩1/ 2


)
(3)
Each grid cell is shifted by a uniformly random phase oﬀsetb. The
full width at half maximum of each grid ﬁeld is 0.45 l. In physical
space, the oﬀset of a grid cell isAb, where integers can be added to
either component of b; the shortest distance between these oﬀsets
for two grid cells is the physical distance shown in Figure 5D.
The tuning curve of a head direction cell as a function of
directionθ is
sdir(θ; c)= f
(
4⟨θ− c⟩π
)
. (4)
Each head direction cell is shifted by a uniformly random
direction oﬀset c. The full width at half maximum of the head
direction ﬁeld isπ/ 2.
The tuning curve of a conjunctive cell is simply the product
sconj(x,θ; b, c)= sgrid(x; b)sdir(θ; c). (5)
Each conjunctive cell has uniformly random oﬀsets b and c.
4.1.3. Non-periodic Neural Populations
For non-grid spatial cells, we generate tuning curves as a function
of position for each neuron of the form
sspatial(x)= 1
2
(
e−∥ x− d1∥2/ 2σ 2
+ e−∥ x− d2∥2/ 2σ 2 )
, (6)
whereσ = 40 cm and the di’s are chosen uniformly randomly
between (0, 0 cm) and (180, 180 cm).
For random neurons, we obtain activity time series by
sampling from a distribution every 2 s, or 10 timepoints,
and interpolating in between using cubic polynomials. The
distribution is Gaussian with mean 0 and width 0.5, truncate d
between 0 and 1.
4.1.4. From Tuning Curves to Time Series
To obtain activity time series for all populations except for
random neurons, we apply the tuning curves to each trajectory
timepoint. Whenever the velocity decreases below 5 cm / s, we
set the activity to be 0. This threshold simulates the behavi or
of neurons in the hippocampal region that exhibit high activity
during locomotion and low activity during idle periods (
Sargolini
et al., 2006; Kropﬀ et al., 2015; Hinman et al., 2016 ).
4.1.5. Multi-Neuron Units for Grid Cells (Figures 4A,B)
We generate multi-neuron units ( Figure 4) by linearly
combining activity time series from multiple grid cells. Eac h
mixing coeﬃcient is chosen from a uniform random distributi on
between 0 and 1. The activity is then normalized by the sum of
squares of the mixing coeﬃcients.
4.1.6. Spiking Noise for Grid Cells (Figures 4C,D)
The activities described above are dimensionless, and we typically
do not need to assign a scale because we divide each time serie s
by its mean before applying persistent cohomology. To create
spiking noise, however, we must set the ﬁring rate. We linearl y
rescale the rate given by Equation (3):
λ= 0.4+ 7.6sgrid. (7)
This sets the maximum ﬁring rate to be 8 and creates a baseline
rate of 0.4; with 0.2 s time bins, these values correspond to 40
and 2 Hz, respectively. However, we still set the ﬁring rate to 0 Hz
when the animal’s velocity decreases below 5 cm/ s.
Usingλ , we generate Poisson-like spiking noise with diﬀerent
levels of variability (Figure 4). At each timestep, the noisy activity
is given by
snoisy= F· X, X∼ Pois(λ/ F). (8)
F sets the Fano factor of the random process, which is its variance
divided by its mean (for any givenλ ). The F= 1 case corresponds
to a Poisson random process; F< 1 implies sub-Poissonian noise
and F> 1 implies super-Poissonian noise.
4.1.7. Generating Grid Cells With Various Properties
(Figures 4E–K)
• Square enclosure (Figure 4E): We use 1,000 s from a trajectory
extracted from an experimental animal in a square enclosure of
width 1.5 m (
Stensola et al., 2012 ), binned in the same way as
for the circular enclosure (section 4.1.1). To change the la ttice
orientation, we use a non-zero value for φ in Equation (2).
• Scale factor ( Figure 4F): Grid scale is modiﬁed by changing l
in Equation (2). The scale factor is l divided by the diameter of
the enclosure, 1.8 m.
• Field size factor ( Figure 4G): Field size is modiﬁed by
replacing 0.45 in Equation (3) by the ﬁeld size factor. In other
words, the ﬁeld size factor multiplied by the grid scale is the
full width at half maximum of each grid ﬁeld.
• Aspect ratio ( Figure 4H): The grid lattice is elongated to
an aspect ratio ε ≥ 1, which is the ratio between the
major and minor axes of the ellipse that circumscribes each
hexagonal lattice domain. This is accomplished by replacing
the transformation matrix in Equation (2) with
A= l·
√
3
2 sec 2ψ
( 2 cosψ cosφ cos
(
φ+ ψ
)
2 cosψ sinφ sin
(
φ+ ψ
)
)
, (9)
whereψ ≤ 60◦ is the angle between the two lattice vectors. ψ
is related toε by
ψ = arcsec
( 3
ε− 1
)
. (10)
When ε = 3/ (1+
√
2) ≈ 1.24, ψ = 45◦ and the lattice
becomes square.
• Field jitter ( Figure 4I): Jitter in the position of grid ﬁelds is
introduced by shifting each ﬁeld in physical space by
U1l
( cosφ
sinφ
)
+ U2l
( cos
(
φ+ π
3
)
sin
(
φ+ π
3
)
)
, (11)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 13 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
where l is the grid scale, φ is the grid orientation, and Ui∼
Unif(− ﬁeld jitter, ﬁeld jitter).
• Field variability ( Figure 4J): V ariability across grid
ﬁelds is introduced by choosing random numbers
Uij ∼ Unif(− ﬁeld var., ﬁeld var.) at 20 cm-intervals
throughout the enclosure for each grid cell. A linear
interpolation is constructed for these points, which is
smoothed by a Gaussian ﬁlter of width 20 cm. This resulting
random function is added to the standard tuning curve in
Equation (3), and all values under 0 are clipped to 0.
• Lattice variability ( Figure 4K): V ariability in lattices
across grid cells is introduced by randomly perturbing
the transformation matrix for each grid cell (Equation 2)
according to
A=
( 1+ W11 W12
W21 1+ W22
)
l
( cosφ cos
(
φ+ π
3
)
sinφ sin
(
φ+ π
3
)
)
, (12)
where
Wij∼ Unif(− lattice var., lattice var.). (13)
4.2. Neural Activity Maps
We construct activity maps for each neuron as a function of
position or direction. To do so, we simply tally the total amoun t
of activity in each positional or directional bin. Note that t hese
maps do not depict ﬁring rate because we do not divide by the
occupancy of each bin; we decided against this in order to show
the activity experienced through the animal trajectory.
4.3. Processing Neural Recordings
For each neuron, we ﬁrst divide its activity at every timepoin t
by its mean activity. We then delete all timepoints whose neur al
activities are all smaller than a small limit 1 × 10− 4. This simple
procedure removes points at the origin that we do not expect to
participate in topological structures.
To improve computational eﬃciency, we reduce the number
of input points while preserving their topological structure
by applying a geometric subsampling strategy. We pick the
ﬁrst point at random, and then iteratively add a point to our
subsample that is the furthest away from the already chosen
points. Speciﬁcally, if P is the input point set and Qi is the
subsample after i iterations, we form Qi+ 1 by adding the point
qi+ 1 chosen as
arg max
p∈ P
min
q∈ Qi
∥p− q∥. (14)
Figure 1B illustrates a result of this strategy. By construction, the
subsample Qi forms anε i+ 1-net of the input point sample, which
means the largest distance from any input point to the nearest
point of the subsample does not exceed ε i+ 1= minq∈ Qi∥qi+ 1−
q∥. Because persistent cohomology is stable, this guarantees t hat
the persistence diagram we compute for the subsample Qi is
at most ε i+ 1 away, in bottleneck distance (
Cohen-Steiner et al.,
2007), from the persistence diagram of the full point set P. We
generally select 1,000 points through this process. The resul ts in
Figures 5H,I were obtained by applying persistent cohomology
on the full dataset without subsampling.
To measure success rate, we apply persistent cohomology on
100 replicate datasets and measure the proportion of successes a s
determined by the largest-gap heuristic.
4.4. Applying Persistent Cohomology
We refer the reader to extensive literature on persistent
(co)homology (
Edelsbrunner and Harer, 2010; Edelsbrunner and
Morozov, 2017) for the full details. More details on the involved
constructions are presented in the Supplementary Material.
Here, we only brieﬂy mention some of them. For technical
reasons—both to recover the circular coordinates and for
computational speed—we work with persistent cohomology,
which is dual to persistent homology, which a reader might be
more familiar with.
To recover the topology of the space sampled by a point
set P, we construct a Vietoris–Rips simplicial complex. Given a
parameter r, Vietoris–Rips complex consists of all subsets of the
point set P, in which every pair of points is at most r away from
each other,
VR(P, r)={ σ ⊆ P|∥p− q∥≤ r∀p, q∈ σ}. (15)
The cohomology group, Hk(VR(P, r)), deﬁned formally in the
Supplementary Material, is an algebraic invariant that describes
the topology of the Vietoris–Rips complex. Its rank, called the
k-th Betti number, counts the number of “holes” in the complex.
As we vary the radius r in the deﬁnition of the Vietoris–Rips
complex, the simplicial complexes nest: VR( P, r1)⊆ VR(P, r2),
for r1≤ r2. The restriction of the larger complex to the smaller
induces a linear map on cohomology groups, and all such maps
form a sequence:
Hk(VR(P, r1))← Hk(VR(P, r2)← Hk(VR(P, r3))← ... (16)
It is possible to track when cohomology classes (i.e., “holes”)
appear and disappear in this sequence. Recording all such birth–
death pairs (ri, rj), we get a persistence diagram, which completely
describes the changes in the sequence of cohomology groups.
For a persistent class, i.e., one with a large diﬀerence betwee n
birth and death,
de Silva et al. (2011) describe a procedure for
turning it into a map from the input data points into a circle,
which assigns a circular coordinate to each data point.
Perea
(2018) extends that procedure to allow computation of persistent
cohomology on a subsample of the data, e.g., the geometric
subsample mentioned in the previous subsection.
4.5. Reconstructing Animal Trajectory
From Circular Coordinates
The process for obtaining circular coordinates outlined in t he
previous subsection (and presented in greater detail in the
Supplementary Material) outputs one value between 0 and 2 π
for each persistent 1-cocycle at each timepoint. A grid module
yields two persistent 1-cocycles, so our circular coordinat es form
a vector ut= (ut1, ut2) at each timepoint t= 1,... , T. We divide
each coordinate value by 2π so that each uti∈ [0, 1). No matter
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 14 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
the recording duration used to obtain circular coordinates , we
only reconstruct the ﬁrst 100 s of the animal trajectory.
We ﬁrst perform a preliminary unfolding of the circular
coordinates. We calculate all the diﬀerence vectors between
adjacent timepoints and cancel out changes by more than± 1/ 2:
/Delta1uunfolded
ti =⟨ uti− ut− 1,i⟩1/ 2,
where ⟨a⟩1/ 2≡ (a+ 1/ 2 mod 1)− 1/ 2. (17)
Next, we seek to unshear the coordinates. The rhombic unit ce ll
in physical space is sheared by 30◦ relative to the orthogonal axes
of topological space. We wish to apply this transformation to the
diﬀerence vectors to restore the unsheared trajectory. Ther e are
two possible unshearing matrices
S±=
( cos 0 cos
( π
2± π
6
)
sin 0 sin
( π
2± π
6
)
,
)
(18)
and we could perform the rest of the analysis for both
transformations separately, knowing that one trajectory is
unsheared and the other is doubly shared. Instead, we
assume knowledge that the animal is exploring an open ﬁeld
environment in which all directions of motion should genera lly
be sampled uniformly. We calculate the covariance matrix for
both sets of transformed diﬀerence vectors:
/Sigma1±
ij = 1
T
∑
t
/Delta1u±
ti/Delta1u±
tj , where /Delta1u±
t = S±/Delta1uunfolded
t . (19)
The proper unshearing S produces the covariance matrix whose
ratio of eigenvalues is closest to 1. This heuristic could bechanged
assuming diﬀerent statistics of animal motion, for example th ose
corresponding to a linear track.
After identifying the unshearing matrix S, we return to
the raw coordinates and apply this transformation ﬁrst, befor e
unfolding:
/Delta1uunsheared
t = S(ut− ut− 1). (20)
Since shear transformations change distances, we reevalua te our
unfolding. We compare the norm of every diﬀerence vector
/Delta1uunsheared
t to its norm after possible unfoldings along the
unsheared lattice vectors given by the columns of S. The shortest
vector at each timepoint is the reconstructed diﬀerence /Delta1urecon
t ,
and the reconstructed trajectory segment shown in Figure 5E is
their accumulation urecon
t = ∑
t/Delta1urecon
t .
So far, this reconstruction has not incorporated detailed
information about the animal trajectory. To judge its qualit y,
we now ﬁt the reconstruction to the true segment of animal
trajectory xt through rigid transformation and uniform scaling.
We ﬁrst determine whether or not the reconstruction needs to be
unreﬂected. To judge this, we calculate the signed vector an gles
between adjacent steps for both the reconstruction and the tr ue
trajectory
/Delta1θrecon
t =
⟨
arctan(/Delta1urecon
t2 //Delta1urecon
t1 )− arctan(/Delta1urecon
t− 1,2//Delta1urecon
t− 1,1)
⟩
π
/Delta1θt=⟨ arctan(/Delta1xt2//Delta1xt1)− arctan(/Delta1xt− 1,2//Delta1xt− 1,1)⟩π , (21)
where⟨a⟩π ≡ (a+ π mod 2π )− π . If the mean square diﬀerence
between−/Delta1θrecon
t and/Delta1θt is less than that between/Delta1θrecon
t and
/Delta1θt, then we reﬂect our reconstruction uoriented
t =
( 1 0
0− 1
)
urecon
t .
Otherwise, uoriented
t = urecon
t .
Finally, we ﬁt the reconstruction to the true trajectory segment
by minimizing the mean squared error after uniform scaling a,
translation b and rotationθ :
min
a,b,θ
∑
t



xt− a
( cosθ − sinθ
sinθ cosθ
)
uoriented
t + b




2
. (22)
Note that we chose to try particular unshearing matrices in
Equation (18) and use the general assumption of isotropic
animal motion to select between them, all before ﬁtting the
reconstruction to the actual animal trajectory in Equation (22).
These choices were designed to obtain the most faithful
reconstruction without using the animal trajectory, which is the
information that we would like to infer. This process assumes
knowledge of the angle between directions of periodicity, wh ich
is ∼ 60◦ for grid modules. Moreover, it also relies on the
circular coordinates implementation (explained in greater d etail
in Supplementary Material) selecting two of the shortest non-
parallel vectors between lattice vertices as its basis—that selection
is not guaranteed, but empirically, it frequently occurs in o ur
case, as indicated by low reconstruction errors in Figure 5.
An alternative method for unshearing before comparison with
the true trajectory is to ﬁnd a transformation matrix that
yields a covariance matrix for the transformed diﬀerence vec tors
(analogously to Equation 19) with a desired ratio of eigenval ues.
Otherwise, if a sheared reconstruction is suﬃcient, unshear ing
can be skipped.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets and source code presented in this study can be found
in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositori es
and accession number(s) can be found at: https://louiskang.
group/repo.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LK and DM conceptualized the study and wrote the paper. LK,
BX, and DM developed the methods, calculated the persistent
cohomology, and analyzed the results. LK generated the neural
data. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
LK has been supported by a Miller Research Fellowship from the
Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of
California, Berkeley. BX was supported by a US Department of
Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship. This work
was partially supported by the US Department of Energy under
Contract Number DE-AC02-05CH11231 at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 15 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Francesco Fumarola for insightful and helpful
discussions. This manuscript has been released as a preprint on
bioRxiv (
Kang et al., 2020).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fncom.
2021.616748/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Babichev, A., Morozov, D., and Dabaghian, Y. (2018). Robust s patial memory
maps encoded by networks with transient connections. PLoS Comput. Biol.
14:e1006433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006433
Babichev, A., Morozov, D., and Dabaghian, Y. (2019). Replays of spatial memories
suppress topological ﬂuctuations in cognitive map. Netw. Neurosci. 3, 707–724.
doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00076
Burak, Y., and Fiete, I. R. (2009). Accurate path integration in c ontinuous
attractor network models of grid cells. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5:e1000291.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000291
Chaudhuri, R., Gerçek, B., Pandey, B., Peyrache, A., and Fiete , I. (2019).
The intrinsic attractor manifold and population dynamics of a canoni cal
cognitive circuit across waking and sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1512–1520.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0460-x
Chazal, F., Cohen-Steiner, D., and Mérigot, Q. (2011). Geometri c inference for
measures based on distance functions. Foundat. Comput. Math. 11, 733–751.
doi: 10.1007/s10208-011-9098-0
Chowdhury, S., Dai, B., and Mémoli, F. (2018). The importance of for getting:
limiting memory improves recovery of topological characteristics from
neural data. PLoS ONE 13:e0202561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.02
02561
Cohen-Steiner, D., Edelsbrunner, H., and Harer, J. (2007). Stab ility
of persistence diagrams. Discrete Comput. Geometry 37, 103–120.
doi: 10.1007/s00454-006-1276-5
Curto, C. (2016). What can topology tell us about the neural code? Bull. Am. Math.
Soc. 54, 63–78. doi: 10.1090/bull/1554
Dabaghian, Y., Mémoli, F., Frank, L., and Carlsson, G. (2012). A to pological
paradigm for hippocampal spatial map formation using persistent homology .
PLoS Comput. Biol. 8:e1002581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002581
de Silva, V., Morozov, D., and Vejdemo-Johansson, M. (2011). Pe rsistent
cohomology and circular coordinates. Discrete Comput. Geometry 45, 737–759.
doi: 10.1007/s00454-011-9344-x
Diehl, G. W., Hon, O. J., Leutgeb, S., and Leutgeb, J. K. (2017). Grid and
nongrid cells in medial entorhinal cortex represent spatial location a nd
environmental features with complementary coding schemes. Neuron 94, 83–
92.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.03.004
Edelsbrunner, H., and Harer, J. (2010). Computational Topology: An Introduction .
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society. doi: 10.1090/mb k/069
Edelsbrunner, H., and Morozov, D. (2017). “Persistent homology, ”in Handbook of
Discrete and Computational Geometry, eds J. E. Goodman, J. O’Rourke, and C.
D. Tóth (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press), 637–661.
Fiete, I. R., Burak, Y., and Brookings, T. (2008). What grid cells c onvey about rat
location. J. Neurosci. 28, 6858–6871. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5684-07.2008
Gallego, J. A., Perich, M. G., Miller, L. E., and Solla, S. A. (2017).
Neural manifolds for the control of movement. Neuron 94, 978–984.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.025
Gao, P., and Ganguli, S. (2015). On simplicity and complexity in the b rave
new world of large-scale neuroscience. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 32, 148–155.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.04.003
Gardner, R. J., Hermansen, E., Pachitariu, M., Burak, Y., Baas, N. A ., Dunn, B.
A., et al. (2021). Toroidal topology of population activity in grid ce lls. bioRxiv
[Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/2021.02.25.432776
Giusti, C., Pastalkova, E., Curto, C., and Itskov, V. (2015). C lique topology reveals
intrinsic geometric structure in neural correlations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
112, 13455–13460. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1506407112
Guibas, L., Morozov, D., and Mérigot, Q. (2013). Witnessed k-d istance. Discrete
Comput. Geometry 49, 22–45. doi: 10.1007/s00454-012-9465-x
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M. B., and Moser, E. I . (2005).
Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 801–806.
doi: 10.1038/nature03721
Hardcastle, K., Maheswaranathan, N., Ganguli, S., and Giocomo, L . M. (2017).
A multiplexed, heterogeneous, and adaptive code for navigation in medial
entorhinal cortex. Neuron 94, 375–387.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.03.025
Hinman, J. R., Brandon, M. P., Climer, J. R., Chapman, G. W., and Hasse lmo, M.
E. (2016). Multiple running speed signals in medial entorhinal corte x. Neuron
91, 666–679. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.027
Hyvärinen, A. (1999). Fast and robust ﬁxed-point algorithms for
independent component analysis. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 10, 626–634.
doi: 10.1109/72.761722
Jazayeri, M., and Afraz, A. (2017). Navigating the neural space i n search of the
neural code. Neuron 93, 1003–1014. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.019
Johnson, W. B., and Lindenstrauss, J. (1984). Extensions of lipschitz mappings into
a hilbert space. Contemp. Math. 26:1. doi: 10.1090/conm/026/737400
Jun, J. J., Steinmetz, N. A., Siegle, J. H., Denman, D. J., Bauza, M ., Barbarits, B.,
et al. (2017). Fully integrated silicon probes for high-density recording of neural
activity. Nature 551, 232–236. doi: 10.1038/nature24636
Kang, L., and Balasubramanian, V. (2019). A geometric attractor mec hanism
for self-organization of entorhinal grid modules. eLife 8:e46687.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.46687
Kang, L., Xu, B., and Morozov, D. (2020). State space discovery in spatial
representation circuits with persistent cohomology. bioRxiv [Preprint] .
doi: 10.1101/2020.10.06.328773
Khalid, A., Kim, B. S., Chung, M. K., Ye, J. C., and Jeon, D. (2014 ). Tracing
the evolution of multi-scale functional networks in a mouse model of
depression using persistent brain network homology. Neuroimage 101, 351–
363. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.040
Kropﬀ, E., Carmichael, J. E., Moser, M. B., and Moser, E. I. (2015). Speed cells
in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 523, 419–424. doi: 10.1038/nature
14622
Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S., Barry, C., and O’Keefe, J. (2015 ). Grid
cell symmetry is shaped by environmental geometry. Nature 518, 232–235.
doi: 10.1038/nature14153
Lisman, J. E., and Jensen, O. (2013). The theta-gamma neural code . Neuron 77,
1002–1016. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007
Mathis, A., Herz, A. V. M., and Stemmler, M. (2012). Optimal population c odes
for space: grid cells outperform place cells. Neural Comput. 24, 2280–2317.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00319
McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N., and Großberger, L. (2018). UMAP : uniform
manifold approximation and projection. J. Open Source Softw. 3:861.
doi: 10.21105/joss.00861
Mosheiﬀ, N., Agmon, H., Moriel, A., and Burak, Y. (2017). An eﬃcien t
coding theory for a dynamic trajectory predicts non-uniform allocati on
of entorhinal grid cells to modules. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13:e1005597.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005597
O’Keefe, J., and Dostrovsky, J. (1971). The hippocampus as a spatia l map.
Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 34,
171–175. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(71)90358-1
Perea, J. A. (2018). Sparse circular coordinates via principal Z-Bundles. arXiv
arXiv:1510.06629.
Piangerelli, M., Rucco, M., Tesei, L., and Merelli, E. (2018). Topolo gical classiﬁer
for detecting the emergence of epileptic seizures. BMC Res. Notes 11:392.
doi: 10.1186/s13104-018-3482-7
Rybakken, E., Baas, N., and Dunn, B. (2019). Decoding of neura l data
using cohomological feature extraction. Neural Comput. 31, 68–93.
doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01150
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748


--- Page 16 ---
Kang et al. Persistent Cohomology and Spatial Representation
Sanzeni, A., Balasubramanian, V., Tiana, G., and Vergassola, M. (2016). Complete
coverage of space favors modularity of the grid system in the brain. Phys. Rev.
E 94:062409. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.94.062409
Sargolini, F., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., McNaughton, B. L., Witt er, M. P., Moser,
M. B., et al. (2006). Conjunctive representation of position, dire ction, and
velocity in entorhinal cortex. Science 312, 758–762. doi: 10.1126/science.11
25572
Saxena, S., and Cunningham, J. P. (2019). Towards the neural population doctrine.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 55, 103–111. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2019.02.002
Shadlen, M. N., and Newsome, W. T. (1998). The variable discharge of cortical
neurons: implications for connectivity, computation, and informat ion coding.
J. Neurosci. 18, 3870–3896. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-10-03870.1998
Spreemann, G., Dunn, B., Botnan, M. B., and Baas, N. A. (2015). Us ing persistent
homology to reveal hidden information in neural data. arXiv [Preprint].
arXiv:1809.09269.
Sreenivasan, S., and Fiete, I. (2011). Grid cells generate an analo g error-correcting
code for singularly precise neural computation. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1330–1337.
doi: 10.1038/nn.2901
Stemmler, M., Mathis, A., and Herz, A. V. M. (2015). Connecting multi ple spatial
scales to decode the population activity of grid cells. Sci. Adv. 1:e1500816.
doi: 10.1126/science.1500816
Stensola, H., Stensola, T., Solstad, T., Frøland, K., Moser, M. B., and Moser,
E. I. (2012). The entorhinal grid map is discretized. Nature 492, 72–78.
doi: 10.1038/nature11649
Stensola, T., Stensola, H., Moser, M. B., and Moser, E. I. (2015) . Shearing-
induced asymmetry in entorhinal grid cells. Nature 518, 207–212.
doi: 10.1038/nature14151
Takens, F. (1981). “Detecting strange attractors in turbulenc e, ” in Dynamical
Systems and Turbulence, Warwick 1980 , eds D. Rand and L.-S. Young
(Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 366–381. doi: 10.1 007/BFb00
91924
Taube, J. S., Muller, R. U., and Ranck, J. B. (1990). Head-directio n cells recorded
from the postsubiculum in freely moving rats. I. Description and quant itative
analysis. J. Neurosci. 10, 420–435. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-02-0042
0.1990
Tenenbaum, J. B., Silva, V., and Langford, J. C. (2000). A global g eometric
framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Science 290, 2319–2323.
doi: 10.1126/science.290.5500.2319
Wang, Y., Ombao, H., and Chung, M. K. (2018). Topological data ana lysis of
single-trial electroencephalographic signals. Ann. Appl. Stat. 12, 1506–1534.
doi: 10.1214/17-AOAS1119
Wei, X. X., Prentice, J., and Balasubramanian, V. (2015). A principle of
economy predicts the functional architecture of grid cells. eLife 4:e08362.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.08362
Zhang, M., Kalies, W. D., Kelso, J. A. S., and Tognoli, E. (2020). Topological
portraits of multiscale coordination dynamics.J. Neurosci. Methods 339:108672.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108672
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Kang, Xu and Morozov. This is an open-access articl e distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 April 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 616748
