--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 19 March 2013
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00016
Versatile networks of simulated spiking neurons displaying
winner -take-all behavior
Y anqing Chen1, Jeffrey L. McKinstry 1,2* and Gerald M. Edelman 1
1 The Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, CA, USA
2 Mathematical, Information, and Computer Sciences, Point Loma Nazarene University, San Diego, CA, USA
Edited by:
David Hansel, University of Paris,
France
Reviewed by:
T odd T royer, University of T exas,
USA
Apostolos Georgopoulos, University
of Minnesota, USA
*Correspondence:
Jeffrey L. McKinstry,
The Neurosciences Institute,
San Diego, 800 Silverado Street,
Suite 302, La Jolla,
CA 92037-4234, USA.
e-mail: mckinstry@nsi.edu
We describe simulations of large-scale networks of excitatory and inhibitory spiking
neurons that can generate dynamically stable winner -take-all (WTA) behavior. The network
connectivity is a variant of center -surround architecture that we call center -annular -surround
(CAS). In this architecture each neuron is excited by nearby neighbors and inhibited by
more distant neighbors in an annular -surround region. The neural units of these networks
simulate conductance-based spiking neurons that interact via mechanisms susceptible to
both short-term synaptic plasticity and STDP . We show that such CAS networks display
robust WTA behavior unlike the center -surround networks and other control architectures
that we have studied. We ﬁnd that a large-scale network of spiking neurons with separate
populations of excitatory and inhibitory neurons can give rise to smooth maps of sensory
input. In addition, we show that a humanoid brain-based-device (BBD) under the control
of a spiking WTA neural network can learn to reach to target positions in its visual ﬁeld,
thus demonstrating the acquisition of sensorimotor coordination.
Keywords: brain-based computational model, spiking neuronal networks, winner -take-all, motor control and
learning/plasticity, spike-timing-dependent plasticity, sensorimotor control, large-scale spiking neural networks,
neurorobotics
INTRODUCTION
Analyses in computational neurobiology have successfully used
mean-ﬁring-rate neuronal models to simulate the spatiotemporal
patterns of neural activity that arise in interconnected networks of
excitatory and inhibitory neurons, such as those in the vertebrate
cortex ( V on der Malsburg, 1973; Obermayer et al., 1990; Dayan
and Abbott, 2001). Certain aspects of these systems may, however,
require the modeling of the dynamic properties of large popu-
lations of individual neurons, each calculated with millisecond
precision. Simulations of such systems are challenged with issues
such as non-linearity, instability, and resistance to scaling. Here
we address these issues by simulating networks of spiking neu-
rons that are capable of sensory map formation and sensorimotor
interactions.
It has been proposed that local microcircuits of the cere-
bral cortex can function as winner-take-all (WTA) networks
(Douglas and Martin, 2004). In such systems, an individual pat-
tern of input can evoke network responses that suppress possible
alternative responses. In addition, the population response to
any sensory stimulus is sparse. This proposal is attractive for
several reasons. On theoretical grounds, WTA networks have
demonstrated utility in models of pattern recognition ( Vo n d e r
Malsburg, 1973), map formation ( Obermayer et al., 1990 ), selec-
tive attention ( Itti et al., 1998 ), and working memory ( Wilson
and Cowan, 1973). The proposal is also supported by cortical
anatomy. A characteristic structural feature of WTA networks
is long range inhibition among cellular components coupled to
short range excitation. Anatomical evidence exists for such an
architecture in animal nervous systems ( Goldman-Rakic, 1995;
Kisvárday et al., 2000; Holmgren et al., 2003; Fino and Yuste, 2011;
Perin et al., 2011). Indirect physiological evidence ( Derdikman
et al., 2003; Haider et al., 2010 ) has also been obtained for
local excitation and surround inhibition in the cerebral cortex of
mammals.
Rate-based WTA networks with center-surround architec-
ture have been extensively explored ( Dayan and Abbott, 2001 ).
Although these networks have been shown to possess useful
properties, they lack the temporal precision and biological real-
ism of networks of spiking neurons. In some prior studies of
spiking models capable of WTA behavior the neuronal network
structure has been highly simpliﬁed. Networks are simulated
as a one-dimensional chain or ring ( Laing and Chow, 2001;
Shriki et al., 2003). The inhibitory population may be reduced
to one unit ( Oster et al., 2009; Rutishauser et al., 2011 ), or the
inhibitory population was removed altogether and modeled as
direct inhibitory connections among excitatory neurons ( Laing
and Chow, 2001; Choe and Miikkulainen, 2004). One large-
scale spiking model did produce smooth maps of orientation
columns, but this model also combined excitatory and inhibitory
neurons into a single population, and did not incorporate spike-
timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) ( Choe and Miikkulainen,
2004). If the complex circuits of the cortex function as WTA net-
works, biologically realistic spiking models must exhibit robust
WTA network dynamics that can explain behavior at the systems
level.
In the present study we describe a general and robust com-
puter simulation of the activity within neural networks contain-
ing thousands of excitatory and inhibitory spiking neurons in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE


--- Page 2 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
a variant of center-surround architecture that we call center-
annular-surround (CAS). In this architecture each neuron is
excited by nearby neighbors and inhibited by more distant neigh-
bors in an annular-surround region ( Figure 1A). The neural
units of these networks simulate conductance-based spiking neu-
rons that interact via mechanisms susceptible to both short-term
synaptic plasticity and STDP . W e show that such CAS networks
display robust WTA behavior unlike the center-surround net-
works we have studied. We demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that
a large-scale network of spiking neurons with separate popu-
lations of excitatory and inhibitory neurons can give rise to
FIGURE 1 | The center -annular -surround (CAS) spiking network
architecture leads to winner-take-all (WTA) dynamics. (A) The CAS
network architecture consists of inte rconnected spiking neurons, excitatory
(green ovals), and inhibitory (red ovals). Each population is arranged in a
two-dimensional grid. Connections from representative c ells are illustrated.
Axons from excitatory neurons (green arrows) project to neurons within
green areas. Axons from inhibitory neurons (red arrows) project to neurons
in the transparent red annular areas. The sensory input projecting
non-topographically to both the excitatory and inhibitory “cortical”
populations is not shown. (B) The CAS connectivity leads to WTA
dynamics: small areas of high activity are surrounded by large regions with
little activity. The ﬁring rates of excitatory neurons in the network are
shown as pixels with brightness proportional to ﬁring-rate indicated by the
scale bar to the right (in Hz). The num ber and size of the winning regions
are functions of a variety of network parameters.
smooth maps of sensory input ( Obermayer et al., 1990 ). We
also show that, a brain-based-device (BBD) under the con-
trol of a system of such networks learns to reach to visual
targets.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SPIKING NEURONAL NETWORKS
Each modeled network ( Figure 1A) is comprised of three inter-
connected populations of spiking neuronal units ( Izhikevich,
2010) distributed over two-dimensional square grids. Each pop-
ulation is composed of units simulating one of three functional
classes of spiking neurons: input (“thalamic”), excitatory, and
inhibitory. The parameters of simulated neurons in each class
are tuned so that the voltage waveform mimics its biological
counterpart ( Izhikevich, 2003 ). The synapses display STDP and
short-term plasticity dynamics as previously described in detail
(Izhikevich and Edelman, 2008 ). The neuron model equations,
short-term synaptic plasticity equations, and STDP equations are
presented below.
NEURONAL DYNAMICS
Spiking dynamics of each neuron were simulated using the phe-
nomenological model proposed by Izhikevich (2003).T h em o d e l
has only two equations and four dimensionless parameters that
could be explicitly determined from neuronal resting potential,
input resistance, rheobase current, and other measurable charac-
teristics. W e present the model in a dimensional form so that the
membrane potential is in millivolts, the current is in picoamperes
and the time is in milliseconds:
C˙v = k(v − v
r )(v − vt ) − u − Isyn (1)
˙u = a{b(v − vr) − u} (2)
where C is the membrane capacitance, v is the membrane poten-
tial (in mV), vr is the resting potential, vt is the instantaneous
threshold potential, u i st h er e c o v e r yv a r i a b l e( t h ed i f f e r e n c eo fa l l
inward and outward voltage-gated currents), Isyn is the synaptic
current (in pA) deﬁned below, a and b are parameters. When the
membrane potential reaches the peak of the spike, i.e., v > vpeak,
the model ﬁres a spike, and all variables are reset according to
v ← c and u ← u + d,w h e r ec and d are parameters. Ta b l e A 1
lists each of the neuron model parameters used in all experiments.
At the start of all simulations, v was set to − 60 for all neurons,
whereas u was set to a different random value for each neuron
drawn uniformly from the range 0–100.
SHORT-TERM SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY
The strength of synapses varied as a function of the presynaptic
neuron’s ﬁring history. We assume that the synaptic conductance
(strength) of each synapse can be scaled down (depression) or
up (facilitation) on a short time scale (hundreds of millisec-
onds) by a scalar factor x. This scalar factor, different for each
presynaptic cell, is modeled by the following one-dimensional
equation
˙x = (1 − x)/τ
x, x ← px when presynaptic neuron ﬁres. (3)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 2


--- Page 3 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
x tends to recover to the equilibrium value x = 1w i t ht h et i m e
constant τx, and it is reset by each spike of the presynaptic cell to
the new value px.A n yv a l u ep < 1 decreases x and results in short-
term synaptic depression, whereas p > 1 results in short-term
synaptic facilitation. The parameters, τx and p, for each combina-
tion of presynaptic and postsynaptic neuron types were as follows:
exc. → exc.: 150, 0.8; exc. → inh.: 150, 0.8; inh. → exc.: 150, 0.8;
inh. → inh.: 150, 0.8; thalamic → exc: 150, 0.7; thalamic → inh.:
200, 0.5.
SYNAPTIC KINETICS
The total synaptic current to each neuron is simulated as
Isyn = gAMPA(v − 0) + gNMDA
[(v + 80)/60]2
1 +[ (v + 80)/60]2 (v − 0)
+ gGABAA (v + 70) + gGABAB (v + 90) + gSH(v + 90) (4)
where v is the postsynaptic membrane potential, and the subscript
indicates the receptor type. Each conductance g (here we omit
t h es u b s c r i p tf o rt h es a k eo fc l a r i t y )h a sﬁ r s t - o r d e rl i n e a rk i n e t i c s
g′ =− g/τ with τ= 5, 150, 6, 150, and 5000 ms for each of the
simulated AMPA, NMDA, GABAA,GABAB,a n ds l o wh y p e r p o l a r -
izing (SH) receptors, respectively. The SH “receptors” were an ad
hoc method for adding SH currents in order to bias cells to remain
off for longer periods of time; this improved pattern separation,
and was used only in the BBD experiments.
E a c hﬁ r i n go fa ne x c i t a t o r yn e u r o ni n c r e a s e sgAMPA by
xc,w h e r e c is the synaptic conductance (synaptic weight) in
nanoSiemens and x is the short-term depression/potentiation
scaling factor as above; gNMDA was increased by nmda_gain xc,
where nmda_gain is the ratio of NMDA to AMPA conduc-
tances and is found experimentally to be less than one ( Myme
et al., 2003 ). Similarly gabab_gain and gabash_gain are used to
adjust the contribution of gGABAB and gSH, respectively, relative
to gGABAA. The gain factor for gSH was set to zero for all simula-
tions except for the BBD experiments in which case the gain factor
was set to 0.2 for the ﬁrst 45 simulation seconds and was set to 0.0
f o rt h er e m a i n d e ro ft h es i m u l a t i o n .
STDP
The change in conductance (weight) of each synapse in the model
is simulated according to STDP: the synapse is potentiated or
depressed depending on the order of ﬁring of the presynaptic and
postsynaptic neurons ( Bi and Poo, 1998 ). W e use the following
equations to update each plastic synapse, s,i nt h en e t w o r k :
˙c =− c/τ
c + αSTDP(t)δ(t − tpre/post) (5)
˙s = c (6)
where δ(t) is the Dirac delta function that step-increases the vari-
able c. Firings of pre- and postsynaptic neurons, occurring at
times tpre, tpost, respectively, change c by the amount αSTDP(t)
where α is the learning rate for the synapse, t = tpost − tpre is the
interspike interval, and
STDP(t) =
{A+ exp(− 1/τ+)t , t > 0
A− exp(− 1/τ− )|t|, t ≤ 0
}
. (7)
where A+ = 0.005, A− = 0.001, τ+ = τ− = 20 ms. The variable
c decays to zero exponentially with the time constant τc = 1s ,
and s is updated once every 50 ms for computational efﬁciency.
Note that for simplicity, each synapse was modeled with a sin-
gle weight, s; therefore the STDP rule changed both AMPA and
NMDA components of the synapse proportionally.
SYNAPTIC SCALING
Synaptic scaling was performed for each neuron in order to main-
tain the total of all synaptic strengths on a given connection
pathway, stotal, at a constant value. This scaling was performed
for every neuron every 50 ms during the simulation. In addition,
each synapse was prevented from exceeding smax or going below
zero, regardless of learning rules and normalization.
ANATOMY
The Input network is composed of 484 simulated “thalamic” neu-
rons that provide excitatory input to “cortical” excitatory and
inhibitory neurons. “Thalamic” neurons project to both “cor-
tical” populations with uniform random connectivity. Current
levels to these “thalamic” cells were adjusted to evoke distinct
patterns of activity in the input area with a maximum ﬁring
rate of approximately 100 Hz for either abstract patterns or video
camera input.
The cortical network contained 3481 excitatory cells and 900
inhibitory cells. All connections made from cortical excitatory
neurons to other neurons followed local-type connectivity. In
this connectivity, a two-dimensional Gaussian probability dis-
tribution, centered on each cell, determined the probability of
forming an input synapse to surrounding neurons. This prob-
ability density function was scaled to generate, on average, a
pre-speciﬁed number of excitatory synapses onto each cell (see
Appendix for details). The initial synaptic strength between con-
nected neurons also varied as a Gaussian function of the distance
between them. The total of all synaptic efﬁcacies for each simu-
lated neuron was scaled to sum to a constant value unique to each
neuron type.
In contrast, inhibitory neurons in the system exhibited CAS
connectivity. For CAS connectivity, each neuron received synaptic
input only from neurons located in a surrounding area speci-
ﬁed by a minimum ( r
min) and maximum ( rmax)r a d i a ld i s t a n c e
from the postsynaptic cell. The probability of forming a connec-
tion with a neuron in the annulus was a function of the distance
separating the cells. The function used was a Gaussian with stan-
dard deviation σ,c e n t e r e da t(rmin + rmax)/2. This probability
distribution function was scaled to create a prespeciﬁed number
of inhibitory synapses onto each neuron. The synaptic strengths
for the surround-type connection were also initialized using the
same function, with the same parameters. However, the synaptic
strengths of this type were scaled to make their sum equal to a
constant value under experimental control.
W e found that this CAS connectivity arrangement confers
WTA properties to the networks. Each distinctive pattern of neu-
ral activity in the “thalamic” network evoked enhanced neural
activity in only a few localized patches in the “cortical” area
due to competitive interactions between local neural populations
(Figure 1B). Local patches of interconnected neurons that on
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 3


--- Page 4 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
average respond better than surrounding cells “win” a dynamic
competition and remain active. In contrast, neurons in the sur-
round are suppressed by inhibition and do not ﬁre. A detailed
description of the network along with all the parameter settings
used in the experiments can be found in the Appendix, and
connectivity parameters can be found in Ta b l e s A 2–A4.
WINNER-TAKE-ALL MEASURE
W e use the following measure of population sparseness ( S)t o
characterize WTA dynamics in the excitatory population:
S =
1 −
(
N∑
j = 1
rj
N
)2 /(
N∑
j= 1
rj
N
2
)
1 − 1
N
where rj is the number of spikes emitted by neuron j during the
measurement interval, (one second in this paper) and N was the
number of neurons in the population ( Willmore and T olhurst,
2001).
BRAIN-BASED-DEVICE (BBD)
T o demonstrate that a simulated network can control real-world
behavior, we designed and constructed a humanoid BBD. The
device is 50 cm high and uses a black and white wireless webcam
for vision. Each arm of the BBD contains eight Dynamixel servo-
motors (Robotis, Irvine, CA, USA). In the speciﬁc experiments
described here only the two shoulder joints function; all other
joints remain stationary with the arm extended. Shoulder joint
angles provided by the motors determine the posture of the arms.
A miniature PC (VIA T echnologies, Fremont, USA) mounted on
the back of the BBD maintains wireless communication between
the device and the neuronal networks simulated on a Mac-Pro
(Apple, Inc. Cupertino, CA).
A simulated motor neural network constructed and incor-
porated into the BBD controlled its behavior. This network
was similar to the sensory network, but was composed of only
1600 excitatory and 400 inhibitory spiking neurons. Different
patterns of activity in the motor area neurons speciﬁed dis-
tinct equilibrium postures of the left arm. Since the camera
of the BBD was aimed at the left robotic hand, each of these
postures presented a distinct pattern of visual input to the
system. The motor region received non-topographic connec-
tions from the output of the sensory network. By adjusting
parameters of feed-forward connections to the motor area from
the cortical area receiving camera input, this system came to
associate the visual input evoked by different postures to the
motoric output pattern that would generate and maintain those
postures.
POSITION ERROR CALCULATION
W e measure the position error of a given joint as follows. For every
arm posture measured during testing, we ﬁnd the closest posture
found during the training period. W e then measure the angular
difference of the joint between these two postures. W e report the
median and the maximum joint position error across all joints,
reaching trials, and subjects.
RESULTS
SPIKING ACTIVITY IN A WTA NETWORK
W e ﬁrst characterized spiking activity in the network as a func-
tion of the parameters of network connectivity ( Figure 1). All
analyses were carried out under the assumption of CAS con-
nectivity described above, and examined the effects of different
patterns of relative synaptic strengths on the various pathways in
the network.
In these analyses, each simulated network received identi-
cal random input to “thalamic” cells and started with identical
random neural states, but had different values of total excitatory-
to-inhibitory and inhibitory-to-excitatory synaptic strengths.
The total weight of inhibitory-to-inhibitory synapses was kept
equal to 2.4 times the total weight of inhibitory-to-excitatory
synapses to limit the parameter space. The strengths of excitatory-
to-excitatory synapses were kept constant in all simulations.
Connection strengths were not modulated by STDP but were
subject to the short-term synaptic plasticity inherent in mod-
eled neurons ( Izhikevich and Edelman, 2008 ). Exact values of
all parameters are given in Ta b l e A 2. All spikes that the net-
works emitted between 2 and 3 s after the onset of thalamic
input were recorded, at which time most simulations had reached
steady state.
Figure 2A illustrates the dynamic behavior of these networks
for 2000 different combinations of excitatory-to-inhibitory and
inhibitory-to-excitatory synaptic strengths. The color of each
pixel in Figure 2A is determined by a measure of the WTA behav-
ior of the network dynamics in the same 1 s time period. Since
WTA behavior entails sparse activity, we use a standard measure
of population activity sparseness to characterize WTA behavior
(see “Materials and Methods”). The measure will be close to one
for networks in which only a small subset of neurons respond
to the “thalamic” input with elevated ﬁring rates. Parameters
modeled in each raster plot in Figures 2B–D are indicated by a
corresponding labeled arrow in Figure 2A.
When both excitatory and inhibitory connection weights were
relatively high, local patches of excitatory neurons had a high
maximal ﬁring rate, as shown in the corresponding spike raster
plot ( Figure 2B). However, only a localized subset, (25% of this
neuronal population), maintained high ﬁring rates; most neu-
rons were silent. This outcome, in which a subset of neurons
ﬁres persistently at a high frequency and suppresses the activity
of other neurons, deﬁnes a WTA network state. The majority of
the parameter space explored corresponds to the WTA state as
indicated by the predominance of warm colors in Figure 2A.
The spike raster plot in Figure 2C shows activity within a
network in a traveling wave state. The ﬁring of both excitatory
and inhibitory neurons moves as a localized “patch” through
the network rather than remaining stationary in a WTA state.
Figure 2D shows a network that remained in an initial rhyth-
mic, periodic state for a prolonged period after stimulus onset,
but entered a WTA state toward the end of the third sec-
ond of stimulus presentation. Single excitatory neurons main-
tained a state of high-frequency spiking activity only when con-
nection strengths were within the WTA region delineated in
Figure 2A. Figures A1–A3 show close up plots from portions of
Figures 2B–D.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 4


--- Page 5 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
FIGURE 2 | WTA dynamics can occur in large regions of the parameter
space of CAS networks. (A) A measure of winner -take-all behavior in a
network is plotted as a function of synaptic weights coupling the excitatory
and inhibitory neural populations. The measure we use is the highest ﬁring
rate of any neuron in the network, subj ect to a sparseness constraint that
at least half of the neurons in the network are ﬁring at less than 2 Hz;
otherwise the measure is deﬁned to be zero. The total synaptic
conductance in nano-siemens (nS) ( Izhikevich and Edelman, 2008 )i ne a c h
individual inhibitory neuron from excitatory neurons is on the y-axis, and
total inhibitory conductance received by each neuron, excitatory or
inhibitory, is on the x-axis. The orange and red areas indicate regions of the
parameter space in which the network exhibits WTA behavior. The lower
left region of the parameter space, labeled “Epileptic, ” deﬁnes networks
exhibiting epileptic dynamics in which all neurons ﬁre indiscriminately to
the stimulus. (B–D) Are raster plots which show all spikes (blue dots)
during the third second of the simulation for each excitatory neuron in the
network. (B) All spikes of a network in a WTA state at parameters labeled
“Winner -T ake-All” in (panel A). During this state some excitatory neurons
(horizontal band of blue dots) ﬁre persistently in response to a constant
stimulus while others are silent. (C) At certain values of parameters, labeled
“T raveling Wave” in (panel A), region of the parameter space, the network
exhibits moving patches of activity instead of the stable patches shown in
(B); this results in diagonal bands in the one-dimensional raster plot. (D)
Occasionally the network requires more than two simulated seconds for a
winner to emerge. These “T ransient Rhythmic” states result in all neurons
ﬁring synchronously and rhythmically for some time before a winning group
emerges. See Figures A1 –A3 for close up plots from (panels B–D). A
raster plot corresponding to the epileptic activity state is not shown.
For comparison, we also simulated the spiking behavior
of networks of excitatory and inhibitory cells linked together
in three different, non-CAS architectures. The three alterna-
tive network architectures analyzed were: (1) standard center-
surround architecture in which connectivity among all neurons
was determined by a two-dimensional Gaussian probability dis-
tribution centered on each cell, inhibition having a larger σ than
excitation; (2) an inverse connectivity in which the excitatory
connections project to an annular-surround and the inhibitory
neurons connect locally, and (3) uniform random connectivity
among all neuron types (excitatory-to-inhibitory, inhibitory-to-
excitatory, excitatory-to-excitatory, and inhibitory-to-inhibitory)
(see Appendix for details of the parameters used). In the same
parameter space analyzed in Figure 2A, none of these connection
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 5


--- Page 6 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
types supported WTA behavior, characterized by stable patch
activity. The maximum population sparseness measure for the
three alternative network architectures listed above were 0.16,
0.54, and 0.21, respectively, whereas for the CAS network, the
majority of the parameter space yielded population sparseness
measures close to 1 ( Figure 2A). The most common ﬁring pat-
terns evoked in these neural networks were quasi-rhythmic ﬁr-
ings of excitatory neurons in the 10–20 Hz range punctuated
with short bursts of localized activity in inhibitory neurons.
Among the different connectivities we analyzed, only the CAS
motif gave rise to localized persistent activity that deﬁnes a
WTA state.
USING CAS ARCHITECTURE TO DEVELOP MAPS OF ORIENTATION
SELECTIVITY
Smooth maps, in which nearby neurons have similar response
properties, are ubiquitous in sensory and motor regions of the
cerebral cortex ( Obermayer et al., 1990; Kaschube et al., 2010 ).
For example, in the primary visual area of many animals, smooth
retinotopic maps coexist with smooth maps of stimulus orienta-
tion. Computational neural models have successfully generated
such smooth maps ( Choe and Miikkulainen, 2004 ), but not, so
far, with detailed networks of excitatory and inhibitory spiking
neurons. It is therefore of interest to investigate whether such
simulated networks of interconnected excitatory and inhibitory
spiking neurons might produce such maps. W e found that by
slowly increasing inhibition in the model over time as experimen-
tally observed ( Ben-Ari et al., 2012 ), the CAS network described
above develops smooth orientation maps when trained with
oriented visual input.
The “thalamic input” to the “cortical” cells were given a rough
initial topographic bias ( Choe and Miikkulainen, 2004 )b yl i m i t -
ing the maximum distance over which “thalamic” inputs traveled
to synapse on “cortical” cells. This simulation allows a maxi-
mum radius of 0.65 mm in a simulated 2 mm by 2 mm cortical
region. T raining stimuli consisted of 4000 images of computer-
generated elongated Gaussian shapes distributed throughout the
visual ﬁeld at random locations and orientations as in Choe and
Miikkulainen (2004). STDP was used to train a network of 60 by
60 excitatory and 30 by 30 inhibitory neurons for 40,000 sim-
ulated seconds. Each of the 4000 stimuli was presented to the
network 20 times, and each presentation lasted 500 ms.
T o assure smoothness in the resulting maps, more abstract
models of orientation map formation have generally made use
of an annealing process ( Obermayer et al., 1990 ). This anneal-
ing process takes the form of a slow decrease of the size of the
subpopulation of neurons active during the presentation of a
stimulus (Kohonen, 1984). W e sought a biological mechanism to
accomplish this slow decrease in the active population size. Recent
experimental evidence suggests that early during development,
GABAergic conductances are excitatory rather than inhibitory
(Ben-Ari et al., 2012 ). We hypothesized that such a lack of inhi-
bition would lead to a large fraction of the population becoming
active, and that slowly increasing inhibition during map forma-
tion would cause a monotonic reduction in active neurons. This
has the same effect as the more artiﬁcial annealing process imple-
mented algorithmically in abstract models of map formation.
W e approximated this mechanism in our simulations by slowly
increasing the GABAergic conductance of synapses onto excita-
tory cells, from zero to a plateau value. This plateau is reached
one fourth of the way through the simulation (see Ta b l e A 3).
This mechanism had the desired effect. Early during map devel-
opment, nearly one-quarter of the neurons in the network
responded to each stimulus. This number was reduced to a small
fraction of the neurons when inhibition reached its maximal level,
and the active population remained small for the remainder of the
training period (data not shown).
Finally, we tested the proposed annealing mechanism in con-
junction with the CAS architecture for the ability to develop
smooth maps. As shown in the resulting map ( Figure 3), nearby
neurons in the network tend to have similar orientation pref-
erences, i.e., the map is smooth, a characteristic of the primary
visual cortex of cat, ferret, tree shrew, and monkey (Obermayer et
al., 1990; Kaschube et al., 2010). In addition, dark areas are found
at the centers of so-called orientation pinwheels, around which
cells responding to all of the different orientations are found. The
fact that each color occurs multiple times in the map reﬂects the
fact that groups of cells respond to all orientations at each loca-
tion in the visual ﬁeld. This simpliﬁed spiking model based on the
visual cortex develops orientation columns qualitatively similar to
those found in the animal species mentioned above.
LEARNING HAND-EYE COORDINATION IN A BBD CONTROLLED
BY A LARGE SCALE SPIKING NETWORK
The work of Davison and Frégnac (2006) demonstrated that
STDP could be used to establish a mapping between two spik-
ing networks with correlated spiking activity. W e conﬁrm that this
FIGURE 3 | A simulated neural network develops a smooth orientation
map similar to those of cat and primate visual cortex. The map shows
the preferred orientation of individual excitatory neurons arrayed in a
60 × 60 neuron grid. Pixel colors relate location of each neuron to its
preferred orientation as indicated by the color bar at right of the map.
Adjacent neurons in the network tend to have similar orientation
preferences. Brightness varies with orientation selectivity (dark = low
selectivity, bright = high selectivity); dark areas are found at the centers of
so-called orientation pinwheels.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 6


--- Page 7 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
ﬁnding holds in a real-world task in a large-scale model of approx-
imately 7000 spiking neurons, which was able to learn a mapping
from visual targets to motor actions in a BBD.
T o do so we coupled together two CAS networks to create a
system that could learn the correlations between individual maps.
After training, the output of a system of such networks controlled
behavior in a real-world task: reaching to targets within the visual
ﬁ e l do faB B D .T od ot h i s ,w ei n t e g r a t e daC A S - n e t w o r km o t o r
map in a BBD. This motor map gave rise to autonomous arm
movements, a form of “motor babbling. ” With experience, this
system came to correlate the location of the hand in its own visual
ﬁeld to the motor command needed to maintain the hand at that
location, i.e., hand-eye-coordination.
The upper torso of the BBD maintained a seated posture that
allowed a sufﬁcient range of arm motion (see Figure 4). The head
unit containing a gray-scale video camera was aimed and held
ﬁxed during the experiment to allow the full range of motion of
the left arm to ﬁt into the camera’s ﬁeld of view. A bright yellow
object (5 × 5× 7 cm) attached to the end of the left arm allowed
FIGURE 4 | STDP plus synaptic scaling forms a mapping between
visual and motor maps. CAS networks were used in a humanoid BBD to
demonstrate that such a system could l earn sensorimotor coordination.
CAS networks consist of populations of excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I)
neurons synaptically coupled as described in the text. Visual input from the
video camera provided patterned input to “thalamic” (T) neurons of the
visual area (V), while the output of excitatory neurons in the motor area
(M) were used to control the two shoulder joints of the left arm. After
repeatedly stimulating the motor area in one of nine different locations, and
thus moving the arm to one of nine different postures, a mapping formed
from the visual area responses to the location of the hand to the motor area
output that drove the hand to those locations.
the visual system to detect the location of the end effector. The
neural simulation controlled only the two shoulder joints of the
BBD. Any given combination of the two joint angles yielded a
unique arm posture and thus determined the location within the
visual ﬁeld of the bright object. The goal was to form a mapping
between the visual input and joint angle commands that gave rise
to that input.
The neural network controlling the behavior of the BBD con-
sisted of the visual map area (V) and the motor area (M).
Area V was a two-dimensional array of 3481 excitatory and 900
inhibitory neurons. The network formed a topographic map of
the visual input from the camera (see Appendix for details of
visual input processing). The activity of each neuron in this
array was roughly proportional to the brightness level of the
corresponding pixel from the video input.
Area M, the motor area, contained 1600 excitatory and 400
inhibitory neurons. Each excitatory neuron was assigned a pre-
ferred set of angles for each of the two shoulder joints. Nearby
neurons in this predetermined map responded to similar joint
angles, but different patterns of activity among these cells could
evoke all possible positions of the left arm. In order to translate
from neuronal ﬁrings to joint angle in the left shoulder of the
BBD, the output of these cells was pooled using population vector
averaging (Georgopoulos et al., 1986 ). That is, for each joint, the
preferred joint angles of all cells, weighted by the corresponding
ﬁring rate, were summed to determine an equilibrium posture.
Joint angles were recalculated in this manner, and the angles of
the shoulder joints were adjusted every 250 ms.
T o learn the mapping from visual input to motor output, area
V was connected to area M with initially random one-way synap-
tic connections. In order to allow arbitrary mappings to form,
the connections were all-to-all. STDP was calculated as described
in “Materials and Methods” and was used to adjust the synaptic
strengths during the learning proc ess; short-term synaptic plas-
ticity was used as described previously ( Izhikevich and Edelman,
2008). In addition, the sum of the incoming synaptic strengths
for each neuron was normalized to a constant value on this
connection pathway. Ta b l e A 4gives all parameters used in this
experiment.
In order to train the device to reach, a so-called motor-
babbling reﬂex was incorporated in the BBD. During each move-
ment trial of the training phase we directly stimulated one of nine
different spots in the motor network by injecting current into
excitatory neurons for 450 ms. This effectively drove the arm into
a corresponding posture in open-loop fashion within approxi-
mately 100 ms, and the arm remained in a constant posture for
nearly 400 ms. before the beginning of the next trial. A total of
15 repetitions, each generating nine postures, were used during
this motor-babbling phase. During this time, STDP modulated
the strength of connections between co-active neurons in the
simulated visual and motor cortex, generating the visuomotor
mapping.
After the training phase, direct motor cortex stimulation was
turned off, and the target yellow object was detached from the
BBD. With the arm of the BBD at its side, the target object was
repeatedly placed by the experimenter in each of the nine spatial
locations that it had occupied during training. This experiment
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 7


--- Page 8 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
was repeated ﬁve times; in each repetition, parameters and con-
ditions were unchanged, except for initial synaptic strengths and
connectivity that were controlled by a seed of the random num-
ber generator function from the standard C library ( Kernighan
and Ritchie, 1988 ). During the testing period, the arm moved in
response to each new visual stimulus. Figure 5 shows the joint
angles that correspond to the nine successive postures assumed
by the BBD during training (blue) and testing (red) phases for all
ﬁve experiments. The joint angles arrived at during testing cluster
around those achieved in the training period, indicating an accu-
rate mapping between visual and motor responses. T o quantify
the precision of equilibrium postures, a measure of the position
error was recorded. W e deﬁne position error at a given joint as the
difference between the joint angles of the visually evoked postures
during testing and those recorded during the training period (see
“Materials and Methods”). The median joint angle error, pooled
across the two joints and across subjects, was 0.3
◦; the maximum
error was 13.6◦. V ariability in manually positioning the stimulus
in the visual ﬁeld of the robot contributed to the variability in the
m o t o re r r o r .Av i d e oc l i ps h o w i n gt h eb e h a v i o ro ft h es y s t e ma f t e r
being trained to reach to four positions is available in the online
Supplementary Material.
DISCUSSION
Our studies indicate that large-scale simulations of networks
of excitatory and inhibitory spiking neurons incorporating CAS
anatomy and synaptic plasticity can generate dynamically stable
behavior. Such networks are versatile, as shown by their ability to
form smooth maps, and they can serve as a basis for systems that
learn sensorimotor coordination.
FIGURE 5 | The BBD reaches accurately toward visual targets after
training. During the testing period, the arm consistently moved in
response to the visual stimulus. T o demonstrate the accuracy of the
movements, the joint angles of the commanded movements made during
training (blue) and testing (red) are plo tted in two-dimensional joint angle
space every 200 ms for all ﬁve subjects. Note that the joint angles achieved
during testing cluster around those achieved in the training period showing
the accuracy of the visually guided, learned movements.
How did competitive interactions in a network of spiking neu-
rons lead to a network that can categorize external inputs? Initial
synaptic strengths were randomly distributed, so neurons were
not tuned to speciﬁc stimuli. For any particular pattern of input,
some local population of neurons will, by chance, be slightly more
responsive than alternative groups, and active neuronal groups
will suppress activity in surrounding neurons. The operation of
STDP then acts to increase the synaptic drive from that input pat-
tern of activity. In addition, STDP and synaptic normalization
force heterosynaptic reduction in the strength of synapses from
uncorrelated input patterns.
The model networks described in this paper rely upon the
presence of short-range excitation and long-range inhibition.
This result is consistent with recent theoretical arguments that
long-range inhibitory interactions are critical for cortical map
formation (Kaschube et al., 2010). Among the three different con-
nectivity topologies we analyzed, it was expected that the standard
center-surround architecture would have also produced WTA
network behavior ( Dayan and Abbott, 2001 ). However, only the
CAS inhibition motif gave rise to the generation of localized per-
sistent activity that characterizes a WTA state. It is possible that
connection architectures other than the ones we tried might pro-
duce WTA behavior. Although we did explore the parameter space
for the standard center-surround model as we did for the CAS
model in Figure 2A,i ti sa l s op o s s i b l et h a te v e nt h i sc o n n e c t i v -
ity might work under different parameter settings. It may prove
informative to further explore analytically and empirically why
the center-surround inhibition failed to produce WTA behav-
ior in our simulations, and why the CAS architecture produced
robust WTA behavior under these same conditions.
W e have demonstrated the establishment of a mapping
between two maps given spiking input from the real-world. The
work of Davison and Frégnac (2006) demonstrated that STDP
could be used to establish a mapping between two areas with cor-
related spiking activity. W e conﬁrm that this ﬁnding holds in a
real-world task which, in our large-scale visuomotor model with
approximately 7000 spiking neurons, was able to learn a map-
ping from visual targets to motor actions in a BBD. Since STDP
requires consistent ﬁring of presynaptic before postsynaptic neu-
rons to potentiate synaptic efﬁcacies, one might not expect that
STDP would strengthen synapses from the visual to the motor
area, given that motor commands occur well before any visual
feedback from the arm movement occurs. However, at high ﬁr-
ing rates STDP is purely facilitory, so that all that was required
to learn the mapping between visual and motor areas was a brief
overlap between the time of bursts of spikes in the two areas. This
was accomplished by maintaining the BBD in each posture long
enough to assure that both motor area and visual area achieved
equilibrium.
In the simulated network reported here at least one type of
inhibitory neuron strongly inhibits an annulus in its surround
while not inhibiting nearby neurons. This differs from com-
putational models in which inhibitory connection proﬁles have
a Gaussian distribution with the strongest inhibition occurring
within the neighboring region ( Dayan and Abbott, 2001; Laing
and Chow, 2001 ). Such models are capable of WTA behavior
because strong local excitation is greater than local inhibition,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 8


--- Page 9 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
essentially removing that local inhibition. In our spiking model,
however, we did not obtain WTA behavior with strong local inhi-
bition. This may relate to the previous ﬁnding that spike synchro-
nization can prevent competition in networks of spiking neurons
(Lumer, 2000). Our simulations are in agreement with this ﬁnd-
ing (see for example, Figure 2D) .I na d d i t i o n ,w eh a v es h o w nt h a t
WTA behavior can arise in large-scale spiking networks even in
the presence of strong initial synchronization, if inhibitory neu-
rons inhibit in an annular surrounding region rather than locally.
W e have found that WTA behavior still emerges in our CAS net-
work when we shrink the inner radius to zero indicating that some
level of local inhibition may be tolerated (data not shown).
Our model with annular-surround inhibition also appears
to conﬂict with anatomical connections observed among cer-
tain inhibitory cells within the cortex. Reports of high connec-
tion probabilities between nearby basket and inhibitory neurons
(Holmgren et al., 2003 ) and the ﬁnding that small basket cells
tend to project little more than 100 μ from the cell body seem
at odds with our model. However, local connections from small
basket cells may perform a different role than do large basket
cells that project up to 1 mm from their cell bodies, and that
have been reported to mediate lateral inhibition in cortical net-
works ( Crook et al., 1998 ). Regardless of the mechanisms, our
simulations lead to the testable prediction that inhibition should
be stronger in some annular region surrounding inhibitory neu-
rons than it is within the local region from which it receives its
excitatory inputs.
The behavior of our simulations demonstrates the versatility
of networks of simulated spiking neurons endowed with CAS
connectivity and activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. Further
analyses of such simulations will undoubtedly prove to be a valu-
able tool leading to an understanding of brain function. They may
also form a useful basis for more sophisticated BBDs, and for
further theoretical studies of increasingly realistic brain networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W e thank Joseph A. Gally for numerous helpful comments and
suggestions on the manuscript. Our Engineer Donald Hudson
built the custom BBD for us. Engineer Richard Martin helped
in developing the computer interface to the BBD, and carry-
ing out the BBD experiments. This work was supported in part
by DARPA through ONR Grant 00014-08-1-0728 and by AFRL
Cooperative Agreement FA8750-11-2-0255 to Neurosciences
Research Foundation. For support of late developments we
are grateful to the Mathers Charitable Foundation. The US
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright nota-
tion thereon. The views, opinions, and/or ﬁndings contained in
this article/presentation are those of the authors/presenters and
should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial views or
policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency, the Air Force Research Laboratory, the
Department of Defense, or the US Government.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: http://www.frontiersin.org/Computational_Neuroscience/
10.3389/fncom.2013.00016/abstract
REFERENCES
Ben-Ari, Y ., Woodin, M. A., Sernagor,
E., Cancedda, L., Vinay, L., Rivera,
C., et al. (2012). Refuting the
challenges of the developmental
shift of polarity of GABA actions:
GABA more exciting than ever!
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 6:35. doi:
10.3389/fncel.2012.00035
Bi, G. Q., and Poo, M. M. (1998).
Synaptic modiﬁcations in cul-
tured hippocampal neurons:
dependence on spike timing,
synaptic strength, and postsy-
naptic cell type. J. Neurosci. 18,
10464–10472.
Binshtok, A. M., Fleidervish, I. A.,
Sprengel, R., and Gutnick, M. J.
(2006). NMDA receptors in layer
4 spiny stellate cells of the mouse
barrel cortex contain the NR2C sub-
unit. J. Neurosci. 26, 708–715.
Choe, Y ., and Miikkulainen, R. (2004).
Contour integration and segmen-
tation in a self-organizing map of
spiking neurons. Biol. Cybern. 90,
75–88.
Crook, J. M., Kisvárday, Z. F ., and
Eysel, U. T. (1998). Evidence for
a contribution of lateral inhibi-
tion to orientation tuning and
direction selectivity in cat visual
cortex: reversible inactivation of
functionally characterized sites
combined with neuroanatom-
ical tracing techniques. Eur. J.
Neurosci.10, 2056–2075.
Davison, A. P ., and Frégnac, Y . (2006).
Learning cross-modal spatial trans-
formations through spike timing-
dependent plasticity. J. Neurosci. 26,
5604–5615.
Dayan, P ., and Abbott, L. F .
(2001). Theoretical Neuroscience:
Computational and Mathematical
Modeling of Neural Systems .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
255–256.
Derdikman, D., Hildesheim, R.,
Ahissar, E., Arieli, A., and Grinvald,
A. (2003). Imaging spatiotemporal
dynamics of surround inhibition in
the barrels somatosensory cortex.
J. Neurosci. 23, 3100–3105.
Douglas, R. J., and Martin, K. A.
C. (2004). Neural circuits of the
neocortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci . 27,
419–451.
Fino, E., and Yuste, R. (2011). Dense
inhibitory connectivity in neocor-
tex. Neuron 69, 1188–1203.
Georgopoulos, A. P ., Schwartz, A.
B., and Kettner, R. E. (1986).
Neuronal population coding of
movement direction. Science 233,
1416–1419.
Goldman-Rakic, P . S. (1995). Cellular
basis of working memory. Neuron
14, 477–485.
H a i d e r ,B . ,K r a u s e ,M .R . ,D u q u e ,
A., Yu, Y ., T ouryan, J., Mazer, J.
A., et al. (2010). Synaptic and
network mechanisms of sparse
and reliable visual cortical activ-
ity during nonclassical receptive
ﬁeld stimulation. Neuron 65,
107–121.
Holmgren, C., Harkany, T.,
Svennenfors, B., and Zilberter,
Y . (2003). Pyramidal cell commu-
nication within local networks in
layer 2/3 of rat neocortex. J. Physiol.
551(Pt 1), 139–153.
Itti, L., Koch, C., and Niebur, E. (1998).
A model of saliency-based visual
attention for rapid scene analysis.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 20, 1254–1259.
Izhikevich, E. M. (2003). Simple model
of spiking neurons. IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. 14, 1569–1572.
I z h i k e v i c h ,E .M . ,a n dE d e l m a n ,G .M .
(2008). Large-scale model of mam-
malian thalamocortical systems.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
3593–3598.
Izhikevich, E. M. (2010). Hybrid
spiking models. Philos. Transact.
A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 368,
5061–5070.
Kaschube, M., Schnabel, M., Löwel, S.,
Coppola, D. M., White, L. E., and
W olf, F . (2010). Universality in the
evolution of orientation columns
in the visual cortex. Science 330,
1113–1116.
Kernighan, B. W., and Ritchie, D.
M. (1988). The C Programming
Language. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Kisvárday, Z. F ., Crook, J. M.,
Buzás, P ., and Eysel, U. T.
(2000). Combined physiological-
anatomical approaches to study
lateral inhibition. J. Neurosci.
Methods 103, 91–106.
Kohonen, T. (1984). Self-Organization
and Associative Memory .B e r l i n :
Springer-V erlag.
Laing, C. R., and Chow, C. C. (2001).
Stationary bumps in networks of
spiking neurons. Neural Comput.
13, 1473–1494.
Lumer, E. D. (2000). Effects of
spike timing on winner-take-all
competition in model corti-
cal circuits. Neural Comput. 12,
181–194.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 9


--- Page 10 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
Myme, C. I., Sugino, K., Turrigiano, G.
G., and Nelson, S. B. (2003). The
NMDA-to-AMPA ratio at synapses
onto layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons
is conserved across prefrontal and
visual cortices. J. Neurophysiol. 90,
771–779.
Obermayer, K., Ritter, H., and Schulten,
K. (1990). A principle for the
formation of the spatial struc-
ture of cortical feature maps.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87,
8345–8349.
Oster, M., Douglas, R., and Liu,
S. (2009). Computation with
spikes in a winner-take-all
network. Neural Comput. 21,
2437–2465.
Perin, R., Berger, T. K., and Markram,
H. (2011). A synaptic organiz-
ing principle for cortical neuronal
groups. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 5419–5424.
Rutishauser, U., Douglas, R. J., and
Slotine, J. (2011). Collective sta-
bility of networks of winner-take-
all circuits. Neural Comput. 23,
735–773.
Shriki, O., Hansel, D., and
Sompolinsky, H. (2003). Rate
models for conductance-based
cortical neuronal networks. Neural
Comput. 15, 1809–1841.
V on der Malsburg, Ch. (1973).
Self-organization of orien-
tation sensitive cells in the
striate cortex. Kybernetik 14,
85–100.
Willmore, B., and T olhurst, D. J.
(2001). Characterizing the sparse-
ness of neural codes. Network 12,
255–270.
Wilson, H. R., and Cowan, J. D. (1973).
A mathematical theory of the
functional dynamics of cortical and
thalamic nervous tissue. Kybernetik
13, 55–80.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.
Received: 17 October 2012; accepted: 01
March 2013; published online: 19 March
2013.
Citation: Chen Y , McKinstry JL and
Edelman GM (2013) Versatile net-
works of simulated spiking neurons dis-
playing winner-take-all behavior. Front.
Comput. Neurosci. 7:16. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2013.00016
Copyright © 2013 Chen, McKinstry
and Edelman. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License ,
which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in other forums, provided
the original authors and source are cred-
ited and subject to any copyright notices
concerning any third-party graphics etc.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org March 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 16 | 10


--- Page 11 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
APPENDIX
NEURON PARAMETERS
T able A1 | Neuron parameters.
Neuron type Area Ck v r vt vpeak ab cd
Excitatory V 80 3 − 60 − 50 50 0.01 5 − 60 10
Inhibitory V 20 1 − 55 − 40 25 0.15 8 − 55 200
Excitatory Motor 100 0 .7 − 60 − 50 0 0.03 − 2 − 60 100
Inhibitory Motor 20 1 − 55 − 40 25 0.15 8 − 55 200
Thalamic Input 200 1 .6 − 60 − 50 40 0.01 15 − 60 10
ANATOMY
The connectivity between model neurons fell into two classes:
either local-type or surround-type. For local-type connectivity,
a two-dimensional Gaussian probability distribution, centered
on each postsynaptic cell, determines the probability of form-
ing a synapse between each potential presynaptic neuron within a
speciﬁed maximum distance, rmax
f (d) = ae− (d − μ)2
2σ2
where a is a scale factor set to generate, on average, a target num-
ber of synapses on each postsynaptic cell,d is the distance between
the presynaptic neuron and the postsynaptic neuron,μ is 0, and σ
is the standard deviation. In a similar manner, a two-dimensional
Gaussian function was also used to specify the synaptic strength
between connected neurons as a function of the distance between
them in the network. The total of all synaptic efﬁcacies was scaled
to sum to a constant parameter with units in nanoSiemens (nS).
Thus both connection probability and strength were maximal
between nearest neighbors, and fell off as a function of distance,
controlled by the same parameter, the standard deviation of a
Gaussian.
For surround-type connectivity, a postsynaptic neuron
receives synaptic connections from neurons located in a sur-
rounding annular region speciﬁed by a minimum ( rmin)a n d
maximum (rmax) radial distance from the postsynaptic cell. (This
is equivalent to saying that each presynaptic neuron sends pro-
jections to postsynaptic neurons in an annular region). The
probability of forming a connection with a neuron in the annu-
lus is determined as a function of distance from the postsynaptic
cell. The function used is a Gaussian with standard deviation
σ,c e n t e r e da tμ = (r
min + rmax)/2. Thus a postsynaptic neuron
connects with no neurons in the center of the annulus, has mini-
mal connection probability at the minimum radius, increasing to
the maximum probability half-way between the inner and outer
radius, and falling off once again with increasing distance up
to the outer radius, beyond which the connection probability is
forced to zero. This probability distribution function is scaled to
create a target number of synapse s for each postsynaptic neuron.
The synaptic strengths for the su rround-type connection are also
initialized using the same function, with the same parameters.
However, the sum of all synaptic strengths of this type was scaled
to make the total equal to a constant value under experimenter
control.
In order to avoid boundary conditions in the network, the
network was treated as a torus. Thus connections from neurons
that would go outside of the network instead “wrap around” to
connect with neurons on the opposite edge.
Ta b l e A 2shows the parameters deﬁning the anatomy and
synaptic parameters of the CAS network used in the parame-
ter space analysis in Results section “Spiking Activity in a WTA
Network. ” The table deﬁnes two types of information for every
neural area: the neuron composition, and the synaptic connectiv-
ity for each neuron type. The ﬁrst four columns of the table list,
for each separate neural population in the simulation, the type of
neuron, the area in which it is located, the number of neurons in
the population, and the total number of synapses per neuron.
The remaining columns deﬁne the connectivity for each type
of neuron in the area. Multiple rows are necessary to deﬁne the
connectivity for each postsynaptic type; one row is needed for
each presynaptic neuron type forming synapses on the postsynap-
tic neurons. Pre-area and pre-type specify the presynaptic area
and type of the neuronal group projecting to the postsynaptic
group. The next column speciﬁes the percentage of the postsy-
naptic cell’s synapses allocated to this pathway. The remaining
columns provide all of the parameters used to specify details of
the synaptic pathways as described in the paragraphs above.
Ta b l e A 3shows the parameters deﬁning the anatomy and
synaptic parameters of the orientation selective map experiment
in the Results section “Using CAS Architecture to Develop Maps
of Orientation Selectivity”; the format is the same as that for
Ta b l e A 2.
Ta b l e A 4shows the parameters deﬁning the anatomy and
synaptic parameters of the visuomotor coordination network
used to control the arm of The BBD in the Results section
“Learning Hand-eye Coordination in a BBD Controlled by a
Large Scale Spiking Network”; the format is the same as that for
Ta b l e A 2.
CLOSE UP OF A PORTION OF FIGURES 2B–D
Figures A1–A3 show close ups of Figures 2B–D.
CONTROL EXPERIMENT PARAMETERS
The following parameters were used in control experiments to
demonstrate that the CAS architecture made an improvement in
WTA behavior in our simulations.
Standard center-surround architecture
In the classical center-surround topology, both excitatory and
inhibitory neurons have local connection type but with different
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org M a r c h2 0 1 3|V o l u m e7|A r t i c l e1 6| 11


--- Page 12 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
T able A2 | Anatomical and synaptic parameters for the CAS network used in the parameter space analysis in results section “Spiking Activity
in a WTA Network. ”
Postsynaptic neuron type
Postsynaptic area
Number of neurons
Average synapses per neuron
Presynaptic area
Presynaptic neuron type
Percentage of total synapses
rmin (mm)
rmax (mm)
σ (mm)
ε
stotal (nS)
smax (nS)
Initial α
Final α
Learning start time (ms)
Learning end time (ms)
nmda_gain
gabab_gain
Exc. V 3481 3520 V Exc. 12.5 – 0.1 0.05 0 22 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 25 0.1 1 0.8 0 0–1600 20 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 62.5 – 1 .44 2.5 0 900 50 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Inh. V 900 2000 V Exc. 20 – 0.33 0.16 0 0–100 5 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 40 0.1 1 0.3333 0 0–240 15 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 40 – 4.0 10 0 10 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Thalamic Input 441 0 – – 0 – 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
T able A3 | Anatomy and synaptic parameters for the orientation selective map experiment.
Postsynaptic neuron type
Postsynaptic area
Number of neurons
Average synapses per neuron
Presynaptic area
Presynaptic neuron type
Percentage of total synapses
rmin (mm)
rmax (mm)
σ (mm)
ε
stotal (nS)
smax (nS)
Initial α
Final α
Learning start time (ms)
Learning end time (ms)
nmda_gain
gabab_gain
Exc. V 3600 2200 V Exc. 20 – 0.035 0.07 0 10 2 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 40 0.035 1 0.3333 0 400 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 40 – 0.65 0.25 0.5 20 10 0.01 0.01 0 10,000,000 0.5 0.1
Inh. V 900 2000 V Exc. 20 – 0.33 0.16 0 20 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 40 0.07 1 0.3333 0 180 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 40 – 1 .44 10 0.5 30 2 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Thalamic Input 400 0 – – 0 – 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
standard deviations. This connection architecture has been
reported to produce WTA dynamics (see main text for ref-
erences). In this control experiment, excitatory neurons con-
nected with inhibitory neurons in a Gaussian distribution
with maximal distance ( r_max) of 0.33 mm and a stan-
dard deviation of 0.16 mm. Inhibitory neurons connect to
excitatory neurons and themselves in a wider Gaussian dis-
tribution with maximal distance ( r_max) at 1.44 mm and
larger standard deviations (sigma = 0.8 mm) than excitatory
connections.
Excitatory-surround, inhibitory center architecture
An additional control experiment was conducted with a connec-
tion architecture is a reverse version of our CAS topology. That
is, excitatory connections are annular-surround type speciﬁed
by r_min = 0.1 mm, r_max = 1 mm and a Gaussian distribution
centered at ( r_min + r_max)/2 with a standard deviation of
0.3333 (sigma). Inhibitory connection, on the other hand, are
local Gaussian type with r_max = 0.333 and standard deviation
of 0.16.
Uniform random excitatory and inhibitory architecture
In this control experiment, excitatory and inhibitory neurons
have an equal probability of connecting to any other excitatory
or inhibitory neuron. This is implemented as a local connec-
tion in which the maximal connection distance is set to cover
t h ee n t i r ea r e a(r_max = 1.44 mm, r_min = 0 mm) and standard
deviation of the Gaussian distribution used to generate the con-
nection probability is large enough to approximate a uniform
distribution (sigma = 10 mm).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org M a r c h2 0 1 3|V o l u m e7|A r t i c l e1 6| 12


--- Page 13 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
T able A4 | Anatomy and synaptic parameters for the visuomotor coordination network used to control the arm of the BBD.
Postsynaptic neuron type
Postsynaptic area
Number of neurons
Average synapses per neuron
Presynaptic area
Presynaptic neuron type
Percentage of total synapses
r
min (mm)
rmax (mm)
σ (mm)
ε
stotal (nS)
smax (nS)
Initial α
Final α
Learning start time (ms)
Learning end time (ms)
nmda_gain
gabab_gain
Exc. V 3481 3520 V Exc. 12.5 – 0 .1 0.05 0 22 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 25 0.1 1 0.8 0 1250 20 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 62.5 – 1 .44 2.5 0 900 50 0.9 0.9 0 45,000 0.5 0.1
Inh. V 900 2000 V Exc. 20 – 0 .33 0.16 0 25 5 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Inh. 40 0.1 1 0.3333 0 180 15 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Input Thalamic 40 – 4 .0 10 0 10 10 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Thalamic Input 441 0 – – 0 – 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
Exc. M 1600 1800 M Exc. 33 – 0 .33 0.16 0 5 5 0.9 0.02 45,000 81,000 0.5 0.1
M Inh. 45 0.3333 1 .444 10 0 1200 100 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
VE x c . 2 2 – 1 .414 4.5 0 25 5 0.9 0.02 45,000 81,000 0.5 0.1
Inh. M 400 1000 M Exc. 42.8 – 0 .33 0.16 0 10 5 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
M Inh. 28.6 0.3333 1 .444 10 0 800 20 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
V Exc. 28.6 – 1 .414 4.5 0 30 5 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.1
F I G U R EA 1|C l o s eu po fFigure 2B showing individual spike trains for a
small subset of excitatory neurons. See Figure 2B caption for a complete
description.
VISUAL INPUT TO THE BBD
Video was recorded with an Axis 207MW wiﬁ camera. Black
and white images with a resolution of 320 × 240 were trans-
mitted at 30 fps. The central portion of the video frames
were used as input to a two-dimensional grid of on-center
retinal ganglion cells (RGC). The grid size was 21 × 21 neu-
rons with a center area size of 3 × 3 and the surround area
FIGURE A2 | Close up of Figure 2C showing individual spike trains
for a small subset of excitatory neurons. See Figure 2C caption for a
complete description.
of 6 × 6 neurons. Each RGC receives a current that is com-
puted following the algorithm of W ohrer and Kornprobst (2009).
These currents were constantly injected at each integration step
until the next video frame was received. RGCs were mod-
eled with the Izhikevich model ( Izhikevich and Edelman, 2008 )
with the following parameters: C = 100, Vr =− 70 mV , Vt =
− 50 mV , k = 1, a = 0.005, b = 0, c =− 75 mV , d = 250, and
Vpeak = 10 mV .
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org M a r c h2 0 1 3|V o l u m e7|A r t i c l e1 6| 13


--- Page 14 ---
Chen et al. Versatile networks of spiking neurons
FIGURE A3 | Close up of Figure 2D showing individual spike
trains for a small subset of excitatory neurons. See Figure 2D
caption for a complete description.
SUPPLEMENTARY VIDEO
The online supplementary material includes a video showing the
behavior of the BBD during testing, after it has been trained to
reach to four visual locations.
REFERENCES
Izhikevich, E. M., and Edelman, G. M. ( 2008). Large-scale model of mammalian
thalamocortical systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 3593–3598.
Wohrer, A., and Kornprobst, P . (2009). Virtual retina: a biological retina model and
simulator, with contrast gain control. J. Comput. Neurosci. 26, 219–249.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org M a r c h2 0 1 3|V o l u m e7|A r t i c l e1 6| 14
