--- Page 1 ---
Effects of ﬁxational eye movements on retinal ganglion cell
responses: A modelling study
Matthias H. Hennig 1* and Florentin W ¨org ¨otter2
1. Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
2. Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of G ¨ottingen, Germany
Edited by: Misha T sodyks, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
Reviewed by: Klaus R. Pawelzik, University of Bremen, Germany
Peter Konig, University of Osnabr ¨uck, Germany
Visual response properties of retinal ganglion cells (GCs), the retinal output neurons, are shaped by numerous processes and interactions
within the retina. In particular, amacrine cells are known to form microcircuits that affect GC responses in speciﬁc ways. So far, relatively
little is known about the inﬂuence of retinal processing on GC responses under naturalistic viewing conditions, in particular in the presence
of ﬁxational eye movements. Here we used a detailed model of the mammalian retina to investigate possible effects of ﬁxational eye
movements on retinal GC activity. Populations of linear, sustained (parvocellular, PC) and nonlinear, transient (magnocellular, MC) GCs
were simulated during ﬁxation of a star-shaped stimulus, and two distinct effects were found: (1) a fading of complete wedges of the
star and (2) an apparent splitting of stimulus lines. Both effects only occur in MC-cells, and an analysis shows that fading is caused by
an expression of the aperture problem in retinal GCs, and the splitting effect by spatiotemporal nonlinearities in the MC-cell receptive
ﬁeld. These effects strongly resemble perceived instabilities during ﬁxation of the same stimulus, and we propose that these illusions
may have a retinal origin. We further suggest that in this case two parallel retinal streams send conﬂicting, rather than complementary,
information to the higher visual system, which here leads to a dominant inﬂuence of the MC pathway. Similar situations may be common
during natural vision, since retinal processing involves numerous nonlinearities.
Keywords: motion perception, eye movements, ﬁxation, model, retina, nonlinearities, magnocellular pathway
INTRODUCTION
Visual perception is initiated by the responses of multiple populations of
neurons in the retina, each with different response properties. While the
properties of neurons in the early visual system are responsible for a
number of limitations of visual perception, not all speciﬁc response prop-
erties of a given neuron class are readily rediscovered at the perceptual
level. Instead they may disappear in higher visual areas due to integra-
tion and other mechanisms which facilitate a correct interpretation of a
stimulus.
A famous example of this kind is the aperture problem (Hildreth and
Koch, 1987; Wallach, 1935). The area where a neuron in the visual system
can be excited by a stimulus is constrained by the ﬁnite dimensions of
its receptive ﬁeld, the neuron’s window or aperture to the outer world. If
an elongated stimulus passes over such a receptive ﬁeld, the neuron will
only respond to the motion component orthogonal to the orientation of the
stimulus. This effect occurs essentially for all cells at lower visual process-
ing stages where receptive ﬁelds are small and the ability of individual
neurons to unambiguously encode stimulus properties is hence limited.
On the other hand, the activity of a subset of neurons usually provides
∗ Correspondence: Matthias H. Hennig, Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computa-
tion, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH1 2QL, UK. e-mail:
mhhennig@gmail.com
Received: 25 Aug. 2007; paper pending published: 15 Oct. 2007; accepted: 15 Oct.
2007; published online: 2 Nov. 2007.
Full citation: Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience (2007) 1:2
doi: 10.3389/neuro.10/002.2007
Copyright: ©2007 Hennig and W ¨org ¨otter. This is an open-access article subject to an
exclusive license agreement between the authors and the Frontiers Research Foundation,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original authors and source are credited.
sufﬁcient information to resolve these ambiguities at higher levels. It has,
for instance, been demonstrated that the aperture problem is resolved by
integration in the motion sensitive area MT ( Pack and Born, 2001 ).
While this is only one example, large-scale integration effects are
thought to be generally involved in the generation of stable visual per-
cepts and the individual cell properties over which integration takes place
remain, therefore, often hidden. As a consequence, speciﬁc properties of
two dominant early visual processing streams, the parvo- (PC) or mag-
nocellular (MC) systems, are not always discovered at the perceptual
level.
In the primate retina, the PC stream is represented by linear, sustained
PC-cells and the MC stream by MC-cells, which show fast, transient
responses and nonlinear spatiotemporal summation ( Benardete et al.,
1992; Derrington and Lennie, 1984; Kaplan and Shapley, 1982; Leventhal
et al., 1981; White et al., 2002). PC-cells have smaller receptive ﬁelds and
a higher density than MC-cells, and only PC-cells have colour-opponent
receptive ﬁelds. It is, therefore, often hypothesised that PC-cells mediate
high-acuity vision for static stimuli while MC-cells are mainly involved
in the processing of moving stimuli ( Schiller and Logothetis, 1990; but
see Lee et al., 1993 ). These two cell classes provide the basis for the
segregation into the ventral and dorsal visual pathways, which have been
associated with form- and motion analysis in the visual cortex ( Merigan
and Maunsell, 1993).
In this paper, we suggest that two visual illusions, caused by ﬁxational
eye movements, may be directly related to speciﬁc properties of retinal
MC ganglion cells (GCs). To show this, we simulated responses of linear,
sustained (PC) and nonlinear, transient (MC) GCs during stimulation with
a star-shaped stimulus in the presence of ﬁxational eye movements. We
found two effects in the population response of MC-cells: a fading of
lines or whole wedges of the stimulus, and an apparent splitting of single
1
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 2 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
lines. Both effects, which were not visible in the PC-cell population, show
spatiotemporal instabilities consistent with visual illusions caused by a
number of related stimuli. We will show how the effects are induced by
ﬁxational eye movements and can be explained by speciﬁc properties of
the retinal MC system. We will further discuss that under these conditions
visual perception is dominated by MC responses, while information in the
PC stream that cold facilitate a correct interpretation of the stimulus is
bypassed.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Structure of the model retina
The model aims to simulate responses of populations of two types of
retinal GCs: a linear, sustained type with a small receptive ﬁeld and
a nonlinear, transient type with a larger receptive ﬁeld. The speciﬁc
parameters for each cell class were chosen, where possible, to reﬂect
those of the primate foveal PC and MC on-centre channels under
cone-dominated illumination conditions. We will show that important
Figure 1. Summary of the model connectivity and behaviour. (A) Schematic diagram of the model retina. Photoreceptors (P) connect by excitatory synapses
(⊕ ) to horizontal cells (H) and by sign-inverting synapses ( ⊖) to on-centre bipolar cells (BCs). Horizontal cells connect to BCs with sign-conserving synapses.
The receptive ﬁeld of on-centre GCs consists of excitatory input from on-centre BCs (centre) and inhibitory input from wide ﬁeld amacrine cells (A, su rround). For
MC-cells, the presynaptic BCs receive inhibition from narrow-ﬁeld amacrine cells (N) at the axon terminal (forming a subgroup of transient BCs). Nar row-ﬁeld
amacrine cells receive excitatory input from BCs and inhibition from wide-ﬁeld amacrine cells (W). Wide-ﬁeld amacrine cells are excited by transien t BCs and
receive inhibition from narrow-ﬁeld amacrine cells. Combined, this coupling of amacrine cells forms a nested circuit (shaded region), which leads t o transient
responses in MC-GCs. (B) Spatial parameters of the simulated network (relative sizes are to scale). Shown are the point spread function (PSF) simulating ocular
blurring, the separation of photoreceptors (open circles) and PC- and MC-GCs (ﬁlled circles). ( C) Responses of a photoreceptor, sustained and transient BC and
PC- and MC-GC during contrast reversal of a sinusoidal grating (90 degree phase, 11 cpd, 5 Hz). (D) Contrast sensitivity for simulated PC- (grey) and MC-cells
(black) as a function of spatial frequency, calculated by estimating the slope of the contrast-response function (inset shows this fo r a 2 cpd grating). Response
amplitudes are the ﬁrst harmonics (F1) of the membrane potential in response to drifting sinusoidal gratings (8 Hz). (E) Receptive ﬁeld nonlinearities in simulated
MC-cells. The top graph shows the ﬁrst (F1) and second harmonic (F2) response of a MC-cell during stimulation with a contrast-reversed sine grating (8 Hz;
black: 8 cpd; grey: 12 cpd) as a function of the RF location relative to the stimulus. The response amplitudes were multiplied by the sign of the response phase.
The bottom graph shows the corresponding nonlinearity indices (F2/F1) as a function of the spatial frequency.
2
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 3 ---
Eye movements and retinal activity
features of these neurons are well captured by this model. Therefore,
we refer to the two types as PC- and MC-cells throughout this study. The
model was largely based on an earlier model used to explore differences
in X- and Y-cell behaviour in the cat retina ( Hennig et al., 2002a ). The
limitations of the model will be addressed in Discussion.
A schematic diagram of the connectivity of the model neurons is shown
in Figure 1A. Model neurons are arranged on two-dimensional, stacked
hexagonal grids. The photoreceptor layer consists of 200 × 200 neurons,
with a nearest-neighbour separation of 0 .55
′. Stimuli are ﬁrst convolved
with a PSF to account for the ocular optics (Figure 1B; Westheimer, 1986).
Horizontal and BCs receive synaptic input from photoreceptors. The hor-
izontal cell layer was modelled as an electrically coupled syncytium and
the activity is calculated at each site of synaptic contact to BCs. A transient
and sustained on-centre BC type was included, with the same density as
the photoreceptors (Dacey, 1993; Milam et al., 1993; W¨assle and Boycott,
1991). Both sustained and transient BCs receive excitatory input from
photoreceptors and are inhibited by horizontal cells. In addition, transient
BCs receive recurrent inhibition from amacrine cells which leads to an
ampliﬁcation of transient response characteristics (‘nested amacrine cir-
cuit’, shaded region in Figure 1C ). PC GCs receive synaptic input from
sustained and MC-cells from transient BCs. Furthermore, both GC types
receive inhibitory input from wide-ﬁeld amacrine cells, which contributes
to their receptive ﬁeld surround ( Flores-Herr et al., 2001; Sinclair et al.,
2004). Figure 1C illustrates representative responses of the sustained
and transient pathway in the model.
This connectivity, which will be described in more detail below, pro-
duces the typical receptive ﬁelds of GCs composed of a Gaussian-shaped
excitatory centre and a wider surround. The temporal dynamics and gain
of PC-cells closely follows that of the photoreceptors, whereas MC-cells
are transient and show nonlinear spatiotemporal summation.
Neuron models and synaptic connectivity
Neurons were modelled by the equation for a passive neural membrane
C dV (t)
dt =
( N∑
i=0
gi(t) · (V (t) − Ei)
)
+ Vrest − V (t)
R (1)
Here C is the membrane capacitance, gi(t) the conductance evoked by
input i, Ei its reversal potential, R the membrane resistance and Vrest
the resting potential. To simplify the model, the following common set
of parameters were used for all neurons: C = 100 pF, R = 100 M/Omega1
and Vrest =− 60 mV. For excitatory (glutamatergic) inputs the reversal
potential was Erev,glu = 0 mV, and for inhibitory input, it was set
to Erev,GABA =− 70 mV for GABAergic and Erev,gly =− 80 mV for
glycinergic synapses.
Synaptic conductances were modelled as functions of the presynap-
tic potential, expressed as gi(t) = f (Vpre) · 0.3 nS/V for all cell types
except for transient BCs, where gi,T (t) = f (Vpre) · 0.4 nS/V was used
(see below). The glutamate release for BCs and amacrine cells was trun-
cated at − 3 mV below resting potential (assuming a low maintained
transmitter release)
f (t) = V
pre − Vrest
1 + exp(−
Vpre−Vrest− 3 mV
10 mV )
(2)
Photoreceptors. Cone photoreceptor responses under photopic condi-
tions were simulated by means of a state-variable description. This is
based on a model description of the photocurrent of macaque cones after
brief stimulation ( Schnapf et al., 1990 ), which was extended to calculate
the corresponding photovoltage during light stimulation. The following set
of equations describe the model:
τ
Casc
dSi(t)
dt = Si− 1(t) − Si(t) (3)
d[cGMP](t)
dt =− β·
(
[Ca2+](t) − 1
)
  
re− synthesis
−S3(t) · [cGMP](t)  
stimulus induced
(4)
d[Ca2+](t)
dt = γ(1 + c · ([cGMP](t) − 1))  
inﬂux
−α· [Ca2+](t)  
efﬂux
(5)
d[H](t)
dt =
(
1
e(VP (t)−AH )SH + 1
)
· (1 − [H](t)) − δH [H](t) (6)
CP
dVP (t)
dt = qP
d[Ca](t)
dt + qI
d[H](t)
dt (7)
Parameters and their description are given in Table 1 . This model
reproduces the time course of the photovoltage during light stimu-
lation as described by Schnapf et al. (1990) , produces a Michaelis
Menten intensity-response relation and follows Weber’s law for back-
ground desensitisation (Hennig et al., 2002a). The photovoltage response
of the model is biphasic with a sharp onset transient, which is fol-
lowed by a weaker sustained response. The response terminates
due to action of an inward hyperpolarisation-activated current with
a transient depolarisation (Equation 6), which is slower and slightly
weaker than the initial onset transient ( Figure 1C ). For a com-
plete description and discussion of this photoreceptor model, see
Hennig et al. (2002a) (note there is a mistake in Equation (4) in
this paper).
It should be noted that a conceptually similar, but much more detailed
model of a primate photoreceptor was recently developed by van Hateren
(2005), which was later extended to include their coupling to horizon-
tal cells in the outer plexiform layer ( van Hateren, 2007 ). These models,
which produced excellent ﬁts to experimental data from horizontal cells,
share some features with our model (cf. Hennig et al., 2002a , Figure 2):
sensitivity is regulated as a function of the background light intensity, at
higher contrast the photovoltage response is increasingly distorted, and
sensitivity regulation leads to nonlinearities in horizontal cell responses.
An important difference is that our model operates only in a very lim-
ited luminance range, primarily because the feedback mechanisms were
assumed to operate linearly. Nevertheless, we assume that our model
is sufﬁciently accurate to realistically reproduce responses in the limited
luminance and contrast range investigated here.
Horizontal cells. Horizontal cells were simulated as a syncytium of elec-
trically coupled neurons. The spatial decay of the activity was assumed
to be Gaussian shaped. We note that this is a strongly simpliﬁed model, a
more accurate treatment would not predict a Gaussian spatial decay (Nel-
son, 1977). The standard deviation was set to four cone diameters, about
the size of the midget cell receptive ﬁeld surround in the fovea ( W ¨assle
et al., 1989 ). Hence, these horizontal cells best reﬂect the achromatic
H1 population, which is held responsible for shaping midget BC receptive
ﬁelds ( Dacey et al., 2000; McMahon et al., 2004 ).
Bipolar cells. The model includes two types of BCs: sustained and tran-
sient on-centre BCs (see representative responses in Figure 1C). All BC
types receive sign-inverted excitatory input from cones and are antago-
nised by horizontal cells to account for their receptive ﬁeld surround (Dacey
et al., 2000; McMahon et al., 2004 ). This was simulated by inverting the
horizontal cell activity and assuming a synapse with a reversal potential at
E
rev,inh =− 70 mV (Feigenspan et al., 1993 ). When voltage-gated cur-
rents in cones/BCs are neglected, this implementation is mathematically
equivalent to both a non-GABAergic mechanism which relies on the volt-
age modulation in the synaptic cleft ( Kamermans and Spekreijse, 1999 )
or on an increase in the Cl
− reversal potential above the resting potential
in the cone axon or bipolar dendrites ( Vardi et al., 2000 ).
In addition, transient BCs receive GABAergic inhibition from narrow-
ﬁeld amacrine cells at their axon terminals as part of a circuit which
3
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 4 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
Table 1. Constants, variables and parameters of the photoreceptor model.
Parameter Equations Description Value
Si(t) 3 Activity of the ith low-pass ﬁlter stage ( i = 1,..., 3, i = 0: stimulus).
Emulates the initial ampliﬁcation cascade
τCasc 3 Time constant of the low-pass ﬁlter 2 ms
[cGMP](t) 4 Concentration of hydrolysed cGMP
β 4 Strength of the re-synthesis reaction of cGMP 1 ms− 1
[Ca2+](t) 5 Intracellular concentration of Ca2+
α, γ 5 Rates of efﬂux and inﬂux of ions 0 .4 ms− 1
c 5 Impact of [cGMP] on the cation concentration 0 .1 ms− 1
[H](t) 6 Hyperpolarisation-activated Ih current
VP (t) 7 Photovoltage
AH 6 Activation of the h-current − 0.4 V
SH 6 Slope of the activation function for the h-current 10 V− 1
δH 6 Rates of increase and decay of the ionic concentrations for the h-current 0 .025 ms− 1
CP 7 Membrane capacity 100 pF
qP 7 Unit charge transported by the Ca2+ current 1 · 10− 9 C
qI 7 Unit charge transported by the Ih current 6 · 10− 9 C
It consists of the following stages: (1) three cascaded low-pass ﬁlters (Equation 3), (2) hydrolisation of the second messenger cGMP (Equation 4)
and Ca2+-dependent re-synthesis, (3) in- and outﬂux of Ca2+ (Equation 5), (4) the hyperpolarisation-activated Ih current (Bader and Bertrand, 1984;
Demontis et al., 1999) (Equation 6) and the calculation of the photovoltage (Equation 7). Concentrations of second messengers and cations are calculated
in dimensionless units relative to the boundaries [0, 1] and the photovoltage is calculated in Volts.
leads to more transient responses (see below). Their input conductance
was increased by a factor of 1.3 to compensate for the reduced transient
component due to inhibition.
Amacrine cells. The axon terminal of transient BCs receives inhibition
from a narrow-ﬁeld amacrine cell, which is part of a nested amacrine
circuit (shaded region in Figure 1A). Narrow-ﬁeld amacrine cells receive
excitatory input from a single BC and are inhibited by wide-ﬁeld amacrine
cells. Inhibitory wide-ﬁeld amacrine cells receive excitatory input from
transient BC terminals and are in turn inhibited by narrow ﬁeld amacrine
cells. A narrow-ﬁeld amacrine cell receptive ﬁeld centre is, therefore,
equivalent to the BC receptive ﬁeld, and that of wide-ﬁeld cells Gaussian
shaped with a radius of 2.5 cone diameters ( σ
C = 1.4′).
This circuit reduces the sustained component of transient BCs by
means of delayed inhibition. The onset transient is further ampliﬁed by
wide-ﬁeld amacrine cells, which then act in a disinhibitory way. This effect
is particularly pronounced for larger stimuli that excite wide-ﬁeld amacrine
cells fully. Experimental results suggest that an equivalent amacrine cell
circuit contributes to the transient responses of GCs (Nirenberg and Meis-
ter, 1997; Roska et al., 1998 ). In addition, a similar circuit has been used
in a model to explain complex spike patterns in the turtle retina ( Thiel
et al., 2006 ). While this speciﬁc model is based on data obtained in the
salamander retina ( Roska et al., 1998 ), data from the cat retina sug-
gests that an equivalent circuit may exist in mammals ( O’Brien et al.,
2003).
A further type of amacrine cell was included as an inhibitory interneu-
ron with a wide receptive ﬁeld that contributes to the GC receptive ﬁeld
surround. These cells receive excitatory input from BCs and inhibit GCs
(Flores-Herr et al., 2001; Sinclair et al., 2004 ). The Gaussian radius of
their receptive ﬁelds was set to 3.8 times the centre size of the respective
postsynaptic GC.
Ganglion cells. PC-cells were separated by 0.55
′ and MC-cells by 1.65′
on the hexagonal retinal grid (Dacey and Petersen, 1992; Goodchild et al.,
1996). The receptive ﬁeld centre of PC-cells consisted of input from a
single BC, and MC-cells received input over a radius of 1 .1′. Another
study has reported higher values ( Dacey and Petersen, 1992 ), but the
receptive ﬁeld size was not critical for the results presented here (see
Discussion). The inhibitory surround is mediated by wide ﬁeld amacrine
cells with a receptive ﬁeld of > 3.8 times the centre input.
It should be noted that the receptive ﬁeld dimensions speciﬁed above
reﬂect the anatomical connectivity, and that the effective physiological
receptive ﬁeld is larger due to optical blurring and the presynaptic circuitry.
Consistent with experimental data ( Croner and Kaplan, 1995; Lee, 1996 ),
the ‘physiological’ centre radius of simulated PC- and MC-cells, when
tested with drifting gratings, is similar, but PC-cells respond at higher
spatial frequencies than MC-cells ( Figure 1D).
Simulated PC-cells effectively inherit their response characteristics
from photoreceptors after spatiotemporal ﬁltering ( Figure 1C , compare
photoreceptor, BC and PC-cell responses). In contrast, the response of MC-
cells is strongly inﬂuenced by the action of the nested amacrine circuit,
which leads to the pronounced transient behaviour ( Figure 1C, compare
photoreceptor, transient BC and MC-cell responses). Simulated MC-cells
have a higher contrast gain than PC-cells ( Figure 1D, see inset), but do
not exhibit the type of contrast gain control found experimentally ( Kaplan
and Shapley, 1986).
In addition, simulated MC-cells show frequency-doubled responses
during stimulation with a contrast-reversed sine grating. For these stim-
uli, the Fourier transform of the membrane potential response contains
a second harmonic component, which is largely insensitive to the loca-
tion of the stimulus relative to the receptive ﬁeld ( Figure 1E , top). This
behaviour has been thoroughly characterised in Y-cells in the cat and
guinea pig retina ( Demb et al., 1999, 2001a; Enroth-Cugell and Robson,
1966; Hochstein and Shapley, 1976; Victor, 1988 ), and was also found
in primate MC-cells in the LGN ( Benardete et al., 1992; Derrington and
Lennie, 1984; Kaplan and Shapley, 1982; Leventhal et al., 1981) and retina
(White et al., 2002). The nonlinearity index, which is deﬁned as the second
harmonic response divided by the ﬁrst harmonic response ( Hochstein and
Shapley, 1976), measures the degree of spatiotemporal nonlinearity. Con-
sistent with recordings in the primate retina (White et al., 2002), this value
is less than 1 in our simulated MC-cells and increases with increasing
spatial frequency (Figure 1E, bottom).
4
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 5 ---
Eye movements and retinal activity
Figure 2. Simulated ﬁxational eye movements. (A) Power spectrum of ﬁx-
ational eye movements. ( B) Example trace. The inset shows 2s of slow drift
movements as recorded by Murakami (2004) (vertical calibration bar indicates
20’). (C) Velocity distributions of the slow drift movements. The velocities were
obtained after resampling the eye movement traces at 1 kHz, to allow for
comparison with experimental data.
Optical blurring
Optical blurring was simulated by convolving the stimulus with a PSF given
by (Westheimer, 1986) for the human fovea
PSF(ρ) = 0.933 · e− 2.59·ρ1.36
+ 0.047 · e− 2.34·ρ1.74
(8)
where ρ denotes the visual angle in minutes of arc. The PSF is illustrated
in Figure 1B.
Ocular micromovements
Simulated ﬁxational eye movements include slow drift movements and the
ocular microtremor, which were generated by a multiplication of Fourier-
transformed white noise with a characteristic power spectrum. The power
spectrum of the microtremor was modelled as Gaussian normal distribu-
tion with a peak at 80 Hz and standard deviation of 25 Hz ( Bolger et al.,
1999; Spauschus et al., 1999 ). For the ocular drift, following Eizenman
et al. (1985) the following expression for the power spectrum was used:
P(f ) = A
(1 + T1f )2 · (1 + T2f )2 (9)
where f [Hz] is the frequency. The variables were T2 = 0.1 second,
A = 3000′′ and T1 = 1.3 second, and the tremor was superimposed
onto the drift spectrum. The resulting simulated eye movements consist
of the tremor with a mean amplitude of 15
′′–20 ′′ (Ditchburn and Ginsborg,
1953; Riggs and Ratliff, 1951; Steinman et al., 1973) and drift movements
with a mean amplitude of 6 .5′ and a mean velocity of 0.5 degree/second
(Murakami, 2004).
Stimulus
A static star shaped stimulus at 100% contrast with a diameter of 110 ′
and 24 bars, each 2.86′′ wide.
Simulations
The simulation software was implemented in C++ and simulations were
performed on a cluster of Intel ×86/Linux computers. Numerical integra-
tion was performed in double precision using the second order Runge
Kutta method for the photoreceptor model and forward Euler integration
for the remaining cell types, both with a time step of 100 /H9262s. This allowed
for an accurate simulation of cone responses in the presence of fast ocular
microtremor.
RESUL TS
The activity of GCs was simulated during ﬁxation of a star
shaped stimulus ( Figure 3A ). Small eye movements were included
to simulate a physiological ﬁxation condition ( Figure 3B ). In the
following, a representative episode of 250 ms of the popula-
tion response will be analysed to illustrate the main effects.
Movies of these activity patterns are available at http://www.bccn-
goettingen.de/Members/root/matthias
hennig/visual-illusions/.
Snapshots of the GC activity, taken at two different times t1 and
t2 (as indicated in Figure 3B ), are shown in Figures 3C–3F . The top
panels (Figure 3C and 3D) show PC-cell, those on the bottom (E,F) MC-
cell responses. At time t1, the eye-movement direction is approximately
vertical, top to bottom, which changes to bottom-right at t2 (arrows in
Figure 3B).
Both at t1 and t2, and for both cell types, the bars of the stimulus
cause depolarising responses (colour-coded red in Figures 3C– 3F). The
stimulus motion also leads to a trailing hyperpolarisation (colour-coded
blue), which is caused by stimulation of the receptive ﬁeld surround. This
is the expected behaviour of GCs, which respond to local changes in
contrast.
A comparison of PC- and MC-cell response patterns, however, clearly
shows that the activity of MC-cells is strongly reduced in two sectors,
which are located along one axis of the stimulus. The orientation of this
axis changes slowly as the direction of the eye movements change from
vertical to oblique. This change is gradual over time and very pronounced
in MC-cells, but also, albeit much weaker, visible in PC-cells (compare
E, F and C, D). In PC-cells, the membrane potential in the sectors with a
reduced response is reduced to about 50% of the peak activity. In MC-cells,
the responses in these sectors are reduced almost to resting potential.
In addition, a second effect is visible in the simulated MC-cell popula-
tion response in Figure 3E and 3F. The snapshot of the MC-cell population
activity taken at t
2 (Figure 3F) shows that some lines display a spatially
separated activity towards the periphery, which does not correspond to
any part of the stimulus. Instead of the regular pattern of the stimulus,
one ﬁnds pairs of depolarising lines next to each other. This effect does
not occur in the PC-cell population.
The comparison of the membrane potential traces details this observa-
tion (Figure 3H). Photoreceptors and PC-cells show two moving, spatially
separated activity peaks, which correspond to two lines of the stimulus.
The same peaks are found in the MC-cells. Between both real peaks, how-
ever, MC-cell responses show a smaller additional activity peak (marked
by diamonds).
We note here that both effects can indeed be experienced during
careful ﬁxation of a star-shaped stimulus. The strength of the effect,
however, varies from person to person and depends on speciﬁc stimulus
parameters (see Discussion). The results presented here could, therefore,
guide further psychophysical or electrophysiological experiments.
Line-fading. How are eye movements and direction of the ‘fading’ of star-
segments related? In the transition from the ﬁrst snapshot in Figure 3
at t
1 to the second at t2, eye movement direction has changed from
approximately vertical to bottom-right (arrows in Figure 3B ). Thus, in
both situations, fading occurs in sectors parallel to the eye-movement
direction.
The diagrams in panel G show the activity of modelled photoreceptors,
PC- and MC-cells taken from the cross-section marked by the red bar in
panel A. The receptive ﬁelds of the cells in the middle row ( G, asterisks)
are those stimulated by the line of the stimulus marked by an asterisk inA.
Motion of this line is approximately axial, thus the spatial stimulation of the
5
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 6 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
Figure 3. Population activity of retinal GCs during presentation of a star-shaped stimulus (at half-saturating photoreceptor luminance, 100% contrast,
diameter 110′, bar width 2.86′′). (A) Schematic drawing of the stimulus. Bars indicate where the single cell activity in panels G (red) and H (blue) was recorded.
(B) Simulated horizontal (red) and vertical (blue) eye movements.t1 and t2 indicate where the snapshots in C, D and E, F were taken. The relative two-dimensional
motion direction is indicated by arrows. ( C–F ) Spatial population activity of PC-cells ( C and D) and MC-cells ( E and F), taken at t1 and t2, as indicated in B.( G)
Activity of single photoreceptors, PC- and MC-cells at a location where axial fading is visible at time t2 (red bar in A). The asterisks indicate where fading occurs
in PC- and MC-cells (the location marked by an asterisk in A). ( H) as G, but illustrating line-splitting. Responses were taken from the region marked by a blue bar
in A. Diamonds indicate where splitting is visible. In G and H, GC responses were clipped below resting potential to enhance visibility of the effects. Calibration
bars correspond to 3 mV.
corresponding receptive ﬁelds does not change much during this interval.
Both PC- and MC-cells at this location ﬁrst respond with a depolarisation
as the stimulus enters their receptive ﬁeld. But after about 40 ms, their
activity is reduced to a lower steady-state level (asterisks in G). This is
particularly pronounced for MC-cells and explains the observed strong
activity drop in the MC-cell population.
Strictly speaking, this effect might be interpreted as an expression of
the aperture problem at the level of retinal GCs. The model responses
suggest that MC-cells are susceptible to the aperture problem due to
their transient nature—but while their response does not encode the
direction of stimulus motion, axial motion will lead to a weak response.
As higher motion-sensitive areas mainly receive input from the dorsal
stream (Schiller and Logothetis, 1990), a stimulus under these conditions
may, therefore, remain ‘invisible’ to parts of the visual cortex. Fixational
eye movements will normally prevent this effect by providing additional
motion to stimulate adjacent receptive ﬁelds, but for stimuli with large
homogeneous structures like the star used here, may be the source of a
false percept.
Line-splitting. The apparent splitting of lines of the stimulus in the mode
arises from the nonlinear properties of MC-cells which also can lead to
frequency-doubled responses during stimulation with contrast-reversed
gratings (Derrington and Lennie, 1984; Kaplan and Shapley, 1982; Leven-
thal et al., 1981; White et al., 2002). Frequency-doubling, as ﬁrst described
for cat Y-cells (Enroth-Cugell and Robson, 1966 ), refers to the effect that
some GCs respond with transient depolarisations to a contrast-reversed
6
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 7 ---
Eye movements and retinal activity
Figure 4. Nonlinear spatial summation in MC-cells causes line-splitting.( A) Simulated responses (150 ms) of photoreceptors; ( B) their temporal derivatives
calculated numerically and ( C) MC-cell responses to two lines of the star-shaped stimulus calculated with the full model. Brackets indicate the central 7′ of the
MC-cell receptive ﬁeld. The response of the differentiated signals ( B) summed across the bracket after inversion are shown in D (upper trace: raw data, lower
trace: after low-pass ﬁltering with τ= 4 ms). The low-pass ﬁltered trace is also shown in C. All responses were taken from the simulations shown in Figure 3.
Calibration bars indicate 5 mV.
grating, which is positioned above the receptive ﬁeld such that it receives
no net excitation (seeDemb et al., 1999for a good summary). This effect is
also present in the simulated MC-cell responses (Figure 1E; see Methods).
During ﬁxation of the star stimulus, ﬁxational eye-movements may
move two stimulus lines across opposite parts of a single MC-cell receptive
ﬁeld. In this case, due to the geometry of the stimulus, the situation can
arise where as one line enters the receptive ﬁeld at one side, the second
line leaves it on the other side. This effectively producing a zero net
excitation of the receptive ﬁeld. A linearly summating GC located between
both bars will not respond in this case.
If however, as for MC-cells, the receptive ﬁeld includes nonlinear
spatial summation, a response may be expected. Figure 4 provides a
detailed illustration of this effect: The photoreceptor responses in Figure
4A represent a case where one bar leaves and the other enters a MC-cell
receptive ﬁeld. Panel B shows numerically differentiated photoreceptor
responses, highlighting the on- and offset-responses. This is a simpliﬁ-
cation that in this form is not computed by the full model, but illustrates
best what happens. On- and off-transients in photoreceptors are of
different temporal kinetics and magnitude, and, therefore, summation
across the wide MC-receptive ﬁeld (panel D) leads to a small remaining
‘ghost’ activity at a location without a physical stimulus. This response is
superimposed, after scaling, inverting and applying a low-pass ﬁlter, onto
the full MC-cell model response in panel C. The good match indicates
that in a ﬁrst approximation line-splitting can be understood from the
ampliﬁcation and integration of imbalanced photoreceptor transients. As
suggested earlier (Hennig et al., 2002a), in this model the ampliﬁcation of
asymmetries results from an inhibitory amacrine cell circuit. Note that this
effect cannot occur for moving grating stimuli, as they will not produce
the required balanced on- and off-stimulation of a single receptive ﬁeld.
Differential effects of different sources of nonlinearities for line-
splitting. To investigate the role of the different factors contributing to
the nonlinear behaviour of simulated MC-cells to the line-splitting effect,
Figure 5 shows snapshots of the GC population response for the original
model and modiﬁed versions. Parts A and B show responses of unmod-
iﬁed PC- and MC-cells, respectively. The stimulus was presented at a
higher luminance than in Figure 3 , and in this particular example, eye
movements led mainly to a ‘rotational’ movement of the stimulus with
little on-axis movement. Accordingly, the line-fading effect is weak, but
line-splitting is visible in the MC-cell response (circle in Figure 5B).
Part C shows the MC-cell response after replacing the original pho-
toreceptor model with a ‘linearised’ variant, which consists of a cascaded
low-pass ﬁlter and a Michaelis–Menten saturation characteristic (cf. Hen-
nig et al., 2002a ). In this case, line-splitting is reduced, indicating that
photoreceptor response asymmetries play a role in generating the non-
linear response. It is, however, not fully abolished, indicating additional
sources of nonlinear spatiotemporal summation in the amacrine cell cir-
cuit. This change is similar to the effect of a linear photoreceptor on the
frequency-doubling response for contrast-reversed gratings in this type
of model, as demonstrated earlier ( Hennig et al., 2002a ).
Part D shows an example where the nested amacrine circuit, which
leads to transient responses in MC-cells, was inactivated. This modiﬁca-
tion leads to a complete abolishment of the line-splitting effect. In addition,
the response amplitudes of the GCs are weaker than for the full model,
which results from the lack of ampliﬁcation of onset-transients. Hence, in
this model, the combination of inhibition and disinhibition caused by the
nested amacrine circuit (see Hennig et al., 2002a for details) is the main
factor that leads to the line-splitting effect.
This effect is further illustrated in Figure 5E , where the responses
of MC-cells receiving excitatory input from only a single photoreceptor
are shown, but where the size of the amacrine cell receptive ﬁelds was
unchanged. The splitting effect is in this case even more pronounced
than for a larger receptive ﬁeld, because the smaller receptive ﬁelds also
reduce spatial blurring of the stimulus.
The separation of the spokes of the star stimulus used here increases
with increasing eccentricity, and the splitting effect is visible for a sep-
aration of > 10
′–15 ′. This is by far more than the total receptive ﬁeld
7
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 8 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
Figure 5. Effect of modiﬁcations of the model on the line-splitting effect. Each panel shows a snapshot of the GC population response during stimulation
with the star-shaped stimulus (Figure 3A, at saturating photoreceptor luminance, 100% contrast, diameter 91’, bar width 2.4”). ( A, B) responses for the full PC-
and MC-cell model, respectively. The circle in B indicates a location where line-splitting occurs. ( C) MC-cell responses after replacing the original photoreceptor
model with a linear model. (D) MC-cell response with an inactivated nested amacrine circuit. ( E) Response for MC-cells, when the receptive ﬁeld centre consists
of a single cone.
diameter of a simulated MC-cell (about 10 ′ in this case), thus MC-cells
will not directly receive asymmetric responses from BCs. Instead, the
apparent splitting of the lines of the stimulus is caused by the wide-ﬁeld
amacrine cells, which contribute to the response of a given GC beyond its
anatomical receptive ﬁeld. A similar inﬂuence on simulated responses to
contrast-reversed gratings in nonlinear GCs is also visible at low spatial
frequencies (see Figure 7 in Hennig et al., 2002a ).
Summarising, these results predict that a line-splitting effect may
be caused by nonlinearities in the inner retina, which form a part of
the extra-classical receptive ﬁeld of MC-cells ( Benardete and Kaplan,
1999). This result leads to the prediction that in an electrophysiologi-
cal experiment, the line-splitting effect should be largely abolished in the
presence of antagonists that block inhibition in the inner retina. In addi-
tion, it may be expected that TTX-sensitive long-range inhibition in the
inner retina by spiking amacrine cells, which has been shown to con-
tribute to the frequency-doubling response in nonlinear GCs ( Demb et al.,
1999; not included in this model), may contribute to line-splitting in a
similar way.
DISCUSSION
In this paper, a computational model of the PC- and MC channels in the
primate retina was used to assess the effects of ﬁxational eye movements
on the spatial representation of a star-shaped stimulus. In the presence
of ﬁxational eye movements this kind of stimulus is known to elicit spa-
tiotemporal perceptual instabilities, and we found two distinct effects that
are strongly related to these illusory percepts: fading of complete wedges
of the star and an apparent splitting of stimulus lines. It was shown that
both effects, which are not visible in the PC stream, are initiated by slow
drift movements and result from the nonlinearities in MC-cells that lead to
transient responses and the frequency-doubling nonlinearity. Qualitatively
very similar effects are reported by observers viewing this type of stimulus
(see below), and we propose that their origin may be traced back to the
speciﬁc properties of retinal MC-cells.
Our results suggest that situations may exist where different retinal
processing streams contain not complimentary, but conﬂicting, informa-
tion about visual stimuli. To disambiguate these at the cortical level, as for
instance in the case of the aperture problem, information about the retinal
slip caused by ﬁxational eye movements is required. This information,
however, is provided by retinal image motion ( Murakami and Cavanagh,
2001), and is in the case of the star stimulus, due to the stimulus symme-
tries, also incomplete. Given the striking similarities between the simulated
activity patterns and the corresponding visual percepts, it appears that
under these conditions activity in the MC stream dominates visual per-
ception, and the retinal activity pattern directly matches the visual percept
almost as if higher stages had not contributed to the processing. Two fac-
tors may contribute to this: First, MC-cell responses are generally strong
and very transient under the conditions investigated, compared to toni-
cally, but weakly active PC-cells. The more salient MC-cell activity may,
therefore, dominate visual perception, even if the dorsal and ventral path-
ways provide conﬂicting information. Second, MC-cell responses have
been shown to encode spatial detail with higher spatial accuracy than
PC-cells ( Lee et al., 1993, 1995; R ¨uttiger et al., 2002; Wachtler et al.,
1996), and may therefore generally dominate spatial perception during
conditions of rapid image motion and achromatic stimulation. Given that
retinal computations frequently involve nonlinearities, cases where the
information in different channels is conﬂicting rather than complementary
may even be quite common during natural vision. It is, therefore, an inter-
esting question how the higher visual system deals with these situations
in general.
The results in this paper provide speciﬁc predictions for psychophys-
ical and electrophysiological experiments. Reported fading of lines in
a star-shaped stimulus as well as an apparent splitting of lines should
correlate with the direction of recorded eye movements, and can be
investigated in multielectrode array recordings. As discussed below,
these predictions are based on rather general assumptions about retinal
GC responses, and the requirements on the mechanisms producing these
effects are well supported by the existing experimental data.
8
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 9 ---
Eye movements and retinal activity
Psychophysical correlates and related illusions
In a qualitative assessment, we presented the star stimulus to 35 naive
subjects asking them to provide a verbal description of their percept during
ﬁxation. All observers reported that during ﬁxation wedge-shaped sectors
of this stimulus begin to fade; typically in two wedges opposite to each
other. One participant conﬁrmed the effect after being asked, the others
reported the effect without any previous instructions. The location of the
fading wedges rotates randomly, affecting all orientations. Most observers
reported that the fading is particularly strong on an oblique axis, possibly
due to additional contribution from the ‘oblique effect’ ( Appelle, 1972 ),
according to which horizontally and vertically oriented stimuli are better
seen than oblique structures.
In addition, 66% of the participants ( n = 23/35) reported that lines
appear to split or that they become denser, as if lines have been ‘added
in between close to the centre’ that look like ‘split ends in hair’. Of these,
ﬁve participants reported this effect only after being explicitly asked to
conﬁrm it. Hence, this illusion is less clear than the fading effect, and
observers also consistently reported that the percept is more short-lived
than the line-fading.
These results suggest that the predicted effects might indeed lead to
corresponding visual illusions. But clearly this is only a preliminary test, as
we could neither establish the origin of the illusions nor were the observer’s
eye movements tracked to establish the proposed link between eye move-
ment direction and direction of fading or line-splitting. These results, there-
fore, provide a basis for further experimental investigation of these effects.
Similar effects have been reported for other stimuli with a circular
symmetry, such as the concentric circles of Purkinje and Helmholtz (Wade,
2003) and for well-known MacKay Illusion ( Pirenne et al., 1958 ). In addi-
tion, several impressive visual illusions exist, that are elicited by retinal
image motion due to eye movements during ﬁxation ( Figure 6 ; for a
review, see Wade, 2003 ). More recently, a number of related illusions
were systematically studied and a clear link to ﬁxational instabilities has
been established ( Murakami et al., 2006 ). These aesthetically appeal-
ing pictures, which have also inﬂuenced the arts (‘Op-Art’), have also
been used to deduce possible neuronal mechanisms which underlie their
perception. During ﬁxation, observers report unstable ﬂickering or appar-
ent motion percepts, which can affect the image as a whole or parts
of it.
The aperture problem has been discussed previously in conjunction
with apparent motion effects that are induced by ﬁxational eye move-
ments. Models have been made to explain the Ouchi illusion ( Figure 6D)
and others (Ferm ¨uller et al., 1997; Ferm¨uller et al., 2000; Mather, 2000)b y
means of simulated cortical motion detectors ( Zanker, 2004; Zanker and
Walker, 2004). Our study augments these ﬁndings by providing arguments
for a retinal origin of such apparent motion effects. It is conceivable that
the apparent motion elicited by these illusions requires at some point the
activation of cortical motion detectors. Our results, however, indicate that
this percept may not be the consequence of speciﬁc properties of cortical
motion detectors.
The line-fading effect
In the model, the fading of sectors of the stimulus and the resulting appar-
ent motion effect relies on transient responses, a well-documented feature
of MC-cells ( Lee et al., 1990 ). This effect may be related to perceptual
fading under retinally stabilised conditions (Ditchburn and Ginsborg, 1952;
Riggs et al., 1953), as at least one study has reported rapid perceptual fad-
Figure 6. Examples of stimuli that elicit motion-induced illusions similar to those seen for the star .( A) Purkinje Illusion (Wade, 2003). (B) The Responsive
Eye from Bridget Riley ( Wade, 2003). (C) The MacKay Illusion ( Pirenne et al., 1958 ). (D) Ouchi Illusion ( Spillmann and Werner, 1990).
9
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 10 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
ing within 80 ms during retinal image stabilisation ( Coppola and Purves,
1996), matching well the transient time course of MC-cell responses. As
mentioned, it is curious that PC-cells are still weakly tonically active under
these conditions, and therefore still provide correct information about the
stimulus. While perceptual fading effects may in fact occur at higher
processing stages (e.g. Blakemore et al., 1971; Sharpe, 1972 ), PC-cell
responses are generally weaker than MC-cell activity, which is dominated
by transients and may, therefore, dominate visual perception. Two further
observations would support this hypothesis: ﬁrstly, a fading effect can be
reliably induced with moving low-contrast stimuli (unpublished data), and
secondly, the effect is not seen for a red-green coloured version of the
stimulus with equiluminant bars (then the whole stimulus quickly fades).
Further experiments are needed to clarify these effects.
Here it was assumed that transient responses of MC-cells result from
a combination of recurrent amacrine cell inhibition, disinhibition through
a nested amacrine circuit and higher synaptic gain of BCs, a mechanism
inspired by ﬁndings in the salamander retina ( Roska et al., 1998). Similar
circuits may exist in the mouse and cat retina ( Nirenberg and Meister,
1997; O’Brien et al., 2003 ), but data from the salamander retina has also
shown that cell-intrinsic factors can contribute to transient responses in
BCs (Awatramani and Slaughter, 2000). Therefore, transient GC responses
are likely to have multiple origins in the presynaptic circuitry, and may be
mediated by different circuits, such as a delayed negative feedback either
through a cell-intrinsic pathway or via an inhibitory interneuron. In princi-
ple, any such mechanism could produce a fading effect in the presence of
slow drift movements. A simple delayed feedback, however, would render
cells unresponsive after prolonged stimulation, and a mechanism such
as the nested amacrine circuit proposed here is likely to be involved in
regulating the inhibition received by BC and/or GC (Nirenberg and Meister,
1997; O’Brien et al., 2003 ).
The line-splitting effect
The apparent splitting of lines of the stimulus observed in the model
is caused by nonlinear spatiotemporal summation, which causes a GC
to respond to stimuli which cause zero net excitation of the receptive
ﬁeld ( Figure 1E ; see Methods). This effect is, therefore, related to the
frequency-doubling response for contrast-reversed gratings, as originally
described for cat Y-cells (Enroth-Cugell and Robson, 1966 ).
To our knowledge, the line-splitting effect may be the ﬁrst perceptual
correlate of the frequency-doubling nonlinearity [it should be noted that a
clinically applied glaucoma test where the rapid contrast reversal of a grat-
ing leads to the precept of doubled spatial frequency is not a consequence
of MC-cell frequency-doubling (White et al., 2002). As for the fading effect,
apparent line-splitting only has a neural correlate in MC-cells. This again
suggests that for this stimulus, MC-cells seem to mediate perception, and
that the conﬂicting information provided by PC-cells is bypassed by the
visual system. Furthermore, this explanation for the splitting effect sug-
gests that MC-cells have the ability to encode spatiotemporal variations
on a smaller spatial scale than their classical receptive ﬁeld allows. It
has, for instance, been reported that Y-like cells could provide cues for
second-order motion detection ( Demb et al., 2001b ).
The origin of spatiotemporal nonlinearities in GCs is still not fully under-
stood. Experimental data suggests that (1) amacrine cell involvement is
less important ( Demb et al., 1999 ), and (2) frequency-doubled activity
might result from summation of spatially asymmetric BC activity ( Demb
et al., 2001a ). The latter is the basis for the nonlinear behaviour of MC-
cells in the present model. As discussed in detail in an earlier paper,
the spatial asymmetry of BC responses may result from a combination
of photoreceptor response kinetics and the inﬂuence of amacrine cells
(Hennig et al., 2002a ). In addition, mechanisms regulating the contrast
gain in BCs ( Beaudoin et al., 2007 ), not included in this model, might
contribute.
Frequency-doubled responses in simulated MC-cells show stimulus-
location independent second harmonic response and nonlinearity-indices
less than 1 over a range of spatial frequencies ( Figure 1E)( White et al.,
2002). Therefore, it is unlikely that the strength of receptive ﬁeld nonlin-
earities and the splitting effect is exaggerated in the simulations. It should
further be noted that in this model the effect strongly depends on the
activation of the nested amacrine circuit ( Figure 5D), which contributes
to, but is not the sole source of frequency-doubling (Hennig et al., 2002a).
This suggests that long-range interactions mediating a part of the extra-
classical MC-cell receptive ﬁeld ( Benardete and Kaplan, 1999; Solomon
et al., 2006) might additionally contribute to this effect.
Fixational eye movements
It is interesting to note that ﬁxational eye movements, which are normally
assumed to improve vision ( Ditchburn and Ginsborg, 1953; Greschner
et al., 2002; Hennig et al., 2002b; Olveczky et al., 2003; Riggs et al.,
1953; Hennig and Wörgötter, 2004; Rucci and Casile, 2005; Rucci and
Desbordes, 2003; Martinez-Conde et al., 2006; Rucci et al., 2007; Funke
et al., 2007 ), are in this case the source of false percepts. These effects
are caused by drift movements, as the microtremor, consistent with an
analysis by Barlow (1952), fails to produce strong responses in GCs due to
its small amplitude. The larger and faster microsaccades, which occur
rarely during normal vision Steinman et al. (1967) , were not investi-
gated. Recent work indicates that microsaccades can induce correlations
in retinal motion on short time scales ( Engbert and Kliegl, 2004 ) and
their occurrence is not random, but depends on the history of drift move-
ments (Engbert and Mergenthaler, 2006). It may, therefore, be possible that
microsaccades additionally inﬂuence the effects described here, but psy-
chophysical studies of related visual illusions indicate that mainly slow drift
movements, not microsaccades, cause the relevant effects ( Murakami
et al., 2006; Zanker, 2004; Zanker and Walker, 2004 ). In line with these
results, the most likely effect of microsaccades on the effects described
here is that they produce strong bursts of activity that would disrupt the
fading and splitting effects.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Peter Hancock for advice on psychophysical studies,
Hans Ekkehard Plesser for the Matlab code to plot the population activity
and Adam Barrett for improving the English. This work was supported
by the European Commission grant ‘ECOVISION’ and the Scottish higher
education grant to the ‘Institute for Neural Computational Intelligence’.
REFERENCES
Appelle, S. (1972). Perception and discrimination as a function of stimulus orientation:
the “oblique effect” in man and animals. Psychol. Bull. 78, 266–278.
Awatramani, G. B., and Slaughter, M. M. (2000). Origin of transient and sustained
responses in ganglion cells of the retina. J. Neurosci. 20, 7087–7095.
Bader, C. R., and Bertrand, D. (1984). Effect of changes in intra- and extracellular sodium
on the inward (anomalous) rectiﬁcation in salamander photoreceptors. J. Physiol.
347, 611–31.
Barlow, H. B. (1952). Eye movements during ﬁxation. J. Physiol. 116, 290–306.
Beaudoin, D. L., Borghuis, B. G., and Demb, J. B. (2007). Cellular basis for contrast
gain control over the receptive ﬁeld center of mammalian retinal ganglion cells. J.
Neurosci. 27, 2636–2645.
Benardete, E. A., and Kaplan, E. (1999). The dynamics of primate m retinal ganglion
cells. Vis. Neurosci. 16, 355–368.
Benardete, E. A., Kaplan, E., and Knight, B. W. (1992). Contrast gain control in the primate
retina: P cells are not X-like, some M cells are. Vis. Neurosci. 8, 483–486.
Blakemore, C., Muncey, J. P ., and Ridley, R. M. (1971). Perceptual fading of a stabilized
cortical image. Nature 233, 204–205.
Bolger, C., Bojanic, S., Sheahan, N. F ., Coakley, D., and Malone, J. F . (1999). Dominant
frequency content of ocular microtremor from normal subjects.Vision Res. 39, 1911–
1915.
Coppola, D., and Purves, D. (1996). The extraordinarily rapid disappearance of entopic
images. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 8001–8004.
10
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2


--- Page 11 ---
Eye movements and retinal activity
Croner, L., and Kaplan, E. (1995). Receptive ﬁelds of P and M ganglion cells across the
primate retina. Vision Res. 35, 7–24.
Dacey, D., Packer, O. S., Diller, L., Brainard, D., Peterson, B., and Lee, B. B. (2000). Center
surround receptive ﬁeld structure of cone bipolar cells in primate retina. Vision Res.
40, 1801–1811.
Dacey, D., and Petersen, M. (1992). Dendritic ﬁeld size and morphology of midget and
parasol ganglion cells in the human retina.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA89, 9666–9670.
Dacey, D. M. (1993). The mosaic of midget ganglion cells in the human retina.J. Neurosci.
13, 5334–5355.
Demb, J. B., Haarsma, L., Freed, M. A., and Sterling, P . (1999). Functional circuitry of the
retinal ganglion cell’s nonlinear receptive ﬁeld. J. Neurosci. 19, 9756–9767.
Demb, J. B., Zaghloul, K., Haarsma, L., and Sterling, P . (2001a). Bipolar cells contribute
to nonlinear spatial summation in the brisk-transient (Y) ganglion cell in mammalian
retina. J. Neurosci. 21, 7447–7454.
Demb, J. B., Zaghloul, K., and Sterling, P . (2001b). Cellular basis for the response to
second-order motion cues in Y retinal ganglion cells. Neuron 32, 711–721.
Demontis, G. C., Longoni, B., Barcaro, U., and Cervetto, L. (1999). Properties and func-
tional roles of hyperpolarization-gated currents in guinea-pig retinal rods. J. Physiol.
515, 813–828.
Derrington, A. M., and Lennie, P . (1984). Spatial and temporal contrast sensitivities of
neurones in lateral geniculate nucleus of macaque. J. Physiol. 357, 219–240.
Ditchburn, R. W., and Ginsborg, B. L. (1952). Vision with a stabilized retinal image.Nature
170, 36–37.
Ditchburn, R. W., and Ginsborg, B. L. (1953). Involuntary eye movements during ﬁxation.
J. Physiol. 119, 1–17.
Eizenman, M., Hallett, P . E., and Frecker, R. C. (1985). Power spectra for ocular drift and
tremor. Vision Res. 25, 1635–1640.
Engbert, R., and Kliegl, R. (2004). Microsaccades keep the eyes’ balance during ﬁxation.
Psychol Sci. 15, 431–436.
Engbert, R., and Mergenthaler, K. (2006). Microsaccades are triggered by low retinal
image slip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 7192–7197.
Enroth-Cugell, C., and Robson, J. G. (1966). The contrast sensitivity of retinal ganglion
cells of the cat. J. Physiol. 187, 517–552.
Feigenspan, A., W ¨assle, H., and Bormann, J. (1993). Pharmacology of GABA receptor Cl
channels in rat retinal bipolar cells. Nature 361, 159–161.
Ferm ¨uller, C., Pless, R., and Aloimonos, Y . (1997). Families of stationary patterns pro-
ducing illusory movement: insights into the visual system. Proc. Biol. Sci. 264,
795–806.
Ferm ¨uller, C., Pless, R., and Aloimonos, Y . (2000). The Ouchi illusion as an artifact of
biased ﬂow estimation. Vision Res. 40, 77–96.
Flores-Herr, N., Protti, D. A., and W ¨assle, H. (2001). Synaptic currents generating the
inhibitory surround of ganglion cells in the mammalian retina. J. Neurosci. 21,
4852–4863.
Funke, K., Kerscher, N., and W ¨org ¨otter, F . (2007). Noise-improved signal detection in cat
primary visual cortex via a well balanced stochastic resonance like process. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 26, 1322–1332.
Goodchild, A. K., Ghosh, K. K., and Martin, P . R. (1996). Comparison of photoreceptor spa-
tial density and ganglion cell morphology in the retina of human, macaque monkey,
cat, and the marmoset callithrix jacchus. J. Comp. Neurol. 366, 55–75.
Greschner, M., Bongard, M., Rujan, P ., and Ammerm ¨uller, J. (2002). Retinal ganglion
cell synchronization by ﬁxational eye movements improves feature estimation. Nat.
Neurosci. 5, 341–347.
Hennig, M. H., Funke, K., and W ¨org ¨otter, F . (2002a). The inﬂuence of different reti-
nal subcircuits on the nonlinearity of ganglion cell behavior. J. Neurosci. 22,
8726–8738.
Hennig, M. H., Kerscher, N. J., Funke, K., and W ¨org ¨otter, F . (2002b). Stochastic reso-
nance in visual cortical neurons: does the eye-tremor actually improve visual acuity?
Neurocomputing 44, 115–120.
Hennig, M. H., and W ¨org ¨otter, F . (2004). Eye micro-movements improve stimulus
detection beyond the Nyquist limit in the peripheral retina. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 16, S. Thrun, L. Saul, and B. Sch ¨olkopf, eds.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Hildreth, E. C., and Koch, C. (1987). The analysis of visual motion: from computational
theory to neuronal mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 477–533.
Hochstein, S., and Shapley, R. M. (1976). Linear and nonlinear spatial subunits in Y cat
retinal ganglion cells. J. Physiol. 262, 265–284.
Kamermans, M., and Spekreijse, H. (1999). The feedback pathway from horizontal cells
to cones. A mini review with a look ahead. Vision Res. 39, 2449–2468.
Kaplan, E., and Shapley, R. (1986). The primate retina contains two types of ganglion
cells, with high and low contrast sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 2755–
2757.
Kaplan, E., and Shapley, R. M. (1982). X and Y cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of
macaque monkeys. J. Physiol. 330, 125–143.
Lee, B. (1996). Receptive ﬁeld structure in the primate retina. Vision Res. 36, 631–644.
Lee, B. B., Pokorny, J., Smith, V. C., Martin, P . R., and Valberg, A. (1990). Luminance and
chromatic modulation sensitivity of macaque ganglion cells and human observers.
J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 7, 2223–2236.
Lee, B. B., Wehrhahn, C., Westheimer, G., and Kremers, J. (1993). Macaque ganglion cell
responses to stimuli that elicit hyperacuity in man: detection of small displacements.
J. Neurosci. 13, 1001–1009.
Lee, B. B., Wehrhahn, C., Westheimer, G., and Kremers, J. (1995). The spatial precision
of macaque ganglion cell responses in relation to vernier acuity of human observers.
Vision Res. 35, 2743–2758.
Leventhal, A. G., Rodieck, R. W., and Dreher, B. (1981). Retinal ganglion cell classes in the
old world monkey: morphology and central projections. Science 213, 1139–1142.
Martinez-Conde, S., Macknik, S. L., Troncoso, X. G., and Dyar, T. A. (2006). Microsaccades
counteract visual fading during ﬁxation. Neuron 49, 297–305.
Mather, G. (2000). Integration biases in the Ouchi and other visual illusions. Perception
29, 721–727.
McMahon, M. J., Packer, O. S., and Dacey, D. M. (2004). The classical receptive ﬁeld
surround of primate parasol ganglion cells is mediated primarily by a non-GABAergic
pathway. J. Neurosci. 24, 3736–3745.
Merigan, W. H., and Maunsell, J. H. (1993). How parallel are the primate visual pathways?
Annu Rev. Neurosci. 16, 369–402.
Milam, A. H., Dacey, D. M., and Dizhoor, A. M. (1993). Recoverin immunoreactivity in
mammalian cone bipolar cells. Vis Neurosci. 10, 1–12.
Murakami, I. (2004). Correlations between ﬁxation stability and visual motion sensitivity.
Vision Res. 44, 751–761.
Murakami, I., and Cavanagh, P . (2001). Visual jitter: evidence for visual-motion-based
compensation of retinal slip due to small eye movements. Vision Res. 41, 173–186.
Murakami, I., Kitaoka, A., and Ashida, H. (2006). A positive correlation between ﬁxation
instability and the strength of illusory motion in a static display. Vision Res. 46,
2421–2431.
Nelson, R. (1977). Cat cones have rod input: a comparison of the response properties
of cones and horizontal cell bodies in the retina of the cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 172,
109–136.
Nirenberg, S., and Meister, M. (1997). The light response of retinal ganglion cells is
truncated by a displaced amacrine circuit.
Neuron 18, 637–650.
O’Brien, B. J., Richardson, R. C., and Berson, D. M. (2003). Inhibitory network properties
shaping the light evoked responses of cat alpha retinal ganglion cells. Vis. Neurosci.
20, 351–361.
Olveczky, B. P ., Baccus, S. A., and Meister, M. (2003). Segregation of object and back-
ground motion in the retina. Nature 423, 401–408.
Pack, C. C., and Born, R. T. (2001). Temporal dynamics of a neural solution to the aperture
problem in visual area MT of macaque brain. Nature 409, 1040–1042.
Pirenne, M. H., Compbell, F . W., Robson, J. G., and MacKay, D. M. (1958). Moving visual
images produced by regular stationary patterns. Nature 181, 362–363.
Riggs, L. A., and Ratliff, F . (1951). Visual acuity and the normal tremor of the eyes.Science
114, 17–18.
Riggs, L. A., Ratliff, F ., Cornsweet, J. C., and Cornsweet, T. N. (1953). The disappearance
of steadily ﬁxated visual test objects. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 43, 495–501.
Roska, B., Nemeth, E., and Werblin, F . S. (1998). Response to change is facilitated
by a three-neuron disinhibitory pathway in the tiger salamander. J. Neurosci. 18,
3451–3459.
Rucci, M., and Casile, A. (2005). Fixational instability and natural image statistics:
implications for early visual representations. Network 16, 121–138.
Rucci, M., and Desbordes, G. (2003). Contributions of ﬁxational eye movements to the
discrimination of brieﬂy presented stimuli. J. Vis. 3, 852–864.
Rucci, M., Iovin, R., Poletti, M., and Santini, F . (2007). Miniature eye movements enhance
ﬁne spatial detail. Nature 447, 851–854.
R ¨uttiger, L., Lee, B. B., and Sun, H. (2002). Transient cells can be neurometrically
sustained: the positional accuracy or retinal signals to moving targets. J. Vis. 2,
232–242.
Schiller, P . H., and Logothetis, N. K. (1990). The color-opponent and broad-band channels
of the primate visual system. Trends Neurosci. 13, 392–398.
Schnapf, J. L., Nunn, B. J., Meister, M., and Baylor, D. A. (1990). Visual transduction in
cones of the monkey macaca fascicularis. J. Physiol. 427, 681–713.
Sharpe, C. R. (1972). The visibility and fading of thin lines visualized by their controlled
movement across the retina. J. Physiol. 222, 113–134.
Sinclair, J. R., Jacobs, A. L., and Nirenberg, S. (2004). Selective ablation of a class of
amacrine cells alters spatial processing in the retina. J. Neurosci. 24, 1459–1467.
Solomon, S. G., Lee, B. B., and Sun, H. (2006). Suppressive surrounds and contrast
gain in magnocellular-pathway retinal ganglion cells of macaque. J. Neurosci. 26,
8715–8726.
Spauschus, A., Marsden, J., Halliday, D. M., Rosenberg, J. R., and Brown, P . (1999). The
origin of ocular microtremor in man. Exp. Brain Res. 126.
Spillmann, L., and Werner, J. S. eds. (1990). Visual perception: the neurophisiological
foundations (San Diego, Academic Press).
Steinman, R. M., Cunitz, R. J., Timberlake, G., and Herman, M. (1967). Voluntary control
of microsaccades during maintained monocular ﬁxation. Science 155, 1577–1579.
Steinman, R. M., Haddad, G. M., Skavenski, A. A., and Wyman, D. (1973). Miniature eye
movement. Science 181, 810–819.
Thiel, A., Greschner, M., and Ammerm¨uller, J. (2006). The temporal structure of transient
on/off ganglion cell responses and its relation to intra-retinal processing. J. Comput.
Neurosci. 21, 131–151.
van Hateren, H. (2005). A cellular and molecular model of response kinetics and adap-
tation in primate cones and horizontal cells. J. Vis. 5, 331–347.
van Hateren, J. H. (2007). A model of spatiotemporal signal processing by primate cones
and horizontal cells. J. Vis. 7, 3–3.
Vardi, N., Zhang, L.-L., Payne, J. A., and Sterling, P . (2000). Evidence that different
cation chloride cotransporters in retinal neurons allow opposite responses to GABA.
J. Neurosci. 20, 7657–7663.
Victor, J. D. (1988). The dynamics of cat retinal Y cell subunit. J. Physiol. 405, 289–320.
Wachtler, T., Wehrhahn, C., and Lee, B. B. (1996). A simple model of human
foveal ganglion cell responses to hyperacuity stimuli. J. Comput. Neurosci. 3,
73–82.
11
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 12 ---
Hennig and Wörgötter
Wade, N. J. (2003). Movements in art: from Rosso to Riley. Perception 32, 1029–1036.
Biography.
Wallach, H. (1935). ¨Uber visuell wahrgenommene Bewegungrichtung. Psychol. Forsch
20, 325–380.
W ¨assle, H., and Boycott, B. B. (1991). Functional architecture of the mammalian retina.
Physiol. Rev. 71, 447–479.
W ¨assle, H., Boycott, B. B., and R ¨ohrenbeck, J. (1989). Horizontal cells in the
monkey retina: cone connections and dendritic network. Eur. J. Neurosci. 1,
421–435.
Westheimer, G. (1986). Handbook of Perception and Human Performance, vol. 1, chap.
The eye as an optical instrument (New York, John Wiley & Sons).
White, A. J., Sun, H., Swanson, W. H., and Lee, B. B. (2002). An examination of physio-
logical mechanisms underlying the frequency-doubling illusion. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 43, 3590–3599.
Zanker, J. M. (2004). Looking at Op Art from a computational viewpoint. Spat. Vis. 17,
75–94.
Zanker, J. M., and Walker, R. (2004). A new look at Op art: towards a simple explanation
of illusory motion. Naturwissenschaften 91, 149–156.
12
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 2
