--- Page 1 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 17 February 2009
doi: 10.3389/neuro.10.003.2009
Neural representations that support invariant object 
recognition
Robbe L. T . Goris and Hans P . Op de Beeck*
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Neural mechanisms underlying invariant behaviour such as object recognition are not well 
understood. For brain regions critical for object recognition, such as inferior temporal cortex 
(ITC), there is now ample evidence indicating that single cells code for many stimulus aspects, 
implying that only a moderate degree of invariance is present. However, recent theoretical 
and empirical work seems to suggest that integrating responses of multiple non-invariant 
units may produce invariant representations at population level. We provide an explicit test 
for the hypothesis that a linear read-out mechanism of a pool of units resembling ITC neurons 
may achieve invariant performance in an identiﬁ cation task. A linear classiﬁ er was trained to 
decode a particular value in a 2-D stimulus space using as input the response pattern across 
a population of units. Only one dimension was relevant for the task, and the stimulus location 
on the irrelevant dimension (ID) was kept constant during training. In a series of identiﬁ cation 
tests, the stimulus location on the relevant dimension (RD) and ID was manipulated, yielding 
estimates for both the level of sensitivity and tolerance reached by the network. We studied 
the effects of several single-cell characteristics as well as population characteristics typically 
considered in the literature, but found little support for the hypothesis. While the classiﬁ er 
averages out effects of idiosyncratic tuning properties and inter-unit variability, its invariance is 
very much determined by the (hypothetical) ‘average’ neuron. Consequently, even at population 
level there exists a fundamental trade-off between selectivity and tolerance, and invariant 
behaviour does not emerge spontaneously.
Keywords: object recognition, inferior temporal cortex, population coding, multidimensional tuning
up invariant representations in cortical areas that are critical for 
object recognition, most notably the inferior temporal cortex (ITC; 
Logothetis and Sheinberg, 1996). The most heavily studied attribute 
has been receptive ﬁ eld size, and older studies indeed reported very 
large receptive ﬁ eld sizes for ITC neurons ( Desimone and Gross, 
1979; Desimone et al., 1984; Gross et al., 1969; Perrett et al., 1982; 
T ovee et al., 1994
). However, more recent ﬁ ndings have revealed a 
different picture, with smaller receptive ﬁ elds that convey relatively 
precise information about object position (DiCarlo and Maunsell, 
2003; Op de Beeck and Vogels, 2000). The newer studies used smaller 
stimuli, and stimulus size was found to matter a lot: larger receptive 
ﬁ elds are found with larger stimuli. Thus, the very large estimates 
in previous studies are most likely related to the use of very large 
stimuli, and in reality object representations in the monkey brain 
at the single unit level are not as invariant as the invariance that 
many computer vision systems aim to accomplish. It is interesting 
to note that recent theoretical neuroscience work has picked up 
these newer ﬁ ndings and explicitly included position coding as an 
intrinsic part of how objects are encoded and recognized (
Edelman 
and Intrator, 2000; Roudi and Treves, 2008).
In addition to stimulus position, ITC neurons are also sensitive 
to other transformations, such as the size and viewpoint in which 
objects are shown (
Ito et al., 1995; Logothetis and Pauls, 1995; Op 
de Beeck and Vogels, 2000 ). Recently it was also found that the 
ideal of neurons with strong object selectivity together with high 
invariance is seldomly achieved in ITC cortex, as a trade off was 
INTRODUCTION
The ability to make abstraction of some aspects of observed events 
is critical for all animals. For example, if an exemplar of a particu-
lar species (e.g. tiger, or human) turns out to be very dangerous, 
then other exemplars of that same species might also be danger-
ous, even if encountered at a different place and time. While many 
examples can be given of how humans are superior to other species 
in terms of the degree of abstraction that can be made, a certain 
degree of abstraction is the hallmark of behaviour all around the 
animal world. Here we will mainly focus on a talent that is shared 
by many animals, namely the recognition of objects (‘Is this an 
animal, dog, my dog?’).
Object recognition is often invariant to the exact circumstances 
under which an object is perceived (
Biederman and Bar, 2000; 
Kravitz et al., 2008). For example, we can recognize a dog irrespec-
tive of its retinal/spatial position, size, illumination, and viewpoint. 
Earlier models of object recognition stressed the need to construct 
an abstract, position-, size-, and viewpoint-invariant 3-D model of 
objects (
Biederman, 1987; Marr and Nishihara, 1978). The question 
of how to construct invariant representations is also a central theme 
in computer vision (e.g. 
Khotanzad and Hong, 1990; Lowe, 1999, 
2004; Mundy and Zisserman, 1992; T orres-Mendez et al., 2000).
LIMITED INVARIANCE OF SINGLE NEURONS IN THE PRIMATE BRAIN
Initially, neurophysiology studies were interpreted as showing that 
also the largest biological vision system, the primate brain, builds 
Edited by:
Hava T . Siegelmann, University of 
Massachusetts Amherst, USA
Reviewed by:
Yasser Roudi, NORDITA, Sweden
Bartlett W. Mel, University of Southern 
California, USA
*Correspondence:
Hans P. Op de Beeck, Laboratory of 
Experimental Psychology, University of 
Leuven, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium. 
e-mail: Hans.opdebeeck@psy.
kuleuven.be


--- Page 2 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 2
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
found between the two at the level of single neurons ( Zoccolan 
et al., 2007). Neurons with high object selectivity tend to display 
less invariance compared to less selective neurons. This ﬁ nding was 
observed for many dimensions for which an object recognition 
system might be tolerant, such as position, size, and clutter.
Figure 1A illustrates the typical combination of selectivity for 
shape, position, and size at the level of single ITC neurons. This 
unit is selective for position (variation in colour in each panel), 
stimulus shape (lower responses in the middle panel compared 
to the left panel), and size (higher responses and larger receptive 
ﬁ eld in right panel compared to left panel). Two deﬁ  nitions of 
invariance have been used in studies of single-unit selectivity for 
multiple stimulus properties. The ﬁ rst deﬁ nition focuses on ‘relative 
invariance’ , which refers to a multidimensional tuning so that the 
preferences along one of the dimensions do not change when the 
value of another dimension is altered. The absolute magnitude of 
the responses might vary, but the order not (
Sary et al., 1993; Vogels 
and Orban, 1996). For example, if we rank different object shapes or 
object sizes based on the response strength at one retinal position, 
then we see a similar preference for these object shapes or sizes at 
another retinal position (Figure 1B; for empirical evidence, see 
Ito 
et al., 1995; Op de Beeck and Vogels, 2000). This ranking method is 
often used when at least one of the two dimensions is manipulated 
in a discrete manner (e.g. only two sizes or positions).
A second deﬁ nition of invariance is applicable in the case of 
continuously varying dimensions, and is based on the concept 
of independent or orthogonal tuning (
Jones et al., 1987; Kayaert 
et al., 2005; Mazer et al., 2002). If the tuning for two dimensions 
is independent or uncorrelated, then the 2-D tuning curve can 
be derived by multiplication of the two marginal distributions 
(the tuning for one dimension averaged across all values of the 
other dimension). An example of independent tuning is shown 
in Figure 1C (left panel). The right panel of Figure 1C shows a 
multidimensional tuning that violates independence. The concepts 
of relative invariance and independence are intertwined, as relative 
invariance will be limited or even non-existing if two dimensions 
are highly dependent.
INVARIANT READ-OUT OF NEURAL POPULATION RESPONSE?
Some recent studies have moved away from single-neuron proper-
ties, and have focused on how the responses of multiple neurons 
can be read-out with linear classiﬁ  cation methods. It has been 
suggested that linear classiﬁ ers reading the responses of inferior 
temporal neurons are able to make abstraction of to-be-ignored 
dimensions like position and size (
Hung et al., 2005), despite the 
selectivity for these dimensions at the single-neuron level as illus-
trated above. Similar conclusions have been reached for the human 
brain based on data obtained with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) and analyzed with multivariate techniques: The 
representations of objects in the human brain are sensitive to object 
position, but nevertheless allow the classiﬁ cation of objects across 
position (
Schwarzlose et al., 2008 ). Thus, despite the absence of 
completely invariant neurons or fMRI voxels, it might be possible 
to come to invariant recognition of objects based on the pattern of 
activity across multiple neurons or across multiple fMRI voxels.
While tempting to interpret these ﬁ ndings as showing that more 
invariance can be achieved at population level than at single-neuron 
level – thereby satisfying both the goals of selectivity and toler-
ance – this may not be the correct conclusion. First, the popula-
tion-level studies did not report the degree of invariance at the 
single-neuron or single-voxel level. For example, 
Hung et al. (2005) 
used relatively small changes on the irrelevant dimensions (ID), 
and they might still have been in the relatively limited regime where 
neurons are indeed mostly invariant. Second, no study has inves-
tigated which non-invariant tuning functions of single neurons 
allow invariant read-out when neurons are combined and which 
do not. Not all non-invariant representations will allow invari-
ant read-out, but some might (
DiCarlo and Cox, 2007). Obvious 
candidate tuning properties to consider are those investigated in 
the many single-unit studies of the past two decades: the degree of 
neural selectivity for the relevant stimulus-dimensions (e.g. object 
shape in the context of object recognition), for the to-be-ignored 
stimulus- dimensions (e.g. retinal position), and the degree of 
1                     N
Rank of shapes
Response
RF center
Other position
1                     N
Rank of sizes
Shape 1
Size 1
Shape 2
Size 1
Shape 1
Size 2
0
40
Response
(Spikes/s)
R = 0.00 R = 0.66
A
B
C
1°
Horizontal position Horizontal position Horizontal positionVertical position
Vertical position
Vertical position
Horizontal position Horizontal position
FIGURE 1 | T uning properties of single neurons and deﬁ nitions of 
invariance. (A) The tuning of one simulated neuron for retinal stimulus position 
(horizontal and vertical dimension in the colour matrices) as assessed with two 
shapes and two different sizes. The position and size sensitivity of this simulated 
neuron is representative for empirically measured tuning properties in monkey 
inferior temporal cortex. (B) The ‘relative invariance’ of tuning for multiple 
dimensions can be assessed by ranking stimuli that vary on one dimension 
based on the response strength at one value of a second dimension, and then 
verifying whether this stimulus preference is the same at another value of this 
second dimension. Here this phenomenon is illustrated with shape (left panel) 
or size (right panel) as the ﬁ rst dimension of which the values are being ranked, 
and retinal position as the second dimension. (C) The ‘independence’ of tuning 
for multiple dimensions can be assessed by comparing the joint 2-D tuning with 
the marginal tuning in which the tuning for one dimension is plotted averaged 
across all values of the other dimension. The left panel illustrated independence 
of tuning, the right panel a high degree of dependence.


--- Page 3 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 3
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
is not the tuning that has been found empirically. More intermediate 
and realistic combinations of tuning width of RD and ID reveal a 
trade-off between identiﬁ cation and invariance: better identiﬁ cation 
performance often leads to poorer invariance, and vice versa. The 
degree of independence in the bivariate tuning of units turned out 
to have surprisingly little effect on identiﬁ cation and invariance, as 
long as the deviations from independence among units were random 
(resulting in independence at the population level). However, while 
effects of idiosyncratic tuning properties and inter-unit variability 
may be averaged out at population level, the degree of invariance at 
population level is very much determined by the average unit, i.e. the 
(hypothetical) unit most representative for the pool. Consequently, 
our results show that even at population level there exists a fun-
damental trade-off between selectivity and tolerance. Perhaps sur-
pringly, the implication is that sensitivity increases, but invariance 
decreases as a function of pool size, as is borne out by our data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this series of experiments, we simulated identiﬁ cation perform-
ance for several types of neural networks. All simulations, except for 
the introductory experiment, were run with an array of units tuned 
in a 2-D input space (X, Y). Unit tuning was 1-D in the introduc-
tory experiment. The preferred 2-D stimulus value of the units (i.e. 
their peak sensitivity), [E(x), E(y)], was randomly sampled from a 
bivariate uniform distribution encompassing the whole stimulus 
range used in the experiments. The tuning of each unit around this 
preferred value was deﬁ ned by a 2-D Gaussian function (see e.g. 
Op 
de Beeck and Vogels, 2000). The response of a unit as a function of 
the 2-D stimulus value, G(x, y), is given by Eq. 1:
G(x, y) = Rmax × exp(−0.5 × M × COV−1 × MT), (1)
with Rmax the maximum response of a unit (set to 40 spikes/s); 
M the 2-D difference [x − E(x) y − E(y)] between the stimulus value 
and the value preferred by the unit; and COV the unit’s covariance 
matrix. Between units and simulations, the average unit tuning 
width (determined by the diagonal elements in COV) and average 
correlation (R, which is the covariance normalized for the squared 
tuning width, expressed in σ) were manipulated. Manipulations of 
this correlation are referred to as manipulations of ‘dependence’ , 
to avoid confusion with our manipulation of correlated noise (see 
further). The details of these manipulations are described for each 
experiment in the respective section in ‘Results’ .
T o simulate the fact that neurons are noisy, the response of each 
unit on each trial was taken from a Poisson distribution with G(x, y) 
as mean. In experiment III, the responses of the network units are 
weakly correlated (i.e. they share some noise). This correlated noise 
was implemented by adding a random number, sampled from a 
standard normal distribution, to each unit response. This random 
number was also appropriately scaled, depending on the response 
strength of the unit. For each stimulus presentation, the random 
number was drawn anew. This implementation of correlated noise 
ensured that pair wise correlations of the responses of all network 
units were approximately identical (i.e. 0.15). The correlated noise 
did not change the unit’s mean response, but increased the stand-
ard deviation to be slightly higher than Poisson noise, consistent 
with empirical observations in visual cortex (see e.g. 
Shadlen and 
Newsome, 1998).
 independence of the  selectivity for these dimensions. Third, no 
attempt has been made to estimate how invariance at the popula-
tion level depends on population characteristics such as pool size 
and correlated noise.
THE PRESENT STUDY
Here, we will study the effects of these aforementioned single unit 
and population characteristics on invariance at the population 
level. We will present a series of simulations with networks com-
posed of units tuned along two dimensions according to a bivariate 
Gaussian distribution. We investigate how well a network trained 
to encode the value of the relevant dimension (RD) at one instance 
of the ID is able to generalize towards other instances of the ID. 
This is the way in which invariance has been tested in both the 
neuroimaging and neurophysiology literature (
Hung et al., 2005; 
Schwarzlose et al., 2008 ). The aim of our simulations if thus to 
ﬁ nd out whether invariance is an automatically emerging property 
of classiﬁ cation at the population level when it is not explicitely 
trained. T o explore effects of single unit and population charac-
teristics, we manipulate the tuning width for the RD and ID, the 
degree of independence/covariance in the bivariate tuning and 
consider effects of pool size and correlated noise. Identiﬁ  cation 
of a speciﬁ c value in a 2-D stimulus space may seem fairly simple, 
but it can be generalized to the more general case of multiple 
dimensions. Further, to evaluate the ‘linear-population-invariance’ 
hypothesis, a well-deﬁ ned and fully understood environment is 
better suited than real-life recognition – a ﬁ eld in which researchers 
still do not completely understand the complexity of the problem 
(see e.g. 
Pinto et al., 2008). We will focus on the performance of 
a multivariate classiﬁ cation algorithm, i.e. linear support vector 
machines (SVMs), which receives a vector input formed by the 
activity pattern across multiple units (
Hung et al., 2005 ). Some 
neurophysiological studies have used simpler correlational analy-
ses (e.g. 
Haxby et al., 2001; Op de Beeck et al., 2008a ), or have 
compared a wide range of linear and non-linear classiﬁ  ers (Cox 
and Savoy, 2003; Haynes and Rees, 2006; Kamitani and T ong, 2005; 
Norman et al., 2006
). However, linear SVMs are widely used in 
recent studies, they are the most powerful classiﬁ  er that is still 
neurally plausible (in contrast to non-linear methods, see Kamitani 
and T ong, 2005), and this type of classiﬁ  er was the one used in 
the recent studies that indicated that invariance can be achieved  
at the population level.
We will focus on three topics in our evaluation of the optimal 
tuning properties of neurons. First, how good is a network at iden-
tifying a target value on the RD among multiple distracter values? 
Second, how well does the network generalize to non-trained values 
on the ID? Finally, how does a network deal with potential changes 
in the dimensional relevance, so that the ID becomes relevant and 
vice versa (‘switching’)? The latter topic is especially important in 
the light of the aforementioned theoretical ideas that dimensions 
that are traditionally considered as irrelevant or even a nuisance for 
object identiﬁ cation might be relevant under certain circumstances 
(
Edelman and Intrator, 2000).
The results reveal, rather unsurprisingly, that the best network for 
identiﬁ cation and invariance is a network with narrow tuning for the 
RD and broad tuning for the ID. However, such a network performs 
poorly when the relevance of the two dimensions is switched, and this 


--- Page 4 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 4
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
T o measure the combined read-out of multiple units, linear SVM 
were used, implemented with the OSU-SVM toolbox based on 
the LIBSVM package (
Schwarzlose et al., 2008). The implemented 
problem was an identiﬁ cation task, explained in detail in section 
‘Introductory Experiment’ .
RESULTS
INTRODUCTORY EXPERIMENT
T o introduce the approach adopted in the simulations to follow, 
we ﬁ rst describe the results of a simple network in a straightfor-
ward identiﬁ cation experiment. In this experiment, the network 
was trained to discriminate a 1-D signal stimulus from a 1-D dis-
tracter stimulus. The signal stimulus remained constant throughout 
the whole experiment, while the distracter stimulus was randomly 
selected from a set of eight stimuli on each training run. This design 
is illustrated in Figure 2A. Half of the distracter stimuli had a lower 
value than the signal stimulus while the other half had a higher 
value. This task may thus be thought off as decoding one speciﬁ c 
value on a given dimension.
The networks trained to perform this task consisted of ﬁ ve units, 
the tuning of which is illustrated in Figure 2B for one network. 
Peak sensitivity of these Gaussian-shaped tuning functions was 
randomly selected from a uniform distribution ranging between 0 
and 1 (indicated by the dotted black lines in Figure 2B). The width, 
expressed in σ, was randomly selected from a normal distribution 
with mean value 0.25 and standard deviation 0.1.
As in all experiments to follow, SVM-training consisted of 500 
network-response patterns to both a signal and a range of dis-
tracter stimuli. In order to classify network responses, the SVM 
computes a decision statistic based on a linear combination of 
response patterns. Although responses of each unit are Poisson 
distributed (see Materials and Methods), the central limit theo-
rem predicts that this decision statistic will be approximately nor-
mally distributed for any given stimulus. This can also be seen in 
Stimulus dimension
A
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
Stimulus dimension
0          0.5         1
B
Relative tuning
1
0.5
0
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
D
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Decision statistic
C
Frequency
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6      0.8       1
E
Performance (Z)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
FIGURE 2 | The introductory experiment. (A) The network was trained to 
discriminate a 1-D signal (full black line) from a 1-D distracter, randomly 
selected from a set of eight distracters (dotted black lines) on each trial. 
(B) The Gaussian-shaped tuning functions for one particular network. 
(C) Estimates of the distribution of the decision statistic computed by the 
SVM for the signal (in red) and one particular distracter (in green) for one 
network, based on 1,000 trials. The full black line depicts the decision 
boundary used by the SVM to classify network responses. (D) Classiﬁ cation 
performance as a function of distracter value in the identiﬁ cation test. Green 
symbols indicate results for the network shown in Figure 1B, blue symbols 
results averaged over 100 networks. (E) Normalized average classiﬁ cation 
performance as a function of distracter value. These data correspond to the 
blue symbols shown in panel (D). After normalization, performance is 
expressed in units of standard deviation above (or below) guess rate. Averaging 
over all 30 distracter values yields the sensitivity statistic used throughout the 
paper.


--- Page 5 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 5
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
Figure 2C. Estimates of the distribution of the decision statistic for 
one speciﬁ c network are illustrated for the signal and one particu-
lar distracter. The full black line depicts the decision boundary used 
by the SVM to classify network responses. Stimuli that generate 
a decision statistic smaller than the decision boundary are clas-
siﬁ ed as distracter, while stimuli that generate a decision statistic 
larger than the decision boundary are classiﬁ ed as signal. It will be 
noted in Figure 2C that for this particular instance, the signal is 
always classiﬁ ed correctly. The distracter, however, is misclassiﬁ ed 
on more than half of the occasions, yielding a total classiﬁ  cation 
performance of 68% correct. Given that the SVM was trained to 
discriminate the signal from a set of distracters located around 
the signal, it is not surprising that those distracters that resemble 
the signal most are easily misclassiﬁ ed.
T o measure identiﬁ cation ability, 30 combinations of a previ-
ously unseen distracter and the signal were presented 100 times to 
the network. Each signal-distracter combination yielded 100 times 
two classiﬁ cation judgements (one for the signal and one for the 
distracter). Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function of 
distracter value in Figure 2D. The green symbols indicate results 
for the network illustrated in Figure 2B, the blue symbols results 
averaged over 100 networks. The U-shaped performance functions 
clearly indicate that these ﬁ ve-unit networks allow identiﬁ cation 
of a speciﬁ c value on the stimulus dimension (to a certain degree). 
Further, the smooth shapes of the performance functions show 
that what is learned during training is successfully transferred to 
previously unseen distracters (otherwise, these functions would 
have peaks at the location of the training distracters). The classiﬁ er 
has thus learned to discriminate the signal from the distracter dis-
tribution. One implication is that performance would not change 
by adding or removing (a limited number of) distracter stimuli 
during the training stage, as long as the distribution of distracters 
does not change. Changing the distracter distribution is equivalent 
to manipulations of tuning width, which are discussed in detail in 
section ‘Experiment I: The Role of the Selectivity for a Relevant 
and Irrelevant Dimension’ .
Closer inspection of the green symbols reveals that, for a par-
ticular network, this performance function may not be symmetrical 
around the signal value. This of course depends on the location and 
width of the tuning functions. The network shown in Figure 2B, 
for instance, performs better for distracters larger than the signal 
 compared to distracters smaller than the signal. On average, how-
ever, performance only depends on the relative distance of the dis-
tracter to the signal, as indicated by the approximately symmetrical 
average performance function, shown in blue.
While illustrative, networks as small as ﬁ ve units are usually not 
considered in the literature. Population-coding models of visual 
processing rather assume pool sizes of approximately 50–100 neu-
rons (
Shadlen et al., 1996; Zohary et al., 1994). One may thus won-
der whether an increase in pool size affects these results. T o tackle 
this question, we ran exactly the same experiment as discussed 
above, but with pool sizes varying between 2 and 200 units. T o ease 
comparison across different pool sizes, we summarize network per-
formance in a single number (a sensitivity parameter). T o calculate 
this number, performance was ﬁ rst normalized by the inverse of 
the normal cumulative distribution function (i.e. a Z-transforma-
tion, see Figure 2E) and then averaged over distracter values. This 
sensitivity statistic thus expresses the average performance level in 
the identiﬁ cation test on a standard normal scale (i.e. in units of 
standard deviation above – or below – guess rate).
Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function of distracter 
value for three different pool sizes in Figure 3A. For each pool 
size, results are averaged over 100 networks. Clearly, classiﬁ  ca-
tion performance improves with pool size. This can also be seen 
in Figure 3B, which shows how sensitivity changes as a function 
of pool size on semi-logarithmic coordinates. The symbols indi-
cate average sensitivity, the error bars ±1 SD, calculated over 100 
networks. As pool size increases, sensitivity – and thus identiﬁ ca-
tion performance – improves. These ﬁ ndings are not surprising, 
given that larger pools carry more information about the possible 
stimulus value. Increasing the pool size will thus improve per-
formance, until no more additional information is helpful. From 
approximately 20 units on, addition of more units has very little 
effect on performance. In experiments I and II, we will make use 
of networks that consist of 49 units and are thus ‘saturated’ for 
this simple 1-D identiﬁ  cation experiment. Experiment III will 
further investigate the effect of pool size, as well as the effect of 
correlated noise.
Pool size
1                 10      100
Sensitivity (Z)
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
B
Distracter value
0      0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
A
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
2 units
4 units
28 units
FIGURE 3 | The effect of pool size on classiﬁ cation performance. (A) Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function of distracter value for three different pool 
sizes. Pool size is indicated by the ﬁ gure legend. (B) Sensitivity as a function of pool size on semi-logarithmic coordinates. Error bars indicate ± 1 SD.


--- Page 6 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 6
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
EXPERIMENT I: THE ROLE OF THE SELECTIVITY FOR A RELEVANT AND 
IRRELEVANT DIMENSION
In this experiment, we expand the task and network tuning to 
two dimensions and study the effects of average tuning width (i.e. 
 selectivity) for both dimensions. The network was trained to dis-
criminate a 2-D signal stimulus from a 2-D distracter stimulus. As was 
the case in the introductory experiment, the signal stimulus remained 
constant throughout the whole training, while the distracter stimulus 
was randomly selected from a set of eight stimuli on each training 
run. The design is illustrated in Figure 4A. The blue symbols refer 
to the set of distracters, the green symbol to the signal. It can be seen 
that only one of both stimulus-dimensions is informative for this 
task. In the reminder of this paper, we will refer to this dimension as 
the ‘relevant’ dimension and to the other dimension as the ‘irrelevant’ 
dimension. The RD may be thought off as signalling object identity, 
while the ID could for instance code for object location or size.
The networks trained to perform this task consisted of 49 units, 
tuned to both the RD and ID. Peak sensitivity of these units was 
randomly selected from a bivariate uniform distribution ranging 
between 0 and 1 on both dimensions. One example network is 
shown in Figure 4B; red symbols indicate the peak-sensitivities 
of all network units. In this simulation, we investigate the role of 
the average 2-D Gaussian-shaped tuning width of the network 
units. Therefore, the average tuning width of the network units, 
expressed in σ, was varied between 0.125 and 1 for each dimen-
sion. The standard deviation of the tuning width was held constant 
at 0.1. An example 2-D tuning function can be seen in Figure 4C. 
Note that the peak sensitivity of this unit approximates (0, 0) – as 
can also be seen in Figure 4B – and that the unit is more narrowly 
tuned for the RD than for the ID.
T o measure identiﬁ cation ability, we made use of the task 
explained in the previous section, i.e. we tested how well the 
Relevant dimension
B
0          0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8          1
Relevant dimension
0          0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8          1
Irrelevant dimension
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
A
Relevant dimension
-2        0        2
Irrelevant dimension
2
0
-2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Relative tuning
C
FIGURE 4 | The design of experiment I. (A) The network was trained to 
discriminate a 2-D signal (green symbol) from a 2-D distracter, randomly 
selected from a set of eight distracters (blue symbols) on each trial. Red arrows 
indicate the stimulus value on the ID in the ﬁ ve identiﬁ cation tests. (B) The 
distribution of peak-sensitivities of all units for one particular network. 
(C) The 2-D Gaussian-shaped tuning function of one network unit. The red 
square indicates the bivariate uniform distribution from which peak-sensitivities 
were randomly selected.


--- Page 7 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 7
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
 network managed to discriminate the signal from 30 previously 
unseen distracters that only differed on the relevant dimension . 
T o test the invariance of the network’s signal representation, this 
identiﬁ cation test was run at ﬁ ve different stimulus-locations on 
the ID, indicated by the red arrows in Figure 4A. One of these 
ﬁ ve identiﬁ cation tests was identical to the training circumstances 
(ID-test = ID-train = 0.2). In the four other identiﬁ  cation tests, 
the stimulus value on the ID differed from the training value (ID-
test = 0.35, 0.50, 0.65 and 0.80, respectively).
We ﬁ rst consider identiﬁ cation performance for the case where 
the ID value of the test stimuli equals the ID value of the training 
stimuli. Results, averaged over 30 networks, are shown in detail 
in the ‘identiﬁ cation’ column of Figure 5 for four different tun-
ing width conditions (tuning width for the RD and ID being 
narrow-narrow, narrow-broad, broad-narrow and broad-broad, 
respectively). Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function 
of distracter value. The average tuning width of the network units 
is illustrated by the 2-D tuning functions shown in the left panels Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
A
D
G
J
B
E
H
K
C
F
I
L
Identification Invariance Switching
FIGURE 5 | Results of experiment I for four network-types. The leftward 
panels illustrate the average bivariate tuning functions of the network units. 
Conventions are identical to those of Figure 4C. Identiﬁ cation. Classiﬁ cation 
performance is plotted as a function of distracter value on the RD. The ID value 
of all test stimuli was identical to the training situation. Invariance. 
Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function of distracter value for ﬁ ve 
different ID values of the test stimuli. Symbol colour indicates the ID value (as 
symbols become lighter, the distance between ID-test and ID-train increases). 
Switching. Classiﬁ cation performance when the relevance of both dimensions 
is swapped.


--- Page 8 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 8
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
of Figure 5. The performance functions show that identiﬁ cation 
ability in circumstances that match the training situation (same 
ID value) beneﬁ ts from narrow tuning on the RD. Further, iden-
tiﬁ cation may be slightly better if tuning on the ID is broad. This 
effect is clearer in Figure 6A, which summarizes results of all tun-
ing width conditions. Identiﬁ cation is expressed in sensitivity (i.e. 
the Z- statistic introduced in the previous section) and plotted as 
a function of average tuning width on the RD and ID. Inspecting 
the rows of the colour matrix reveals a rapid change in colour, 
indicating the importance of tuning width on the RD for identiﬁ ca-
tion sensitivity. However, the columns show a mild but consistent 
change in colour as well, indicating that average tuning width on 
the ID partly determines sensitivity. This second result may be 
understood as being a consequence of the pool size effect shown 
in Figure 2E. Networks with units that are (on average) narrowly 
tuned to the ID will have some units that are not sensitive to the 
training stimuli, due to their location on the ID. Consequently, 
these units will not contribute to the decision statistic used by the 
SVM. Broad tuning to the ID, on the other hand, yields more units 
sensitive to the training stimuli and thus effectively larger pool sizes 
used by the SVM. In sum, when only one dimension is relevant for 
the identiﬁ cation task and the test situation matches the training 
situation, best performance is reached on this identiﬁ cation task 
when units are narrowly tuned to the RD and ‘ignore’ the ID.
We now wish to consider how performance of these networks 
generalizes to cases where the ID value of the test stimuli differs 
from the ID value of the training stimuli. Results, averaged over 30 
networks, are shown in detail in the ‘invariance’ column of Figure 5 
for the four tuning width conditions. Classiﬁ cation performance is 
plotted as a function of distracter value for ﬁ ve different identiﬁ ca-
tion tests, indicated by colour (black symbols refer to the case where 
ID-test = ID-train; as symbol colour becomes lighter, the distance 
between ID-test and ID-train increases). Perfect generalization 
implies that network performance is not affected by the ID value 
of the test stimuli and would yield indistinguishable performance 
curves at all ID-test levels. This is the case for the network whose 
performance is shown in Figure 5E. The units of this network are 
narrowly tuned to the RD, but broadly to the ID. For all other 
networks shown, however, identiﬁ cation performance suffers from 
the change in ID-test value relative to ID-train.
A more general summary of these results is shown in Figure 6B. 
T o express invariance in a single number, the ratio of the sensi-
tivity at the most remote ID-test value and the sensitivity at ID-
train was computed. This statistic thus expresses the proportion of 
identiﬁ cation sensitivity in the training situation preserved in the 
most extreme test situation . We shall refer to this statistic as the 
‘invariance ratio’ – note that this relative performance measure 
is only meaningful when identiﬁ cation sensitivity in the training 
situation is reasonably high. In Figure 6B, the invariance ratio is 
plotted as a function of average tuning width on the RD and ID. As 
was the case for the identiﬁ cation sensitivity shown in Figure 6A, 
best invariance is found for networks whose units are narrowly 
tuned to the RD and ignore the ID. Similarly, invariance is worst 
for networks whose units are sensitive to the ID, but insensitive 
to the RD. An important difference between identiﬁ  cation and 
invariance performance, however, can be seen in the upward 
diagonal of the matrix, showing results for networks having a 
similar average selectivity for the RD and ID. In Figure 6A, sen-
sitivity decreases along this diagonal. In Figure 6B, the invariance 
ratio increases along this diagonal. This suggests the existence of a 
trade-off between identiﬁ cation and invariance, a point that will 
be further clariﬁ ed in the discussion.
0.25     0.5     0.75     1
Switching contrast (%)
-100     -50      0       50      100
C
Switching
Tuning width RD (σ)
0.25     0.5     0.75     1
Invariance ratio (%)
0       25       50       75     100
B
Invariance
Tuning width RD (σ)
1
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.25     0.5     0.75     1
Sensitivity (Z)
0       0.5      1       1.5       2
A
Identification
Tuning width RD (σ)
Tuning width ID (σ)
FIGURE 6 | Summary of the results of experiment I. (A) Identiﬁ cation sensitivity as a function of average unit tuning width on the RD and ID. Each cell 
summarizes results of one network-type. (B) The invariance ratio as a function of average unit tuning width on the RD and ID. (C) Switching contrast as a 
function of average unit tuning width on the RD and ID.


--- Page 9 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 9
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
A ﬁ nal issue we wish to address here is how network performance 
changes when RD and IDs are switched and the SVM is trained 
anew. We did not run a new simulation, but estimated this per-
formance by swapping the network-tuning labels ‘RD’ and ‘ID’ . For 
networks that have identical average tuning width for the RD and 
ID, performance estimates will thus also be identical. Results, aver-
aged over 30 networks, are shown in detail in the ‘switching’ column 
of Figure 5 for the four tuning width conditions. Classiﬁ  cation 
performance is again plotted as a function of distracter value for 
ﬁ ve different identiﬁ cation tests, indicated by colour (black symbols 
refer to the case where ID-test = ID-train; as symbol colour becomes 
lighter, the distance between ID-test and ID-train increases). Perfect 
switching implies that network performance is not affected by the 
RD- or ID-label and thus that the ‘switching’ performance curves 
are indistinguishable from the ‘invariance’ performance curves. 
By deﬁ nition, this is the case for the networks whose units have, 
on average, identical tuning width to the RD and ID (compare 
Figures 5B,C, for instance). For networks whose units are differ-
ently  selective to both dimensions, however, switching the relevance 
of both dimensions hurts or improves performance depending on 
which dimension was associated with most selectivity.
The switching results are summarized in Figure 6C. T o express 
switching performance in a single number, we ﬁ rst computed the 
general sensitivity averaged over all RD- and ID-test values for both 
the original and switched task (yielding Z
or and Zsw, respectively). 
Then, the ratio of the difference of both sensitivities to the sum of 
both sensitivities was computed [i.e. ( Z
or − Zsw)/(Zor + Zsw)]. This 
statistic thus expresses the proportion of improvement in general sen-
sitivity when the relevance of both dimensions is switched and varies 
between −1 and 1. We shall refer to this statistic as the ‘switching 
contrast’ . Negative values indicate that general sensitivity beneﬁ ts 
from the switch, positive that general sensitivity is hurt by the 
switch. The most intriguing aspect of Figure 6C is that switching 
contrast is nearly constant when moving right/upwards. This is 
trivial for the upward diagonal (same data used for computing Z
or 
and Zsw), but not for the other right/upward lines. This observation 
indicates that the proportion of change in general sensitivity upon 
relevance-switching is not determined by the absolute tuning width 
to either dimension, but solely by the difference in average tuning 
width for both dimensions.
EXPERIMENT II: THE ROLE OF ORTHOGONAL OR INDEPENDENT TUNING
In this experiment, we introduce dependency of tuning and study 
the effects of mean dependence and variation in dependence. T o 
clarify the effect of dependent tuning, some example 2-D tuning 
functions are shown in Figure 7. Figure 7A shows the average 2-D 
unit tuning function for the network under consideration. Note 
that selectivity for both dimensions is on average identical, broad, 
and independent. In the experiments discussed so far, tuning to 
both dimensions was always independent for all networks and each 
unit. In this example, the average dependence of the network units 
still equals 0, but some variation or scatter in the dependency of 
tuning was introduced (the correlation-distribution is depicted by 
the full black line in Figure 7B). The effect of this scatter on the 
unit tuning functions is shown in Figure 7C: most receptive ﬁ elds 
are no longer horizontally or vertically orientated. This implies 
that the tuning for one dimension depends on the stimulus value 
on the other dimension. Consequently, the individual units have 
no invariant stimulus representations.
We ﬁ rst address the question whether a scatter in dependence 
hurts invariance at the level of the network representation when 
the average dependence equals 0. T o this end, we replicated exper-
iment I for four different tuning width conditions (narrow-nar-
row, narrow-broad, broad-narrow and broad-broad, respectively). 
Results for networks with and without scatter in dependence are 
shown in Figure 8 (for the scatter condition, we used the correla-
tion-distribution depicted by the full black line in Figure 7B). At 
ﬁ rst sight, these performance functions reveal no strong effect of 
the introduced scatter in dependence. This conclusion is supported 
by the fact that the invariance ratios are hardly different from the 
‘no scatter’ condition (i.e. in the order of Figure 8: 13, 100, 3 and 
47% for the ‘no scatter’ condition and 7, 100, 4 and 44% for the 
scatter condition, respectively). The only type of network with a 
convincing effect is the one of Figure 8B, which is a network with 
narrow-narrow units, resulting in good identiﬁ cation performance 
and poor invariance. Nevertheless, also here the effect of a scatter in 
dependence is small. The main ﬁ nding is thus that for networks that 
show no systematic dependence, invariance is mostly determined 
by the average tuning width for both dimensions. These networks 
thus manage to average out the scatter of dependence at the level 
of single units.
How about networks that have an average dependence differ-
ent from 0? Results for the same four tuning width conditions are 
shown in Figure 8, under the heading ‘bias + scatter’ . This time, 
we used the correlation-distribution depicted by the  dotted black 
A
C
Correlation
-1   0           1
BProbability density
FIGURE 7 | The effect of dependent tuning. (A) The average 2-D unit tuning 
function for a particular network. (B) The correlation-distributions used in 
experiment II. (C) Some example unit tuning functions corresponding to the 
average tuning width shown in panel (A) and the correlation-distribution 
depicted by the full line in panel (B).


--- Page 10 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 10
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
line in Figure 7B (the average correlation equals 0.3, the stand-
ard deviation of the correlation 0.25). The effects of an average 
dependence different from 0 – while present in all panels – are 
clearest in Figure 8L. First, identiﬁ cation performance may now 
drop below guess rate. Second, results differ for distracters that 
have a lower value than the signal and distracters that have a higher 
value. For the former, performance in the vicinity of the signal 
has improved and is only slightly impaired at further distances. 
For distracters that have a higher value than the signal, on the 
other hand, performance is severely impaired. In general, the 
 invariance ratio has lowered relative to the ‘no scatter’ conditions 
(i.e. in the order of Figure 8: 13, 100, 3 and 47% for the ‘no scatter’ 
condition and 13, 99, −5 and 8% for the ‘bias + scatter’ condi-
tion, respectively). Networks that have a systematic dependence 
in tuning thus show less invariance and asymmetric effects when 
tested for invariance in an identiﬁ cation test. The loss in invari-
ance depends on the strength of the dependence, as is shown in 
Figure 9. Here the invariance ratio for the ‘broad-broad’ network 
Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
Distracter value
0     0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1
A
D
G
J
B
E
H
K
C
F
I
L
No scatter Scatter Bias + Scatter
FIGURE 8 | Results of experiment II. The leftward panels illustrate the RD and 
ID selectivity of the average bivariate tuning functions of the network units. 
Conventions are identical to those of Figure 4C. No scatter. Classiﬁ cation 
performance is plotted as a function of distracter value for ﬁ ve different ID values 
of the test stimuli. Conventions are identical to Figure 5. For these networks, 
unit tuning functions were not correlated. Scatter. For these networks, average 
dependence was equal to 0. There was some variation in the dependence of the 
unit tuning functions, however, Bias + scatter. For these networks, average 
dependence was equal to 0.3. There was also some variation in the correlation 
of the unit tuning functions.


--- Page 11 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 11
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
We replicated experiment I with networks that were equally 
 sensitive to both dimensions and relatively broadly tuned (i.e. on 
average, σ = 0.5 for the RD and ID, with a standard deviation of 0.1). 
We compare results for networks with no inter-unit correlations and 
networks whose unit responses are weakly correlated (the average 
inter-unit correlation being equal to 0.15). T o see the effect of this 
correlation on unit responses, consider Figure 10. In Figures 10A,B, 
responses of one unit to 100 stimulus presentations are plotted as 
a function of the responses of another unit to the same stimuli. 
The neurons of Figure 10A share no noise, while the responses of 
those shown in Figure 10B are weakly correlated. The effects of 
such correlation at the level of a whole network can be seen in 
Figure 11. Classiﬁ cation performance is plotted as a function of 
disctrater value for three different pool sizes, as indicated by the 
ﬁ gure legend. T o estimate these numbers, more repetitions were 
used for smaller networks than for larger networks. First, consider 
Figures 11A,B, which show results at ID-train without (Figure 11A) 
and with (Figure 11B) correlated noise. Both ﬁ gures cleary reveal a 
pool size effect, consistent with our ﬁ ndings for the simple identiﬁ ca-
tion experiment shown in Figure 3, i.e. identiﬁ cation performance 
increases with pool size (up to a certain critical number of units, see 
Figure 3B). Further, for the three pool sizes shown, weakly correlated 
noise slightly impairs identiﬁ cation sensitivity at ID-train. This, of 
course, is the equivalent of the well-known encoding-limitation 
effect of correlated noise for our identiﬁ cation experiment.
Figures 11C,D  show classiﬁ cation performance at the most 
remote ID-test value for the same pool sizes. In line with our ear-
lier results, identiﬁ cation performance suffers from the change 
in ID-test value relative to ID-train ( Figure 6B reveals that the 
invariance ratio was estimated to be approximately 25% for simi-
larly tuned networks consisting of 49 units). Intriguingly, how-
ever, comparison of the white and grey symbols in Figures 11C,D 
shows a rather surprising pool size effect: The white symbols lay 
below the grey symbols, indicating that the smaller network out-
performs the larger network. Thus, both without (Figure 11C) and 
with (Figure 11D) correlated noise included, a 25-units network 
is more tolerant for changes in the ID-test value than a 100-units 
network. A summary and extension of these results is shown in 
Figure 12. Identiﬁ cation sensitivity is plotted as a function of pool 
of Figure 8 is plotted as a function of average dependence (the 
standard  deviation in correlation was always equal to 0.25). It is 
clear that the invariance ratio goes down when the average depend-
ence goes up beyond 0.1.
EXPERIMENT III: POOL SIZE, CORRELATED NOISE AND INVARIANCE
In this ﬁ nal simulation, we studied the effect of pool size and cor-
related noise on invariance. Single-unit recordings throughout the 
visual cortex, including ITC, have demonstrated that the responses 
of different cortical neurons in discrimination tasks are typically 
weakly correlated (
Gawne and Richmond, 1993; Golledge et al., 
2003; Shadlen et al., 1996; Zohary et al., 1994). Because correlated 
noise limits the encoding capacity of a pool of neurons and the 
strength of this limitation depends on pool size (
Zohary et al., 
1994), weakly correlated noise is an important factor to consider 
when studying effects of pool size.
Average correlation
Invariance ratio (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3
FIGURE 9 | Correlated neural noise in experiment III. The invariance ratio 
for the ‘broad-broad’ network of Figure 8 is plotted as a function of average 
dependence of the unit tuning functions (the standard deviation in correlation 
was always equal to 0.25).
A
Response unit y (Hz)
60
40
20
0
B
Response unit × (Hz)
0                  20     40  60
Response unit y (Hz)
60
40
20
0
Response unit × (Hz)
0                  20     40  60
FIGURE 10 | The effect of pool size and correlated noise on classiﬁ cation performance in experiment III. (A) Responses of one unit to 100 stimulus 
presentations are plotted as a function of the responses of another unit to the same stimuli. These neurons share no noise. (B) Same as in panel (A) for units that 
share weakly correlated noise.


--- Page 12 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 12
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
Pool size
1                        10                    100
Sensitivity (Z)
10
1
0.1
0.01
A
Pool size
Invariance ratio (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
B
1                        10                    100
FIGURE 12 | Results of experiment III. (A) Identiﬁ cation sensitivity is plotted as 
a function of pool size for both correlated noise conditions in the two different ID-
test conditions on double logarithmic coordinates (circles refer to the sensitivity 
at ID-train, squares to the sensitivity at the most remote ID-test value; white 
symbols refer to networks with no inter-unit correlation; grey symbols to 
networks with correlated noise). (B) The invariance ratio is plotted as a function of 
pool size for both correlated noise conditions (white symbols refer to networks 
with no inter-unit correlation; grey symbols to networks with correlated noise).
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
A
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
4 units
25 units
100 units
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
B
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
C
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Distracter value
0       0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8       1
D
Performance (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
4 units
25 units
100 units
4 units
25 units
100 units
4 units
25 units
100 units
FIGURE 11 | The effect of pool size and correlated noise on classiﬁ cation 
performance. (A) Classiﬁ cation performance at ID-train is plotted as a 
function of distracter value for three different pool sizes (as indicated by the 
ﬁ gure legend). Results in (A) are from networks without correlated noise. 
(B) Same as in (A) for networks with correlated noise. (C) Classiﬁ cation 
performance at the most remote ID-test location, results are from networks 
without correlated noise. (D) Same as in (C) for networks with correlated 
noise.
size for both  correlation conditions in the two different ID-test 
conditions on double  logarithmic coordinates (circles refer to the 
sensitivity at ID-train, squares to the sensitivity at the most remote 
ID-test value; white symbols refer to networks with no inter-unit 
correlation; grey symbols to networks with correlated noise).
In Figure 12A, the grey circles lie below the white circles. This 
indicates that weakly correlated noise lowers identiﬁ cation sensitiv-
ity at ID-train for all pool sizes. Intriguingly, comparison of the white 
and grey squares reveals that correlated noise hurts identiﬁ cation 
sensitivity even more at the most remote ID-test value. Correlated 


--- Page 13 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 13
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
noise thus impairs invariance. This can also be seen in Figure 12B. 
The invariance ratio is plotted as a function of pool size for both 
correlation conditions (white symbols refer to networks with no 
inter-unit correlation; grey symbols to networks with correlated 
noise). Even without correlated noise invariance tends to go down 
with increased pool size, but this phenomenon becomes stronger 
with correlated noise. Thus, for this network, increased pool size and 
correlated noise impair invariant identiﬁ cation behaviour.
The invariance ratio compares sensitivity at two different ID values. 
It can go down because performance at the trained ID value increases 
more rapidly than performance at the most extreme untrained ID 
value, while there is still an improved performance at this untrained 
ID value with larger pool sizes. However, we clearly see that perform-
ance at the most extreme untrained ID value can go down with larger 
pool sizes, which is really surprising. Identiﬁ cation sensitivity at the 
most remote ID-test value initially improves with pool size but from 
a certain number of units on decreases as a function of pool size for 
both correlated noise conditions (see Figure 12A). Invariance does 
thus not beneﬁ t from larger pool sizes (see Figure 12B). T o the con-
trary: invariance is approximately 0 for fairly large pool sizes.
This counter-intuitive ﬁ nding can be understood from what is 
learned by SVMs. In small networks, relatively little information 
about the stimulus is present. Each unit represents some unique 
information and is thus used by the SVM in determining the deci-
sion statistic. This is also the case for units that are not ideally tuned 
to the training stimuli due to their ID selectivity. When identiﬁ cation 
performance is tested at a different ID location, the most informative 
units of the training stage might suddenly mainly contribute noise 
to the decision statistic. In contrast, the units that were not optimal 
during training due to their ID selectivity may now be valuable. 
This leads to an approximation of invariant behaviour. In large net-
works, the SVM is offered the luxury to compute its decision statistic 
almost entirely based on response patterns (vectors) that put a strong 
emphasis on units which are optimally tuned to the training stimuli. 
Due to the large amount of information present in the network, the 
SVM can ignore the units that are not ideally tuned to the training 
stimuli. Consequently, identiﬁ cation performance under training 
circumstances will be better when compared to smaller networks, 
as is also borne out by our data. The price to pay, however, is that 
the robustness of the network to unexpected changes in the test 
situation has decreased signiﬁ cantly. In this regard, these results 
are yet another manifestion of the fundamental trade-off between 
selectivity and tolerance existing at population level.
DISCUSSION
We investigated the relationship between single-unit tuning prop-
erties and population-level read-out performance in terms of 
identiﬁ cation performance, invariance, and switching. The results 
indicate how difﬁ cult it is to ﬁ nd a neural code that allows good 
performance according to all three of these measures. Most impor-
tantly, the read-out of a population of non-invariant single units 
is non-invariant itself.
EFFECTS OF BIVARIATE TUNING PROPERTIES ON IDENTIFICATION AND 
INVARIANCE
We started with a simple network with units tuned along one 
dimension. This experiment illustrated how even a network with 
a fairly small number of units can decode the value of a target 
stimulus. This performance was obtained even though the identi-
ﬁ cation problem is essentially non-linear: the target is surrounded 
by distracters at both sides of the stimulus dimension.
Here we are mostly interested in performance when there is at 
least one irrelevant stimulus dimension. Good identiﬁ cation ánd 
good invariance was obtained when individual units in a population 
were very selective for the RD and very broadly tuned for the ID. In 
this case the independence of tuning for the two dimensions did not 
matter. This ﬁ nding follows the intuition that has lead to the proposal 
of very abstract object recognition models: invariant behaviour calls 
for invariance in tuning. However, it already became clear from the 
Introduction that the brain has not implemented this solution. There 
are at least two possible reasons for this. First, a strong difference 
in tuning for the two dimensions leads to inferior switching when 
the relevance of the dimensions would change or reverse. It can be 
argued that the distinction between RD and IDs, and the stability 
of this distinction, is not so clear-cut in natural vision. For example, 
stimulus position, which seems to be irrelevant for object recogni-
tion, might be helpful to represent the relative position of parts in 
multi-part objects (
Edelman and Intrator, 2000). Thus it might not 
be optimal to reduce the selectivity for such dimensions to 0.
Second, the primate visual system might not be able to create 
single neurons with the desired properties of high selectivity for 
the RD and low selectivity for the ID. Indeed, 
Zoccolan et al. (2007) 
observed a trade-off between object selectivity and tolerance at 
the single-neuron level. ITC neurons with higher object selectivity 
tended to be more inﬂ uenced by image transformations such as 
changes in position or size. Thus, even if the distinction between 
RD and IDs might be clear-cut from a conceptual point of view, 
the practical implementation of this distinction into neurons that 
are only sensitive to changes in these RDs might be impossible. 
Whatever the reason why ITC neurons do not achieve the tuning 
characteristics that optimize both identiﬁ  cation and invariance, 
the conclusion is that they do not.
So it is most relevant to look at our simulations with a range of 
other less extreme tuning widths for RD and ID. In general, the ﬁ nd-
ings followed naturally from the aforementioned extreme case. High 
selectivity on the RD is beneﬁ cial for identiﬁ cation, while selectivity 
on the ID had little effect on identiﬁ cation (with a small beneﬁ cial 
effect of less ID selectivity). Low selectivity on the ID is beneﬁ cial for 
invariance. However, in addition we noted an interesting trade-off 
between identiﬁ cation and invariance when RD and ID selectivity 
was similar: High selectivity on both RD and ID is associated with 
good identiﬁ cation and poor invariance, while low selectivity on 
both RD and ID is associated with poor identiﬁ  cation and good 
invariance. Note that this trade-off determines the performance 
of reading out a neural population,  while the trade-off observed 
by Zoccolan and colleagues was characterized at the single-neuron 
level. The single-neuron trade-off prevents the system from hav-
ing very different selectivity for RD and ID, and this causes the 
system to be in a situation where the read-out of the responses is 
subjected to a trade-off between identiﬁ cation and invariance. From 
these trade-offs, we would predict that ITC neurons would not be 
extremely selective for objects, as this would hurt invariance both 
at the single-neuron level (as shown by Zoccolan and colleagues) 
and at the population level (as shown here).


--- Page 14 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 14
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
Correlations in the bivariate tuning of neurons had two sorts of 
effects. A ﬁ rst effect was obtained in cases where the average cor-
relation deviated from 0. In that case, the invariance performance 
was affected very strongly and in an asymmetric way. However, high 
deviations in the average correlation are somewhat artiﬁ cial. If it 
would be encountered in actual data, then it would be a strong indi-
cation that the way dimensions were deﬁ ned by the experimenter 
does not ﬁ t with the dimensions that deﬁ ne single-unit tuning or 
behaviour (see 
Ashby and T ownsend, 1986). In most situations, we 
expect to see a scatter of the correlation around a mean correlation 
that is closer to 0. The effect of this scatter in the correlation was 
very small overall. However, it interacted with tuning width along 
RD and ID in such a way that the strongest effect of scatter in 
correlation was noted in a case with low invariance. The same was 
true for cases in which the average correlation differed from 0. In 
those situations, more scatter in correlation decreases invariance. 
Thus, an increase in the independence of tuning for RD and ID at 
the single-neuron level is one way to increase invariance.
These ﬁ ndings suggest that a linear classiﬁ  er looking at the 
output of a neural population averages out the possible scatter 
in tuning properties to a certain degree. Including more neurons 
also improves identiﬁ cation performance under training circum-
stances. Nevertheless, contrary to what one might expect intuitively, 
population-level classiﬁ cation was not more invariant to changes 
in the ID. We have even observed the opposite: stronger effects of 
the value on the ID with a larger population size. Thus, if neurons 
on average show clear sensitivity for a particular image transfor-
mation, then population-level classiﬁ cation will also be sensitive 
to this image transformation, and sometimes even more so. From 
that perspective average single-neuron selectivity might provide 
an upper-bound of the degree of invariance possible in a neural 
network.
IMPLICATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
The merit of this study is that we provide an explicit test for the 
hypothesis that a linear read-out mechanism of a pool of units 
resembling ITC neurons may achieve invariant performance in 
an identiﬁ cation task. Further, this work draws an explicit connec-
tion between the recent work on multivariate analyses of patterns 
of selectivity across neurons and fMRI voxels and older work on 
multidimensional tuning properties of single neurons. Without 
this explicit connection, we are left wondering how the two sets 
of studies connect, and whether a particular outcome of a multi-
variate analysis is consistent with previously published single-unit 
data. Papers in the literature have not studied identiﬁ  cation and 
invariance at both the single-neuron and population level, but nev-
ertheless it is possible to derive that empirical ﬁ ndings are gener-
ally in line with our conclusions. Importantly, 
Hung et al. (2005) 
suggested that SVMs trained on data from objects presented at one 
position or scale are able to perform very well with data obtained 
at another position or scale, with only a small drop in performance 
(from 76 to 70%). We noted in the Introduction that this ﬁ nding 
might suggest a discrepancy between network-level and single-unit 
invariance as empirical studies have revealed small receptive ﬁ elds 
in ITC (
DiCarlo and Maunsell, 2003; Op de Beeck and Vogels, 
2000). However, while the latter studies revealed the existence of 
small receptive ﬁ elds in ITC and a large scatter of receptive ﬁ eld size, 
the average receptive ﬁ eld was large enough to encompass the fairly 
small 4 visual degrees variation that was included to train and test 
the classiﬁ ers by 
Hung et al. (2005). Thus, the invariance of popula-
tion-level classiﬁ er performance did not exceed expectations based 
on single-neuron tuning curves. Furthermore, the approximation 
of invariance by Hung et al. might be an over-estimation as they 
studied neurons whose responses were not measures simultane-
ously. So their neural populations included no correlated noise. 
Our results reveal that invariance might be lower with correlated 
noise.
Our simulations do not exhaust all possible options of net-
work characteristics. First, we used Gaussian tuning curves. This 
is the most common distribution to ﬁ t the tuning of neurons (e.g. 
McAdams and Maunsell, 1999; Op de Beeck and Vogels, 2000; 
Schoups et al., 2001 ) and in modelling work (e.g. Poggio and 
Edelman, 1990; Pouget et al., 2000 ). Furthermore, it is also the 
best distribution to take as the general ‘default’ as it is a maximum 
entropy distribution. Nevertheless, other distributions can be con-
sidered, some ‘bell-curved’ like the Gaussian distribution, other 
more monotonic. Which tuning function is the optimal depends 
on many factors, including the characteristics of the neural noise, 
read-out constraints, and the mechanisms by which these tuning 
functions are generated (see e.g. 
Beck et al., 2007; Ben-Yishai et al., 
1995; Salinas, 2006; Series et al., 2004). Thus, while we targeted the 
most general case by using Gaussian functions, it is important to 
consider that some of the observed effects might differ with other 
tuning functions.
Second, we have only shortly looked at effects of correlated 
noise and population size, and much more can be done. Note 
that correlated noise is a totally different aspect of a neural code 
than the correlation/independence in the tuning along multiple 
dimensions. While the latter characterizes the multidimensional 
tuning of a single neuron, the former refers to the dependen-
cies in the noise distribution between neurons. Such correlated 
noise is known to affect how performance rises with increases 
in population size (
Shadlen and Newsome, 1998; Zohary et al., 
1994), and a similar effect was observed in our simulations. We 
were surprised to note that the presence of correlated noise does 
not only limit identiﬁ cation performance but also invariance, and 
we have checked that this phenomenon occurs for a wider range of 
parameter combinations than the ones reported here. Nevertheless, 
there are many aspects of correlated noise that we did not study, 
such as what happens when the degree of correlated noise is differ-
ent for units with high and low selectivity, and effects of the exact 
circuit mechanisms that are used to achieve the high selectivity 
(
Pouget et al., 1999).
Third, we have selected one type of classiﬁ  er, linear SVMs, to 
assess read-out performance. This selection was chosen based on 
its prevalence in recent neurophysiological and neuroimaging stud-
ies. Many other multivariate measures can be taken. However, an 
important restriction is that all these measures should combine the 
output of the units in a linear way. Non-linear mechanisms would 
be more powerful and ﬂ exible, but they do no longer tell us how 
well a next layer of neurons would be able to read-out the informa-
tion in a neural representation (
DiCarlo and Cox, 2007; Kamitani 
and T ong, 2005). Nevertheless, read-out processes in the real brain 
might be more powerful than implemented here. For example, 


--- Page 15 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 15
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
Hung, C. P ., Kreiman, G., Poggio, T., and 
DiCarlo, J. J. (2005). Fast readout of 
object identity from macaque infe-
rior temporal cortex. Science  310, 
863–866.
Ito, M., Tamura, H., Fujita, I., and 
Tanaka, K. (1995). Size and position 
invariance of neuronal responses 
in monkey inferotemporal cortex. 
J. Neurophysiol. 73, 218–226.
Jones, J. P ., Stepnoski, A., and Palmer, L. A. 
(1987). The two-dimensional spectral 
structure of simple receptive ﬁ elds in 
cat striate cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 58, 
1212–1232.
Kamitani, Y., and T ong, F. (2005). 
Decoding the visual and subjective 
contents of the human brain. Nat. 
Neurosci. 8, 679–685.
Kayaert, G., Biederman, I., Op de 
Beeck, H. P ., and Vogels, R. (2005). 
Tuning for shape dimensions in 
macaque inferior temporal cortex. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 212–224.
Khotanzad, A., and Hong, Y. H. (1990). 
Invariant image recognition by 
we assumed read-out mechanisms that look at the full pattern of 
selectivity. Instead, separate classiﬁ ers could be built that include 
special sub-classes of neurons, selected based on prior experience. 
It has been previously observed that real neurons are very diverse 
in their tuning properties (e.g. 
Op de Beeck et al., 2008b), and this 
element was also included in the present investigation. However, 
the simulations did not include any a priori labelling of neurons 
as being ‘good’ or ‘bad’ for the task at hand. The real brain is not a 
tabula rasa in which a new task is learned without reference to any 
previous task, and shortcuts based on previously established learn-
ing and wiring might increase the efﬁ ciency and speed of reading 
out object representations in an invariant manner.
In sum, our study was motivated by the observation in the lit-
erature that object-selective neurons are also selective to a certain 
degree of image transformations such as position and size. The 
average neuron does not attain the ideal of high object selectiv-
ity combined with high invariance for such transformations, and 
there is even a trade-off that makes it very unlikely to ﬁ nd any ideal 
neurons. We show that also measures that look at the pattern of 
response across populations of such non-ideal neurons show non-
ideal performance: good identiﬁ cation performance and invari-
ance are not found together, and a trade-off between the two is 
also found at the population level. The situation was even worse 
when these non-ideal neurons displayed correlated tuning for RD 
and ID. We conclude that a network composed of neurons that do 
not individually show good object selectivity and good invariance 
will as a network also be unable to attain good object selectivity 
combined with good invariance.
Finally, we should note that the limited invariance is related to 
a situation in which the classiﬁ er or decoder only encounters one 
value of the ID during training. The same classiﬁ  er would easily 
attain invariant performance if it would be trained on a wider 
range of values on the ID. Here we can refer to the literature on 
the recognition of objects across viewpoints. It was shown previ-
ously that it is possible to attain view-invariant performance with 
a network composed of orientation-selective units if the neural 
network is trained on three very different views (
Logothetis et al., 
1994; Poggio and Edelman, 1990). The exact number of training 
values on an ID that are needed to achieve invariant performance 
will again depend on the neural selectivity for that dimension.
Based on these data, behavioral evidence of invariant recogni-
tion suggests that either the visual system has encountered enough 
variability on IDs, or that the visual system has implemented read-
out processes that are more powerful to serve the goal of invariance 
than the linear classiﬁ er considered here. Nevertheless, in the case 
of ‘overlearned’ visual stimuli like human faces or letters, there are 
behavioral analogues to our simulated results. While we are very 
sensitive for small differences between faces and experts in recogniz-
ing letters, behavioral performance decreases severely when faces or 
a text are inverted or presented at an unusual size (
McKone, 2009; 
Pelli, 1999; Robbins and McKone, 2003). While this is no evidence 
that a similar mechanism as the one we simulated underlies these 
effects, it is interesting to note that for certain special classes of 
stimuli, our visual system is highly selective, but only mildly tolerant 
at behavioral level. Thus, a population read-out of only moderately 
invariant single neurons does not automatically result in invariant 
performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to C. Baker and G. Kayaert for their valuable comments on 
a previous version of the manuscript, and to J. Wagemans for his 
continuous support. This research was supported by a predoctoral 
(R.L.T.G.) and postdoctoral (H.P .O.) fellowship from the Fund for 
Scientiﬁ c Research (FWO) of Flanders, the K.U.Leuven research 
council (project CREA/07/004), and the Human Frontier Science 
Program (CDA 0040/2008).
REFERENCES
Ashby, F. G., and T ownsend, J. T. (1986). 
Varieties of perceptual independence. 
Psychol. Rev. 93, 154–179.
Beck, J., Ma, W. J., Latham, P . E., and 
Pouget, A. (2007). Probabilistic pop-
ulation codes and the exponential 
family of distributions. Prog. Brain Res. 
165, 509–519.
Ben-Yishai, R., Bar-Or, R. L., and 
Sompolinsky, H. (1995). Theory of 
orientation tuning in visual cor-
tex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.  92, 
3844–3848.
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-
components: a theory of human 
image understanding. Psychol. Rev. 
94, 115–147.
Biederman, I., and Bar, M. (2000). 
Differing views on views: response to 
Hayward and Tarr (2000). Vision Res. 
40, 3901–3905.
Cox, D. D., and Savoy, R. L. (2003). 
Functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing (fMRI) ‘brain reading’: detecting 
and classifying distributed patterns of 
fMRI activity in human visual cortex. 
Neuroimage 19, 261–270.
Desimone, R., Albright, T. D., Gross, C. G., 
and Bruce, C. (1984). Stimulus-
 selective properties of inferior tem-
poral neurons in the macaque. J. 
Neurosci. 4, 2051–2062.
Desimone, R., and Gross, C. G. (1979). 
Visual areas in the temporal cortex of 
the macaque. Brain Res. 178, 363–380.
DiCarlo, J. J., and Cox, D. D. (2007). 
Untangling invariant object recogni-
tion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 333–341.
DiCarlo, J. J., and Maunsell, J. H. (2003). 
Anterior inferotemporal neurons of 
monkeys engaged in object recogni-
tion can be highly sensitive to object 
retinal position. J. Neurophysiol. 89, 
3264–3278.
Edelman, S., and Intrator, N. (2000). 
(Coarse coding of shape fragments) 
+ (retinotopy) approximately = rep-
resentation of structure. Spat. Vis. 13, 
255–264.
Gawne, T. J., and Richmond, B. J. (1993). 
How independent are the messages 
carried by adjacent inferior tempo-
ral cortical neurons? J. Neurosci. 13, 
2758–2771.
Golledge, H. D., Panzeri, S.,  
Zheng, F., Pola, G., Scannell, J. W., 
Giannikopoulos, D. V ., Mason, R. J., 
T ovee, M. J., and Y oung, M. P . 
(2003). Correlations, feature- binding 
and population coding in pri-
mary visual cortex. Neuroreport 14, 
1045–1050.
Gross, C. G., Bender, D. B., and Rocha-
Miranda, C. E. (1969). Visual receptive 
ﬁ elds of neurons in inferotemporal 
cortex of the monkey. Science 166, 
1303–1306.
Haxby, J. V ., Gobbini, M. I., Furey, M. L., 
Ishai, A., Schouten, J. L., and Pietrini, P . 
(2001). Distributed and overlapping 
representations of faces and objects in 
ventral temporal cortex. Science 293, 
2425–2430.
Haynes, J. D., and Rees, G. (2006). 
Decoding mental states from brain 
activity in humans. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
7, 523–534.


--- Page 16 ---
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org  February 2009 | Volume 3 | Article 3 | 16
Goris and Op de Beeck Representations for invariant recognition
Zernike moments. IEEE Trans. Pattern 
Anal. Mach. Intell. 12, 489–497.
Kravitz, D. J., Vinson, L. D., and Baker, C. I. 
(2008). How position dependent is 
visual object recognition? Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 12, 114–122.
Logothetis, N. K., and Pauls, J. (1995). 
Psychophysical and physiological 
evidence for viewer-centered object 
representations in the primate. Cereb. 
Cortex 5, 270–288.
Logothetis, N. K., Pauls, J., Bulthoff, H. H., 
and Poggio, T. (1994). View- dependent 
object recognition by monkeys. Curr. 
Biol. 4, 401–414.
Logothetis, N. K., and Sheinberg, D. L. 
(1996). Visual object recognition. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 577–621.
Lowe, D. G. (1999). Object recogni-
tion from local scale-invariant 
features. In Proceedings of the 
Seventh International Conference 
on Computer Vision, Vol. 2, Corfu, 
Greece, pp. 1150–1157.
Lowe, D. G. (2004). Distinctive image fea-
tures from scale-invariant keypoints. 
Int. J. Comput. Vis. 91–110.
Marr, D., and Nishihara, H. K. (1978). 
Representation and recognition of 
the spatial organization of three-
 dimensional shapes. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 
B Biol. Sci. 200, 269–294.
Mazer, J. A., Vinje, W. E., McDermott, J., 
Schiller, P . H., and Gallant, J. L. (2002). 
Spatial frequency and orientation tun-
ing dynamics in area V1. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 1645–1650.
McAdams, C. J., and Maunsell, J. H. (1999). 
Effects of attention on  orientation-
tuning functions of single neurons in 
macaque cortical area V4. J. Neurosci. 
19, 431–441.
McKone, E. (2009). Holistic processing 
for faces operates over a wide range of 
sizes but is strongest at identiﬁ cation 
rather than conversational distances. 
Vision Res. 49, 268–283.
population code? Neural Comput. 11, 
85–90.
Robbins, R., and McKone, E. (2003). 
Can holistic processing be learned for 
inverted faces? Cognition 88, 79–107.
Roudi, Y., and Treves, A. (2008). 
Representing where along with 
what information in a model of a 
cortical patch. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, 
e1000012.
Salinas, E. (2006). How behavioural 
constraints may determine optimal 
sensory representations. PLoS Biol. 4, 
2383–2392.
Sary, G., Vogels, R., and Orban, G. A. 
(1993). Cue-invariant shape selec-
tivity of macaque inferior temporal 
neurons. Science 260, 995–997.
Schoups, A., Vogels, R., Qian, N., and Orban, 
G. (2001). Practising orientation identi-
ﬁ cation improves orientation coding in 
V1 neurons. Nature 412, 549–553.
Schwarzlose, R. F., Swisher, J. D., Dang, S., 
and Kanwisher, N. (2008). The distri-
bution of category and location infor-
mation across object-selective regions 
in human visual cortex. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 4447–4452.
Series, P ., Latham, P . E., and Pouget, A. 
(2004). Tuning curve sharpening for 
orientation selectivity: coding effi-
ciency and the impact of correlations. 
Nat. Neurosci. 7, 1129–1135.
Shadlen, M. N., Britten, K. H., 
Newsome, W. T., and Movshon, J. A. 
(1996). A computational analysis of 
the relationship between neuronal 
and behavioural responses to visual 
motion. J. Neurosci. 16, 1486–1510.
Shadlen, M. N., and Newsome, W. T. 
(1998). The variable discharge of cor-
tical neurons: implications for connec-
tivity, computation, and information 
coding. J. Neurosci. 18, 3870–3896.
T orres-Mendez, L. A., Ruiz-Suarez, J. C., 
Sucar, L. E., and Gomez, G. 
(2000). Translation, rotation, and 
Mundy, J. L., and Zisserman, A. (1992). 
Geometric invariance in computer 
vision. Cambridge, MA, The MIT 
Press.
Norman, K. A., Polyn, S. M., Detre, G. J., 
and Haxby, J. V . (2006). Beyond mind-
reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis 
of fMRI data. Trends Cogn. Sci.  10, 
424–430.
Op de Beeck, H., and Vogels, R. (2000). 
Spatial sensitivity of macaque inferior 
temporal neurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 
426, 505–518.
Op de Beeck, H. P ., Deutsch, J. A., 
Vanduffel, W., Kanwisher, N. G., and 
DiCarlo, J. J. (2008a). A stable topogra-
phy of selectivity for unfamiliar shape 
classes in monkey inferior temporal 
cortex. Cereb. Cortex 18, 1676–1694.
Op de Beeck, H. P ., Wagemans, J., and 
Vogels, R. (2008b). The representa-
tion of perceived shape similarity 
and its role for category learning in 
monkeys: a modelling study. Vision 
Res. 48, 598–610.
Pelli, D. G. (1999). Close encounters – an 
artist shows that size affects shape. 
Science 285, 844–846.
Perrett, D. I., Rolls, E. T., and Caan, W. 
(1982). Visual neurones responsive to 
faces in the monkey temporal cortex. 
Exp. Brain Res. 47, 329–342.
Pinto, N., Cox, D. D., and DiCarlo, J. J. 
(2008). Why is real-world visual object 
recognition hard? PLoS Comput. Biol. 
4, e27.
Poggio, T., and Edelman, S. (1990). 
A network that learns to recognize 
three-dimensional objects. Nature 
343, 263–266.
Pouget, A., Dayan, P ., and Zemel, R. 
(2000). Information processing with 
population codes. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
1, 125–132.
Pouget, A., Deneve, S., Ducom, J. C., and 
Latham, P . E. (1999). Narrow versus 
wide tuning curves: what’s best for a 
scale-invariant object recognition. 
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C Appl. 
Rev. 30, 125–130.
T ovee, M. J., Rolls, E. T., and Azzopardi, P . 
(1994). Translation invariance in the 
responses to faces of single neurons 
in the temporal visual cortical areas 
of the alert macaque. J. Neurophysiol. 
72, 1049–1060.
Vogels, R., and Orban, G. A. (1996). 
Coding of stimulus invariances by 
inferior temporal neurons. Prog. Brain 
Res. 112, 195–211.
Zoccolan, D., Kouh, M., Poggio, T., and 
DiCarlo, J. J. (2007). Trade-off between 
object selectivity and tolerance in 
monkey inferotemporal cortex. 
J. Neurosci. 27, 12292–12307.
Zohary, E., Shadlen, M. N., and 
Newsome, W. T. (1994). Correlated 
neuronal discharge rate and its impli-
cations for psychophysical perform-
ance. Nature 370, 140–143.
Conflict of Interest Statement:  The 
authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or 
ﬁ nancial relationships that could be con-
strued as a potential conﬂ ict of interest.
Received: 11 July 2008; paper pending 
published: 09 September 2008; accepted: 
04 February 2009; published online: 17 
February 2009.
Citation: Goris RLT and Op de Beeck 
HP (2009) Neural representations that 
support invariant object recognition. 
Front. Comput. Neurosci. (2009) 3:3. doi: 
10.3389/neuro.10.003.2009
Copyright © 2009 Goris and Op de Beeck. 
This is an open-access article subject to 
an exclusive license agreement between 
the authors and the Frontiers Research 
Foundation, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original authors and 
source are credited.
