--- Page 1 ---
Neural circuit dynamics underlying accumulation of
time-varying evidence during perceptual decision making
Kong-Fatt Wong1, Alexander C. Huk 2, Michael N. Shadlen 3 and Xiao-Jing Wang 4*
1. Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, Center for the Study of Brain, Mind and Behavior, Princeton University, USA
2. Section of Neurobiology, Center for Perceptual Systems, Institute for Neuroscience, The University of T exas at Austin, USA
3. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, USA
4. Department of Neurobiology, Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, USA
Edited by: Misha T sodyks, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
Reviewed by: Walter Senn, University of Bern, Switzerland
Harel Z. Shouval, University of T exas, Medical School at Houston, USA
How do neurons in a decision circuit integrate time-varying signals, in favor of or against alternative choice options? To address this
question, we used a recurrent neural circuit model to simulate an experiment in which monkeys performed a direction-discrimination
task on a visual motion stimulus. In a recent study, it was found that brief pulses of motion perturbed neural activity in the lateral
intraparietal area (LIP), and exerted corresponding effects on the monkey’s choices and response times. Our model reproduces the
behavioral observations and replicates LIP activity which, depending on whether the direction of the pulse is the same or opposite
to that of a preferred motion stimulus, increases or decreases persistently over a few hundred milliseconds. Furthermore, our model
accounts for the observation that the pulse exerts a weaker inﬂuence on LIP neuronal responses when the pulse is late relative to
motion stimulus onset. We show that this violation of time-shift invariance (TSI) is consistent with a recurrent circuit mechanism of time
integration. We further examine time integration using two consecutive pulses of the same or opposite motion directions. The induced
changes in the performance are not additive, and the second of the paired pulses is less effective than its standalone impact, a prediction
that is experimentally testable. Taken together, these ﬁndings lend further support for an attractor network model of time integration in
perceptual decision making.
Keywords: intraparietal cortex, reaction time, computational modeling, attractor network, visual motion discrimination
INTRODUCTION
Decision making involves accumulation of evidence about choice alter-
natives. This process often takes time when the quality of information is
poor or there are numerous choice options to consider ( Luce, 1986 ). In
the past few years, experiments have revealed that such time integration
is observable in single cortical neurons ( Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Schall,
2001; Schall, 2003; Shadlen and Gold, 2004; Smith and Ratcliff, 2004). For
instance, in a visual motion direction discrimination task, neurons in the
lateral intraparietal (LIP) cortex of macaque monkeys exhibit slow ramping
activity that is correlated with the formation of perceptual decisions about
the direction (Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Shadlen and Newsome, 2001).
The difﬁculty of these decisions was varied from trial to trial by chang-
ing the percentage of dots moving coherently in one direction. Thus, at
lower motion coherence, the subject’s response time was longer, and the
ramping of LIP neuronal ﬁring rate was slower. Yet, for all levels of dif-
ﬁculty and for all reaction times, the ﬁring rates reached the same level
∗ Correspondence: Xiao-Jing Wang, Department of Neurobiology, Kavli Institute for Neu-
roscience, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA. e-mail: xjwang@yale.edu
Received: 7 Sep. 2007; paper pending published: 9 Oct. 2007; accepted: 13 Oct. 2007 ;
published online: 2 Nov. 2007
Full citation: Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience (2007) 1:6
doi: 10.3389/neuro.10/006.2007
Copyright: © 2007 Wong, Huk, Shadlen, Wang. This is an open-access article subject to an
exclusive license agreement between the authors and the Frontiers Research Foundation,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original authors and source are credited.
at the time the behavioral response was produced ( Roitman and Shadlen,
2002).
We have previously investigated a biophysically realistic cortical
network model of LIP responses in the random-dot motion direction dis-
crimination experiment, and showed that this model could account for
salient characteristics of the observed decision-correlated neural activity
as well as the animal’s accuracy and reaction times ( Wang, 2002; Wong
and Wang, 2006 ). In the model, slow recurrent excitation mediated by
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and feedback inhibition pro-
duce attractor dynamics which amplify the difference between conﬂicting
inputs and generates a binary choice. One of the questions addressed
in Wang (2002) was whether the model network can subtract negative
signals as well as accumulate positive signals. Such a capability would be
expected of an accurate neural integrator. It was shown that the attractor
network model could indeed add and subtract inputs, but the inﬂuence of
these inputs diminishes as a function of time, as the network converges
toward one of the attractor states representing the alternative choices.
Recently, Huk and Shadlen (2005) investigated integration of time-
varying evidence of opposite signs in the random-dot motion direction
discrimination task. In addition to the moving random-dot pattern, a brief
motion pulse in the background was introduced with a variable delay after
the onset of the random dots. The direction of the motion pulse could be the
same or opposite to the coherent motion of the random dots. On average, a
motion pulse in the same (opposite) direction as the main motion stimulus
resulted in more (less) choices in the direction of the coherent motion and
faster (slower) decisions. Even though the perturbation from the motion
pulse was brief, the ensuing changes in the ﬁring rate of LIP neurons were
1
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 2 ---
Wong et al.
sustained for several hundreds of milliseconds. Moreover, although the
monkeys were trained to judge the direction of the random dots and to
ignore the background pulse, the brief motion pulse had a long-lasting
effect on the behavioral choices. Thus, this experiment lends support to
the hypothesis that LIP neural activity is directly linked to time integration
of evidence and perceptual decision in this task.
In the present paper, we examine whether the attractor network model
is capable of reproducing the main observations of the motion pulse exper-
iment of Huk and Shadlen (2005). We report three main ﬁndings. First, we
describe the decision dynamics of our recurrent cortical network model
(Wong and Wang, 2006 ), when the input includes both a random-dot
motion stimulus and targets which signal possible choices. Second, we
show how the model accounts for the results in Huk and Shadlen (2005) .
In particular, our model exhibits a violation of time-shift invariance (TSI),
such that later pulses have weaker effects. Third, we introduce a novel
protocol for testing time integration, using two motion pulses that are pre-
sented back to back within a trial. Our model makes testable predictions
about the combined impacts of the double pulse on the temporal integra-
tion process. Part of this work has been presented in preliminary reports
(Wong et al., 2005, 2006 ).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The two-variable network model
In a previous paper ( Wong and Wang, 2006 ), we reduced a spiking neu-
ronal network model (Wang, 2002) to a two-variable model (see Figure 1)
that could account for the experimental results of Shadlen and Newsome
(2001) and Roitman and Shadlen (2002). In the present work, we used this
reduced model to further study motion integration in LIP neurons, with a
focus on the experiment of Huk and Shadlen (2005) .
In the reduced network model, two competing neuronal pools ( i =
L,R ) are selective for leftward ( L) or rightward ( R) direction of motion,
respectively. The total synaptic input currentIi and the resulting ﬁring rate
ri of the neural population i obey the following input–output relationship
ri = f (Ii) = aIi − b
1 − exp [−d(aIi − b)] (1)
which captures the current–frequency function of a leaky integrate-and-
ﬁre neuron (Abbott and Chance, 2005). The parameter values area = 270
Hz/nA, b = 108 Hz, d = 0.154 second.
As schematically shown in Figure 1, the neural circuit model is
endowed with strong recurrent excitation, dominated by NMDA-mediated
receptors within each pool of neurons. For simplicity here, we have
neglected contributions by the AMPA receptors to local recurrent exci-
tation. Hence the synaptic drive originating from the neural pool i is given
by S
i, which represents the fraction of the activated NMDA conductance.
The two neural pools effectively inhibit each other through a third, com-
mon inhibitory neural population which is not explicitly described in the
reduced model. Therefore, the total synaptic currents are
I
L,tot = JLLSL − JLRSR + Imotion,L + Itarget + Inoise,L
IR,tot = JRRSR − JRLSL + Imotion,R + Itarget + Inoise,R
where the synaptic couplings are JLL = JRR = 0.3725 nA, JLR =
JRL = 0.1137 nA. Imotion,i represents the random-dot stimulus. The dots
provide evidence in favor of a saccade to one of the two choice targets.
Itarget represents inputs due to choice targets. The choice targets are spots
of light placed inside or outside the response ﬁeld of the LIP neurons under
study. Neurons also receive background synaptic inputs, with a mean of
I
0 = 0.3297 nA, and a ﬂuctuating component given by a white-noiseηi(t)
ﬁltered by a synaptic time constant τnoise
τnoise
dInoise,i(t)
dt =− (Inoise,i(t) − I0) + ηi(t)√ τnoiseσnoise
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of a reduced decision making network
model. (A) The network consists of two units, representing two competing
neural pools selective for leftward and rightward motion direction, respec-
tively. Each is endowed with strong self-excitatory recurrent coupling (sharp
arrowheads). Cross-coupling between the two units is effectively inhibitory
(circular arrowheads) (through a shared inhibitory neural pool which is not
explicitly represented in this reduced model). I
L (IR) encompasses the exter-
nal inputs from motion-selective (MT) neurons, target-sensitive neurons, and
background neurons. ( B) Inputs to the decision units within a trial consist
of both target stimulus inputs (dashed line) and motion stimulus from the
random-dots (bold line; shown here with zero motion coherence). According
to the model, the target inputs are reduced when the random-dot motion
appears because attention is directed to the motion. ( C) The directional input
comes from MT cells, whose ﬁring rates depend linearly on motion coher-
ence. Coherent motion toward (opposite) the response ﬁeld, RF , increases
(decreases) the cell’s output ﬁring rate.
with noise amplitudeσnoise = 0.009 nA and ﬁlter time constantτnoise = 2
ms.
The network dynamics is dominated by Si, which has a slower time
constant than the ﬁring rate ri. The model is described by the following
dynamical equations (cf. Appendix of Wong and Wang, 2006):
dSi
dt =− Si
τS
+ (1 − Si)γf(Ii) (2)
with γ = 0.641 and τS = 60 ms ( Hestrin et al., 1990 ). In this paper,
we show network simulation results in terms of ﬁring rates, which can be
computed from the input–output relationshipri = f (Ii) = f [Ii(SL,S R)].
Input implementation for targets and motion stimulus
The random-dot motion stimulus is represented by the output of neurons
in the middle temporal (MT or V5) cortex which project to our LIP network
model. Neurons in area MT are tuned to a particular direction of visual
motion, and their ﬁring rate are roughly a linearly increasing (decreasing)
function of the motion coherence if the motion is in the preferred (null)
direction of the cell (Britten et al., 1993). Speciﬁcally, we assume that the
2
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 3 ---
Neural addition and subtraction of evidence in decision making
input current due to the random dots stimulus is
Imotion,i = JA,extµ0
(
1 + f c′ + p
100%
)
where c′ is the motion coherence, JE
A,ext = 1.1 × 10− 3 nA/Hz, and the
+ or − sign refers to the neural population for which the motion stimulus
is the preferred or null direction, respectively. The pooled MT neuronal
response to zero motion coherence is µ
0 = 30 Hz ( Britten et al., 1993 ).
The gain of MT ﬁring rates on either preferred (null) direction f is chosen
to be 0.45. We did not include a transient decay of the ﬁring rates of MT
cells during motion stimulus presentation ( Priebe et al., 2002).
The brief motion pulse, whenever presented, has a duration of 100
ms as in Huk and Shadlen (2005) , and an effective strength of p.W e
assumed p to be 11% coherence (cf. 10% in the modeling work in Huk
and Shadlen, 2005 ). That is, p is 11% ( − 11%) if the motion pulse is in
the preferred (null) direction of the cell.
Unlike the previous model simulations ( Wang, 2002; Wong and Wang,
2006), in this work we explicitly include inputs for the targets which were
used in the monkey experiment to indicate alternative saccadic responses.
Speciﬁcally, during target presentation, large excitatory currents of the
same amplitude were sent to both the leftward and rightward MT pools
of neurons. This mimicks the experimental protocol of simultaneously
presenting two targets in the response ﬁelds of the LIP neurons selec-
tive for the choice alternatives, before the motion stimulus is presented.
LIP neurons exhibit strong responses to targets. Moreover, interestingly,
LIP activity shows a brief decrease (a “dip”) immediately after the onset
of the random dots stimulus, before the ramping of activity ( Huk and
Shadlen, 2005; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002 ). Such a dip has also been
observed in other brain areas in monkey experiments (Li et al., 2006; Sato
and Schall, 2001 ). To reproduce the dip phenomenon, we assume that
upon the motion stimulus onset, there is a shift of attention from targets
to the motion stimulus, leading to a general and equal reduction in the
inputs to LIP from the upstream target coding neurons. Since visual infor-
mation about the onset of random-dot motion affects LIP with latencies
that are more than 100 ms, the target inputs fades before the motion
input arrives ( Huk and Shadlen, 2005; Kiani et al., 2006 ), as shown in
Figure 2A.
The input current I
target for target is implemented as
Itarget =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0, t<t target
JA,ext(50 + 100 exp [− (t − ttarget)/τad ]) Hz,t target ≤ t<t motion
JA,ext(6 + 44 exp [− (t − tmotion )/τad ]) Hz,t ≥ tmotion
where ttarget and tmotion are the onset times for the targets and motion
stimulus, respectively. This input current contains short-term adaptation
with an exponential decay. The adaptation time constant of the neurons,
τ
ad , is chosen to be 40 ms. The transient attentional shift during motion
stimulus presentation is indicated by a reduction in Itarget. The speciﬁc
target input ﬁring rates level are not important, as long as they are sufﬁ-
ciently large to allow the network to successfully transit from its low stable
steady-state to its high symmetrical stable states. When the motion stim-
ulus is presented, it is essential to reduce I
target such that the overall input
to the network is reduced, allowing competition between the two choice
attractors (see section Results).
Figure 2. Neural dynamics of the decision network model .( A) Top: A sample trial with zero motion coherence. During target presentation, both neural pools
(black and orange lines) achieve a relatively high steady state ﬁring rate, similar to the observation of LIP neurons. During motion stimulus present ation (gray
box), the ﬁring rates of the two neural pools ﬁrst increase together, then diverge over time, one ramping up whereas the other ramping down, resulting i na
categorical choice (the decision bound is ﬁxed at 55 Hz). Bottom: inputs. The target input represents static visual stimulus inputs with adaptation, as observed
in experiments. The motion stimulus resembles the output ﬁring rates of MT neurons. Note that in order to reproduce the “dip” immediately in neural act ivity
immediately after motion stimulus onset, the target input is assumed to decrease (due to divided attention) after the motion stimulus onset but befor e the motion
signals reach the LIP neurons. ( B) Trial-averaged neural activities of the two neural pools with ﬁve motion coherence levels. Solid curves: winning population;
dashed curves: losing population. Time courses of neural activity are aligned at the time of motion onset. Note slower ramping activity at a lower moti on
coherence. Only correct trials are shown.
3
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 4 ---
Wong et al.
Data analysis
A decision is made whenever one of the two population ﬁring rates reaches
a prescribed threshold (or “decision bound”). It is set to be 55 Hz to ﬁt
the behavioral data of the no-pulse experimental data. To compute the
reaction time, we have taken into account nondecision times (sensory
input latency and motor response time). The overall nondecision laten-
cies include latencies due to signal transduction from sensory cells to MT
neurons (∼ 100 ms) (Britten et al., 1993); from MT neurons to LIP neurons
(∼ 125 ms) ( Huk and Shadlen, 2005 ); and ﬁnally from LIP neurons to the
motor processing neurons for a saccadic movement ( ∼ 75 ms, compared
with 100 ms in the modeling work of Huk and Shadlen, 2005 ). For sim-
plicity, we assumed that the latencies are constant and independent of the
decision. Thus, as in Huk and Shadlen (2005), we have assumed that the
latency from motion stimulus onset to LIP neurons is 225 ms. This means
that, in simulations with brief pulse perturbations, our model LIP neurons
are not affected by the motion pulse until 225 ms after the pulse onset.
Trial-averaged data were calculated with 1000 simulated trials. Trials
were not taken into account if the decision threshold was crossed before
motion pulse onset. Increasing the number of trials to 3000 did not sub-
stantially change the trial-averaged neural activities and the psychometric
function. As in the experiment, all psychometric functions were ﬁts of a
logistic equation, P = 1/(1 + exp [− (β
0 + β1c′)]), where P is the prob-
ability of making a preferred-target choice, and the β0 and β1 are ﬁtted
parameters. The amount of shift of the psychometric function was then
computed from the difference in the β
0 value.
Phase-plane analyses were done using XPPAUT ( Ermentrout, 1990).
RESUL TS
Decision dynamics in the presence of targets
Figure 2A shows the typical behavior of our network model. Upon pre-
sentation of the target input, both neural pools increase their activity and
reach a relatively high steady-state ﬁring rate. Such a high activity state
corresponds to a symmetrical stable steady-state of our model (Wong and
Wang, 2006). This high ﬁring rate symmetric state is stable during target
presentation, whereas a symmetric state at lower ﬁring rate is unstable
during motion stimulus presentation with zero coherence. This is because
winner-take-all competition requires reverberatory excitation to amplify
small ﬂuctuations in the neural activities of the two decision pools. At high
ﬁring rates, the NMDAR-dependent synapses saturate ( Wang, 1999), and
cannot supply the necessary positive feedback to generate winner-take-all
competition. This way, our model can account for both the stable sym-
metric state during target presentation and all-or-none decision making
during stimulus presentation.
The targets create a large response in the network, and the model
now captures the overall dynamics range of LIP ﬁring rates more closely.
In our previous work, we did not include the increase in LIP ﬁring rates
generated when the choice target is within the response ﬁeld at the start
of the trial. Here, we propose that this symmetric active state naturally
represents the network state prior to the presentation of the moving dots.
When the motion stimulus is presented, the decrease of the effective
target input results in the loss of stability for this symmetric activity state.
Driven by the motion stimulus, the two neural pools integrate the input
signals and compete against each other. Eventually one of them climbs up
while the other ramps down, leading to a categorical choice. Importantly,
this is the case even with zero motion coherence ( Figure 2A) when the
mean input is the same for the two neural pools. Noise inherent in the
network determines the choice outcome in any given trial and the decision
is at chance level across trials. Neural responses with nonzero motion
coherence c
′ are shown in Figure 2B. It is clear that the ramping activity
is faster at a higher c′.
Why is there winner-take-all competition during motion stimulus pre-
sentation but not when only the target input is present? The answer lies
in the fact that the attractor landscape of the model network is recon-
ﬁgured under different input conditions. One way to appreciate this is to
study the phase-plane ( Figure 3), in which the ﬁring rates r
R and rL are
plotted against each other (Wong and Wang, 2006). At each of the epochs
within a trial, when the input is ﬁxed, the steady-states of the network
can be obtained by setting the dynamical equations (Equation 2) of the
network to be zero. For example, if we set dS
L/dt = 0, and solve for SL
in −SL/τS + (1 − SL)γf[IL(SL,S R)] = 0, we will obtain the so-called
nullcline forSL (Strogatz, 2001). Similarly, we can also obtain the nullcline
for SR. Converting Si back to ri, we can plot the nullclines in terms of
the population ﬁring rates in Figure 3. The intersecting points of the two
nullclines are the network’s steady-states.
As can be seen in Figure 3A, in the absence of target or motion stim-
ulus, there are three stable steady-states (black dots). One of them is the
spontaneously active state (lower left corner, with a low r
L = rR). The
other two stable (off-diagonal) ones are persistently active states ( rL is
high and rR is low, or vice versa). The co-existence of these stable states
endows the network with working memory capability: a transient stimulus
can switch the network from the resting state to a persistent state which
is self-sustained to hold information when the stimulus is withdrawn.
Indeed, in prior studies ( Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Shadlen and New-
some, 2001), LIP neurons were selected on the criterion that they showed
persistent activity during working memory. In the delayed response ver-
sion of the motion direction discrimination task, a decision made during
stimulus presentation can be stored in such a memory state and retrieved
later to guide the behavioral response ( Shadlen and Newsome, 2001;
Wang, 2002; Wong and Wang, 2006 ). The regions of attraction of these
stable states are bounded (in a noiseless system) by the black curves in
Figure 3A (see below for explanation).
When the two choice targets appear, both neural pools receive an iden-
tical strong input, and the conﬁguration of the network changes. There is
now a stable symmetrical steady-state at high ﬁring rate (r
L = rR ≃ 37.5
Hz) (Figure 3B shows steady-state after adaptation). The equal excitation
is strong enough to drive the state of the network from its initial low
spontaneous state. This steady-state is presumed to be stable enough
to prevent any decision making before the appearance of random-dots
stimulus. Figure 3B shows a large basin of attraction of this symmetrical
state, conﬁrming the stability of this state. In simulations, this state is
always stable; the network never shifts to one of the choice attractors
before onset of random-dot motion. Note that if the target inputs are sufﬁ-
ciently large, the two asymmetric states disappear, thus the only possible
steady-state is the symmetric one and winner-take-all competition is no
longer possible (Wong and Wang, 2006).
During motion stimulus presentation, the conﬁguration of the network
changes again such that now there exist only two stable and asym-
metric steady-states. These are the decision or choice “attractors”. In
Figure 3C, the motion coherence is 0% and there is no net motion in
either direction. Thus, because the overall inputs to both selective neural
populations are equal, the phase-plane is symmetrical. When there is a
bias in the net direction of the motion stimulus, the symmetry is broken,
as illustrated in Figure 3D with 12.8% of the random dots moving coher-
ently to the left. In each case, the stable manifold of the saddle point
(the “separatrix”) divides the phase-plane into two separate regions, the
“basins of attraction” for the two decision attractors. In the absence of
noise, if the network falls into one of the two basins, it will converge to
the corresponding decision attractor. However, perceptual decisions are
stochastic. The inclusion of noise in the model can break the symmetry
even with zero motion coherence, so the network eventually converges
to one of the two decision attractors in any given trial. However, the
noise is not sufﬁciently large to push the system out of the stable state,
before the motion stimulus is presented. With nonzero motion coher-
ence, the basin of attraction is larger for the correct choice (with high
r
L in Figure 3D) than for the erroneous choice (with high rR), there-
fore, the probability of correct responses becomes higher than the chance
level.
Figures 4A and 4B show the time course ofr
L and rR at c′ = 0% and
c′ = 12.8%. The corresponding phase planes are depicted in Figures 4C
4
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 5 ---
Neural addition and subtraction of evidence in decision making
Figure 3. Decision attractor network is reconﬁgured during different epochs of a trial. In the phase-plane plot, orange and green lines are, respectively,
nullclines of the population ﬁring rates selective to leftward ( rL) and rightward (rR) motion. Black (brown) ﬁlled circles are the stable (unstable) steady-states of
the network. In ( C) and (D), black lines with direction of arrows toward and away from the unstable steady-state (i.e., saddle point) are the stable and unstable
manifolds of the saddle point. In the absence of noise, these manifolds determine the network dynamics. In ( A) and (B), only the stable manifolds are plotted to
show the multiple basins of attraction. Gray region is the basin of attraction of the spontaneous state in ( A), or that of the symmetrical stable state in ( B). (A)
Without visual target nor motion stimulus input to decision network. ( B) With target input only. Steady-states after adaptation. ( C) With both (reduced) saccadic
target input and motion stimulus of zero coherence. The stable time constant τstable(= 79 ms) toward the saddle unstable steady-state is about half that of
the unstable time constant τunstable( = 175 ms).( D) With both (reduced) saccade target input and motion stimulus of 12.8% coherence. τstable = 77 ms and
τunstable = 159 ms. See the text for more details.
and 4D. During the motion stimulus, the network is forced to move toward
one of the attractors such that the mean ﬁring rates of the two competing
neural pools eventually diverge over time. Whenever one of the ﬁring rates
(r
L or rR) crosses a prescribed decision threshold (55 Hz in our case), a
decision (L or R) is made and the corresponding response time is read
out. The speciﬁc value of the threshold is chosen to ﬁt the behavioral data
of the experiment. In Figures 4B and 4D, the net direction of the motion
stimulus was leftward. Therefore, the blue trajectory corresponds to the
average correct choices while the red trajectory corresponds to incorrect
choices.
Comparing Figures 4A and 4B, and also in Figure 2, we can see that
the ramping time course is generally faster at higher coherence. Moreover,
given a ﬁxed motion coherence ( Figure 4B), the neural dynamics are
slower on error trials (red curves) than on correct trials (blue curves). This
can be understood in the phase-plane plot ( Figure 4D). In error trials, the
trajectory has to cross the separatrix of the saddle point so that it eventually
converges to the “wrong attractor” (with a high r
R in this example). This
implies that the trajectory follows the stable manifold for a while, and then
passes very near the saddle point, where the network dynamics are slower
(see Wong and Wang, 2006 for explanation). The behavioral implication
is that reaction times are slower on error trials than on correct trials,
consistent with the observations in the monkey experiment ( Roitman and
Shadlen, 2002).
Temporal integration of a brief pulse of sensory evidence
After re-evaluating the dynamics of the attractor model with the addition of
target input, we next study how the model can integrate an additional brief
motion stimulus. We used the same task protocol as in Huk and Shadlen
(2005), in which a 100 ms motion pulse was applied after a time delay
from motion stimulus onset (seeFigure 5). The direction of the pulse could
be the same as or opposite to that of the coherent motion of the random
dots, which will be referred to as positive and negative, respectively. As in
the experiment, we varied the onset times of the motion pulse to be 100,
150, 211, 287, and 392 ms after motion stimulus onset.
In general, we expect a good integrator to be able to add or subtract
additional sensory evidence, thereby enhancing or reducing the proba-
bility of a given decision outcome. A motion pulse in the direction of the
coherent motion should result in more likely choices in that direction and
faster decisions. Conversely, a motion pulse in the direction opposite the
coherent motion should result in less accurate and slower decisions. As
an example, Figure 5B shows, for a ﬁxed motion coherence and pulse
onset time, the impact of a motion pulse on trial-averaged population
ﬁring rate when the choice is correct and in the response ﬁeld. The
pulse (100 ms after motion stimulus onset) is in the same (green) or
different (red) direction as that of the coherent motion. We see from the
ﬁgure that, on average, the motion pulse perturbs the ramping dynam-
ics of the population ﬁring rates. A positive pulse increases the time
5
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 6 ---
Wong et al.
Figure 4. Network dynamics with two levels of motion coherence.Time course of neural responses and corresponding phase-plane plots during presentation
of motion stimulus at c′ = 0%( A,C) and c′ = 12.8%( B,D). (A,C) Purple: trial-averaged neural activity after stimulus onset. Same for both selective pool of
neurons, due to symmetry. ( B,D) Blue: correct trials, red: error trials. In ( C,D), black lines with arrows are the stable and unstable manifolds of the saddle point,
respectively, and they control the ﬂow of trajectories in the phase-plane in the absence of noise. Note that with a nonzero motion coherence, the tempo ral
dynamics are slower on error trials (red) than on correct trials (blue) ( B). In the phase-plane ( D), the network’s trajectory on error trials passes by the saddle
point where the dynamics are slow. Each trajectory or time course is the average over 1000 trials.
Figure 5. Single motion pulse results in persistent change of neural response in the model. (A) After motion stimulus onset, a 100 ms pulse is presented
either in the same (green) or opposite (red) direction as the coherent random-dot motion. As in the experiment of Huk and Shadlen (2005) , ﬁve different motion
pulse onset times were used: 100 , 150, 211, 287, and 392 ms after motion stimulus onset. ( B) Pulse onset is 100 ms after onset of a c′ = 12.8% motion
stimulus. The neural traces are trial-averaged ﬁring rates in trials when the choice is the preferred direction of the cell. Only correct trials are sh own here. Black:
no motion pulse; green: positive pulse; red: negative pulse. All ﬁring rate traces shown are truncated at the time the decision threshold is crossed, h ence the
apparent saturation of ﬁring rates due to averaging effect near threshold. A pulse takes 225 ms to reach the decision neurons, and the induced change in the
neural activity persists even after pulse is switched off.
6
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 7 ---
Neural addition and subtraction of evidence in decision making
Figure 6. Mean persistent change of neural activity due to a brief motion pulse. Effects of a pulse perturbation, averaged over all trials, motion coherence
levels and pulse onset times. A single pulse of 100 ms duration induces a long-lasting change in the trial-averaged neural activity in both the experim ent (A)
and in the model simulation ( B). Green: positive pulse; red: negative pulse. Colored light green (red) bars denote the duration of the positive (negative) motion
pulse (panel A is reproduced from Huk and Shadlen (2005) with permission.)
course of ﬁring rates (green) compared with the time course without
motion pulse (black). Conversely, a negative pulse decreases the ﬁring
rates (red). The change in the neural activity persists longer than the
duration of the pulse itself, a hallmark of neural integration. Hence, the
small amount of evidence is integrated and remembered to inﬂuence
the perceptual choice that takes place later in time. This is also true for
changes of neural activity averaged over a range of motion coherence
levels (Figure 6B), which reproduces the main physiological observation
of Huk and Shadlen (2005) (reproduced in Figure 6A). Note that these
changes in neural activity converge over time, because the neural ﬁr-
ing rates are truncated at the same decision threshold with or without a
motion pulse.
Figure 7. Effect of a motion pulse on decision accuracy and reaction time of the model. Choices (A,C) and mean reaction times (B,D) are shown as function
of the motion coherence. Black: no motion pulse. Green (respectively red): a positive (respectively negative) pulse shift the psychometric and chro nometric
functions leftward (respectively rightward). ( A,B) Data from experiments (reproduced from Huk and Shadlen (2005) with permission); ( C,D) model simulations.
Psychometric function is ﬁtted by a logistic function (see section Materials and Methods). Curves were calculated by averaging over pulses of ﬁve dif ferent onset
times.
7
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 8 ---
Wong et al.
Figure 8. Violation of TSI: weaker inﬂuence of a later pulse on neural activity and choice accuracy in the model. (A) Average instantaneous change in
neural ﬁring rate as a function of the pulse onset time. The instantaneous change is calculated from 250 to 350 ms after pulse onset, as in the experiment .
The green (red) trace denotes the change in ﬁring rates due to positive (negative) pulse. Only data from trials with weak motion coherence of 0 and 3.2% were
used. (B) Shift in psychometric function decreases with increased pulse onset time. Psychometric function shift is calculated from the shift of the ﬁtted log istic
functions (see section Materials and Methods). Standard errors are small, and hence omitted.
These persistent changes in neural activity induced by brief motion
pulse also led to effects on behavior. For example, with a motion
coherence of c′ = 12.8% ( Figure 5B), a positive pulse changes the
accuracy and mean reaction time from 95 .2% and 746 ms, respec-
tively, to 97 .1% and 714 ms. Conversely, a negative pulse decreases
the accuracy to 88 .7% and prolongs the mean reaction time to
783 ms.
Averaging over all ﬁve pulse onset times, the net effect of a
motion pulse is a shift in both the psychometric function and the
mean reaction times ( Figure 7). The psychometric function is shifted
by ∼ 1.6%, as in Huk and Shadlen (2005) . Note that these are the
mean effects of ﬁve motion pulses at different time points. As we
shall see below, the effect of pulse perturbation is larger with an ear-
lier onset time. Thus, we have shown that the attractor model, like
the diffusion model ( Huk and Shadlen, 2005 ), is capable of reproduc-
ing these behavioral and neurophysiological data of Huk and Shadlen
(2005).
Violation of TSI
When the data from our simulations are sorted according to the pulse onset
times, it is apparent that the effect of the pulse is weaker when its onset
time is later (Figure 8). This diminution in impact is apparent for both the
neural responses ( Figure 8A) and choice behavior ( Figure 8B) produced
by our model. This is clearly a violation of the invariance in time-translation
termed TSI, similar to the violation observed in theHuk and Shadlen (2005)
experiment.
To provide an intuitive explanation of the TSI violation, consider a car-
toon in which the decision making network is described by an energy
function of neural ﬁring rate, or a “potential well” ( Figure 9). The minima
of the well denote the stable steady-states (attractors), and the local max-
imum is the unstable steady-state that divides the basins of attraction.
When the motion stimulus is presented, the network changes its conﬁg-
uration, and its dynamics is represented as a ball rolling toward one of
the minima. The shallower the potential well (near the unstable steady-
state), the slower the ramping activity. A positive (negative) motion pulse
would give the network a brief kick, causing the integration to increase
(decrease) its rate of ramping. With these nonlinear potential wells, one
can easily see that the network states can differ, depending on the stage
in a trial. If the pulse onset is not early enough, the network state has time
to accelerate away from the unstable point and it becomes harder for the
pulse to exert an effect on the network. This explains, qualitatively, the
violation of TSI.
Reverberation, not leak, gives rise to the observed violation of
TSI
To shed further insights into the violation of TSI, we contrast two possi-
bilities: a leaky, stable accumulator of the variety incorporated in some
Figure 9. Effect of motion pulse on a nonlinear attractor network.Diagram
depicts a network whose dynamics are described by an energy function (or
potential well) of the neural ﬁring rate. The speed of the temporal dynamics
is proportional to the slope of the potential well, and the steady-states cor-
respond to the minima and maxima (where the slope is zero). Magenta, blue
and pink regions denote the basins of attractions. Each black mark denote the
unstable steady-state that separates the two neighboring basins of attraction.
The brown ball represents the instantaneous state of the network. Conﬁgu-
rations of the network before motion stimulus presentation (top), and during
motion viewing with a low motion coherence (middle) favoring the blue choice
attractor. The black arrow indicates that the network is more inclined to move
toward the blue attractor. When a positive motion pulse is added, the blue deci-
sion state has a deeper basin of attraction than before. Therefore, the network
dynamics exhibit a faster ramping speed toward the blue state (bottom, left).
When a negative motion pulse is presented instead, the blue decision state
becomes less attractive while the pink decision state becomes more attractive
(bottom, right). This results in a network state less inclined to move to the
blue attractor. Green (red) arrow on the ball represents the average effect of
a positive (negative) pulse on the network dynamics. With later motion pulse
onset, the network becomes harder to inﬂuence since it is more likely to have
commenced acceleration toward one of the choice attractors, thereby violating
TSI. Not shown in the ﬁgure is that the ball is always under the continuous
inﬂuence of noisy perturbations.
8
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 9 ---
Neural addition and subtraction of evidence in decision making
diffusion models ( Usher and McClelland, 2001 ) and an attractor dynami-
cal model characterized by strong recurrent excitation. One might wonder
whether the addition of a leak to a diffusion-like model, and thus a ﬁnite
integration time, could contribute to the violation of TSI. In fact, intuitively
one expects that a leak would lead to a violation of TSI in the opposite
direction, namely the impact of a brief pulse should be larger with a later
onset time, contrary to the experimental observation. This is because an
earlier pulse is gradually “forgotten” due to the leak and does not affect
signiﬁcantly the decision that occurs much later ( Kiani et al., 2006).
To check this intuition, we analyzed a simple linearized version of our
model. For simplicity, let us assume that during an unbiased ( c
′ = 0%)
motion stimulus presentation, the slow ramping dynamics are roughly
along the unstable manifold of the saddle point. Therefore, the overall
dynamics can be approximated by a single variable S = S
L − SR (see
Supplemental Data in Wong and Wang, 2006 ). We shall also neglect the
effects of noise. Then we can approximate the network dynamics by
dS
dt ≈− (S − Sss)
τ + p(t)
where Sss and τ are the effective steady-state and time constant of the
network, respectively. p(t) is a step function of constant height p from
t = T to t = T + Tp, that denotes the perturbation due to a motion
pulse. The pulse height p can be positive or negative, denoting whether
the pulse is adding or subtracting evidence to the coherent motion.
This is a linear dynamical equation with a time-dependent input p(t),
which can be readily solved analytically. The change /Delta1Sin S due the
pulse p(t)i s
/Delta1S= pτe(T−t)/τ (
eTp/τ − 1
)
Because of the factor e−t/τ, we expect that the sustained change due
to a pulse to decay over time. On the other hand, for a ﬁxed pulse duration
T
p, the factor eT/τ is a monotonically increasing function of the pulse onset
time T , in support of the above intuitive reasoning. However, if the pulse is
presented too late, the pulse effect should start to decrease, because now
the ramping activity is truncated when the decision threshold is reached.
In the limit of large τ, as in a perfect integrator (diffusion) model,
pτe
−t/τ (
e(T+Tp)/τ − eT/τ)
≈ pτ
(
1 − t
τ
) (
1 + T + Tp
τ − 1 − T
τ
)
≈ pTp
which is independent of the pulse onset time T , but dependent on the
integral (total area) of the pulse pTp. This result is consistent with our
initial hypothesis that the effect of a ﬂeeting motion pulse on a perfect
integrator (or a diffusion model) is time-shift invariant.
This analysis is valid for a stable leaky integrator processes. If the
integrator is exponentially unstable, e.g., resulting from reverberating
excitation in a recurrent network, then the system is described by
dS
dt ≈ (S − Sss)
τ + p(t)
in which case the pulse effect becomes
/Delta1S= pτe(−T+t)/τ (
1 − e−Tp/τ)
.
Therefore, the change in the activity decreases with pulse onset time,
consistent with our model simulations. Note that in our nonlinear net-
work model the reverberating excitation is ultimately counterbalanced by
negative feedback or saturation, which is not included in this simpliﬁed
linear analysis. Nevertheless, the argument explains why our attractor
circuit violates TSI as observed experimentally ( Huk and Shadlen, 2005 ).
This suggests that LIP embodies a recurrent circuit mechanism for time
integration during perceptual decision making.
Model predictions with two motion pulses
We noted that pulses shown at different time during motion stimulus may
induce nonlinear effects as a result of truncation of the ﬁring rate at the
decision bound. Thus, it would be desirable to use other protocols for
testing nonlinearities of neural integration that avoid the decision thresh-
old effect. To this end, we developed and analyzed a novel protocol that
consists of two motion pulses (Figure 10). The ﬁrst motion pulse is imme-
diately followed by a second pulse which has the same magnitude and
duration but could either be of the same or opposite motion direction as the
ﬁrst pulse. Hence, there are four possible combinations, depending on the
signs of the two pulses. We have limited ourselves to early onset times for
the double-pulse, before threshold crossing becomes more likely to occur.
We examined in the model how a pair of pulses affects the psycho-
metric function. The shift in psychometric function is then compared with
the linear sum of the shifts caused by the two individual pulses that make
up the paired pulses, presented alone. We chose the onset times of 150
and 250 ms for the pair of pulses, which allowed us to distinguish most
clearly between the effect of the paired pulses and that of the sum of two
single pulse perturbations. The results are shown in Figure 10. For each
of the four possible combinations of paired pulses, the effect of the double
pulse is shown by the resulting shift of the psychometric function relative
to one obtained without any motion pulses ( Figure 10B, black bar). The
effect has units of equivalent motion strength. We also derived the shift
of the psychometric function for each of the individual pulses, presented
on their own. We added these individual shifts for pairs corresponding to
same 2-pulse conﬁgurations ( Figure 10B, gray bar). It is clear that the
effect of the double pulse is not the same as the sum of the individual
Figure 10. Nonlinearities in time integration using a double-pulse proto-
col. (A) A positive pulse is immediately followed by a negative pulse of the
same magnitude but opposite direction. In principle, there are four possi-
ble combinations of the two pulses: positive → positive, positive → negative,
negative → positive, negative → negative. ( B) Two pulses, each of 100 ms
duration, are presented at 150 and 250 ms after motion stimulus onset. Shift
of the psychometric function for each of the four possible paired-pulse com-
binations (black bar) is compared to the linear sum of the shifts due to two
individual pulses (gray bar). The second pulse in the paired-pulse protocol
has a weaker effect than its standalone counterpart. In the (+) → (+) and
(− ) → (− ) pairs, the double pulse is weaker than the sum of the effects
produced by the two pulses on their own. In the (+) → (− ) and (− ) → (+)
pairs, the ﬁrst pulse controls the sign of the effect. The sum of single pulse
effects would be cancelation were it not for the violation of TSI. There is less
cancelation by the second pulse in the double-pulse protocol.
9
www.frontiersin.org


--- Page 10 ---
Wong et al.
Figure 11. Changes in the neural response by paired pulses in the model.
(A) Black: a positive pulse is followed by a negative pulse. The time course
of neural activity is compared with that produced by a single positive pulse
(green). Light green and pink regions represent the duration of the ﬁrst and
second pulse, respectively. Effectively, the second pulse in the double pulses is
unable to completely suppress the change caused by the ﬁrst pulse. Because
of the input latency of 225 ms, the neural response to the ﬁrst pulse occurs in
the time window from 225 to 325 ms, and to the second pulse from 325 to 425
ms. Motion coherence is 12.8% in the neuron’s preferred direction. ( B) Gray:
a negative pulse is followed by a positive pulse. The time course of neural
activity is compared with that produced by a single negative pulse (red). Same
label convention as in ( A). The second positive pulse does not suppress the
change due to the ﬁrst negative pulse. Motion coherence is 25.6%. The neural
responses were obtained in correct trials when the choice is the preferred
direction. In both panels, the difference in the neural response is measured
with respect to the average of trials without pulses that lead to the same
correct choice.
pulses. Consider the pulse combinations with opposite sign. Were it not
for the violation of TSI, we would expect the sum of individual pulse effects
to cancel exactly. However, because the process is not TSI, the effect of
the later pulse is not large enough to cancel the ﬁrst. In the double-pulse
protocol, however, this effect is magniﬁed: the effect is dominated by
the ﬁrst pulse. For pulses of the same sign, the same logic applies. In the
double-pulse protocol, the effect of second pulse is attenuated. Therefore,
we see a smaller effect here than the sum of the individual pulse effects.
Figure 11 shows changes in the neural activity induced by two pulses
of opposite signs, compared to those by a single pulse. In this example,
the second pulse does not completely cancel out the effect of the ﬁrst
pulse, and the net persistent change (before the decision threshold effect
becomes important) caused by the paired pulses is not zero. Therefore,
the paired-pulse protocol provides another demonstration that the network
dynamics are not time-shift invariant, even when the effect of decision
threshold crossing is negligible.
DISCUSSION
In this paper, we further tested a recurrent neural circuit model of per-
ceptual decision making, investigating how brief pulses of motion are
temporally integrated. We found that the model was able to replicate both
the psychophysical and neural data of the motion pulse experiments in
Huk and Shadlen (2005) .
Unlike our previous modeling work ( Wang, 2002; Wong and Wang,
2006), here we explicitly represented the presence of the choice targets
as inputs. This facilitated a comparison of the time course of neural activity
between the model and the experiment. Interestingly, the inclusion of
target inputs renders the model behavior closer to a one-dimensional
model of the decision process. Indeed, in the analysis of Wong and Wang
(2006), we found that the network dynamics in response to the motion
stimulus displays two phases over time, which are roughly associated with
the trajectory along the stable and unstable manifolds of a saddle point.
In a linear description that assumes that the network’s decision process
takes place close to the saddle point, the ramping neural activity is dictated
by two time constants (τ
stable and τunstable) associated with the stable and
unstable manifolds of the saddle point. The time constant τstable was a
few hundreds of milliseconds, and hence not negligible, implying that the
network must be described by two dynamical variables. In the present
work, when the target inputs are included, the neural ﬁring rates are high
at the onset time of the motion stimulus, and the network’s phase-plane
conﬁguration is different. In this case, the recurrent excitation resulting
from increasing neural ﬁring signiﬁcantly shortened τ
stable, which is now
less than 100 ms and about half of τunstable (see Figure 3). Therefore,
with the help of the target inputs, it is more plausible to approximate
the network behavior by a one-dimensional dynamical system, roughly
along the unstable manifold of the saddle point ( Bogacz, 2007; Bogacz
et al., 2006; Brown and Holmes, 2001 ). We emphasize, however, that
this reduced system is still a nonlinear attractor model in which strongly
recurrent neural dynamics play a key role in decision computations, in
contrast to the linear diffusion model (Ratcliff and Smith, 2004; Smith and
Ratcliff, 2004; Mazurek et al., 2003 ).
We designed our model to replicate a dip of neural ﬁring at the onset
of the motion stimulus, as observed in LIP neurons ( Huk and Shadlen,
2005; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002 ). Such a pause in neural activity has
been observed in the frontal eye ﬁelds ( Sato and Schall, 2001 ) and supe-
rior colliculus ( Li et al., 2006 ). We hypothesize that this dip results from
“divided attention”, i.e., the subject’s covert attention is shifted to the
motion stimulus, and therefore the effective signal representing the tar-
gets is reduced. Alternatively, the dip could represent some sort of “reset”
of neural integrators before the integration process, and is independent
of the duration of the motion viewing time ( Kiani et al., 2006).
The attractor circuit model replicated the experimentally observed vio-
lation of TSI. It explains the diminishing effect of a pulse as time elapses
during the decision process. In our model simulations, the change in neu-
ral activity due to a pulse ( Figure 6B) is slightly smaller than the LIP data
(Figure 6A, reproduced from Huk and Shadlen, 2005). The small discrep-
ancy is not surprising, because we did not attempt to fully optimize the
model parameters to ﬁt the experimental data quantitatively. Nonetheless,
our model appears to provide a good explanation for the degree to which
later pulses exert diminishing effects on the decision. This trend is not
readily reproducible with the diffusion model, even taking into account
the nonlinearity due to crossing of a decision threshold (Huk and Shadlen,
2005). Furthermore, we demonstrated that this trend is not explained by
a leaky integration process. A more detailed theoretical study of this issue
will be reported elsewhere. Therefore, our result lends further support to
the reverberating circuit model.
Alternative explanations are conceivable. For instance, it is possible
that the decision threshold is not ﬁxed but decreases in time, presumably
10
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | November 2007 | Volume 1 | Article 6


--- Page 11 ---
Neural addition and subtraction of evidence in decision making
as a result of an urgency signal in the brain that becomes stronger later in
a trial (Churchland et al., 2007; Ditterich, 2006; Hanks et al., 2007; Reddi
and Carpenter, 2000). Qualitatively this would be equivalent to acceleration
of the ramping activity (while the decision threshold is ﬁxed), which natu-
rally results from recurrent excitatory dynamics as in our attractor model.
To differentiate a linear diffusion-like model with a ﬁxed decision
bound and a nonlinear recurrent circuit model, the single-pulse protocol
is not ideal because the truncation of ﬁring rate by a decision threshold
inevitably introduces nonlinear effects. We proposed a double-pulse
protocol, in which two brief pulses are presented consecutively in time,
relatively early in a trial to avoid the thresholding effect. This protocol
reveals nonlinear dynamics in the process of time integration subserved
by recurrent neural circuit dynamics. We think it might help to differentiate
the model proposed here from alternative models such as the diffusion
model with a collapsing bound or urgency.
In a broader context, this modeling work represents an attempt to
link the principles derived from experimental studies to more realistic
neural networks. The body of experimental work on the neurobiology
of decision making tends to rely on abstract formalisms to relate neural
activity with decisions. In recent years, biophysically based neural circuit
models have been developed and shown to yield similar results as, but
also some differences from, the drift-diffusion models. Furthermore, tools
such as signal detection theory, wave difference theory and diffusion
models (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Link, 1992; Ratcliff and Rouder, 1998;
Ratcliff and Smith, 2004; Smith and Ratcliff, 2004 ) do not address
the neural circuitry that underlies the process. The level of modeling
represented in this study translates the principle of bounded integration
into a mechanism that is more easily reconciled with real cortical circuits
(Lo and Wang, 2006; Machens et al., 2005; Miller and Wang, 2006;
Wang, 2002; Wong and Wang, 2006 ). We expect these insights to lead to
more reﬁned experimental tests.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Part of this work was done when both K.-F . W. and X.-J. W. were both
at Brandeis University and were supported by NIH grants MH062349 and
DA016455, and by the Swartz Foundation. A. C. H. is supported by The Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin SRA. M. N. S. is supported by HHMI, EY011378,
and RR0016639. We would like to thank Philip Eckhoff, Phil Holmes, and
Christian Luhmann for careful reading of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Abbott, L. F ., and Chance F . S. (2005). Drivers and modulators from push-pull and balanced
synaptic input. Prog. Brain Res. 149, 147–155.
Bogacz, R. (2007). Optimal decision-making theories: linking neurobiology with
behaviour. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 118–125.
Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P ., and Cohen, J. D. (2006). The physics
of optimal decision making: a formal analysis of models of performance in two-
alternative forced choice tasks. Psychol. Rev. 113, 700–765.
Britten, K. H., Shadlen, M. N., Newsome, W. T., and Movshon, J. A. (1993). Response of
neurons in macaque MT to stochastic motion signals.Vis. Neurosci. 10, 1157–1169.
Brown, E., and Holmes P . (2001). Modeling a simple choice task: stochastic dynamics of
mutually inhibitory neural groups. Stoch. Dyn. 1, 159–191.
Churchland, A. K., Kiani, R., and Shadlen, M. N. (2007). LIP neurons combine accumulated
evidence with a representation of elapsed time -urgency- to mediate a perceptual
decision. Soc. Neurosci. Abstract no. 507.3.
Ditterich, J. (2006). Evidence for time-variant decision making. Eur. J. Neurosci. 24,
3628–3641.
Ermentrout, B. (1990). Phase plane: the dynamical systems tool (Paciﬁc Grove, CA,
Brooks/Cole).
Gold, J. I., and Shadlen, M. N. (2007). The neural basis of decision making. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 30, 535–574.
Hanks, T. D., Kiani, R., Kira S., and Shadlen, M. N. (2007). Evidence for the incorporation
of psychophysical urgency in decision making. Soc. Neurosci. Abstract no. 507.4.
Hestrin, S., Sah, P ., and Nicoll, R. A. (1990). Mechanisms generating the time course of
dual component excitatory synaptic currents recorded in hippocampal slices.Neuron
5, 247–253.
Huk, A. C., and Shadlen, M. N. (2005). Neural activity in macaque parietal cortex reﬂects
temporal integration of visual motion signals during perceptual decision making. J.
Neurosci. 25, 10420–10436.
Kiani, R., Hanks, T. D., and Shadlen, M. N. (2006). Improvement in sensitivity with viewing
time is limited by an integration-to-bound mechanism in area LIP . Soc. Neurosci.
Abstract no. 605.7.
Li, X., Kim B., and Basso, M. A. (2006). Transient pauses in delay-period activity of
superior colliculus neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 2252–2264.
Link, S. W. (1992). The wave theory of difference and similarity (Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ).
Lo, C.-C., and Wang, X. J. (2006). Cortico-basal ganglia circuit mechanism for a decision
threshold in reaction time tasks. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 956–963.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: their role in inferring elementary mental organization
(Oxford Psychology Series, 8) (New York, Oxford University Press).
Machens, C. K., Romo, R., and Brody, C. D. (2005). Flexible control of mutual inhibition:
a neural model of two-interval discrimination. Science 18, 1121–1124.
Mazurek, M. E., Roitman, J. D., Ditterich, J., and Shadlen, M. N. (2003). A role for neural
integrators in perceptual decision making. Cereb. Cortex. 13, 1257–1269.
Miller, P ., and Wang, X. J. (2006). Inhibitory control by an integral feedback signal in
prefrontal cortex: a model of discrimination between sequential stimuli. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 103, 201–206.
Priebe, N. J., Churchland, M. M., and Lisberger, S. G. (2002). Constraints on the source
of short-term motion adaptation in macaque area MT. i. the role of input and intrinsic
mechanisms. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 354–369.
Ratcliff, R., and Rouder, J. N. (1998). Modeling response times for two-choice decisions.
Psychol. Sci. 9, 347–356.
Ratcliff, R., and Smith, P . L. (2004). A comparison of sequential sampling models for
two-choice reaction time. Psychol. Rev. 111, 333–367.
Reddi, B. A., and Carpenter, R. H. S.(2000). The inﬂuence of urgency on decision time.
Nat. Neurosci. 3, 827–830.
Roitman, J. D., and Shadlen, M. N. (2002). Response of neurons in the lateral intraparietal
area during a combined visual discrimination reaction time task. J. Neurosci. 22,
9475–9489.
Sato, T., and Schall, J. D. (2001). Pre-excitatory pause in frontal eye ﬁeld responses.
Exp. Brain Res. 139, 53–58.
Schall, J. D. (2001). Neural basis of deciding, choosing and acting. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
2, 33–42.
Schall, J. D. (2003). Neural correlates of decision processes: neural and mental chronom-
etry. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 182–186.
Shadlen, M. N., and Gold, J. I. (2004). The neurophysiology of decision-making as a
window on cognition. In The Cognitive Neurosciences, 3rd edn, M. S. Gazzaniga, ed.
(Cambridge, MA, MIT).
Shadlen, M. N., and Newsome, W. T. (2001). Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the
parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 86, 1916–1936.
Smith, P . L., and Ratcliff, R. (2004). Psychology and neurobiology of simple decisions.
Trend Neurosci. 27, 161–168.
Strogatz, S. H. (2001). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to physics,
biology, chemistry and engineering (Cambridge, MA, Perseus Books Group).
Usher, M., and McClelland, J. L. (2001). On the time course of perceptual choice: The
leaky competing accumulator model. Psychol Rev. 108, 550–592.
Wang, X.-J. (1999). Synaptic basis of cortical persistent activity: the importance of NMDA
receptors to working memory. J. Neurosci. 19, 9587–9603.
Wang, X.-J. (2002). Probabilitic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits.
Neuron 36, 955–968.
Wong, K.-F ., Huk, A. C., Shadlen, M. N., and Wang, X.-J. (2005). Time integration in
a perceptual decision task: adding and subtracting brief pulses of evidence in a
recurrent cortical network model. Soc. Neurosci. Abstract no. 621.5.
Wong, K.-F ., Huk, A. C., Shadlen, M. N., and Wang, X.-J. (2006). Time integration in
a perceptual decision task: adding and subtracting brief pulses of evidence in a
recurrent cortical network model. Cogn. Syst. Neurosci. Abstract no. 177.
Wong, K.-F ., and Wang, X.-J. (2006). A recurrent network mechanism of time integration
in perceptual decisions. J. Neurosci. 26, 1314–1328.
11
www.frontiersin.org
