--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 05 February 2013
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00003
Inﬂuence of slow oscillation on hippocampal activity and
ripples through cortico-hippocampal synaptic interactions,
analyzed by a cortical-CA3-CA1 network model
Jiannis T axidis1,2*, Kenji Mizuseki 3†, Robert Mason 4 and Markus R. Owen 1
1 Centre for Mathematical Biology and Medicine, School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
2 Division of Biology, Computation and Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
3 Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Jersey, NJ, USA
4 Queen’s Medical Centre, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Edited by:
Tomoki Fukai, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Japan
Reviewed by:
Hiroshi Okamoto, RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Japan
Vassilis Cutsuridis, Federation of
Research and Technology—Hellas,
Greece
*Correspondence:
Jiannis Taxidis, Computation and
Neural Systems, California Institute
of Technology, 1200 E. California
Boulevard, Mail Code 136-93,
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
e-mail: jtaxidis@caltech.edu
†Present address:
Kenji Mizuseki, Allen Institute for
Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
Hippocampal sharp wave-ripple complexes (SWRs) involve the synchronous discharge of
thousands of cells throughout the CA3-CA1-subiculum-entorhinal cortex axis. Their strong
transient output affects cortical targets, rendering SWRs a possible means for memory
transfer from the hippocampus to the neocortex for long-term storage. Neurophysiological
observations of hippocampal activity modulatio n by the cortical slow oscillation (SO) during
deep sleep and anesthesia, and correlations between ripples and UP states, support
the role of SWRs in memory consolidation through a cortico-hippocampal feedback loop.
We couple a cortical network exhibiting SO with a hippocampal CA3-CA1 computational
network model exhibiting SWRs, in order to model such cortico-hippocampal correlations
and uncover important parameters and coupling mechanisms controlling them. The
cortical oscillatory output entrains the CA3 network via connections representing the
mossy ﬁber input, and the CA1 network via the temporoammonic pathway (TA). The
spiking activity in CA3 and CA1 is shown to depend on the excitation-to-inhibition ratio,
induced by combining the two hippocampa l inputs, with mossy ﬁber input controlling
the UP-state correlation of CA3 population bursts and corresponding SWRs, whereas
the temporoammonic input affects the overall CA1 spiking activity. Ripple characteristics
and pyramidal spiking participation to SWRs are shaped by the strength of the Schaffer
collateral drive. A set of in vivo recordings from the rat hippocampus conﬁrms a
model-predicted segregation of pyramidal c ells into subgroups according to the SO state
where they preferentially ﬁre and their r esponse to SWRs. These groups can potentially
play distinct functional roles in the replay of spike sequences.
Keywords: hippocampus, sl ow oscillation, sharp waves, ripples, mo ssy ﬁbers, temporoammonic pathway,
correlations
INTRODUCTION
The standard model for memory consolidation assumes that new
memories are stored temporarily in hippocampal and parahip-
pocampal areas, and are later transferred to the neocortex, during
slow wave sleep (SWS), for long-term storage ( Buzsáki, 1989,
2006; Eichenbaum, 2000 ). However, the question of how infor-
mation ﬂows between neocortex and hippocampus during SWS
is still unresolved. A series of recent observations suggest a gen-
eral drive from cortex to hippocampus during SWS ( Siapas and
Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003; Hahn et al., 2006, 2007; Isomura
et al., 2006; Mölle et al., 2006 ). These studies focus on the tem-
poral relationships between intrinsic rhythmic oscillations found
in the cortex and hippocampus, particularly the slow oscillation
(SO) and the sharp wave-ripple complexes (SWRs) respectively.
The SO is an intrinsic cortical oscillation ( Timofeev and
Steriade, 1996; Sanchez-Vives and McCormick, 2000; Timofeev
et al., 2000 ), observed virtually simultaneously throughout all
neocortical areas during SWS and anesthesia ( Steriade, 2006).
It consists of rhythmically recurring (usually <1H z ) s t e p - l i k e
transitions in neuronal membrane potentials between depolar-
izing envelopes with superimposed action potentials (UP states)
and silent, hyperpolarized (DOWN) states. V arious theoreti-
cal and computational approaches of different architectures and
complexities have addressed potential cellular and/or network
mechanisms underlying such oscillations ( Bazhenov et al., 2002;
Compte et al., 2003; Hill and T ononi, 2005; Holcman and
T sodyks, 2006; Parga and Abbott, 2007).
The SWR consists of a large negative local ﬁeld potential
(LFP) peak in the CA1 dendritic layer (sharp wave), accompanied
by transient ∼ 150–200 Hz oscillatory patterns (ripples) located
in the CA1 pyramidal layer LFP ( Buzsáki et al., 1992; Ylinen
et al., 1995 ). Fast-scale replays of temporal patterns of correlated
place cells during SWRs ( Skaggs and McNaughton, 1996; Lee
and Wilson, 2002; Foster and Wilson, 2006; Diba and Buzsáki,
2007) and post-learning memory impairments caused by ripple
disruption ( Girardeau et al., 2009 )i n d i c a t ear o l ef o rS W R sa s
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE


--- Page 2 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
a possible vehicle for memory transfer to the prefrontal cortical
areas (PFC) ( Peyrache et al., 2009 ). SWRs are observed syn-
chronously throughout the hippocampus ( Chrobak and Buzsáki,
1996) and are the result of strong depolarizing inputs from CA3
population bursts, exciting CA1 pyramidal cells and interneurons
through the Schaffer collaterals ( Buzsáki et al., 1992; Csicsvari
et al., 2000; Maier et al., 2003 ). The numerous CA1 interneuron
types exhibit diverse spiking responses to SWRs with some types
increasing their spiking while others become silent ( Klausberger
and Somogyi, 2008 ), potentially serving a mechanism for the
replay of the stored place cell temporal patterns ( Cutsuridis and
Hasselmo, 2010, 2011). Based on the observation that basket cells
dramatically increase their ﬁring during SWRs ( Klausberger and
Somogyi, 2008 ), ﬁring in phase with ripples ( Ylinen et al., 1995;
Csicsvari et al., 1999 ), a recent modeling study of a CA3-CA1
network proposed a ripple generation mechanism, relying on
synchronous CA1 perisomatic interneuronal activity and strong
fast-decaying recurrent inhibition (T axidis et al., 2012).
T emporal correlations between neocortical and hippocampal
LFPs and unit activity during SO have revealed a strong SO-
modulated cortico-hippocampal coupling. The overall cortical
activity precedes hippocampal by tens of ms and ripple occur-
rence increases during UP states ( Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota
et al., 2003; Isomura et al., 2006; Mölle et al., 2006; Sullivan et al.,
2011). In extra- and intra-cellular recordings in the neocortex,
entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus of anesthetized and natu-
rally sleeping rodents, the SO was shown to engage entorhinal
cells as well, while hippocampal spiking is also SO-modulated,
with neurons in the dentate region discharging mostly during cor-
tical UP states ( Isomura et al., 2006; Hahn et al., 2007; Sullivan
et al., 2011 ). A study on anesthetized and naturally sleeping rats
reported that most CA3 neurons were preferentially active dur-
ing DOWN states, organized in gamma frequency oscillations,
while most CA1 cells ﬁred predominantly in UP states, yielding
a correlation of the overall CA1 activity with the SO ( Isomura
et al., 2006 ). In contrast, a study on anesthetized mice reported
a mixed correlation of CA3 membrane potentials with neocorti-
cal UP states, some being depolarized and others hyperpolarized,
while most CA1 pyramidal cells were found to be anti-correlated
with the SO, being hyperpolarized during UP states ( Hahn et al.,
2007). Whole-cell recordings from CA1 dendritic R-LM interneu-
rons (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996 ), also revealed a SO modulation
of their membrane potentials ( Hahn et al., 2006 ), indicating that
CA1 interneuronal activity can also be SO-modulated.
These results suggest a feedforward control of the SO over hip-
pocampal activity that can potentially be a key feature of memory
consolidation processes, with UP states causing neuronal reacti-
vation of newly encoded information in hippocampal circuitry
that can be fed back to the cortex during ripples ( Mehta, 2007).
However, the temporal and functional cross-talk between cortex
and hippocampus during sleep and anesthesia and the network
mechanisms that control the hippocampal SO-modulation and
the UP states-ripples correlation are still not well understood.
W e try to unravel these mechanisms from a modeling perspec-
tive by coupling an established computational model of a cortical
network exhibiting SO ( Compte et al., 2003 ) and the aforemen-
tioned CA3-CA1 network model reproducing many hippocampal
intrinsic dynamics and exhibiting SWRs ( T axidis et al., 2012 ).
The cortical output entrains the hippocampal model via con-
nections to CA3, representing mossy ﬁbers (MF), and to CA1,
representing the temporoammonic pathway (TA). We examine
how the spiking activity and network dynamics of both CA
areas depend on the excitation-to-inhibition balance, induced
by the cortical SO output. Our results suggest that the mossy
ﬁber input determines the UP-state correlation or anticorrela-
tion of CA3 population bursts, and consequently SWRs, while
the temporoammonic input controls the overall spiking activity
of CA1 in relation to UP/DOWN states. Particular ripple charac-
teristics (oscillation frequency, spike-ﬁeld phase-locking) depend
mainly on the Schaffer collateral input to CA1. The combina-
tion of both inputs segregates CA1 pyramidal cells into four
subsets according to the SO state where they preferentially ﬁre
and whether they actively participate in ripple spiking. W e verify
the model-predicted characteristics of these groups by compar-
ing them against a set of in vivo hippocampal recordings from
naturally sleeping rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP , RECORDINGS, ANDIn vivo DATA ANALYSIS
The experimental data presented here were collected in the
lab of György Buzsáki. Detailed information about the surgi-
cal, experimental, recording, and spike sorting procedures has
been described elsewhere ( Csicsvari et al., 1999; Mizuseki et al.,
2009, 2011). Brieﬂy, three male Long-Evans rats (250–400 g) were
implanted with a 4- or 8-shank silicon probe in the right dorsal
hippocampus under isoﬂurane anesthesia (1–1.5%) and recorded
from dorsal CA1 pyramidal layers. Another 4-shank silicon probe
was also implanted in the right dorsocaudal medial entorhinal
cortex. Each shank had eight recording sites and inter-shank dis-
tance was 200 μm. Recordings sites were staggered to provide a
two-dimensional arrangement (20 μm vertical separations). The
EC probe was positioned so that the different shanks recorded
from different layers. The position of the electrodes was con-
ﬁrmed histologically and reported previously in detail ( Mizuseki
et al., 2009).
LFPs and multiple single neurons activity were recorded from
CA1 and EC simultaneously while the animals run on a variety of
environments and during sleep sessions, preceding and following
the exploration tasks ( Mizuseki et al., 2009 ). Signals were ampli-
ﬁed (1000×), bandpass-ﬁltered (1–5 kHz) and acquired contin-
uously at 20 kHz (DataMax system; RC Electronics) at 16-bit
resolution. After recording, the signals were down-sampled to
1250 Hz for the LFP analysis. Spike sorting was performed auto-
matically, using KlustaKwik ( Harris et al., 2000 ), followed by
manual adjustment of the clusters (Klusters software package,
Hazan et al., 2006 ). Only units with clear refractory periods
and well-deﬁned cluster boundaries were included in the anal-
yses ( Harris et al., 2000 ). Classiﬁcation of pyramidal cells and
interneurons of hippocampal and entorhinal cortical neurons was
described previously ( Mizuseki et al., 2009 ). All protocols were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Rutgers University.
SWS periods were detected using the ratio of the power in
theta band (6–10 Hz) to delta band (1–4 Hz) of LFP , followed by
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 2


--- Page 3 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
manual adjustment with the aid of visual inspection of whitened
power spectra and the raw traces ( Sirota et al., 2008; Mizuseki
et al., 2011 ). DOWN-to-UP transitions were detected by thresh-
olding the smoothed multiunit spiking activity of entorhinal cells.
Ripple events were detected by thresholding the bandpassed (140–
230 Hz) CA1 pyramidal layer LFP [see Mizuseki et al. (2009,
2011) for details]. The ripple timings refer to the time of each
event’s spectral peak.
T o assess whether CA1 cells ﬁred preferentially during the UP
or DOWN states, the ﬁring rate of each cell was calculated for
350 ms around each DOWN-to-UP transition in 100 ms bins,
overlapping by 90 ms and was normalized by its total mean. The
position of the maximum ﬁring rate point relative to − 60 ms
from the state transition (where the average ﬁring is at baseline
level, see Figure 6A), was used to classify the cell as an “UP-cell”
or “DOWN-cell. ”
T o assess whether each ripple took place during an UP or
DOWN state, the closest DOWN-to-UP transition was detected.
If the ripple preceded this transition by a time between − 60 ms
and − 350 ms, it was taken to have occurred during a DOWN
state (see Figures 6A and C). In all other cases it was assumed
to have happened during an UP state. Note that reducing by
half the time interval assigned to DOWN-ripples ( − 60 ms up to
− 175 ms) reduced the total number of DOWN-ripples but did
not severely affect our results.
The peri-ripple ﬁring rate of each cell was calculated for 200 ms
around each ripple in 5 ms bins overlapping by 4 ms. The mean
ﬁring rate per ripple was calculated for each cell. The baseline
ﬁring, used to assess spiking increase during the average rip-
ple, refers to the segments of the mean rate that are more than
40 ms away from the ripple peak. Cells that did not produce any
spikes around the DOWN-to-UP or the ripple windows were
discarded (2.7%).
All signiﬁcance tests in section “Correlations of CA1
Pyramidal Spiking to UP-states and Ripples Depend on the
Combined Schaffer and T emporoammonic Inputs. Comparison
with In vivo recordings” refer to P = 0.001 2-sample or paired
t-tests accordingly on the maximum ﬁring rate increase.
CORTICAL MODEL
W e implemented a computational cortical network model devel-
oped in a study of a possible SO-generating mechanism ( Compte
et al., 2003 ). In brief, it consists of a one-dimensional array
of equidistantly distributed pyramidal cells and interneurons,
in a 4:1 ratio. The former are modeled by a two-compartment
(dendritic and axosomatic) regular-spiking Hodgkin-Huxley cell,
including various ionic currents ( Compte et al., 2003 ), and
the latter by the single-compartment fast-spiking Wang–Buzsáki
cell ( Wang and Buzsáki, 1996 ). A ﬁxed number of connections
between cells is assigned (on average 20 per cell on each cell
type), with an implemented heterogeneity among the popula-
tion. These connections are distributed to the neighbors around
each cell with a Gaussian probability distribution, centered on the
cell. Excitatory connections are more widespread than inhibitory
ones. Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) are AMPA- and
NMDA-mediated, and inhibitory ones are GABA-mediated. This
model was shown to exhibit robust UP and DOWN states,
alternating at frequency <1 Hz, closely resembling the cortical
SO ( Compte et al., 2003, 2008 ). Spontaneous pyramidal spikes
initiate UP states in non-speciﬁc sites, which spread through-
out the network via recurrent excitation, regulated by inhibition,
and are terminated by the buildup of hyperpolarizing currents,
particularly the Na+-dependent K+ current IKNa.
A version of the original model was implemented, includ-
ing 1000 pyramidal cells and 250 interneurons and a modiﬁed
synaptic-interaction scheme. Whenever a presynaptic spike is
detected (with detection threshold at 10 mV for the membrane
potential of the presynaptic cell) a ﬁxed instantaneous increase
is given in the postsynaptic cell’s synaptic conductance. This
increase is set to be 1/3 of the corresponding parameter α
syn
in Compte et al. (2003) for excitatory connections and 1/2 for
inhibitory ones. Moreover, in the original model each synapse
in a cell is modeled by an independent post-synaptic variable,
whereas in our implementation each cell has one “total” variable
for each synaptic type. We therefore adjusted the overall excita-
tion by reducing the original model’s maximal excitatory con-
ductances (to 4.15 nS and 0.225 nS for pyramidal-to-pyramidal
AMPA and NMDA synapses respectively, and to 0.5 nS and
0.11 nS for pyramidal-to-interneuron synapses. Original values
were 5.4, 0.9, 2.25, and 0.5 nS respectively) and we enhanced
inhibition by reducing the GABA reversal potential from − 70
to − 75 mV . Finally, note that the maximum sodium-dependent
potassium conductance gKNa, in the dendritic compartment of
cortical pyramidal cells has been reduced to 0.5 mS/cm 2 from
the original value 1.33 mS/cm 2 (Compte et al., 2003 ). This is
done to increase the excitability of pyramidal cells, prolonging
(shortening) the duration of UP (DOWN) states. The resulting
approximately equal duration of UP and DOWN states allows an
unbiased temporal analysis of correlations between hippocam-
pal activity and the two SO states. With these modiﬁcations,
the network reproduces all the basic characteristic properties
of the original one, i.e., alternating UP/DOWN states with fre-
quency <1H z( ∼ 0.83 Hz) and UP-state ﬁring rates of∼ 15 Hz for
pyramidal cells and ∼ 30 Hz for interneurons.
CA3-CA1 MODEL
The detailed morphology of the CA3-CA1 hippocampal net-
work model has been extensively described in a previous study
of SWRs in the rat hippocampus ( T axidis et al., 2012 ). Both
CA areas consist of one dimensional arrays of 1000 pyramidal
cells and 100 interneurons, equidistantly distributed. Pyramidal
cells are modeled by the two-compartment (dendritic and axoso-
m a t i c )P i n s k y – R i n z e lc e l l(Pinsky and Rinzel, 1994). All interneu-
rons are considered perisomatic basket cells and are modeled
by the Wang–Buzsáki model ( Wang and Buzsáki, 1996 ). Both
are Hodgkin–Huxley cell models that accurately capture the ﬁr-
ing properties of the respective cell types ( T axidis et al., 2012 ).
All connectivity parameters and synaptic strengths were inspired
from the literature so that the ﬁnal topology of both areas, while
simpliﬁed, is as realistic as possible [see Ta x i d i s e t a l .(2012)
for details and justiﬁcation of parameter values]. Brieﬂy, the
connectivity scheme is again based on a Gaussian probability
distribution of connections around each cell, similar to the cor-
tical model. The SD of the Gaussian is again larger for pyramidal
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 3


--- Page 4 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
cells than interneurons, mimicking extensive excitatory axons and
more locally constrained inhibition ( Bernard and Wheal, 1994;
T raub et al., 1999).
CA3 is characterized by an extensive recurrent excitatory net-
work, with no inhibition between interneurons. In accordance
with anatomical studies (Sik et al., 1993; T raub et al., 1999), pyra-
midal cells make 55 connections (29% of their total 190) to other
CA3 pyramidal cells, ﬁve connections (2.6%) to CA3 interneurons
and 130 connections (68.4%) forming Schaffer collaterals to CA1
cells. This yields a connectivity probability of 10.62% between
any CA3 pyramidal-pyramidal pair [within the estimated 15%
upper limit for the intact CA3 ( Bernard and Wheal, 1994 )] and
∼ 10% connectivity probability for pyramidal-interneuron pairs
(Miles et al., 1988; T raub and Miles, 1991 ). Interneurons make
68 connections on nearby CA3 pyramidal cells, forming multiple
contacts with each targeted cell ( T raub et al., 1999), resulting in
a high connectivity probability within their connections-cluster
(Miles et al., 1988; T raub and Miles, 1991 ).
In contrast to CA3, a strong and dense recurrent inhibitory
network underlies CA1 topology, while connections between
pyramidal cells are omitted. Interneurons make 400 and 100
connections with nearby pyramidal cells and interneurons
respectively, making multiple contacts with each cell ( Buhl
et al., 1994 ) and yielding high connectivity probabilities around
each interneuron ( Bartos et al., 2007 ). Pyramidal cells con-
tact 20 interneurons on average in their extensive connections-
cluster, making mostly monosynaptic connections ( Gulyás et al.,
1993), yielding a connectivity probability of 30% ( Knowles and
Schwartzkroin, 1981).
Moreover, CA3 drives CA1 through a set of excitatory con-
nections, depolarizing both pyramidal cells and interneurons,
mimicking Schaffer collaterals. Each CA3 pyramidal cell con-
tacts 130 CA1 neurons on average, with connections distributed
according to a Gaussian probability centered on the correspond-
i n gC A 1p y r a m i d a lc e l la n dc o v e r i n gr o u g h l yt w ot h i r d so f
the total network length ( Li et al., 1994 ). T o include multi-
ple contacts on each targeted cell ( Sorra and Harris, 1993 )a n d
to implement a strong Schaffer-drive to CA1 ( Andersen et al.,
2007) 13 synapses are assigned for each Schaffer connection on
interneurons. The strength of the Schaffer drive varies throughout
the CA1 pyramidal cells, by assigning to each cell a number
of synapses per incoming Schaffer connection, taken from a
Gaussian distribution: |13 ± 13| (mean and SD), taking the abso-
lute value to avoid negative numbers [see Ta x i d i s e t a l .(2012)f o r
details]. Thus, a subset of cells receives stronger excitation than
average, constituting a “strongly-driven subset. ” The numbers of
synapses-per-Schaffer connection are changed in some of the sim-
ulations to induce an increased Schaffer drive, as explained in the
“Results” section.
Both networks have individually been shown to reproduce
various anatomical properties and functional features of the
respective CA areas. Most importantly, the CA3 network exhibits
theta-periodic quasi-synchronized population bursts, with sparse
pyramidal spiking, whereas the interneuronal network in CA1
oscillates at gamma frequencies and can synchronize further at
ripple frequency range. The full CA3-CA1 model was shown to
generate SWRs in CA1 as a response to the CA3 bursts, accurately
reproducing all basic ripple characteristics ( T axidis et al., 2012).
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS AND GENERAL CORTICO-HIPPOCAMPAL
CONNECTIVITY
In both the cortical and hippocampal networks all excitatory con-
nections target the dendritic compartment of pyramidal cells,
whereas inhibitory ones target the axosomatic compartment. All
postsynaptic currents within and between the individual net-
works are given by:
I
syn = gsynssyn
(
V − Vsyn
)
(1)
where gsyn is a ﬁxed conductance, V is the membrane poten-
tial of the postsynaptic cell and Vsyn is the reversal potential
of the synapse. The postsynaptic variable ssyn is instantaneously
increased by a ﬁxed value αsyn when an action potential arrives
at the synapse and then decays exponentially with decay time
τsyn [except for the NMDA currents in the cortical network, as
explained in Compte et al. (2003)]. For all relevant parameter
values of the individual network and hippocampal models, see
Compte et al. (2003)a n d Ta x i d i s e t a l .(2012) along with the
aforementioned adjustments for the cortical network. All synap-
tic parameter values, for the cortico-hippocampal connections
between the individual models, are summarized in Ta b l e 1and
are explained in detail in the following two sections.
T able 1 | Parameter values for the instantaneous increase αsyn of the postsynaptic variable ssyn for all types of cortico-hippocampal synapses
in the model.
αsyn EPSP (mV) EPSC (nA) Reported EPSP (mV) Reported EPSC (nA) References
PFC-CA3
PY 70 5 4.5 2–12 0.2 Y amamoto et al., 1987;
Jonas et al., 1993
IN 0.5 0.25 0.03 0.03 Lawrence et al., 2004
PFC-CA1
PY 2 0.16 0.13 0.16 Otmakhova et al., 2002
IN 2 1 0.13 1 Empson and
Heinemann, 1995
The resulting EPSPs and EPSCs on pyramidal cells (PY) and inter neurons (IN) and the ones reported through physiological recordings (where available) are also
displayed. All PSPs in the model were measured from a background membrane potential of−7 4.5 mV for cortical pyramidal cells,−65.3 mV for CA3 pyramidal cells,
−62.6 mV for CA1 pyramidal cells and−62 mV for all interneurons.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 4


--- Page 5 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
Figure 1A shows the basic wiring diagram used to couple
the cortical and hippocampal model. W e add the various cou-
pling mechanisms progressively and examine them individually
and in combination. The cortical network is taken to repre-
sent the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and sends output to both CA3
and CA1 areas. Since the SO has been shown to extend even
to the entorhinal cortex ( Isomura et al., 2006; Sullivan et al.,
2011), we assume that the cortical output also represents the out-
put produced by the SO of the entorhinal cortex that reaches
the hippocampus. CA1 receives direct input from the entorhi-
nal layer 3 (EC3) via the TA, so the PFC-to-CA1 connection
represents multistep pathways originating from PFC and reach-
ing CA1 through EC3. The afferent connections in CA3 are the
MF originating from the dentate gyrus (DG) which has also
been shown to partially participate in the SO ( Isomura et al.,
2006; Hahn et al., 2007; Sullivan et al., 2011 ). We therefore
assume that the cortical output that is fed into CA3 represents
a polysynaptic pathway passing through the entorhinal cortex
and the DG. Direct monosynaptic projections from the entorhi-
nal cortex to CA3 are ignored, since their effect is considered
to be much weaker than the mossy ﬁber input ( Andersen et al.,
2007).
0
2
4
x1 0
5
Cortica
l
Activity (nA)
2
4 x1 0
5
Av
erage
DOWN-UP
1 sec
C
B
A
EC3
PFC
CA1
CA3
DG MF
TA
SC
lags (msec)
FIGURE 1 | (A) Schematic diagram of the full cortico-hippocampal
connectivity implemented in our computational network model. The cortex
provides input to both CA3 and CA1 through the dentate gyrus (DG) mossy
ﬁber connections (MF) and the entorhinal cortex layer 3 (EC3)
temporoammonic pathway (TA). (B) T otal cortical synaptic activity (grey) of
the cortical network during SO. All UP states are detected when the
activity exceeds 0.45 × SD and the window between the end of each UP
state until the end of the next is taken as an SO cycle (black lines).
(C) Resulting average SO cycle (black li ne) of the cortical synaptic activity.
(Time 0 ms corresponds to maximum UP-state activity in all ﬁgures of
average SO cycle).
CONNECTIVITY OF THE MOSSY FIBERS AND TEMPOROAMMONIC
PATHWAY
The direct cortex-to-hippocampus connections in the model rep-
resent polysynaptic pathways involving many types of cells and
therefore they are highly simpliﬁed. Nevertheless, our goal is for
both CA areas to receive a realistic input.
MF in the rat hippocampus is mostly oriented transverse to
the longitudinal axis of CA3, with very limited overlap in the sep-
totemporal direction ( Amaral and Witter, 1989; Andersen et al.,
2007). T emporoammonic connections are more widespread in
CA1 and are topographically organized, with each EC3 axon cov-
ering about one quarter of the septotemporal CA1 axis (Andersen
et al., 2007 ). For simpliﬁcation, we assign here uniform prob-
ability distributions for both types of connections, so that the
cortical output will be spread over the entire extent of the CA
areas. This is done so that the wave propagation of UP states in
the cortical model ( Compte et al., 2003 ) is not reproduced in the
hippocampus.
Both MF and the TA have been shown to excite pyramidal cells
and interneurons in their respective target areas ( Empson and
Heinemann, 1995; Acsady et al., 1998; Gabbott et al., 2002 ), so
we implemented connections from cortical cells to both cell types
in CA3 and CA1. T o reduce further the number of free parame-
ters, we ﬁx the magnitude of the unitary excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSPs), so that only the number of connections to
pyramidal cells and interneurons varies between different sim-
ulations. The EPSP and/or EPSC levels, shown in Ta b l e 1,a r e
taken from the literature [partly summarized in Cutsuridis et al.
(2010)].
The implemented mossy ﬁber EPSP to pyramidal cells is 5 mV ,
within the reported range of 2–12 mV ( Y amamoto et al., 1987),
although the EPSC is much higher than reported (4.5 vs. 0.2 nA).
However, EPSCs up to 1 nA have been recorded (Cutsuridis et al.,
2010). The implemented synapse triggers spikes in the CA3 pyra-
midal cell after a train of four spikes at 40 Hz (not shown) in
agreement with recordings (Henze et al., 2002). The implemented
EPSC in CA3 interneurons (30 pA) is similar to the recorded
quantal EPSC ( Lawrence et al., 2004 ), although a corresponding
average EPSP has not been reported.
The TA synapses lie in the stratum lacunosum moleculare of
CA1, exciting the distal dendrites of pyramidal cells ( Colbert and
Levy, 1992 ). As a result, they are relatively weak and get atten-
uated along the dendrites, producing very small depolarizations
in the somatic compartment that have little effect on the ﬁr-
ing properties of the cell ( Colbert and Levy, 1992; Empson and
Heinemann, 1995; Jarsky et al., 2005 ). W e thus assign a small
somatic EPSP magnitude to these connections, 0.16 mV , which is
comparable to the Schaffer collateral EPSP ( Sayer et al., 1990 ).
A similar magnitude has also been used in a complex simula-
tion of the TA effect on pyramidal cells ( Jarsky et al., 2005 ).
The corresponding EPSC peaks at 0.13 nA which is close to the
reported 0.16 nA ( Otmakhova et al., 2002 ). Moreover, the TA
input exerts a powerful feedforward inhibition in CA1, with
EC3 cells possibly targeting strata lacunosum moleculare- and
radiatum-lying inhibitory neurons as well ( Colbert and Levy,
1992; Empson and Heinemann, 1995 ). W e model this inhibition
by assigning direct connections to CA1 interneurons, although
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 5


--- Page 6 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
our interneurons represent pyramidal-layer perisomatic basket
cells. The implemented EPSP is 1 mV , as suggested by recordings
(Empson and Heinemann, 1995 ), and the peak EPSC is the same
as in pyramidal cells.
SIMULATIONS OF EXTRACELLULAR RECORDINGS AND DETECTION OF
UP STATES, CA3 BURSTS, AND RIPPLES
W e model extracellular synaptic activity in the cortex using
the total post-synaptic currents from all types of connections,
summed over the whole cortical network. All ﬁring rates are
calculated by summing spikes from cells of the corresponding
network over 30 ms non-overlapping bins.
UP states are detected either (1) through synaptic activity,
whenever the total post-synaptic current exceeds a 0.45 × SD
detection threshold, or (2) through the average ﬁring rate of
all cortical pyramidal cells, calculated in 30 ms non-overlapping
bins, whenever it exceeds 0.2 × SD, where SD is the standard
deviation of the respective measures over the whole simulation.
Any UP states closer than 100 ms are taken as one. By visual
inspection, we ensured that both procedures resulted in correct
UP-state detection. An SO cycle is considered to begin at the end
of a detected UP state and last until the end of the next one, thus
including one DOWN state followed by one UP ( Figure 1B).
CA3 population bursts are detected through the average ﬁr-
ing rate of all CA3 pyramidal cells, calculated in 10 ms non-
overlapping bins, whenever it exceeds 1.5 × SD. The bursts’
boundaries are set where the ﬁring rate drops below 1.2 × SD.
Visual inspection ensured that these criteria detected population
bursts correctly for all cases of interneuronal drive by the cortex
(kDG− IN , see “Results” section).
Ripples are detected from the 150–200 Hz bandpass ﬁltered
total synaptic conductance summed over all connections that
would correspond to somatic (pyramidal) layer recordings (so
only Schaffer excitatory synapses are ignored). This summation
is done over a part of the CA1 network of length 560 μmi n
the middle of the CA1 array, containing 50 pyramidal cells and
six interneurons which we will refer to as the “recording site”
throughout the text [see Ta x i d i s e t a l .(2012)f o rd e t a i l sa n dj u s t i ﬁ -
cation]. The root mean square (RMS) of the measure is calculated
in bins of 10 ms, overlapping by 50%, and its SD is derived over
the whole signal. Ripples are detected when the RMS exceeds a
3 × SD threshold and their boundaries are set where the RMS
drops below 2 × S D .E v e n t sw i t hl e s st h a n2 0 m st o t a ld u r a t i o n
are discarded and neighboring ripples less than 10 ms apart are
taken as one event. Similar algorithms were used in Csicsvari et al.
(1999, 2000 )a n d Klausberger et al. (2003). Note that spectral
analysis of CA1 interneuronal membrane potentials and ripple-
related spike histograms include only cells in this “recording
site. ”
For the averaging over SO cycles, all detected pairs of DOWN-
UP states are aligned using the maximum point of the total synap-
tic current (or ﬁring rate) as reference point (0 ms, Figure 1C),
whereas for the averaging over ripples all detected ripple events
are aligned over their minimum point. This point is also taken as
the reference time of each ripple when aligning them to their cor-
responding SO state. Finally, when aligning cell spiking with the
average SO cycle, the ﬁring rate of each cell is averaged over all
cycles and turned into the z-score, i.e., its mean is subtracted and
it is normalized by its standard deviation.
NUMERICAL METHODS
All models were implemented in the Python-based spiking neu-
ral networks simulator Brian ( Goodman and Brette, 2008 ),
using a second-order Runge–Kutta method for all ordinary dif-
ferential equations, with a time step of 0.05 ms. Spikes were
recorded at every time step, while all other variables were
recorded every 1 ms. Data analysis and plotting was performed
in MATLAB. Power spectral densities and spike train correla-
tions were computed using algorithms from the Neurospec 20
numerical toolbox (Halliday and Rosenberg, 1999 ). The CircStat
toolbox ( Berens, 2009 ) was used for circular plotting and sta-
tistical analysis of pyramidal spike phase-locking to the average
ripple. Instantaneous phases of the average ripple were calculated
through the Hilbert transform and all phase locking signiﬁcance
p-values refer to V-tests for non-uniformity of phase distribu-
tions with mean direction equal to − 90◦ (corresponding to ripple
troughs).
All results presented are taken from simulations producing 40 s
of data (except for Figure 7 where 100 s were produced). These
contained 32 SO cycles of average duration ∼ 1210 ms (0.83 Hz).
RESULTS
W e study the effects of each implemented cortico-hippocampal
connection separately and in combinations, by progressively
adding the various contacts between the cortical and the two CA
networks. We ﬁrst explore the role of the mossy ﬁber input on
CA3 population bursts and then the oscillatory responses in CA1
resulting from the Schaffer collaterals. W e next add the TA input
to CA1 and study its effects on cell spiking, with and without
combining it with the Schaffer input. Finally, we compare the
predicted correlations with SO states and ripples against a set of
in vivo recordings, collected in the György Buzsáki lab ( Mizuseki
et al., 2009, 2011; Sullivan et al., 2011 ). For clarity, all ﬁgures
include a diagram with the connections implemented for each
simulation.
EFFECTS OF MOSSY FIBER INPUT ON CA3
W e ﬁrst examine the effect of the cortical input on CA3 which,
when driven by a noisy depolarizing current on all pyramidal
cells, exhibits quasi-synchronized population bursts recurring at
theta frequencies (T axidis et al., 2012). Note that the theta rhyth-
micity is due to the intrinsic bursting frequency range of the CA3
single cell model ( Pinsky and Rinzel, 1994).
MF have a very limited spatial extent along the longitudinal
CA3 axis, with each granule cell having on average 10–18 large
mossy terminals that target only 10–15 different CA3 pyrami-
dal cells ( Amaral et al., 1990 ). T o simplify the almost one-to-one
mossy ﬁber projections we assign only one connection from
each pyramidal cell in the cortical network (which here rep-
resents the DG as well) to CA3 pyramidal cells ( kDG− PY = 1).
This connection can reach any cell with uniform probability
distribution. Since both networks contain the same number of
pyramidal cells (n = 1000), each CA3 cell receives on average one
input.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 6


--- Page 7 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
MF have been shown to excite almost 10 times more CA3
interneurons than pyramidal cells, but with much weaker con-
nections involving small en passant boutons and very thin (ﬁlopo-
dial) extensions of the mossy terminals ( Acsady et al., 1998). This
can result in an overall feedforward inhibitory input to CA3 from
the DG discharges ( Mori et al., 2004 ), although the details of the
corresponding circuits are still not well understood. T o exam-
ine the effect of the feedforward excitation-to-inhibition ratio on
the emergence of CA3 bursts we performed simulations with dif-
ferent average numbers of connections from each cortical cell
to CA3 interneurons ( k
DG− IN ). Figures 2A,B contain the raster
plot of the cortical network exhibiting SO and the resulting CA3
raster plots for three different cases of kDG− IN : no connections to
interneurons, one, or 10 connections per cortical cell. There are
1000 cortical pyramidal cells sending output to 100 CA3 interneu-
rons, so, in the latter two cases, each interneuron receives on
average 10 × kDG− IN = 10 and 100 connections respectively.
When the SO output drives only pyramidal cells, ( kDG− IN =
0), the combined strong feedforward and recurrent excitation
forces most cells above bursting threshold producing population
bursts in UP states, each involving on average ∼ 18% of (non-
speciﬁc) CA3 pyramidal cells along with their interneuronal tar-
gets. The resulting combination of dendritic excitation, somatic
inhibition and after hyperpolarization of the bursting cells leaves
the network in a disorganized state once the cortical input is
removed. At the onset of the DOWN state, population events
are less synchronous, involving small cell clusters that produce
widespread feedback inhibition, preventing the emergence of
population scale bursts. When interneurons receive weak exci-
tation ( k
DG− IN = 1), the UP-state bursts become less coher-
ent due to early interneuronal ﬁring desynchronizing pyramidal
cells, but DOWN states can now sustain more coherent burst-
ing activity ( ∼ 10.39% of cells ﬁre on an average burst). In
the last case ( kDG− IN = 10), feedforward UP-state inhibition on
CA3 pyramidal cells becomes too strong for spikes to occur. In
contrast, the increased inhibition and the resulting lack of pyra-
midal spikes organizes the pyramidal membrane potentials in
a more uniform distribution at the onset of the DOWN state,
resulting in highly synchronous DOWN-state population bursts
(∼ 12.33% of cells ﬁre on an average burst). Figure 2C displays
10
20
Number of
CA3 Bursts
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2 | Inﬂuence of the SO on CA3 activity in a computational
model of the mossy ﬁber input on CA3 (model diagram shown on
top). (A) SO in the cortical model acting as input to the CA3 model.
Pyramidal cell spikes are shown in black and interneuronal ones in grey
(y-axis corresponds to cell numbers in all raster plots). (B) Raster plots of
the CA3 network when each cortical cell connects to one CA3 pyramidal
cell and (from top) 0, 1 and 10 interneurons. The larger the feedforward
inhibition in CA3, the less (more) population bursts during the UP
(DOWN) state. (C) Number of detected CA3 population bursts aligned
with the average SO cycle (thick black line) for all three cases of
interneuronal drive: 0 interneurons contacted by each cortical cell (dotted
line), 1 interneuron (black line) and 10 interneurons (grey line). (D) To t a l
spike histogram of CA3 pyramidal cells correlated with the average SO
cycle, when each cortical cell connects to one CA3 pyramidal cell and
one interneuron. Interneurons exhibit a similar histogram (not shown).
(E) Color -coded z-score normalized average ﬁring rate of each CA3
pyramidal cell (rows), arranged by their peak from top to bottom and
aligned with the average SO cycle (white line) calculated from the
average ﬁring rate of the whole cortical network (arbitrary units). The
three cases of interneuronal input in A are displayed again.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 7


--- Page 8 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
the number of detected CA3 bursts in correlation with the aver-
age SO cycle for all three cases of kDG− IN .T h et w oe x t r e m e
cases of kDG− IN result in a tradeoff between the CA3 popu-
lation activity and it’s SO-correlation. Strong UP state-driven
bursts (kDG− IN = 0), each involving only parts of the pyramidal
population, result in a disorganized DOWN state activity with
cells being in various states of excitation, while intense UP-state
interneuronal spiking ( kDG− IN = 10) brings pyramidal cells in a
uniform (hyperpolarized) state, promoting the ensuing DOWN-
state intrinsic CA3 bursting. A similar tendency of interneuronal
activity to promote such post-inhibitory “rebound” bursts has
been demonstrated through hippocampal electrophysiological
recordings (Cobb et al., 1995; Harris et al., 2001; Ellender et al.,
2010).
T o examine the correlation of individual CA3 pyramidal spik-
ing with the SO for all three simulated cases, the ﬁring rate of each
pyramidal cell was calculated and was averaged over the SO cycle,
detected through the average ﬁring rate of the cortical network.
Figure 2E displays the z-score normalized average ﬁring rate of
each CA3 pyramidal cell, ordered according to the time of its ﬁr-
ing rate peak during the SO cycle. As expected, when kDG− IN =
0, the majority of cells ﬁre mostly during UP states, whereas
when kDG− IN = 10, pyramidal cells ﬁre almost exclusively during
DOWN states. In the intermediate case ( kDG− IN = 1), roughly
half the cells ﬁre preferentially during DOWN-state bursts, since
they get too inhibited by UP state-induced inhibition to partic-
ipate in population events, and the rest ﬁre mostly during UP
states, where the excitation they receive drives them above spiking
threshold. Therefore this connectivity scheme effectively divides
the pyramidal population into two distinct groups according to
their UP-state response. A similar mixed UP-state correlation and
anticorrelation of pyramidal cells was observed in CA3 intracellu-
lar recordings on anesthetized mice (Hahn et al., 2007). Moreover
by setting each cortical cell to contact one interneuron (k
DG− IN =
1) and one pyramidal cell ( kDG− PY = 1), interneurons receive on
average 10 times more connections than pyramidal cells, which is
an anatomically realistic ratio ( Acsady et al., 1998 ). We thus keep
this regime for the cortico-CA3 connectivity in the rest of this
study.
T o examine the overall CA3 spiking activity, we detect all
SO cycles through the average cortical synaptic activity and
superimpose all CA3 pyramidal spikes accordingly to get the
total spike histogram of pyramidal cells ( Figure 2D). Although
roughly half the cells respond preferentially to DOWN states
(Figure 2E) the total spiking activity increases during UP states
where population bursts are more dense and engage more cells.
Interneuronal spiking produces a similar histogram (not shown).
W e note that intracellular recordings on naturally sleeping rats
suggested a preferential CA3 DOWN-state ﬁring ( Isomura et al.,
2006). Nevertheless, this DOWN-state correlation was associated
with gamma-oscillatory population activity (not included in our
model), whereas most SWRs (and thus CA3 bursts) were still
observed during UP states.
CA1 RESPONSES TO SCHAFFER COLLATERAL INPUT
W e next examined the characteristics of CA1 responses to CA3
population bursts during SO (with k
DG− PY = kDG− IN = 1). W e
omit the TA input, so that CA1 activity is driven purely by the
Schaffer collaterals.
Since CA3 activity depends on the feedforward excitation-
to-inhibition ratio induced by the SO, CA1 responses will also
depend on it. When the input to CA3 is mostly excitatory (as
in the case of kDG− IN = 1) most CA3 bursts and hence most
SWRs are expected to arise during UP states, which agrees with
electrophysiological studies ( Sirota et al., 2003; Isomura et al.,
2006; Mölle et al., 2006; Sullivan et al., 2011 ). Figure 3A displays
the CA1 responses detected through our ripple-detection algo-
rithm (top) and their histogram relative to the average SO cycle
(bottom). As expected, more SWR-like events appear during the
UP state in our particular setup ( kDG− IN = 1). This picture is
reversed when e.g., kDG− IN = 10 (not shown).
T o assess whether these detected events can be considered
as ripples, we check if they share the established ripple fea-
tures that the pure CA1 network has been shown to reproduce
(T axidis et al., 2012 ). In the isolated CA3-CA1 network, when
all CA3 pyramidal cells are driven by a noisy depolarizing cur-
rent, the average membrane potential power spectral density of
CA1 interneurons in the recording site peaks in the range of 150–
200 Hz, indicating that interneuronal oscillations underlie ripple
generation ( T axidis et al., 2012 ) .T h ef r e q u e n c yo ft h es p e c t r a l
peak was shown to depend on the amount of excitation CA1
receives through the Schaffer collaterals, i.e., the more pyrami-
dal spikes in a CA3 burst, the higher the CA1 frequency. In the
current cortico-hippocampal model, where the UP states pro-
duce both excitation and inhibition to CA3 and there is no input
during DOWN states, the drive to CA1 is weaker on average.
As a result, the spectral peak is largely lost, even for purely UP-
state responses after removing all data segments corresponding
to cortical DOWN states ( Figure 3B,d o t t e dl i n e ) ,i m p l y i n gt h a t
interneurons rarely participate in a synchronous population oscil-
lation. Therefore, the Schaffer input implemented for the pure
CA3-CA1 model is, in this case, insufﬁcient to drive interneu-
ronal spiking to ripple frequencies and additional excitatory drive
is needed.
As in Ta x i d i s e t a l .(2012), we split pyramidal cells into two
groups: those that receive less than 19.5 synapses-per-Schaffer
collateral connection [1.5 × the mean (13) of the Gaussian distri-
bution of synapses per Schaffer input] which constitute ∼ 70% of
the population, and those that receive more than 19.5 synapses.
W e refer to the former group as the “moderately-driven subset”
and the latter as the “strongly-driven subset. ” Figure 3C shows
the total ﬁring histograms of pyramidal cells of both groups,
within the CA1 recording site, in correlation with the average
bandpassed ripple-like response. Rhythmic spiking in strongly-
driven pyramidal cells is not signiﬁcantly phase-locked to the
average signal (P = 0.094), with ﬁring peaks not overlapping with
ripple troughs ( Figure 3C inset). This is an additional indication
of the low excitation that CA1 cells receive through the Schaffer
collaterals, even during UP-state bursts.
Figure 3E depicts the total spike histograms of pyramidal
cells of both groups in correlation with the average SO cycle.
Strongly-driven cells (and interneurons, not shown) increase
spiking during UP states, where the CA3 bursts involve more
cells. In contrast, the majority of pyramidal cells that receive a
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 8


--- Page 9 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Interneuronal
Power Spectrum
Frequency (Hz)
−1000 −800 −600 −400 −200 0 2000
400
800
1200
Pyramidal
Histogram
lags(msec)
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
30
Pyramidal
Histogram
lags (msec)
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50
50
Pyramidal
Histogram
lags (msec)
−1000 −800 −600 −400 −200 0 2000
500
1000
1500
Pyramidal
Histogram
lags (msec)
lags (msec)
   Ripple
Histogram
Average
DOWN-UP (nA)
AB
C
E
D
F
  0.1
90
270
180 0
  0.1
90
270
180 0
FIGURE 3 | CA1 spiking activity in the cortico-hippocampal
computational model, when the cortical network targets only CA3
(model diagram shown on top). (A) Raster of detected SWR-like
responses (top) and their histogram (bottom) correlated with the average
SO cycle (thick line). Most SWRs appear during cortical UP states.
(B) Power spectral density of the average membrane potential of CA1
interneurons in the default recording site during UP states. With the
original Schaffer drive (dotted line), no peak appears at the ripple
frequency range (150–200 Hz), unlike in the pure CA3-CA1 network
(T axidis et al., 2012 ). After increasing the Schaffer collateral-drive, (solid
line) a peak at a broad ripple fr equency range (100–200 Hz) appears.
(C,D) Spike histograms of pyramidal cells (strongly-driven subset in grey
and moderately-driven in black) correlated with the average ripple-like
response (black line, arbitrary units), with low (C) and high (D) Schaffer
drive. Insets depict the spike phase distribution relative to the average
ripple. (E,F) Spike histogram of CA1 pyramidal cells (strongly-driven
subset in grey and moderately-driven in black) correlated with the
average SO cycle of the cortical ﬁring rate (black line, arbitrary units),
with low (E) and high (F) Schaffer drive. Spiking of moderately-driven
cells decreases during U P states in both cases.
moderate or weak Schaffer-drive reduce ﬁring during UP states
due to increased interneuronal activity. They ﬁre mostly in the
DOWN states, when they can overcome the feedforward inhibi-
t i o n .T h i ss u p p o r t so b s e r v a t i o n so na n e s t h e t i z e dm i c ew h e r eC A 1
cells were found to be hyperpolarized by UP states ( Hahn et al.,
2007) but is at odds with recordings on naturally sleeping rats
where most CA1 pyramidal cells tended to ﬁre during UP states
(Isomura et al., 2006).
Therefore, additional excitation to CA1 is needed to induce
UP-state preferential pyramidal spiking and robust ripple activ-
ity, i.e., interneurons to ﬁre synchronously at ripple frequencies
(150–200 Hz) and strongly-driven pyramidal spiking to be phase
locked to ripple troughs. One straightforward way of inducing
this additional excitation is by increasing the Schaffer drive to
CA1. W e thus increased the number of synapses per Schaffer
connection in CA1 interneurons to 20. For CA1 pyramidal cells
the mean and SD of the Gaussian distribution of synapses per
connection was also set to 20 (this increased Schaffer input is
implemented in all following simulations). Figure 3B depicts the
resulting power spectrum of the average interneuronal membrane
potential during UP states (solid line). The peak at ripple fre-
quencies is restored, indicating that the interneurons now receive
enough excitation to oscillate synchronously at ripple frequencies.
Moreover, the phase locking of the spike histogram of pyrami-
dal cells during the average ripple ( Figure 3D) has also been
restored, with spikes being signiﬁcantly locked to the average
ripple trough (inset, P < 0.001). Nevertheless, the total spike his-
togram of pyramidal cells during the average SO cycle (Figure 3F)
reveals that the majority of cells, those that are moderately-driven
by CA3 (black bars), are still inhibited during UP states since they
are inhibited during ripples.
Conclusively, a strong Schaffer-drive restores interneuronal
ripple oscillations and the strongly-driven pyramidal cell spik-
ing, restoring the main features of ripple events, but does not
allow an overall UP-state preferential spiking of pyramidal cells,
contradicting reports on naturally sleeping rats ( Isomura et al.,
2006). Different strengths or distributions of the Schaffer-drive
over the pyramidal population, could either make moderately-
driven cells ﬁre during ripples, which is inconsistent with the
observation of most cells being silent ( Ylinen et al., 1995 ), or
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 9


--- Page 10 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
it would still prevent them from spiking during ripples, contra-
dicting the in vivo UP-state preferential spiking ( Isomura et al.,
2006). Therefore, an additional, external drive, unrelated to the
Schaffer-input is necessary to produce the UP-state spiking, with-
out making the majority of pyramidal cells participate in ripples.
EFFECTS OF TEMPOROAMMONIC INPUT ON CA1
An alternative approach to further increase the drive to CA1 is to
assign a direct cortical input through the TA pathway. The impor-
tance of the TA for the SO-CA1 coupling has been implied by
in vivo studies ( Dickson et al., 2005; W olansky et al., 2006 )a n d
i n d i r e c t l yb yt h er o l eo fT Ai n p u to nC A 1s p i k i n ga n dp l a s t i c i t y
(Remondes and Schuman, 2002 ) and on memory consolidation
(Remondes and Schuman, 2004).
Although a topographic organization of the EC3 connections
to the distal dendrites in the stratum lacunosum moleculare in
CA1 has been described ( Andersen et al., 2007 ), the exact details
of this circuit are not well understood, e.g., how many CA1 pyra-
midal cells or interneurons are contacted by a single EC3 axon.
The TA input has been shown to have little effect on the ﬁring
properties of postsynaptic pyramidal cells, but exerts a power-
ful inhibitory effect on CA1 ( Colbert and Levy, 1992; Empson
and Heinemann, 1995 ). Since inhibition can easily dominate in
our network (the ﬁxed pyramidal cell EPSP is much weaker than
the interneuronal one, Ta b l e 1), we included few connections to
interneurons and a larger number to pyramidal cells, so that some
can overcome feedforward inhibition.
T o test the isolated TA-input effect on CA1, we ﬁrst removed
the Schaffer input and implemented various values for the num-
bers of pyramidal and interneuronal cells that each cortical cell
targets ( k
EC− PY and kEC− IN respectively). Figure 4A contains a
segment of the cortical SO and Figure 4B shows the resulting CA1
spike raster plots with different sets of kEC− PY and kEC− IN .N o t e
that again an interneuron receives on average 10 × kEC− IN con-
nections. In all cases, DOWN states are accompanied by sparse
spontaneous ﬁring of CA1 pyramidal cells, depolarizing neigh-
boring interneurons. When k
EC− PY = 100 and kEC− IN = 1, pyra-
midal activity is similar during UP and DOWN states. Doubling
kEC− PY leads to more pyramidal spikes in the UP states and con-
sequently more interneuronal ones as well, whereas increasing
kEC− IN allows only few pyramidal cells to ﬁre during UP states,
with multiple spikes.
After restoring Schaffer collaterals, we calculated the z-score
normalized ﬁring rates of CA1 pyramidal cells and plotted them,
similarly to Figure 2B, for the same combinations of kEC− PY
and kEC− IN as before ( Figure 4C). Cells are again either corre-
lated or anticorrelated with UP states. As expected, increasing
only the pyramidal drive results in more UP-state active cells
(Figure 4C, middle), while increasing the interneuronal drive, has
the opposite effect (Figure 4C, right). Nevertheless, the added TA
input is weaker than the Schaffer input, and does not appear to
have prominent effects on the features of ripple events. Stronger
interneuronal drive (as in the kEC− IN = 4 case) produces only
a small increase of the ripple-frequencies spectral peak of the
A
B
C
FIGURE 4 | Inﬂuence of the T A input on CA1 activity, in the
cortico-hippocampal computational model, without and with Schaffer
input (model diagrams are shown on top for each case). (A) SO in the
cortical model acting as input to the CA1 model (pyramidal spikes are in black
and interneuronal in grey). (B) Three CA1 raster plots with the average
number of pyramidal cells and interneurons contacted by each cortical cell,
displayed on top. The Schaffer input from CA3 is removed here, to show the
effect of solely the TA input. (C) Color coded z-score normalized average
ﬁring rates of CA1 pyramidal cells, arranged by their peak from top to bottom
and aligned with the average SO cycle (white line, arbitrary units). The
number of cells ﬁring preferentially during UP states depends on the form of
the TA input. The increased Schaffer input has been restored here.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 10


--- Page 11 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
UP-state average interneuronal potential power spectrum (not
shown), while the phase locking of pyramidal spikes to ripple
troughs remains signiﬁcant for all three cases of TA excitation-
to-inhibition ratios (see Figure 5D).
Although the TA input does not determine the particular char-
acteristics of the ripple activity, it affects the fraction of pyramidal
cells that will overcome UP-state inhibition. Our model suggests
that a strong TA-drive to CA1 pyramidal cells aids in reproducing
the CA1 UP-state spiking described inIsomura et al. (2006), while
its additional drive to interneurons enhances synchronous spiking
at ripple frequencies. W e thus ﬁx the TA input to k
EC− PY = 200
and kEC− IN = 2. A segment of the raster plot from all three net-
w o r k sw i t ht h e s ep a r a m e t e rv a l u e si ss h o w ni nFigure 5A.T h e
total pyramidal spike histogram ( Figure 5B) indicates that the
additional TA input lead to the increase of spiking activity of both
subsets during UP states (compare with Figures 3E and F). The
ripple histogram over the average SO cycle ( Figure 5C)a n dt h e
ripple-correlated spike histogram ( Figure 5D)e n s u r et h a ta g a i n
most ripples appear during UP states and the phase locking of
spikes from the strongly-driven subset to the ripple troughs is still
highly signiﬁcant ( P < 0.001). Moreover, in this set up, ∼ 11.5%
of CA1 cells ﬁre in the average ripple, which is in close agreement
F
  0.1
90
270
180 0
AE
B
C
D
FIGURE 5 | Activity in the cortico-hippocampal model when the SO
drives directly both CA3 and CA1 (model diagram shown on top).
Each cortical cell targets 200 CA1 pyramidal and 2 interneuronal cells in
CA1 through the TA input. (A) Raster plot of all three networks. (B,C)
Spike histogram of CA1 pyramidal cells (B, strongly-driven subset in grey
and moderately-driven in black) and detected ripples histogram (C) in
correlation with the average SO cycle (black line, arbitrary units). Both
pyramidal cell subsets increase spiking during UP states (compare with
Figures 3G,H ). Ripple occurrence is again correlated with UP states.
(D) Spike histogram of pyramidal cells in the recording site, aligned with
the average ripple, and spike phase distribution relative to the average
ripple (inset). The TA input did not signiﬁcantly affect the spike phase
locking (compare with Figure 3D ). (E) Color coded z-score ﬁring rates of
CA1 pyramidal cells during the average SO cycle (white line). Cells are
stacked according to the peak ﬁring rate, from top to bottom. The
number of synapses per Schaffer colla teral-connection that each cell
receives is plotted on the left. (F) Same as (E), for cells stacked
according to this number of Schaffer synapses.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 11


--- Page 12 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
with the reported percentage (10%) in naturally sleeping rats
(Ylinen et al., 1995).
Finally, to examine the spiking activity of individual CA1
cells, we repeated the z-score normalized ﬁring rate calculation
for each cell, and arranged them according to either the time of
the ﬁring rate peak ( Figure 5E) or the number of synapses-per-
Schaffer input each cell receives (Figure 5F)w h i c hi sp l o t t e dn e x t
to each panel. Figure 5E indicates that, with the implemented
combination of TA and Schaffer drive, most CA1 pyramidal cells
ﬁre preferentially during UP states [663 cells (70.6%) against
276 (29.4%) ﬁring mostly in DOWN states]. The corresponding
Schaffer input is, on average, higher for these cells (the average
number of synapses per-Schaffer connection is 28.5 for the
“UP-cells” and 13.7 for the “DOWN-cells”). In fact, Figure 5F
suggests that the stronger the Schaffer drive, the higher the
probability that the cell will ﬁre mostly in UP states (93% of the
strongly-driven cells ﬁre mostly in UP states). Note, however,
that some cells (7%) with strong Schaffer drive get too inhibited
in UP states and tend to ﬁre more in DOWN states, while many
of the moderately-driven cells which are silent during DOWN
states, ﬁre in UP states due to strong depolarizations from the
TA input. In conclusion, the correlation of any particular cell’s
spiking activity with the SO appears to depend on a combination
of both the Schaffer and the TA drive.
CORRELATIONS OF CA1 PYRAMIDAL SPIKING TO UP-STATES AND
RIPPLES DEPEND ON THE COMBINED SCHAFFER AND
TEMPOROAMMONIC INPUTS. COMPARISON WITH In vivo
RECORDINGS
Our results suggest that the combination of direct TA- and indi-
rect DG-CA3-input from the cortex can segregate CA1 pyramidal
cells into four subgroups, with distinct ﬁring properties related to
t h eS Os t a t ew h e r et h e yp r e f e r e n t i a l l yﬁ r ea n dt h ee x t e n to ft h e i r
ripple spiking:
1. Pyramidal cells that are excited by the TA input and receive
strong CA3 drive, are expected to ﬁre preferentially during UP
states, and participate in all ripples, irrelevant of whether they
take place during UP or DOWN states.
2. Pyramidal cells excited by the TA input and receiving aver-
age/weak CA3 drive. They should ﬁre preferentially during
UP states but their ﬁring increase during any ripple will be
minimal.
3. Pyramidal cells inhibited by the TA input, receiving
strong/average CA3 drive. They would ﬁre mostly dur-
ing DOWN states, particularly during the ripples taking place
there. UP-state ripples should also transiently increase their
spiking activity, since the CA3 input appears to be more
critical during the ripple.
4. Pyramidal cells inhibited by the TA input and receiving aver-
age/weak CA3 drive. They should ﬁre preferentially during
DOWN states and also remain relatively silent during all
ripples.
The characteristics of these groups are summarized in Ta b l e 2.
The model predicts that in the absence of a TA input, subgroups
2 and 3 largely disappear, with the vast majority of cells forming
g r o u p4a n dam i n o r i t yi ng r o u p1(Figure 3), as observed in anes-
thetized mice ( Hahn et al., 2007 ). With the additional TA drive
most cells are expected to form groups 2 and 4, with a minority
in groups 1 and 3. W e tested this segregation on a set of clus-
tered CA1 pyramidal cells ( n = 2334) recorded from the dorsal
CA1 of rats, during SWS preceding or following space exploration
tasks (Mizuseki et al., 2009, 2011). Ripples were detected through
the CA1 pyramidal layer LFP and DOWN-to-UP transition times
refer to entorhinal spiking activity (see section “Materials and
Methods”).
In accordance with ( Isomura et al., 2006 ) average spiking
of cells around DOWN-UP transitions was typically correlated
with either the pre-transition or the post-transition segment
(Figure 6A) and all cells were split into two groups (referred to
as “UP-cells” and “DOWN-cells”) according to the SO state they
correlate with (see “Materials and Methods”). 93.6% ( n = 2185)
were classiﬁed as UP-cells and 6.4% ( n = 149) as DOWN-cells
T able 2 | Summary of the four CA1 pyramidal cell groups suggested by the computational model (see section “Correlations of CA1 Pyramidal
Spiking to UP-states and Ripples Depend on the Combined Schaffer and T emporoammonic inputs. Comparison with in vivo recordings”), and
detected in a set of in vivo electrophysiological data.
Strong schaffer collaterals input Average/weak schaffer collaterals input
Group 1 Group 2
Excitatory input from the UP-state preferential ﬁring UP-state preferential ﬁring
temporoammonic pathway Large spiking increase during all ripples Small spiking increase during all ripples
(17 .8%) (75.8%)
Group 3 Group 4
DOWN-state preferential ﬁring DOWN-state preferential ﬁring
Inhibitory input from the Large spiking increase during DOWN-state ripples. Low spiking during any ripple
temporoammonic pathway Lower spiking increase in UP-state ripples
(1 .3%) (5.1%)
They are classiﬁed according to their spiking correlation with SO states and ripples. These correlations are associated to the inputs they receive from CA3 and from
the entorhinal cortex. Percentages correspond to the ratio of in vivo recorded cells that were found to fall within each category.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 12


--- Page 13 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Normalized mean UP− and 
DOWN−cell firing rates (Hz)
 Cell number
 
 
200
600
1000
1400
1800
2200
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
0.4
0.5
0.6
lags (msec)
Mean CA1
firing rate (Hz)
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
lags (msec)
Cell number
 
 
200
600
1000
1400
1800
2200
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
2
4
lags (msec)
Mean CA1
firing rate (Hz)
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
lags (msec)
−5
0
5
10
Mean ripple
firing rates of
UP/DOWN
cells (Hz)
 
 
Mean normalized
ripple firing rates
of UP/DOWN
cells (Hz)−5
0
5
10
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
lags (msec)
Number of ripples
Mean ripple
occurrence rate (Hz)
0.4
0.2
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
50
100
150
200
250
Maximum firing rate increase of UP/DOWN cells during UP/DOWN−ripples
Firing rate increase (Hz)
Number of cells
CA1 firing rates (z-score)
CA1 firing rates (z-score)
A
B
CF
E
D
FIGURE 6 | Analysis on a set of in vivo multiunit recordings from the
rat CA1 pyramidal layer. (A) Color coded z-score average ﬁring rate of
each CA1 pyramidal cell (top) and mean population rate (bottom) around
DOWN-to-UP transitions (thick line) assessed by entorhinal neuronal
activity. Thin black line indicates the time threshold for segregating cells
into UP-state and DOWN-state correlated cells ( − 60 ms). (B) Average
ﬁring rates and standard deviations of UP-cells (blue) and DOWN-cells
(red), normalized by their total means. (C) Number of ripples during UP
states (blue) and DOWN states (red), and average ripple occurrence rate
(black). (D) Color coded z-score average ﬁring rate of each CA1 pyramidal
cell (top) and mean population rate (bottom) around detected ripple
power peaks (black line). White lines indicate the average time limits of
detected ripple episodes. (E) Mean ﬁring rate of U P-cells (blue) and
DOWN-cells (red) around the average ripple (top) and normalized by the
mean baseline activity (bottom). (F) Histograms of average maximum
ﬁring rate increase from baseline of UP cells (blue) and DOWN-cells (red)
during UP- and DOWN-ripples respectively. Lines indicate the 1 .5 × mean
increase, for the classiﬁcation into highly- and low-ﬁring cells.
(Figure 6B). According to our model, this implies that the TA
input acts as an excitatory drive to the majority of CA1 neurons
during SWS, promoting the emergence of groups 1 and 2.
All recorded ripple episodes were also separated into
events that took place during a DOWN state (referred to as
DOWN-ripples) or an UP state (UP-ripples). 90.1% of events
(n = 111214) were classiﬁed as UP-ripples and 9.9% of events
(n = 12229) as DOWN-ripples ( Figure 6C). Note that the aver-
age occurrence rate of ripple episodes is much higher in UP states,
therefore the large abundance of UP-cells may also be related to
the increased number of SWRs during those (apart from the TA
input).
W e examined the correlation of individual cell spiking with
ripples, where CA3 is expected to provide the prominent drive.
Most cells increased their ﬁring around the average ripple with the
majority of cells exhibiting a ﬁring peak 3–6 ms before the ripple
peak [ Figure 6D, in accordance with ( Csicsvari et al., 1999 )].
Figure 6E depicts the mean ﬁring rate of UP- and DOWN-cells
around the average ripple. UP cells show a signiﬁcantly higher rate
increase (P < 0.001). This may be due to a stronger input from
CA3 (more coherent and/or widespread CA3 population busts
in UP states) and/or the additional TA input. When normalizing
the average ﬁring rates by the mean baseline activity around the
ripples, the relative spiking increase becomes equal for both cell
groups, implying that the Schaffer-input received by either group
provides a similar relative gain. Therefore, as in our model, the TA
input seems unlikely to severely affect ripple spiking responses.
We return to this issue further below.
Next, each (UP-) DOWN-cell was classiﬁed according to
its average ﬁring rate increase during (UP-) DOWN-ripples.
The classiﬁcation threshold was set to 1.5 × the mean ﬁring
rate increase of (UP-) DOWN-cells during the average (UP-)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 13


--- Page 14 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
DOWN-ripple (similarly to the model where strongly-driven cells
were set by a 1.5 × the mean synapses-per-Schaffer input thresh-
old). 19% of UP-cells ( n = 415) and 20.8% of DOWN cells ( n =
31) were classiﬁed as “highly-ﬁring” ( Figure 6E). T ogether, these
cells constitute 19.1% of the total population, close to the per-
centage of strongly-driven cells in our model (30%). Figure 7A
depicts the average ﬁring rate increase of both subsets of UP-cells
(top) and DOWN-cells (bottom) around the average ripple. Cells
classiﬁed as highly-ﬁring show signiﬁcantly higher rate increases
during ripple episodes (P < 0.001 for UP-cells and DOWN-cells).
As in Figure 6E, the depolarizing inputs received during UP states
induce a signiﬁcantly larger spiking increase to the two UP-cell
groups than the corresponding DOWN-cells (P < 0.001 for both
highly-spiking cells and weakly-spiking cells). This implies that
either DOWN-cell receive weaker inputs from CA3 or that the TA
input aids UP-cell spiking during ripples.
T o clarify this further, we compared the spiking increase of all
four groups of cells during the ripples of their corresponding SO
state and those of the opposite state ( Figure 7B). UP-cells with
either strong or weak spiking during UP-ripples (i.e., those that
fall into groups 1 and 2 in Ta b l e 2), exhibit a similar increase in
DOWN-ripples (P = 0.305 and 0.031 respectively). DOWN-cells
t h a tf a l li n t og r o u p s3a n d4a l s os h o ws i m i l a rm a x i m u mﬁ r i n g
increases in UP-ripples and DOWN-ripples ( P = 0.133 and 0.32
respectively). These results support that different sets of CA1 neu-
rons receive Schaffer-drive of different intensity during SWRs, but
the drive to each set is roughly ﬁxed, irrelevant of the SO state
where the event took place. Moreover, the TA input, either exci-
tatory or inhibitory (for UP- and DOWN-cells respectively) does
not affect the ﬁring rate of cells during the ripple duration.
Figures 7C,D c o r r e s p o n dt ot h es a m em e a s u r e sc a l c u l a t e df o r
the model data. In the model, the strongly-driven DOWN-cells
(segregated as before, based on the synapses-per-Schaffer input)
show a particularly lower ripple-spiking than the correspond-
ing UP-cells. Note that the average number of synapses-per-
Schaffer input that the former receive is 37.5 vs. 43.6 for the
latter. Therefore, the model suggests that the reduced ﬁring of
DOWN-cells during ripples is due to a weaker CA3-input. The
differences between spiking during UP- and DOWN-ripples are
again non-signiﬁcant in all cell groups ( Figure 7D). The only
exception being cells in group 1 that increase their ﬁring rate
signiﬁcantly more in DOWN-ripples ( P < 0.001), since ﬁring
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
0
5
10
15
20
-100
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
0
5
10
15
20
-100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
0
5
10
15
20
-100
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
0
5
10
15
20
-100
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100-100
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100-100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100 -100
−80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100-100
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80
0
4
8
12
16
all ripples all ripples
UP cellsDOWN cells
UP cellsDOWN cells
all ripples all ripples
UP ripples
UP ripples
UP cellsDOWN cells
UP cellsDOWN cells
DOWN ripples
DOWN ripples
100
0
4
8
12
16
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
UP ripples
UP ripples
UP cellsDOWN cells
UP cellsDOWN cells
DOWN ripples
DOWN ripples
lags (msec) lags (msec) lags (msec) lags (msec)
lags (msec)lags (msec)
A
BD
C
0
4
8
0
4
8
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 80 100
0
4
8
12
0
4
8
12
0
4
8
12
0
4
8
12
1
2
1
2
3
4
3
4
In Vivo Data Model Data
FIGURE 7 | Ripple-correlated spiking of highly- and low-ﬁring UP-
and DOWN-cells in electrophysiological recordings during natural
sleep and in the model. (A) T op, average ﬁring rate increase (Hz) from
baseline of highly-ﬁring (blue) and low-ﬁring (red) UP-cells during ripples.
Bottom, same for DOWN-cells. (B) Average ﬁring rate increase (Hz)
from baseline of highly-ﬁring (blue) and low-ﬁring (red) UP- and
DOWN-cells during UP- and DOWN-ripples. Numbers indicate which of
the cell groups, summarized in Ta b l e 2, each line correspond to.
(C,D) Same as (A) and (B) respectively, computed on a set of 100
s-long data produced by a simulation of our model. The model captures
in a qualitative fashion, the SO-related ripple-spiking characteristics of
the various cell subgroups.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 14


--- Page 15 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
rates outside UP-ripples are high (unlike in the data where UP
and DOWN activity in CA1 is not as distinct as in the model).
Therefore, the TA input again appears not to inﬂuence spiking
during the actual ripples, whereas the CA3-drive is the critical
factor. Conclusively, cells that receive the highest input from CA3
will ﬁre preferentially in UP states where SWRs are more frequent.
Those that receive a weaker drive can still ﬁre in ripples, but the
TA input can either shift them to an UP-state or DOWN-state
correlation. Cells with weak CA3 input will depend on the TA
for their correlation with the SO and will not actively partici-
pate in ripple spiking. Finally, note that the reduced spiking of
DOWN-cells during UP-ripples in the model is mainly due to the
TA inhibition that appears somewhat stronger in our model than
what is suggested by the recordings.
DISCUSSION
V arious studies have addressed the impact of the cortical SO
on other brain areas including the thalamus and hippocampus,
focusing on correlations between their intrinsic rhythms and the
SO states ( Siapas and Wilson, 1998; Sirota et al., 2003; Battaglia
et al., 2004; Isomura et al., 2006; Mölle et al., 2006 ). These studies
support the fundamental role of the SO in coupling rhythmical
activity of thalamic and hippocampal circuits, with the intense
cortical UP-state spiking exerting a strong drive on both areas,
promoting their oscillatory events. The spiking activity of the
v a r i o u sh i p p o c a m p a la r e a sd u r i n gt h eS Oh a sa l s ob e e nr e c e n t l y
studied ( Isomura et al., 2006; Hahn et al., 2007; Sullivan et al.,
2011), occasionally with contradictory results.
T o suggest potential functional mechanisms giving rise to
the observed UP state-hippocampal activity relationships and to
the contradictions between observations under different exper-
imental protocols, we coupled a SO-exhibiting cortical net-
work ( Compte et al., 2003, 2008 ) with a CA3-CA1 network
model of SWRs ( T axidis et al., 2012). The implemented cortico-
hippocampal connectivity ( Figure 1)i sas i m p l i ﬁ c a t i o no ft h e
direct and indirect projections between PFC and hippocam-
pus. W e focused our analysis on how the spiking activity and
intrinsic network dynamics of the two CA areas depend on the
excitation-to-inhibition balance, induced by the cortical SO. T o
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst modeling study of the SO effects on
hippocampal spiking and ripples. The main results from our sim-
ulations can be summarized as follows: (1) The correlation of CA3
population bursts, and corresponding CA1 SWRs, with the corti-
cal SO are controlled by the feedforward excitation-to-inhibition
ratio induced by the mossy ﬁber input. Pyramidal-targeted inputs
on CA3 lead to SWRs correlated with UP states, whereas an anti-
correlation exists when feedforward inhibition is promoted by
the mossy input. (2) Ripple characteristics (interneuronal oscil-
lation frequency and timing of pyramidal spikes) are controlled
by the Schaffer input to CA1. This varies between CA1 cells but
remains constant between UP-state and DOWN-state ripples. (3)
The overall amount of CA1 spiking in relation to UP/DOWN
states is affected by the excitation-to-inhibition ratio induced via
the temporoammonic TA input. Stronger drive on CA1 pyrami-
dal cells, than on interneurons, promotes UP state-correlated CA1
pyramidal spiking and vice versa, without affecting ripple char-
acteristics. (4) The combination of CA3 and TA inputs on CA1
segregates pyramidal cells into different groups depending on the
SO state where they preferentially ﬁre and whether they substan-
tially spike during ripples or not. These groups, conﬁrmed by
in vivo recordings, may have distinct functional roles during SWS
and the ensuing memory consolidation.
These observations are in agreement with previous Granger
causality-based ( Baccalá and Sameshima, 2001 ) statistical anal-
ysis, reporting that the mPFC drives hippocampal activity par-
ticularly during short cortical UP-like states in anesthetized rats
(T axidis et al., 2010).
MOSSY FIBER INPUT
Our model-suggested tradeoff between CA3 population activi-
ties during the two SO states is generated by the CA3 network’s
intrinsic dynamics. While pyramidal cells receive the UP-state
input, weak or no drive to interneurons allows the network to
self-organize into the population bursts seen in the isolated CA3
network (T axidis et al., 2012), but leaves it in a disorganized state
during DOWN states, where cells are in various levels of excita-
tion, leading to poor DOWN activity. In contrast, when interneu-
ronal spiking dominates UP-states, pyramidal cells are left in a
more uniform hyperpolarized state at the onset of DOWN states,
where they can easily synchronize in spontaneous population
bursts. Such a tendency of interneuronal activity to synchronize
post-inhibitory pyramidal spiking has also been demonstrated in
CA3 and CA1 in in vitro slices (Cobb et al., 1995; Ellender et al.,
2010)a n d in vivo recordings ( Harris et al., 2001 ). Since these
bursts will produce SWRs in CA1, the SO-induced excitation-to-
inhibition ratio in CA3 will determine whether ripple occurrence
will be correlated or anticorrelated with UP states. Though strong
feedforward excitation in CA3 reproduces the widely reported
correlation of ripple activity with UP states ( Sirota et al., 2003;
Battaglia et al., 2004; Isomura et al., 2006; Mölle et al., 2006 ), our
model predicts that a selective blockade of the mossy ﬁber input
on CA3 pyramidal cells or an enhancement of UP-state interneu-
ronal spiking will reduce the UP-state ripple occurrence and even
reverse it to a DOWN-state correlation.
The modeled CA3 pyramidal population can be separated into
two groups, one being driven to spike by the UP state input and
the other silenced by the enhanced inhibition from neighboring
interneurons. A similar distinction was also found throughin vivo
intracellular recordings on anesthetized mice, where CA3 pyrami-
dal cell membrane potentials exhibited a mixed SO modulation,
some being correlated with the UP state and some anticorre-
lated (Hahn et al., 2007 ). However, a study on anesthetized and
naturally sleeping rats reported preferential ﬁring of most cells
during DOWN states, organized in gamma oscillations, while
SWRs are still UP-correlated ( Isomura et al., 2006 ). W e pro-
pose that the increased DOWN-activity could be due to the
gamma oscillations producing more overall ﬁring than popula-
tion bursts ( Isomura et al., 2006; Sullivan et al., 2011 ), while
population bursts, involving a cell minority, are still organized
by the mossy input, giving rise to UP-state SWRs. Since the
current version of our CA3 network does not support gamma
frequency oscillations, this remains to be examined. Moreover,
species-, anesthetic- or preparation-speciﬁc differences between
the two studies could result in differences in the input that
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 15


--- Page 16 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
CA3 receives through the SO, thus affecting the size of the two
subgroups.
Given the entrainment of the DG by the SO ( Isomura et al.,
2006; Hahn et al., 2007; Sullivan et al., 2011 ) CA3 is expected to
be under a barrage of dentate input during UP states, which is
largely absent in DOWN states. However, ourin vivo data analysis
suggests that the excitatory input received by CA1 during SWRs is
roughly ﬁxed, irrespective of the SO state during which it took
place, implying that the CA3 population bursts yielding SWRs
do not vary substantially in either state. This is suggestive of an
intrinsic self-organized activity in CA3, promoted by the UP state
input, but not shaped by it, similar to the independence of the
hippocampal circuit organization proposed in the framework of
theta oscillations (Mizuseki et al., 2009). The CA3 architecture of
extensive recurrent excitation combined with feedback inhibition
can support such self-organization.
TEMPOROAMMONIC AND SCHAFFER INPUTS
The ability of the TA-CA1 synapse to exhibit both long-
term depression and potentiation ( Remondes and Schuman,
2002), and the dependence of CA1 spikes on the timing dif-
f e r e n c eb e t w e e nt h eT Aa n dt h eS c h a f f e ri n p u t s(Empson and
Heinemann, 1995; Remondes and Schuman, 2002; Jarsky et al.,
2005), suggest the importance of the TA input during SWS.
Correlations of R-LM interneurons ( Freund and Buzsáki, 1996 )
with the SO ( Hahn et al., 2006 ), and of CA1 spiking with
persistent entorhinal UP-state activity ( Hahn et al., 2012 ), and
deﬁciencies of TA-lesioned rats in memory retrieval ( Remondes
and Schuman, 2004; Suh et al., 2011) support an active role of TA
input in promoting the SO entrainment to the hippocampus and
its importance in spatial memory consolidation.
Our model suggests that strong Schaffer drive to CA1, variable
for pyramidal cells, is sufﬁcient to reproduce coherent interneu-
ronal ripple oscillations, but the majority of pyramidal cells would
be silenced during UP states ( T axidis et al., 2012 ), reminiscent
of the UP-state hyperpolarization of CA1 cells found in anes-
thetized mice (Hahn et al., 2007 ), but contradicting the observed
UP-state correlated spiking in naturally sleeping rats [ Figure 6
and Isomura et al. (2006)]. This discrepancy was overcome in the
model by the inclusion of the SWR-independent TA input that
promoted UP-state pyramidal ﬁring without critically inﬂuencing
SWR characteristics. Our simulations suggest that factors, such as
anesthesia, that may suppress the TA input or alter it in favor of
interneuronal activity could yield the observations in (Hahn et al.,
2007). However, a speciﬁc minority of “strongly Schaffer-driven”
cells would still ﬁre in ripples, mostly during UP states, in con-
trast with the rest of the population. This overall suppression of
UP-state spiking in most cells, particularly during UP-state rip-
ples, may underlie the temporal association memory deﬁcits that
were recently observed in transgenic mice where entorhinal cells
were inhibited, depriving CA1 cells from the TA input ( Suh et al.,
2011).
Our combined modeling and in vivo analysis indicates that
the main factor for determining the overall correlation of a CA1
pyramidal cell with either of the SO states is the TA input. Since
most cells ﬁre mostly during UP states, we propose that this input
is largely excitatory for most of the CA1 population. Conversely,
the main factor for determining whether a cell will actively par-
ticipate in ripple spiking is the Schaffer input, which appears to
vary substantially among CA1 cells. Our observed variability in
the ﬁring responses to SWRs has also been reported elsewhere,
for both CA1 pyramidal cells ( Royer et al., 2012 )a n di n t e r n e u -
rons (Csicsvari et al., 2000). Although in the model the variability
is implemented in the number of Schaffer connections pyrami-
dal cells receive, it may also be linked to either the strength of the
Schaffer input on different CA1 pyramidal cells ( Fernández-Ruiz
et al., 2012 ) or in the convergence of Schaffer collaterals on CA1
cells or assemblies (T akahashi et al., 2012).
Apart from the effective segregation of the pyramidal popu-
lation according to which SO state each cell correlates with and
whether it actively participates in ripple spiking, CA1 pyramidal
cells have also been shown to be segregated according to whether
or not they shift their theta phase correlation between REM
and non-REM sleep ( Mizuseki et al., 2011 ). 35.1% of recorded
cells that did exhibit a REM-related shift (a similar ratio to our
strongly-Schaffer-driven group), also showed stronger entrain-
ment by the SO and were more active during ripple spiking,
and can be linked to our “strongly Schaffer-driven” cells. These
cells are located mostly in deep sublayers of the CA1 stratum
pyramidale, indicating that such sublayers may underlie differ-
ent functional purposes ( Mizuseki et al., 2011 ). Whether, these
groups also reﬂect different functional roles, potentially linked to
memory consolidation processes, remains to be examined.
MODEL EXTENSIONS
The relatively simple network architecture developed here, offers
a ﬁrst modeling approach to the problem of SO-hippocampal
correlations, shedding light on the role of important parameters
and key components, but omitting many features of hippocampal
circuitry and cortico-hippocampal connections. Circuits such as
monosynaptic projections from CA1 to the PFC, from entorhinal
cortex to CA3 through the perforant path, or even commissural
CA3 connections ( Andersen et al., 2007 ) can provide delayed
feedback mechanisms that may potentially have a serious effect on
the timing and the excitation-to-inhibition ratio of the UP state
input received by the two CA areas. Such circuits provide inter-
esting potential extensions to the model, whose effects cannot be
readily predicted.
A simpliﬁcation in our model architecture is the omission of
UP-state signal ﬁltering by the DG. In vitro studies revealed that
the mossy output to CA3 pyramidal cells can be excitatory or
inhibitory, depending on the spiking frequency of the dentate
cells in combination with facilitation (depression) of excitatory
(inhibitory) inputs ( Mori et al., 2004 ). Therefore, the UP state
signal arriving in CA3 and the induced excitation-to-inhibition
ratio could be altered by dentate activity. The future addition of a
distinct DG network to our model could shed some light on the
ﬁnal form of the UP state signal that arrives in CA3.
SWR generation in the model is based solely on perisomatic
inhibition, excluding various types of interneurons that are
involved in SWRs ( Klausberger and Somogyi, 2008 ). Recent
optogenetic studies have shown dendritic interneurons to be crit-
ical for the pyramidal output ( Lovett-Barron et al., 2012; Royer
et al., 2012 ) or the regulation between TA and Schaffer inputs
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 16


--- Page 17 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
(Leão et al., 2012 ) and computational models have included a
variety of interneuronal types in mechanisms for place cell pat-
tern learning and replay ( Cutsuridis and Hasselmo, 2010, 2011 ).
Future model versions can address the role of such interneu-
rons on the cortico-hippocampal communication and ripple
generation.
The inclusion of neuronal networks from other brain areas,
like the DG or thalamic subregions which inﬂuence hippocam-
pal activity, would shed further light on the general cortico-
hippocampal cross-talk during deep sleep. Recently, it was
shown that decoupling such circuitries can lead to disrupted
correlations between intrinsic hippocampal and thalamocorti-
cal oscillations ( Phillips et al., 2012 ). Most importantly, the
inclusion of plasticity in the involved synapses and of more
complex membrane currents would also help a detailed study
of the process of temporal pattern transfer through the hip-
pocampus and eventually to PFC during SWRs, for memory
consolidation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to warmly thank Albert Compte for his
help and advice in implementing the cortical model, György
Buzsáki, Christof Koch, Anton Sirota, and Erik Schomburg for
helpful discussions, Steve Coombes for his valuable help in con-
structing our computational model, Uri Maoz for his help in
statistical analysis and all reviewers for their constructive recom-
mendations. This work was funded by the Marie Curie Network,
MMBNOTT, Project No. MEST-CT-2005-020723).
REFERENCES
Acsady, L., Kamondi, A., Sik, A.,
Freund, T., and Buzsáki, G. (1998).
GABAergic cells are the major post-
synaptic targets of mossy ﬁbers in
the rat hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 18,
3386–3403.
Amaral, D. G., Ishizuka, N., and
Claiborne, B. (1990). Neurons,
numbers and the hippocampal
network. Prog. Brain Res. 83, 1–11.
Amaral, D. G., and Witter, M. P . (1989).
The three-dimensional organiza-
tion of the hippocampal forma-
tion: a review of anatomical data.
Neuroscience 31, 571–591.
Andersen, P ., Morris, R., Amaral, D.,
Bliss, T., and O’Keefe, J. (2007). The
Hippocampus Book. New Y ork, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Baccalá, L. A., and Sameshima, K.
(2001). Partial directed coherence:
a new concept in neural struc-
ture determination. Biol. Cybern. 84,
463–474.
Bartos, M., Vida, I., and Jonas, P .
(2007). Synaptic mechanisms of
synchronized gamma oscillations
in inhibitory interneuron networks.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 45–56.
Battaglia, F . P ., Sutherland, G. R.,
and McNaughton, B. L. (2004).
Hippocampal sharp wave bursts
coincide with neocortical “up-state”
transitions. Learn. Mem. 11,
697–704.
Bazhenov, M., Timofeev, I., Steriade,
M., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2002).
Model of thalamocortical slow-wave
sleep oscillations and transitions
to activated states. J. Neurosci. 22,
8691–8704.
Berens, P . (2009). CircStat: a MA TLAB
toolbox for circular statistics. J. Stat.
Softw. 31, 1–21.
Bernard, C., and Wheal, H. V . (1994).
Model of local connectivity pat-
terns in CA3 and CA1 areas of
the hippocampus. Hippocampus 4,
497–529.
Buhl, E. H., Halasy, K., and Somogyi,
P . (1994). Diverse sources of hip-
pocampal unitary inhibitory post-
synaptic potentials and the number
of synaptic release sites. Nature 368,
823–828.
Buzsáki, G. (1989). Two-stage model of
memory trace formation: a role for
“noisy” brain states. Neuroscience
31, 551–570.
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the
Brain. New Y ork, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Buzsáki, G., Horvath, Z., Urioste, R.,
Hetke, J., and Wise, K. (1992).
High-frequency network oscillation
in the hippocampus. Science 256,
1025–1027.
Chrobak, J. J., and Buzsáki, G. (1996).
High-frequency oscillations in
the output networks of the
hippocampal-entorhinal axis of
the freely behaving rat. J. Neurosci.
16, 3056–3066.
Cobb, S. R., Buhl, E. H., Halasy,
K . ,P a u l s e n ,O . ,a n dS o m o g y i ,P .
(1995). Synchronization of neu-
ronal activity in hippocampus by
individual GABAergic interneurons.
Nature 378, 75–78.
Colbert, C. M., and Levy, W. B. (1992).
Electrophysiological and pharmaco-
logical characterization of perforant
path synapses in CA1: mediation by
glutamate receptors. J. Neurophys.
68, 1–8.
Compte, A., Reig, R., Descalzo, V .
F . ,H a r v e y ,M .A . ,P u c c i n i ,G .D . ,
and Sanchez-Vives, M. V . (2008).
Spontaneous high-frequency
(10–80 Hz) oscillations during up
states in the cerebral cortex in vitro.
J. Neurosci. 28, 13828–13844.
Compte, A., Sanchez-Vives, M. V .,
McCormick, D. A., and W ang,
X. J. (2003). Cellular and net-
work mechanisms of slow oscil-
latory activity ( <1H z ) a n d w a v e
propagations in a cortical network
model. J. Neurophys.
89, 2707–2725.
Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Czurko, A.,
Mamiya, A., and Buzsáki, G. (1999).
Oscillatory coupling of hippocam-
pal pyramidal cells and interneu-
rons in the behaving rat. J. Neurosci.
19, 274–287.
C s i c s v a r i ,J . ,H i r a s e ,H . ,M a m i y a ,A . ,
and Buzsáki, G. (2000). Ensemble
patterns of hippocampal CA3-CA1
neurons during sharp wave–
associated population events.
Neuron 28, 585–594.
Cutsuridis, V ., Graham, B., Cobb, S.,
and Vida, I. (2010). Hippocampal
Microcircuits: A Computational
Modeler’s Resource Book. New York,
NY: Springer V erlag.
Cutsuridis, V ., and Hasselmo, M.
(2010). “Dynamics and function
of a CA1 model of the hippocam-
pus during theta and ripples, ” in
ICANN 2010, Part I, LNCS 6352 ,
eds K. Diamantaras, W. Duch, and
L. S. Iliadis (Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-V erlag), 230–240.
Cutsuridis, V ., and Hasselmo, M.
(2011). Spatial memory sequence
encoding and replay during mod-
eled theta and ripple oscillations.
Cogn. Comput. 3, 554–574.
Diba, K., and Buzsáki, G. (2007).
Forward and reverse hippocampal
place-cell sequences during ripples.
Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1241–1242.
Dickson, C. T., Wolansky, T. D., and
Kerber, J. W. (2005). Neocortical
modulation of the hippocampal
slow oscillation via the entorhi-
nal cortex. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 31,
275.273.
Eichenbaum, H. (2000). A cortical–
hippocampal system for declara-
tive memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1,
41–50.
Ellender, T. J., Nissen, W., Colgin, L. L.,
Mann, E. O., and Paulsen, O. (2010).
Priming of hippocampal population
bursts by individual perisomatic-
targeting interneurons. J. Neurosci.
30, 5979–5991.
E m p s o n ,R .M . ,a n dH e i n e m a n n ,U .
(1995). The perforant path projec-
tion to hippocampal area CA1 in
the rat hippocampal-entorhinal cor-
tex combined slice. J. Physiol. 484,
707–720.
Fernández-Ruiz, A., Makarov, V . A.,
Benito, N., and Herreras, O. (2012).
Schaffer-speciﬁc local ﬁeld poten-
tials reﬂect discrete excitatory events
at gamma frequency that may ﬁre
postsynaptic hippocampal CA1
units. J. Neurosci. 32, 5165–5176.
Foster, D. J., and Wilson, M. A. (2006).
Reverse replay of behavioural
sequences in hippocampal place
cells during the awake state. Nature
440, 680–683.
Freund, T. F ., and Buzsáki, G. (1996).
Interneurons of the hippocampus.
Hippocampus 6, 347–470.
Gabbott, P ., Headlam, A., and Busby,
S. (2002). Morphological evi-
dence that CA1 hippocampal
afferents monosynaptically inner-
vate PV-containing neurons and
NADPH-diaphorase reactive cells in
the medial prefrontal cortex (Areas
25/32) of the rat. Brain Res. 946,
314–322.
Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener,
S. I., Buzsáki, G., and Zugaro, M.
B. (2009). Selective suppression of
hippocampal ripples impairs spa-
tial memory. Nat. Neurosci. 12,
1222–1223.
Goodman, D., and Brette, R. (2008).
Brian: a simulator for spik-
ing neural networks in Python.
Front. Neuroinf. 2:5. doi: 10.3389/
neuro.11.005.2008.
Gulyás, A. I., Miles, R., Sik, A., T oth,
K., T amamaki, N., and Freund, T.
F . (1993). Hippocampal pyrami-
dal cells excite inhibitory neurons
through a single release site. Nature
366, 683–687.
Hahn, T. T. G., McFarland, J. M.,
Berberich, S., Sakmann, B., and
Mehta, M. R. (2012). Spontaneous
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 17


--- Page 18 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
persistent activity in entorhinal cor-
tex modulates cortico-hippocampal
interaction in vivo . Nat. Neurosci.
15, 1531–1538.
H a h n ,T .T .G . ,S a k m a n n ,B . ,a n d
Mehta, M. R. (2006). Phase-locking
of hippocampal interneurons’
membrane potential to neocortical
up-down states. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
1359–1361.
H a h n ,T .T .G . ,S a k m a n n ,B . ,a n d
Mehta, M. R. (2007). Differential
responses of hippocampal sub-
ﬁelds to cortical up–down states.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
5169–5174.
Halliday, D. M., and Rosenberg, J.
R. (1999). “Time and frequency
domain analysis of spike train
and time series data, ” in Modern
Techniques in Neuroscience Research,
eds U. Windhorst and H. Johansson
(Berlin: Springer-V erlag), 503–543.
H a r r i s ,K .D . ,H e n z e ,D .A . ,C s i c s v a r i ,J . ,
Hirase, H., and Buzsáki, G. (2000).
Accuracy of tetrode spike sepa-
ration as determined by simulta-
neous intracellular and extracellu-
lar measurements. J. Neurophys. 84,
401–414.
Harris, K. D., Hirase, H., Leinekugel,
X . ,H e n z e ,D .A . ,a n dB u z s á k i ,
G. (2001). T emporal interaction
between single spikes and complex
spike bursts in hippocampal pyra-
midal cells. Neuron 32, 141–149.
Hazan, L., Zugaro, M., and Buzsáki,
G. (2006). Klusters, neuroScope,
NDManager: a free software suite
for neurophysiological data process-
ing and visualization. J. Neurosci.
Methods 155, 207–216.
Henze, D. A., Wittner, L., and Buzsáki,
G. (2002). Single granule cells reli-
ably discharge targets in the hip-
pocampal CA3 network in vivo. Nat.
Neurosci. 5, 790–795.
Hill, S., and T ononi, G. (2005).
Modeling sleep and wakefulness
in the thalamocortical system.
J. Neurophys. 93, 1671–1698.
Holcman, D., and Tsodyks, M.
(2006). The emergence of up and
down states in cortical networks.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 2:e23. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020023
Isomura, Y ., Sirota, A., Özen, S.,
Montgomery, S., Mizuseki, K.,
Henze, D. A., et al. (2006).
Integration and segregation of
activity in entorhinal-hippocampal
subregions by neocortical slow
oscillations. Neuron 52, 871–882.
Jarsky, T., Roxin, A., Kath, W. L., and
Spruston, N. (2005). Conditional
dendritic spike propagation follow-
ing distal synaptic activation of hip-
pocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons.
Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1667–1676.
Jonas, P ., Major, G., and Sakmann,
B. (1993). Quantal components of
unitary EPSCs at the mossy ﬁber
synapse on CA3 pyramidal cells of
rat hippocampus. J. Physiol. 472,
615–663.
Klausberger, T., Magill, P . J., Márton,
L. F ., Roberts, J. D. B., Cobden, P .
M., Buzsáki, G., et al. (2003). Brain-
state-and cell-type-speciﬁc ﬁring of
hippocampal interneurons in vivo .
Nature 421, 844–848.
Klausberger, T., and Somogyi, P .
(2008). Neuronal diversity and
temporal dynamics: the unity of
hippocampal circuit operations.
Science 321, 53–57.
Knowles, W . D., and Schwartzkroin,
P . A. (1981). Local circuit synaptic
interactions in hippocampal brain
slices. J. Neurosci. 1, 318–322.
Lawrence, J. J., Grinspan, Z. M., and
McBain, C. J. (2004). Quantal trans-
mission at mossy ﬁber targets in the
CA3 region of the rat hippocampus.
J. Physiol. 554, 175–193.
Leão, R. N., Mikulovic, S., Leão, K. E.,
Munguba, H., Gezelius, H., Enjin,
A., et al. (2012). OLM interneu-
rons differentially modulate CA3
and entorhinal inputs to hippocam-
pal CA1 neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 15,
1524–1530.
Lee, A. K., and Wilson, M. A. (2002).
Memory of sequential experience in
the hippocampus during slow wave
sleep. Neuron 36, 1183–1194.
L i ,X .J . ,S o m o g y i ,P . ,Y l i n e n ,A . ,a n d
Buzsáki, G. (1994). The hippocam-
pal CA3 network: an in vivo intra-
cellular labeling study.
J. Comp.
Neurol. 339, 181–208.
Lovett-Barron, M., Turi, G. F ., Kaifosh,
P. , L e e , P. H . , B o l z e , F. , S u n , X . ,
et al. (2012). Regulation of neuronal
input transformations by tunable
dendritic inhibition. Nat. Neurosci.
15, 423–430.
Maier, N., Nimmrich, V ., and Draguhn,
A. (2003). Cellular and network
mechanisms underlying sponta-
neous sharp wave-ripple complexes
in mouse hippocampal slices.
J. Physiol. 550, 873–887.
Mehta, M. R. (2007). Cortico-
hippocampal interaction during
up-down states and memory
consolidation. J. Neurosci. 10,
13–15.
M i l e s ,R . ,T r a u b ,R .D . ,a n dW o n g ,R .K .
(1988). Spread of synchronous ﬁr-
ing in longitudinal slices from the
CA3 region of the hippocampus.
J. Neurophysiol. 60, 1481–1496.
Mizuseki, K., Diba, K., Pastalkova,
E., and Buzsáki, G. (2011).
Hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells
form functionally distinct sublayers.
Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1174–1181.
M i z u s e k i ,K . ,S i r o t a ,A . ,P a s t a l k o v a ,E . ,
and Buzsáki, G. (2009). Theta oscil-
lations provide temporal windows
for local circuit computation in
the entorhinal-hippocampal loop.
Neuron 64, 267–280.
Mölle, M., Y eshenko, O., Marshall, L.,
Sara, S. J., and Born, J. (2006).
Hippocampal sharp wave-ripples
linked to slow oscillations in rat
slow-wave sleep. J. Neurophys. 96,
62–70.
M o r i ,M . ,A b e g g ,M .H . ,G ä h w i l e r ,
B. H., and Gerber, U. (2004). A
frequency-dependent switch from
inhibition to excitation in a hip-
pocampal unitary circuit. Nature
431, 453–456.
Parga, N., and Abbott, L. F . (2007).
Network model of spontaneous
activity exhibiting synchronous
transitions between up and down
states. Front. Neurosci. 1:57–66. doi:
10.3389/neuro.01.1.1.004.2007
Peyrache, A., Khamassi, M.,
Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I.,
and Battaglia, F . P . (2009). Replay
of rule-learning related neural pat-
terns in the prefrontal cortex during
sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 919–926.
Phillips, K. G., Bartsch, U., McCarthy,
A. P ., Edgar, D. M., Tricklebank, M.
D., Wafford, K. A., et al. (2012).
Decoupling of sleep-dependent cor-
tical and hippocampal interactions
in a neurodevelopmental model of
schizophrenia. Neuron 76, 526–533.
Pinsky, P . F ., and Rinzel, J. (1994).
Intrinsic and network rhythmogen-
esis in a reduced Traub model for
CA3 neurons. J. Comput. Neurosci.
1, 39–60.
Otmakhova, N. A., Otmakhov, N.,
and Lisman, J. E. (2002). Pathway-
speciﬁc properties of AMPA and
NMDA-mediated transmission in
CA1 hippocampal pyramidal cells.
J. Neurosci. 22, 1199–1207.
Remondes, M., and Schuman, E. M.
(2002). Direct cortical input mod-
ulates plasticity and spiking in CA1
pyramidal neurons. Nature 416,
736–740.
Remondes, M., and Schuman, E. M.
(2004). Role for a cortical input to
hippocampal area CA1 in the con-
solidation of a long-term memory.
Nature 431, 699–703.
Royer, S., Zemelman, B. V ., Losonczy,
A . ,K i m ,J . ,C h a n c e ,F . ,M a g e e ,J .C . ,
et al. (2012). Control of timing, rate
and bursts of hippocampal place
cells by dendritic and somatic inhi-
bition. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 769–775.
Sanchez-Vives, M. V ., and McCormick,
D. A. (2000). Cellular and network
mechanisms of rhythmic recurrent
activity in neocortex. Nat. Neurosci.
3, 1027–1034.
Sayer, R. J., Friedlander, M. J., and
Redman, S. J. (1990). The time
course and amplitude of EPSPs
evoked at synapses between pairs
of CA3/CA1 neurons in the hip-
pocampal slice. J. Neurosci. 10,
826–836.
Siapas, A. G., and Wilson, M. A. (1998).
Coordinated interactions between
hippocampal ripples and cortical
spindles during slow-wave sleep.
Neuron 21, 1123–1128.
Sik, A., T amamaki, N., and Freund, T.
F . (1993). Complete axon arboriza-
tion of a single CA3 pyramidal
cell in the rat hippocampus,
and its relationship with postsy-
naptic parvalbumin-containing
interneurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 5,
1719–1728.
Sirota, A., Csicsvari, J., Buhl, D., and
Buzsáki, G. (2003). Communication
between neocortex and hippocam-
pus during sleep in rodents.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
2065–2069.
Sirota, A., Montgomery, S., Fujisawa,
S., Isomura, Y ., Zugaro, M., and
Buzsáki, G. (2008). Entrainment
of neocortical neurons and gamma
oscillations by the hippocampal
theta rhythm. Neuron 60, 683–697.
Skaggs, W. E., and McNaughton, B.
L. (1996). Replay of neuronal ﬁr-
ing sequences in rat hippocampus
during sleep following spatial expe-
rience. Science 271, 1870–1873.
Sorra, K. E., and Harris, K. M. (1993).
Occurrence and three-dimensional
structure of multiple synapses
between individual radiatum axons
and their target pyramidal cells in
hippocampal area CA1. J. Neurosci.
13, 3736–3748.
Steriade, M. (2006). Grouping of brain
rhythms in corticothalamic systems.
Neuroscience 137, 1087–1106.
Suh, J., Rivest, A. J., Nakashiba, T.,
T ominaga, T., and T onegawa, S.
(2011). Entorhinal cortex layer III
input to the hippocampus is crucial
for temporal association memory.
Science 334, 1415–1420.
Sullivan, D., Csicsvari, J., Mizuseki,
K., Montgomery, S., Diba, K., and
Buzsáki, G. (2011). Relationships
between hippocampal sharp waves,
ripples, and fast gamma oscillation:
inﬂuence of dentate and entorhi-
nal cortical activity. J. Neurosci. 31,
8605–8616.
T akahashi, N., Kitamura, K., Matsuo,
N . ,M a y f o r d ,M . ,K a n o ,M . ,
Matsuki, N., et al. (2012). Locally
synchronized synaptic inputs.
Science 335, 353–356.
T axidis, J., Coomber, B., Mason, R.,
and Owen, M. R. (2010). Assessing
cortico-hippocampal functional
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 18


--- Page 19 ---
T axidis et al. A network model of cortico-hippocampal coupling
connectivity under anesthesia and
kainic acid using generalized partial
directed coherence. Biol. Cybern.
102, 327–340.
T axidis, J., Coombes, S., Mason, R.,
and Owen, M. R. (2012). Modeling
sharp wave-ripple complexes
through a CA3-CA1 network
model with chemical synapses.
Hippocampus 22, 995–1017.
Timofeev, I., Grenier, F ., Bazhenov,
M., Sejnowski, T . J., and Steriade,
M. (2000). Origin of slow cor-
tical oscillations in deafferented
cortical slabs. Cereb. Cortex 10,
1185–1199.
Timofeev, I., and Steriade, M. (1996).
Low-frequency rhythms in the
thalamus of intact-cortex and
decorticated cats. J. Neurophys. 76,
4152–4168.
Traub, R. D., Jefferys, J. G., and
Whittington, M. A. (1999). Fast
Oscillations in Cortical Circuits.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Traub, R. D., and Miles, R. (1991).
Neuronal Networks of the
Hippocampus. New Y ork, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
W ang, X. J., and Buzsáki, G. (1996).
Gamma oscillation by synaptic inhi-
bition in a hippocampal interneu-
ronal network model. J. Neurosci.
16, 6402–6413.
Wolansky, T., Clement, E. A., Peters,
S. R., Palczak, M. A., and Dickson,
C. T. (2006). Hippocampal slow
oscillation: a novel EEG state and
its coordination with ongoing neo-
cortical activity. J. Neurosci. 26,
6213–6229.
Y amamoto, C. D., Higashima, M., and
Sawada, S. (1987). Quantal analy-
sis of potentiating action of phor-
bolester on synaptic transmission in
the hippocampus. Neurosci. Res. 5,
28–38.
Ylinen, A., Bragin, A., Nadasdy, Z.,
Jando, G., Szabo, I., Sik, A., et al.
(1995). Sharp wave-associated
high-frequency oscillation (200 Hz)
in the intact hippocampus: network
and intracellular mechanisms.
J. Neurosci. 15, 30–46.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research
was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Received: 28 November 2012; accepted:
21 January 2013; published online: 05
February 2013.
Citation: T axidis J, Mizuseki K, Mason
R and Owen MR (2013) Inﬂuence of
slow oscillation on hippocampal activity
and ripples through cortico-hippocampal
synaptic interactions, analyzed by a
cortical-CA3-CA1 network model.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 7:3. doi:
10.3389/fncom.2013.00003
Copyright © 2013 T axidis, Mizuseki,
Mason and Owen. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
License, which permits use, distribution
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source
are credited and subject to any copy-
right notices concerning any third-party
graphics etc.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org February 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 3 | 19
