--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 28 August 2014
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00098
T -type calcium channels promote predictive homeostasis of
input-output relations in thalamocortical neurons of lateral
geniculate nucleus
Su Z. Hong , Haram R. Kim and Christopher D. Fiorillo *
Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea
Edited by:
Rava Azeredo Da Silveira, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, France
Reviewed by:
Gianluigi Mongillo, Paris Descartes
University, France
Thomas Fucke, Bernstein Center for
Computational Neuroscience
Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany
*Correspondence:
Christopher D. Fiorillo, Department
of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Building
611, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701,
South Korea
e-mail: ﬁorillo@kaist.ac.kr
A general theory views the function of all neurons as prediction, and one component of
this theory is that of “predictive homeostasis” or “prediction error. ” It is well established
that sensory systems adapt so that neuronal output maintains sensitivity to sensory input,
in accord with information theory. Predictive homeostasis applies the same principle at
the cellular level, where the challenge is to maintain membrane excitability at the optimal
homeostatic level so that spike generation is maximally sensitive to small gradations
in synaptic drive. Negative feedback is a hallmark of homeostatic mechanisms, as
exempliﬁed by depolarization-activated potassium channels. In contrast, T -type calcium
channels exhibit positive feedback that appears at odds with the theory. In thalamocortical
neurons of lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), T -type channels are capable of causing bursts
of spikes with an all-or -none character in response to excitation from a hyperpolarized
potential. This “burst mode” would partially uncouple visual input from spike output and
reduce the information spikes convey about gradations in visual input. However, past
observations of T -type-driven bursts may have resulted from unnaturally high membrane
excitability. Here we have mimicked within rat brain slices the patterns of synaptic
conductance that occur naturally during vision. In support of the theory of predictive
homeostasis, we found that T -type channels restored excitability toward its homeostatic
level during periods of hyperpolarization. Thus, activation of T -type channels allowed two
retinal input spikes to cause one output spike on average, and we observed almost no
instances in which output count exceeded input count (a “burst”). T -type calcium channels
therefore help to maintain a single optimal mode of transmission rather than creating a
second mode. More fundamentally our results support the general theory, which seeks to
predict the properties of a neuron’ s ion channels and synapses given knowledge of natural
patterns of synaptic input.
Keywords: thalamus, retinogeniculate, efﬁcient coding, predictive coding, prediction error, low-threshold spike
INTRODUCTION
Homeostatic mechanisms are vital to life in general, with numer-
ous examples existing in every cell. Among the most familiar of
examples within the nervous system is light adaptation, which
allows neurons to maintain sensitivity to small ﬂuctuations in
light intensity despite the fact that intensity varies over a large
range. Although the value of homeostatic adaptation is obvi-
ous, principles from information theory have provided additional
insight by providing a means to identify the optimal relation-
ship between input and output, which should correspond to
the desired homeostatic target level. The nervous system should
counteract (adapt to) patterns in stimulus intensity that are
predictable (such as mean intensity) so that neural activity is
made to be maximally sensitive to the unpredicted compo-
nent of stimulus intensity that carries new, “non-redundant”
information (Barlow, 1961). Sensory systems have indeed been
found to implement efﬁcient (predictive) coding (Laughlin, 1981;
Srinivasan et al., 1982; Dan et al., 1996; Rieke et al., 1997;
Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001; Wang et al., 2003; Hosoya et al.,
2005; T obler et al., 2005).
The same principle has been described at the neuronal level
as “predictive homeostasis” or “prediction error” ( Fiorillo, 2008,
2012; Fiorillo et al., 2014). The homeostatic ideal is for a neuron’s
spike output to be as sensitive as possible to the amplitude of the
excitatory postsynaptic conductance (EPSG) that should cause its
spikes. Both the importance and difﬁculty of achieving this ideal
are evident in the fact that synaptic conductance is an analog sig-
nal (it can take many values) that varies on a timescale as fast as a
millisecond, yet spike output during such a brief period is binary
(spike or no spike). Synaptic conductance naturally ﬂuctuates
with multiple temporal patterns, and thus a level of membrane
excitability that is optimal at one moment could render a neuron’s
spike output completely insensitive and “blind” to its synaptic
input at another moment.
Depolarization-activated potassium channels are well known
to promote homeostasis and preserve sensitivity of spike output
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE


--- Page 2 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
to input currents (e.g., Wang et al., 2003 ). By counteracting the
depolarization that causes their activation, these channels exhibit
the negative feedback that is a hallmark of homeostatic mech-
anisms. In contrast, positive feedback is notoriously difﬁcult to
control. Furthermore, since spikes are caused by synaptic excita-
tion, the need for homeostatic inhibition is more obvious than the
need for homeostatic excitation. Since depolarization-activated
sodium and calcium channels are excitatory and exhibit positive
feedback, they are the antithesis of what one would expect of
homeostatic ion channels. One motivation of the present work
is to extend the principle of predictive homeostasis to include
excitatory ion channels and positive feedback.
In thalamocortical (TC) neurons, T-type calcium channels
can exhibit positive feedback powerful enough to cause a “low-
threshold spike” (L TS) that is nearly all-or-none and can cause a
stereotyped burst of multiple sodium spikes ( Llinás and Jahnsen,
1982; Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan et al., 1999; Gutierrez et al.,
2001). Although evidence eventually emerged suggesting that
T-type channels could cause a graded ampliﬁcation of synap-
tic excitation under certain conditions ( Ulrich and Huguenard,
1997a; Timofeev et al., 2001; W olfart et al., 2005; W ei et al.,
2011; Deleuze et al., 2012 ), the common belief arose that TC
neurons ﬁre in distinct burst and tonic “modes” ( Lu et al.,
1992; Guido et al., 1995; Reinagel et al., 1999; Sherman, 2001;
Lesica and Stanley, 2004; Denning and Reinagel, 2005; Llinás
and Steriade, 2006; Wang et al., 2007 ). At depolarized potentials
(∼− 65 mV), T-type channels are inactivated (Coulter et al., 1989;
Crunelli et al., 1989 ) and TC neurons ﬁre in a “tonic mode” with
a nearly linear input-output (I-O) relation. When hyperpolar-
ized (∼− 80 mV), T-type channels deinactivate and are thereby
“primed. ” It has been presumed that if synaptic excitation then
crosses a threshold, T-type channels will initiate a L TS and sub-
sequent burst of multiple sodium spikes. The I-O relation would
therefore be non-linear in the “burst mode, ” so that relative to the
“tonic mode, ” output spike count becomes less sensitive to input
spike count and EPSG amplitude.
The role of T-type calcium channels in information process-
ing has been particularly well studied in TC neurons of LGN,
which “relay” visual information from retina to cortex. Assuming
that the ﬂow of information follows causation, vision in cortex
is best served by maintaining the causal link between retino-
geniculate EPSGs (rEPSGs) and spike output in TC neurons.
However, if T-type channels cause spikes, they would partially
uncouple the causal link between retinal input and spike output
that is necessary to efﬁciently transmit visual information. Even if
T-type-driven bursts convey visual information and are not truly
all-or-none, any reduction in “visual causality” would reduce
the information conveyed about gradations in visual stimuli.
Although it has been recognized that dual modes of transmission
appears problematic, it has been assumed to be an empirical fact,
and therefore efforts have been made to understand what advan-
tages might be offered by the burst mode ( Guido and W eyand,
1995; Guido et al., 1995; Reinagel et al., 1999; Lesica and Stanley,
2004; Denning and Reinagel, 2005).
If T-type channels drive bursts of spikes in TC neurons, this
would contradict the theory of predictive homeostasis, which
seeks to generalize the principles of efﬁcient coding and to apply
them at the cellular level to understand the function of ion chan-
nels. According to this theory, the optimal and homeostatic level
of membrane excitability is achieved when a rEPSG depolarizes
the membrane precisely to the threshold for the generation of
a sodium spike, so that the slightest variation in rEPSG ampli-
tude would determine whether a spike does or does not occur
(Fiorillo et al., 2014 ). A large variety of homeostatic mecha-
nisms are proposed to predict and counteract patterns in rEPSG
input (Fiorillo, 2008 ), resulting in the temporal decorrelation of
spike output relative to visual input that has been observed in
LGN ( Dan et al., 1996 ) .I np a r t i c u l a r ,t h et h e o r yo fp r e d i c t i v e
homeostasis ( Fiorillo et al., 2014 ) can explain why the average
probability that a rEPSG causes a spike is 0.5 ( Kaplan et al., 1987;
Movshon et al., 2005; Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich et al., 2007;
W eyand, 2007; Casti et al., 2008 ). According to theory, an ion
channel subtype performs a homeostatic function if it tends to
cause membrane voltage to move toward rather than away from
spike threshold under natural conditions. Thus, T-type channels
would serve a homeostatic function if they amplify rEPSPs toward
spike threshold so that spikes might be generated, but they would
oppose homeostasis if their activation consistently causes spikes,
as implied by the “burst hypothesis. ”
Here we have tested the prediction of theory that T-type chan-
nels in LGN do not drive bursts to alter the I-O relation, but
rather serve a homeostatic function to maintain the I-O relation.
Our primary challenge was to mimic natural visual conditions
within rat brain slices. Visually driven transient hyperpolariza-
tion partially deinactivates T-type channels, and thus subsequent
retinogeniculate excitation will activate them ( Figure 1A)( Wang
et al., 2007). Our hypothesis was that, in this natural context, acti-
vation of T-type channels will amplify retinogeniculate excitatory
postsynaptic potentials (rEPSPs) to restore the homeostatic I-O
relation of 1 spike for 2 rEPSGs, without causing excess spikes
(bursts) ( Figure 1B). Our experimental results conﬁrmed this
hypothesis. The bursts observed in prior studies were likely the
result of the unnaturally high membrane excitability that is typical
of brain slice experiments.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
BRAIN SLICE PREPARATION
Brains were dissected from male Sprague-Dawley rats (21–35
days) anesthetized with CO
2 as part of a procedure approved
by the KAIST Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Slices containing dorsal LGN were cut with a vibratome (VT1200,
Leica) in a solution (4
◦C) that contained (in mM): 205 sucrose,
2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4,7 . 5M g C l2,0 . 5C a C l2, 21.4 NaHCO3, 11.1
D-glucose, 1.3 ascorbic acid, 3 pyruvic acid, and 1 kynurenic acid,
with pH equilibrated to 7.3 with 95% O
2 and 5% CO 2. Slices
(200–300μm) were cut in the coronal plane except in the case
of experiments with retinogeniculate EPSGs, in which case slices
were parasaggital (400 μm) to better preserve the optic tract, as
previously described ( T urner and Salt, 1998). Slices were stored
in artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF) for at least 30 min prior to
being transferred to the recording chamber. During both storage
and recording, ACSF was 34
◦C and had a pH of 7.4 maintained by
equilibration with 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2. It contained (in mM):
125 NaCl 2, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH 2PO4, 25 NaHCO 3,1M g C l 2,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 2


--- Page 3 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
FIGURE 1 | Three alternative scenarios. (A) T op, a TC neuron in cat
LGN is hyperpolarized for hundreds of milliseconds during viewing of a
naturalistic movie (adapted with permission from Wang et al., 2007 ).
Spikes at the end of the hyperpolarization were caused by at least one
rEPSG together with T -type current. Actual membrane voltage was not
reported. (B) Schematic of hypothetical changes in membrane
excitability (distance from spike threshold) during hyperpolarization.
Homeostatic excitability (1 output spike for 2 input spikes) prevails at
depolarized potentials (time 1, red). Hyperpolarization will initially cause
a reduction in excitability (time 2, green), but this should recover due
to deinactivation of T -type channels. (C) Hypothetical I-O functions for
retinal input and TC neuron spike output. Relative to the homeostatic
and theoretically optimal I-O relation at − 65 mV (time 1, red), excitability
(at time 3, blue) will either be too weak (left), too strong (middle), or
“just right” (right). The burst hypothesis (middle) requires that the I-O
relation becomes steeper, but it may or may not shift to the left of
the homeostatic I-O relation. In theory, input could correspond to
rEPSG amplitude and output to spike probability ( Fiorillo et al., 2014 ),
but we measured rEPSG and spike counts and thus I-O relations are
not sigmoid ( Figure 8 ).
2C a C l2, 10 D-glucose. A slice was submerged in a recording
chamber of 0.5 ml and ACSF was perfused at 1.5 ml/min.
WHOLE-CELL AND PERFORATED-PATCH RECORDINGS
Neurons were visualized with gradient contrast infrared optics
using an upright microscope (BX51WI, Olympus) with a 60x
water-immersion objective. Patch recordings of neurons were
performed using a Multiclamp 700B ampliﬁer, Digidata 1320A
A/D converter, and pClamp10 software (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA). V oltage was sampled at 40 kHz and low-pass
ﬁltered at 10 kHz. Patch recordings were performed with borosili-
cate pipettes (3–4 M/Omega1) ﬁlled with a solution containing (in mM):
135 K-methylsulfate, 1.5 MgCl
2, 0.5 EGTA, 10 HEPES, 2 Mg-
ATP, 0.2 Na 2-GTP , and 10 phosphocreatine, with pH adjusted
to 7.3 with KOH (osmolarity 280 mOsm). Pipette solution was
the same for perforated-patch recordings, except for the inclusion
of 50 μM β-escin. Sufﬁcient membrane perforation required 20–
30 min, with ﬁnal series resistances ranging from 10 to 20 M/Omega1.I n
all recordings, access and series resistance was monitored period-
ically using the “membrane test” function of pClamp10. Data was
discarded if series resistance exceeded 25 M /Omega1,o ri ft h e r ew a sa
change of greater than 20% from its initial value. Correction was
made for a liquid junction potential of +10 mV .
The pipette’s chloride concentration was lower than in typical
whole-cell solutions to maintain the natural chloride equilibrium
potential. W e conﬁrmed, through experiments with iontophore-
sis of GABA, that the chloride reversal potential was near its
reported level of − 80 mV in TC neurons (Ulrich and Huguenard,
1997b). The low chloride internal solution was designed for
experiments in which membrane excitability was to be measured
in the presence of GABA. However, data from such experiments
is not presented here, and thus the chloride equilibrium potential
was presumably irrelevant for interpretation of the reported data.
IDENTIFICATION OF TC NEURONS IN DORSAL LGN
Most of the boundary of dLGN was easily distinguished in liv-
ing tissue, both in the coronal plane as well as the parasagittal
plane used for retinogeniculate EPSPs. The ventromedial bound-
ary (in coronal slices) was more difﬁcult to see, although the oval
shape of dLGN allowed its position to be inferred. T o be conser-
vative, recordings were made at least 100 μm from the inferred
ventromedial boundary. Most recordings were near the center of
dLGN, ∼ 4–5 mm caudal of Bregma.
TC neurons in dLGN were distinguished from interneurons by
established criteria. Prior to patching, a neuron was selected that
had more than two dendrites extending from the soma. TC neu-
rons were subsequently distinguished from interneurons by the
presence of a rebound L TS with a burst of multiple sodium spikes
in response to sudden offset of a large hyperpolarizaing cur-
rent (indicative of T-type current), a depolarizing “sag” following
strong hyperpolarization (indicative of H-type current), and rest-
ing membrane resistances not greater than 300 M /Omega1. Cells judged
to be TC neurons had resting potentials of − 71.4 ± 6.2m V
and membrane resistances at resting potential of 180 ± 43 M/Omega1
(mean ± SD, n = 87).
RETINOGENICULATE EPSPs
Retinogeniculate EPSPs were evoked by electrical stimulation
(16–30 μA, 0.2 ms) using a concentric bipolar stainless steel elec-
t r o d ep l a c e da tt h ep o i n ta tw h i c ht h eo p t i ct r a c te n t e r st h a l a m u s
(FHC Inc., Bowdoin, ME). Experiments were performed in the
presence of the GABA
A receptor antagonist picrotoxin (100μM).
In addition to the site of stimulation being within the optic
tract, excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) were judged to
be of retinal origin (rather than cortical) by their large unitary
amplitude and strong paired-pulse depression ( T urner and Salt,
1998; Chen et al., 2002 ). In each of the 9 neurons (from which
rEPSP data is reported), EPSCs were recorded in neurons voltage-
clamped at − 70 mV . The amplitude of extracellular stimulation
current was increased in small increments (2 μA), and a rEPSC
was distinguished by a large and abrupt increase in EPSC ampli-
tude (>280 pA) that did not increase substantially with additional
current. In 3 of the 9 neurons for which data is reported, we
observed two large increases in amplitude, consistent with the
known existence of up to several retinogeniculate inputs in some
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 3


--- Page 4 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
TC neurons. Neurons were excluded from analysis if no large and
abrupt increase in EPSC amplitude was observed. EPSCs were
subsequently evoked in pairs (with an interval of 50 ms) every
20 s, and were observed to exhibit strong depression (the ampli-
tude of the second EPSC being 70% or less of the ﬁrst EPSC in all 9
neurons). EPSCs were blocked by the AMPA-receptor antagonist
CNQX (10μM).
W e wished to mimic the natural condition in vivo in which
temporal summation of 2 EPSGs is necessary to cause 1 spike.
However, in many cells we found that a spike occurred in response
to the ﬁrst rEPSG evoked from − 65 mV , and that additional
rEPSGs caused a very small increase in rEPSP amplitude and did
not result in additional spikes. This discrepancy from the in vivo
case is likely to be because the retinogeniculate synapse is in a
“depressed state” under natural conditions in vivo , and there-
fore “paired pulse” interactions are small and rEPSG amplitude
varies little over time ( Borst, 2010). There are several factors that
probably act to reduce paired-pulse interactions in vivo , includ-
ing moderately high ﬁring rates in retinal ganglion neurons and
lower extracellular calcium than the 2.0 mM used here and in
most studies in vitro (Borst, 2010). Another factor is likely to be
suppression of vesicle release by presynaptic G-protein coupled
receptors, which can virtually eliminate paired-pulse depression
(Brenowitz and T russell, 2001 ). W e therefore performed exper-
iments in a low concentration of the GABA
B receptor agonist
baclofen (0.05–1.0 μM across the 9 cells), which reduced paired-
pulse depression of rEPSCs evoked 50 ms apart from a control
level of 0.58 ± 0.12 to 0.86 ± 0.20 in baclofen (mean ± SD of sec-
ond to ﬁrst rEPSC amplitude, n = 9). In the presence of baclofen,
temporal summation of EPSPs was more pronounced, so that
two rEPSGs were often necessary and sufﬁcient to cause one
spike.
For most aEPSG events and all rEPSG events, an interval of
5.0 ms was used between single EPSGs. This is at least twice the
absolute refractory period for spikes in retinal ganglion neurons
in vivo .H o w e v e r ,t h ea b s o l u t er e f r a c t o r yp e r i o di no u rb r a i n
slices could have been longer, at least in part because of our
lower temperature (34
◦). This could have resulted in failure of
some of our electrical stimuli to evoke presynaptic spikes in reti-
nal axons (complete failures of vesicle release given a spike seem
unlikely, since the retinogeniculate synapse is a large synapse with
many release sites, and our use of baclofen suppressed paired-
pulse depression). W e therefore visually inspected rEPSPs to look
for transmission failures. W e focused on rEPSPs evoked after
50 ms at − 80 mV (since these did not result in spikes), especially
the case of events with 4 rEPSGs. Successful transmission could
be recognized as positive slope about 3–5 ms after each electri-
cal stimulus (interrupted at 5 ms in some cases by the electrical
artifact of the subsequent stimulus), and a subsequent lack of
substantial decay of the rEPSP after about 7–10 ms ( Figure 4A).
In only 1 of the 9 cells did we observe failures, and these always
occurred for the 3rd of 4 rEPSGs (for 8 of 8 rEPSPs after 50
and 100 ms at − 80 mV). Nonetheless, this cell displayed a typi-
cal proﬁle in terms of its I-O counts. In particular, it had more
spikes in response to 4 rESPGs than 2 rEPSGs, both at − 65 mV
(1.9 vs. 0.9) and after 400 and 800 ms at − 80 mV (1.4 vs. 0.9).
Thus, presynaptic spike failures appeared to be infrequent and
relatively inconsequential. If such failures had made a substantial
contribution, they would not necessarily have altered the relative
excitability at − 80 vs. − 65 mV . Indeed, even when 4 aEPSGs with
no paired-pulse depression were delivered with 2.0 ms intervals
(500 Hz), excitability at − 80 mV did not exceed that at − 65 mV
(Figure 6).
DYNAMIC CLAMP
Dynamic clamp was used to deliver artiﬁcial synaptic conduc-
tances. It utilized an Intel Quad Core computer equipped with
an acquisition card (NI PCI-6251 ADC/DAC, M series, National
Instruments, Austin, TX) connected to a Multiclamp 700B ampli-
ﬁer, operating in current-clamp mode, via a Digidata 1320A A/D
converter (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Artiﬁcial conduc-
tance was generated by Windows-based dynamic clamp software,
StdpC2012 (Nowotny et al., 2006; Kemenes et al., 2011).
NATURAL PATTERNS OF SYNAPTIC CONDUCTANCES
Our artiﬁcial conductances should mimic the sum of all synaptic
conductances that are typically present during a rEPSP . In addi-
tion to the rEPSGs and opponent-type IPSGs described in Results,
synaptic inhibition from local interneurons with the “same sign”
(e.g., an ON-type interneuron inhibits an ON-type thalamocor-
tical neuron) typically has an onset about 1 ms after rEPSG onset
and could therefore have a homeostatic role in suppressing rEP-
SPs (Blitz and Regehr, 2005; Lindström and Wróbel, 2011; Wang
et al., 2011; Vigeland et al., 2013 ). There is also a relatively tonic
inhibition mediated by high-afﬁnity, extrasynaptic GABA
A recep-
tors that is probably greater in vivo than in vitro (Cope et al., 2005;
Bright et al., 2007 ). There are corticogeniculate EPSGs on distal
dendrites, but their timing with respect to rEPSGs is not known.
They are believed to be “modulatory” in the sense that although
they depolarize the membrane, unlike rEPSGs they are not the
proximal cause of spikes ( Sherman and Guillery, 1998; Fiorillo
et al., 2014).
Retinogeniculate excitation and opponent inhibition will nat-
urally be anti-correlated with one another (since it is rare to have
simultaneous evidence both for and against light in the receptive
ﬁeld center) (Mastronarde, 1989). Therefore, periods of hyperpo-
larization will usually be accompanied by an absence of rEPSGs,
and the onset of a rEPSG will often coincide with the offset of
opponent inhibition, as in the example of Figure 1A.H o w e v e r ,
homeostatic, “same-sign” synaptic inhibition presumably tends
to accompany rEPSGs regardless of whether the rEPSGs occur
at depolarized or hyperpolarized potentials. Therefore, synaptic
inhibition is likely to be at a high level throughout the period in
which T-type channels are activated. Our artiﬁcial conductances
should ideally mimic the dynamically varying sum of both types
of synaptic inhibition as well as rEPSGs. However, for simplic-
ity, we did not attempt to mimic homeostatic synaptic inhibition
during EPSG events, at either − 65 or − 80 mV .
ARTIFICIAL EPSGs
The waveform of an aEPSG was delivered via dynamic clamp (see
above) and was based on “Destexhe Synapses” ( Destexhe et al.,
1994) built in StdpC2012 with the following parameter values
for maximum conductance (gSyn = 7–12 nS), reversal potential
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 4


--- Page 5 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
(Vrev = 0 mV), duration of extracellular neurotransmitter (tRe-
lease = 1.0 ms), forward rate constant (alpha = 0.11/ms), and
backward rate constant (beta = 0.19/ms). Our aEPSGs were
designed to mimic only the AMPA-receptor-mediated compo-
nent of rEPSGs, and not the more complex NMDA-receptor
component.
Although paired-pulse depression is likely to occur in vivo ,
its effect is modest (see Retinogeniculate EPSPs). Thus, each of
our aEPSGs was of equal amplitude, both within and across
events within a single neuron. With our standard 5 ms inter-
EPSG intervals, our aEPSPs displayed less PPD than our rEPSPs
(Figures 4A,B), but they were more effective in reproducing the
natural I-O relation. Relative to natural conditions, we suspect
that our aEPSGs had too little PPD and that our rEPSGs had too
much (possibly related to our use of 2.0 mM external calcium;
Borst, 2010).
All experiments with aEPSGs began by adjusting aEPSG
amplitude so that the second but not the ﬁrst of 2 aEPSGs would
cause 1 spike from a potential of − 65 mV . During this initial
adjustment process, events consisted of 1 aEPSG in isolation, and
in alternating sweeps, a pair of 2 aEPSGs separated by 5.0 ms
(or 2 or 10 ms in 7 cells), each individual aEPSG having an
equivalent peak amplitude. The amplitude of aEPSGs was grad-
ually increased until one spike was evoked by the pair of aEPSGs
but not by the single aEPSGs. The amplitude was then further
increased until the single aEPSG was sufﬁcient to evoke a spike
(which was always observed to occur with a lesser aEPSG ampli-
tude than that required to evoke 2 spikes with 2 aEPSGs). W e then
selected as our standard peak aEPSG amplitude (for that cell)
the average of the lower value (for which only the 2nd aEPSG
of the pair caused a spike) and the higher value (for which just
a single aEPSG caused a spike). This resulted in a range of peak
amplitudes across cells of 7 − 12 nS.
Peak aEPSG amplitudes (7–12 nS) were similar to those esti-
mated for rEPSGs (6–18 nS based on voltage-clamp recordings).
Likewise, aEPSPs were virtually identical to rEPSPs in amplitude
(15.7 ± 3.3 for aEPSPs vs. 15.2 ± 3.6 mV for rEPSPs at − 80 mV ,
mean ± SD) and half-decay time (20.0± 6.2 for aEPSPs vs. 24.9±
10.4 mV for rEPSPs at − 65 mV , 12.5± 2.8 for aEPSPs vs. 13.1 ±
3.1 for rEPSPs at − 80 mV) in response to one EPSG. Since our
aEPSG waveform was not designed to mimic the NMDA-receptor
component of the EPSP , this might account for the very slight
tendency of our aEPSPs to decay faster than rEPSPs, especially
for EPSPs evoked from − 65 mV . The substantially faster decay of
both aEPSPs and rEPSPs at − 80 mV relative to − 65 mV was pre-
sumably due to a faster membrane time constant as a result of the
higher membrane conductance at − 80 mV .
ARTIFICIAL INHIBITION
Artiﬁcial inhibitory conductance (3–10 nS) was applied for
1.0–1.2 s with a square wave pattern. Its reversal potential was
adjusted in each cell to cause hyperpolarization to near − 80 mV ,
which required reversal potentials between − 85 and − 100 mV
across cells. These values are between the measured equilib-
rium potentials in TC neurons for chloride ( − 80 mV) ( Ulrich
and Huguenard, 1997b ) and potassium ( − 100 to − 110 mV).
Although our intention was to mimic synaptic inhibition, we
did not attempt to mimic the waveform of unitary inhibitory
postsynaptic conductances because we wanted to study EPSPs
and TTDs without the complexity added by dynamic inhibition.
Furthermore, the waveform of unitary IPSPs is not visible dur-
ing synaptically-mediated hyperpolarization of thalamocortical
neurons in LGN (Figure 1A)( Wang et al., 2007, 2010).
In experiments with square-wave depolarizing currents,
hyperpolarization to near − 80 mV was achieved by injection
of an artiﬁcial conductance of 10 nS for 1.2 s. This same con-
ductance (10 nS) was previously shown to suppress generation
of the L TS through shunting ( Ulrich and Huguenard, 1997a ).
It should ideally mimic the summed conductance of both the
synaptic inhibition that causes hyperpolarization as well as the
synaptic excitation that activates T-type channels. Resistance at
resting potentials was 152 ± 55 M/Omega1(mean ± SD, range 90–
300 M/Omega1at − 70 ± 4 m Vi n2 2n e u r o n s ) ,a n dt h ea r t i ﬁ c i a l
conductance would be expected to reduce this to 59 ± 8M/Omega1
(47–75 M/Omega1) if we disregard the fact that membrane resistance
would be somewhat lower at − 8 0d u et oa ni n c r e a s ei nH - t y p e
conductance. In comparison, the average resting in vivo mem-
brane resistance of TC neurons under anesthesia was estimated
to be 22 M /Omega1with sharp electrodes ( Vigeland et al., 2013 )a n d
less than 65 M /Omega1(the series resistance) with patch electrodes
(Margrie et al., 2002).
In experiments with rEPSGs and aEPSGs, the membrane was
hyperpolarized to near − 80 mV (1.0 s) by an artiﬁcial conduc-
tance (3–10 nS, mean 6 nS) that was equal to the resting conduc-
tance of the cell and thus would be expected to reduce membrane
resistance by half from its resting level at − 65 mV of 191 ± 43.
Previous efforts to mimic in vivo c o n d i t i o n sb ya p p l i c a t i o no fa r t i -
ﬁcial conductances also reduced membrane resistance by about
one half ( W olfart et al., 2005; Deleuze et al., 2012 ), or more
(Ulrich and Huguenard, 1997a ) (this excludes the conductance
of the real or artiﬁcial retinogeniculate EPSG, both here and in
previous studies). Our artiﬁcial conductances may be somewhat
low in comparison to natural synaptic conductance. A single pulse
of extracellular electrical stimulation caused a 75% reduction of
membrane resistance at the peak of a GABA
A IPSG in TC neurons
in brain slices (Crunelli et al., 1988).
ESTIMATES OF MEMBRANE CONDUCTANCE IN OUR EXPERIMENTS
At the peak of single rEPSGs and aEPSGs (mean = 9.5 nS), mem-
brane conductance increased 2.7-fold above its mean resting level
(near − 70 mV) of 5.5 nS. At the peak of the 4th aEPSG in an
event, the total aEPSG conductance was about 15 nS (1.6-fold
greater than the peak of a unitary aEPSG, as a result of tem-
poral summation). When we consider the additional artiﬁcial
conductance that caused hyperpolarization and was intended to
mimic opponent-type synaptic inhibition (mean of 5.5 nS), the
total artiﬁcial conductance at the peak of a single aEPSG would
be about 15 nS, and total membrane conductance would reach an
average peak greater than 21 nS (it would be greater considering
that the estimate of 21 nS neglects the increased in conductance
due to opening of H-type cation channels following hyperpo-
larization to − 80 mV). In comparison, Vigeland et al. (2013)
performed in vivo intracellular recordings in LGN and reported
that rEPSPs caused total membrane conductance to increase to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 5


--- Page 6 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
about 86 nS from a resting level of 46 nS. This estimate was based
on average synaptic conductance over a 20 ms period, which
included simultaneous rEPSGs and homeostatic (“same-sign”)
synaptic inhibition, but did not include opponent-type synaptic
i n h i b i t i o n .T h el o w e rc o n d u c t a n c e si no u rc e l l sw e r el i k e l yd u ea t
least in part to the loss of some dendrites during slice preparation.
TEMPORAL ASPECTS OF EXPERIMENTAL DESIGNS
Our standard protocol consisted of alternating periods of a depo-
larized state near − 65 mV (2.0 s) and a hyperpolarized state
near − 80 mV (1.0–1.2 s) ( Figures 2A, 4A,B). The depolarized
potential was adjusted to ∼− 65 mV through current injection.
The hyperpolarization was achieved by injection of an artiﬁ-
cial conductance (except current alone in the experiments of
Figure 10) with a square-wave pattern.
In experiments with square-wave currents, depolarizing
currents of 10 ms duration were injected from − 65 mV , or
from − 80 mV after delays of 50, 100, 200, 400, and 800 ms
following onset of hyperpolarization. Currents were increased
over successive sweeps in increments of 10 pA over a range of
200–900 pA. However, in a subset of 7 cells tested with two
concentrations of external calcium, the range was 100–1000 pA.
These cells contributed to Figures 3, 12.I na n o t h e rs u b s e to f5
cells, 10 pA increments were used from 200 to 500 pA, and 50 pA
increments between 500 and 900 pA. This latter subset was there-
fore excluded in Figures 2F ,G. In all cells, one current increment
was tested during each 3.0 s “sweep, ” starting with the smallest
current. During a single sweep, a current was injected at − 65 mV
(at 650 ms prior to hyperpolarization) (Figure 2A), and a current
of the same amplitude was then injected from − 80 mV . All cur-
rent increments were tested at 50 ms before proceeding to longer
delays, ending with 800 ms. A single increment size at a single
delay was delivered once per cell. Currents were injected at delays
of 100 ms in only 9 of the 22 neurons for which data is reported.
In experiments with EPSGs, multiple EPSG events were deliv-
ered during each 2.0 s period at − 65 mV , but just one event was
delivered at − 80 mV (Figures 4A,B). 5 aEPSG events were deliv-
ered in each of two consecutive seconds at − 65 mV (10 events
total), with a pattern of 1, 2, 4, 2, 1 unitary aEPSGs per event
(20 total aEPSGs) ( Figure 4B) .T h es a m ed e s i g nw a su s e df o r2
of the 9 cells for which data is reported with rEPSGs, but half of
that rate was used for the other 7 cells (5 total events were spread
o v e r2 . 0 s ,w i t h1 ,2 ,4 ,2 ,a n d1r E P S G sp e re v e n t ) .T h i sa l l o w e d
us to measure excitability from a typical depolarized potential,
and to roughly mimic naturally occurring levels of EPSG input
and spike output (about 14 and 7 Hz, respectively). The depolar-
ized potential may also have kept T-type channels in their normal
phosphorylated and “potentiated” state (Bessaïh et al., 2008).
One EPSG event was delivered during each 1.0 s period at
− 80 mV , following delays from hyperpolarization onset of 50,
100, 200, 400, and 800 ms. Each of the 3 events (1, 2, and 4 EPSGs)
was tested at each of the 5 delays in 15 consecutive “sweeps”
within a single “block, ” starting with 1 EPSG and progressing to
4E P S G s .W i t h i ne a c hb l o c k ,d e l a y sw e r et e s t e di nt h eo r d e r5 0 ,
800, 100, 400, and 200 ms. The block was then repeated 4 times,
for a total of 4 repetitions of each condition (EPSG count and
delay) at− 80 mV . In the case of rEPSGs, all the data reported were
from blocks 2 to 4. The ﬁrst block was excluded in order to allow
time for paired-pulse interactions and rEPSP amplitudes to reach
a steady state.
DATA ANALYSIS
Data were analyzed using Matlab (Natick, MA). TTD amplitude
in Figure 2G was measured after smoothing with a 10 ms moving
average (incremented by steps of 1 ms) in order to minimize the
contribution of sodium spikes. The peak of the TTD was consid-
ered to be the maximum value of the smoothed trace, measured
from baseline voltage prior to current injection (near − 80 mV).
For analysis of the effect of lower calcium on TTD ampli-
tude, we pooled across conditions in order to maximize statistical
power to assess what was a modest effect. For each cell, one aver-
age TTD was selected in 2.0 mM calcium and another in 1.2 mM
calcium. T o ﬁnd this one average TTD for each cell, we identiﬁed
the largest TTD for each of the four time points (100, 200, 400,
and 800 ms) from among all TTDs in response to each input con-
dition (current amplitude in our square-wave protocol, or aEPSG
count). W e excluded any responses with one or more sodium
spikes. W e then averaged across these four TTDs in each cell to
ﬁnd the average TTD for that cell and calcium concentration.
Although the input conditions (current or aEPSG count) varied
across cells, the input was identical for both calcium concentra-
tions in any given cell. W e then made paired comparisons of TTD
amplitude across the population of 17 cells (7 in the square-wave
protocol and 10 in the aEPSG protocol) ( Figure 12C).
Sodium-based action potential thresholds were quantiﬁed in
each of the two calcium concentrations by visual inspection. The
viewer was “blind” to the calcium concentration. This was done
in 17 cells, 7 in the square-wave protocol and 10 in the aEPSG
protocol. For the 7 cells recorded with the square-wave proto-
col, we also estimated action potential thresholds based on the
peak voltage achieved in response to the largest current injection
that did not cause a spike. Because current-increments were small
(10 pA for 10 ms), voltage increments were also small (∼ 0.2 mV),
and thus this was a sensitive technique. Conﬁrming the lower
thresholds found in all 17 cells based on visual inspection (see
Calcium Concentration in Results), spike thresholds measured in
this way were also signiﬁcantly lower in 1.2 mM ( − 54 ± 3.5 mV ,
mean ± SD) vs. 2.0 mM calcium ( − 50 ± 2.0 mV) ( n = 7, p =
0.003, paired t-test).
CHEMICALS
All chemicals were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO), except
potassium methylsulfate from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium).
COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS EFFORTS TO MIMIC NATURAL
PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF T-TYPE CHANNEL ACTIVATION
Like the present study, both W olfart et al. (2005) and Deleuze
et al. (2012) studied T-type calcium channels in TC neurons
while using dynamic clamp to mimic aspects of natural synaptic
input. Although not motivated by the theoretical issues explored
here, the latter study in somatosensory (ventrobasal) thalamus
also found that T-type calcium channels maintain I-O relations
during hyperpolarization (over the range of − 55 to − 72 mV).
Their results are fully consistent with ours and support the theory
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 6


--- Page 7 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
FIGURE 2 | The T -type depolarization has a graded character . (A) Overlay
of membrane voltage during 10 sweeps. On each sweep, membrane
potential was near − 65 mV (for 2.0 s) before and after hyperpolarization to
near − 80 mV by injection of an artiﬁcial conductance (10 nS for 1 .2 s).
Depolarizing currents were injected for 10 ms at − 65 mV , and after a delay
following hyperpolarization of 50, 100, 200, 400, or 800 ms (the illustrated
current was 290 pA). The depolarization increased over time at − 80 mV under
control conditions (black) but not in the presence of nickel (400 μM)
(magenta). (B) Voltage responses to currents of 290 (left) and 320 pA (right) at
50 (cyan), 100 (green), 200 (blue), 400 (red), and 800 ms (black) after onset of
hyperpolarization in the same cell shown in (A). Scale bars apply to (B–F). (C)
Voltage responses to all current increments at 50 (left) and 400 ms (middle) in
the same cell as (A,B). At right, voltages at 50 ms were subtracted from
those at 400 ms to isolate the TTD (albeit with sodium spikes). (D) The decay
of depolarization at 50 ms was accelerated in the presence of nickel (400 μM)
(magenta), indicating a small TTD. Each of the two traces represents the
average response across 5 cells to the largest current that did not evoke a
sodium spike. (E) The TTD at 100 ms in 9 cells (other cells included in (F)
were not tested at 100 ms) in response to the largest current in each cell
which did not cause a sodium spike (430–650 pA). (F) Average TTDs at 200,
400, and 800 ms. For each cell, we identiﬁed the smallest current increment
that caused at least one sodium spike, and we averaged the voltage
response to that current and all smaller currents ( − 10 pA, − 20 pA, etc.)
across all cells. The largest TTD at each time shows the remnants of sodium
spikes that appear diminished in amplitude due to averaging. (G) Following
the method in (F), the amplitude of the TTD required to cause a spike
(“0 pA ”) and all smaller TTDs is plotted as a function of current for 200 (blue),
400 (red), and 800 ms (black). Fewer cells contributed data at shorter delays
here and in (F), since no spikes were evoked by the largest tested current in
some cells. (H) L TS thresholds were measured as the peak voltage reached
at the end of the largest current injection that did not cause a L TS. Each point
represents the mean ( ±s.e.m.) across 2–22 neurons, as indicated. The
experimental design used to evoke TTDs from − 75 mV (gray) was identical to
that at − 80 (black), including application of an artiﬁcial conductance of 10 nS.
of predictive homeostasis. Here we describe several respects
in which our experiments are distinct from these two prior
studies and may be more relevant to natural physiological
conditions.
First, both prior studies examined the case of sustained
hyperpolarization (lasting at least seconds), whereas we examined
responses during mimicry of the transient (sub-second) peri-
ods of visually driven hyperpolarization observed in vivo ,w h i c h
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 7


--- Page 8 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
FIGURE 3 | T -type calcium channels restore membrane excitability . The
minimal “threshold” current (mean ± s.e.m., n = 17, black) necessary to
evoke one or more sodium spikes from − 80 mV was divisively normalized
by the threshold current at − 65 mV (432 ± 128 pA, mean ± SD). In a subset
of these cells ( n = 5, red), nickel (400 μM) was subsequently perfused. It
typically caused a depolarization of a few mV . After readjusting holding
current and the reversal potential of the artiﬁcial conductance to restore
membrane potentials to ∼− 65 and − 80 mV , the same protocol was
repeated. The threshold currents in nickel were normalized to the threshold
current from − 65 mV in nickel (333 ± 65 pA), which was less than in control
conditions (432 ± 128 pA).
cause only partial deinactivation of T-type channels. Second,
whereas the input variable of their I-O relation (and that of
W olfart et al., 2005 ) was the amplitude of unitary aEPSGs,
unitary rEPSG amplitude has not been found to vary substan-
tially in vivo (Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich et al., 2007; Borst,
2010), as suggested by inspection of Figure 1A (Wang et al.,
2007). The more critical input variable is the number of tem-
porally summed rEPSGs ( Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich et al.,
2007; W eyand, 2007; Casti et al., 2008 ), which we mimicked
(Figure 4).
A third distinction is that both prior studies applied a ran-
dom background “noise” conductance (via dynamic clamp). This
variable conductance was intended to mimic the effect of cortico-
geniculate activity, and it was shown by W olfart et al. (2005) to
have a powerful effect in ﬂattening the I-O relation (after averag-
ing across trials with identical artiﬁcial retinogeniculate “input”
conductance but variable “noise” conductance). Although cor-
ticogeniculate activity presumably has an important modulatory
function on the retinogeniculate I-O relation ( Sherman and
Guillery, 1998), the timing of corticogeniculate activity relative to
retinogeniculate input is unknown. W e presume that it is neither
random nor contributes noise under conditions of active vision.
In addition, the level of membrane potential variance added via
dynamic clamp ( SD = 3.6 m Vi nt h ec a s eo fW olfart et al., 2005,
and presumably comparable in the study of Deleuze et al., 2012 )
appears to have been considerably greater than that observed
during visually-driven hyperpolarization of thalamocortical neu-
rons recorded in vivo (∼ 1 mV or less in anesthetized animals)
(Figure 1A)( Wang et al., 2007, 2010). The sub-millivolt variance
in our experiments may therefore have been closer to the in vivo
case.
F o u r t h ,w ew e n tb e y o n db o t ho ft h e s ep r i o rs t u d i e si n s o f a r
as we veriﬁed our central observations with real retinogenicu-
late EPSPs, with perforated-patch pipettes (in combination with
aEPSGs) to maintain the natural cytosolic constituents of neu-
rons, and with a lower and more physiological concentration of
extracellular calcium.
RESULTS
T o understand the experimental design and judge its ability to
address the hypothesis, it is ﬁrst necessary to have knowledge of
both the homeostatic I-O relation and natural conditions in TC
neurons. W e therefore address these issues in relation to our spe-
ciﬁc hypothesis before we present experimental results. W e often
refer to synaptic conductances (EPSGs) rather than potentials
(EPSPs) because they are the input to neurons, they are relatively
independent of membrane properties, and they are more directly
under our control.
NATURAL CONDITIONS OF T-TYPE CHANNEL ACTIVATION
LGN was chosen for this study in part because we have relatively
substantial knowledge of naturally occurring patterns of in vivo
synaptic input. T o test our hypothesis, we must have knowledge of
natural patterns of the hyperpolarization that “primes” the T-type
calcium channels as well as the retinal excitation that activates
them. T-type channels in LGN become deinactivated (“primed”)
by visually driven hyperpolarization that can last several hun-
dred ms, and they can then be activated by rEPSPs ( Figure 1A)
(Wang et al., 2007 ). The hyperpolarization is caused by GABA-
mediated synaptic inhibition from local interneurons. Whereas
rEPSGs provide evidence for a neuron’s “preferred stimulus, ” this
“opponent inhibition” provides evidence against it. Thus, an ON-
type TC neuron is excited by light in the center of its receptive ﬁeld
via rEPSGs, and inhibited by dark in the same region of retino-
topic space via feedforward IPSGs from an OFF-type interneuron
(Wang et al., 2011).
Excitatory drive is relatively simple because most TC neurons
receive strong synaptic excitation from just one retinal neu-
ron, which causes virtually all of its spikes ( Usrey et al., 1998;
Sincich et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007). Although rEPSGs show pow-
erful paired-pulse depression (PPD) under standard slice condi-
tions (following a long-period without presynaptic spikes, and
in 2.0 mM extracellular calcium) ( Chen et al., 2002; Blitz and
Regehr, 2003), unitary rEPSG amplitude varies little over time in
LGN in vivo (Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich et al., 2007; Borst,
2010), as suggested by inspection ofFigure 1A (Wang et al., 2007).
Although unitary rEPSG amplitude varies little, temporal sum-
mation has a profound inﬂuence on rEPSP amplitude and spike
generation ( Usrey et al., 1998; Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich
et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007; Casti et al., 2008 ). Following a long
interval without a retinal input spike ( >50 ms), a single rEPSG
rarely caused an output spike (1–10%), but when two input spikes
occurred within 10 ms of one another, the probability of an out-
put spike rose to about 90% ( Sincich et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007).
Although a large variety of other factors are undoubtedly impor-
tant to the I-O relation, temporal summation of rEPSPs alone
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 8


--- Page 9 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
FIGURE 4 | Graded ampliﬁcation of EPSPs. Events consisting of 1, 2, or
4 unitary EPSGs separated by 5 ms intervals were evoked at − 65 mV
and after delays of 50–800 ms after injection of an artiﬁcial conductance
(3–10 nS for 1 .0 s) that hyperpolarized the membrane to near − 80 mV .
(A) T op, two separate sweeps in which 2 rEPSGs occurred either at 50
(magenta) or 800 ms (black). Numbers indicate EPSG input count and
spike output for each EPSG event. Bottom, overlaid rEPSPs in response
to 1 (blue), 2 (black), and 4 (red) rEPSGs at − 65 mV (left), and after 50
(middle) and 800 ms (right) at − 80 mV . Scale bars also apply to (B).
(B) Same as in (A), but for aEPSGs from another cell. (C) Population
mean TTDs at 100, 200, 400, and 800 ms in response to 1 (left) and 2
(right) EPSGs. rEPSGs at top, aEPSGs at bottom. Population mean EPSPs
at 50 ms (red) are overlaid for comparison. Scale bars apply to all traces
in (C) and (D). (D) T emporal summation illustrated by TTDs in response
to 1 (left) and 2 (right) aEPSGs at 200 (top) and 800 ms (bottom). Each
trace is an average of 4 repetitions in one cell. The traces from each cell
were assigned a color based on the response of that cell to 1 aEPSG at
800 ms (lower left), according to whether there was virtually no TTD
(blue; n = 13), a large TTD that caused no spike (red; n = 6), or a TTD
that caused one or more spikes (black; n = 7). Each cell is represented
by the same color in the other three conditions, but to aid clarity, cells
with spikes in response to 1 aEPSG at 800 ms are not shown in the
case of 2 aEPSGs. If little TTD was present in response to 1 aEPSG, the
second aEPSG caused a large TTD. In other cells with a large TTD but
no spikes, the second aEPSG caused at least one spike. Similar results
were obtained with rEPSGs.
is sufﬁcient to account for its general characteristics ( Carandini
et al., 2007; Casti et al., 2008 ). Thus, we consider “the input” to
be the number of unitary rEPSGs, of approximately equal ampli-
tude, that occur within a brief enough time to sum together in the
postsynaptic potential.
THE HOMEOSTATIC I-O RELATION
The optimal and homeostatic I-O relation can be derived from
theory given sufﬁcient knowledge of natural patterns of input
(Fiorillo et al., 2014 ). Alternatively, the actual I-O relation can
be characterized experimentally in response to natural patterns
of stimuli, and it can then be inferred that this I-O relation
is probably close to optimal on the assumption that neural
systems in healthy adult animals should be well adapted to
their environments. Both theory and experiment indicate that
the homeostatic relation in TC neurons of LGN is one out-
put spike for every 2 input spikes. The experimental evidence
comes from simultaneous extracellular recording of rEPSPs and
spikes from a single electrode and a single thalamocortical neuron
(Kaplan et al., 1987; Movshon et al., 2005; Carandini et al., 2007;
Sincich et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007; Casti et al., 2008 ). W e have
previously summarized and discussed the results of these studies
in relation to the theory of predictive homeostasis ( Fiorillo et al.,
2014).
Visually driven opponent inhibition will hyperpolarize the
membrane (Figure 1A) and will naturally cause a large reduction
in membrane excitability in which rEPSGs will virtually never
cause spikes ( Figure 1B). According to theory, it is appropriate
that sudden and unexpected evidence against the neuron’s stimu-
lus (an opponent-type IPSG) should strongly suppress the ability
of a rEPSG to cause a spike and thereby drive the I-O relation away
from its homeostatic level. However, if strong synaptic inhibition
persists in a partially predictable manner, then it would be desir-
able for homeostatic mechanisms to restore the ability of rEPSGs
to cause spikes.
During sustained hyperpolarization ( − 80 mV), T-type chan-
nels will deinactivate over hundreds of milliseconds and will then
amplify rEPSPs. Relative to the homeostatic I-O relation associ-
ated with the depolarized state (− 65 mV), the ampliﬁcation must
either be too weak, too strong, or “just right” ( Figures 1B,C)
Without ampliﬁcation, rEPSGs will fail to cause spikes (assuming
that rEPSGs at − 80 mV and − 65 are of similar amplitude), but if
ampliﬁcation is too strong, one input spike will consistently cause
one or more output spikes, as implied by the “burst hypothesis. ”
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 9


--- Page 10 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
If T-type channels are ﬁnely tuned, in accord with theory, the I-O
relation will recover to near its homeostatic level ( Figures 1B,C).
GRADED DEPOLARIZATION BY T-TYPE CHANNELS
W e sought to mimic natural in vivo conditions using dynamic
clamp patch recording in TC neurons in slices of rat dorsal LGN
(Materials and Methods). Before considering EPSGs, we ﬁrst
examined responses to brief current injections with a square-wave
pattern (10 ms, 100–900 pA in 10–50 pA increments), since this
simpler waveform allowed us to more easily recognize and char-
acterize the L TS. W e studied voltage responses to currents injected
from near − 65 and − 80 mV . T o mimic the synaptically mediated
hyperpolarization that occurs naturally during vision (Figure 1A)
we used dynamic clamp to inject an artiﬁcial hyperpolarizing
conductance for 1.2 s during each 3.2 s “sweep” ( Figure 2A). The
artiﬁcial conductance was 10 nS in each cell, but its reversal poten-
tial was adjusted as needed in each cell (range − 85 to − 100 mV)
to hyperpolarize the membrane to near − 80 mV . This conduc-
tance should ideally mimic the summed conductance associated
with both the IPSG that causes the hyperpolarization and the
rEPSG that activates T-type channels, as well as other synap-
tic conductances. W e provide a justiﬁcation for the artiﬁcial
conductance amplitude in Materials and Methods.
W e examined the extent to which T-type depolarizations
(TTDs) were graded. A TTD was classiﬁed as a L TS if there was
a region of positive slope in membrane voltage following off-
set of the depolarizing current ( Figures 2B,C). As expected, the
L TS emerged only after a few hundred ms at − 80 mV , and it was
blocked by nickel (400 μM) ( Figure 2A). Among 22 total neu-
rons, a L TS was observed in 22, 21, and 18 after 800, 400, and
200 ms, respectively, but not in any neurons at 50 ms.
There were two respects in which the TTD was graded rather
than all-or-none. First, the “minimal L TS” (evoked by the mini-
mum suprathreshold current) often caused 0 or 1 sodium spike,
a n dl a r g e rc u r r e n t se v o k e dm o r es p i k e s(Figures 2A–C). After
800 ms at − 80 mV , the minimal L TS caused 0, 1, 2, and 3 spikes in
3, 8, 10 and 1 neuron, respectively. Under natural conditions, it is
likely that most TTDs occur after a shorter duration of hyperpo-
larization to a less extreme potential. The minimal L TS caused 0
a n d1s p i k ei n4a n d2n e u r o n sa f t e r1 0 0m sa t− 80 mV (3 others
had no L TS). After hyperpolarization to − 75 mV for 800 ms, the
minimal L TS caused 0 and 1 spike in 6 and 3 neurons, respectively
(2 others had no L TS). This suggests that a large fraction of L TSs
may cause no spikes, and thus greater synaptic excitation is likely
to increase the number of spikes.
Second, TTDs were graded in amplitude for currents that were
insufﬁcient to cause a L TS. Even at 50 ms, the depolarization
decayed faster in the presence of nickel (400 μM), indicative of
a small TTD ( Figure 2D). T o isolate TTDs, we subtracted volt-
age responses at 50 ms from those at 100–800 ms ( Figure 2C).
At 100 ms, the largest current injection that did not cause a
sodium spike generated a TTD of 9.0 mV (range 2.8–15 mV;
n = 9) (Figure 2E). T o characterize subthreshold TTDs, we iden-
tiﬁed the smallest current necessary to evoke a sodium spike in
each cell, and we then averaged voltage responses across all cells
at this threshold current and all smaller currents. At 800 ms, the
threshold current evoked a TTD (which was a L TS) much larger
than with just 10 pA less ( Figures 2F ,G). Nonetheless, subthresh-
old current injections caused TTDs that were graded in amplitude
up to about 10 mV (Figures 2F ,G).
TTDs were graded over a larger range of currents and voltages
after shorter periods of hyperpolarization, which was due at least
in part to a higher L TS threshold voltage when T-type channels
were only partially deinactivated ( Figures 2F ,H). W e were able
to measure L TS threshold voltage with high precision due to our
brief currents and small increments (the difference in peak depo-
larization to currents of 10 vs. 20 pA below the minimal current
that evoked a L TS at 800 ms was 0.50± 0.34 mV , mean± SD). The
L TS threshold was ∼ 5 mV more depolarized at 100 than 800 ms
(− 63 vs. − 68 mV) (Figure 2H), and some neurons had no L TS at
all at early times (see above). Likewise, L TS threshold was ∼ 5m V
more depolarized when evoked from − 75 mV ( Figure 2H). In
contrast, when the L TS was evoked in a more conventional
experimental design, after at least a few seconds of sustained
hyperpolarization and in the absence of any artiﬁcial conduc-
tance (Llinás and Jahnsen, 1982; Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan
et al., 1999; Gutierrez et al., 2001 ), L TS threshold was substan-
tially more hyperpolarized ( − 72.5 ± 0.5a n d − 74.8 ± 0.5m V ,
mean ± s.e.m., n = 30, when evoked from − 80 and − 90 mV ,
respectively).
A notable feature of the L TS is its variable timing. When it
is evoked by minimal supra-threshold currents, or when only
a small fraction of T-type channels are deinactivated and able
to contribute to the L TS, the peak of the L TS occurs substan-
tially later, by more than 100 ms in some cells ( Figures 2B,C)
(Zhan et al., 1999 ). This would appear problematic if it were to
create a corresponding level of variability in spike timing (rel-
ative to rEPSGs). However, subthreshold TTDs (those with no
L TS) reached peak amplitude at 28 ± 4.5 ms after current onset
(mean ± SD at 200 ms), and the time course varied little with
current amplitude or time at − 80 mV (Figure 2F) or across cells
(Figure 2E). W e did not observe spikes at latencies longer than the
peak of subthreshold TTDs (>30 ms) (see Spike Timing).
T o examine the effect of the TTD on excitability we mea-
sured the minimal (“threshold”) current required to evoke at
least one sodium spike. Relative to the baseline threshold current
at − 65 mV , the current was twice as great at 50 ms, but it recov-
ered by 200 ms and at 800 ms it was 81 ± 22% (mean ± SD) of
baseline (Figure 3)( n = 17, p = 0.005, paired t-test). Excitability
did not recover when T-type channels were blocked with nickel
(400μM) (Figure 3). Despite the modest increase in excitability
observed after 800 ms, excitability was much closer to its homeo-
static level (that observed at − 65 mV) because of the presence of
T-type channels (Figure 3).
T-TYPE DEPOLARIZATION RESTORES SENSITIVITY OF SPIKE OUTPUT
TO SYNAPTIC EXCITATION
Above we have provided evidence that the TTD functions in a
graded manner, but only over a moderately narrow range of input
amplitudes. The theory of predictive homeostasis implies that
this narrow range will be closely matched to the range of natu-
rally occurring rEPSP amplitudes. W e therefore studied responses
to rEPSGs, as well as artiﬁcial EPSGs (aEPSGs) delivered via
dynamic clamp (Materials and Methods). W e were guided by
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 10


--- Page 11 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
knowledge of naturally occurring patterns of synaptic input (see
“The Homeostatic I-O Relation”), particularly the ﬁnding that
unitary rEPSG amplitude displays only modest variation, and
temporal summation of 2 rEPSGs is usually required to cause 1
spike (Sincich et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007).
Synaptic events consisted of 1, 2, or 4 EPSGs delivered with
a standard inter-EPSG interval of 5 ms. rEPSGs were studied in
the presence of a low concentration of GABA
B agonist (0.05–
1.0 μM baclofen) to help remove the unnaturally high level of
paired-pulse depression found under standard slice conditions,
and to thereby better reproduce the temporal summation of rEP-
SPs that is necessary to cause spikes in vivo (see Materials and
Methods). At the start of recording from each cell tested with
aEPSGs, the amplitude of unitary aEPSGs was adjusted so that
temporal summation of 2 aEPSGs (separated by 5 ms) was nec-
essary to cause 1 spike from a potential of − 65 mV . This method
resulted in aEPSG and aEPSP amplitudes almost identical to their
retinogeniculate counterparts (see Materials and Methods). The
similarity was remarkable given that we selected aEPSG ampli-
t u d e st or e p r o d u c ein vivo I-O relations, rather than aiming to
directly match rEPSG amplitude. The similarity helps to validate
our method of attempting to mimic natural conditions.
EPSG events were delivered at − 65 mV and at various times
after application of an artiﬁcial conductance that hyperpolar-
ized the membrane to near − 80 mV (Figures 4A,B). As expected,
EPSP amplitude increased over time at − 80 mV (Figures 4A–C).
W e isolated TTDs in the same way described above, by subtrac-
tion of the voltage waveform after 50 ms at − 80 mV from that at
100–800 ms. At 800 ms, the TTD was roughly comparable in aver-
age peak amplitude to the EPSP at 50 ms ( ∼ 10 mV), although
it had a slower time course ( Figure 4C). Similar to results with
square-wave current pulses ( Figure 2), the time course of TTDs
varied little with time at − 80 mV or with number (or frequency;
not shown) of temporally summed EPSGs ( Figure 4C).
As at − 65 mV , temporal summation of EPSGs was necessary
for spike generation from− 80 mV . For illustration only, we sorted
the 26 neurons into three color-coded groups based on their
responses to one aEPSG at 800 ms ( Figure 4D, lower left). One
aEPSG caused virtually no TTD in half the cells (13 of 26), but a
large TTD in the other half ( Figure 4D) (this could potentially
reﬂect functional diversity of cell types, perhaps with differing
receptive ﬁelds, but it is more easily explained by the natural
variation found within nominally homogeneous cell populations,
as well as artifactual variation due to slice preparation, together
with some all-or-none character of the TTD). In cells with no
TTD in response to one aEPSG, temporal summation with a sec-
ond aEPSG caused a large TTD in all of these cells (13 of 13).
However, large TTDs often failed to cause spikes. In response
t oo n ea E P S G ,6o f1 3c e l l sw i t hl a r g eT T D sh a dn os p i k e ,b u t
all 6 of these cells had at least one spike in response to two
aEPSGs ( Figure 4D, lower right). Similar results were observed
after 200 ms (Figure 4D, upper traces) and for rEPSGs. Thus, gen-
eration of TTDs often depended on temporal summation of two
EPSPs, and even in the presence of a TTD, additional EPSGs were
often required to cause spikes. Consistent with theory, both TTD
generation and spike generation were highly sensitive to EPSG
input count.
FIGURE 5 | Recovery of spike counts following hyperpolarization. Spike
counts (mean ± s.e.m.) in response to 1 (black), 2 (red), and 4 EPSGs (blue)
at − 65 mV and as a function of elapsed time at − 80 mV .(A) Spike counts in
response to rEPSGs (left) and aEPSGs (right) in two individual neurons.
Large symbols represent means, and small symbols represents spike
counts for a single EPSG event, offset slightly in some cases to avoid
overlap with other data points. The cell illustrating aEPSGs was chosen
because it had the highest spike counts at 800 ms among 26 neurons. (B)
Spike counts (mean ± s.e.m.) in response to rEPSG (left) and aEPSG (right)
events averaged across the population of recorded neurons. Of 26 neurons
tested with aEPSGs, only 13 were tested at 100 ms. (C) Spike counts in
response to aEPSGs did not recover in the presence of nickel (300 μM). (D)
Population spike counts in response to aEPSG events, as in recordings in
the whole cell conﬁguration in (B), but for a separate population of 1 1
neurons recorded with perforated-patch pipettes.
The TTD was found to increase excitability toward but not
above its homeostatic level ( Figures 5A,B). The single cell shown
with aEPSGs ( Figure 5A, right) displayed moderately greater
excitability at − 80 than − 65 mV (in the case of 4 aEPSGs after
200 ms or more). However, we chose to illustrate this cell because
it had the greatest number of spikes at 800 ms of any of the 26
cells tested. Nonetheless, it never exhibited a spike count that
exceeded the number of aEPSG inputs, and in this sense it never
exhibited internally driven bursts of spikes. Thus, consistent with
theory, we never observed a cell with excitability at − 80 mV that
was substantially above the homeostatic ideal. Averaged across the
population of all neurons, the number of spikes at− 80 mV recov-
ered to but not above the level observed at − 65 mV by 800 ms,
either with real or artiﬁcial EPSGs ( Figure 5B).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 11


--- Page 12 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
As expected, recovery did not occur in the presence of nickel
(300 μM) (Figure 5C). This concentration of nickel would not be
expected to fully block T-type calcium channels, and it is likely to
have partially blocked other types of calcium channels (200 μM
nickel blocked 66% of T-type current and 36% of L-type current
in thalamocortical neurons of ventrobasal thalamus; Huguenard
and Prince, 1992). However, the recovery of excitability observed
here matches the well-known voltage-dependence and kinetics of
T-type channels. Furthermore, our hypothesis is not exclusive to
T-type channels, and thus other channels may also contribute to
the recovery of excitability during hyperpolarization.
The solution within our whole-cell patch pipettes could have
altered the function of T-type channels or other aspects of
membrane excitability. However, similar results were observed
with perforated-patch recordings ( n = 12) ( Figure 5D). In sep-
arate experiments with whole-cell recordings that were designed
to test stability ( n = 5), no signiﬁcant change was observed
in the TTD or membrane excitability over more than 15 min
(which was longer than the period of ∼ 10 min required for
our standard protocol). This is consistent with previous evi-
dence that T-type currents are stable in whole-cell recordings
(Kuo and Y ang, 2001 ). Thus, the lack of an all-or-none burst
of spikes was unlikely to have been an artifact of whole-cell
recording.
W e asked whether the TTD would also have a homeostatic
function for other aEPSG intervals (input frequencies). In 7 addi-
tional neurons tested with aEPSG intervals of 2, 5, and 10 ms,
we obtained results qualitatively similar to those reported above
for 5 ms intervals ( Figure 6). The lack of excessive excitability in
response to EPSG events with 2 ms intervals (500 Hz) is note-
worthy, because the rapid and large depolarization would be
expected to have maximal effect in eliciting an L TS and driving
bursts of spikes. Our aEPSGs were designed with no “paired-pulse
depression” (each was of identical conductance amplitude), and
therefore the resulting aEPSPs may be as large and fast as any that
would occur naturally.
Modulatory neurotransmitters are typically at higher extra-
cellular concentrations in an awake brain compared to a brain
slice, and acetylcholine is known to have a strong inﬂuence on
TC neurons. W e therefore studied 11 additional neurons in the
FIGURE 6 | Recovery of spike counts in response to events with
inter -aEPSG intervals of 2, 5, and 10 ms. Fully analogous to Figure 5B
with 5 ms intervals, but for a separate population of 7 neurons that were
also tested with 2 and 10 ms intervals. Gray region at the left of each plot
shows spike counts evoked from − 65 mV . Prior to the protocol being run
with a particular interval, aEPSG amplitude was adjusted as necessary so
that the second of two aEPSGs at − 65 mV would evoke one spike.
Intervals were tested in the order 2, 5, and then 10 ms.
presence of carbachol (3–10 μM), a cholinergic receptor agonist.
The same protocol described above with aEPSGs was performed
before and after perfusion of carbachol. As expected, carbachol
caused depolarization (7.4 ± 3.4 mV). Membrane potential and
aEPSG amplitude was then adjusted once again, in the same way
that it was at the start of recording in each cell, so that 2 aEPSGs
delivered from− 65 mV caused one spike. Relative to control con-
ditions, carbachol suppressed the recovery of spike counts over
time at − 80 mV (Figure 7). Subsequent perfusion of a muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor antagonist (1μM scopolamine) in the con-
tinued presence of carbachol partially reversed the suppressive
effect of carbachol, although its effect was of borderline signiﬁ-
cance (n = 5, p = 0.11 and 0.02 for 4 aEPSGs at 400 and 800 ms,
respectively, paired t-tests). These results might be explained by
the ﬁnding that muscarinic receptor activation suppresses L TS
amplitude (Zhan et al., 2000 ). Thus, cholinergic stimulation may
blunt the effect of T-type channels, strengthening our conclusion
that T-type channels work toward restoring excitability rather
than increasing excitability above its homeostatic baseline.
MAINTENANCE OF INPUT-OUTPUT RELATIONS
T o further examine I-O relations, we counted spikes as a func-
tion of the number of EPSGs in an event. Averaged across the
population of neurons, the I-O relation was close to linear with
a slope near 0.5 at − 65 mV (Figure 8A). Following hyperpolar-
ization to − 80 mV , the slope approached zero, but it recovered
over time so that by 800 ms it was virtually indistinguishable
from that at− 65 mV (Figure 8A). Recovery was blocked by nickel
(300μM) (Figure 8A).
Figure 8B shows linear ﬁts of I-O counts in each neuron
at − 65 and after 800 ms at − 80 mV . T o compare the two in
each neuron, we subtracted the linear ﬁt at − 65 from the one
at − 80 mV . The difference had a slope near zero in most neu-
rons (indicating recovery of homeostatic excitability) and was
slightly negative in others (incomplete recovery) ( Figure 8C). As
FIGURE 7 | Suppressed recovery of spike counts during activation of
cholinergic receptors. Mean (±s.e.m.) spike counts evoked by 2 (left) and
4 (right) aEPSGs in 1 1 neurons before (black) and after (red) perfusion of the
cholinergic agonist carbachol (3–10 μM). Plots are analogous to Figure 5B,
but with 2 and 4 aEPSGs shown on separate plots. From − 65 mV , carbachol
caused depolarization of 7 .4± 3.4 mV and reduced membrane resistance
by about 20 M/Omega1. Adjustments were then made once again, following the
same method used at the start of each recording, so that 2 aEPSGs
from − 65 mV caused 1 spike.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 12


--- Page 13 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
expected, the differences were negative in the presence of nickel
(Figure 8C). Although the I-O relation was restored over time
at − 8 0m V ,s l o p e st e n d e dt ob es l i g h t l yl e s st h a na t− 65 mV even
after 800 ms, indicating that excitability did not fully recover in a
FIGURE 8 | Recovery of the I-O relation following hyperpolarization.
rEPSGs at left, aEPSGs at right. (A) Population average spike counts
(mean ± s.e.m.) as a function of EPSG count at − 65 mV (black) and
at − 80 mV (pink and red). For rEPSGs (left), spike counts are shown in
response to rEPSGs at 50–800 ms following onset of hyperpolarization. For
aEPSGs (right), spike counts are shown both in the presence (triangles) and
absence (circles) of nickel (300 μM), and data at − 80 mV is shown only for
800 ms. (B) A line was ﬁt to mean spike counts (3 or 4 counts per cell) in
each individual neuron at − 65 (black) and after 800 ms at − 80 mV
(magenta). (C) The linear ﬁts of (B) at − 65 mV were subtracted from those
at − 80 mV to show how the I-O relation changed in each neuron. The
preponderance of ﬂat lines indicate little change in most neurons, whereas
the negative slopes observed in the presence of nickel (red) indicate that
the I-O relation at − 80 mV had lower slope than at − 65 mV .(D) Using the
linear ﬁts of (B), the time course of recovery was characterized for both the
slope and y-offset (mean ± s.e.m.). The y-offset was deﬁned as the number
of spikes in response to 2 EPSGs, and was multiplied by 0.5 only so that
the scale was similar to that of slope for the purpose of illustration.
Recovery was suppressed in the presence of nickel (triangles).
substantial fraction of neurons ( Figures 8B–D) (rEPSGs: 0.26 ±
0.06 at 800 ms vs. 0.42 ± 0.05 at − 65 mV ,p = 0.06, n = 9, paired
t-test; aEPSGs: 0.59 ± 0.02 at 800 ms vs. 0.66 ± 0.2, p = 0.05,
n = 26).
Most above analyses have examined mean spike counts. For
the burst hypothesis to be correct would not necessarily require
that the mean spike count is increased above the level observed
at − 65 mV . It is conceivable that the mean could be preserved
but the distribution changed so that most EPSG events result
either in zero spikes or in a burst of multiple spikes. W e therefore
examined all I-O counts from all individual EPSG events in all
cells (under control conditions) (Figure 9). Out of a total of 2184
aEPSG events in 65 neurons at 50–200 ms (1, 2, and 4 aEPSGs),
we never observed an excess spike (O/I never exceed 1). Nor did
we ever observe an excess spike in response to 2 or 4 aEPSGs at 400
or 800 ms (among 1040 events). The only excess spikes occurred
with 1 aEPSG at 400 and 800 ms, where we found 21 of 520 events
with 2 spikes (4%, or 0.6% of 3744 total events across all 3 aEPSG
counts at all 5 time points). W e did not observe a single instance
FIGURE 9 | Rarity of excess spikes. The fraction of all EPSG events
(rEPSGs at left, aEPSGs at right) that resulted in 0 (black), 1 (red), 2 (blue),
and 3 (magenta) spikes as a function of time at − 80 mV for (A) 1 EPSG, (B)
2 EPSGs, and (C) 4 EPSGs. Spike count only exceeded EPSG count in a
small fraction of cases in which 1 EPSG caused 2 spikes at 400 and 800 ms.
For each EPSG count and time point, there were a total of 27 rEPSG events
(3 per cell in 9 cells) and 260 aEPSG events (4 per cell in 65 cells), except
208 aEPSG events at 100 ms (4 per cell in 52 cells). For aEPSG events, data
includes all cells recorded under standard conditions (2.0 mM calcium) with
5.0 ms inter -aEPSG intervals, including perforated-patch recordings.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 13


--- Page 14 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
of any EPSG event causing an excess of 2 or more spikes (0 of
3744 events). Virtually identical results were found among a total
of 405 rEPSG events in 9 cells ( Figure 9). Thus, we conclude that
T-type driven bursts were exceedingly rare.
T-TYPE CHANNELS CAUSE EXCESSIVE EXCITABILITY IN A LOW
CONDUCTANCE STATE
The same experiment (as in Figure 4B) was repeated in a separate
group of neurons (n = 25), but the hyperpolarization to − 80 mV
and the aEPSPs were caused only by current injection, without
any mimicry of synaptic conductances ( Figure 10A). Following
hyperpolarization, excitability recovered to a signiﬁcantly higher
level than either at − 65 mV (Figure 10B), or after 400 or 800 ms
in experiments with artiﬁcial conductances (p < 10
− 6 in all cases,
paired and unpaired t-tests). Likewise, the I-O relation after
800 ms at − 80 mV was shifted upwards relative to that at− 65 mV
(Figure 10C). These results suggest that the suppressive effect of
synaptic conductances on membrane excitability (via shunting) is
an important factor in the I-O relation, which potentially explains
why studies that used only current injection found that T-type
channels caused a stereotyped burst of spikes (Llinás and Jahnsen,
1982; Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan et al., 1999; Gutierrez et al.,
2001).
SPIKE TIMING
Whereas above we show that T-type channels help to preserve
spike counts, here we investigate their effect on spike timing. W e
FIGURE 10 | T -type channels cause excessive spike counts when
activated in a low conductance state. (A) Voltage recording from a single
cell. Fully analogous to our standard aEPSC experiment shown in
Figure 4B, but performed without artiﬁcial conductances. Both
hyperpolarization and aEPSPs were achieved solely by current injection
(aEPSCs in “current clamp” rather than aEPSGs in “dynamic clamp”). The
higher membrane resistance may account for the slower hyperpolarization
(relative to Figures 4A,B), which was not complete after 50 ms. T wo
sweeps are shown, one with two aEPSCs at 50 ms (magenta) and another
with two aEPSCs at 800 ms (black). Inset numbers indicate aEPSC input
and spike output for each event. (B) Compare to Figure 5B.A f t e r
200–800 ms at − 80 mV , spike count (mean± s.e.m.) exceeded its
homeostatic level at − 65 mV in response to 1 (black), 2 (red), and 4 aEPSCs
(blue), in a separate population of 25 neurons that contributed data only to
this ﬁgure. (C) Average spike counts (mean ± s.e.m.) as a function of EPSG
count at − 65 mV (black) and after 800 ms at − 80 mV (green). Compare to
Figure 8A.
presume that each spike should ideally be caused by a rEPSG,
preferably with a delay as brief as possible. However, it is difﬁ-
cult to imagine an ampliﬁcation mechanism that could preserve
at − 80 mV the spike timing seen at − 65 mV while also preserving
I-O counts. The median latency of spikes in vivo is 1–3 ms (Usrey
et al., 1998; Sincich et al., 2007; W eyand, 2007). W e observed sim-
ilar latencies to the ﬁrst spike from − 65 mV , but latencies were
substantially longer when EPSGs were delivered from − 80 mV
(7.7 ± 1.0 ms at − 80 mV vs. 1.7 ± 0.1 ms at − 65 mV , mea-
sured from onset of the second of two aEPSGs). The raster of
Figure 11A shows spike times across all cells (4–6 trials per cell).
The variability in timing of the ﬁrst spike (“jitter”) appears greater
at − 80 mV than − 65 mV ( Figure 11A), but this was primarily
due to variability across cells rather than across trials in individual
cells. When measured by the coefﬁcient of variation (SD/mean),
variability in spike timing across trials in individual cells was
modestly reduced at − 80 mV (0.08 ± 0.01 at − 80 mV vs. 0.21 ±
0.06 at − 65 mV for cells tested with 2 aEPSGs or rEPSGs, p =
0.036, n = 29, paired t-test). Short inter-spike intervals (ISIs) are
known to be a hallmark of T-type-induced bursts, and indeed,
intervals were modestly reduced at − 80 mV (Figure 11C).
The effect of hyperpolarization on spike timing was mostly
restricted to the early period of high frequency EPSG events,
as would be expected given temporal summation of EPSGs and
ag r a d e dT T D .S p i k e sf o l l o w e dat h i r da n df o u r t hE P S Gw i t h
shorter latencies (than a second EPSG) ( Figures 11A,B). Spike
latency was lower following the second of two aEPSGs when
the aEPSG interval was 10 ms rather than 5 ms ( Figures 11B,D).
Likewise, ISIs were longer for 10 ms than 5 ms inter-aEPSG inter-
vals (p < 10
− 5 for ISIs at 5 vs. 10 ms, rank sum test).
Although spike timing was altered at − 80 mV , EPSGs rather
than TTDs remained the primary and proximal cause of spikes.
With 5 ms EPSG intervals, virtually all spikes occurred within
15 ms after onset of the second EPSG, substantially before the
peak of the TTD at about 25 ms ( Figures 4C, 11A). Furthermore,
as the TTD increased in amplitude over time at − 80 mV
(Figure 4C), there was no change in either ISI or ﬁrst spike latency
(Figure 11C). Finally, in 7 neurons tested with aEPSG intervals
of 2, 5, and 10 ms, spike times were clearly related to timing
of aEPSGs ( Figures 11B,D). This was particularly apparent for
aEPSG intervals of 10 ms, in which case there was little difference
between − 80 and − 65 mV ( Figures 11B,D). Thus, TTDs were
not associated with stereotyped spike timing, and the causal link
of synaptic input and spike output was substantially preserved.
CALCIUM CONCENTRATION
The results presented above were obtained with an extracellu-
lar calcium concentration of 2.0 mM, which is typical of in vitro
experimental conditions, including those studies that found
bursts with an all-or-none character ( Llinás and Jahnsen, 1982;
Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan et al., 1999; Gutierrez et al., 2001).
However, estimates of in vivo calcium are at least 25% lower
(1.1–1.5 mM) ( Hansen, 1985; Jones and Keep, 1988 ). T o exam-
ine the effect of lower calcium, the same experimental protocols
described above were performed in an additional group of neu-
rons in 2.0 mM extracellular calcium, followed by perfusion of
solution containing 1.2 mM calcium. Membrane potentials and
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 14


--- Page 15 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
FIGURE 1 1 | Spike timing. (A) Rasters of spike times in response to 2
(left) and 4 EPSGs (right) delivered from − 65 (black) and − 80 mV (blue),
with rEPSGs at top (6 trials from each of 9 cells, half at 400 ms and half
at 800 ms) and aEPSGs at bottom (4 trials in each of 26 cells at 800 ms).
Vertical red lines indicate EPSG onsets. For 2 aEPSGs at − 80 mV , the
population average aEPSP at 50 ms (red) and TTD at 800 ms (blue),
(identical to those in Figure 4C ) are shown for comparison. (B) Spike
times from 7 cells tested with inter -aEPSG intervals of 2, 5, and 10 ms.
(C) First spike times (in response to 2 EPSGs, black) and ﬁrst ISIs (in
response to 4 EPSGs, red) at − 65 mV and as a function of time at
− 80 mV , with rEPSGs at left and aEPSGs at right. EPSGs were delivered
with 5 ms intervals as in (A). Medians ( ±25 percentiles) are from all
spikes in all cells. The number of spikes range from 2 at 50 ms to 1559
at − 65 mV for aEPSGs, and 3–387 for rEPSGs. (D) Times of ﬁrst and
second spikes evoked from − 65 mV (black) and after 800 ms at − 80 mV
(blue), measured from onset of ﬁrst aEPSG, as a function of aEPSG
interval. Median times ( ±25 percentiles) of 5–28 spikes at − 80 mV , and
260–420 spikes at − 65 mV . For the case of the second spike with an
inter -aEPSG interval of 10 ms, the 75th percentile was truncated for
clarity; it was at 33 ms, whether evoked from − 65 or − 80 mV . Similar to
what is shown here at 800 ms, spike times also increased with aEPSG
interval at 200 and 400 ms (not shown).
aEPSG amplitudes were readjusted in 1.2 mM calcium in the same
way that they were at the start of recording in each cell (see above).
In 1.2 mM calcium, recovery of excitability over time at − 80 mV
was reduced, and was not complete by 800 ms, whether measured
in the square-wave protocol ( Figure 12A) or the aEPSG proto-
col ( Figure 12B). The effect of 1.2 mM calcium was reversed by
subsequent return to 2.0 mM calcium (Figure 12B). These results
further strengthen our conclusion that T-type channels work
toward restoring excitability rather than increasing excitability
above its homeostatic baseline.
Lower external calcium would be expected to reduce TTD
amplitude by reducing T-type calcium currents, and in princi-
ple this could explain the suppression of recovery at − 80 mV .
However, the reduction in external calcium had additional effects
on excitability that made it difﬁcult to determine the likely con-
tribution of reduced T-type currents to the reduced recovery
of excitability at − 80 mV . Perfusion of 1.2 mM calcium resulted
in a small but signiﬁcant hyperpolarization ( − 1.6 ± 2.1m V
from − 65 mV , mean ± SD, n = 17, p = 0.007, paired t-test),
which was corrected by current injection. In addition, it decreased
action potential threshold ( − 2.1 ± 1.3m V , m e a n± SD, n =
17, p = 0.0007) and increased membrane resistance ( +11.5 ±
12.8% at − 65 mV , mean ± SD, n = 13, p = 0.007). Likewise,
the current required to cause a spike decreased, whether injected
from − 65 mV (386 ± 25 pA in 2.0 to 245 ± 39 pA in 1.2 mM,
mean ± s.e.m., n = 7, p = 0.0001, paired t-test) or after 50 ms
at − 80 mV (730 ± 45 pA to 603 ± 92 pA, p = 0.0009). In con-
trast, there was an insigniﬁcant increase after perfusion of 1.2 mM
calcium in the current required to cause a spike after 800 ms
at − 80 mV (344 ± 44 pA to 365 ± 68 pA, p = 0.14), suggesting
that although excitability was generally greater in 1.2 mM cal-
cium, this was compensated by a reduced T-type calcium current
once T-type channels were deinactivated.
Despite the fact that an increase in membrane resistance
would be expected to increase TTD amplitude, TTDs tended to
be smaller in lower calcium ( Figure 12C)( − 3.4 ± 1.5m V f o r
square-wave currents, mean ± s.e.m., n = 7, p = 0.086; − 1.8 ±
0.6 mV for aEPSGs, n = 10, p = 0.02). Because the decrease in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 15


--- Page 16 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
B CA
04 0 0Time (ms) Time (ms)800 0 400 800
0
1
2Spike count
Calcium (mM)
2.0, 1.2, 2.0
2 aEPSGs
04 0 0 8 0 00
1
2
3
Time (ms)
Current (normalized)
20 ms
2.0 mM
1.2 mM
Calcium
2.0 mM
n=6
1.2 mM
n=7 n=10
n=10
4 aEPSGs
n=10
Currents aEPSGs
2 mV
FIGURE 12 | Reduced recovery of excitability in 1.2 vs. 2.0 mM calcium.
Our standard protocols were performed in 2.0 mM followed by 1 .2 mM
calcium in 17 neurons. (A) In the square-wave protocol ( Figure 2 ),
recovery of excitability at − 80 mV was reduced in 1 .2 mM (red) vs. 2.0 mM
calcium (black), as measured by the minimal “threshold” current required
to evoke a sodium spike. Plot is analogous to Figure 3 . Currents in each
cell were divisively normalized to the corresponding threshold current at
− 65 mV (386 ± 25 pA in 2.0 mM calcium, 245 ± 39 pA in 1 .2 mM calcium,
mean ± s.e.m.). (B) In the aEPSG protocol ( Figure 4 ), recovery of spike
counts at − 80 mV was reduced in 1 .2 mM calcium (2 aEPSGs at left, 4
aEPSGs at right). The protocol in each cell was performed sequentially in
2.0 (black), 1 .2 (red), and again in 2.0 mM calcium (gray). (C) Population
TTDs (mean ± s.e.m.) in response to square- wave current (left) and a EPSG
inputs (right). The input conditions (current or aEPSG count) in each cell
were selected to maximize TTD amplitude in the absence of sodium
spikes, and were averaged across times at − 80 mV (100–800 ms) (see
Materials and Methods). TTDs were evoked in 2.0 and 1 .2 mM calcium in
each cell, and responses were normalized to the peak TTD amplitude in
2.0 mM calcium prior to averaging across cells. One cell tested in the
square-wave protocol was incl uded here (and in the statistics presented in
Results), but excluded in (A), because of a large and sudden change in
input resistance that occurred after collection of data at 50 and 800 ms in
1 .2 mM calcium (thus data collected subsequently at 100, 200, and 400 ms
in 1 .2 mM calcium was discarded).
amplitude was small, and we wished to exclude the potential
inﬂuence of sodium spikes, Figure 12C and the above statistics
were obtained by pooling across conditions that were chosen in
each cell to maximize TTD amplitude in the absence of spikes (see
M a t e r i a l sa n dM e t h o d s ) .W ec o n c l u d et h a tar e d u c t i o ni nT - t y p e
calcium current in 1.2 vs. 2.0 mM external calcium was very likely
to have contributed to the slower and less complete recovery of
excitability at − 80 mV (Figures 12A,B).
DISCUSSION
The present results support the theory of predictive home-
ostasis ( Fiorillo et al., 2014 ), which proposes that most or all
voltage-regulated ion channels in sensory neurons serve a homeo-
static role. That T-type calcium channels maintain a homeostatic
level of excitability is of particular interest, since unlike many
other voltage-regulated channels (e.g., depolarization activated
potassium channels, hyperpolarization-activated cation chan-
nels), T-type channels are both excitatory and exhibit positive
feedback. Our results suggest that T-type channels are speciﬁcally
designed for restoring excitability following hyperpolarization
lasting more than a 100 ms. Such hyperpolarization is likely to be
prominent in many neurons that receive opponent-type synaptic
inhibition, including ON- and OFF-type neurons throughout the
visual system (Ferster, 1988; Hirsch et al., 1998; Wang et al., 2007)
as well as midbrain dopamine neurons ( Fiorillo, 2013; Fiorillo
et al., 2013).
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
W e have provided evidence that T-type calcium channels do not
i n d u c ea“ b u r s tm o d e ”i nL G Nu n d e rn a t u r a lc o n d i t i o n s ,b u t
rather work toward maintaining a single optimal and homeostatic
I-O relation, as predicted by theory ( Dan et al., 1996; Fiorillo
et al., 2014 ). Past evidence for bursts was obtained under con-
ditions in which membrane excitability was very likely to have
been unnaturally high. W e have identiﬁed at least four factors that
decrease membrane excitability and counteract the generation
of T-type-driven depolarizations under natural conditions, none
of which were examined in studies that reported T-type driven
bursts with an all-or-none character ( Llinás and Jahnsen, 1982;
Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan et al., 1999; Gutierrez et al., 2001).
First, the synaptic conductance of neuronal membranes is much
higher in the brain than under typical conditions in brain slices
(Destexhe et al., 2003 ), particularly since both synaptic excita-
tion and inhibition are strong at the time of TTDs. W e found
that excitability at hyperpolarized potentials nearly matches the
homeostatic excitability found at depolarized potentials in the
presence ( Figures 5, 8)b u tn o ta b s e n c e(Figure 10)o fs y n a p t i c
conductances, consistent with previous evidence that the shunt-
ing of membrane current suppresses the all-or-none character of
the L TS (Ulrich and Huguenard, 1997a ). Second, the standard
extracellular concentration of calcium utilized in vitro (2.0 mM)
is higher than found in vivo (1.1–1.5 mM) (Hansen, 1985; Jones
and Keep, 1988), and TTDs and membrane excitability at hyper-
polarized potentials are reduced at a lower and more physiological
concentration of calcium (1.2 mM) ( Figure 12). Third, acetyl-
choline and other modulatory neurotransmitters are typically at
higher extracellular concentrations in an intact brain. W e found
that activation of cholinergic receptors suppresses recovery of
membrane excitability following hyperpolarization ( Figure 7),
consistent with the ﬁnding that acetylcholine suppresses the
T-type mediated LTS (Zhan et al., 2000).
Fourth, in most studies, including all of those that reported
T-type driven bursts with an all-or-none character ( Llinás and
Jahnsen, 1982; Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; Zhan et al., 1999;
Gutierrez et al., 2001 ), membrane hyperpolarization was artiﬁ-
cially sustained for at least seconds. By contrast, most hyperpo-
larizations during vision are likely to be brief (less than 250 ms on
average) (Wang et al., 2007 ). Membrane potential is unlikely to
reach below − 80 mV (the primary membrane potential studied
here), since − 80 mV is the chloride equilibrium potential (Ulrich
and Huguenard, 1997b). Only about 25% of T-type channels are
deinactivated after allowing enough time to reach steady state
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 16


--- Page 17 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
at − 80 mV , and fewer are deinactivated at more positive poten-
tials (Coulter et al., 1989; Crunelli et al., 1989 ). Deinactivation of
T-type channels has been found to reach about half of its steady
state level after 100 ms ( ∼ 12%), and may only be complete after
500 ms (based on extrapolation to − 80 mV and 37
◦)( Crunelli
et al., 1989; Coulter et al., 1989). Thus, if T-type channels are most
often activated following 100–300 ms at − 75 to − 80 mV , we can
infer that the fraction of deinactivated (primed) T-type channels
during hyperpolarization may typically be 10–15%. Our results
suggest that T-type channels help to restore excitability after such
brief hyperpolarization, but that excitability remains substantially
below its homeostatic level for at least several 100 more millisec-
onds (Figures 5–8) (see below for discussion of related theoretical
issues).
Previous in vitro studies have also provided evidence that
T-type channels in TC neurons can contribute to graded ampli-
ﬁcation of EPSPs, particularly when current is shunted by ele-
vated membrane conductance ( Ulrich and Huguenard, 1997a;
Timofeev et al., 2001; W olfart et al., 2005; W ei et al., 2011; Deleuze
et al., 2012 ). T wo of these were comparable to the present study
in using dynamic clamp to mimic aspects of in vivo synaptic
conductances ( W olfart et al., 2005; Deleuze et al., 2012 ). At the
end of Materials and Methods we compare our study to these
prior studies and we note several respects in which we believe
our experimental design to have more closely mimicked natural
physiological conditions in the brain, including temporal sum-
mation of EPSPs and transient hyperpolarization. Although not
motivated by the same theoretical issues, Deleuze et al. (2012)
also provided evidence in support of our theory by showing that
T-type channels maintain rather than alter I-O relations dur-
ing prolonged periods of hyperpolarization in somatosensory
(ventrobasal) thalamus. The most fundamental advance of the
present work over that ofDeleuze et al. (2012) is in demonstrating
the contribution of T-type channels to maintenance of a pre-
cise homeostatic I-O relation that is optimal according to theory
(Dan et al., 1996; Fiorillo et al., 2014 ) and has been found during
vision (Dan et al., 1996; Carandini et al., 2007; Sincich et al., 2007;
W eyand, 2007; Casti et al., 2008).
Studies performed in vivo with intracellular recordings have
found that T-type channels contribute to bursts of spikes ( Lu
et al., 1992; Wang et al., 2007 ). Although these studies proposed
that T-type channels cause the bursts and thereby create a sec-
ond “burst mode” of ﬁring, I-O relations were not quantiﬁed and
t h u st h eo b s e r v e db u r s t so fo u t p u ts p i k e sm a yh a v eb e e nd r i v e nb y
bursts of retinal input spikes. The study of Lu et al. (1992) caused
hyperpolarization via current injection without mimicking the
natural inhibitory synaptic conductance ( Lu et al., 1992).
Simultaneous recordings of retinal input and thalamocortical
spike output during visual stimulation support the view that reti-
nal input, not T-type conductance, is the proximal cause of spikes
in LGN. The vast majority of spikes ( >95%) are preceded by a
rEPSG within 2 ms, including those within bursts ( Sincich et al.,
2007); see also ( W eyand, 2007). Bursts of spikes following peri-
ods (>100 ms) without spikes were always (>99.9%) preceded by
“failed” rEPSGs occurring several ms earlier (Sincich et al., 2007).
This is consistent with our ﬁnding that when T-type channels are
primed, a “failed” ﬁrst rEPSG and TTD are necessary so that a
second rEPSG can cause a spike. Likewise, Wang et al. (2007)
reported that “many putative T-currents were not large enough
to drive the membrane across the threshold for sodium spikes or
led to only one sodium spike. ” Quantiﬁcation of the I-O relation
with intracellular recordings could provide further evidence, but
this has never been done so far as we know. The potential difﬁ-
culty in counting rEPSGs during high frequency synaptic events
could be overcome in future experiments if the timing of rEPSGs
is directly controlled by experimenters (rather than occurring at
uncertain times in response to a naturalistic movie, as in the study
of Wang et al., 2007).
A standard criterion for identiﬁcation of bursts based on
extracellular recordings is an inter-spike interval of 4 ms or less
following a period of 100 ms or more with no spikes ( Lu et al.,
1992; Guido and W eyand, 1995; Reinagel et al., 1999; W eyand
et al., 2001; Lesica and Stanley, 2004; Denning and Reinagel,
2005). These bursts have been found to be rare events, contribut-
ing less than 1–5% of all spikes in TC neurons of LGN ( Guido
and W eyand, 1995; W eyand et al., 2001). Our results suggest that
these thalamic bursts are caused by bursts of retinal spikes that are
ampliﬁed by activation of T-type channels, with a homeostatic
average of one thalamic spike for two retinal spikes. Given the
time required for deinactivation of T-type channels, and the likely
prevalence of hyperpolarized periods during vision (feed-forward
opponent inhibition should be about as prevalent as retinogenic-
ulate excitation; Wang et al., 2007 ), our results also suggest that
T-type channels will often amplify the effect of rEPSGs, and that
this will result in either 0 or 1 spike in the majority of cases
(assuming that most retinal ﬁring events consist of either 1 or 2
spikes). Thus, although T-type channels appear not to induce a
fundamentally distinct ﬁring mode, they are likely to contribute
considerably more to normal visual function than one would
expect based on extracellular analyses of burst frequency.
RELATION TO THEORY
W e predicted the present results based on a theory that ascribes a
homeostatic role to the majority of voltage-sensitive ion channels,
and proposes that the properties of such channels are opti-
mized for predicting natural temporal patterns of synaptic input
(Fiorillo, 2008; Fiorillo et al., 2014 ). The remarkable diversity
of voltage-regulated ion channels would be needed to maintain
homeostasis of membrane excitability given the numerous tem-
poral patterns that are found within the brain and even within
a single neuron. Some of these patterns arise from external sen-
sory stimuli whereas others are internally generated (such as the
moderately stereotyped shape of a unitary EPSP , as inFigure 1A).
If the theory is correct, we should be able to predict the prop-
erties of a speciﬁc ion channel given knowledge of the statistical
patterns of synaptic input and membrane excitability associated
with its activation. That T-type channels restore the homeostatic
I-O relation without causing bursts implies that the density, volt-
age dependence, and activation kinetics of the channels are ﬁnely
tuned to amplify EPSPs toward spike threshold without consis-
tently crossing it. Additional mechanisms may work with T-type
channels to help to restore homeostasis following hyperpolariza-
tion lasting a 100 ms or more, including depolarization caused by
H-type cation channels, and the facilitation of rEPSG amplitude
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 17


--- Page 18 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
(decay of paired-pulse depression) following long intervals with-
out presynaptic spikes.
If we had greater knowledge of natural statistics we could
attempt to predict more speciﬁc properties, such as the optimal
rate of deinactivation and density of functional (deinactivated)
T-type channels. For example, we can imagine the simple scenario
that the duration of the hyperpolarized state (prior to a rEPSG)
is “random” and thus exponentially distributed with some char-
acteristic and predictable mean. It is naturally better to update
predictions and restore homeostasis quickly so as to minimize the
period of “blindness, ” and thus faster deinactivation would pre-
sumably be favored. Alternatively, we can imagine that in addition
to the longer-lasting hyperpolarization for which T-type chan-
nels are designed, a second pattern of hyperpolarization is brief
(<50 ms) and stereotyped without the longer-lasting component
(as might happen in the case of a synchronous GABA
A IPSP that
reaches a peak and immediately decays). In this latter scenario,
deinactivation should not be too fast since T-type channels should
not contribute to excessive excitability once synaptic inhibition is
gone. Thus, we can imagine that the moderate rate of deinactiva-
tion of T-type channels could be optimal for channels designed
to compensate only for the slower of two common patterns of
hyperpolarization. If so, we could say that T-type channels “wait
to collect evidence” that the hyperpolarization will be sustained
rather than transient before deinactivating.
Despite our lack of detailed knowledge of natural statistical
patterns of synaptic input, it is clear that deinactivation of T-type
channels must necessarily come at the cost of excessive excitabil-
ity in some instances ( Figure 9). In addition to the informational
cost of excessive excitability, there would also be the metabolic
cost of T-type calcium currents as well as spikes. These costs
would favor lower densities of T-type channels having slower
deinactivation. This could account for our observation that
excitability was not fully recovered, on average, even after 800 ms
at − 80 mV . This incomplete recovery of excitability matches the
common ﬁnding that homeostatic feedback mechanisms typically
cause incomplete compensation rather than overcompensation.
The better a neuron’s homeostatic mechanisms are able to
predict synaptic drive and maintain homeostatic excitability, the
more information spikes will carry about sensory stimuli, and
the better sensory perception should be. There are many types
of visual “contrast adaptation” that are known to improve the
ability of neurons and animals to discriminate light intensity (or
contrast), and these occur at multiple levels of the visual sys-
tem through various mechanisms. Our results suggest that T-type
channels mediate a speciﬁc form of contrast adaptation dedicated
to high spatial frequencies (due to the small size of receptive ﬁelds
in LGN) and temporal frequencies below about 10 Hz (due to the
deinactivation rate of T-type channels). W e are unaware of any
studies that have looked for this particular sort of contrast adap-
tation, which might be revealed in psychophysical experiments
by use of a high-contrast checkerboard pattern as an “adapting”
stimulus followed by low-contrast “test” increments of oppo-
site polarity. For example, the high-contrast adapting stimulus
should hyperpolarize a set of ON-type thalamocortical neurons
that have “dark” in the center of their receptive ﬁelds. If a low-
contrast test increment is subsequently made in the light intensity
(the darkness in the receptive ﬁeld center of these ON-type cells
suddenly becomes less dark), this would be expected to cause
synaptic excitation of those ON-type neurons. If this test incre-
ment occurs 50 ms after onset of the adapting stimulus (with no
gap between offset of adapting stimulus and onset of test stimu-
lus), when T-type channels are inactivated, the ON-type neurons
should have synaptic excitation but no spikes, and psychophys-
ical tests should show low sensitivity to the increments. When
the same test increments are delivered instead after a few hun-
dred ms of the high-contrast stimulus, when T-type channels have
had time to deinactivate, the test increments should evoke spikes
(in roughly half the trials and in half the cells), and perceptual
discrimination of the increment intensity should be improved rel-
ative to the case of shorter adaptation times. Furthermore, theory
would predict that psychophysical sensitivity to luminance would
be greatest in response to the speciﬁc test increment that evokes
spikes in half the trials and in half the relevant cells (ON-type cells
with appropriate spatial receptive ﬁelds in this example) ( Fiorillo
et al., 2014 ). Nonetheless, at any time during which the rele-
vant neurons are substantially hyperpolarized from rest (about
− 65 mV), we would expect perceptual sensitivity to be inferior
to the more prevalent situation in which neurons are closer to
resting potential, and predictions are highly accurate in the pres-
ence of static and low-contrast visual stimulation (low spatial and
temporal frequencies).
Principles of information and prediction have been highly
successful in explaining properties of early sensory systems in
relation to natural patterns of external sensory stimuli (Simoncelli
and Olshausen, 2001 ). Application of related theoretical princi-
ples at the cellular level could allow us to explain the diversity of
ion channel properties and their informational content in relation
to natural patterns of local synaptic input ( Fiorillo, 2008, 2012;
Fiorillo et al., 2014 ). In addition to providing experimental evi-
dence supporting the theory, the present work provides the ﬁrst
speciﬁc and detailed illustration of how the theory can be tested.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Su Z. Hong and Christopher D. Fiorillo designed the experiments.
Su Z. Hong and Haram R. Kim performed the experiments.
Christopher D. Fiorillo and Su Z. Hong wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W e thank Thomas Nowotny for assistance in using his
dynamic clamp software (“StdpC”), and Pamela Reinagel for
helpful suggestions. Research was supported by a grant to
Christopher D. Fiorillo. from the Basic Science Research Program
(2012R1A1A2006996) of the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
T echnology.
REFERENCES
Barlow, H. B. (1961). “Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory
messages, ” in Sensory Communication ,e dW .A .R o s e n b l i t h( C a m b r i d g e ,M A :
MIT Press), 217–234.
Bessaïh, T., Leresche, N., and Lambert, R. C. (2008). T current potentiation
increases the occurrence and temporal ﬁdelity of synaptically evoked burst ﬁr-
ing in sensory thalamic neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 11376–11381.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0801484105
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 18


--- Page 19 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
Blitz, D. M., and Regehr, W. G. (2003). Retinogeniculate synaptic properties
controlling spike number and timing in relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol . 90,
2438–2450. doi: 10.1152/jn.00562.2003
Blitz, D. M., and Regehr, W. G. (2005). Timing and speciﬁcity of feed-forward inhi-
bition within the LGN. Neuron 45, 917–928. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.01.033
Borst, J. G. G. (2010). The low synaptic release probability in vivo. Trends Neurosc i.
33, 259–266. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2010.03.003
Brenowitz, S., and T russell, L. O. (2001). Minimizing synaptic depression by control
of release probability. J. Neurosci. 21, 1857–1867.
Bright, D. P ., Aller, M. I., and Brickley, S. G. (2007). Synaptic release
generates a tonic GABAA receptor-mediated conductance that modulates
burst precision in thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurosci . 27, 2560–2569. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5100-06.2007
Carandini, M., Horton, J. C., and Sincich, L. C. (2007). Thalamic ﬁltering of retinal
spike trains by postsynaptic summation. J. Vision 7, 20–20. doi: 10.1167/7.14.20
Casti, A., Hayot, F ., Xiao, Y ., and Kaplan, E. (2008). A simple model of retina-
LGN transmission. J. Comput. Neurosci. 24, 235–252. doi: 10.1007/s10827-007-
0053-7
Chen, C., Blitz, D. M., and Regehr, W. G. (2002). Contributions of receptor desen-
sitization and saturation to plasticity at the retinogeniculate synapse. Neuron 33,
779–788. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00611-6
Cope, D. W., Hughes, S. W., and Crunelli, V . (2005). GABA A receptor-mediated
tonic inhibition in thalamic neurons. J. Neurosci . 25, 11553–11563. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3362-05.2005
Coulter, D. A., Huguenard, J. R., and Prince, D. A. (1989). Calcium currents in
rat thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient, low-
threshold current. J. Physiol. 414, 587–604.
Crunelli, V ., Haby, M., Jassik-Gerschenfeld, D., Leresche, N., and Pirchio, M.
(1988). Cl− —and K+-dependent inhibitory postsynaptic potentials evoked by
interneurones of the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Physiol. 399, 153–176.
Crunelli, V ., Lightowler, S., and Pollard, C. E. (1989). A T-type Ca2+ current under-
lies low-threshold Ca2+ potentials in cells of the cat and rat lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Physiol. 413, 543–561.
Dan, Y ., Atick, J. J., and Reid, R. C. (1996). Efﬁcient coding of natural scenes in
the lateral geniculate nucleus: experimental test of a computational theory. J.
Neurosci. 16, 3351–3362.
Deleuze, C., David, F ., Behuret, S., Sadoc, G., Shin, H. S., Uebele, V . N.,
et al. (2012). T-Type calcium channels consolidate tonic action potential out-
put of thalamic neurons to neocortex. J. Neurosci . 32, 12228–12236. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1362-12.2012
Denning, K. S., and Reinagel, P . (2005). Visual control of burst priming in
the anesthetized lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci . 25, 3531–3538. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4417-04.2005
Destexhe, A., Mainen, Z. F ., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1994). An efﬁcient method for
computing synaptic conductances based on a kinetic model of receptor binding.
Neural Comput. 6, 14–18. doi: 10.1162/neco.1994.6.1.14
Destexhe, A., Rudolph, M., and Paré, D. (2003). The high-conductance state of neo-
cortical neurons in vivo. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 739–751. doi: 10.1038/nrn1198
Ferster, D. (1988). Spatially opponent excitation and inhibition in simple cells of
the cat visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 8, 1172–1180.
Fiorillo, C. D. (2008). T owards a general theory of neural computation based
on prediction by single neurons. PLoS ONE 3:e3298. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0003298
Fiorillo, C. D. (2012). Beyond Bayes: on the need for a uniﬁed and Jaynesian
deﬁnition of probability and information within neuroscience. Information 3,
175–203. doi: 10.3390/info3020175
Fiorillo, C. D. (2013). T wo dimensions of value: dopamine neurons represent
reward but not aversiveness.Science 341, 546–549. doi: 10.1126/science.1238699
Fiorillo, C. D., Kim, J. K., and Hong, S. Z. (2014). The meaning of spikes
from the neuron’s point of view: predictive homeostasis generates the appear-
ance of randomness. Front. Comput. Neurosci . 8:49. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.
00049
Fiorillo, C. D., Song, M. R., and Yun, S. R. (2013). Multiphasic temporal dynamics
in responses of midbrain dopamine neurons to appetitive and aversive stimuli.
J. Neurosci. 33, 4710–4725. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3883-12.2013
Guido, W., Lu, S. M., V aughan, J. W., Godwin, D. W., and Sherman, S. M. (1995).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of neurons in the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus during tonic and burst response mode. Vis. Neurosci . 12,
723–741. doi: 10.1017/S0952523800008993
Guido, W., and W eyand, T. (1995). Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the
a w a k eb e h a v i n gc a t .J. Neurophysiol. 74, 1782–1786.
Gutierrez, C., Cox, C. L., Rinzel, J., and Sherman, S. M. (2001). Dynamics of low-
threshold spike activation in relay neurons of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus.
J. Neurosci. 21, 1022–1032.
Hansen, A. J. (1985). Effect of anoxia on ion distribution in the brain. Physiol. Rev.
65, 101–148.
Hirsch, J. A., Alonso, J.-M., Reid, R. C., and Martinez, L. M. (1998). Synaptic
integration in striate cortical simple cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 9517–9528.
Hosoya, T., Baccus, S. A., and Meister, M. (2005). Dynamic predictive coding by the
retina. Nature 436, 71–77. doi: 10.1038/nature03689
Huguenard, J. R., and Prince, D. A. (1992). A novel T-type current underlies pro-
longed Ca (2+)-dependent burst ﬁring in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic
reticular nucleus. J. Neurosci. 12, 3804–3817.
Jahnsen, H., and Llinás, R. R. (1984). Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. J. Physiol. 349, 205–226.
Jones, H. C., and Keep, R. F . (1988). Brain ﬂuid calcium concentration and response
to acute hypercalcaemia during development in the rat.
J. Physiol. 402, 579–593.
Kaplan, E., Purpura, K., and Shapley, R. M. (1987). Contrast affects the transmis-
sion of visual information through the mammalian lateral geniculate nucleus. J.
Physiol. 391, 267–288.
Kemenes, I., Marra, V ., Crossley, M., Samu, D., Staras, K., Kemenes, G., et al.
(2011). Dynamic clamp with StdpC software. Nat. Protoc . 6, 405–417. doi:
10.1038/nprot.2010.200
Kuo, C. C., and Y ang, S. (2001). Recovery from inactivation of T-type Ca 2+
channels in rat thalamic neurons. J. Neurosci. 21, 1884–1892.
Laughlin, S. B. (1981). A simple coding procedure enhances a neuron’s information
capacity. Z. Naturforsch. C Biosci. 36, 910–912.
Lesica, N. A., and Stanley, G. B. (2004). Encoding of natural scene movies by tonic
and burst spikes in the lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci. 24, 10731–10740.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3059-04.2004
Lindström, S., and Wróbel, A. (2011). Feedforward and recurrent inhibitory recep-
tive ﬁelds of principal cells in the cat’s dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Pﬂugers
Arch 461, 277–294. doi: 10.1007/s00424-010-0900-7
Llinás, R. R., and Jahnsen, H. (1982). Electrophysiology of mammalian thalamic
neurones in vitro. Nature 297, 406–408. doi: 10.1038/297406a0
Llinás, R. R., and Steriade, M. (2006). Bursting of thalamic neurons and states of
vigilance. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 3297–3308. doi: 10.1152/jn.00166.2006
Lu, S.-M., Guido, W., and Sherman, S. M. (1992). Effects of membrane volt-
age on receptive ﬁeld properties of lateral geniculate neurons in the cat:
contributions of the low-threshold Ca2+ conductance. J. Neurophysiol . 68,
2185–2198.
Margrie, T., Brecht, M., and Sakmann, B. (2002). In vivo , low-resistance, whole-
cell recordings from neurons in the anaesthetized and awake mammalian brain.
Pﬂugers Arch 444, 491–498. doi: 10.1007/s00424-002-0831-z
Mastronarde, D. N. (1989). Correlated ﬁring of retinal ganglion cells. Trends
Neurosci. 12, 75–80. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(89)90140-9
Movshon, J. A., Kiorpes, L., Hawken, M. J., and Cavanaugh, J. R. (2005).
Functional maturation of the macaque’s lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci.
25, 2712–2722. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2356-04.2005
Nowotny, T., Szûcs, A., Pinto, R. D., and Selverston, A. I. (2006). StdpC:
a modern dynamic clamp. J. Neurosci. Meth . 158, 287–299. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.05.034
Reinagel, P ., Godwin, D., Sherman, S. M., and Koch, C. (1999). Encoding of visual
information by LGN bursts. J. Neurophysiol. 81, 2558–2569.
Rieke, F ., Warland, D., de Ruyter V an Steveninck, R. R., and Bialek, W. (1997).
Spikes: Exploring the Neural Code.C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s .
Sherman, S. M. (2001). T onic and burst ﬁring: dual modes of thalamo-
cortical relay. Trends Neurosc i. 24, 122–126. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)
01714-8
Sherman, S. M., and Guillery, R. W. (1998). On the actions that one nerve cell can
have on another: distinguishing “drivers” from “modulators. ” Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 95, 7121–7126. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.12.7121
Simoncelli, E. P ., and Olshausen, B. A. (2001). Natural image statistics
and neural representation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci . 24, 1193–1216. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.1193
Sincich, L. C., Adams, D. L., Economides, J. R., and Horton, J. C. (2007).
T ransmission of spike trains at the retinogeniculate synapse. J. Neurosci . 27,
2683–2692. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5077-06.2007
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 19


--- Page 20 ---
Hong et al. T -type channels maintain homeostatic excitability
Srinivasan, M. V ., Laughlin, S. B., and Dubs, A. (1982). Predictive coding: a fresh
view of inhibition in the retina. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 216, 427–459. doi:
10.1098/rspb.1982.0085
Timofeev, I., Bazhenov, M., Sejnowski, T. J., and Steriade, M. (2001). Contribution
of intrinsic and synaptic factors in the desynchronization of thalamic oscillatory
activity. Thalamus Related Sys. 1, 53–69. doi: 10.1017/S1472928801000048
T obler, P . N., Fiorillo, C. D., and Schultz, W. (2005). Adaptive coding of
reward value by dopamine neurons. Science 307, 1642–1645. doi: 10.1126/sci-
ence.1105370
T urner, J. P ., and Salt, T. E. (1998). Characterization of sensory and corticothala-
mic excitatory inputs to rat thalamocortical neurones in vitro . J. Physiol . 510,
829–843. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.829bj.x
Ulrich, D., and Huguenard, J. R. (1997a). GABA(A)-receptor-mediated rebound
burst ﬁring and burst shunting in thalamus. J. Neurophysiol. 78, 1748–1751.
Ulrich, D., and Huguenard, J. R. (1997b). Nucleus-speciﬁc chloride homeostasis in
rat thalamus. J. Neurosci. 17, 2348–2354.
Usrey, W. M., Reppas, J. B., and Reid, R. C. (1998). Paired-spike interactions and
synaptic efﬁcacy of retinal inputs to the thalamus. Nature 395, 384–387. doi:
10.1038/26487
Vigeland, L. E., Contreras, D., and Palmer, L. A. (2013). Synaptic mechanisms of
temporal diversity in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. J. Neurosci.
33, 1887–1896. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4046-12.2013
Wang, X., Sommer, F . T., and Hirsch, J. A. (2011). Inhibitory circuits for
visual processing in thalamus. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol . 21, 726–733. doi:
10.1016/j.conb.2011.06.004
Wang, X., V aingankar, V ., Sanchez, C. S., Sommer, F . T., and Hirsch, J. A. (2010).
Thalamic interneurons and relay cells use complementary synaptic mechanisms
for visual processing. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 224–231. doi: 10.1038/nn.2707
Wang, X., W ei, Y ., V aingankar, V ., Wang, Q., Koepsell, K., Sommer, F . T., et al.
(2007). Feedforward excitation and inhibition evoke dual modes of ﬁring in
the cat’s visual thalamus during naturalistic viewing. Neuron 55, 465–478. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2007.06.039
Wang, X.-J., Liu, Y ., Sanchez-Vives, M. V ., and McCormick, D. A. (2003).
Adaptation and temporal decorrelation by single neurons in the primary visual
cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 89, 3279–3293. doi: 10.1152/jn.00242.2003
W ei, H., Bonjean, M., Petry, H. M., Sejnowski, T. J., and Bickford, M. E. (2011).
Thalamic burst ﬁring propensity: a comparison of the dorsal lateral geniculate
and pulvinar nuclei in the tree shrew. J. Neurosci . 342, 17287–17299. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6431-10.2011
W eyand, T. G. (2007). Retinogeniculate transmission in wakefulness.
J. Neurophysiol. 98, 769–785. doi: 10.1152/jn.00929.2006
W eyand, T. G., Boudreaux, M., and Guido, W. (2001). Burst and tonic response
modes in thalamic neurons during sleep and wakefulness. J. Neurophysiol. 85,
1107–1118.
W olfart, J., Debay, D., Le Masson, G., Destexhe, A., and Bal, T. (2005). Synaptic
background activity controls spike transfer from thalamus to cortex. Nat.
Neurosci. 8, 1760–1767. doi: 10.1038/nn1591
Zhan, X. J., Cox, C. L., Rinzel, J., and Sherman, S. M. (1999). Current clamp and
modeling studies of low-threshold calcium spikes in cells of the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 81, 2360–2373.
Zhan, X. J., Cox, C. L., and Sherman, S. M. (2000). Dendritic depolarization
efﬁciently attenuates low-threshold calcium spikes in thalamic relay cells.
J. Neurosci. 20, 3909–3914.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 18 May 2014; accepted: 01 August 2014; published online: 28 August 2014.
Citation: Hong SZ, Kim HR and Fiorillo CD (2014) T-type calcium channels promote
predictive homeostasis of input-output relations in thalamocortical neurons of lateral
geniculate nucleus. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 8:98. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00098
This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience.
Copyright © 2014 Hong, Kim and Fiorillo. This is an open-access article dis-
tributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publica-
tion in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org August 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 98 | 20
