--- Page 1 ---
METHODS ARTICLE
published: 24 January 2013
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00101
Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
Stephen E. Robinson 1*, Arnold J. Mandell 2 and Richard Coppola 1
1 MEG Core Facility, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
2 Department of Psychiatry, University California, San Diego, CA, USA
Edited by:
Peter Robinson, The University
of Sydney, Australia
Reviewed by:
G. Brad Ermentrout, University
of Pittsburgh, USA
J. Michael Herrmann, The University
of Edinburgh, UK
*Correspondence:
Stephen E. Robinson, MEG Core
Group, National Institute of Mental
Health, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda,
MD 20814, USA.
e-mail: robinsonse@mail.nih.gov
What are the functional neuroimaging measurements required for more fully
characterizing the events and locations of neocortical activity? A prime assumption has
been that modulation of cortical activity will inevitably be reﬂected in changes in energy
utilization (for the most part) changes of gl ucose and oxygen cons umption. Are such a
measures complete and sufﬁcient? More direct measures of cortical electrophysiological
activity show event or task-related modulation of amplitude or band-limited oscillatory
power. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), these measures have been shown to
correlate well with energy utilization sensitive BOLD fMRI. In this paper, we explore
the existence of state changes in electrophysiological cortical activity that can occur
independently of changes in averaged amplitude, source power or indices of metabolic
rates. In addition, we demonstrate that such state changes can be described by
applying a new measure of complexity, rank vector entropy (RVE), to source waveform
estimates from beamformer -processed MEG. RVE is a non-parametric symbolic dynamic
informational entropy measure that accommodates the wide dynamic range of measured
brain signals while resolving its temporal variations. By representing the measurements
by their rank values, RVE overcomes the problem of deﬁning embedding space partitions
without resorting to signal compression. This renders RVE-independent of absolute signal
amplitude. In addition, this approach is robust, being relatively free of tunable parameters.
We present examples of task-free and task-dependent MEG demonstrating that RVE
provides new information by uncovering hidden dynamical structure in the apparent
turbulent (or chaotic) dynamics of spontaneous cortical activity.
Keywords: magnetoencephalography, neuroscience, cognitive, beamformer , complexity, nonlinear , turbulence,
mixing
INTRODUCTION
ENTROPY AND COMPLEXITY
The term “entropy” is commonly deﬁned as a measure of the
order or disorder in a physical system. In the context of time-
varying electrophysiological brain signals we use the term “com-
plexity” instead of “entropy” in order to emphasize the temporal
ﬂuctuations of information rate rather than the total information
of that signal. Signals having low complexity include synchronous
events and oscillations. Signals with high complexity appear more
chaotic and correspond to a higher information rate.
The topographic characteristics of spatiotemporal ﬂuctuations
in cortical electrophysiological activity are analogous to those
of non-laminar, turbulent ﬂow as visualized by optical imaging
using voltage sensitive dyes ( Cohen et al., 1978). On a macro-
scopic scale, the activity of individual neurons is hidden from
external non-invasive measures such as magnetoencephalography
(MEG) (Cohen, 1968) or electroencephalography (EEG) (Berger,
1989), the ensemble behavior of the underlying cortical neural
network exhibits complex emergent and traveling fronts of excita-
tion and inhibition that are supported by both short-range inter-
neuron connections and “small world” longer-range connections.
There have been a variety of experimental approaches that have
been developed to characterize the dynamics of turbulent ﬂuid
ﬂow ranging from visualization of waves and eddies through the
use of ﬂuorescent dyes ( Busse and Clever, 1979) and monitoring
heat ﬂux using cryogenic techniques (Swinney and Gollub, 1981 )
to laser Doppler techniques that allow measurement of local
ﬁeld velocities without perturbing the ﬁeld signiﬁcantly (Gollub
and Steinman, 1981). The spatiotemporal patterns observed with
changing parameter values include transitions from laminar (lin-
ear) ﬂow via a Hopf bifurcation to periodic oscillations, fol-
lowed by two or more simultaneous irrationally related periodic
ﬂows and ﬁnally the aperiodic oscillations of turbulent (chaotic)
dynamics ( Ruelle and T akens, 1971 ). The latter state is char-
acterized by positive entropy generation (Eckmann and Ruelle,
1985) similar to that observed in the MEG record (Mandell et al.,
2011a,b; Robinson et al., 2012).
Brain activity is most commonly modeled by narrow-band
oscillatory regions that are coupled to one another via networks.
Chaos theory is often used as a model to describe complex bio-
logical measurements for which linear theory is incomplete. The
criteria for chaos modeling include sensitivity to initial conditions
and topological mixing. Both of these conditions are satisﬁed
by local measures of ongoing brain activity. This naturally leads
to combining a measurement of local cortical signals such as a
beamformer estimate derived from MEG to a sensitive and robust
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE


--- Page 2 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
measure of the broad bandwidth non-linear properties of those
s i g n a l ss u c ha sR V E .
The lack of suitable existing complexity measures for MEG
is our motivation for developing rank vector entropy. First, we
require a method for observing the spatiotemporal structure
of cortical non-linear dynamics. Retaining temporal resolution
allows for the study of the entropy change time-course that is
needed to characterize event and task-related brain activity. The
focus of current MEG complexity measures has been long-term
properties having no temporal resolution such as Lempel-Ziv
complexity (Fernandez et al., 2011), transfer complexity (Va ko r i n
et al., 2010 ), and comparisons of multiple entropy/complexity
measures ( Bruna et al., 2012 ). Although there are sliding block
methods for observing temporal changes in entropy ( Adler and
Marcus, 1979 ), this is computationally inefﬁcient when applied
to thousands of voxels for functional brain imaging. The esti-
mated source time-series from beamformed MEG is efﬁciently
transformed into an entropy time-series by RVE.
The rank vector entropy (RVE) algorithm is a non-
parametric partial analog to metric (Kolmogorov) entropy
(ME) (Kolmogorov, 1958; Crutchﬁeld and Feldman, 2003 ). Both
methods estimate the entropy of a one-dimensional series of
measurements (e.g., a neurophysiological signal) computed on
probability distributions of short sequence “states” encountered
in the time series. A unique property of the RVE as a metric
entropy lies in its initial encoding of the time series using the
topological property of sequence order ( Cornﬁeld et al., 1982;
Bandt and Pompe, 2002 ) .I nt h em o r ec o n v e n t i o n a lM E ,as h o r t
sequence of lagged measurement values from a one-dimensional
time-series are mapped into an N-dimensional phase space
(Ott, 1993 ). This embedding space is then partitioned into
N-dimensional hypercubes. Each partition represents a state that
the signal can manifest in its trajectory through N-dimensional
space. The metric entropy of the signal is a measure on the
probability distribution of trajectories passing through possible
partitioned spaces. The number of partitions in ME can be
arbitrary and must be sufﬁcient in number, and with sufﬁcient
continuity to accommodate the dynamic range of the signal. In
some implementations, dynamic range compression of the mea-
surements is required in order to limit the number of partitions
to a manageable number. The classical criteria of a “generating
partition”—no more than one entry per partitioned space
(Eckmann and Ruelle, 1985 ) is impractical in the context of real
biological data. In contrast, in the RVE algorithm the measure-
ment values of a short sequence of samples extracted from the
entire time series are converted to their rank ordered values. The
number of states, as partitions of the one-dimensional sliding
window is quantized according to the number of elements in the
sequence of measurements. Each sequence, with the topological
property of relative “nearness, ” is referred to as a “rank vector”
which can also be thought of as a rank ordered one-dimensional
embedding space. The RVE algorithm ignores the absolute signal
amplitude in favor of its relative amplitude within the span of
each sample window. A metric entropy is then computed on the
probability distribution of the ﬁnite set of rank sequences. It will
be shown that RVE is relatively free of arbitrarily tunable param-
eters (aside from selection of signal bandwidth, window length,
and a decay time constant). The more conventional ME requires
the investigator to use a variety of schemes, many involving the
Whitney embedding theorem ( Milnor, 1997; T emin, 1997 ), to
determine the number of dimensions and lags for the embedding
space and the size and number of partitions in embedding space.
W e measure the spatiotemporal complexity of brain activity by
applying the RVE analysis to sensor mediated brain signals. This
could be accomplished by analyzing the signals from individual
sensors (V akorin et al., 2010; Gomez et al., 2011), pairs of sensors
(Mandell et al., 2011a,b ), or source estimates from MEG using a
scalar LCMV beamformer ( Robinson and Black, 1990; Robinson
and Rose, 1993; V an V een et al., 1997; Vrba and Robinson, 2002).
The latter completes the analogy to characterization of time-series
of turbulent chaotic ﬂuid ﬂow, sampled at multiple spatial points
within the ﬂow.
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY
Spontaneous MEG signals are on the order of 10 − 13 Te s l a p e a k -
to-peak. Despite its small signal strength, MEG has been made
practical by larger DC-SQUID based sensor arrays covering the
entire head in combination with excellent rejection of environ-
mental magnetic interference ( Fife et al., 2002 ). The application
of RVE to MEG signals is a natural one. The magnetoencephalo-
gram is the magnetic counterpart of the electroencephalogram.
MEG is a measure of the magnetic ﬁeld arising from primary
(impressed) neural currents, whereas EEG measures the electri-
cal potentials on the scalp that arise from the volume currents
and is therefore dependent on tissue conductivity and its bound-
aries ( Plonsey, 1981 ). The major contributor to the observed
primary currents is the potential difference between the dendritic
tree and soma of neocortical pyramidal neurons. Because MEG
is less dependent on tissue conductivity its measurements can
be modeled using simple analytic solutions ( Sarvas, 1987 ). The
accuracy of such analytic solutions for MEG enables the use of
beamformers (detailed in section “Scalar LCMV Beamformer”) to
estimate the source time series for any coordinate within the brain
(Robinson, 1989 ). Application of the RVE transform (section
“Rank V ector Entropy”) to any source time series yields a corre-
sponding complexity time series of that activity. The relationship
of spatiotemporal RVE to sensorimotor events and cognitive tasks
can then be determined by signal averaging or by comparison of
the RVE signals that have been parsed into active and control state
time segments.
EXAMPLE MEG STUDIES
W e have selected four different examples of MEG studies to
explore the properties of spatiotemporal RVE analysis. These
datasets were selected from an archive of normal control studies.
The task-free (resting) MEG dataset was chosen to compare the
spatial distribution and timing relationships of RVE complexity
to power in a 4–150 Hz bandpass. The P300 study, also referred to
as the mismatch negativity (MMN), demonstrates the properties
of evoked signals to frequent and deviant auditory stimuli. In the
EEG, comparison of the frequent to deviant tone signal averages is
characterized by a slow wave after about 250 ms ( Naatanen et al.,
1978) .T h es a m ep r o t o c o li sa l s or e f e r r e dt oa saP
300 study when
a response is required for the deviant tones ( Donchin, 1981 ).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 2


--- Page 3 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
The working memory (n-back) study is used to compare broad-
band RVE with power in an effortful short-term memory task
(Kirchner, 1958 ). Lastly, we present a MEG study of self-paced
voluntary ﬁnger movement to compare complexity with SCP .
Self-paced voluntary movement is preceded by a slow “readiness”
potential (Bereitschaftspotential) ( Kornhuber and Deecke, 1964 )
and a corresponding “readiness” ﬁeld (Bereitschaftsﬁeld) (Deecke
et al., 1982).
METHODS
RANK VECTOR ENTROPY
The RVE algorithm can be described as follow: ﬁrst, consider
a one-dimensional discretely sampled time series of length K
samples: X = [x1, x2,..., xK ]. Let the sample rate and low-pass
“corner” frequency of X be denoted by fS and fC , respectively. For
any given low-pass frequency, X is completely determined at 2 fC
samples per second. It is unnecessary for the rank vector to repre-
sent every sample, sequentially. It is sufﬁcient to deﬁne the lag ξ
required to avoid oversampling as:
ξ = fS
2fC
. (1)
Thus, for any speciﬁed low-pass cutoff and sample rate we need
only process every ξth sample ( ξ i sr o u n d e du pt ot h en e a r e s t
integer). Note the analogy of ξ to the sample lags that are used
to deﬁne the dimensionality of the embedding space in conven-
tional ME computations (Eckmann and Ruelle, 1985; Crutchﬁeld
and Feldman, 2003 ). The selection of lags in ME is usually
based upon the mixing length reﬂected in the decay of the auto-
correlation function ( Walters, 1982 ). In this way it is biased
in favor of the dominant signal and its ordering. These meth-
ods characteristically assume that the signal is stationary (which
it is not) and it may also have the unfortunate side effect of
aliasing information. Furthermore, it appears that with real bio-
logical data, some investigators have been occasionally arbitrary
in their selection of lags (evaluating several different lags so as
to obtain results more consistent with their expectations). In the
RVE algorithm, the lags are rigorously deﬁned by sample rate
and low-pass corner frequency, thus not justifying any further
modiﬁcation. If the frequency band of interest is below the data
acquisition bandwidth, the investigator can set the low-pass fre-
quency accordingly, from which the lags are again automatically
determined.
Let us select a sub-window of W samples (at integer ξ inter-
vals) from X, with the window beginning with the kth sample:
W
k =
[
xk, xk+ ξ,..., xk+ (W − 1)ξ
]
. The measured signal for each
lagged sample within sub-window Wk is initially converted to its
integer rank values, forming a rank vector Rk of length W: Rk =
[rank1, rank2,..., rankW ].F o raw i n d o wo fl e n g t hW there are
W! (factorial) unique rank vectors (i.e., vectors of length W for
which the ordered rank values do not repeat). Let there be a table
S to map rank vector sequences to symbols, where the symbol
value is obtained from a “look up” table indexed for matching
rank vectors. For example, let us consider a window length of
W = 5f o rw h i c ht h e r ea r e5 != 120 unique rank vectors from
which we derive 120 state symbols, sn. Counting and normaliz-
ing the number of occurrences of each unique symbol can then
generate a probability histogram. Counting these symbols in RVE
is analogous to counting visits of the signal to the higher dimen-
sional hypercube partitions in ME ( Ott, 1993). For this example,
we use W = 5, fS = 600 Hz, fC = 100 Hz, and ξ = 3. For exam-
ple, let the measured values of xk through xk + 4ξ (i.e., Wk)b e
(4.07, − 3.12, 3.95, 8.51, − 1.21). Its rank vector and symbol
v a l u ea r e( 2 ,5 ,3 ,1 ,4 )a n d4 5 ,r e s p e c t i v e l y( as y m b o lv a l u eo f
45 indicates its place in an ascending numerical order of rank
vectors).
As the sub-window of W s a m p l e si sa d v a n c e dt h r o u g hX one
sample at a time, a new rank vector R
k and new symbolic repre-
sentation sn is generated. The frequency of occurrence of each of
these symbols is accumulated in a corresponding state histogram:
Fk =
[
f1 (k), f2 (k),..., fW! (k)
]
.T h er e s u l t i n gh i s t o g r a mc o n -
tains the cumulative counts of each rank vector (state). Since
our primary interest is in observing the time-dependent, event-
related changes in the rank vector informational entropy, it is
necessary to avoid the reduction in relative temporal sensitivity
by saturation. We prevent this by introducing a time-constant
determining the rate of decay of histogram counts with time.
The integrator decay rate τ (1/e time) is required in order to
measure the ﬂuctuations in entropy over time. The amplitude
of the entropy ﬂuctuations depends on the decay rate (longer
τ yields smaller peak-to-peak ﬂuctuations). The relative rather
than the absolute changes in entropy are of interest for event or
task-related functional imaging (including ICA or resting state
MEG). Provided that τ is longer than the time required to com-
pletely ﬁll all states, the entropy waveform will be independent
of τ— e x c e p tf o ri t sa m p l i t u d e .A sap r a c t i c a lm a t t e r ,w es e l e c ta
time constant such that the 1/ e time (in samples) corresponds to
three times the number of states. This is implemented by deﬁning
constant α:
α = e− 1/(τfS), (2)
in which τ is the time for the counts to decay to 1/ e of their initial
values, such that for each time step:
Fk = αFk − 1. (3)
This constitutes what is termed a “leaky integrator. ” The his-
togram count corresponding to the current state symbol is the
incremented by one. Based upon the revised count frequencies,
there will be a corresponding set of probabilities for each state:
Pk =
[
p1 (k), p2 (k),..., pW! (k)
]
. (4)
If the cumulative entropy over all samples of X is required, then
α = 1. Otherwise, the entropy is estimated as time-dependent.
Finally, for each step k, we compute the Shannon entropy
(Shannon, 1963 ) over all state probabilities greater than zero, as
normalized by its maximum value, constraining entropy to the
range 0–1:
h(k) = 1
log2 W!
W!∑
n= 1
− pn (k) log2 pn (k). (5)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 3


--- Page 4 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
The steps in the algorithmic procedure for computing the time
series of RVEs are as follows:
1. Initialize the state count histogram F (set all fn values to 1.0).
2. For each sample index k in time series X, generate a length W
rank vector Rk with lags of ξ samples.
3. Look up state symbol index n corresponding to Rk.
4. Multiply all elements of histogram F by α, thus allowing the
count histories to decay (Equation 3).
5. Increment the corresponding histogram count fn by one
(where n is the index in S corresponding to Rk).
6. Compute the probabilities of each state from the histogram of
counts (Equation 4).
7. Compute the RVE metric entropy for this time step
(Equation 5).
8. Advance sample index by one sample and continue to
repeat steps 2 through 7 and in this way generating
a new entropy value for each cycle of the algorithmic
process.
SCALAR LCMV BEAMFORMER
Synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) is a scalar linearly con-
strained minimum variance (LCMV) beamformer estimating
source activity from MEG signals for speciﬁed coordinates in
the brain. The mathematics of the beamformer procedure can
be traced to the minimum variance estimator ﬁrst described by
Gauss (1823). SAM minimizes the variance (power) of all corre-
lated signals observed by an array of SQUID sensors, subject to
a unity gain constraint for a speciﬁed coordinate. As such, the
action of the SAM may be regarded as spatially selective noise
reduction, where noise is deﬁned as unwanted environmental or
biological magnetic signals.
The computational procedure has been described in detail
elsewhere but can be summarized brieﬂy, as follows: consider
measured MEG from an array of sensors. Let the signal space
vector at time sample k be denoted by M(k). Given a sufﬁcient
number of time samples, we construct a source estimate ˆS
r for
coordinate r as the weighted sum MEG measurements.
ˆSr (k) = WT
r M(k). (6)
T o compute the weights using the method of Gauss, we use the
quadratic form: [
ˆSr (k) = WT
r M (k)
]2
, (7)
for which, after integrating over time, we obtain:
ˆS2
r = WT
r CWr, (8)
where C is the covariance matrix computed over the integration
time:
C =
⣨
MMT
⟩
, (9)
where <.> denotes the expectation value. W e solve for W by
introducing a constraint such that ˆS2
r (power or variance) is
minimized subject to unit gain for a speciﬁed coordinate. One
such constraint is:
WT
r Br = 1, (10)
where Br is the ap r i o r iforward solution for the ﬁeld observed by
an array of M sensors generated by a current dipole source located
at r.T h a ti s :
Br =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
b1 (r)
b2 (r)
...
bM ( r)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
. (11)
Suitable methods for computing forward solutions include the
current dipole in a homogeneou sly conducting sphere model
(Grynszpan and Geselowitz, 1973; Sarvas, 1987; Hari et al.,
1988), multiple local spheres ﬁtted to the surface of the head
(Huang et al., 1999 ), boundary element methods ( De Munck,
1992) or perturbative solutions derived from the spherical har-
monic expansion of the conductive boundary (Nolte et al., 2004).
However, to compute Br we must ﬁrst estimate the dipole orien-
tation. W e do this by ﬁnding the dipole orientation yielding the
highest signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at location r.W ed e ﬁ n eLr,
the matrix of forward solutions for dipoles oriented in the three
cardinal directions as:
Lr =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
b11 b12 b13
b21 b22 b23
..
.
..
.
..
.
b
M1 bM2 bM3
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
. (12)
W e also deﬁne a diagonal matrix/Sigma1of uncorrelated sensor instru-
mental noise power σ2
m:
/Sigma1=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
σ2
1 0
σ2
2
...
0 σ2
M
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
∼= ¯σ2I. (13)
T h es o u r c ep o w e rS in each of three cardinal directions is given by:
S2
r =
[
LT
r C− 1Lr
]− 1
, (14)
and the noise power N by:
N2
r =
[
/Sigma1LT
r C− 2Lr
]− 1
. (15)
The SNR is given by a generalized eigensystem of these two 3 × 3
matrices ( Sekihara and Nagarajan, 2008 ). By assuming that the
SQUID noise is nearly equal in all sensors, we can neglect /Sigma1,
as it represents a scalar ( ¯σ2I) that will not affect determination
of the moment vector. The dipole orientation maximizing SNR
is given by the eigenvector emax corresponding to the maximum
eigenvalue λmax of the generalized eigensystem:
LT
r C− 2Lrek = λkLT
r C− 1Lrek. (16)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 4


--- Page 5 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
The forward solution for the dipole vector for the highest SNR is
therefore:
Br = Lremax. (17)
Solving for the optimum scalar LCMV beamformer weights using
Lagrange multipliers results in:
Wr = C− 1Br
BT
r C− 1Br
. (18)
Substituting Wr into Equation (6) yields an estimate of the source
time series.
APPLICATION OF RVE TO MEG DATA
Subjects
MEG data from four healthy normal control subjects, one per
example study, were randomly selected from a larger group of
NIMH study subjects of both genders, mean age 27.6 years. All
subjects gave written informed consent according to protocols
approved by the NIH CNS Institutional Review Board.
Data acquisition
MEG data were acquired using a 275-channel whole head MEG
(CTF Systems, Inc.) housed within a three layer magnetically
shielded room (V acuumschmelze AK-3). Three head localization
coils were afﬁxed to subjects at the nasion, right preauricular, and
left preauricular points. The acquisition software energizes these
coils with sinusoidal currents at three different frequencies before
and after data acquisition in order to localize and establish each
subject’s head position relative to the MEG sensors. Data were
sampled continuously, without breaking it into epochs or trials at
600 Hz in a bandpass of DC to 150 Hz, with the subjects in seated
position. Stimulus and response trigger markers for each study
were recorded with the data. Synthetic 3rd-gradient mode was
used during data acquisition to obtain further reduction in mag-
netic noise ( Vrba and Robinson, 2002 ). Raw data were archived
on disk for subsequent analysis.
RVE analysis parameters for all studies were ﬁxed at a 4–150 Hz
bandpass, W = 5 (120 states), lags every two samples, and an
integrator decay time constant of 0.6 s.
All subjects were given a T1-weighted volumetric MRI.
Radiological markers were afﬁxed to the identical ﬁducial points
as were used for the head localization coils used during MEG
acquisition. Markers were used to transform the MRI to the MEG
head frame for subsequent processing, including segmentation
of the cortical boundary, and coregistration of functional and
anatomical data.
Data analysis
Analyses were applied to the unaveraged continuous data. We use
the single-layer realistic head model ( Nolte et al., 2001 )t oc o m -
pute the forward solutions. The scalar beamformer processing
includes the steps:
1. Coregister a T1-weighted MRI to the MEG frame and segment
the MRI to extract subject’s brain hull, using AFNI software
(Cox, 1996).
2. Compute the outward-pointing normal vectors for the brain
hull.
3. Estimate the MEG measurement covariance matrix for the
required time segments and frequency bandpass (Equation 9).
4. Compute points (voxel coordinates) on a regular three-
dimensional grid at 5 mm intervals within the head.
5. For each voxel within the hull boundary:
a. Compute the lead-ﬁeld matrix (Equation 12) using the
brain hull as a single-layer realistic head model (Nolte et al.,
2001).
b. Compute the beamformer coefﬁcients (Equation 18).
c . E s t i m a t et h es o u r c et i m es e r i e s( E q u a t i o n6 ) .
The RVE voxel time-series is computed for a 4–150 Hz band-
pass (Equation 1–5). No additional ﬁltering or smoothing is
required as the RVE time-series is inherently smooth. Source
power time-series are computed from the smoothed envelope
of a Hilbert transform following bandpass ﬁltering of the MEG
data. The Hilbert envelope was smoothed using lowpass ﬁlter
corresponding to the lowpass corner frequency of each selected
bandpass.
The ﬂuctuations in RVE are relatively small (on the order
of 5–15% for α = 0.6 s). RVE deviation relative to its statistical
mode is used for analysis of the task-free data. For the remain-
ing studies, we compute the Student’s T-value for each latency in
the RVE time, relative to a selected baseline. Static (3D) and spa-
tiotemporal images (3D + time) were assembled and displayed
using AFNI software (Cox, 1996).
Task-free (resting) protocol
T wo hundred and forty seconds of task-free (“resting’) MEG data
were recorded from a normal subject (eyes opened), using data
acquisition procedures outlined in section “Data Acquisition. ”
Beamformer weights were computed as above for the entire
duration at 5 mm voxel intervals on a three-dimensional grid
occupying the entire head. The envelope of the source power
S2 and the RVE were then computed for each voxel and the
results mapped as three dimensions plus time images at 50 ms
intervals. Because RVE is a measure on temporally hierarchi-
cal brain signals, it is studied using a broad bandwidth of
4–150 Hz. In this way we avoid the potential reduction in com-
plexity that would accompany our narrowing the bandwidth of
observation. In comparing RVE, with the simultaneously stud-
ied envelopes of band width power, the latter was computed
using a smoothed Hilbert transform for a sequence of band-
widths that included: 4–150 Hz, 4–8 Hz (theta), 8–13 Hz (alpha),
15–30 Hz (beta), 35–70 Hz (low gamma), and 70–150 Hz (high
gamma). The RVE time series is inherently smooth and required
no additional ﬁltering.
Auditory P300 (Mismatched Negativity) protocol
The auditory P300 protocol consisted of random presentation
of 200 frequent (1.0 kHz) and 50 rare (1.5 kHz) 50 ms dura-
tion tone bursts delivered binaurally via non-magnetic earphones
(Etymotic), with a 1.0–1.5 s pseudo-random interstimulus inter-
val (ISI). Subjects were instructed to respond to the rare tones by
pressing a response button. MEG data were acquired as noted in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 5


--- Page 6 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
section “Data Acquisition” and stored to disk together with trigger
markers for identifying the onset of the rare and frequent tone
bursts, along with the button response.
Beamformer weights were computed from the unaveraged
MEG data for each of three conditions: (1) both frequent and rare
tones, (2) frequent tones, and (3) rare tones. The weights were
computed in a 4–150 Hz bandpass. Three-dimensional images
of RVE were then computed at 5 ms intervals over a time win-
dow from − 0.2 to +0.8 s relative to the markers for each of
the three conditions. Image maxima and minima coordinates
were determined and additional beamformer weights computed
for a DC to 100 Hz bandpass. These weights were then applied
to the averaged RVE signal of the three conditions in order to
show the time course of the entropy waveforms. Note that we
compute the average of the entropy and not the entropy of the
averaged signal. The RVE functional images and time series are
displayed as Student’s T-values for each voxel, relative to the
selected pre-stimulus baseline.
Working memory (N-back) protocol
The numerals 1 through 4 were randomly presented to the sub-
ject at 1.4-s intervals in 18 blocks of 11 trials each, using a DLP
projector. Preceding each block the subject received instructions
how to respond to via four numbered buttons, that corresponds
to the numbers 1 through 4. For 0-back blocks, the subject sim-
ply pressed the button corresponding to the number presented.
For 1 and 2-back conditions, the subject pressed the button cor-
responding to the numbers that were presented one or two trials
back, respectively. MEG was recorded, along with trigger mark-
ers indicating the task (i.e., respond to 0, 1, or 2-back), which
number was displayed and which response button was depressed,
using the settings in section “Data acquisition. ”
The RVE was applied to the continuous source time series of
each voxel, resulting in an RVE time series. The RVE voxel time
series was then parsed into 0.5-s segments (± 0.25 s relative to the
button response) for the 0, 1, and 2-back conditions. The RVE
was integrated over each segment. A Student’s T-test was used
to compare the difference in integrated RVE signal for pairs of
each condition (i.e., 2 vs. 0-back, 2 vs. 1-back) for each individual
voxel. The results were displayed as p-values using AFNI.
In a similar manner, we computed and displayed the compar-
isons for beta-band (14–30 Hz) power using the same conditions.
Self-paced voluntary movement protocol
Subjects performed self-paced button presses at intervals of at
least 10 s while continuous MEG was recorded together with time
markers for each button press, as outlined in section “Data acqui-
sition. ” No cues were given to the subjects as to when to press the
button.
Scalar beamformer weights were computed for the entire
unaveraged dataset in a bandpass of 4–150 Hz. W eights were then
applied to the measured MEG data yielding a source estimate time
series for each voxel. The voxel time series was then transformed
to a RVE time series. The mean entropy value over the interval
from − 3.0t o − 2.5 s prior to the button press was designated
as a baseline for comparison of later entropy changes; the RVE
time-series was averaged relative to the voluntary button press, at
5m s i n t e r v a l s f r o m− 3.0 to 2.0 s. The RVE averaged response is
displayed as its Student’s T-value relative to the selected baseline.
The voxel having the maximum relative RVE prior to the but-
ton press was also used to compute the averaged source strength
time-series.
RESULTS
TASK-FREE (RESTING) PROTOCOL
Comparison of the spatial and temporal patterns in the 4–150 Hz
bandpass reveals very little apparent correlation between RVE and
the Hilbert envelope of power. The ﬂuctuations in entropy are
noticeably slower than that of power. In many cortical locations
the RVE shows transient decreases from its modal value; spon-
taneous entropy increases are not as prominent in the resting
condition ( Figure 1 top panel). Changes in power relative to its
modal value ( Figure 1 center panel) are much more rapid than
those of the RVE. The spatial distribution of RVE and power also
are seen to differ (Figure 1 bottom panel).
An expanded 30-s view of the time course of the smoothed
Hilbert envelope of power and across multiple frequency bands
shows no apparent correlation with RVE 4–150 Hz ( Figure 2).
Changes in entropy clearly show slower, longer wavelength fea-
tures that are not evident in measures of power.
AUDITORY P300 TASK
In this characteristic example, we observed a reduction in entropy
coinciding with the N
100M peak ( Figure 3B)f o rf r e q u e n ta n d
combined frequent and rare trials ( Figure 3A). The reduction in
entropy at 100 ms was much smaller for the rare tones, alone
(Figure 3B). The reduction in entropy was maximal in the vicin-
ity of the left Heschl’s gyrus ( Figures 3C,D,E), with a much
smaller reduction in the right hemisphere. Although a ﬂat base-
line was seen in the pre-stimulus interval of − 0.2 to 0.0 s in
the averaged overlay of all sensors ( Figure 3B), it is absent from
the combined and frequent trial averages ( Figure 3A). W e also
observed an increase in the entropy T-value after 100 ms for
the rare tones ( Figure 3A). At 700 ms this increase was maximal
in anterior cingulate and left temporal cortex ( Figure 3F). The
increase does not appear in the sensor signal averaged overlay.
WORKING MEMORY TASK
In the 2 vs. 0-back comparison, we observe a reduction in beta-
band power in the 2-back task relative to the 0-back task, ERD, in
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and an increase in power,
ERS, in inferior occipital cortex ( Figure 4A). For the identical
comparison, there is a signiﬁcant increase in entropy ( p < 10
− 5)
in the 2-back condition that is widely distributed throughout the
brain, with the largest changes in the left hemisphere (Figure 4B).
In the 2 vs. 1-back comparison, beta-band ERD is seen
in DLPFC and bilaterally near the inferior temporal pole
(Figure 5A). The same comparison for RVE shows an increase in
entropy in anterior cingulate cortex and a decrease in the right
inferior temporal pole (Figure 5B).
SELF-PACED VOLUNTARY FINGER MOVEMENT
The Bereitschaftsﬁeld (BF), average of 29 trials, appears as a slow
low frequency rise in the source moment in premotor cortex
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 6


--- Page 7 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 1 | Rank vector entropy and noise-normalized source power
differed in both locations and dynamical patterns, i.e., in both time and
space. The time-courses of RVE and power for the 4–150 Hz bandwidth are
shown for a single location in the brain, as indicated by the cross-hairs in the
functional images. The functional i mages of RVE and power correspond to
activity at the time indicated by the red cursor.
that occurs over the time span from − 2.5s t o 0s , r e l a t i v e t o
the button press ( Figure 6 top). W e observed a peak dipole
moment of about 10 nA -m relative to a mean baseline over the
interval − 3.0t o − 2.5 s. Signal-to-noise ratio for this source is
low, requiring a lowpass ﬁlter of 5 Hz in order to see the slow
changes. By contrast, the averaged RVE (4–150 Hz), displayed as
a T-value relative to baseline, has excellent signal-to-noise and
spans − 1.75 to 0 s (Figure 6 bottom). We refer to this wave as the
“Bereitschaftskomplexität” (BK), to emphasize its relationship to
the BF. Both the BF and BK waveforms are similar.
DISCUSSION
Our single most important ﬁnding is that the RVE measure of
complexity adds new information about brain dynamics that
was previously hidden within the apparent chaos of spontaneous
cortical signals. Moreover, RVE, when combined with a scalar
beamformer, reveals an underlying spatiotemporal complexity
pattern that is modulated by stimuli and tasks. We have presented
experimental evidence demonstrating that these patterns of com-
plexity are decoupled from conventional measures of amplitude
and oscillatory power. Thus, RVE reveals new information on the
dynamics of brain activity.
Next, we will examine the experimental evidence regarding
what directional changes in entropy signify. MEG measures such
as band-limited oscillatory power or amplitude have been shown
to be concordant with functional imaging by BOLD fMRI ( Singh
et al., 2002; Coppola et al., 2004 ). Induced changes in cortical
activity, particularly for movement, are signaled by event-related
desynchronization (ERD) of power ( T aniguchi et al., 2000)a n d
also by increases in the BOLD signal relative to a resting or control
state. How does one interpret event-related changes in RVE? The
answer is not straightforward. W e show that a simple auditory
stimulus induces a decrease in the RVE at a latency correspond-
ing to the N100m and location corresponding to primary auditory
cortex in the left hemisphere. Comparable MEG studies also show
ERD in the beta and alpha bands at the latency and locations
corresponding to the N
100m, and fMRI shows a corresponding
increase in the BOLD signal.
In our auditory P 300 study the response to the rare tones
elicited later increases in the RVE signal that persisted for over
1 s. The increase was seen broadly in anterior cingulate cortex
and in left temporal cortex in a wide area centered on where the
N100m response appeared. These late responses are not visible in
the averaged overlay of sensors and in the event-related changes
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 7


--- Page 8 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 2 | The time course of rank vector entropy, h(k) (blue
trace), is apparently uncorrelated with changes in the envelope
of source power , in any bandpass. The 4–150 Hz RVE is
compared with source power at the same location in multiple
bandwidths for a 30 s expanded view derived from the waveforms
shown in Figure 1 .
in power. W e see that the absence of a stable baseline for the fre-
quent tones is a consequence of the slow return to baseline of the
entropy increase evoked by the rare tones. That is, the 1.0–1.5 s
ISI is not sufﬁcient for the induced RVE increase to return to its
resting value.
These P 300 results demonstrate that stimuli and tasks can
induce either in increase or a decrease in entropy relative to
its resting value. The RVE of task-free MEG is characterized by
transient decreases in entropy from its modal value of∼ 0.92, last-
ing two or more seconds. Increases above the modal value are
not as prominent and are more rapid—suggesting that bidirec-
tional modulation of RVE reﬂects the parabolic character of the
entropy function and/or its governance by at least two different
mechanisms. The N100 evoked component of frequent tones cor-
responds to a transient decrease in the RVE signal that is much
shorter than the observed transients in the task-free MEG record-
ings. The localization of decrease was centered on the left auditory
cortex, but included perisylvian areas. The broad distribution
of the induced entropy changes conﬁrm that the auditory N 100
component arises from multiple regions and not simply primary
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 8


--- Page 9 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 3 | Relationship of rank vector entropy to the auditory evoked
response to rare and frequent tone bursts. (A) Average of entropy time
series for left primary auditory cortex; (B) average overlay of 275 MEG
sensors; (C) RVE image of combined rare and frequent tones at 100 ms; (D)
RVE image of frequent tones at 100 ms; (E) RVE image of rare tones at
100 ms; (F) RVE image of rare tones at 700 ms latency.
auditory cortex (Naatanen and Picton, 1987). Although the aver-
aged evoked response to the rare tones showed only a small peak
corresponding to the P 300 response, there was a profound slow
increase in the RVE signal starting at about 250 ms. This slow
increase is concordant with the mismatch negativity signal that
is observed in similar protocols involving frequent and deviant
tones. It appears that synchronized cortical activity, such as that
leading to an averaged evoked response component, induces a
transient decrease in entropy in the corresponding regions. By
contrast, the slow and prolonged rise in entropy induced by the
rare tones suggests an increase in asynchronous cortical activ-
ity that signiﬁes attentional mechanisms. It should be noted that
t h ef r e q u e n tt o n ea v e r a g e(Figure 3A) shows what appears to be
activity where the pre-stimulus baseline should instead be ﬂat.
This is an artifact due to the long duration of the slow RVE com-
ponent of the rare tones and the relatively short 1.5 s interstimulus
interval.
RVE’s relatively long time scales (in seconds) and the continu-
ity and differentiability in its time-dependent changes suggests a
relationship of this measure to the family of slow cortical poten-
tials (SCPs), including the contingent negative variation (CNV)
and the Bereitschaftsﬁeld ( Birbaumer et al., 1990 ). This is par-
ticularly evident when comparing BF and BK waveforms seen
in Figure 6. The slow changes in entropy are only partially due
to integration of symbolic state counts. The decay time constant
incorporated into the integrator permits RVE to respond rapidly
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 9


--- Page 10 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 4 | Comparison of event-related changes in beta-band power
and in rank vector entropy for 2 vs. 0-back working memory task
centered on the response. Images are univariate p-values for a
Student’ s T -test, with a threshold of 10
− 5. (A) Event-related
desynchronization of beta band power (14–30 Hz) appears bilaterally in
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and in left supraorbital prefrontal cortex.
(B) RVE (4–150 Hz) shows widely distributed increases that overlap with
regions of beta-band ERD.
to changing complexity. The observed slow changes in RVE are
signiﬁcantly longer than the 0.6-s 1/ e integration decay time con-
stant used in these analyses. Thus, the slow shifts in entropy are
not an artifact of the analysis but rather reﬂect cortical processes.
Further studies will be needed to compare RVE with other SCP
phenomena (e.g., the contingent negative variation paradigm and
orienting responses).
The working memory task lends additional insight into how
the RVE complexity measure is modulated by cognitive effort.
The contrast for the 2-back to the 0-back condition for RVE
(Figure 4) shows widespread and highly signiﬁcant ( p < 10
− 5)
increases in entropy throughout the brain. The 2-back task
engages working memory whereas the 0-back task does not.
Although the RVE spatial distribution is not uniform, it sug-
gests greater and more signiﬁcant changes than does event-related
beta-band power. These same conditions viewed as beta-band
power show the expected focal changes in DLPFC. The difference
between RVE and beta-band power images suggests that there vast
tracts of cortex that have changed into an “up” state (i.e., activa-
tion of the thalamo-cortical attention circuit), without signiﬁcant
expenditure of energy. Is this arousal? Is it readiness? One might
speculate that this widespread increase in entropy represents a
decrease in the cortical excitability threshold—necessary for the
efﬁcient performance of the 2-back task. Such a mechanism
would be concordant with our observations of other slow changes
in RVE, such as that seen in the self-paced voluntary ﬁnger move-
ment study and late P 300 components for the rare tones. By
contrast, the 2-back and 1-back conditions both engage working
memory but with different levels of effort. For this comparison
the RVE demonstrates a number of focal increases bilaterally in
anterior cingulate gyri, supraorbital prefrontal cortex, and a focal
decrease in the left inferior temporal pole ( p < 10− 11)a ss h o w n
in Figure 5. Thus, the contrast for increasing memory workload
can result in both increases and decreases in RVE. The RVE results
are qualitatively different from the same contrasts in task-related
beta-band power ( Figures 4 and 5). Beta-band changes appear
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 10


--- Page 11 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 5 | Comparison of event-related changes in beta-band
power and in entropy for 2 vs. 1-back working memory task
centered on the response. Images are univariate p-values for a
Student’ s T -test, with a threshold of 10 − 3. (A) Event-related
desynchronization of beta band power (14–30 Hz) and (B) RVE
(4–150 Hz).
mainly as ERD in dorsolateral prefrontal and parietal cortex for
both 2 vs. 0-back and 2 vs. 1-back. The p-values for these regions
are smaller than those for the RVE. Overall, the working memory
task suggests the higher cognitive load is associated with increases
in RVE.
The results obtained from these MEG studies provide evi-
dence that RVE—speciﬁcally increases in complexity—are mea-
sures of attention and intention. The neurophysiological basis of
attentional arises from the non-speciﬁc projections from the cen-
tromedian thalamic nucleus to the neocortex ( Steriade, 1995 ).
Activation of these projections depolarizes the apical dendrites
of neocortical pyramidal neurons resulting in a decrease in the
excitability threshold. An increase in asynchronous ﬁring rate of
these neurons will be reﬂected by an increase in complexity, as
seen in the RVE signal. It should also be noted that this same
mechanism is responsible for the low frequency negative signal
appearing in the scalp EEG—the so-called SCP ( Birbaumer et al.,
1990). Detection of the EEG SCP signals requires careful removal
of motion artifacts, eye-blinks, and higher frequency signals and
rhythms. By contrast the RVE signals corresponding to atten-
tion are readily measured in a broad bandwidth with little or
no ﬁltering. Thus RVE is a more sensitive measure of attentional
mechanisms than is the SCP .
The complexity decrease associated with synchronous and
evoked events such as the auditory N100 implies alow information
rate. This calls to question the model that synchronous events rep-
resent transfer of information. Instead, we suggest a new model
in which synchronous activity signiﬁes degradation of the cur-
rent cognitive context in a cortical region so that new information
from sensory or associative sources can be incorporated into a
new cognitive context. Exploration of this model is the subject of
our ongoing research.
The RVE combines some properties of topological (relative
nearness as non-numeric sequences) and metric (probability
measure theoretic) entropies ( Cornﬁeld et al., 1982; Ornstein,
1989; Milnor, 1997 ). The log density of states (Equation 7) is a
metric entropy. These states are a consequence of mapping topo-
logically ordered sequences to vectorial states, then mapping these
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 11


--- Page 12 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
FIGURE 6 | Comparison of the averaged Bereitschaftsﬁeld (DC to 5 Hz) to the averaged Bereitschaftskomplexität RVE (4–150 Hz) for a single voxel in
premotor cortex contralateral to a self-paced voluntary ﬁnger movement (button press).
states into a symbolic dynamic topology, eventuating in the met-
ric transformation of the density distribution of these symbolic
states (Pollicott and Yuri, 1998).
The RVE is distinguished from ME in the order of oper-
ations. In ME, the states are deﬁned by discrete partitions in
t h ee m b e d d i n gs p a c eo fmeasured values and the probabilities
are derived from the number of counts in each n-dimensional
partition. It can be difﬁcult to deﬁne the boundaries of each
partition—particularly when signals cover a wide dynamic range.
In such cases, signal amplitude compression may be required. By
contrast, RVE reduces the measurements to their rank values for
each length W window. Each rank vector represents a state symbol
(Adler et al., 1977) and partitions, as such, are no longer required;
it only necessary to count the instances of each symbol. This step
not only deﬁnes a ﬁnite number of available states but also renders
the entropy measure-independent of absolute signal amplitude.
As a consequence of the integrator decay time constant, the
mean of the entropy time series will be smaller than in the limit of
α = 1 for which integration takes place over all samples. A simi-
lar decrement from the maximum entropy was also found in older
methods (Walters, 1982). This decay time constant is required in
order to maintain sensitivity to entropy changes over time. As
expected, RVE approaches its limiting value as the decay con-
stant is increased. At long decay constants ﬂuctuations will be very
small due to the accruing “memory” of the state counts. For MEG
data sampled at 600 Hz and W = 5, we choose a 1/ e time con-
stant 0.6 s—corresponding to three times the number of states,
in samples. This is more efﬁcient than the sliding block methods
for which entropy is computed for the number of samples in each
block, and the blocks are advanced one sample at a time ( Adler
and Marcus, 1979 ). It should be mentioned here that altering
the decay time constant changes the peak-to-peak amplitude
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 12


--- Page 13 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
of the entropy ﬂuctuations, but not its waveform (thus the RVE
measure)—provided the time constant is sufﬁciently long to allow
the state counts to fully populate.
There is an inherent frequency bias in the RVE method.
The duration of the sub-window from which the rank vector is
obtained constitutes a highpass ﬁlter on the signal. T o a mea-
sureable extent the contribution of the entropy of signals with
wavelengths longer than this sub-window is reduced. This sug-
gests future innovations of the RVE algorithm for the purpose of
better conserving the range of broadband responses. For exam-
ple, one could apply a 6 dB per octave increase in the measured
signal for frequencies below the window cutoff to compensate for
the decline in sensitivity.
The tunable parameters for RVE analysis are the rank vector
length, signal lowpass frequency, and integration decay rate. W e
here note practical limitations of rank vector length. Since the
number of possible states is exactly determined by the length of
the rank vector, if W = 4, 5, and 6 there are 24, 120, and 720
possible states, respectively. As a compromise, W = 5 seems most
attractive because it allows for a sufﬁcient number of states to
reﬂect the probabilities without too many or too few states to be
impractical (i.e., to not fully represent the latent structure in the
time-series). For example, when W = 3, there are only 6 allow-
able states and when W = 7 there are 5040 allowable states. The
latter would require a very large number of samples to accurately
reﬂect the probabilities of each state, while the former would
p r o v i d ev e r yp o o rs t a t er e s o l u t i o n .T h el a g sd e ﬁ n i n gt h ep h a s e
space are determined by the signal lowpass frequency. Since signal
complexity decreases as bandwidth is reduced, it defeats the pur-
pose of complexity analysis to limit the bandwidth. Therefore, the
low pass should reﬂect the information content of the measured
signal. Lastly, the integrator decay rate is selected so as to allow the
state count histogram to be well-populated (a sufﬁcient number
symbol counts for obtaining a good estimate of the entropy) and
have a short lead-in time (i.e., the time required for the entropy to
approach its asymptotic value). For 120 states, and a sample rate
of 600 Hz, a 1/ e t i m eo f0 . 6 si ss u f ﬁ c i e n t .N o t et h a t ,a si n d i c a t e d
above, the integrator decay does not lowpass ﬁlter the entropy
waveform. It only affects the relative amplitude of the entropy
ﬂuctuations around the asymptotic value.
The normal cerebral cortex is never quiescent—even when
not engaged in speciﬁc tasks. W e have shown that stimuli and
tasks modulate the regional entropy of cortical activity, inducing
either increases or decreases in our RVE measure. The question
posed initially was whether RVE provides new information on
brain activity that is not obvious when observing only changes
in source power. We conclude that RVE is a sensitive mea-
sure of brain signal complexity that complements other MEG
functional imaging techniques including event and task-related
changes in power.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank T om Holroyd for software for extract-
ing the hull model from the MRI, and Frederick Carver and Judy
Mitchell-Francis for access to the many archived MEG studies,
and to Surjo Soekedar and Matthias Witkowski for the self-
paced ﬁnger movement datasets. This work is supported by the
Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Mental
Health, with additional support for Arnold J. Mandell from the
Franklin-Fetzer Fund.
REFERENCES
Adler, R. L., Goodwyn, L. W., and
Weiss, B. (1977). Equivalence of
topographic Markov shifts. Israel. J.
Math. 27, 49–63.
Adler, R. L., and Marcus, B. (1979).
T opological entropy and equiva-
lence of dynamical systems. Mem.
Am. Math. Soc. 219, 114–126.
Bandt, C., and Pompe, B. (2002).
Permutation entropy: a natural
complexity measure for time series.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88:174102. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.174102
Berger, S. (1989). “On the elec-
troencephalogram of man. The
fourteen original reports on the
human electroencephalogram, ” in
Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, Trans. from the
German and ed P . Gloor (1969)
(New Y ork, NY: Elsevier), xii+ 350,
(Suppl. 28), 151–171.
Birbaumer, N., Elbert, T., Canavan, A.
G., and Rockstroh, B. (1990). Slow
potentials of the cerebral cortex and
behavior. Physiol. Rev. 70, 1–41.
Bruna, R., Poza, J., Gomez, C., Garcia,
M., Fernandez, A., and Hornero,
R. (2012). Analysis of spontaneous
MEG activity in mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease
using spectral entropies and statis-
tical complexity measures. J. Neural
Eng. 9:036007. doi: 10.1088/1741-
2560/9/3/036007
Busse, F . H., and Clever, R. M. (1979).
Instabilities of convection rolls in a
ﬂuid of moderate Prandl number.
J. Fluid Mech. 91, 319–327.
Cohen, D. (1968). Magnetoencephalo-
graphy: evidence of magnetic ﬁeld
produced by alpha rhythm currents.
Science 161, 784–786
Cohen, L. B., Salzberg, B. M., and
Grinvald, A. (1978). Optical
methods for monitoring neuron
activity. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 1,
171–182.
Coppola, R., Callicott, J. H., Holroyd,
T ., V erchinski, B. A., Sust, S.,
and Weinberger, D. R. (2004).
“MEG activation comparison to
fMRI BOLD for a working mem-
ory task, ” in Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on
Biomagnetism, eds E. Halgren, S.
Ahlfors, M. Hãmäläinen, and D.
Cohen (Boston, MA), 7.
Cornﬁeld, B. R., Fomin, V ., and Sinai,
Y . (1982). Ergodic Theory .B e r l i n :
Springer-V erlag.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: software
for analysis and visualization of
functional magnetic resonance neu-
roimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. 29,
162–173.
Crutchﬁeld, J. P ., and Feldman, D.
P . (2003). Regularities unseen,
randomness observed: levels of
entropy convergence. Chaos 13,
25–54.
Deecke, L., Weinberg, H., and Brickett,
P . (1982). Magnetic-ﬁelds of
the human-brain accompa-
nying voluntary movement –
Bereitschaftsmagnetfeld. Exp. Brain
Res. 48, 144–148.
De Munck, J. C. (1992). A linear
discretization of the volume con-
ductor boundary integral equation
using analytically integrated ele-
ments. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 39,
986–990.
Donchin, E. (1981). Presidential
address, 1980. Surprise! ...S u r p r i s e ?
Psychophysiology 18, 493–513.
Eckmann, J. P ., and Ruelle, D. (1985).
Ergodic theory of chaos and strange
attractors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 57,
617–656.
Fernandez, A., Lopez-Ibor, M.
I., Turrero, A., Santos, J. M.,
Moron, M. D., Hornero, R.,
et al. (2011). Lempel-Ziv com-
plexity in schizophrenia: a MEG
study. Clin. Neurophysiol. 122,
2227–2235.
Fife, A. A., Vrba, J., Haid, G., Hoang,
T . ,K u b i k ,P .R . ,L e e ,S . ,e ta l .
(2002). “ A 275-channel whole
cortex MEG system,” in Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference
on Biomagnetism ,e d sH .N o w a k ,
J. Hauesen, F . Gießler, and R.
Huonker (Berlin: VDE V erlag
GMBH), 912–914.
Gauss, C. F . (1823). “Theoria com-
binationis observationum erroribus
minimus obnoxiae, ” Trans. Stewart,
G. W. (1995). “Theory of the com-
bination of observations least sub-
ject to errors, ” in Classics in Applied
Mathematics, Chap. 4 (Philadelphia,
PA: SIAM), 30.
Gollub, J., and Steinman, J. (1981).
Doppler imaging of the onset of tur-
bulent convection. Phys. Rev. Lett.
47, 505–509.
Gomez, C., Poza, J., Garcia, M.,
Fernandez, A., and Hornero,
R. (2011). Regularity analysis
of spontaneous MEG activity
in Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 13


--- Page 14 ---
Robinson et al. Spatiotemporal imaging of complexity
Disorder. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc. 2011, 1765–1768.
Grynszpan, F ., and Geselowitz, D.
B. (1973). Model studies of the
magnetocardiogram. Biophys. J. 13,
911–925.
Hari, R., Joutsiniemi, S. L., and
Sarvas, J. (1988). Spatial resolu-
tion of neuromagnetic records:
theoretical calculations in a spheri-
cal model. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 71, 64–72.
Huang, M. X., Mosher, J. C., and Leahy,
R. M. (1999). A sensor-weighted
overlapping-sphere head model and
exhaustive head model compari-
son for MEG. Phys. Med. Biol. 44,
423–440.
Kirchner, W. K. (1958). Age dif-
ferences in short-term retention
of rapidly changing information.
J. Exp. Psychol. 55, 352–358.
Kolmogorov, A. N. (1958). A new met-
ric invariant of transitive dynami-
cal systems and automorphisoms of
Lebesgue spaces. Dokl. Russ. Acad.
Sci. 119, 861–864.
Kornhuber, H. H., and Deecke, L.
(1964). Hirnpotentialanderungen
beim Menschen vor und nach
Willkurbewegungen dargestellt
mit Magnetbandspeicherung und
Ruckwartsanalyse. Pﬂugers Arch.
Eur. J. Physiol. 281, 52.
Mandell, A. J., Selz, K. A., Aven,
J . ,H o l r o y d ,T . ,a n dC o p p o l a ,R .
(2011a). “Daydreaming, thought
blocking and strudels in the
taskless, resting human brain’s
magnetic ﬁelds, ” in International
Conference on Applications in
Nonlinear Dynamics (ICAND 2010),
eds V . In, P . Longhini, and A.
Palacios (Lake Louise; Melville:
American Institute of Physics),
7–24.
Mandell, A. J., Selz, K. A., Holroyd,
T., and Coppola, R. (2011b).
“Intermittent vorticity, power spec-
tral scaling and dynamical measures
on resting brain magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuc-
tuations, ” in Neuronal V ariability
and Its Functional Signﬁcance,e d sD .
Glanzman and M. Ding (New Y ork,
NY: Oxford University Press),
328–390.
Milnor, J. (1997). Topology from the
Differential Viewpoint. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Naatanen, R., Gaillard, A. W., and
Mantysalo, S. (1978). Early
selective-attention effect on
evoked potential reinterpreted.
Acta Psychol. (Amst.) 42, 313–329.
Naatanen, R., and Picton, T. (1987).
The N1 wave of the human electric
and magnetic response to sound: a
review and an analysis of the com-
ponent structure. Psychophysiology
24, 375–425.
Nolte, G., Fieseler, T ., and Curio, G.
(2001). Perturbative analytic solu-
tions of the magnetic forward prob-
lem for realistic volume conductors.
J. Appl. Phys. 89, 2360–2369.
Nolte, G., Holroyd, T., Carver, F.,
Coppola, R., and Hallett, M. (2004).
Localizing brain interactions from
rhythmic EEG/MEG data. Conf.
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2,
998–1001.
Ornstein, D. S. (1989). Ergodic theory,
randomness, and “chaos. ” Science
243, 182–187.
Ott, E. (1993). Chaos in Dynamical
Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Plonsey, R., (1981). “Generation of
magnetic ﬁelds by the human
body (theory), ” in Proceedings
Third International Workshop on
Biomagnetism, eds S. N. Erné, H.-D.
Halbohm, and H. Lübbig (Berlin;
New Y ork: W alter de Gruyter),
177–205.
Pollicott, M., and Yuri, M. (1998).
Dynamical Systems and Ergodic
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Robinson, S. E. (1989). “Theory
and properties of lead ﬁeld syn-
thesis analysis, ” in Advances in
Biomagnetism, eds H. Manfried, S.
J. Williamson, M. Kotani, and G.
Stroink (New Y ork, NY: Plenum
Press), 599–602.
R o b i n s o n ,S .E . ,a n dB l a c k ,W .C .J r .
(1990). Analysis of Biological Signals
Using Data from Arrays of Sensors .
USA patent application 07/359, 640.
December 18, 1990.
Robinson, S. E., Mandell, A. J., and
Coppola, R. (2012). “Imaging com-
plexity, ” in 18th Annual Meeting of
the Organization for Human Brain
Mapping. (Beijing).
R o b i n s o n ,S .E . ,a n dR o s e ,D .F .
(1993). “Current source image
estimation by spatially ﬁltered
MEG, ” in Biomagnetism: Clinical
Aspects, eds M. Hoke, S. N.
E r n e ,Y .C .O k a d a ,a n dG .L .
Romani (Muenster, Germany:
Elsevier Science Publishers, B.V .),
761–765.
Ruelle, D., and T akens, F . (1971). On
the nature of turbulence. Commun.
Math. Phys. 82, 137–151.
Sarvas, J. (1987). Basic mathematical
and electromagnetic concepts of the
biomagnetic inverse problem. Phys.
Med. Biol. 32, 91–97.
Sekihara, K., and Nagarajan, S. S.
(2008). “Scalar adaptive spatial
ﬁlter: deriving the optimum source
orientation, ” in Adaptive Spatial
Filters for Electromagnetic Brain
Imaging, ed J. H. Nagel (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-V erlag),
89–92.
Shannon, C. E. (1963). A Mathematical
Theory of Communication.
Champaign-Urbana, IL: University
of Illinois Press.
Singh, K. D., Barnes, G. R., Hillebrand,
A . ,F o r d e ,E .M . ,a n dW i l l i a m s ,
A. L. (2002). T ask-related changes
in cortical synchronization are spa-
tially coincident with the hemo-
dynamic response. Neuroimage 16,
103–114.
Steriade, M. (1995). Neuromodulatory
systems of thalamus and neocortex.
Sem. Neurosci. 7, 361–370.
Swinney, H., and Gollub, J. (eds.).
(1981). Hydrodynamic Instabilities
and the Transition to T urbulence.
Berlin: Springer.
T a n i g u c h i ,M . ,K a t o ,A . ,F u j i t a ,N . ,
Hirata, M., T anaka, H., Kihara, T.,
et al. (2000). Movement-related
desynchronization of the cerebral
cortex studied with spatially ﬁl-
tered magnetoencephalography.
Neuroimage 12, 298–306.
T emin, R. (1997). Inﬁnite Dimensional
Dynamical Systems in Mechanics
and Physics . Applied mathemat-
ical sciences, 2nd Edn. (Berlin:
Springer), 648.
Vakorin, V . A., Ross, B., Krakovska,
O., Bardouille, T., Cheyne, D.,
and McIntosh, A. R. (2010).
Complexity analysis of source
activity underlying the neuromag-
netic somatosensory steady-state
response. Neuroimage 51, 83–90.
Van V een, B. D., Van Drongelen,
W ., Yuchtman, M., and Suzuki, A.
(1997). Localization of brain electri-
cal activity via linearly constrained
minimum variance spatial ﬁlter-
ing. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 44,
867–880.
Vrba, J., and Robinson, S. E. (2002).
SQUID sensor array conﬁgurations
for magnetoencephalography appli-
cations. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 15,
R51–R89.
W alters, P . (1982). An Introduction to
Ergodic Theory. Berlin: Springer.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research
was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Received: 22 Augus t 2012; accepted: 30
December 2012; published online: 24
January 2013.
Citation: Robinson SE, Mandell AJ
and Coppola R (2013) Spatiotemporal
imaging of complexity. Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 6:101. doi: 10.3389/fncom.
2012.00101
Copyright © 2013 Robinson, Mandell
and Coppola. This is an open-access arti-
cle distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License ,
which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in other forums, provided
the original authors and source are cred-
ited and subject to any copyright notices
concerning any third-party graphics etc.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 101 | 14
