--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 09 January 2014
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00190
A computational model of altered gait patterns in
parkinson’ s disease patients negotiating narrow doorways
Vignesh Muralidharan 1, Pragathi P . Balasubramani1, V . Srinivasa Chakravarthy1*, Simon J. G. Lewis 2
and Ahmed A. Moustafa 3
1 Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of T echnology Madras, Chennai, India
2 Parkinson’ s Disease Research Clinic, Brain and Mind Research Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
3 Marcs Institute for Brain and Behaviour and School of Social Sciences and Psychology, University of Western Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Edited by:
Izhar Bar -Gad, Bar -Ilan University,
Israel
Reviewed by:
Rafal Bogacz, University of Oxford,
UK
Robert Rosenbaum, University of
Pittsburgh, USA
*Correspondence:
V . Srinivasa Chakravarthy,
Computational Neuroscience
Laboratory, Department of
Biotechnology, School of
Biosciences, Indian Institute of
T echnology Madras, Chennai,
T amil Nadu 600036, India
e-mail: schakra@iitm.ac.in
We present a computational model of altered gait velocity patterns in Parkinson’ s Disease
(PD) patients. PD gait is characterized by short shufﬂing steps, reduced walking speed,
increased double support time and sometimes increased cadence. The most debilitating
symptom of PD gait is the context dependent cessation in gait known as freezing of gait
(FOG). Cowie et al. (2010) and Almeida and Lebold (2010) investigated FOG as the changes
in velocity proﬁles of PD gait, as patients walked through a doorway with variable width.
The former reported a sharp dip in velocity, a short distance from the doorway that was
greater for narrower doorways. They compared the gait performance in PD freezers at ON
and OFF dopaminergic medication. In keeping with this ﬁnding, the latter also reported
the same for ON medicated PD freezers and non-freezers. In the current study, we sought
to simulate these gait changes using a computational model of Basal Ganglia based on
Reinforcement Learning, coupled with a spinal rhythm mimicking central pattern generator
(CPG) model. In the model, a simulated agent was trained to learn a value proﬁle over a
corridor leading to the doorway by repeatedly attempting to pass through the doorway.
T emporal difference error in value, associated with dopamine signal, was appropriately
constrained in order to reﬂect the dopamine-deﬁcient conditions of PD. Simulated gait
under PD conditions exhibited a sharp dip in velocity close to the doorway, with PD
OFF freezers showing the largest decrease in velocity compared to PD ON freezers and
controls. PD ON and PD OFF freezers both showed sensitivity to the doorway width,
with narrow door producing the least velocity/ stride length. Step length variations were
also captured with PD freezers producing smaller steps and larger step-variability than PD
non-freezers and controls. In addition this model is the ﬁrst to explain the non-dopamine
dependence for FOG giving rise to several other possibilities for its etiology.
Keywords: gait, freezing of gait, doorway, basal ganglia, reinforcement learning
INTRODUCTION
Altered gait behavior is a motor impairment observed in patients
with Parkinson’s disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder that
involves a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the brain. PD gait is
characterized by the following features: (1) Reduced stride length,
reduced walking speed, increased cadence and increased double
support duration (Morris et al., 1998); (2) Exhibits ﬂat foot strike,
and in rare conditions the “toe to heel strike” gait pattern is also
observed (Hughes et al., 1990); (3) Intra-individual variability in
foot strike patterns is lower in PD patients than in control subjects
(Kimmeskamp and Hennig, 2001 ); (4) V ertical ground reaction
force (VGRF) representing the normal force exerted on the foot
during gait, has two peaks in controls—one when the foot hits the
ground, and the other when it lifts off again. In early stages of PD,
the two peaks in VGRF are present but with lower intensity com-
pared to controls. In advanced PD, where the patients walk with
narrow shufﬂing steps, the two peaks in VGRF merge into one
(Koozekanani et al., 1987); (5) Postural instability is a common
feature in late stage PD. Postural sway is also reduced probably
due to reduced ﬂexibility in adjusting one’s bodily responses to
changing posture ( Morris et al., 2000). Abnormal postural sway
in PD might also be due to stiff joints. The degree of gait variabil-
ity as seen by any of the above mentioned features, is correlated
with gait severity in PD patients ( Hausdorff et al., 1998).
In addition to the aforementioned features, a more debilitat-
ing and dramatic feature of PD gait is known as Freezing of Gait
(FOG). It is characterized by frequent falls ( Latt et al., 2009 ),
and is an episodic phenomenon of cessation of gait triggered by
certain environmental contexts like narrow passages or crowded
places ( Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ). PD gait
features like reduced stride length and reduced walking speed
appear to be gradually aggravated under certain environmental
conditions, culminating in a motor block, or a freezing episode
(Chee et al., 2009 ). Some cases of PD patients (PD-freezers)
exhibit freezing in speciﬁc contexts such as facing transverse
l i n e so nar o a dc r o s s i n go rn a r r o wd o o r w a y s(Hughes et al.,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 1
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE


--- Page 2 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
1990; Morris et al., 1998 ), while the same transverse lines on a
treadmill alleviates freezing symptoms ( Azulay et al., 1999 ). This
shows the importance of the higher level cortical control over the
rhythm generating spinal control in gait and FOG, since the visual
feedback can affect gait only through the cortical route.
Human motor function has three levels of control: cortical,
subcortical and spinal. Speciﬁcally gait is controlled by a complex
network of brain areas spanning all the three levels: the neocor-
tex ( Sahyoun et al., 2004 ); subcortical areas including the basal
ganglia (BG), vestibular system, cerebellum; and the spinal cord
(Middleton and Strick, 2000; Lemon, 2008; T akakusaki et al.,
2008). Motor commands arising from the brain’s gait control
centers are strongly inﬂuenced by sensory feedback via visual,
proprioceptive and other sensory channels (Sahyoun et al., 2004).
At the level of spinal cord each limb is thought to be controlled
by a network of unit burst generators called Central Pattern
Generators (CPGs) (Ijspeert, 2008). This network of CPGs, which
acts under the top-down control from higher cortical motor areas,
and the proprioceptive and visual feedback, is thought to be the
ultimate driver of human gait. The broad picture of the neu-
ral substrates involved in gait control is shown in Figure 1A.
However, since the focus of the present study is PD gait, we limit
ourselves to a smaller architecture that highlights the role of BG
(Figure 1B). A more detailed description and justiﬁcation of the
model architecture is presented in The Model.
Motor and other forms of impairment observed in PD are pri-
marily linked to dopamine deﬁciency caused by cell loss in the
Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNc), a small but important
nucleus in BG ( Kish et al., 1988 ) .T h eB Gi sag r o u po fs u b c o r t i -
cal nuclei performing vital roles of action selection, action gating,
motor preparation, among others (Chakravarthy et al., 2010). The
striatum is the major input port of BG affected by the activity of
the cortex and the limbic regions. This gets connected directly to
the output port (Globus Pallidus interna / Substantia Nigra pars
reticulata) via the direct pathway (DP), or through Sub-thalamic
Nuclei—Globus Pallidus externa network via the indirect path-
way (IP). The output nuclei project onwards to cortical targets
like prefrontal, premotor and the motor cortices via the thalamus
(Chakravarthy et al., 2010).
The idea that mesencephalic dopamine signal is linked to envi-
ronmental rewards (Houk et al., 1995; Schultz et al., 1997)o p e n e d
doors to the application of concepts from reinforcement learning
(RL) to model BG ( Joel et al., 2002; Frank, 2005; Chakravarthy
et al., 2010). The basic tenet of RL is that stimulus-response pairs
that are rewarding are reinforced and those that are punitive are
attenuated. The mapping between stimuli and responses would
have been an easier problem, but for the fact that often reward
comes, not immediately after an action is performed, but after
a delay. In some cases, reward and punishment feedback arrives
after a long series of actions. It remains then to allocate credit
to past actions and determine which actions have contributed to
reward and to what action, a problem otherwise known as tempo-
ral credit assignment problem. Since reward comes after a delay,
for the simulated object (referred to here as agent) to select the
correct action at any given instant, RL theory offers a surrogate
t or e w a r dk n o w na sv a l u ef u n c t i o n .T h ev a l u ef u n c t i o ni sd e ﬁ n e d
as the total expected future reward, with appropriate discounting
FIGURE 1 | (A) Architecture showing the hierarchy of control on gait
execution; (B) Model architecture considered in our study to understand
FOG.
of future. The RL component known as the ’Critic’ computes
value after repeatedly sampling the action space and receiving
rewards/punishments. Another key RL component known as the
’Actor’ uses the value information provided by the critic to select
correct or potentially rewarding actions. Many computational
models have been directed toward mapping RL concepts onto the
functional anatomy of BG (Joel et al., 2002).
According to the classical depictions of functional anatomy of
BG, the DP facilitates movement, and is hence dubbed the GO
pathway, while the IP inhibits movement and hence known as the
NOGO pathway ( Albin et al., 1989; Frank, 2005 ). Signal trans-
mission between DP and IP is thought to be switched by striatal
dopamine: higher (lower) levels of striatal dopamine activate the
GO (NOGO) pathway. In earlier work, we proposed that the clas-
sical GO/NOGO picture of BG function needs to be expanded,
suggesting insertion of a third “EXPLORE” regime between GO
and NOGO ( Sridharan et al., 2006; Chakravarthy et al., 2010;
Magdoom et al., 2011; Kalva et al., 2012 ). This EXPLORE regime
drives the stochastic exploration of action space, which is essential
for RL to work in complex environments. In the present study we
use this expanded GO/EXPLORE/NOGO (GEN) understanding
of BG functioning, to model PD gait.
T wo experimental studies, that investigate the gait pattern of
PD patients as they approach a doorway, are simulated in the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 2


--- Page 3 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
present study (Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010). The
study of Cowie et al. (2010) shows a sharp dip in velocity as the
PD patient approaches the doorway, a dip that becomes sharper in
the case of narrower doorways (Cowie et al., 2010); this effect was
more pronounced in PD patients (ON and OFF freezers) than in
healthy controls. Almeida and Lebold (2010) consider a similar
setup but compare the gait patterns of PD freezers with non-
freezers in terms of step lengths and its variability ( Almeida and
Lebold, 2010 ) .T h ep r o p o s e dB Gm o d e la c c o u n t sf o rt h ea b o v e
mentioned velocity proﬁles and gait features (stride / step lengths)
of PD patients from these two experimental studies.
W e model them at two stages of control: (1) the higher level
of control representing the cortico-basal-ganglia system, and (2)
the spinal level CPGs that translate the higher level gait com-
mands such as velocity into gait rhythm ( Figure 1B). The BG
model is essentially simulated using the Actor-Critic architecture,
with the difference that the Actor is modeled by the GEN model
(Sridharan et al., 2006; Chakravarthy et al., 2010; Magdoom et al.,
2011; Kalva et al., 2012 ). The spinal CPGs are modeled by net-
works of hopf oscillators (Righetti and Ijspeert, 2006). The model
is used to simulate the results of two PD gait studies (Almeida and
Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ).
The paper is outlined as follows: the Model section describes
the modeling components and equations. The Result section
explains the experimental setup, the model implementation and
the simulation results. V elocity proﬁles of control subjects and
PD patients (ON/OFF , freezers / non-freezers) as they negotiate a
doorway are simulated and compared with experimental results.
Section Discussion ﬁnally discusses the results obtained, model
limitations, predictions and future work.
THE MODEL
The proposed model simulates the approach of a subject to a
doorway and computes the velocity proﬁle along the track lead-
ing to the doorway. The agent repeatedly approaches a doorway,
walking along a short track. The agent aims at passing through
the doorway without bumping into the sides of the doorway. Due
to the well-known tradeoff between accuracy and speed in motor
function ( Mackay, 1982; Bradshaw and Sparrow, 2000; Duarte
and Latash, 2007 ), rapid approaches to the doorway are more
likely to result in a collision. Therefore, in our model, the agent
learns to reduce its speed in the vicinity of the doorway, which it
does using RL mechanisms.
Figure 2 shows the block diagram of the proposed model,
which mainly consists of three components—the Cortico-BG sys-
tem, CPG, and locomotor apparatus. The Cortico-BG system,
shown inside the dashed box ( Figure 2), takes a representation
of the view of the doorway, the “view vector, ” from the posi-
tion, X, of the agent. It is obtained from the cortical module:
VISION. The block denoting τdenotes the time delay in the pas-
sage. The BG [consisting of the CRITIC, ACTOR (GEN), V ALUE
DIFFERENCE, and the TD ERROR modules] uses the view vector
and updates the agent’s velocity ( v
x and vy). This velocity infor-
mation from the higher command centers is sent to the CPG
module, which translates the velocity into joint angles ( θ). The
subsequent block labeled STRIDE uses the joint angle informa-
tion and orientation ( v
x and vy) and computes the next position.
FIGURE 2 | Block diagram detailing the Cortico-Basal Ganglia system
and the Central Pattern Generator module used in our study . The arrow
on the Critic represents the module training. The ﬁgure also projects the
Cortico-BG system, CPG, and locomotor apparatus in the shades of blue,
brown, and violet respectively.
The ENVIROMENT (doorway) module checks if the new posi-
tion results in a collision of the agent with the doorway. A positive
reward, r, is delivered if there is no collision, and a punishment
(negative r)i nc a s eo fc o l l i s i o n .T h eB Gu s e st h ev i e wv e c t o ra n d
reward information to compute value, thereby completing the
cycle.
W e now describe individual model components in detail.
THE CORTICO-BASAL GANGLIA SYSTEM: VISION
This module computes the state of the agent, the “view vector, ”
φ, which codes the view of the doorway from the position [ (x, y)
or X]o ft h ea g e n t(Figure 3). The calculations are given by the
Equations (1–5).
In our study, the ﬁeld of vision (FOV) of the agent is ﬁxed at
120
◦. The FOV is divided into small sectors, denoting the size
of the view vector. In our case, the view vector is a 1x 50 array
and therefore FOV is spilt into 50 sectors (Figure 3). The position
of the agent (x, y) is the viewing point and the orientation vec-
tors v
x and vy form the view direction of the agent from which
it can see 60 ◦ to the left and 60 ◦ to the right. Considering Ro as
the orientation vector (2 × 1) represented by vx and vy and the
angle subtended by each ith sector with respect to Roas /Theta1sec
i ,t h e
orientation vectors of each of other 49 sectors is given by
Rsec
i = Omat.Ro (1)
where Omat is the orientation matrix (2 × 2) given by
Omat =
[
cos
(
/Theta1sec
i
)
, sin
(
/Theta1sec
i
)
;− sin
(
/Theta1sec
i
)
, cos
(
/Theta1sec
i
)]
(2)
The slope mi( E q u a t i o n3 )o fe a c ho ft h eRsec
i is calculated with
r e s p e c tt ot h ea g e n t ’ sc u r r e n tp o s i t i o n( x ,y ) .
mi =
[(
y + Ry
i
)
− y
]
/
[(
x + Rx
i
)
− x
]
(3)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 3


--- Page 4 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
FIGURE 3 | View vector associated with different ( x, y) positions and
orientation vector for (A) far from the doorway and (B) near the
doorway, for the ﬁxed door size ( dlength).
In order to identify if a given sector’s orientation hits the door
or a wall assuming the y coordinate of the door is ydoor
i ,t h ex -
coordinate (xdoor
i ) of each of the orientation vectors is calculated
at ydoor
i as in Equation 4.
xdoor
i =
(
ydoor
i − y
)
/mi + x (4)
Using the xdoor
i coordinates of all the views, the view vector is given
as Equation 5.
if(xdoor
i ≥− dposx )∧(xdoor
i ≤ dposx )
φi (t) = 1
else
φi (t) = 0
(5)
Therefore, the agent viewing the doorway from a given position
(X), would see more or less number of 1 s in its visual ﬁeld,
depending on its orientation, distance to the doorway and the
width of the doorway ( dlength)( Figure 3). The view vector is thus
ideally suited to be used as the state of the agent.
THE BASAL GANGLIA MODULE
The BG module is essentially simulated using the Actor-Critic
architecture (Joel et al., 2002) but with important deviations from
classical RL ( Sutton and Barto, 1998 ) regarding the formulation
of the Actor.
Critic
The Critic computes the value “ V”f o rt h ev i e wv e c t o r[φ(t)]. It
is deﬁned as an estimation of the predicted reward at any time, t,
for that state φ(t).T h ev a l u ef u n c t i o ni sd e n o t e db yE q u a t i o n6 .
V(t) = E(rt + 1 + γrt + 2 + γ2rt + 3 +··· ) (6)
Here, rt is the reward r obtained at time, t.
In our study, we approximated V(t) as in Equation 7.
V(t) = tanh
[∑
Wi(t)φi(t)
]
(7)
The update equation for the above approximation (having weight
vector, W)i sg i v e nb ye q n .8 .
/Delta1W = ηδφ(t) (8)
Here, “δ(t)” denotes the TEMPORAL DIFFERENCE (TD) error
in value function, that is correlated to dopamine signaling
(Schultz, 2010). It is given by Equation 9 in whichγis the discount
factor.
δ= r(t) + γV(t) − V(t − 1) (9)
GO/EXPLORE/NOGO or GEN
The policy (Actor) used here is known as the
GO/EXPLORE/NOGO or GEN policy, the neurobiological
origins of which were described in earlier work ( Sridharan et al.,
2006; Magdoom et al., 2011; Kalva et al., 2012 ). GEN essentially
represents an approach to action selection, by performing a
stochastic hill-climbing over the value function. In the doorway
problem that is presently studied, reward, r,i so b t a i n e da tt h e
doorway when the agent passes through the doorway without
collision. Thus the value proﬁle is expected to have a maximum at
the doorway. Therefore, value gradient can be used to approach
the doorway securely without colliding with the sides of the
doorway.
A quantity known as V ALUE DIFFERENCE(Equation 10), δ
V ,
which is the gradient of the value,
δV = V(t) − V(t − 1) (10)
plays an important role in the process of hill-climbing over the
value proﬁle.
Note the resemblance between the V alue Difference in eqn. 10
and the TD error (Equation 9). It may be observed that, δ= δV ,
when γ= 1 and when the agent is not at the goal state ( r = 0).
W e assume that both δ and δV represent dopamine signals but
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 4


--- Page 5 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
perform distinct roles: while δis used for training the value func-
tion as in the case of typical Actor-Critic models of BG, we assume
that δ
V is used for switching between DP and IP , which is thought
to be a function of striatal dopamine ( Humphries and Prescott,
2010; Amemori et al., 2011 ). δV can be used to hill-climb over
value function using the following rules,
if(δV > Dhi)
/Delta1X(t) =+ /Delta1X(t − 1) − “Go” (a)
elseif(δV > Dlo ∧ δV ≤ Dhi)
/Delta1X(t) = χ − “Explore” (b)
else (δV ≤ Dlo)
/Delta1X(t) =− /Delta1X(t − 1) − “NoGo” (c)
(11)
where X = (x, y) denotes the position of the agent on the track;
Dhiis a positive threshold and Dlo is a negative threshold; χ is a
uniform random variable. A similar rule for hill-climbing over
value function was used earlier in Magdoom et al. (2011) ,w h i c h
describes a model of Parkinsonian reaching movements.
The key difference in the classical RL implementation of Actor,
wherein the action is typically modeled as an explicit function of
the state φ,a n dt h eG E Np o l i c y ,i st h a tt h ea c t i o ni sc o m p u t e db y
following the value gradient over the position space, X. Although
value is a function of the view vector, φ(t),w ep e r f o r mt h eh i l l -
climbing over the position space, X, that is mapped onto the view
vector uniquely.
The 3 discrete regimes—GO, EXPLORE and NOGO—of
Equation 11 can be combined seamlessly into a single equation
as follows (Equation 12):
/Delta1X(t) = A
Gsig(λGδV)/Delta1X(t − 1)
+AEχ exp(−δ2
V/σ2
E)
− ANsig(λNδV)/Delta1X(t − 1)
(12)
where
sig(xsig) = 1/
[
1 + exp(− xsig)
]
(13)
The rationale behind Equations (11–13) ( Sridharan et al., 2006;
Chakravarthy et al., 2010; Magdoom et al., 2011; Kalva et al.,
2012) may be described as follows. The “GO” regime, which
occurs when δ
V > Dhi, means that the previous position update,
X(t − 1), had caused signiﬁcant increase in the value ( δV ).
Therefore, according to Equation 11 above, /Delta1X(t) is in the same
direction as /Delta1X(t − 1), which justiﬁes the form of the ﬁrst term
in eqn. 12, that is a continuous version of rule Equation 11a,
as shown in Figure 4. The GO regime is thought to be imple-
mented by the DP , which is activated at higher levels of striatal
dopamine, δ
V . A low level of dopamine δV < Dlo implies that the
previous position update had caused signiﬁcant decrease in the
value. Therefore, the position update is in the opposite direction
to the previous update. This mechanism is thought to be imple-
mented by the IP . This regime is denoted by the third logsig term
with a negative slope ( λ
N) in the Equation 12, a continuous ver-
sion of the rule of Equation 11c. Intermediate levels of dopamine,
(D
hi < δV < Dlo), implies that the previous change in value is
not signiﬁcant; therefore the subsequent position update occurs
FIGURE 4 | An illustration of the operation of GO, EXPLORE, NOGO
regimes. Each of the regimes represent a map between X(t− 1) and X(t)
deﬁned as X(t) = χ∗C(δv)∗X(t− 1). (A) For GO regime, for δv > Dhi, C = 1;
else C = 0; χ = 1. The resulting step-like proﬁle is approximated by a
sigmoid, shown as the ﬁrst term on the RHS of Equation (12). (B) For
NOGO regime, for δv < Dlo, C = 1, else C = 0; χ = 1. The resulting
inverted step proﬁle is approximated by the sigmoid deﬁned as the third
term on RHS in Equation (12). (C) For the EXPLORE regime, for
D
lo < δv < Dhi, C = 1, else C = 0. This pulse-like proﬁle of C is
approximated by a Gaussian function of δv a; χ is a random number
generated from a uniform distribution with range [ − 0.5t o0 . 5 ]i nt h i sc a s e .
in a random ( χ) direction (Equation 11b). The second term in
Equation (12) is a continuous version of the rule of Equation 11b.
The parameters that deﬁne the GEN policy are AG, AN, AE,
λG, λN in Equation (12), the discount factor, γ in Equation
(9), and width, σ, of the Gaussian term in Equation (12). The
last parameter, σ, is known as the “exploration parameter” since
it controls the extent of exploration by the GEN policy. The
parameters that denote changes in dopamine corresponding to
PD OFF and ON conditions are δ
lim and δmed respectively.
These parameters are trained using genetic algorithms (Appendix
A) after imposing speciﬁc constraints related to various condi-
tions (controls, PD OFF and PD ON) as described in the later
sections.
Thus the GEN policy computes the update in position, /Delta1X.
The position update is represented as velocity components ( v
x
and vy) and passed onto the CPG module, which in turn com-
putes the hip and knee angles θ, for the calculation of the next
position.
THE CPG MODULE
CPGs are neural networks capable of producing coordinated
rhythmic activity in the spinal cord for driving rhythmic move-
ments like locomotion ( Ijspeert, 2008 ). A network of coupled
non-linear oscillators, modeled using adaptive hopf oscillators
(Righetti and Ijspeert, 2006 ), is used here as a model of the CPG
network. The model assumes that the CPG controls the angle pro-
ﬁles of hip and knee joints that directly reﬂects the motor output,
producing the necessary activation and deactivation of muscles
producing gait. It is a simple kinematic model of the leg, where
the CPGs control the joint angles including those of the hip ( θ
h)
and two knees ( θk1 and θk2). The hip and knee joint angles are
approximations of the human locomotion obtained by Fourier
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 5


--- Page 6 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
analysis ( De Pina Filho and Dutra, 2009 ). Figure 5B shows the
approximate proﬁles of hip and knee joints, modeled as truncated
Fourier series ( De Pina Filho and Dutra, 2009 ). It represents the
training signals for the CPGs which are 500 steps in time for one
gait cycle (T). Since our aim is to reproduce the rhythms, dur-
ing training these are provided repeatedly to the network till it
converges to produce such gait cycles with appropriate amplitude,
frequency and phase relationship.
The motivation behind using the adaptive hopf network is
to have a smooth control over the amplitude and frequency
of the oscillators. Three pools are used to represent the CPG
network (where s = 3a n d j = 1: s represents the hip, knee1,
and knee2 respectively). Each pool consists of optimal num-
ber of oscillators, two for the hip and three for each of the
knees (where N = 1o r N = 2a n d i = 0: N,r e s p e c t i v e l y ) ,t h a t
in total constitute the CPG network ( Figure 6). The dynamics of
the adaptive hopf oscillators are given by Equations 14–21, for
the neurons (oscillators) in each pool j.E a c hv a r i a b l ei sr e p r e -
sented with the subscript i, j denoting the ith oscillator in the
FIGURE 5 | (A) The joint angle representation on the kinematic leg model
with the thigh (l 1) and shank (l 2) links representing the joint angles θh (hip),
θk1, θk2(two knees); (B) Variation of hip and knee angles with time and their
inter -phase relationships. Extrema (θh_ext ) in the hip angle are denoted by
numbers 1, 2, and 3.
jth pool. The intrinsic variables pi, jand qi, j of the oscillators
are in Equations 14, 15 with zi, j =
√
p2
i, j + q2
i, j. Fj(T) is the
error signal as described in Equation 18, where “ T” denotes time
steps needed to complete one gait cycle, which in our study is
taken to be a vector of size [1 × 500]. It is weighted by a factor
ϵ, and is given as feedback to the oscillators through Equation
14. In Equations 14, 15, μ controls the amplitude of oscilla-
tions, and ξ controls the speed of recovery of the system after
perturbations.
p
i,j = ξ(μ − z2
i,j)pi,j − ωi,jqi,j + εFj(T) + τsin(θIP
i,j − ψi,j)
(14)
qi,j = ξ(μ − z2
i,j)qi,j − ωi,jpi,j (15)
The adaptation of the oscillators to a speciﬁc frequency (ωi,j)a n d
amplitude (αi,j)of an input signal is achieved by Equations 16 and
17 respectively. The learning rate ηafor the update equation for
αi,j (Equation 17) is set at 0.08.
ωi,j =− εFj(T) qi,j
zi,j
(16)
αi,j = ηapi,jFj(T) (17)
Fj(T) describes the error signal (Equation 18) that is deﬁned as
the difference between the teaching signal (Pteach,j) and the learnt
signal (Qlearned,j) at a time instant. The teach signals (a single gait
cycle) for the oscillators in a pool “ j” represent the angle proﬁle
of any one of the joints (either the hip, knee1, or knee2) seen in
Figure 5B and is vector of size (1 × 500) in time. Hence all the
FIGURE 6 | T raining of the CPG network with the desired hip ( h)a n d
knee (k1a n d k2) angles ( θ) represented in Figure 5B. The number of
hopf oscillators used to train the hip ( ωh) and knee angles ( ωk1 and ωk2)a r e
2 and 3 respectively. Phase difference within-CPGs is maintained by ψlocal
while across-CPGs is maintained by ψglobal. αs modulate the intrinsic CPG
rhythm to output the learnt joint angles.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 6


--- Page 7 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
oscillators (i = 0: N) in a particular pool ( j) receive the teach sig-
nal of the hip (if j = 1) or the knee 1 (if j = 2), knee 2 (if j = 3),
respectively.
Fj(T) = Pteach,j(T) − Qlearned,j(T) (18)
Fj(T) is provided to the oscillatory network only during the
adaptation stage (learning) and grows smaller as the learning pro-
gresses till it eventually becomes zero ( P
teach,j = Qlearned,j). The
αi,j and ωi,j converge at this point, and the network still encodes
the pattern even after the removal of Fj(T). These variables can
be represented as α0
i,j and ω0
i,j where the superscript “0” denotes
the convergence to optimal values. The learnt signals which are
joint angles, expressed here by θh, θk1and θk2,a r et h eo u t p u to f
each oscillator pool represented by the dot product of α0
i,j and pi,j
(Equation 19).
Qlearned,j(T) =
N∑
i = 0
α0
i,jpi,j (19)
Intra-pool phase relationship (i.e., within hip, within each knee)
is maintained via the internal variable ψi,j (Equation 20) where τ
forms the weight factor to maintain the phase relationship among
the oscillators (Equation 14) wi th respect to the 0th oscillator
within the pool (for a single “ j” under consideration). This indi-
cates that each oscillator within that pool receives a scaled phase
input ψ
i,j from its respective reference oscillator ψ0,j
ψi,j = sin
( ωi,j
ω0,j
θIP
0,j − θIP
i,j − ψi,j
)
(20)
where the instantaneous phase of an oscillator, θIP
i,j within a pool
is
θIP
i,j = sgn(pi,j) cos− 1(− qi,j
zi,j
) (21)
In addition to a local phase variable ψi,j (Equation 20), which
does not consider the phase maintenance across different pools
of oscillators ( j = 1: s), a global/inter-pool phase relationship
(between the hip and two knees) is introduced via a new state
variable ψ
G
0,j, whose dynamics are governed by the following
equations (Equations 22, 23). The Equation 22 is similar to
Equation 14 with two changes that includes the variable p0,j,c o n -
trolling the dynamics of only the 0th oscillator of each pool and
the addition of the global phase variable ψ
G
0,j(Equation 23). These
equations represent phase maintenance by a scaled phase input
(ψG
0,j) across the pools of oscillators. In our case the global phase
is maintained with respect to one of the hip oscillators (the 0th
oscillator in the hip pool, i.e., ψG
0,1) as the reference oscillator. The
block diagram for training the CPG network is given by Figure 6,
and the Ta b l e 1denotes the values of various parameters used in
the CPG model.
p0,j = (μ − z2)p0,j − ω0,jq0,j + τsin(θIP
0,j − ψG
0,j) (22)
ψG
0,j = sin(θIP
0,j− 1 − θIP
0,j − ψG
0,j) (23)
T able 1 | List of parameter values for simulating the network of
adaptive hopf oscillators (CPG model).
Parameters Hip ( h) Knees ( k1a n d k2)
ξ 81 2
μ 11
ϵ 0.9 0.3
τ 21
The GEN equation yields velocity components vx and vy,p r o -
viding information on the magnitude and the direction of the
agent’s movements. Since our aim is to model the aspect of stride
length, the magnitude of velocity obtained from the BG module is
used to control theα
0
i,j of the oscillators through a proportionality
gain (k) (Equation 24). This provides a proxy for the magnitude of
velocity in terms of the joint angles. Since the joint angular veloc-
ity can be varied in terms of their amplitude (by changing α
0
i,j),
it is very convenient to translate an indirect measure of velocity
obtained from the GEN module to a realistic motion of joints.
k(t) = Ak tanh(ck
√
v2x + v2y) (24)
where k(t) is the proportionality gain variable. Ak is the amplitude
factor for the gain and ck is the sensitivity/slope factor which are
set at 3 and 1 respectively in all conditions. The α0
i,j is modulated
by k(t)a si nE q u a t i o n2 5
αf
i,j(t) = α0
i,jk(t) (25)
Here αf
i,j reﬂects the changes in α0
i,j on being modulated by a fac-
tor of k(t)i ne a c hs t e po fat r i a lt ot h ed o o r w a y .N o wαf
i,j takes
u pt h er o l eo fα0
i,j (as seen in Equation 19) and has an effect on
the output of the CPG network especially on dictating the ampli-
tudes of the hip and knee angles. On obtaining larger/smaller
values of velocity (v
x and vy) from the GEN module the gain vari-
able k(t) is varied i.e., either increased/decreased which in turn
increases/decreases the amplitudes of the hip and knee angles by
modulating α
0
i,j(Equation 25). Therefore, increased amplitude of
velocity obtained from the BG results in increased stride lengths
from the oscillator network and vice-versa. The stride module
then calculates the stride/step length using θh, θk1and θk2,w h i c h
is the actual displacement used to translate the agent’s position in
space. The stride length obtained as a function of the joint angles
i sd e s c r i b e di nt h es e c t i o nb e l o w .T h ec o n n e c t i v i t yb e t w e e nt h e
BG network and the CPGs for training is given by Figure 2.O n c e
the CPGs are trained, the gait execution is modeled as in Figure 7.
THE LOCOMOTOR APPARATUS: STRIDE
As depicted in Figure 2 the stride module uses the angles θi (espe-
cially θh) from the CPG network to determine the stride length.
Stride length in a gait cycle is deﬁned as the distance between
the heel strike of one leg to the heel strike of the same leg and
thus covers two steps. The hip angle θ
h as seen in Figure 5B has
three peaks. Since θh is the angle between the two hips and knee
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 7


--- Page 8 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
FIGURE 7 | Obtaining stride from the combined BG and the CPG
network after training.
angles are almost 0 at the extremes ( Figure 5B)e a c hp e a ki nt h e
hip angle represents a Step. Considering the ﬁrst peak as the heel
strike of one the legs, the next two peaks would be the next two
steps or a Stride (Figure 5B). The thigh length, l
1 is taken as 0.5 m
and the shank length, l2 as 0.6 m (Figure 5A)a n di sa d a p t e df r o m
T aga’s biped model (T aga et al., 1991). The stride length (SL) is
calculated as in Equation 26.
LSTR = 2(l1 + l2) sin(θh_ext2/2) + 2(l1 + l2) sin(θh_ext3/2) (26)
In order to simulate the step lengths,o n l yas i n g l ep e a k(θh_ext2)
is considered; hence LSTRwill possess only the ﬁrst term. As the
α0
i s are modulated, the amplitude of θh varies giving rise to dif-
ferent stride / step lengths . The stride / step length now supplies
the displacement information to the agent. The information for
direction is obtained from the unit vectors of v
x and vy (ˆνx and
ˆνy) of GEN module, respectively. The stride length and the direc-
tion are combined to calculate the agent’s next position as in
Equation 27.
/Delta1x = L
STR∗ˆvx
/Delta1y = LSTR∗ˆvy
(27)
The change in position (performed by Equation 27) would
then trigger the VISION module to compute the new view vec-
tor, thus forming a loop. The trained Cortico-Basal ganglia, CPG
module along with the locomotor apparatus is then used for
testing the agent’s performance as shown in Figure 7.
RESULTS
W e simulate the results of two experimental conditions that study
gait patterns of PD patients as a they walk towards a doorway
(Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ). In both stud-
ies, PD patients were asked to walk through doorways of different
sizes (wide, medium and narrow), with the idea of understand-
ing the changes in gait velocity and the conditions that trigger
FOG. The Cowie et al. (2010) study shows signiﬁcant differences
FIGURE 8 | (A) Effect of δlim on stride lengths (simulations are run for
γ= 0.8a n dσ= 0.3) with other GEN parameters the same as that of the
controls; (B) Effect of different levels of γ and σ on stride length
(unclamped δ).
in the gait velocity and stride length, for healthy controls, PD
ON and PD OFF freezers. The velocity and stride lengths were
signiﬁcantly different among the three subject groups. In this
study, the controls produce higher velocities of gait and higher
stride lengths than PD freezers, under all door conditions. PD
ON subjects show lesser velocities and stride lengths compared to
controls but higher than PD OFF , who show the lowest velocities.
The PD subjects (both ON and OFF) also produce signiﬁcant dips
in their gait velocity especially near the doorway, showing signs
of freezing ( Figures 9A, 10A). The Almeida and Lebold (2010)
study takes into account the gait patterns speciﬁcally of PD freez-
ers and PD non-freezers. The differences among the three groups
of subjects—controls, PD freezers and non-freezers—are evident
from their step length proﬁles. PD freezers produce signiﬁcantly
low step lengths compared to controls and PD non-freezers. The
trend is exaggerated as the doorway width decreases with the nar-
row doorway producing the least step length ( Figure 12A). They
also show increased variability among PD freezers in compari-
son to controls and non-freezers ( Figure 13A). The experimental
paradigm is quite similar in both the above studies ( Almeida and
Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ).
SIMULATING THE ENVIRONMENT
W e start with a description of the doorway and the reward sched-
ule used in the ENVIRONMENT module of our model. The
agent’s state and action representation is in the form of view vec-
tor and the velocity vector respectively. The position vector limits
are: [-2, 2] for x-position across the breadth of the track, and
[0, 10] for y-position along the length of the track ( Figure 3).
At the start, the agent is always positioned at y = 0.1f o rar a n -
dom x, and is directly oriented toward the door, whose center is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 8


--- Page 9 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
FIGURE 9 | Normalized velocity proﬁle for controls and PD freezers in
(A) Experiment (Cowie et al., 2010)a n d (B) simulation under different
doorway conditions. 100% velocity in the experimental results represents
the velocity proﬁle under a no-door condition. In simulation results, the
velocity proﬁles are normalized by an average velocity far before (5–6 m)
from the doorway.
located at (x, y) = (0, 10) (Figure 3). The view vector φ(t) cor-
responding to any given position and orientation is given by eqn.
5, and the velocity is the action selected by following policy GEN
(Equation 12). The agent is presented with three door conditions
(wide, medium, and narrow).
In the Cowie et al. (2010) study, the door sizes are scaled to
the participant’s shoulders (100% shoulder width—narrow door;
125% shoulder width—medium door; 150% shoulder width—
wide door), while the Almeida and Lebold study uses doors
of ﬁxed size (wide door—1.8 m; normal door—0.9 m; narrow
door—0.675 m). In our model, the agent has a circular body of
diameter 1 m and the door sizes (d
length) are 3 m for “wide, ” 2.5 m
for “medium/normal” and 2 m for “narrow” cases. The agent
must control its movements through a distance of 10 m before
it encounters the door. The rewards/punishments are as follows:
r = 5 at the door for successful passage, and r =− 1 for collision
with the sides of the door and the boundaries of the track; r = 0
elsewhere.
SIMULATING THE GEN
In the BG model, GEN parameters ( A’s and λ’s: AG,
AN,AE,λG,λN) of Equation 12 are computed for all the doorway
cases (narrow, medium and “wide”) and medicated conditions
(ON/OFF). For all the doorways, once the above parameters are
ﬁrst optimized for controls, they are then directly used for simu-
lating the PD condition. The optimization is done such that the
simulation results fall within the error of the experimental results.
The cost function chosen for optimization considers two ele-
ments: (a) the magnitude of stride / step length for each doorway
FIGURE 10 | Mean Stride lengths and Standard Errors for Controls, PD
On and PD Off under different doorway conditions in (A) experiments
(Cowie et al., 2010) and (B) simulations, reported with p < 0.005,
N = 50.
condition and (b) the stride / step length gradient between each
doorway in any medication condition, the details of which are
explained in Appendix A. The distinction between conditions
of PD freezers (ON and OFF) and non-freezers among the two
experiments is explained as follows.
In Cowie et al. (2010) study
O n c et h es e tf o rc o n t r o l s(AG, AN, AE, λG, λN, γ and σ)i s
optimized, the set for the PD freezers is obtained as follows.
The parameters δ
lim (a status of limited dopamine availabil-
ity), δmed = 0 are treated specially for PD OFF case. Since δlim
controls the clamping of δ (Equation 9), a step that repre-
sents dopamine deﬁciency under PD conditions, we search for
the optimal δ
lim(Equation 28) to describe PD OFF gait results.
Furthermore, in PD OFF condition, we set δmed = 0 denoting
absence of medication. Additionally γ (discount factor) and σ
(exploration parameter) are also trained in PD OFF condition. In
summary, the parameters that are trained in PD OFF condition
are δ
lim, γ,a n dσ.T h ep a r a m e t e rδmed is simply set to 0. All these
parameters (A’s and λ’s from the control set, δlim, γ) are carried
over to PD ON from PD OFF case, except σ and δmed(Equation
29) which are trained. The optimized parameter values are as in
Ta b l e 2.
In Almeida and Lebold (2010) study
The controls set ( AG, AN, AE, λG, λN, γ,a n d σ)i sﬁ r s to p t i -
mized as in the Cowie et al. case. Further as the experimental
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 9


--- Page 10 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
FIGURE 1 1 | Value function represented across space for a narrow
door ( dlength = 2) in Controls (A,C) and PD Condition (B,D). The
graphs for (A) and (B) are obtained by using only the orientation vector
facing toward the door at all points in space, while that of (C,D) are
obtained by averaging the values corresponding to all the possible
orientations, at a point in space.
results for both freezers and non-freezers are in PD ON con-
dition, δlim, δmed, γ and σ are optimized for PD freezers. For
the PD non-freezers, all the PD freezers parameters are carried
over except for γ and σ that are also optimized to match the
experimental results. The optimized parameter values are as in
Ta b l e 3.
The effect of adjusting parameters such as γ and σ in addi-
tion to δ(δ
lim, δmed) for simulating PD freezers (ON / OFF as in
Cowie et al., 2010 ) and non-freezers (as in Almeida and Lebold,
2010) compared to controls is apart from conventional modeling
of PD condition where just the dopamine analogueδin particular
δlim and δmed is varied. The motivation behind such a strategy is
explained in Rationale Behind Optimization Strategy and Model
Behavior Section.
The parameters including A
G, AN ,a n d AE are optimized to
2.5, 1 and 1 respectively; and the sensitivity to Go (λG)a n dN o G o
(λN) is ﬁxed at 1 and -1, respectively for the controls, PD freezers
/ non-freezers irrespective of the door-widths dlength simulated.
Since PD is a dopamine-deﬁcient condition, PD OFF conditions
are simulated in the model by clamping δ(Equation 9) to a low
value “δ
lim” (Equation 28). T o the clamped δ, a medication fac-
tor δmed is added to simulate PD ON conditions (Equation 29).
A similar modeling approach to PD conditions was adopted ear-
lier in ( Magdoom et al., 2011 ). Conceptually, if the range of δ
values for controls is represented as [ ab ], then PD OFF adopts
ar a n g eo f [aδ
lim] where both a, δlim < b and PD ON takes
up the range of [ a + δmed, δlim + δmed]w h e r eδlim + δmed < b.
In the simulations we set a and b as − 1a n d +1, respectively.
Ta b l e s 2, 3 show the parameter values for different condition
settings.
PDOFF : If δ> δlim
δ= δlim
(28)
PDON :
If δ> δlim
δ= δlim + δmed
else
δ= δ+ δmed
(29)
SIMULATING THE VELOCITY PROFILES, STRIDE / STEP LENGTHS
The Cowie et al. (2010) study suggests that there is no signiﬁcant
change in cadence (steps/s) of the subjects involved in the study.
Therefore, frequency of the hopf oscillators is ﬁxed such that the
output rhythm produces 2 steps/s or 1 stride. Moreover in order
to prevent the agent from making undesirable backward move-
ments away from the door, stride length/ step length is equated
to a small constant value whenever the velocity ( v
y) generated
from GEN is negative. In our simulation, this constant value is
taken to be 0.0001. (Note that in the other case, the velocities v
x
and vy from GEN are translated into the corresponding stride /
step length by using the CPGs of section The CPG Module). The
model (cortico-BG system) simulation is discrete in time ( t) i.e.,
each iteration is considered as execution of a single stride and a
single update of the velocity of the agent.
During training, the agent repeatedly walks along a track to the
doorway of speciﬁc size for 100 passes, and the value function is
built up by training the value weights, W (Equation 8). In testing
conditions, the pre-trained weights of the value function are used
and the agent is run for another 100 passes to obtain a velocity
proﬁle along the track.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 10


--- Page 11 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
FIGURE 12 | Mean and Standard Deviation of Step length proﬁles for
PD freezers and non-freezers under wide, medium and narrow door
conditions in (A) experiments ( Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al.,
2010), and (B) simulations. PD freezers show signiﬁcantly reduced step
lengths compared to non-freezers ( p < 0.05) and controls ( p < 0.005) under
all door conditions ( N = 50).
Since the model does not provide velocities at every point in
space, linear interpolation is conducted to ﬁll in the gaps of vy,
which is averaged across the 100 passes to construct the velocity
proﬁle. Here, ifv
a and vb represent velocities at two discrete points
Xa and Xb,t h e nt h ev e l o c i t i e sf o ri n t e r v a l si nb e t w e e nXa and Xb
is given by Equation 30.
vres = va + (vb − va) Xres − Xa
Xb − Xa
(30)
The following results are averaged over a length of the track
starting from 2 m before the door till the doorway (in Y axis),
for 50 such velocity proﬁles. In order to maintain regional
consistency with each door size, the positions of the agent
taken into account for averaging the velocities are (1) the
position of the door itself and, (2) half of the door width
[− 2d
pos,2dpos] on either side of the door along the width of the
track.
RATIONALE BEHIND OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY AND MODEL
BEHAVIOR
PD is a condition marked by decreased dopamine levels in the
BG, and hence the simulations of the same from the controls are
ﬁrst directed toward understanding the role of the parameterδ
lim.
The dopamine analogue δlim is varied between [− 1, 1],w h e r e− 1
represents highly depleted conditions and +1 is the unclamped
control conditions, and the stride length is determined at each
level of δ
lim as the model output. The simulations are carried out
FIGURE 13 | (A) Experimental Step length variability in controls, PD
freezers and PD non-freezers ( Almeida and Lebold, 2010), (B) Simulated
Step length variability in controls, PD freezers and PD non-freezers. The
signiﬁcance between the conditions (Controls, PD freezers, PD
non-freezers) and the cases (door ways: wide, medium, narrow) are
reported with p < 0.05, N = 50.
in a freeze-stimulating narrow door case (following simulation
criteria used for the Cowie et al. study, see Ta b l e 2)w i t ha l lo t h e r
parameters kept constant at control levels. The model shows no
signiﬁcant differences in the stride lengths on varying the param-
eter δ
limas seen in Figure 8A. Incidentally the Cowie et al. study
makes an interesting observation between the velocity proﬁles of
PD OFF and PD ON freezing subjects. The presence of the medi-
cation is not able to affect the stride trends for different doorways
seen in both ON and OFF states (i.e., although PD ON subjects
have increased strides to PD OFF , both class of subjects show sen-
sitivity to doorway size), suggesting the involvement of factors
other than dopamine in freezing events ( Figure 10A).
These observations then forced us to investigate other param-
eters which could bring about such a behavior trend seen in
the freezers. The discount factor γ and the exploration param-
eter σ are good modulatory candidates to explore apart from
dopamine, owing to the fact that they are related to the neural
correlates (Doya, 2002; T anaka et al., 2007)—serotonin and nore-
pinephrine respectively and also that their levels have been shown
to be altered in PD and in medication conditions (Chalmers et al.,
1971; Fahn et al., 1971 ). V arying the values of γ and σ, individ-
ually starts to produce changes in the stride lengths as seen in
Figure 8B. These simulations (also following the simulation cri-
teria used for Cowie et al. study, see Ta b l e 2) are carried out at
unclamped or control level of δ
lim under a narrow doorway. The
variation in stride length encourages the necessity in optimizing
γ and σ in PD conditions to match the same trends seen in the
experiments.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 11


--- Page 12 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
T able 2 | Parameter values for different condition settings for δlim, γ,
σ,a n d δmed for the Cowie et al. (2010) study .
Parameters Controls Freezers
PD OFF PD ON
δlim – − 0.1 − 0.1
γ 0.8 0.1 0.1
σ 0.3 0.01 0.15
δmed 00 0 . 1 2
T able 3 | Parameter values for different condition settings for δlim, γ,
σ,a n d δmed for the Almeida and Lebold (2010) study .
Parameters Controls PD ON
Non-freezers Freezers
δlim – − 0.1 − 0.1
γ 0.85 0.8 0.75
σ 0.23 0.22 0.02
δmed 0 0.12 0.12
T h ev e l o c i t yp r o ﬁ l eo b t a i n e df r o mt h em o d e lo fCowie
et al. (2010) for controls and the PD condition is as shown in
Figures 9A,B respectively. In controls there seems to be a reduc-
tion in velocity on approaching the doorway which is exaggerated
in PD conditions. The velocity near the doorway is normalized
by the average velocity calculated far before the doorway (5–
6m ) a s s e e n i nFigures 9A,B. Additionally simulations show a
certain door-size dependent scaling of velocity in case of PD sub-
jects. The simulated stride length proﬁle for controls, PD ON and
PD OFF under different doorway sizes is shown in Figure 10B,
and that of the experiments ( Cowie et al., 2010 )i n Figure 10A.
The average stride length of controls is higher than that of the
PD patients. In the model, we also found that PD ON case has
higher mean velocities than PD OFF , in agreement with exper-
imental data. Our simulation results also show that there is a
signiﬁcant difference in stride lengths ( p < 0.005) between the
wide/medium door and the narrow door conditions in both PD
ON and PD OFF states ( Figure 10). The shape of value function
proﬁle for both the controls and PD shows marked differences
(Figure 11). Here, the value function for controls shows a posi-
tive gradient in the vicinity of the door suggesting the presence
of a reward at the door. In case of PD patients, the value func-
tion is inverted and dips before the doorway, indicating low
reward expectancy near the doorway. Since the GEN dynamics
(Equation 12) depend on the gradient of value function (rep-
resented by δ
V : Equation. 10), that negative gradient of value
function may be a factor contributing to the velocity dip near
the doorway.
Almeida and Lebold (2010) in their study show differences in
gait patterns between PD ON—freezers and non-freezers. The
experiments conducted in the ON condition report that the PD
freezers group produces signiﬁcantly reduced step lengths, com-
pared to non-freezers and controls. This reduction in step lengths
is further ampliﬁed in the case of reduced door sizes ( d
length). PD
freezers also show changes in step length variability, a clear con-
comitant feature of freezing ( Almeida et al., 2007 ). Our model
captures this effect, and we present our results in terms of step
length and step length coefﬁcient of variation (CV). PD freezers
show signiﬁcantly reduced step lengths compared to non-freezers
(p < 0.05) and controls ( p < 0.005) under all door conditions
(Figure 12). In order to capture the increased variability observed
in PD freezers, the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) in step length
within a trial is determined ( Figure 13B) throughout the corri-
dor facing the doorway, and is averaged across trials ( N = 50).
Step length CV shows similar trends as seen in the original study
(Figure 13A) where the PD freezers show signiﬁcantly higher CV
in comparison to controls and PD non-freezers in all the three
door conditions. The step length CV reported in Almeida and
Lebold (2010) is hypothesized to be a factor of unstable gait and
a voluntary control over it.
A conclusion that the experiments lead to is that dopamine
reduction, modeled here by clampingδ, alone cannot lead to FOG
(Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ). The simulations
also reinforce the same conclusion. Therefore we studied the role
of other model parameters including γ and σ in bringing about
FOG ( Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ). This sug-
gests the involvement of several factors for an event like FOG,
and a single parameter ( δ, γ,o r σ) might not be sufﬁcient to
produce the observed effect of freezing. A plausible neurobiolog-
ical interpretation of this modeling conclusion is presented in the
following section.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we model gait changes and the occurrence of
FOG in PD patients walking through doorways of different sizes.
Our model reproduces the results of the studies of Cowie et al.
(2010) and Almeida and Lebold (2010) . The model shows sig-
niﬁcant decrease in the velocities (as a dip in velocity) and
stride lengths for the PD (ON/OFF) compared to the Controls
as seen in Cowie et al. (2010) . The decrease in velocity observed
in the controls and PD (ON/OFF) freezers, is also signiﬁ-
cant with changing door sizes i.e., the reduction in the door
size increases the dip in velocity near the doorway. The step
length proﬁles of Controls, PD freezers and PD non-freezers are
also reproduced in concordance with the Almeida and Lebold
(2010) results. W e show that PD freezers produce signiﬁcantly
smaller steps than the controls and PD non-freezers in all the
doorway conditions. Furthermore within the PD freezers (dif-
ferent doorway conditions), there exists a doorway effect with
the narrowest door producing the least step length. In addi-
tion we replicate the trends observed that is the increased CV
in step length found in PD freezers compared to non-freezers
and controls.
FOG is a characteristic feature highlighting the cortical-BG
loop inﬂuence on the spinal rhythms in the gait generation (Lewis
and Barker, 2009; Naismith et al., 2010 ). Here, gait is a motor
function that can be driven by spinal circuits and the error
correcting systems like BG, with only a limited consciousness
and voluntary control from the motor cortical areas ( T akakusaki
et al., 2008 ). Certain external conditions, for example conﬁned
spaces, might force a shift toward increased voluntary control
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 12


--- Page 13 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
(Maruyama and Y anagisawa, 2006 ) on gait. Furthermore the
manifestation of FOG as start-hesitation, destination-hesitation
and obstacle avoidance have been thought to be a result of impair-
ment in willed / voluntary action ( Maruyama and Y anagisawa,
2006). Lewis and Barker hypothesized that freezing might also
result from the depletion in the available dopamine ( δ), on
induction of high cognitive loads ( Lewis and Barker, 2009).
There are no existing computational models explaining the
FOG in PD, to our knowledge. Our model captures this feat
by carefully considering the impact of different levels of con-
trol on gait. The model consists of two stages of control: the
cortico-BG and CPG on the locomotor apparatus. The cortico-
BG module uses RL concepts for learning the environment in
which the agent is placed (for navigating through doorway of
variable widths). The BG dynamics are modeled through GEN
that has been tested in many of our earlier studies ( Sridharan
et al., 2006; Magdoom et al., 2011; Kalva et al., 2012 ). This
module outputs a higher level control parameter such as veloc-
i t yo fg a i tt ob ep a s s e do nt ot h en e x ti nc o n t r o l :t h eC P G s .
The CPGs are modeled through dynamic adaptive hopf oscil-
lators ( Righetti and Ijspeert, 2006 ) representing the rhythmic
spinal cord activity aiding the locomotion. Here the velocity
obtained from the cortico-BG module is translated to the joint
angle displacement during gait. This joint angle information is
converted to the translatory motion in terms of stride / step
lengths in the locomotor apparatus. This approach of model-
ing gives two major advantages: (1) It consolidates the essential
functioning of the two stages of control in an abstract man-
ner to explain the FOG, which a detailed model of only CPG
driven biped model of gait ( T aga et al., 1991; Mori et al., 2004 )
cannot reproduce. (2) It also explains the non-dopamine depen-
dence on the FOG seen in the experiments modeled in this
study (Almeida and Lebold, 2010; Cowie et al., 2010 ). The results
point out the implications of the other parameters used in the
study ( γ and σ) for explaining the context dependent freezing
phenomenon.
INFLUENCE OF δ, γ AND σ PARAMETERS AND THEIR PLAUSIBLE
CORRELATES:
As discussed in the text above, δ is the dopamine functioning
correlate depicting the temporal difference error in value func-
tion. Since dopamine deﬁciency is generally considered the crucial
factor, the “star of the show” ( Lewitt, 2012 ), responsible for PD
related impairment, RL-based computational models of BG func-
tion typically propose TD error (a dopamine correlate) as the key
variable that controls normal and pathological function. It has
to be noted that the study by Cowie et al. (2010) made an inter-
esting observation that the L-Dopa medication given to resurge
the dopamine levels of PD freezers did not have a signiﬁcant
effect on the sensitivities to doorways. The same is captured by
our model effectively, as seen in Figure 8A. The ﬁgure backs the
non-dopamine dependence of FOG by showing no signiﬁcant
changes in stride length simulated for narrow doorway (width
2 m) under various clamped δ conditions simulated for control
levels of γand σ. It is also known that there are signiﬁcant changes
in other key neuromodulators like norepinephrine, serotonin
and acetylcholine that is observed in PD, though these ﬁndings
have not sufﬁciently inﬂuenced mainstream thinking about PD
pathogenesis.
Norepinephrine is involved in important brain functions
like wakefulness, vigilance and circadian rhythms ( Aston-Jones
et al., 1994; Yu and Dayan, 2005; Lewitt, 2012 ). Similar to
loss of dopaminergic cells in SNc, there is marked loss of
norepinephrine-releasing cells in Locus Coeruleus (LC) in PD
(Cash et al., 1987; Del T redici et al., 2002). Loss of norepinephrine
is found to produce more pronounced motor impairment than
destruction of dopamine ﬁbers caused by MPTP ( Rommelfanger
and W einshenker, 2007). Serotonin is known to be signiﬁcantly
involved in a wide spectrum of activities ranging from moods like
anxiety, depression leading to major disorders such as bipolar dis-
order, major depression, schizophrenia, to reward- punishment
sensitivity and their prediction in action selection ( Lopez-Ibor,
1992; V aswani et al., 2003; Boureau and Dayan, 2011; Rogers,
2011). There is evidence for altered serotonergic transmission and
its involvement in motor impairment in PD ( Fahn et al., 1971;
Kish et al., 2008 ). It would be interesting to have a theory of BG
function that combines the action of dopamine, norepinephrine
and serotonin.
There was indeed an attempt to accommodate the function
of all the four neuromodulators—dopamine, serotonin, nore-
pinephrine and acetylcholine—in a uniﬁed theoretical framework
based on RL (Doya, 2002). According to this view, dopamine rep-
resents TD error, norepinephrine represents exploration denoted
by the temperature parameter, β, serotonin represents discount
parameter, γ, and acetylchoine represents the learning rate, η.
Speciﬁcally, within BG circuitry, it was suggested that GP is the
substrate for exploration ( Doya, 2002). GP is also known to have
high levels of norepinephrine (Russell et al., 1992). From a purely
dynamical point of view, chaotic dynamics of STN-GPe system
qualiﬁes to serve as a source of exploratory drive, an idea that
has been investigated extensively using computational models
(Sridharan et al., 2006; Ranganathan et al., 2012 ). In the present
model, the exploration parameter, σ, denotes the extent of explo-
ration, and therefore may be described as a neural correlate for
norepinephrine in BG. Similarly serotonin has been linked to the
discount factor, γ, or the time-scale of reward integration, with
larger values of γ corresponding to higher levels of serotonin
(T anaka et al., 2007). Low levels of serotonin were associated with
impulsivity, a behavior that may be thought to be a result of short-
term reward seeking (Rogers, 2011) .B a s e do nt h ea r g u m e n t sj u s t
described, we adjust both γ and σ that represent serotonin and
norepinephrine respectively, in addition to δ
lim and δmed that
are related to dopamine levels, in the present model to capture
PD-related gait changes.
Therefore, in addition to incorporating PD-related changes
in δ (δ
lim and δmed) corresponding to ON and OFF conditions
respectively, we also explore the effect of the discount factor ( γ)
and exploration parameter (σ) on the velocity proﬁle of the agent.
These parameters have distinct roles in the model. By lowering σ
it is possible to produce the velocity dip and stride length decrease
as in Figures 8B, 9B. As a result PD freezers (ON / OFF) are
modeled with lower σ compared to controls (See Ta b l e 2). The
lower γ maintains the doorway effect between the controls and
PD freezers and also emphasizes the fact that smaller values of
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 13


--- Page 14 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
γ ﬁt PD velocity proﬁles better in the model, reﬂecting reduced
serotonin levels in PD patients compared to controls (Figure 8B).
Speciﬁcally, the PD ON conditions are modeled by increased σ
compared to the PD OFF case and addition of δmed in the model
(described in Section Simulating the GEN). This assumption in
modulating σ in addition to δ
med in PD ON implies that the
medication factor δmed increases the norepinephrine levels in the
BG. There is evidence pointing to this claim and that the nore-
pinephrine levels do increase on uptake of dopamine medication
(Chalmers et al., 1971 ). L-Dopa treated rats have been found
to have higher levels of norepinephrine mainly in the striatum,
hypothalamus, brainstem and cerebellum ( Romero et al., 1972 ).
T aking into account these factors, the model incorporates the
changes in σ which gives much better match to the experimen-
tal data than just altering δ
med. This further led us to believe that
even among PD subjects, the freezers could be hypothesized to
have decreased serotonin and norepinephrine compared to non-
freezers. Under the conditions of PD non-freezers, the γ and σ
level increase in comparison to the PD freezers ( Ta b l e 3). This
r e s u l t su r g eu st op r o p o s et h a tγand σvalues may possibly reﬂect
the importance of considering the other neuromodulators like
serotonin and norepinephrine respectively, on context dependent
FOG.
W e conclude that the loss of dopaminergic cells alone can-
not explain the FOG mechanism observed in PD patients. W e
predict that altered levels of serotonin and norepinephrine may
contribute to freezing. Future work will be aimed at development
of more detailed network model of BG and its role in gait con-
trol. The model will elucidate the contributions of dopamine,
serotonin and norepinephrine to gait in normal and PD
conditions.
REFERENCES
Albin, R. L., Y oung, A. B., and Penney, J. B. (1989). The functional anatomy
of basal ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosc i. 12, 366–375. doi: 10.1016/0166-
2236(89)90074-X
Almeida, Q. J., Frank, J. S., Roy, E. A., Patla, A. E., and Jog, M. S. (2007).
Dopaminergic modulation of timing control and variability in the gait of
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 22, 1735–1742. doi: 10.1002/mds.21603
Almeida, Q. J., and Lebold, C. A. (2010). Freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease: a
perceptual cause for a motor impairment? J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 81,
513–518. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.160580
Amemori, K., Gibb, L. G., and Graybiel, A. M. (2011). Shifting responsibly:
the importance of striatal modularity to reinforcement learning in uncertain
environments. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 5:47. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00047
Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P ., and Alexinsky, T. (1994). Locus coeruleus
neurons in monkey are selectively activated by attended cues in a vigilance task.
J. Neurosci. 14, 4467–4480.
Azulay, J.-P ., Mesure, S., Amblard, B., Blin, O., Sangla, I., and Pouget, J. (1999).
Visual control of locomotion in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 122, 111–120. doi:
10.1093/brain/122.1.111
Boureau, Y . L., and Dayan, P . (2011). Opponency revisited: competition and coop-
eration between dopamine and serotonin. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 74–97.
doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.151
Bradshaw, E. J., and Sparrow, W. (2000). The speed-accuracy trade-off in human
gait control when running towards targets. J. Appl. Biomech. 16, 331–341.
Cash, R., Dennis, T., L ’Heureux, R., Raisman, R., Javoy-Agid, F ., and Scatton, B.
(1987). Parkinson’s disease and dementia Norepinephrine and dopamine in
locus ceruleus. Neurology 37, 42–42. doi: 10.1212/WNL.37.1.42
Chakravarthy, V . S., Joseph, D., and Bapi, R. S. (2010). What do the basal ganglia
do? A modeling perspective. Biol. Cybern. 103, 237–253. doi: 10.1007/s00422-
010-0401-y
Chalmers, J., Baldessarini, R., and Wurtman, R. (1971). Effects of L-dopa on nore-
pinephrine metabolism in the brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 68, 662–666.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.68.3.662
Chee, R., Murphy, A., Danoudis, M., Georgiou-Karistianis, N., and Iansek,
R. (2009). Gait freezing in Parkinson’s disease and the stride length
sequence effect interaction. Brain 132, 2151–2160. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awp053
Cowie, D., Limousin, P ., Peters, A., and Day, B. L. (2010). Insights into the neural
control of locomotion from walking through doorways in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Neuropsychologia 48, 2750–2757. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.
05.022
Del T redici, K., Rüb, U., De V os, R. A., Bohl, J. R., and Braak, H. (2002). Where does
Parkinson disease pathology begin in the brain? J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 61,
413–426.
De Pina Filho, A. C., and Dutra, M. S. (2009). “ Application of hybrid van der
Pol-Rayleigh oscillators for modeling of a bipedal robot, ” Mechanics of Solids
in Brazil,V o l .1 .e d sH .S .d aC o s t aM a t t o sa n dM .A l v e s( R i od eJ a n e i r o :A B C M
- Associação Brasileira de Engenhariae Ciências Mecânicas), 209–221.
Doya, K. (2002). Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Netw. 15, 495–506.
doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(02)00044-8
Duarte, M., and Latash, M. L. (2007). Effects of postural task requirements on the
speed–accuracy trade-off. Exp. Brain Res. 180, 457–467. doi: 10.1007/s00221-
007-0871-x
Fahn, S., Libsch, L. R., and Cutler, R. W. (1971). Monoamines in the human neos-
triatum: topographic distribution in normals and in Parkinson’s disease and
their role in akinesia, rigidity, chorea, and tremor. J. Neurol. Sci. 14, 427–455.
doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(71)90178-X
Frank, M. J. (2005). Dynamic dopamine modulation in the basal ganglia: a
neurocomputational account of cognitive deﬁcits in medicated and nonmed-
icated Parkinsonism. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 17, 51–72. doi: 10.1162/08989290528
80093
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimization and Machine
Learning. Boston, MA: Addison-W esley Longman Publishing Co.
Hausdorff, J. M., Cudkowicz, M. E., Firtion, R., W ei, J. Y ., and Goldberger, A. L.
(1998). Gait variability and basal ganglia disorders: stride-to-stride variations of
gait cycle timing in parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease. Mov. Disord.
13, 428–437. doi: 10.1002/mds.870130310
Houk, J. C., Davis, J. L., and Beiser, D. G. (1995). Models of Information Processing
in the Basal Ganglia. Cambridge, MA: The MIT press.
Hughes, J., Bowes, S., Leeman, A., O’Neill, C., Deshmukh, A., Nicholson, P .,
et al. (1990). Parkinsonian abnormality of foot strike: a phenomenon of ageing
and/or one responsive to levodopa therapy? Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 29, 179–186.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.1990.tb03617.x
Humphries, M. D., and Prescott, T. J. (2010). The ventral basal ganglia, a selection
mechanism at the crossroads of space, strategy, and reward. Prog. Neurobiol. 90,
385–417. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.11.003
Ijspeert, A. J. (2008). Central pattern generators for locomotion con-
trol in animals and robots: a review. Neural Netw. 21, 642–653. doi:
10.1016/j.neunet.2008.03.014
Joel, D., Niv, Y ., and Ruppin, E. (2002). Actor-critic models of the basal ganglia:
new anatomical and computational perspectives. Neural Netw.15, 535–547. doi:
10.1016/S0893-6080(02)00047-3
Kalva, S. K., Rengaswamy, M., Chakravarthy, V . S., and Gupte, N. (2012). On the
neural substrates for exploratory dynamics in basal ganglia: a model. Neural
Netw. 32, 65–73. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.02.031
Kimmeskamp, S., and Hennig, E. M. (2001). Heel to toe motion characteristics
in Parkinson patients during free walking. Clin. Biomech. 16, 806–812. doi:
10.1016/S0268-0033(01)00069-9
Kish, S. J., Shannak, K., and Hornykiewicz, O. (1988). Uneven pattern of
dopamine loss in the striatum of patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease.
Pathophysiologic and clinical implications . N. Engl. J. Med. 318, 876–880. doi:
10.1056/NEJM198804073181402
Kish, S. J., T ong, J., Hornykiewicz, O., Rajput, A., Chang, L.-J., Guttman,
M., et al. (2008). Preferential loss of serotonin markers in caudate ver-
sus putamen in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 131, 120–131. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awm239
Koozekanani, S., Balmaseda, M. Jr., Fatehi, M., and Lowney, E. (1987). Ground
reaction forces during ambulation in parkinsonism: pilot study. Arch. Phys.
Med. Rehabil. 68, 28.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 14


--- Page 15 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
Latt, M. D., Lord, S. R., Morris, J. G., and Fung, V . S. (2009). Clinical and physio-
logical assessments for elucidating falls risk in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord.
24, 1280–1289. doi: 10.1002/mds.22561
Lemon, R. N. (2008). Descending pathways in motor control. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 31, 195–218. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.060407.
125547
Lewis, S. J. G., and Barker, R. A. (2009). A pathophysiological model of freez-
ing of gait in Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 15, 333–338. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.08.006
Lewitt, P . A. (2012). Norepinephrine: the next therapeutics frontier for
Parkinson’s disease. Transl. Neurodegener. 1, 4. doi: 10.1186/2047-
9158-1-4
Lopez-Ibor, J. J., Jr. (1992). Serotonin and psychiatric disorders. Int. Clin.
Psychopharmacol 7(Suppl 2), 5–11. doi: 10.1097/00004850-199210002-00003
Mackay, D. G. (1982). The problems of ﬂexibility, ﬂuency, and speed–accuracy
trade-off in skilled behavior. Psychol. Rev. 89, 483. doi: 10.1037/0033-
295X.89.5.483
Magdoom, K. N., Subramanian, D., Chakravarthy, V . S., Ravindran, B., Amari,
S., and Meenakshisundaram, N. (2011). Modeling basal ganglia for under-
standing Parkinsonian reaching movements. Neural Comput. 23, 477–516. doi:
10.1162/NECO_a_00073
Maruyama, T., and Y anagisawa, N. (2006). Cognitive impact on freezing of
gait in Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 12, S77–S82. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.05.024
Middleton, F . A., and Strick, P . L. (2000). Basal ganglia and cerebellar loops:
motor and cognitive circuits. Brain Res. Rev. 31, 236–250. doi: 10.1016/S0165-
0173(99)00040-5
Mori, T., Nakamura, Y ., Sato, M.-A., and Ishii, S. (2004). “Reinforcement learning
for cpg-driven biped robot, ” inAAAI Proceedings of the 19th National Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , eds D. L. McGuinness and G. Ferguson (San Jose, CA:
The MIT Press), 623–630.
Morris, M., Iansek, R., Matyas, T., and Summers, J. (1998). Abnormalities in the
stride length-cadence relation in parkinsonian gait. Mov. Disord. 13, 61–69. doi:
10.1002/mds.870130115
Morris, M., Iansek, R., Smithson, F ., and Huxham, F . (2000). Postural instability
in Parkinson’s disease: a comparison with and without a concurrent task. Gait
Posture 12, 205–216. doi: 10.1016/S0966-6362(00)00076-X
Naismith, S. L., Shine, J. M., and Lewis, S. J. (2010). The speciﬁc contribu-
t i o n so fs e t - s h i f t i n gt of r e e z i n go fg a i ti nP a r k i n s o n ’ sd i s e a s e .Mov. Disord. 25,
1000–1004. doi: 10.1002/mds.23005
Ranganathan, R., Madanmohan, S., Kesavan, A., Baskar, G., Krishnamoorthy, Y . R.,
Santosham, R., et al. (2012). Nanomedicine: towards development of patient-
friendly drug-delivery systems for oncological applications. Int. J. Nanomedicine
7, 1043–1060. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S25182
Righetti, L., and Ijspeert, A. J. (2006). “Programmable central pattern generators:
an application to biped locomotion control, ” inRobotics and Automation, 2006.
ICRA 2006. Proceedings 2006 IEEE International Conference on: IEEE , (Orlando,
FL), 1585–1590.
Rogers, R. D. (2011). The roles of dopamine and serotonin in deci-
sion making: evidence from pharmacological experiments in humans.
Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 114–132. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.165
Romero, J., Chalmers, J., Cottman, K., Lytle, L., and Wurtman, R. (1972). Regional
effects of L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) on norepinephrine metabolism
in rat brain. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 180, 277–285.
Rommelfanger, K., and W einshenker, D. (2007). Norepinephrine: the redheaded
stepchild of Parkinson’s disease. Biochem. Pharmacol. 74, 177–190. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2007.01.036
Russell, V ., Allin, R., Lamm, M., and T aljaard, J. (1992). Regional distribution of
monoamines and dopamine D1-and D2-receptors in the striatum of the rat.
Neurochem. Res. 17, 387–395. doi: 10.1007/BF00974582
Sahyoun, C., Floyer-Lea, A., Johansen-Berg, H., and Matthews, P . (2004). T owards
an understanding of gait control: brain activation during the anticipation,
preparation and execution of foot movements. Neuroimage 21, 568–575. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.065
Schultz, W. (2010). Dopamine signals for reward value and risk: basic and recent
data.
Behav. Brain Funct. 6, 24. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-6-24
Schultz, W., Dayan, P ., and Montague, P . R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction
and reward. Science 275, 1593–1599. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5306.1593
Sridharan, D., Prashanth, P . S., and Chakravarthy, V . S. (2006). The role of the basal
ganglia in exploration in a neural model based on reinforcement learning. Int.
J. Neural Syst. 16, 111–124. doi: 10.1142/S0129065706000548
Sutton, R., Barto, A. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Adaptive
Computations and Machine Learning.B r a d f o r d :M I TP r e s s .
T aga, G., Y amaguchi, Y ., and Shimizu, H. (1991). Self-organized control of bipedal
locomotion by neural oscillators in unpredictable environment. Biol. Cybern.
65, 147–159. doi: 10.1007/BF00198086
T akakusaki, K., T omita, N., and Y ano, M. (2008). Substrates for normal gait
and pathophysiology of gait disturbances with respect to the basal ganglia
dysfunction. J. Neurol. 255, 19–29. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-4004-7
T anaka, S. C., Schweighofer, N., Asahi, S., Shishida, K., Okamoto, Y ., Y amawaki,
S., et al. (2007). Serotonin differentially regulates short- and long-term pre-
diction of rewards in the ventral and dorsal striatum. PLoS ONE 2:e1333. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0001333
V aswani, M., Linda, F . K., and Ramesh, S. (2003). Role of selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors in psychiatric disorders: a comprehensive review.
Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 27, 85–102. doi: 10.1016/S0278-
5846(02)00338-X
Yu, A. J., and Dayan, P . (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention.
Neuron 46, 681–692. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.026
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 30 September 2013; accepted: 21 December 2013; published online: 09
January 2014.
Citation: Muralidharan V , Balasubramani PP , Chakravarthy VS, Lewis SJG and
Moustafa AA (2014) A computational model of altered gait patterns in parkinson’s
disease patients negotiating narrow doorways. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 7:190. doi:
10.3389/fncom.2013.00190
This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience.
Copyright © 2014 Muralidharan, Balasubramani, Chakravarthy, Lewis and
Moustafa. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that
the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 15


--- Page 16 ---
Muralidharan et al. Computational model of PD FOG
APPENDIX
The Genetic Algorithm (Goldberg, 1989) option set for optimization is given in the fol lowing table. Optimization toolbox 6.0, Matlab
R2011a, The Mathworks Inc. is used.
T able A1 | Option set for the GA tool.
Option Value
Population size 20
Crossover fraction 0.8
Elite count 4
Generation time 1000
Function tolerance 1 e-6
Bounds AG AN AE ,λG λN γσδ lim δmed
Upper 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 − 10
Lower 10 10 10 1 − 111 1 0 . 5
Cost function (Expt measure—Sims measure) 2
C = _0.5 ∑3
i = 1(exi − simsi)2 + 0.5{[(ex1 − ex2) + (ex2 − ex3) + (ex1 − ex3)]−
[(sims1 − sims2) + (sims2 − sims3) + (sims1 − sims3)]}
“ex” here refers to the experimental stride length values at each of the doorway (1—wide, 2—medium and 3—narrow) and
“sims” is the model’s ouput to a set of parameter values. The details of the parameters optimized at any given condition is
described in section Result.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience www.frontiersin.org January 2014 | Volume 7 | Article 190 | 16
