--- Page 1 ---
REVIEW
published: 11 December 2019
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00083
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83
Edited by:
Spyridon Bakas,
University of Pennsylvania,
United States
Reviewed by:
Rong Pan,
Arizona State University, United States
Guotai Wang,
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, China
*Correspondence:
Jakub Nalepa
jnalepa@ieee.org
Received: 30 April 2019
Accepted: 27 November 2019
Published: 11 December 2019
Citation:
Nalepa J, Marcinkiewicz M and
Kawulok M (2019) Data Augmentation
for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A
Review.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13:83.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00083
Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor
Segmentation: A Review
Jakub Nalepa 1,2*, Michal Marcinkiewicz 3 and Michal Kawulok 2
1 Future Processing, Gliwice, Poland, 2 Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland, 3 Netguru, Poznan, Poland
Data augmentation is a popular technique which helps improve generalization capabilities
of deep neural networks, and can be perceived as implicit reg ularization. It plays a pivotal
role in scenarios in which the amount of high-quality ground -truth data is limited, and
acquiring new examples is costly and time-consuming. This is a very common problem in
medical image analysis, especially tumor delineation. In t his paper, we review the current
advances in data-augmentation techniques applied to magne tic resonance images
of brain tumors. T o better understand the practical aspects of such algorithms, we
investigate the papers submitted to the Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge
(BraTS 2018 edition), as the BraTS dataset became a standard benchmark for validating
existent and emerging brain-tumor detection and segmentat ion techniques. We verify
which data augmentation approaches were exploited and what was their impact on
the abilities of underlying supervised learners. Finally, we highlight the most promising
research directions to follow in order to synthesize high-q uality artiﬁcial brain-tumor
examples which can boost the generalization abilities of de ep models.
Keywords: MRI, image segmentation, data augmentation, deep le arning, deep neural network
1. INTRODUCTION
Deep learning has established the state of the art in many sub -areas of computer vision and
pattern recognition (
Krizhevsky et al., 2017 ), including medical imaging and medical image
analysis ( Litjens et al., 2017 ). Such techniques automatically discover the underlying d ata
representation to build high-quality models. Although it is pos sible to utilize generic priors and
exploit domain-speciﬁc knowledge to help improve representati ons, deep features can capture
very discriminative characteristics and explanatory facto rs of the data which could have been
omitted and/or unknown for human practitioners during the process of manual feature engineering
(Bengio et al., 2013).
In order to successfully build well-generalizing deep models, we need huge amount of
ground-truth data to avoid overﬁtting of such large-capacit y learners, and “memorizing” training
sets (LeCun et al., 2016 ). It has become a signiﬁcant obstacle which makes deep neura l networks
quite challenging to apply in the medical image analysis ﬁeld whe re acquiring high-quality ground-
truth data is time-consuming, expensive, and very human-depe ndent, especially in the context of
brain-tumor delineation from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI ) (Isin et al., 2016; Angulakshmi
and Lakshmi Priya, 2017; Marcinkiewicz et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019). Additionally, the majority
of manually-annotated image sets are imbalanced—examples b elonging to some speciﬁc classes
are often under-represented. To combat the problem of limited medical training sets, data
augmentation techniques, which generate synthetic training examples, are being actively developed
in the literature (Hussain et al., 2017; Gibson et al., 2018; Park et al., 2019 ).


--- Page 2 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
In this review paper, we analyze the brain-tumor segmentation
approaches available in the literature, and thoroughly inves tigate
which techniques have been utilized by the participants of the
Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge (BraTS 2018).
To the best of our knowledge, the dataset used for the BraTS
challenge is currently the largest and the most comprehensiv e
brain-tumor dataset utilized for validating existent and e merging
algorithms for detecting and segmenting brain tumors. Also , it is
heterogeneous in the sense that it includes both low- and hig h-
grade lesions, and the included MRI scans have been acquired
at diﬀerent institutions (using diﬀerent MR scanners). We
discuss the brain-tumor data augmentation techniques alre ady
available in the literature, and divide them into several gr oups
depending on their underlying concepts (section 2). Such MRI
data augmentation approaches have been applied to augment
other datasets as well, also acquired for diﬀerent organs (
Amit
et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2019; Oksuz et al., 2019 ).
In the BraTS challenge, the participants are given multi-
modal MRI data of brain-tumor patients (as already mentioned,
both low- and high-grade gliomas), alongside the correspond ing
ground-truth multi-class segmentation (section 3). In thi s
dataset, diﬀerent sequences are co-registered to the same
anatomical template and interpolated to the same resolution
of 1 mm 3. The task is to build a supervised learner which is
able to generalize well over the unseen data which is release d
during the testing phase. In section 4, we summarize the
augmentation methods reported in 20 papers published in the
BraTS 2018 proceedings. Here, we focused on those papers
which explicitly mentioned that the data augmentation had been
utilized, and clearly stated what kind of data augmentation had
been applied. Although such augmentations are single-modal—
meaning that they operate over the MRI from a single sequence—
they can be easily applied to co-registered series, hence to
augment multi-modal tumor examples. Finally, the paper is
concluded in section 5, where we summarize the advantages
and disadvantages of the reviewed augmentation techniques, and
highlight the promising research directions which emerge fr om
(not only) BraTS.
2. DATA AUGMENTATION FOR
BRAIN-TUMOR SEGMENTATION
Data augmentation algorithms for brain-tumor segmentatio n
from MRI can be divided into the following main categories
(which we render in a taxonomy presented in Figure 1): the
algorithms exploiting various transformations of the origi nal
data, including aﬃne image transformations (section 2.1),
elastic transformations (section 2.2), pixel-level transformations
(section 2.3), and various approaches for generating artiﬁcial
data (section 2.4). In the following subsections, we review
the approaches belonging to all groups of such augmentation
methods in more detail.
Traditionally, data augmentation approaches have been
applied to increase the size of training sets, in order to allow
large-capacity learners beneﬁt from more representative tra ining
data (
Wong et al., 2016 ). There is, however, a new trend in the
deep learning literature, in which examples are augmented on
the ﬂy (i.e., during the inference), in the test-time1 augmentation
process. In Figure 2, we present a ﬂowchart in which both
training- and test-time data augmentation is shown. Test-t ime
data augmentation can help increase the robustness of a trained
model by simulating the creation of a homogeneous ensemble,
where ( n + 1) models (of the same type, and trained over
the same training data) vote for the ﬁnal class label of an
incoming test example, and n denotes the number of artiﬁcially-
generated samples, elaborated for the test example which is being
classiﬁed. The robustness of a deep model is often deﬁned as
its ability to correctly classify previously unseen examples—su ch
incoming examples are commonly “noisy” or slightly “perturbed”
when confronted with the original data, therefore they are m ore
challenging to classify and/or segment (
Rozsa et al., 2016 ). Test-
time data augmentation can be exploited for estimating the
level of uncertainty of deep networks during the inference— it
brings new exciting possibilities in the context of medical i mage
analysis, where quantifying the robustness and deep-network
reliability are crucial practical issues (
Wang et al., 2019). This type
of data augmentation can utilize those methods which modify
an incoming example, e.g., by applying aﬃne, pixel-level or
elastic transformations in the case of brain-tumor segment ation
from MRI.
2.1. Data Augmentation Using Afﬁne Image
Transformations
In the aﬃne approaches , existent image data undergo
diﬀerent operations (rotation, zooming, cropping, ﬂipping,
or translations) to increase the number of training
examples (
Pereira et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017 ). Shin et al.
pointed out that such traditional data augmentation techniq ues
fundamentally produce very correlated images ( Shin et al.,
2018), therefore can oﬀer very little improvements for the
deep-network training process and future generalization over the
unseen test data (such examples do not regularize the problem
suﬃciently). Additionally, they can also generate anatomic ally
incorrect examples, e.g., using rotation. Nevertheless, aﬃn e
image transformations are trivial to implement (in both 2D an d
3D), they are fairly ﬂexible (due to their hyper-parameters), and
are widely applied in the literature. In an example presented in
Figure 3, we can see that applying simple data augmentation
techniques can lead to a signiﬁcant increase in the number of
training samples.
2.1.1. Flip and Rotation
Random ﬂipping creates a mirror reﬂection of an original image
along one (or more) selected axis. Usually, natural images ca n
be ﬂipped along the horizontal axis, which is not the case for
the vertical one because up and down parts of an image are
not always “interchangeable.” A similar property holds for MRI
brain images—in the axial plane a brain has two hemispheres,
and the brain (in most cases) can be considered anatomically
symmetrical. Flipping along the horizontal axis swaps the left
1Test-time augmentation is also referred to as the inference-time and the online
data augmentation in the literature.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 3 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 1 | Data augmentation for brain-tumor segmentation—a taxonom y.
FIGURE 2 | Flowchart presenting training- and test-time data augment ation. In the training-time data augmentation approach, we g enerate synthetic data to increase
the representativeness of a training set (and ultimately bu ild better models), whereas in test-time augmentation, we b eneﬁt from the ensemble-like technique, in which
multiple homogeneous classiﬁers vote for the ﬁnal class label for an incoming example by classifying this sample and a numb er of its augmented versions.
FIGURE 3 | Applying afﬁne and pixel-level (discussed in more detail in s ection 2.3) transformations can help signiﬁcantly increase the size (and potentially
representativeness) of training sets. In this example, we ge nerate seven new images based on the original MRI (coupled wi th its ground truth in the bottom row).
hemisphere with the right one, and vice versa. This operation
can help various deep classiﬁers, especially those beneﬁtti ng
from the contextual tumor information, be invariant with respect
to their position within the brain which would be otherwise
diﬃcult for not representative training sets (e.g., contain ing
brain tumors located only in the left or right hemisphere).
Similarly, rotating an image by an angle α around the center
pixel can be exploited in this context. This operation is followe d
by appropriate interpolation to ﬁt the original image size. The
rotation operation denoted as R is often coupled with zero-
padding applied to the missing pixels:
R =
( cos α − sin α
sin α cos α
)
. (1)
2.1.2. Translation
The translation operation shifts the entire image by a given
number of pixels in a chosen direction, while applying padding
accordingly. It allows the network to not become focused on
features present mainly in one particular spatial region, but i t
forces the model to learn spatially-invariant features inste ad. As
in the case of rotation—since the MRI scans of diﬀerent patients
available in training sets are often not co-registered—tran slation
of an image by a given number of pixels along a selected axis
(or axes) can create useful and viable images. However, this
procedure may not be “useful” for all deep architectures—
convolutional neural networks exploit convolutions and
pooling operations, which are intrinsically spatially-invari ant
(
Asif et al., 2018).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 4 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
2.1.3. Scaling and Cropping
Introducing scaled versions of the original images into the
training set can help the deep network learn valuable deep
features independently of their original scale. This operati on
S can be performed independently in diﬀerent directions (for
brevity, we have only two dimensions here):
S =
( sx 0
0 sy
)
, (2)
and the scaling factors are given as sx and sy for the x and y
directions, respectively. As tumors vary in size, scaling can indeed
bring viable augmented images into a training set. Since var ious
deep architectures require images of the constant size, sca ling
is commonly paired with cropping to maintain the original
image dimensions. Such augmented brain-tumor examples may
manifest tumoral features at diﬀerent scales. Also, cropping c an
limit the ﬁeld of view only to those parts of the image which are
important (
Menze et al., 2015).
2.1.4. Shearing
The shear transformation ( H) displaces each point in an image
in a selected direction. This displacement is proportional to i ts
distance from the line which goes through the origin and is
parallel to this direction:
H =
( 1 hx
hy 1
)
, (3)
where hx and hy denote the shear coeﬃcient in the x and
y directions, respectively (as previously, we consider two
dimensions for readability). Although this operation can de form
shapes, it is rarely used to augment medical image data
because we often want to preserve original shape characterist ics
(
Frid-Adar et al., 2018).
2.2. Data Augmentation Using Elastic
Image Transformations
Data augmentation algorithms based on unconstrained elastic
transformations of training examples can introduce shape
variations. They can bring lots of noise and damage into the
training set if the deformation ﬁeld is seriously varied—see an
example by
Mok and Chung (2018) in which a widely-used
elastic transform produced a totally unrealistic synthetic MRI
scan of a human brain. If the simulated tumors were placed
in “unrealistic” positions, it would likely force the segmen tation
engine to become invariant to contextual information and ra ther
focus on the lesion’s appearance features (
Dvornik et al., 2018 ).
Although there are works which indicate that such aggressiv e
augmentation may deteriorate the performance of the models
in brain-tumor delineation (
Lorenzo et al., 2019 ), it is still an
open issue. Chaitanya et al. (2019) showed that visually non-
realistic synthetic examples can improve the segmentation of
cardiac MRI and noted that it is slightly counter-intuitive—it may
have occurred due to the inherent structural and deformatio n-
related characteristics of the cardiovascular system. Fin ally,
elastic transformations often beneﬁt from B-splines (
Huang
and Cohen, 1996; Gu et al., 2014 ) or random deformations
(Castro et al., 2018).
Diﬀeomophic mappings play an important role in brain
imaging, as they are able to preserve topology and generate
biologically plausible deformations. In such transformation s, the
diﬀeomorphism φ (also referred to as a diﬀeomorphic mapping) is
given in the spatial domain /Omega1 of a source image I, and transforms
I to the target image J: I ◦ φ − 1(x, 1). The mapping is the solution
of the diﬀerential equation:
dφ (x, t)
dt = v
(
φ (x, t), t
)
, (4)
where φ (x, 0) = x, v is a time-dependent smooth velocity
ﬁeld, v : /Omega1 × t → Rd, φ (x, t) is a geodesic path ( d denotes
the dimensionality of the spatial domain /Omega1 ), and φ (x, t) : /Omega1 ×
t → /Omega1 . In Nalepa et al. (2019a) , we exploited the directly
manipulated free-form deformation, in which the velocity ve ctor
ﬁelds are regularized using B-splines ( Tustison et al., 2009 ). The
d-dimensional update ﬁeld δ vi1,... ,id is
δ vi1,... ,id =
N/Omega1∑
c= 1
(
∂ξ
∂ x
)
c
d∏
j= 1
Bij (xc
j )
d∏
j= 1
B2
ij (xc
j )
(
N/Omega1∑
c= 1
d∏
j= 1
B2
ij (xc
j )
) (
r+ 1∑
k1= 1
. . .
r+ 1∑
kd= 1
d∏
j= 1
B2
kj
(xc
j )
) , (5)
and B(·) are the B-spline basis functions, N/Omega1 denotes the
number of pixels in the domain of the reference image, r is the
spline order (in all dimensions), and ∂ξ
∂ x is the gradient of the
spatial similarity metric at a pixel c. The B-spline functions act
as regularizers of the solution for each parametric dimensio n
(Tustison and Avants, 2013).
Examples of brain-tumor images generated using
diﬀeomorphic registration are given in Figure 4—such
artiﬁcially-generated data signiﬁcantly improved the abili ties
of deep learners, especially when combined with aﬃne
transformations, as we showed in
Nalepa et al. (2019a) .
The generated ( I′) images preserve topological information of
the original image data ( I) with subtle changes to the tissue.
Diﬀeomorphic registration may be applied not only to images
exposing anatomical structures (
Tward and Miller, 2017 ).
In Figure 5, we present examples of simple shapes which
underwent this transformation—the topological informatio n is
clearly maintained in the generated images as well.
2.3. Data Augmentation Using Pixel-Level
Image Transformations
There exist augmentation techniques which do not alter
geometrical shape of an image (therefore, all geometrical features
remain unchanged during the augmentation process), but aﬀect
the pixel intensity values (either locally, or across the ent ire
image). Such operations can be especially useful in medical
image analysis, where diﬀerent training images are acquired
in diﬀerent locations and using diﬀerent scanners, hence can
be intrinsically heterogeneous in the pixel intensities, in tensity
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 5 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 4 | Diffeomorphic image registration applied to example brain images allowed for obtaining visually-plausible generate d images. For source ( I), target ( J), and
artiﬁcially generated ( I′) images, we also present tumor masks overlayed over the corr esponding original images (in yellow; rows with the o subscript), alongside a
zoomed part of a tumor (rows with the z superscript).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 6 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 5 | Diffeomorphic image registration applied to basic shapes w hich underwent simple afﬁne registration (translation) bef ore diffeomorphic mapping. Source
images (I) transformed to match the corresponding targets ( J) still clearly expose their spatial characteristics ( I′).
FIGURE 6 | Generative adversarial networks are aimed at generating fa ke data (by a generator; potentially using some available data characteristics) w hich is
indistinguishable from the original data by the discriminator. Therefore, the generator and discriminator compete with o ne another.
gradients or “saturation” 2. During the pixel-level augmentation,
the pixel intensities are commonly perturbed using eitherrandom
or zero-mean Gaussian noise (with the standard deviation
corresponding to the appropriate data dimension), with a
given probability (the former operation is referred to as the
random intensity variation). Other pixel-level operations include
shifting and scaling of pixel-intensity values (and modifyi ng the
image brightness), applying gamma correction and its multiple
variants (
Agarwal and Mahajan, 2017; Sahnoun et al., 2018 ),
sharpening, blurring, and more ( Galdran et al., 2017 ). This kind
of data augmentation is often exploited for high-dimensiona l
data, as it can be conveniently applied to selected dimensions
(
Nalepa et al., 2019b).
2.4. Data Augmentation by Generating
Artiﬁcial Data
To alleviate the problems related to the basic data augmentat ion
approaches (including the problem of generating correlated da ta
samples), various approaches toward generating artiﬁcial data
(GAD) have been proposed. Generative adversarial networks
(GANs), originally introduced in
Goodfellow et al. (2014) , are
being exploited to augment medical datasets ( Han et al., 2019;
Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019 ). The main objective of a GAN
(Figure 6) is to generate a new data example (by a generator)
which will be indistinguishable from the real data by the
2These variations can be however alleviated by appropriate data stand ardization.
discriminator (the generator competes with the discriminator,
and the overall optimization mimics the min-max game). Mok
and Chung proposed a new GAN architecture which utilizes a
coarse-to-ﬁne generator whose aim is to capture the manifold
of the training data and generate augmented examples (
Mok
and Chung, 2018 ). Adversarial networks have been also used
for semantic segmentation of brain tumors ( Rezaei et al.,
2017), brain-tumor detection ( V arghese et al., 2017), and image
synthesis of diﬀerent modalities ( Yu et al., 2018 ). Although
GANs allow us to introduce invariance and robustness of deep
models with respect to not only aﬃne transforms (e.g., rotatio n,
scaling, or ﬂipping) but also to some shape and appearance
variations, convergence of the adversarial training and ex istence
of its equilibrium point remain the open issues. Finally, there
exist scenarios in which the generator renders multiple very
similar examples which cannot improve the generalization
of the system—it is known as the mode collapse problem
(
Wang et al., 2017).
An interesting approach for generating phantom image data
was exploited in Gholami et al. (2018), where the authors utilized
a multi-species partial diﬀerential equations (PDE) growth model
of a tumor to generate synthetic lesions. However, such data
does not necessarily follow the correct intensity distributi on
of a real MRI, hence it should be treated as a separate
modality, because using the artiﬁcial data which is sampled f rom
a very diﬀerent distribution may adversely aﬀect the overall
segmentation performance by “tricking” the underlying deep
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 7 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
model ( Wei et al., 2018 ). The tumoral growth model itself
captured the time evolution of enhancing and necrotic tumor
concentrations together with the edema induced by a tumor.
Additionally, the deformation of a lesion was simulated by
incorporating the linear elasticity equations into the mode l. To
deal with the diﬀerent data distributions, the authors applied
CycleGAN (
Zhu et al., 2017 ) for performing domain adaptation
(from the generated phantom data to the real BraTS MRI scans).
The experimental results showed that the domain adaptation was
able to generate images which were practically indistinguis hable
from the real data, therefore could be safely included in the
training set.
A promising approach of combining training samples using
their linear combinations (referred to as mixup) was proposed
by
Zhang et al. (2017) , and further enhanced for medical
image segmentation by Eaton-Rosen et al. in their mixmatch
algorithm ( Eaton-Rosen et al., 2019 ), which additionally
introduced a technique of selecting training samples that
undergo linear combination. Since the medical image datase ts
are often imbalanced (with the tumorous examples constituti ng
the minority class), training patches with highest “foregro und
amounts” (i.e., the number of pixels annotated as tumorous)
are combined with those with the lowest concentration of
foreground. The authors showed that their approach can increase
performance in medical-image segmentation tasks, and relat ed
its success to the mini-batch training. It is especially rele vant in
the medical-image analysis, because the sizes of input scans are
usually large, hence the batches are small to keep the traini ng
memory requirements feasible in practice. Such data-driven
augmentation techniques can also beneﬁt from growing groun d-
truth datasets (e.g., BraTS) which manifest large variabil ity
of brain tumors, to generate even more synthetic examples.
Also, they could be potentially applied at test time to build an
ensemble-like model, if a training patch/image which matche s
the test image being classiﬁed was eﬃciently selected from t he
training set.
3. DATA
In this work, we analyzed the approaches which were exploited
by the BraTS 2018 participants to segment brain tumors from
MRI (45 methods have been published,
Crimi et al., 2019 ),
and veriﬁed which augmentation scenarios were exploited in
these algorithms. All of those techniques have been trained over
the BraTS 2018 dataset consisting of MRI-DCE data of 285
patients with diagnosed gliomas: 210 patients with high-grad e
glioblastomas (HGG), and 75 patients with low-grade gliomas
(LGG), and validated using the validation set of 66 previously
unseen patients (both LGG and HGG, however the grade has not
been revealed) (
Menze et al., 2015; Bakas et al., 2017a,b,c ). Each
study was manually annotated by one to four expert readers. Th e
data comes in four co-registered modalities: native pre-con trast
(T1), post-contrast T1-weighted (T1c), T2-weighted (T2), and T2
Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR). All the pixels have
one of four labels attached: healthy tissue, Gd-enhancing t umor
(ET), peritumoral edema (ED), the necrotic and non-enhancin g
tumor core (NCR/NET). The scans were skull-stripped and
interpolated to the same shape (155, 240, 240 with the voxel siz e
of 1 mm3).
Importantly, this dataset manifests very heterogeneous ima ge
quality, as the studies were acquired across diﬀerent institu tions,
and using diﬀerent scanners. On the other hand, the delineati on
procedure was clearly deﬁned which allowed for obtaining
similar ground-truth annotations across various readers. To this
end, the BraTS dataset—as the largest, most heterogeneous,
and carefully annotated set—has been established as a standa rd
brain-tumor dataset for quantifying the performance of exist ent
and emerging detection and segmentation approaches. This
heterogeneity is pivotal, as it captures a wide range of tumor
characteristics, and the models trained over BraTS are easi ly
applicable for segmenting other MRI scans (
Nalepa et al., 2019).
To show this desirable feature of the BraTS set
experimentally, we trained our U-Net-based ensemble
architecture (
Marcinkiewicz et al., 2018 ) using (a) BraTS
2019 training set (exclusively FLAIR sequences) and (b) our set
of 41 LGG (WHO II) brain-tumor patients who underwent the
MR imaging with a MAGNETOM Prisma 3T system (Siemens,
Erlangen, Germany) equipped with a maximum ﬁeld gradient
strength of 80 mT/m, and using a 20-channel quadrature head
coil. The MRI sequences were acquired in the axial plane with
a ﬁeld of view of 230 × 190 mm, matrix size 256 × 256 and 1
mm slice thickness with no slice gap. In particular, we exploite d
exclusively FLAIR series with TE = 386 ms, TR = 5,000 ms, and
inversion time of 1,800 ms for segmentation of brain tumors.
These scans underwent the same pre-processing as applied in the
case of BraTS, however they were not segmented following
the same delineation protocol, hence the characteristics of t he
manual segmentation likely diﬀer across (a) and (b). The
4-fold cross-validation showed that although the deep mode ls
trained over (a) and (b) gave the statistically diﬀerent resul ts
at p < 0.001, according to the two-tailed Wilcoxon test 3, the
ensemble of models trained over (a) correctly detected 71.4%
(5/7 cases) of brain tumors in the WHO II test dataset, which
included seven patients kept aside while building an ensemble,
with the average whole-tumor DICE of 0.80, where DICE is
given as:
DICE(A, B) = 2 · |A ∩ B|
|A|+ |B| , (6)
where A and B are two segmentations, i.e., manual and
automated, 0 ≤ DICE ≤ 1, and DICE = 1 means the perfect
segmentation score. On the other hand, a deep model trained
over the WHO II training set and used for segmenting the test
WHO II cases detected 85.7% tumors (6/7 patients) with the
average whole-tumor DICE = 0.84. This tiny experiment shows
that the segmentation engines trained over BraTS can capture
tumor characteristics which are manifested in MRI data acquired
and analyzed using diﬀerent protocols, and allow us to obtain
high-quality segmentation. Interestingly, if we train ourensemble
over the combined BraTS 2019 and WHO II training sets, we
3We tested the null hypothesis saying that applying the models trained exclusively
over the BraTS or our WHO II datasets leads to the same-quality segme ntation.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 8 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 7 | T wo example low- and high-grade glioma patients from the Bra TS 2018 dataset: red—GD-enhancing tumor (ET), green—perit umoral edema (ED), and
blue—necrotic and non-enhancing tumor core (NCR/NET); (A–D) show original images, whereas (A’–D’) present overlaid ground-truth masks.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 9 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
TABLE 1 | Data augmentation techniques applied in the approaches val idated within the BraTS 2018 challenge framework.
References Model Flip Rot. Trans. Scale Shear Elastic GAD Pix el-wise
Albiol et al., 2019 VGG, Inception, Dense 3D afﬁne transformations
Benson et al., 2018 * CNN (encoder-decoder) Yes Random
Carver et al., 2018 U-Net Yes
Chandra et al., 2018 V-Net, ResNet-18, FC-CRF Yes Yes
Dai et al., 2018 Domain-adapted U-Net Yes
Feng et al., 2018 U-Net Yes
Gholami et al., 2018 * U-Net PDE
Isensee et al., 2018 U-Net Yes Yes Yes Random Gamma
Kao et al., 2018 DeepMedic, 3D U-Net Yes
Kermi et al., 2018 U-Net Yes Yes Yes
Lachinov et al., 2018 * Cascaded U-Net Yes B-spline Gaussian
Ma and Yang, 2018 3D CNN Yes Yes Yes
McKinley et al., 2018 Dense CNN Yes Yes Shift, scale
Mehta and Arbel, 2018 U-Net Yes Yes Yes Yes
Myronenko, 2018 CNN (encoder-decoder) Yes Yes Shift
Nuechterlein and Mehta, 2018 3D-ESPNet Yes Yes
Puybareau et al., 2018 VGG-16 Yes Yes
Rezaei et al., 2018 † Voxel-GAN Yes Yes Gaussian
Sun et al., 2018 CNN, DFKZ, 3D CNN Yes Gaussian
Wang et al., 2018 *† CNN Yes Yes Yes Random
Number of methods utilizing this augmentation → 15 8 2 9 1 2 1 8
Percentage (%) of methods utilizing this augmentation → 75 40 10 45 5 10 5 40
The top-performing techniques (over the unseen test set) are annotated wi th green.
*The authors veriﬁed the impact of data augmentation of the generalization abilities of their deep models.
†The authors used both training- and test-time data augmentation.
will end up having the correct detection of 85.7% tumors (6/7
cases) with the average whole-tumor DICE of 0.76. We can
appreciate the fact that we were able to improve the detection,
but the segmentation quality slightly dropped, showing that t he
detected case was challenging to segment. Finally, it is wor th
mentioning that this experiment sheds only some light on the
eﬀectiveness of applying the deep models (or other data-driven
techniques) trained over BraTS for analyzing diﬀerent MRI
brain images. The manual delineation protocols were diﬀerent ,
and the lack of inter-rater agreement may play pivotal role
in quantifying automated segmentation algorithms over suc h
diﬀerently acquired and analyzed image sets—it is unclear if
the diﬀerences result from the inter-rater disagreement of t he
incorrect segmentation (
Hollingworth et al., 2006; Fyllingen
et al., 2016; Visser et al., 2019 ).
3.1. Example BraTS Images
Example BraTS 2018 images are rendered in Figure 7 (two
low-grade and two high-grade glioma patients), alongside th e
corresponding multi-class ground-truth annotations. We ca n
appreciate that diﬀerent parts of the tumors are manifested in
diﬀerent modalities—e.g., necrotic and non-enhancing tumo r
core is typically hypo-intense in T1-Gd when compared to
T1 (
Bakas et al., 2018 ). Therefore, multi-modal analysis appears
crucial to fully beneﬁt from the available image informatio n.
4. BRAIN-TUMOR DATA AUGMENTATION
IN PRACTICE
4.1. BraTS 2018 Challenge
The BraTS challenge is aimed at evaluating the state-of-
the-art approaches toward accurate multi-class brain-tumor
segmentation from MRI. In this work, we review all published
methods which were evaluated within the framework of
the BraTS 2018 challenge—although 61 teams participated
in the testing phase (
Bakas et al., 2018 ), only 45 methods
were ﬁnally described and published in the post-conference
proceedings (
Crimi et al., 2019 ). We verify which augmentation
techniques were exploited to help boost generalization abili ties
of the proposed supervised learners. We exclusively focus on 20
papers (44% of all manuscripts) in which the authors explicitly
stated that the augmentation had been used and report the type
of the applied augmentation.
In Table 1, we summarize all investigated brain-tumor
segmentation algorithms, and report the deep models utilize d in
the corresponding works alongside the augmentation techniques.
In most of the cases, the authors followed the cross-validat ion
scenario, and divided the training set into multiple non-
overlapping folds. Then, separate models were trained over
such folds, and the authors ﬁnally formed an ensemble of
heterogeneous classiﬁers (trained over diﬀerent training d ata) to
segment previously unseen test brain-tumor images. Also, ther e
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 10 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 8 | The DICE values: (A) whote-tumor (WT), (B) tumor core (TC), and (C) enhancing tumor (ET), obtained using the investigated tech niques over the BraTS
2018 validation set.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 11 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
TABLE 2 | The impact of applying data augmentation on the average DICE s cores.
Without augmentation With augmentation Change (in %)
References WT TC ET WT TC ET /Delta1WT /Delta1TC /Delta1ET
Benson et al., 2018 0.82 0.64 0.59 0.82 0.61 0.56 0 − 5 − 5
Gholami et al., 2018 0.89 0.80 0.74 0.91 0.82 0.79 + 2 + 3 + 7
Lachinov et al., 2018 * 0.91 0.84 0.77 0.91 0.84 0.78 0 0 + 1
Wang et al., 2018 0.90 0.85 0.79 0.90 0.86 0.80 0 + 1 + 1
For the methods reported by Lachinov et al. (2018) and Wang et al. (2018) , we analyzed the best-performing models.
*The authors veriﬁed the impact of data augmentation over the training se t.
TABLE 3 | The impact of applying data augmentation on the average Haus dorff distance values (in mm).
Without augmentation With augmentation Change (in %)
References WT TC ET WT TC ET /Delta1WT /Delta1TC /Delta1ET
Benson et al., 2018 94.28 130.70 18.12 13.57 17.95 14.29 − 86 − 86 − 21
Wang et al., 2018 5.38 6.61 3.34 6.18 6.37 3.13 + 26 − 4 − 6
For the method reported by Wang et al. (2018) , we analyzed the best-performing models. Note that Gholami et al. (2018) and Lachinov et al. (2018) did not present the Hausdorff
distances obtained using their approaches.
TABLE 4 | The fully convolutional neural networks proposed in Lorenzo et al. (2019) have been trained using a number of datasets with different p reprocessing
and augmentations.
Setup→ A, A’ B, B’ C, C’ D, D’ E, E’ F , F’ G, G’ H, H’ I, I’ J, J’ K, K’ L, L’ M, M ’ N, N’ O, O’
Feature centering No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Ye s Yes Yes
Vertical ﬂip No No Yes No Yes No No Yes No Yes No No Yes No Yes
Horizontal ﬂip No No No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes
Max. rotation ( ∡ max) 0 0 0 0 0 45 45 45 45 45 90 90 90 90 90
Augmentation factor 1, 2 1, 2 2, 4 2, 4 4, 8 2, 4 2, 4 4, 8 4, 8 8, 16 2, 4 2, 4 4, 8 4, 8 8, 16
In the prime versions, we applied elastic deformations. This table come s from our previous paper ( Lorenzo et al., 2019 ).
are approaches, e.g., by Albiol et al. (2019), Chandra et al. (2018),
or Sun et al. (2018), in which a variety of deep neural architectures
were used.
In the majority of investigated brain-tumor segmentation
techniques, the authors applied relatively simple training-t ime
data augmentation strategies—the combination of training - and
test-time augmentation was used only in two methods ( Rezaei
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018). In 75% of the analyzed approaches,
random ﬂipping was executed to increase the training set
size and provide anatomically correct brain images 4. Similarly,
rotating and scaling MRI images was applied in 40% and
45% of techniques, respectively. Since modern deep network
architectures are commonly translation-invariant, this t ype of
aﬃne augmentation was used only in two works. Although
other augmentation strategies were not as popular as easy-
to-implement aﬃne transformations, it is worth noting that
the pixel-wise operations were utilized in all of the top-
performing techniques (the algorithms by
Myronenko (2018) ,
4Note that we do not count the algorithm proposed by Albiol et al. (2019), because
the authors were not very speciﬁc about their augmentation strate gies.
Isensee et al. (2018) , and McKinley et al. (2018) achieved the
ﬁrst, second, and third place across all segmentation algorithms5,
respectively). Additionally, Isensee et al. (2018) exploited elastic
transformations in their aggressive data augmentation procedure
which signiﬁcantly increased the size and representativene ss of
their training sets, and ultimately allowed for outperformi ng
a number of other learners. Interestingly, the authors show ed
that the state-of-the-art U-Net architecture can be extreme ly
competitive with other (much deeper and complex) models
if the data is appropriately curated. It, in turn, manifests the
importance of data representativeness and quality in the cont ext
of robust medical image analysis.
In Figure 8, we visualize the DICE scores obtained using
almost all investigated methods (
Puybareau et al., 2018; Rezaei
et al., 2018 did not report the results over the unseen BraTS 2018
validation set, therefore these methods are not included in the
ﬁgure). It is worth mentioning that the trend is fairly coherent for
all classes (whole tumor, tumor core, and enhancing tumor), a nd
the best-performing methods by Isensee et al. (2018) , McKinley
5For more detail on the validation and scoring procedures, see Bakas et al. (2018).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 12 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
et al. (2018) , and Myronenko (2018) consistently outperform
the other techniques in all cases. Although the success of th ese
approaches obviously lies not only in the applied augmentation
techniques, it is notable that the authors extensively bene ﬁt from
generating additional synthetic data.
Albeit data augmentation is introduced in order to improve
the generalization capabilities of supervised learners, thi s impact
was veriﬁed only in four BraTS 2018 papers (
Benson et al.,
2018; Gholami et al., 2018; Lachinov et al., 2018; Wang et al. ,
2018). Gholami et al. (2018) showed that their PDE-based
augmentation delivers very signiﬁcant improvement in the DICE
scores obtained for segmenting all parts of the tumors in the
multi-class classiﬁcation. The same performance boost (in t he
DICE values obtained for each class) was reported by
Lachinov
et al. (2018). Finally, Wang et al. (2018) showed that the proposed
test-time data augmentation led to improving the performance of
their convolutional neural networks.
In Table 2, we gathered the DICE scores obtained with
and without the corresponding data augmentation, alongside
the change in DICE (reported in %; the larger the DICE
score becomes, the better segmentation has been obtained).
Interestingly, training-time data augmentation appeared to be
adversely aﬀecting the performance of the algorithm presented
by
Benson et al. (2018) . On the other hand, the authors showed
that the Hausdorﬀ distance, being the maximum distance of
TABLE 5 | Five best-performing conﬁgurations of our fully convolutio nal neural
network according to the Friedman’ s test (at p < 0.05) taking into account the
results elaborated for the WHO II validation set ( Lorenzo et al., 2019 ).
Variant→ I E O E’ J’
Rank 4.75 5.50 6.00 7.25 7.75
FIGURE 9 | Exploiting various augmentations and coupling them into an augmentation tree allow us to generate multiple versions of an original patch (or image) which
may be included in a training set. This ﬁgure is inspired by Lorenzo et al. (2019) .
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 13 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
all points from the segmented lesion to the corresponding
nearest point of the ground-truth segmentation (
Sauwen
et al., 2017 ), signiﬁcantly dropped, hence the maximum
segmentation error quantiﬁed by this metric was notably
reduced (the smaller the Hausdorﬀ distance becomes, the
better segmentation has been elaborated; Table 3). Test-time
data augmentation exploited by
Wang et al. (2018) not only
decreased DICE for the whole-tumor segmentation, but also
caused the increase of the correspoding Hausdorﬀ distance.
TABLE 6 | The results, both (a) average, and (b) median DICE over our cli nical
MRI data of low-grade glioma (WHO II) patients in the whole-tum or segmentation
task, for different augmentation scenarios.
Augmentation Training Validation T est
(a)
Without 0.823 0.743 0.763
Flip 0.836 0.790 0.785
DIR 0.858 0.777 0.773
DIR + Flip 0.865 0.808 0.800
(b)
Without 0.823 0.779 0.785
Flip 0.838 0.808 0.797
DIR 0.859 0.802 0.792
DIR + Flip 0.867 0.816 0.809
The results come from our paper ( Nalepa et al., 2019a ). The best results are boldfaced.
Therefore, applying it in the WT segmentation scenario led
to decreasing the abilities of the underlying models. Overal l,
the vast majority of methods neither report nor analyze
the real impact of the incorporated augmentation techniques
on the classiﬁcation performance and/or inference time of
their deep models. Although we believe the authors did
investigate the advantages (and disadvantages) of their da ta
generation strategies (either experimentally or theoretic ally),
data augmentation is often used a standard tool which is
applied to any diﬃcult data (e.g., imbalanced, with highly
under-represented classes).
4.2. Beyond the BraTS Challenge
Although practically all brain-tumor segmentation algorit hms
which emerge in the recent literature have been tested over
the BraTS datasets, we equipped our U-Nets with a battery of
augmentation techniques (summarized in Table 4) and veriﬁed
their impact over our clinical MRI data in
Lorenzo et al.
(2019). In this experiment, we have focused on the whole-
tumor segmentation, as it was an intermediate step in the
automated dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI analysis, in which
perfusion parameters have been extracted for the entire tumor
volume. Additionally, this dataset was manually delineate d by a
reader (8 years of experience) who highlighted the whole-tum or
areas only.
FIGURE 10 | Examples from our clinical dataset segmented using our deep network trained in the DIR+Flip setting: (A–C) are original images, (D–F) are
corresponding segmentations. Green color represents true positives, blue—false negatives, and red—false positives .
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 14 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
We executed multi-step augmentation by applying both aﬃne
and elastic deformations of tumor examples, and increased th e
cardinality of our training sets up to 16 × . In Figure 9, we can
observe how executing simple aﬃne transformations leads to
new synthetic image patches. Since various augmentation
approaches may be utilized at diﬀerent depths of this
augmentation tree, the number of artiﬁcial examples can
be signiﬁcantly increased. The multi-fold cross-validati on
experiments showed that introducing rotated training exampl es
was pivotal to boost the generalization abilities of underly ing
deep models. To verify the statistical importance of the resu lts,
we executed the Friedman’s ranking tests which revealed tha t
the horizontal ﬂip with additional rotation is crucial to bu ild
well-generalizing deep learners in the patch-based segment ation
scenario (Table 5).
Similarly, we applied diﬀeomorphic image registration
(DIR) coupled with a recommendation algorithm 6 to select
training image pairs for registration in the data augmentati on
process (
Nalepa et al., 2019a ). The proposed augmentation was
compared with random horizontal ﬂipping, and the experiments
indicated that the combined approach leads to statistically
signiﬁcant (Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01) improvements in DICE
(Table 6). In Figure 10, we have gathered example segmentations
obtained using our DIR+Flip deep model, alongside the
corresponding DICE values. Although the original network,
trained over the original training set would correctly dete ct and
segment large tumors ( Figures 10A,B), it failed for relatively
small lesions which were under-represented in the training s et
(Figure 10C). Similarly, synthesizing artiﬁcial training examples
helped improving the performance of our models in the case
of brain tumors located in the brain areas which have not
been originally included in the dataset (by applying rotation
and ﬂipping).
5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we reviewed the state-of-the-art data augmentation
methods applied in the context of segmenting brain tumors
from MRI. We carefully investigated all BraTS 2018 papers
and analyzed data augmentation techniques utilized in
these methods. Our investigation revealed that the aﬃne
transformations are still the most widely-used in practice, since
they are trivial to implement and can elaborate anatomically -
correct brain-tumor examples. There are, however, augmentation
methods which combine various approaches, also including
elastic transformations. A very interesting research dire ction
encompasses algorithms which can generate artiﬁcial images
(e.g., based on the tumoral growth models) that not necessar ily
follow real-life data distribution, but can be followed by
other techniques to ensure correctness of such phantoms.
6We used a recommendation algorithm for selecting source-target ima ge pairs
that undergo registration. Such pairs should contain the trainin g images which
capture lesions positioned in the same or close part of the brain, as the totally
diﬀerent images can easily render unrealistic brain-tumor examples. A po tential
drawback of this recommendation technique is its time complexity which amounts
to O(||T||2), where ||T||is the cardinality of the original training set.
The results showed that data augmentation was pivotal in the
best-performing BraTS algorithms, and
Isensee et al. (2018)
experimentally proved that well-known and widely-used fully-
convolutional neural networks can outperform other (perhaps
much more deeper and complex) learners, if the training
data is appropriately cleansed and curated. It clearly indicates
the importance of introducing eﬀective data augmentation
methods for medical image data, which beneﬁt from aﬃne
transformations (in 2D and 3D), pixel-wise modiﬁcations
and elastic transform to deal with the problem of limited
ground-truth data. In Table 7, we gather the advantages and
disadvantages of all groups of brain-tumor data augmentatio n
techniques analyzed in this review. Finally, these approaches
can be easily applied in both single- and multi-modal scans,
TABLE 7 | The pros and cons of state-of-the-art brain-tumor data
augmentation algorithms.
Transformation of original data
Advantages Disadvantages
Afﬁne transformations
• Easy to implement and
understand
• Produce correlated images
• Operate in real-time due to low
time complexity
• Easily generate anatomically
incorrect examples (*)
• Applicable in training- and
test-time
• Deliver invariance with respect
to the lesion position, scale, and
rotation
Elastic transformations
• Can be applicable in training-
and test-time
• Not trivial to implement
• Can introduce variations in
shape
• Often have high time complexity
• Easily generate anatomically
incorrect examples (*)
Pixel-wise transformations
• Easy to implement and
understand
• Cannot introduce changes in
shape
• Operate in real-time due to low
time complexity
• Applicable in training- and
test-time
• Can simulate different
acquisition scenarios
Generation of artiﬁcial data
• Can synthesize realistic
examples
• (Very) high time complexity
• (Potentially) applicable in
test-time
• GANs applicable in
training-time only
• Can introduce invariance with
respect to afﬁne transformations
and appearance variations
• Can easily render multiple
similar examples (mode collapse
problem)
*The real impact of incorporating unrealistic examples into training sets still
needs investigation.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 15 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
FIGURE 11 | Anatomically incorrect brain images may still manifest val id tumor features—the impact of including such examples (wh ich may be easily rendered by
various data-generation augmentation techniques) into tr aining sets for brain-tumor detection and segmentation tas ks is yet to be revealed.
usually by synthesizing artiﬁcial examples separately for ea ch
image modality.
Although data augmentation became a pivotal part of virtually
all deep learning-powered methods for segmenting brain lesi ons
(due to the lack of very large, suﬃciently heterogeneous
and representative ground-truth sets, with BraTS being an
exception), there are still promising and unexplored research
pathways in the literature. We believe that hybridizing techniques
from various algorithmic groups, introducing more data-dri ven
augmentations, and applying them at training- and test-time
can further boost the performance of large-capacity learners .
Also, investigating the impact of including not necessarily
anatomically correct brain-tumor scans into training sets
remains an open issue (see the examples of anatomically incorrect
brain images which still manifest valid tumor characterist ics
in Figure 11).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JN designed the study, performed the experiments, analyzed
data, and wrote the manuscript. MM provided selected
implementations and experimental results, and contributed t o
writing of some parts of the initial version of the manuscript. MK
provided qualitative segmentation analysis and visualizat ions.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Polish National Centre
for Research and Development under the Innomed Grant
(POIR.01.02.00-00-0030/15). JN was supported by the Silesian
University of Technology funds (The Rector’s Habilitation
Grant No. 02/020/RGH19/0185). The research undertaken in
this project led to developing Sens.AI—a tool for automated
segmentation of brain lesions from T2-FLAIR sequences (https://
sensai.eu). MK was supported by the Silesian University of
Technology funds (Grant No. 02/020/BK_18/0128).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the Reviewers for their constructi ve
and valuable comments that helped improve the paper. JN thanks
Dana K. Mitchell for lots of inspiring discussions on (not only )
brain MRI analysis.
This paper is in memory of Dr. Grzegorz Nalepa, an
extraordinary scientist, pediatric hematologist/oncologis t, and a
compassionate champion for kids at Riley Hospital for Children,
Indianapolis, USA, who helped countless patients and their
families through some of the most challenging moments of
their lives.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, M., and Mahajan, R. (2017). Medical images contrast enh ancement
using quad weighted histogram equalization with adaptive gama
correction and homomorphic ﬁltering. Proc. Comput. Sci. 115, 509–517.
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2017.09.107
Albiol, A., Albiol, A., and Albiol, F. (2019). “Extending 2D deep lea rning
architectures to 3D image segmentation problems, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma,
Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries , eds A. Crimi, S.
Bakas, H. Kuijf, F. Keyvan, M. Reyes, and T. van Walsum (Cham: Sprin ger
International Publishing), 73–82.
Alex, V., Mohammed Safwan, K. P., Chennamsetty, S. S., and Krishna murthi, G.
(2017). “Generative adversarial networks for brain lesion detection, ” inMedical
Imaging 2017: Image Processing , eds M. A. Styner and E. D. Angelini (SPIE),
113–121. doi: 10.1117/12.2254487
Amit, G., Ben-Ari, R., Hadad, O., Monovich, E., Granot, N., and H ashoul, S.
(2017). “Classiﬁcation of breast MRI lesions using small-size trai ning sets:
comparison of deep learning approaches, ” inMedical Imaging 2017: Computer-
Aided Diagnosis , eds S. G. Armato III and N. A. Petrick (SPIE), 374–379.
doi: 10.1117/12.2249981
Angulakshmi, M., and Lakshmi Priya, G. (2017). Automated brain tumo ur
segmentation techniques—a review. Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol. 27, 66–77.
doi: 10.1002/ima.22211
Asif, U., Bennamoun, M., and Sohel, F. A. (2018). A multi-modal, disc riminative
and spatially invariant CNN for RGB-D object labeling. IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal.
Mach. Intell. 40, 2051–2065. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2747134
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby , J. S., et al. (2017a).
Segmentation labels and radiomic features for the pre-operative scans of the
TCGA-GBM collection. Cancer Imaging Arch . Available online at: https://
wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/display/DOI/Segmentation+Labels+and+
Radiomic+Features+for+the+Pre-operative+Scans+of+the+TCGA-GBM+
collection
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby, J. S., et al. (2017b).
Segmentation labels and radiomic features for the pre-operative scans of the
TCGA-LGG collection. Cancer Imaging Arch. Available online at: https://
wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/display/DOI/Segmentation+Labels+and+
Radiomic+Features+for+the+Pre-operative+Scans+of+the+TCGA-GBM+
collection
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby , J. S.,
et al. (2017c). Advancing the cancer genome atlas glioma MRI collect ions
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 16 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
with expert segmentation labels and radiomic features. Sci. Data 4, 1–13.
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2017.117
Bakas, S., Reyes, M., Jakab, A., Bauer, S., Rempﬂer, M., Crimi, A. , et al.
(2018). Identifying the best machine learning algorithms for brain tumor
segmentation, progression assessment, and overall survival predict ion in the
BRATS challenge. CoRR abs/1811.02629.
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. (2013). Representati on
learning: a review and new perspectives. IEEE TPAMI 35, 1798–1828.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50
Benson, E., Pound, M. P., French, A. P., Jackson, A. S., and Prid more, T. P.
(2018). “Deep hourglass for brain tumor segmentation, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma,
Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4t h International
Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granad a,
Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 419–428.
Carver, E., Liu, C., Zong, W., Dai, Z., Snyder, J. M., Lee, J., et al. (2018).
“Automatic brain tumor segmentation and overall survival predictio n using
machine learning algorithms, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke
and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held
in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised
Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in ComputerScience (Cham),
406–418.
Castro, E., Cardoso, J. S., and Pereira, J. C. (2018). “Elastic def ormations for
data augmentation in breast cancer mass detection, ” in 2018 IEEE EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical Health Informatics (B HI), 230–234.
doi: 10.1109/BHI.2018.8333411
Chaitanya, K., Karani, N., Baumgartner, C. F., Becker, A., Dona ti, O., and
Konukoglu, E. (2019). “Semi-supervised and task-driven data au gmentation, ”
in Information Processing in Medical Imaging , eds A. C. S. Chung, J. C. Gee,
P. A. Yushkevich, and S. Bao (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 29–41.
Chandra, S., V akalopoulou, M., Fidon, L., Battistella, E., Estien ne, T., Sun, R.,
et al. (2018). “Context aware 3D CNNs for brain tumor segmentation , ” in
Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traum atic Brain Injuries -
4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction wi th MICCAI
2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Par t II, vol.
11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 299–310.
Crimi, A., Bakas, S., Kuijf, H. J., Keyvan, F., Reyes, M., and van Walsum, T. (eds).
(2019). Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traum atic Brain
Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conj unction with
MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Pape rs,
Part II, volume 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham).
Dai, L., Li, T., Shu, H., Zhong, L., Shen, H., and Zhu, H. (2018). “ Automatic
brain tumor segmentation with domain adaptation, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma,
Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4t h International
Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granad a,
Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 380–392.
Dvornik, N., Mairal, J., and Schmid, C. (2018). On the importance of visual context
for data augmentation in scene understanding. CoRR abs/1809.02492.
Eaton-Rosen, Z., Bragman, F., Ourselin, S., and Cardoso, M. J. (2 019). Improving
data augmentation for medical image segmentation. OpenReview.
Feng, X., Tustison, N. J., and Meyer, C. H. (2018). “Brain tumor se gmentation
using an ensemble of 3d u-nets and overall survival prediction usin g radiomic
features, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain
Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conj unction with
MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Pape rs,
Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 279–288.
Frid-Adar, M., Diamant, I., Klang, E., Amitai, M., Goldberger, J. , and Greenspan,
H. (2018). Gan-based synthetic medical image augmentation for i ncreased
cnn performance in liver lesion classiﬁcation. Neurocomputing 321, 321–331.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2018.09.013
Fyllingen, E. H., Stensjøen, A. L., Berntsen, E. M., Solheim, O., an d Reinertsen,
I. (2016). Glioblastoma segmentation: comparison of three diﬀerent s oftware
packages. PLoS ONE 11:e0164891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164891
Galdran, A., Alvarez-Gila, A., Meyer, M. I., Saratxaga, C. L., Araujo, T., Garrote, E.,
et al. (2017). Data-driven color augmentation techniques for de ep skin image
analysis. CoRR abs/1703.03702.
Gholami, A., Subramanian, S., Shenoy, V., Himthani, N., Yue, X., Zha o, S.,
et al. (2018). “A novel domain adaptation framework for medical image
segmentation, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham),
289–298.
Gibson, E., Li, W., Sudre, C., Fidon, L., Shakir, D. I., Wang, G ., et al. (2018).
NiftyNet: a deep-learning platform for medical imaging. Comput. Methods
Prog. Biomed. 158, 113–122. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2018.01.025
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley , D., Ozair, S.,
et al. (2014). “Generative adversarial nets, ” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27 , eds Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence and K. Q. Weinberger (Curran Associates, Inc.), 2672– 2680.
Available online at: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5423-generative- adversarial-
nets.pdf
Gu, S., Meng, X., Sciurba, F. C., Ma, H., Leader, J., Kaminski, N. ,
et al. (2014). Bidirectional elastic image registration using b-s pline
aﬃne transformation. Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 38, 306–314.
doi: 10.1016/j.compmedimag.2014.01.002
Han, C., Murao, K., Satoh, S., and Nakayama, H. (2019). Learning mo re
with less: gan-based medical image augmentation. CoRR abs/1904.00838.
doi: 10.1145/3357384.3357890
Hollingworth, W., Medina, L. S., Lenkinski, R. E., Shibata, D. K. , Bernal, B.,
Zurakowski, D., et al. (2006). Interrater reliability in assessing quality of
diagnostic accuracy studies using the quadas tool: a preliminary as sessment.
Acad. Radiol. 13, 803–810. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2006.03.008
Huang, Z., and Cohen, F. S. (1996). Aﬃne-invariant b-spline moment s for
curve matching. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 5, 1473–1480. doi: 10.1109/83.
536895
Hussain, Z., Gimenez, F., Yi, D., and Rubin, D. (2017). “Diﬀeren tial data
augmentation techniques for medical imaging classiﬁcation tas ks, ” in
AMIA 2017, American Medical Informatics Association Annual Sympo sium
(Washington, DC).
Isensee, F., Kickingereder, P., Wick, W., Bendszus, M., and M aier-Hein, K. H.
(2018). “No new-net, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and
Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, Brai nLes 2018, Held in
Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revi sed
Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in ComputerScience (Cham),
234–244.
Isin, A., Direkoglu, C., and Sah, M. (2016). Review of mri-based brain tumor image
segmentation using deep learning methods. Proc. Comput. Sci. 102, 317–324.
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.407
Kao, P., Ngo, T., Zhang, A., Chen, J. W., and Manjunath, B. S. (2018). “Brain tumor
segmentation and tractographic feature extraction from structural M R images
for overall survival prediction, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke
and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held
in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised
Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in ComputerScience (Cham),
128–141.
Kermi, A., Mahmoudi, I., and Khadir, M. T. (2018). “Deep convolut ional neural
networks using u-net for automatic brain tumor segmentation in mult imodal
MRI volumes, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 37–48.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2017). Imagen et classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun. ACM 60, 84–90.
doi: 10.1145/3065386
Lachinov, D., V asiliev, E., and Turlapov, V. (2018). “Glioma segmen tation with
cascaded unet, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham),
189–198.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2016). Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–555.
doi: 10.1038/nature14539
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 17 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
Litjens, G., Kooi, T., Bejnordi, B. E., Setio, A. A. A., Ciompi, F ., Ghafoorian, M.,
et al. (2017). A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Med. Image
Anal. 42, 60–88. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2017.07.005
Liu, Y., Stojadinovic, S., Hrycushko, B., Wardak, Z., Lau, S., L u, W., et al. (2017).
A deep convolutional neural network-based automatic delineatio n strategy for
multiple brain metastases stereotactic radiosurgery. PLoS ONE 12:e0185844.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185844
Ma, J., and Y ang, X. (2018). “Automatic brain tumor segmentation b y exploring
the multi-modality complementary information and cascaded 3d lightweig ht
cNNs, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traum atic Brain
Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conj unction with
MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Pape rs,
Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 25–36.
Marcinkiewicz, M., Nalepa, J., Lorenzo, P. R., Dudzik, W., and Mrukwa, G. (2018).
“Segmenting brain tumors from MRI using cascaded multi-modal U-Nets , ” in
Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traum atic Brain Injuries -
4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction wi th MICCAI
2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Par t II, vol.
11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 13–24.
McKinley, R., Meier, R., and Wiest, R. (2018). “Ensembles of den sely-connected
cnns with label-uncertainty for brain tumor segmentation, ” in Brainlesion:
Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Inj uries - 4th
International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI
2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Par t II, vol.
11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 456–465.
Mehta, R., and Arbel, T. (2018). “3D U-Net for brain tumour segment ation, ” in
Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traum atic Brain Injuries -
4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction wi th MICCAI
2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Par t II, vol.
11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 254–266.
Menze, B. H., Jakab, A., Bauer, S., Kalpathy-Cramer, J., Farahani, K., Kirby, J., et al.
(2015). The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (BraT S).
IEEE TMI 34, 1993–2024. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2014.2377694
Mok, T. C. W., and Chung, A. C. S. (2018). Learning data augmenta tion for brain
tumor segmentation with coarse-to-ﬁne generative adversarial networks. CoRR
abs/1805.11291:1–10.
Myronenko, A. (2018). “3D MRI brain tumor segmentation using aut oencoder
regularization, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham),
311–320.
Nalepa, J., Lorenzo, P. R., Marcinkiewicz, M., Bobek-Billewicz, B., Wawrzyniak,
P., Walczak, M., et al. (2019). Fully-automated deep learning-powere d
system for DCE-MRI analysis of brain tumors. CoRR abs/1907.08303.
doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2019.101769
Nalepa, J., Mrukwa, G., Piechaczek, S., Lorenzo, P. R., Marcinki ewicz, M., Bobek-
Billewicz, B., et al. (2019a). “Data augmentation via image regist ration, ” in2019
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , 4250–4254.
Nalepa, J., Myller, M., and Kawulok, M. (2019b). Training- and test- time data
augmentation for hyperspectral image segmentation. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.
Lett. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/LGRS.2019.2921011
Nguyen, K. P., Fatt, C. C., Treacher, A., Mellema, C., Trivedi, M. H. , and Montillo,
A. (2019). Anatomically-informed data augmentation for function al MRI with
applications to deep learning. CoRR abs/1910.08112.
Nuechterlein, N., and Mehta, S. (2018). “3D-ESPNet with pyramidal reﬁnement for
volumetric brain tumor image segmentation, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple
Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4th Interna tional Workshop,
BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain,
September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lect ure Notes
in Computer Science (Cham), 245–253.
Oksuz, I., Ruijsink, B., Puyol-Antón, E., Clough, J. R., Cruz, G ., Bustin, A., et al.
(2019). Automatic CNN-based detection of cardiac MR motion arte facts using
k-space data augmentation and curriculum learning. Med. Image Anal. 55,
136–147. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2019.04.009
Park, S.-C., Cha, J. H., Lee, S., Jang, W., Lee, C. S., and Lee, J. K. (2019).
Deep learning-based deep brain stimulation targeting and clinica l applications.
Front. Neurosci. 13:1128. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01128
Pereira, S., Pinto, A., Alves, V., and Silva, C. A. (2016). Brain tu mor segmentation
using convolutional neural nets in MRI images. IEEE TMI 35, 1240–1251.
doi: 10.1109/TMI.2016.2538465
Puybareau, É., Tochon, G., Chazalon, J., and Fabrizio, J. (2018 ). “Segmentation of
gliomas and prediction of patient overall survival: a simple and fast proce dure, ”
in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries -
4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction wi th MICCAI
2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Par t II, vol.
11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 199–209.
Rezaei, M., Harmuth, K., Gierke, W., Kellermeier, T., Fischer, M., Y ang, H., et al.
(2017). Conditional adversarial network for semantic segmenta tion of brain
tumor. CoRR abs/1708.05227:1–10.
Rezaei, M., Y ang, H., and Meinel, C. (2018). “voxel-gan: advers arial framework
for learning imbalanced brain tumor segmentation, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma,
Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4t h International
Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granad a,
Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (Cham), 321–333.
Ribalta Lorenzo, P., Nalepa, J., Bobek-Billewicz, B., Wawrzyniak, P., Mrukwa, G.,
Kawulok, M., et al. (2019). Segmenting brain tumors from ﬂair MRI us ing fully
convolutional neural networks. Comput. Methods Prog. Biomed. 176, 135–148.
doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.05.006
Rozsa, A., Günther, M., and Boult, T. E. (2016). Towards robust d eep neural
networks with BANG. CoRR abs/1612.00138.
Sahnoun, M., Kallel, F., Dammak, M., Mhiri, C., Ben Mahfoudh, K., an d Ben
Hamida, A. (2018). “A comparative study of MRI contrast enhancemen t
techniques based on Traditional Gamma Correction and Adaptive Gamma
Correction: Case of multiple sclerosis pathology, ” in 2018 4th International
Conference on Advanced Technologies for Signal and Image Proc essing (ATSIP),
1–7.
Sauwen, N., Acou, M., Sima, D. M., Veraart, J., Maes, F., Himmelreich, U., et al.
(2017). Semi-automated brain tumor segmentation on multi-parametric M RI
using regularized non-negative matrix factorization. BMC Med. Imaging 17:29.
doi: 10.1186/s12880-017-0198-4
Shin, H.-C., Tenenholtz, N. A., Rogers, J. K., Schwarz, C. G., Se njem, M. L.,
Gunter, J. L., et al. (2018). “Medical image synthesis for data augmentation
and anonymization using generative adversarial networks, ” in Simulation and
Synthesis in Medical Imaging, eds A. Gooya, O. Goksel, I. Oguz, and N. Burgos
(Cham: Springer), 1–11.
Shorten, C., and Khoshgoftaar, T. M. (2019). A survey on image data augmentation
for deep learning. J. Big Data 6:60. doi: 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0
Sun, L., Zhang, S., and Luo, L. (2018). “Tumor segmentation and survival
prediction in glioma with deep learning, ” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple
Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries - 4th Interna tional Workshop,
BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain,
September 16, 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lect ure Notes
in Computer Science (Cham), 83–93.
Tustison, N. J., and Avants, B. B. (2013). Explicit B-spline regula rization
in diﬀeomorphic image registration. Front. Neuroinformatics 7:39.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2013.00039
Tustison, N. J., Avants, B. B., and Gee, J. C. (2009). Directly ma nipulated
free-form deformation image registration. IEEE TIP 18, 624–635.
doi: 10.1109/TIP.2008.2010072
Tward, D., and Miller, M. (2017). “Unbiased diﬀeomorphic mapping of
longitudinal data with simultaneous subject speciﬁc template esti mation, ” in
Graphs in Biomedical Image Analysis, Computational Anatomy and Imaging
Genetics, eds M. J.Cardoso, T.Arbel, E. Ferrante, X. Pennec, A. V. Dalca, S.
Parisot, S. Joshi, N. K. Batmanghelich, A. Sotiras, M. Nielsen, M. R. Sabuncu, T.
Fletcher, L. Shen, S. Durrleman, and S. Sommer (Cham: Springer Internati onal
Publishing), 125–136.
Visser, M., Müller, D. M. J., van Duijn, R. J. M., Smits, M., Verburg, N., Hendriks, E.
J., et al. (2019). Inter-rater agreement in glioma segmentations on longitudinal
MRI. NeuroImage 22:101727. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101727
Wang, G., Li, W., Aertsen, M., Deprest, J., Ourselin, S., and Verc auteren,
T. (2019). Aleatoric uncertainty estimation with test-time augme ntation
for medical image segmentation with convolutional neural
networks. Neurocomputing 338, 34–45. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2019.
01.103
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83


--- Page 18 ---
Nalepa et al. Data Augmentation for Brain-Tumor Segmentation: A Review
Wang, G., Li, W., Ourselin, S., and Vercauteren, T. (2018). “Au tomatic brain
tumor segmentation using convolutional neural networks with tes t-time
augmentation, ” inBrainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
Brain Injuries - 4th International Workshop, BrainLes 2018, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II, vol. 11384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham),
61–72.
Wang, K., Gou, C., Duan, Y., Lin, Y., Zheng, X., and Wang, F. (20 17). Generative
adversarial networks: introduction and outlook. IEEE/CAA J. Automat. Sin. 4,
588–598. doi: 10.1109/JAS.2017.7510583
Wei, W., Liu, L., Truex, S., Yu, L., and Gursoy, M. E. (2018). Ad versarial examples
in deep learning: characterization and divergence. CoRR abs/1807.00051.
Wong, S. C., Gatt, A., Stamatescu, V., and McDonnell, M. D. (2016 ).
“Understanding data augmentation for classiﬁcation: when to w arp?” in
2016 International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Tech niques and
Applications (DICTA), 1–6. doi: 10.1109/DICTA.2016.7797091
Yu, B., Zhou, L., Wang, L., Fripp, J., and Bourgeat, P. (2018). “3 D cGAN based
cross-modality MR image synthesis for brain tumor segmentation, ” i n 2018
IEEE 15th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018), 626–
630. doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2018.8363653
Zhang, H., Cissé, M., Dauphin, Y. N., and Lopez-Paz, D. (2017). mi xup: beyond
empirical risk minimization. CoRR abs/1710.09412.
Zhao, J., Meng, Z., Wei, L., Sun, C., Zou, Q., and Su, R. (2019) . Supervised brain
tumor segmentation based on gradient and context-sensitive fe atures. Front.
Neurosci. 13:144. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00144
Zhu, J., Park, T., Isola, P., and Efros, A. A. (2017). Unpaired
image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial
networks. CoRR abs/1703.10593. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.20
17.244
Conﬂict of Interest: JN was employed by Future Processing, and MM was
employed by Netguru.
The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in t he absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Nalepa, Marcinkiewicz and Kawulok. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited a nd that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 December 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 83
