--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 30 June 2017
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00057
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57
Edited by:
Xiaoli Li,
Beijing Normal University, China
Reviewed by:
Juan Wang,
Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore
Dong Cui,
Yanshan University, China
*Correspondence:
Anna L. Mangia
annalisa.mangia2@unibo.it
Received: 01 March 2017
Accepted: 12 June 2017
Published: 30 June 2017
Citation:
Mangia AL, Ursino M, Lannocca M
and Cappello A (2017) Transcallosal
Inhibition during Motor Imagery:
Analysis of a Neural Mass Model.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11:57.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00057
Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor
Imagery: Analysis of a Neural Mass
Model
Anna L. Mangia *, Mauro Ursino, Maurizio Lannocca and Angelo Cappello
Department of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engin eering, University of Bologna, Cesena, Italy
The EEG rhythmic activities of the somato-sensory cortex re veal event-related
desynchronization (ERD) or event-related synchronizatio n (ERS) in beta band (14–30 Hz)
as subjects perform certain tasks or react to speciﬁc stimuli. Data reported for imagination
of movement support the hypothesis that activation of one se nsorimotor area (SMA) can
be accompanied by deactivation of the other. In order to impr ove our understanding
of beta ERD/ERS generation, two neural mass models (NMM) of a cortical column
taken from
Wendling et al. (2002) were interconnected to simulate the transmission of
information from one cortex to the other. The results show th at the excitation of one
cortex leads to inhibition of the other and vice versa, enfor cing the Theory of Inhibition.
This behavior strongly depends on the initial working point (WP) of the neural populations
(between the linear and the upper saturation region of a sigm oidal function) and on how
the cortical activation or deactivation can move the WP in the upper saturation region
ERD or in the linear region ERS, respectively.
Keywords: ERD/ERS, EEG, neural mass model, transcallosal con nection, Theory of Inhibition, Theory of Excitation
INTRODUCTION
An important feature of the brain is its ability to generate ch aracteristic rhythms in its activity.
The frequency of such brain oscillations depends both on the me mbrane properties of the single
neurons and on the organization and interconnectivity of ne tworks to which they belong (
da Silva,
1991).
The EEG rhythmic activities of the somato-sensory cortex (S ensory Motor Rhythms, SMR) are
commonly modulated when subjects perform certain tasks or rea ct to speciﬁc stimuli. Generally, it
is assumed that the spectra band power is related to the degree o f synchrony of the underlying
oscillating neuronal population. In particular, a decrease in m u (8–13 Hz) or beta (14–30 Hz)
rhythmic activity occurring after a given event, which mani fests as a decrease in the spectra band
power, is called event-related desynchronization (ERD), whe reas the inverse is called event-related
synchronization (ERS). Both mu and beta rhythm ERD/ERS patterns are associated with real and
imagined movement, and these features are much used for brai n computer interface (BCI) control.
Diﬀerent mechanisms are probably at the origin of these two rhy thms. Hughes and Crunelli
(2005) discovered that the occurrence of mu oscillations depends on t he activity of a subset of
thalamocortical neurons ( Hughes and Crunelli, 2005 ). Conversely, several experiments found out
that oscillations in the beta frequency range are easily dete ctable in diﬀerent cortical sites, but not
in simultaneously obtained recordings from thalamic elect rodes. These ﬁndings have led to the
interpretation that these rhythmic activities are primarily g enerated in the cortex itself ( da Silva,
2010).


--- Page 2 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
Pfurtscheller and Neuper studied the spatiotemporal patterns
of mu and beta rhythms during motor imagery with a dense
array of EEG electrodes. The subjects were instructed to ima gine
movements of either the right or the left hand. These rhythms
displayed an ERD only over the contralateral hemisphere,
while an enhancement of the rhythms ERS was found over
the ipsilateral side. Furthermore,
Pfurtscheller (2006) , using a
qualitative model, proposed that ERD or ERS, induced by a
sudden change of activation, may depend on the initial workin g
point (WP). At certain physiological levels of activation, an
increase in activation results in ERD, whereas activation decrease
results in ERS.
The previous data support the hypothesis that activation
of one sensorimotor area (SMA) can be accompanied by
deactivation of the other (
Pfurtscheller and Neuper, 1997 ). The
ipsilateral synchronization can be interpreted as deactivat ion or
active inhibition of the ipsilateral sensorimotor structur es. It is
not surprising that, for an optimal performance of a speciﬁc task
(e.g., imagination of the right hand movement), cortical areas not
speciﬁcally involved in the task may be deactivated or inhibi ted
for information processing (
Pfurtscheller, 1992; Pfurtscheller and
Neuper, 1997 ). By way of example, enhanced inhibition of the
homotrophic motor area via the transcallosal ﬁber system, wa s
reported by Netz et al. (1995).
The corpus callosum is a brain structure that connects the
left and the right cerebral hemispheres. Intrahemispheric
communication occurs by means of axonal projections
connecting cortexes both with cortico-cortical and cortic o-
subcortical pathways. It is however still uncertain how the
corpus callosum regulates transfer and communication betwe en
hemispheres, as studies investigating its role report conﬂic ting
statements.
Some studies suggest that the corpus callosum could
play an inhibitory role (Theory of Inhibition), whereas
others say that the corpus callosum serves an excitatory
function (Theory of Excitation) (
Clarke and Zaidel, 1994;
Bloom and Hynd, 2005 ). The inhibitory model poses that
the corpus callosum maintains independent processing
between the two hemispheres, hindering activity in the
opposing hemisphere and causing greater connectivity to
increase lateralization (positively correlated) (
Welcome and
Chiarello, 2008; Adam and Güntürkün, 2009 ). Lateralization
of the brain hemispheres refers to a functional dominance
of one hemisphere over the other, in which one is more
responsible or entirely responsible for control of a function in
comparison to the other (
Noggle and Hall, 2011 ). The excitatory
model poses that the corpus callosum shares and integrates
information between hemispheres, causing greater connecti vity
to decrease laterality eﬀects by masking the underlying
hemispheric diﬀerences in tasks that require interhemispheri c
exchange (negatively correlated) (
Clarke and Zaidel, 1994;
Bloom and Hynd, 2005; van der Knaap and van der Ham,
2011
).
A deeper understanding of the EEG signal and of the
neurophysiological information it contains can be gained
through the use of biologically inspired neurocomputational
models. In particular, two main classes of models have been
proposed to simulate cortical rhythms: models with spiking
neurons (see
Dayan and Abbott, 2001 for a review) and
neural mass models (NMM). In the latter, the main variables
represent the cumulative activity of population of neurons
(instead of single cells) which share a similar membrane
potential and exhibit the same dynamical behavior. Among
the others, NMMs have been successfully used to simulate
speciﬁc aspects of electrical brain activity, such as alpha
rhythms (
Jansen and Rit, 1995), oscillations and synchronization
in the γ-band ( Schillen and König, 1994 ), dynamics in the
olfactory cortex ( Freeman, 1987 ), epileptic patterns ( Wendling
et al., 2002 ) and brain rhythms during sleep ( Cona et al.,
2014).
In order to test the phenomenon of mu ERD/ERS generation,
Suﬀczynsky et al. used a computational model of interacting
neural populations, with the emphasis on thalamo-cortical
networks (
Suﬀczynski et al., 2001 ). Even though intra-cortical
networks also play an important role in rhythms propagation,
the model in
Suﬀczynski et al. (2001) does not include these,
rather focusing on the system responsible for the generation
and modulation of mu rhythmic activities, namely the thalamo-
cortical circuit. However, this simpliﬁcation cannot be val id
for beta ERD/ERS, because of their origin in the cortex.
Pfurtscheller proposed a cortical activation model to explain
whether an internally or externally paced event induces an
ERD or ERS in a speciﬁc frequency band (
Pfurtscheller, 2006 ).
He found that, depending on the baseline level of cortical
activation, a sudden change in input can induce either ERD
or ERS in a given area. This study introduces the concept of
WP as the level of activation from which diﬀerent behaviors
can be obtained. In particular, when the baseline of cortical
activation is low and most of the neurons in a given area
are still available for synchronization, an ERS is expected
following an increase in cortical activation. Converesely, when
the cortical activation baseline is high and the majority of
neurons is occupied by synchronization processes, an increas e
of cortical activation can induce an ERD. The number of
neurons available for synchronization and the excitation l evel
of cortical neurons are the two parameters that deﬁne the WP
in the cortical activation model and therewith the amplitude
of oscillations. However, this still remains quite a theoreti cal
concept if not included in a quantitative framewok, which can
explain the relationship between the WP and the mechanism
that generates a speciﬁc rhythm. Grabska-Barwinska proposed
a simpliﬁed lumped computational model of a cortical circuit
consisting only of pyramidal and fast spiking interneuronal
populations. The model elucidates the mechanisms of transitio n
between slower and faster rhythms, gamma synchronization
and beta desynchronization and rebound eﬀects during motor
preparation and execution (
Grabska-Barwi´nska and ˙Zygierewicz,
2006).
The introduced works have analyzed diﬀerent aspects
of the same phenomenon, but they also exhibit important
limitations, especially for what concerns the analysis in th e
beta band. In particular, a neural model which includes
four populations is more adequate to analyze how beta
rhythms are generated in the cortex (
Wendling et al., 2002 ).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 3 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
Moreover, previous models do not include the interhemispheric
communication and so cannot analyze its role in the ERD/ERS
generation.
In order to overcome the previous limitations, in the present
paper we make use of a NMM that: (i) generates beta rhythm
through a four population modeling of intra-cortical network s.
In particular, we used the four population NMM by
Wendling
et al. (2002), originally proposed to simulate rhythms generation
in the hippocampus, but with parameters assigned to simulate
beta rhythms in the right and left SMA (
Zavaglia et al.,
2006). (ii) evaluates how intercortical connections transmit t hat
rhythm. Hence, the overall model consists of two neural columns
(one per each area). For both the two areas, we deﬁned a
set of parameters to generate beta rhythm independently of
one another. The intercortical connections are modeled as
long range synapses that mimic the transcallosal connection s
(TC).
The ﬁnal aim is to gain a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for ERD/ERS in the somatosensory
cortex in response to a modulating input. In particular,
we aim (i) to verify whether the experimentally observed
ERD/ERS patterns can be ascribed to a simple change of
the population WP and to the TC transmission between the
two hemispheres, (ii) to assess whether the obtained results
support the well-known theory of inhibition. A more general
aim is to provide a straightforward theoretical framework, w hich
can be used to interpret diﬀerent data (depending on the
WP), to drive BCI experiments, and to formulate new testable
predictions.
METHODS
Single Column Model
The model of a single area was obtained by modifying the
Equations by
Wendling et al. (2002) . The model consists of
four populations of neurons, pyramidal cells (p), excitatory
interneurons (e), inhibitory interneurons with slow synapt ic
kinetics (s) and inhibitory interneurons with fast synaptic
kinetics (f). Neurons in each population are lumped together
and are assumed to share the same membrane potential. One
lumped circuit communicates with another through the averag e
ﬁring rate, which corresponds to the average activity of that
given population of cells. Each neural group receives an avera ge
postsynaptic membrane potential from the other groups, and
converts the average membrane potential into an average dens ity
of spike ﬁred by the neurons. This conversion is simulated via a
static sigmoidal relationship. The eﬀects of synapses are described
by a second order linear transfer function, which converts
the presynaptic spike density into the postsynaptic membrane
potential. Three diﬀerent kind of synapses, with impulse response
he, hs and hf , are used to describe the synaptic eﬀect of excitatory
neurons (both pyramidal cells and excitatory interneurons) , of
slow inhibitory interneurons and fast inhibitory interneu rons.
The layout of the model of a single column is shown in Figure 1.
According to Figure 1, model Equations can be written as
follows:
PYRAMIDAL NEURONS
dyp(t)
dt = xp (t) (2.1)
dxp(t)
dt = Ge ωezp (t) − 2ωexp (t) − ω2
e yp(t) (2.2)
zp = 2 e0
1 + er(s0−vp) (2.3)
vp = Cpeye (t) − Cpsys (t) − Cpf yf (t) (2.4)
EXCITATORY INTERNEURONS
dye(t)
dt = xe (t) (2.5)
dxe(t)
dt = Ge ωe
(
ze (t)+ up (t)
Cpe
)
−2ωexe (t)−ω2
e ye(t) (2.6)
ze = 2 e0
1 + er(s0−ve) (2.7)
ve = Cepyp (t) (2.8)
SLOW INIBHITORY INTERNEURONS
dys(t)
dt = xs (t) (2.9)
dxs(t)
dt = Gs ωszs (t) − 2ωsxs (t) − ω2
s ys(t) (2.10)
zs = 2 e0
1 + er(s0−vs) (2.11)
vs = Cspyp (t) (2.12)
FAST INIBHITORY INTERNEURONS
dyf (t)
dt = xf (t) (2.13)
dxf (t)
dt = Gf ωf zf (t) − 2ωf xf (t) − ω2
f yf (t) (2.14)
dyl (t)
dt = xl (t) (2.15)
dxl(t)
dt = Ge ωeuf (t) − 2ωexl (t) − ω2
e yl(t) (2.16)
zf = 2 e0
1 + er(s0−vf ) (2.17)
vf = Cfpyp (t) − Cfsys (t) + yl (2.18)
In these Equations and in Figure 1, the symbols vi represent
the average membrane potentials ( i = p, e, s, f ). These are the
inputs for the sigmoid function which converts them into the
average density spike ( zi, i = p, e, s, f ) ﬁred by the neurons. The
sigmoid function is deﬁned by parameters e0, s0 and r, and it
is shown in Figure 2. These parameters, assumed to be equal for
all populations, set the maximal saturation, the position, and th e
slope of the sigmoid, respectively. In the curve, we identiﬁed a
low saturation region ( zi < 1), a linear slope region (1 < zi < 4)
and a high saturation region ( zi > 4).
These outputs ( zi) enter into the synapses (excitatory, slow
inhibitory or fast inhibitory), represented by the second or der
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 4 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 1 | Layout of the model of a single region: four neural populatio ns (pyramidal cells, excitatory interneurons, fast inhibi tory interneurons and slow inhibitory
interneurons) which communicate via excitatory and inhibi tory synapses.
FIGURE 2 | Representation of the sigmoid curve used in the model.
linear functions. Each synapse is described by an average
gain ( Ge, Gs, Gf for the excitatory, slow and fast inhibitory
synapses, respectively) and a time constant (the reciprocal of
ωe, ωs and ωf , respectively). The outputs of these Equations
represent the postsynaptic membrane potentials ( yi, i =
p, e, s, f ). Interactions among neurons are represented via seven
connectivity constants Cij, from the j-th population to the i-th
one. Finally ui (i = p, f ) represents the external input to the
column, which will be described in detail in paragraph Driving
Input.
Since the beta frequency band in which ERD/ERS occur
may diﬀer among individual subjects, we tested the robustness
of the obtained results by using three sets of parameters, to
simulate three beta sub-bands. Speciﬁcally, starting from t he
parameters’ values proposed by
Zavaglia et al. (2006) we ﬁnely
tuned synapsis average gains and time constants to obtain thre e
power spectra with the peaks in. low beta (LB: 14–19 Hz),
medium beta (MB: 20–24 Hz) and high beta (HB: 25–30 Hz)
sub-bands.. The values of these parameters are reported in
Table 1.
T wo Columns Model and Transcallosal
Connection
Transcallosal Connection
In order to study the interhemispheric connectivity by TC, we
considered two cortical areas, the right and the left SMA (eac h
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 5 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
TABLE 1 | Model basal parameters.
Common parameter Low beta Medium beta High beta
C = 135
Cep = C G e = 3.9 Ge = 3.9 Ge = 4.3
Cpe = 0.8 C G s = 4.3 Gs = 4.3 Gs = 4.6
Csp = 0.25 C G f = 25 Gf = 25 Gf = 29
Cps = 0.25 C ωe = 55 ωe = 75 ωe = 90
Cfp = 0.3 C ωs = 25 ωs = 33 ωs = 36
Cfs = 0.1 C ωf = 250 ωf = 330 ωf = 380
Cpf = 0.8 C
s0 = 6
e0 = 2.5
r = 0.56
described by Equations 2.1–2.18), interconnected through long-
range excitatory connections with a time delay. Figure 3 shows
the model layout.
In TC modeling, we relied on the assumptions that all
transcallosal ﬁbers are excitatory at a neurochemical level (Bloom
and Hynd, 2005 ) since the long-range connections originate
exclusively from pyramidal population. However, both excitatory
and inhibitory messages have been demonstrated to travel
through the corpus callosum (
Swayze, 1987; Bloom and Hynd,
2005); indeed, the functional eﬀects of these connections depend
on various factors, such as the receptors and the interneuron s
involved. In particular, a synaptic connection from pyramidal
neurons in one area to pyramidal neurons in the other areas has
an excitatory role on the target region, whereas a connection from
pyramidal neurons in one area to inhibitory interneurons in t he
other area has an inhibitory eﬀect.
Ursino et al. demonstrated that an excitatory connection to
fast inhibitory interneurons is able to transmit the rhythm s from
one region to the other very eﬃcaciously, while connections
to slow inhibitory interneurons are less eﬀective (
Ursino et al.,
2010). For these reasons, we modeled TC as projections from
pyramidal cells to contralateral pyramidal neurons and to fas t
inhibitory interneurons.
To simulate connectivity, we assumed that the average spike
density of pyramidal neurons of the presynaptic area ( zp) aﬀects
the target region via a connectivity constant to fast inhibi tory
interneurons ( Kf ) and to pyramidal neurons ( Kp) with a time
delay T.
This is achieved by modifying the input quantities up and uf
of the two cortexes.
We can write:
ui(t) = ni(t) + Ki · zp(t − T)i = p, f (2.19)
where ni (t) represents the external input (see Section Driving
Input).
In the model, we deﬁned a global connectivity constant K as:
K = Kp + Kf (2.20)
We used the same value of Kp and Kf for both cortexes.
To assign a relative value for these parameters, we made
two approximations: (i) we considered only layers 2/3 and 5,
provided that the origins of TC is mainly located in those
layers (
Koralek et al., 1990; Rouiller et al., 1991; Martínez-García
et al., 1994; Karayannis et al., 2007; Molyneaux et al., 2007 ); (ii)
we considered that the ﬁbers from layers 2/3 and 5 generate
more synapses to fast-spiking interneurons (about 70%) than to
pyramidal neurons (about 30%). The contribution of synapses to
the other interneurons was considered negligible (
Dantzker and
Callaway, 2000).
Accordingly, we assumed that 70% of synapses target the fast
inhibitory interneurons (hence Kf = 0.7K), while the remaining
30% of synapses target the pyramidal ones ( Kp = 0.3K).
The choice of these percentages might seem decisive for model
behavior. However, a preliminary sensitivity analysis showed that
the overall behavior of the model does not change appreciably
if this ration is changed even greatly. Indeed, only the edge s of
the working regions range, that will be described below, sli ghtly
changes.
It is known that the corpus callosum has a variable
number of ﬁbers and, depending on the considered theory
(Theory of inhibition or Theory of Excitation), that number
correlates negatively/positively with the information tran sfer
and positively/negatively with the lateralization, respecti vely. To
represent this variability, we tested the model with 101 K K -
values equally distributed between 0 and 100; then Kp varies
between 0 and 30 and Kf between 0 and 70.
The delay in the information transfer between the two
cortexes, which depends on the complexity of the speciﬁc
task, can vary in a range 10–300 ms. Considering the
results of transcranial magnetic stimulation studies, tra nscallosal
conduction times between motor cortexes of healthy subject s are
typically about 13 ms (
Liederman, 1998). So we used a time delay
T equal as great as 13 ms.
Driving Input
Parameters sensitivity analysis showed that inputs to slow
inhibitory and excitatory interneurons do not produce
appreciable changes in the model dynamics (
Ursino et al.,
2010). Therefore, in the following, we will consider only external
inputs to pyramidal neurons and to fast inhibitory interneuro ns.
The external input ni(t) (i = p, f ) is represented as a Gaussian
white noise which accounts for all inputs not incorporated in
the model, both excitation coming from the environment and
the density of action potentials coming from other connected
regions. It was modeled as a positive input to the pyramidal cells
(hence excitatory) with mean m = 40 pps (pulses per second)
and standard deviation σ = 1 and a positive input to the fast
inhibitory interneurons (hence with an inhibitory eﬀect) wi th
m = 3 pps and σ = 1. The external inputs have the same m
and σ for the two cortexes. The inputs are given for the entire
simulation. The model parameters and the external input set th e
WP at a level similar to that used by other models in literature
(
Wendling et al., 2002; Zavaglia et al., 2006 ).
The driving input has a very important role for setting
the population WP and then the potential cortex excitability.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 6 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 3 | Layout of the model of two regions. For each region (Right and Left SMA), four neural populations (pyramidal cells, excit atory interneurons, slow-inhibitory
interneurons and fast-inhibitory interneurons) communic ate via excitatory and inhibitory synapses. The connection between the two cortexes is mediated by two
connectivity constants which origin from pyramidal neuron s of one cortex and target the pyramidal neurons and the fast- inhibitory interneurons of the other cortex.
In particular, in agreement with the cortical activation mod el
(Pfurtscheller, 2006), the baseline WP determines the modulation
of the cortex, and so the induction of an ERD or an ERS.
Modulating Input
To simulate the occurrence of the task, consisting in the
persistent imagery of the right hand movement, we added
a modulating input to the pyramidal population of the
contralateral cortex (i.e., to the left SMA).
We simulated a typical motor imagery trial lasting 16 s: 4 s
of baseline, 8 s of motor imagery and 4 s of rest (
Suﬀczynski
et al., 2001 ). The modulating input is modeled as a smoothed
trapezoidal function, with the rise and fall times as long as 2 s
and a maximum amplitude plateau as high as 100 pps lasting 4 s
(Figure 4).
Model Output
Outputs of the model are the average membrane potentials of the
pyramidal populations, which simulate the local ﬁeld potential
recorded by superﬁcial EEG over the left and the right SMA (in
Figure 3 vout_L and vout_R , respectively). Moreover, during the
simulations we also analyzed the average spike density zp of the
pyramidal neurons. This variable is related with the neurona l
ﬁring rate, then it contains a direct information on the interaction
between the two cortexes. In particular, zp can vary between 0
and 2 × e0. In the following, we will call WP the value of zp
around which the cortex works. The simulated sample frequency
is 100 Hz.
After introducing the modulating input and once ﬁxed the
WP , we computed the ERD/ERS as follows:
ERD/ERS (%) = P (t) − PB
PB
· 100 (2.21)
FIGURE 4 | Modulating input introduced to the Left SMA. It includes 4 s of
baseline, 8 s of motor imagery and 4 s of rest.
where P(t) is the power extracted of vp(t) at each time-point over
the 16 s, and PB the mean power in baseline (during the ﬁrst 4 s).
RESUL TS
Single Column Model
The power spectral density (PSD) in the three beta sub-bands is
shown in Figure 5.
The spectra show a peak at three diﬀerent frequencies (about
15, 20, and 25 Hz) covering the all range of beta frequencies. As
reported in Table 1, it is possible to modulate the spectral content
and obtain the generation of these rhythms just tuning Gi and
ωi, i = e, s, f .
The three spectra are the starting point to evaluate the changes
induced by the connection of the two cortexes. As in the previous
presented models (
Wendling et al., 2002; Zavaglia et al., 2006 ),
the WP of the pyramidal population for the three beta sub-bands
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 7 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 5 | PSD of the single column model output in the three beta
sub-bands (Low Beta, Medium Beta and High Beta). The PSD spec tra are
computed with modiﬁed periodogram method using 1 s window and 0.01 s
overlapping and averaged for the total length of the trial.
is around 4, then near to the transition between the linear sl ope
region and the high saturation region ( Figure 1). The excitatory
interneurons population works in a condition of completely
upper saturation (WP = 5), the slow inhibitory interneurons
work near the linear region and the upper saturation region
(WP = 3/4) and the fast inhibitory interneurons work near
the low saturation region (WP = 0.5/0.8). These working
conditions make the fast inhibitory interneurons the most
sensitive population to an excitatory driving input because,
starting from a lower saturation condition, they have the gr eater
margin to increase and to move their WP near a linear region.
T wo Columns Model and Transcallosal
Connection
Driving Input
For each beta sub-bands, we considered 101 values of K to
evaluate the role of the connection strength on the transmis sion
of the signal from one cortex to the other. In this phase there i s
no modulating input on the cortexes.
The average value of zp over time (16 s), for each of the two
cortexes, is shown in Figure 6 as a function of K. LB, MB, and
HB curves show the same behavior and include 3 regions:
(i) In the ﬁrst region the relation between mean zp and K
describes a concave curve, which reﬂects the passage from the
saturated to the linear slope region of the sigmoid.
(ii) In the second region, the relation between mean zp and K
describes a convex curve. As for the ﬁrst region, the average
zp decreases with K, moving in the linear slope region of the
sigmoid function.
(iii) In the third region, the activity in the two cortexes qu ickly
move away from the linear slope region of the sigmoid. In
particular, activity in one region falls to zero, i.e., the WP
moves in the silent region of the sigmoid, while the other
cortex works in its original WP , as if there were no connection
with the other cortex.
The previous results can be explained by the following
mechanisms: in the ﬁrst two regions, the network start from
an upper saturation point and the presence of TC move the
WP of pyramidal neurons near a linear region of the sigmoid,
increasing the interhemispheric communication. In particul ar,
excitation from pyramidal neurons of the other hemisphere,
via the inter-hemispheric connection Kf , causes excitation of
FIGURE 6 | Trends of pyramidal average spike density for both Right (bl ue
line) and Left (green line) SMA as a function of K. For each of the three beta
sub-bands three regions were identiﬁed, here delimited with a dashed line.
fast inhibitory interneurons. Indeed, this population has a v ery
important role since it is sensible to the input and produces the
greater variations of the WP at the increase of K. Conversely,
excitation to pyramidal neurons, through the connection Kp,
has a less relevant role, since this population works close to
the upper saturation. The strong increase in zf , in turn, causes
a signiﬁcant inhibition of pyramidal neurons, with the global
result to move the pyramidal WP toward a linear region of the
sigmoid. Moreover, the decrease of pyramidal activity reduce s
the WPs of the slow inhibitory interneurons and of excitator y
interneurons. Finally, it is worth while that a reduction in t he
WP (i.e., functioning in the linear region) is associated with larger
ﬂuctuations in the population activity induced by noise.
The behavior in the third zone reﬂects a competitive
mechanism, similar to a winner takes all dynamics: only one
region (due to a better inﬂuence of external noise) wins the
competition causing the almost complete inhibition of the oth er.
This mechanism reﬂects a strong lateralization of the brain .
Figure 7 shows a map of the vout_R and vout_L log-
transformed PSD spectra of each beta sub-bands, computed for
each connectivity constant K. In the ﬁgure, the three previously
identiﬁed regions are well evident for each beta band. Speciﬁcally,
when K is lower than 7, the maps show the main spectral content
in the beta bands (light blue areas) for both the cortexes. Si milar
to the ﬁrst region, values of K belonging to the second identiﬁed
region (LB: 7 < K < 35, MB: 7 < K < 26 and HB: 7 < K < 16),
provide PSD spectra with the main content in the beta bands but
with a greater amplitude (red areas) for both right and left SMA.
In the third region (LB:K > 35, MB: K > 26 and HB: K > 16), one
of the cortex is completely inhibited (left SMA) and it shows the
main spectral content in low frequency band (2–7 Hz) (light red
and white areas), whereas the other cortex shows a behavior a s in
the “no-connectivity” condition with the main spectral cont ent
in beta bands (light blue and white areas).
To clarify this phenomenon Figure 8 shows the vout_R and
vout_L PSD spectra of each beta sub-bands, computed using
3 connectivity constants belonging to the 3 above identiﬁed
working regions.
The information transfer is well evident using the connectivity
constant K = 4: the PSD spectra of the two cortexes are similar
and have a power content greater that the “no-connectivity”
condition (Figure 5).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 8 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 7 | Plots of the log-transformed PSD extracted from both cortex es for each beta sub-band and for each K-value. The PSD spectra are computed with
modiﬁed periodogram method, using 1 s window and 0.01 s overla pping and averaged for the total length of the trial.
Using K = 14 there is a very eﬃcient transmission of the two
rhythms: the two cortexes are indeed synchronized at the sam e
frequency, and the PSD spectra show a peak of higher amplitude
with respect to the K = 4 condition.
In the third region ( K = 70), we found a diﬀerent behavior
between the two cortexes: one cortex works as in the “no-
connectivity” condition, whereas the other is characteriz ed by a
low frequency content. This signiﬁes that the strong connec tion
strength form the ﬁrst to the second cortex causes a slower
rhythm (mainly in the theta range) but, due to the prevalence o f
inhibition, the average membrane potential in the second cor tex
lies below the threshold of the sigmoid relationship, i.e., t he
second region works in the low saturation region.
Modulating Input
After analyzing the behavior of the system with the driving i nput
alone, we added the modulating input to simulate the imagery
task. Since simulation concerns the imagination of the right hand
movement, we gave the input to the left SMA.
Figure 9 shows the ERD/ERS % maps (computed with
Equation 2.21) as a function of the time and as function of K.
In this phase, we focused on the ﬁrst two previously identiﬁed K
regions.
As shown in the ﬁgure, an increase in K causes a signiﬁcant
decrease in the average power (hence ERD) in the contralateral
side, and a signiﬁcant increase in power (hence ERS) in the
ipsilateral side. The latter increases with K until a maximum is
reached, than the eﬀect decreases at larger values of K.
From Figure 9, we selected two K K -values, KH and KL, for
each beta sub-bands, corresponding to a high and low amplitude
of ERD/ERS, respectively, and tested the temporal pattern of
ERD/ERS during the task ( Figure 10). The selected values are 10
and 26 for LB band, 6 and 24 for MB band and 4 and 13 for HB
band.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 9 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 8 | Plots of the PSD extracted from both cortexes for each beta su b-band using three K-values belonging to the three previously identiﬁed working r egions.
The PSD spectra are computed with modiﬁed periodogram method , using 1 s window and 0.01 s overlapping and averaged for the t otal length of the trial.
For each beta sub-bands the ﬁgure shows that, using KH, an
ERD occurs in the Left SMA, while an ERS occurs in the Right
SMA, at the beginning of the imagery task. As the motor imagery
task ends, the two powers return to their baseline values. Usi ng
KL, the transmission becomes less eﬃcient. Actually, the ERD
follows the same behavior as for KH, but with a lower amplitude.
Conversely, the ERS is not generated.
To better explain the ERD/ERS generation, some exempla of
vout_R, vout_L, zp_R and zp_L are showed as function of time
in Figure 11. The ﬁgure shows the behavior of the network for
low beta and the two K-values used in Figure 9 (KH = 10
and KL = 26). In particular, the ERD is generated for both K-
values since the modulating input, during the motor imagery
task, moves zp of the target cortex (left cortex) toward upper
saturation. The smaller ﬂuctuations in zp, in turn, are reﬂected in
smaller ﬂuctuations in the overall column, and so the amplitud e
of vout_L decreases. For KH, the TC produces a decrease of zp
in the ipsilateral cortex, (right), moving the WP in the linea r
region. This corresponds to large ﬂuctuations (ERS). For KL, zp
oscillation of the right cortex is already maximum and it can not
generate a further ERS.
DISCUSSION
T wo Columns Model and Transcallosal
Connection
We used a neural mass model to simulate the connection between
the Left and the Right SMA in resting state and during a
motor imagery task. In particular, we adopted the model by
Wendling et al. (2002) which represents a good compromise
between synthesis and completeness. Compared with the well-
known model by
Jansen and Rit (1995) it incorporates a
fourth population of fast inhibitory interneurons, which all ows
FIGURE 9 | Maps of ERD/ERS % as function of time during the modulating
input and as function of K-value. The value of K was varied only in the ﬁrst two
previously identiﬁed regions. The maps are reported for both cortexes and
each beta sub-band.
a more accurate simulation of brain rhythms especially at high
frequencies (Beta and Gamma bands). We did not include the
thalamus, as in other recent models (
Suﬀczynski et al., 2001; Cona
et al., 2014 ), since a thalamic feedback is especially signiﬁcant in
the generation of lower frequency rhythms (Alpha and Theta)
which are not investigated in the present work.
The communication between the two cortexes is driven
by means of TC, simulated as a connectivity constant, which
transmits the cortical rhythms (Pyramidal Output), using the
same dynamics used for the excitatory (glutamatercig) syna pses.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 10 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 10 | Plots of ERD/ERS % as function of the time during a trial. For
each beta sub-band, the selected KH and KL are used to extract the
ERD/ERS.
This choice agrees with the well-accepted idea that long-ran ge
connections are imputable to pyramidal neurons. Furthermore ,
we included a physiological time delay to account for the long
inter-hemispheric connection.
A diﬃcult problem is to decide to which population the
connection should target. Neurophysiological data (
Felleman
and V an Essen, 1991 ) suggest that long range connections
from pyramidal neurons to distal cortical regions can reach
all populations, depending on the role of these connections.
However, a previous work using a similar NMM (
Ursino et al.,
2010) showed that synapses to excitatory interneurons and to
slow inhibitory interneurons have a minor inﬂuence on the
dynamics of the target region. Hence, for the sake of parsimon y,
only pyramidal-pyramidal and pyramidal-fast inhibitory
connections are included in this work. Furthermore, accord ing
to neurophysiological data, we assumed that connections to
inhibitory neurons are more numerous than connections to
the pyramidal ones. We explored a 0–100 range of connectivity
constants K, which simulate the TC strength.
Driving Input
Analyzing Figure 6, we distinguished 3 regions:
(i) In the ﬁrst region the neurons work close to the upper
saturation, and so there is only a moderate communication
of the individual rhythms.
(ii) In the second region, the two neurons work in the linear
slope region of the sigmoid function, since the reciprocal
inhibition reduces the position of the WP. This is the
region of maximum information transfer because the two
cortexes’ WPs are near the sigmoid central point, and so the
oscillatory activity is maximal.
(iii) In the third region, one of the cortexes works below the
lower threshold of the sigmoidal relationship (mean zp close
to 0) while the other works at its own equilibrium point
(around zp = 4). In this condition, one cortex is completely
inhibited, while the other is potentially excitable and its WP
is the same as for K = 0.
Behavior in the third region agrees with the inhibitory theo ry
of metacontrol proposed by Banich. In fact, in metacontrol
information presented to both hemispheres is completely
managed by one dominant hemisphere (
Banich, 1995). In other
words, by inhibiting activity of the opposing hemisphere the
other hemisphere becomes dominant for the processing of the
stimulus information (
Hellige et al., 1989 ). The model suggests
a similar behavior in case of high values of K (i.e., in the third
region described above). Here, model behavior implements a
“winner takes all” dynamics, in which only one among the
competitors (in this case one of the two areas of the cortex) wi ns
the competition and completely dominates the task. Conversely ,
at intermediate vales of K, both hemispheres are involved in
the process, and in this region we can observe the maximal
synchronization between the two rhythms. Here, the model
suggests that cooperation between the two hemispheres is the
adopted strategy, in which binding of the rhythms allows the
integration of the two pieces of information (left and right) i nto
a single combined response.
Modulating Input
In this section we will discuss how a modulating input is
transmitted from the target cortex to the other. When K is equal
to zero (no connection) the input is not transferred from one
cortex to the other, than an ERD is generated on the target
cortex but and ERS is not generated in the controlateral one.
However, for low values of K the transfer is maximum (blue
and red areas for ERD and ERS, respectively in Figure 8) and
speciﬁcally there is a turning point after which, increasing t he
value of K, the transfer starts to decrease (light blue and lig ht red
areas for ERD and ERS, respectively in Figure 8). The condition
of maximum transfer is a condition in which the two cortexes are
near the transition from the concave region to the convex reg ion.
In this point the zp amplitude and mean are not too high, so a
modulating input is able to modulate the zp in a signiﬁcant way.
Our simulation results show that a modulating input produces
a decrease of the power in beta band on the target cortex ERD and
an increase of the power on the ipsilateral cortex ERS. This can
be explained with the following mechanism. The input excites
the target cortex, which inhibits more the ipsilateral cortex . The
latter in turn inhibits less the target cortex. This process generates
a loop to which the target cortex is increasingly excited and
the ipsilateral one increasingly inhibited. As a consequence , the
WP of the target cortex moves to a position closer to the upper
saturation, i.e., a position where the amplitude of the rhythm
decreases. In fact, here the spiking frequency of the neurons
is less aﬀected by the external noise. Conversely, the WP of
the ipsilateral cortex moves down in the linear region of the
sigmoid relationship, where the spiking frequency of neurons is
maximally aﬀected by noise, thus causing a power increase in the
beta range. This mechanism allows the generation of the ERD
(related with an excitation state, close to upper saturation) a nd
ERS (related with a inhibition state, close to the central regi on)
patterns.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 11 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
FIGURE 11 | Plots of vout and zp of the Right cortex (blue line) and of the Left SMA (green line ) as function of time for LB using K = 10 and K = 26. For both
K-values, the modulating input moves zp of the target cortex (left) toward the upper saturation regi on and so the amplitude of oscillation decreases. For K = 10, zp in
the ipsilateral cortex (right) moves toward a linear region and the amplitude of the oscillation increases. For K = 26, zp in the ipsilateral cortex has already reached a
maximum oscillation amplitude, then it cannot be further mo dulated and vout_R does not change its amplitude. The red line is the moving aver age ﬁltered signal of
each subplot.
Of course, this result strongly depends on model assumption
on the initial WP of the two pyramidal populations, placed in
the upper portion of the sigmoidal relationship, not too distant
from saturation (
Wendling et al., 2002; Zavaglia et al., 2006 ) and
is consistent with the model of cortical activation ( Pfurtscheller,
2006). According to this theory, when the cortical activation
baseline level is high and the majority of neurons is occupied
by synchronization processes, an increase of cortical activ ation,
induced for example by an external excitatory input, can only
induce an ERD. This is the behavior observed in the target
cortex. In turn, the WP of the pyramidal population strongly
depends on WP of the fast interneurons population, placed in
the lower saturation portion of the sigmoid. These neurons ar e
very sensitive and ready to spike as soon as they receive an
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 12 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
input. As a consequence, excitation of fast inhibitory neuro ns
in the ipsilateral cortex (induced by TC from the target other
cortex) causes a decrease in the WP of their pyramidal neurons ,
thus inducing an increase in ﬂuctuations. This is in accorda nce
with the cortical activation model: when the cortical activ ation
baseline level is high and the majority of neurons is occupied by
synchronization processes, a decrease of cortical activati on can
only induce an ERS.
In this phase we have not considered the before identiﬁed
third region, since in that region one of the cortexes takes t he
control of the process and the other is completely turned oﬀ.
Excitation and Inhibition Theories
In the context of the debate about excitatory or inhibitory
theories of the corpus callosum, this model is collocated mai nly
in accordance with the inhibitory theory.
If there are no modulating inputs on the cortex, but only a
common driving input, as K increases, the interaction between
the two cortexes moves the WP toward a more linear region of
the sigmoid. After a certain value ofK, i.e., increasing the strength
of the TC, the laterality increases because one hemisphere is
inhibited and the other tasked with the performance of the
speciﬁc cognitive process. This is in accordance with the ﬁndi ng
of Fling et al., which reported a strong, positive relationshi p
between the strength of interhemispheric inhibition and the
microstructure of interhemispheric ﬁbers that is speciﬁc to
tracts connecting the primary motor cortexes. In particular,
an increased ﬁber microstructure in young adults predicts
interhemispheric inhibitory capacity (
Fling et al., 2013).
With the introduction of the modulating input, the behavior
remains of inhibitory type: the inhibition of one cortex lead s
to the excitation of the other cortex, and vice versa. This
behavior, causing an opposite shift in the WP of the two areas,
can explain the observed ERD in the target cortex and the
observed ERS in the ipsilateral cortex, and enforces the inhibitory
theory: the two hemispheres are in constant mutually inhibito ry
relationship with each other and this competition is mediate d
by the corpus callosum. Also, included in this theory there is
the notion that the corpus callosum serves as an “inhibitory
barrier” between hemispheres to prevent maladaptive cross
talk between the hemispheres for which a given function is
dominant (
Kinsbourne, 1982; Bloom and Hynd, 2005; Welcome
and Chiarello, 2008; Adam and Güntürkün, 2009 ).
Implication in BCI Control and New Perspective
As previously investigated by several researchers (
Filippini
et al., 2010; Lindenberg et al., 2012; Halder et al., 2013 ), the
integrity and the number of connections of the deep white
matter structure are predictors of SMR-based BCI performance,
and there is a relation between the white matter architectur e
and SMR-BCI aptitude. In particular, the corpus callosum was
one of the top ﬁve white matter regions which were found
to be most discriminating in the low vs. high BCI-aptitude
group comparison, showing signiﬁcant correlations ( p < 0.05)
with individual BCI-performance. According to our ﬁndings,
when corpus callosum had a too low number of ﬁbers, we
expected a lower ERD and ERS amplitude and consequently
lower BCI performances. At the increasing of corpus callosum
ﬁbers number, the generation of ERD/ERS becomes optimal until
reaching a too high number of ﬁber and only an ERD is produced.
Halder et al. proposed that the best strategy to improve
BCI performance in low aptitude users is by conducting a
long-term BCI training program consisting of multiple sessions,
which not only targets to increase proﬁciency in BCI usage for
communication and control, but also attempts to incorporate
interventions to increase or stabilize the microstructural integrity
of BCI-critical central white matter (
Halder et al., 2013).
In this context and in the light of our ﬁndings, we propose a
further strategy to be combined with the one just presented. It
consists in the use of neuromodulation techniques during BC I
training (
Matsumoto et al., 2010; Wei et al., 2013; He et al., 2014).
In particular, an appropriate stimulation could move the neural
circuit in an ideal WP , which could improve the information
transfer between the two cortexes and increase the ERD/ERS
amplitudes.
Model Validation Hypothesis
The validation of a model requires predictive ability to be te sted.
As the proposed model is based on several assumptions separately
validated in the previously discussed studies (
Pfurtscheller and
Neuper, 1997; Suﬀczynski et al., 2001; Wendling et al., 2002;
Grabska-Barwi´nska and ˙Zygierewicz, 2006; Zavaglia et al., 2006;
Fling et al., 2013
), the model should simulate accurately the
phenomenon of beta ERD/ERS generation and its dependency on
TC. A speciﬁc protocol for the validation of the proposed model
should include the recording of both:
(i) EEG signals from the SMA, during resting state condition
and motor imagery tasks. The PSD and ERD/ERS should be
extracted and ﬁtted with model outputs to identify a K-value
for each participant.
(ii) Images of structural data using DTI for in-vivo scanning
of human brain anatomy connectivity. The Functional
Anisotropy could be extracted as indices of the TC (
Halder
et al., 2013).
The analysis of the correlation between K and Function
Anisotropy could provide the validation of the model,
demonstrating the dependency of the ERD/ERS amplitude
on TC and the phenomenon of Transcallosal Inhibition. This is
planned in future works.
CONCLUSIONS
A two columns NMM was implemented to simulate (i) the
right and left SMA and (ii) the mechanism of generation and
propagation of beta ERD/ERS induced by a modulating input
which simulates a motor imagery task. The model assumes that
the way in which the input is transmitted is inhibitory, i.e., the
inhibition of one cortex leads to the excitation of the other cortex
and vice versa. The results can explain the ERD and ERS observed
during the task and enforces the theory of inhibition, which
supports that the two hemispheres are in constant mutually
inhibitory relationship with each other and this competitio n is
mediated by the corpus callosum.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 13 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AM contributed to the design and conceptualization of the
study, carried out the computational modeling, contributed t o
interpretation of the data and drafting of the manuscript. MU
contributed to interpretation of the data and drafting of the
manuscript. ML contributed to the design and conceptualizatio n
of the study and drafting of the manuscript. AC contributed to
the design and conceptualization of the study and drafting of the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Adam, R., and Güntürkün, O. (2009). When one hemisphere takes
control: metacontrol in pigeons ( Columba livia ). PLoS ONE 4:e5307.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005307
Banich, M. T. (1995). “Interhemispheric processing: theoretical considerations and
empirical approaches, ” inBrain Asymmetry, eds R. J. Davidson and K. Hugdahl
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 427–450.
Bloom, J. S., and Hynd, G. W. (2005). The role of the corpus callosum
in interhemispheric transfer of information: excitation or inhib ition?
Neuropsychol. Rev. 15, 59–71. doi: 10.1007/s11065-005-6252-y
Clarke, J. M., and Zaidel, E. (1994). Anatomical-behavioral relatio nships: corpus
callosum morphometry and hemispheric specialization. Behav. Brain Res. 64,
185–202. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(94)90131-7
Cona, F., Lacanna, M., and Ursino, M. (2014). A thalamo-cortical neural mass
model for the simulation of brain rhythms during sleep. J. Comput. Neurosci.
37, 125–148. doi: 10.1007/s10827-013-0493-1
Dantzker, J., and Callaway, E. (2000). Laminar sources of synaptic input to cortical
inhibitory interneurons and pyramidal neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 701–707.
doi: 10.1038/76656
da Silva, F. L. (1991). Neural mechanisms underlying brain waves: fro m neural
membranes to networks. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 79, 81–93.
doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(91)90044-5
da Silva, F. L. (2010). “EEG: origin and measurement, ” in EEG-fMRI: Physiological
Basis, Technique, and Applications , eds C. Mulert and L. Lemieux (Berlin;
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 19–38.
Dayan, P., and Abbott, L. F. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience . Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Felleman, D. J., and V an Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in
the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47. doi: 10.1093/cercor/1.1.1
Filippini, N., Douaud, G., Mackay, C. E., Knight, S., Talbot, K., and
Turner, M. R. (2010). Corpus callosum involvement is a consistent
feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 75, 1645–1652.
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fb84d1
Fling, B. W., Benson, B. L., and Seidler, R. D. (2013). Transcallos al sensorimotor
ﬁber tract structure-function relationships. Hum. Brain Mapp. 34, 384–395.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.21437
Freeman, W. J. (1987). Simulation of chaotic EEG patterns with a dyn amic model
of the olfactory system. Biol. Cybern. 56, 139–150. doi: 10.1007/BF00317988
Grabska-Barwi´nska, A., and ˙Zygierewicz, J. (2006). A model of event-related EEG
synchronization changes in beta and gamma frequency bands. J. Theor. Biol.
238, 901–913. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.07.001
Halder, S., V arkuti, B., Bogdan, M., Kübler, A., Rosenstiel, W., Sitaram, R., et al.
(2013). Prediction of brain-computer interface aptitude from ind ividual brain
structure. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:105. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00105
He, W., Wei, P., Zhou, Y., and Wang, L. (2014). “Modulation eﬀec t of transcranial
direct current stimulation on phase synchronization in motor imagery b rain-
computer interface, ” in2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (Chicago, IL), 1270–1273.
Hellige, J. B., Taylor, A. K., and Eng, T. L. (1989). Interhemispheri c interaction
when both hemispheres have access to the same stimulus information. J. Exp.
Psychol. 15:711. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.15.4.711
Hughes, S. W., and Crunelli, V. (2005). Thalamic mechanisms of EEG alpha
rhythms and their pathological implications. Neuroscientist 11, 357–372.
doi: 10.1177/1073858405277450
Jansen, B. H., and Rit, V. G. (1995). Electroencephalogram and visu al evoked
potential generation in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biol.
Cybern. 73, 357–366. doi: 10.1007/BF00199471
Karayannis, T., Huerta-Ocampo, I., and Capogna, M. (2007). GABAer gic
and pyramidal neurons of deep cortical layers directly receive and
diﬀerently integrate callosal input. Cereb. Cortex 17, 1213–1226.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhl035
Kinsbourne, M. (1982). Hemispheric specialization and the growth of human
understanding. Am. Psychol. 37:411. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.37.4.411
Koralek, K. A., Olavarria, J., and Kellackey, H. P. (1990). Areal and lami nar
organization of corticocortical projections in the rat somatosen sory
cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 299, 133–150. doi: 10.1002/cne.9029
90202
Liederman, J. (1998). The dynamics of interhemispheric collaboratio n and
hemispheric control. Brain Cogn. 36, 193–208. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1997.0952
Lindenberg, R., Zhu, L. L., Rüber, T., and Schlaug, G. (2012). Predicting functional
motor potential in chronic stroke patients using diﬀusion tensorimaging. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 33, 1040–1051. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21266
Martínez-García, F., González-Hernández, T., and Martínez-Millá n, L. (1994).
Pyramidal and nonpyramidal callosal cells in the striate cortex of the ad ult rat.
J. Comp. Neurol. 350, 439–451. doi: 10.1002/cne.903500308
Matsumoto, J., Fujiwara, T., Takahashi, O., Liu, M., Kimura, A., and Ushiba, J.
(2010). Modulation of mu rhythm desynchronization during motor i magery
by transcranial direct current stimulation. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 7, 1–5.
doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-7-27
Molyneaux, B. J., Arlotta, P., Menezes, J. R. L., and Macklis, J. D . (2007). Neuronal
subtype speciﬁcation in the cerebral cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 427–437.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2151
Netz, J., Ziemann, U., and Hömberg, V. (1995). Hemispheric asymmetry
of transcallosalinhibition in man. Exp. Brain Res. 104, 527–533.
doi: 10.1007/BF00231987
Noggle, C. A., and Hall, J. J. (2011). “Hemispheres of the Brain, Latera lization of, ”
in Encyclopedia of Child Behavior and Development, eds S. Goldstein and J. A.
Naglieri (Boston, MA: Springer US), 740–741.
Pfurtscheller, G. (1992). Event-related synchronization (ERS): an
electrophysiological correlate of cortical areas at rest. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 83, 62–69. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(92)90133-3
Pfurtscheller, G. (2006). The cortical activation model (CAM).Prog. Brain Res. 159,
19–27. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)59002-8
Pfurtscheller, G., and Neuper, C. (1997). Motor imagery activates
primary sensorimotor area in humans. Neurosci. Lett. 239, 65–68.
doi: 10.1016/S0304-3940(97)00889-6
Rouiller, E. M., Simm, G. M., Villa, A. E. P., De Ribaupierre, Y., and De Ribaupierre,
F. (1991). Auditory corticocortical interconnections in the c at: evidence for
parallel and hierarchical arrangement of the auditory cortical areas. Exp. Brain
Res. 86, 483–505. doi: 10.1007/BF00230523
Schillen, T. B., and König, P. (1994). Binding by temporal structure in multiple
feature domains of an oscillatory neuronal network. Biol. Cybern. 70, 397–405.
doi: 10.1007/BF00203232
Suﬀczynski, P., Kalitzin, S., Pfurtscheller, G., and Da Silva, F. L. (2001).
Computational model of thalamo-cortical networks: dynamical contro l of
alpha rhythms in relation to focal attention. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 43, 25–40.
doi: 10.1016/S0167-8760(01)00177-5
Swayze, V. (1987). Two hemispheres-one brain: functions of the c orpus callosum.
Am. J. Psychiatry 144, 1351–1352. doi: 10.1176/ajp.144.10.1351-a
Ursino, M., Cona, F., and Zavaglia, M. (2010). The generation of rhythms within
a cortical region: analysis of a neural mass model. Neuroimage 52, 1080–1094.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.084
van der Knaap, L. J., and van der Ham, I. J. (2011). How does the corpu s callosum
mediate interhemispheric transfer? Rev. Behav. Brain Res. 223, 211–221.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.04.018
Wei, P., He, W., Zhou, Y., and Wang, L. (2013). Performance of moto r
imagery brain-computer interface based on anodal transcranial dire ct current
stimulation modulation. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 21, 404–415.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2013.2249111
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57


--- Page 14 ---
Mangia et al. Transcallosal Inhibition during Motor Imagery
Welcome, S. E., and Chiarello, C. (2008). How dynamic is interhemisphe ric
interaction? Eﬀects of task switching on the across-hemisphere a dvantage.
Brain Cogn. 67, 69–75. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2007.11.005
Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Bellanger, J. J., and Chauvel, P. (200 2).
Epileptic fast activity can be explained by a model of impaired
GABAergic dendritic inhibition. Eur. J. Neurosci. 15, 1499–1508.
doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.01985.x
Zavaglia, M., Astolﬁ, L., Babiloni, F., and Ursino, M. (2006). A n eural mass
model for the simulation of cortical activity estimated from high re solution
EEG during cognitive or motor tasks. J. Neurosci. Methods 157, 317–329.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.04.022
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Mangia, Ursino, Lannocca and Cappello. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forum s is permitted,
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited an d that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 June 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 57
