--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 09 January 2019
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00100
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100
Edited by:
Florentin Wörgötter,
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen,
Germany
Reviewed by:
Rifai Chai,
University of Technology Sydney,
Australia
Joachim Hass,
Central Institute for Mental Health,
Germany
*Correspondence:
Thalita F . Drumond
thalita.ﬁrmo-drumond@inria.fr
Received: 14 February 2018
Accepted: 03 December 2018
Published: 09 January 2019
Citation:
Drumond TF , Viéville T and
Alexandre F (2019) Bio-inspired
Analysis of Deep Learning on
Not-So-Big Data Using
Data-Prototypes.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12:100.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00100
Bio-inspired Analysis of Deep
Learning on Not-So-Big Data Using
Data-Prototypes
Thalita F . Drumond*, Thierry Viéville and Frédéric Alexandre
Mnemosyne Team, INRIA Bordeaux, Talence, France
Deep artiﬁcial neural networks are feed-forward architect ures capable of very impressive
performances in diverse domains. Indeed stacking multiple layers allows a hierarchical
composition of local functions, providing efﬁcient compac t mappings. Compared to
the brain, however, such architectures are closer to a singl e pipeline and require huge
amounts of data, while concrete cases for either human or mac hine learning systems
are often restricted to not-so-big data sets. Furthermore, interpretability of the obtained
results is a key issue: since deep learning applications are increasingly present in society,
it is important that the underlying processes be accessible and understandable to
every one. In order to target these challenges, in this contr ibution we analyze how
considering prototypes in a rather generalized sense (with respect to the state of the
art) allows to reasonably work with small data sets while pro viding an interpretable view
of the obtained results. Some mathematical interpretation of this proposal is discussed.
Sensitivity to hyperparameters is a key issue for reproduci ble deep learning results, and
is carefully considered in our methodology. Performances and limitations of the proposed
setup are explored in details, under different hyperparame ter sets, in an analogous
way as biological experiments are conducted. We obtain a rat her simple architecture,
easy to explain, and which allows, combined with a standard m ethod, to target both
performances and interpretability.
Keywords: deep learning, not so big data, data prototypes, i nterpretability, transfer learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have had a great success in many domains, especially in visual
recognition tasks. From AlexNet in 2012 (
Krizhevsky et al., 2012 ) to Residual Networks in
2015 ( He et al., 2016 ), this class of models has shown outstanding performances at th e Large
Scale Image Recognition Challenge (aka ImageNet), motivati ng the use of deep learning in
multiple domains such as speech recognition and language proce ssing ( LeCun et al., 2015 ).
The key idea is that, at least for threshold units with positive weights, reducing the number
of layers induces an exponential complexity increase for the sa me input/output function
(Håstad and Goldmann, 1991 ). On the reverse, it is a reasonable assumption, numerically
veriﬁed, that increasing the number of layers yields an input /output function compact
representation1, as a hierarchical composition of local functions ( Goodfellow et al., 2016c ).
1Here compact means that adding a network layer allows a better input-out put mapping approximation or a mapping
considering a higher functional sub-space for a number of units which would have been exponentially higher with decreasing
the number of layers.


--- Page 2 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
1.1. The Data Requirement Challenge
However, deep learning remains very ineﬃcient concerning
data requirements. Most successful results are reported on la rge
databases. For the simple handwritten digit recognition tas k, on
the MNIST database we were already at 60 K images for 10
classes (
LeCun et al., 1998). For the complex ImageNet challenge,
we reached more than 1M images for 1 K classes ( Krizhevsky
et al., 2012 ). While large tech companies may have access to
large amounts of labeled and unlabeled data, this is not the c ase
in many domains, where the ability to generalize from only a
few tenths of examples per class is required. This limitation n ot
only concerns industrial application requirements but is als o
a strong limitation as far as modeling cognitive processes is
concerned.
Elaborating over this necessity,
Mouret (2016) argues for the
three basic precepts to deal with small corpus of data, also call ed
micro-data learning: (i) actively search about which is the most
relevant data to consider (active learning), (ii) exploit ev ery bit
of information (detailed learning), (iii) use as much as poss ible
prior knowledge. In fact, the quick learning ability of humans and
animals is largely due to our prior knowledge about the world we
interact with and is referred to as transfer learning (
Weiss et al.,
2016). This can be performed considering general knowledge,
beyond ad-hoc application dependent choices. In practice,
learning from limited data often requires embedding of prior
knowledge at some stage, be it at the input data pre-processing,
the architecture choice, cost functions, and regularizati on rules,
or even as smart training strategies. Following this track a re
works focused in few-shot learning (
Dong et al., 2017; Rahman
et al., 2017), which deals with very few learning samples (usually
less than ten), when not only one sample, or zero (i.e., only a
priori information).
We would like to study how to investigate a middle range of
a few tenths of samples. We may call this situation “not-so-bi g-
data.” The rational for this is two-fold: On one hand it appears
that learning entirely new concepts of forms in human (e.g.,
reading characters;
Leroy, 1967 ) does not require one or a very
few number of samples, but more than 10. On the other hand,
several industrial applications are able to provide ten to hund red
samples for a given perceptual tasks, but not thousands. Such not-
so-big-data learning is an extension of few-shot and micro- data
learning, reusing several key features such as transfer lea rning, as
reviewed in the section 2.2.
1.2. The Interpretability Issue
A step further, we argue that in order to be able to introduce
prior knowledge at a general level (and not only using an ad-hoc
mechanism limited to a single application), the lever is to provide
an interpretable processing. Interpretable mechanisms can he lp
to better tune the architecture with small data set, as discu ssed
in this paper. Interpretability also requires a data descriptio n
easy to explain to a lay audience, and means to provide an
explanation for algorithmic decisions that may aﬀect citizen life.
We have such requirement in mind in this contribution, as
already addressed in
Drumond et al. (2017b).
When considering such an issue in the present literature
(e.g., Kim et al., 2016 , or Zhao and Park, 2016 ) it appears
that interpretability is understood as “results are interpre table.”
However, if we really want to propose some easy-to-share and
explainable mechanism, in order to be able to state that the
process is transparent, we must not only look for interpretable
results. We also must attempt to consider easily understood
processes, i.e., interpretable mechanisms. This is the reaso n why
in this paper we are going to take the risk to study to which extent
a “non trivial but easy to explain” mechanism, used with a small
amount of data, can still provide performances close to the best
state of the art performances.
1.3. On Network Architecture
One of the intuitions behind the success of deep learning is
that stacking multiple layers induces learning of a hierarch ical
representation, a successive composition of local functions that
ends up describing higher level concepts as reviewed (e.g.,
Bengio and LeCun, 2007 ). This includes, for convolutional
neural networks (CNN) with weight sharing, the capability to
take global, e.g., translational invariant, features into account
(
Goodfellow et al., 2016b ). That aspect of deep architectures has
a strong parallel with our current knowledge of representatio ns
in the brain, especially in the visual pathway from retina
until the infero-temporal cortex, where object identiﬁcati on is
performed. This feed-forward pathway is indeed hierarchical
and is responsible for our primary (ﬁrst ≈ 100 ms) visual
identiﬁcation capabilities (
Fabre-Thorpe et al., 1998 ). When
considering, however, the complete visual system, a simple fe ed-
forward pipeline cannot represent all the computations taking
place in the brain. Identiﬁcation is only part of our visual sys tem,
namely the What ventral pathway, associated to the Where-
How dorsal pathway (
Milner and Goodale, 1995 ). Furthermore,
there are dynamic mechanisms, feedback modulations, shortcuts,
lateral inhibition, to cite a few, that are often disregarded
(
Medathati et al., 2016).
Concerning the connectivity patterns within the visual syst em
(Bullier, 2001 ), the capability to mix features from diﬀerent
levels of the hierarchy, as observed regarding the role of
the pulvinar (
Cortes, 2012 ), has to be considered. Integrating
focus of attention within certain regions of the feature spac e
(Saalmann et al., 2012 ), and other functionalities such as on-
the-ﬂy adaptation to incoming data, in link with the few-
short learning paradigm (further discussed in section 2.2) i s
also important to take into account 2. All these functionalities
require rather general recurrent architectures (
Medathati et al.,
2016). The possibility to provide a framework in which not
only feed-forward or speciﬁc recurrent architectures can be
taken into account is addressed by other works (
Viéville
et al., 2017 ) and is beyond the scope of this paper. The
present proposal is mainly inspired on how the infero-temporal
cortex has a kind of prototypical representation, with neurons
tuned to respond to particular categories (
Viéville and Crahay,
2004).
2Further aspects of feed-back functionality, such as on-line compu tations with
feed-backs, will not be considered here.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 3 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
1.4. Hyperparameter Dependence
Automated machine learning 3 is “the process of automating
the end-to-end process of machine learning, ” because the
complexity of adjusting the hyperparameters, including selec ting
a suitable method, becomes easily time-consuming when not
intractable. To this end, the general idea is to consider a
standard machine-learning algorithm and to add on “top of it ”
another algorithmic mechanism, e.g., another machine lear ning
algorithm dedicated to automatic hyperparameter adjustment ,
with the caveat of generating other hyperparameters for the
meta-learning algorithm and without formal guaranty that t his
accumulation of mechanisms is optimal.
What corresponds to hyperparameters in the brain or for a
fully autonomous system is managed in three ways: It is eithe r
modulated by other structures (such as the diﬀerent cortico-
thalamic pathways through the basal ganglia;
McHaﬃe et al.,
2005) and at diﬀerent time-scales (such as short-term versus
long-term synaptic plasticity; Cooper et al., 2004 ), or integrated
as learning parameters, the system being able to learn new
parameters and to adapt also the way it learns as a coherent
process. A third track is to design robust processes in the sens e
that hyperparameters precise values are not critical. A key iss ue
in a distributed system such as the brain, is that hyperparamet ers
are usually global while still implemented via local processe s
(e.g., neuro-modulation). Some are also related to the netw ork
construction (e.g., the number of layers).
Here we are going to carefully study these aspects,
in order to make explicit to which extents the proposed
method is related to robust hyperparameters, thus without
requirement about questionable value adjustment. If not,
the hyperparameter adjustment is going to be managed
using standard hyperparameter adjustment methods, and the
interpretability of the such meta-parameter adjustment is al so
going to be made explicit.
1.5. The Present Contribution
Bio-inspired improvements of deep learning extend far beyond
the three issues reviewed here, as discussed recently in
Marcus
(2018). The biological plausibility of deep-learning is another
issue, see Bengio et al. (2016) for a recent discussion. In a nutshell,
there is a clear correlation between deep-learning CNN states
and the primary visual cortex macroscopic activity as observe d
in
Mensch et al. (2017) , while the contribution of deep-learning
as a tool to better understand the brain is not obvious as explained
in Medathati et al. (2016) . Nevertheless, these issues are beyond
the scope of this paper.
Here we would like to revisit the notion of prototypes, as a
tool to improve deep learning on not-so-big data, considerin g
some aspects of the brain architecture and addressing also th e
hyperparameter dependence issue. There are multiple deﬁnitions
and usages of what is called prototypes. Here prototypes are
centers of a k-means procedure over training samples, acting
3The notions of “automated machine learning, ” “meta-learning, ” inc luding
“meta-optimization” and “hyperparameter” and the related “hyperparameter
optimization, ” have precise meaning in machine learning, and we assu me this is
known to the reader.
as data-representatives in the feature space. The present work
explores this notion of prototypes for interpretability and
classiﬁcation under not-so-big datasets, building up on th e idea
introduced in
Drumond et al. (2017b) with more comprehensive
experiments on real datasets and including comparison with
few-shot meta-learning methodologies. This work focuses on
convolutional networks and applications to vision, although what
is proposed in this paper is general and applicable to other deep
learning frameworks.
Our main claim is that such data prototypes may help
address the not-so-big data issue in an interpretable fashio n,
considering a few bio-inspired aspects made explicit in this
introduction. Proposing a solution to both aforementioned
issues—“not-so-big-data” learning together with data and
process interpretability—is the main contribution of the paper .
The key point of our proposal is the notion of data prototypes, as
made explicit in the sequel. In order to introduce this notion , we
need to discuss one aspect of network architecture and point ou t
issues regarding the hyperparameters.
In the next section we are going to review the literature related
to this subject, then formalize the model description, in ord er
to experiment the idea in the subsequent section, allowing us to
discuss based on these results how the issues quoted here can be
addressed, while proposing several perspectives of this work.
2. RELATED WORKS
2.1. Prototypes in Literature
The term prototypes can be found in the literature under
diﬀerent meanings: a priori information, representation in
clusters, quantiﬁcation of space, as we discuss now.
Jetley and Torr (2015) proposes a prototypical priors layer,
with a priori chosen prototype images of road signs, encoded
using a HoG (histogram of oriented gradients) descriptor, and
added as ﬁxed units of the penultimate layer. Here, the networ k
is ultimately trained to match the HoG representation of the
prototypes but it is assumed to exist a standard representative
image per class in the input space to be encoded as a prototype
unit.
In prototypical networks (
Snell et al., 2017 ), prototypes are
deﬁned as class centroids in the feature space spanned by the
embedding CNN. In this simple approach, the nearest-prototype
is used to classify a given sample. This proved to be eﬀective on
the considered datasets. However, this does not respond to th e
scenario of metric learning proposed in
Song et al. (2017) . Also
derived from this work, Gaussian prototypical networks ( Fort,
2017) predict a covariance radius for each prototype, yielding
some insight on the discriminating force of each of them.
Self-organizing maps, or the dictionary sparse representatio n
methods ( Rubinstein et al., 2010 ), perform a prototypical
sampling on the data space ( Hecht and Gepperth, 2016 ) and
allow to represent what is known about a data distribution,
using methods quoted in prototypical networks and known as
optimizing statistical criteria (
Banerjee et al., 2005).
Bio-inspired models also consider the notion of prototypes, as
in e.g., ( Serre et al., 2007 ) which introduce a general framework
for the recognition of complex visual scenes, that follows th e
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 4 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
organization of visual cortex building an increasingly comple x
and invariant feature representation and considering a redundant
dictionary of features for object categorization. Further more,
Viéville and Crahay (2004) has related the notion of prototypes
to a SVM model of the inferior temporal object recognition brain
area.
2.2. Few-Shot Learning and Learning to
Learn
The importance of learning new concepts from small data-
sets motivated the study of few-shot learning tasks. Few-sh ot
learning refers to the ability of learning to discriminate b etween
N unseen classes given k examples of each, with k usually below
5 (
Triantaﬁllou et al., 2017). This task is also referred to as k-shot
N-way learning. One-shot learning is a special case of this setting,
where the system must generalize from a single example for each
class. Slightly diﬀerent is zero-shot learning, where no exa mple
of a given class is available in the target domain (e.g., imag es)
whereas information on the categories originates from othe r
domains (e.g., textual descriptions) (
Goodfellow et al., 2016d).
Learning a deep discriminative model for a large number of
classes has high data requirement, and is prone to overﬁtting if
applied directly in a few-shot data framework. For this reason ,
usually some form of transfer learning is used to tackle this
problem: a model is trained on other classes before attacking the
N new ones. Since the model learned in this pre-training phase
will have to be adapted to the target classes, few-shot classiﬁcation
can also be seen as a form of “learning how to learn, ” which is a
very sensible framework when the goal is to learn whichever n ew
categories to come. In this spirit, pre-training is a meta-tra ining
phase, where we learn a meta-model that can learn any set of N
classes given to it. Using the model on new k-shot N-way tasks
corresponds to a meta-testing phase, where for each task some
inner training may take place.
There are diﬀerent ways of implementing this meta-learning
setting4, but any such should have a meta-training and
meta-testing phase, with their respective class-wise disjoi nt
datasets DMtrain and DMtest. Details on each phase vary
between propositions, but globally meta-training works like
some sort of pre-training, where the model is trained on some
discriminative task over the classes in DMtrain, while constructing
a representation that will be useful to generalize to new class es
in DMtest. In this sense, this methodology can still be seen as a
form of transfer learning. Later, meta-testing phase will con sist
of actually performing the k-shot N-way task multiple times, f or
diﬀerent subsets of N classes drawn from DMtest. Each subset itself
has to be divided into training and test splits, in order to hav e
kN reference samples for the new classes from one and evaluate
performance on the other.
To give a clearer example, let us present a common
organization of meta-learning: episodic training. First pro posed
by
Vinyals et al. (2016) , it has continued to be adopted in
other recent works ( Santoro et al., 2016; Fort, 2017; Ravi and
Larochelle, 2017; Ren et al., 2017; Snell et al., 2017 ). Arguing that
4Not to be confused with meta-learning in the sense of hyperparameter tuning and
automatic machine learning.
approximating meta-training to meta-testing conditions cou ld
enhance learning, they proposed that, during each step in the
meta-training phase, the model be trained on a diﬀerent k-shot
N-way task, with new N classes drawn from DMtrain. Each such
task is called an episode, and demands not only kN examples as a
training (or support) set but also some examples of the N classes
to serve as a test or query set. During this phase, the error ove r
this query set can be used to adjust the model, while in meta-
testing only the support set will be used as a reference to classif y
the query samples.
In line with the above discussion, many of the recent works
focused on this problem, seek to learn an embedding space over
the meta-training set that will hopefully generalize for unse en
classes in meta-testing. This common feature space allows to
compare test with training examples to decide on their class,
usually with some kind of nearest neighbors algorithm, but
sometimes resorting to more complicated models. Siamese nets
(
Koch et al., 2015) are an early example of such models, in which
two identical networks are used to map a pair of examples into a
learned metric space so that they can be compared via a distance
function. The whole network is trained to predict whether an
input pair belongs or not to the same class, this being repeated
for multiple pairs. Matching networks (
Vinyals et al., 2016) work
on a one-shot setting, also relying on learning a network tha t will
map support examples of each class to an embedding space, to be
later matched to the query example. The embedding is composed
by CNNs providing inputs to LSTMs, providing a context aware
embedding that models dependence between the CNN feature
vectors for each support point, and also between support points
and query point. Prototypical nets (
Snell et al., 2017 ) also learn
an embedding based on a CNN, with the matching between
support and query samples performed by a nearest class means
classiﬁer. The CNN is adjusted during meta-training, with a cross
entropy loss function over the points in the query set, for multiple
episodes.
This line of work is in close relation with metric learning,
which aims to adapt a metric function over feature vectors for a
given dataset (
Bellet et al., 2013). If a signiﬁcant metric is learned,
distance-based classiﬁcation becomes a relevant alternat ive, as
exempliﬁed by Mensink et al. (2013) . They consider metric
learning methods for two distance-based classiﬁers, the k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) and nearest class mean (NCM), and propose
new methods for NCM allowing to model more complex class
distributions with multiples centers per class. This possible
complexity in class distribution cannot be captured by local
metric learning methods, as is the case with current deep met ric
learning. As discussed by
Song et al. (2017) they are incapable
of identifying scattered classes, with multiple clusters in th e
space. In response, they propose to learn an embedding function
that directly maximizes a clustering metric (normalized mut ual
information).
Using memory augmented networks has also been explored in
the context of few-shot learning (
Santoro et al., 2016). The idea is
to build on top of a Neural Turing Machine ( Graves et al., 2014),
an implementation of a content-based access memory for neura l
networks, adapting it to the one-shot learning task. This is y et
another meta-learning approach, where the recurrent network is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 5 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
not trained to predict directly a speciﬁc set of classes, but tr ies
to predict the right classiﬁcation at each time-step based on the
sample-class associations it could learn and keep in memory o n
the previous time steps. It still needs to see a large number (mo re
than 10 k) of episodes to make good predictions, incrementally
making better predictions as it sees up to 10 examples of the same
class. Compared to human memory, its functioning could be seen
as a working memory, that can match new samples to recently
seen examples but limited to a low amount of distinct categori es.
2.3. Interpretability
Interest in the ﬁeld of interpretable machine learning has
raised in the last years, partly inspired by the ever-growing
impact of machine learning systems in society. Nevertheless ,
interpretability is a broad term still lacking a precise deﬁni tion,
with open discussions on what it is and how to quantify
it (
Lipton, 2016; Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017 ). One common
understanding is to equate it to explainability—the ability to
provide explanations to a model’s predictions or, even better, the
reasoning process behind its predictions.
Understanding the reasoning behind complex models such
as deep neural networks is a diﬃcult task. In visual recognit ion
applications, one common eﬀort is to try to visualize what types
of features have been learned by certain units or layers of a
convolutional network. This is usually achieved by optimizi ng
network input to maximize the activations of the layer of interest.
Since the ﬁrst visualizations produced with DeconvNet (
Zeiler
and Fergus, 2014), there have been many propositions to improve
the quality of the input reconstruction, including the use of
regularization priors that enforce more “natural-looking” images
(see
Olah et al., 2017, for a review). Another way of producing
such images is to search the training set for image patches
maximizing the activations. This approach has the advantage
of producing real examples, although not necessarily specifyi ng
which features in the image led to it to be put in a particular
category.
In-between these feature visualization strategies is the
problem of attribution, where the goal is to identify which
regions of the input image were responsible for maximizing a
chosen activation (
Bach et al., 2015; Sundararajan et al., 2017 ).
An example of attribution procedure is LIME, a method that
locally approximates the model around the output prediction
and goes back to the input image highlighting superpixels
most responsible for its predicted class (
Ribeiro et al., 2016 ).
Other works are interested in generating some salience map
information over the input image (
Bach et al., 2015; Shrikumar
et al., 2017). While feature visualization is still abstract and away
from verbal human-level explanation, attribution or salien ce
maps are grounded on real images and can provide some level
of justiﬁcation.
Even though these methods were developed having deep
CNNs in mind, some of them can be generally applied to
explain other classes of models. The explanation procedure
itself can be seen as an explanation model, trained to provide
justiﬁcations given the inputs and outputs of the black-box
prediction model.
Lundberg and Lee (2017) deﬁnes additive
feature attribution methods, a class of local explanation mo dels,
unifying diverse approaches from literature (includingBach et al.,
2015; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Shrikumar et al., 2017). Another way to
use an accessory model as explanation is to distill the network
into a class of allegedly interpretable models—such as decision
trees—training the explanation model to mimic the networks
predictions (
Frosst and Hinton, 2017).
3. MODEL PROPOSED
3.1. Model Architecture
Here we introduce a prototype matching layer as proposed in
Snell et al. (2017) , after the embedding provided by a CNN,
deﬁned by a set of prototypes sampling the input distribution in
the feature space. This layer is a softmax taking both the sampl e
features and the sample prototype proximity into account. This
allows grouping examples with respect to the induced metric
learned by the CNN layers, and taking the competition between
prototypes into account. Diﬀering from
Snell et al. (2017) , this
output feeds an additional ﬁnal softmax classiﬁer layer, that
correlates the prototype’s matching to class labels. This allo ws to
introduce a soft but sparse prototype-to-class label assignmen t:
A given prototype is encouraged to represent a unique class,
but in ambiguous situations this mapping is not hardwired. It
also diﬀers from alternative mechanisms such as support-vecto r
machines, Kohonen-like maps, or radial basis functions (such a s
e.g.,
Lyu and Simoncelli, 2009).
Some speciﬁcity with respect to usual architectures using
prototypes are taken into account here:
• The prototype layer is not the ﬁnal layer but an intermediate
upper-layer of the architecture, as a complementary
information to perform the perceptual task. Here classiﬁcation
is the task, but this extends to other perceptual tasks.
• A prototype is a “data prototype” in the sense that its role
is not only to reveal if a neighborhood of the feature space
belongs to a given category of the classiﬁcation task, but also
to represent at a macroscopic level the feature space itself
(e.g., which regions are to be taken into account, whether a
category corresponds to a connected region or not, whether a
region contains adversarial samples, etc). As a consequence,we
neither hard-wire sample to prototype matching nor prototype
to class label assignment, but let the estimation provide the
best description of the data, given the classiﬁcation task, in an
interpretable way, as discussed below. This is quite diﬀerent
from the related works reviewed in the previous section.
• Given a dataset, the ﬁnal task-related layer is fed with two
alternative combined inputs: (i) The whole feature sample
vector, and: (ii) The data in relation with the prototype space.
With the former choice only, the prototype layer role is simply
to represent the data in the feature space but is not involved
in the classiﬁcation task. With the latter choice only, the l arge
dimensional feature sample (here of dimension 2,048, see
details in the next section) reduces to a very low dimensiona l
space (<50 in our setup). This very likely introduces some bias,
but may limit overﬁtting.
Let us now turn to the formal detailed description of the model .
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 6 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
FIGURE 1 | The three layer model. The input data is fed to a convolution n eural network, transforming the original image into a set of feature vectors. Then the
information in this high dimensional feature space is summa rized via a set of prototypes, in order to understand the land scape. Finally, the relation between a given
data point and the label to infer is calculated through their proximity to the prototypes.
3.2. Model Speciﬁcation
We consider 5 a set of labeled images {· · ·(Ii, li) · · · }, i ∈ { 1, M},
labels being ﬁnite li ∈ { 1, N}. This input space I is embedded
in a feature space X of huge dimension D through a function
f : I → X, here deﬁned by the CNN. We introduce the notion
of prototype in order to discriminate between twisted feature s at
the output of some CNN.
To this end, we propose to consider the estimation of a ﬁxed-
size set of prototypes in the feature space pj, j ∈ {1, J}, J ≥ N. The
fact this set is ﬁxed is going to be discussed at the experiment al
stage, showing that the hyperparameter J is robust.
We are in a supervised learning paradigm considering samples
{· · ·(xi, li) · · · } providing examples of association between
features and categories.
We proceed in two steps. First, qj(x) = p(x ∈ Qj) is the
probability for the feature vector x of a sample, to be associated
to the j-th prototype. This association is written as x ∈ Qj,
where Qj is the set of samples associated to the given prototype.
Interestingly enough, our model does not implicitly assume t hat
the Qj form a partition of the feature space, as discussed in
Appendix A5. These regions may overlap or uncover the whole
space. Furthermore a sample may be sparsely represented, thanks
to the softmax criterion, by several prototypes as in a diction ary
representation method (see e.g.,
Rubinstein et al., 2010 ). We
approximate qj(x) as a function of the proximity −∥ x − pj∥ to
the prototypes, writing:
qj(x) = νj
(
−∥ x − pj∥2/2
)
, (1)
where νj(·) stands for the softmax distribution, the related
D × J weight matrix of this layer corresponding to prototypes
5Notations: Vectors and matrices are written in bold, the vector dot-product
writes xT x′, i.e., as a matrix product with the row vector transpose of the left
column vector. The Heaviside function writes H(u). Partial derivatives are written
in compact form, e.g., ∂xn f(x) means ∂f(x)
∂xn . The notation δP stands for 1 if the
property P is true and 0 otherwise (e.g., δ2>1 = 1). The notation {a, b} stands
for an integer interval and [ a, b] for a real interval. When considering a vector
x augmented by new dimension c we simply write ( x, c) for the corresponding
element in the Cartesian product of the corresponding spaces.
coordinates in the feature space X. See Appendix A1 for a
detailed presentation of this equation.
Then, cl(x) = p(l|x) is the probability for a sample to be
associated to the label of index l. For the purpose of analyzing
diﬀerent aspects of the given architecture, we consider two
alternatives: direct use of the prototypes and combined use of
prototypes and features.
3.2.1. Direct Use of the Prototypes
The label of sample is estimated by another softmax layer:
cl(x) = νl
(
wT
l q(x)
)
, (2)
the related J × N weight matrix corresponding to the prototype-
to-class association. This design choice introduces an impo rtant
dimensional reduction (see e.g.,
Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David,
2014, Chapter 23) in the processing. It is a strong choice and it is
going to be numerically studied against a vanilla alternative made
explicit in the next subsection.
Considering an approximate cross-entropy criterion to adjust
the parameters given sample features xi and their label li yields
the following minimization:
C = −
∫
X
p(x) log
(
c(x)
)
+ 1
C |wl|d ≃
− 1
M
∑
i
log
(
cli (xi)
)
+ 1
C |wl|d, (3)
where d ∈ { 1, 2} corresponds to the L1 or L2 norm, while C is a
hyperparameter weighting the regularization term.
A straightforward derivation (see Appendices A2, A3 for the
details) of the related normal equations leads to an estimat ion-
minimization method:
- The ∂pj C = 0 equation yields a k-means estimation of
the prototypes given the samples, weighted by the prototype
proximity. This deep relation between divergence estimation and
k-means algorithms is known (
Banerjee et al., 2005 ) and will
allow us to derive an eﬃcient implementation, and to minimize
the role of meta-parameters for this step. In our implementatio n
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 7 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
we have experimented that considering only a standard k-mean s
initialized by a k-means++ mechanism is numerically suﬃcie nt.
- ∂wl C = ∑
i
[
δl= li − cl(xi)
]
q(xi) + R, where R stands for
regularization terms, yields a Hebbian-like interpretable1st order
rule for adjusting the prototype-to-class association, as a function
of each training sample a priori class label.
3.2.2. Combining Prototype-Encoded and Original
Features
The combined model uses the probabilities for a given input
sample to correspond to the prototypes in order to predict
the class. The input sample is encoded via these numbers. It
is obvious to decode such information, i.e., to reconstruct the
predicted sample given this information:
˜x def=
∑
j
qj(x) pj, (4)
where ˜x is the simple Bayesian estimation of x given p(x ∈ Qj),
providing6 a simpliﬁed form of linear autoencoder mechanism
(
Goodfellow et al., 2016a).
When D ≫ J, it might be the case that the prototype
information is insuﬃcient to allow a good classiﬁcation
performance. Conversely, using a large J may interfere with
interpretability, a large number of prototypes being harder to
analyses and eventually being less meaningful. To this end, we
are also going to also consider
cl(x) = νl
(
wT
l (x | ˜x)
)
= νl
(
w
′T
l x | ˜w
′T
l ˜x
)
, (5)
in the upper classiﬁcation layer, where |is a vector concatenation
operator and w
′T
l = (w
′T
l | ˜w
′T
l ). This provides the following layer
with both features and prototype-encoded information to make
a classiﬁcation decision. Additionally, comparing w
′T
l with ˜w
′T
l
allows to numerically evaluate the contributions of both pat hs
identifying to what extent the reduction of information fro m
the whole data features to a prototype-encoded representation is
relevant to the classiﬁcation decision.
3.2.3. Relation Between Prototypes and Category
Information
Another issue with respect to the state of the art is, as proposed
in
Rippel et al. (2016) , to consider the prototypes as a mixture
between unsupervised information (sampling the feature space
without any knowledge) and supervised hardwired informatio n,
each prototype being hardwired to a given category. In order to
further understand the relationship between the data protot ypes
and the categorization, since in alternative approaches prototypes
are often “hard-wired” to a given category, we have also
investigated an extension of the k-means algorithm step on
the learning set, taking also the learning sample category int o
account.
6Obviously, if the classiﬁcation task is performed on ˜x, i.e., if we consider
cl(x) = νl
(
w
′T
l ˜x
)
, this is equivalent to the previous form cl(x) = νl
(
wT
l q(x)
)
,
with w
′T
l pj = wT
l , thus simply correspond to an over-parameterization of the
classiﬁcation layer using D × N weights, but with only J × N degrees of freedom.
To this end the following extended metric for the k-means
algorithm applied on learning samples is considered:
d
(
(xi, li), (xi′, li′)
)
= | xi − xi′|2 + β
∑
j
δli̸= li′ (6)
In words we augment the feature space by new dimensions
corresponding to each categories in order to move apart samples
related to diﬀerent categories. Clearly for β = 0 this reduces
to our original setup, whereas for large values of β, we make
explicit in Appendix A4 how this allows to hard-wire prototypes
to categories.
This complementary tool is not related to performances
but to only better understand this aspect of the problem.
Additionally, it is important to understand that there is a
deep relationship between a softmax classiﬁcation layer and a
prototype representation, as discussed in details in Appendix A7.
4. EXPERIMENTS AND RESUL TS
Here we perform a series of experiments to gain intuition about
the proposed model, test its performance under a few-shot setting
and demonstrate its potentialities as an interpretable altern ative.
In summary we used two experimental methodologies: ﬁrst a
k-means based implementation over ﬁxed features, followed
by a second end-to-end implementation used in a meta-
learning setting. In both cases, we work under few-shot lear ning
conditions, exploring the performance of these models for not -
so-big data situations.
4.1. Datasets
A known benchmark dataset for few-shot learning is the
Omniglot dataset (
Lake et al., 2011). It consists of images of 1,622
characters from 50 diﬀerent alphabets, each drawn by 20 diﬀerent
people. The small number of samples per class and the large
number of classes make it a challenging problem to learn all th e
classes simultaneously. Therefore we will work on episodes: c lass
subsets of N classes randomly picked among the 1,622 characters
(see Figure 2: Left for an example).
To study the eﬀect of increasing training set sizes, we will use
two larger standard benchmark datasets: MNIST7 and CIFAR108.
Both datasets comprise 10 diﬀerent classes. MNIST has 28 ×
28 images of handwritten digits, 60 K samples in the training
set and 10 K in the test set. CIFAR10 has 60 K 32 × 32 color
images of 10 object categories, with 50 K in the training set a nd
the remaining 10 K on the test set. From these datasets, it wil l
be possible to sample training subsets ranging from few-shot to
many-shot situations.
4.2. Studying the Model Under Fixed
Features
Contrary to usual few-shot learning paradigms we do not
consider here meta-learning as discussed in section 2.2, bu t a
7http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist
8https://www.cs.toronto.edu/ kriz/cifar.html
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 8 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
transfer learning paradigm: by using a general purpose pre-
trained CNN, we skip any meta-training routines that allow
learning CNN ﬁlters on a particular few-shot dataset. We
use ﬁxed features extracted with a standard CNN architectur e
pre-trained on ImageNet data, namely Inception v3 (
Szegedy
et al., 2015 ), that has successfully been used in transfer learning
settings (for instance Shin et al., 2016; Esteva et al., 2017 ).
Features are normalized in the range [0, 1]. Based on features
FIGURE 2 | (Left) Sub-sample of 10 classes from the Omniglot dataset, showing 5 samples per class (total is 20 per class). (Right) T -SNE visualization of the
Inception v3 features for the 200 samples of this subset, see t ext for details.
FIGURE 3 | Mean accuracy (with standard deviation bars) obtained duri ng grid search for the inverse regularization parameter C an d the number of clusters, under L2
regularization. (T op)Direct model. (Bottom) Combined model.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 9 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
extracted from the penultimate layer of this network, our mod el
has to learn to predict from very few samples (see Figure 2:Right
for a visualization example of this feature space for a sample
episode of Omniglot dataset). Fixing the embedding network
allows to isolate and assess performance variations due to th e
ﬁnal layers of the model, under equal input features. Assessi ng
whether the tested models allow learning of a more appropriate
representation is addressed in section 4.4.
Except for experiments with increasing training set sizes
(section 4.3), all experiments in this section are performed
on Omniglot dataset. In comparison to meta-learning
methodologies, we are skipping the meta-training phase,
where the embedded representation is learned, and going
directly to meta-testing, where for each independent episode ,
the model is actually only learning to predict from few-shot
data, for a certain quantity N of classes. Thus we operate direct
learning on each episode, with a training data set for paramete r
estimation and a test set for checking generalization. Each
episode is split in half, with 10 N samples for training and 10 N
samples for testing. When hyperparameter tuning is needed, 5 ×
2-fold cross-validation over the training set is used, leav ing 5 N
samples to train and 5 N to validate. Once the hyperparameters
are chosen, the model is re-trained on the entire training se t. To
see how the model performs over the entire dataset, observati ons
are repeated for a large number of episodes.
With those two simpliﬁed design choices (using ﬁxed features
and performing direct learning), these results cannot be fai rly
compared to other few-shot meta-learning approaches (this will
be addressed in section 4.4). More precisely, we withdraw from
learning the CNN layers, which are not adapted to the target
data to give a speciﬁc representation, relying on transfer lea rning
instead. Moreover, using the direct model only, it drastical ly
restrains the classiﬁcation number of degrees of freedom fr om
thousands to a few tenths. This is done on purpose in order to
study to what extents this compromises the result. Neverthel ess,
we also know how to also ensure performances, using the
so-called combined model. In both cases, we compare our
propositions to other classical classiﬁers tested in the same
setting, namely: softmax, SVM, and nearest centroids.
To visualize how data samples and prototypes are distributed
in space, we obtain a 2D non-linear projection using T-SNE
(
Maaten and Hinton, 2008 ) over the data samples feature
vectors together with the prototypes coordinates pj in the
feature space, as shown in Figure 2: Right. Such mechanism
preserves local neighborhood of closed samples, whereas long
range distances can not be interpreted since skewed by the non -
linear projection: The map only reﬂects the similarities bet ween
the high-dimensional inputs in a stochastic, but not metric w ay.
Code and further analysis for this section and section 4.3 ar e
available at https://gitlab.inria.fr/mnemosyne/data_prototypes.
4.2.1. Study of a Sample Episode
Hyperparameter adjustment is a key factor in the success of any
machine learning model. This ﬁrst analysis focuses on gaini ng
intuition on the behavior of the model on a sample episode
with N = 10 classes (shown in Figure 2). The aim is to study
its hyperparameters, experiment with visualization of prototy pes
and data samples in a common space and try to understand the
relation between prototypes and their attributed class. In thi s
section we consider only the hyperparameters introduced by th e
formulation presented in section 3.2. More details on these an d
other hyperparameters can be found in Appendix B.
In the current experimental setting, our base model has two
hyperparameters: the inverse regularization strength ( C) and the
number of clusters, thus of prototypes ( J). We explored 10 values
of C ∈ [10− 3, 108], and 10 values of J ∈ [2N, 5N], where
N = 10 is the number of classes (see Figure 3). For the direct
model under L2 regularization, we can identify that average
performance is stable for C ≤ 10− 1, and more sensitive around
larger C values in (10 2, 106], raising around C ≤ 102. For L1
larger values are preferred, presenting a stable score as soon as
C ≤ 102. For the combined model, we have a behavior similar
to direct-L1 under both regularizations, with any values abo ve a
certain threshold being equivalently good (10 − 2 for L2 and 10 1
for L1). Since no clear preference could be stated between L1 an d
L2 regularization, both regularizations keep being analyzed in the
following (and are included in the comparative analysis in section
4.2.3).
Regarding the number of prototypes J, as visible in Figure 3,
a higher number of prototypes is preferred by the direct model,
while the combined model does not seem to depend on it.
However, for the direct model, using a too large number of
prototypes would ultimately amount to a nearest-neighbors-
like algorithm and possibly counteract on their interpretabil ity
purpose (too many prototypes representing too many base
concepts to support a simple explanation), while overﬁtting
and poor generalization performances are expected. With the
combined model, we can avoid this issue by choosing a lower
number of prototypes while keeping high performances.
Nevertheless, a minimal number of prototypes can be
important for interpretability, but can be ignored when looki ng
only at accuracies in cross-validation. This motivates usin g
another method for choosing the appropriate number of
prototypes. As far as data representation is concerned, we
can simply rely on usual k-means prototype count adjustment
methods. This is usually done by sweeping some range of values
for the number of clusters and keeping the one minimizing its
loss or, in case of saturation as J grows, keeping the lowest value
that reaches close to minimal loss. We exemplify this procedur e
in Figure 4 for an Omniglot 10-shot episode, which suggests
a number of prototypes around 20. Statistical signiﬁcance of
the observed elbow curve has been veriﬁed. More precisely,
considering a least-squares adjustment of a parametric elbow
model against a constant value model, the related Fisher ratio test
probability threshold is p = 0.2 on the non-normalized values.
It is only p = 0.3 on the normalized values, and it is more
than p = 0.001 (non-normalized) and p = 0.2 (normalized)
on the MINST data set reported on Figure 9 and only p = 0.3
for the CIFAR 10 data set. We have tested for several parametri c
models (cubic, piece-wise linear, exponential) and obtained t he
same results. We hypothesize this is due to due to very small
set of data used (10 samples by data point). However, as far
as interpretability is concerned it is still interesting to ha ve an
estimation of a reasonable order of magnitude of the number o f
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 10 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
prototypes. We also are going to observe in the sequel that this
number is not critical regarding performances, so that this r ough
estimate is suﬃcient.
In summary, we can choose the number of prototypes in
the clustering phase based directly on its unsupervised loss,
optimizing the number of prototypes for data representation.
Altogether, the key points here are that this hyperparameter is to
be considered more as a way to optimize the data interpretabili ty
than the classiﬁcation performances, with the possibility of being
automatically adjusted.
When using the extended metric described in section 3.2.3, we
have an extra hyperparameter β weighting the added class-aware
term. Based on the previous analysis for C and J, we decided to
constrain the search of C ∈ [102, 106] and reduce the number
of parameters searched to 3. For J, we still search on the same
range but limit the number of parameters to 5. Figure 5 shows
accuracy results on cross validation for diﬀerent pairs of β and
J (with C ﬁxed on the best value found by grid search). The
contribution of this term for a ﬁxed value of J is not clear, at this
stage, but it is interesting to notice that when J = N = 10 there is
an improvement until a certain threshold, followed by a platea u
(β lower than ≈ 7.8 under both L1 and L2 regularizations).
This can indicate that for large enough β the class-aware term
has dominated the positioning of each cluster undermining the
FIGURE 4 | Average training loss on the k-means algorithm as a function of the number of prototypes. The mean square distance betwee n samples and prototypes
decreases until a plateau (sometimes called elbow) and then either re-increases, as visible in this example, or do not si gniﬁcantly re-decreases as shown in Figure 9
for other datasets.
FIGURE 5 | Veriﬁcation that the introduction of a priori information on the prototype category has no signiﬁcant impact on the perfor mances, as soon as the number
for prototypes is high enough. Graphs show mean accuracy (wi th standard deviation bars) obtained during grid search und er the best regularization parameter found.
(Left) Under L1 regularization, C = 104. (Right) Under L2 regularization, C = 102.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 11 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
inﬂuence of the ﬁrst distance-to-prototypes term. It could al so
be that for small numbers of prototypes this additional term
(that encourages prototypes to cluster samples corresponding
to a unique category) has a positive inﬂuence on performances,
whereas it is no more the case when the number of prototypes
is high enough. We consider this result as a good indication
that the compromise between a good data representation good
classiﬁcation performances seems possible with our so called
data-prototypes.
4.2.2. Interpretability of the Model
As previously discussed, prototypes in our model lie in the same
feature space as the data and correspond to virtual examples.
In this section we demonstrate how this fact can support
explanations about the model’s decisions. For such, we provid e a
visualization for each prototype by looking at its closest tra ining
samples, in Figure 6. To observe prototypes in the feature space,
we use T-SNE visualizations of training and test samples in the
feature space together with prototypes ( Figure 7). Visualizations
in this section correspond to our main model combining features
and prototypes, under L2 regularization. With this model, sinc e
the performance is not sensitive to the number of prototypes,
J = 10 prototypes was the value chosen by cross validation.
We observe the representative images obtained are coherent
with the prototype classes, except for prototype 7, which was
classiﬁed as class 2 but had a closest sample coming from class
7. This could be due to the fact explained by the fact that both
classes correspond to very similar characters (both look lik e a
lowercase “g” under diﬀerent rotations, see Figure 2), and indeed
the T-SNE visualization shows these classes are very mixed i n
the feature space. Additionally, class 5 is also mixed in and
corresponds to a similar character. Indeed, the top-2 most lik ely
classes for p7 predicted with close probability were c2 with
87% and c7 with 7% (see Figure 7), indicating p7 lies in a
slightly more ambiguous region of the feature space. In a scenario
with an adaptive number of prototypes, this prototype-to-class
association information could serve as an index for adding mo re
prototypes in the region.
Representation by the closest training sample illustrates
how each prototype can be represented by a corresponding
input, having the advantage of being a hyperparameter-free
method yielding real images. Of course feature visualizati on
methods based on input optimization could also be applied, but
appropriately tuning such models is fundamental for obtaining
realistic image representations and out of the scope of this wo rk.
4.2.3. Comparison Over Multiple Episodes
Extending this analysis, we now compare test accuracies over 100
random episodes for diﬀerent model variants, in order to obtai n
results of statistical signiﬁcance. As reference methods w e have a
softmax regression layer (multinomial regression), an SVM and
a nearest class centroids classiﬁer [like the classiﬁer laye r used
by
Snell et al. (2017) ]. From our proposal we test four variants:
both combined and direct models, using L1 or L2 regularization
(as deﬁned in 3.2). Test accuracy results for 100 episodes are
displayed in Figure 8.
Statistical signiﬁcance of the results are veriﬁed by a non-
parametric Friedman test with post-hoc Nemenyi tests (with
p ≤ 0.05, see Table 1) (
Demšar, 2006). No signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between both regularizations could be observed for the direc t
model, while L2 is signiﬁcantly superior for the combined model.
Between direct and combined, combined is signiﬁcantly bett er in
both cases. Regarding the baseline comparisons, we highlight that
the combined model with L2 regularization diﬀers signiﬁcant ly
from an SVM for N = 20, 30, although no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
FIGURE 6 | The top-4 closest training samples visually illustrate wha t is being represented by each prototype. For each prototype p1, p2, .., its related class c2, c5,
.. is written, this “main” class being estimated as the most p robable class proposed by our algorithm. The number of sampl es corresponding to the related cluster is
given.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 12 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
FIGURE 7 | T -SNE visualizations of dataset points (as Inception v3 feat ures) together with learned prototypes, indicated by black markers. Each class is identiﬁed by
color, and the predicted class for each prototype is annotat ed. Misclassiﬁed points are over-marked by an “x” of the predi cted class color. (T op)Visualization of the
training set; (Bottom) Visualization of the test set.
to softmax could be observed. Additionally, all models diﬀer
signiﬁcantly from nearest-centroids.
4.3. Comparison Over Different Training
Sets With Varying Sizes
In order to conﬁrm our results we have considered two
diﬀerent datasets: MNIST and CIFAR10. These datasets have
larger training sets, allowing to subsample training sets of
size larger than 20 N (which was the case for Omniglot).
Additionally, they have a large standard test set (10 K sample s)
over which to evaluate the performances. Class distribution i n
these datasets is approximately balanced, and the distributio n
is preserved when sampling the training subsets. We explored
training subsets of size 100, 200, 300, 500, 750, 1,000 (that
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 13 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
FIGURE 8 | Box plots for test accuracies over 100 episodes. Boxes exten d between 1st and 3rd quartiles ( IQR), with median value noted at the bottom and marked
by a green line. Bars mark a range of ± 1.5 IQR from quartiles, with outliers as circles. Our models are mar ked with a ∗.
TABLE 1 | Statistical signiﬁcance for all pairs of classiﬁers tested on Omniglot.
10 classes 20 classes 30 classes
Models L2 Combined L1 Combined L2 Softmax SVM Softmax SVM L2 Softmax SV M L2
L1 o ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ o ++ ++ o
combined L1 ++ – ++ ++ o ++ + ++ ++ ++ ++
combined L2 ++ ++ – o o o ++ ++ o ++ ++
SVM ++ o o ++ – ++ – ++ ++ – ++
“++” and “+” mark all pairs which presented a signiﬁcant differen ce (for p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively), while “o”s mark those which did not. Non-reported pairs we re found to be
signiﬁcantly different with p < 0.01 (except for direct L1 vs. direct L2 at 30 classes, for which p < 0.05).
is, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 75, 100 samples per class on average).
The idea is to evaluate performances ranging from few-
shot data (here 10 samples per class) to not-so-big data
(here a few tenths of samples per class). For hyperparameter
selection we proceed exactly as done for Omniglot, by 5 ×
2 cross-validation. All models are retrained over the whole
training set using the best validation parameters. Statisti cal
signiﬁcance is also evaluated in the same way (Friedman non-
parametric test + Nemenyi post-test). We report the mean
test accuracy, averaged over 10 diﬀerent random training
subsets, all evaluated on the standard test partition for eac h
dataset.
We also have numerically studied for these new datasets
whether the k-means prototype count automatic adjustment is
still numerically valid, as reported in Figure 9, after Figure 4.
We thus have now observations for Omniglot (sample 10-shot
episode), and MNIST and CIFAR10 (training subset with 500
samples). Such a method indicates 20 clusters for Omniglot and
CIFAR10, but a larger number for MNIST (between 30 and 50
depending on a saturation tolerance). The optimal value does
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 14 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
not correspond to a minimum but is still detectable as an elbow
corresponding to the occurrence of a plateau. This result is no t
always statistically signiﬁcant. It is the case for MNIST but not
for CIFAR10.
A ﬁrst evaluation of the means (and standard deviations, see
Figure 10) allows to observe that our combined models perform
best or similar to a softmax or an SVM classiﬁer, all performin g
better than nearest centroids or our direct models, which is
congruent with results obtained on Omniglot (but here on a
larger test set). Particularly for MNIST , the nearest centro ids
classiﬁer is considerably lower than the top performing meth ods.
Considering statistical signiﬁcance of the comparisons,
on MNIST our combined model with L2 regularization is
consistently better than nearest centroids, although the s ame can
be said about softmax. In most cases, for both datasets, combined
models, softmax, and SVM are signiﬁcantly better than eithe r
of the direct models, but comparison between the two variants
(L1 and L2) is inconclusive. For CIFAR10 the signiﬁcance
results are less conclusive, but we do observe some signiﬁca nce
in the superiority of the combined model (L1 regularization)
over nearest-centroids (between 200 to 1000 training samples ).
Detailed results for statistical testing of all classiﬁer pa irs for all
training set sizes can be consulted in the code repository for this
paper.
4.4. Experiments in the Meta-Learning
Paradigm
To allow a fair comparison to usual few-shot learning paradigms,
we carried on end-to-end training of the model under meta-
learning conditions. We continue to use Omniglot dataset
described above, with 4 rotations per character used for data
augmentation (0, 90, 270, 360 degrees), and use episodical
training, following the methodology of
Snell et al. (2017). We use
the same CNN architecture (4 layers, 3x3 kernels, resulting in a
64 dimension embedding) and experimental setup, based on their
publicly available implementation9.
In summary, the task here is to prepare a meta-model which
will be able to learn to classify N classes based on k training
samples, for diﬀerent subsets of N classes. For this, the full
architecture is meta-learned over a some episodes sampled from
a meta-training set containing 1,200 characters, with episo des
from a meta-validation set containing 172 characters being used
to evaluate and early-stop the meta-training, while the remaining
423 characters are used to generate meta-testing episodes (subsets
of N classes not seen in the meta-training phase).
More speciﬁcally, the meta-training phase is carried on 100
randomly chosen 5-shot 60-way episodes. Another 100 5-shot
5-way episodes are sampled to form a meta-validation set. Meta-
training is stopped after 200 epochs with no improvement on the
meta-validation set, keeping the best model so far. At meta-t est
time, we apply the model to solve 5, 10, 20 and 30-shot learning
tasks on 1,000 episodes sampled from previously unseen classes.
9Code for prototypical networks available at https://github.com/ja kesnell/
prototypical-networks, under MIT license. Our fork is available at ht tps://github.
com/thalitadru/prototypical-networks
Since these experiments are more computationally intensive,
using cross-validation to choose hyperparameters becomes
prohibitive. We ﬁxed J = 2N, i.e., 2 prototypes per class and
L2 regularization of 10− 4 (via weight decay). Optimization of the
complete model, including CNN weights, is done with an Adam
optimizer with initial learning rate of 10 − 2 (and default moment
estimation parameters). For each episode the top two layers of
model need to be ﬁtted on the new classes using the training
(or support) k-shot examples. This optimization was run for 200
iterations, with an initial learning rate of 0.1 (also using A dam).
The test (or target) examples serve to evaluate the model and,
when in meta-training phase, calculate the loss and gradients that
will adjust the bottom CNN weights.
We compare our accuracy results over 1,000 test episodes
to two other propositions in the literature: Matching network s
(
Vinyals et al., 2016 ) and Prototypical networks ( Snell et al.,
2017) (see Table 2). These are seminal works in the ﬁeld of few-
shot learning and remain competitive compared to more recent
proposals (for instance
Garcia and Brina, 2018 or Finn et al.,
2017). For prototypical networks, we re-ran the models using the
code released by the authors to obtain results for more value s
of N classes. Slightly diﬀerent results are normal, since we did
not do the ﬁnal retraining step , where the model is retrained
in the full meta-training set (including the portion separate d for
meta-validation).
Overall, we can observe that learning the CNN weights
through this meta-training approach yields better performanc es
in comparison to using ﬁxed features, as expected. Considerin g
that no hyperparameter tuning was done, we still obtain good
results, a little lower than the state-of-the-art, even tho ugh they
degrade faster as the number of classes goes up. Some discussio n
on this result is presented in the next section. Between combi ned
and direct model, we also observe that the former performs better
at a higher number of classes N = 20, 30, while the second is
better for N = 5, 10.
5. DISCUSSION
5.1. Performances and Use of the
Algorithm
We have proposed a simple three-step model, applied to
classiﬁcation tasks on visual data under very small (few-sh ot
on Omniglot) to not-so-big datasets (subsets from MNIST or
CIFAR10). Let us now discuss the main questions presented in
the course of this work in the light of our experimental result s.
- Is the setup able to properly learn such a task in an
interpretable way? Our models were capable of performing the
classiﬁcation tasks, both under ﬁxed features and under the
meta-learning paradigm, while proﬁting from the explainabilit y
support that can be provided by our rather simple architecture.
Our “data prototypes” that can be used to provide a visual
explanation of the model’s internal representations, by
indicating ambiguous classiﬁcation regions for example.
Some mathematical discussions on how the prototypes
induce a partition of the feature space are presented in
Appendices A5, A6. This explanatory power is however limited
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 15 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
FIGURE 9 | Performances on the k-means algorithm as a function of the nu mber of prototypes, for training subsets with 500 samples fr om MNIST and CIFAR10
datasets.
FIGURE 10 | Mean accuracies over standard test sets for MNIST and CIFAR10 d atasets, for increasing training set sizes. Results are ave raged over 10 different
training subsets. Our models are marked with a ∗.
when using the combined model, since raw features are also
considered in prediction. Prioritizing interpretability by using
only the direct model yields reduced performances under ﬁxed
features, indicating a trade-oﬀ between interpretability a nd
classiﬁcation accuracy in this case.
Altogether, this is no more than a variant of the notions
of prototypes used in the ﬁeld, but with the objective to
both represent the data in an unsupervised way and the
supervised information. The name “data prototype” is chosen
particularly because they may be considered as virtual samples
that summarize what has been learned during the learning
phase, acting as a local descriptor in the feature space. Being
virtual samples, they could be fed to feature visualization
techniques to provide a graphic explanation (here exempliﬁed
by taking the closest training samples as a visualization
proxy).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 16 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
TABLE 2 | Average test accuracy (%) for 5-shot learning on Omniglot ov er 1,000 episodes.
Method 5 classes 10 classes 20 classes 30 classes
Matching networks 98.9 – 98.5 –
Matching networks– ﬁne tuning 98.7 – 98.7 –
Prototypical networks 99.7 – 98.9 –
Prototypical networks (re-run) 99.54 ± 0.07 99.17 ± 0.06 98.57 ± 0.06 98.01 ± 0.06
Direct - 2N prototypes 98.4 ± 0.2 97.2 ± 0.2 94.8 ± 0.3 92.6 ± 0.4
Combined - 2N prototypes 97.1 ± 0.2 96.3 ± 0.2 96.2 ± 0.1 95.9 ± 0.1
We compare to results reported by two other works: Matching networks ( Vinyals et al., 2016 ) and Prototypical networks ( Snell et al., 2017 ).
Another non negligible aspect is the fact that our proposed
architecture, schematized in Figure 1 is “easy to explain” to non-
specialists : (i) features are extracted (by the deeper layers), (ii) the
data is organized in regions (parameterized by prototypes), an d
(iii) the classiﬁcation is performed combining all informat ion.
Our will to provide an interpretable and understandable proces s
is not only a wish but corresponds to real interaction with lar ge
public targets, including providing didactic resources on th ese
subjects, as reported in Drumond et al. (2017a) or available in
Chraibi Kaadoud and Viéville (2016).
- To which extents does the prototype dimensional reduction
impairs the global performances? Under ﬁxed features, indeed
we have a strong dimensionality reduction which impairs the
performance of our direct model, which justiﬁes the use of a
combination of features and prototype information in our main
model. This way it is possible to both beneﬁt from the prototype
layer and obtain optimized performances as good as or better
than a standard method.
In meta-learning paradigm, we also learn the features by
learning the weights of a CNN that feeds our model. In this
case, since the features are learned together with our protot ype
model, the class representations should become more adapted t o
a prototype-based discrimination, resulting in higher accur acies
than under ﬁxed features even for the direct model. Moreover,
the dimensionality reduction was not as strong because we us e a
64 dimension embedding and 2 N prototypes.
Combining these two options allows the user to both obtain
state of art performances and interpretable results. With res pect
to other comparable existing methods, we have obtained simil ar
performances, except when considering meta-learning with a
large number of classes. This is explained by the fact that we h ave
not optimized hyper-parameters in this case, which had already
been done in the ﬁxed-features paradigm.
We can also hypothesize that our algorithm, since based on
a reduced set of prototypes that acts as support-vectors of the
classiﬁcation (see
Viéville and Crahay, 2004, for a development
of the link between support-vectors and prototypes), may have
good generalization properties, e.g., may limit overﬁtting w hich
is to be expected in a not-so-big data setup. This is indeed the
case for the direct model. For the combined model, as detailed in
Appendix A7, we may interpret the softmax layer as piece-wise
linear classiﬁer considering O(L2) prototypes. As a perspective
of this work, going in depth in this interpretation may be an
interesting issue.
- Is the hyperparameter adjustment automatic at the end-user
level? The main hyperparameters we introduce are the number
of prototypes and a typical regularization strength, this last one
being not too critic (specially for the combined model). Even
if the number of prototypes is a non-negligible choice in terms
of data representation, with the combined model we eliminate
sensitivity to this hyper parameter in terms of performance.
However, in terms of interpretability, this leads to choosing a
small number of prototypes that might no represent so well
classes in the feature space. Conversely, with the direct mod el,
we are led to choose an always large number of prototypes
at the risk of overﬁtting, because at the limit (one prototype
by learning sample) the method reduces to a nearest-neighbor
classiﬁer, known to be of poor generalization performances. Here,
we ﬁx this issue by proposing to choose the number of prototypes
in the clustering phase based directly on its unsupervised loss ,
optimizing it for data representation. We have experimentally
veriﬁed the feasibility of this method for the diﬀerent data s ets.
Comparing to other methods, this seems to be the main new
qualitative result to point out.
5.2. Perspectives and Future Work
Beyond these outcomes, general or application dependent
extensions of the method can be pointed out.
+ Consider incremental learning, where learning can continue
when given new samples, by updating the prototypes and the
related category prediction. This can be achieved for instan ce
through incremental k-means, which is a standard process (see ,
e.g.,
Aaron et al., 2014). Applying cross-entropy minimization in
an incremental manner is also straightforward, iteratively a dding
loss terms for newly arrived samples.
+ Consider prototype editing , where (i) redundant prototypes
within the same connected component can be deleted, while
(ii) learning samples detected as exceptions and generating
a classiﬁcation error can be taken into account via a
new prototype. Additionally, and adaptive mechanism for
determining the number of prototypes could better explain the
data representation, improving interpretability of the featu re
space, while eliminating one sensitive hyperparameter of the
model. In domain-speciﬁc applications where classes might be
composed of many diﬀerent subclasses, a sensible number of
prototypes could better identify these subclasses and provide
means of representing the diﬀerent subgroups.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 17 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
+ Interacting with the deep-learning lower layers , since the
knowledge of the prototypes may help disentangling the lower-
layer feature extraction. A class disentanglement is a like ly
cause behind the improved performances in the meta-learning
setting (when compared to using ﬁxed features), since all
layers are trained end-to-end. In a transfer learning setti ng,
we could proceed to the ﬁne-tuning of the upper layers
of the pre-trained CNN to try to achieve a similar result.
Moreover, disentanglement could be enforced implicitly via l ow
dimensional manifold regularization (
Zhu et al., 2018 ), or using
generative latent factor models ( Hoogeboom, 2017 ). Another
form of interaction could be the introduction of shortcuts f rom
lower layers to the feature layer in order to increase the prototype
components, analogous to other architectures incorporating
some form of forward shortcut (
He et al., 2016; Shelhamer et al.,
2016; Huang et al., 2017 ).
+ Integrate knowledge from unlabeled examples is also a
possibility. These examples can represented in the same featur e
space as other labeled samples and prototypes, using same
embedding CNN to extract this representation. These examples
then can be taken into account when computing the prototype
coordinates, analogously to what has been demonstrated by
Ren
et al. (2017). Particularly when trying to solve ambiguous regions
where the system makes mistakes, a related track is to develo p
some active learning heuristics and infer which new examples
could be of most help if labeled.
6. CONCLUSION
We analyzed how considering data prototypes at a diﬀerent level
with respect to the state of the art allows to both reasonably
work with small data sets, and with an interpretable view of
the obtained results. The proposed architecture is minimal an d
combine both the performances of a standard method and the
capability to observe the feature space representation.
At the methodological level, we also pay attention at
exploring in details the performances and limitations of the
proposed set-up, in an analogous way as biological experiments
are conducted, considering in details all hyperparameters
involved in the process. This is somehow diﬀerent from
simply “winning the game” with respect to some deep learning
benchmarks.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TD is the main author at the origin of the data prototype
idea and has designed, developed and performed the
numerical experiments and their analysis. FA, TV , and TD
wrote sections of the manuscript. All authors contributed
to manuscript revision, read and approved the submitted
version.
FUNDING
Work partially developed under project FUI Sumatra (PIA and
Nouvelle Aquitaine Region fund).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fncom.
2018.00100/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Aaron, B., Tamir, D. E., Rishe N. D., and Kandel, A. (2014). “Dyna mic
incremental K-means clustering, ” in 2014 International Conference on
Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (Las Vegas, NV), 308-
313. doi: 10.1109/CSCI.2014.60
Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.-R ., and
Samek, W. (2015). On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classi ﬁer
decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PLoS ONE 10:e0130140.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130140n
Banerjee, A., Merugu, S., Dhillon, I. S., and Ghosh, J. (2005). C lustering with
bregman divergences. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6, 1705–1749. Available online at:
http://www.jmlr.org/papers/v6/banerjee05b.html
Bellet, A., Habrard, A., and Sebban, M. (2013). A Survey on Metric Learning for
Feature Vectors and Structured Data. Research Report. Laboratoire Hubert
Curien UMR 5516.
Bengio, Y., and LeCun, Y. (2007). “Scaling learning algorithms tow ards AI, ” in
Large Scale Kernel Machines , eds L. Bottou, O. Chapelle, D. DeCoste, and J.
Weston (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 321–360.
Bengio, Y., Lee, D.-H., Bornschein, J., and Lin, Z. (2016). Tow ards biologically
plausible deep learning. arXiv[Preprint]: 1502.04156.
Bullier, J. (2001). Integrated model of visual processing. Brain Res. Rev. 36, 96–107.
doi: 10.1016/S0165-0173(01)00085-6
Chraibi Kaadoud, I., and Viéville, T. (2016). L ’apprentissage profond : une idée à
creuser ? Interstices.
Cooper, L. N., Intrator, N., Blais, B. S., and Shouval, H. Z. (2004). Theory of Cortical
Plasticity. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing. doi: 10.1142/5462
Cortes, N. (2012). The Role of the Pulvinar in the Transmission of Information in
the Visual Hierarchy. Ph.D. thesis, UMPC.
Demšar, J. (2006). Statistical comparisons of classiﬁers over mult iple data sets. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 7, 1–30. Available online at: http://www.jmlr.org/papers/v7/
demsar06a.html
Dong, X., Zheng, L., Ma, F., Y ang, Y., and Meng, D. (2017). “Few -
example object detection with model communication, ” in IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.
2844853
Doshi-Velez, F., and Kim, B. (2017). Towards a rigorous science of interpretable
machine learning. arXiv[Preprint]: 1702.08608.
Drumond, T., Viennot, L., Viéville, T., and François, V. (2017a). Jouez avec les
Neurones de la Machine. Blogs Le Monde - Binaire, 1–3.
Drumond, T. F., Viéville, T., and Alexandre, F. (2017b). “Using proto types
to improve convolutional networks interpretability, ” in Neural Information
Processing Systems: Transparent and Interpretable Machine Learning in Safety
Critical Environments Workshop (Long Beach, CA).
Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R. A., Ko, J., Swetter, S. M., Blau, H. M., et al. (2017).
Dermatologist-level classiﬁcation of skin cancer with deep neura l networks.
Nature 542, 115–118. doi: 10.1038/nature21056
Fabre-Thorpe, M., Richard, G., and Thorpe, S. (1998). Rapid
categorization of natural images by rhesus monkeys. Neuroreport 9,
303–308.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. (2017). “Model-agnostic me ta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks, ” in Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Machine Learning (Sydney, NSW),
1126–1135.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 18 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
Fort, S. (2017). Gaussian prototypical networks for few-shot learn ing on omniglot.
arXiv[Preprint]: 1708.02735.
Frosst, N., and Hinton, G. (2017). “Distilling a neural network int o a soft decision
tree, ” inComprehensibility and Explanation in AI and ML (CEx Worksho p) at
AI*IA 2017 (Bari).
Garcia, V., and Brina, J. (2018). “Few-shot learning with graph neural networks, ” in
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICL R) (V ancouver, BC),
1–13.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016a). “Autoenc oders, ” in Deep
Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 493–516.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016b). “Convolutional networks, ” in
Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 321–362.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016c). “Deep feedforward networks, ”
in Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 163–220.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016d). “Represent ation learning, ” in
Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 517–548.
Graves, A., Wayne, G., and Danihelka, I. (2014). Neural turing mac hines.
arXiv[Preprint]: 1410.5401.
Håstad, J., and Goldmann, M. (1991). On the power of small-depth thresh old
circuits. Comput. Complex. 1, 113–129.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). “Deep residual learn ing for image
recognition, ” inIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) (Las Vegas, NV), 770–778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
Hecht, T., and Gepperth, A. (2016). Computational advantages of de ep prototype-
based learning. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lec ture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfo rmatics), 9887
LNCS:121–127.
Hoogeboom, E. (2017). Few-Shot Classiﬁcation by Learning Disentangled
Representations. Msc, University of Amsterdam.
Huang, G., Liu, Z., Weinberger, K. Q., and van der Maaten, L. (2 017).
“Densely connected convolutional networks, ” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (Honolulu, HI), 4700–4708.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.243
Jetley, A., Romera-Paredes, B., Jayasumana, S., and Tor, P. (2015 ). “Prototypical
priors: from improving classiﬁcation to zero-shot learning, ” in Proceedings of
the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), eds X. Xie, M. W. Jones, and G.
K. L. Tam (Swansea: BMV A Press), 120.1–120.12.
Kim, B., Khanna, R., and Koyejo, O. (2016). “Examples are not enoug h, learn
to criticize! criticism for interpretability, ” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29 (Barcelona), 2280–2288. Available online at: http://
papers.nips.cc/paper/6300-examples-are-not-enough-learn-to-criti cize-
criticism-for-interpretability.pdf
Koch, G., Zemel, R., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2015). “Siamese neura l networks for
one-shot image recognition, ” inICML Deep Learning Workshop (Lille).
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). “Image net classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks, ” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, eds F. P. Weinberger, C. J. C. Burges, and L. Bottou (Lake
Tahoe, NV: Curran Associates, Inc.), 1097–1105.
Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R. R., Gross, J., and Tenenbaum, J. B . (2011). “One
shot learning of simple visual concepts, ” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2011) (Boston, MA; Red
Hook, NY: Curran Associates, Inc.),2568–2573.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444.
doi: 10.1038/nature14539
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haﬀner, P. (1998). Grad ient-
based learning applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE 86, 227
8–2324.
Leroy, A. (1967). L ’apprentissage de la lecture chez les jeunes enfan ts:
acquisition des lettres de l’alphabet et maturité mentale. Enfance
20, 27–55.
Lipton, Z. C. (2016). “The mythos of model interpretability, ” in ICML Workshop
on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning (New York, NY: WHO).
Lundberg, S., and Lee, S.-I. (2017). “A uniﬁed approach to interpre ting model
predictions, ” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 , eds I.
Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwan athan, and
R. Garnett (Long Beach, CA: Curran Associates, Inc.), 4765–477 4.
Lyu, S., and Simoncelli, E. P. (2009). Nonlinear extraction of ind ependent
components of natural images using radial gaussianization. Neural Comput. 21,
1485–1519. doi: 10.1162/neco.2009.04-08-773
Maaten, L. V. D., and Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 620, 267–284. Available online at: http://www.jmlr.org/papers/v9/
vandermaaten08a.html
Marcus, G. (2018). Deep learning: a critical appraisal. arXiv[Preprint]: 1801.00631,
1–27.
McHaﬃe, J. G., Stanford, T. R., Stein, B. E., Coizet, V., and Re dgrave, P. (2005).
Subcortical loops through the basal ganglia. Trends Neurosci. 28, 401–407.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2005.06.006
Medathati, N. V. K., Neumann, H., Masson, G. S., and Kornprobst, P.
(2016). Bio-inspired computer vision: towards a synergistic approa ch of
artiﬁcial and biological vision. Comput. Vis. Image Understand. 150, 1–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.cviu.2016.04.009
Mensch, A., Mairal, J., Bzdok, D., Thirion, B., and V aroquaux, G.(2017). “Learning
neural representations of human cognition across many fMRI studies , ” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett(Long Beach,
CA: Curran Associates, Inc.), 5883–5893.
Mensink, T., Verbeek, J., Perronnin, F., and Csurka, G. (2013). Distance-based
image classiﬁcation: generalizing to new classes at near-zero cos t. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35, 2624–2637. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.83
Milner, D., and Goodale, M. (1995). The Visual Brain in Action, 2nd Edn. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mouret, J.-B. (2016). Micro-data learning: the other end of the s pectrum. ERCIM
News, ERCIM, 18–19.
Olah, C., Mordvintsev, A., and Schubert, L. (2017). Feature visu alization. Distill.
2:e7. doi: 10.23915/distill.0000
Rahman, S., Khan, S. H., and Porikli, F. (2017). A uniﬁed approach for
conventional zero-shot, generalized zero-shot and few-shot lea rning. IEEE
Trans. Image Process. 27, 5652–5667. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2018.2861573
Ravi, S., and Larochelle, H. (2017). “Optimization as a model for few -shot
learning, ” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICR L)
(Toulon), 1–11.
Ren, M., Triantaﬁllou, E., Ravi, S., Snell, J., Swersky, K., Tenen baum, J. B., et al.
(2017). “Meta-learning for semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁca tion, ” in NIPS
Workshop on Learning With Limited Labeled Data (Long Beach, CA).
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., and Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why should I trust you?:
explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer, ” in 22nd ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (San Francisco, CA).
Rippel, O., Paluri, M., Dollar, P., and Bourdev, L. (2016). “Metric learn ing with
adaptive density discrimination, ” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) (San Juan).
Rubinstein, R., Bruckstein, A. M., and Elad, M. (2010). Dictio naries
for sparse representation modeling. Proc. IEEE 98, 1045–1057.
doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2010.204055
Saalmann, Y. B., Pinsk, M. A., Wang, L., Li, X., and Kastner, S. (2 012).
The pulvinar regulates information transmission between cortical are as
based on attention demands. Science 337, 753–756. doi: 10.1126/science.12
23082
Santoro, A., Bartunov, S., Botvinick, M., Wierstra, D., and Lillicrap, T. (2016). One-
shot learning with memory-augmented neural networks. arXiv[Preprint]: 160
5.06065.
Serre, T., Wolf, L., Bileschi, S., Riesenhuber, M., and Poggio, T . (2007).
Robust object recognition with cortex-like mechanisms. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Analys. Mach. Intell. 29, 411–426. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.56
Shalev-Shwartz, S., and Ben-David, S. (2014). Understanding Machine Learning:
From Theory to Algorithms. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Shelhamer, E., Long, J., and Darrell, T. (2016). Fully convolutional n etworks for
semantic segmentation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 39, 640–651.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2572683
Shin, H.-C., Roth, H. R., Gao, M., Lu, L., Xu, Z., Nogues, I., et al. (2016).
Deep convolutional neural networks for computer-aided detectio n: CNN
architectures, dataset characteristics and transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Med.
Imaging 35, 1285–1298. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2016.2528162
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100


--- Page 19 ---
Drumond et al. Data Prototypes and Small Data
Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., and Kundaje, A. (2017). “Learning important
features through propagating activation diﬀerences, ” in Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning (Sydney, NSW), 3145–3153.
Snell, J., Swersky, K., and Zemel, R. S. (2017). “Prototypical netw orks for few-
shot learning, ” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, eds
I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishw anathan,
and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc.: Long Beach, CA), 4077– 4087.
Song, H. O., Jegelka, S., Rathod, V., and Murphy, K. (2017). “Deep metric learning
via facility location, ” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) (Honolulu, HI), 5382–5390. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.237
Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., and Y an, Q. (2017). “Axiomatic attrib ution for deep
networks, ” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR (Sydney, NSW), 3319–3328.
Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., et al.
(2015). “Going deeper with convolutions, ” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (Boston, MA), 1–9.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594
Triantaﬁllou, E., Zemel, R., and Urtasun, R. (2017). “Few-shot learni ng through
an information retrieval lens, ” in Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS 2017) (Long Beach, CA).
Viéville, T., and Crahay, S. (2004). Using an hebbian learning rule
for multi-class SVM classiﬁers. J. Comput. Neurosci. 17, 271–287.
doi: 10.1023/B:JCNS.0000044873.20850.9c
Viéville, T., Hinaut, X., Drumond, T. F., and Alexandre, F. (2017).Recurrent Neural
Network Weight Estimation Through Backward Tuning. Research Report
RR-9100, INRIA.
Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Wierst ra, D. (2016).
Matching networks for one shot learning. arXiv[Preprint]: 1606.04080.
Weiss, K., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., and Wang, D. (2016). A surveyof transfer learning.
J. Big Data 3:9. doi: 10.1186/s40537-016-0043-6
Zeiler, M. D., and Fergus, R. (2014). “Visualizing and understanding convolutional
networks, ” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, eds D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B.
Schiele, T. Tuytelaars. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham: S pringer),
818–833.
Zhao, Y., and Park, I. M. (2016). “Interpretable nonlinear dynamic mo deling
of neural trajectories, ” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 29 , eds D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V Luxburg, I. Guyon,
and R. Garnett (Barcelona: Curran Associates, Inc.), 3333–3341 . Available
online at: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6543-interpretable-nonlinea r-dynamic-
modeling-of-neural-trajectories.pdf
Zhu, W., Qiu, Q., Huang, J., Calderbank, R., Sapiro, G., and Daube chies,
I. (2018). “LDMNet: Low dimensional manifold regularized neural
networks, ” in IPAM Workshop on New Deep Learning Techniques
(Los Angeles, CA).
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Drumond, Viéville and Alexandre. This is an open -access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited a nd that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 19 January 2019 | Volume 12 | Article 100
