--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 05 March 2018
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00012
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12
Edited by:
Taro Toyoizumi,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute (BSI),
Japan
Reviewed by:
Joel Zylberberg,
University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, United States
Joshua David Downer,
University of California, San Francisco,
United States
*Correspondence:
Maoz Shamir
shmaoz@bgu.ac.il
Received: 19 November 2017
Accepted: 19 February 2018
Published: 05 March 2018
Citation:
Mendels OP and Shamir M (2018)
Relating the Structure of Noise
Correlations in Macaque Primary
Visual Cortex to Decoder
Performance.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12:12.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00012
Relating the Structure of Noise
Correlations in Macaque Primary
Visual Cortex to Decoder
Performance
Or P . Mendels1,2 and Maoz Shamir 2,3,4*
1 Department of Cognitive Sciences, Ben-Gurion University o f the Negev, Beersheba, Israel, 2 Zlotowski Center for
Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beershe ba, Israel, 3 Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beers heba, Israel, 4 Department of Physics, Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Is rael
Noise correlations in neuronal responses can have a strong i nﬂuence on the information
available in large populations. In addition, the structure of noise correlations may have
a great impact on the utility of different algorithms to extr act this information that
may depend on the speciﬁc algorithm, and hence may affect our understanding of
population codes in the brain. Thus, a better understanding of the structure of noise
correlations and their interplay with different readout al gorithms is required. Here we
use eigendecomposition to investigate the structure of noi se correlations in populations
of about 50–100 simultaneously recorded neurons in the prim ary visual cortex of
anesthetized monkeys, and we relate this structure to the pe rformance of two common
decoders: the population vector and the optimal linear esti mator. Our analysis reveals
a non-trivial correlation structure, in which the eigenval ue spectrum is composed of
several distinct large eigenvalues that represent differe nt shared modes of ﬂuctuation
extending over most of the population, and a semi-continuous tail. The largest eigenvalue
represents a uniform collective mode of ﬂuctuation. The sec ond and third eigenvalues
typically show either a clear functional (i.e., dependent o n the preferred orientation of the
neurons) or spatial structure (i.e., dependent on the physi cal position of the neurons).
We ﬁnd that the number of shared modes increases with the popu lation size, being
roughly 10% of that size. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the noise i n each of these collective
modes grows linearly with the population. This linear growt h of correlated noise power
can have limiting effects on the utility of averaging neuron al responses across large
populations, depending on the readout. Speciﬁcally, the co llective modes of ﬂuctuation
limit the accuracy of the population vector but not of the opt imal linear estimator.
Keywords: population coding, population vector, optimal li near estimator, eigendecomposition, collective modes
of ﬂuctuation
INTRODUCTION
The information provided by a neuronal population depends on the r elationship among several
quantities: the signal provided by the population (i.e., how the mean response of each neuron varies
with stimulus parameters—the tuning); the variability of th e neuronal population, particularly the
structure of variability that is shared between neurons (of ten termed “noise” correlations); and the


--- Page 2 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
manner in which the information is extracted (the decoder an d
its weights) ( Georgopoulos et al., 1982; Salinas and Abbott,
1994; Abbott and Dayan, 1999; Deneve et al., 1999; Sompolinsky
et al., 2001; Averbeck et al., 2006; Shamir, 2006; Shamir and
Sompolinsky, 2006; Ecker et al., 2011; Graf et al., 2011
).
Numerous studies have described the structure of shared
ﬂuctuations in neuronal populations, reporting that noise
correlations (hereafter referred to as simply “correlation s”)
depend on the physical and functional distance between neuron s
(
Smith and Kohn, 2008; Rothschild et al., 2010; Cohen and Kohn,
2011; Smith and Sommer, 2013) as well as other features that may
lead to shared variability ( Cui et al., 2016 ). More recent work
has emphasized that correlations arise from a low-dimension al
form of dependency—in the simplest scenario, correlations ma y
arise from a single ﬂuctuation shared throughout the populatio n
(Ecker et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015; Schölvinck et al., 2015 , but see
Rabinowitz et al., 2015; Rosenbaum et al., 2017 ).
Previous work that has investigated the eﬀect of correlated
variability on information has usually compared informatio n in
raw and shuﬄed (randomly permuting across trials to strongly
reduce correlations) data (
Gawne and Richmond, 1993; Panzeri
et al., 1999; Petersen et al., 2002; Romo et al., 2003; Averbec k
and Lee, 2006; Graf et al., 2011 ). This provides a quantitative
evaluation of how shared variability aﬀects information. However
it does not provide much insight into the outcome—how much of
the eﬀect should be attributed to the distribution of noise? H ow
much to the distribution of the signal? How much depends on the
choice of readout algorithm? The importance of the relations hip
between these three factors is made clear by recent progress
in understanding which correlations limit information in l arge
neuronal populations (
Moreno-Bote et al., 2014; Kanitscheider
et al., 2015; Kohn et al., 2016 )—those termed diﬀerential
correlations. Diﬀerential correlations limit the performan ce of
any linear estimator (but not that of estimators that can ext ract
information from the higher order statistics of the neurona l
responses Shamir and Sompolinsky, 2002, 2004 ) because they
introduce ﬂuctuations in the same direction as the signal th at is
being extracted.
Here we apply new methods—developed in previous
theoretical work ( Shamir, 2014 ) but not previously applied to
physiological data—to analyse the structure of correlation s in
populations of V1 neurons. All data analyzed here is courtesy
of the laboratory of Adam Kohn. Speciﬁcally, we conduct an
eigendecomposition of the correlation matrix. Consistent w ith
previous work, we ﬁnd that much of the observed correlated
variability involves a uniform mode ﬂuctuation mode, altho ugh
there is additional signiﬁcant structure as well. We use the
eigendecomposition to clarify how two common decoders—
population vector and optimal linear estimator (OLE)—are
aﬀected by structured variability. Both the population vector
and the OLE are linear readout mechanisms. The population
vector (
Georgopoulos et al., 1982 ), does not take neuronal
noise correlations into account and modeling studies predict ed
that its accuracy will be limited due to the correlated noise
(
Sompolinsky et al., 2001 ). By construction, the accuracy of the
OLE is superior to that of the population vector, but the OLE
requires some degree of ﬁne-tuning (
Shamir and Sompolinsky,
2006). This has led people who believe in optimality principle
of computation in the brain to reject the population vector as a
valid hypothesis for the neural code. However, the question o f
the neural code is a scientiﬁc question that should be addres sed
experimentally and not based upon belief. For instance, the
reduction of correlations during attention (
Cohen and Maunsell,
2009) is not easy to reconcile with the expected performance
of the OLE. Here, we show how the diﬀerences between the
performance of these decoders on raw and shuﬄed data can be
understood by examining the relationship between the decod er
weights and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All measures of variability are ± 1 std, unless otherwise noted.
Experimental Procedures
All data analyzed here is courtesy of the laboratory of Adam
Kohn. Experimental procedures have already been reported
in the past and described in detail (
Smith and Kohn, 2008 ).
Brieﬂy, neural activity was recorded using the “Utah” Array
from the primary visual cortex of anesthetized monkeys (maca ca
fascicularis) while the monkeys were presented with visual
stimuli. The array consists of a 10 × 10 grid of microelectrodes
spaced 400 µm apart.
The visual stimuli were oriented drifting gratings presente d
in a circular aperture surrounded by a gray ﬁeld of average
luminance (8 orientations in 5 datasets and 36 orientations in
3 datasets). Stimuli were presented binocularly, for 300–40 0 ms,
and separated by 500–800 ms intervals during which we
presented an isoluminant gray screen. Each stimulus was
presented 200–400 times. For each experiment (data set) stimulus
presentation times, inter-stimulus duration and the number of
trials per stimulus were ﬁxed.
Analysis
Let us denote the spike count of the i-th neuron in a population
of N neurons to the t-th presentation of a grating stimulus with
orientation θ during the entire duration of stimulus presentation,
by
{
ri,t
}N
i = 1.
Rate Tuning
For the calculation of the tuning curves, E[ri|θ ], the ﬁring rate
in each trial was calculated using a time window from stimulus
onset to stimulus oﬀset. The tuning curves were then ﬁtted
using the Von-Mises function: Aieki cos[2(θ − ϕi)], where θ is the
stimulus orientation and ϕi is the preferred orientation of the
cell. As we are interested in the functional dependence of the
correlations, i.e., in the dependence on the preferred orient ation,
and in comparing the population vector to the OLE, we discarded
from the analysis cells that did not show a good ﬁt. This is
because the preferred orientation of a cell with poor tuning is
meaningless. The goodness of ﬁt was deﬁned as one minus the
mean square of the deviation of the tuning curve (i.e., mean
ﬁring rate for a given stimulus) from the Von-Mises ﬁt over the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 3 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
variance of the tuning curve, Goodness = 1 −
∑
θ
(E[ri|θ ]− fi(θ ))2
∑
θ
(E[ri|θ ]− E[ri])2 ,
and a threshold of 0.5 was used except for Figure 3 where the
spatial and not the functional structure was of interest. In a ll,
there were 675 units out of which 457 met our goodness of ﬁt
criterion. The exact value of threshold of 0.5 for the goodne ss
of ﬁt did not change qualitatively our results. This should n ot
be taken to imply that cells with poor tuning cannot contribute
to the information content of the population response, see e.g. ,
Zylberberg (in review).
Correlations
The trial-to-trial ﬂuctuations of the neural response from i ts
conditional mean, given the stimulus, δri,t = ri,t − E[ri|θ ] yield
the noise that limits the accuracy of a linear readout. Due to this
reason the correlation coeﬃcients that are presented here ar e the
correlation coeﬃcients of these deviations from the mean ﬁr ing.
For shuﬄed data the distribution of correlation
coeﬃcients was well ﬁtted (not shown) by Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and variance of
1/
√
trials per stimulus × number of stimuli. Shuﬄing was
done by randomly permuting all trials for each neuron given a
speciﬁc stimulus.
The analysis of the correlation matrix structure (e.g.,
Figures 1–4) was done using correlation matrices that were
averaged over all stimulus conditions (i.e., grating orien tation).
Consequently, the results we have shown are for “stimulus
independent” correlations. We conﬁrmed that the correlatio n
structure was similar for each grating orientation separate ly
as well as for spontaneous activity measured during the
interstimulus interval, consistent with previous ﬁndings (
Kohn
and Smith, 2005).
One dataset (dataset 2, shown in Figures 2E–H, 3, top row,
Figure 4) showed some measure of non-stationarity around
the start and the end of the experiment. To prevent the non-
stationarity from aﬀecting our results we excluded the ﬁrst 5 9
and last 6 trials from our analysis. Interestingly, restric ting trials
did not change any qualitative result. Moreover, the structu re of
the principle eigenvectors remained extremely stable (even w hen
including non-stationary trials) and the main quantitativ e eﬀect
was in the eigenvalues themselves.
Signiﬁcance of Eigenvalues
In the limit of large (number of trials /neuron) the eigenvalues in
the shuﬄed data will have a ﬁnite support (given by Marchenko-
Pastur distribution), and there will be zero probability of ﬁ nding
eigenvalues beyond that speciﬁc interval around one. As the
number of trials in our dataset is considerable, the overwhe lming
majority of eigenvalues of the shuﬄed data fall within the bounds
of the Marchenko-Pastur distribution, and those that fall b eyond
are extremely close. To reﬂect the nature of the eigenvalue
distribution (of the shuﬄed data) we deﬁned an eigenvalue to be
signiﬁcant if it was larger than the maximal eigenvalue in 1, 000
realizations of shuﬄed data.
Population Vector and Optimal Linear Readout
In all of our calculations of the population vector and optimal
linear estimator accuracy we have used half of the trials (ch osen
FIGURE 1 | Noise correlations and eigenvalue spectrum. (A) The histogram of
correlation coefﬁcients of the response ﬂuctuations of pairs of 77
simultaneously recorded orientation tuned neurons (blue h istogram). The black
line shows a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and standa rd deviation of
1/√ trials per stimulus × number of stimuli that very well approximates the
distribution of correlation coefﬁcients in shufﬂed data. (B) The functional
dependence of the correlations. The pair-wise correlation coefﬁcients are
plotted as a function of the preferred orientation differen ce of each pair. The
green line depicts a linear ﬁt of the functional dependence wi th a slope of
− 4e-4 deg− 1 with standard error of 5e-5 deg − 1. (C) The correlation matrix
shown in color code as function of the neuron’ s preferred ori entation. (D) The
eigenvalues of the correlation matrix are shown by rank orde r (blue circles). For
comparison, the eigenvalues of a typical correlation matri x of shufﬂed data are
also shown (red circles). The gray region depicts the range b etween the
maximal eigenvalue obtained over 1,000 realizations of shu fﬂed data and the
minimal one. In the limit of inﬁnite number of trials all eigenv alues of shufﬂed
data will be one (black dotted line). The inset shows the numb er of signiﬁcant
eigenvalues in the different datasets as function of the num ber of tuned units in
each dataset. The red asterisk shows the point of zero signiﬁc ant eigenvalues
for population of N = 1 neurons. The solid blue line shows a linear regression
ﬁt through (1,0) with a slope of 10%, p < 0.001 t-test (n = 6).
randomly with equal probability without repetitions for each
stimulus condition) as training set to deﬁne the preferred
orientations of the neurons and the optimal linear readout
weights. The accuracy was then estimated using the rest of the
trials as generalization set. For every value of population siz e, n
(out of N in the dataset) readout accuracy ( Figures 5I, 6E, 7E)
was averaged over 100 repetitions of randomly choosing the
training set and of choosing the subpopulation of n neurons out
of N (when applies). Note that the mean squared error of each
readout includes both a bias term and noise term (variance).
However, as the bias can be overcome by a simple deterministic
mapping and decays to zero rapidly with the population size, we
focused here on the noise term.
In Figures 5-7 we present the (squared) projection of the
readout weight vector on diﬀerent directions. The projection o f
a normalized vector x on a normalized eigenvector v is simply
x·v
∥x∥∥v∥ (which also deﬁnes the cosine of the angle between the two
vectors). The noise of a linear readout ˆz = w · r as displayed in
Figures 5–7D is given by wtCw, where C is the correlation matrix
and xt denotes the transpose of x. The weights of the OLE can
be written in a signal to noise like expression, wole = Q− 1U,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 4 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 2 | Functional and spatial structure of the collective modes of ﬂuctuation. (A–D) Present functional structure of modes in one dataset. (E–H) Show the spatial
structure of modes in another dataset. The eigenvectors cor responding to the ﬁrst (A), second (B), third (C) eigenvalues and shufﬂed data (D) are shown in the
functional space representation, i.e., element k of the vec tor is shown as function of the preferred orientation of neur on k. The green line in (A) depicts the mean of the
eigenvector. The green line in (C) shows a cosine ﬁt. The squared projection of the ﬁrst eigenvect or onto the uniform direction is ( v(1) · u)2 = 0.56, whereas, for
comparison the projection of a random direction is expected to be zero on average with variance of 1/ N = 1/36 = 0.028 in this example. (E–H) Show the ﬁrst,
second, third eigenvectors of raw data, and the principle ei genvector of shufﬂed data (respectively) in their spatial re presentation. The matrices represent the location
of the electrode (ten by ten Utah array) and the color depicts the value of the eigenvector at that entry. In case several neu rons were separated from the same
electrode we present their mean.
where the “noise” is embedded in the neuronal correlations,
Qij = E
[
rirj
]
. The signal for the optimal linear estimator is
given by the co-variation of the signal and the neuronal responses
ui = E[E[ri|θ ]ei2θ ], where ei2θ is a unit vector (in the complex
plane) in the direction of the stimulus, θ (the factor 2 is due to the
fact that orientation has a 180 ◦ symmetry and not 360 ◦). Signal
distribution in Figures 6B, 7B shows the (squared) projection of
the signal onto the (rank ordered) eigenvalues of the correl ation
matrix.
RESUL TS
We analyzed 8 data sets recorded in V1 of 6 anesthetized
monkeys. The neuronal populations consisted of 23–129 putative
single units that we shall refer to as units or single units hereafter.
Neurons were driven by drifting sinusoidal gratings of 8–36
diﬀerent orientations. One data set used random phases for the
stimulus. Consequently, all of its evoked data were exclude d and
we only present its inter-stimulus data in Figure 3. As we were
interested in part in investigating the correlation structu re with
respect to the preferred orientation space we excluded (except for
Figure 3) units that did not show a clear preferred orientation,
resulting in 7 data sets of 16–77 (51 ± 22) units.
Neuronal Noise Correlations Are Highly
Diverse
Consistent with many previous studies, trial-to-trial vari ability
was correlated between neurons (
Cohen and Kohn, 2011 ). For
the dataset illustrated in Figure 1 the mean correlation was 0.07
with standard deviation of 0.07 (standard error of the mean
correlation was 0.001). Most pairs had positive correlations th at
fell outside the distribution of correlations produced by th e
same responses after shuﬄing (randomly permuting the trials
of each neuron, shown in the black line on Figure 1A). Across
datasets 78 ± 7% of the pairs exhibit correlations that deviate by
more than two standard deviations from the shuﬄed distribution
mean. Correlations were stronger between pairs of neurons
with similar orientation preferences than between neurons w ith
diﬀerent preferences ( Figure 1B), as shown in previous work
(
Zohary et al., 1994; Lee et al., 1998; Smith and Kohn, 2008;
Cohen and Maunsell, 2009; Rothschild et al., 2010; Cohen and
Kohn, 2011; Smith and Sommer, 2013
). This is demonstrated
by the linear regression, green line, with a slope of − 4e-4 deg − 1
with standard error of 5e-5 deg − 1 (that yields a decrease of
about 40% of the mean correlations over 90 ◦ diﬀerence), which
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than zero, p < 10− 3, t-test (n = 2,924).
However, correlations show considerable variability aroun d the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 5 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 3 | Additional examples of spatial structure of eigenvectors. The ﬁrst, second and third eigenvector are shown (by column) i n their spatial representation, for
three simultaneously recorded data sets (rows). The matric es represent the location of the electrode (ten by ten Utah ar ray) and the color depicts the value of the
eigenvector at that entry. In case several neurons were separ ated from the same electrode we present their mean. The eigen vectors were computed from the
correlation matrix of the inter-stimulus interval data, wh ich provides a much clearer structure. Here, to obtain a less noisy display we used also units that showed poor
orientation tuning, as we are interested in the spatial stru cture and not the functional. T o appreciate the stability of the eigenvector structure one may compare the ﬁrst
row here (dataset 2 with all N = 129 single units) and Figures 2E-G that show the results for the same dataset but with all N = 71 tuned single units. The picture that
emerges from this ﬁgure is of a hierarchy of spatial structure s. Starting with a uniform mode and showing increasingly ﬁner structure for higher order modes.
systematic functional dependence. This variability is even more
apparent in viewing the correlation matrix ( Figure 1C), in
which the neurons were ordered according to their preferred
orientation. This substantial diversity complicates the stu dy of
correlation structure.
Eigendecomposition
To investigate the structure of the correlation matrix it is
useful to examine its eigenvalue spectrum and corresponding
eigenvectors. The utility of this approach is that, instead of
studying N(N-1)/2 pairs, the decomposition to the eigenvectors
of the correlation matrix allows us to represent the ﬂuctuati ons
in the population response as sum of N modes of ﬂuctuation
that are uncorrelated with each other, where N is the number
of neurons in the population. Each mode is characterized by its
eigenvalue and its corresponding eigenvector, v(n). The trial-to-
trial ﬂuctuations can then be represented as a sum of uncorrelated
modes. Namely, the deviation of neuroni from its mean response,
δri ≡ ri − E[ri|θ ](see also section Materials and Methods) can be
written as δri = ∑N
n = 1 znv(n)
i , where {zn}is a set of uncorrelated
trial-to-trial ﬂuctuations with zero mean and variance cn–for the
raw responses these are the modes of the covariance matrix and
for normalized responses (divided by the standard deviation)
the correlation coeﬃcients matrix. In addition, the eigenv alue
spectrum ranks the modes by the strength of their ﬂuctuations
allowing us to focus on the most dominant modes. It is also
common to refer to the eigenvectors of the correlation matri x
with the largest eigenvalues as principal components.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 6 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 4 | The collective nature of eigenvalues. (A) The eigenvalue spectrum of the noise correlation matrix is s hown as function of the population size (same data
set as in Figures 2E-G). The dashed line shows the spectrum for independent neural population, that is the shufﬂed data in the limit of inﬁnitely m any trials. (B) The
distribution of the slope of the linear scaling of the ﬁrst, se cond and third eigenvalues with the population size across t he different data sets. (C) The eigenvalue
spectrum as in (A) for shufﬂed data. Note the different scale of (A,C).
Figure 1D shows the eigenvalue spectrum of the correlation
matrix for one example data set (blue circles). For comparison ,
the spectrum of the correlation matrix after shuﬄing is shown in
red circles. With unlimited data the correlation matrix of shuﬄed
data will be a unity matrix of size N, and its spectrum will be ﬂat
with all eigenvalues equal to one (dashed black line). As dat a are
ﬁnite (we used the same number of trials in the shuﬄed data as
in the real data), the eigenvalues of the shuﬄed data correla tion
matrix will be distributed around one. The gray region depicts the
eigenvalue range estimated by 1,000 realizations of the shu ﬄed
data. We deﬁned an eigenvalue of the correlation matrix to be
signiﬁcant if it is larger than the maximal eigenvalue achie ved
by 1,000 realizations of shuﬄed data (see section Materials and
Methods).
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the eigenvalue distribution of
the real correlation matrix is composed of a few large, signiﬁ cant
eigenvalues and a semi-continuous tail of many eigenvalues
that are small and not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the shuﬄed
distribution. The number of signiﬁcant eigenvalues varies across
datasets and roughly scales linearly with the number of neur ons,
Figure 1D inset. On average across datasets the percentage of
signiﬁcant eigenvalues was 12.5 ± 5% of the population size.
The Structure of the Collective Modes
The eigenvectors with largest eigenvalues represent sharedmodes
of ﬂuctuations involving a ﬁnite fraction of the entire neur al
population. Figures 2A-C show the eigenvectors of the three
most dominant modes in one dataset, i.e., with the largest
eigenvalues. The eigenvectors are represented here as a func tion
of the preferred orientation of each neuron. The ﬁrst eigenve ctor
(Figure 2A) involves almost all neurons (except for a few with
values close to zero). A prominent feature of the ﬁrst mode is
that almost all of its components are of the same sign, and thos e
with a diﬀerent sign are small in absolute value. Consequentl y,
this mode reﬂects a uniform shared mode of ﬂuctuation in which
most of the neurons increase or decrease their ﬁring rate together.
The squared projection of the ﬁrst eigenvector onto the unifo rm
direction is ( v(1) · u)
2
= 0.56, where u = (1, 1, 1 . . .)/
√
N is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 7 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 5 | Population vector accuracy in a correlated heterogeneous p opulation, example 1. (A) Noise distribution. The eigenvalue spectrum of the noise-c orrelation
matrix is presented by rank order. Dashed line shows the spec trum in the uncorrelated case. (B) The squared overlap between the population vector weights
ff2= (ei2ϕ1 , ei2ϕ2 , . . .ei2ϕN )/
√
N and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix, arranged by their eigenvalue rank order. (C) The squared overlap between the
population vector as function of the population size. The ov erlap with different eigenvectors is depicted by color. The black line shows for comparison the expected
overlap of two N-dimensional random vectors, which is 1/N. (D) Population vector noise. The total variability of the popul ation vector subspace, which is the sum of
the noise distribution in (A) weighted by the projection in (B), is shown as function of the population size. (E-H) Same plots as in (A-D), respectively, for a single
iteration of shufﬂed data. (I) Population vector angular accuracy. One over the variance o f the population vector angular estimation error is shown as function of the
population size for the actual and shufﬂed data in solid red an d dashed magenta, respectively.
the uniform vector. The hallmark of this ﬂuctuation can also be
seen in the distribution of correlation coeﬃcient that is sh ifted
toward the positive side (see e.g., Figure 1B). We ﬁnd that in all
datasets the ﬁrst eigenvector has a considerable overlap wit h the
uniform direction (0.67 ± 0.15). In contrast, for shuﬄed data any
eigenvector will be a random direction, its scalar product with the
uniform direction (or any pre-determined direction) will be z ero
on average with variance 1/N.
In this example dataset, the second eigenvector ( Figure 2B)
also shows a signiﬁcant projection on the uniform direction o f
(v(1) · u)
2
= 0.24, which is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than zero,
p < 0.001 (compared with a random direction). However, on
average, the second eigenvector had almost no overlap with
the uniform direction (0.09 ± 0.13), and neither did the third
(0.035 ± 0.04).
The third collective mode shows a prominent functional
structure ( Figure 2C). The elements of the eigenvector with
negative preferred orientation tended to be positive whereas
elements with negative preferred orientation negative. Thi s
represents a mode of ﬂuctuations in which neurons with
positive preferred orientations ﬂuctuate in an opposite manner
to neurons with negative preferred orientations. Thus, neur ons
with similar preferred orientations will tend to ﬂuctuate together.
This mode gives rise to structure resembling a sine function .
To quantify the similarity of this eigenvector to sine and co sine
tuning we studied its squared projection onto the second Four ier
space |v(3) · ﬀ2|2, where ﬀ2 = (ei2ϕ1 , ei2ϕ2 , . . . ei2ϕN )/
√
N.
In the example of Figure 2C the squared projection of the
third eigenvector onto the second Fourier component was 0.12 ,
p < 0.05 (compare with the projection of a random direction that
is zero on average with variance of 1/ N = 0.028). For this dataset
the squared projection of the second eigenvector onto the sec ond
Fourier component was 0.006.
For comparison, we show in Figure 2D the ﬁrst eigenvector
of the correlation matrix of shuﬄed data. In the shuﬄed case t he
eigenvectors lack functional structure and their projectio ns onto
the uniform direction and onto the second Fourier subspaces a re
zero, on average, with variance of 1/ N.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 8 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 6 | Optimal linear estimator accuracy in a correlated heteroge neous population, example 2. (A) Noise distribution. The eigenvalue spectrum of the
noise-correlation matrix is presented by rank order. Dashe d line shows the spectrum in the uncorrelated case. (B) Signal distribution. The squared overlap between
the signal, in terms of the covariance between stimulus and n eural responses (see section Materials and Methods) and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix is
shown by the eigenvalue rank order. (C) The squared overlap between the optimal linear estimator we ights and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix, arran ged by
their eigenvalue rank order. (D) Optimal linear estimator noise. The total variability of th e optimal linear estimator, which is the sum of the noise dist ribution in
(A) weighted by the projection in (C), is shown as a function of the population size (blue). Cyan li ne shows the uncorrelated case, for comparison. (E) Optimal linear
estimator angular accuracy. One over the variance of the ang ular estimation error is shown as function of the population size for the raw and shufﬂed data in solid blue
and dashed cyan, respectively.
In some cases we found that the structure of the second and
third eigenvectors was spatial. As the neurons are recorded b y an
array of electrodes arranged on a square lattice (400 µm spacing),
we can represent the eigenvectors by the electrode location o f
each neuron instead of its preferred orientation. In cases wh ere
several neurons were isolated on the same electrode, we show
their average. Figures 2E-G show an example of eigenvectors
from a diﬀerent dataset that exhibit spatial structure. The
eigenvector of the ﬁrst mode, as above, represents the unifor m
mode, Figure 2E. This is to be expected as the uniform vector
will remain uniform in any representation. Examining the second
eigenvector reveals a collective mode of ﬂuctuations, in wh ich
neurons in the upper right ﬂuctuate in anti-phase to neurons
in the lower left, Figure 2F. The third mode demonstrates a
collective mode of ﬂuctuation with a ﬁner spatial structure,
Figure 2G. A clearer picture of the eigenvector structure emerges
when the inter-stimulus-interval correlation matrix is us ed,
Figure 3 (top row, note that here we used also untuned units).
For comparison, Figure 2H shows the spatial structure of the ﬁrst
eigenvector of the correlation matrix of shuﬄed data. Addit ional
examples of spatial modes from additional datasets are shown i n
the second and third rows of Figure 3. One possibility to test the
signiﬁcance on the spatial structure of these eigenvectors i s to
examine their overlap with another vector that has a clear spati al
structure compared with the distribution of overlaps (scalar
dot product) of random vectors (Gaussian with zero mean and
variance one over the vector length). We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant overlap
of the 2nd mode (middle column inFigure 3) with the ﬁrst spatial
Fourier mode (planar wave) in the x direction, p < 0.01, for
each of the presented data sets. However, a stronger indicati on
for the non-randomness of the structure is its stability ove r
diﬀerent conditions. Comparing Figure 2 and Figure 3 one can
see the great similarity in the structure of the eigenvector s—in
spite of the facts that (i) Neurons were added ( Figure 3 includes
also neurons that did not show a clear preferred orientation),
(ii) Figure 2 uses stimulus evoked data, whereas Figure 3 uses
inter-stimulus-interval data, (iii) The second and third ro ws in
Figure 3 are from a diﬀerent data set than Figure 2.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 9 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 7 | Optimal linear estimator accuracy in a correlated heteroge neous population, example 3. (A) Noise distribution. The eigenvalue spectrum of the
noise-correlation matrix is presented by rank order. Dashe d line shows the spectrum in the uncorrelated case. (B) Signal distribution. The squared overlap between
the signal, in terms of the covariance between stimulus and n eural responses (see section Materials and Methods) and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix is
shown by the eigenvalue rank order. (C) The squared overlap between the optimal linear estimator we ights and the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix, arran ged by
their eigenvalue rank order. (D) Optimal linear estimator noise. The total variability of th e optimal linear estimator, which is the sum of the noise dist ribution in
(A) Weighted by the projection in (C), is shown as a function of the population size (blue). Cyan li ne shows the uncorrelated case, for comparison. (E) Optimal linear
estimator angular accuracy. One over the variance of the ang ular estimation error is shown as function of the population size for the raw and shufﬂed data in solid blue
and dashed cyan, respectively.
We conclude that the correlation matrix reﬂects several
distinct sources: a uniform mode of ﬂuctuation; and modes in
which shared ﬂuctuations are stronger among subsets of neurons
that are nearby in functional or physical space.
The Effect of Collective Modes on Noise
Distribution
The eigenvalue of a correlation matrix can be thought of as th e
variance of the ﬂuctuations in the direction of the correspon ding
eigenvector. The ﬂuctuations in the responses of diﬀerent
neurons in the direction of a collective mode are correlated and,
consequently, will not be averaged out by the summation; rat her
they will add to yield an eigenvalue that scales linearly with
the number of neurons that participate in the mode. Thus, the
collective nature of these modes implies that the noise (i.e. , the
variance or respective eigenvalue of the correlation matrix ) in
each mode grows linearly with the population size N. This is in
contrast to shuﬄed data, in which noise in each mode will remain
ﬁxed due to the absence of correlations.
Figure 4 shows the eigenvalue spectrum of the correlation
matrix for an example data set, as a function of the population
size, N. For each value of N, we averaged the spectrum over 100
random choices of a population of N neurons out of Nmax = 71
in this example (except for populations of 1, 70, and 71 neurons).
Thus, the top blue line shows the averaged eigenvalue of the ﬁ rst
eigenvector, over 100 realizations of random subpopulation o f N
neurons. Similarly the top green line depicts the average sec ond
eigenvalue, and so on. The eigenvectors for smaller populatio ns
do not, of course, need to be identical to those identiﬁed in t he
full population; that is, the ﬁrst eigenvalue may in principle
capture a diﬀerent ﬂuctuation mode for a small population
than a large one. However, we found the eigenvectors—
particularly the ﬁrst eigenvector—were remarkably similar
across correlation matrices computed from diﬀerent
subpopulations of neurons (see e.g., Figure 2 and ﬁrst row of
Figure 3).
The linear scaling of the eigenvalues of the shared modes
implies that for large populations each collective mode account s
for a ﬁnite fraction of the entire variability. As the total variability
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 10 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
in the population (i.e., the normalized variability or trace o f the
correlation matrix) equals the population size, N, this fraction
can be estimated by the slope of the linear ﬁt for the scaling
of the eigenvalue with the population size. Figure 4B shows
the distribution of the fraction of the variance in each of th e
ﬁrst three shared modes across the diﬀerent data sets. The ﬁrs t
mode accounts for 11 ± 4%, the second 4 ± 1.4%, and the
third 3 ± 1% of the entire variability. Figure 4C shows the
eigenvalue spectrum of the correlation matrix as function of the
population size for shuﬄed data for comparison (note the scale) .
The maximal eigenvalue increases sub-linearly, as expected f rom
the Marcenko-Pasture distribution when the number of trials per
eigenvalue is decreased.
It is important to note that correlations do not increase nois e
but rather re-distribute it. Thus, one can think of the spectr um of
the correlation matrix as the distribution of noise in the sy stem.
As the sum of all eigenvalues is N (population size), the existence
of strong shared modes requires the existence of modes with
lower (than shuﬄed) noise levels.
The Effect of Collective Modes on
Population Codes
The utility of a population code is that, in principle, it allows f or
the accumulation of signal from many neurons. Shared modes
of ﬂuctuation can limit the information content of a population
code, as the noise may increase as fast as the signal yieldinga ﬁnite
signal to noise ratio. However, whether noise correlationsactually
limit information depends also on the distribution of the sig nal
relative to the noise (
Averbeck et al., 2006; Kohn et al., 2016 ).
Below we show three examples—applied to both raw and shuﬄed
data—to illustrate how the performance of the decoder can be
understood by its relation to the eigenvectors of the correl ation
matrix.
Example 1: The population vector (
Georgopoulos et al., 1982),
pv, is a linear weighted average of the neuronal responses with
a speciﬁc choice of weights: the response of each neuron is
weighted by a two dimensional vector pointing at its preferred
orientation, pv = r · ﬀ2. Thus, the population vector can
only extract information from the second Fourier mode of the
neuronal responses, as a linear projection onto that mode. In
most situations, the pv is a suboptimal decoder—it extracts
less information than that extracted by the best linear deco der.
However, this decoder has been widely used in previous work
(
Georgopoulos et al., 1986; Seung and Sompolinsky, 1993; Salinas
and Abbott, 1994; Groh et al., 1997; Sompolinsky et al., 2001;
Hohl et al., 2013
).
The eﬀect of noise correlations on the population vector is
demonstrated in Figure 5. Figure 5A shows the eigenvalue
spectrum for this example dataset, which reﬂects the
distribution of noise. The variance of the population vector
is determined by the overlap of the population vector weights,
ﬀ2 = (ei2ϕ1 , ei2ϕ2 , . . .ei2ϕN )/
√
N , with these eigenvectors.
Figure 5B shows the (squared) projection of the population
vector weights on the diﬀerent eigenvectors of the correlati on
matrix, arranged according to their eigenvalue. The populatio n
vector has a considerable projection on the several largest s hared
modes of ﬂuctuation, whereas its projection onto the higher
order modes that have less than average variance is rather lo w.
Furthermore, the projection of the population vector onto the
shared modes with large eigenvalue converges to a ﬁnite limi t as
N grows ( Figure 5C). In contrast, the projections onto higher
modes, which are added as the population size increases, are
decaying fast to zero. The black line shows for comparison the
expected overlap of two N-dimensional random vectors, which
is 1/N. Thus, the population vector has ﬁnite overlap with the
collective modes in which the noise grows linearly with N. As
a result, the total variability of the population vector, whic h is
given by the sum of the product of each eigenvalue ( Figure 5A)
with its projection onto the population vector ( Figure 5B),
grows linearly in N (Figure 5D). Note that the population vector
variability can also be computed directly from the correlati on
matrix as a bi-linear form ( ﬀ2)tC(ﬀ2). As the signal that the
population vector extracts grows linearly with N as well, the
signal to noise ratio should converge to a ﬁnite limit, resul ting
in the saturation of the population vector accuracy at large N
(with the asymptotic accuracy depending on the relative rate o f
increase of the signal and noise).
Figures 5E-H repeat the above exercise with shuﬄed data.
As the amount of data is ﬁnite the eigenvalue spectrum
and the noise distribution is not completely ﬂat, Figure 5E.
However, shuﬄing removes the structure of the noise
resulting in a uniform distribution of signal across all
modes, Figures 5F ,G. As a result, the total variability of the
population vector remains ﬁxed as the population size grows,
Figure 5H.
The consequences of the diﬀerent alignment of the noise with
the readout weights, for raw and shuﬄed data, can be compared
directly by looking at population vector accuracy (speciﬁcall y,
the inverse of the population vector angular estimation error
variance) in the real and shuﬄed data ( Figure 5I; solid red and
dashed magenta lines, respectively). It is important to note t hat
the diﬀerence of the population vector accuracy in raw verses
shuﬄed data does not result from the mere fact that largest
eigenvalue of the correlation matrix is big for the raw data
(c.f. 1st eigenvalue ∼ 8 in the raw data Figure 5A and ∼ 1.4 in
shuﬄed data Figure 5E). But rather from the fact that the largest
eigenvalues grow linearly with the population size, Figure 4.
Thus, a main distinguishing factor between the raw and shuﬄe d
data is the rate in which noise is accumulated by the readout. This
can be quantiﬁed by the rate of increase of the readout noise wi th
the population size. Speciﬁcally, below we shall use the slope of a
linear regression to Figures 5D,H.
Example 2 : Figure 6 presents the signal to noise analysis for
the optimal linear estimator (
Salinas and Abbott, 1994 ). For the
optimal linear estimator the signal is the vector of co-varia tion
of the response of each neuron with the stimulus ( Shamir,
2014). Figure 6B shows how the OLE signal is distributed across
the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix, i.e., the (squa red)
projections of the OLE signal vector on the eigenvectors of
the correlation matrix. The signal has a high projection onto
the directions with the high eigenvalues; however, it is wid ely
distributed across many directions. Note this is the same dat a
set as in Figure 5. The optimal linear estimator weights take
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 11 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
into account both signal ( Figure 6B) and noise ( Figure 6A for
comparison); thus, the optimal linear estimator gives low weights
to the two noisiest collective modes, Figure 6C, even though
they contain a considerable part of the signal. Consequently , the
optimal linear estimator noise is rather similar to the shuﬄed case
in this example, Figure 6D (as in the population vector the noise
can be given by wtCw, where w is the normalized weight vector
of the estimator, note the scale of the ordinate), and its acc uracy
is also comparable (Figure 6E).
Example 3 : Figure 7 shows a somewhat diﬀerent scenario,
for a diﬀerent data set. Here, the signal is more widely
distributed (compare Figures 6B, 7B). As a result, the optimal
linear estimator can give a larger weight to the less noisy
modes of the system (compare Figure 6C and Figure 7C). In
this case the noise of the optimal linear estimator is reduced
relative to the shuﬄed case, Figure 7D, and its accuracy is
higher in the presence of correlations, Figure 7E. Comparing
the rate in which the diﬀerent readouts accumulate noise, we
ﬁnd that for the population vector across datasets this rate
of noise accumulation is 0.02 ± 0.02, and always positive,
whereas for the optimal linear readout it is − 0.0012 ± 0.0013,
Figure 8.
Stability of the Global Structure of the
Correlations
The results we have presented above regarding the correlatio n
structure, spectrum and eigenvectors were obtained for aver aged
correlation matrix. Namely, ﬁrst the (conditional) covari ance
matrix of the neural responses was calculated for every given
FIGURE 8 | The rate of noise accumulation by different readout algorit hms.
The cumulative distribution of noise accumulation rate for the population
vector (red) and the optimal linear readout (blue) across 7 d atasets. The rate
was deﬁned as the slope of a linear regression to the increase o f the readout
noise with the population size, e.g., Figures 5D, 6D, 7D.
stimulus. Then, the covariance matrix was averaged over the
diﬀerent stimuli, and ﬁnally normalized to yield correlatio n
coeﬃcient matrix. Consequently, the results we have shown a re
for “stimulus independent” correlations, as we averaged over all
stimulus conditions.
Figure 9 shows 8 correlation matrices for one data set, each
for a diﬀerent stimulus orientation (out of 36 stimuli). The
mean correlation matrix is shown at the bottom right. The
estimated correlation matrices are similar to each other bu t
not identical. However, this is to be expected as each stimulu s-
dependent correlation matrix has N(N − 1)/2 ≈ 2500 diﬀerent
elements and only T = 135 trials per stimulus to estimate
them. One would expect ﬂuctuations with standard deviation o f
1/
√
T ≈ 0.086 (if there are no correlations). Consequently, the
main noticeable diﬀerence is that the (ﬁnite sample estimatio n)
noise in the averaged (or “stimulus independent”) correlati on
matrix is smaller by a factor of
√
36 = 6 (see also [32]).
To study the similarity of the correlation matrices we
examined more global features. Figures 10,11 show the spectra
and ﬁrst eigenvector for the eight conditional (or “stimulu s
dependent”) correlation matrices in blue and of the average
correlation matrix in red (bottom right). The eigenvalue
spectrum shows a distinct qualitative similarity: two relat ively
well separated principle eigenvalues followed by a semi-
continuous tail of smaller eigenvalues. The diﬀerent eigenv ectors
also seem to share qualitatively similar features. To quanti fy
their similarity we computed the cosine of the angle between
each eigenvector for a given stimulus and the corresponding
eigenvector of the averaged correlation matrix. We ﬁnd that for
the ﬁrst eigenvalue the cosine is 0.93 ± 0.02 (mean ± std across
the 36 diﬀerent orientations) and for the second eigenvector
0.83 ± 0.05. Across datasets the mean cosine for the ﬁrst
eigenvector is 0.88 ± 0.12, for the second eigenvector 0.63 ± 0.21,
and for typical eigenvector 0.15 ± 0.08. In addition, we ﬁnd
similar correlation structure during the inter-stimulus-in terval.
For the speciﬁc example of Figure 11 the cosine between the
ﬁrst eigenvector of the average correlation matrix and the i nter-
stimulus-interval is 0.8 and for the second eigenvector 0.6. Across
datasets the cosine between of the angle the ﬁrst eigenvecto r of
the average correlation matrix and of the inter-stimulus-int erval
correlation matrix is 0.87 ± 0.1, and for the second eigenvector
0.57 ± 0.32.
DISCUSSION
We ﬁnd that neuronal noise correlations have a non-trivial
structure. Trial-to-trial ﬂuctuations are composed of a few
large collective modes of ﬂuctuations and a semi-continuou s
tail of small eigenvalues ( Figure 1D). The magnitude of the
ﬂuctuations in the collective modes grows linearly with the
population size with a ratio that decreases with the order of the
mode ( Figure 4B). Consequently, as the population size grows,
more eigenvectors become signiﬁcant ( Figure 4A). We ﬁnd that
about 10% of the eigenvalues are collective modes ( Figure 1D,
inset).
The structure of the collective modes is extended, involvin g
most of the neurons in the population ( Figure 2). The largest
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 12 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 9 | Stimulus dependent correlation matrices. Nine correlatio n matrices from the same data set are shown in color code as fun ction of the neuron’ s preferred
orientation: (A-H) Show the correlation matrices for a given stimulus orientat ion (out of 36 stimuli). (I) Shows the mean correlation matrix.
FIGURE 10 | Eigenvalue distribution for stimulus dependent correlati on. The distribution of eigenvalues for the 9 matrices in thi s ﬁgure is shown by rank order (open
circles). The gray region depicts the range between the maxi mal eigenvalue obtained over 1,000 realizations of shufﬂed d ata and the minimal one for each case.
(A–H) Show the distribution for a given stimulus orientation (out of 36 stimuli). (I) Shows the distribution for the mean correlation matrix.
collective mode represents a “uniform” mode of ﬂuctuations,
as observed in both awake (
Arieli et al., 1996; Yu et al., 2011;
Rabinowitz et al., 2015; Engel et al., 2016) and anesthetized (Ecker
et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015; Schölvinck et al., 2015 ) animals. The
second and third modes often have spatial or functional structure.
It is important to note that the ability to detect additional
structure requires suﬃcient data, both suﬃcient trial numb er to
accurately estimate the correlation matrix and suﬃcient ne urons
to see more distributed patterns of activity. It is easy to mis s
non-uniform modes with less data (see e.g., Figure 10).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 13 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 11 | The principal eigenvector for stimulus dependent correlat ion. The eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenval ue for the 9 matrices in Figure 10
and this ﬁgure is shown by neuron number. (A–H) Show the principal eigenvector for a given stimulus orienta tion (out of 36 stimuli). (I) Shows the principal eigenvector
for the mean correlation matrix.
Our analysis of the structure of neuronal noise correlation s
was based on studying the correlation coeﬃcients matrix, as is
customary in the ﬁeld. However, when studying the accuracy
of linear population codes the covariance matrix is the more
natural quantity. The use of correlation coeﬃcient matrix
facilitates the comparison with other studies. In addition,it assists
the investigation of the underlying structure by removing t he
considerable variability on the diagonal of the covariance matrix,
namely the distribution of variances. Nevertheless, qualit atively
similar ﬁndings arise from the investigation of the covaria nce
matrix, Figure 12.
The magnitude of the collective modes is relatively small.
The relative strength of the mode, in terms of the eigenvalue
divided by N, is typically about 10% for the “uniform mode”
and less than 5% for other modes. However, their potential
eﬀect on information coding results not from their relative
size, but from the fact that their variance grows with the
population size, causing decoding accuracy to asymptote to a
ﬁnite value as population size increases, at least for the population
vector, Figure 12C. Thus, we emphasize, that these results are
fundamentally diﬀerent than the common example of how the
accuracy of a suboptimal readout is less than that of the optima l.
The diﬀerence in the population vector and the optimal linear
readout performances is not quantitative, but qualitative. T he
saturation of the population vector accuracy is evident from
the linear scaling of its noise ( Figure 12B), which allows us to
compute its asymptotic accuracy ( Figure 12C).
On the other hand, the performance of the optimal linear
estimator does not appear to show any sign of correlations
limiting information–at least for populations of about 100
neurons. The main diﬀerence for the diﬀerent behavior of
the population vector and the optimal linear readout is that
the population vector deﬁnes its weights based only on the
signal, whereas the optimal linear readout takes into accoun t
the noise distribution as well. Why do we fail to observe
saturating performance, as predicted by ﬁnite psychophysical
accuracy (
Moreno-Bote et al., 2014 )? Recent work estimated the
required number of simultaneously recorded neurons to observ e
the saturating eﬀect to be on the order of several thousands
(
Kanitscheider et al., 2015 ), whereas in our datasets we have
less than 100 neurons. As we ﬁnd that about 10% of the modes
are collective modes of ﬂuctuations, it is reasonable to ass ume
that for a population of several thousands of neurons additiona l
modes will manifest possibly including information limiting
modes. Note, however, that such population size may also require
collecting an order of magnitude more trials in order to obta in a
fair estimate of the correlation matrix.
In some cases the accuracy of the optimal linear readout is
better in the presence of correlations than in shuﬄed data. Th is
ﬁnding has been presented recently in some studies as beneﬁci al
correlations (
Lin et al., 2015; Franke et al., 2016; Zylberberg et al.,
2016). Alternatively, one may argue that the comparison with
shuﬄed data is unclear. Shuﬄing does remove correlated noise ,
rather it re-distributes it ( Shamir, 2014).
Recently, it was suggested that stimulus dependent
correlations improve coding accuracy of linear readouts
and that stimulus independent correlations that are obtaine d by
averaging the correlations over diﬀerent stimulus conditio ns are
harmful. Could this be the reason for the information limitin g
eﬀect of the population vector accuracy? No – the error of the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 14 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
FIGURE 12 | Structure of the covariance matrix. (A) The eigenvalue spectrum of the response covariance matrix i s shown as function of the population size (same
data set as in Figures 1, 5, 6). For every population size, n, the eigenvalue spectrum was averaged over 1,000 (compare w ith 100 for the correlation matrix spectrum
in Figure 4) random choices of subpopulations of n neurons out of N = 77 (except for n = 1, N− 1, and N). The dashed line shows the mean variance in the
population. (B) The population vector noise is plotted as function of the pop ulation size. We separated the noise into two contributions . The ﬁrst contribution is to
ﬂuctuations in the magnitude of the population vector, i.e., projection on PVc= (cos 2ϕ1, cos 2ϕ2, . . . cos 2ϕN)
√
2/N (blue), where we measure the preferred
orientations of the neurons relative to stimulus orientati on. These ﬂuctuations do not affect the angular estimation of the population vector (that we focused on here).
However, one may consider scenarios in which the magnitude o f the population vector carries relevant information e.g., stimulus contrast or degree of conﬁdence in
the estimation. Thus, ﬂuctuations in the magnitude of the pop ulation vector may affect the estimation of contrast or the c onﬁdence in the angular estimate, but will not
affect the angular estimation of the orientation. The secon d, contribution is to ﬂuctuations in the tangential directio n of the population vector, i.e., projection on
PVs= (sin 2ϕ1, sin 2ϕ2, . . . sin 2ϕN)
√
2/N (blue). Fluctuations in this direction will affect the angu lar estimation of the orientation. (C) Assuming the variability in the
direction of PVs will continue to scale linearly with the population size one can compute the asymptotic accuracy of the population vecto r as (square root of) the ratio
of linear slopes of noise and signal (where the signal is the p rojection of the population tuning curve on the direction of PVc) in the limit of large N. Note that the
difference in the rate of noise growth in the radial and tange ntial directions (slope of blue vs. red curves in B) reﬂects stimulus dependence of the correlations.
population vector estimation was not computed on averaged
data. Care was also taken to separate the data to training set
and generalization set. The training set was used to deﬁne
the preferred orientations of the neurons for the population
vector. The generalization set was used to estimate the erro r.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd high similarity in the global features o f
the noise structure between the stimulus dependent correlat ion
matrices, the average stimulus independent matrix and the in ter-
stimulus interval correlation structure. Nevertheless, t his should
not be taken to imply that the correlations are independent
of the stimulus or that this dependence has no computational
implications. The diﬀerence in the rate of noise growth in the
radial and tangential directions of the population vector (slope of
blue vs. red curves in Figure 12B) reﬂects stimulus dependence
of the correlations.
Ecker et al. (2014) used Gaussian process factor analysis
to investigate the correlations structure. They ﬁnd that mo st
of the correlated variability can be accounted for by a single
global parameter that modulates the activity of the entire
population, which they link to the “brain state transitions
under anesthesia.”
Schölvinck et al. (2015) reported that a
single uniform mode of ﬂuctuations accounts for most of the
correlated variability in their measured responses. Simila rly,
we also ﬁnd that the most prominent collective mode of
ﬂuctuations is the uniform mode. It is important to note that
such common modes are likely prominent in the awake state
(
Arieli et al., 1996; Yu et al., 2011; Rabinowitz et al., 2015; E ngel
et al., 2016 ), although they may be enhanced under anesthesia.
However, in addition to the uniform mode we ﬁnd additional
collective modes of ﬂuctuation that exhibit a clear meaning.
Although these additional modes are considerably weaker tha n
the uniform mode their eﬀect on population codes may be
dramatic and highly dependent upon the readout algorithm
used to extract the information from the neuronal population
response.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This work focuses on data analysis. All data analyze here is
courtesy of the laboratory of Adam Kohn. All procedures were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 15 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva Universi ty,
and were in compliance with the guideline set forth in the
United States Public Health Service Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MS conceived and designed research; OM and MS analyzed data.
Both authors reviewed the last version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the United States-Israel Binational
Science Foundation (grant 2013204). MS is also funded in part
by the Israel Science Foundation ISF grant No 300/16.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the Kohn Lab for sharing their data.
REFERENCES
Abbott, L. F., and Dayan, P. (1999). The eﬀect of correlated varia bility
on the accuracy of a population code. Neural Comput. 11, 91–101.
doi: 10.1162/089976699300016827
Arieli, A., Sterkin, A., Grinvald, A., and Aertsen, A. (1996). Dyna mics of ongoing
activity: explanation of the large variability in evoked cortical responses. Science
273, 1868–1871. doi: 10.1126/science.273.5283.1868
Averbeck, B. B., Latham, P. E., and Pouget, A. (2006). Neural co rrelations,
population coding and computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 358–366.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1888
Averbeck, B. B., and Lee, D. (2006). Eﬀects of noise correlation s on
information encoding and decoding. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 3633–3644.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00919.2005
Cohen, M. R., and Kohn, A. (2011). Measuring and interpreting neu ronal
correlations. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 811–819. doi: 10.1038/nn.2842
Cohen, M. R., and Maunsell, J. H. (2009). Attention improves performan ce
primarily by reducing interneuronal correlations. Nat. Neurosci. 12,
1594–U148. doi: 10.1038/nn.2439
Cui, Y., Liu, L. D., McFarland, J. M., Pack, C. C., and Butts, D. A . (2016). Inferring
cortical variability from local ﬁeld potentials. J. Neurosci. 36, 4121–4135.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2502-15.2016
Deneve, S., Latham, P. E., and Pouget, A. (1999). Reading populat ion codes:
a neural implementation of ideal observers. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 740–745.
doi: 10.1038/11205
Ecker, A. S., Berens, P., Cotton, R. J., Subramaniyan, M., Denﬁe ld, G. H.,
Cadwell, C. R., et al. (2014). State dependence of noise correlation s in macaque
primary visual cortex. Neuron 82, 235–248. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
02.006
Ecker, A. S., Berens, P., Tolias, A. S., and Bethge, M. (2011). T he eﬀect of
noise correlations in populations of diversely tuned neurons. J. Neurosci. 31,
14272–14283. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2539-11.2011
Engel, T. A., Steinmetz, N. A., Gieselmann, M. A., Thiele, A., Moore , T.,
and Boahen, K. (2016). Selective modulation of cortical state du ring spatial
attention. Science 354, 1140–1144. doi: 10.1126/science.aag1420
Franke, F., Fiscella, M., Sevelev, M., Roska, B., Hierlemann, A., and da Silveira, R.
A. (2016). Structures of neural correlation and how they favor codi ng. Neuron
89, 409–422. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.12.037
Gawne, T. J., and Richmond, B. J. (1993). How independent are the me ssages
carried by adjacent inferior temporal cortical-neurons. J. Neurosci. 13,
2758–2771.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Kalaska, J. F., Caminiti, R., and Massey, J. T. (1982). On the
realations between the direction of two-dimensional arm movements and cell
discharge in primate motor cortex. J. Neurosci. 2, 1527–1537.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B., and Kettner, R. E. (1986). Neuronal
population coding of movement direction. Science 233, 1416–1419.
doi: 10.1126/science.3749885
Graf, A. B., Kohn, A., Jazayeri, M., and Movshon, J. A. (2011). Decoding the activity
of neuronal populations in macaque primary visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
239–245. doi: 10.1038/nn.2733
Groh, J. M., Born, R. T., and Newsome, W. T. (1997). How is a sensory ma p read
Out? Eﬀects of microstimulation in visual area MT on saccades and s mooth
pursuit eye movements. J. Neurosci. 17, 4312–4330.
Hohl, S. S., Chaisanguanthum, K. S., and Lisberger, S. G. (2013) . Sensory
population decoding for visually guided movements. Neuron 79, 167–179.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.026
Kanitscheider, I., Coen-Cagli, R., and Pouget, A. (2015). Ori gin of information-
limiting noise correlations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, E6973–E6982.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1508738112
Kohn, A., Coen-Cagli, R., Kanitscheider, I., and Pouget, A. ( 2016). Correlations
and neuronal population information. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 39, 237–256.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-070815-013851
Kohn, A., and Smith, M. A. (2005). Stimulus dependence of neuronal correlation
in primary visual cortex of the macaque. J. Neurosci. 25, 3661–3673.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5106-04.2005
Lee, D., Port, N. L., Kruse, W., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (1998). V a riability and
correlated noise in the discharge of neurons in motor and parietal are as of the
primate cortex. J. Neurosci. 18, 1161–1170.
Lin, I. C., Okun, M., Carandini, M., and Harris, K. D. (2015). The Nature of shared
cortical variability. Neuron 87, 644–656. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.035
Moreno-Bote, R., Beck, J., Kanitscheider, I., Pitkow, X., Lat ham, P., and Pouget,
A. (2014). Information-limiting correlations. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1410–1417.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3807
Panzeri, S., Schultz, S. R., Treves, A., and Rolls, E. T. (1999). Co rrelations and the
encoding of information in the nervous system. Proc. R. Soc. B-Biol. Sci. 266,
1001–1012. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1999.0736
Petersen, R. S., Panzeri, S., and Diamond, M. E. (2002). Populati on
coding in somatosensory cortex. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 12, 441–447.
doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(02)00338-0
Rabinowitz, N. C., Goris, R. L., Cohen, M., and Simoncelli, E. P. ( 2015).
Attention stabilizes the shared gain of V4 populations. Elife 4:e08998.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.08998
Romo, R., Hernández, A., Zainos, A., and Salinas, E. (2003). Correla ted neuronal
discharges that increase coding eﬃciency during perceptual dis crimination.
Neuron 38, 649–657. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00287-3
Rosenbaum, R., Smith, M. A., Kohn, A., Rubin, J. E., and Doiron, B . (2017). The
spatial structure of correlated neuronal variability. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 107–114.
doi: 10.1038/nn.4433
Rothschild, G., Nelken, I., and Mizrahi, A. (2010). Functional organization and
population dynamics in the mouse primary auditory cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 13,
353–360. doi: 10.1038/nn.2484
Salinas, E., and Abbott, L. F. (1994). Vector reconstruction fro m ﬁring rates. J.
Comput. Neurosci. 1, 89–107. doi: 10.1007/BF00962720
Schölvinck, M. L., Saleem, A. B., Benucci, A., Harris, K. D., and Ca randini, M.
(2015). Cortical state determines global variability and correlatio ns in visual
cortex. J. Neurosci. 35, 170–178. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4994-13.2015
Seung, H. S., and Sompolinsky, H. (1993). Simple-models for reading
neuronal population codes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90, 10749–10753.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.22.10749
Shamir, M. (2006). The scaling of winner-takes-all accuracy wit h population size.
Neural Comput. 18, 2719–2729. doi: 10.1162/neco.2006.18.11.2719
Shamir, M. (2014). Emerging principles of population coding: in
search for the neural code. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 25, 140–148.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2014.01.002
Shamir, M., and Sompolinsky, H. (2002). “Correlation codes in neurona l
populations, ” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 14, Vols.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12


--- Page 16 ---
Mendels and Shamir Structure of Noise Correlations in V1
1 and 2, eds T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani (Cambrid ge, MA:
MIT Press).
Shamir, M., and Sompolinsky, H. (2004). Nonlinear population codes. Neural
Comput. 16, 1105–1136. doi: 10.1162/089976604773717559
Shamir, M., and Sompolinsky, H. (2006). Implications of neuronal
diversity on population coding. Neural Comput. 18, 1951–1986.
doi: 10.1162/neco.2006.18.8.1951
Smith, M. A., and Kohn, A. (2008). Spatial and temporal scales of neu ronal
correlation in primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 28, 12591–12603.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2929-08.2008
Smith, M. A., and Sommer, M. A. (2013). Spatial and temporal scales
of neuronal correlation in visual area V4. J. Neurosci. 33, 5422–5432.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4782-12.2013
Sompolinsky, H., Yoon, H., Kang, K., and Shamir, M. (2001). Population coding in
neuronal systems with correlated noise. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter
Phys. 64:051904. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.64.051904
Yu, B., Kohn, A., and Smith, M. A. (2011). Estimating shared ﬁring rate
ﬂuctuations in neural populations. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 483:18.
Zohary, E., Shadlen, M. N., and Newsome, W. T. (1994). Correlated ne uronal
discharge rate and its implications for psychophysical performance.Nature 370,
140–143. doi: 10.1038/370140a0
Zylberberg, J., Cafaro, J., Turner, M. H., Shea-Brown, E., and Rie ke, F.
(2016). Direction-selective circuits shape noise to ensure a prec ise
population code. Neuron 89, 369–383. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.
11.019
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Mendels and Shamir. This is an open-access artic le distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the or iginal publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 March 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 12
