--- Page 1 ---
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 22 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00088
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88
Edited by:
Wenting Liu,
Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore
Reviewed by:
J. Michael Herrmann,
University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom
Andrey Olypher,
Georgia Gwinnett College,
United States
*Correspondence:
Atsushi Masumori
masumori@sacral.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Received: 03 February 2019
Accepted: 16 December 2019
Published: 22 January 2020
Citation:
Sinapayen L, Masumori A and
Ikegami T (2020) Reactive, Proactive,
and Inductive Agents: An Evolutionary
Path for Biological and Artiﬁcial
Spiking Networks.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13:88.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00088
Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive
Agents: An Evolutionary Path for
Biological and Artiﬁcial Spiking
Networks
Lana Sinapayen 1,2†, Atsushi Masumori 3*† and Takashi Ikegami 3
1 Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Inc., Tokyo, Japan, 2 Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology ,
Tokyo, Japan, 3 Department of General Systems Studies, Graduate School of A rts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan
Complex environments provide structured yet variable sens ory inputs. T o best exploit
information from these environments, organisms must evolv e the ability to anticipate
consequences of new stimuli, and act on these predictions. W e propose an evolutionary
path for neural networks, leading an organism from reactive behavior to simple proactive
behavior and from simple proactive behavior to induction-b ased behavior. Based on
earlier in-vitro and in-silico experiments, we deﬁne the conditions necessary in a network
with spike-timing dependent plasticity for the organism to go from reactive to proactive
behavior. Our results support the existence of speciﬁc evol utionary steps and four
conditions necessary for embodied neural networks to evolv e predictive and inductive
abilities from an initial reactive strategy.
Keywords: neural network, spiking neural network, predict ive coding, LSA, STDP
1. INTRODUCTION
There are surprisingly few hypotheses about how cognitive fun ctions such as generalization and
prediction might have evolved. The ability to generate predic tions especially, is often assumed to
be a given in evolutionary simulations. Dennett proposes an ev olutionary path by dividing living
systems in four classes (
Dennett, 1995): Darwinian creatures, with hard-wired reactions acquire d
through evolutionary processes; Skinnerian creatures, with phenotypic plasticity to acquire suitable
sensory-motor coupling in their environment; Popperian creatures, which can predict the outcome
of their actions; and Gregorian creatures, which use knowle dge acquired from their predecessors.
Dennett also proposes that the biological creatures must have evolved in this order. The three types
of agents discussed in this paper have partial overlap with Denet t’s classiﬁcation. We focus on a
speciﬁc deﬁnition of “agent”: a neural network embedded in a b ody, and able to perform actions
that cause changes in the environment. Note that we only consi der agents that are able to learn
during their lifetime. Our three types of agents are as follows:
• Reactive agents learn during their lifetime how to react to en vironmental stimuli. These agents
correspond to Skinnerian creatures.
• Through evolution, if reactive agents become able to act in a nticipation of a stimulus before
receiving that stimulus, we call them proactive agents: they can perform actions based
on prediction. Proactive agents correspond to Popperian creatu res. The idea that organisms
constantly try to predict their environment has been credite d for explaining typical perception


--- Page 2 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
(Rao and Ballard, 1999 ), illusions ( Raman and Sarkar, 2016;
Edwards et al., 2017; Watanabe et al., 2018 ), hallucinations
(Powers et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2017 ), and even
consciousness ( Seth et al., 2012 ). Without going so far,
proactive agents have clear advantages over reactive agents :
they can avoid or select behaviors before experiencing
undesirable (resp. desirable) consequences.
• Inductive agents ﬁt in-between Denett’s Popperian and
Gregorian creatures. Inductive agents are able to make
generalizations about learned stimuli, and to react to new
stimuli based on these generalizations. As Gregorian creatures
must be able to apply knowledge from their predecessors to
their own situation, we can argue that inductive agents must
come before Gregorian creatures in terms of evolution.
The distinction between reaction and prediction can be uncle ar,
because learning to react to stimuli is sometimes inseparable from
learning to predict consequences of stimuli. Here, we deﬁne a
prediction as the information generated inside an agent, equ al to
the content of an external input, but preceding that input in time.
The ability to make predictions therefore implies the existen ce of
a generative model inside the agent.
In
Chung et al. (2009) and Kwon and Choe (2008), Chung and
Kwon show through simulated evolution experiments that neural
networks with predictable dynamics are better at generalizin g
what they learned to novel tasks. The predictability of netwo rk
dynamics does not correlate with better performance on known
tasks, but it does correlate with better performance on new
tasks, showing that the networks have better generalization
abilities. Unfortunately these results do not tell us about t he
actual predictive ability of the networks. Predictable netw orks do
better, but are the networks themselves performing any kind o f
predictions on the environment?
The contribution of this paper is to propose a theory of
how and why predictive and generalizing abilities might have
evolved in neural networks. To the authors’ knowledge, ther e is
currently no theory relating these concepts or explaining how , in
practice, they would have emerged from an evolutionary point o f
FIGURE 1 | Our proposal of evolutionary path for reactive agent, proac tive agent, and inductive agent. An organism needs behavior ; this need is met by the evolution
of actuators to modify the world. It needs to know the conseque nces of its actions without necessarily acting them out; thi s need is met by evolving predictive abilities.
Finally, the agent needs to generalize these predictions, w hich is the role of classiﬁcation. Prediction emerges to impr ove the agent’ s actions, and classiﬁcation
emerges to improve the agent’ s predictions.
view. In this paper, we focus on the evolutionary transition fr om
reactive agents to proactive agents, and from proactive agent s to
inductive agents.
Figure 1 shows how these three functions are linked, and the
environmental needs these functions can fulﬁll for an embod ied
agent. An agent ﬁrst needs behavior: the ability to change it s
environment to its advantage. This need is met by reactive agents:
through action, they can change their environment. An agentthat
can only react to the environment does not have much control
on its future. Increasing this control is increasing empower ment.
Empowerment is a quantity deﬁned as how much the agent
can potentially inﬂuence the environment. It quantiﬁes not w hat
the agent actually does, but what it can “potentially” do to
inﬂuence the environment (
Klyubin et al., 2005 ). To increase its
empowerment, an agent needs to predict the consequences of
its actions: these are proactive agents. Finally comes a need for
generalization: the ability to recognize new inputs as being similar
to known inputs, and to generate appropriate predictions. This
need is met by inductive agents through classiﬁcation. We arg ue
that action, prediction and classiﬁcation emerge from the bottom
up: prediction emerges from action and classiﬁcation emerges
from prediction.
As a practical example of learning rule that can be used for
the three functions, we use results from our experiments with
Learning by Stimulation Avoidance (LSA). LSA (
Sinapayen et al.,
2017) is a property exhibited by spiking networks coupled with
Spike-Timing Dependent Plasticity rules (STDP; Caporale and
Dan, 2008 ): the networks learn the behaviors that stop external
stimulation, and they learn to avoid the behaviors that star t
external stimulation. Neither LSA nor STDP are considered
as necessary mechanisms in this paper; we take them as one
practical example of how our ideas can be implemented, and we
acknowledge that other implementations are possible.
STDP causes changes in synaptic weights between two ﬁring
neurons depending on the timing of their activity ( Figure 2). For
a presynaptic neuron i, postsynaptic neuron j, and the connection
wi,j from i to j: if neuron i ﬁres just before neuron j, wi,j increases
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 3 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
FIGURE 2 | Symmetric spike-timing dependent plasticity between two n eurons. Let us consider presynaptic neuron i, postsynaptic neuron j, and the connection wi,j
from i to j. If neuron i ﬁres just before neuron j (i.e., /Delta1tp < 20 ms), the synaptic weight increases by /Delta1w. If neuron i ﬁres just after neuron j (i.e., /Delta1td < 20 ms), the
synaptic weight decreases by /Delta1w.
[long-term potentiation (LTP)], and if neuron i ﬁres just after
neuron j, wi,j decreases [long-term depression (LTD)].
In LSA, two mechanisms for avoiding stimulation emerge
based on STDP. We explain these two mechanisms through a
minimal case with three neurons: an input neuron, an output
neuron, a hidden neuron. The input neuron is connected to
the two other neurons ( Figure 3). The hidden neuron has
no eﬀect on other neurons or on the environment, and ﬁres
randomly. The ﬁrst mechanism, mediated by LTP , reinforces
behaviors that lead to a decrease in stimulation ( Figure 3A). We
assume an embodiment in which if the output neuron ﬁres, the
stimulation to the input neuron is temporarily and immediately
removed (the action of ﬁring leads to a decrease of external
stimulation). This leads the connection weight from the inpu t
neuron to the output neuron to increase, because on average
the eﬀect of LTP is stronger than the eﬀect of LTD. On the
other hand, the connection from the input neuron to the hidden
neuron barely changes, because on average the eﬀect of LTP
and LTD are similar. Thus, behaviors leading to a decrease in
stimulation are reinforced. The second mechanism, mediate d by
LTD, is the weakening of behaviors leading to an increase in
stimulation (Figure 3B). We assume an embodiment in which if
the output neuron ﬁres, then stimulation from the environmen t
to the input neuron starts (the action of ﬁring leads an increa ses
of external stimulation). In that case, the connection weight from
the input neuron to the output neuron decreases because on
average the eﬀect of LTD is stronger than the eﬀect of LTP.
The connection from the input neuron to the hidden neuron
barely changes because the eﬀects of LTP and LTD are equivalent
on average. Thus, behaviors leading to increases in stimula tion
are weakened.
We explained LSA in a minimal case for the sake of clarity,
but these dynamics work in larger networks that can express a
greater variety output patterns, as we demonstrated in
Sinapayen
et al. (2017) , Masumori et al. (2017) , and Masumori (2019) .
Among all output patterns, output patterns leading to a decrease
in stimulation are reinforced by the ﬁrst mechanism; output
patterns leading to an increase in stimulation are weakened b y
the second mechanism. There is one limitation to the scalabi lity
of these networks: the bigger the network, the more internal
noise the output neurons receive, and the harder it is for the
network to learn a task. We previously showed that there is a
lower limit of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the network for LSA.
The SNR decreases when the network size increases, and at the
size of 60,000 neurons the network cannot learn even simple
behaviors (
Masumori, 2019). Below, we discuss the conditions for
the emergence of various behaviors in networks subject to LS A.
We ﬁrst demonstrate the existence of three conditions
required to obtain reactive behavior in biological network s as
well as simulated networks (section 2). We then show that a fe w
modiﬁcations in the topology allow simulated networks to lea rn
to predict external stimuli (section 3.1). Finally, we explai n how
the reactive and predictive structures can be coupled to produc e
proactive behavior (section 3.2) before discussing how indu ctive
behavior can emerge from predictions (section 4).
2. REACTIVE BEHAVIOR IN BIOLOGICAL
AND SIMULATED NETWORKS
Let us remind the deﬁnition of reactive agents from the
introduction of this paper:
Deﬁnition: Reactive agents learn during their lifetime how to
react to environmental stimuli.
Even without neural plasticity, an agent can act reactively
using hard-wired abilities as Darwinian creatures do. Howe ver,
hard-wired reactive behavior can have negative consequence s if
environmental changes happen during an individual life time.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 4 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
FIGURE 3 | Learning by Stimulation Avoidance in three neurons: input n euron, output neuron, and hidden neuron. (A) Reinforcement dynamics of LSA. For an
embodiment where if the output neuron ﬁres right after stimul ation from its environment, the stimulation is temporarily removed, the time window /Delta1tp1 between spikes
of the input neuron and spikes of the output neuron gradually becomes smaller on average than the time window /Delta1td1 between spikes of the output neuron and
spikes of the input neuron. LTP being stronger than LTD, the c onnection weight from the input neuron to the output neuron i ncreases. On the other hand, the
connection from the input neuron to the hidden neuron barely changes, as the time windows /Delta1tp2 and /Delta1td2 are similar on average. (B) Weakening dynamics of LSA.
For an embodiment where if the output neuron ﬁres, stimulatio n to the input neuron starts, the time window /Delta1tp1 between spikes of the input neuron and spikes of the
output neuron gradually becomes larger on average than the t ime window /Delta1td1 between spikes of the output neuron and spikes of the input ne uron. The effect of LTD
become stronger than the effect of LTP , and the connection we ight from the input neuron to the output neuron decreases. On the other hand, the connection from the
input neuron to the hidden neuron barely changes.
FIGURE 4 | A robot is moving on a line. At the end of the line, bumping into a
wall causes stimulation. Turning around stops the stimulat ion by allowing the
robot to move away from the wall.
For example, a behavior resulting in a food reward might resul t
in getting poisoned in the future. In an environment that changes
rapidly, learning reactive behavior is an eﬀective way to help the
survival of the agent. In this section, we focus on some neces sary
conditions to learn reactive behavior.
In a previous study ( Sinapayen et al., 2017 ), we showed that
spiking networks with STDP exhibit LSA. The behaviors learne d
by these networks is reactive: they learn to perform an actionafter
receiving a certain type of stimulation. We oﬀer a simple example
in Figure 4. A robot is moving on a line. At the end of the line,
bumping into a wall causes stimulation through distance sensors.
Turning around stops the stimulation by allowing the robot to
move away from the wall. The robot gradually learns to turn away
when its distance sensors are stimulated by the walls.
In this section, we focus on the necessary conditions for
reactive behavior to be learned ( Figure 5). We identify one
qualitative condition for the network, Connectivity: relevant
information from the sensors must be able to reach the
actuators of the agent . In the speciﬁc case of LSA, it means
that input neurons must be able to directly or indirectly tran smit
stimulation from the environment to the output neurons. This
condition can be broken if intrinsic noise is destroying the
signal or if the path from sensors to actuators is destroyed. Th is
condition is simple, but we build on it in following sections.
There is another qualitative condition for the environment,
Controllability: there exists a subset of outputs from the age nt
that can modify the source of the input in the environment.
This deﬁnition is a special case of the deﬁnition of control by
Klyubin et al. (2005) . In the speciﬁc case of LSA, it means that
there is an output pattern from the network that can inhibit the
stimulation through an action (e.g., turning away from the w all);
it can also mean that there is an action from the network that
can start the stimulation to the input neurons, in which case
this action will be avoided by the network in the future. The la st
condition is a quantitative time constraint linking the netw ork
and the environment: (1) the input-output loop must be closed
in less time than τ . τ is the time window during which the
network can evaluate the consequences of a speciﬁc action that it
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 5 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
FIGURE 5 | Necessary conditions for reactive behavior: Connectivity
condition for the network: relevant information from the en vironment must be
able to reach the actuators of the agent. In the speciﬁc case of L SA, it means
that input neurons must be able to directly or indirectly tra nsmit stimulation
from the environment to the output neurons. Controllability condition for the
environment: there must be an output pattern from the networ k that can inhibit
the stimulation through some action. Finally, there is a tim e condition: the
input-output loop must be closed in less time than a speciﬁc ti me window τ .
The value of τ depends on the memory of the network. It is the time window
during which the network can evaluate the consequences of a s peciﬁc action.
took. This time constant depends on the memory of the network.
For example, in a simulated minimal spiking network with two
neurons and in the absence of long term memory, τ is equal to
20 ms (the time constant of the STDP learning rule). The weigh ts
of a neuron’s connections are only changed by STDP during thi s
20 ms time window before or after the neuron spikes, so an action
by the network in response to a stimulation must take eﬀect in the
environment in less than 20 ms, for the action to be associate d to
the input and learned by the network.
A reactive agent must respect these conditions. In the
following subsections, we explore the consequences of
these conditions and show that they are necessary for the
network to learn reactive behavior based on results from our
previous studies.
2.1. Controllability
In a previous paper, we showed that simulated networks and
biological networks can learn the wall avoidance task in a
one-dimensional environment ( Figure 4;
Masumori et al., 2018 )
through LSA. This is reactive behavior, as the robot must rea ct
to the wall by turning around. In those studies we compared
the results when Controllability is respected (the target ou tput
from the network stops the stimulation immediately,/Delta1t2 = 0 ms)
and when Controllability is not respected (the stimulation i s
random and no output can stop it). The Connectivity condition
was respected in both conditions. In the controllable settin g, the
networks learned to react to the stimulation by ﬁring the expected
output; in the uncontrollable setting, the networks did not l earn
to react to the input. Controllability is therefore necessar y for
proper learning in both biological and simulated networks.
2.2. Connectivity
In a previous study, we also evaluated the relation between
connectivity and learning success in biological networks
(
Masumori, 2019 ). To evaluate the connectivity between the
input neurons and the output neurons, we deﬁned the
connectivity measure as the ratio of connections with low
time delay between input neurons and output neurons. We
deﬁned a success measure as the decrease of reaction time
(time between reaching the wall and turning away from
it). We found a strong correlation between connectivity and
success; in addition, if the connectivity measure is zero
(no appropriate connections between input and output), the
network cannot learn the behavior to avoid the stimulation.
Connectivity is therefore necessary for proper learning in
biological networks, and although we have not yet conducted
simulation experiments, we argue that this condition should be
respected in simulated networks.
Since, for LSA, the loop formed by stimuli—input neurons—
output neurons—feedback from output to stimuli should be
closed within a speciﬁc time window, it is clear that a time
condition is required. In the previous study, we showed that t he
this loop must be closed in 40 ms in simulated networks with
100 neurons (
Masumori, 2019). The embodiment was idealized:
the time delay for executing an action was dismissed. However,
in nature there are large diﬀerences between the timescale of
synaptic plasticity and timescale of behavior: e.g., in Drosoph ila,
synaptic plasticity lasts a few milliseconds, behaviors last seconds
(
Drew and Abbott, 2006 ). This diﬀerence becomes larger if for
bigger and more complex bodies. One way of bridging this
gap is to sustain the response to stimuli (
Drew and Abbott,
2006). This mechanism might be required if the embodiment is
more complex.
3. PROACTIVE BEHAVIOR IN SIMULATED
NETWORKS
Deﬁnition: Proactive agents perform actions based
on prediction.
Although it is diﬃcult to discuss the evolution of prediction
separately from action, we ﬁrst focus on the necessary condit ions
for a network to learn to predict environmental input without any
actions. We then add actions back into the picture and discuss
proactive agents.
3.1. Predictions
In the introduction we deﬁned a prediction as information
generated inside an agent, equal to the content of external
input, but preceding that input in time. To make predictions,
an agent therefore needs an internal generative model and a
way to compare the output of that model to the input from
the environment.
In Figure 6, we hypothesize that the comparison operation
is done by inhibitory neurons (
Buonomano, 2000; Rao and
Sejnowski, 2001; Wacongne et al., 2012 ). These neurons can
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 6 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
FIGURE 6 | Necessary conditions for prediction: Predictability condition for
the environment: the time correlation between the stimulus at T1 (unpredictable
anticipatory stimulus) and the stimulus at T2 (predictable target stimulus) must
be reliable, i.e., the environment must provide predictabl e stimuli in order for
predictions to be learned. Connectivity condition for the network: input
neurons must be able to directly or indirectly transmit and r eceive stimulation
from the inhibitory neurons. Time conditions: (1) the trans mission and the
inhibition must be closed in less time than τ ; (2) time condition: the interval
between the anticipatory stimulus and the target stimulus m ust be closed in
less time than τ . The value of τ depends on the memory of the network.
compute prediction errors by inhibiting external stimulatio n:
the error is null if the output of the inhibitory neurons and
the external stimulation are exactly opposite. Since the STDP
rule does not change, in the case of LSA the only evolutionary
step between reactive and proactive agents is the addition of
inhibitory neurons in the network.
On the network, we still have the Connectivity condition:
relevant information from the sensors must be able to reach t he
comparison units of the network. In the particular case of LSA,
the prediction signal and the input to be predicted come to the
inhibitory neurons; Connectivity is respected if the input neurons
are able to directly or indirectly transmit and receive stim ulation
from the inhibitory neurons. This is the condition that allo ws us
to consider predictions as information generated by the netw ork,
equal to the information of the target input, but preceding it:
the inhibitory neurons must ﬁre just before the input neurons in
order to suppress the incoming stimulation. On the environment,
we have one new condition, Predictability: the time correlation
between the stimulus at T1 (unpredictable anticipatory stimulus)
and the stimulus at T2 (predictable target stimulus) must be
reliable, i.e., the environment must provide predictable sti muli
in order for predictions to be learned. In the case of LSA, the
condition is strict: T1 can be random, but T1 − T2 ≈ constant,
or the prediction cannot be learned. Not all environments respect
this condition: for example, at micro-scales, the motion of s mall
particles is stochastic.
There are also two time conditions; (1) is unchanged, the
input-output loop must be closed in less time than τ . The new
condition is (2) The time delay between the two stimuli must
be smaller than the total processing time of the network .
This condition simply states that the network cannot generat e
predictions on a bigger timescale than the timescale of its
own memory.
Our previous results with a simulated minimal network
consisting of three neurons (1 anticipatory input neuron
stimulated at T1, 1 target input neuron stimulated at T2 and 1
inhibitory neuron in between), which satisﬁes these condit ions,
could predict a simple causal sequence of stimuli (
Masumori,
2019). Our preliminary results show that if the time interval
between T1 and T2 becomes large, the network is not able to learn
to predict the sequence.
This suggests that our proposed topology makes the network
strengthen the path from anticipatory to target neurons, and
that the Predictability condition and the time condition (2 ) are
necessary to learn predictions.
Therefore predictive abilities can evolve from a reactive ag ent
by adding only one element to its neural network: inhibitory
connections. In the next subsection, we discuss the necessa ry
conditions to obtain a agent that not only predicts inputs, but
also acts on these predictions.
3.2. Proactive Behavior
The reactive agent discussed in section 2 can only initiate a n
action in relation to a stimulus after starting to receive th at
stimulus. In the worst case, even if the agent learns a reacti on
to a damaging stimulus, it cannot avoid the damage itself. If o nly
the agent could predict the damage when getting the anticipato ry
stimulus, it could initiate an avoiding behavior before get ting
damaged. In this purely speculative section, we discuss how
prediction and action can be combined into proactive behavior .
In Figure 6, there is only minimal processing happening
between the reception of an input and the next prediction.
Figure 7 shows how to leverage more complex processing.
For clarity, the output and input neurons are separated, but
in the simplest case a neuron can act both as an input (by
receiving external stimulation) and as an output (by outputti ng
directly to an inhibitory neuron). Here the task of the output
neurons is to activate the right inhibitory neurons at the ri ght
time: the output neurons play the role of generative model.
After valid predictions start being learned by the network,
these predictions and the model that generates them can be
harnessed not simply by the inhibitory neurons, but can be
used to guide the behavior of the agent. Now the agent respects
our deﬁnition of proactive behavior: cued by an anticipatory
stimulus, it generates a prediction, and acts based on that
prediction. For example, learning to move to avoid damage
following an anticipatory stimulus.
From an evolutionary point of view, predictions can only
evolve if they provide increased ﬁtness to the agent. The proactive
agent must therefore either evolve directly from a reactive
agent, or predictions must have evolved as a side eﬀect of
some other ﬁtness-increasing process. How is this possible? A
plausible evolutionary path might have looked like this: ﬁrst ,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 7 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
FIGURE 7 | Necessary conditions for proactive behavior: Predictability
condition for the environment: the time correlation betwee n the stimulus at T1
(unpredictable anticipatory stimulus) and the stimulus at T2 (predictable target
stimulus) must be reliable, i.e., the environment must prov ide predictable
stimuli in order for predictions to be learned. Connectivity condition for the
network: input neurons must be able to transmit stimulation to inhibitory
neurons via output neurons and receive stimulation from the inhibitory
neurons. Time conditions: (1) the interval between the anti cipatory stimulus
and the target stimulus must be closed in less time than τ ; (2) the time window
between transmission and inhibition must be smaller than τ . The value of τ
depends on the memory of the network.
reactive agents with increased number of neurons are favore d by
evolution thanks to their bigger repertoire of reactive beha viors.
Since coupling several excitatory neurons together leads to over-
excitation of the network (maladaptive, synchronized burst s in
vitro; Wagenaar et al., 2005), mutations leading to the apparition
of inhibitory neurons are favored. Even randomly coupled,
inhibitory neurons tend to stabilize spiking networks (
Brunel,
2000). In this random structure, some of the inhibitory neurons
will learn predictions because of LSA, even if the predictions are
not used by the agent. Eventually, the agents that randomly l earn
to make use of these predictions are rewarded by higher ﬁtness ,
and the structure of the network becomes less random and clos er
to our proposed structure, to favor the production of predictions.
We could then have proactive agents.
4. SPECULATING ABOUT INDUCTIVE
AGENTS
Deﬁnition: Inductive agents make generalizations about past
stimuli, and react to new stimuli based on these generalizati ons.
The proactive agent can learn temporal sequences of
stimuli, but it cannot extract relevant features to generali ze
its predictions. It is unable to judge the similarity between
two stimuli, and must learn predictions anew for every
single stimulus.
The last step of the path is the inductive agent. Its ability to
perform classiﬁcation is an advantage when the environment i s
variable or noisy. In these conditions, the agent must learn to
abstract relevant signals from variable inputs.
Here the “similarity” of inputs can be deﬁned in relation to
the predictions that they elicit. For example, if a set of inputs
A ’ are all just noisy versions of input A, they should lead to th e
same predictions and can therefore be considered similar; A ’ a nd
A belong to the same class. “Noise” is one type of variation,
but there can be others that still lead to “similar” prediction s,
where this time prediction similarity is deﬁned relatively t o the
actions aﬀorded by the predictions. The notion of similarity ca n
in this way be propagated from the bottom up through all 3
functions: action, prediction, and classiﬁcation. Same acti on or
same prediction caused by some inputs means that the inputs
belong to the same class.
With artiﬁcial networks, classiﬁcation is typically consider ed
in the context of labeled data. The labels are used to compute an
error signal that is propagated from the output neurons to the
input neurons. For an agent in the biological world, there are
usually no labels, and reward/error signals from the environment
are too sparse to learn to classify even a few thousands of input s.
Predictions can provide the abundant error signal necessary
to learn classiﬁcation: each time step provides a prediction
error. The connections in the network can be optimized at each
time step to give better predictions. Let us suppose a cost on
updating the connections in the network: changing the weight
of one connection is less costly than changing the weight of
two connections, etc. We now have the perfect setup for the
emergence of hierarchies of classes.
In hierarchical networks, the input from lower layers is
aggregated in upper layers into classes that are more and more
general. The most invariant properties of the input end up being
represented by the classes at the top of the hierarchy. In our
proposal, the neurons receiving the raw prediction error are
the neurons close to the input neurons, lower in the hierarchy
(note that this is the opposite of Deep Learning Neural Network
architectures, where the error signal is propagated from high er
layers to lower input layers). The lower layers can remove as
much variance as possible from the input before passing it
to upper neurons. Most of the prediction error, due to the
most variable properties of the input, will be corrected in thes e
lower layers. The remaining error is progressively correcte d
by updating weights in upper layers. Our proposal therefore
minimizes the cost of learning by having the entry point of the
error signal close to the input neurons.
Note that the cost function relies on the similarity measure ,
therefore the similarity measure has to come ﬁrst. Clusteri ng
neurons into modules and organizing the modules hierarchica lly
decreases the number of weights that need to be changed at eac h
update. Clustering is always deﬁned in relation to a similarit y
measure. If the error signal on which weights updates are base d
comes from the diﬀerence between prediction and input, the
similarity measure must also be based on the diﬀerence between
prediction and input.
Földiák (1991) demonstrate a similar result in simulation:
with a local learning rule (minimizing the number of weights
being updated), a predictive neural network learns invarianc es
in temporal sequences and becomes able to do simple
generalizations through groups of cells reacting to similar in puts.
Foldiak’s experiments demonstrate that predictive networks
with a cost on updating the weights learn to cluster their
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 8 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
neurons and become able to perform generalization. Clustering
and generalization are the basis of classiﬁcation as deﬁned in
this paper.
Therefore we hypothesize that predictive abilities are a
necessary condition to obtain the abundant error signal
required to learn classiﬁcation, and updating costs are a
necessary condition to obtain the hierarchical, modular structure
characteristic of generalization. A consequence of this hypothesis
is that classiﬁcation emerges as a way to improve the quality
of predictions.
5. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have outlined necessary, practical evolution ary
steps to go from a reactive to an inductive agent. The steps require
4 conditions to be satisﬁed:
• Connectivity: relevant information from the sensors must be
able to reach the comparison units of the network.
• Predictability: the time correlation between unpredictable
anticipatory stimuli and predictable target stimuli must
be reliable.
• Time condition (1) : the input-output loop must be closed in
less time than a speciﬁc time window τ .
• Time condition (2): the transmission and the inhibition must
be closed in less time than τ .
The reactive agent, although requiring preliminary conditio ns
[Controllability, Connectivity, and time condition (1)], does not
require a well-designed network structure. The network req uires
only excitatory neurons for the agent to learn reactive beha viors.
Prediction requires two additional conditions: Predictab ility and
time condition (2). A network respecting simple structural
rules and containing inhibitory neurons can learn predictiv e
behaviors. The proactive agent, in addition to the four previo us
conditions, requires a more well-designed structure. Our r esults
support the hypothesis that in evolutionary history, at ﬁrst,
reactive agents emerge with simple structured network with
limited type of neurons (excitatory neurons) and neuronal
plasticity. Proactive agents evolve from reactive agents with more
structured network with various type of neurons (excitatory
neurons and inhibitory neurons). Inductive agents, in addi tion
to the previous conditions, require to have a cost on updating t he
weights of the network connections.
Our proposed action-prediction-classiﬁcation evolutionary
path therefore requires, in this order, the evolution of: exc itatory
neurons, inhibitory neurons, cost-based network structur e.
What experiments could consolidate or disprove our
hypotheses? To demonstrate our proposed step for the transitio n
from action to prediction, we must show that inhibitory neuro ns
are used for prediction. This could be demonstrated by ﬁnding
a positive correlation between the activity of inhibitory ne urons
and the value of target stimuli in the environment, especiall y in
animals with a simple nervous system.
The transition from prediction to classiﬁcation
might be supported by extending the experiments of
Kwon and Choe (2008). They showed that generalization
might have evolved from networks with predictable internal
dynamics. If “predictable internal dynamics” reﬂect the fac t
that the networks have learned to predict the environment,
and this environmental predictability is mirrored by intern al
predictability, then this would support our hypothesis of a
transition from predictive networks to generalizing networ ks.
In addition, if the predictable networks show a hierarchical
internal structure with error correction happening primarily
at lower layers, this would further support our proposed
mechanism for the transition from prediction to classiﬁcatio n.
This would demonstrate the relationship between classiﬁcat ion
and prediction.
Our four types of agents depart from Dennett’s four classes
in two major ways. First, we are only interested in learning
happening during the lifetime of an agent: Dennett’s Darwinia n
creatures (which have no learning ability) and Gregorian
creatures (which pass knowledge on beyond the timescale of a
lifetime) are out of the scope of our considerations. Secondly , we
introduce the inductive agent as a step between Popperian and
Gregorian creatures, thus arguing that the ability to gener alize
through the classiﬁcation of stimuli is evolutionary distin ct
from predictive abilities and diﬀerent from trans-generatio nal
learning. Focusing on the evolutionary links between agent s’
abilities made this new classiﬁcation necessary.
There is recent interest in common AI approaches toward
predictive networks, yet the connection between action,
prediction, and classiﬁcation is rarely explored. Indeed, unt il
recently, disembodied classifying networks represented mos t
of the state of the art. From there, interest is slowly shifti ng
toward predictive networks. Our results suggest that the opposite
direction, focusing on prediction and from there evolving
classiﬁcation abilities, can be a fruitful area of research .
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AM and LS contributed equally to this paper as ﬁrst authors,
writing the drafts, and revising the manuscript. TI contribu ted
to the conception and design of the study. All authors
contributed to the manuscript revision, read, and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
AM is supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows (16J09357).
This work is partially supported by MEXT project Studying
a Brain Model based on Self-Simulation and Homeostasis
in Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas
Correspondence and Fusion of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Bra in
Science (19H04979).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the reviewers for their thoughtful comments tha t
helped us improve this paper.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88


--- Page 9 ---
Sinapayen et al. Reactive, Proactive, and Inductive Agents
REFERENCES
Brunel, N. (2000). Dynamics of sparsely connected networks of exci tatory
and inhibitory spiking neurons. J. Comput. Neurosci. 8, 183–208.
doi: 10.1023/A:1008925309027
Buonomano, D. V. (2000). Decoding temporal information: a model
based on short-term synaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci. 20, 1129–1141.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-03-01129.2000
Caporale, N., and Dan, Y. (2008). Spike timing-dependent plasticity :
a Hebbian learning rule. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 25–46.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.060407.125639
Chung, J. R., Kwon, J., and Choe, Y. (2009). “Evolution of recolle ction and
prediction in neural networks, ” in2009 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (Atlanta, GA: IEEE), 571–577.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of
Life. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Drew, P. J., and Abbott, L. F. (2006). Extending the eﬀects of
spike-timing-dependent plasticity to behavioral timescales. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 8876–8881. doi: 10.1073/pnas.06006
76103
Edwards, G., Vetter, P., McGruer, F., Petro, L. S., and Muckli, L. (2017). Predictive
feedback to v1 dynamically updates with sensory input. Sci. Rep. 7:16538.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16093-y
Földiák, P. (1991). Learning invariance from transformation seque nces. Neural
Comput. 3, 194–200.
Klyubin, A. S., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. L. (2005). “Empowerment : a universal
agent-centric measure of control, ” in 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation, Vol. 1 (Edinburgh), 128–135.
Kwon, J., and Choe, Y. (2008). “Internal state predictability as an evolutionary
precursor of self-awareness and agency, ” in 2008 7th IEEE International
Conference on Development and Learning (Monterey, CA: IEEE),
109–114.
Masumori, A. (2019). Homeostasis by action, prediction, selection in embodied
neural networks (Doctoral dissertation). The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
Masumori, A., Sinapayen, L., and Ikegami, T. (2017). “Learning by stimulation
avoidance scales to large neural networks, ” in Proceedings of the 14th European
Conference on Artiﬁcial Life ECAL 2017 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press),
275–282.
Masumori, A., Sinapayen, L., Maruyama, N., Mita, T., Bakkum, D., Fre y, U.,
et al. (2018). “Autonomous regulation of self and non-self by stimula tion
avoidance in embodied neural networks, ” in The 2018 Conference on Artiﬁcial
Life: A Hybrid of the European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life (ECAL) and the
International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of L iving Systems
(ALIFE) (Tokyo), 163–170.
Powers, Albert R., I., Kelley, M., and Corlett, P. R. (2016). Hallucin ations
as top-down eﬀects on perception. Biol.Psychiatry 1, 393–400.
doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2016.04.003
Raman, R., and Sarkar, S. (2016). Predictive coding: a possible
explanation of ﬁlling-in at the blind spot. PLOS ONE 11:e0151194.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151194
Rao, R. P. N., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the vi sual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld eﬀects. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 79–87.
Rao, R. P. N., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2001). Spike-timing-depend ent hebbian
plasticity as temporal diﬀerence learning. Neural Comput. 13, 2221–2237.
doi: 10.1162/089976601750541787
Seth, A., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. (2012). An interoceptive
predictive coding model of conscious presence. Front. Psychol. 2:395.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00395
Sinapayen, L., Masumori, A., and Ikegami, T. (2017). Learning by s timulation
avoidance: a principle to control spiking neural networks dynamics. PLOS ONE
12:e0170388. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170388
Suzuki, K., Roseboom, W., Schwartzman, D. J., and Seth, A. K. (20 17). A deep-
dream virtual reality platform for studying altered perceptual phenomeno logy.
Sci. Rep. 7:15982. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16316-2
Wacongne, C., Changeux, J.-P., and Dehaene, S. (2012). A Neu ronal Model of
Predictive Coding Accounting for the Mismatch Negativity. J. Neurosci. 32,
3665–3678. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5003-11.2012
Wagenaar, D. A., Madhavan, R., Pine, J., and Potter, S. M. (20 05). Controlling
bursting in cortical cultures with closed-loop multi-electrode stimu lation. J.
Neurosci. 25, 680–688. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4209-04.2005
Watanabe, E., Kitaoka, A., Sakamoto, K., Y asugi, M., and Tana ka, K. (2018).
Illusory motion reproduced by deep neural networks trained for predictio n.
Front. Psychol. 9:345. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00345
Conﬂict of Interest: LS is employed by company Sony Computer Science
Laboratories, Inc.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in t he absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Sinapayen, Masumori and Ikegami. This is an open- access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited a nd that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 88
