--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 07 September 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00078
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78
Edited by:
Pulin Gong,
The University of Sydney, Australia
Reviewed by:
Louis Kang,
University of California, Berkeley,
United States
Upinder S. Bhalla,
National Centre for Biological
Sciences, India
Dilawar Singh,
National Centre for Biological
Sciences, Bangalore, India in
collaboration with reviewer UB
Bhanu Priya Somasekharan,
National Centre for Biological
Sciences, Bangalore, India in
collaboration with reviewer UB
*Correspondence:
Philippe Vincent-Lamarre
pvinc058@uottawa.ca
Received: 13 February 2020
Accepted: 24 July 2020
Published: 07 September 2020
Citation:
Vincent-Lamarre P , Calderini M and
Thivierge J-P (2020) Learning Long
Temporal Sequences in Spiking
Networks by Multiplexing Neural
Oscillations.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 14:78.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00078
Learning Long T emporal Sequences
in Spiking Networks by Multiplexing
Neural Oscillations
Philippe Vincent-Lamarre *, Matias Calderini and Jean-Philippe Thivierge
School of Psychology and Center for Neural Dynamics, Univer sity of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Many cognitive and behavioral tasks—such as interval timing , spatial navigation, motor
control, and speech—require the execution of precisely-tim ed sequences of neural
activation that cannot be fully explained by a succession of external stimuli. We show how
repeatable and reliable patterns of spatiotemporal activi ty can be generated in chaotic
and noisy spiking recurrent neural networks. We propose a ge neral solution for networks
to autonomously produce rich patterns of activity by provid ing a multi-periodic oscillatory
signal as input. We show that the model accurately learns a va riety of tasks, including
speech generation, motor control, and spatial navigation. Further, the model performs
temporal rescaling of natural spoken words and exhibits seq uential neural activity
commonly found in experimental data involving temporal pro cessing. In the context of
spatial navigation, the model learns and replays compresse d sequences of place cells
and captures features of neural activity such as the emergence of ripples and theta phase
precession. T ogether, our ﬁndings suggest that combining oscillatory neuronal inputs with
different frequencies provides a key mechanism to generate precisely timed sequences
of activity in recurrent circuits of the brain.
Keywords: neural oscillations, spiking neural networks, r ecurrent neural networks, temporal processing,
balanced networks
1. INTRODUCTION
Virtually every aspect of sensory, cognitive, and motor proce ssing in biological organisms involves
operations unfolding in time (
Buonomano and Maass, 2009 ). In the brain, neuronal circuits
must represent time on a variety of scales, from milliseconds to minutes and longer circadian
rhythms (Buhusi and Meck, 2005). Despite increasingly sophisticated models of brain activity, time
representation remains a challenging problem in computationa l modeling ( Grondin, 2010; Paton
and Buonomano, 2018).
Recurrent neural networks oﬀer a promising avenue to detect and produce precisely timed
sequences of activity (Abbott et al., 2016). However, it is challenging to train these networks due to
their complexity ( Pascanu et al., 2013 ), particularly when operating in a chaotic regime associated
with biological neural networks ( van Vreeswijk and Sompolinsky, 1996; Abarbanel et al., 2008 ).
One avenue to address this issue has been to use reservoir com puting (RC) models ( Jaeger,
2002; Maass et al., 2002 ). Under this framework, a recurrent network (the reservoir) projects onto
a read-out layer whose synaptic weights are adjusted to produc e a desired response. However,
while RC can capture some behavioral and cognitive processes ( Sussillo and Abbott, 2009; Laje
and Buonomano, 2013; Nicola and Clopath, 2017 ), it often relies on biologically implausible
mechanisms, like strong feedback form the readout to the res ervoir or implausible learning rules


--- Page 2 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
required to control the reservoir’s dynamics. Further, cur rent
RC implementations oﬀer little insight to understand how the
brain generates activity that does not follow a strict rhythm ic
pattern (
Buonomano and Maass, 2009; Abbott et al., 2016 ). That
is because RC models are either restricted to learning period ic
functions, or require an aperiodic input to generate an aperiod ic
output, thus leaving the neural origins of aperiodic activity
unresolved (
Abbott et al., 2016 ). A solution to this problem is
to train the recurrent connections of the reservoir to stabi lize
innate patterns of activity ( Laje and Buonomano, 2013 ), but this
approach is more computationally expensive and is sensitive to
structural perturbations (
Vincent-Lamarre et al., 2016).
To address these limitations, we propose a biologically
plausible spiking recurrent neural network (SRNN) model that
receives multiple independent sources of neural oscillations
as input. The architecture we propose is similar to previous
RC implementations (
Nicola and Clopath, 2017 ), but we use
a balanced SRNN following Dale’s law, which are typically
used to model the activity of cortical networks (
van Vreeswijk
and Sompolinsky, 1998; Brunel, 2000 ). The combination of
oscillators with diﬀerent periods creates a multi-periodic co de
that serves as a time-varying input that can largely exceed
the period of any of its individual components. We show
that this input can be generated endogenously by distinct sub-
networks, alleviating the need to train recurrent connecti ons
of the SRNN to generate long segments of aperiodic activity.
Thus, multiplexing a set of oscillators into a SRNN provides an
eﬃcient and neurophysiologically grounded means of controlling
a recurrent circuit (
Vincent-Lamarre et al., 2016 ). Analogous
mechanisms have been hypothesized in other contexts includi ng
grid cell representations ( Fiete et al., 2008 ) and interval timing
(Miall, 1989; Matell and Meck, 2004 ).
This paper is structured as follows. First, we describe a
simpliﬁed scenario where a SRNN that receives a collection of
input oscillations learns to reproduce an arbitrary time-evo lving
signal. Second, we extend the model to show how oscillations
can be generated intrinsically by oscillatory networks tha t can be
either embedded or external to the main SRNN. Third, we show
that a network can learn several tasks in parallel by “tagging ”
each task to a particular phase conﬁguration of the oscillatory
inputs. Fourth, we show that the activity of the SRNN captures
temporal rescaling and selectivity, two features of neural a ctivity
reported during behavioral tasks. Fifth, we train the model
to reproduce natural speech at diﬀerent speeds when cued by
input oscillations. Finally, we employ a variant of the model t o
capture hippocampal activity during spatial navigation. Together,
results highlight a novel role for neural oscillations in reg ulating
temporal processing within recurrent networks of the brain.
2. METHODS
2.1. Integrate-and-Fire Networks
2.1.1. Driven Networks
Our network consists of leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neurons, w here
Nrnn = 1, 000 for the SRNN projecting to the read-out units
and Nosc = 500 for each oscillatory network, by default. Eighty
percent of these neurons are selected to be excitatory while t he
remaining 20% are inhibitory. The membrane potential of all
neurons is given by
C dV
dt = 1
R (EL − V)+ gex(Eex − V)+ gin(Ein − V)+ Itonic + Iext (1)
where C and R are the membrane capacitance and resistance,
EL is the leak reversal potential, gex and gin are the time-
dependent excitatory and inhibitory conductances, Eex and Ein
are the excitatory and inhibitory reversal potentials, Itonic is
a constant current applied to all neurons and Iext is a time-
varying input described below. Parameters were sampled from
Gaussian distributions as described in Table 1. The excitatory
and inhibitory conductances, gex and gin, respectively, obey the
following equations:
τ exi
dgexi
dt = − gexi +
Nrnn∑
j = 1
Wi,jGexi δ (t − t(j) − T(j)
delay) (2)
τ ini
dgini
dt = − gini +
Nrnn∑
j = 1
Wi,jGini δ (t − t(j) − T(j)
delay) (3)
where τ ex and τ in are the time constants of the excitatory and
inhibitory conductances, and Gin and Gex are the change in
conductance from incoming spikes to excitatory and inhibito ry
synapses. Vθ is the spiking threshold, t(j) denotes the time since
the last spike of the pre-synaptic neuron j, after which V is set to
Vreset for a duration equal to τ ref . Tdelay is the propagation delay
of the action potential. The SRNN connectivity is deﬁned as a
Nrnn× Nrnn sparse and static connectivity matrixW with a density
prnn (probability of having a non-zero pairwise connection). The
non-zero connections are drawn from a half-normal distribut ion
f (0, σ rnn), where σ rnn = γ rnn
√
Nrnn× prnn
. All ODEs are solved using a
forward Euler method with time-step )Delta1 t = 0.05 ms. This results
in an asynchronous regular network ( Figure S1).
Each SRNN neuron is connected to each of the Ninp input
units with probability pinp. The external inputs ( Iext) follow:
Iext(t) = M( A
2 (sin(2π ft + φ ) + 1)) (4)
where Iext ∈ I RNrnn and f , φ ∈ I RNinp . The frequency of the
sine waves and their initial phase are represented by f (hz)
and φ are drawn from the uniform distributions U(− π , π ) and
U(fmin, fmax), respectively (ﬁxed for each realization of a task).
The sine wave is then transformed by adding 1 and dividing by
2 to limit its range to [0,A]. The full input-to-SRNN connectiv ity
matrix M is a Nrnn × Ninp sparse and static matrix, with a density
of pinp. The non-zero connections of M are drawn from a normal
distribution N (0, 1) and A is the amplitude of the input (30 pA
by default).
All of the SRNN’s excitatory neurons project to the readout
units. Their spiking activity r is ﬁltered by a double exponential:
τ d
drj
dt = − rj + hj (5)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 3 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
TABLE 1 | SRNN parameters.
Main SRNN Input (oscillatory networks)
N 1,000 500
R 100 M)Omega1 100 M)Omega1
C 200 pF 200 pF
EL µ = − 60 mV ,σ = 1.2 mV µ = − 60 mV ,σ = 0.6 mV
Vθ µ = − 50 mV ,σ = 0.5 mV µ = − 50 mV ,σ = 0.5 mV
Vreset µ = − 60 mV ,σ = 1.2 mV µ = − 60 mV ,σ = 0.6 mV
Itonic 90 pA 90 pA
Tdelay µ = 1 ms, σ = 0.02 ms µ = 1 ms, σ = 0.01 ms
τ ref µ = 2 ms, σ = 0.04 ms µ = 2 ms, σ = 0.02 ms
Gex µ = 20 pS, σ = 0.4 pS µ = 30 pS, σ = 0.03 pS
Gin µ = 160 pS, σ = 3.2 pS µ = 140 pS, σ = 1.4 pS
τ ex µ = 20 ms, σ = 0.4 ms µ = 20 ms, σ = 0.2 ms
τ in µ = 20 ms, σ = 0.4 ms µ = 80 ms, σ = 0.8 ms
Eex 0 mV 0 mV
Ein − 80 mV − 80 mV
prnn 0.1 1
pinp 0.3 1
γ rnn 1 1
τ r
dhj
dt = − hj + 1
τ d
N∑
j = 1
δ (t − t(j)) (6)
where τ r = 6 ms is the synaptic rise time and τ d = 60 ms is the
synaptic decay time.
2.2. Output and T arget Functions
The signal derived from Equations (5) and (6) is sent to the Nout
linear output units resulting in the ﬁnal output ˆy = WT
out(t)r(t).
Wout is initialized as a N(ex)
rnn × Nout null matrix that is modiﬁed
according to the learning rule described below (see trainin g
procedure). Nout is the number of readout units and N(ex)
rnn is the
number of excitatory neurons in the SRNN.
Unless otherwise stated, the target functions y ∈ I RNout
employed to train the model were generated from white noise
with a normal distribution N(0, 30), then low-pass ﬁltered with a
cut-oﬀ at 6 Hz. To assess network performance, we computed the
Pearson correlation between the output of the network ( ˆy) and
the target function (y).
2.3. Learning Algorithm for the Readout
Unit
We used the recursive least square algorithm (
Haykin, 2002) to
train the readout units to produce the target functions. The Wout
weight matrix was updated based on the following equations:
Wout(t) = Wout(t − )Delta1 t) − P(t)r(t)e(t)T, (7)
e(t) = ˆ y − y(t). (8)
Where the error e(t) was determined by the diﬀerence between
the values of the readout units obtained with the multiplicat ion
of the reservoir’s activity with the weights Wout, and the target
functions’ values y at time t. Each weight update was separated
by a time interval )Delta1 t of 2.5 ms for all simulations. P is a running
estimate of the inverse of the correlation matrix of the netw ork
rates r (see Equation 5), modiﬁed according to Equation (9) and
initialized with Equation (10).
P(t) = P(t − )Delta1 t) − P(t − )Delta1 t)r(t)rT(t)P(t − )Delta1 t)
1 + rT(t)P(t − )Delta1 t)r(t) , (9)
P(0) = I
α . (10)
where I is the identity matrix and α is a learning rate constant.
2.4. Oscillatory Networks
2.4.1. External Drive
Each oscillatory network obey the same equations as the SRNNs.
However, theIext term in Equation (1) is replaced by a summation
of the following step functions:
I(ex) =
{
0 if tstim > t, or t > tex
end
AWin otherwise (11)
I(in) =
{
0 if tstim > t, or t > tin
end
AWin otherwise (12)
where tstim = 500 ms, tex
end denotes the end of the excitatory pulse
and tin
end (diﬀerent across oscillatory networks) is the end of the
inhibitory pulse, where tex
end >tin
end and Win ∈ I RNosc representing
the connections from the tonic inputs to the oscillatory networks,
where A = 20 pA.
The oscillatory networks each project to the SRNN with a
Nrnn × (Nosc × Ninp) sparse and static connectivity matrix M,
where each oscillatory network projects to the SRNN with a
density of pinp = 0.5. The non-zero connections are drawn from
a normal distribution N (0, σ inp), where:
σ inp = γ inp
√pinpNrnnNosc
(13)
and γ inp = 10 (a.u.) by default.
Where stated in section 3, the SRNN projects back to the
oscillatory networks with a (Nosc × Ninp) × Nrnn sparse and static
connectivity matrix M′, where each SRNN unit projects to the
oscillatory networks with a density of pfb = 0.5 and γ fb = 0.5.
The non-zero connections are drawn from a normal distributio n
N (0, σ fb), where:
σ fb = γ fb√pfbNrnnNosc
. (14)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 4 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
2.4.2. Selection of Stable Networks
As we were interested in regimes where the networks would
produce reliable and repeatable oscillations to be used as an
input to our model, we considered networks with an inter-tria l
correlation coeﬃcient (10 trials) of their mean ﬁring-rate greater
than 0.95 as stable. A wide range of parameter combinations
lead to reliable oscillations, but diﬀerent random initiali zations
of networks with the same parameters can lead to drastically
diﬀerent behavior, both in activity type (ansynchronous and
synchronous) and inter-trial reliability (Figure S4).
2.5. Jitter Accumulation in Input Phase
While a perfect sinusoidal input such as the one in Equation
(21) allows for well-controlled simulations, it is unreali stic from
a biological standpoint. To address this issue, we added jitt er
to the input phase of each input unit. This was achieved by
converting the static input phase injected into unit k φ k to a
random walk φ k(t). First, we discretize time into non-overlapping
bins of length )Delta1 t, such that tn = )Delta1 t∗n. From there, we iteratively
deﬁne φ (t) (index k is dropped to alleviate the notation) as:
φ t+ )Delta1 t = φ t + ε t ⇐ ⇒ φ n+ 1 = φ n + ε n+ 1 (15)
with
φ (0) = φ 0 (16)
ε ∼ N (0, σ 2
φ )Delta1 t) (17)
from initial value φ 0, sampled from a uniform distribution as
speciﬁed previously. More intuitively, φ (t) can be constructed as:
φ (0) = φ 0
φ 1 = φ 0 + ε 1
φ 2 = φ 1 + ε 2 = φ 0 + ε 1
...
φ N = φ 0 +
N∑
n = 1
ε n (18)
On average, the resulting deviation from the deterministic signal,
i.e., E [φ N − φ 0], is null. On the other hand, one can calculate
its variance:
var ( φ N − φ 0) = var
(
φ 0 +
N∑
n = 1
ε n − φ 0
)
= var
( N∑
n = 1
ε n
)
Since all ε n are i.i.d:
N∑
n = 1
var ( ε n) = Nvar ( ε n)
= Nσ 2
φ )Delta1 t
⇔ var ( φ N − φ 0) = tσ 2
φ (19)
For ease of comparison, we can express the equivalent standard
deviation in degrees (see Figure S8):
σ deg =
√
tσ 2
φ
180
π (20)
2.6. Model for Place Cells Sequence
Formation
2.6.1. Network Architecture and Parameters
We employed a balanced recurrent network similar to the ones
used for all other simulations, with a few key diﬀerences. The
input consisted of Ninp = 20 oscillators with periods ranging
from 7.5 to 8.5 Hz that densely projected to the SRNN ( p = 1)
and follow:
Iext(t) = M(sin(2π ft + φ ) + 1) (21)
C was set to 100 pF for all neurons and γ rnn was set to
0.5. We removed the readout unit and connections, and we
selected 10 random excitatory cells ( Nplace) as place cells. Those
cells had parameters identical to the other SRNN excitatory
units, except:
1. We set the resting potential of those cells to the mean of EL,
to avoid higher values that could lead to high spontaneous
activity (that in turn can lead to spurious learning).
2. A 600 ms sine wave at 10 Hz with an amplitude of 60 pA was
injected in each of the place cells at a given time representing
the animal going through its place ﬁeld.
3. The connections between the input oscillators and the place
cells were modiﬁed following Equation (22).
We modeled the environmental input (10 Hz depolarization of
CA1 place cells) based on a representation of the animal’s location
that was fully dependent on time. In order to explain phase
precession, our model relied on an environmental input of a
slightly higher frequency than the background theta oscill ation,
as suggested in
Lengyel et al. (2003).
The learning rule seeks to optimize the connections between
the oscillating inputs and the place cells in order to make them
ﬁre whenever the right phase conﬁguration is reached (
Miall,
1989; Matell and Meck, 2004).
We used a band-pass ﬁlter between 4 and 12 Hz to isolate the
theta rhythm in the SRNN. We then used a Hilbert transform to
obtain the instantaneous phase of the resulting signal.
2.6.2. Learning Algorithm
We developed a correlation-based learning rule (
Kempter et al.,
1999) inspired by the results obtained by ( Bittner et al., 2017):
Mi,k(t + )Delta1 t) = Mi,k + α Iextk (t) (22)
where i ∈ { 1, . . ., Nplace}, k ∈ { 1, . . ., Ninp} and α = 0.25. With
this rule, the weight update is only applied when a burst occurs
in the place cells. A burst is deﬁned as any spike triplets that
occur within 50 ms. In experiments, these post-synaptic bursts
were associated with Ca2+ plateaus in place cells (
Bittner et al.,
2017) that lead to a large potentiation of synaptic strength with as
few as ﬁve pairings. The connections of M were initialized from
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 5 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
FIGURE 1 | Oscillation driven SRNN to learn complex temporal tasks. (A) Schematic of the model’ s architecture. This implementatio n has two input units that inject
sine-waves in a subset of the SRNN’ s neurons. M denotes the connections from the input units to the SRNN neur ons. W denotes the recurrent connectivity matrix of
the SRNN. Wout denotes the trainable connections from the excitatory SRNN neurons to the readout unit. (B) Example showing how two sine waves of different
frequencies can be combined to generate a two-dimensional f unction with a period longer than either sine wave. (C) Sample average current per neuron, raster and
average instantaneous ﬁring rate over one trial, respective ly. The external drive is only delivered to a subset of SRNN un its (pinp = 0.3) for each input unit. (D) Output of
the readout unit during testing trials (learning rule turne d off) interleaved during training. The nearly constant out put without the input is due to random activity in the
SRNN (E) Pearson correlation between the output of the network and th e target function as a function of the number of training epoc hs when driven with (blue) and
without (red) multi-periodic input. (F) Pearson correlation between the output and the target funct ion as neurons of the SRNN are clamped.
a half-normal distribution f (0, σ inp), where σ inp = 0.1 and the
signal amplitude A was set to 1. M was bound between 0 and 5σ inp
during training.
2.7. Audio Processing for Speech Learning
We used the numpy/python audio tools from
Kastner (2019) ,
adapted by Sainburg (2018) , to process the audio WA VE ﬁle.
We used the built-in functions to convert the audio ﬁle to a
mel-scaled spectrogram and to invert it back to a waveform.
3. RESUL TS
3.1. A Cortical Network Driven by
Oscillations
We began with a basic implementation of our model where
artiﬁcial oscillations served as input to a SRNN ( Figure 1A)—in
a later section, we will describe a more realistic version wh ere
recurrent networks generate these oscillations intrinsica lly.
In this simpliﬁed model, two input nodes, but potentially
more ( Figure S2), generate sinusoidal functions of diﬀerent
frequencies. These input nodes project onto a SRNN that
is a conductance-based leaky integrate-and-ﬁre (LIF) mode l
(
Destexhe, 1997 ) with balanced excitation and inhibition ( van
Vreeswijk and Sompolinsky, 1996 ). Every cell in the network
is either strictly excitatory or inhibitory, thus respectin g
Dale’s principle.
The combination of Ninp input oscillators will generate a
sequence of unique Ninp-dimensional vectors where the sequence
lasts as long as the least common multiple of the inputs’
individual periods (
Vincent-Lamarre et al., 2016 ). For instance,
two sine waves with periods of 200 and 250 ms would create a
multi-periodic input with a period lasting 1,000 ms. This eﬀect
can be viewed as a two-dimensional state-space where each axis
is an individual sine wave ( Figure 1B). Using a phase reset of the
oscillations on every trial can then evoke a repeatable pattern
of activity in the downstream population of neurons. Thus,
multiplexed oscillations provide the network with inputs whose
timescale largely exceeds that of individual units.
When a SRNN ( Nres = 2,000) was injected with oscillations,
excitatory and inhibitory populations modulated their activ ity
over time, while the average input currents to individual neu rons
remained balanced ( Figure 1C, top panel). To illustrate the
beneﬁts of oscillatory inputs on a SRNN, we designed a simple
task where a network was trained to reproduce a target functio n
consisting of a time-varying signal generated from low-pass
ﬁltered noise ( Figure 1C, bottom panel). Simulations were split
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 6 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
into a training and a testing phase. During the training phase,
the network was training when receiving a combination of two
oscillatory inputs at 4 and 5 Hz. Synaptic weights from the
SRNN to the read-out were adjusted using the recursive least-
squares learning algorithm (
Haykin, 2002 ) adapted to spiking
units ( Nicola and Clopath, 2017 ). During the testing phase,
synaptic weights were frozen and the network’s performance
was assessed by computing the Pearson correlation between
the target function and the network’s output. This correlati on
increased to 0.9 within the ﬁrst 10 training epochs and remain ed
stable thereafter ( Figures 1D,E). By comparison, the output of
a similar network with no oscillatory inputs (i.e., there is n o
external input and the SRNN is in a spontaneous chaotic regime)
remained uncorrelated to the target function. Thus, oscilla tory
inputs create rich and reliable dynamics in the SRNN that enabled
the read-out to produce a target function that evolved over ti me
in a precise manner. The network displays some tolerance to
deviations of the input phase of the oscillations that accumul ates
over time and Gaussian noise ( Figures S1, S8).
Next, we investigated the resilience of the network to
structural perturbations where a number of individual neuro ns
from the SRNN were “clamped” (i.e., held at resting potential)
after training (
Vincent-Lamarre et al., 2016 ). Removing neurons
can alter the trajectory of the SRNN upon the presentation of the
same stimulus, and it reduces the dimensionality of the read out
unit. We trained a network for 10 epochs, then froze the weight s
and tested its performance on producing the target output. We
then gradually clamped an increasing proportion of neurons
from the SRNN. The network’s performance decreased gradually
as the percentage of clamped units increased ( Figure 1F).
Remarkably, the network produced an output that correlated
strongly with the target function (correlation of 0.7) even when
10% of neurons were clamped. Further exploration of the model
shows a wide range of parameters that yield high performances
(Figure S2). Oscillatory inputs thus enabled SRNN to produce
precise and repeatable patterns of activity under a wide range
of modeling conditions. Next, we improved upon this simple
model by developing a more biologically-inspired network that
generated oscillations intrinsically.
3.2. Endogenously Generated Oscillatory
Activity
While our results thus far have shown the beneﬁts of input
oscillations when training a SRNN model, we did not consider
their neural origins. To address this issue, we developed a mo del
that replaces this artiﬁcial input with activity generated by a n
“oscillator” spiking network acting as a central pattern gener ator
(
Marder and Calabrese, 1996).
To do so, we took advantage of computational results
showing that sparsely connected networks can transition fro m
FIGURE 2 | SRNN driven with intrinsically generated oscillations. (A) T op: Sample rasters from one network on ﬁve different trials. Bottom: Average and standard error
of the excitatory (red) and inhibitory (blue) conductance o f a stable network on ﬁve different trials (see section 2). The network is asynchronous when the external drive
is off, and becomes periodic when turned on. (B) Architecture of the augmented model. As in Figure 1A, W and Wout denote the recurrent and readout connections,
respectively. M is the connection matrix from the input to the SRNN, except th at the input units are now replaced by networks of neurons. M′ denotes the feedback
connections from the SRNN to the oscillatory network. Winp denotes the connections providing the tonic depolarizatio n to the oscillatory networks. (C) Connectivity
matrix of the model. The external drive is provided solely to the oscillatory networks that project to the SRNN that in tur n projects to the readout unit. (D) External
inputs provided to the oscillatory networks with varied inh ibitory transients associated with each excitatory input. (E) T op: Sample activity of the oscillatory networks
(green) on two separate trials with different inputs, and th e SRNN for one trial (input #1). Bottom: PSTH of the network’ s neurons activity on ﬁve different trials with
input #1. (F) Post-training output of the network, where input #1 was pair ed with the target, but input #2 was not.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 7 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
an asynchronous to a periodic synchronous regime in response
to a step current (
Brunel, 2000; Brunel and Hansel, 2006;
Thivierge et al., 2014 ), thus capturing in vivo activity ( Buzsáki
and Draguhn, 2004 ) (see section 2; Figure 2A). The periodicity
of the synchronous events could therefore potentially be use d to
biologically capture the eﬀects of artiﬁcially generated sine waves.
In simulations, we found that this transition was robust to
both synaptic noise and neuronal clamping ( Figure S3). Further,
the frequency of synchronized events could be modulated by
adjusting the strength of the step current injected in the ne twork,
with stronger external inputs leading to a higher frequency o f
events ( Figure S3). Thus, oscillator networks provide a natural
neural substrate for input oscillations into a recurrent net work.
From there, we formed a model where three oscillator
networks fed their activity to a SRNN ( Figure 2B). These
oscillator networks had the same internal parameters except
for the inhibitory decay time constants of their recurrent
synapses ( τ in = 70, 100, and 130 ms for each network) thus
yielding diﬀerent oscillatory frequencies ( Figures S3, S4). In
order to transition from an asynchronous to a synchronous
state, the excitatory neurons of the oscillator networks re ceived
a step current.
The full connectivity matrix of this large model is depicted
in Figure 2C. As shown, the oscillator networks send sparse
projections (with a probability of 0.3 between pairs of units)
to the SRNN units. Only the excitatory neurons of the SRNN
project to the readout units. There is weak feedback from
the SRNN to the oscillators—in supplementary simulations,
we found that strong feedback projections desynchronized
the oscillator networks ( Figures S2, S5). The feedback
connections were included to simulate a case where the
oscillators networks would be embedded in the SRNN
(and therefore exhibit some degree of local connectivity),
instead of sending eﬀerent connections from an upstream
brain region.
A sample of the full model’s activity is shown in Figure 2E.
Both the oscillator and the SRNN showed asynchronous activity
until a step current was injected into the excitatory units o f
the oscillator networks. In response to this step current, bot h
oscillator and SRNN transitioned to a synchronous regime. The
FIGURE 3 | Parallel training of multiple tasks. (A) Schematic of the model’ s architecture with an additional re adout unit. An example of possible phase shifted inputs is
shown at the bottom. (B) Trajectory of the SRNN on the ﬁrst three components of a PCA. Wi thout an external input, the network is spontaneously activ e and
constrained in a subspace of the state-space (depicted by th e circle). Upon injection of the input, the SRNN’ s activity i s kicked into the trajectory related to the input.
(C) Output of the two readout units after the ﬁrst and tenth traini ng epochs. The colored line of epoch #10 shows the average of 5 trials (black lines). (D) Heat map
showing the performance of the model on tasks with different lengths and frequencies.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 8 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
model reverted back to an asynchronous regime once the step
current was turned oﬀ.
To illustrate the behavior of this model, we devised a “cued”
task similar to the one described above, where the goal was to
reproduce a random time-varying signal. When learning this
signal, however, the oscillator networks received a cue (“I nput
1”) consisting of a combination of excitatory step current a nd
transient inhibitory input ( Figure 2D) that alters the relative
phase of the input oscillators, but not their frequency. Follo wing
20 epochs of training, we switched to a testing phase and showed
that the model closely matched the target signal ( Figure 2F).
Crucially, this behavior of the model was speciﬁc to the cue
provided during training: when a diﬀerent, novel cue (shaped by
inhibitory transients) was presented to the network (“Input 2”), a
diﬀerent output was produced ( Figure 2F).
In sum, the model was able to learn a complex time-
varying signal by harnessing internally-generated oscilla tions
that controlled the ongoing activity of a SRNN. In the followin g
section, we aimed to further explore the computational capacit y
of the model by training a SRNN on multiple tasks in parallel.
3.3. An Artiﬁcial Network That Learns to
Multitask
To explore the ability of the model to learn two tasks
concurrently, we reverted to our initial model with artiﬁci al
oscillations, allowing for a more principled control of the in put
injected to the SRNN. The oscillatory input consisted of three
sine waves of diﬀerent frequencies ( Figure 3A) (more inputs
units lead to better performances, Figure S2). We trained this
model on two diﬀerent motor control tasks that required the
network to combine the output of two readout units in order to
draw either a circle or a star in two dimensions. Here, each of
the outputs corresponded to x- and y-coordinates, respectively .
The phase of the oscillations (“Input 1” vs. “Input 2”) were
individually paired with only one of the two tasks in alternat ion
(Figure 3A).
We employed a principal component analysis (PCA) to
visualize the activity of the SRNN before and during training
(Figure 3B). Before injecting the oscillatory inputs, the network
generated spontaneous activity that occupied a limited portion of
the state space (Figure 3B, circle). During training, the oscillatory
inputs were turned on, resulting in diﬀerent trajectories
depending on the relative phase of the oscillations. The networ k
thus displayed a distinct pattern of activity for each of the
two tasks.
Viewed in two dimensions, the outputs of the network rapidly
converged to a circle and a star that corresponded to each of th e
two target shapes when given each respective input separately
(Figure 3C). These shapes were speciﬁc to the particular phase
of the oscillatory input—in a condition where we presented a
randomly-chosen phase conﬁguration to the network, the output
did not match either of the trained patterns ( Figure 3C).
Finally, we tested the ability of the model to learn a number o f
target signals varying in duration and frequency. We genera ted
a number of target functions consisting of ﬁltered noise (as
described previously), and varied their duration as well as thecut-
oﬀ frequencies of band-pass ﬁltering. The network performed
optimally for tasks with relatively low frequency ( <30 Hz) and
shorter duration ( <5 s), and had a decent performance for even
longer targets (e.g., correlation of r = 0.5 for a time of 7 s and a
frequency below 30 Hz; Figure 3D).
In sum, the model was able to learn multiple tasks in parallel
based on the phase conﬁguration of the oscillatory inputs to th e
SRNN units. The range of target signals that could be learned was
dependent upon their duration and frequency. The next section
will investigate another aptitude of the network, where a targ et
signal can be rescaled in time without further training.
3.4. T emporal Rescaling of Neuronal
Activity
A key aspect of many behavioral tasks based on temporal
sequences is that once learned they can be performed faster or
slower without additional training. For example, when a new
word is learned, it can be spoken faster or slower without havi ng
to learn the diﬀerent speeds separately.
We propose a straightforward mechanism to rescale a learned
temporal sequence in the model. Because the activity of the model
strongly depends upon the structure of its oscillatory inputs, w e
conjectured that the model may generate a slower or faster output
by multiplying the period of the oscillatory inputs by a common
factor. Biologically, such a factor might arise from aﬀerent neural
structures that modulate oscillatory activity (
Brunel, 2000). Due
to the highly non-linear properties of the network, it is not tri vial
that rescaling the inputs would expand or compress its activity
in a way that preserves key features of the output (
Goudar and
Buonomano, 2018).
To test the above mechanism, we trained a SRNN receiving
sine wave inputs to produce a temporal sequence of low-pass
ﬁltered random activity. After the pair of input-target was trained
for 10 epochs, we tested the network by injecting it with sine
waves that were either compressed or expanded by a ﬁxed
factor relative to the original inputs ( Figure 4A). To evaluate
the network’s ability to faithfully replay the learned seque nce,
we computed the Pearson correlation between the output of the
network ( Figure 4B) and a compressed or expanded version of
the target signal.
Performance degraded gradually with inputs that were
expanded or contracted in time relative to the target signal ( i.e.,
as the rescaling factor moved further away from 1) ( Figure 4C).
Further, performance degraded more slowly beyond a rescalin g
factor of 1.5, particularly when input noise was absent, suggesting
some capacity of the network to expand the target signal in
time ( Figure S7). This result oﬀered a qualitative match to
experimental ﬁndings (
Hardy et al., 2018 ) and the performance
of the network was tolerant to small phase deviations resultin g
from the addition of random jitter in the phase of all the input
oscillations (Figure S8).
In sum, rescaling the speed of the input oscillations by
a common factor lead to a corresponding rescaling of the
learned task, with compressed neural activity resulting in m ore
error than expanded activity. The next section examines some
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 9 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
FIGURE 4 | T emporal rescaling of the network’ s activity. (A) Activity of two input units with different rescaling factor s. Each phase is represented in a different color.
The two dots shown for the different velocities are spaced at a constant proportion of the whole duration, and show that th e phase alignment of the two oscillators is
preserved across different rescaling factors. (B) Output of the network for different rescaling factors. The t arget is represented by the gray dashed line. (C) Pearson
correlation between the output and the target function for d ifferent rescaling factors and different input noise varia nce (σ ). (D) Spiking activity of the RNN at 0.75X, 1X,
2X, and 3X sorted based on the peak of the activity at the origi nal scaling (1X). (E) Average excitatory (red), inhibitory (blue), and external input (green) received by each
cell aligned on their peak ﬁring rate (at t = 0 ms). The combined inputs (black, external + excitation - in hibition) is represented at the bottom.
of the underlying features of activity in a SRNN driven by
oscillatory inputs.
3.5. T emporal Selectivity of Artiﬁcial
Neurons
A hallmark of temporal processing in brain circuits is that som e
subpopulations of neurons increase their ﬁring rate at speciﬁc
times during the execution of a timed task (
Harvey et al., 2012;
Mello et al., 2015; Bakhurin et al., 2017 ). To see whether this
feature was present in the model, we injected similar oscillat ory
inputs as above (10 input units between 5 and 10 Hz for 1 s)
for 30 trials. To match experimental analyses, we convoluted
the ﬁring rate of each neuron from the SRNN with a Gaussian
kernel (s.d. = 20 ms), averaged their activity over all trials,
and converted the resulting values to a z-score. To facilitat e
visualization, we then sorted these z-scores by the timing o f their
peak activity. We retained only the neurons that were active
during the simulations (71%). Results showed a clear temporal
selectivity whereby individual neurons increased their ﬁr ing rate
at a preferred time relative to the onset of each trial ( Figure 4D).
These “selectivity peaks” in neural activity were maintaine d
in the same order when we expanded or contracted the
input oscillations by a ﬁxed factor ( Figure 4A), and sorted
neurons based on the original input oscillations ( Figure 4D),
thus capturing recent experimental results (
Mello et al., 2015 ).
To shed light on the ability of simulated neurons to exhibit
temporal selectivity, we examined the timing of excitatory a nd
inhibitory currents averaged across neurons of the SRNN. We
then aligned these currents to the timing of selectivity peak s
and found elevated activity around the time of trial-averag ed
peaks (Figure 4E). Therefore, both the input E/I currents and the
external inputs drive the activity of the neurons near their pe ak
response, showing that both intrinsic and external sources d rives
the temporal selectivity of individual neurons.
In sum, neurons from the SRNN show sequential patterns
of activity by leveraging a combination of external drive an d
recurrent connections within the network. Next, we examine d
the ability of the model to learn a naturalistic task of
speech production.
3.6. Learning Natural Speech, Fast, and
Slow
In a series of simulations, we turned to a biologically and
behaviorally relevant task of natural speech learning. This t ask
is of particular relevance to temporal sequence learning give n the
precise yet ﬂexible nature of speech production: once we learn t o
pronounce a word, it is straightforward to alter the speed at which
this word is spoken without the need for further training. We thus
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 10 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
FIGURE 5 | Speech learning and production with temporal rescaling. (A) Workﬂow of the transformation and learning of the target audi o sequence. (B) The input
frequencies are either sped-up or slowed-down in order to in duce temporal rescaling of the speed of execution of the task . (C) The rescaled output spectrograms are
scaled back to the original speed in order to compare them to t he target spectrogram. (D) Average correlation between the output and target of all cha nnels of the
spectrograms for the different rescaling factors.
designed a task where an artiﬁcial neural network must learn to
utter spoken words in the English language and pronounce them
slower or faster given the appropriate input, without retrainin g.
To train a network on this task, we began by extracting the
waveform from an audio recording of the word “reservoir” and
converting this waveform to a spectrogram ( Figure 5A). We
then employed a compression algorithm to bin the full range of
frequencies into 64 channels spanning a range from 300 Hz to 8
kHz (see section 2). Each of these channels were mapped onto
an individual readout unit of the model. Synaptic weights of t he
SRNN to the readout were trained to reproduce the amplitude
of the 64 channels over time. The output spectrogram obtained
from the readout units was converted to an audio waveform and
compared to the target waveform (see Movie S1).
Following training, the network was able to produce a
waveform that closely matched the target word ( Figure 5A). To
examine the ability of the network to utter the same word fast er
or slower, we employed the rescaling approach described earlie r,
where we multiplied the input oscillations by a constant factor
(Figure 4A).
Our model was able to produce both faster and slower speech
than what it had learned (Figure 5B). Scaling the outputs back to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 11 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
the original speed showed that the features of the spectrogram
were well replicated ( Figure 5C). The correlation between the
rescaled outputs and target signal decreased as a function of the
rescaling factor ( Figure 5D), in a manner similar to the above
results on synthetic signals ( Figure 4C).
Results thus suggest that multiplexing oscillatory inputs
enabled a SRNN to acquire and rescale temporal sequences
obtained from natural speech. In the ﬁnal section below, we
employed our model to capture hippocampal activity during a
well-studied task of spatial navigation.
3.7. T emporal Sequence Learning During
Spatial Navigation
Thus far, we have modeled tasks where units downstream of the
SRNN are learning continuous signals in time. In this section , we
turned to a task of spatial navigation that required the model to
learn a discrete sequence of neural activity.
A wealth of experiments shows that subpopulations of
neurons become selectively active for speciﬁc task-related t ime
intervals. A prime example is seen in hippocampal theta
sequences (
Foster and Wilson, 2007 ) that are observed during
FIGURE 6 | Formation of place cell sequences and replay. (A) Subpopulations of CA3 cells oscillating in the theta range a nd projecting to CA1. CA1 place cells are
driven by a slightly faster oscillating input upon entering their place ﬁeld. (B) RC implementation of the phenomenological model. The input layer is composed of
oscillatory units (CA3) and CA1 is modeled by a SRNN where 10 e xcitatory units (purple) are randomly selected as place cel ls. The connections from the input to the
place cells are subject to training. (C) T op: Each of the 10 SRNN place cells were driven by a depolariz ing oscillating input in a temporal sequence analogous to a
mouse moving along a linear track. Bottom: Resulting theta f requency of the combined oscillations (red). Each number sh ows a place cell activated at a given time
along the ongoing theta input. The multi-periodic input fro m CA3 guarantees that each place cell is activated with a uniq ue combination of the input, following the
sequence in which the cell is active. (D) Multiplexing CA3 inputs generates a visible theta oscillat ion in the CA1 SRNN. (E) Spike times of the ten place cells in relation
to the phase of the population theta activity. Each dot repre sents a spike at a certain time/position. Each cell shows a shi ft toward earlier theta phase as the animal
moves along its place ﬁelds. (F) Activity of cell #10 upon entering its place ﬁeld. T op: theta b and-passed activity of the SRNN (red) and place ﬁeld related i nput (dashed
black). Bottom: phase of the theta oscillation (gray) and sp ike times. (G) T op shows a heatmap of the place cell activity and bottom show s the spike raster during each
phase of training. Before training: All place cells are sile nt. During training: place cells are depolarized upon enter ing their place ﬁeld. After training: a similar sequence
is evoked without the external stimulation used during trai ning. (H) Rescaling the input (factor of X0.15) leads to a high-freque ncy input reminiscent of ripples. A
compressed version of the sequence learned in (G) is evoked, and a reversed sequence is evoked when a reverse “r ipple” is injected in the SRNN.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 12 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
spatial navigation in rodents, where individual place cells
(
O’Keefe, 1976 ) increase their ﬁring rate at a given location in
space (place ﬁelds). During spatial navigation, the hippocampus
shows oscillatory activity in the theta range (4–12 Hz), lik ely
originating from both the medial septum (
Dragoi et al., 1999) and
within hippocampus (Traub et al., 1989; Goutagny et al., 2009 ).
In a series of simulations, we examined how neurons in a
SRNN may beneﬁt from theta oscillations to bind and replay such
discrete place cells sequences. We designed a SRNN (associate d
with area CA1,
Foster and Wilson, 2007 ) that received inputs
from multiple input oscillators (CA3, Montgomery et al., 2009 )
(Figures 6A,B). We randomly selected 10 excitatory units within
the SRNN and labeled them as “place cells.” To simulate the
response of place cells to an environmental input indicating th e
spatial location of the animal (
Frank et al., 2000), we depolarized
these cells by an oscillating input at 10 Hz for 600 ms with a
speciﬁc onset that diﬀered across neurons in order to capture
their respective place ﬁelds (assuming a ﬁxed spatiotemporal
relation of 100 ms = 5 cm on a linear track). In this way, the
sequential activation of place cells from the SRNN mimicked th e
response of CA1 neurons to an animal walking along a linear
track (Figure 6C). Although we modeled the task as a sequence
of multiple place cells, it could also be performed with individ ual
place cells.
To capture the eﬀect of theta oscillations on CA1 activity,
all neurons from the SRNN were driven by a combination of
multiple oscillating inputs where the frequency of each input
was drawn from a uniform distribution in the range of 7–
9 Hz. Connections from the input units and the place cells
within the SRNN were modiﬁed by a synaptic plasticity rule
(see section 2).
As expected from the input oscillators, mean population
activity of the SRNN exhibited prominent theta activity
(Figure 6D). To assess the baseline performance of the model, we
ran an initial simulation with oscillatory inputs but no syna ptic
plasticity or place ﬁelds (i.e., no environmental inputs to theplace
cells). All place cells of the model remained silent ( Figure 6G).
Next, we ran a training phase simulating a single lap of the virtual
track lasting 5 s, where place cells received oscillatory input s
(CA3) as well as a depolarizing oscillation (10 Hz) whenever
the cell entered its place ﬁeld. During this lap, individual pla ce
cells entered their respective ﬁeld only once. We assessed th e
performance of the model during a testing phase where both
synaptic plasticity and depolarizing oscillations were turne d oﬀ.
During the testing phase, place cells yielded a clear sequence
of activation that matched the ﬁring pattern generated durin g
training ( Figure 6G). Thus, place cell activity was linked to the
phase of the oscillatory inputs after a single lap of exploratio n.
Going further, we explored two key aspects of place cell
activity in the SRNN that are reported in hippocampus, namely
phase precession and rapid replay. During phase precession, the
phase of ﬁring of place cells exhibits a lag that increases with
every consecutive cycle of the theta oscillation (
O’Keefe and
Recce, 1993; Foster and Wilson, 2007 ). We examined this eﬀect
in the model by extracting the instantaneous phase of ﬁring
relative to the global ﬁring rate ﬁltered between 4 and 12 Hz. The
activity of individual place cells from the SRNN relative to th eta
activity exhibited an increasing phase lag characteristic o f phase
precession (Figures 6E,F).
A second feature of hippocampal activity is the rapid replay of
place cells during rest and sleep in a sequence that mirrors th eir
order of activation during navigation (
Lee and Wilson, 2002 ).
This replay can arise in either a forward or reverse order from
the original sequence of activation (
Foster and Wilson, 2006). We
compressed (factor of 0.15) the CA3 theta oscillations injec ted
in the SRNN during training, resulting in rapid (50–55 Hz)
bursts of activity ( Figure 6H). These fast oscillations mimicked
the sharp-wave ripples that accompany hippocampal replay (
Lee
and Wilson, 2002). In response to these ripples, place cells of the
SRNN exhibited a pattern of response that conserved the order
of activation observed during training ( Figure 6H). Further, a
reverse replay was obtained by inverting the ripples (that is,
reversing the order of the compressed sequence) presented to t he
SRNN (Figure 6H).
In sum, oscillatory inputs allowed individual neurons of the
model to respond selectively to external inputs in a way that
captured the sequential activation and replay of hippocampal
place cells during a task of spatial navigation.
4. DISCUSSION
4.1. Summary of Results
Taken together, our results suggest that large recurrent ne tworks
can beneﬁt from autonomously generated oscillatory inputs in
order to learn a wide variety of artiﬁcial and naturalistic s ignals,
and exhibit features of neural activity that closely resembl e
neurophysiological experiments.
One series of simulations trained the model to replicate
simple shapes in 2D coordinates. Based upon the structure of
its oscillatory inputs, the model ﬂexibly switched between tw o
shapes, thus showing a simple yet clear example of multitasking
with a recurrent network.
When we modulated the period of input oscillations delivered
to neurons of the SRNN, the model was able to produce an
output that was faithful to the target signal, but sped up or
slowed down by a constant factor (
Mello et al., 2015; Hardy
et al., 2018). Oscillations served to train a recurrent network that
reproduced natural speech and generated both slower and faste r
utterances of natural words with no additional training. Us ing
further reﬁnements of the model, we employed this principle of
oscillation-driven network to capture the fast replay of place c ells
during a task of spatial navigation.
Below we discuss the biological implications of our model as
well as its applications and limitations.
4.2. Biological Relevance and Predictions
of the Model
Despite some fundamental limitations common to most
computational models of brain activity, our approach
was designed with several key features of living neuronal
networks, including spiking neurons, Dale’s principle, balanc ed
excitation/inhibition, a heterogeneity of neuronal and sy naptic
parameters, propagation delays, and conductance-based
synapses (
van Vreeswijk and Sompolinsky, 1996; Sussillo and
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 13 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
Abbott, 2009; Ingrosso and Abbott, 2019 ). We used a learning
algorithm that isn’t biologically plausible to train the rea dout
unit (recursive least-square). However, given that the SRNN ’s
dynamics is independent of the readout’s output, any other
learning algorithm would be compatible with our model. We
used a non-biological training algorithm (RLS) in this work,
because we are interested in the trained representation of th e
network and not the learning itself.
Further, and most central to this work, our model included
neural oscillations along a range of frequencies that close ly
matched those reported in electrophysiological studies (
Buzsáki
and Draguhn, 2004; Yuste et al., 2005 ). However, the optimal
range of frequencies depends on the electrophysiological and
synaptic time constants of the network (
Nicola and Clopath,
2017). Although there is an abundance of potential roles for
neural oscillations in neuronal processing, much of their function
remain unknown (Wang, 2010). Here, we proposed that multiple
heterogeneous oscillations may be combined to generate an
input whose duration greatly exceeds the time-course of any
individual oscillation. In turn, this multiplexed input allo ws
a large recurrent network operating in the chaotic regime to
generate repeatable and stable patterns of activity that can be read
out by downstream units.
It is well-established that central pattern generators in
lower brain regions such as the brain stem and the spinal
cord are heavily involved in the generation of rhythmic
movements that match the period of simpler motor actions
(e.g., walking or swimming;
Marder and Bucher, 2001 ). From
an evolutionary perspective, it is compelling that higher brai n
centers would recycle the same mechanisms ( Yuste et al., 2005 )
to generate more complex and non-repetitive actions ( Rokni
and Sompolinsky, 2011; Churchland et al., 2012 ). In this vein,
Churchland et al. (2012) showed that both periodic and quasi-
periodic activity underlie a non-periodic motor task of reach ing.
Our model provides a framework to explain how such activity
can be exploited by living neuronal networks to produce rich
dynamics whose goal is to execute autonomous aperiodic tasks .
While our model shows that oscillatory networks can generate
input oscillations that control the activity of a SRNN ( Figure 2),
the biological identity of these oscillatory networks is la rgely
circuit-dependent and may originate from either intrinsic o r
extrinsic sources. In the hippocampus, computational (
Traub
et al., 1989 ) and experimental ( Goutagny et al., 2009 ) ﬁndings
suggest an intrinsic source to theta oscillations. Speciﬁcal ly,
studies raise the possible role of CA3 in forming a multi-perio dic
drive consisting of several interdependent theta generator s that
activate during spatial navigation ( Montgomery et al., 2009 ).
However the exact source of this periodic drive is still debat ed,
where the medial septum and the entorhinal cortex could play a
signiﬁcant role in the theta activity recorded in the hippocam pus
(
Buzsáki, 2002). Additionally, place cells are also found in other
subﬁelds of the hippocampus such as CA3 ( Lee et al., 2004 ).
Therefore, alternative architectures involving those hippo campal
structures could be used to implement our oscillation based
model of spatial navigation.
Similarly, the neural origin of the tonic inputs controlling the
activity of the oscillatory networks is not explicitly accoun ted
for in our simulations. However, it is well-established that
populations of neurons can exhibit bistable activity with UP-
states lasting for several seconds (
Wang, 2016) that could provide
the necessary input to drive the transition from asynchronou s to
synchronous activity in oscillatory networks.
Going beyond an in silico replication of neurophysiological
ﬁndings, our model makes two empirically testable prediction s.
If one was to experimentally isolate the activity of the input
oscillators, one could show that: (i) a key neural signature o f
a recurrent circuit driven by multi-periodic oscillations i s the
presence of inter-trial correlations between the phase of the se
oscillations; and (ii) the period of the input oscillators shou ld
appear faster or slower to match the rescaling factor of the
network. This correspondence between the input oscillations and
temporal rescaling is a generic mechanism behind the model’s
ability to perform a wide variety of tasks, from spatial navigat ion
to speech production.
4.3. Related Models
Our approach was inspired by predecessors in computational
neuroscience. Multiplexing multiple oscillations as a way to
generate long sequences of non-repeating inputs was ﬁrst
introduced by
Miall (1989) , with a model of interval timing
relying on the coincident activation of multiple oscillators
of diﬀerent frequencies. This idea served as a basis for the
striatal beat frequency model (
Matell and Meck, 2004 ), where
multiple cortical regions are hypothesized to project to the
striatum which acts as a coincidence detector that encodes
timing intervals. A similar mechanism was also suggested for
the representation of space by grid cells in rodents (
Fiete
et al., 2008 ). Grid cells have periodic activation curves spanning
diﬀerent spatial periods ( Moser et al., 2008 ), and their activation
may generate a combinatorial code employed by downstream
regions to precisely encode the location of the animal in space
(
Fiete et al., 2008).
Other studies have suggested that phase precession during
spatial navigation could originate from a dual oscillator pro cess
(O’Keefe and Recce, 1993; Burgess et al., 2007 ). Along this
line, a recent model of the hippocampus uses the interference
between two oscillators to model the neural dynamics related
to spatial navigation (
Nicola and Clopath, 2019 ). Although this
model shares similarities with ours, a fundamental diﬀerenc e
is that our model uses the phase of combined oscillators to
create a unique input at every time-step of a task, whereas
their model relies on the beat of the combined frequencies.
Additionally, in our model, increasing the frequency of input
oscillations by a common factor leads to compressed sequences
of activity. By comparison, in the model of
Nicola and Clopath
(2019), sequences are compressed by removing an extrinsic input
oscillator. More experimental data will be needed to support
either model.
4.4. Limitations and Future Directions
In our model, periodic activity was readily observable in the
SRNN dynamics due to the input drive (e.g., Figure 1C or
Figure 6D). However, the architecture of our model represents a
simpliﬁcation of biological networks where several intermed iate
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 14 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
stages of information processing occur between sensory input
and behavioral output. Oscillatory activity resulting from a
multi-periodic drive might occur in one, but not necessarily
all stages of processing. Further work could examine this iss ue
by stacking SRNN connected in a feed-forward manner; such
a hierarchical organization may have important computationa l
beneﬁts (
Gallicchio et al., 2017).
In the spatial navigation task, we ensured that the location
of the animal was perfectly correlated with the time spent in
the place ﬁeld of each cell. This is, of course, an idealized
scenario that does not account for free exploration and
variable speed of navigation along a track. These factors wou ld
decorrelate the spatial location of the animal and the time
elapsed in the place ﬁeld. Hence, further work would beneﬁt
from a more ecologically-relevant version of the navigatio n
task. This new version of the task might aim to capture
how the time spent in a given place ﬁeld impacts the link
between the activity of place cells and theta oscillations
(
Schmidt et al., 2009).
Finally, our task of speech production was restricted to
learning a spectrogram of the target signal. This simpliﬁed
task did not account for the neural control of articulatory
speech kinetics, likely involving the ventral sensory-motor cortex
(
Conant et al., 2018; Anumanchipalli et al., 2019 ).
4.4.1. Applications
Our modeling framework is poised to address a broad
spectrum of applications in machine learning of natural and
artiﬁcial signals. With recent advances in reservoir comput ing
(
Salehinejad et al., 2017 ) and its physical implementations
(Tanaka et al., 2018 ), our approach oﬀers an alternative to using
external arbitrary time-varying signals to control the dyn amics
of a recurrent network. Our model may also be extended
to neuromorphic hardware, where it may beneﬁt chaotic
networks employed in robotic motor control (
Folgheraiter et al.,
2019). Finally, our model is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst to
produce temporal rescaling of natural speech, with implication s
extending to conversational agents, brain-computer interf aces,
and speech synthesis.
Overall, our model oﬀers a compelling theory for the
role of neural oscillations in temporal processing. Support
from additional experimental evidence could impact our
understanding of how brain circuits generate long sequence s of
activity that shape both cognitive processing and behavior.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The custom python scripts replicating the main results of this
article can be found at https://github.com/lamvin/Oscillat ion_
multiplexing.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PV-L conceived the model and ran the simulations. PV-L and
MC performed the data analysis. PV-L and J-PT designed
the experiments. PV-L, MC, and J-PT wrote the manuscript.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by a doctoral scholarship from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)
to PV-L, the program of scholarships of the 2nd cycle from
the Fonds de recherche du Québec—Nature et technologies
(FRQNT) to MC, and a Discovery grant to J-PT from NSERC
(Grant No. 210977).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This manuscript has been released as a pre-print at bioRxiv
(
Vincent-Lamarre et al., 2020).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fncom.
2020.00078/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abarbanel, H. D., Creveling, D. R., and Jeanne, J. M. (2008).
Estimation of parameters in nonlinear systems using balanced
synchronization. Phys. Rev. E 77:016208. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.77.0
16208
Abbott, L. F., DePasquale, B., and Memmesheimer, R.-M. (2016). B uilding
functional networks of spiking model neurons. Nat. Neurosci . 19:350.
doi: 10.1038/nn.4241
Anumanchipalli, G. K., Chartier, J., and Chang, E. F. (2019). Speec h
synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences. Nature 568:493.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1119-1
Bakhurin, K. I., Goudar, V., Shobe, J. L., Claar, L. D., Buonoman o,
D. V., and Masmanidis, S. C. (2017). Diﬀerential encoding of ti me
by prefrontal and striatal network dynamics. J. Neurosci . 37:854.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1789-16.2016
Bittner, K. C., Milstein, A. D., Grienberger, C., Romani, S., an d Magee,
J. C. (2017). Behavioral time scale synaptic plasticity underlies
CA1 place ﬁelds. Science 357, 1033–1036. doi: 10.1126/science.aa
n3846
Brunel, N. (2000). Dynamics of sparsely connected networks of exci tatory
and inhibitory spiking neurons. J. Comput. Neurosci . 8, 183–208.
doi: 10.1023/A:1008925309027
Brunel, N., and Hansel, D. (2006). How noise aﬀects the synchronization properties
of recurrent networks of inhibitory neurons. Neural Comput . 18, 1066–1110.
doi: 10.1162/neco.2006.18.5.1066
Buhusi, C. V., and Meck, W. H. (2005). What makes us tick? Functi onal
and neural mechanisms of interval timing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci . 6, 755–765.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1764
Buonomano, D. V., and Maass, W. (2009). State-dependent computa tions:
spatiotemporal processing in cortical networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci . 10,
113–125. doi: 10.1038/nrn2558
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 15 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
Burgess, N., Barry, C., and O’Keefe, J. (2007). An oscillatory int erference model of
grid cell ﬁring. Hippocampus 17, 801–812. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20327
Buzsáki, G. (2002). Theta oscillations in the hippocampus. Neuron 33, 325–340.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00586-X
Buzsáki, G., and Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in co rtical networks.
Science 304, 1926–1929. doi: 10.1126/science.1099745
Churchland, M. M., Cunningham, J. P., Kaufman, M. T., Foster, J. D., Nuyujukian,
P., Ryu, S. I., et al. (2012). Neural population dynamics during reaching. Nature
487, 51–56. doi: 10.1038/nature11129
Conant, D. F., Bouchard, K. E., Leonard, M. K., and Chang, E. F.
(2018). Human sensorimotor cortex control of directly measured vocal
tract movements during vowel production. J. Neurosci . 38, 2955–2966.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2382-17.2018
Destexhe, A. (1997). Conductance-based integrate-and-ﬁre mo dels. Neural
Comput. 9, 503–514. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.3.503
Dragoi, G., Carpi, D., Recce, M., Csicsvari, J., and Buzsáki, G. ( 1999).
Interactions between hippocampus and medial septum during sharp wave s
and theta oscillation in the behaving rat. J. Neurosci . 19, 6191–6199.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-14-06191.1999
Fiete, I. R., Burak, Y., and Brookings, T. (2008). What grid cells c onvey about rat
location. J. Neurosci. 28, 6858–6871. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5684-07.2008
Folgheraiter, M., Keldibek, A., Aubakir, B., Gini, G., Franchi, A. M., and Bana, M.
(2019). A neuromorphic control architecture for a biped robot. Robot. Auton.
Syst. 120:103244. doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2019.07.014
Foster, D. J., and Wilson, M. A. (2006). Reverse replay of behavio ural
sequences in hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature 440:680.
doi: 10.1038/nature04587
Foster, D. J. and Wilson, M. A. (2007). Hippocampal theta sequences. Hippocampus
17, 1093–1099. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20345
Frank, L. M., Brown, E. N., and Wilson, M. (2000). Trajectory encod ing
in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. Neuron 27, 169–178.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00018-0
Gallicchio, C., Micheli, A., and Pedrelli, L. (2017). Deep reservoi r
computing: a critical experimental analysis. Neurocomputing 268, 87–99.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2016.12.089
Goudar, V., and Buonomano, D. V. (2018). Encoding sensory and mo tor patterns
as time-invariant trajectories in recurrent neural networks. eLife 7:e31134.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.31134
Goutagny, R., Jackson, J., and Williams, S. (2009). Self-generat ed theta oscillations
in the hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1491–1493. doi: 10.1038/nn.2440
Grondin, S. (2010). Timing and time perception: a review of recent be havioral and
neuroscience ﬁndings and theoretical directions. Attent. Percept. Psychophys .
72, 561–582. doi: 10.3758/APP.72.3.561
Hardy, N. F., Goudar, V., Romero-Sosa, J. L., and Buonomano, D. V.
(2018). A model of temporal scaling correctly predicts that motor timing
improves with speed. Nat. Commun . 9:4732. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-
07161-6
Harvey, C. D., Coen, P., and Tank, D. W. (2012). Choice-speciﬁ c sequences in
parietal cortex during a virtual-navigation decision task. Nature 484, 62–68.
doi: 10.1038/nature10918
Haykin, S. (2002). Adaptive Filter Theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ingrosso, A. and Abbott, L. F. (2019). Training dynamically
balanced excitatory-inhibitory networks. PLoS ONE 14:e0220547.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220547
Jaeger, H. (2002). “Adaptive nonlinear system identiﬁcation w ith echo state
networks, ” in NIPS’02: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (V ancouver, BC), 593–600.
Kastner, K. (2019). Audio Tools for Numpy/Python. Available online at: https://gist.
github.com/kastnerkyle/179d6e9a88202ab0a2fe
Kempter, R., Gerstner, W., and van Hemmen, J. L. (1999). Hebbian learn ing and
spiking neurons. Phys. Rev. E 59, 4498–4514. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.59.4498
Laje, R., and Buonomano, D. V. (2013). Robust timing and motor pat terns
by taming chaos in recurrent neural networks. Nat. Neurosci . 16, 925–933.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3405
Lee, A. K., and Wilson, M. A. (2002). Memory of sequential experien ce
in the hippocampus during slow wave sleep. Neuron 36, 1183–1194.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)01096-6
Lee, I., Yoganarasimha, D., Rao, G., and Knierim, J. J. (2004). Co mparison of
population coherence of place cells in hippocampal subﬁelds CA1 and CA3.
Nature 430, 456–459. doi: 10.1038/nature02739
Lengyel, M., Szatmáry, Z., and Erdi, P. (2003). Dynamically detuned oscillations
account for the coupled rate and temporal code of place cell ﬁring.
Hippocampus 13, 700–714. doi: 10.1002/hipo.10116
Maass, W., Natschläger, T., and Markram, H. (2002). Real-time computing without
stable states: a new framework for neural computation based on perturb ations.
Neural Comput. 14, 2531–2560. doi: 10.1162/089976602760407955
Marder, E. and Bucher, D. (2001). Central pattern generators and
the control of rhythmic movements. Curr. Biol . 11, R986–R996.
doi: 10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00581-4
Marder, E., and Calabrese, R. L. (1996). Principles of rhythmic motor pattern
generation. Physiol. Rev. 76, 687–717. doi: 10.1152/physrev.1996.76.3.687
Matell, M. S., and Meck, W. H. (2004). Cortico-striatal circuits and interval timing:
coincidence detection of oscillatory processes. Cogn. Brain Res . 21, 139–170.
doi: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.06.012
Mello, G. B., Soares, S., and Paton, J. J. (2015). A scalable populatio n code for time
in the striatum. Curr. Biol. 25, 1113–1122. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.036
Miall, C. (1989). The storage of time intervals using oscillating ne urons. Neural
Comput. 1, 359–371. doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.3.359
Montgomery, S. M., Betancur, M. I., and Buzsáki, G. (2009). Beh avior-dependent
coordination of multiple theta dipoles in the hippocampus. J. Neurosci . 29,
1381–1394. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4339-08.2009
Moser, E. I., Kropﬀ, E., and Moser, M.-B. (2008). Place cells, grid c ells, and
the brain’s spatial representation system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci . 31, 69–89.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723
Nicola, W., and Clopath, C. (2017). Supervised learning in spiking neural networks
with FORCE training. Nat. Commun. 8:2208. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01827-3
Nicola, W., and Clopath, C. (2019). A diversity of interneurons an d Hebbian
plasticity facilitate rapid compressible learning in the hippocampus. Nat.
Neurosci. 22:1168. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0415-2
O’Keefe, J. (1976). Place units in the hippocampus of the freely movin g rat. Exp.
Neurol. 51, 78–109. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(76)90055-8
O’Keefe, J., and Recce, M. L. (1993). Phase relationship betwe en hippocampal
place units and the EEG theta rhythm. Hippocampus 3, 317–330.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.450030307
Pascanu, R., Mikolov, T., and Bengio, Y. (2013). “On the diﬃcu lty of
training recurrent neural networks, ” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 1310–1318. Available online at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.555 5/
3042817.3043083
Paton, J. J., and Buonomano, D. V. (2018). The neural basis of ti ming:
distributed mechanisms for diverse functions. Neuron 98, 687–705.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.045
Rokni, U., and Sompolinsky, H. (2011). How the brain generates movement .
Neural Comput. 24, 289–331. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00223
Sainburg, T. (2018). Spectrograms, MFCCs, and Inversion in Python . Available
online at: https://timsainburg.com/python-mel-compression-inver sion.html
Salehinejad, H., Sankar, S., Barfett, J., Colak, E., and V alaee, S. (2017). Recent
advances in recurrent neural networks. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:1801.01078.
Schmidt, R., Diba, K., Leibold, C., Schmitz, D., Buzsáki, G., and Kempter, R. (2009).
Single-trial phase precession in the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 29, 13232–13241.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2270-09.2009
Sussillo, D., and Abbott, L. (2009). Generating coherent patterns
of activity from chaotic neural networks. Neuron 63, 544–557.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.018
Tanaka, G., Y amane, T., Héroux, J. B., Nakane, R., Kanazawa, N., Takeda, S.,
et al. (2018). Recent advances in physical reservoir computing: a review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.04962. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.03.005
Thivierge, J.-P., Comas, R., and Longtin, A. (2014). Attracto r dynamics in local
neuronal networks. Front. Neural Circ. 8:22. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2014.00022
Traub, R. D., Miles, R., and Wong, R. K. S. (1989). Model of the ori gin of rhythmic
population oscillations in the hippocampal slice. Science 243, 1319–1325.
doi: 10.1126/science.2646715
van Vreeswijk, C., and Sompolinsky, H. (1996). Chaos in neuronal ne tworks
with balanced excitatory and inhibitory activity. Science 274, 1724–1726.
doi: 10.1126/science.274.5293.1724
van Vreeswijk, C., and Sompolinsky, H. (1998). Chaotic balanced st ate
in a model of cortical circuits. Neural Comput . 10, 1321–1371.
doi: 10.1162/089976698300017214
Vincent-Lamarre, P., Calderini, M., and Thivierge, J.-P. (2020) . Learning long
temporal sequences in spiking networks by multiplexing neural oscillati ons.
bioRxiv [Preprint]. 766758. doi: 10.1101/766758
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78


--- Page 16 ---
Vincent-Lamarre et al. Multiplexing Oscillations in Spiking Neural Networks
Vincent-Lamarre, P., Lajoie, G., and Thivierge, J.-P. (2016). Driving
reservoir models with oscillations: a solution to the extreme structu ral
sensitivity of chaotic networks. J. Comput. Neurosci . 41, 305–322.
doi: 10.1007/s10827-016-0619-3
Wang, X.-J. (2010). Neurophysiological and computational principles
of cortical rhythms in cognition. Physiol. Rev . 90, 1195–1268.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00035.2008
Wang, X.-J. (2016). Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic pers istent
activity. Trends Neurosci. 24, 455–463. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)01868-3
Yuste, R., MacLean, J. N., Smith, J., and Lansner, A. (2005). T he cortex as a central
pattern generator. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 477–483. doi: 10.1038/nrn1686
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Vincent-Lamarre, Calderini and Thivierge. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credit ed and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 September 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 78
