--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
p
ublished: 10 January 2017
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00144
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin .org 1 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144
Edited by:
M
arcel Van Gerven,
Radboud University Nijmegen,
Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Simon R. Schultz,
Imperial College London, UK
Fleur Zeldenrust,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Netherlands
*Correspondence:
Viola Folli
viola.folli@iit.it
Received: 19 September 2016
Accepted: 20 December 2016
Published: 10 January 2017
Citation:
Folli V , Leonetti M and Ruocco G
(2017) On the Maximum Storage
Capacity of the Hopﬁeld Model.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10:144.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00144
On the Maximum Storage Capacity of
the Hopﬁeld Model
Viola Folli 1*, Marco Leonetti 1 and Giancarlo Ruocco 1, 2
1 Center for Life Nanoscience, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rome, Italy, 2 Department of Physics, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) have traditionally been of great interest for their capacity
to store memories. In past years, several works have been devoted to determine the
maximum storage capacity of RNN, especially for the case of the Hopﬁeld network, the
most popular kind of RNN. Analyzing the thermodynamic limit of the statistical properties
of the Hamiltonian corresponding to the Hopﬁeld neural network, it has been shown
in the literature that the retrieval errors diverge when the number of stored memory
patterns (P ) exceeds a fraction (≈ 14%) of the network size N. In this paper, we study
the storage performance of a generalized Hopﬁeld model, where the diagonal elements
of the connection matrix are allowed to be different from zero. We investigate this model
at ﬁnite N. We give an analytical expression for the number of retrieval errors and show
that, by increasing the number of stored patterns over a certain threshold, the errors
start to decrease and reach values below unit for P ≫ N. We demonstrate that the
strongest trade-off between efﬁciency and effectiveness relies on the number of patterns
(P) that are stored in the network by appropriately ﬁxing the connection weights. When
P≫N and the diagonal elements of the adjacency matrix are not forced to be zero, the
optimal storage capacity is obtained with a number of stored memories much larger than
previously reported. This theory paves the way to the design of RNN with high storage
capacity and able to retrieve the desired pattern without distortions.
Keywords: maximum storage memory, feed-forward structure, random recurrent network, Hopﬁeld model,
retrieval error
1. INTRODUCTION
A vast amount of literature deals with neural networks, both as model for brain functioning ( Amit,
1
989), and as smart artiﬁcial systems for practical applications in c omputation and information
handling (Haykin, 1999).
A
mong the diﬀerent possible applications of artiﬁcial neural networks, those referred to as
“associative memory” are particularly important (Rojas, 1996), i.e., circuits with the capability to
s
tore and retrieve speciﬁc information patterns. According to Amit et al. (1985a,b) there is a natural
l
imit for the usage of an N nodes neural network built according to the Hebbian principle (Hebb,
1
949) as associative memory. The association is embedded within t he connection matrix which has
a dyadic form: the weight connecting neuron i to neuron j is the product of the respective signals.
The limit of storage is linear with N: an attempt to store a number P of memory elements larger
than α cN, with α c ≈ 0.14, results in a “divergent” (orderP) number of retrieval errors. In order to be
eﬀective (low retrieval error probability) a neural network working as associative memory cannot be
eﬃcient (i.e., it can store only a small number of memory elements). This is particularly frustrating
in practical applications, as it strongly limits the use of artiﬁcial neural networks for information


--- Page 2 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
storage, especially since it is well known that the number of
ﬁxed points in randomly connected (symmetric) neural networks
shows an exponential relation with N (
Tanaka and Edwards,
1980; Sompolinsky et al., 1988; Wainrib and Touboul, 2013 ).
Contemporaneous to Amit et al., Abu-Mostafa, and St. Jaques
(Abu-Mostafa et al., 1985 ) claimed that the number of ﬁxed
points that can be used for memory storage in a Hopﬁeld model
with a generic coupling matrix is limited to N (i.e., P<N). Soon
after,
Mc Eliece et al. (1987), considering only the Hebbian dyadic
form for the coupling matrix, found a more severe limitation:
the maximum P scales as N/ log(N). In a more recent study,
Sollacher et al. (2009) designed a network of speciﬁc topology,
reaching α c-values larger than 0.14, but still maintaining the
limit of a linear N dependence of the maximum storage capacity.
The storage problem remains an open research question ( Brunel,
2016).
In this letter we show that the existence of a critical P/ N-
value in the Hebbian scheme for the coupling matrix is only part
of the story. As demonstrated in
Amit et al. (1985a,b), the limit
P<α cN holds in the region where P<N. In all previous studies,
the diagonal elements are removed from the dyadic form of the
coupling matrix. Here we show the existence of a not yet explored
region in the parameter space, with P≫ N, where the number of
retrieval errors decreases with increasing P and reaches values
lower than one. This region can be found by not removing the
diagonal elements. Strictly speaking the present model is not a
“Hopﬁeld model, ” as in the latter case the diagonal elements a re
forced to vanish and—as we will see- bring signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in the network behavior. In order to avoid confusion, let us
call the present model as “Hopﬁeld model with autapses” or
“Generalized Hopﬁeld model.” This strategy allows the desig n
of eﬀective and eﬃcient associative memories based on artiﬁc ial
neural networks. In the following we will derive analytically
the probability of retrieval errors, validate these results by their
comparison with a numerical simulation and study the eﬃcienc y
of the system as a function of P and N.
2. METHODS
2.1. Network Model
In an artiﬁcial neural network working as associative memor y,
one deals with a network of N neurons of which each one has
state si (i = 1...N) that can be “active” ( si = 1) or “quiescent”
(si = − 1). The conﬁguration of the whole network is given by
the vector ¯s ≡ { s1, s2, ..sN} and its temporal evolution follows the
parallel non-linear dynamics:
si(t + /Delta1t) = E[si(t)] .= sign
[ N∑
j= 1
Jijsj(t)
]
, (1)
where J = { Jij} is the connection matrix. We set external inputs
to be equal to 0. We assume a symmetric bimodal distribution
for the synaptic polarities in the wiring matrix J, so 50% of the
connections are excitatory and 50% inhibitory. After a tran sient
time related to the ﬁnite value of N, the network reaches a ﬁxed
point, si = E[si], or a limit cycle of length L, si = E(L)[si].
2.2. The Hebbian Rule and the Storage
Memory
Previous work has studied the cycle length and transient tim e
distribution as a function of the properties of J (
Gutfreundt et al.,
1988; Sompolinsky et al., 1988; Derrida, 1989; Bastolla et al. ,
1997). In order to work as an associative memory, the matrix
J must be tailored in such a way that one or more patterns of
neurons are ﬁxed points of the dynamics in Equation (1), i.e.,
they are the “memory elements” stored in the network. To stor e
one pattern ¯ξ , the connection matrix is simply the dyadic form
given by Jij = ξ iξ j 1 , while to store a generic number P of
patterns ¯ξ µ (µ = 1...P) one follows the storage prescription of
Cooper (1973) and Cooper et al. (1979), who exploited an old
idea which goes back to Hebb (1949) and Eccles (1953) and which
states that the change in synaptic transmission is proportiona l
to the product of the signals of pre and post-synaptic neurons.
The process for which each matrix element is appropriately
determined is called learning. Speciﬁcally, the “Hebbian” rule
results in the following expression for the connectivity matr ix,
Jij = 1
P
P∑
µ= 1
ξ µ
i ξ µ
j . (2)
The set of vectors ¯ξ mu is known as “training set.” In this case, it is
not guaranteed that each ¯ξ µ is a ﬁxed point. In other words, ¯ξ µ is
stable in probabilistic sense. Further, the probability for ¯ξ µ to be
a ﬁxed point depends on the values of P and N. This dependence
has been ﬁrst studied by Hopﬁeld (1982); Hopﬁeld et al. (1983);
Hopﬁeld (1984) who concluded that the retrieval of the memory
stored in the Hebbian matrices is guaranteed up to a P-value
which is a critical fraction on the number of network nodes N
of the order of 10–20%. Above this value, the associative memory
quickly degrades. Following these studies, Amit et al. (1985a,b),
who noticed the similarity between the Hopﬁeld model for the
associative memory and the spin glasses, developed a statistica l
theory for the determination of the critical P/ N ratio, that turned
out to be ≈ 0.14, in good agreement with the previous Hopﬁeld
estimation. Above P=0.14N the number of errors is so large that
the network based on the Hebbian matrix is no longer capable
to work as an associative memory. All these studies assumed a
modiﬁed form of Equation (2): the diagonal elements of J are
forced to be zero.
2.3. Numerical Simulations and Data
Analysis
In order to demonstrate the validity of our analytic results (see
Section 3), we perform numerical simulations by evolving the
network model as described in Equation (1). We design the
default network by ﬁxing the NxN recurrent connections as given
in Equation (2), by randomly assigning the value ± 1 to ξ µ
i and
retaining the diagonal elements. So, the N(N − 1) connections are
50% excitatory and 50% inhibitory and the N neurons can form
self-connections. We then run simulations by varying the si ze of
the network, N = 50, .., 200 and the number of stored memories
1The evolution E[ξ i] always return ξ i since the sum ∑
j ξ 2
j = N.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 3 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
in Equation (2), P = 1, ..., 2000. Finally, for each pair of N and P,
we perform 1000 diﬀerent random realizations.
All P patterns introduced in Equation (2) are given as input
to the network and their dynamics is followed until the netwo rk
reaches the equilibrium state. The initial patterns are chos en
among those that were stored in the adjacency matrix and that
have been randomly chosen in the designing of the network.
Evolved patterns were recorded at each time step and compared
with the initial one. Then, if the evolved pattern is diﬀerent
from the initial state, we calculated the temporal evolution
of the distortion (number of wrong bits) and determined the
probability that one of the bits was wrong, the probability that the
whole vector was exactly recovered, and the number of memory
patterns that could not be recovered, as a function of N and
P. Basically, to calculate the storage capacity, it is suﬃcien t to
determine all these quantities by using the distortion between the
stimulus (the stored memory) and its ﬁrst evolved pattern.
3. RESUL TS
3.1. The Probability of Recovery
In order to investigate the maximum storage memory of our
model, we calculate the one-step dynamical evolution. We gi ve
as input a vector of the training set and we calculate a single st ep
of the dynamical evolution according to Equation (1). Then, we
compare the output with the input. We aim to look whether or
not a vector, ¯ξ µ, belonging to the training set, is truly a ﬁxed
point. If ¯ξ µ is a ﬁxed point, the output coincides with the input,
and the recovery has been successful. If ¯ξ µ is not a ﬁxed point,
the two vectors diﬀer for at least a single bit. We now derive
an analytical expression for the probability that the recover y of
a stored pattern was not successful. The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the
probability pB that -given the matrix J of Equation (2)- a single
element of the vector (a “bit”) was wrong, i.e., the probabili ty
that E[ξ µ
i ] ̸= ξ µ
i . Basically, we need to evolve a vector ¯ξ mu
(from the training set) for one step and count how many bits
of its time evolution are diﬀerent from the bits of ¯ξ mu itself.
Obviously, if ¯ξ mu actually is a ﬁxed point, this distance vanishes.
On the contrary, ¯ξ mu is not a ﬁxed point, the network has made
a recovery error. Thus, pB (or better, pV , as we see in the next
paragraph) measures “how many” training set vectors are not
ﬁxed points. The argument of the sign function in Equation (1) is
Aµ
i = ∑N
j= 1
∑P
ν = 1 ξ ν
i ξ ν
j ξ µ
j , this contains NP terms among which
there are N+P− 1 terms (those with j=i 2 and those with ν =µ)
where two out of the three ξ of the product are equals to each
other ξ ν
i and the third is ξ µ
i . Thus Aµ
i = (N+ P− 1)ξ µ
i + Tµ
i ,
with Tµ
i = ∑N
j̸= i
∑P
ν ̸= µ ξ ν
i ξ ν
j ξ µ
j . The ﬁrst term is the “coherent”
one, its sign is identical to ξ µ
i , and it will -if dominant- guarantee
that ¯ξ µ is a ﬁxed point of the dynamics. The second term Tµ
i ,
on the contrary, is “noise” and its presence can either reinforce or
weaken the stability of ξ µ
i as ﬁxed point. Speciﬁcally, if |Tµ
i | >
(N+ P− 1) and sign( Tµ
i ) ̸= ξ µ
i , then the i-th bit of the vector
¯ξ µ will turn out to be wrong. The quantity Tµ
i is the sum of
(N− 1)(P− 1) statistically independent terms, each one being + 1
2These are P terms that are present only if the diagonal elements are kept as they
are and are not forced to vanish.
or − 1. Therefore, for large enough P and N, its distribution N(T)
can be approximated by a gaussian with zero mean and standard
deviation √
(N − 1)(P − 1):
N(T) = e− T2/ (2(N− 1)(P− 1))
√ 2π (N − 1)(P− 1) . (3)
It is now straightforward to determine the probability that|Tµ
i |>
(N+ P− 1) and sign( Tµ
i ) ̸= ξ µ
i , thus that one of the bits of E[ξ µ
i ]
was wrong, as pB =
∫ ∞
N+ P− 1 dT N (T). In conclusion:
pB = 1
2
[
1 − erf
( N + P− 1√ 2(N − 1)(P− 1)
)]
. (4)
It is worth to note that this expression is symmetric under the
exchange of P with N, and that for large P and N, with P/ N = 1,
it tends to (1 − erf(
√
2))/ 2≈ 0.02275 which corresponds to the
maximum of probability in a wrong recovery of a single bit (see
Figures 1, 2).
The second step is the determination of the probabilitypV that
one of the P vectors encoded into the connection matrix (the
training set) turns out not be a ﬁxed point. If only a single bit
of the vector is wrong, the whole vector is considered “wrong. ”
Since there are N bits that can be wrong, the probability pV will
be much higher than pB. The calculation is straightforward, in
order not to be wrong, all the bits of the vector ¯ξ µ must be right,
thus pV = 1− (1− pB)N, therefore:
pV = 1 −
[ 1
2 + 1
2 erf
( N + P− 1√ 2(N − 1)(P− 1)
)] N
. (5)
Finally, the number, NV , of memory vectors that are not
recovered, i.e., that are not true ﬁxed points of the dynamics is
given by PpV , that is:
NV =
[
1 −
[ 1
2 + 1
2 erf
( N + P− 1√ 2(N − 1)(P− 1)
)] N]
P (6)
3.2. The Asymptotical Approximation
Equations (4), (5) and, in particular, Equation (6) represent the
main result of this work. Before showing their validity, via a
comparison with numerical simulations, and discussing thei r
relevance in the framework of artiﬁcial neural networks, it is
important to present the asymptotical approximation for NV .
The argument of the error function, for either P≫ N or P≪ N,
is large, and can be expanded as erf( x) ≈ 1− exp(− x2)/ (x√
π ).
Furthermore, as pB is exponentially small with N (or P) for large
N (P), we use, (1− pB)N ≈ (1− NpB). Thus, for large N or large P:
pV ≈ N3/ 2P1/ 2e− (N+ P)2
2NP
√
2π (N + P)
(7)
NV ≈ N3/ 2P3/ 2e− (N+ P)2
2NP
√
2π (N + P)
(8)
We note that, while in the exact expression for NV (Equation 6)
the P↔ N exchange symmetry is lost, in the approximate form
the symmetry is recovered.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 4 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
FIGURE 1 | Comparison of the results of the numerical simulation (pB,
full dots A ; pV , full squares, B; NV , full diamonds, C) with the corresponding
theoretical function ( pB, Equation 4; pV , Equation 5; NV , Equation 6) reported
as full lines. The three quantities are reported as a functio n of P for ﬁxed N. The
values of N are 50 (black), 100 (blue), 150 (green), and 200 (red). The P range
in (C) is extended with respect to (A,B).
For sake of comparison with the previous literature, it is also
useful to express the main results as a function of α .= P/ N.
Equations (4) (for large N) and (8) read:
pB ≈ 1
2
[
1 − erf
( 1 + α√
2α
)]
(9)
NV ≈ NP 1√
2π
√ α
1 + α e− (1+ α )2
2α . (10)
While pB only depends on α , NV clearly is an extensive
observable, being proportional to P and N. Furthermore, both
expressions keep their symmetry with respect to the exchange o f
P and N, thus to the exchange of α with 1/α . The last observation
anticipates that there must exists a region at large α -values where
the same features are observed as at small values of α .
3.3. Numerical Results
To check the predictions of our network model, we have
simulated the Model (1) and studied the dynamics for several
values of N and P, in the range of few hundred, see Section
FIGURE 2 | Theoretical curves for the three quantities pB, pV , and NV
(pB, Equation 4, A ; pV , Equation 5, B; NV , Equation 6, C) reported as full
lines. The three quantities are reported in linear scale as a function of α = P/ N
for ﬁxed N. The values of N are 50 (black), 100 (blue), and 200 (red). The
dotted lines in (C) represent NV = P.
2.3 for details. In the numerical analysis, the P memory vectors
have been randomly chosen and used to construct the connection
matrix J. Next, we tested whether or not the stored memories
were ﬁxed points of the dynamics. The values of pB, pV and NV
were calculated by averaging over (up to) 1000 diﬀerent rando m
realizations of ¯ξ µ. The results of the numerical simulations
are reported (dots) in Figure 1, together with the analytical
Expressions (4)–(6) (lines). The three panels refer to the thr ee
quantities pB (Figure 1A), pV (Figure 1B), and NV (Figure 1C)
as a function of P for the selected values of N, as reported in
the legend. From Figure 1, we observe that on increasing P,
at ﬁxed N, both the single bit probability error, the probability
of recovery error ( PV ), and the number of wrong recoveries
NV , after a ﬁrst fast increase, reach a maximum (equal to
0.02275 for pB, close to one for pV , and larger than N for
NV ) then start to decrease, tending to zero for very large P-
values.
To better emphasize this behavior, the same quantities are
reported (analytic results only) as a function of α in Figure 2
(linear scale) and in Figure 3 (log scale) for selected N. The
dotted lines in panels C of both ﬁgures represent NV = P,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 5 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
i.e., indicate the case of “totally wrong recovery.” Due to t he
already observed α ↔ 1/α symmetry, the asymptotic curve in
Figure 3A appears with a left-right symmetry around α = 1.
From Figures 2, 3, we can clearly identify two regions of high
recovery eﬃciency. The low α region, already studied many
years ago by Hopﬁeld (1982); Hopﬁeld et al. (1983); Hopﬁeld
(1984) and Amit et al. (1985a,b), shows the existence of a quick
transition toward “loss of memory recover” on increasing α
around α ≈ 0.14. The second region at large α -values is not yet
explored.
Although the value α = 1 ( P = N) represents traditionally
a sort of limit in the computation of the storable memories in a
RNN, there is no reason why not to store more than N memory
elements in a network of N neurons, that by construction allows
2N possible patterns. Indeed, the number of ﬁxed points in a
(random) symmetric matrix is known to be, for fully connected
symmetric matrices as in our case, exponentially large with N
(
Tanaka and Edwards, 1980 ). Speciﬁcally, the number of ﬁxed
points Po is equal to Po = exp(γ N), with γ ≈ 0.2. Po, much larger
than N, can be considered a natural limit for P.
FIGURE 3 | Theoretical curves for the three quantities pB, pV, and NV
(pB, Equation 4, A ; pV, Equation 5, B; NV, Equation 6, C) reported in
Log-Log scale as full lines. The three quantities are report ed in linear scale as a
function of α = P/N for ﬁxed N. The values of N are 50 (black), 100 (blue), and
200 (red). The dotted lines in (C) represent NV = P.
The recovery eﬃciency increases for large P. In fact, the
coherent term in the argument of the sign function increases
linearly with P and the noise increases as P1/ 2. For large P, the
relative weight of the noise decreases as P− 1/ 2, this allows to store
a large number of memories in a relatively small neural netwo rk.
For practical purposes, as for example in the design of
an artiﬁcial neural network with high eﬃciency (large storag e
capacity) and eﬀectiveness (low recovery error rates), it is
important to study (Equation 6, and its approximation in
Equation 8) and, in particular, to ﬁnd the conditions for which the
network shows “perfect recovery.” Let’s deﬁne perfect recove ry
as the state where the number of retrieval errors NV is smaller
than one.
In Figure 4 we show the contour plot of the (decimal)
logarithm of NV , from Equations (6) and (8), in the P-N range
[0–100]. The full lines are the loci of the points where log10(NV )
equals 0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6, as indicated on the right sid e of the
ﬁgure. The dashed lines are the same level lines for the (logarithm
of the) approximate form of NV reported in Equation (8). As can
be observed, for NV ≈ 1, the approximation (Equation 8) for
NV is highly accurate, indicating that this approximation can be
safely applied to ﬁnd the “perfect recovery” condition.
In the P-N plane the existence of two regions (small and
large α ) where the perfect recovery ( NV = 1, red lines) takes
place can be easily observed and the result is symmetric under the
exchange of P and N. In the already explored small α region, we
also show (full blue line) the P = 0.14N condition. Similar to the
high α region, it is important to ﬁnd a simple relation between
N and P identifying the NV = 1 condition. We aim, therefore,
to obtain a function P(N) which returns, at given N, the P-value
FIGURE 4 | Contour plot of log 10(NV ) from Equations (6) (full lines) and
(8) (dashed lines), in the P and N range 0–100. The lines are the loci of the
points where log10(NV ) equals 0.0 (red), 0.4, 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6 (black), as
indicated on the right side of the ﬁgure. The blue line represe nts P = 0.14N,
while the black dotted line is the bisectrix N = P, plotted to emphasize the
symmetry of the contour lines.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 6 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
such that NV = 1. We write the prefactor NP in Equation (10)
as α N2 and exploit the α ≫ 1 limit, so to obtain NV ≈ N2α 1/ 2
exp(− α/ 2)/
√
2π . The equation N2α 1/ 2exp(− α/ 2)/
√
2π = 1
can be squared, α exp(− α ) = 2π/ N4, and solved with respect
to α , to give α = − W− 1(− 2π/ N4), where W− 1(x) is the second
real branch of the Lambert function ( Olver et al., 2010 ). In
conclusion, the “perfect recovery condition” is satisﬁed -f or each
N-value- if we chose to store a number of memories larger than
P(N) given by:
P(N) = − NW− 1(− 2π/ N4). (11)
For practical purposes, for large enough N, we can use the small-
argument expansion of the Lambert function − W− 1(− x) ≈
− ln(x)+ ln(− ln(x)) (Corless et al., 1996), to have:
P(N) = N
[
ln
( N4
2π
)
+ ln
(
ln
( N4
2π
))]
. (12)
The results for P(N) are shown in Figure 5 as a function of N in
the range 1–1000. The black line represents the exact, numeri cal,
solution to NV = 1, with NV in Equation (6), the blue line is the
expression for P(N) in Equation (11), while the red line is those
in Equation (12).
It is important to note that the presence of a decrease of
the retrieval error probability at high P, or α , values is due
to the presence of non-zero diagonal elements in the J matrix
that creates a coherent term of weight P. Indeed, repeating
the rationale leading to Equation (4) with the assumption tha t
Jii = 0, would give rise to the same (Equations 4–6) but with
the numerator of the argument of the error functions equal to
N − 1 instead of to N + P − 1. This is shown graphically in
Figure 6 where we compare for N = 50, both theoretically (full
FIGURE 5 | The quantity P(N), i.e., the P-value where the perfect
recovery is guaranteed, is shown as a function of N. The blue line is the
numerical solution of NV = 1 from Equation (6), the blue line is the plot of
Equation (11) and the red line is the plot of Equation (12).
line) and numerically (full dots), the quantities pB, pV , and NV as
a function of P in the two cases: diagonal elements in Equation (2)
(black) and diagonal elements forced to vanish (orange).
The stabilization of the ﬁxed points ¯ξ µ in the high storage
region arises from the presence of the non-zero diagonal
elements. Asymptotically, on increasing P, the diagonal elements
growth coherently and the J matrix tends to become the unit
matrix. However, the dynamics (see Equation 1) dictated by t he
matrix J does not tend to the dynamics dictated by the unit
matrix. In the latter case, indeed, all the 2 N state vectors should
become ﬁxed points and the network should loose on important
feature: the capability to distinguish between the stored memories
(the vectors ¯ξ µ, for µ = 1...P) and the spurious ﬁxed points,
all the vectors ¯ζ not belonging to the set ¯ξ µ but such that E[ ¯ζ ]
= ¯ζ . To study this property, we have calculated the probability
that a (randomly chosen) vector ¯ζ (diﬀerent from all the ¯ξ µ used
FIGURE 6 | The upper panel (A) reports for a given N-value (N = 50), as
a function of P , the probability pB that, stimulating the network with a
vector inside the training set, there is one bit wrong in the n etwork
response. The middle panel (B) reports pV , the probability that, stimulating
the network with a vector inside the training set, the vector obtained after one
dynamical step is not the stimulating vector. The lower pane l (C) reports
NV = PpV . The black symbols/lines refer to the case where the diagonal
elements are as determined in Equation (2), while the orange s ones to
diagonal elements forced to vanish. The full lines are the th eoretical prediction,
the full dots are the results of the numerical simulation.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 7 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
to build the J matrix) was recognized as a “memory” from the
network dynamics. To be consistent with the previous notatio n
(where we called pB and pV the probability of errors, not that
of correct retrieval of the memory states) we deﬁne ¯pB (¯pV ) as
the probability of correctly not retrieving a vector not belo nging
to the training set. More speciﬁcally, the quantity ¯pV is the
probability that one dynamical step after presenting a vector ζ
not belonging to the training set to the network, the output a
vector is diﬀerent from ζ .” More speciﬁcally, the quantity ¯pV is
the probability that presenting a vector ζ not belonging to the
training set to the network, after one dynamical step we foun d
as output a vector diﬀerent from ζ . Similarly for ¯pB. It turns out
that 3:
¯pB = 1
2
[
1 − erf
( P√ 2(N − 1)(P− 1)
)]
(13)
¯pV = 1 −
[ 1
2 + 1
2 erf
( P√ 2(N − 1)(P− 1)
)] N
. (14)
In Figure 7 we report the comparison of the P dependence of
pB and ¯pB (Figure 7A) and that of pV and ¯pV (Figure 7B). As
usual, full lines are the theoretical results, while the ful l dots
are the outcome of the numerical simulation. Black data are f or
the “memory states, ” while the green ones are for the “spuriou s
state.” As can be seen, the spurious state becomes more and more
“present” in the set of memories stored by the network as P
increases. It seems however that also at high P-values the retrieval
of the memory states is reasonably good and that of the spuriou s
states reasonably bad.
To be quantitative on this point, we rewrite Equation (14) in
its large N limit:
¯pV ≈ N3/ 2P− 1/ 2e − P
2N
√
2π
(15)
and compare it with Equation (7). In particular, is interestin g to
calculate the ratio, ρ , between the probability of wrong retrieval
of a spurious state and that of a memory state: ρ = ¯pV / pV . From
Equations (7) and (15) it turns out:
ρ =
( N + P
P
)
e
(N+ P)2
2NP e− P
2N . (16)
This quantity only depends on α :
ρ =
( 1 + α
α
)
e
(
1+ 1
2α
)
(17)
and ρ has a ﬁnite high α limit:
limα →∞ ρ = e. (18)
In other words, although the number of spurious attractors tends
to increase for P ≫ N, the vectors encoded into the system
through the connection matrix are retrieved with an eﬃcienc y
almost three times better than for the spurious states.
3The calculation follows the same steps already depicted before, counti ng the
“coherent” terms, that, in this case, only arise from the diagonal e lements ( i=j)
and not from the µ=ν terms that now do not exist. The weight of the coherent
part is equal to P instead of N + P − 1. The rest of the demonstration follows
straightforward.
FIGURE 7 | (A) The upper panel reports for a given N-value (N = 50), as a
function of P , the probability that, stimulating the networ k with a vector inside
(pB, black) or outside ( ¯pB, green) the training set, there is one bit differing
between the input and the output vector. (B) The lower panel reports the
probability that, stimulating the network with a vector ins ide (pV , black) or
outside ( ¯pV , green) the training set, the vector obtained after one dyna mical
step is not the stimulating vector. The full lines are the the oretical prediction,
the full dots are the results of the numerical simulation.
4. DISCUSSION
In this work we have developed a simple theoretical approach to
investigate the computational properties and the storage capacity
of feed-forward networks with self-connections. We have worked
out an exact expression which gives the probability pB of having
a wrong bit in the recovery of a memory element from a Hebbian
N-node neural network, where P memory elements are stored.
In disagreement with previous studies we have investigated t he
case in which the diagonal elements were not forced to vanish .
Studying the storage capacity, and deriving the related probability
pV and number NV of having a wrongly recovered memory
element, we discovered that besides the well know P≪ N region,
there is another region, at P≫ N, where the recovery is highly
eﬀective. When P ≫ N, the eﬃciency of recall for a large number
of encoded vectors in the J matrix is related to the presence of
non-zero diagonal elements of the matrix. Basically, the hi gher
storage performance of the network depends on the number of
“coherent” terms (the signal) in the quantity Aµ
i (see Section
3.1) with respect to the “incoherent” ones (the noise). The lar ger
the ratio between coherent to incoherent terms, the lower th e
probability of a wrong recovery. The number of coherent terms
is ( N + P − 1) in the case of autapses, it is ( N − 1) in the case
of no autapses. Indeed, the P terms disappear if the diagonal is
forced to be zero as in the standard Hopﬁeld model. It is clear
that, apart from a transient regime at P ∼ N, increasing P ≫ N
strongly reinforces the signal-to-noise ratio and induces a much
larger storage capacity. In addition to the vectors encoded i nto
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 8 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
the system, other unwanted memories also appear in the network.
These are the spurious states, ﬁxed points which do not belong to
the training set. The presence of spurious states is not a featu re
speciﬁc to the present model, it is a typical characteristic of
the standard Hopﬁeld network and its successive improvements .
Indeed, as shown by
Tanaka and Edwards (1980), a random
N × N matrix has 2 γ N ﬁxed points ( γ ≈ 2). As an example,
if N = 100, the number of ﬁxed points is about one million.
A Hebbian 100 × 100 matrix storing P = 1000 patterns, besides
the “good” P ﬁxed points have also an overwhelming number
of spurious ﬁxed points (or “false memories”). The interest of
our approach does not rely in “how many” spurious (i.e., not
belonging to the training set) states are present but rather i n how
the recognition of a vector belonging to the training set is a s a
“good” one. Obviously, the argument of Tanaka-Edwards applies
only to random matrices. The Hebbian form, with or without
autapses, is not fully random (there exists correlation amon g the
matrix elements), but we expect a number of ﬁxed points similar
to that of a random matrix. It would be interesting to determi ne
such a number, but this is beyond the scope of the present paper.
In spite of the overwhelming majority of spurious ﬁxed points,
the network—even at very large P-values, maintains the capacity
of discriminate between “good” state (belonging to the trai ning
set) and “wrong” ones (not belonging to the training set). Mor e
speciﬁcally, looking at the one-step dynamical evolution an d
comparing the input vector with the output one, we have posed
to the network the question: “is the input vector belonging to the
training set”? We have demonstrated that, when the input vect or
actually belongs to the training set, at large P (similarly to low
P) the probability of having a wrong response (“no, it does not
belong to the training set) goes to zero. Furthermore, we hav e
demonstrated that when the input vector does not belong to the
training set the probability of a wrong response (“yes, it is a ﬁ xed
point”) is much less that in the previous case, asymptotically 2 .7
time worst.
In order to identify whether or not a vector belonging to
the training set was a ﬁxed point we propose to the system a
vector of the training set as input. Then we perform a one-
step dynamic evolution of this input state. If after one step t he
output vector is equal to the input one, this is a ﬁxed point. On
the contrary, if after one step the output vector is not equal t o
the input one, it could be possible that further dynamical steps
lead to the input vector. From this point on, as the dynamic is
deterministic, the system enters a limit cycle (of length gr eater
than one). Since it is not clear whether or not a limit cycle ca n be
considered a “right recognition, ” we have excluded this possibility
from the counts of the right recognition. Only ﬁxed point are
considered “good.” For this reason, to determine the probabi lity
of “right recognition” one dynamical step is enough. We havealso
not considered the possibility that, using as input a vector not
belonging to the training set, it converges to one of the trai ning
vectors. The probability of right recognition reported here i s an
underestimation of the network capability. A further quanti ty
that it would be interesting to evaluate is the size of the att raction
basin of a given ﬁxed point, i.e., how many non-training vecto rs
converge to a given training vector ﬁxed point. The basins siz e
would be an important measure of the network performance,
their determination is however diﬃcult to achieve analytic ally,
and is behind the goal of the present paper.
One important ﬁnding is summarized in Equation (18). It
states that for P ≫ N, when the connection matrix is dominated
by the diagonal term and is still diﬀerent from the unity matrix
(this is due to the great number of oﬀ-diagonal elements with
zero average and RMS of the order of 1/
√
P ), the network retains
its capacity of give more “good” than “wrong” answers. This
property, the fact that the limit in Equation (18) is e and not
“1, ” can be ascribed to the observation that, although the matrix J
tends to the unit matrix for largeP, the dynamics (see Equation 1)
dictated by the matrix J does not tend to the dynamics dictate d
by the unit matrix. This ﬁnding opens the way to a much
more eﬃcient use of the artiﬁcial Hebbian neural network for
information storage. In the ﬁrst region, as well known since 4 0
years, the storage capacity is limited as the number of encode d
vectors becomes of the order N. Indeed, in the high α region, the
number of elements is basically unlimited 4, when the number of
stored elements is taken larger than ≈ 4Nln(N).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GR designed research. VF , ML, and GR performed numerical
simulations, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript.
4The word unlimited is obviously non-physical. However, the value of Po arising
from the Tanaka-Edwards relation ( Tanaka and Edwards, 1980 ), Po = exp(γ N),
with γ = 0.2. Po, already at the N-values reported in Equation (5) is so large
(Po(N = 1000) ≈ 1087) with respect to P(N) ( P(N = 1000) ≈ 2 10 4 to state
that Po is unlimited to any practical purpose.
REFERENCES
Abu-Mostafa, Y. S., and St. Jacques, J.-M. (1985). Informatio n capacity
of the Hopﬁeld model. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory IT-31, 461.
doi: 10.1109/tit.1985.1057069
Amit, D. J. (1989). Modelling Brain Function: The World of Attractor Neural
Networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., and Sompolinsky, H. (1985a). Storing inﬁn ite numbers
of patterns in a spin-glass model of neural networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55:1530.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.55.1530
Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., and Sompolinsky, H. (1985b). Spin-glass
models of neural networks. Phys. Rev. A 32:1007. doi: 10.1103/physreva.
32.1007
Bastolla, U., and Parisi, G. ( 1997). Attractors in fully asymmetric neu ral networks.
J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 30:5613.
Brunel, N. (2016). Is cortical connectivity optimized for storing information? Nat.
Neurosci. 19:749. doi: 10.1038/nn.4286
Cooper, L. N. (1973). “A possible organization of animal memory and learning, ” in
Proceedings of the Nobel Symposium on Collective Properties of Physical Systems,
eds B. Lundquist and S. Lundquist (New York, NY: Academic Press) , 252–264.
Cooper, L. N., Liberman, F., and Oja, E. (1979). A theory for the ac quisition
and loss of neuron speciﬁcity in visual cortex. Biol. Cybern. 33:9.
doi: 10.1007/BF00337414
Corless, R. M., Gonnet, G. H., Hare, D. E. G., Jeﬀrey, D. J., and Knut h,
D. E. (1996). On the LambertW function. Adv. Comput. Math. 5:329.
doi: 10.1007/BF02124750
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144


--- Page 9 ---
Folli et al. Hopﬁled Model: Maximum Storage Capacity
Derrida, B. (1989). Distribution of the activities in a diluted neural network. J. Phys.
A Math. Gen. 22:2069. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/22/12/012
Eccles, J. G. (1953). The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon.
Gutfreundt, H., Regert, J. D., and Young, A. P. (1988). The nature of attractors in
an asymmetric spin glass with deterministic dynamics. J. Phys. A Math. Gen.
21:2775. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/21/12/020
Haykin, S. (1999). Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation . Prentice
Hall. Available online at: https://lecteurepub-a507a.ﬁrebaseapp.com/
3RO4lXk7OXbEm12/Neural%20Networks%20A%20Comprehensive
%20Foundation%202nd%20Edition%20Ebooks%20Gratuit.pdf
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. New York, NY: Wiley.
Hopﬁeld, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emer gent
collective computational abilities. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79:2554.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554
Hopﬁeld, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded response have collective computational
properties like those of two-state neurons. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81:3088.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.10.3088
Hopﬁeld, J. J., Feinstein, D. I., and Palmer, R. G. (1983). ‘Unlearnin g’ has a
stabilizing eﬀect in collective memories Nature 304, 158.
Mc Eliece, R. J., Posner, E. C., Rodemich, E. R., and Venkatesh, S. S. (1987). The
capacity of the hopﬁeld associative memory. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory IT-33, 461.
Olver, F. W. J., Lozier, D. W., Boisvert, R. F. and Clark, C. W. (eds .). (2010).
Handbook of Mathematical Functions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rojas, R. (1996). Neural Networks. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sollacher, R., and Gao, H. (2009). Towards real-world applications of on line
learning spiral recurrent neural networks. J. Intell. Learn. Syst. Appl. 1:1.
doi: 10.4236/jilsa.2009.11001
Sompolinsky, H., Crisanti, A., and Sommers, H. (1988). Chaos in random neural
networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 61:259. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.259
Tanaka, F., and Edwards, S. F. (1980). Analytic theory of the grou nd state
properties of a spin glass. I. Ising spin glass. J. Physi. F Met. Phys. 10:2769.
doi: 10.1088/0305-4608/10/12/017
Wainrib, G., and Touboul, J. (2013). Topological and dynamical
complexity of random neural networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118:101259.
doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.110.118101
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Folli, Leonetti and Ruocco. This is an open-acce ss article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic prac tice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with thes e terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2017 | Volume 10 | Article 144
