--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 18 April 2017
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00025
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25
Edited by:
Daqing Guo,
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, China
Reviewed by:
Ivan Raikov,
Stanford University, USA
Ying Wu,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
*Correspondence:
Peter N. Taylor
peter.taylor@newcastle.ac.uk
Yujiang Wang
yujiang.wang@newcastle.ac.uk
Received: 22 January 2017
Accepted: 29 March 2017
Published: 18 April 2017
Citation:
Baier G, Taylor PN and Wang Y (2017)
Understanding Epileptiform
After-Discharges as Rhythmic
Oscillatory Transients.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11:25.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00025
Understanding Epileptiform
After-Discharges as Rhythmic
Oscillatory Transients
Gerold Baier 1, Peter N. Taylor 2, 3, 4* and Yujiang Wang 2, 3, 4*
1 Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London , London, UK, 2 Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, 3 Interdisciplinary Computing and Complex BioSystems (ICOS), School of Computing Science,
Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK, 4 Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK
Electro-cortical activity in patients with epilepsy may sh ow abnormal rhythmic transients
in response to stimulation. Even when using the same stimulation parameters in the same
patient, wide variability in the duration of transient resp onse has been reported. These
transients have long been considered important for the mapping of the excitability levels in
the epileptic brain but their dynamic mechanism is still not well understood. T o investigate
the occurrence of abnormal transients dynamically, we use a thalamo-cortical neural
population model of epileptic spike-wave activity and stud y the interaction between
slow and fast subsystems. In a reduced version of the thalamo -cortical model, slow
wave oscillations arise from a fold of cycles (FoC) bifurcat ion. This marks the onset of
a region of bistability between a high amplitude oscillator y rhythm and the background
state. In vicinity of the bistability in parameter space, th e model has excitable dynamics,
showing prolonged rhythmic transients in response to supra threshold pulse stimulation.
We analyse the state space geometry of the bistable and excit able states, and ﬁnd that
the rhythmic transient arises when the impending FoC bifurc ation deforms the state
space and creates an area of locally reduced attraction to th e ﬁxed point. This area
essentially allows trajectories to dwell there before esca ping to the stable steady state,
thus creating rhythmic transients. In the full thalamo-cor tical model, we ﬁnd a similar
FoC bifurcation structure. Based on the analysis, we propos e an explanation of why
stimulation induced epileptiform activity may vary betwee n trials, and predict how the
variability could be related to ongoing oscillatory backgr ound activity. We compare our
dynamic mechanism with other mechanisms (such as a slow para meter change) to
generate excitable transients, and we discuss the proposed excitability mechanism in
the context of stimulation responses in the epileptic corte x.
Keywords: afterdischarge, epilepsy model, spike-wave, stimu lation, transients
1. INTRODUCTION
Epileptic seizures are typically marked by abnormal rhythmic d ischarges of electrical activity in the
human brain. The rhythmicity is taken as an indication of an u nderlying deterministic nonlinear
oscillation. The transition from a disorganized backgroun d activity to the epileptic rhythm is
described as a state transition either due to a changing parameter (
Breakspear et al., 2006); or due to
a cross-separatrix perturbation in a bistable situation (Lopes da Silva et al., 2003); or a combination


--- Page 2 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
of both ( Wang et al., 2014 ). A problem that has not been
satisfactorily addressed is the nature of the termination o f the
abnormal rhythm. Corresponding to the situation at rhythm
onset, rhythm termination could be equally be due to a parameter
change (
Kramer et al., 2012 ), a cross-separatrix perturbation in
a bistable situation ( Taylor et al., 2014 ) or a mixture of the
two. However, in the case of human EEG, no direct observation
for either the claimed (slow) parameter change or the cross-
separatrix perturbation has been provided, although we discus s
some indirect evidence later on.
Abnormal rhythmic discharges can also often be induced
in patients with epilepsy by stimulation. Well-known examples
are the reﬂex epilepsies, where epileptic rhythms are induced
by some form of motor-sensory stimulation (
Koepp et al.,
2016), and the so-called afterdischarges following invasive
electrical stimulation of the cortex ( Penﬁeld and Jasper,
1954; Blume et al., 2004 ). Figure 1 is an example of an
abnormal spike-wave rhythm induced by transcranial
magnetic stimulation. As in the case of spontaneous
epileptic seizures, these rhythms typically self-terminate
and the dynamic mechanism of the termination remains
speculative.
A previous computational modeling study has suggested
that there is a third possibility to explain the termination
of an abnormal rhythm. Looking at the case of electrical
responses to cortical pulse stimulation, it was suggested tha t
prolonged rhythmic transients could be self-terminating in
spatially extended systems (
Goodfellow et al., 2012a; Taylor
et al., 2013 ). This means that neither a parameter change
nor a cross-separatrix stimulus would be required for the
rhythm to stop. The transient abnormal rhythm would
then constitute an example of excitability of a dynamical
system. Excitability is a prominent feature of information-
processing systems (like neurons) as it allows self-resetti ng
after information has been delivered. It is unknown whether
the epileptic brain constitutes an excitable medium with
thresholds to epileptic discharges, but computational models
demonstrate that a large number of features surrounding
epilepsy can be recreated in heterogeneous excitable media
(
Goodfellow et al., 2012b ). However, a major problem
with high-dimensional spatio-temporal models is that the
mathematical nature of state space features is diﬃcult to
unveil.
Here we study a previously proposed model of cortico-
thalamic interaction which ignores the spatial extension an d
heterogeneities of the cortex as is typically done to describ e
widely synchronized epileptiform rhythms shown in e.g.,
Blume
et al. (2004) and Kimiskidis et al. (2015) , also see Figure 1
for an example. To investigate the dynamic mechanisms of
the transients in the thalamo-cortical model, we propose a
simpliﬁed version of it to demonstrate the possibility of
abnormal rhythmic transients in its low-dimensional state
space. With some variations, diﬀerent types of transient
waveforms can be created in the full model, in particular
those known to occur in patients with epilepsy. With this
proposed alternative mechanism, we can explain the observatio n
of variability on stimulation response in the clinical setti ng,
and suggest a model based prediction to explain the variabilit y.
Future computational studies of abnormal brain activity can
use these mechanisms to generate alternative predictions to
be compared to clinical observations (instead of attempting
to ﬁt a single model to the data), c.f.
Estrada et al.
(2016).
2. METHODS
2.1. Thalamocortical Model
We simulate thalamocortical interactions by following prev ious
modeling based on the known connectivity of this system (see
Figure 2B; c.f.
Suﬀczynski et al., 2004; Breakspear et al., 2006 ).
Speciﬁcally, the neural mass approach by Suﬀczynski et al. (2004)
forms a neural population version of the detailed biophysical
model described by
Destexhe (1998). In our macroscopic model,
we consider the activity changes in four neural populations.
The cortical pyramidal cell population ( PY) is self-excitatory
(
Amari, 1977 ) and excites the cortical inhibitory interneuron
population ( IN) ( Suﬀczynski et al., 2004 ). In addition, PY
excites the thalamocortical cell population in the thalamus
(TC), and a population of cells in the reticular nucleus of the
thalamus ( RE) (
Suﬀczynski et al., 2004; Yousif and Denham,
2005). The interneuron population IN inhibits the excitatory
cortical PY population (Suﬀczynski et al., 2004 ). Direct thalamic
output to the cortex comes exclusively from excitatory TC
connections to the PY population ( Breakspear et al., 2006 ).
Intrathalamic connectivity is incorporated into the model a s
follows: TC cells have excitatory projections to RE, which in
turn inhibits the TC population along with self-inhibition of RE.
This connectivity scheme is consistent with experimental resu lts
reviewed in Pinault and O’Brien (2005) and summarized in their
Figure 1.
It was demonstrated in a minimal model of epileptic spike-
wave discharges (SWD) that at least one slow driver is requir ed
in addition to the cortical PY and IN units (Wang et al., 2012).
There is experimental evidence for abnormal slow thalamic
processes (variations in a tonic inhibitory current), which may
be a common mechanism in typical absence seizures ( Cope
et al., 2009 ). This is also supported by theoretical studies that
ﬁnd slow timescales crucial for the generation of realistic SWD.
These studies either incorporate the slow timescale directl y by
modeling the slower reaction of thalamic populations ( Marten
et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2013 ) or by incorporating explicit
delays ( Breakspear et al., 2006 ). Marten et al. (2009) compares
these approaches and ﬁnds bifurcation structures leading to
the onset of SWD which are similar. As the exact dynamic
mechanisms underlying the emergence of the slow timescale i s
still unclear, we assume here that the thalamic compartment
operates on a slower timescale in the abnormal condition of
increased susceptibility to undergo transitions to SWD. Fro m a
theoretical point of view, this has the advantage that the mod el
can be analyzed in terms of slow-fast subsystems (
Wang et al.,
2012).
The model uses the neural population approach based on
the neural ﬁeld equations proposed by Amari (1977) . Spike-
wave solutions are found following the analysis done in Taylor
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 3 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 1 | Clinically recorded self-terminating spike-wave d ischarges induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation. The stimulation was applied at the
red arrow. Spike and wave afterdischarges are observed. Fig ure is visualized from Kimiskidis et al. (2015) .
FIGURE 2 | Connectivity scheme of the (A) simpliﬁed and (B) thalamocortical model. Excitatory connections are shown i n green, inhibitory connections are shown
in orange.
and Baier (2011) and Taylor et al. (2013) . The set of ordinary
diﬀerential equations is given as:
dPY
dt = τ 1(hpy − PY + C1 f [PY] − C3 f [IN] + C9 f [TC])
dIN
dt = τ 2(hin − IN + C2 f [PY])
dTC
dt = τ 3(htc − TC + C7 f [PY] − C6 (s[RE]))
dRE
dt = τ 4(hre − RE + C8 f [PY] − C4 (s[RE]) + C5 (s[TC]))
(1)
where hpy,in,tc,re are input parameters, τ 1...4 are time scale
parameters and f [.] and s[.] are the activation functions:
f [u] = (1/ (1 + ǫ −u)) (2)
s[u] = au + b (3)
with u = PY, IN, TC, RE. The parameter ǫ determines the slope
of the sigmoid. Two activation functions are used here, one
sigmoid, one linear. This is because we found that in our previous
studies (
Taylor et al., 2014 ) the RE and TC interactions mainly
happened in the linear range of the sigmoid activation functio n.
Hence we replaced them with a linear activation. This is also
useful to directly compare the slow thalamic subsystem to the
simpliﬁed model later, where we also use linear activation for
simpliﬁcation.
Details about the parameters can be found in Tables S1, S2.
Code to simulate the model can be found online at https://
senselab.med.yale.edu/modeldb/showmodel.cshtml?model=
168856.
2.2. Simpliﬁed Model
To investigate mechanisms leading to bistability/excitab ility in
the model we use a simpliﬁed model of three variables which
allows for easier visualization (we will call it the 3V model -
Figure 2A). The simpliﬁed model preserves the important
aspects of the more detailed model including timescale separation
and bistability. Speciﬁcally, the two slow variables create a focus
in the slow subsystem, just like the full thalamo-cortical m odel.
The two fast cortical variables have been simpliﬁed to one,
eﬀectively removing the Hopf bifurcation in the fast subsystem .
This is so that the full system is simpliﬁed to only display
simple oscillations, rather than slow-fast oscillations. In deed, the
transient dynamics are built up by these two slow and one fast
variables. As we will show in results, the additional fast vari able
in the full system just adds the Hopf bifurcation back into the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 4 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
system, allowing for transient slow-fast (spike-wave) osci llations.
The equations for the simpliﬁed system are as follows:
dX
dt = τ fast(hX − X + Cd f [Y])
dY
dt = τ slow(hY − Y − Ca Z + Cb X)
dZ
dt = τ slow(hZ − Z + Cc Y) (4)
where hX,Y,Z are input parameters, τ slow,fast are time scale
parameters and f [.] is the activation function above (Equation 2).
We can essentially identify the slow subsystem ( TC and RE)
with the slow subsystem in the 3V model ( Y and Z). The cortical
system PY and IN can be considered the expansion of the
3V system variable X. The parameter values for the simpliﬁed
model were obtained through visual comparison of the state
space structures as described above. Or in other words, we
constructed the state space structures in the simpliﬁed model
with the parameters, such that they matched the the full syste m
as described above.
Details about the parameters can be found in Tables S1, S2.
2.3. Slow and Fast Manifolds
We will use the slow and fast manifolds in state space to explain
some of the phenomena and mechanisms we observe. The slow
manifold is technically deﬁned as the manifold in state space
on which the change in the fast subsystem is zero, i.e., the
slow dynamics dominate. For the 3V model, this would be the
condition dX
dt = 0, hence ( hX − X + Cd f [Y]) = 0, hX +
Cd f [Y] = X. This means the manifold is a sigmoid-shaped plane
(green plane in Figure 3). For the full thalamo-cortical system,
this would be the conditions dPY
dt = 0, dIN
dt = 0. Essentially the
ﬁxed point of the fast subsystem. However, in our analysis, we
have expanded this deﬁnition of slow manifold, by also including
limit cycles of the fast subsystem in the slow manifold (blue
mesh in the later Figures 6–8). This is justiﬁed in more detail
in
Wang et al. (2012) , but essentially we assume that the time
scale separation is suﬃcient to separate the slow dynamics fro m
the fast oscillations. We obtained the slow manifold for the f ull
system numerically by obtaining the ﬁxed points and limit cyc les
of the fast subsystem. The numerical simulation approach was
used here (as opposed to continuation), as routine for detecti ng
ﬁxed points and limit cycles could be reused for the detection
of transient events with small adaptations. In both cases we
essentially detect if trajectories stay in the proximity of each other.
The fast manifold, in contrast, is where the slow dynamics ar e
essentially zero. For the 3V system this means dY
dt = 0 and dZ
dt = 0.
This gives (hY − Y − Ca Z + Cb X) = 0 and (hZ − Z + Cc Y) = 0.
If expressed as dependent on X we get: Z = hZ + Cc Y and
Y = (−Ca ∗ hZ + Cb ∗ X + hY )/ (1 + Ca ∗ Cc). In other
words, the fast manifold is a line in the state space (orange li ne
in Figure 3). For the full thalamocortical system, we have the
conditions: dTC
dt = 0, dRE
dt = 0. This gives a linear equation
system, where the solution is the set of ﬁxed points of the slow
subsystem (orange line in Figure 6F).
3. RESUL TS
3.1. Analysis of a Slow-Fast Subsystem
To begin our analysis, we will look at the 3V simpliﬁed system
to illustrate the main dynamic mechanisms before applying the
analogous analysis to the full thalamo-cortical model.
The reduced three-dimensional model is a slow-fast system,
with one fast variable (X) and two slow variables ( Y, Z). Previous
studies of such slow-fast systems have shown that Fenichels
Theorem (
Fenichel, 1979 ) is a powerful tool of analysis. The
theorem essentially states that the (stable of unstable) ﬁxed points
of the fast subsystem form a manifolds in the full state space
with similar properties. By analysing these manifolds, one ca n
understand the dynamics of the full system in state space.
Using Fenichels Theorem, and the slow and fast manifolds,
the behavior of the system can be understood geometrically
(
Izhikevich, 2000; Desroches et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012 ).
These slow and fast manifolds are shown in Figures 3A–D as
green and red manifolds, respectively. The slow manifold (i.e .,
where the change in the fast subsystem is zero, dX/ dt = 0)
is a green sigmoid shaped plane, which is attractive in the
direction of X. The fast manifold (i.e., where there is no change
in the slow subsystem, dY/ dt = 0 and dZ/ dt = 0) is a
red line indicating a stable focus in the slow subsystem. The
intersection of these two manifolds is a ﬁxed point of the full
system (blue dot in Figures 3A–D). Additionally, when the fast
manifold (red) is positioned near the non-linear part of the slo w
sigmoidal manifold (green), the interplay between the fast an d
slow dynamics can create a stable limit cycle in the full syst em
(indicated in magenta in Figures 3A–D) that is bistable to the
ﬁxed point (blue). The bistability is additionally demonstra ted
in Figures 3E,F by perturbing the ﬁxed point and showing
the following trajectory evolving to the limit cycle; and by a
subsequent perturbation from the limit cycle back to the ﬁxed
point. Note that the bistable limit cycle is created around (a nd
due) to the non-linearity in the sigmoidal slow manifold.
The stable ﬁxed point and the stable limit cycle are separated
by a saddle cycle (indicated in orange in Figures 3A–D). We
additionally show the stable direction of the saddle cycle as a gray
tube manifold in Figures 3A–D. This manifold also represents
the separatrix between the ﬁxed point and limit cycle.
In order to understand the type of bifurcation leading to this
bistability, we slowly vary the parameter hX, which controls how
close the fast manifold (red line) is shifted toward the nonli near
part of the sigmoid-shaped slow manifold (green plane). We
ﬁnd that the new coexisting limit cycle arises in a fold of cycl es
bifurcation (marked as FoC1 in Figure 4A), as the fast manifold
approaches the nonlinear part of the sigmoidal slow manifold.
When hX is further increased, the stable ﬁxed point becomes
unstable in a subcritical Andronov-Hopf bifurcation, where also
the saddle cycle disappears (marked as H1 in Figure 4A). Due
to the symmetry in the sigmoid slow manifold, both bifurcati ons
occur again as the fast manifold passes through the upper part of
the sigmoid (marked as H2 and FoC2 in Figure 4A).
Interestingly, the impending fold of cycles bifurcation
introduces a slowing/trapping in the local state space, which i s
well documented for the fold or saddle-node types of bifurcations
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 5 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 3 | Bistability in the 3V model. (A–D) state space diagrams of the 3V system in different projectio ns showing the fast (red line), slow (green), and separating
(gray) manifolds, and the ﬁxed point (blue dot) and limit cycl e (magenta line). (E) Time series of the system when stimulated to transition from the ﬁxed point to the limit
cycle, and back. (F) Y -Z state space showing the trajectory in (E). Black arrows indicate the stimulation points. Parameter v alues used can be found in T able S1.
(see e.g., Damme and V alkering, 1987 ). In the case of a fold of
cycles bifurcation, this means that long transients of osci llations
can be observed prior to the bifurcation. Figure 4B shows an
example of such a long transient lasting for 14 cycles (over 5
model time seconds). Figure 4C shows the same time series in
state space. In this projection the slowing/trapping in state spa ce
becomes particularly clear, as the trajectories dwell in the region
in state space, where the stable and saddle limit cycle are to b e
born.
We additionally measured the length of these transients
for diﬀerent values of hX and ﬁnd a sudden increase just
prior to the FoC bifurcation in parameter space, ( Figure 5,
ﬁrst column). This behavior changes quantitatively with ot her
parameters. For example, as the bifurcation point in hX shifts
with the parameter τ slow, the parameter region in hX supporting
long transients also increases. In other words, long transi ents
can be found further away from the FoC point in hX as
τ slow decreases ( Figure 5A). When analysing properties of the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 6 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 4 | Excitability in the 3V model. (A) Bifurcation diagram for the parameter hX showing minimum and maximum values of Y . The red line indicates the
parameter setting for (B,C). FoC indicates a fold of cycles bifurcation. H indicates a su bcritical Andronov-Hopf bifurcation. The zoom-in shows th e FoC bifurcation in
the variables Y and Z. The unstable limit cycle is shown in the zoomed panel in blue , with the stable limit cycle in pink. (B) An example of a transient following a
stimulus (black arrow) at a parameter setting before the FoC bifurcation (red line in A). (C) The same transient is shown in the state space of the variable s y and z.
Parameters used here can be found in T able S1.
transients further, we observe that indeed the oscillation a ppears
to become slower with decreasing τ slow (Figure 5B). This results
in a roughly constant number of oscillations for diﬀerent τ slow
(Figure 5C). However, this eﬀect is not observed in another
parameter (e.g., Cc, Figures 5D–F). The parameter region in
hX showing long transients appears to stay about the same
for diﬀerent Cc (Figure 5D), but the number of oscillations
increases substantially with diﬀerent Cc (Figure 5F). These two
examples illustrate that the properties of the transients near the
FoC bifurcations in hX can be modulated by other parameters.
Particularly, the properties of the duration of the transient and
the number of oscillations in the transient can be modiﬁed. W e
found that the modiﬁcation essentially works by the mechani sm
of changing the ﬂow in state space near the ghost of the
saddle cycle. More precisely, the local ﬂow creating the dwelli ng
behavior in state space (near where the saddle node of cycles
bifurcation will happen) determines how the transients will
appear. This local ﬂow is inﬂuenced by other parameters of the
system, such as Cc and τ slow.
3.2. Analysis of the Full Model
We now turn our attention to the full thalamo-cortical syste m.
We can essentially identify the slow subsystem ( TC and RE) with
the slow subsystem in the 3V model ( Y and Z). The cortical
system PY and IN can be considered the expansion of the 3V
system variable X. This identiﬁcation is possible through the
analysis of the geometry of the fast and slow manifolds in stat e
space (compare Figure 3 with Figure 6). Where the fast manifold
in the 3V model was a stable focus, this is exactly preserved in the
full system (by design of the 3V system, see Section 2). Where the
slow manifold in the 3V model was previously a simple sigmoid
manifold, it is now a manifold that partly resembles a sigmoid
manifold, only with a Hopf bifurcation at one end creating an
additional limit cycle manifold in the fast subsystem. Note again,
the bistable limit cycle is created around the non-linearit y (or
bend) of the slow manifold—as in the simpliﬁed model.
Using the knowledge from the three-dimensional reduced
model, the analysis of the four-dimensional system can proceed
in an analogous manner. Figures 6C–F show the state space
projections of the full model, which can be compared to
Figures 3A–D qualitatively. The fast manifold is still a stable
focus, shown as an orange line in the projection of Figures 6C,D.
The fast subsystem is now richer in dynamics. With respect
to the slow modulation from the thalamic subsystem, the
fast cortical system can undergo a supercritical Andronov-
Hopf bifurcation. This means that the slow manifold is more
complex in structure. Figures 6C–F show the slow manifold as
a blue mesh. Particularly in Figures 6C,E,F the cone structure
of the slow manifold is visible, which occurs due to the
supercritical Andronov-Hopf bifurcation in the fast subsyst em.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 7 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 5 | Properties of the transients in parameter space of t he 3V model. (A–C) Scanning hX and τ slow. (D–F) Scanning hX and Cc. (A,D) Duration of the
transient shows the total duration of the induced transient in seconds. In the dark red area, the FoC1 bifurcation is alrea dy passed and the limit cycle is stable. (B,E)
Shows that some parameters can change the period of the oscil latory transient, e.g., low values of τ slow can prolong the period. (C,F) The number of oscillations in
the transient can also change depending on the parameters, e .g., at very high values of Cc. Parameter values can be found in T able S1.
The intersection of the fast and slow manifold again forms a
stable ﬁxed point. The interaction of the slow and fast subsys tem
additionally creates a limit cycle. The limit cycle is not on ly
a simple slow oscillation as in the reduced system, but also
includes an additional fast spike. The fast spike arises due to the
Andronov-Hopf oscillation in the fast subsystem. The attrac tor
(black line in Figures 6C–F) can be characterized as having a
spike-and-wave morphology (Figure 6A). The basin of attraction
for the ﬁxed point is now more complex than in the three-
dimensional case, and more diﬃcult to visualize as it is four -
dimensional. We have illustrated it in Figures 6C–F as a dot
cloud, and also as Video S1.
The bistability between the ﬁxed point and the spike-wave
limit cycle is additionally demonstrated in Figures 6A,B. The
red and blue bars indicate two perturbations, which induce a
transition to and from the spike-wave limit cycle.
The mechanism by which the bistable spike-wave limit cycle
arises is, as in the three-dimensional case, through a fold of cycles
bifurcation. The bifurcation scan of the system with respect to htc
and hre are shown in Figures 7A,B. Analogous to the 3V case,
just prior to the FoC bifurcation, the transient length incre ases
(Figures 7C,D). Figure 7E shows an example time series of such
a transient. As the impending bifurcation will create a limit c ycle
of spike-wave morphology, the transients also show a spike-wav e
oscillation. Figure 7F shows the same time series in state space,
again showing the dwelling in the region where the stable and
saddle limit cycles will appear.
Desroches et al. (2012) and other studies have shown that in
slow-fast systems of bursting, adjusting the time scale rati o can
increase the winding numbers of the spikes in a cycle of spike and
wave. In our system this is indeed the case as well. By adjusting
the time scale ratio we can produce a poly-spike-wave limit cycl e
that is bistable to the ﬁxed point ( Figures 8A,C). Prior to the
FoC, we can also observe transient poly-spike-wave oscillati ons
(Figures 8B,D).
3.3. Implication for Clinical Application
As an outlook, we present a prediction for the clinical
application in afterdischarges. When testing for afterdisch arges
clinically, variability in the stimulation response durati on is
often observed (e.g., in single pulse stimulation such as in
V alentín et al., 2002 ), despite using the same stimulation
parameters. In Figure 9A we show that in our 3V model
of excitable transients simulated with low level noise input,
similarly variable stimulation responses can be observed. I t is
important to note that the noise is of such a low level that
on its own, it does not provoke high amplitude oscillatory
transients in our total simulation time of 1,500 s. We stimul ate
such a system every 15 s, and indeed see that the response
is not the same every time. Rather, short and long transients
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 8 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 6 | Bistability in the 4V model. (A) Time series of the full thalamo-cortical system when stimul ated to transition from the ﬁxed point to the spike-wave limit
cycle, and back. (B) PY -RE-TC state space showing the trajectory in (A). Blue and red arrows indicate the stimulation points. (C–F) State space projection of the
four-dimensional thalamo-cortical system. Blue mesh show s the slow manifold (attractors of the fast subsystem), and t he orange dashed line shows the fast manifold
(attractors of the slow subsystem). The intersection of the blue mesh and orange line is the ﬁxed point for the full system ( gray dot). The black line shows the
spike-wave limit cycle of the full system. The colored dots o utline the state space area that is the basin of attraction fo r the ﬁxed point of the full system. As this basin
is a 4D structure, we show a 3D slices of it here, and the slice p oint is a point on the SWD attractor, marked by the red star. Pa rameters used here can be found in
T able S2.
are seen, despite using the same stimulation and system
parameters.
To understand if there is any regularity to when shorter or
longer transients are provoked, we project the simulated time
series into state space in Figure 9B (note this is essentially the
same as Figure 4C, only simulated with noise and zoomed in).
We ﬁnd the majority of the time series around the background
state (ﬁxed point) in state space. The stimuli every 15 s are see n
as large displacements in the stimulation direction. We assum ed
the stimulation direction, i.e., to what extent each variab le is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 9 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 7 | Excitability in the 4V thalamo-cortical model. (A,B ) Numerical bifurcation scan of the full thalamo-cortical mo del (see Section 2 for details) for the
parameters htc and hre. (C,D) Numerical scan of the transient length before the FoC bifurc ations (marked by the green and blue lines) in htc and hre. (E) Time series of
an example of a excitable spike-wave transient. Stimulatio n is shown as a red arrow. The corresponding parameters are ma rked as dashed red lines in (C,D). (F)
Same trajectory as in (E) shown in the PY , TC, RE state space. Parameters used here can b e found in T able S2.
aﬀected by the stimulus, to be constant. The transient oscilla tory
responses are then seen as trajectories around the backgroun d
state. To determine from where in state space long (vs. short)
transients are provoked, we marked the stimulation position with
dots in Figure 9B. The color of the dots indicates the provoked
response length. With such a projection, we indeed see that the
longer stimulation responses tend to be clustered, and locat ed on
the right hand side of the ﬁgure.
With our knowledge of the deterministic 3V system described
earlier, this is easy to understand: the stimuli need to be fr om
a position in state space that is near the ghost of the basin
boundary of the background state. The stimulation directio n and
strength then determine where the long oscillatory transients can
be provoked from. The remaining degree of variability can ﬁnally
be attributed to the noisy nature of the simulation. In terms
of clinical prediction, our results indicate that if we projec ted
clinical EEG into a state space equivalent (e.g., using Taken ’s
reconstruction
Takens, 1981; Taylor et al., 2014), we might be able
to observe a similar pattern, where a particular area of state s pace
is producing long afterdischarges. The implication of this is that,
whilst clinically one may simply see a varied response, a phase
space reconstruction of the response may explain why there is
a varied response. An alternative interpretation of the resul ts is:
if the background state has a dominant oscillatory component ,
then we predict that afterdischarges might be more readily fo und
in a particular phase of this ongoing oscillation. This ﬁnding also
holds for the full system ( Figure S1).
4. DISCUSSION
We demonstrated that excitable transients can be provoked ne ar
a fold of cycles bifurcation in a reduced thalamocortical mo del.
We also showed that this helps to explain the occurrence of
excitable complex transients in the full thalamocortical mod el.
The thalamocortical model thereby generates time series th at
resemble the diﬀerent waveform morphologies of transient
dynamics provoked by stimulation in patients (
Blume et al.,
2004). Hence we hypothesize that excitability in the vicinity of
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 10 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 8 | Excitability in the 4V model. (A,B) 3D state space projections of the 4D thalamocortical system . The slow and fast manifolds (blue mesh and orange
dashed line) are shown exactly as in Figure 6. (A) A bistable poly-spike-wave can also be created from the same ingredients as in the spike-wave case, simply by
increasing the relative time scale of the fast vs. the slow su bsystem. The trajectory of the poly-spike-wave limit cycle is shown as a blue line. (B) By the same
procedure as (A) the spike-wave excitable transient can also be transformed into an excitable poly-spike-wave transient. The trajecto ry of the poly-spike-wave
transient is shown as a red line. (C,D) Time series of the trajectories in (A,B), respectively. Parameters used here can be found in T able S2.
a FoC bifurcation is a potential dynamic mechanism underlyin g
the clinically observed abnormal transients.
4.1. Mechanism of Excitable Transients
The study of neural dynamics has traditionally focused on th e
analysis of stable states, either ﬁxed points or limit cycles . Little
eﬀort has been devoted to the analysis of transient dynamics,
with the exception of a few studies (
Nowacki et al., 2011,
2012; Goodfellow et al., 2012a; Osinga and Tsaneva-Atanaso va,
2013), although they were successful to explain other biological
phenomena (e.g., gene expression regulation Süel et al., 2006 ).
Traditionally, excitability in neural systems is divided i n two
classes: type I, and type II excitability. The distinction is
made based on how the frequency of the oscillation following
stimulation changes with the strength of stimulation. This has
classically also been mapped to diﬀerent bifurcations, near wh ich
the excitable transients are found. Type I excitability is fo und
near saddle-node on invariant circle (SNIC) bifurcations, and
type II excitability is found near an Andronov-Hopf and a fold
of cycles bifurcation (
Izhikevich, 2000; Buri et al., 2005 ). Our
mechanism of excitability is very similar to the type II fold o f
cycles bifurcation, however the conﬁgurations of the surrounding
state space are such that the dwelling behavior as described i n
Results is much more prominent than in other system. The
dwelling behavior is mainly determined by the phase space
ﬂow, which in turn is controlled by connectivity and time sca le
parameters (see Figure 5).
In this type II of excitability, there is a soft threshold (unl ike
in type I excitability, where it is a hard threshold, which is t he
stable manifold of the saddle). The soft threshold in our case
is essentially the state space area, where the stable manifol d of
the saddle cycle (gray tube in Figure 3) will form. Perturbation
beyond this area will be followed by an excitable transient,
which settles in an oscillation with almost stable frequency for
a substantial amount of time before returning to the stable
ﬁxed point. The impending bifurcation essentially introduces
a local deformation in state space that allows trajectories t o
dwell in the “ghost” of the to-be-born cycles ( Figure 4). The
frequency and amplitude of the excitable transient is essenti ally
determined by the cycle that will form. Of course, this direc tly
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 11 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
FIGURE 9 | Afterdischarge duration depends on where in state s pace
the system is when stimulated. (A) Simulation of repeated stimuli every 15 s
to provoke after discharges in the 3V model with noise input. All parameters
are unchanged between stimuli. Purple markers indicate the timing of the
stimulus. (B) When plotting the time series from (A) in state space (white lines),
we see the background state as a dense concentration of traje ctories, and the
stimulations occasionally cause bigger deviations beyond the background
state. Overlayed, we show the state space position where sti muli were applied
as dots. The color of the dots indicate the duration of the ens uing response.
Larger deviations tend to cluster on the right hand side of th e background
state. The direction of simulated stimulation is shown with the blue arrow.
depends on the parameter setting of the model ( Figure 5).
The absolute duration of the excitable transient depends on
the proximity to the bifurcation (as expected, as the local
state space deformation nearer the bifurcation is stronger) .
If perturbed beyond the soft threshold the stimulus intensit y
will not signiﬁcantly impact the morphology of the rhythmic
transient, except for the initial return to the dwelling area i n state
space.
These properties make the excitable transients in our model
an attractive candidate for modeling stimulus induced seiz ure-
like events (SLE). As these SLE are often referred to as complex
discharges following stimulation, they are usually of a sub stantial
duration (i.e., not a simple return to the background state). We
are not aware of consistent reports of the dependency of the
response amplitude or frequency on stimulus intensity. However,
usually a threshold phenomenon is reported in the stimulus
intensity (
Lesser et al., 1984 ). All these properties are fulﬁlled
in our rhythmic transient, but not in the traditional type I an d
type II transients ( Izhikevich, 2000; Buri et al., 2005 ). To test if
the state space setup in our model is a good candidate, a simila r
approach as in Jia and Gu (2012) could be used, where the system
is driven by noise input. The statistics of noise induced transients
(interval distributions) could hint at the type of excitabili ty and
state space setup in the data, which can be compared to real
experiments, where a noisy input is provided to brain tissue.
We also highlight here, that our mechanism of creating
transient oscillatory behavior is diﬀerent to that of e.g.,
Jirsa
et al. (2014) . Our slow timescale does not simply serve as
the slow variable change (i.e., our slow time scale is not the
ultraslow time scale in variable z in
Jirsa et al., 2014 ). Indeed,
we show with our model that the ultraslow time scale/slow
parameter change is not needed to create transient oscillato ry
behavior. This point may also have important implications for
the biophysics of transient epileptiform afterdischarges, where so
far the hypothesized mechanism of creating transient behavi or
is through such ultra-slow variables. Our model proposes that
such ultra-slow variables—often hypothesized to be quantiti es
such as extracellular potassium, or pO 2
Jirsa et al. (2014) —may
not be needed. In this context, it is of course important to
acknowledge that ultraslow time scales may still play a crucia l
role in the termination of seizure events or even stimulatio n
triggered epileptiform events. For example, one compelling piece
of evidence in the context of seizures is provided by
Bauer et al.
(2017).
Finally, we also show that the waveform morphology can be
modiﬁed to reﬂect the various waveforms that are observed in
clinical settings (
Blume et al., 2004 ). In Figure 7 we showed
that, in addition to slow oscillations, the excitable trans ient can
take the form of a train of spike-waves, similar to the clinical
picture in Figure 1. This is possible through the addition of
another fast variable, and the required dynamic mechanism i s
the introduction of a supercritical Andronov-Hopf bifurcati on
in the fast system during each cycle of the slow oscillation
(Figure 6). The global bifurcation mechanism of generating the
excitable transient in the ﬁrst place remains the same as in
the 3V system, i.e., through the fold of cycles. By adjusting
the time scale separation of the two time scales, additional
spikes can be added between successive waves, leading to
the appearance of poly-spike-waves, also observed clinically.
This spike-adding mechanism through the time-scale ratio ha s
been well-documented in previous studies of slow-fast syste ms
(
Desroches et al., 2012).
4.2. Stimulation Provoked Events as
Transients
In a more general context, the question arises whether excita ble
transients are a good model of stimulus induced seizure-
like activity at all. Particularly in the context of clinical
seizures, the established concept is that seizures are oscil latory
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 12 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
attractors that a neural system can reach either through som e
underlying parameter change (bifurcation) ( Wendling et al.,
2002; Breakspear et al., 2006 ) or through perturbation from a
coexisting stable background state (bistability) ( Lopes da Silva
et al., 2003; Lytton, 2008 ).
However, as we pointed out in the introduction, the
bifurcation-based explanation requires the change of an
underlying parameter for the start and termination of the
seizure. This is often illustrated as a “path through paramete r
space” (
Wendling et al., 2002; Breakspear et al., 2006; Nevado-
Holgado et al., 2012 ). The particular attraction of the parameter
variation hypothesis is that seizures (and also a small percen tage
of afterdischarges for that matter Blume et al., 2004 ) can evolve
in their waveform morphology over seconds, which would
point to a slow change in parameter. However, such a path
has never been conﬁrmed through direct measurements in
a clinical context. Some indirect evidence exists in animal
models and human EEG (
Kramer et al., 2012; Jirsa et al.,
2014). So, although this concept can be useful in some
applications, it still needs further consolidation in order t o
provide a mechanistic explanation of seizure onset/oﬀset. In
the context of stimulation induced activity, such as that sh own
in Figure 1, this concept becomes particularly diﬃcult. For
the onset, the parameter change would have to take eﬀect
instantaneously triggered by the stimulus, and the termina tion
would involve a parameter change that is not stimulation
triggered. Although conceivable in theory, it is diﬃcult to
identify processes that could be measured and manipulated
directly to test this hypothesis. In terms of biophysical
interpretation, we essentially suggest that a slow parameter
change (e.g., extracellular potassium, or pO 2) may not be
necessary to produce stimulation induced transient epileptif orm
activity.
The bistability-based explanation has the advantage that
stimuli can indeed induce a transition without the need for
underlying parameter changes. However, for the termination ,
the bistable model still required a terminating stimulus, o r a
parameter change. Hence, excitable transients appear well sui ted
as a deterministic model to describe stimulation induced se izure
like activity. However, in a noise-driven system, the pictur e
is more complicated. If we assume that local brain activity is
modeled by noise-driven dynamics (see e.g.,
Breakspear et al.,
2006; Deco et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2014 ), even a bistable
system could terminate the transient activity just through the
noise input. However, this will depend on the noise level
and we suggest that again, a detailed analysis of the event
statistics (e.g., distribution of duration of after discha rges)
might oﬀer insights into the exact dynamic mechanism. One
study uses this approach and presents some indirect evidence
that seizure onset may be described by a random walk
process, but not seizure oﬀset (
Suﬀczynski et al., 2006 ). This is
particularly interesting, as they describe seizure oﬀset to have a
deterministic component, which would ﬁt with the excitabili ty
model.
For low noise levels (low meaning transitions induced just
by the noise alone is extremely unlikely), the distinction o f
bistable vs. excitable would still make sense. It is easy to s ee
that for low noise levels, the duration of afterdischarges w ill
be much longer in the bistable case, compared to that of the
excitable case. For medium levels of noise, more complex and
non-trivial phenomena can arise (
Lindner et al., 2004 ), which
can be studied in future work, and matched to experimental
ﬁnding (
Lesser et al., 2008 ). In this context, it has for example
been noted that an afterdischarge increases the likelihood o f the
following afterdischarge in the same stimulation location within a
certain time window (Lee et al., 2010). Such a phenomenon is for
example imaginable for an intermediate noise level driving th e
fast system, which can stabilize a state space region around t he
ﬁxed point (see e.g., Muratov et al., 2005 ), enabling an increased
likelihood for a subsequent excitable transient.
In this context, we also oﬀer a prediction for the
observation and interpretation of afterdischarges. Assumi ng
that afterdischarges are indeed excitable transients, then in
the presence of low level noise, the response to stimulation
is variable (as observed in the clinical setting). We predict
that part of this variability may be explained by the state of
the ongoing background activity ( Figure 9). If our prediction
proves to be true, it does not only support our theory, but also
has wide-ranging implications. For the evaluation of cortic al
stimulation and afterdischarges, it means that these need t o be
considered carefully with regards to the ongoing activity (e .g.,
phase of the ongoing background oscillations), and ideally o ver
several trials. This may indeed be at the heart of the discrepa ncy
that afterdischarges do not seem to overlap well with seizure
onset zone (
Blume et al., 2004).
Finally, this leads us to comment on the relationship of the
stimulation induced seizure-like events, and naturally occ urring
seizure activity. To our knowledge, there is no direct link between
the two phenomena ( Blume et al., 2004 ), although they may be
related on a fundamental level ( Penﬁeld and Jasper, 1954; Kovac
et al., 2016 ). From the modeling perspective, the generation of
excitable transients through stimulation reﬂects a genera l level
of propensity/ability of the human cortex to generate seizure s
(as the system is near a bifurcation to seizure-like activit y).
However, the dynamic mechanism of seizure onset could be
entirely diﬀerent (as discussed, speciﬁc parameter changes co uld
drive onset and oﬀset, or a bistability could occur). This mig ht
explain that although afterdischarges and seizures appear to h ave
some commonalities, the spatial sites and networks involved do
not necessarily overlap. In other words, afterdischarges mig ht
be a general (not necessarily spatial) indicator of proximity t o
the seizure attractor, but the actual seizure onset and evolu tion
could (through active parameter changes) involve sites that diﬀer
from those activated by local stimulation. A careful evalua tion of
stimulation and afterdischarges over several repeated trials might
unlock the true mechanism underlying afterdischarges, and link
it mechanistically to seizures.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceived the study: GB, PT , and YW. Wrote the code: GB, PT ,
and YW. Analyzed and interpreted the results: GB, PT , and YW.
Wrote the manuscript: GB, PT , and YW.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 13 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PT was funded by Wellcome Trust (105617/Z/14/Z). The funders
played no role in the design or interpretation of this study.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3 389/fncom.
2017.00025/full#supplementary-material
Figure S1 | Afterdischarge duration depends on where in state space the
system is when stimulated. (A) Simulation of repeated stimuli every 10 s to
provoke afterdischarges in the 4V model with noise input. Al l parameters are
unchanged between stimuli. (B) When plotting the time series from (A) in state
space (white lines), we see the background state as a dense co ncentration of
trajectories, and the stimulations occasionally cause big ger deviations beyond the
background state. Overlayed, we show the state space positi on where stimuli
were applied as dots. The color of the dots indicate the durat ion of the ensuing
response. Larger deviations tend to cluster on the right han d side of the
background state. The direction of simulated stimulation i s shown with the blue
arrow.
T able S1 | Parameter values used to produce the ﬁgures for the re duced
3D system in this manuscript.
T able S2 | Parameter values used to produce the ﬁgures for the ful l
thalamo-cortical system in this manuscript.
Video S1 | Basin of attraction for the full thalamo-cortical sys tem. The basin
of attraction for the full model is a 4D object. In each frame of the video, we project
the basin into 3D state space of PY , IN, TC (into PY TC RE for the i nset video). The
slice point through the 4D space for each frame is shown as a re d dot, and the
video shows the full basin, where the fourth dimension is pro jected onto time.
REFERENCES
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateral-inhibition type neural
ﬁelds. Biol. Cybern. 27, 77–87. doi: 10.1007/BF00337259
Bauer, P. R., Thijs, R. D., Lamberts, R. J., Velis, D. N., Visser, G. H.,
Tolner, E. A., et al. (2017). Dynamics of convulsive seizure termina tion and
postictal generalized EEG suppression. Brain 140, 655–668. doi: 10.1093/brain/
aww322
Blume, W. T., Jones, D. C., and Pathak, P. (2004). Properties of aft er-discharges
from cortical electrical stimulation in focal epilepsies. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115,
982–989. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2003.11.023
Breakspear, M., Roberts, J., Terry, J. A., Rodrigues, S. R., Mahant , N., and
Robinson, P. A. (2006). A unifying explanation of primary generalize d seizures
through nonlinear brain modeling and bifurcation analysis. Cereb. Cortex 16,
1296–1313. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhj072
Buri, N., Grozdanovi, I., and V asovi, N. (2005). Type I vs. type II excitable
systems with delayed coupling. Chaos Solit. Fract. 23, 1221–1233.
doi: 10.1016/S0960-0779(04)00371-6
Cope, D. W., Di Giovanni, G., Fyson, S. J., Orbán, G., Errington, A. C., Lodblac,
M. L., et al. (2009). Enhanced tonic GABAA inhibition in typica l absence
epilepsy. Nat. Med. 15, 1392–1398. doi: 10.1038/nm.2058
Damme, R. V., and V alkering, T. P. (1987). Transient periodic behaviour related to
a saddle-node bifurcation. J. Phys. A 20:4161.
Deco, G., Jirsa, V., McIntosh, A. R., Sporns, O., and Kötter, R. (2009). Key role of
coupling, delay, and noise in resting brain ﬂuctuations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 106:10302. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901831106
Desroches, M., Guckenheimer, J., Krauskopf, B., Kuehn, C., Osin ga, H. M., and
Wechselberger, M. (2012). Mixed-mode oscillations with multiple ti me scales.
SIAM Rev. 54, 211–288. doi: 10.1137/100791233
Destexhe, A. (1998). Spike-and-wave oscillations based on the properties of
GABAB receptors. J. Neurosci. 18, 90–99.
Estrada, J., Andrew, N., Gibson, D., Chang, F., Gnad, F., and Gu nawardena,
J. (2016). Cellular interrogation: exploiting cell-to-cell variabilit y to
discriminate regulatory mechanisms in oscillatory signalling. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 12:e1004995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004995
Fenichel, N. (1979). Geometric singular perturbation theory for
ordinary diﬀerential equations. J. Diﬀer. Equat. 31, 53–98.
doi: 10.1016/0022-0396(79)90152-9
Goodfellow, M., Schindler, K., and Baier, G. (2012a). Self-orga nised
transients in a neural mass model of epileptogenic tissue dynamics.
NeuroImage 59, 2644–2660. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.
08.060
Goodfellow, M., Taylor, P. N., Wang, Y., Garry, D. J., and Baier, G.
(2012b). Modelling the role of tissue heterogeneity in epileptic
rhythms. Eur. J. Neurosci. 36, 2178–2187. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.
08093.x
Izhikevich, E. (2000). Neural excitability, spiking and bursting. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos
10, 1171–1266. doi: 10.1142/S0218127400000840
Jia, B., and Gu, H. (2012). Identifying type I excitability usin g dynamics
of stochastic neural ﬁring patterns. Cogn. Neurodyn. 6, 485–497.
doi: 10.1007/s11571-012-9209-x
Jirsa, V. K., Stacey, W. C., Quilichini, P. P., Ivanov, A. I., a nd Bernard,
C. (2014). On the nature of seizure dynamics. Brain 137, 2210–2230.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu133
Kimiskidis, V. K., Koutlis, C., Tsimpiris, A., Kälviäinen, R., Ryv lin, P., and
Kugiumtzis, D. (2015). Transcranial magnetic stimulation combine d with EEG
reveals covert states of elevated excitability in the human epileptic brain. Int. J.
Neural Syst. 25:1550018. doi: 10.1142/S0129065715500185
Koepp, M. J., Caciagli, L., Pressler, R. M., Lehnertz, K., and Benic zky, S. (2016).
Reﬂex seizures, traits, and epilepsies: from physiology to pathology. Lancet
Neurol. 15, 92–105. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00219-7
Kovac, S., Kahane, P., and Diehl, B. (2016). Seizures induced b y direct
electrical cortical stimulation–Mechanisms and clinical conside rations. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 127, 31–39. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2014.12.009
Kramer, M. A., Truccolo, W., Eden, U. T., Lepage, K. Q., Hochberg, L. R .,
Eskandar, E. N., et al. (2012). Human seizures self-terminate across spatial
scales via a critical transition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 21116–21121.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1210047110
Lee, H. W., Webber, W. R., Crone, N., Miglioretti, D. L., and Lesse r, R. P. (2010).
When is electrical cortical stimulation more likely to produce afterdisc harges?
Clin. Neurophysiol. 121, 14–20. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.10.001
Lesser, R. P., Lee, H. W., Webber, W. R., Prince, B., Crone, N. E.,and Miglioretti, D.
(2008). Short-term variations in response distribution to cortica l stimulation.
Brain 131, 1528–1539. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn044
Lesser, R. P., Lüders, H., Klem, G., Dinner, D. S., Morris, H. H., and
Hahn, J. (1984). Cortical afterdischarge and functional respon se
thresholds: results of extraoperative testing. Epilepsia 25, 615–621.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1984.tb03471.x
Lindner, B., Garca-Ojalvo, J., Neiman, A., and Schimansky-Gei er, L.
(2004). Eﬀects of noise in excitable systems. Phys. Rep. 392, 321–424.
doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2003.10.015
Lopes da Silva, F. H., Blanes, W., Kalitzin, S. N., Parra, J., Suﬀczyn ski, P.,
and Velis, D. N. (2003). Dynamical diseases of brain systems: diﬀ erent
routes to epileptic seizures. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 50, 540–548.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2003.810703
Lytton, W. (2008). Computer modelling of epilepsy.Nat. Rev. Neurosci.9, 626–637.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2416
Marten, F., Rodrigues, S., Suﬀczynski, P., Richardson, M. P., and Terry, J. R. (2009).
Derivation and analysis of an ordinary diﬀerential equation mean- ﬁeld model
for studying clinically recorded epilepsy dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 79:021911.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.79.021911
Muratov, C. B., V anden-Eijnden, E., and Weinan, E. (2005). Se lf-induced
stochastic resonance in excitable systems. Physica D 210, 227–240.
doi: 10.1016/j.physd.2005.07.014
Nevado-Holgado, A. J., Marten, F., Richardson, M. P., and Terry, J. R. (2012).
Characterising the dynamics of EEG waveforms as the path through parame ter
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25


--- Page 14 ---
Baier et al. Understanding Epileptiform After-Discharges
space of a neural mass model: application to epilepsy seizure evolution.
Neuroimage 59, 2374–2392. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.111
Nowacki, J., Osinga, H. M., Brown, J. T., Randall, A. D., and Tsane va-
Atanasova, K. (2011). A uniﬁed model of CA1/3 pyramidal cells: an
investigation into excitability. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 105, 34–48.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2010.09.020
Nowacki, J., Osinga, H. M., and Tsaneva-Atanasova, K. (2012). Dynamical systems
analysis of spike-adding mechanisms in transient bursts. J. Math. Neurosci. 2:7.
doi: 10.1186/2190-8567-2-7
Osinga, H. M., and Tsaneva-Atanasova, K. T. (2013). Geometric a nalysis of
transient bursts. Chaos 23:046107. doi: 10.1063/1.4826655
Penﬁeld, W., and Jasper, H. (1954). Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the
Human Brain. London: Little, Brown & Co.
Pinault, D., and O’Brien, T. (2005). Cellular and network mechanisms of
genetically-determined absence seizures. Thalamus Relat. Syst. 3, 181–203.
doi: 10.1017/S1472928807000209
Süel, G. M., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., Liberman, L. M., and Elowitz, M. B. (2006).
An excitable gene regulatory circuit induces transient cellular diﬀ erentiation.
Nature 440, 545–550. doi: 10.1038/nature04588
Suﬀczynski, P., Lopes da Silva, F. H., Parra, J., Velis, D. N., Bouwma n, B. M.,
van Rijn, C. M., et al. (2006). Dynamics of epileptic phenomena determi ned
from statistics of ictal transitions. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53, 524–532.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2005.869800
Suﬀczynski, P., Kalitzin, S., and Lopes Da Silva, F. (2004). Dyn amics of non-
convulsive epileptic phenomena modeled by a bistable neuronal network.
Neuroscience 126, 467–484. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.03.014
Takens, F. (1981). “Detecting strange attractors in turbulenc e, ” in Dynamical
Systems and Turbulence, Warwick, 1980, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol.
898, eds D. Rand and L. S. Young (Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer), 366– 381.
Taylor, P. N., and Baier, G. (2011). A spatially extended model for
macroscopic spike-wave discharges. J. Comput. Neurosci. 31, 679–684.
doi: 10.1007/s10827-011-0332-1
Taylor, P. N., Baier, G., Cash, S. S., Dauwels, J., Slotine, J.-J ., and Wang, Y. (2013).
A model of stimulus induced epileptic spike-wave discharges. IEEE Proc. SSCI
2013, 53–59. doi: 10.1109/ccmb.2013.6609165
Taylor, P. N., Wang, Y., Goodfellow, M., Dauwels, J., Moeller, F., S tephani,
U., et al. (2014). A computational study of stimulus driven epileptic
seizure abatement. PLoS ONE 9:e114316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.01
14316
V alentín, A., Anderson, M., Alarcón, G., Seoane, J., Selway, R. , Binnie, C., et al.
(2002). Responses to single pulse electrical stimulation identify e pileptogenesis
in the human brain in vivo . Brain 125, 1709–1718. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awf187
Wang, Y., Goodfellow, M., Taylor, P. N., and Baier, G. (2012). Ph ase space
approach for modeling of epileptic dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 85:061918.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.85.061918
Wang, Y., Goodfellow, M., Taylor, P. N., and Baier, G. (2014). Dy namic
mechanisms of neocortical focal seizure onset.PLoS Comput. Biol. 10:e1003787.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003787
Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Bellanger, J. J., and Chauvel, P. (200 2).
Epileptic fast activity can be explained by a model of impaired
GABAergic dendritic inhibition. Eur. J. Neurosci. 15, 1499–1508.
doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.01985.x
Yousif, N. A., and Denham, M. (2005). A population-based model of
the nonlinear dynamics of the thalamocortical feedback network
displays intrinsic oscillations in the spindling (7–14 hz) range.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 3179–3187. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.
04496.x
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Baier, T aylor and Wang. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitt ed, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 25
