--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 16 April 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00032
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32
Edited by:
Spyridon Bakas,
University of Pennsylvania,
United States
Reviewed by:
Guotai Wang,
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, China
Tuo Zhang,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, China
*Correspondence:
David Gering
david.gering@healthmyne.com
Received: 26 November 2019
Accepted: 24 March 2020
Published: 16 April 2020
Citation:
Gering D, Kotrotsou A,
Young-Moxon B, Miller N, Avery A,
Kohli L, Knapp H, Hoffman J,
Chylla R, Peitzman L and Mackie TR
(2020) Measuring Efﬁciency of
Semi-automated Brain Tumor
Segmentation by Simulating User
Interaction.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 14:32.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00032
Measuring Efﬁciency of
Semi-automated Brain Tumor
Segmentation by Simulating User
Interaction
David Gering *, Aikaterini Kotrotsou, Brett Young-Moxon, Neal Miller, Aa ron Avery,
Lisa Kohli, Haley Knapp, Jeffrey Hoffman, Roger Chylla, Lind a Peitzman and
Thomas R. Mackie
HealthMyne Inc., Madison, WI, United States
Traditionally, radiologists have crudely quantiﬁed tumor extent by measuring the longest
and shortest dimension by dragging a cursor between opposite boundary points across a
single image rather than full segmentation of the volumetric extent. For algorithmic-based
volumetric segmentation, the degree of radiologist experi ential involvement varies from
conﬁrming a fully automated segmentation, to making a single drag on an image to initiate
semi-automated segmentation, to making multiple drags and clicks on multiple images
during interactive segmentation. An experiment was design ed to test an algorithm that
allows various levels of interaction. Given the ground-tru th of the BraTS training data,
which delimits the brain tumors of 285 patients on multi-spe ctral MR, a computer
simulation mimicked the process that a radiologist would fo llow to perform segmentation
with real-time interaction. Clicks and drags were placed on ly where needed in response
to the deviation between real-time segmentation results an d assumed radiologist’ s goal,
as provided by the ground-truth. Results of accuracy for var ious levels of interaction are
presented along with estimated elapsed time, in order to measure efﬁciency. Average total
elapsed time, including loading the study through conﬁrmin g 3D contours, was 46 s.
Keywords: brain MRI, tumor, segmentation, glioma, deep learni ng, efﬁciency
INTRODUCTION
Malignant brain tumors often have unfavorable prognoses suc h as time to progression and overall
survival, and also have direct impact on motor and/or cogniti ve function and poor quality of life
(
Omuro and DeAngelis, 2013 ). In recent decades, imaging has played a key role throughout the
entire treatment paradigm of cancer patients ranging from dia gnosis and presurgical planning to
treatment response assessment. Additionally, multimodal MRI protocols allow for non-invasive
interrogation of tumor heterogeneity and identiﬁcation of phenotypic sub-regions i.e., peritumoral
edema/invasion, enhancing active tumor core and necrotic r egions which reﬂect tumor biological
properties including tumor cellularity, vascularity, and blo od-brain barrier integrity.
However, despite the exponential enhancement in imaging sequ ences, hardware and software,
we have barely begun to tap the potential of non-invasive imagi ng to characterize the
phenotype of tumors. To date, radiologic assessments are qual itative including tumor detection
and image-based tumor staging or semi-quantitative using f reehand uni-dimensional and


--- Page 2 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
bi-dimensional measurements of the tumor. In fact, all curr ent
imaging assessment criteria [such as Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), Response Assessment in
Neuro-Oncology (RANO), immune related RECIST (irRECIST),
and immune related response criteria (irRC)] used to evaluat e
tumor response in the clinical setting or in clinical trials r ely on
these freehand measurements to evaluate tumor size (
Sorensen
et al., 2008; Eisenhauer et al., 2009; Wolchok et al., 2009; W en
et al., 2010).
Accurate assessment of tumor volume is important for clinical
management and particularly for monitoring treatment response
and development of new therapies and trials. Despite the
well-known advantages of whole tumor volumetric assessmen t,
as recognized by the RANO Working Group, currently it is
only performed for research purposes as manual outlining can
be time-consuming, and it is susceptible to inherent intra-
observer and inter-observer variability (
Wen et al., 2010 ).
Research eﬀorts have focused on the development of computer-
aided techniques for tumor segmentation. Computer-aided
tumor segmentation techniques can be grouped in two major
categories based on the radiologist/user interaction with the tool;
(1) fully automated techniques that require no, or negligib le
user input, and (2) semi-automated techniques that require
some localization or initialization from the user; then the
algorithm provides the majority of segmentation optimizatio n.
Semi-automated techniques outperform automatic approaches,
resulting in suﬃciently accurate and robust results (
Zhao and Xie,
2013). However, semi-automated techniques do not scale well to
large number of labeled datasets, since developing and valid ating
interactive algorithms becomes laborious as the datasets g row.
Consequently, there is an unmet need for an approach to
simulate user interaction that will allow for eﬃcient and co st-
eﬀective evaluation of semi-automated techniques througho ut
the development and validation stages.
In a recent publication we presented Semi-Automated Map-
BAsed Segmentation (SAMBAS), which allows for real-time
feedback by an expert radiologist (
Gering et al., 2018 ). In short,
the user initializes the segmentation process by drawing a lo ng
axis; during the long axis drawing, the 2D segmentation updat es
in real-time for interactive feedback. In cases of suboptima l 2D
segmentation the user can reﬁne the result by drawing a short
axis. Further optimization can be performed on the other two
planes prior to 3D segmentation initialization. This interac tive
system outperformed the Deep Learning (DL) approach alone;
as demonstrated in our publication, using the Multimodal
Brain Segmentation Competition (BraTS) 2018 validation dat a
the interactive system resulted in an improved Dice similari ty
coeﬃcient over DL alone and the lowest Hausdorﬀ-95% distance
on the BraTS leaderboard (
Menze et al., 2015; Bakas et al., 2017a,
2018; Gering et al., 2018 ).
However, it is still unknown how real-time experiential input
aﬀects Dice coeﬃcient and Hausdorﬀ-95% distance. Therefore,in
this study, we designed an experiment to simulate the level ofuser
interaction. Speciﬁcally, we used the 2018 BraTS training da ta
as the ground-truth and a computer simulation mimicked the
process that a radiologist would follow to perform segmentati on
with real-time interaction (
Bakas et al., 2018 ). Clicks and drags
were placed only where needed in response to the deviation
between real-time segmentation results and assumed radiologist’s
goal, as provided by the ground-truth. Results of accuracy for
various levels of interaction are presented along with estim ated
elapsed time, in order to measure eﬃciency.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rapid Precise Metrics TM (RPM) implements an interactive
algorithm as a probabilistic framework with eﬃcient user
interaction and control in the HealthMyne R⃝ Platform
(HealthMyne, Madison, WI). Additional details on how
RPM seamlessly merges DL with user interaction can be found
on
Gering et al. (2018) . For the purposes of this work, we
removed the DL component because access was needed to the
same ground-truth data on which the DL would have trained.
Indications by a skilled radiologist are another aspect of RPM
missing from this experiment. Consequently, the absolute va lues
of accuracy reported do not fully reﬂect clinical performance
of RPM, however, relative accuracy and timing measurements
should be representative.
The organization of the manuscript is as follows: the system
for interactive Multi-Plane Reformat (MPR) segmentation will
be described ﬁrst, followed by the method for simulating a user ’s
interaction with the system. Finally, the method for perform ing
timed tests will be presented.
Interactive Multi-Plane Reformat (MPR)
Segmentation
Like a digital simulation of a traditional light box on which
radiologists formerly viewed ﬁlm, the 3D volume is visualize d by
displaying 2D planes sequentially. A MPR refers to reformatting
more than one plane, such that a trio of planes is displayed side-
by-side corresponding to axial, coronal, and sagittal orien tations
(Figure 1).
The user initializes the segmentation process by drawing a
long axis on one plane of the MPR. As the user draws the
long axis, a 2D segmentation updates in real-time for interac tive
feedback. The feedback has proven to be very helpful for the
user to know precisely where to place the endpoint of the axis
(
Gering et al., 2018). Upon release of the mouse, 2D segmentation
occurs immediately on the other MPR planes. Figure 2 shows the
interactive feedback.
When the 2D contour is unsatisfactory, additional drags
may be drawn to complement the long axis. Furthermore,
single clicks may be used to “drop” points along the structure
boundary. Another available editing operation is a “ball too l”
for drawing with a digital brush. A correct 2D segmentation
is important since probability distributions are learned from
the 2D segmentation and employed in segmenting the other
MPR planes.
When the contours on other MPR planes are unsatisfactory,
then the user can further reﬁne the segmentation by either
drawing long axes on these planes, or by editing the
segmentation masks with the ball tool. This is especially
useful for irregularly shaped lesions or lesions oriented
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 3 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
FIGURE 1 | Multi-Plane Reformat: an example of Multi-Plane Reformat ( MPR) slices of the 3D volume corresponding to axial, coronal and sagittal planes. The yellow
lines denote the position of the coronal plane (B), with respect to the axial plane (A) and the sagittal plane (C).
FIGURE 2 | Interactive segmentation: several instances during intera ctive segmentation (A–D) depicting the segmentation contour (red) updating in real- time as the
user drags the endpoint of the long axis (blue). In (C) a correct segmentation of core tumor is displayed, while (D) displays response to overdrawing.
FIGURE 3 | Separating adjoining tumors: three examples of adjoining t umors (A–C) which were manually separated to form distinct tumors, show n here in tan and
red.
obliquely to the anatomical axes. Once initial segmentatio n
is satisfactory, the user can initiate 3D segmentation by a
single click.
3D segmentation occurs quickly (approximate time = 1–2 s),
and the user may inspect the resulting contours by scrolling
through slices on any MPR plane. If unsatisﬁed, the user has
two options, either delete the lesion segmentation and re-dra w a
better long axis, or alternatively edit the 3D segmentation using a
3D sphere tool. When satisﬁed, the user clicks a button to conﬁrm
the 3D contours.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 4 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
FIGURE 4 | Medially placed longest axis: a demonstration of a more medi ally
placed longest axis obtained by ﬁtting an ellipse (blue) to th e ground-truth
(yellow) and ﬁnding the long and short axes (green) parallel t o the major and
minor axes of the ellipse. The true longest axis is drawn in (A), while the more
medially positioned axis is drawn in (B).
Simulation System
The simulation system automatically draws a long axis on eac h
tumor. Depending on the accuracy of the resulting segmentation,
more drags or clicks are added as needed. The process by which
these are drawn aims to mimic a human user’s actions, as
described below.
Data Preparation
Multi-institutional, routine clinically-acquired, pre-ope rative,
multispectral MR scans were provided by the 2018 BraTS
challenge (
Bakas et al., 2017b,c, 2018 ). The data have been
preprocessed to be co-registered to the same anatomical
template, interpolated to the same resolution (1 mm 3),
and skull-stripped.
For the purposes of this work, we used only the post-contrast
T1-weighted MR scans. While BraTS provided labels for three
phenotypes: whole tumor, core tumor, and active tumor, we
combined the ground-truth masks for “core” and “active” to form
“core tumor, ” and used this one tumor component exclusively in
this experiment, since this is representative of the gross tum or
extent assessed by a radiologist in the clinical setting.
Enumerating Tumors
While RPM is designed to segment individual lesions, BraTS
ground-truth presents a uniﬁed mask without separating
individual lesions. Therefore, we manually drew blank (zer o-
valued) lines to separate adjoining lesions. After this one m anual
step, lesions could be enumerated automatically by running 3 D
connected-component analysis (CCA) to identify each distin ct
“island” of the ground-truth mask, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Given the 285 patients, 232 had 1 lesion, 33 had 2 lesions, and
20 had 3 or more, with the maximum being 5.
Simulating the Drawing of a Long Axis
The ﬁrst step toward drawing a long axis is selecting the axial slice
on which to draw. Our aim was to replicate the approach of an
expert radiologist brieﬂy scrolling through the slices to eyeball the
one on which the tumor appears the largest. In the ﬁrst step, for
each enumerated tumor, the range of slices containing groun d-
truth was found, and the subset of slices in the central third was
considered. Given this subset, the slice with the largest ar ea of
ground-truth was chosen.
In order to simulate the type of long axis that a user might
draw, we employed four diﬀerent methods: (i) identiﬁcation of
the true longest axis, (ii) selection of an axis that is locat ed
more medially than the true longest axis, (iii) search for an ax is
that includes pixels that statistically typify the tumor, and ( iv)
sweeping a short distance to search for optimal results.
To draw the “medial” long axis, an ellipse is ﬁt by Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) to the 2D segmentation (
Duda et al.,
2012). The long axis with the same orientation as the major axis
of the ellipse is selected, as shown in Figure 4. This method is
driven by the fact that RPM tends to perform better on centrally
located drags where symmetry can be exploited.
Since RPM samples statistics under the long axis, it’s
important to consider that aspect in addition to length and
centrality. Therefore, the third method searches the set of N2
possible axes drawn between a set of N points spaced near
each endpoint of the medial axis. Based on the ellipse, these
points are spaced by a few degrees, and lie on the boundary of
the ground-truth. A score is computed for each axis, and the
axis with the best score is selected. Equation (1) describes the
score as a weighted combination of properties of the long axis,
namely length, centrality, and relative entropy, also referr ed to as
Kullback-Leibler divergence (DKL) (
Cover and Thomas, 2012).
Score = α ∗ (1 − DKL) + β ∗ Length + γ ∗ Centrality (1)
where α, β and γ are scalar parameters. Since the Kullback-
Leibler divergence is a measure of how one probability
distribution is diﬀerent from another, it is an appropriate
metric for evaluating how well the pixels along the long axis
relate to the pixels of the entire 2D structure. Equation (2)
expresses this relationship where the probability distributi on, Q,
of pixels sampled under the long axis is estimated by Parzen
window density estimation, and the probability distribution, P, is
estimated similarly from pixels sampled under the ground-tru th
mask (
Duda et al., 2012).
DKL(P||Q) = −
∑
x∈ X
P (x) log
( Q(x)
P(x)
)
(2)
The Length and Centrality in Equation (1) are terms with a range
[0, 1] and are computed as follows:
Length = length of axis
length of true longest axis (3)
Centrality = 0.1 + 0.9 ∗ C/(2r) (4)
Where C encodes the distance from center of ellipse obtained for
Equation (5):
C = |i − r|+
⏐
⏐j − r
⏐
⏐ (5)
Where indices, i and j, index the sets of N points on each side of
the axis, and r represents the index, N/2, of the middle point in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 5 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
FIGURE 5 | Comparing distributions: estimations of the probability d istribution function (PDF) for tumor ground truth and pixel s under the long axis are plotted. A high
discrepancy is plotted in (A) resulting in large Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, whil e the PDFs are more similar in (B) resulting in small KL divergence.
FIGURE 6 | Demonstration of sweeping approach for long axis identiﬁcat ion:
while the leftmost endpoint of the long axis (green) is held ﬁx ed, the rightmost
endpoint is swept along a short path (pink) along the boundar y of ground-truth
(dark blue). At each position, the similarity between the se gmentation (light
blue) and ground-truth is measured.
a set. Furthermore, we favor axes that cross the center by hal ving
the expression above when i and j both lie on the same side of r.
Figure 5 presents examples of probability distribution functions
for a long axis that is representative of the tumor, and anothe r
axis that is divergent.
To draw the “swept” long axis, the ﬁrst endpoint of the long
axis is held ﬁxed while the second endpoint is dragged along th e
boundary of the structure, by a short distance in each direct ion,
as shown in Figure 6. At each position during the sweep, the
interactive 2D segmentation is performed, and the position wi th
the best comparison with ground-truth is selected (by DSC
deﬁned below).
Simulating the Drawing of a Short Axis
While the RPM algorithm allows multiple drags of any
orientation, we simpliﬁed this experiment by drawing only
the “short axis, ” which is deﬁned as the longest axis that lie s
perpendicular to the long axis.
Simulating Dropped Points Along Structure Boundary
Given a segmentation based on the long and short axes, the
contour point of greatest disagreement with the ground-trut h is
identiﬁed. Subsequently, an editing operation is performed by
“dropping” a point on the structure boundary as indicated by the
ground-truth. As described earlier, these drops serve as inpu ts
into RPM’s algorithm that are quicker to draw than a line with
two endpoints.
Following the ﬁrst dropped point, segmentation is
recomputed and the next contour point of greatest disagreemen t
is identiﬁed, if any, as there may be no remaining signiﬁcant
discrepancies. New points cannot be placed too closely to
earlier points. In this manner, more points can be “dropped”
in succession, triggering new segmentations with each droppe d
point (Figure 7).
Simulating Drawing on MPR
The center of the long axis is used to determine the center of th e
reformatted sagittal and coronal planes that comprise the 3-plane
MPR. Long and short axes were drawn in similar manner on all
planes. The additional axes precipitate MPR segmentation.
Comparison of Volumes
While each tumor is segmented individually, the “ground-tr uth”
is provided per patient rather than per lesion. Consequently,
we took the union of the segmentations of all lesions for each
patient, and compared these aggregates with the “ground-trut h”
for agreement. The Dice similarity coeﬃcient (DSC) was used t o
measure the similarity between two sets of segmentations and was
calculated using the Equation (3):
DSC = 2(A ∩ B)
(A + B) (6)
where A represents the semi-automated segmentation and B
represents the “ground-truth” (
Allozi et al., 2010 ). Scores were
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 6 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
FIGURE 7 | Demonstration of dropping points: segmentation (yellow) r elative to the ground-truth outline (blue) for a progressio n of dropping points to segment a
complex lesion: (A) green line denotes where a dropped point is most needed, (B) updated segmentation after dropping that point, (C) updated segmentation after
dropping ﬁve points, each indicated with a green line.
TABLE 1 | Timed tasks.
Load study
Scroll to lesion
Segment by dragging long axis
Optionally open MPR view for additional drags/clicks
Perform 3D segmentation
Scroll to inspect 3D contours
Conﬁrm 3D contours
computed by uploading segmentations to the CBICA Image
Processing Portal.
Timing T ests
To estimate an average elapsed time, the entire population was
partitioned into three categories so that a weighted average could
be computed where the weights are determined based on the size
of each category. From each category, 10 cases were randomly
sampled (by Python script) to be segmented by a human user
with the interactive system; the user has extensive backgro und
in the design and implementation of clinical software soluti ons,
though no speciﬁc radiology training. The total elapsed time
measured included all of the tasks listed in Table 1, which span
from beginning to load the study to conﬁrming 3D contours.
The three categories were the following: (i) cases that
segmented well with drawing an axial long axis (DSC > 0.883;
n = 109); (ii) cases that required drawing long axis on all MPR
planes ( n = 123); (iii) cases that required additional edits ( n =
53). Prior to the random selection, the categories were whit tled
down in size by more restrictive criteria in order to form sub sets
of patients for which the interaction was more meaningful. These
subsets were cases that segmented extremely well (DSC >= 0.93)
with a single drag ( n = 39), cases whose score increased by at
least 0.05 to achieve a total score of at least 0.85 given a lon g axis
drag on all MPR planes (n = 25), and cases whose score increased
further by at least 0.05 to achieve a total score of at least 0.85 given
additional edits on MPR ( n = 41).
TABLE 2 | Comparison of various strategies for simulating the drawin g of the long
axis.
Long axis style 3D dice
True longest
Mean 0.798
St. Deviation 0.130
Range [0.315–0.972]
Favoring medial position
Mean 0.812
St. Deviation 0.122
Range [0.232–0.963]
Searching for statistics
Mean 0.807
St. Deviation 0.130
Range [0.232–0.963]
Sweeping one endpoint
Mean 0.821
St. Deviation 0.120
Range [0.305–0.972]
To evaluate the realistic nature of simulations against real user
interaction, DSC score from manual segmentation was compared
against DSC obtained from simulations. First, the ﬁtness of DSC
scores to normal distribution was determined by Kolmogorov -
Smirnov test, and then the scores were compared using t-test
or Mann-Whitney test accordingly. A p-value of <0.05 was
considered statistically signiﬁcant. Finally, for complet eness we
calculated the DSC score between the segmentation obtained
from real user interaction and from simulation.
RESUL TS
Of the 285 patients, 232 had a solitary lesion, and 53 had more
than one lesion resulting in a total of 365 brain lesions avai lable
for segmentation.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 7 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
Long Axis Simulation
We simulated four diﬀerent strategies for drawing the long ax is:
(i) obtaining the true longest axis, (ii) assigning the long axis
more medially than the true longest axis, (iii) searching fo r an
axis that statistically typiﬁes the tumor, and (iv) sweeping a short
TABLE 3 | Varying levels of interaction.
User input Axial plane only All 3 MPR planes
Long axis only
Mean 0.821 0.851
St. Deviation 0.120 0.079
Range [0.305–0.972] [0.517–0.965]
Long and short axes
Mean 0.823 0.858
St. Deviation 0.110 0.068
Range [0.385–0.973] [0.512–0.965]
Long and short axes and
few dropped points
Mean 0.834 0.864
St. Deviation 0.103 0.063
Range [0.309–0.973] [0.557–0.965]
Edited to perfection
Mean 0.839 0.890
St. Deviation 0.105 0.050
Range [0.431–0.970] [0.681–0.970]
TABLE 4 | Progression through processing stages.
Stage True
long
Sweep
long
Long and
short
Long, short
and drops
Axial
perfect
MPR
perfect
2D 0.886 0.916 0.919 0.947 0.972 0.968
3-plane
Scout
0.845 0.859 0.866 0.878 0.886 0.960
3D 0.798 0.821 0.823 0.834 0.839 0.890
distance to search for optimal results. Using the aforementio ned
strategies as initialization step, the 3D segmentations wer e
compared with the “ground-truth.” Table 2 summarizes the
results for DSC between the four strategies, with swept being
noticeably superior (DSC = 0.821).
Simulating User Interaction
We simulated a varied degree of user interaction from drawing
only one axis to editing 3D segmentation to perfection.
Additionally, simulations allowed for drawing on the axial plane
only, or on all 3 MPR planes: axial, coronal, and sagittal. Table 3
summarizes the results of 3D segmentations with varying degrees
of user interaction. Our results indicate that drawing long axes
on MPR planes compared to drawing only one long axis on the
axial plane resulted in signiﬁcantly (by at least 0.05) improv ed
DSC scores in 76 patients out of a total of 285. Similarly,
drawing short axes and dropping points on MPR planes resulted
in signiﬁcantly higher DSC scores in 88 patients, while in 14
patients the DSC score worsened signiﬁcantly. Finally, edit ing
segmentation outcome to perfection on MPR planes signiﬁcantly
improved the DSC score in 123 patients while signiﬁcantly
worsening only 2.
Table 4 presents results from a few intermediate stages of
the algorithm. For responsive interaction, RPM segments ﬁrst
in 2D, corresponding to the ﬁrst row of Table 4, and then it
initializes the 3D segmentation by segmenting on a 3-plane
“scout” reformat, corresponding to the second row of theTable 4,
and then it ﬁnally segments in 3D. There is a column for each
level of user interaction.
Timing T ests
The average elapsed time for each patient in the entire population
was estimated to be 46.2 s; this was a weighted average compute d
over three categories whose boundaries were described in section
Timing Tests. The number of cases in the ﬁrst category (drawi ng
an axial long axis) is the total number of cases whose scores we re
above 0.883, which was 109. The number of cases in the second
category (drawing long axes on all MPR planes) was the number
TABLE 5 | Timing measurements.
User input Mean elapsed time
(seconds)
DSC (user vs.
ground-truth)
DSC (simulation vs.
ground-truth)
p-value DSC (user vs.
simulation)
Long axis only
Mean 30.38 0.934 0.943 0.1041 0.951
St. Deviation 6.41 0.013 0.008 0.021
Range [23.65–44.92] [0.911–0.952] [0.933–0.954] [0.918–0.985 ]
Long axis on 3 MPR planes
Mean 52.0 0.882 0.876 0.3075 0.877
St. Deviation 17.70 0.063 0.035 0.059
Range [31.75–86.61] [0.719–0.935] [0.8162–0.928] [0.792–0.96 2]
Long and short and few dropped
points, on MPR
Mean 65.31 0.844 0.857 0.5205 0.825
St. Deviation 18.01 0.054 0.029 0.063
Range [46.73–107.75] [0.729–0.923] [0.817–0.907] [0.718–0.92 1]
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 8 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
FIGURE 8 | Accuracy Comparison: segmentation outlines by simulation (green), user (red) relative to the ground-truth (yellow) f or one case in each of the three
categories (A) drawing an axial long axis, (B) drawing long axes on all MPR planes, and (C) performing additional edits required by dropping points.
of the remaining patients whose scores were at least 0.796 giv en
MPR drags, which is 123. Finally, 53 cases comprised the third
category (additional edits required).
Table 5 summarizes the results of measuring elapsed time for
a user to segment a batch of 10 cases from each of the three
categories of interaction. Regarding the ﬁrst category wher e the
long axis is drawn only on the axial plane, the average time the
segmenter reported was 30.38 s, ranging from 23.65 to 44.92 s.
One of the 10 cases was large and highly heterogeneous, and
therefore the user had more slices to sort through to determi ne
a good place to drag; it should be noted that the initial drag fo r
this case was deleted and redrawn from a better angle. Simila rly,
drawing the long axis on all three MPR planes resulted in an
average time of 52.0 s (range: 31.75–86.61 s). In the ﬁnal category,
dragging lines and dropping points, as well as drawing using the
ball tool, as needed on MPR, resulted in an average time of 65.31 s
(range: 46.73–107.75 s).
DSC scores obtained from manual segmentation and
simulations are presented in Table 5. Simulated interaction
performed marginally better in the ﬁrst and third categories ,
while real interaction scored moderately better in the seco nd
category, though none of those diﬀerences were statisticall y
signiﬁcant. Further, DSC scores obtained by comparing user
segmentation and simulation are in the same range as DSC scores
with ground-truth. Given the three levels of user interacti on,
segmentation results are depicted in Figure 8. In most cases, the
“between” DSC score was higher than both individual scores
computed relative to ground-truth ( Figure 8B). In Figure 8A,
the “between” score is between the individual scores, which
in this case, occurs because the user under-segmented the
tumor area. Lastly, Figure 8C illustrates the third pattern of
the “between” score lying below both individual scores. In
this case the user under-segmented while the simulation ove r-
segmented, resulting in great disparity between the two. Not e, in
the case depicted in Figure 8C there is no enhancing component
surrounding the necrotic core, a typical presentation of a GBM,
which would aid identiﬁcation of tumor border and increase
agreement between user and simulation.
DISCUSSION
As large-scale labeled image datasets are being curated for
academic challenges and training DL models, the most
common application tends to be the development of fully
automatic methods for tumor segmentation that do not
involve user interaction. One driver of this trend might
be that developing and validating interactive algorithms
becomes laborious as the datasets grow, owing to the
time required to interact with every case in the validation
dataset. Further, validation ideally occurs very frequent ly,
interspersed between algorithm updates, and throughout
the process of algorithm development. However, for a
segmentation algorithm to be clinically applicable its outcome
should be optimal, i.e., similar to the ground-truth, and
therefore it’s expected to require “some” user input (
Langlotz
et al., 2019 ). Our research aims to provide an approach to
automate many aspects of user interaction and thus expedite
large-scale validation.
Given a labeled dataset, it seems natural to employ it for
validation by measuring the true longest axis, and then using
that as an input to an interactive algorithm such as RPM.
However, our results showed that the true longest axis would
be a poor choice, as it scored the lowest of the four strategies
listed in Table 2, where “sweeping” the long axis proved the
optimal approach.
Further, our results showed a steady improvement in 3D
accuracy as interaction increases on axial plane; DSC scores
increased from 0.82 to 0.89. We demonstrate that drawing on
MPR markedly improves accuracy vs. drawing on axial planes
alone. Somewhat surprisingly, drawing a short axis in additio n
to the long axis made a rather insigniﬁcant improvement in DSC.
Motivated by this ﬁnding, we changed RPM’s design to accept
multiple arbitrary lines rather than a single line constraine d to be
perpendicular to the long axis. Therefore, the user may draw the
line through image content whose brightness needs to be sampled
in order to complement the sampling already performed by the
long axis.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 9 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
Future work will be inspired by the results of Table 4, which
suggest that accuracy in the 2D segmentations falls oﬀ moderately
as the algorithm advances to the scout segmentations, and
does so again during advancement to the 3D segmentation.
Although each stage of the algorithm performs some machine
learning to glean information from the results of the prior st age,
perhaps more can be done in this regard. Future work will also
investigate why additional editing operations worsened sco res
for certain patients as the statistical sampling from the initi al
long axis appears to have been better suited for application to
3D segmentation.
Table 5 reveals that accuracy was comparable between the
simulated interaction and the real human interaction. Simu lated
interaction performed marginally better in the ﬁrst and thir d
categories, while real interaction scored moderately bett er in
the second category. Human interaction scores lower when
the segmenter and creators of ground-truth have a diﬀerence
of opinion. This eﬀect is somewhat canceled out by the fact
that human interaction scores higher when the segmenter
can apply more intelligence than that embodied by the
simulation algorithm.
Timing results were extremely fast when comparing with
the limited number of reports currently published; one study
measured lung lesion contouring to require an average of
10.31 min (
Velazquez et al., 2013 ). Our sub-minute timing
conﬁrms that RPM enables segmentation in routine clinical us e.
For a technical description of how the algorithm compares
with popular interactive methods, the reader is referred to Gering
et al. (2018) . Recent works have also introduced simulated user
interaction to either identify the object and initiate segm entation
(Xu et al., 2016 ) or reﬁne the segmentation output obtained by
DL ( Wang et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2019 ). In contrast, our goal
in this manuscript was to simulate the approach a radiologist
would follow for initiating a segmentation and providing inpu t
real time until the optimal result is achieved. When comparing
the approach Xu et al. followed for object identiﬁcation, thei r
mode of interaction was to drop points, in contrast to our
mixture of lines and points (
Xu et al., 2016 ). Further, their
objective was to generate tens of thousands of training sample s
and points are sampled randomly from the foreground and
background object interiors with spacing constraints ( Xu et al.,
2016). For comparison with other methods which accept user
strokes instead of just points, these randomly sampled points
are expanded to circles of radius 5 pixels. Observe that human
users would draw free-form strokes rather than perfect circle s, so
our method diﬀers by its intention to more realistically mimi c
the actions of a human user, and by its purpose of facilitating
continuous algorithm development. Last but not least, in our
work we performed direct comparison of the outcome obtained
from simulations with the outcome obtained by a human user
to demonstrate that our simulations realistically capture real user
interaction (Table 5 and Figure 8).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
article/supplementary material.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study
on human participants in accordance with the local legislation
and institutional requirements. Written informed consent fo r
participation was not required for this study in accordance wi th
the national legislation and the institutional requirement s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
DG conceived the idea, developed the theory, and performed the
computations. BY-M performed the user segmentations for the
Timing Tests. DG contributed to the interpretation of the results.
DG and AK wrote the manuscript. NM, AA, and TM provided
critical feedback during manuscript preparation. LK, HK, JH,
RC, and LP provided critical feedback in RPM discussions and
design sessions. All authors approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was partially supported by NSF #1345927 (RC).
REFERENCES
Allozi, R., Li, X. A., White, J., Apte, A., Tai, A., Michalski, J. M. , et al. (2010).
Tools for consensus analysis of experts’ contours for radiotherapy structure
deﬁnitions. Radiother. Oncol. 97, 572–578. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2010.
06.009
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby , J. (2017c).
Segmentation Labeld and Radiomic Features for the Pre-Opera tive Scans of the
TCGA-LGG Collection. The Cancer Imaging Archive.
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby , J. S.,
et al. (2017a). Advancing the cancer genome atlas glioma MRI collect ions
with expert segmentation labels and radiomic features. Sci. Data 4:170117.
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2017.117
Bakas, S., Akbari, H., Sotiras, A., Bilello, M., Rozycki, M., Kirby, J. S., et al. (2017b).
Segmentation Labels and Radiomic Features for the Pre-Opera tive Scans of the
TCGA-GBM Collection. The Cancer Imaging Archive.
Bakas, S., Reyes, M., Jakab, A., Bauer, S., Rempﬂer, M., Crimi, A. ,
et al. (2018). Identifying the best machine learning algorithms for
brain tumor segmentation, progression assessment, and overall
survival prediction in the BRATS challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:
181102629.
Cover, T. M., and Thomas, J. A. (2012).Elements of Information Theory. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E., and Stork, D. G. (2012). Pattern Classiﬁcation. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Eisenhauer, E. A., Therasse, P., Bogaerts, J., Schwartz, L. H., S argent, D., Ford, R.,
et al. (2009). New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST
guideline (version 1.1). Eur. J. Cancer 45, 228–247.
Gering, D., Sun, K., Avery, A., Chylla, R., Vivekanandan, A., Koh li, L., et al.
(2018). “Semi-automatic brain tumor segmentation by drawing long a xes on
multi-plane reformat, ” inInternational MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop (Berlin:
Springer), 441–455.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32


--- Page 10 ---
Gering et al. Tumor Segmentation by Simulating User Interaction
Langlotz, C. P., Allen, B., Erickson, B. J., Kalpathy-Cramer, J., Bigelow, K., Cook, T.
S., et al. (2019). A roadmap for foundational research on artiﬁcia l intelligence
in medical imaging: from the 2018 NIH/RSNA/ACR/the academy worksh op.
Radiology 291, 781–791. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2019190613
Menze, B. H., Jakab, A., Bauer, S., Kalpathy-Cramer, J., Farahani, K., Kirby, J., et al.
(2015). The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (BRATS).
IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 34, 1993–2024. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2014.2377694
Omuro, A., and DeAngelis, L. M. (2013). Glioblastoma and other
malignant gliomas: a clinical review. JAMA. 310, 1842–1850.
doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.280319
Sorensen, A. G., Batchelor, T. T., Wen, P. Y., Zhang, W. T., and J ain, R. K.
(2008). Response criteria for glioma. Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol. 5, 634–644.
doi: 10.1038/ncponc1204
Velazquez, E. R., Parmar, C., Jermoumi, M., Mak, R. H., van Baardwijk, A.,
Fennessy, F. M., et al. (2013). Volumetric CT-based segmentation of NSCLC
using 3D-Slicer. Sci. Rep. 3:3529. doi: 10.1038/srep03529
Wang, G., Zuluaga, M. A., Li, W., Pratt, R., Patel, P. A., Aertsen, M., et al.
(2018). DeepIGeoS: a deep interactive geodesic framework for medi cal
image segmentation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 41, 1559–1572.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2840695
Wen, P. Y., Macdonald, D. R., Reardon, D. A., Cloughesy, T. F., So rensen, A. G.,
Galanis, E., et al. (2010). Updated response assessment criteria for h igh-grade
gliomas: response assessment in neuro-oncology working group. J. Clin. Oncol.
28, 1963–1972. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.26.3541
Wolchok, J. D., Hoos, A., O’Day, S., Weber, J. S., Hamid, O., Lebb ,é, C., et al.
(2009). Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity i n solid
tumors: immune-related response criteria. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 7412–7420.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1624
Xu, N., Price, B., Cohen, S., Y ang, J., and Huang, T. S. (2016). De ep interactive
object selection . Paper presented at: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (Las Vegas, NV).
Zhao, F., and Xie, X. (2013). An overview of interactive medical i mage
segmentation. Ann. BMV A2013, 1–22.
Zhou, B., Chen, L., and Wang, Z. (2019). Interactive deep edit ing framework for
medical image segmentation. Paper presented at: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (Shenzhen).
Conﬂict of Interest: DG, AA, and RC are named co-inventors on a patent
application (Patent Application No. PCT/US2018/040473. DG, AA, JH, BY-M,
LK, HK, RC, and LP are named co-inventors on a patent application (Pat ent
Application No. PCT/US2019/059897). TM declares an equity interes t and
advisory role to HealthMyne, Inc. DG, BY-M, NM, AA, LK, HK, JH, RC, and LP
declare equity interest to HealthMyne, Inc. AK declares salary support fro m The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, and HealthMyne, Inc.
Copyright © 2020 Gering, Kotrotsou, Young-Moxon, Miller, Avery, Kohli, Knapp,
Hoﬀman, Chylla, Peitzman and Mackie. This is an open-access arti cle distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 April 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 32
