--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
p
ublished: 14 January 2016
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00153
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin .org 1 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153
Edited by:
D
avid Hansel,
Université Paris Descartes, France
Reviewed by:
Petia D. Koprinkova-Hristova,
Institute of Information and
Communication Technologies,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
Bulgaria
Jing Zhang,
Georgia State University, USA
*Correspondence:
Malte J. Rasch
malte.rasch@bnu.edu.cn;
Si Wu
wusi@bnu.edu.cn
Received: 29 October 2015
Accepted: 21 December 2015
Published: 14 January 2016
Citation:
Wang T , Yin L, Zou X, Shu Y ,
Rasch MJ and Wu S (2016) A
Phenomenological Synapse Model for
Asynchronous Neurotransmitter
Release.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 9:153.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00153
A Phenomenological Synapse Model
for Asynchronous Neurotransmitter
Release
Tao Wang 1, Luping Yin 2, Xiaolong Zou 1, Yousheng Shu 1, Malte J. Rasch 1* and Si Wu 1*
1 State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning and IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, China, 2 Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
Neurons communicate with each other via synapses. Action potentials cause release
of neurotransmitters at the axon terminal. T ypically, this neurotransmitter release is
tightly time-locked to the arrival of an action potential and is thus called synchronous
release. However, neurotransmitter release is stochastic and the rate of release of
small quanta of neurotransmitters can be considerably elevated even long after the
ceasing of spiking activity, leading to asynchronous release of neurotransmitters. Such
asynchronous release varies for tissue and neuron types and has been shown recently to
be pronounced in fast-spiking neurons. Notably, it was found that asynchronous release
is enhanced in human epileptic tissue implicating a possibly important role in generating
abnormal neural activity. Current neural network models for simulating and studying
neural activity virtually only consider synchronous release and ignore asynchronous
transmitter release. Here, we develop a phenomenological model for asynchronous
neurotransmitter release, which, on one hand, captures the fundamental features of
the asynchronous release process, and, on the other hand, is simple enough to be
incorporated in large-size network simulations. Our proposed model is based on the
well-known equations for short-term dynamical synaptic interactions and includes an
additional stochastic term for modeling asynchronous release. We use experimental data
obtained from inhibitory fast-spiking synapses of human epileptic tissue to ﬁt the model
parameters, and demonstrate that our model reproduces the characteristics of realistic
asynchronous transmitter release.
Keywords: asynchronous release, synchronous release, neurotransmitter, synaptic model, short-term plasticity,
Ca2+ concentration, stochasticity
1. INTRODUCTION
Most neurons are connected with chemical synapses that release neurotransmitters to
communicate. A synapse connects the axon of a presynaptic neuron with the dendrite of a
postsynaptic neuron and has complex physiological structure including several functional sub-
compartments ( Sudhof, 2004). In particular, neurotransmitters are stored in vesicles lo
 cated at
the axon terminal, called the active zone ( Paradiso et al., 2007). Upon arrival of an axonic
a
ction potential, the voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels in the active zone open, leading to the inﬂux of
Ca2+-ions that bind to Ca 2+ sensors on the vesicles. When suﬃciently many Ca 2+-ions are bound,


--- Page 2 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
sensors activate and the fusion of the vesicles with the memb rane
is initiated. Consequently, the neurotransmitters stored inside
the vesicles are released to the outside of the axon terminal.
They then diﬀuse to the postsynaptic site, bind to membrane
receptors, and initiate a sequence of biochemical reactions in the
postsynaptic neurons, e.g., activate ion channels that chang e the
membrane voltage possible resulting in ﬁring activity of the post
synaptic neuron (
Sudhof, 2004).
The release of neurotransmitters is generally time-locked to
the arrival of an action potential, so that the former occurs
immediately after the latter; a process called synchronous
release. However, in some types of neurons and in certain
circumstances, signiﬁcant amount of neurotransmitters ca n be
released asynchronously to the arrival of action potentials (
Goda
and Stevens, 1994). Asynchronous release of neurotransmitters is
stochastic and may occur and persist long after the last arriv al of
an action potential (Chapman, 2008).
Although synchronous release predominates in most
synapses, asynchronous release can be strong in certain types of
chemical synapses, in particular, when the presynaptic neuron
ﬁres at high frequency (
Heﬀt and Jonas, 2005; Daw et al.,
2009). Notably, it was found that in fast-spiking interneurons in
human epileptic tissues, asynchronous GABA release increase s
signiﬁcantly compared to control tissues ( Jiang et al., 2012 ),
indicating that asynchronous neurotransmitter release ma y play
an important role in generating or compensating for abnormal
neural activities. Although it has been speculated in severa l
studies that asynchronous release may contribute to enhanc ing
neuronal inhibitory interactions (
Medrihan et al., 2014 ) and
desynchronizing network responses ( Manseau et al., 2010 ), the
exact role of asynchronous release in brain function remain s
largely unknown and unexplored.
One reason for the lack of understanding of the eﬀect of
asynchronous release onto neural activity is that virtuall y
all modeling studies of brain functions only include
synchronous neurotransmitter release and neglect the exis tence
of asynchronous release. While many phenomenological
models of various degrees of complexities exist for modeling
synchronous release—from simple exponential decays (
Destexhe
et al., 1994; Dayan and Abbott, 2003 ) and delayed alpha
functions ( Rall, 1967 ) to more-variable models that include
short-term plasticity ( Markram and Tsodyks, 1996; Tsodyks
and Wu, 2013 )—a simple phenomenological model of
the eﬀect of asynchronous release onto the membrane
voltage of the postsynaptic neurons does not exist. Thus,
the computational neuroscience toolbox currently does not
provide a simple mathematical framework to describe the
dynamics of asynchronous release that could be easily inclu ded
in large-scale neural network models.
Therefore, to enable the study of the role of asynchronous
release in brain functions by using a neural network modeling
approach, we here develop a simple phenomenological model
for synaptic release that includes both, synchronous and
asynchronous transmitter release. We base our description o n
a common synaptic model for short-term synaptic plasticity
(STP), that phenomenologically describes the dynamics of th e
synchronous release (
Loebel et al., 2009; Tsodyks and Wu, 2013).
We thus call our model the synchronous-asynchronous releas e
STP model (short: SAR model). By comparison to experimental
data, we show that the SAR model, despite being simple enough
to support large-size network simulation, nevertheless captu res
the essential features of both transmitter release processe s.
2. RESUL TS
2.1. Derivation of the SAR Model
We ﬁrst show an example measurement of experimentally
observed asynchronous transmitter release. Figure 1A shows
presynaptically and postsynaptically measured currents
measured at the synapse from a fast-spiking interneuron to
a pyramidal neuron in a human epileptic tissue (same data
as described in
Jiang et al., 2012 ). Note that large inhibitory
postsynaptic currents (IPSC) are coupled with the spikes of the
presynaptic neurons (in the time range of 80–110 ms), indicatin g
synchronous release. However, IPSC are variable and stocha stic
release events can be seen even after the spiking activity
(indicated with arrows), which we refer to as asynchronous
release.
To develop an adequate synaptic model describing both
asynchronous and synchronous synaptic activity, we ﬁrst rev iew
a well-known model describing synchronous release, which w e
will later extend to include asynchronous release as well.
2.1.1. STP Model for Synchronous Release
The classical phenomenological model for describing the
short-term dynamics of synaptic currents of the synchronous
neurotransmitter release was introduced by
Markram and
Tsodyks (1996). This model postulates a pool of releasable vesicle
and a dynamically changing release probability (e.g., depend ing
on the changing Ca 2+ concentration). Let u denote the release
probability and x the amount of neurotransmitters contained
in the readily releasable vesicles. Each presynaptic spike
induces the current fraction u(t) of vesicles to release all their
neurotransmitters, which subsequently causes a postsynaptic
voltage change.
The dynamics of u and x are given by
Tsodyks and Wu (2013),
du ( t)
dt = − u ( t)
τ f
+ U [1 − u ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) , (1)
dx ( t)
dt = XF − x ( t)
τ d
− q(t), (2)
q(t) = u ( t+ ) x ( t− )
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) , (3)
where tm denotes the arriving moment of the mth spike, and
δ (·) is the Dirac delta function. Note that in comparison to
the original model in Markram and Tsodyks (1996), we have
here for convenience changed the deﬁnition of the variable x
to be the amount of neurotransmitter available rather than t he
fraction of neurotransmitters available. Further, U denotes the
increment of u due to the arrival of an action potential. The
time constant τ f controls the rate of the decay of u, and τ d
controls the rate of replenishment of vesicles. XF is the total
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 3 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 1 | (A) An example of asynchronous release recorded at a presynapti c neuron from Jiang et al. (2012). Upper panel: the membrane current at the
presynaptic neuron. The current pulses represent action po tentials at the presynaptic neuron. Lower panel: the IPSC at t he postsynaptic neuron. T wo asynchronous
release events long after action potentials are indicated w ith arrows. (B) Illustration of the neurotransmitter release process in the SAR model for consecutive times
(from upper to lower row) in the active zone. First row: at res ting state, vesicles dock at the membrane in the active zone, the amount of Ca 2+ bound to the Ca 2+
sensors in the vesicles in low (indicated color by the white c olor). Second row: after an action potential, Ca 2+ binds to the sensors on the vesicles (orange color), and
vesicles have high release probability. Third row: soon aft er the action potential, some vesicles (marked green and blu e) are activated by the Ca 2+ sensors and start to
release transmitters. Activation of vesicles can stem from the synchronous release (green) or the asynchronous releas e (blue) process competing for vesicles. Forth
row: Vesicles released need to be replenished and newly recr uited to the active zone (indicated with arrows). In this time , they are not available for release. Due to
Ca2+ clearance process in the neuron, remaining available vesic les decrease in release probability (yellow). However, som e vesicles are still activated by the
asynchronous release sensors and start to release transmit ters (blue). Some other vesicles are being replenished at th e same time. Fifth row: as the release probability
decreases, less vesicles are activated by the asynchronous release process. Last row: as Ca 2+ is cleared, all vesicles return to the resting state and rele ase is
stopped. Neurotransmitter release will only be newly initi ated by spiking activity.
amount of neurotransmitters in all vesicles at the active zo ne,
when all vesicles are replenished. The notion t+ and t− indicates,
respectively, the moments of just after and before the arriva l of
an action potential. q(t) is the rate of neurotransmitter release at
a given time t. According with the synchronous release process,
this neurotransmitters release here is time-locked to the arrival of
a presynaptic spike (delta function in Equation 3).
Finally, a simple way to describe the induced postsynaptic
membrane current Isyn due to the released neurotransmitters
is Destexhe et al. (1994), Dayan and Abbott (2003)
Isyn(t) = g(t)
(
v(t) − Esyn
)
, (4)
dg(t)
dt = − g(t)
τ syn
+ wq(t − D), (5)
where v(t) is the membrane potential, g(t) is the synaptic
conductance at the postsynaptic site, Esyn the reversal potential of
the synapse, τ syn the time constant of the synaptic ion-channels,
w the synaptic eﬃcacy produced by one unit of neurotransmitter,
and D the time delay due to the signal transmission.
2.1.2. Extension of the STP Model to Include
Asynchronous Release
We extend the above STP model to include the asynchronous
release process. The simple dynamics of the synchronous relea se
probability in the STP model provides an adequate framework
for modeling the asynchronous release since it allows for
implementing a slowly changing asynchronous release rate th at
is modulated by ﬁring activity as observed in experiments (
Wen
et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2012 ).
Molecular biological studies found that synchronous and
asynchronous neurotransmitter release are mediated via diﬀerent
Ca2+ sensors ( Sun et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2009; Wen et al.,
2010; Bacaj et al., 2013 ) that have distinct association and
dissociation rates with Ca 2+. We therefore use two variables, usr
and uar, to denote their corresponding release probabilities, that
is, usr denotes the release probability due to synchronous release
during spiking events, and uar the release probability due to the
asynchronous release per unit time.
In the SAR model, we assume that for both release
probabilities the qualitative dynamics remain identical to the STP
model (Equation 1) although parameters are diﬀerent in genera l.
We thus write
dusr ( t)
dt = − usr ( t)
τ sr
+ Usr [1 − usr ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) , (6)
duar ( t)
dt = − uar ( t)
τ ar
+ Uar [Umax − uar ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) , (7)
where Usr and Uar denote, respectively, the increments of release
probability induced by an action potential via the synchronou s
and asynchronous release pathways, and τ sr and τ ar denote,
respectively, the dissociation rates of Ca 2+ from the two kinds
of sensors. Note that technically, since the synchronous re lease
is locked to instantaneous events while the asynchronous
release process is an ongoing process, the usr is a release
probability whereas uar is a probability rate. We thus add an
additional parameter, Umax, representing the saturation level of
the facilitation for asynchronous release probability rate.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 4 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
Experimental studies further suggest that ﬂuctuations of
synchronous and asynchronous releases are anti-correlate d,
implying that they are competing for the same pool of vesicles
(
Wen et al., 2010 ). We therefore use a single variable x as
in Equation (2) to denote the amount of readily available
neurotransmitters.
As before, the synchronous release of neurotransmitters is
time-locked to the arrival of an action potential, and rate of
release is given by
qsr(t) = usr(t+ )x(t− )
∑
m
δ (t − tm). (8)
The asynchronous release of neurotransmitters is, on the ot her
hand, highly stochastic. This stochasticity can be modeled a s
a binomial process (
Del Castillo and Katz, 1954 ). A random
variable n is said to be binomial, n ∼ B
(
M, p
)
, when it follows
the distribution P(n = k|M, p) =
( N
k
)
pk(1 − p)N− k, with k ∈
{0, . . . , M}and p the probability of a single event.
Suppose that x0 is the amount of neurotransmitters contained
in a vesicle, called the quantum size. Thus, the maximal numb er
of readily releasable vesicles at time t is therefore ∼
⌊
x(t)/x0
⌋
,
with the symbol ⌊·⌋ denoting taking the nearest integer number
from below. Further, in a small time interval [ t, t + dt), the
release probability of a single vesicles due to asynchronous
release is uar(t) dt. Therefore, when assuming that the number
of asynchronous release events is binomial distributed, it is
given by a binomial random variable n(t) that follows the
binomial distribution B
(⌊
x(t)/x0
⌋
, uar(t) dt
)
. Thus, the amount
of neurotransmitters released in the interval [ t, t + dt) is
given by
qar(t) dt = x0nar(t), (9)
where nar(t) is the binomial random variable deﬁned above.
When calculating the joint rate of synchronous and
asynchronous releases, in principle we have to correct for
the case that some active vesicle were released due to the
asynchronous release and are thus not available anymore for
the synchronous release during spiking activity. However, s ince
spikes are instantaneous events, and in practice the time inte rval
is very small, the overlap of the two processes can be neglecte d.
Thus, the overall neurotransmitter release rate at t is given by
q(t) = qar(t) + qsr(t). (10)
The Equations (2, 6, 7, 10) jointly deﬁne the synaptic dynamics of
a release model, that includes stochastic asynchronous bes ides a
deterministic synchronous release process.
2.1.3. Including Stochastic Synchronous Release in
the SAR Model
While in the previous section the synchronous release is base d
on the deterministic STP model, in reality the synchronous
release process is stochastic (
Loebel et al., 2009 ). To arrive at our
ﬁnal SAR-model, we replace the deterministic STP model by a
stochastic version, as suggested previously (
Loebel et al., 2009 ).
For that, we add two stochastic processes, one to describe the
number of released vesicles by the synchronous release, nsr(t),
and the other describing the number of replenished vesicles, r(t).
These variables can be similarly modeled as binomial processes as
shown previously. For the number of released vesicles trigger ed
by the spikes by the synchronous release, it is thus
nsr(t) ∼ B
(
N(t), usr(t+ )
)
, (11)
where N(t) is the number of available vesicle resources, that is
N(t) =
⌊
x(t)/x0
⌋
in the notation of the last subsubsection and
the usr is the release probability given by Equation (6). Second,
for the number of replenished vesicles at time t it is
r(t) ∼ B
(
NF − N(t), dt/τ d
)
, (12)
implementing a stochastic depression process analogous to
Equation (2), with parameter NF = ⌊XF/x0⌋. Taken together, the
number of available vesicles at time t in the common pool, N(t),
changes according to the released and replenished vesicles at time
t, thus
dN(t) = r(t) − nar(t) − nsr(t)
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) dt. (13)
Finally, the synchronous release rate changes to
qsr(t) = x0nsr(t)
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) (14)
These equations complete our SAR model, which is illustrated
in Figure 1B. The equations jointly deﬁning the synaptic
dynamics of the SAR model, which includes both stochastic
synchronous and asynchronous neurotransmitter release, a re
summarized in the Algorithm 1. A numerical example
simulation of the SAR model is shown in Figure 2.
Algorithm 1 |Synchronous-Asynchronous Release STP
Model
Sync. release probability: dusr ( t)
dt = − usr ( t)
τ sr
+ Usr [1 − usr ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm)
Async. rel. probability rate: duar ( t)
dt = − uar ( t)
τ ar
+ Uar [Umax − uar ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm)
Sync. release rate: qsr(t) = x0nsr(t)
∑
m
δ ( t − tm)
Async. release rate: qar(t) dt = x0nar(t)
Available vesicle number: d N(t) = r(t) − nar(t) − nsr(t)∑
m
δ ( t − tm) dt
Vesicles replenishment: r(t) ∼ B
(
NF − N(t), dt/τ d
)
Sync. released vesicles: nsr(t) ∼ B
(
N(t), usr(t+ )
)
Async. released vesicles: nar(t) ∼ B
(
N(t), uar(t) dt
)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 5 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 2 | Numerical simulation of the SAR-model. The spike train
consist of 5 spikes (100 Hz, black dotted lines). (A) The number of released
vesicle according to the stochastic processes for the synch ronous (black line)
and asynchronous release (red line). (B) Dynamics of the release probability of
synchronous (black) and asynchronous release (red line). (C) Fraction of
available vesicles in the pool. Parameters: τ sr = 2 ms, Usr = 0.3, τ ar = 12 ms,
Uar = 0.005, τ d = 30 ms, Umax = 0.5, and NF = 271.
2.2. Estimation of the Parameters of the
SAR Model
To apply the SAR model in network simulations in practice,
we need to ﬁnd a working set of its free parameters, which
are τ sr, τ ar, Usr, Uar, τ d, NF, Umax, and x0. In general, these
parameters may vary in diﬀerent cortical areas and for diﬀerent
types of synapses, analogous to the parameters of the STP model
for synchronous release (
Silberberg et al., 2005 ). Note that the
SAR model includes short-term plasticity of the synchronous
release, so that facilitating and depressing synapse dynamic s can
be expressed with the model in addition to dynamics of the
asynchronous release.
In the following, we develop a method which ﬁts the free
parameters according to experimental data. We use experimental
data from a synapse connecting a fast-spiking neuron to a
pyramidal neuron as an example case (
Jiang et al., 2012 ). We
proceed in two steps. First, the time course of the release rate
has to be estimated from the raw IPSC traces. Second, we use th e
release rate time course to estimate parameters of the model b y
probabilistic inference.
2.2.1. Extracting the Neurotransmitter Release Rate
from the Recorded IPSC
We ﬁrst extract the release rate of neurotransmitters from
the inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) recorded at the
postsynaptic pyramidal neuron.
Let Isyn denote the synaptic current and g(t) the synaptic
conductance at the postsynaptic neuron. We use Equations (4)
and (5) to describe the synaptic currents induced by GABA
receptors, and have
Isyn(t) = g(t) ( v − EGABA) , (15)
dg(t)
dt = − g(t)
τ GABA
+ wq(t − D), (16)
with analogous variables as in Equations (4) and (5).
The experimental data was recorded using voltage-clamp, the
membrane voltage v was ﬁxed and EGABA was stable when the
neuron was at equilibrium, therefore A ≡ w(v − EGABA) is
a constant ( Jiang et al., 2012 ). With this condition, the above
equations are solved for Isyn(t),
Isyn(t) =
∫ t
−∞
e− t− t′
τGABA A q(t′ − D) dt′. (17)
We need to extract q(t) given Isyn(t). Since q(t) and A always
come together as a product in Equation (17), we can only estimate
q(t) up to a scaling factor A. Because the asynchronous release
events are relatively sparse, classical approaches, such as Fou rier
methods, are not suitable in estimating the release rate. In the
Section 4, we thus develop an eﬀective deconvolution method
to estimate Aq(t) from Isyn (see Section 4.3, for details), and
take care that the measured Isyn was not confounded by a leaky
current (see Section 4.2). Figure 3 presents an example of the
estimated release rate extracted from IPSC of the postsynaptic
neuron. The reconstructed postsynaptic current based on the
estimated release rate agrees well with the experimental data
showing the adequateness of our deconvolution method.
2.2.2. Estimating the Parameters by Probabilistic
Inference
Before ﬁtting the SAR model, by comparing the membrane
current at the presynaptic neuron with the extracted release r ate,
we observed that the peak of the release rate proﬁle lags behind
the peak of the membrane current by roughly a constant time
0.75 ms (Figures 3C,D). This implies that the transmission delay
D = 0.75 in Equation (16).
We found further that the release rate increased sharply
after 0.3 ms of the presynaptic spike, and decreased abruptly
after 1.1 ms of the sharp increase. Thus, we divided the time
trails into two types of time intervals: The ﬁrst type started
at 0.3 ms after each spike and lasted 1.1 ms, and we called
these intervals the synchronous release periods P(k, i)
sr , where k
is the spike number and i the trial number. The second type
was the time interval between two synchronous release period s
and named asynchronous release periods P(k, i)
ar . The integrated
neurotransmitter release in the deﬁned time periods is calcu lated
as (with r = sr, ar)
M(k, i)
r =
∫
t∈ P(k, i)
r
Aq(t) dt. (18)
After calculating the integrated neurotransmitter releas e in each
synchronous or asynchronous periods, we adopted a probabilistic
inference method to estimate the parameters in the SAR model
similar to
Costa et al. (2013). Similar to the assumptions in Costa
et al. (2013), we assume that the released neurotransmitters in
a certain release period conforms to a Gaussian distribution.
Therefore, we use only the sample mean and standard deviation
for each period over trials i, i.e., µ(k)
r = ∑
i M(k, i)
r /n and σ (k)
r =√
∑
i(M(k, i)
r − µ(k)
r )2/n, for ﬁtting the model.
When Mr collects the values for the released
neurotransmitters in predeﬁned intervals from experimental
data, the likelihood that the parameter set θ = { τ sr, Usr, τ ar,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 6 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 3 | Pre-processing of the raw IPSC recordings for estima ting parameters of the SAR model. The experimental data was recorded from a synapse
connecting a fast-spiking neuron to a pyramidal neuron in a h uman epileptic tissue ( Jiang et al., 2012 ). (A) Blue curve: an example IPSC trace. Red dashed curve: the
reconstructed IPSC trace based on the extracted release rate (from B). The two curves agree very well with each other. (B) Extracting release rate from experimentally
measured IPSC traces. The scaled release rate ˜q = Aq extracted from the IPSC in A by the deconvolution method. (C,D) Estimation of the transmission delay by
comparison of the time of spikes (black dotted lines) in the p re-synaptic voltage trace (C) and the peak of the release rate (D). Red dotted line mark the moments 0.75
ms after action potentials, which roughly coincide with the peaks of release rate indicating a constant transmission de lay.
TABLE 1 | Fitted parameters that maximizes the log likelihood wi thin the
indicated search space using grid search for a FS-PC synapse.
Parameter Unit Value Conﬁdence interval Search space
Usr 0.11 [0.104 , 0.117] [0.02 , 0.3]
τ sr ms 1 [0.10 , 3.7] [1 , 4]
Uar 0.0035 [0.00325 , 0.0037] [0.004 , 0.024]/Umax
τ ar ms 13 [12 , 14] [4 , 32]
τ d ms 60 [51 , 76] [20 , 80]
Umax 1/ms 0.5 [0.06 , > 2] [0.125 , 2]
NF 271 n.a. n.a.
Uar, τ d, Umax} can match the experimental observations Mr is
P ( Mr |θ ) . Given each parameter set θ the log likelihood is
log P ( Mr |θ ) =
∑
r∈{sr, ar}
Nsp∑
k= 1
(
−
( ˜M(k)
r − µ(k)
r
) 2
2
(
σ (k)
r
) 2 − log
√
2π σ (k)
r
)
,
(19)
where ˜M(k)
r are the amount of released neurotransmitters
predicted by the SAR model in the corresponding periods for a
given parameter set. The technical details of the ﬁtting proce ss
are described in the Section 4.4.
The results on the experimental data are shown in Table 1 and
Figure 4. We found that the SAR model qualitatively captured
the randomness and the general appearance of the experimental
data (see Figure 5, for a comparison).
After having estimated a suitable parameter set, we explore
in the following eﬀects of selected parameter variations on th e
response of the SAR model.
2.3. Effect on Asynchronous Release
Caused by Slower Ca 2+ Buffering
For a fast-spiking interneuron of the epileptic human tissues,
the estimated decay time constant of the asynchronous relea se
was τ ar = 8 ms (see Table 1), which means that the
asynchronous release rate decays very fast after spiking act ivity.
In cholecystokinin (CCK)-expressing interneurons, on the ot her
hand, the post spike train asynchronous release was found
to decay slower (
Heﬀt and Jonas, 2005 ). Mechanistically, the
fast decay of the release might be caused by the parvalbumin
(PV) contained in the fast-spiking interneuron. Parvalbumin
is a Ca 2+-binding albumin protein, which can cause free Ca 2+
concentration to rapidly decay causing a fast deactivation of Ca2+
sensors. Therefore, τ ar in PV-containing fast-spiking interneuron
synapses is expected to be relatively small. Accordingly, a
previous study (
Jiang et al., 2015 ) suggested that faster
clearance of free Ca 2+ could contribute to the reduction of the
asynchronous release.
In experiments, the speed of free Ca 2+ clearance can be
controlled by the administration of the drug EGTA-AM, which
enhances the speed of Ca 2+ clearance (
Otsu et al., 2004; Jiang
et al., 2012 ). This would correspond to smaller τ sr and τ ar time
constants in the SAR model. Because the two Ca 2+ sensors
have diﬀerent biochemical properties, the inﬂuence of a slower
decay of the free Ca 2+ concentration on τ sr and τ ar may be
diﬀerent.
We ran the model with diﬀerent τ ar to see how the time
decay of the Ca 2+ concentration can aﬀect asynchronous
and synchronous release. For better illustration, we plot bo th
releases separately. Speciﬁcally, based on the receptor model
Equation (17), we can separate IPSCs in Iar(t) and Isr(t)
according to
Isyn(t) = Isr(t) + Iar(t), (20)
Iar(t) =
∫ t
−∞
e− t− t′
τGABA w(v − EGABA) qar(t′) dt′, (21)
Isr(t) =
∫ t
−∞
e− t− t′
τGABA w(v − EGABA) qsr(t′) dt′. (22)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 7 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 4 | Parameter estimation of the SAR model and comparison of the best ﬁtting SAR model with experimental data. (A) Average amount of
neurotransmitter release in the periods after the kth spike in experiments (asterisks) for synchronous and asy nchronous release periods (red and green colors,
respectively) and prediction of the SAR model (solid lines) . The model captures the experimental observation very well (log likelihood value –52.8259, see Equation 19),
although the ﬁt was only constraint by the ﬁrst 10 spikes (see Se ction 4). Error bars indicate standard deviations. Note tha t the number of trails for each spike is
different. In particular, for spikes 21–25 only 3 trials were available (see Section 4). (B–G) Scaled likelihood along each dimension around the optimal p arameter set for
the 6 ﬁtted parameters of the SAR model. Shaded areas indicate the region where the likelihood is above 90% of the maximal va lue, when the single parameter is
varied while all other remain ﬁxed.
Increasing the time constant τ ar from e.g., 8 to 30 ms made
the asynchronous release rate uar visibly slower, so that uar
accumulates and saturates at higher levels after repetitive spikes,
in turn leading to a larger Iar (see Figure 6). Moreover, the
amount of free vesicles x decreases to lower levels as a result of
the enhancement of asynchronous release, which also causes a
smaller Isr due to the resource competition of the two release
processes. This form of competition was found in experimental
data as well (
Otsu et al., 2004 ). Finally, after the spike train,
the asynchronous current lasts longer because τ ar decays more
slowly.
2.4. Effect on Asynchronous Release
Caused by Stronger Inﬂux of Ca 2+
In rat epileptic tissues, it was found that action potentials
have higher amplitude than that in normal rats (
Jiang et al.,
2012). The higher amplitude could in principle lead to an
increased Ca 2+ inﬂux, which will cause the Ca 2+ sensors to
be more active. Interestingly, it was found that manipulatin g
the amplitude of action potentials had greater inﬂuence on
the asynchronous release than on the synchronous release
process (
Jiang et al., 2012 ). The change of Ca 2+ inﬂux
would correspond to an increase of Usr and Uar in the SAR
model.
We therefore run the model with diﬀerentUar to see the eﬀects
on Isr and Iar (results are shown in Figure 7). Increasing the
parameter Uar caused uar to rise to higher levels after each spike.
Since τ ar was short, uar saturated soon after a few spikes. Higher
uar levels resulted in stronger asynchronous IPSC. Similar to
the previous simulation, stronger asynchronous release depl etes
resources (that is, a decrease in x), and thus forces smaller
synchronous IPSCs.
It is known that changes of Na +, K +, and Ca 2+ channels can
all contribute to epilepsy ( Lytton, 2008). Changes in the channel
dynamics might deform the waveform of action potentials, and
thus in turn might lead to the enhancement of asynchronous
release. In some experiments (
Zengel and Magleby, 1977;
Otsu et al., 2004 ), Ba 2+, Sr 2+, and Li + are used to selectively
enhance synchronous or asynchronous release. These change s
can be modeled with the change of Uar in the SAR model as
described.
Although both, larger Uar and larger τ ar, can enhance
asynchronous release, there are some crucial diﬀerences on
the release characteristics. With large τ ar, the asynchronous
release rate uar will increase slowly during repetitive spikes,
and then decay slowly after the spikes have ceased. Thus, Iar
does not increase much during the ﬁrst few spikes, but lasts
longer after the spike train. On the other hand, with large Uar,
asynchronous release level uar increases rapidly after the ﬁrst few
spikes, and also decays fast after the spikes have ceased. Thus ,
in contrast to the case when varying the time constant, when
changing Uar the dynamics of Iar is faster, while the level of
asynchronous release during the spike train is elevated in bo th
cases.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 8 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 5 | Comparison of the experimental traces with the SAR mod el after ﬁtting the parameters. (A) Experimentally observed release rate for the 3 trials
having 10 spikes. (B) Experimentally observed synaptic current corresponding t o the release rate in (A). (C,D) 3 example trials simulated with the SAR model with the
same spike pattern as in (A,B). Note that simulated traces are qualitatively similar with the experimental data. (E,F) Synaptic current comparison of the rest of the
experimental trials (E) and further example realizations of the SAR model (F). See T able 1for parameters used. For (A,C), a boxcar ﬁlter with 1 ms width was used to
better visualize the instantaneous release events.
2.5. Quantum Size Controls the Transmitter
Release Variability
We found that the quantum size x0 mainly aﬀects the variability
of the asynchronous release.
Assume that the overall amount of released neurotransmitte r
stayed the same but each vesicles contained less neurotransmitter
(implicating a increased numbers of vesicles in the active zo ne).
This can be modeled by holding the synapse strength wXF
constant, when increasing the total available vesicles XF
x0 by
reducing the released quantum x0. Note that w is the synaptic
weight in the receptor model (see Equation 16).
Suppose that at a time t, the fraction of remaining
neurotransmitters is ξ . Then there are ξ XF
x0 vesicles. If each
vesicle had a release probability of p in a short period, then the
variance of released vesicles is ξ XF
x0 p(1 − p) based on the binomial
release hypothesis. So the variance of the conductance g from
Equation (16) is
(wx0)2 ξ XF
x0
p(1 − p) = wx0(ξ wXF)p(1 − p)
= wx0c,
(23)
where c is a constant, since wXF is held constant. Thus, for
larger XF/x0, wx0 becomes smaller, so that the variance of
the conductance caused by neurotransmitter release become s
smaller. Therefore, smaller wx0 makes the IPSC generated by the
asynchronous release appear smoother (see Figure 8).
3. DISCUSSION
In this article, we developed a phenomenological synaptic model,
the SAR model, that includes a description of the dynamics of
both, asynchronous and synchronous neurotransmitter rele ase.
We based the derivation of the SAR model on a popular
model for short-term plasticity, so that possible short-term
synaptic plasticity dynamics of the synchronous release proce ss
can be described in addition to the asynchronous release
dynamics. We found that our model agrees well with data on
asynchronous release characteristics from experiments (
Jiang
et al., 2012 ) and in particular reproduced the eﬀect of
selectively enhancing or reducing asynchronous release fou nd by
experimental manipulation of the Ca 2+-dynamics ( Otsu et al.,
2004).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 9 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 6 | Effect of an increase in the asynchronous release de cay time constant τar in the SAR model. (A) The IPSCs caused by transmitter release. (B)
The synchronous component of the IPSC caused by synchronous r elease. (C) The asynchronous IPSC caused by asynchronous release. (D) The internal state usr of
the synapse model during the spike train. (E) The internal state uar during the spike train. (F) The internal state x (with a scale of 1 : XF ) during the spike train.
Parameters: taken from T able 1except τ ar as indicated. The amplitude of the IPSC caused by a quantum rel ease is Ax0 = 10 pA.
FIGURE 7 | Enhancement of asynchronous release with an increa se of Uar in the SAR model. (A) The IPSCs caused by total transmitter release. (B) The
synchronous component of the IPSC caused by synchronous rele ase. (C) The asynchronous IPSC caused by asynchronous release. (D) The internal state usr of the
synapse model during the spike train. (E) The internal state Uar during the spike train. (F) The internal state x (with a scale of 1 : XF ) during the spike train. Note that
asynchronous release causes a decrease in the synchronous r elease due to the competition of vesicle resources. Parameters: taken from T able 1, except Uar as
indicated. Ax0 = 10 pA.
3.1. Features of the Model
A previous experimental study suggested that the asynchronou s
release phenomenon may be caused by two diﬀerent release
sites having diﬀerent distances to the Ca 2+ channels (
Heﬀt and
Jonas, 2005 ). However, this phenomenon can also be explained
by only having one release site but diﬀerent Ca 2+ sensors
that have distinct association, dissociation, and cooperat ivity
properties. In our model, we thus assumed two diﬀerent
Ca2+ sensors for the two release processes. This could be a
simpliﬁcation, because in a much more biologically detailed
model that only includes one kind of Ca 2+ sensor but assumes
a detailed vesicle life cycle and Ca 2+ concentration dynamics,
asynchronous release phenomenon also emerged (
Pan and
Zucker, 2009 ). However, for the purpose of building a simple
phenomenological model, the assumption of having two pools of
sensors competing for a common pool of free vesicles seems to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 10 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
FIGURE 8 | Inﬂuence of the effective quantum size on the asynch ronous release in the SAR model. (A) The IPSCs caused by the total transmitter release.
(B) The synchronous component of the IPSC caused by synchronous r elease. (C) The asynchronous component of the IPSC caused by asynchronou s release. (D)
The internal state usr of the synapse model during the spike train. (E) The internal state Uar during the spike train. (F) The internal state x (with a scale of 1 : XF ) during
the spike train. Note that the current caused by asynchronou s release is visibly smoother if the released quantum size is smaller. Parameters: taken from T able 1,
except NF = XF /x0 as indicated. Ax0 = 10 pA.
be an adequate simpliﬁcation and able to reproduce experimental
data.
Another model was proposed for describing asynchronous
release on a molecular basis using 3D Monte-Carlo simulations
of Ca 2+ diﬀusion in a single synapse (
Nadkarni et al.,
2010). However, these molecular details for describing the
asynchronous release process in the hippocampal synapse
makes the model very computationally expensive and thus
unsuitable for large scale network simulations. Computatio nal
eﬃciency in simulating synaptic interactions is in particula r
important because in a network of N neurons, the number
of synapses is proportional to N2. Thus, the dynamics of
synapses are the most costly aspect to compute in typical
neural network simulations. When considered in addition to
the synchronous release process already present in a network
simulation, the asynchronous release in our SAR model
adds only a single dynamical equation (for the asynchronous
release rate) together with two noise processes (one for
replenishment, one for the released amount) per synapse
and time step for simulating the dynamics of a neural
network.
Our model is thus simple and computationally eﬃcient while
still catching some key features of the asynchronous releas e
found in the experimental studies. Note that also the STP mode l,
which we use for describing the synchronous release process
in the SAR model, is in itself only an phenomenologically
approximation to the complex biophysical mechanism of
synchronous release (
Tsodyks and Wu, 2013 ). Taken together,
the SAR model is thus suitable to be used in large-scale netwo rk
simulation to investigate the eﬀect of asynchronous release
on network dynamics. Parameters of the SAR model can be
adjusted to adapt for diﬀerent contributions of synchronous a nd
asynchronous release as illustrated in the Section 2.
3.2. Possible Extension of the Model
Our model does not include a positive stationary probability of
asynchronous release in the absence of spike, because the rel ease
probability rate will decay to zero (with time constant τ ar) when
spiking ceases (compare to Equation 7). However, it is known that
in some synapses, spontaneous release events occur even in the
absent of spikes (
Kavalali, 2015). We here neglected spontaneous
release, since in our data single events are tiny and thus can not
be reliably distinguished from background noise. However, i f
needed, this rate could be easily incorporated in the SAR mode l.
In Equation (7), the steady state had to be changed to some
positive spontaneous rate, e.g., U0, that is the equation would be
modiﬁed to
duar ( t)
dt = − uar(t) − U0
τ ar
+ Uar [Umax − uar ( t) ]
∑
m
δ ( t − tm) .
(24)
This would yield spontaneous release events in the absent of
spiking activity in the SAR model.
3.3. Release Rate Estimation from
Experimental Trials
Some assumptions during the estimation of the model
parameters may not hold exactly in the reality, possible
confounding the accuracy of the estimated release rate from
experimental trails. For example, it was assumed that the
leaky current was constant, but in fact, it may change with
the membrane voltage and the internal state of the neuron.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 11 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
Moreover, the reversal potential EGABA was also assumed to be
constant. However, in high frequency spike trains it is known
that a neuron may not be able to maintain ion concentration
stable (
Staley et al., 1995), which may lead to a drift in EGABA.
In the estimation of the parameters of the SAR model, the
receptor dynamics was assumed to be a simple exponential decay
process. This assumptions might be too restrictive for some
synapse types, for instance, because any receptor saturation i s
neglected. While the ﬁtting process might be more diﬃcult wit h
more complex receptor dynamics, the core of the SAR model is
still valid as it models the neurotransmitter release proces s and
not the receptor dynamics.
Taken together, there are some assumptions that limit the
precision of the estimation of the release rate from IPSC, which in
turn might aﬀect the accuracy of the parameter estimation of th e
SAR model. Although quantitative aspects might slightly cha nge,
it is unlikely that the above assumptions would compromise a
useful qualitative description of the asynchronous release process
by the SAR model.
3.4. Categorizing the Synchronous and
Asynchronous Release Periods from the
Experimental Observed IPSC
Though synchronous and asynchronous release have diﬀerent
underlying mechanisms, it is diﬃcult to distinguish them fr om
the postsynaptic currents alone. Some experimental studies (
Pan
and Zucker, 2009; Wen et al., 2010 ) chose the neuromuscular
junctions as model system because the receptor’s conductanc e
decay constant is very short. It is thus easy to directly iden tify
both release processes from the measured synaptic currents.
This method gives both the timing and relative amount of
neurotransmitter release, but it is limited to certain kind s of
synapses. Other studies (
Jiang et al., 2012, 2015) used the slope of
the IPSC after the spike train to identify events of asynchron ous
release. This method can give the timing of asynchronous release,
but cannot give the amount of released neurotransmitters at the
same time.
If the receptor decay time constant is not short enough,
the asynchronous IPSC will be mingled together with the
synchronous IPSC, and it is not easy to categorize the releas e
as synchronous or asynchronous. In this article in contrast to
previous method, we thus developed a deconvolution approach
to account for the ﬁnite conductance decay time constant to
directly get an estimation of the transmitter release rate. We then
used the timing of the release rate (and not that of the IPSCs)
to achieve categorization since it is more reasonable to ass ume
that synchronous release rate can be described by a instantaneous
pulse functions.
3.5. Applicability to Other Synapse Types
To ﬁt the SAR model we used data obtained from a synapse of
a fast spiking interneuron to pyramidal cell. We found that the
average release rate changes after spikes were well captured b y
the model yielding simulations that were qualitative compara ble
to the experimental traces. Note that the model is also suitable for
modeling synapses with negligible asynchronous release, su ch as
PC-PC synapses, since the SAR model generalizes the established
STP model of the synchronous release. Data were too limited t o
more quantitatively test how well other more detailed aspects,
i.e., the form of the distribution of asynchronous events, we re
predicted after ﬁtting the model. Since we assumed only very
simple release dynamics, the SAR model can only be seen as a
ﬁrst approximation to the underlying biophysics. The variabil ity
of the parameters of the model for other synapses of the same
type or between diﬀerent synapse types is not addressed here and
needs future experimental studies, where the SAR model and ou r
methods could be used to ﬁt data from many synapses of the same
type (but from diﬀerent neurons or areas) and between diﬀerent
types of synapses.
3.6. Conclusion
We here presented a new model for the phenomenological
description of synchronous and asynchronous neurotransmit ter
release at chemical synapses. Since our model extends a well-
known STP model often used in large-scale network simulatio ns,
it should be easy to include it in future modeling studies.
We hope that the SAR model will facilitate the understanding
of the computational properties and neural function of the
asynchronous release process.
4. MATERIALS AND METHODS
4.1. Experimental Methods
The experimental data used for the ﬁtting of the SAR model
was taken from a previous study (
Jiang et al., 2012 ). We
thus refer to Jiang et al. (2012) for a detailed description of
the experimental protocol. In brief, human neocortical tissu es
obtained from patients with intractable epilepsy were section ed
in ice-cold sucrose-based slicing solution, and then mainta ined
in artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid at 35.5C ◦. Whole-cell recordings
were performed in synaptically connected layer 5 fast-spiking and
pyramidal cell pairs (FS-PC) with high-chloride internal solution.
The presynaptic FS cells were stimulated by current pulses to
generate action potentials. Asynchronous release (AR) event s
could be detected in the postsynaptic PC during and after the
action potentials.
4.2. Estimating the Synaptic Current
The leaky current should be subtracted from the recorded
current, so that the remaining part is purely the synaptic curre nt
Isyn(t) caused by neurotransmitter release. Here, we estimate the
leaky current Ileaky to be the mean of the recorded current in a
short period before each spike train. In principle, Isyn(t) should
be non-positive for inhibitory synapses. However, in some tri als,
there were some time points where Isyn(t) > 0, probably due to
small noise ﬂuctuations. We thus set Isyn(t) to a small negative
value − ǫ where Isyn(t) > − ǫ . Here ǫ should be small enough so
that it does not introduce much bias compared to the amount
of noise. We set ǫ to 0.2 pA, which is much smaller than the
amplitude of the IPSC.
4.3. The Deconvolution Method
We found that classical approaches to deconvolution are
ineﬀective for inferring the release events. We thus develop i n
the following a new deconvolution approach.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 12 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
Consider that a time course of a postsynaptic current Isyn(t) in
a time interval [0 , T] with a temporal resolution d t = 0.05 ms
was recorded. After pre-processing (see Section 4.2), we divi ded
the time interval into a sequence of N = T/ dt time bins with
size d t. In discrete form, the synaptic current in the ith time bin
according to the model is given by (compare to Equation 17),
Isyn(i) =
i∑
j= 1
K(i − j)q(j − )Delta1) dt, (25)
where the kernel is K(i − j) = Ae− (i− j) dt/τ GABA when i ≥ j and
otherwise 0 and )Delta1= D/ dt is the transmission delay.
First, we estimate the GABA receptor’s decay time constant
τ GABA by estimating the kernel K from the data using MATLAB’s
curve ﬁtting toolbox.
The time constant τ GABA could be estimated from
spontaneous neurotransmitter release events or from single
action potentials. However, both estimates were similar (se e
Figure 9). For a synapse between fast-spiking neurons, we found
τ GABA ≈ 2.6 ms, for a synapse from fast-spiking neurons to
pyramidal neurons, τ GABA ≈ 5 ms, which is in good agreement
with values reported in the literature (
Bartos et al., 2002).
Having estimated the form of the kernel, we adopted a
sequential approach to estimate q(i − )Delta1) one-by-one, starting
from i = 1 to i = N. We start with q(1 − )Delta1) = 0. At the ith
step, we assume that the q(j − )Delta1) for steps j = 1, . . . , i − 1 are
already estimated. We then choose the q(i − )Delta1) by satisfying
q(i − )Delta1) = arg min
p≥ 0
⏐
⏐
⏐
i− 1∑
j= 1
K(i − j)q(j − )Delta1) dt + A p dt − ˜Isyn(i)
⏐
⏐
⏐
≡ arg min
p≥ 0
|J(i)|,
subject to ˜Isyn(k) ≥ e− (k− i) dt/τ GABAJ(i) ∀k ≥ i,
(26)
where ˜Isyn(i) is the experimentally measured IPSC in the time
interval i and J(i) is an abbreviation of the term to maximize. Note
that the optimization constraints achieves that the release rate at
time t can only grow if the future decay can be accommodated.
This procedure resulted in an good estimate of the release rat e
(see Figure 3, for an example).
4.4. Parameter Fitting
We used n = 12 trials of release rate under spike frequency
of 100 Hz and spike number of 10 (3 trials), 15 (3 trials), 20
(3 trials), and 25 (3 trials). For comparability, only the rel ease
rate statistics of ﬁrst Nsp = 10 spikes were used for all trails.
Incorporating more spikes did not improve the ﬁt, because (a) the
usable trials number was reduced and (b) the release rate sta tistic
change started to saturate after about 10 spikes in this data s et.
Because the amount of available trails were limited, we divi ded
the spike trails in short intervals and optimized the parameter s
of the model to match the average estimated neurotransmitte r
within these short intervals. We inferred the model parameter s
by minimizing the log likelihood given in Equation (19) of the
main text.
Since the amount of released neurotransmitters in the SAR
model is stochastic, the released amount ˜M(k)
r in each of the time
periods deﬁned in the main text should be averaged over trials.
Since we only ﬁt the mean of the experimental data, to save
time in calculating ˜M(k)
r for purpose of ﬁtting, we modiﬁed the
Equation (9) of the SAR model to
qar(t) dt = x(t)uar(t) dt, (27)
and additionally used the deterministic model of the synchronous
release described in the main text, so that there is no stocha sticity
in the model during ﬁtting. Calculating mean release rate in this
way was much faster than taking the average of release rate ov er
many trials generated by the model in Section 2.1.2 but does n ot
change the results. This modiﬁcation also makesx0 a meaningless
parameter during the ﬁtting. We thus estimated quantum size x0
later using another method (see Section 4.4.2 below).
After we calculated the generated release rate q′(t) by the
model, we computed the model response ˜M(k)
r as described for
FIGURE 9 | Estimating the receptor decay time constant. The experimental data is from a synapse of epileptic human ti ssue connecting a fast-spiking
interneuron with a pyramidal neuron. Blue curve: the IPSCs. R ed curve: the ﬁtted IPSC using an exponential decay function (w ith offset). (A) A spontaneous release
event. The estimated τ GABA was 4.8 ms (conﬁdence interval 4.39–5.27 ms). (B) Single action potential triggered release. The estimated τ GABA was 6.2 ms
(conﬁdence interval 6.06–6.46 ms).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 13 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
the experimental data [the synchronous release periods P(k, i)
sr
started immediately when there was synchronous release andalso
lasted for 1.1 ms], except that we accounted for the normalization
factor A [corresponding to w(v − EGABA)] to ensure that the sum∑˜M(k)
r corresponded to that of the experimental data.
Note that the released neurotransmitters increase
proportionally to the parameter XF (see Equations 6, 7, 10,
and 2), so that A ∝ 1
XF . This means that XF is not constrained if
w(v − EGABA) is not known. Thus, we arbitrarily set XF = 1 in
the ﬁtting process.
A grid search was used to ﬁnd the parameter set which
maximized the log likelihood. See Table 1 in the main text for
the grid space used and the inferred parameters.
After ﬁnding the optimal parameter set ˆθ , we examined the
nearby space around it with thinner bin size and smaller range
along each parameter dimension to estimate a conﬁdence region.
The conﬁdence interval along the each dimension was taken
where the likelihood was above 90% of the maximal likelihood
value. See Table 1, for the list of the determined conﬁdence
intervals.
4.4.1. Validating the Fitting Method on Simulated Data
To check how reliably the ﬁtting method ﬁnds the true
parameters of the model, we tested it on artiﬁcially generateddata
with the SAR model. For that, we randomly chose 120 random
parameter settings (in the ranges τ sr ∈ [4, 10], Usr ∈ [0.1, 0.5],
τ ar ∈ [8, 20], Uar ∈ [0.004, 0.02], τ d ∈ [20, 80], Umax ∈
[0.2, 1], and NF = 271), simulated released neurotransmitter for
spike trains with 25 action potentials (100 Hz) for 50 trials an d
performed grid search for all 6 parameter.
We found that when comparing the estimated with the true
values, the parameters Usr and τ d could be very reliably estimated
(Usr: R2 = 0.9261; τ d: R2 = 0.957). We thus ﬁxed the values
found for these two parameter to save computation time and
performed a ﬁner grid search for the other 4 free parameters. This
yielded values very close to the true values for τ ar (R2 = 0.81)
and still reasonable values for τ sr (R2 = 0.49). The reason why
τ sr could be less reliably estimated, is that for moderate spike
rates and moderate facilitation, the exact time constant of the
synchronous release rate does not aﬀect the dynamics of the
model signiﬁcantly as long as it decays almost to zero within the
inter-spike interval (see e.g., Figure 6B).
Finally, we found that although the overall quality of the ﬁt
to the simulated data was very good throughout (on average 1%
relative deviation of the likelihood of the estimated parame ter
compared to the likelihood of the true model on the same
data, averaged over all 120 groups of parameters), the estimat ed
parameters Umax and Uar were in general not close to the true
values ( Umax: R2 = 0.25; Uar: R2 = 0.2). This could be
understood by reviewing the SAR model formulation. Note tha t
the parameter Umax is somewhat redundant with the parameter
Uar, because they both increase the update of the asynchronous
release rate (see Equation 7). Indeed, we found that the produ ct
UmaxUar was correctly estimated by our ﬁtting method and very
close to the true values ( R2 = 0.93). In other words, for relatively
short spike trains with moderate ﬁring rate, the saturation l evel
of the asynchronous release process, Umax, is seldom reached,
so that an incorrect setting of Umax does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect
the dynamics as it can be compensated for by an appropriate
setting of Uar. For our data, we found that ﬁxing Umax to a
constant number e.g., Umax = 1 ms− 1, and performing the grid
search only on the remaining 5 parameters yielded good result s
in practice.
4.4.2. Estimating the Quantum Size
After the parameters are found, one can calculate the quantit y
of x0. According to the receptor model, the amplitude of
the IPSC triggered by a release of an individual quantum
neurotransmitters is ˜x0 = A · x0, with x0 = ˜x0
A the quantum
size. A is the normalization factor and ˜x0 can be estimated based
on the statistics of the post train release rate as follows.
Similar to the case of ﬁtting the release rate, we can only
estimate ˜x0 = w(v − EGABA)x0 = Ax0, that is the amplitude of
IPSC generated by the release of a single vesicle.
For that, we collected the postsynaptic currents generated
by pure asynchronous release, i.e., those after the synchron ous
release due to presynaptic action potentials are ceased ( Jiang
et al., 2012 ). We divided the time into small intervals of equal
length with )Delta1t = 3.9 ms. At each interval j, the quantity M(j) =
˜q(j))Delta1t was extracted using the deconvolution method described
in Section 4.3.
The vesicle fusion associated with asynchronous release is
a binomial process, which can be approximated by a Poisson
process. In particular, a previous study found that the mean
and variance of post spike train IPSC are linearly correlated
(
Heﬀt and Jonas, 2005 ), which is an indicator for a Poisson
process. Although the number of released vesicles is in general an
inhomogeneous Poisson process over time, in a short interval , it
can be treated as homogeneous. Thus, the ratio between its me an
and variance (that is the Fano factor) should equal to 1 in eac h
small interval. We use this property to infer the value of ˜x0.
FIGURE 10 | Estimation of the amplitude of the postsynaptic cur rent
due to the release of a single vesicle. The Poisson nature of the vesicle
release process is utilized to estimate the quantum size. Ea ch data point
represents the mean and the variance of M(j) obtained from 6 trials. Linear
regression (R2 = 0.89) gives an estimation of ˜x0 = 10.21 pA.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 14 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
Denote p(j) a random number associated with the Poisson
release at the jth interval of each trial. The amount of
neurotransmitters released in this interval is thus given by M(j) =
˜x0p(j). For the Fano factor F{M(j)} for each interval j, that is
the ratio between the mean and the variance of M(j) over trials,
should thus hold
F
{
M(j)
}
= ˜ x0F
{
p(j)
}
= ˜ x0, (28)
because the Fano factor of a Poisson process is 1. By calculati ng
the mean and variance of M(j), j = 1, . . . , N, from the
experimental data and ﬁtting them by linear regression, we
obtained ˜x0 = 10.21 pA (see Figure 10). This value is in the range
of the amplitude of the minimum spontaneous postsynaptic
current (10–20 pA) recorded in the experiments (
Jiang et al.,
2012) validating our approach.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Designed research: SW, YS, TW. Mathematical model
formulation and simulation: TW, MR, SW. Analyzed data:
TW, LY , XZ, MR, YS. Wrote paper: TW, MR, SW.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program
of China [2014CB846101 (SW, MR), and 2011CBA00400 (YS)],
the National Natural Science Foundation of China [31371109
(MR), 31261160495 (SW), 31430038 (YS), and 31025012 (YS)],
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
[248105584GK (SW)], and the Specialized Research Fund
for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education [20130003
110022 (SW)].
REFERENCES
Bacaj, T., Wu, D., Y ang, X., Morishita, W., Zhou, P., Xu, W., et al.
(2013). Synaptotagmin-1 and synaptotagmin-7 trigger synchronou s and
asynchronous phases of neurotransmitter release. Neuron 80, 947–959. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.026
Bartos, M., Vida, I., Frotscher, M., Meyer, A., Monyer, H., Geig er, J. R., et al.
(2002). Fast synaptic inhibition promotes synchronized gamma osci llations
in hippocampal interneuron networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99,
13222–13227. doi: 10.1073/pnas.192233099
Chapman, E. R. (2008). How does synaptotagmin trigger
neurotransmitter release? Annu. Rev. Biochem. 77, 615–641. doi:
10.1146/annurev.biochem.77.062005.101135
Costa, R. P., Sjöström, P. J., and V an Rossum, M. C. (2013).
Probabilistic inference of short-term synaptic plasticity in neoco rtical
microcircuits. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 7:75. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.
00075
Daw, M. I., Tricoire, L., Erdelyi, F., Szabo, G., and McBain, C. J. (2009).
Asynchronous transmitter release from cholecystokinin-containi ng inhibitory
interneurons is widespread and target-cell independent. J. Neurosci. 29,
11112–11122. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5760-08.2009
Dayan, P., and Abbott, L. F. (2000). Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and
Mathematical Modeling of Neural Systems. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Del Castillo, J., and Katz, B. (1954). Quantal components of the end-plate potential.
J. Physiol. 124, 560. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1954.sp005129
Destexhe, A., Mainen, Z. F., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1994). Syn thesis of
models for excitable membranes, synaptic transmission and neuromodulat ion
using a common kinetic formalism. J. Comput. Neurosci. 1, 195–230. doi:
10.1007/BF00961734
Goda, Y., and Stevens, C. F. (1994). Two components of transmitte r release
at a central synapse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 12942–12946. doi:
10.1073/pnas.91.26.12942
Heﬀt, S., and Jonas, P. (2005). Asynchronous gaba release generat es long-
lasting inhibition at a hippocampal interneuron–principal neuron synapse. Nat.
Neurosci. 8, 1319–1328. doi: 10.1038/nn1542
Jiang, M., Y ang, M., Yin, L., Zhang, X., and Shu, Y. (2015). Dev elopmental
reduction of asynchronous gaba release from neocortical fast-spik ing neurons.
Cereb. Cortex 25, 258–270. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht236
Jiang, M., Zhu, J., Liu, Y., Y ang, M., Tian, C., Jiang, S., et al. (2012). Enhancement of
asynchronous release from fast-spiking interneuron in human and rat e pileptic
neocortex. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001324
Kavalali, E. T. (2015). The mechanisms and functions of spontaneo us
neurotransmitter release. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 5–16. doi: 10.1038/nrn3875
Loebel, A., Silberberg, G., Helbig, D., Markram, H., Tsodyks, M., and
Richardson, M. J. (2009). Multiquantal release underlies the dist ribution
of synaptic eﬃcacies in the neocortex. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 3:27. doi:
10.3389/neuro.10.027.2009
Lytton, W. W. (2008). Computer modelling of epilepsy. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
626–637. doi: 10.1038/nrn2416
Manseau, F., Marinelli, S., Méndez, P., Schwaller, B., Prince, D. A ., Huguenard,
J. R., et al. (2010). Desynchronization of neocortical networks by asynchronous
release of gaba at autaptic and synaptic contacts from fast-spiking interneurons.
PLoS Biol. 8:e1000492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000492
Markram, H., and Tsodyks, M. (1996). Redistribution of synaptic eﬃ cacy between
neocortical pyramidal neurons. Nature 382, 807–810. doi: 10.1038/382807a0
Medrihan, L., Ferrea, E., Greco, B., Baldelli, P., and Benfenati, F. (2014).
Asynchronous gaba release is a key determinant of tonic inhibition and controls
neuronal excitability: a study in the synapsin ii − /− mouse. Cereb. Cortex 25,
3356–3368. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu141
Nadkarni, S., Bartol, T. M., Sejnowski, T. J., and Levine, H. (201 0). Modelling
vesicular release at hippocampal synapses. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6:e1000983. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000983
Otsu, Y., Shahrezaei, V., Li, B., Raymond, L. A., Delaney, K. R., and Murphy, T. H.
(2004). Competition between phasic and asynchronous release for re covered
synaptic vesicles at developing hippocampal autaptic synapses. J. Neurosci. 24,
420–433. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4452-03.2004
Pan, B., and Zucker, R. S. (2009). A general model of synaptic tran smission and
short-term plasticity. Neuron 62, 539–554. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.03.025
Paradiso, M. A., Bear, M. F., and Connors, B. W. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring
the Brain. Hagerstwon, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Rall, W. (1967). Distinguishing theoretical synaptic potentials computed for
diﬀerent soma-dendritic distributions of synaptic input. J. Neurophysiol.
30:1138.
Silberberg, G., Grillner, S., LeBeau, F. E., Maex, R., and Markram, H. (2005).
Synaptic pathways in neural microcircuits. Trends Neurosci. 28, 541–551. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2005.08.004
Staley, K. J., Soldo, B. L., and Proctor, W. R. (1995). Ionic mecha nisms of
neuronal excitation by inhibitory gabaa receptors. Science 269, 977. doi:
10.1126/science.7638623
Sudhof, T. C. (2004). The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 509. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412
Sun, J., Pang, Z. P., Qin, D., Fahim, A. T., Adachi, R., and Südh of, T. C. (2007).
A dual-ca2+-sensor model for neurotransmitter release in a central s ynapse.
Nature 450, 676–682. doi: 10.1038/nature06308
Tsodyks, M., and Wu, S. (2013). Short-term synaptic plasticity. Scholarpedia
8:3153. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.3153
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153


--- Page 15 ---
Wang et al. A Phenomenological Synapse Model
Wen, H., Linhoﬀ, M. W., McGinley, M. J., Li, G.-L., Corson, G. M. , Mandel, G.,
et al. (2010). Distinct roles for two synaptotagmin isoforms in synchronous and
asynchronous transmitter release at zebraﬁsh neuromuscular junctio n. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 13906–13911. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1008598107
Xu, J., Pang, Z. P., Shin, O.-H., and Südhof, T. C. (2009). Synapt otagmin-1
functions as a ca2+ sensor for spontaneous release. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 759–766.
doi: 10.1038/nn.2320
Zengel, J. E., and Magleby, K. L. (1977). Transmitter release during repetitive
stimulation: selective changes produced by sr2+ and ba2+. Science 197, 67–69.
doi: 10.1126/science.17160
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Wang, Y in, Zou, Shu, Rasch and Wu. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic prac tice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with thes e terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 153
