--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 19 January 2016
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00155
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersin .org 1 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155
Edited by:
Yoram Burak,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Reviewed by:
Gianluigi Mongillo,
Paris Descartes University, France
Malte J. Rasch,
Beijing Normal University, China
*Correspondence:
Fariba Shariﬁan
fariba@neuro.hut.ﬁ
Received: 03 August 2015
Accepted: 22 December 2015
Published: 19 January 2016
Citation:
Shariﬁan F , Heikkinen H, Vigário R and
Vanni S (2016) Contextual Modulation
is Related to Efﬁciency in a Spiking
Network Model of Visual Cortex.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 9:155.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.00155
Contextual Modulation is Related to
Efﬁciency in a Spiking Network
Model of Visual Cortex
Fariba Shariﬁan 1, 2, 3*, Hanna Heikkinen 1, 2, Ricardo Vigário 4, 5 and Simo Vanni 3
1 Brain Research Unit, Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, 2 Aalto
Neuroimaging, AMI Centre, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, 3 Clinical Neurosciences, Neurology, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland,
5 Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, University Nova of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
In the visual cortex, stimuli outside the classical receptive ﬁeld (CRF) modulate the
neural ﬁring rate, without driving the neuron by themselves. In the primary visual cortex
(V1), such contextual modulation can be parametrized with an area summation function
(ASF): increasing stimulus size causes ﬁrst an increase and then a decrease of ﬁring
rate before reaching an asymptote. Earlier work has reported increase of sparseness
when CRF stimulation is extended to its surroundings. However, there has been no
clear connection between the ASF and network efﬁciency. Here we aimed to investigate
possible link between ASF and network efﬁciency. In this study, we simulated the
responses of a biomimetic spiking neural network model of the visual cortex to a set
of natural images. We varied the network parameters, and compared the V1 excitatory
neuron spike responses to the corresponding responses predicted from earlier single
neuron data from primate visual cortex. The network efﬁciency was quantiﬁed with ﬁring
rate (which has direct association to neural energy consumption), entropy per spike
and population sparseness. All three measures together provided a clear association
between the network efﬁciency and the ASF . The association was clear when varying the
horizontal connectivity within V1, which inﬂuenced both the efﬁciency and the distance to
ASF , DAS. Given the limitations of our biophysical model, this association is qualitative,
but nevertheless suggests that an ASF-like receptive ﬁeld structure can cause efﬁcient
population response.
Keywords: spiking network model, simulation, V1, inhibition, excitation, area summation, efﬁciency
INTRODUCTION
Contextual stimuli outside the classical receptive ﬁeld (CRF) modulate the responses of visually
responsive cortical neurons ( Maﬀei and Fiorentini, 1976; Knierim and van Essen, 1992; Levit t and
Lund, 1997; Sceniak et al., 1999; Li et al., 2000; Felsen et al., 2005 ). In the primary visual cortex
(V1), contextual modulation has been studied by systematically changing the size of a circular
grating stimulus centered in the cells’ receptive ﬁelds ( Sceniak et al., 1999; Angelucci et al., 2002;
Cavanaugh et al., 2002 ). The typical response curve, the area summation function (ASF ), starts
with a sharp increase in neural ﬁring rate, as a function of increasing stimulus diameter ( Figure 1).
When the stimulus diameter exceeds a certain size, called summation ﬁeld, the response begins to
drop, eventually reaching an asymptote. However, although widely reported, it is still not clear why


--- Page 2 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
FIGURE 1 | Area summation function. The function shows the summation
ﬁeld size, surround ﬁeld size, and suppression strength, for a V1 neuron whose
receptive ﬁeld center is located at 14 ◦ eccentricity. The three parameters come
from linear regression of monkey V1 data ( Figure 3).
such non-linear area summation is useful for biological visu al
signal processing. In particular, we studied whether the non-
linear ASF can be related to an improvement in energy
consumption and coding eﬃciency within the visual system.
There is no standard deﬁnition of coding eﬃciency, although
it usually requires a speciﬁc goal of optimization in presence
of a constraint. In a neural network, one deﬁnition of coding
eﬃciency can be the information that is transmitted (as the g oal)
with one unit of energy (as the constraint). An early theoreti cal
study suggested that reduction of redundancy in correlated
neural activation patterns will improve coding eﬃciency (
Barlow,
1961). Later, experimental (Baddeley et al., 1997 ) and theoretical
(Olshausen and Field, 1996 ) work showed that a sparse code is
expected to emerge as a result of coding eﬃciency. Sparse code
in a network is the case where a fraction of neurons encode the
signal, while the rest remain relatively silent.
Several studies have associated contextual modulation with
eﬃcient coding. In particular,
Vinje and Gallant (2000) showed
that stimulation outside the CRF increases population sparseness
and decorrelates neural responses in the V1 of macaque monkeys.
They suggested that inputs from the classical and outside CRF s
together contribute to the formation of a metabolically eﬃc ient
sparse code.
Schwartz and Simoncelli (2001) suggested that
the visual system can use knowledge about image statistics
surrounding the CRF , to reduce dependencies between single
cells and thus increase eﬃciency. In addition, in previous st udies
we suggested indirectly that contextual modulation increas es
eﬃciency of the population responses (
Shariﬁan et al., 2013 ), as
measured with fMRI. However, earlier work has not attempted
to link the ASF directly to coding eﬃciency. Because ASF is a
prominent and common receptive ﬁeld property in the visual
cortex, such a link would emphasize that coding eﬃciency may
be a primary evolutionary driver for contextual modulation.
Hence, we hypothesized that the ASF , which is an expression
FIGURE 2 | Flowchart of the data analysis, showing how the
biomimetic simulations (on the left), and area summation target
patterns (on the right) are generated from the natural images.
of contextual modulation at single cell level, might be direct ly
associated with coding eﬃciency in visually responsive neur ons
(V anni, 2012).
Cavanaugh et al. (2002) provided quantitative data from
macaque cortex, as well as a mathematical description of
the ASF. The ASF function, together with a biophysically
meaningful (biomimetic) 2D spiking neural network simulato r
of the primary visual cortex (
Heikkinen et al., 2015 ) gave us
the opportunity to study quantitatively the relation between the
ASF and the network eﬃciency of a model visual cortex. The
biomimetic neural network simulator provides a powerful tool
to explore the mechanisms which help the brain (population
of neurons) to work more eﬃciently. We wanted to investigate
if area summation is one of these mechanisms or not. Unlike
abstract mathematical models, such biomimetic model approach
supports acting much closer to biological reality and thus bet ter
explains how an eﬃcient code might emerge in biological
network. In short, we aimed to answer two questions: (i) when
simulated neural activation becomes close to biological ASF ,
does eﬃciency increase? (ii) If yes, can we ﬁnd parameters
of the model which aﬀect this eﬃciency? We simulated the
response of the model network to natural images, while varying
network parameters, in order to obtain outputs with varying
degree of conformation with the biological reality. The net work
output was then compared to the predicted spike output
in the visual cortex, calculated from existing ASF data of
primate V1 neurons. Figure 2 shows the ﬂowchart of the data
analysis. We show here that the non-linear ASF is strongly
associated with a decrease of metabolic cost of neural signal
processing, as well as with an increase of entropy per spike and
sparseness.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 3 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
METHODS
Experimental Area Summation Data
Target data for our model simulations was derived from the
single cell receptive ﬁeld responses from
Cavanaugh et al.
(2002), provided by James Cavanaugh, Wyeth Bair, and Anthony
Movshon. In their study, data were collected from simple and
complex cells in the primary visual cortex of adult Cynomolgus
monkeys and pig-tailed macaques. The neurons were stimulate d
with variable contrast sinusoidal gratings, presented on a g ray
background. From the 352 neurons in V1, 87% showed at least
ﬁve spikes per second and clear CRF boundaries. Those were
analyzed further. The neurons’ receptive ﬁelds were centered at
eccentricities between 0 and 30 ◦. For each single neuron in a
speciﬁc eccentricity (i) summation ﬁeld, (ii) surround diam eter,
and (iii) suppression levels were recorded. Figure 1 illustrates the
prototypical ASF response curve of a neuron whose receptive
ﬁeld center is located at 14 ◦ eccentricity. The ASF gives the
neuron’s response as a function of circular grating patch size .
They modeled the neural response R(x) as a function of stimulus
contrast and size with a relation of two Gaussian functions,
Equation (1).
R(x) = kcLc(x)
1 + ksLs(x)
Lc(x) =
( 2√ π
∫ x
0
e− (y/′wc)2
dy
) 2
(1)
Ls(x) =
( 2√ π
∫ x
0
e− (y/′ws)2
dy
) 2
In this ASF , x is the diameter of circular stimulus and [ kc,
ks] and [ wc, ws] are the gain and spatial extents of the center
and surround components’ coeﬃcients, respectively. The gain
coeﬃcients ( kc and ks) are dependent on the stimulus overall
contrast (
Cavanaugh et al., 2002 ). However, we assumed ﬁxed kc
and ks in our natural image stimuli. TheLc and Ls are the summed
squared activations of the center and surround mechanisms,
respectively.
This model describes neural response to a grating stimulus, a s
a relation between excitatory and inhibitory Gaussian func tions.
The parameters for the Gaussian functions were estimated fro m
the ASF data of the monkey cells (
Cavanaugh et al., 2002 ).
The ASF data comprised three parameters: summation ﬁeld
size, surround ﬁeld size, and suppression strength ( Figures 1,
3). As an approximation, linear regression was used to model
each parameter as a function of eccentricity. The values for
kc, ks, wc, and ws, Equation (1), were obtained from this data
for each neuron, with a Nelder-Mead simplex optimization
algorithm (
Lagarias et al., 1998 ). Once the model parameters
were ﬁxed, we got estimations of R(x) for each neuron in
the primary visual cortex. The response was dependent on the
eccentricity of the neural receptive ﬁeld center in the visua l
ﬁeld.
FIGURE 3 | Measured values from Cavanaugh et al. (2002) , for
summation ﬁeld (A), surround diameter (B), and suppression lev el (C)
as a function of eccentricity. The solid lines show corresponding linear ﬁts
to the data points.
Theoretical Visual Neural Network
Response Based on Area Summation Data
The area summation response [ R(x), see Equation (1) and
Figure 1] of the V1 neurons was next used to estimate the
expected neural responses to a series of 20 grayscale natural
images from the image set of
van Hateren and van der Schaaf
(1998).
The ASF R(x) is determined from the neural response to
circular grating stimuli of varying sizes, and is expected to predict
how elements from various distances from the receptive ﬁeld
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 4 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
center contribute to the neural response. In typical experimen tal
setup with monkeys, grating parameters (position, orientati on,
spatial frequency) are ﬁrst optimized for each cell, when the
ASF is experimentally determined. Thus, to convert this cell -
speciﬁc function for general gray scale images ( Figure 4A), we
need to ﬁrst convert the gray-scale images to contrast energ y
representations ( Figure 4B). Then we apply the ASF ﬁlter to
get the expected spatial distribution of the V1 response for a
speciﬁc stimulus, i.e., the “target.” Such contrast energy i mage
provides the spatial structure of contrast energy, with broad-band
sensitivity to both orientation and spatial frequency conte nt.
Please note that this contrast energy image is comparable to
the retina output for a speciﬁc stimulus and is not directly
comparable with overall contrast of a grayscale image. The
contrast energy was calculated by ﬁltering the natural gray -scale
images with ﬁve diﬀerent Gabor ﬁlter frequencies 1, 2, 4, 8, an d
FIGURE 4 | The stimuli, predicted and simulated neural activat ion patterns. (A) The selected area of an example natural image illustrates th e projection of the
image to the Gabor ﬁlter and ASF calculations of the left visua l ﬁeld. Small dots in the pink square show the cortical density of cells in the visual ﬁeld. The density of
cells in each eccentricity follows the human cortical magni ﬁcation factor. (B) The contrast energy image from the same natural image as in (A), built as the output of a
series of Gabor ﬁlters. These contrast images are the input fo r estimating the target area summation patters. (C) The area summation target activation pattern,
corresponding to the same natural image as in (A). The color code of the activation pattern borders illustrat es the projection of the image from the visual ﬁeld to the
model cortex, with the color code as in (A). (D) Simulated output pattern for the image in (A). (E) The normalized strength as a function of the spatial frequen cy
contents for the natural images in Low and Mixed frequencies groups. Error bars represent the standard error of mean. (F) The output of the retina ﬁlter to the natural
image in (A), which served as an input to the spiking neural network simul ations.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 5 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
16 cycles per 5 ◦ ﬁeld of view ( Kay et al., 2008 ), which capture
the maximum contrast sensitivity for human vision ( Hess, 2004).
Here we assumed that 82 pixels cover 5 ◦ of the visual ﬁeld. Each
frequency comprised eight orientations with 0 ◦ and 90 ◦ oﬀset
phases, thus we had all together 5∗8∗2 = 80 diﬀerent ﬁlters. After
applying all these ﬁlters to each pixel in a natural image, we
summed the normalized values of the ﬁltered images, and used
this contrast image as the input to the ASF , deﬁned in Equation
(1). The result can be seen in Figure 4B.
Next, we derived the general response function f (u,v), as a
distance-dependent weighing function of the contrast respon se
for a pixel at location ( u,v), at distance r from the model neuron
receptive ﬁeld center, according to:
f (u, v) = R′(2r)/
πr
r2 = u2 + v2
R′(x) = kcL′
c(x)(1 + ksLs(x)) − ksL′
s(x)kcLc(x)
(1 + ksLs(x))2 (2)
L′
c(x) = 8
π e− (x/wc)2
∫ x
0
e− (y/wc)2
dy
L′
s(x) = 8
π e− (x/ws)2
∫ x
0
e− (y/ws)2
dy
With homogeneous distribution of pixels in the visual ﬁeld,f (u,v)
can be derived from R(x) in Equation (1). Lines 3, 4, and 5 of the
Equation (2) calculate this derivative.
To obtain the relative contribution from each visual ﬁeld
location to a model V1 neuron’s response, the derivative of
the ASF response, f (u,v), was calculated for each location ( u,v),
with respect to its distance from the receptive ﬁeld center
of the cell. These diﬀerential weighting functions were then
multiplied with the image contrast energy, separately for eac h
point ( u,v) around the model cells, and thus obtained response
contributions, which were then summed over a 7 ◦ diameter
area surrounding the receptive ﬁeld center of each neuron. Th is
area is clearly enough to reach the asymptote of the individua l
neuron’s response ( Figure 3). Repeating this for each model
neuron, we obtained the target neural activation pattern of t he
primary visual cortex to each natural image ( Figure 4C). These
target activation patterns were then compared with the model
simulation outputs ( Figure 4D). The expected area summation
pattern was an approximation because the variability in single cell
parameters (Figure 3) was not included into the ASF model.
To control how the amount of suppression and size of the
summation ﬁeld is related to the network eﬃciency, we generated
two artiﬁcial ASFs, in addition to the natural ASF. One with a
larger summation ﬁeld and no suppression [by multiplying kc
and ks at Equation (1) by factors of 4 and 0.25, respectively],
and the other one with a smaller summation ﬁeld and stronger
suppression [by multiplying kc and ks at Equation (1) by factors
of 0.25 and 4, respectively] compared to natural ASF.
The gray-scale natural images contained highly varying
features. For a simple check on how diﬀerent properties of input
stimuli might aﬀect our results, we divided the input stimuli i nto
two groups, based on the distribution of their spatial frequen cies.
We used the same Gabor ﬁlter frequencies as in the image
preprocessing ( Figure 4B, with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 cycles over
5◦ of visual ﬁeld). Thus, each natural image was characterized
with a 5 bin histogram of frequency values. The 20 gray-scale
natural images where then assigned into two groups based on
the frequency histograms, using k-means clustering approach.
The low frequency group contained 10 gray-scale images, wit h
predominantly low spatial frequencies, and the 10 images in th e
mixed frequencies group had closer to equal portions of high and
low spatial frequencies (Figure 4E).
Input to the Biomimetic Visual Cortex
Model
The natural image input to the spiking network model of the
visual cortex was ﬁrst ﬁltered through a retina model (Figure 4F).
The retina model consisted of midget on- and oﬀ-cells, which
both covered the left visual ﬁeld from 0.5 to 27 ◦ eccentricities.
Each midget cell center covered a region spatially resembling
a segment of an arc, and together these segments covered the
sampled visual ﬁeld with no space gaps, separately for the on-
and the oﬀ cells. The midget on-cells’ receptive ﬁeld centers were
about 30% larger in diameter than those of the oﬀ-cells, and
their number correspondingly smaller. The ﬁlter density followed
the midget cell density in human retina (
Dacey, 1993 ). As an
approximation, each millimeter of retina covered 3.8 ◦ of visual
ﬁeld. This proportion was equal at all eccentricities. The reti na
model contained 83,934 on-type cells, with density dropping as a
function of eccentricity. In an additional control simulat ion, we
used a lower density of midget cells, corresponding to 1/5 relation
of that in human retina. Correspondingly, the receptive ﬁeld s ize
was larger than in humans. This ﬁlter included 3331 on-type cells.
Oﬀ-type cells were included in the retina model but were not
used because there was no speciﬁcity of connections in the cortex
model. Thus, the on and oﬀ-cells would have mutually canceled
the net signal from retina.
The shift of midget cell inner segment positions in relation
to their soma-part were compensated for the innermost 3 mm
close to the fovea (
Dacey, 1993 ). When projecting pixel images
to the model retina, images were ﬁrst ﬁtted to the model visua l
ﬁeld, and then resampled to a grid with 161,900 units per mm 2,
corresponding to the highest photoreceptor density of human
retina at the fovea (
Curcio et al., 1987). Next, the gray scale values
(a proxy for retinal luminous ﬂux) of the resampled grid units
landing inside the midget receptive ﬁeld centers were linear ly
summed. The center inputs were contrasted with the input from
the 8-neighborhood of receptive ﬁeld centers, each multiplied
with value − 1/8. The resulting center-surround receptive ﬁeld
inputs were ﬁrst normalized and then transformed to relative
ganglion cell ﬁring rates with a logistic function (range fr om 0
to 1). Finally these relative ﬁring rates in the retina were s patially
transformed to V1 (
Schwartz, 1994) using human magniﬁcation
factor ( Duncan and Boynton, 2003 ), and transformed to actual
model input ﬁring rates.
Biomimetic Spiking Network Simulation
We used a recursive network of exponential integrate-and-
ﬁre (EIF) neurons (
Naud et al., 2008 ), to simulate the V1
population response to the gray scale natural images. The
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 6 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
network was originally implemented for studying the spatial
properties of neural activation and functional imaging signa ls
on the primary visual cortex and has been described detail in
Heikkinen et al. (2015) . The model neurons comprised either six
compartments (V1 excitatory cells) or a single-compartment (a ll
other cells). The compartmental neurons implemented passive
dendritic properties (
Rall, 1962) of pyramidal neurons, adjusted
to match more recent data on the decaying excitatory post-
synaptic potential eﬃciency as a function of distance from
cell soma (
Williams and Stuart, 2002 ). Our previous study
(Heikkinen et al., 2015 ) suggested that anisotropic landing of
inputs from diﬀerent origins to apical dendritic tree could
underlie some of their distinct functional roles, such as th e
contextual modulation by visual features outside the CRF. In
a set of control simulations we used the pointwise model for
all neurons. The neurons received both excitatory (AMPA) and
inhibitory (GABA type A) conductance. The membrane potential
of the single compartment neurons and the somata of the
compartmental neurons followed the EIF equation.
The simulations were run for 500 ms, with 200 ms of
baseline followed by 300 ms of stationary image input. The
network’s output to each stimulus was evaluated as the mean
spike count of each neuron between 200 and 500 ms, and
the preceding 200 ms baseline was excluded from further
analysis. The simulations were implemented in Brian 1.5
simulation environment (
Goodman and Brette, 2008 ), and
computations were conducted at the Finnish IT Center for
Scientiﬁc Computation (CSC) Taito super cluster with maximum
448 number of parallel cores and 4GB of memory usage per core.
The network consisted of ﬁve diﬀerent groups of neurons,
in three hierarchical levels ( Figure 5): Group 1: The input
layer at the bottom of the hierarchy (226,206 neurons; 9014
neurons for the control simulations with low number of cells
in retina), Group 2: excitatory pyramidal cells at the V1 (42, 849
neurons), Group 3: inhibitory fast-spiking basket-like cel ls at the
V1 (10,713 neurons), Group 4: excitatory extrastriate neur ons
(10,713 neurons), and Group 5: inhibitory extrastriate neu rons
(10,713 neurons). The neurons in Group 1, Group 2–3, and
Group 4–5 belong to the input, primary visual cortex and higher-
tier visual cortex, hierarchical level respectively. The inpu t from
LGN had a Poisson distribution with probability proportional t o
stimulus strength at each spatial location, and for all otherneuron
groups (V1 excitatory, V1 inhibitory, extrastriate excitat ory,
and extrastriate inhibitory) the spatial synaptic connectio ns
between two neural groups were stochastically generated. Th e
connection probability was ﬁrst determined with sparseness-
parameter. Next the probability was decayed either with Gaussian
function or exponentially as a function of the distance betwe en
the pre- and postsynaptic cells (
Heikkinen et al., 2015 ). In short,
the feedforward connections from lateral geniculate nucleu s
to excitatory V1 cells (LGN → EV1) were determined with
Gaussian distribution with sigma of 0.23 mm along the cortic al
surface. The lateral connections (E V1 → EV1, EV1 → IV1, IV1 →
EV1) were determined with exponential function with lambda
of 1 mm, whereas the feedforward and feedback connections
(EV1 → EX, E X → IX, I X → EX, E X → EV1, E X → IV1) were
determined with exponential function with lambda of 3.3 mm.
FIGURE 5 | A schematic view of the spiking network layers and
connections.
Above, V1 subscript denotes the primary visual cortex, X denotes
the extrastriate area of the model, and E and I the excitatory and
inhibitory model neurons, respectively.
In the biomimetic network, we ﬁrst set an initial value of
each parameter according to literature when available, and t hen
adjusted a subset of parameters for reasonable dynamic range
(see
Heikkinen et al., 2015 , for the motivation and details). Next,
two parameter pairs which seemed to aﬀect the results most were
varied independently while other parameters were ﬁxed. The
changing parameters were (i) the number of connections between
the V1 and extrastriate cortex excitatory cells (E V1 → EX, EX →
EV1, and E X → IV1) and (ii) the number of lateral connections
in V1 between excitatory and inhibitory cells (E V1 → IV1,
IV1 → EV1). These variations in the number of connections were
controlled by changing a scaling factor,β, in range of 0.17-4.20 for
connections probability between the V1 and extrastriate cor tex
and 0.1-2.45 for connection probability between V1 excitato ry
and V1 inhibitory cells. The scaling factor β was changed in
logarithmic scale. Each pair comprised a ﬁxed ratio of bi-
directional connections parameters which scaled together. The
ratios within a group were chosen to produce almost equal
number of feedforward and feedback connections and strengt h
of EX → IV1 was tied to E X → EV1 in order to assign 10% of the
feedback to the inhibitory neurons.
The biomimetic network model was stimulated with the 20
grayscale images, ﬁltered through the retina model. For each
image, the simulations were repeated for 625 times, over whic h
the number of connections in the network were varied to produce
outputs with variable levels of biological realism. The choi ce
of network connections followed the network optimization
procedure of our previous study (
Heikkinen et al., 2015 ), where
the network output was matched to conform to both single cell
electrophysiology and functional magnetic resonance imagi ng
data, by ﬁnding a suitable set of inhibitory and feedback
connections. Thus, the simulations yielded a total of 20 ∗ 625 =
12,500 simulated response patterns that served as data points i n
evaluating the network eﬃciencgy.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 7 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
Figure 6A shows the response of a model cell located at 14 ◦
eccentricity to a circular patch stimulus. The two samples of th e
parameter combinations are associated with either high (sol id
blue curve) or low (solid red curve) eﬃciency. The response is
averaged across 15 neighboring cells in order to avoid emerg ing
noise to a single neuron response from stochastic nature of inputs
and neural connections. For the high eﬃciency network, this
function is similar to the ASF , although the summation ﬁeld si ze
is smaller than in the target ASF curve (dashed curve, simila r to
Figure 1). In contrast, the average responses of cells in the low-
eﬃciency network do not show any clear summation peak or
suppression.
Comparison Between the T arget Activation
and Model Simulation Output
For each gray scale image, the simulated response pattern was
compared to the corresponding area summation target pattern,
and the comparison was repeated for all network parameter
combinations. To reduce border eﬀects, we excluded from the
analysis those neurons whose receptive ﬁeld centers were withi n
0.5◦ from the edge of the visual ﬁeld.
To compare a simulated spiking network model response
to the corresponding target pattern predicted from the neural
area summation data, we ﬁrst normalized both response pattern s
between 0 and 1, by ﬁrst subtracting the minimum value from
FIGURE 6 | Simulation result compared to natural ASF . (A) Examples of the spiking network response associated with hi gh (solid blue curve) and low (solid red
curve) efﬁciency measures to an increasing stimulus patch si ze, for a representative model neuron located at 14 ◦ eccentricity. Response is averaged across 15
neighboring cells. The high-efﬁciency response is similar t o ASF target at the same eccentricity (dashed curve) but with smaller summation ﬁeld size. (B) Normalized
mean distance to ASF (DAS), number of spikes, entropy per spi ke, and sparseness across all 20 natural images as a function of the number of V1 lateral
excitatory-inhibitory and V1-extrastriate feedforward- feedback connections.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 8 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
each response and then dividing it by the maximum value. The
normalization was done on each network parameter combination
and stimulus image separately. We then calculated the diﬀeren ce
(absolute distance) of the simulated and target responses (m ean
normalized action potential frequency) for each neuron, and
summed these distances across all neurons into a single measu re
Distance to Area Summation (DAS):
DAS =
n∑
i= 1
|Si − Ti| (3)
where n is number of neurons in the activation patterns and S, T
are simulated and target response, respectively.
The output of the spiking network model for each stimulus
image and parameter combination was evaluated with three
diﬀerent eﬃciency metrics. Our ﬁrst measure of eﬃciency
was the energy consumption related to processing one image.
Attwell and Laughlin (2001) calculated energy usage based on
dephosphorylation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules
as follows: 3.4 × 108 ATPs / s are used on average to maintain
the resting potential of a neuron. In addition, 1 × 108 ATPs /
s are used to maintain the resting potential of associated gli al
cells. A total of > 10 × 108 ATPs / spike are required for ﬁring
a spike, and the associated recycling of glutamate, as well as
pre- and postsynaptic housekeeping actions. Their study suggests
approximately a linear link (plus a baseline) between the total
number of spikes in a simulated response pattern and the energy
consumption of the neuron, and thus the overall spike count was
selected as a simple proxy for the relative energy consumption o f
the network.
Our second measure of eﬃciency is the entropy per spike,
which describes the energy eﬃciency of the activation patter ns.
Importantly, this corresponds to the entropy over the spatial
pattern of the mean spike count (for all the 40k + cells in the
model V1) and not to the entropy, over time, of single cell spike
trains. To calculate the entropy per spike, spike counts of the V1
excitatory cells were ﬁrst normalized by dividing by the max imal
spike count. Next, we calculated the probability distributio n (q)
of relative spike outputs from a histogram with 256 bins.
ES = E/
Ns
E = − sum(q log2 q) (4)
where E, ES and Ns are entropy, entropy per spike and total
number of spikes, respectively. We could then calculate the
entropy based on the q-values, Equation (4).
Our third measure of eﬃciency is the neural population
sparseness (
Vinje and Gallant, 2000 ), which reﬂects coding
eﬃciency of the activation patterns. The population sparseness
of a simulated response pattern was calculated as:
Sp =





1 −



( N∑
n= 1
( yn/N
) ) 2
N∑
n= 1
(
yn
) 2/
N








/
[
1 − 1
N
]
(5)
where y n is the mean ﬁring rate of neuron number n among N
neurons and Sp is population sparseness. In Equation (5) smaller
values indicate lower level of sparseness and larger values indicate
higher level of sparseness.
RESUL TS
We simulated the neural responses of V1 in a biomimetic
recurrent spiking network model, to study the relation betwe en
the non-linear area summation properties of primate V1 neurons
and eﬃciency of the neural activity at the population level. Th e
network was stimulated with gray-scale images of natural sc enes
and the parameters of the network connectivity were varied
to produce outputs with varying level of biological realism. I n
each simulation output, the spike counts of the cells varied in
average (across diﬀerent images and parameters combinations)
between 11 ± 27 (mean and standard deviation of minimum
spike counts over 300 ms of stimulation, across all natural images
and parameter combinations) to 81 ± 18 (mean and standard
deviation of maximum spike counts) with average of 42 ± 34.
These values are at the high end of V1 ﬁring rates in typical
experimental paradigms (
Reich et al., 2001; Y an et al., 2014 ).
Such high rates were necessary, because in vivo there are much
larger number of synapses than in our model, and thus in our
model we need higher ﬁring rates than in vivo to have enough
input to neurons to keep them in dynamic range. However, we
normalized the spike counts of each simulation output between 0
and 1, to be able to compare them with the corresponding target
created from ASF. For each parameter set and image, the spike
response of the network was evaluated for three measures whic h
together quantify the network eﬃciency: (1). total spike cou nt
provided an estimate for the energy consumption of the whole
system, (2). entropy per spike served as a measure of the potential
information content of the spike output, and (3). population
sparseness, typical to cortical networks, reﬂects coding eﬃc iency
in two ways. The mean ﬁring rate in a sparse code is lower than in
a dense code, saving energy. Moreover, a sparse code decorrelates
the neural output and thus reduces redundancy in the population
response. Sparse codes are therefore able to carry informatio nal
aspects of the input with relatively fewer spikes. These eﬃcien cy
measures were analyzed against diﬀerence between simulated
and predicted (ASF-like) 2D spike response patterns in the
V1 cortex. A low diﬀerence between spike response patterns
from simulation and prediction based on ASF indicate a high
association to ASF.
Figure 6B shows the Distance to Area Summation DAS target
and the eﬃciency measures (number of spikes, entropy per spike,
and sparseness) as a function of the varied parameter space.
The two-dimensions of the parameter space were the number of
feedforward-feedback connections between V1 and extrastr iate
cortex (E V1 → EX, E X → EV1, and E X → IV1, see Section
Biomimetic Spiking Network Simulation for neural group
deﬁnitions) and the number of lateral V1 connections (E V1 →
IV1 and IV1 → EV1). The connections between the excitatory cells
within V1 (EV1 → EV1) were earlier found to have no explanatory
power to model BOLD and spiking responses. Our results show
that the lateral connections between V1 excitatory and inhibitory
cells have clearly stronger eﬀect on ASF-association compared
to extrastriate feedforward-feedback connections. If the l ateral
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 9 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
connections are very silent (normalized value 0 in Figure 6
horizontal axis), distance to ASF is largest. Eﬃciency incr eases
with increasing strength of lateral connections. However, the
distance to DAS peaks before reaching the maximum value of
lateral connections.
Figure 7 shows the eﬃciency metrics, as a function of DAS
(as a measure of DAS target, see Section Methods), for all imag es
and simulation parameters. In each panel, there are 20 stripe-l ike
sets of dots, which represent the 20 distinct natural images ( color
coded in the left panel). The distinct dots for each stripe represent
the parameter variations of the biomimetic model.
The total number of spikes counted from V1 excitatory
neurons had a positive link (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient =
0.88, p < 0.01) to DAS ( Figure 7A, left column). Thus, with
biological neurons our network model would have used less
energy, when the spatial pattern of V1 ﬁring rates was close to
the area summation target.
Our second measure of eﬃciency, entropy per spike, measures
the number of diﬀerent possible states in the ﬁring rate code,
and thus how much information can be coded into the spike
train. The highest eﬃciency emerges when the full range of ﬁr ing
rates is associated with a small mean ﬁring rate. Figure 7B (left
column) shows the relationship between entropy per spike of
the simulated response patterns and DAS. Our results show a
signiﬁcant relationship (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.59,
p < 0.01) between entropy per spike and DAS. Eﬃciency is high
close to target pattern (low DAS), as the highest entropy per spike
values coincide with small DAS.
Figure 7C (left column) shows the results for our third
eﬃciency measure, neural population sparseness in relation to
DAS. The high population sparseness is associated with the most
similar output patterns to the area summation target (Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.56, p < 0.01).
All the aforementioned measures together show that eﬃciency
of the simulated response patterns is correlated with the
natural spatial structure of the receptive ﬁeld. There is a
clear tendency for parameter combinations producing ASF-type
response patterns to be most eﬃcient, although the relation wa s
generally nonlinear and varied between images.
To see how much of the variations between the natural
images could be explained by spatial frequencies, we divided
the input stimuli in two groups, comprising of images with
large proportion of low frequencies and images with a more
even distribution of spatial frequencies ( Figure 4E). The middle
column of Figure 7 is exactly the same as the left column but
color coded with either black (for low frequencies) or blue
color (for mixed frequencies), for diﬀerent groups of natural
images. The relationship between total number of spikes and
DAS is signiﬁcantly stronger for the low spatial frequencies
group (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient = 0.96, compared to
0.81; Wilcoxon rank sum test, p < 0.01; here the diﬀerent
natural images are the samples of the Wilcoxon rank sum test).
Figure 7B (middle column) shows that the low spatial frequency
images have a stronger association between entropy per spike
and DAS than the mixed frequency images (Pearson correlatio n
coeﬃcient = − 0.71, compared to − 0.46; p < 0.01). Moreover,
the neural population sparseness is also more strongly linked t o
DAS in the lower than in the mixed frequency group (Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.67, compared to − 0.44; p < 0.01).
The input drive (sum of input spike rate) to the simulator from
the images in low frequency group was not signiﬁcantly diﬀere nt
(Friedman, p = 0.06) compared to mixed frequency group.
These results show that the target ASF in our simulations is
associated more strongly with eﬃcient representation for th e
images containing primarily low frequency information.
In Figure 7A right column, the activation patterns which have
very high or very low number of spikes (15% from top and
bottom of the dynamic range of the total number of spikes;
blue and yellow data points respectively) are color-coded so th at
the mid-range data can be inspected separately. In this way,
we aimed to avoid the parameter combinations that lead to
saturated or low-responding activation patterns. Excluding t hese
extreme activation patterns from the analysis, the relation ship
between the total number of spikes and DAS remained similar
to the full data (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient over diﬀeren t
images = 0.87, compared to 0.88; Wilcoxon rank sum test, p <
0.05). However, the black data points show a stronger association
between entropy per spike and DAS ( Figure 7B, correlation
coeﬃcient = − 0.76, compared to − 0.59; p < 0.001). For the
neural population sparseness, the middle part of ﬁring rates
dynamic rang showed a reversed link to DAS (black data points
in Figure 7C, correlation coeﬃcient = 0.49 compared to − 0.56;
p < 0.001 for the diﬀerence). These results show that for the
ﬁring rate and entropy per spike association between ASF and
eﬃciency was best when ﬁring rates are not saturated or very low.
We did two sets of control simulations. In the ﬁrst set, we
checked the eﬀect of retina resolution on the simulations res ults.
The density of midget cells was decreased to 1/5 of the origin al
(see Section Methods). The decrease in density resulted in a
lower number of input ﬁlters, and correspondingly in spatially
larger ﬁlters, apparently shifting the ﬁlter sensitivity toward lower
spatial frequencies. The results show almost similar or slig htly
better link between DAS and the eﬃciency measures [ Figure 8,
all the correlation values which are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
original ones (Wilcoxon rank sum test with p < 0.05) at Figure 7
are marked with *] compared to full-resolution retina.
In the second set of control simulations, we checked the
eﬀect of compartmental neurons (excitatory pyramidal cells at
the model V1) on the simulations results. In this control, we
replaced the compartmental neurons with pointwise neurons (see
Section Methods). The results conﬁrm that the compartments
have a clear role in linking the area summation with the eﬃciency
of the network ( Figure 9, all the correlation values which are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the original ones (Wilcoxon rank sum
test with p < 0.05) at Figure 7 are marked with ∗).
Finally, we tested dependence of the relation between
eﬃciency of the network output and ASF , and the properties
of the ASF. We generated two artiﬁcial ASFs, to test how the
amount of suppression and size of the summation ﬁeld is related
to the network eﬃciency. If the natural ASF is optimal for natural
images processed by a biophysically meaningful network, we
should observe loss of eﬃciency when changing the function
form. Figure 10A shows the three function forms (the middle
column contains the natural ASF) and Figure 10B the V1 area
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 10 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
FIGURE 7 | The efﬁciency of the spiking network, as a function o f Distance to Area Summation (DAS). Left column: (A) The relationship between the total
number of spikes counted from V1 excitatory neurons (associ ated linearly with energy consumption) of simulated output patterns and similarity to estimated area
summation target patterns. The data points in this plot repr esent the simulator output for the 20 images, each using 625 p arameter combinations, with the data color
coding for different images. 0.5 ◦ from the border, for all the patterns, were removed to avoid i nstability in borders. r corresponds to the correlation coe fﬁcient. (B) The
relationship between entropy per spike of the simulated out put patterns and DAS, with the same simulation output data an d color coding as in (A). (C) The
relationship between neural population sparseness (0 is mi nimum and 1 is maximum sparseness) of simulated output patte rns and DAS, with the same simulation
output data and color coding as (A). The middle column is the same as left column, but color coded to illustrate the division of the stimulating images to two g roups,
based on their spatial frequency contents ( Figure 4E): black dots represent images with the low frequencies, and blue those with the mixed frequencies. Right column
follows also the structure as in the left column, but color co ded to indicate the data points excluded due to saturated or l ow-responding activation patterns (blue and
yellow respectively) and the remaining data points (black) .
summation target pattern for the sample image of Figure 4A,
estimated for each ASF. Figure 10C shows the entropy per spike
vs. DAS for the ASF in the corresponding column, with the
middle panel thus reproducing the data of Figure 7B. The results
show that, with the larger summation ﬁeld and no suppression,
the entropy per spike of the activation patterns is less relevant to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 11 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
FIGURE 8 | The efﬁciency measures for a set of control simulation s with a lower resolution of the retina ﬁlter. (A–C) The three efﬁciency measures as a
function of DAS, as in Figures 7A–C. The color coding in the columns is the same as in Figures 7A–C. The correlation values differing signiﬁcantly (Wilcoxon r ank
sum test with p < 0.05) from the original ones at Figure 7 are marked with *. (D) The low resolution retina function output for the Figure 2, comparable to Figure 4F.
(E) A sample of the corresponding simulated output pattern, com parable to Figure 4D. However, note that the color scale is different.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 12 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
FIGURE 9 | Efﬁciency measures for a set of control stimulations w ith pointwise (instead of compartmental in Figure 7) excitato ry pyramidal neurons in
the model V1. (A–C) The three efﬁciency measures as a function of DAS, as in Figures 7A–C. The color coding in the columns is the same as in Figures 7A–C. All
the correlation values which are signiﬁcantly (Wilcoxon ran k sum test with p < 0.05) different from the original ones at Figure 7 are marked with *. See Figure 7
legend for other details.
the similarity to predicted area summation pattern than with t he
natural ASF (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.39, compared
to − 0.59; Wilcoxon rank sum test, p < 0.001). However, the
smaller summation ﬁeld and stronger suppression showed almost
similar dependency between entropy per spike and DAS than
natural ASF (Pearson correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.58, compared
to − 0.59; p = 0.65).
DISCUSSION
We studied the relationship between the ASF and the eﬃciency
of neural population code, using a biomimetic simulation of
the visual cortex. Our results show that the ASF is associate d
with reduced energy consumption, better information carryi ng
capacity (as measured by the entropy per spike), and higher
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 13 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
FIGURE 10 | The area summation functions, the corresponding V1 o utput patterns and the entropy per spike measures for the natur al and two
artiﬁcial area summation functions. (A) The middle column shows the natural mean area summation func tion at 14 ◦ eccentricity (red color, the same as Figure 1)
and the left and right columns show the two artiﬁcially create d area summation functions at the same eccentricity (green a nd magenta colors). (B) The estimated area
summation target patterns for each area summation function for one a sample input natural image (the same image as in Figure 4A). Columns as in (A). (C)
Relationship between the entropy per spike and DAS (the same as Figure 7B) for each area summation functions. r corresponds to correl ation coefﬁcient.
population sparseness. The relation was typically nonlinear, b ut
consistently present. Consequently, we suggest that the nonlinear
and nonmonotonic area summation property of visual neurons
is related to energy eﬃciency in the visual system. The resul t
was further reﬁned in several control setups. Our simulator
seemed to work better with low spatial frequency input than
with the images containing both high and low frequencies
suggesting need to reﬁne the model in future studies. In addition,
excluding the parameter combinations which led to saturated
or low-responsive activation patterns improved the link betwe en
entropy per spike and ASF , suggesting that the association is best
at the dynamic range of ﬁring rates. Moreover, an artiﬁcial AS F
with a monotonically increasing summation function was mor e
poorly associated with the eﬃciency, compared to the natural
ASF of macaque monkeys. This indicates that the surround
suppression of the ASF is important for the eﬃciency.
Our ﬁndings are in line with biological data, such as a previous
contextual modulation study (
Vinje and Gallant, 2000 ), which
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 14 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
showed a link between stimulation outside the CRF and sparse
code representation of the visual input. Moreover,
Schwartz
and Simoncelli (2001) suggested that the visual system reduces
dependencies between single cells and thus increases eﬃciency by
means of the knowledge of image statistics surrounding the C RF.
Our results are also in line with an association between contextual
modulation and eﬃcient coding of the fMRI responses (Shariﬁan
et al., 2013).
In contrast to the experimental studies in vivo, the biomimetic
neural network simulation approach gives us a unique tool
to quantitatively characterize this eﬃciency. In particula r,
we found a clear association between horizontal inhibitory
connectivity and eﬃciency. This can be generalized to horizo ntal
connectivity including the excitatory to excitatoryconne ctions,
because their relative contribution increases when the exc itatory
to inhibitoryconnection strengths decrease. Interesting ly, the
minimal DAS is not at the most eﬃcient point but somewhat
oﬀset from this point. We assume that the lowest ﬁring rates (o n
average 13 Hz ﬁring rate for the last three columns of Figure 6B)
are too small to carry signiﬁcant information, and thus the A SF
in vivo is oﬀset from this end.
Recently,
Nurminen and Angelucci (2014) claimed that
horizontal connections have a speciﬁc role in network eﬃcien cy.
The horizontal connections carry information about the
orientation preference, and this information might be essen tial
to reduce the statistical redundancy in cortical representa tion
of spatially neighboring edges (
Geisler et al., 2001 ). In line
with this statistical dependency, the near surround is more
strongly orientation tuned than the far surround in both
human psychophysics and monkey single cells (
Shushruth et al.,
2013). Our model has no orientation preference and thus no
optimization target for coding images eﬃciently. In other wo rds,
we did not maximize the eﬃciency for the information content of
the images; instead we only compared the ASF spatial structure
and eﬃciency.
While the feedback strength did not have much eﬀect on
eﬃciency, the connectivity structure of the feedback did. We used
a compartmental neuron model for the V1 excitatory pyramidal
neurons.
Heikkinen et al. (2015) emphasized the role of passive
dendritic properties ( Rall, 1962 ) of pyramidal neurons for a
good simultaneous simulation of both spiking networks and
experimental fMRI data. In particular, the much smaller spread
of target ASF prediction in their study could not be reached wi th
concurrent much larger spread of the fMRI signals, without a
compartmental neuron model. We found a similar result with
eﬃciency. Compared to simulations with a soma-only model,
the model with compartmental neurons presented a stronger
association between ASF and the eﬃciency of the neural netwo rk
(Figure 9).
In summary, we suggest that the basic low-level connectivity
plan in visual cortex, resulting in ASF-like spatial receptive ﬁeld
structure, is related to the evolutionary pressure for codin g
eﬃciency. Our second eﬃciency measure (entropy per spike) is
a measure of energy eﬃciency, but not coding eﬃciency, becau se
it does not necessarily lead to better classiﬁcation of the activation
patterns according to their information content. A network
that is eﬃcient in energy consumption might have no useful
information in the network to classify images. In our model
network, the lack of information content is expected because in
our neural network the receptive ﬁelds have no structure, just
the position, and scatter. Future work will need to address th e
eﬀect of receptive ﬁeld structure (e.g., orientation preference) and
meaningful information carried by the network on the model
output distance to ASF.
Our model is a rough simpliﬁcation of the primate visual
system, and the reduction of complexity most likely modiﬁes
the results of this study. First of all we have a reduced numbe r
of units in our neural network model, compared to the primate
visual cortex, with our resolution corresponding to ∼ 0.1◦ at 5 ◦
eccentricity. This may directly impact the processing of the h igh-
frequency content of the images. Further, the model implemen ts
only one higher visual area and ignores corticothalamic feedback.
Second, our simulation of visual cortex lacks the layered
structure of the primate cerebral cortex. Instead, we model al l
neural activation with one layer, which most likely results i n
important omissions of parameters aﬀecting the results. Third,
we only have spatial position tuning in our model and no
orientation, speed, disparity, spatial frequency, ocular dominance
or wavelength tuning, as primate V1 cells do. One discrepancy
with primate cortex is apparent in Figure 6A (solid blue curve).
Whereas, the general ASF form (dashed curve, monkey data)
could be reached with the biomimetic model simulation, the
size of the summation ﬁeld was on average smaller than in
monkeys (as exempliﬁed in Figure 1) at this eccentricity. Other
example cells at diﬀerent eccentricities showed similarly to o
small summation ﬁeld sizes. Mammal cerebral cortex hosts
several types of inhibitory neurons with distinct anatomical and
physiological characteristics (
Ascoli et al., 2008 ). Discrepancy in
the summation ﬁeld size can easily emerge from omission of thi s
diversity, and remains a challenge for future studies. Incl uding
diﬀerent types of inhibitory cells with distinct inhibitory ﬁel d
size will probably enhance our model to better ﬁt the natural
summation ﬁeld size. Such enhancement of the model is not
expected to ruin the relationship between ASF and our eﬃcienc y
measures, but underlies the qualitative nature of our resul t.
For example in Figure 10, almost similar (Pearson correlation
coeﬃcient = − 0.58, compared to − 0.59; p = 0.65) relationship
between ASF and the eﬃciency measures emerge with smaller
summation ﬁeld and stronger suppression. In addition, the result
of Figure 10 shows weaker relationship between ASF and the
eﬃcacy measures in absence of inhibitory surround (Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient = − 0.39, compared to − 0.59; Wilcoxon
rank sum test, p < 0.001), which suggests that inhibition rather
than summation ﬁeld size is the important attribute of the ASF
in maintaining eﬃcacy of the system. Nevertheless, our mode l
shows robust dependence of eﬃciency with the non-linear ASF ,
and the mismatch in the summation ﬁeld size most likely creating
a positive baseline to the total error measure. Moreover, our
results show considerable variations in the absolute value s of the
eﬃciency measures for a speciﬁc DAS value which might emerge
from un-physiological parameter ranges, non-linearities of t he
system, or the unavoidable simpliﬁcations in our model.
We run the simulation for 200 ms before the visual input to
reach a stable baseline and thereafter presented stationary input
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 15 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
for 300 ms. The mean ﬁring rate was calculated based on the las t
300 ms time interval.
Primarily we used comparable density of midget cells to
the human retina in our simulations. This results in a very
high computational load, which can be suboptimal given the
much lower sampling of the biomimetic cortex. A set of control
simulations showed that 1/5 of this density of midget cells c an
lead to a somewhat better association between area summatio n
and eﬃciency of the neural network ( Figure 8). The better link
between DAS and eﬃciency measures in some panels may emerge
from high-spatial frequency noise in the simulation output
with the high-resolution retina ﬁlter. The high input resolu tion
(compare Figure 4F with Figure 8D) leads to a V1 activation
pattern with higher spatial frequencies (compare Figure 4D
with Figure 8E). If the spatial frequencies in the biomimetic
simulations are higher than after ﬁltering the image with th e
model ASF , the residual ﬁring patterns for the highest frequencies
would show up as additional noise.
Clearly, the optimal size for the summation and suppression
ﬁelds of the ASF depends on the input features. Each 20
gray-scale natural images drew a distinct path into the three
diagrams of eﬃciency vs. DAS. The results from middle column
of Figure 7 show that the simulated network output associates
best with the eﬃciency measures for the group of images
containing mainly low frequency information than for the gr oup
of images containing both high and low frequency informatio n.
In calculations of the target ASF , as a ﬁrst approximation, we used
the average values of the measured summation ﬁeld, surround
diameter and suppression levels at each eccentricity and igno red
the diversity of these values in our model ( Figure 3). This
might explain why the results show variation in eﬃciency vs.
DAS between diﬀerent stimuli ( Figure 7, middle column). The
variability of the receptive ﬁeld parameters in the real corti cal
neurons may help capture the range of spatial frequencies present
in natural images. Alternatively, lack of biological divers ity in
the inhibitory neuron population or other simpliﬁcations in th e
model structure may explain the less accurate ﬁt of the model
output with eﬃciency, when the stimuli comprised the higher
spatial frequencies.
For each natural image, we had 625 simulation runs, which
came from varying the extrastriate connectivity and inhibi tion
within V1 as free parameters. In the simulations, the number
of lateral connection between V1 excitatory and inhibitory cells
seems to be a more determinative parameter to match the
target ASF compared to the feedforward-feedback connection s
between V1 and the extrastriate area ( Figure 6B). Clearly some
of these combinations lead to saturated or nearly non-responding
activation patterns ( Figure 7A, right columns). In addition,
these data points caused huge variation in absolute value of
our eﬃciency measures for a speciﬁc DAS value. The link
between eﬃciency measures and DAS was much clearer in the
case of excluding these extremes from our analysis ( Figure 7,
right column). The selection of the outlier threshold is alw ays
somewhat arbitrary. The main ﬁnding from this analysis is a w ell
matched relationship between entropy per spike and ASF with
reasonably physiological ﬁring rates (on average 14–78 spikes per
neuron per 300 ms).
The ASF can be regarded as a comprehensive model of
the spatial receptive ﬁeld, including the summation close to
the center of the receptive ﬁeld (CRF) as well as contextual
positive (summation ﬁeld) and negative (surround suppression)
modulation of a neuron’s response. In the current study, we wer e
interested in the relation of the ASF and the eﬃciency of neur al
output at the system level. Apparently, the nonlinear ASF helps
to avoid saturations of the response patterns. The largest spik e
counts were associated with large distances from the predicte d
ASF target. In addition, the middle 70% of the dynamic range
of the ﬁring rate showed strong association between entropy
per spike and ASF. While the relation between sparseness and
the ASF target was not so straightforward within this same
dynamic range and indeed appeared to be positively correlated,
high sparseness were overall well associated with ASF. Moreove r,
for the low-resolution input, sparseness had an overall bette r
association with the ASF.
In summary, our study shows that the nonlinear ASF , which
is a mathematical formulation of extra-CRF modulation onto the
CRF responses, is related to eﬃciency of a neuronal population
model.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FS designed, simulated, and analyzed the neural network
and wrote the paper. HH designed the neural network, and
participated in writing the paper. RV participated in data analysis
and writing the paper. SV designed and analyzed the neural
network, and wrote the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study has been supported by Finnish Society of Sciences,
Otto A. Malm and Oskar Öﬂunds Stiftelse foundations, Helsink i
University Central Hospital Research Funds and by the BRAHE
neuroscience collaboration between the Aalto University an d the
University of Helsinki.
REFERENCES
Angelucci, A., Levitt, J. B., Walton, E. J., Hupe, J. M., Bullier, J. , and Lund, J. S.
(2002). Circuits for local and global signal integration in primary visual cortex.
J. Neurosci. 22, 8633–8646.
Ascoli, G. A., Alonso-Nanclares, L., Anderson, S. A., Barrionuevo , G., Benavides-
Piccione, R., Burkhalter, A., et al. (2008). Petilla terminology: no menclature of
features of GABAergic interneurons of the cerebral cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
9, 557–568. doi: 10.1038/nrn2402
Attwell, D., and Laughlin, S. B. (2001). An energy budget for sig naling in the
grey matter of the brain. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 21, 1133–1145. doi:
10.1097/00004647-200110000-00001
Baddeley, R., Abbott, L. F., Booth, M. C., Sengpiel, F., Freeman, T ., Wakeman,
E. A., et al. (1997). Responses of neurons in primary and inferior tempora l
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155


--- Page 16 ---
Shariﬁan et al. Area-Summation is Linked to Efﬁciency
visual cortices to natural scenes. Proc. Biol. Sci. 264, 1775–1783. doi:
10.1098/rspb.1997.0246
Barlow, H. (1961). “Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory
messages, ” in Sensory Communication, ed W. Rosenblith (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press). 217–234.
Cavanaugh, J. R., Bair, W., and Movshon, J. A. (2002). Nature a nd interaction of
signals from the receptive ﬁeld center and surround in macaque V1 neuro ns.
J. Neurophysiol. 88, 2530–2546. doi: 10.1152/jn.00692.2001
Curcio, C. A., Sloan, K. R. Jr., Packer, O., Hendrickson, A. E., an d
Kalina, R. E. (1987). Distribution of cones in human and monkey ret ina:
individual variability and radial asymmetry. Science 236, 579–582. doi:
10.1126/science.3576186
Dacey, D. M. (1993). The mosaic of midget ganglion cells in the human retina.
J. Neurosci. 13, 5334–5355.
Duncan, R. O., and Boynton, G. M. (2003). Cortical magniﬁcatio n within human
primary visual cortex correlates with acuity thresholds. Neuron 38, 659–671.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00265-4
Felsen, G., Touryan, J., and Dan, Y. (2005). Contextual modulati on of orientation
tuning contributes to eﬃcient processing of natural stimuli. Network 16,
139–149. doi: 10.1080/09548980500463347
Geisler, W. S., Perry, J. S., Super, B. J., and Gallogly, D. P. (2001). Edge co-
occurrence in natural images predicts contour grouping performance. Vision
Res. 41, 711–724. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(00)00277-7
Goodman, D., and Brette, R. (2008). Brian: a simulator for spiking neural networks
in python. Front. Neuroinform. 2:5. doi: 10.3389/neuro.11.005.2008
Heikkinen, H., Shariﬁan, F., Vigario, R., and V anni, S. (2015). F eedback to
distal dendrites links fMRI signals to neural receptive ﬁelds in a spi king
network model of the visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 114, 57–69. doi:
10.1152/jn.00169.2015
Hess, R. F. (2004). “Spatial scale in visual processing, ” in The Visual Neuroscience,
Vol. 2, eds L. M. Chalupa and J. S. Weber (Cambridge, MA; London: The MIT
Press), 1043–1059.
Kay, K. N., Naselaris, T., Prenger, R. J., and Gallant, J. L. (2008) . Identifying
natural images from human brain activity. Nature 452, 352–355. doi:
10.1038/nature06713
Knierim, J. J., and van Essen, D. C. (1992). Neuronal responses to s tatic texture
patterns in area V1 of the alert macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 67, 961–980.
Lagarias, J. C., Reeds, J. A., Wright, M. H., and Wright, P. E. (199 8). Convergence
properties of the nelder-mead simplex method in low dimensions. SIAM J.
Optim. 9, 112–147. doi: 10.1137/S1052623496303470
Levitt, J. B., and Lund, J. S. (1997). Contrast dependence of co ntextual eﬀects in
primate visual cortex. Nature 387, 73–76. doi: 10.1038/387073a0
Li, W., Thier, P., and Wehrhahn, C. (2000). Contextual inﬂue nce on orientation
discrimination of humans and responses of neurons in V1 of alert monkey s.
J. Neurophysiol. 83, 941–954.
Maﬀei, L., and Fiorentini, A. (1976). The unresponsive regions o f visual cortical
receptive ﬁelds. Vision Res. 16, 1131–1139. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(76)90253-4
Naud, R., Marcille, N., Clopath, C., and Gerstner, W. (2008). Firi ng patterns in the
adaptive exponential integrate-and-ﬁre model. Biol. Cybern. 99, 335–347. doi:
10.1007/s00422-008-0264-7
Nurminen, L., and Angelucci, A. (2014). Multiple components of surroun d
modulation in primary visual cortex: multiple neural circuits with
multiple functions? Vision Res . 104, 47–56. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2014.
08.018
Olshausen, B. A., and Field, D. J. (1996). Emergence of simple-cell re ceptive ﬁeld
properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature 381, 607–609.
doi: 10.1038/381607a0
Rall, W. (1962). Theory of physiological properties of dendrites. Ann. N.Y. Acad.
Sci. 96, 1071–1092. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1962.tb54120.x
Reich, D. S., Mechler, F., and Victor, J. D. (2001). Temporal codi ng of contrast in
primary visual cortex: when, what, and why. J. Neurophysiol. 85, 1039–1050.
Sceniak, M. P., Ringach, D. L., Hawken, M. J., and Shapley, R. (1 999). Contrast’s
eﬀect on spatial summation by macaque V1 neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 733–739.
doi: 10.1038/11197
Schwartz, E. L. (1994). “Computational studies of the spatial ar chitecture of
primate visual cortex: columns, maps, and protomaps, ” inCerebral Cortex, Vol.
10: Primary Visual Cortex in Primates, eds A. Peters and K. S. Rockland (New
York, NY; London: Plenum Press), 359–442.
Schwartz, O., and Simoncelli, E. P. (2001). Natural signal statistics and sensory gain
control. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 819–825. doi: 10.1038/90526
Shariﬁan, F., Nurminen, L., and V anni, S. (2013). Visual interac tions conform
to pattern decorrelation in multiple cortical areas. PLoS ONE 8:e68046. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0068046
Shushruth, S., Nurminen, L., Bijanzadeh, M., Ichida, J. M., V an ni, S., and
Angelucci, A. (2013). Diﬀerent orientation tuning of near- and far-surround
suppression in macaque primary visual cortex mirrors their tuning in
human perception. J. Neurosci. 33, 106–119. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2518-
12.2013
van Hateren, J. H., and van der Schaaf, A. (1998). Independent component ﬁlters of
natural images compared with simple cells in primary visual cortex. Proc. Biol.
Sci. 265, 359–366. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1998.0303
V anni, S. (2012). Local model for contextual modulation in the c erebral cortex.
Neural Netw. 25, 30–40. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2011.08.001
Vinje, W. E., and Gallant, J. L. (2000). Sparse coding and decorrela tion in
primary visual cortex during natural vision. Science 287, 1273–1276. doi:
10.1126/science.287.5456.1273
Williams, S. R., and Stuart, G. J. (2002). Dependence of EPSP eﬃcac y on
synapse location in neocortical pyramidal neurons.Science 295, 1907–1910. doi:
10.1126/science.1067903
Y an, Y., Rasch, M. J., Chen, M., Xiang, X., Huang, M., Wu, S., et al.
(2014). Perceptual training continuously reﬁnes neuronal populati on codes
in primary visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1380–1387. doi: 10.1038/
nn.3805
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Shariﬁan, Heikkinen, Vigário and Vanni. This is a n open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic prac tice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with thes e terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2016 | Volume 9 | Article 155
