--- Page 1 ---
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 11 January 2021
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.593166
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166
Edited by:
Tatyana Sharpee,
Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
United States
Reviewed by:
Masami Tatsuno,
University of Lethbridge, Canada
Daya Shankar Gupta,
Camden County College,
United States
*Correspondence:
Yuri Dabaghian
yuri.a.dabaghian@uth.tmc.edu
Received: 09 August 2020
Accepted: 02 December 2020
Published: 11 January 2021
Citation:
Dabaghian Y (2021) From Topological
Analyses to Functional Modeling: The
Case of Hippocampus.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 14:593166.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.593166
From T opological Analyses to
Functional Modeling: The Case of
Hippocampus
Yuri Dabaghian*
Department of Neurology, The University of Texas McGovern M edical School, Houston, TX, United States
T opological data analyses are widely used for describing an d conceptualizing large
volumes of neurobiological data, e.g., for quantifying spi king outputs of large neuronal
ensembles and thus understanding the functions of the corre sponding networks. Below
we discuss an approach in which convergent topological anal yses produce insights
into how information may be processed in mammalian hippocam pus—a brain part
that plays a key role in learning and memory. The resulting fu nctional model provides
a unifying framework for integrating spiking data at differ ent timescales and following
the course of spatial learning at different levels of spatio temporal granularity. This
approach allows accounting for contributions from various physiological phenomena into
spatial cognition—the neuronal spiking statistics, the eff ects of spiking synchronization
by different brain waves, the roles played by synaptic efﬁca cies and so forth. In
particular, it is possible to demonstrate that networks wit h plastic and transient synaptic
architectures can encode stable cognitive maps, revealing the characteristic timescales
of memory processing.
Keywords: spatial learning, hippocampus, topological metho ds, place cells, theoretical model
1. INTRODUCTION
Spatial cognition in mammals is based on an internal representa tion of their environments—a
cognitive map—used for spatial planning, navigating paths, ﬁnd ing shortcuts, remembering the
location of the home nest, food sources and so forth. A centra l role in producing these maps
is played by the hippocampal neurons famous for their spatially tun ed spiking activity. In rats,
these neurons, known as “place cells, ” ﬁre in speciﬁc domains of the navigated environment—their
respective “place ﬁelds” (
O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978; Moser et al., 2008 ). Thus, the spatial layout of
the place ﬁelds in a given environment E—a place ﬁeld map ME —deﬁnes the temporal order in
which place cells ﬁre during animal’s moves ( Schmidt and Redish, 2013; Agarwal et al., 2014 ), and
can therefore be viewed as a geometric “proxy” of the animal’s cognitive map.
Experiments in “morphing” 2 D environments demonstrate that place ﬁeld maps are ﬂexible: if
the environment is deformed, then the place ﬁelds may change th eir shapes, sizes and locations,
while preserving mutual overlaps, adjacencies, containments , etc. (Gothard et al., 1996; Leutgeb et
al., 2005; Touretzky et al., 2005; Wills et al., 2005; Dabaghian et al., 2014; Bellmund et al., 2020; Place
and Nitz, 2020). Hence the sequences in which the place cells ﬁre during animal’s navigation remain
largely invariant within a certain range of geometric trans formations, which suggests that the
hippocampus provides a qualitative, topological representation o f space—more akin to a subway
map than a than to a topographical city street map ( Alvernhe et al., 2012; Dabaghian et al., 2014;
Wu and Foster, 2014).


--- Page 2 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
The mechanisms that produce cognitive maps and the
computational principles by which the brain converts patterns
of neuronal ﬁring into global representations of external spa ce
remain vague. Broadly, it is believed that the information
provided by the individual place cells is somehow combined
into single coherent whole. However, this “fusion” should
not be viewed as a naïve aggregation of the smaller “pieces, ”
because the signals provided by the individual neurons have
no intrinsic spatial attributes; rather, spatial properties ar e
emergent, i.e., appearing at a neuronal ensemble level (
Wilson and
McNaughton, 1993; Pouget et al. , 2000; Postle, 2006 ).
A computational framework developed in Dabaghian et al.
(2012), Arai et al. (2014) , Hoﬀman et al. (2016) , Basso et
al. (2016) , Babichev et al. (2016a,b) , Babichev and Dabaghian
(2018), Dabaghian (2019) , and Dabaghian (2016) helps to
understand these phenomena by integrating the activity of th e
individual neurons into a large-scale map of the environmen t
and to study the dynamics of its appearance, using algebraic
topology techniques. Below we review some basic ideas and key
concepts used in this framework, and discuss how they may apply
to hippocampal physiology and cognitive realm. We then outline
several examples that demonstrate how various characterist ics
of individual cells and synapses can be incorporated into the
model and what eﬀect these “microscopic” parameters produce
at a “macroscale, ” i.e., in the map that they jointly encode.
2. TOPOLOGICAL MODEL
2.1. Alexandrov- ˇCech’s Theorem
The topological nature of the cognitive map suggests that
the information transmitted via place cell spiking should be
amenable to topological analyses. For example, a place ﬁeld map
can be viewed as a cover of the environment E by the place ﬁelds
υ i, E = ∪ iυ i, which, according to the Alexandrov-ˇCech’s theorem
(
Alexandroﬀ, 1928; ˇCech, 1932), encodes the topological shape of
E. To evaluate its speciﬁc characteristics, one constructs the nerve
of the cover—an abstract simplicial complex N whose simplexes,
ν i0,i1,... ,ik = [υ i0 , υ i1 , . . . υ ik ], correspond to non-empty overlaps
between the place ﬁelds, υ i0 ∩ υ i1 ∩ . . . ∩ υ ik ̸= ∅ . If these overlaps
are contractible, then N has the same topological shape as E, i.e.,
the same number of components, holes, tunnels, etc. ( Hatcher,
2002). An implication of this construction is that if the place ﬁelds
cover the environment suﬃciently densely, then their overla ps
encode the topology of E, which provides a link between the place
cells’ spiking pattern and the topology of the represented space
(
De Silva and Ghrist, 2007; Curto and Itskov, 2008; Chen et al. ,
2012; Dabaghian et al., 2012; Kang et al., 2020 ).
2.2. T emporal Coactivity Complex
From the physiological perspective, the arguments based on the
analyses of place ﬁelds provide only an indirect description of the
information processing in the brain. In reality, the hippocampu s
and the downstream brain regions do not have access to the
shapes and the locations of the place ﬁelds, which are but artiﬁcial
constructs used by experimentalists to visualize their data . In
the brain, the information is transmitted via neuronal spiki ng
activity: if the animal enters a location where several place ﬁelds
overlap, then there is a probability that the corresponding place
cells will produce spike trains that overlap temporally (
Curto
and Itskov, 2008; Dabaghian et al., 2012 ). Such coactivities may
be interpreted intrinsically by the downstream brain areas, and
integrated into a global map of the ambient space. Thus, a proper
description of place cell (co)activity requires a temporal analog
of the nerve complex, built using temporal relationships between
spike trains—which is, in fact, straightforward. Indeed, si nce the
place ﬁeld overlaps represent place cells’ coactivities, one can
construct a “coactivity complex” T whose simplexes correspond
to combinations of active place cells, σ = [ci0 , ci1 , . . . , cik ]. It was
shown in
De Silva and Ghrist (2007) , Curto and Itskov (2008) ,
and Dabaghian et al. (2012) that if such a complex is suﬃciently
complete (i.e., if it incorporates a suﬃcient number of the
coactivity events) then its structure is similar to the stru cture of
the spatially-derived nerve complex N , e.g., T correctly captures
the topology of the physical environment. Note however, that
structural similarity between N and T (representability of T )
is a non-trivial point with profound mathematical implication s
(
Tancer, 2013).
2.3. Simplicial Schemas of Cognitive Maps
Both complexes N and T provide a contextual framework
for representing spatial information encoded by the place
cells (
Babichev et al., 2016b ). For example, a sequence of
place ﬁelds traversed during the rat’s moves over a particular
trajectory γ and the place cell combinations ignited along
this trajectory can be represented, respectively, by a “nerve
path” Ŵ N = { ν 1, ν 2, . . . , ν k}—a chain of nerve-simplexes
in N , or by a “coactivity path” Ŵ T = { σ 1, σ 2, . . . , σ k}—a
chain of the coactivity-simplexes in T (see also
Babichev and
Dabaghian , 2018). These simplicial paths qualitatively represent
the shape of the physical trajectories: a closed simplicial path
represents a closed physical route; a non-contractible simpli cial
path corresponds to a class of the physical paths that enclose
unreachable or yet unexplored parts of the environment; two
topologically equivalent simplicial paths Ŵ 1 ∼ Ŵ 2 represent
physical paths γ 1 and γ 2 that can be deformed into one another
and so forth (
Brown et al., 1998; Jensen and Lisman, 2000;
Guger et al., 2011; Dabaghian, 2016 ). By the Alexandrov- ˇCech’s
theorem, the net pool of the simplicial paths can thus be used
to describe the topological connectivity of the environment E via
homological characteristics of N and T .
2.4. The Large-Scale T opology of the
Cognitive Map
C(E), as represented by a coactivity complex, can be described at
diﬀerent levels. A particularly concise description of a topological
shape is given in terms of its topological loops (surfaces identiﬁed
up to topological equivalence) in diﬀerent dimensions, i.e., b y
its Betti numbers bn, n = 0, 1, . . . (
Alexandrov, 1965; Hatcher,
2002). For example, the number of inequivalent topological loops
that can be contracted to a zero-dimensional (0 D) vertex, b0(T ),
corresponds to the number of the connected components in
T ; the number of loops that contract to a one-dimensional
(1D) chain of links, b1(T ), deﬁnes the number of holes and
so forth (
Alexandrov, 1965; Hatcher, 2002 ). The full list of
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 3 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
the Betti numbers of a space or a complex X is known as its
topological barcode, b(T ) = (b0(T ), b1(T ), b2(T ), . . . ), which
captures the topological identity of T (Zomorodian, 2005;
Zomorodian and Carlsson, 2005; Ghrist, 2008; Carlsson, 2009 ,
2013; Edelsbrunner and Harer, 2010 ). For example, the barcode
b = (1, 1, 0, . . . ) corresponds to a topological annulus, the
barcode b = (1, 0, 1, 0,. . . )—to a two-dimensional (2 D) sphere
S2, the barcode b = (1, 2, 1, 0,. . . )—to a torus T2 and so forth
(Edelsbrunner and Harer, 2010). Thus, by comparing the barcode
of the coactivity complex b(T ) to the barcode of the environment
b(E) one can establish whether their topological shapes may
match, i.e., whether the coactivity complex provides a faithf ul
representation of the environment at a given moment t.
2.5. A Model of Spatial Learning
A key diﬀerence between the complexes N and T is that the
topological shape of N is fully deﬁned by the structure of the
place ﬁeld map, whereas the shape of T unfolds in time at the rate
with which the spike trains are produced. At every given moment
of time, the coactivity complexT represents connections between
the place ﬁelds that the animal had time to “probe”: as the anima l
begins to explore a new environment, T is small, fragmented and
may contain gaps that represent lacunae in the animal’s intern al
map of the navigated space, rather than physical obstacles or
inaccessible spatial domains. As the animal continues to navigate,
more combinations of coactive place cells contribute connectivity
information, the coactivity complex grows, T (t) ⊆ T (t′), t <
t′, and acquires more details, converging to a stable shape that
captures the physical structure of the surroundings.
Mathematically, T can thus be viewed as a ﬁltered complex,
with the ﬁltration deﬁned by the times of the simplexes’
ﬁrst appearance, tσ (
Dabaghian et al., 2012 ). Methods of the
Persistent Homology theory allow describing the dynamics of the
topological loops in T , e.g., evaluating the minimal time Tmin
after which the topological structure of T matches the topology
of the environment, bn(T ) = bn(E) (De Silva and Ghrist, 2007;
Curto and Itskov, 2008; Dabaghian et al., 2012 ). Biologically,
this value provides a low-bound theoretical estimate for the time
required to learn a novel topological map from place cell output s
(Figure 1A) ( Dabaghian et al., 2012; Arai et al., 2014; Babichev
et al., 2016a,b, 2018; Basso et al., 2016; Hoﬀman et al., 2016;
Dabaghian, 2019
).
2.6. Facing the Biological Realm
The physiological viability of these algebraic-topological
constructions depends on the parameters of neuronal ﬁring
activity: just as there must be a suﬃcient number of place ﬁelds
covering a space in order to produce a topologically correct
nerve complex N , certain conditions must be met by the
place cell spiking proﬁles in order to produce an operational
coactivity complex T . For example, there should be enough
coﬁring of place cells with suﬃcient spatial speciﬁcity of
spiking; the encoded relationships should not be washed out
by noise; the model should make realistic predictions, e.g.,
produce viable learning periods in diﬀerent environments,
etc. Given that biological systems are highly variable (
Fenton
and Muller, 1998 ), these criteria may or may not be met
by the physiological place cell ensembles, or vice versa,
the model may single out a certain “operational” scope of
parameters that may not match the biological range. In
the following, we discuss this and other correspondences
between the topological model and hippocampal physiology.
We demonstrate that, ﬁrst, the model can incorporate a vast
scope of physiologically relevant characteristics of spike ti mes,
spiking statistics, their modulations by the “brain waves, ”
eﬃcacies of synaptic connections, architectures of the neuro nal
networks, etc., all of which correlate with dynamics of spati al
learning. Second, the model allows converting this informa tion
consistently into coherent, biologically viable descriptions of
a wide scope of neurophysiological phenomena. It becomes
possible to systematically deduce functional properties of the
system following not just the only empirical observations
or experimental line of reasoning that currently dominate
neurophysiological literature, but also the models’ own,
intrinsic logic.
2.7. Parameterization
To cope with the complexity of the cognitive map’s construction,
the model is built hierarchically: its main components implement
most prominent physiological phenomena, and more subtle
eﬀects are incorporated as modiﬁcations of the skeletal
structures. In the following, we will proceed in steps, by select ing
a speciﬁc phenomenon, embedding it into the model using
a minimal set of tools, outlining the results and discussing
biological implications.
To simplify the approach, we will describe neuronal spiking
in terms of Poisson ﬁring rates, which, in case of the place cell s,
can be approximated by Gaussian functions of rat’s coordinate s
with the amplitude fi (the ith place cell’s maximal ﬁring rate), and
the width si (the size of the corresponding place ﬁeld) (
Barbieri
et al., 2004; Dabaghian et al., 2012 ). For an ensemble of N place
cells, the N values si and fi can be viewed as instantiations of two
random variables drawn from their respective distributions w ith
certain modes (s and f correspondingly) and standard deviations,
σ s and σ f . To avoid overly broad or overly narrow distributions
we impose additional conditions σ s = bs and σ f = af with the
coeﬃcients a and b selected so match the experimental statistics
(Brunel et al., 2004; Barbour et al., 2007; Buzsáki and Mizusek i,
2014). As a result, each speciﬁc place cell ensemble can be indexed
by a triplet of parameters, ( s, f , N).
Second block of parameters characterizes animal’s behavior,
e.g., speeds and trajectory shapes, which are computationally
intractable. We assume a practical approach to this problem
and simulate non-preferential exploratory spatial behavior, with
no artiﬁcial moving patterns or favoring of one segment of the
environment over another, with typical experimentally obser ved
speed ranges. Such approach allows reproducing a natural ﬂow of
spiking data and estimating how long it takes to integrate it i nto
a topological map. The statistical alternatives for the model a re
produced by randomizing place ﬁeld maps over a ﬁxed trajectory
rather than by sampling over diﬀerent trajectories, which is
practically much more eﬃcient.
It should be emphasized however, that these and all the
subsequent simpliﬁcations should not be viewed as limitatio ns
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 4 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 1 | T opological description of spatial learning. (A) As the rat begins to explore an environment, the simplicial c omplex T (t) contains many 0 D cycles that mark
contractible spatial domains represented by small groups o f coﬁring place cells. Additionally, there exists many 1 D cycles that represent transient holes in T (t). As
exploration continues, spurious cycles disappear, leavin g behind only a few persisting ones, which express stable top ological information. (B) Each point in the
parameters space with coordinates ( s, f, N) represents a particular place cell ensemble. The colors of the dots represent the mean learning time Tmin; the larger the
dot, the higher the rate of capturing the correct topologica l information for the corresponding ( s, f, N). The ensembles that can produce a correct map occupy a
particular domain of the parametric space—the Learning Region, L, where learning is fastest and most accurate; near the bound ary, map forms over times and
exhibits higher error rates. Outside of L learning fails. Importantly, the parameter values that corr espond to L happen to parallel experimentally derived values, which
indicates a biological relevance of the model. The smaller L on the left panel corresponds to a 2 D arena with a hole, about 1.5 × 1.5 m in size, and the larger L on the
right corresponds to a quasi-linear environment (top right corner of each panel). The more complex the environment, the more tuned the neural ensembles have to be
to learn the space.
of the approach but only as approximations used for simplifying
speciﬁc computations. The model would also work with more
detailed information, e.g., using more precisely estimated
spike times or behavioral parameters, physiologically record ed
or generated via accurate network models, detailed synaptic
transmission mechanisms, etc.
3. OVERVIEW OF THE RESUL TS
3.1. The Learning Region
For a particular set of values ( s, f , N), a trajectory traversing
a place ﬁeld map ME produces a certain time-dependent
coactivity complex T (t). One may inquire whether, and for which
ensembles, such a complex acquires the correct topological shape
and how long this process may take. As it turns out, the coactivity
complexes produced by generic place ﬁeld maps can assume
correct topological shapes, bk(T ) = bk(E), k ≥ 0, in a biologically
feasible period—if the spiking parameters fall into a speciﬁc
domain in the parameter space that we refer to as the learning
region, L (Figure 1B). It is important to note that although the
exact structure of T (t) depends profusely on the details of the
map ME (
Babichev and Dabaghian , 2018 ), most large-scale
characteristics of T (t), e.g., its Betti numbers, are largely ME -
independent. This leads to the model’s ﬁrst predictive outcom e,
namely to the observation that the mean spiking parameters
(s, f , N) may be used to identify a particular hippocampal “state”
with a certain learning capacity,
Tmin = Tmin(s, f , N). (1)
The second key observation is that the placement of the learni ng
region in the parameter space matches the biological range of
spiking characteristics derived from electrophysiological ly
recorded data (
Dabaghian et al., 2012 ). A priori , this
correspondence is not guaranteed: the region L that emerges
from the “homological” computations could have appeared
anywhere in the parameter space. However, the fact that the
“operational” domain of the topological model appears to match
the biological domain, suggests that the topological approach
captures actual aspects of the neurophysiological computations
taking place in the hippocampal network. In particular, it
indicates that the physiological neurons can indeed encode a
topological map of space in a biologically feasible time. On th e
other hand, boundedness of L also shows that spatial selectivity
of ﬁring does not, by itself, guarantee a reliable mapping of th e
environment, despite a widespread belief among neuroscienti sts
to the contrary.
Third, the size and the shape of L reﬂect the scope of
the biological variability that the hippocampus can aﬀord in
a given environment: the larger the learning region L, the
more stable the map ( Figure 1B). Indeed, the model implies
that the hippocampus can change its operating state inside L
without compromising the integrity of the topological map:
if one parameter begins to move outside the learning region,
then a successful spatial learning can still occur, provided th at
compensatory changes of other parameters can keep the neuronal
ensemble inside L. This observation allows reasoning about
the eﬀects of certain diseases [e.g., Alzheimer’s
Cacucci et al.,
2008; Cohen et al., 2013 ] or environmental toxins [e.g., ethanol
Matthews et al., 1996; White and Best, 2000, cannabinoids Robbe
and Buzsáki, 2009 ] that produce more diﬀuse place ﬁelds, lower
place cell ﬁring rates, smaller numbers of active cells and thu s
may disrupt spatial learning by shifting system’s parameters
beyond the perimeter of the learning region.
Fourth, the structure of the learning region may also vary
with the geometry of the environment, the laboriousness of
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 5 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
navigation: the greater the task’s complexity, the narrower the
range that can sustain learning—as suggested by experimenta l
studies ( Nithianantharajah and Hannan, 2006; Fenton et al.,
2008; Eckert and Abraham, 2010 ). Thus, despite the topological
nature of the information processing, the place cells are not
“agnostic” about the scale and the shape of the navigated space. In
fact, it can be shown that maps of large spaces can be assembled
from the maps of their parts, e.g., if a domain E is split into two
subdomains E1 and E2 that meet but do not overlap, then one
can compute the individual learning times Tmin(E1) and Tmin(E2)
using only the spikes ﬁred within each subdomain. The sum of
these learning times is similar to total time spent by rat in th e
entire arena, Tmin(E) ≈ Tmin(E1) + Tmin(E2), with statistically
insigniﬁcant diﬀerences (
Arai et al., 2014 ). Mathematically, this
result may be viewed as an adaptation of the Mayer-Vietoris
theorem that states that if a space E is split into pieces E1
and E2 that overlap over a domain with vanishing homologies,
Hq(E1 ∩ E2) = 0, then the homologies of the whole space are
given by the direct sum of the homologies of the components,
Hq(E) = Hq(E1) ⊕ Hq(E2) (
Hatcher, 2002 ). In case of the
coactivity complexes, simulations demonstrate that persist ent
loops that represent topological obstacles in two complementary
domains combine into the set of the persistent loops that
represent the whole space, providing a novel perspective on the
learning process.
These outcomes of the model correspond well with our
subjective learning experiences: the complexity of the task an d
the size of the navigated environment inﬂuence learning tim e;
diﬃcult tasks are accomplished at or just beyond the limits of our
capacity; disease or intoxication can reveal limits in our spa tial
cognition that would normally be compensated for, and so fort h.
3.2. Coactivity Window
The results discussed above are based on topological analyses
of spiking data produced by large populations of coactive place
cells; but what deﬁnes neuronal coactivity in the ﬁrst place?
At a phenomenological level, an instance of coactivity may be
characterized by the length of the period allocated for detec ting
the spikes ﬁred by two or more cells. Experimental studies suggest
that the “physiological” width w of the coactivity window ranges
between tens to hundreds of milliseconds, with the standard
estimate w ∼ 200 ms (
Ang et al., 2005; Huhn et al., 2005; Maurer
et al., 2006; Mizuseki et al., 2009 ). The topological model allows
addressing this question theoretically: one can ask, e.g., what
range of window sizes could allow constructing topological maps
and would these values match the biological range of coactiv ity
periods? One can also inquire, given a particular width w,
whether the dynamics of T (t) depends on a speciﬁc arrangement
of the coactivity intervals along the time axis and how sensi tive
the results may be with respect to the windows’ variations fro m
one instance of coactivity to another. In biological terms: c an the
noise and/or variability of coactivity readouts aﬀect the an imal’s
learning capacity?
As it turns out, the answer to the latter two questions
is negative: the statistics of place cell coactivity and henc e
the structure of the coactivity complex do not exhibit strong
dependence on either the coactivity windows’ random temporal
FIGURE 2 | Dependence of learning time on window width, with (blue line )
and without (black line) θ -modulation of spiking activity. The radius of the
circles indicates the percentage of times when topological learning is
successful. In both cases, the coactivity complexes with phy sically correct
topological shapes start to form at about wo = 0.2 θ -periods, when the
learning time is long (hours) and sensitive to the variation s of w, and fail at
w ∼ 4.5 θ -periods, when learning becomes unreliable. At ws ∼ 1.5 θ -periods
the dependence Tmin(w) plateaus, marking the domain of stable w, which
continues to ws ∼ 3 θ -periods. As w grows further, the success rate
diminishes, and for ws > 5.5 θ -periods topological learning fails. Here s = 23
cm, f = 28 Hz, and N = 350 cells.
shifts or on the window sizes’ “jitter” (both for up to 50% of
the mean w). On the one hand, this justiﬁes using a single
parameter w for studying the dependence of the coactivity
complex’ structure on the window width. On the other hand, it
is clear that learning dynamics should depend on the systemat ic
changes of w: if the coactivity window is too narrow, then the
spike trains produced by the place cells will often “miss” one
another, so that the map will either fail or take a long time to
emerge. However, if w is too wide, then the place cells with
disconnected place ﬁelds will contribute spurious links that m ay
compromise the map’s structure.
Simulations show that indeed, an accurate topological map
emerges within a well-deﬁned range of ws, wo ≈ 25 ≤
w ≤ wc ≈ 1, 250 ms, beyond which the maps have vanishing
convergence rates (i.e., maps rarely or never produces the corr ect
Betti numbers). In-between, the learning time follows a powe r
law dependence, Tmin(w) ∼ w− α , with α ≈ 1.2 starting at high
values [ Tmin(wo) ≈ 5 h] that rapidly decrease with growing w
(Figure 2). The “operational” range of ws is even smaller since
the biological dependence Tmin(w) should be not only ﬁnite, but
also stable, i.e., it should not be hypersensitive to variations of
w or exhibit low convergence rates. In the model, such a range
of ws lays approximately between 125 and 250 ms ( Figure 2),
which matches the domain implicated in experimental studies.
Thus, the model once again allows deriving the physiologicall y
observed values—in this case the operational widths of the
coactivity windows—from purely theoretical considerations .
3.3. The Brain Waves
The temporal organization of the spike trains is strongly
inﬂuenced by the oscillating extracellular electrical ﬁelds —the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 6 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
brain waves, that control the temporal architecture of the spiking
activity and the parcellation of the information ﬂow in the br ain
(Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004 ). In particular, the θ -wave (4–
12 Hz) and the γ -waves (40–80 Hz), are known to modulate
the place cells’ activity at several timescales and aﬀect spati al
leaning (Buzsáki, 2002; Hasselmo et al., 2002; Colgin and Moser,
2010). However, it remains unclear at what level, and through
what mechanisms, do these waves exert their inﬂuence. Most
theoretical analyses address the eﬀect of θ - and γ -rhythms on
individual cells’ spiking (
Lisman and Idiart, 1995; Jensen and
Lisman, 2000; Hasselmo et al., 2002 ). In contrast, the topological
model allows addressing this question at the ensemble level , by
tracing how the θ - and the γ -modulation of spike trains changes
the dynamics of the corresponding coactivity complexes, e.g., the
speed of their convergence toward correct topological shape, t he
statistics of topological defects exhibited during this proc ess and
so forth. Let us discuss a few examples.
(i) θ -phase precession is a key mechanism by which the θ -
wave controls place cell’s spiking: as a rat moves through a
place ﬁeld, the corresponding place cell spikes near a certain
preferred θ -phase that progressively diminishes for each new
θ -cycle (
Buzsáki, 2005; Huxter et al., 2008 ) ( Figure 3A). As
discussed in Jensen and Lisman (1996) and Skaggs et al. (1996) ,
this phenomenon helps to recapitulate the temporal sequence of
the rat’s positions in space during each θ -period and it is therefore
widely believed to enhance learning (
Buzsáki, 2002, 2005).
Simulations show that indeed, θ -precession signiﬁcantly
enlarges the learning region, making otherwise poorly
performing ensembles much more capable of learning. Without
θ -precession, the learning region L is small and sparse, and
vice versa, certain place cell ensembles that in absence of θ lay
beyond the learning region, become functional with the addi tion
of θ -precession ( Figure 3B). Moreover, θ -precession increases
the probability of the correct outcome for ensembles that
occasionally fail to form an accurate map, which suggests tha t
θ -precession may not just correlate with, but actually enforce
spatial learning (
Arai et al., 2014).
In terms of the coactivity complex’ structure, θ -enhancement
of learning is manifested through shortened durations of th e
spurious 1 D cycles, while initially increasing their number. In
other words, θ -modulation suppresses spurious defects in the
cognitive map at the price of creating more transient errors a t
the initial stages of the navigation. Curiously, simulatio ns also
show that learning times are relatively insensitive to the d etails
of the θ -wave structure: the presence of a spike-modulating θ -
rhythm by itself is more important than a speciﬁc wave shape
(
Arai et al., 2014).
As for the interplay with the coactivity parameters,
the stabilization of the Tmin(w) dependence is achieved at
approximately the same range of ws as without the θ -precession,
at w ∼ 1 − 2 θ -cycles ( Arai et al., 2014 ) ( Figure 2). Such
recurrent matches between the preferred coactivity timesca le
and the θ -timescale suggest that the interplay between neuronal
spiking and the parameters of animal’s behavior (e.g., speed)
required for optimal processing of topological information
may actually deﬁne the temporal domain of neuronal
synchronization in the rat’s hippocampal network. Thus,
θ -modulated coactivity complexes provide a self-consistent
description of the hippocampal network’s function at the θ -
timescale, predicting inter alia an optimal integration window
for reading out the information and the temporal domain
of synchronization.
(ii) γ -modulation of spiking . As w shrinks beyond the
range predicted for the independently θ -precessing place cells
(w < wo), spatial learning fails. Interestingly, this happens
precisely at the timescale where complementary mechanisms of
spike synchronization, driven by the second key component of
the hippocampal brain waves—the γ -oscillations—are taking
over (
Colgin et al., 2009; Buzsáki and Wang, 2012 ). This raises
question about whether an additional γ -synchronization
of spiking could improve the predicted properties of
the cognitive map, i.e., produce topologically correct
coactivity complexes.
Physiologically, γ -wave represents fast oscillations of the
inhibitory post-synaptic potentials. As its amplitude Aγ (t) drops
at a certain location, the surrounding cells with high membra ne
potential spike (
Lisman, 2005; Jia and Kohn, 2011; Nikoli et
al., 2013 ). As a result, each γ -trough deﬁnes the preferred θ -
phase of several cells, i.e., marks an ignition of a particular
place cell combination, represented by a coactivity simplex.
Computationally, coupling spike times with the γ -wave can be
achieved by modulating neuronal ﬁring rates with a Boltzmann
factor e− Aγ (t)/τ i . The parameter τ i can be interpreted as an
eﬀective “temperature” that controls the temporal spread of
spikes around the ith γ -trough: for large mean τ = ⟨ τ i⟩, the
spikes are “hot, ” i.e., spread diﬀusely near the γ -troughs and for
small τ they “freeze” at them. In particular, the case in which the
spike trains are uncorrelated with the γ -troughs corresponds to
the limiting case of an “inﬁnitely hot” hippocampus ( τ = ∞ ,
e.g., the pure θ -modulated cells discussed above). Meanwhile,
the “physiological” eﬀective temperature that describes the
characteristic huddling of spikes within a γ -period observed in
the experiments (
Colgin et al., 2009; Colgin and Moser, 2010 ) is
comparable to the mean γ -amplitude, τ ≈ Aγ .
The net eﬀect of the γ -modulation on the coactivity
complexes is as follows: as the eﬀective temperature drops and
the temporal spread of the spikes near the γ -troughs shrinks, the
coactivity complexes produce fewer, faster-contracting spuri ous
loops. In particular, at the “physiological” eﬀective temperatur es,
γ -synchronized cognitive map can robustly capture the topology
of the environment by integrating place cell coactivity at the γ -
timescale, i.e., yield ﬁnite learning times at w < wos, which
provides a direct demonstration of the importance of the γ -
synchronization at the systemic level.
This result may shed light on the well-known correlation
between successful learning and retrieval with the increas e
of the γ -amplitude in raised attention states (
Moretti et al.,
2009; Vugt et al., 2010; Lundqvist et al., 2011; Trimper et al. ,
2014). In particular, it helps understanding why suppression of
the γ -waves induced, e.g., by psychoactive drugs ( Whittington
et al., 2000a,b ), such as cocaine ( Dilgen et al., 2013; McCracken
and Grace, 2013 ), or arising due to neurodegeneration or
aging ( Vreugdenhil and Toescu, 2005; Lu et al., 2011 ), usually
correlates with learning impairments—according to the mode l,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 7 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 3 | Brain waves enhances learning. (A) θ -precession and γ -synchronization modulate place cell spiking activity: Sp ike times precess with the θ -rhythm (≈ 8
Hz), schematically shown by the red wave: as the rat traverse s a place ﬁeld, the corresponding place cell discharges at a pr ogressively earlier phase in each new
θ -cycle. The preferred θ -phases correspond to γ -cycles (≈ 60 Hz). The blue wave shows the net θ + γ amplitude. Boxed image: the spikes, shown by tickmarks
colored according to the place ﬁelds traversed by the animal’ s trajectory, cluster over the γ -troughs, yielding dynamical cell assemblies. The spike ti me probabilities
are modulated by a Boltzmann factor e− Aγ (t)/τ , where Aγ the amplitude of a trough and τ is an “effective temperature.” (B) Learning regions with θ -precession (left)
and without it (right). In the latter case, the size and the den sity of L diminishes, indicating that θ -oscillations enhance place cells’ ability of to encode spa tial maps,
making them more resilient in the face of the spiking rate or p opulation size changes. Computations are made for a 1 × 1 m environment shown in the top left corner.
all these phenomena suppress map formation—or retrieval—at
the γ timescale. On the constructive side, the model suggests
a new characteristics of the γ -synchronized spiking activity—
the eﬀective γ -temperature of spiking—that may be studied
empirically and explained via neuronal mechanisms.
3.4. Ramiﬁcations of Coactivity Complexes
The predictions derived from the constructions discussed ab ove
are not universal. For example, a direct application of the mode l
to the case of the bats navigating 3 D caves (
Ulanovsky and Moss,
2007; Y artsev and Ulanovsky, 2013) often produces dysfunctional
coactivity complexes, with hundreds of persistent spurious
loops—even for the experimentally observed parameters of
spiking activity (
Hoﬀman et al., 2016 ). On the one hand, this
failure can be explained by the relatively high speeds of the
bat’s movements (over 2 m/s), which allows producing spurious
coactivities between place cells with non-overlapping place ﬁe lds
(
Hoﬀman et al., 2016 ). On the other hand, it also suggests that
the very idea that place cells operate by responding to certain
spatial domains (currently dominating in the ﬁeld) may be only a
simpliﬁed interpretation of their spiking mechanism, suitabl e for
low speeds and basic environments. The model points out that
deriving topological maps from such “passive responses” may, at
higher speeds, generate mismatches between the spatial patter n
of the prearranged place ﬁelds and the temporal pattern of the
corresponding place cells’ coactivities. In other words, the model
suggests that the raw pool of place cell spiking data requires
editing—a surprising conclusion because it appeals to reasoning
beyond the model’s original setup. In eﬀect, it suggests that t he
hippocampal network should be wired to highlight some place
cell coactivities and suppress others, even though no explicit
references to the networks’ structure were made in the origi nal
Alexandrov- ˇCech construction.
Curiously, this line of arguments addresses to a well-
known neurophysiological phenomenon, namely the fact
that place cells tend to form operative units known as
cell assemblies—functionally interconnected groups of neurons
that drive their respective “readout” neurons in the downstre am
networks (
Harris et al., 2003; Harris, 2005; Jackson and Redish,
2007; O’Neill et al. , 2008; Buzsaki, 2010 ). The spiking response
of the latter actualizes connectivity relationships betwee n the
regions encoded by the individual place cells: if a speciﬁc instance
of place cell coactivity does not elicit a response of a readout
neuron, then the corresponding connectivity information do es
not contribute to the hippocampal map (
Buzsaki, 2010; Babichev
et al., 2016b ). A cell assembly network of a speciﬁc architecture
can thus control processing of the information supplied by the
place cell spiking activity and the overall connectivity stru cture
of the cognitive maps ( Figure 4A).
3.4.1. Clique Coactivity Complexes
A simple model a place cell assembly network can be built by
constructing a coactivity graph G, whose vertexes vi correspond
to place cells ci and the links, ς i0i1 = [vi0 , vi1 ] represent
the connections (functional or physiological) between pairs o f
coactive cells (
Burgess and O’Keefe, 1996; Muller et al., 1996 ).
The place cell assemblies then correspond to fully interconnected
subgraphs of G, i.e., to its maximal cliques ς = [ci0 , ci1 , . . . , cin ].
As a combinatorial objects, cliques are identical to the simpl exes
span by the same sets of vertexes; hence the collection of G-
cliques produces a complex ( Jonsson, 2008) that may serve as a
schematic representation of either the cell assembly network or
the cognitive map encoded by it ( Babichev et al., 2016a).
Simulations show that such complexes, denoted below as Tς ,
are structurally very similar to the original coactivity co mplexes
derived from the higher-order place cell coactivities, which we
will denote as Tσ . However functionally, Tς s often perform much
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 8 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 4 | Synaptic efﬁcacies and cell assembly complexes. (A) Cell assemblies are functionally interconnected network o f place cells (black dots) are modeled as
cliques of the coactivity graph G. Spikes from kth pair of coactive place cells in an assembly σ are transmitted to a readout neuron (blue pentagons) with pr obability
pσ ,k < 1 (an ignited cell assembly is shown in red). The net structur e of the cell assembly network is represented by the correspo nding cell assembly complex TCA,
which captures the topology of underlying environment E. (B) The number of coactivity links shrinks with the diminishing spike transmission probability at a power rate
(black line), whereas the number of spurious topological lo ops in TCA proliferates exponentially. (C) As synapses weaken, the learning time Tmin grows at a power rate.
The size of the data points represents the percentage of the o utcomes with the correct Betti numbers [ b0,1(TCA) = b0,1(E) = 1]. Computations are performed using an
ensemble of N = 400 neurons with a mean ﬁring rate of f = 28 Hz and mean place ﬁeld size 30 cm.
better than Tσ s, e.g., they exhibit a much smaller number of
shorter-living spurious loops, more robust learning times, e tc.
(Babichev et al., 2016a; Basso et al., 2016; Hoﬀman et al., 2016 ).
The explanation for this eﬀect is simple: the lowest order,pairwise
place cell coactivities are captured easier and more reliably than
the higher-order coactivity events (Katz et al., 2007; Brette, 2012).
An additional advantage is oﬀered by a structural ﬂexibility of
the clique coactivity complexes, since it is possible to assemb le its
individual cliques ς ∈ Tς by accumulating low order coactivities
over time, rather than by detecting higher-order coactivity events.
For example, in order to identify a third-order coactivity cl ique,
ς = [ci0 , ci1 , ci2 ], one can ﬁrst detect the coactive pair [ ci0 , ci1 ],
then [ ci1 , ci2 ] and then [ ci0 , ci2 ], over an extended integration
window ̟ , whereas in order to produce a coactivity simplex
σ = [ci0 , ci1 , ci2 ], all three cells must become active within a single
coactivity window w.
From the physiological perspective, the clique construction
can be used to model a wide scope of physiological phenomena,
e.g., for testing whether the readout neurons may operate as
“coincidence detectors” that respond to nearly simultaneous
activity of the pre-synaptic cells [for short integration win dows
̟ ∼ w
Katz et al., 2007; Brette, 2012 ] or as “integrators”
of the spiking inputs [for ̟ ≫ w König et al., 1996; Magee,
2000; London and Häusser, 2005; Spruston, 2008; Ratté et al.,
2015
], along with the intermediate and/or mixed cases. The
original approach based on the Alexandrov- ˇCech’s construction
corroborates with the ﬁrst scenario: indeed, the nerve complex N
is derived from the spatial overlaps between the regions, whic h
mark the domains of nearly simultaneous place cell coactivit y.
The architecture of the clique coactivity complex suggests an
alternative approach that signiﬁcantly broadens the models’
capacity to represent synaptic computations.
Simulations show that, in fact, the connections within most
cliques of G activate nearly simultaneously, i.e., most simplexes
of Tσ are also present in Tς . Nevertheless, there exists a small
population of cliques that are never observed as simultaneous
coactivity events and require assembling over extended peri ods
(
Hoﬀman et al., 2016). As a result, clique coactivity complexes Tς
are typically larger and produce much fewer spurious topologica l
loops that rapidly disappear with learning. In particular, such
complexes produce correct topological maps of 3 D spaces for
the experimentally observed parameters of the spiking activit y
(
Hoﬀman et al., 2016 ), suggesting that the readout neurons in
bats’ (para)hippocampal areas should function as integrators
of synaptic inputs (with estimated spike integration period of
about 4 min), rather than detectors of place cells’ coactivity —a
prediction that may potentially be veriﬁed experimentally.
Another curious diﬀerence between the rats’ and the bats’
cognitive map construction mechanism is that less than 4%
of the bat’s place cells exhibit signiﬁcant θ -modulated ﬁring
(
Y artsev and Ulanovsky, 2013), which implies that θ -precession
in these animals may not play the same role as in rats. Indeed,
simulating bat’s movements with and without θ -precession
reveals that in the θ -oﬀ case, the ensembles of place cells
acquire correct maps faster than in the θ -on cases, producing
fewer topological loops both in the simplicial and in the clique
coactivity complexes (
Hoﬀman et al., 2016 ). To explain these
results, one can consider the eﬀect of θ -precession from two
perspectives: on the one hand, it synchronizes place cells and
hence increases their coactivity rate, which may help learn ing
(
Buzsáki, 2002; Harris et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2004; Geisler et
al., 2010; Jezek et al., 2011 ). On the other hand, it can be
viewed as a constraint that reduces the probability of the cell s’
coactivity and hence decimates the pool of coactivity events
(
Skaggs et al., 1996 ). In relatively slow moving rats, when the
coactivity events are reliably captured, the ﬁrst eﬀect domin ates,
contributing a steady inﬂux of grouped spikes to downstream
neurons. In rapidly moving bats however, when the network
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 9 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
struggles to capture the coactivities, the constraint impose d by
phase precession acts more as an impediment and slows down
spatial learning process.
3.5. Cell Assembly Complex
Question arises, whether the coactivity complexes may be
implemented, in some capacity, in physiological networks or vice
versa, whether it is possible to construct complexes that captur e
the organization of the cell assembly networks. Simulations
show that the original set of coactive place cell combination s
is very large: the numbers of d-dimensional simplexes in Tς ,
Nd, scale proportionally to the binomial coeﬃcients Cd+ 1
N . More
speciﬁcally, it can be shown that the ratios η d = Nd/ Cd+ 1
N depend
primarily on the mean place ﬁeld sizes and the ﬁring rates and not
on the number of cells within the ensemble, N (
Arai et al., 2014).
In contrast, the number of cells that may potentially serve as
readout neurons is similar to the number of place cells N, which
implies that only a small fraction of coactive place cell groups
can form assemblies (
Shepherd, 2004; Buzsaki, 2010 ). This raises
the question: is it possible to identify a suﬃciently small bu t
functionally complete set of place cell combinations—putativ e
cell assemblies—using simple selection rules?
In model’s terms, the task of identifying a subpopulation
of coactive place cell combinations corresponds to selecting
a “cell assembly subcomplex” TCA of Tς , according to some
biologically motivated criteria. First, the total number o f the
maximal simplexes in TCA should be comparable to the number
of its vertexes (i.e., of active cells), Nmax(TCA) ≈ N(TCA),
but the latter should not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the origina l
number of place cells, N(TCA) ≈ N(Tς ). Second, only a few cell
assemblies (selected cliques) should be active at a given lo cation,
to avoid redundancy of the place cell code. Conversely, the
periods during which all place cell assemblies are inactive sh ould
be short, so that the rat’s movements should not go unnoticed
by the hippocampal network. Third, the larger is the number
of cells shared by consecutively igniting cell assemblies ( i.e., by
the adjacent simplexes in a simplicial path), the more contiguo us
is the representation of the rat’s moves. Hence the contiguit y
between the simplexes in TCA should not decrease compared to
Tς . Lastly, TCA should correctly capture the topological shape of
the environment (
Babichev et al., 2016a).
As it turns out, it is possible to carry out the required
construction by selecting the most prominent combinations o f
coactive place cells—the ones that appear most frequently. Thi s
selection principle is motivated by the Hebbian “ﬁre togetherwire
together” neuronal plasticity mechanisms: frequently appear ing
combinations have a higher chance of being wired into the
network (
Neves et al., 2008 ). Speciﬁcally, one can construct
the desired clique complexes by identifying the connections the
coactivity graphs G(ξ ) that activate at a rate exceeding a certain
threshold ξ . Alternatively, one can select, for every cell ci, its n0
neighbor-cells that are most frequently coactive with ci, which
yields another family of coactivity graphs, G(n0). Computations
show that the ﬁrst family, G(ξ ), exhibits certain random graph
properties while the second family, G(n0), demonstrates scale-
free properties ( Barabási and Albert, 1999; Albert and Barabási,
2002), characteristic of the hippocampal network ( Bonifazi et
al., 2009; Li et al., 2010 ). However, both families of “restricted”
coactivity graphs allow constructing operational cognitive m ap
models, for a viable set of ξ s and n0s.
As expected, the size and the dimensionality of the
corresponding clique complexes, Tς (ξ ) and Tς (n0), decrease with
the growing threshold ξ or diminishing n0. In addition, their
maximal simplexes become more contiguous and their number,
Nmax, remains close to the number of cells. Lastly, the topological
behavior of both Tς (ξ ) and Tς (n0) is also regular: with minor
rectiﬁcation algorithms that do not change signiﬁcantly th e
complex’s structure or alter the appearance rate of simplexes,
correct topological shapes can be attained as fast and as relia bly
as with the entire set of the place cell coactivities, without
compromising the place cell coverage of the environment or
fragmenting the map (
Babichev et al., 2016a ). Thus, the generic
biological requirements listed above are met and we may
conclude that the selected “critical mass” of coactive place cell
combinations can produce viable cell assembly complexes TCA(ξ )
and TCA(n0) (
Babichev et al., 2016a).
3.6. Synaptic Parameters
The physiologically implementable cell assembly complexes TCA
set the stage for further developments of the topological mode l.
For example, the simplexes of TCA can be rigged with parameters
describing transferring, detecting and interpreting neuro nal
(co)activity in the corresponding cell assemblies, allowing us to
account for the eﬀects of the hippocampal network’s synaptic
architecture and providing a basic description of the synaptic
computations in the cell assemblies.
In a phenomenological approach, synaptic connections can be
characterized simply by the probabilities of transmitting spi kes
from a place cell to a readout neurons’ membranes and by
the probabilities that the latter will spike upon collecting th eir
inputs. If the cell assemblies are modeled as cliques of the
coactivity graph, then the key role is played by the probability
of transmitting the coactivity from the pairs of coactive plac e
cells to the corresponding readout neurons’ and response
probabilities. In principle, these probabilities can be evalua ted
using detailed neuronal and synaptic models; however, in a
simpler phenomenological approach, they may be regarded as
random variables drawn from stationary, unimodal distribut ions
with the modes p∗ (transmission) and q∗ (response) and the
variances /Delta1 p and /Delta1 q. The stationarity here implies that we
disregard synaptic plasticity processes (
Brunel et al., 2004;
Barbour et al., 2007; Buzsáki and Mizuseki, 2014 ).
Under such assumptions, it is possible to study how the large
scale, systemic characteristics of the spatial memory map de pend
on the synaptic strengths, at what point spatial learning may
fail, and so forth. It can be shown, e.g., that if the characte ristic
coactivity transmission probability is high (0.9 ≤ p∗ ≤ 1) then
its small variations do not produce strong eﬀects on the spatial
map. On the other hand, as p∗ decreases further, the changes
accumulate and, as p∗ approaches a certain critical value pcrit,
learning times diverge at a power rate,
Tmin ∝ (p∗ − pcrit)− κ ,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 10 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
with κ ranging typically between 0.1 and 0.5 ( Figure 4B). The
eﬀects produced by the diminishing probability of the post-
synaptic neurons’ responses, q∗, are qualitatively similar but
weaker than the eﬀects of lowering the spike transmission
probability p∗ (
Dabaghian, 2019).
These results suggest explanations for numerous observatio ns
of correlative links between weakening memory capacity and
deterioration of synapses, broadly discussed in neuroscien ce
literature (
Shapiro, 2001; Selkoe, 2002; Toth et al., 2012 ).
According to model, weakening synapses reduce the size the
coactivity complex and degrade its topological structure. Fo r
example, simulations demonstrate the number of connections in
the coactivity graph G near pcrit drops as N2 ∝ (p∗ − pcrit)δ ,
δ ∼ 1, whereas the number of longer-lasting 1 D spurious loops
in the corresponding coactivity complex grows exponentially,
log(b1) ∝ (pcrit − p∗) (Figure 4C), suggesting a phase transition
from a regular to an irregular state (
Donato et al., 2016 ). In
physiological terms, this implies that synaptic depletion redu ces
the number of detectable coactivities while generating def ects
in the cognitive map, which results in a rapid increase of the
learning time.
Moreover, weakening synapses reduce the learning region
down to its compete disappearance at p∗ = pcrit, which suggests
that spatial learning may fail not only because the parameters
of neuronal ﬁring are pushed beyond a certain ﬁxed “working
range, ” but also because that range itself may shrink or ceas e to
exist. In particular, the fact that the learning region disappe ars
if the transmission probability drops below the critical valu e
implies that deterioration of memory capacity produced by the
synaptic failure cannot be compensated by increasing the place
ﬁeld’s ﬁring rates or by recruiting a larger population of activ e
neurons—for more details see
Dabaghian (2019).
3.7. Dynamical Cell Assemblies
Physiologically, cell assemblies are dynamic structures: they may
form among the cells that demonstrate repeated coactivity an d
disband as a result of deterioration of synaptic connections ,
caused by reduction or cessation of spiking, then reappear during
a subsequent surge of coactivity, disband again and so forth
(
Harris et al., 2003; Buzsaki, 2010 ). In the model, the formation
and disbanding of the cell assemblies is represented by the
appearances and disappearances of the corresponding simplexes,
so that the net dynamics of the cell assembly network and the
evolution of the resulting cognitive map is represented by a
“ﬂickering” cell assembly complex, denoted as F(t). Unlike its
“perennial” counterpart T (t), which can only grow and stabilize
with time ( Figures 5A,B), the ﬂickering complex F(t) may
inﬂate, shrink, fragment into pieces that may fuse back toget her,
produce transient holes, fractures, gaps, and other dynamic
“topological defects” (Figures 5C,D).
One of the key questions that can be addressed by the
model is the following: experimentally, cell assemblies’ li fetimes
range between minutes (
Goldman-Rakic, 1995; Billeh et al.,
2014; Hiratani and Fukai, 2014 ) and hundreds of milliseconds
(Whittington et al., 2000a,b; Bi and Poo, 2001; Bennett et al. ,
2018), whereas cognitive representations of environments can
last for days and months ( Clayton et al., 2003; Brown et al.,
2007; Meck et al., 2013 ). How can a rapidly rewiring network
sustain stable representations of the world? In model’s term s,
can the large-scale topological properties of F(t) be stable,
despite rapid recycling of its simplexes? Computationally, thi s
question can be addressed using Zigzag Persistent Homology
theory (
Edelsbrunner et al., 2002; Carlsson et al., 2009; Carlsson
and Silva, 2010).
(i) Decaying ﬂickering coactivity complexes. Flickering of the
coactivity complexes and their topological dynamics can be
simulated in many ways (see
Battiston et al., 2020 for a broad
review). A simple model can be based on the dynamics of links of
the coactivity graph G as follows.
• Vertexes ς i of G appear at the moment of the
corresponding place cells’ ﬁrst activation and thereupon
remain stable, as place cells do in learned environments
(
Thompson and Best, 1990).
• A link ς ij between vertexes ς i and ς j appears with
probability p+
ij = 1 at the moment when cells ci
and cj become coactive and disappears with probability
p−
ij (t) =∼ e− t/τ ij , where time t is counted from the
moment of ς ij’s last activation and τ ij deﬁnes its proper
decay time. Below we consider a simple case in which all
connections decay at the same rate, τ ij = τ ,
p−
ij (t) =∼ e− t/τ , (2)
so that the decay dynamics of the ﬂickering coactivity
graph depends on a single parameter τ .
• The behavior of the higher-order cliques and hence of the
ﬂickering complex Fτ are also deﬁned by the link decay
period τ . Note that pairs of place cells may coactivate
before decaying, i.e., links in Gτ can rejuvenate; hence
cliques of orders m ≥ 1 may acquire eﬀective lifetimes
τ (m)
e > τ .
As mentioned in §1 of this section, details of the coactivity
complex’ dynamics depend on the sequence in which the rat
traverses place ﬁelds in a map ME . For a given map ME ,
a trajectory γ (t) and ﬁxed physiological parameters (ﬁring
rates, place ﬁeld sizes, etc.), the Betti numbers bk(Fτ (t))
depend primarily on the links’ decay time τ (
Babichev and
Dabaghian, 2017a,b; Babichev et al., 2018, 2019 ). One would
expect that if τ is too small (e.g., if the coactivity simplexes
tend to disappear between two consecutive co-activations of
the corresponding cells), then the ﬂickering complex should
rapidly deteriorate without attaining an adequate topologic al
shape. If τ is too large, then the eﬀect of the decaying
connections should be insigniﬁcant, i.e., the ﬂickering co mplex
Fτ (t) should follow the dynamics of its “perennial” counterpart
T (t) ≡ F∞ (t), constructed for the same spiking parameters. In
particular, if the place cells’ coactivity complex T (t) assumes the
correct topological shape in a biologically viable time Tmin(T ),
then a similar behavior should be expected from its slowly
decomposing counterpart Fτ (t). For intermediate values of τ ,
the topological dynamics of Fτ (t) may exhibit a rich variety
of behaviors.
Simulations show that a characteristic interval between
successive activations of links in the environment shown on
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 11 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 5 | Perennial and ﬂickering coactivity complexes. (A) In absence of decay, the coactivity complex T steadily grows. At ﬁrst, it contains many pieces riddled
transient holes, but then, as the place cells’ spiking infor mation accumulates, there emerges just one stable piece and only one hole survives (shown by red chain of
simplexes)—the one that corresponds to non-contractible s implicial path encircling a hole in the environment E (Figures 3B, 4A). (B) The timelines of 0 D (top) and 1 D
(bottom) topological loops in T , computed using Persistent Homology theory methods, show t hat the topological shape of the coactivity complex stabili zes. One
persistent loop in each dimension remaining after the minim al learning time Tmin (vertical dashed line) indicate the stable topological bar code of T . (C) If decay is
allowed, then the coactivity simplexes may not only appear b ut also disappear, yielding a “ﬂickering” coactivity comple x F . Unlike the perennial complexes T ,
ﬂickering complexes F may never stabilize, i.e., transient topological defects, described by Zigzag Persistent Homology theory (D) may persist indeﬁnitely.
Figures 5A,C is about /Delta1 t ≈ 30 s. If the proper decay times are
not too large (2.5 /Delta1 t ≲ τ ≲ 4.5/Delta1 t), then the time intervals
between consecutive births and deaths of a link ς distribute
bimodally: the relatively short lifetimes distribute expon entially,
with about twice longer eﬀective lifetimes τ (2)
e ≈ 2τ (higher-
order simplexes decay more rapidly, e.g., τ (3)
e ≈ τ , etc.). In
addition, there appears a pool of long-living connections that
persist throughout the entire navigation period ( Figure 6A). In
other words, the ﬂickering coactivity complex Fτ (t) acquires a
stable “core” formed by a population of “surviving simplexes, ”
enveloped by a population of “rapidly ﬂuttering” simplexes.
The resulting mix of skeletal (stable) and ﬂuttering simplex es
rapidly grows at the onset of the navigation and begins to
saturate by the time a typical link makes an appearance, which,
incidentally, is comparable to the “perennial” learning time
Tmin(T ) (a few minutes). The characteristic size of Fτ (t) grows
to about a half of the size of F∞ (t), with about 15% ﬂuctuations
(Figure 6B). Thus, the population of simplexes in Fτ (t) is indeed
transient: although the size of Fτ (t) ﬂuctuates slowly from one
moment of time to the next, the set of simplexes that are present
at a given moment of time t but missing at a later moment t′,
grows as a function of temporal separation |t − t′|, becoming
close to the sizes of either Fτ (t) or Fτ (t′) in approximately one
learning period Tmin(T ) (
Babichev et al., 2018, 2019 ).
The topological shape of Fτ (t) changes much slower: after
a brief initial stabilization period, the topological barcod e
b(Fτ ) remains similar to the barcode of the navigated
environment E, exhibiting occasional topological ﬂuctuations at
the Tmin-timescale ( Figure 6C). Thus, the coactivity complex
Fτ can preserve not only its approximate size but also
its topological structure, despite the ongoing recycling of
its simplexes.
As τ grows, the eﬀective lifetimes τ (2)
e and τ (3)
e , as well
as the number of simplexes actualized at a given moment
increase approximately linearly, yielding a growing “stable core”
(Figure 6). As a result, a complete suppression of topological
ﬂuctuations in the coactivity complex is achieved at a ﬁnite
values of τ = τ ∗ (Figure 7), which gives a theoretical estimate
for the rate of physiological transience that permits stable
representations of the environment E (
Babichev et al., 2018). This
observation illustrates the phenomenon of emergent topological
stability in ﬂickering complexes, which may provide insight into
how transient networks sustain lasting representations of s table
physical reality.
(ii) Finite latency ﬂickering coactivity complexes. An alternative
model of ﬂickering clique complexes can be built by restricti ng
the period over which the coactivity graph is formed to a shorte r
“spike integration” time window ̟ (Theunissen and Miller,
1995; Hoﬀman et al., 2016; Perea, 2019 ). In such approach, the
coactivity simplexes that emerge within the starting ̟ -period,
̟ 1, will constitute a coactivity complex F(̟ 1); the simplexes
appearing within the next window, ̟ 2 will form the complex
F(̟ 2) and so forth. A given clique-simplex ς (as deﬁned by
the set of its vertexes) may therefore appear through a chain
of consecutive windows, ̟ 1, ̟ 2, . . . , ̟ k− 1, then disappear at
the kth step ̟ k (i.e., ς ∈ F(̟ k− 1), but ς / ∈ F(̟ k)), then
reappear in a later window ̟ l≥ k, then disappear again, and so
forth. The duration of ς ’s existence between its k-th consecutive
appearance and disappearance, δ tς ,k, can then be as short as the
shift between the consecutive windows /Delta1̟ or as long as the
animal’s navigation session.
It is natural to view the individual, “instantaneous” complexes
F(̟ i) as instantiations of a single “ﬁnite latency” ﬂickering
coactivity complex, F(̟ i) = F̟ (ti). As it turns out, such
complexes exhibit a number similarities with the decaying
complexes Fτ (t), e.g., for ̟ ≥ Tmin(T ) the pool of maximal
simplexes is renewed at about ̟ timescale, but the net number
of simplexes contained in F̟ (t) changes within about 5 − 10%
of its mean value ( Figure 8A). Biologically, this implies that a
cell assembly network that described by F̟ (t) fully rewires in
about a ̟ period, without changing its overall size. Speciﬁcally,
for ̟ exceeding the perennial learning time Tmin(T ) and small
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 12 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 6 | T opological dynamics of the decaying coactivity complex. (A) The histogram of the time intervals between the connections ’ consecutive appearances and
disappearances: the lifetimes the rapidly “ﬂuttering” simp lexes are distributed exponentially (red line ﬁt). The popul ation of the “survivor” links produces a bulging tail of
the distribution (red arrow). (B) The population of 1 D (blue trace) and 2 D (green trace) simplexes in the decaying “ﬂickering” complex Fτ (t), compared to the population
of 1D and 2D simplexes in the perennial complex T (t) (dashed lines). The size of Fτ (t) remains dynamic, whereas T (t) saturates in about 10 min. (C) At τ = 125 s
decay period, the mean Betti numbers b0(Fτ ) (blue) and b1(Fτ ) (green) converge to their “physical” values b0,1 = 1 as the active place cell population increases from
N = 300 to N = 750 units; the b0,1-ﬂuctuations decrease (shrinking error bars) and the rates ξ 0,1 of producing the correct Betti values grow to nearly 100 %. Statistics
evaluated over a T = 25 min navigation period.
FIGURE 7 | T opological stabilization. As the decay constant τ grows from ∼ 75 to ∼ 135 s, the topological shape of Fτ (t) stabilizes. A complete suppression of
topological ﬂuctuations is achieved for τ ≈ 2 − 2.5 min, with the other system parameters (rat’ s speed, plac e cell ﬁring rates, place ﬁeld sizes, etc.) within a
physiological range. Blue and green dots show Betti numbers b0 and b1 at select moments of time. The ξ values show the percentage of times when physically
correct topological signature was captured.
time steps /Delta1̟ ≳ 0.01̟ , the intervals δ tς ,k, as well as their
means, tς = ⟨ δ tς ,k⟩k, are exponentially distributed, which allows
characterizing the simulated cell assemblies by a half-life, τ ̟ that
typically varies within τ ς ≈ 3 − 20 s. As ̟ widens, the mean
lifetimes tς of the maximal simplexes grow, and vice versa, as the
memory window shrinks, simplex-ﬂickerings intensify.
On the other hand, the large-scale shape of F̟ (t) is much
more stable than its individual simplexes, as in the case of
the “decay model” (2). The topological ﬂuctuation reduce wit h
growing ̟ , and, for suﬃciently long latency periods ̟ ≥
̟ ∗ ≈ 1.5Tmin they tend to disappear completely (Figure 8B)—
even though the simplexes’ lifetimes remain short ( τ ∗
̟ ≈ 15 s
for the environment illustrated on Figure 5A). For suﬃciently
long latencies, ̟ ≳ 1.2 Tmin(T ), the time required to produce
physical barcode b(F̟ ) = b(E) within typical window ̟ k
is similar to the perennial learning time, ¯Tmin = ⟨ T(k)
min⟩k ≈
Tmin(s, f , N), with a variance of about 20 − 40% of the mean,
which shows that topological dynamics of the simulated cognitive
maps is largely time-invariant. In plain words, this result sh ows
that accumulation of the topological information can start a t any
point (e.g., at the onset of the navigation or after an explorat ory
delay) and produce the desired stable map after about the same
period of learning. In eﬀect, this observation justiﬁes using
perennial coactivity complexes for estimating Tmin in
Dabaghian
et al. (2012), Arai et al. (2014) , Basso et al. (2016) , Hoﬀman et al.
(2016), and Dabaghian (2019).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 13 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
FIGURE 8 | T opological dynamics in the ﬁnite latency ﬂickering complexe s. (A) At each moment, tn, the blue line shows the proportion of maximal simplexes of F̟ (tn)
that were present at the previous time tn− 1, i.e., in F̟ (tn− 1). The green line shows the proportion of maximal simplexes o f F̟ (tn) that were present at the onset of the
navigation, i.e., in F̟ (t1). The latter population changes by about 95 % in about 2 min. (B) The low-dimensional Betti numbers, b1, b2, b3, and b4 (colors shown in the
left box) as a function of time, computed using ̟ = 1.5Tmin demonstrate full topological stabilization of F̟ (t), whose shape fully matches the topological shape of the
underlying environment (right box) at all times. Here ( s, f, N) is (23, 28, 350).
Moreover, for these latencies [ ̟ ≳ ̟ crit ≈ 1.4Tmin(T )],
the instantaneous learning times T(k)
min become ̟ -independent,
i.e., the ﬁnite latency model can provide a parameter-free
characterization of the time required by a network of place ce ll
assemblies to represent the topology of the environment and
establishes the timescale for the topological ﬂuctuations i n the
simulated cognitive map.
Note that ﬁnite latency model ( ii) cannot be naívely reduced
to the decay model ( i) by ﬁxing the links’ lifetimes, i.e., by using
the decay probability
p− (t) =
{
1 if t = τ
0 if t ̸= τ . (3)
The topological structure of the “quenched-decay” coactivi ty
complex F ∗
τ (t) controlled by the distribution (3) exhibits more
unstable dynamics than either F̟ (t) or Fτ (t), even for the
τ -values that reliably produce physical Betti numbers for the
exponentially distributed lifetimes. As decay slows down (i .e., as
τ grows), the population of survivor links produced by (3) also
grows and the topological structure of F ∗
τ (t) eventually stabilizes;
nevertheless, robust Betti numbers appear at much higher valu es
of τ than with the exponentially decaying links, and the match
between them and the physical Betti numbers is much less
frequent. Thus, the statistical spread of the connections’ l ifetimes
produced by the tail of the exponential distribution (2) plays a n
important role in attaining the net complex’ stability, i.e., t hat
a certain “synaptic disorder” is required for eﬀective learni ng
(
Chowdhury et al., 2018).
Overall, the model suggests that although many details of
topological dynamics of ﬂickering complexes may depend on
the simplexes’ lifetimes and other parameters, several qualit ative
features, notably the emergent topological stability of F(t) are
universal, i.e., largely independent from the simplex-recycling
mechanisms. In fact, even if the functional connections bet ween
place cells are established and pruned randomly, at a rate that
matches the statistics (2), the resulting random connectiv ity
graph Gr(t) produces a random clique complex Fr(t) whose Betti
numbers converge to the Betti numbers of the environment at the
same timescale as the Betti numbers of Fτ (t) or F̟ (t), exhibiting
similar pattern of the topological ﬂuctuations. Importantly, in the
latter case, the details of these processes are controlled by the
physiological parameters, e.g., by the number of active cells a nd
their ﬁring rates (see Figure 6C and
Babichev et al., 2018, 2019 ).
3.8. Memory Spaces
In the above discussion, the coactivity complexes were used
to describe topological structure of the hippocampal spatial
memory frameworks—cognitive maps (
Moser et al., 2008;
Schmidt and Redish, 2013 ). However, it is well-known that
hippocampus encodes not only spatial but also generic, non-
spatial memories (
Wood et al., 2000; Ginther et al., 2011; Wixted
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020 ), embedding them into broader
contexts, placing them in sequence of preceding and succeedin g
events (Agster et al., 2002; Fortin et al., 2002 ). In Eichenbaum et
al. (1999) it was suggested that the resulting integrated memory
structure may be viewed as a memory space M that subjects
can “mentally explore” or “mentally navigate” ( Theves et al.,
2020). In other words, it was suggested that individual memory
episodes and the spatiotemporal relationships between them
may be viewed as “locations” or “regions” that may overlap,
contain one another or be otherwise related in a spatial manne r
(
Babichev and Dabaghian , 2018 ). In particular, the standard
spatial inferences that enable spatial cognition and behavio r are
viewed as particular examples of the memory space navigations
(
Johnson and Redish, 2007; Hopﬁeld, 2010; Issa and Zhang, 2012;
Dabaghian, 2016).
From a physiological perspective, the fact that a memory
space associated with a given environment E is encoded by the
same place cell population that produces a cognitive map of E,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 14 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
suggests that the corresponding coactivity complex TCA may be
used to represent both structures. To gain an insight into thi s
representation, notice that any simplicial complex, in particul ar
TCA, deﬁnes a ﬁnite topological space A(TCA), endowed with
Alexandrov topology: the locations in A(TCA) correspond to
the coactivity simplexes and the topological neighborhoods o f
a given location represented by a simplex ς are formed by
the locations whose simplexes include ς (Alexandroﬀ, 1937;
Babichev and Dabaghian , 2018 ). Since the simplexes of TCA
represent combinations of coactive place cells, which, in tur n,
are believed to represent memory elements, one may view
the resulting “topological space of coactivities” A(TCA) as a
representation of the topological memory space encoded by the
corresponding cell assembly network, M = A(TCA). There are
three immediate implications of this construction.
i. The dynamics of the large-scale topological structure
of memory space can be inferred directly from the algebro-
topological studies of the corresponding coactivity complexes ,
since the (singular) homologies of M(TCA) are identical to the
(simplicial) homologies of the coactivity complex TCA (
McCord,
1966; Stong, 1966; Babichev et al., 2016a ). This implies, e.g.,
that a memory space that contains a topological map of a given
environment emerges over the same learning period Tmin and
within the same scope of spiking parameters L as the cognitive
map, that it is similarly aﬀected by the brain waves, by the
deteriorating synapses, etc., and by the remappings (
Babichev
and Dabaghian , 2018).
ii. It can be shown that neuronal activity representing a
trajectory γ traced by the animal in physical space maps
continuously into path ℘ navigated in the Alexandrov topology
of the memory space M(TCA). This provides a theoretical base
for the intuition of “mental exploration, ” allowing to inter pret
the succession of the place cell activities as a representatio n of
a continuous succession of memory episodes ( Samsonovich and
McNaughton, 1997; Issa and Zhang, 2012; Buzsáki et al., 2014 ;
Dabaghian, 2016).
iii. In neuroscience literature it is recognized that “ space
is constructed in the brain rather than perceived, and the
hippocampus is central to this construction , ” and yet its meaning
remains unclear: “ how can spaceless data enter the hippocampal
system and spatial cognitive maps come out ” (
O’Keefe and Nadel,
1978; Nadel and Hardt, 2004 ). The topological model may shed
light on these problems, because it allows interpreting spatia lity
intrinsically, as a certain relational structure deﬁned on spiking
activity (Vickers, 1989; Roeper, 1997; Cohn and Hazarika, 2001 ),
thus providing an ontological foundation for the emergent
spatiality of the cognitive map, mentioned in the Introductio n.
4. DISCUSSION
Extensive studies are dedicated to establishing correlati ons
between parameters of neuronal activity and the characteris tics
of cognitive phenomena that emerge from this activity (
Postle,
2006). The approach discussed above aims at ﬁlling the “semantic
gap” between these two scales of information processing withi n
a uniﬁed framework, based on the conjecture about topologica l
nature of the hippocampal memory organization ( Dabaghian
et al., 2014; Babichev et al., 2016b; Babichev and Dabaghian ,
2018). A formal connection with the realm of simplicial topology
is made based on an observation that neuronal computations
may be described as operations over spike combinations—
which ones are produced over a given period, which ones
are detected or transformed into speciﬁc outputs, etc. Viewin g
each particular collection of spikes as an abstract simplex
allows representing large volumes of spiking data as abstract
simplicial complexes whose topological properties describe the
net qualitative information emerging at the neuronal ensemb le
level. With this approach, the simplicial complex’ dynamics
may be used as a metaphor for the learning processes, which
permits not only phenomenological descriptions at diﬀerent
spatiotemporal scales but also possesses explanatory power, i.e. ,
allows embedding empirical data into qualitative and quantitative
schemas for reasoning about cognitive phenomena.
The framework also allows describing the ﬂow of information
in transient networks, which signiﬁcantly expands the scope o f
the modeled phenomena. The net structure of this information
is represented by ﬂickering coactivity complexes that exhibi t
topological dynamics at three complementary timescales. The
fastest timescale corresponds to rapid recycling of the local
connections, which represents the ﬂow of the ongoing, temporary
information—the short-term memory (
Hebb, 1949; Cowan,
2008). The net topological dynamics, described by the time-
dependent invariants, e.g., Betti numbers, unfolds at a time scale
that is by about an order of magnitude slower than the simplex-
level ﬂuctuations. Physiologically, this “operational” tim escale
corresponds to the intermediate-term memory (
Eichenbaum et
al., 1994; Kesner and Hunsaker, 2010 ). Lastly, the topological
variations occur over a robust base that marks persistent,
qualitative characteristics that marks the long-term memory .
Such stratiﬁcation indicates functional importance of the
complementary learning systems for processing information
at diﬀerent levels of spatiotemporal granularity (
O’Reilly
and McClelland, 1994; McClelland et al., 1995; Fusi et al.,
2005
).
The model reveals complex interactions between these
dynamics; for example, for suﬃciently slow transience rates ,
the ﬂuctuations of the topological shapes encoded by the
network freeze out, i.e., the simulated cognitive map can ac quire
topological stability. Physiologically, this implies that i f the
cell assemblies rewire suﬃciently slowly, then the net map
encoded by the corresponding network may retain its structur e
despite the recycling connections in its neuronal substrate . In
other words, the model suggests that synaptic and structural
plasticity, which are ultimately responsible for the network ’s
ability to incorporate new information (
McHugh and Tonegawa,
2009; Leuner et al., 2010; Schaefers et al., 2010 ), do not
necessarily compromise the qualitative information represe nted
by the system. Rather, renewing connections allow correcti ng
errors, e.g., removing spurious topological defects that may
have appeared by an accident. As a result, a network capable
of recycling information demonstrates better learning capac ity,
suggesting that both learning and forgetting components are
necessary for physiological learning (
Dupret et al., 2010; Kuhl
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 15 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
et al., 2010; Murre et al., 2013 ). The model also suggests
that memory deterioration caused by an overly rapid decay of
the network’s connections may be compensated by increasing
neuronal activity, e.g., by boosting the neuronal ﬁring rat es
(
Babichev et al., 2018) or by increasing the “oﬀ-line, ” endogenous
activity of the hippocampal network that can occur in wake
or in sleep states (
Ji and Wilson, 2007; Karlsson and Frank,
2009; Dragoi and Tonegawa, 2011, 2013 ). In certain contexts,
such replays can be viewed as manifestations of the animal’s
“mental explorations” of its cognitive map ( Foster and Wilson,
2006; Johnson and Redish, 2007; Hopﬁeld, 2010; Issa and Zhang,
2012; Dabaghian, 2016
), which are believed to help learning
and memory consolidation ( Girardeau et al., 2010; Roux et al.,
2017). Indeed, the model shows that frequent place cell replays
signiﬁcantly reduce the structural ﬂuctuations in the cogn itive
map, thus helping to separate the fast and the slow timescales and
to extract stable, qualitative representation of the extern al world
(Babichev et al., 2019).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are includ ed
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
YD conceived and wrote this manuscript.
FUNDING
The work was supported by the NSF grants 1422438 and 1901338.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks V. Brant for helping with the text and his
collaborators, notably A. Babichev.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, G., Stevenson, I., Berényi, A., Mizuseki, K., Buzsáki , G., and Sommer, F.
(2014). Spatially distributed local ﬁelds in the hippocampus encode ratposition.
Science 344, 626–630. doi: 10.1126/science.1250444
Agster, K., Fortin, N., and Eichenbaum, H. (2002). The hippocampus a nd
disambiguation of overlapping sequences. J. Neurosci. 22, 5760–5768.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05760.2002
Albert, R., and Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics o f complex networks.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47–97. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.74.47
Alexandroﬀ, P. (1928). Untersuchungen über Gestalt und Lage abg eschlossener
Mengen beliebiger Dimension. Ann. Math. 30, 101–187. doi: 10.2307/1968272
Alexandroﬀ, P. (1937). Diskrete Räume. Rec. Math. 2, 501–518.
Alexandrov, P. (1965). Elementary Concepts of Topology . New York, NY: F. Ungar
Pub. Co.
Alvernhe, A., Sargolini, F., and Poucet, B. (2012). Rats build an d update
topological representations through exploration. Anim. Cogn. 15, 359–368.
doi: 10.1007/s10071-011-0460-z
Ang, C., Carlson, G., and Coulter, D. (2005). Hippocampal CA1
circuitry dynamically gates direct cortical inputs preferentially at th eta
frequencies. J. Neurosci. 25, 9567–9580. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2992-
05.2005
Arai, M., Brandt, V., and Dabaghian, Y. (2014). The eﬀects of th eta precession
on spatial learning and simplicial complex dynamics in a topological
model of the hippocampal spatial map. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10:e1003651.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003651
Babichev, A., Cheng, S., and Dabaghian, Y. (2016b). Topologic al schemas
of cognitive maps and spatial learning. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10:18.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00018
Babichev, A., and Dabaghian, Y. (2017a). Persistent memories
in transient networks. Springer Proc. Phys. 191, 179–188
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-47810-4_14
Babichev, A., and Dabaghian, Y. (2017b). Transient cell assemb ly networks
encode stable spatial memories. Sci. Rep. 7:3959. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-
03423-3
Babichev, A., and Dabaghian, Y. (2018). Topological schemas of memory
spaces. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12:27. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.
00027
Babichev, A., Ji, D., Memoli, F., and Dabaghian, Y. (2016a). A t opological model
of the hippocampal cell assembly network. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10:50.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00050
Babichev, A., Morozov, D., and Dabaghian, Y. (2018). Robust s patial memory
maps encoded by networks with transient connections. PLoS Comput. Biol.
14:e1006433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006433
Babichev, A., Morozov, D., and Dabaghian, Y. (2019). Replays of spatial memories
suppress topological ﬂuctuations in cognitive map. Netw. Neurosci. 3, 707–724.
doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00076
Barabási, A.-L, and Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in rand om networks.
Science 286, 509–512. doi: 10.1126/science.286.5439.509
Barbieri, R., Frank, L., Nguyen, D., Quirk, M., Solo, V., Wilson, M ., et al.
(2004). Dynamic analyses of information encoding in neural ensembles. Neural
Comput. 16, 277–307. doi: 10.1162/089976604322742038
Barbour, B., Brunel, N., Hakim, V., and Nadal, J.-P. (2007). What can we
learn from synaptic weight distributions? Trends Neurosci. 30, 622–629.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2007.09.005
Basso, E., Arai, M., and Dabaghian, Y. (2016). Gamma synchroniza tion inﬂuences
map formation time in a topological model of spatial learning. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 12:e1005114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005114
Battiston, F., Cencetti, G., Iacopini, I., Latora, V., Lucash , M., Patania, A., et al.
(2020). Networks beyond pairwise interactions: structure and dyn amics. Phys.
Rep. 874, 1–92. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2020.05.004
Bellmund, J., de Cothi, W., Ruiter, T., Nau, M., Barry, C., and Doelle r, C. (2020).
Deforming the metric of cognitive maps distorts memory. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4,
177–188. doi: 10.1038/s41562-019-0767-3
Bennett, S., Kirby, A., and Finnerty, G. (2018). Rewiring the
connectome: evidence and eﬀects. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 88, 51–62.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.03.001
Bi, G., and Poo, M. (2001). Synaptic modiﬁcation by correlated
activity: Hebb’s postulate revisited. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 139–166.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.139
Billeh, Y., Schaub, M., Anastassiou, C., Barahona, M., and Koch , C. (2014).
Revealing cell assemblies at multiple levels of granularity. J. Neurosci. Methods
236, 92–106. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.08.011
Bonifazi, P., Goldin, M., Picardo, M., Jorquera, I., Cattani, A. , Bianconi, G.,
et al. (2009). GABAergic hub neurons orchestrate synchrony in de veloping
hippocampal networks. Science 326, 1419–1424. doi: 10.1126/science.1175509
Brette, R. (2012). Computing with neural synchrony. PLoS Comput. Biol.
8:e1002561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002561
Brown, E., Frank, L., Tang, D., Quirk, M., and Wilson, M. (1998). A statistical
paradigm for neural spike train decoding applied to position prediction from
ensemble ﬁring patterns of rat hippocampal place cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 7411–
7425. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-18-07411.1998
Brown, M., Farley, R., and Lorek, E. (2007). Remembrance of places you pa ssed:
social spatial working memory in rats. J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process. 33,
213–224. doi: 10.1037/0097-7403.33.3.213
Brunel, N., Hakim, V., Isope, P., Nadal, J.-P., and Barbour, B. (20 04). Optimal
information storage and the distribution of synaptic weights: perceptron versus
purkinje cell. Neuron 43, 745–757. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00528-8
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 16 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
Burgess, N., and O’Keefe, J. (1996). Cognitive graphs, resisti ve grids, and
the hippocampal representation of space. J. Gen. Physiol. 107, 659–662.
doi: 10.1085/jgp.107.6.659
Buzsáki, G. (2002). Theta oscillations in the hippocampus. Neuron 33, 325–340.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00586-X
Buzsáki, G. (2005). Theta rhythm of navigation: link between path integration
and landmark navigation, episodic and semantic memory. Hippocampus 15,
827–840. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20113
Buzsaki, G. (2010). Neural syntax: cell assemblies, synapsembles, and readers.
Neuron 68, 362–385. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.09.023
Buzsáki, G., and Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in co rtical networks.
Science 304, 1926–1929. doi: 10.1126/science.1099745
Buzsáki, G., and Mizuseki, K. (2014). The log-dynamic brain: ho w skewed
distributions aﬀect network operations. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 264–278.
doi: 10.1038/nrn3687
Buzsáki, G., Peyrache, A., Kubie, J. (2014). Emergence of cogn ition
from action. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 79, 41–50.
doi: 10.1101/sqb.2014.79.024679
Buzsáki, G., and Wang, X. (2012). Mechanisms of gamma oscillations . Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 35, 203–225. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150444
Cacucci, F., Yi, M., Wills, T., Chapman, P., and O’Keefe, J. (2008 ). Place
cell ﬁring correlates with memory deﬁcits and amyloid plaque burden in
Tg2576 Alzheimer mouse model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 7863–7868.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0802908105
Carlsson, G. (2009). Topology and data. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 46, 255–308.
doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-09-01249-X
Carlsson, G., and Silva, Vd. (2010). Zigzag persistence. Found. Comput. Math. 10,
367–405. doi: 10.1007/s10208-010-9066-0
Carlsson, G., Silva, Vd., and Morozov, D. (2009). “Zigzag persist ent
homology and real-valued functions, ” in Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Symposium on Computational Geometry (Aarhus: ACM), 247–256.
doi: 10.1145/1542362.1542408
ˇCech, E. (1932). Théorie générale de l’homologie dans un espace quelc onque.
Fundam. Math. 19, 149–183. doi: 10.4064/fm-19-1-149-183
Chen, Z., Kloosterman, F., Brown, E., and Wilson, M. (2012). Uncove ring
spatial topology represented by rat hippocampal population neuronal
codes. J. Comput. Neurosci. 33, 227–255. doi: 10.1007/s10827-012-
0384-x
Chowdhury, S., Dai, B., and Memoli, F. (2018). The importance of for getting:
limiting memory improves recovery of topological characteristics
from neural data. PLoS ONE 13:e0202561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0202561
Clayton, N., Bussey, T., and Dickinson, A. (2003). Can animals re call the
past and plan for the future? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 685–691. doi: 10.1038/
nrn1180
Cohen, R., Rezai-Zadeh, K., Weitz, T., Rentsendorj, A., Gat e, D., Spivak, I., et
al. (2013). A transgenic Alzheimer rat with plaques, tau pathology, be havioral
impairment, oligomeric A β , and Frank neuronal loss. J. Neurosci. 33, 6245–
6256. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3672-12.2013
Cohn, A. G., and Hazarika, S. M. (2001). Qualitative spatial repres entation and
reasoning: an overview. Fundam. Inf. 46, 1–29. doi: 10.5555/1219982.1219984
Colgin, L., Denninger, T., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., Bonnevie, T ., Jensen, O., et al.
(2009). Frequency of gamma oscillations routes ﬂow of information in the
hippocampus. Nature 462, 353–357. doi: 10.1038/nature08573
Colgin, L., and Moser, E. (2010). Gamma oscillations in the hippocampu s.
Physiology 25, 319–329. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00021.2010
Cowan, N. (2008). What are the diﬀerences between long-term,
short-term, and working memory? Prog. Brain Res. 169, 323–338.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(07)00020-9
Curto, C., and Itskov, V. (2008). Cell groups reveal structure of sti mulus
space. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4:e1000205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1000205
Dabaghian, Y. (2016). Maintaining consistency of spatial in formation in the
hippocampal network: a combinatorial geometry model. Neural Comput. 28,
1051–1071. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00840
Dabaghian, Y. (2019). Through synapses to spatial memory maps: a topolo gical
model. Sci. Rep. 9:572. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-36807-0
Dabaghian, Y., Brandt, V., and Frank, L. (2014). Reconceiving the hippocampal
map as a topological template. eLife 3:e03476. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03476.009
Dabaghian, Y., Memoli, F., Frank, L., and Carlsson, G. (2012). A to pological
paradigm for hippocampal spatial map formation using persistent homology .
PLoS Comput. Biol. 8:e1002581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002581
De Silva, V., and Ghrist, R. (2007). Coverage in sensor networks v ia persistent
homology. Algebr. Geometr. Topol. 7, 339–358. doi: 10.2140/agt.200 7.7.339
Dilgen, J., Tompa, T., Saggu, S., Naselaris, T., and Lavin, A. (2013). Optogenetically
evoked gamma oscillations are disturbed by cocaine administration. Front. Cell
Neurosci. 7:213. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00213
Donato, I., Gori, M., Pettini, M., Petri, G., De Nigris, S., Franz osi, R., et al. (2016).
Persistent homology analysis of phase transitions. Phys. Rev. E 93:052138.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.93.052138
Dragoi, G., and Tonegawa, S. (2011). Preplay of future place cell
sequences by hippocampal cellular assemblies. Nature469, 397–401.
doi: 10.1038/nature09633
Dragoi, G., and Tonegawa, S. (2013). Distinct preplay of multiple nove l
spatial experiences in the rat. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 9100–9105.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1306031110
Dupret, D., Pleydell-Bouverie, B., and Csicsvari, J. (2010). Rate
remapping: when the code goes beyond space. Neuron 68, 1015–1016.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.12.011
Eckert, M., and Abraham, W. (2010). Physiological eﬀects of enriched environment
exposure and LTP induction in the hippocampus in vivo do not transfer
faithfully to in vitro slices. Learn. Mem. 17, 480–484. doi: 10.1101/lm.1822610
Edelsbrunner, H., and Harer, J. (2010). Computational topology: an i ntroduction.
Am. Math. Soc. (Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press), 241.
doi: 10.1090/mbk/069
Edelsbrunner, H., Letscher, D., and Zomorodian, A. (2002). Topolog ical
persistence and simpliﬁcation. Discrete Computat. Geom. 28, 511—533.
doi: 10.1007/s00454-002-2885-2
Eichenbaum, H., Dudchenko, P., Wood, E., Shapiro, M., and Tanila,H. (1999). The
hippocampus, memory, and place cells: is it spatial memory or a memory space?
Neuron 23, 209–226. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80773-4
Eichenbaum, H., Otto, T., and Cohen, N. (1994). Two functional components
of the hippocampal memory system. Behav. Brain Sci. 17, 449–472.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00035391
Fenton, A., Kao, H., Neymotin, S., Olypher, A., V ayntrub, Y., Lytt on, W., et
al. (2008). Unmasking the CA1 ensemble place code by exposures to small
and large environments: more place cells and multiple, irregularly arranged,
and expanded place ﬁelds in the larger space. J. Neurosci. 28, 11250–11262.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2862-08.2008
Fenton, A., and Muller, R. (1998). Place cell discharge is extremely variable during
individual passes of the rat through the ﬁring ﬁeld. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
95, 3182–3187. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.6.3182
Fortin, N., Agster, K., and Eichenbaum, H. (2002). Critical role of the
hippocampus in memory for sequences of events. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 458–462.
doi: 10.1038/nn834
Foster, D., and Wilson, M. (2006). Reverse replay of behavioural s equences
in hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature 440, 680–683.
doi: 10.1038/nature04587
Fusi, S., Drew, P., and Abbott, L. (2005). Cascade models of syna ptically stored
memories. Neuron 45, 599–611. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.001
Geisler, C., Diba, K., Pastalkova, E., Mizuseki, K., Royer, S., and Buzsáki, G. (2010).
Temporal delays among place cells determine the frequency of population theta
oscillations in the hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 7957–7962.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912478107
Ghrist, R. (2008). Barcodes: the persistent topology of data. Bull. Am. Math. Soc.
45, 61–75. doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-07-01191-3
Ginther, M., Walsh, D., and Ramus, S. (2011). Hippocampal neurons enc ode
diﬀerent episodes in an overlapping sequence of odors task. J. Neurosci. 31,
2706–2711. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3413-10.2011
Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S., Buzsaki, G., and Zu garo, M. (2010).
Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat.
Neurosci. 12, 1222–1223. doi: 10.1038/nn.2384
Goldman-Rakic, P. (1995). Cellular basis of working memory.Neuron 14, 477–485.
doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(95)90304-6
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 17 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
Gothard, K., Skaggs, W., and McNaughton, B. (1996). Dynamics o f mismatch
correction in the hippocampal ensemble code for space: interaction bet ween
path integration and environmental cues. J. Neurosci. 16, 8027–8040.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-24-08027.1996
Guger, C., Gener, T., Pennartz, C., Brotons-Mas, J., Edlinger,G., Badia, S. B. I., et al.
(2011). Real-time position reconstruction with hippocampal place cells. Front.
Neurosci. 5:85. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00085
Harris, K. (2005). Neural signatures of cell assembly organization . Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 6, 399–407. doi: 10.1038/nrn1669
Harris, K., Henze, D., Hirase, H., Leinekugel, X., Dragoi, G., Czurkó, A .,
et al. (2002). Spike train dynamics predicts theta-related phase preces sion
in hippocampal pyramidal cells. Nature 417, 738–741. doi: 10.1038/nature
00808
Harris, K. D., Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Dragoi, G., and Buzsaki, G. (2003).
Organization of cell assemblies in the hippocampus. Nature 424, 552–556.
doi: 10.1038/nature01834
Hasselmo, M., Bodelon, C., and Wyble, B. (2002). A proposed function for
hippocampal theta rhythm: separate phases of encoding and retrieval
enhance reversal of prior learning. Neural Comput. 14, 793–817.
doi: 10.1162/089976602317318965
Hatcher, A. (2002). Algebraic Topology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hebb, D. (1949). The Organization of Behavior; A Neuropsychological Theory .
New York, NY: Wiley.
Hiratani, N., and Fukai, T. (2014). Interplay between short- and lon g-
term plasticity in cell-assembly formation. PLoS ONE 9:e101535.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101535
Hoﬀman, K., Babichev, A., and Dabaghian, Y. (2016). A model of to pological
mapping of space in bat hippocampus. Hippocampus 26, 1345–1353.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.22610
Hopﬁeld, J. (2010). Neurodynamics of mental exploration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 1648–1653. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0913991107
Huhn, Z., Orbán, G., Érdi, P., and Lengyel, M. (2005). Theta osci llation-coupled
dendritic spiking integrates inputs on a long time scale. Hippocampus 15,
950–962. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20112
Huxter, J., Senior, T., Allen, K., and Csicsvari, J. (2008). Thet a phase-speciﬁc codes
for two-dimensional position, trajectory and heading in the hippo campus. Nat.
Neurosci. 11, 587–594. doi: 10.1038/nn.2106
Issa, J., and Zhang, K. (2012). Universal conditions for exac t path integration
in neural systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 6716–6720.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1119880109
Jackson, J., and Redish, A. (2007). Network dynamics of hippocampa l cell-
assemblies resemble multiple spatial maps within single tasks. Hippocampus 17,
1209–1229. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20359
Jensen, O., and Lisman, J. (1996). Hippocampal CA3 region predicts memory
sequences: accounting for the phase precession of place cells. Learn. Mem. 3,
279–287. doi: 10.1101/lm.3.2-3.279
Jensen, O., Lisman, J. (2000). Position reconstruction from an e nsemble of
hippocampal place cells: contribution of theta phase coding. J. Neurophysiol.
83, 2602–2609. doi: 10.1152/jn.2000.83.5.2602
Jezek, K., Henriksen, E., Treves, A., Moser, E., and Moser, M.-B . (2011). Theta-
paced ﬂickering between place-cell maps in the hippocampus. Nature 478,
246–249. doi: 10.1038/nature10439
Ji, D., and Wilson, M. (2007). Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex and
hippocampus during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 100–107. doi: 10.1038/nn1825
Jia, X., and Kohn, A. (2011). Gamma rhythms in the brain. PLoS Biol. 9:e1001045.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001045
Johnson, A., and Redish, A. (2007). Neural ensembles in CA3 trans iently encode
paths forward of the animal at a decision point. J. Neurosci. 27, 12176–12189.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3761-07.2007
Jonsson, J. (2008). Simplicial Complexes of Graphs. New York, NY: Springer.
Kang, L., Xu, B., and Morozov, D. (2020). State space discovery in
spatial representation circuits with persistent cohomology. bioRxiv
2020.2010.2006.328773. doi: 10.1101/2020.10.06.328773
Karlsson, M., and Frank, L. (2009). Awake replay of remote experiences i n the
hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 913–918. doi: 10.1038/nn.2344
Katz, Y., Kath, W., Spruston, N., and Hasselmo, M. (2007). Coinci dence
detection of place and temporal context in a network model of spiking
hippocampal neurons. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3:e234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
0030234
Kesner, R., and Hunsaker, M. (2010). The temporal attributes of episodic memory.
Behav. Brain Res. 215, 299–309. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.12.029
König, P., Engel, A., and Singer, W. (1996). Integrator or coin cidence detector?
The role of the cortical neuron revisited. Trends Neurosci. 19, 130–137.
doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(96)80019-1
Kuhl, B., Shah, A., DuBrow, S., and Wagner, A. (2010). Resistan ce to forgetting
associated with hippocampus-mediated reactivation during new learn ing. Nat.
Neurosci. 13, 501–506. doi: 10.1038/nn.2498
Lee, I., Yoganarasimha, D., Rao, G., and Knierim, J. (2004). Compari son of
population coherence of place cells in hippocampal subﬁelds CA1 and CA3.
Nature 430, 456–459. doi: 10.1038/nature02739
Leutgeb, J., Leutgeb, S., Treves, A., Meyer, R., Barnes, C., Mc Naughton,
B., et al. (2005). Progressive transformation of hippocampal neuronal
representations in “morphed” environments. Neuron 48, 345–358.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.007
Li, X., Ouyang, G., Usami, A., Ikegaya, Y., and Sik, A. (2010). S cale-free topology
of the CA3 hippocampal network: a novel method to analyze functional
neuronal assemblies. Biophys. J. 98, 1733–1741. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.
01.013
Lisman, J. (2005). The theta/gamma discrete phase code occuring du ring the
hippocampal phase precession may be a more general brain coding scheme.
Hippocampus 15, 913–922. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20121
Lisman, J., and Idiart, M. (1995). Storage of 7 ± 2 short-term memories
in oscillatory subcycles. Science 267, 1512–1515. doi: 10.1126/science.
7878473
London, M., and Häusser, M. (2005). Dendritic computation. Ann. Rev. Neurosci.
28, 503–532. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.28.061604.135703
Lu, C., Hamilton, J., Powell, A., Toescu, E., and Vreugdenhil, M. (2 011).
Eﬀect of ageing on CA3 interneuron sAHP and γ oscillations is activity-
dependent. Neurobiol. Aging 32, 956–965. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.
05.006
Lum, P., Singh, G., Lehman, A., Ishkanov, T., Vejdemo-Johansson, M., Alagappan,
M., et al. (2013). Extracting insights from the shape of complex data using
topology Sci. Rep. 3:1236. doi: 10.1038/srep01236
Lundqvist, M., Herman, P., and Lansner, A. (2011). Theta and gamma power
increases and alpha/beta power decreases with memory load in an attract or
network model. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 23, 3008–3020. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_
00029
Magee, J. (2000). Dendritic integration of excitatory synaptic input. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 1, 181–190. doi: 10.1038/35044552
Matthews, D., Simson, P., and Best, P. (1996). Ethanol alters s patial
processing of hippocampal place cells: a mechanism for impaired
navigation when intoxicated. Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 20, 404–407.
doi: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.1996.tb01660.x
Maurer, A., Cowen, S., Burke, S., Barnes, C., and McNaughton, B. (2006).
Organization of hippocampal cell assemblies based on theta phase prece ssion.
Hippocampus 16, 785–794. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20202
McClelland, J., McNaughton, B., and O’Reilly, R. (1995). Why there are
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex:
insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of
learning and memory. Psychol. Rev . 102, 419–457 doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.10
2.3.419
McCord, M. C. (1966). Singular homology groups and homotopy
groups of ﬁnite topological spaces. Duke Math. J. 33, 465–474.
doi: 10.1215/S0012-7094-66-03352-7
McCracken, C., and Grace, A. (2013). Persistent cocaine-indu ced reversal
learning deﬁcits are associated with altered limbic cortico-striata l
local ﬁeld potential synchronization. J. Neurosci. 33, 17469–17482.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1440-13.2013
McHugh, T., and Tonegawa, S. (2009). CA3 NMDA receptors are require d for
the rapid formation of a salient contextual representation. Hippocampus 19,
1153–1158. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20684
McHugh, T., Tonegawa, S., Leuner, B., and Gould, E. (2010). Stru ctural
plasticity and hippocampal function. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 61, 111–140.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100359
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 18 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
Meck, W., Church, R., and Olton, D. (2013). Hippocampus, time, and memo ry.
Behav. Neurosci. 127, 655–668. doi: 10.1037/a0034188
Mizuseki, K., Sirota, A., Pastalkova, E., and Buzsáki, G. (200 9). Theta oscillations
provide temporal windows for local circuit computation in the entorh inal-
hippocampal loop. Neuron, 64, 267–280. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.
08.037
Moretti, D., Fracassi, C., Pievani, M., Geroldi, C., Binetti, G. , Zanetti, O., et al.
(2009). Increase of θ/γ ratio is associated with memory impairment. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 120, 295–303. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.012
Moser, E. I., Kropﬀ, E., and Moser M-B. (2008). Place cells, grid cells , and
the brain’s spatial representation system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 69–89.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723
Muller, R., Stead, M., and Pach, J. (1996). The hippocampus as a cognitive graph. J.
Gen. Physiol. 107, 663–694. doi: 10.1085/jgp.107.6.663
Murre, J., Chessa, A., and Meeter, M. (2013). A mathematical model of forgetting
and amnesia. Front. Psychol. 4:76. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00076
Nadel, L., and Hardt, O. (2004). The spatial brain. Neuropsychology 18, 473–476.
doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.18.3.473
Neves, G., Cooke, S., and Bliss, T. (2008). Synaptic plasticity, memory and the
hippocampus: a neural network approach to causality. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
65–75. doi: 10.1038/nrn2303
Nikoli, D., Fries, P., and Singer, W. (2013). Gamma oscillations: pre cise
temporal coordination without a metronome. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 54–55.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.12.003
Nithianantharajah, J., and Hannan, A. (2006). Enriched environments, experience-
dependent plasticity and disorders of the nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7,
697–709. doi: 10.1038/nrn1970
O’Keefe, J., and Nadel, L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. New York,
NY: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press.
O’Neill, J., Senior, T., Allen, K., Huxter, J., and Csicsvari, J. (2 008). Reactivation
of experience-dependent cell assembly patterns in the hippocampus. Nat.
Neurosci. 11, 209–215. doi: 10.1038/nn2037
O’Reilly, R., and McClelland, J. (1994). Hippocampal conjunctive enco ding,
storage, and recall: avoiding a trade-oﬀ. Hippocampus 4, 661–682.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.450040605
Perea, J. (2019). Topological time series analysis. Notices Am. Math. Soc. 66,
686–693. doi: 10.1090/noti1869
Place, R., and Nitz, D. (2020). Cognitive maps: distortions of th e
hippocampal space map deﬁne neighborhoods. Curr. Biol. 30, R340–R342.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.02.085
Postle, B. (2006). Working memory as an emergent property of the mind and brain.
Neuroscience 139, 23–38. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.06.005
Pouget, A., Dayan, P., and Zemel, R. (2000). Information processin g with
population codes. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 125–132. doi: 10.1038/35039062
Ratté, S., Lankarany, M., Rho, Y.-A., Patterson, A., and Presc ott, S. (2015).
Subthreshold membrane currents confer distinct tuning properties that enable
neurons to encode the integral or derivative of their input. Front. Cell Neurosci.
8:452. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00452
Robbe, D., and Buzsáki, G. (2009). Alteration of theta timescale
dynamics of hippocampal place cells by a cannabinoid is
associated with memory impairment. J. Neurosci. 29, 12597–12605.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2407-09.2009
Roeper, P. (1997). Region-based topology. J. Philos. Logic 26, 251–309.
doi: 10.1023/A:1017904631349
Roux, L., Hu, B., Eichler, R., Stark, E., and Buzsaki, G. (2017). Sharp wave ripples
during learning stabilize the hippocampal spatial map. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
845–853. doi: 10.1038/nn.4543
Samsonovich, A., and McNaughton, B. L. (1997). Path integrati on and cognitive
mapping in a continuous attractor neural network model. J Neurosci. 17,
5900–5920. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-15-05900.1997
Schaefers, A., Grafen, K., Teuchert-Noodt, G., and Winter, Y. (2010). Synaptic
remodeling in the dentate gyrus, CA3, CA1, subiculum, and entorhin al cortex
of mice: eﬀects of deprived rearing and voluntary running. Neural Plast.
2010:11. doi: 10.1155/2010/870573
Schmidt, B., and Redish, A. (2013). Neuroscience: navigation with a cognitive map.
Nature 497, 42–43. doi: 10.1038/nature12095
Selkoe, D. (2002). Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure. Science 298, 789–791.
doi: 10.1126/science.1074069
Shapiro, M. (2001). Plasticity, hippocampal place cells, and cognitive maps. Arch.
Neurol. 58, 874–881. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.6.874
Shepherd, G. (2004). The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. 5th Edn.Oxford; New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Skaggs, W., McNaughton, B., Wilson, M., and Barnes, C. (1996).
Theta phase precession in hippocampal neuronal populations and
the compression of temporal sequences. Hippocampus 6, 149–172.
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996)6:2<149::AID-HIPO6>3.0.CO;2-K
Spruston, N. (2008). Pyramidal neurons: dendritic structure and syn aptic
integration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 206–221. doi: 10.1038/nrn2286
Stong, R. E. (1966). Finite topological spaces. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 123, 325–340.
doi: 10.1090/S0002-9947-1966-0195042-2
Tancer, M. (2013). “Intersection patterns of convex sets via s implicial complexes:
a survey, ” in Thirty Essays on Geometric Graph Theory , ed J. Pach (New York,
NY: Springer), 521–540. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0110-0_28
Theunissen, F., and Miller, J. (1995). Temporal encoding in nervo us systems: a
rigorous deﬁnition. J. Comput. Neurosci. 2, 149–162. doi: 10.1007/BF00961885
Theves, S., Fernández, G., and Doeller, C. (2020). The hippocampus
maps concept space, not feature space. J. Neurosci. 40, 7318–7325.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0494-20.2020
Thompson, L., and Best, P. (1990). Long-term stability of the place -ﬁeld activity
of single units recorded from the dorsal hippocampus of freely behaving rats.
Brain Res. 509, 299–308. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90555-P
Toth, M., Melentijevic, I., Shah, L., Bhatia, A., Lu, K., Talwa r, A., et
al. (2012). Neurite sprouting and synapse deterioration in the agin g
Caenorhabditis elegans nervous system. J. Neurosci. 32, 8778–8790.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1494-11.2012
Touretzky, D., Weisman, W., Fuhs, M., Skaggs, W., Fenton, A., a nd Muller,
R. (2005). Deforming the hippocampal map. Hippocampus 15, 41–55.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20029
Trimper, J., Stefanescu, R., and Manns, J. (2014). Recognition memory
and θ − γ interactions in the hippocampus. Hippocampus 24, 341–353.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.22228
Ulanovsky, N., and Moss, C. (2007). Hippocampal cellular and network
activity in freely moving echolocating bats. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 224–233.
doi: 10.1038/nn1829
van Vugt, M., Schulze-Bonhage, A., Litt, B., Brandt, A., and Ka hana, M. (2010).
Hippocampal gamma oscillations increase with memory load. J. Neurosci. 30,
2694–2699. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0567-09.2010
Vickers, S. (1989). Topology via Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vreugdenhil, M., and Toescu, E. (2005). Age-dependent reductio n of γ
oscillations in the mouse hippocampus in vitro. Neuroscience 132, 1151–1157.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.01.025
White, A., and Best, P. (2000). Eﬀects of ethanol on hippocampal
place-cell and interneuron activity. Brain Res. 876, 154–165.
doi: 10.1016/S0006-8993(00)02629-9
Whittington, M., Faulkner, H., Doheny, H., and Traub, R. (2000a) . Neuronal fast
oscillations as a target site for psychoactive drugs.Pharmacol Ther. 86, 171–190.
doi: 10.1016/S0163-7258(00)00038-3
Whittington, M., Traub, R., Kopell, N., Ermentrout, B., and Buhl, E.
(2000b). Inhibition-based rhythms: experimental and mathematic al
observations on network dynamics. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 38, 315–336.
doi: 10.1016/S0167-8760(00)00173-2
Wills, T., Lever, C., Cacucci, F., Burgess, N., and O’Keefe, J. (2005). Attractor
dynamics in the hippocampal representation of the local environment. Science
308, 873–876. doi: 10.1126/science.1108905
Wilson, M., and McNaughton, B. (1993). Dynamics of the hippocampal ensemble
code for space. Science 261, 1055–1058. doi: 10.1126/science.8351520
Wixted, J., Goldinger, S., Squire, L., Kuhn, J., Papesh, M., Smit h, K., et al. (2018).
Coding of episodic memory in the human hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 115, 1093–1098. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1716443115
Wood, E., Dudchenko, P., Robitsek, R., and Eichenbaum, H. (200 0).
Hippocampal neurons encode information about diﬀerent types of
memory episodes occurring in the same location. Neuron 27, 623–633.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00071-4
Wu, C., Schulz, E., Garvert, M., Meder, B., and Schuck, N. (2020 ). Similarities
and diﬀerences in spatial and non-spatial cognitive maps. PLoS Comput. Biol.
16:e1008149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008149
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166


--- Page 19 ---
Dabaghian T opological Model of Hippocampal Map
Wu, X., and Foster, D. (2014). Hippocampal replay captures the unique
topological structure of a novel environment. J. Neurosci. 34, 6459–6469.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3414-13.2014
Y artsev, M., and Ulanovsky, N. (2013). Representation of three-di mensional
space in the hippocampus of ﬂying bats. Science 340, 367–372.
doi: 10.1126/science.1235338
Zomorodian, A. (2005). Topology for Computing . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Zomorodian, A., and Carlsson, G. (2005). Computing persistent homolo gy.
Discrete Comput. Geom. 33, 249–274. doi: 10.1007/s00454-004-1146-y
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Dabaghian. This is an open-access article distr ibuted under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). T he use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the or iginal author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original pub lication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 19 January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 593166
