--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 17 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00097
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97
Edited by:
Wulfram Gerstner,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, Switzerland
Reviewed by:
Maurizio Mattia,
Istituto Superiore di Sanit (ISS), Italy
Paolo Del Giudice,
Istituto Superiore di Sanit (ISS), Italy
*Correspondence:
Nicolas Brunel
nicolas.brunel@duke.edu
Received: 03 October 2018
Accepted: 23 December 2019
Published: 17 January 2020
Citation:
Pereira U and Brunel N (2020)
Unsupervised Learning of Persistent
and Sequential Activity.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13:97.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00097
Unsupervised Learning of Persistent
and Sequential Activity
Ulises Pereira 1 and Nicolas Brunel 1,2,3,4*
1 Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago, Chica go, IL, United States, 2 Department of Neurobiology, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 3 Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC,
United States, 4 Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States
T wo strikingly distinct types of activity have been observe d in various brain structures
during delay periods of delayed response tasks: Persistent activity (PA), in which
a sub-population of neurons maintains an elevated ﬁring rat e throughout an entire
delay period; and Sequential activity (SA), in which sub-po pulations of neurons are
activated sequentially in time. It has been hypothesized th at both types of dynamics
can be “learned” by the relevant networks from the statistic s of their inputs, thanks
to mechanisms of synaptic plasticity. However, the necessa ry conditions for a synaptic
plasticity rule and input statistics to learn these two type s of dynamics in a stable fashion
are still unclear. In particular, it is unclear whether a sin gle learning rule is able to learn
both types of activity patterns, depending on the statistic s of the inputs driving the
network. Here, we ﬁrst characterize the complete bifurcati on diagram of a ﬁring rate
model of multiple excitatory populations with an inhibitor y mechanism, as a function of
the parameters characterizing its connectivity. We then in vestigate how an unsupervised
temporally asymmetric Hebbian plasticity rule shapes the d ynamics of the network.
Consistent with previous studies, we ﬁnd that for stable lea rning of PA and SA, an
additional stabilization mechanism is necessary. We show t hat a generalized version of
the standard multiplicative homeostatic plasticity (
Renart et al., 2003; T oyoizumi et al.,
2014) stabilizes learning by effectively masking excitatory connections during stimulation
and unmasking those connections during retrieval. Using the bifurcation diagram derived
for ﬁxed connectivity, we study analytically the temporal e volution and the steady state of
the learned recurrent architecture as a function of paramet ers characterizing the external
inputs. Slow changing stimuli lead to PA, while fast changin g stimuli lead to SA. Our
network model shows how a network with plastic synapses can s tably and ﬂexibly learn
PA and SA in an unsupervised manner.
Keywords: unsupervised learning, persistent activity, se quential activity, synaptic plasticity, Hebbian plastici ty,
homeostatic plasticity
INTRODUCTION
Selective persistent activity (PA) has been observed in many neurophysiological experiments in
primates performing delayed response tasks, in which the identi ty or spatial location of a stimulus
must be maintained in working memory, in multiple cortical ar eas, including areas in the temporal
lobe (
Fuster et al., 1982; Miyashita, 1988; Miyashita and Chang, 198 8; Sakai and Miyashita, 1991;
Nakamura and Kubota, 1995; Miller et al., 1996; Naya et al., 199 6; Erickson and Desimone, 1999 ),


--- Page 2 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
parietal cortex ( Koch and Fuster, 1989; Chafee and Goldman-
Rakic, 1998), and prefrontal cortex ( Fuster and Alexander, 1971;
Funahashi et al., 1989, 1990, 1991; Miller et al., 1996 ). More
recently, selective persistent activity has also been obser ved in
mice ( Guo et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2014; Inagaki et al., 2019 )
as well as ﬂies ( Kim et al., 2017 ). It has been hypothesized
that PA represents the mechanism at a network level of the
ability to hold an item in working ( active) memory for several
seconds for behavioral demands. Theoretical studies support
the hypothesis that persistent activity is caused by recurren t
excitatory connections in networks of heavily interconnec ted
populations of neurons (
Amit et al., 1994; Durstewitz et al., 2000;
Wang, 2001; Brunel, 2005 ). In these models, PA is represented
as a ﬁxed point attractor of the dynamics of a network that
has multiple stable ﬁxed points. The connectivity matrix in su ch
models has a strong degree of symmetry, with strong recurren t
connections between sub-groups of neurons which are activat ed
by the same stimulus. This connectivity matrix can be learne d
by modifying recurrent connections in a network according t o
an unsupervised Hebbian learning rule (
Mongillo et al., 2005;
Litwin-Kumar and Doiron, 2014; Zenke et al., 2015 ).
Sequential activity (SA) has been also observed across
multiples species in a number of behaviors such as spatial
navigation (
Foster and Wilson, 2006; Harvey et al., 2012;
Grosmark and Buzsáki, 2016 ) and bird song generation
(Hahnloser et al., 2002; Amador et al., 2013; Okubo et al.,
2015). Furthermore, a large body of experimental evidence
shows that SA can be learned throughout experience ( Okubo
et al., 2015; Grosmark and Buzsáki, 2016 ). Several theoretical
network models have been able to produce SA ( Amari, 1972;
Kleinfeld and Sompolinsky, 1988; Abeles, 1991; Diesmann et a l.,
1999; Izhikevich, 2006; Liu and Buonomano, 2009; Fiete et al .,
2010; Waddington et al., 2012; Cannon et al., 2015 ). In these
models, the connectivity contains a feedforward structure —
neurons active at a given time in the sequence project in a
feedforward manner to the group of neurons which are active
next. From a theoretical stand point, the mechanism to genera te
SA is fundamentally diﬀerent from the one that generates PA.
While SA usually corresponds to a path in the state space of the
network, PA is identiﬁed as a ﬁxed point attractor. Thus, SA ha s
an inherent transient nature while PA is at least linearly sta ble in
a dynamical system sense.
The question of how sequential activity can be learned
in networks with plastic synapses has received increased
interest in recent years. The models investigated can be
roughly divided in two categories: models with supervised
and unsupervised plasticity rules. In models with supervised
plasticity rules, the synapses are updated according the activ ity
of the network and an error signal that carries information
about the diﬀerence between the current network dynamics and
the one that it is expected to learn by the network (
Sussillo
and Abbott, 2009; Laje and Buonomano, 2013; Memmesheimer
et al., 2014; Rajan et al., 2016
). In models with unsupervised
plasticity rules, sequential dynamics is shaped by external
stimulation without an error signal (
Jun and Jin, 2007; Liu
and Buonomano, 2009; Fiete et al., 2010; Waddington et al.,
2012; Okubo et al., 2015; Veliz-Cuba et al., 2015
). In those
models SA is generated spontaneously, and the temporal
statistics of the stimulation shapes the speciﬁc timing of
the sequences.
Both experimental and theoretical work therefore suggest that
neural networks in the brain are capable to learn PA and SA.
One unresolved issue is whether the learning rules used by
brain networks to learn PA are fundamentally diﬀerent than th e
ones used to learn SA, or whether the same learning rule can
produce both, depending on the statistics of the inputs to the
network. Learning rules employed in theoretical studies to l earn
PA typically do not contain any temporal asymmetry, while rules
used to learn SA need to contain such a temporal asymmetry.
Here, we hypothesize that a single learning rule is able
to learn both, depending on the statistics of the inputs. We
investigate what are the conditions for the plasticity mecha nisms
and external stimulation to learn PA or SA using unsupervised
plasticity rules. We consider a model composed of multiple
populations of excitatory neurons, each activated by a distinct
stimulus. We consider a sequential stimulation protocol in which
each population of neurons is stimulated one at a time, one after
the other. This protocol is characterized by two parameters, t he
duration of stimulus presentations and the time interval bet ween
stimulations. This simple setting allows us to explore betwee n
the extremes of isolated stimulations with short or large du ration
and sequential stimulations close or far apart temporally. We u se
a rate model to describe the activity of populations of neurons
(
Wilson and Cowan, 1972 ). The connectivity in this model
represents the average of the synaptic connections between
populations of neurons, allowing to investigate at a mesoscopic
level the learning mechanisms of PA and SA. This model has the
advantage of analytical tractability.
This paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst characterize
the types of possible dynamics observed in network with both
feedforward and recurrent connections, in the space of possibl e
(ﬁxed) connectivities. We then show that a network with plast ic
connections described by a unsupervised temporally asymmetri c
Hebbian plasticity rule stimulated sequentially does not st ably
learn PA and SA. We then explore two types of stabilization
mechanisms: (1) synaptic normalization; (2) a generalized
version of the standard multiplicative homeostatic plasticit y
(
Renart et al., 2003; Toyoizumi et al., 2014 ). We show that when
a synaptic normalization mechanism is included, PA and SA
cannot be learned stably during sequential stimulation. However,
the addition of a generalized homeostatic learning rule lead s to
successful learning of PA or SA by weakening the excitatory
synaptic weights during stimulation, eﬀectively masking the
connectivity shaped by Hebbian learning. After stimulation , the
learned connectivity structure is unmasked by the strengthening
of the synaptic connections in a multiplicative fashion. PA
or SA is learned depending on the temporal parameters of
external inputs, and the learning can be characterized analytically
as a dynamical system in the space of ﬁxed connectivities
parametrized by the stimulus parameters.
1. METHODS
1.1. Networks With Fixed Connectivity
We ﬁrst consider two diﬀerent n population rate models
that share in common two connectivity motifs that have
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 3 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 1 | Network models with ﬁxed connectivity. (A) T wo models of recurrent and feedforward connected populati ons: (I) pure excitatory; (II) excitatory with shared
inhibition. (B) Transfer Functions: piecewise linear (PL), sigmoidal (S), and piecewise non-linear (PNL).
been classically considered a distinctive feature of PA and SA
respectively: recurrent and feedforward connections. The t wo
network models considered are: (1) n excitatory populations; (2)
n excitatory populations with shared inhibition. The strength
of the recurrent and feedforward connections are w and s,
respectively. We used the current based version of the widelyused
ﬁring rate model, which is equivalent to its rate based versi on
(Miller and Fumarola, 2012 ) with three diﬀerent non-linear
transfer functions.
1.1.1. Network of Excitatory Neurons
The network consists in n excitatory populations connected by
recurrent and feedforward connections with strength w and
s, respectively as it is shown in Figure 1AI. The dynamics is
given by:
τ du1
dt = I1 − u1 + wφ (u1)
τ dui
dt = Ii − ui + wφ (ui) + sφ (ui− 1) i = 2, . . . , n (1)
where ui and Ii correspond to the synaptic and the external input
to population i respectively, τ is the characteristic time scale for
excitatory populations, and φ (u) is the current to average ﬁring
rate transfer function (or f-I curve). The resulting averag e ﬁring
rates are denoted by ri ≡ φ (ui).
1.1.2. Network of Excitatory Neurons With Shared
Inhibition
The network consists in n excitatory populations connected
as in section 1.1.1, and a single inhibitory population fully
connected with the excitatory populations. A schematic of the
network architecture is shown in Figure 1AII. Assuming a linear
inhibitory transfer function, the dynamics of the network i s
given by:
τ du1
dt = I1 − u1 + wφ (u1) − wEIuI
τ dui
dt = Ii − ui + wφ (ui) + sφ (ui− 1) − wEIuI i = 2, . . . , n
τ I
duI
dt = − uI + wIE
n∑
j= 1
φ (uj), (2)
where wEI is the average inhibitory synaptic strength from
inhibitory to excitatory populations, wIE the average inhibitory
synaptic strength from excitatory to inhibitory populations a nd
τ I the characteristic time scale of the inhibitory population. When
τ I ≪ τ , then uI ≈ wIE
∑N
i= 1 φ (ui) and Equation (2) becomes
τ du1
dt = I1 − u1 + wφ (u1) − wI
n
n∑
j= 1
φ (uj)
τ dui
dt = Ii − ui + wφ (ui) + sφ (ui− 1)
− wI
n
n∑
j= 1
φ (uj) i = 2, . . . , n, (3)
where wI ≡ nWEIWIE. See Figure S1 for the agreement between
the full model described in Equation (2) and its approximation in
Equation (3).
1.2. Transfer Functions
For the ﬁxed connectivity part of this study we used three
diﬀerent families of transfer functions. The sigmoidal trans fer
function is described by
φ (u) = 1
2
(
1 + tanh[a(u + b)]
)
. (4)
This is a saturating monotonic function of the total input, an d
represents a normalized ﬁring rate. This transfer function ha s
been widely used in many theoretical studies in neuroscienc e
(Ermentrout and Terman, 2010; Gerstner et al., 2014 ), and has
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 4 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
the advantage to be smooth. Furthermore, we have recently
shown that such transfer functions provide good ﬁts to in vivo
data (
Pereira and Brunel, 2018).
The second transfer function considered is piecewise linear :
φ (u) =





0 if θ > u
ν (u − θ ) if θ ≤ u ≤ uc
ν (uc − θ ) uc < u.
(5)
This is a piecewise linear approximation of the sigmoidal transfer
function. The main advantage of this transfer function is it s
analytical tractability—the non-linear dynamics of a netw ork
with such a transfer function can be analyzed as a piecewise linear
dynamical system.
The third transfer function used in this work is piecewise
non-linear (
Brunel, 2003)
φ (u) =









0 if ˜θ > u
˜ν
(
u− ˜θ
˜uc− ˜θ
) 2
if ˜θ ≤ u ≤ ˜uc
2 ˜ν
√
u− ˜θ
˜uc− ˜θ − 3
4 ˜uc < u.
(6)
This transfer function combines several features that are pr esent
in more realistic spiking neuron models and/or real neurons:
a supralinear region at low rates, described by a power law
(
Roxin et al., 2011 ), and a square root behavior at higher rates,
as expected in neurons that exhibit a saddle-node bifurcatio n
to periodic ﬁring ( Ermentrout and Terman, 2010 ). Examples of
these three transfer functions are shown in Figure 1B.
1.3. Sequential Stimulation
During the learning protocol excitatory populations are
stimulated sequentially once at a time for a period T and a time
delay /Delta1. The stimulation can be implemented as a sequence of
vectors presented to the entire the network (i.e., I⃗e1, I⃗e2, . . . , I⃗en),
each vector corresponds to the canonical base in Rn scaled by a
stimulation amplitude I. This sequence of stimulation is repeated
k times. To prevent a concatenation between the ﬁrst and the las t
population stimulated, the period between each repetition k is
much longer than T and /Delta1and any time constant of the network.
Each stimulus in the sequence has the same magnitude, that is
larger than the learning threshold (i.e., rw < I). A schematic
diagram of the stimulation protocol is described in section 2 .2.
1.4. T emporally Asymmetric Hebbian
Plasticity Rule
When a temporally asymmetric Hebbian plasticity rule is
included (see sections 2.2–2.5 in Results), the dynamics of
excitatory-to-excitatory connectivity obeys
dWi,j
dt = wmaxf [ri(t)]g[rj(t − D)] − Wi,j
τ w[ri(t), rj(t − D)] , (7)
where f (r) and g(r) are sigmoidal functions given by
g(r) = 1
2
(
1 + tanh
[
apre(r − bpre)
])
(8)
f (r) = 1
2
(
1 + tanh
[
apost(r − bpost)
])
. (9)
They describe the dependence of the learning rule on post- and
pre-synaptic ﬁring rates, respectively [i.e., their dependenc e on
φ (ui) and φ (uj)], and are bounded by zero for small or negative
values of the population synaptic current, and by one for large
values (see Figures 4A,B). Here wmax is the maximal synaptic
eﬃcacy; D is a temporal delay; and τ w is an activity-dependent
time constant of the plasticity rule. The learning time scale is
given by
τ w[ri(t), rj(t − D)] =
{
∞ if ri < rw and rj < rw
Tw if rw ≤ ri or rw ≤ rj. (10)
(see dashed line in Figures 4A–C) and time scale respectively.
The time scale Tw is chosen to be several order of magnitude
slower than the population dynamics (see Table S3). When pre-
and post-synaptic ﬁring rates are below a plasticity threshold rw,
the activity-dependent time constant τ w becomes inﬁnite, and
therefore no plasticity occurs. When pre and/or post-synaptic
ﬁring rates are above rw, then the activity-dependent time
constant τ w is equal to Tw, and plasticity is ongoing. Thus, with
this rule strong, long (i.e., large T) and/or frequent enough (i.e.,
short /Delta1) stimuli produce lasting modiﬁcations in the synaptic
weights. When wmaxf [ri(t)]g[rj(t− D)] < Wi,j, the corresponding
synaptic weight tend to decrease, and therefore LTD takes plac e.
For a ﬁxed high pre-synaptic ﬁring rate, LTD occurs when post-
synaptic ﬁring rates are low, similar to learning rules such a s the
BCM rule (
Bienenstock et al., 1982 ) and Hebbian rules used in
recurrent networks ( Mongillo et al., 2003 ). Likewise, for a ﬁxed
high post-synaptic ﬁring rate, LTD also occurs in an intermediate
and low region of pre-synaptic ﬁring rates. Conversely, when
Wi,j < wmaxf [ri(t)]g[rj(t − D)], the corresponding synaptic
weight tend to increase, and LTP takes place.
In our model, we assume the activity of each population
represents the average activity over many neurons (of the
order of tens of thousands). Likewise, synaptic couplings are
assumed to represent averages over very large numbers of
synapses connecting two populations (or one population to
itself). Therefore, the learning parameters (e.g., D and Tw)
represent average quantities over a large number of synapses. We
expect the variability of these parameters to disappear in the limit
of large number synaptic couplings.
1.5. Synaptic Normalization
When a synaptic normalization mechanism is included (see
section 2.3 in Results), in addition to the Hebbian plasticity rule
described in section 1.4, in our network simulations, at eac h time
step we subtracted the average synaptic change to each incomi ng
synapse to a given population. This average is taken over all
the incoming synapses to a particular neuron. This simulation
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 5 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
scheme ensures that the sum of the incoming synaptic weights t o
each population remains constant, i.e.,
n∑
j= 1
Wi,j = C i = 1, 2, . . . , n. (11)
1.6. Generalized Homeostatic Plasticity
Rule
We implement a modiﬁed version of the multiplicative
homeostatic rule proposed in
Renart et al. (2003) and Toyoizumi
et al. (2014) (see sections 2.4 and 2.5 in Results). The rule is
implemented in addition to the Hebbian plasticity rule descri bed
in the section 1.4. In this rule a homeostatic variable Hi slowly
controls the ﬁring rate of neuron i by scaling its synaptic weights
multiplicatively. The synaptic weights will be given by
Wi,j(t) = Hi(t)Wi,j(t). (12)
The variable Wi,j(t) is governed by the Hebbian plasticity rule
described by Equations (7–10). The dynamics for Hi is given by
τ H ˙Hi =
(
1 − ri(t)
r0
)
Hi − H2
i , (13)
where r0 = φ (u0) is a parameter that controls the average ﬁring
rate of population i and τ H is the characteristic time scale of
the learning rule. Note that because of the quadratic term in the
r.h.s. of Equation (13), this rule does not in general keep th e
ﬁring rates at a ﬁxed value, and therefore this rule is not str ictly
speaking homeostatic. Therefore, we term this rule generaliz ed
homeostatic plasticity rule, since this rule is a generalizat ion of
the standard multiplicative homeostatic plasticity rule in Renart
et al. (2003) and Toyoizumi et al. (2014). As in the standard rule,
for strong inputs, the homeostatic variables of this rule dec rease
to values that are smaller than 1, scaling down the excitator y
connections and masking synaptic changes learned via Hebbian
plasticity. However, unlike the standard rule, after stimul ation,
the homeostatic variables return to values Hi ∼ O(1), and the
synaptic changes learned via Hebbian plasticity are unmasked.
See section 2.4 and section 5 in the Supplementary Material for
a detailed analysis of this rule.
1.7. Learning Dynamics Under Noisy
Stimulation
In the last section of the Results, we include noise in the
population dynamics in order to asses the robustness of the
learning process (see section 2.5 in Results). The equations u sed
to describe the dynamics of the network with Hebbian and
generalized homeostatic plasticity are given by
τ ˙ui = − ui + σ η i + Ii +
n∑
j= 1
HiWi,jrj − WI
n
n∑
i= 1
φ (ui)
˙Wi,j = wmaxf [ri(t))]g[rj(t − D)] − Wi,j
τ w(ri(t), rj(t − D))
τ H ˙Hi =
(
1 − ri(t)
r0
)
Hi − H2
i , (14)
where ri(t) = φ (ui(t)) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n and η i is a Gaussian
white noise.
1.8. Code
Simulations were performed using code written in Python.
A self-contained version of the code that reproduces all the
ﬁgures in this paper is available in the GitHub repository:
https://github.com/ulisespereira/Unsupervised.
2. RESUL TS
2.1. Persistent and Sequential Activity in
Networks With Fixed Connectivity
To better understand the dependence of PA and SA generation
on network connectivity, we consider ﬁrst a simple n population
rate model with ﬁxed feedforward and recurrent connectivit y
(see Figure 1A). This architecture possesses the two connectivity
motifs that have been classically considered the hallmarks o f PA
and SA—recurrent and feedforward connections—in a space of
parameters that is low dimensional enough to be suitable for f ull
analytical treatment. In this model, the dynamics of the netw ork
is characterized by the synaptic inputs ui to each population of
the network ( i = 1, . . . , n) whose dynamics obey the system
of ordinary diﬀerential equations in Equation (1). Note that
we use here the current based formulation of the ﬁring rate
equations, that has been shown to be equivalent to the rate based
formulation (
Miller and Fumarola, 2012).
In this model, we identify the regions in the connectivity
parameter space where SA, PA, or decaying sequences of activit y
(dSA) are generated. We start with a piecewise linear transfe r
function with slope ν , and compute the bifurcation diagram
that gives the boundaries for qualitatively diﬀerent dynami cs
in the parameter space (see Figure 2A and section 2 in the
Supplementary Material for mathematical details). We ﬁnd that
robust SA can be generated provided recurrent connections ar e
smaller than the inverse of the slope ν , and the feedforward
connections are strong enough, w < 1/ν < w + s. For large
values of w (w > 1/ν ), the dynamics converge to a ﬁxed point
where 0 ≤ p ≤ n populations are in a high rate state, where
p depends on the initial conditions. When both recurrent and
feedforward connections are weak enough (i.e., w + s < 1/ν ) the
activity decays to zero ﬁring rate ﬁxed point, after a transie nt in
which diﬀerent populations are transiently activated—a pattern
which we term decaying sequence of activity or dSA.
This picture is qualitatively similar when other types of non-
linear transfer functions are used (see Methods and Figure 1B
for the transfer functions used in this paper). The saturation
non-linearity of the transfer function is key to generate
long lasting (non-attenuated) SA even when the number of
populations is large. In a linear network, sequential activity
would increase without bound for an increasing number of
populations participating in the SA (see Figure 2A, dashed lines
and section 2 in the Supplementary Material for mathematical
details). During sequential activity, each population is act ive for
a speciﬁc time interval. We used the analytical solution of the
linearized system (see Equation S3) to show that the duratio n of
this active interval scales as the squared root of the position of the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 6 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 2 | PA and SA generation in a network with ﬁxed connectivity. (A) Phase diagram for model (I) using a piecewise linear transfer function (top-left plot) and
examples of the dynamics corresponding to the three phases. Dashed lines correspond to the dynamics for the same network but using a linear transfer function. (B)
SA generation for models (I) and (II) using sigmoidal (ﬁrst row), piecewise non-linear (second row), and piecewise linear (t hird row) transfer functions. The parameters
for the transfer functions are the same as the ones used in Figure 1B. Firing rates of excitatory populations are colored accord ing to their position in the
feedforward-recurrent connected excitatory network. Par ameters used in (A,B) can be found in T able S1.
population along the sequence. This implies that for long lasti ng
SA the fraction of active populations will increase with time
(see Figure 2A). This feature is not consistent with experimental
evidence that shows that the width of the bursts of activity a long
the sequence is approximately constant in time (
Hahnloser et al.,
2002; Harvey et al., 2012 ). In the model, we can prevent this
phenomenon by including negative feedback mechanisms to our
network architecture as global inhibition (see Figure 1AII). We
found that in both cases the network robustly generates PA an d
SA in which the fraction of active populations is approximately
constant in time. These results were also qualitatively simil ar
when diﬀerent saturation non-linearities in the transfer fu nction
were considered (see Figure 2B).
We now turn our attention to the network of excitatory
neurons with global inhibition ( Figure 1AII), since inhibition
is likely to be the dominant source of negative feedback in
local cortical circuits. Inhibitory interneurons are typic ally faster
than excitatory neurons (
McCormick et al., 1985 ). For the
sake of simplicity we set the inhibitory population dynamics
as instantaneous compared with the excitatory timescale. Ou r
numerical simulations conﬁrm that this approximation preserves
all the qualitative features of the dynamics with ﬁnite inhi bitory
time constants, up to values of τ I = 0.5τ (see Figure S1). Using
this approximation, the connectivity of the network is equiva lent
to a recurrent and feedforward architecture plus a uniform
matrix whose elements are wI ≡ nwEIwIE. We obtained the
bifurcation diagram for such a network with a piecewise linea r
transfer function (see section 4 in the Supplementary Material).
This new bifurcation diagram shows qualitative diﬀerences w ith
the pure excitatory network bifurcation diagram (see Figure 3).
First, a qualitatively diﬀerent behavior arises, where SA en ds in
persistent activity (region SA/PA). Second, the PA region br eaks
down in n(n + 1)/ 2 square regions of size wI/ n × wI/ n. Each
region is characterized by a minimum and maximum number
of populations active during PA. The lower left corner of each
squared region is ( imin
(wI
n
)
, 1 + imax
(wI
n
)
) with imin, imax =
1, 2, . . . , n (see Figure 3, diﬀerent regions in graded blue), where
imin and imax correspond to the minimum and maximum number
of population active during PA within this squared region when
just the ﬁrst population is initialized in the active state ( Figure 3
top and middle right plots). Therefore, the number of possible
patterns of PA increases with the strength of the recurrent
connections and decreases with strength of the feedforward
connections. On the other hand, the SA/PA is divided in n
qualitatively diﬀerent rectangular regions of size
(wI
n
)
× [1 −
jSA/ PA
(wI
n
)
] with jSA/ PA = 1, 2, . . . , n, where jSA/ PA corresponds
to the number of populations that ends in PA after SA elicited
by stimulating the ﬁrst population in the sequence ( Figure 3
bottom right plot). Then for a given strength of the recurrent
connectivity w∗ above 1 +
(wI
n
)
, the critical feedforward strength
sc that separates the PA and SA/PA regions is
sc = wI
n
⌈ (
w∗ − 1 − wI
n
)
n
wI
⌉
, (15)
where ⌈·⌉ is the ceiling function. Similarly, for a given strength
of the feedforward connection s∗ above wI
n , the critical recurrent
strength separating SA/PA and PA is
wc = wI
n
⌈ (
s∗ − wI
n
)
n
wI
⌉
. (16)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 7 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 3 | Bifurcation diagram for feedforward-recurrent connected network of excitatory populations with shared inhibition. T op left plot: Bifurcation diagram in the
s-w plane, showing qualitatively different regions: dSA (gray ), SA (red), SA/PA (green), and PA (blue). The PA region is divi ded in sub-regions which are distinguished by
the maximum and minimum number of populations active during PA (see text). The SA/PA region is also subdivided into sub-re gions characterized by a different
number of the maximum number of populations active in PA at th e end of the sequence. Regions are separated by black lines an d sub-regions are separated by gray
lines. Five plots encompassing the bifurcation diagram sho w examples of the dynamics observed in its four qualitativel y different regions. Initial condition: ﬁrst
population active at the maximum rate, while the rest is sile nt. The location in the corresponding regions of the paramet er space are indicated with the symbols on the
top right of the surrounding plots. Parameters can be found i n T able S2. Firing rates of excitatory populations are colored as in Figure 2.
Lastly, we ﬁnd that the SA region is shrunk compared with the
pure excitatory network, and that the dSA region is wider.
2.2. Unsupervised T emporally Asymmetric
Hebbian Plasticity Rule
Let us consider now a fully connected network of n excitatory
populations with plastic synapses and global ﬁxed inhibition.
The plasticity rule for the excitatory-to-excitatory conne ctivity
is described by Equation (7). Using this learning rule, with ﬁxed
pre- and post-activity, the connectivity tends asymptoticall y to
a separable function of the pre- and post-synaptic activity. The
functions f (r) and g(r) are bounded by zero for small or negative
values of the population synaptic current, and by one for large
values (see Figures 4A,B). This learning rule is a generalization
of classic Hebbian rules like the covariance rule (
Dayan and
Abbott, 2001 ), with a non-linear dependence on both pre and
post-synaptic ﬁring rates.
The delay D in the learning rule leads to a temporal asymmetry
(Blum and Abbott, 1996; Gerstner and Abbott, 1997; Veliz-
Cuba et al., 2015 ). This delay describes the time it takes for
calcium inﬂux through NMDA receptors to reach its maximum
(
Sabatini et al., 2002; Graupner and Brunel, 2012 ). When this
learning rule operates and the network is externally stimula ted,
the connectivity changes depending on the interaction of the
input, the network dynamics and the learning rule. Due to
the relaxational nature of Equation (7), for long times with out
external stimulation the connectivity matrix will converg e to
a stationary rank-1 matrix with entries of the form f (r∗
i )g(r∗
j ),
where ⃗r∗ = φ (⃗u∗) is the stationary ﬁring rate vector, independent
of all inputs presented in the past. Therefore, stimuli learned in
the connectivity matrix will be erased by the background acti vity
of the network for long times after stimulation. To prevent th is
inherent forgetting nature of the learning rule we introduc e an
activity-dependent plasticity time scale in Equation (10). T hus,
when pre and/or post-synaptic currents are below a plasticity
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 8 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 4 | Unsupervised Hebbian learning rule. (A) Piecewise linear transfer function. The dashed gray horizo ntal line indicates the plasticity threshold rw. (B)
Post-synaptic dependence on the rates of the stationary con nectivity function, f(r). The vertical dashed gray line indicates the plasticity th reshold. (C) Contour plot of
the stationary connectivity function, wmaxf(ri)g(rj). The dashed gray box indicates the plasticity threshold. F or Wi,j = 0.5wmax the red region below the dashed green
line corresponds to LTD while the yellow region above it to LT P . Parameters can be found in T able S3.
threshold rw, the time scale becomes inﬁnite, and therefore no
plasticity occurs. When both are above rw, then the time constant
is given by Tw [see Equation (10) and Figure 4]. Lastly, the
time scale Tw of these changes are chosen to be several order of
magnitude slower than the population dynamics, consistent wi th
the time it takes ( ∼ 1 min or more) for plasticity to be induced in
standard synaptic plasticity protocols (see e.g., Markram et al.,
1997; Bi and Poo, 1998; Sjöström et al., 2001 , but see Bittner
et al., 2017 ). Importantly, the weight changes are proportional
to the diﬀerence wmaxf [ri(t)]g[rj(t − D)] − Wi,j, which depends
on both the pre and post-synaptic ﬁring rates and the current
value of the synaptic weight (see Equation 7). Typically, when
both pre and post-synaptic ﬁring rates are at intermediate valu es
(see the red region in Figure 4C) the corresponding synapse
undergoes LTD (weight strength tend to decrease), and when
they are both high (see the yellow region in Figure 4C) it
undergoes LTP (wight strength tend to increase). Therefore , the
rule goes from no plasticity to LTD and then to LTP when
both pre and post-synaptic ﬁring rates increase (see diagonal
direction in Figure 4C), which is reminiscent of results in pairing
experiments (
Ngezahayo et al., 2000).
Our goal is to understand the conditions for a sequential
stimulation to lead the network dynamics to PA or SA,
depending of the temporal characteristics of the stimulus, wh en
this plasticity rule is introduced. Here we consider a simple
stimulation protocol where each population in the network is
stimulated sequentially one population at a time (see Figure 5A).
In this protocol, population 1 is ﬁrst stimulated for some time
T. Then, after an inter-stimulation time /Delta1, population 2 is
stimulated for the same duration T. The other populations are
then stimulated one at a time (3, 4, . . . ,n) using the same protocol.
The amplitude of the stimulation is ﬁxed such that the maximum
of the current elicited in each population leads to a ﬁring rate that
is greater than the plasticity threshold of the learning rule . The
time interval between each repetition of the sequence is much
longer than T and /Delta1and any time constant of the network. When
the duration of each stimulation is larger than the synaptic d elay
(i.e., D < T), recurrent connections increase, since the Hebbian
term driving synaptic changes ( f [ri(t)]g[ri(t − D)], where i is
the stimulated population) becomes large after a time D after
the onset of the presentation. When the inter-stimulation tim e is
smaller that the synaptic delay (i.e.,/Delta1 <D), then the feedforward
connections increase, since the Hebbian term driving synapt ic
changes ( f [ri+ 1(t)]g[ri(t − D)]) is large in some initial interval
during presentation of stimulus i + 1 (see also
Herz et al., 1988).
As a result, there are four distinct regions of interest
depending on the relative values of the /Delta1and T with respect
to the synaptic delay D. When T is larger than the synaptic
delay, and /Delta1is smaller than the synaptic delay, both recurrent
and feedforward connections increase. When T is larger than
the synaptic delay and /Delta1is much larger than D, only the
recurrent connections increase. When /Delta1is smaller than the
synaptic delay and T is much smaller, only the feedforward
connections increase. Lastly, when /Delta1is larger and T is smaller
than D no changes in the connectivity are observed. The initial
temporal evolution of both recurrent and feedforward weight s
in representative examples of the four regions is presented in
Figure 5B. We chose not to study the region corresponding to
2T + /Delta1 < D here, which is a region where “feedforward”
connections involving non-nearest neighbor populations can
also increase during learning.
We found that this learning rule is in general unstable for
long sequential stimulation when both feedforward and recurrent
connections increase during the stimulation (i.e., /Delta1 <D < T)
to values large enough to produce persistent activity states. T his
is a consequence of the classic instability observed with He bbian
plasticity rules, where a positive feedback loop between the
increase in synaptic connectivity and increase in ﬁring rates leads
to an explosive increase in both (
Dayan and Abbott, 2001). Larger
feedforward and recurrent connections lead to an increase i n
number of populations active at the same time during stimulation
(see Figures 6A,D) which produce an increase of the overall
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 9 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 5 | Sequential stimulation and initial synaptic weights dynam ics. (A) Schematic diagram showing stimulation protocol for two pop ulations. Population 1 is ﬁrst
stimulated for some time T. Then, after an inter-stimulation /Delta1time, population 2 is stimulated for the same duration T. (B) The weight dynamics for a network of
excitatory populations with shared inhibition and a piecew ise linear transfer function is shown for four different sti mulation regimes. T op-left: /Delta1 <D < T; top-right:
D < /Delta1, T; bottom-left: T, /Delta1 <D; bottom-right: T < D < /Delta1. Cyan: recurrent connections; Yellow/Green: feedforward; Blue: all other connections. Parameters can be
found in T ables S3, S4.
connectivity by the synaptic plasticity rule ( Figures 6B,C). This
leads to an increase in the overall activity producing longer
periods of PA during stimulation until a ﬁxed point where many
populations have high ﬁring rates is reached, and the connectivity
increases exponentially to its maximum value (see Figures 6B,C).
By increasing the plasticity threshold, it is possible to incre ase
the number of stimulations (and consequently the strength o f
the feedforward and recurrent connections) where the netwo rk’s
activity is stable. However, this does not solve the problem, since
the instability on the weights eventually occurs but for a la rger
number of stimulations and stronger synaptic weights. In ord er
to prevent this instability, we investigate in the next secti ons two
diﬀerent stabilization mechanisms: synaptic normalization a nd
generalized homeostatic plasticity. Throughout this paper, f or
testing whether PA, SA, SA/PA, or dSA is learned, after sequential
stimulation we stimulate the ﬁrst population and then check
whether the network recalls the corresponding type of activit y
(see Figure 3).
2.3. Synaptic Normalization
The ﬁrst mechanism we consider is synaptic normalization.
This mechanism is motivated by experimental evidence of
conservation of total synaptic weight in neurons (
Royer and Paré,
2003; Bourne and Harris, 2011 ). In our model, we enforce that
the sum of the incoming synaptic weights to a given population
is ﬁxed throughout the dynamics (see Equation 11 in Methods).
This constraint prevents the growth of all the synaptic weight s
to their maximum value during sequential stimulation due to
the Hebbian plasticity, as is described in the previous sectio n.
This leads to a heterogeneous dynamics in the synaptic weight s
where they strongly ﬂuctuate in time during the stimulation
period (see Figure 7B). We ﬁnd that the network does not reach
a stable connectivity structure, and that the connectivity after
the stimulation markedly depends on the speciﬁc moment when
stimulation ended for a large range of stimulation parameter s.
At the initial stages of the stimulation, feedforward and
recurrent connections grow, while the rest of the synaptic
connections decrease at the same rate (see Figure 7B). When
the feedforward and recurrent connections are large enough
for producing persistent activity, co-activation between a
population(s) undergoing persistent activity and the population
active due to the stimulation (which are not necessarily adj acent
in the stimulation sequence, see Figures 7A,D) produces an
increase in feed-back and upper triangular connections that a re
diﬀerent than feedforward and recurrent (see Figure 7B). In
turn, feedforward and recurrent connections decrease due t o
the synaptic normalization mechanism. This leads to complex
dynamics in the synaptic weights, in which the connections
sustaining co-active neuronal assemblies (i.e., group of excitatory
populations with clustered connectivity) learned via Hebbian
plasticity are depressed due to the interplay between synaptic
normalization and sequential stimulation. This then leads t o the
formation of new assemblies due to the interplay of Hebbian
plasticity and sequential stimulation.
During stimulation, the feedforward and recurrent
connectivity studied in the ﬁrst section increase ﬁrst, lea ding
then in a second stage to connectivities with strong bi-directional
connections (see Figure 7C). Persistent activity can not be
learned consistently after long times, and most populations
are simultaneously active in retrieved states (see Figure 7E).
For a very few parameter values compared with the explored
parameter space sequential activity is learned (data not show n).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 10 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 6 | Runaway instability of the unsupervised Hebbian learning r ule. (A) Population dynamics during 4 s of sequential stimulation wi th T = 19 ms and /Delta1= 10
ms. After about 25 s, the last six populations stimulated bec ome active at maximal rates. (B) Synaptic weights dynamics during stimulation. Cyan: recur rent
connections; Light Yellow/Green: feedforward; Red: feed-b ackward. (C) Connectivity matrix at different stimulation times. From l eft to right and from top to bottom: 0,
10, 20, and 30 s. (D) Three examples of population dynamics during a single seque ntial stimulation at 0, 20.28, and 27.3 s, respectively. Not e the buildup of activity
preceding each stimulus presentation because of the build- up in the feedforward connectivity at 20.28 s. In (A,D) the black and gray traces indicate a scaled version
of the stimulus. Parameters can be found in T ables S3, S4. Firing rates of excitatory populations are colored accord ing to their position in the sequential stimulation.
Overall, it is unclear whether neural circuits can use the
observed complex synaptic dynamics to store retrievable
information about the external stimuli. Thus, we ﬁnd that
synaptic normalization is not suﬃcient in this case to stabil ize
learning dynamics and to lead to a consistent retrieval of PA
or SA. We checked that this ﬁnding is robust to changes in
parameters, in particular to changes in the sum of incoming
synaptic weights [parameter C in Equation (11)] and the
sequential stimulation magnitude I, period T, and delay /Delta1. In
the next section we consider a second stabilization mechani sm,
namely generalized homeostatic plasticity.
2.4. Generalized Homeostatic Plasticity
Homeostatic plasticity is another potential stabilization
mechanism that has been characterized extensively in
experiments (
Turrigiano et al., 1998; Turrigiano, 2017 ).
The interplay between homeostatic plasticity and Hebbian
plasticity has recently been the focus of multiple theoretica l
studies (
Renart et al., 2003; Toyoizumi et al., 2014; Keck et al.,
2017). Here, we study the eﬀect of a generalization of the
standard multiplicative homeostatic plasticity and Hebbian
plasticity for learning SA and PA. We consider a model for
homeostatic plasticity in which the overall connectivity at each
time Wi,j(t) is given by the multiplication of two synaptic
variables with diﬀerent time scales as is shown in Equation (1 2).
In this equation, the fast plastic variable Wi,j(t) (time scale of
seconds) is governed by Hebbian plasticity, see Equation (7) . On
the other hand, the slow (with a time scale of tens to hundred o f
seconds) homeostatic variable Hi(t) scales the incoming weights
to population i, ensuring that the network maintain low average
ﬁring rates on long time scales. The dynamics of the homeosta tic
variable is given by Equation (13). This is a generalization of
the standard homeostatic learning rule (
Renart et al., 2003;
Toyoizumi et al., 2014 ), that does not include the quadratic term
in the r.h.s. of Equation (13). We term this rule generalized
homeostatic plasticity since is a non-linear generalizatio n of the
standard multiplicative homeostatic plasticity rule in
Renart
et al. (2003) and Toyoizumi et al. (2014) . The equation proposed
in Toyoizumi et al. (2014) stabilizes the network’s activity during
stimulation, preventing the runaway of the ﬁring rates and
synaptic weights. Scaling down the overall connectivity dur ing
stimulation prevents co-activation of multiple populations, an d
lead to stable learning. However, in the network’s steady st ate
(i.e., when times longer than the time scale of the homeostat ic
variable have passed without any stimulation), if the equati on
proposed in
Toyoizumi et al. (2014) is used, then each connection
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 11 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 7 | Heterogeneous synaptic dynamics for Hebbian plasticity an d synaptic normalization. (A) Population dynamics during 10 s of sequential stimulation w ith
T = 19 ms and /Delta1= 10 ms. (B) Synaptic weights dynamics during stimulation. Cyan: recur rent connections; Light Yellow/Green: feedforward; Red: fe ed-backward;
Blue: feed-second-forward; Green: feed-second-backward . (C) Connectivity matrix at different stimulation times. From l eft to right and from top to bottom: 0, 13.8,
27.6, and 41.5 s. (D) T wo examples of population dynamics during a single sequent ial stimulation at 0 and 15.8 s respectively. In (A,D) the black and gray traces
indicate a scaled version of the stimulus. (E) Network dynamics after learning for the initial condition w here the ﬁrst population is active at high rate and the rest sil ent.
Parameters can be found in T ables S3, S4. Firing rates of excitatory populations are colored accord ing to their position in the sequential stimulation.
will be proportional to the factor φ − 1(r0)
r0 multiplied by a number
of order one (see section 5 in the Supplementary Material for
the mathematical details). This implies that the steady stat e
connectivity after learning will depend sensitively on the ch oice
of the value of the objective background ﬁring rate (i.e., r0) and
the speciﬁc functional form of the transfer function (i.e., φ (u)).
Due to the transfer function non-linearity, small changes i n r0
might produce large values for the factor φ − 1(r0)
r0 and therefore
very strong connections for the steady state connectivity. This is
due to the fact that steady state large values in the homeosta tic
variable H scale up the connectivity learned via Hebbian
plasticity in a multiplicative fashion, see Equation (12). In
practice, PA is retrieved almost always independently of the t ype
of stimulation presented during learning, and in the absence of
the quadratic term in Equation (13) no temporal attractor oth er
than PA can be learned. This problem can be prevented by the
introduction of a quadratic term in the original homeostati c
rule (see section 5 in the Supplementary Material). Note that
with this quadratic term, the homeostatic plasticity rule do es
not exactly achieve a given target ﬁring rate, and therefore is
not strictly speaking “homeostatic.” Additionally, the tim escale
of this rule is of the order of minutes (see Figure 8A), which
is an order of magnitude faster of what has been reported
experimentally (
Turrigiano et al., 1998; Turrigiano, 2008, 2017 )
(see section 3.3 for a discussion).
We explore the role of this generalized homeostatic learning
rule for learning both PA and SA. During sequential stimulat ion,
the average ﬁring rate is higher than the background objecti ve
ﬁring rate r0, and the homeostatic variables decrease to values
that are smaller than 1, see Figures 8A,C. As a result, during
sequential stimulation the dynamics of the homeostatic var iable
will be dominated by the linear version of the homeostatic
learning rule proposed in
Toyoizumi et al. (2014) , since H2
i ≪ 1.
Then, the small values that the homeostatic variables take d uring
the sequential stimulation scale down the increasing values of the
recurrent and feedforward connections due to Hebbian plasticity.
This produces a weak excitatory connectivity during a repeate d
sequential stimulation (see Figure 8C, left), preventing activation
of spurious populations during stimulation (see Figure 8B), even
though the strength of recurrent and feedforward connectio ns
learned via Hebbian plasticity are strong enough to produce PA
or SA, since these connections are masked by the homeostatic
variable. When the network returns to the steady state after
sequential stimulation, the homeostatic variables return to values
Hi ∼ O(1) (see section 5 in the Supplementary Material for
the mathematical details), and the recurrent and feedforwa rd
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 12 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 8 | Learning dynamics in a network with Hebbian and generalized homeostatic plasticity. (A) T op: synaptic weights dynamics during and after stimulatio n.
Cyan: recurrent; Yellow: feedforward; Blue: all other conn ections. Bottom: homeostatic variables colored according to the position of the corresponding excitatory
population in the sequential stimulation (as in B). Gray vertical dashed line indicate the end of the sequenti al stimulation. (B) Neuron dynamics during stimulation for
two different periods of time. (C) Snapshots of the connectivity matrix Wi,j(t) at the end of the sequential stimulation (left) and 60 s afte r the end of the sequential
stimulation (right). (D) Network dynamics after learning following an initial condi tion where the ﬁrst population is active at high rate while all others are silent for two
different stimulation parameters, one that generates SA (l eft), the other PA (right). Parameters can be found in T ables S3, S4. Firing rates of excitatory populations are
colored according to their position in the sequential stimu lation.
connections learned via Hebbian plasticity are unmasked. This
mechanism stabilizes learning, allowing the network to sta bly
learn strong recurrent and feedforward connections, consi stent
with SA or PA dynamics (see Figure 8D).
The weakening of recurrent connections during sequential
stimulation allows us to derive an approximate analytical
description of the temporal evolution of the synaptic connectivity
with learning. Since the net current due to connections
between populations is very small, each population dynamics
is well-approximated by an exponential rise (decay) toward
the stimulation current (background current) provided the
stimulation is strong and inhibition is weak enough (see
Figure 9). By using this approximation we build a mapping
that yields the value of the recurrent and feedforward synapt ic
strengths as a function of stimulation number k, stimulation
period, T, and delay, /Delta1(see Equations S39, S40 in 6
of Supplementary Material). This mapping provides a fairly
accurate match of both the dynamics of the synaptic weights
and the ﬁnal steady state connectivity matrix in the case of
weak (see Figure 10A, corresponding to wI = 1) and stronger
inhibition (see Figure 10B, wI = 2). The mapping derived for
evolution of the synaptic weights during sequential stimula tion
corresponds to a dynamical system in the ( s, w) phase space
that depends on the stimulus parameters ( /Delta1, T) and the initial
connectivity. The ﬁnal connectivity corresponds to the ﬁxed
point of these dynamics (see Equations S41, S42 in section 6 of
Supplementary Material).
Figure 10 shows that depending on the temporal
characteristics of the input sequence, the network can reach any
of the four qualitatively diﬀerent regions of the phase diagrams
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 13 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 9 | Analytical approximation of the dynamics of the network wit h Hebbian and generalized homeostatic plasticity. First ro w: Current dynamics for the second
and third populations in a network of 20 populations during o ne presentation of the sequence. The dashed red line shows th e analytical approximation for the
dynamics during stimulation (Equation S32 in section 6 of Supplementary Material). Second row: Dynamics of the recurrent synaptic strength w ithin the second
population (cyan), and the “feedforward” synaptic strengt h from the second to the third population (yellow) during the same presentation of the sequence. The dashed
red line shows the analytical approximation for the synapti c weight dynamics (Equations S34, S37 in section 6 of Supplementary Materials). (A,B) correspond to
the ﬁrst and the ﬁfth presentation of the stimulation sequenc e respectively. Parameters can be found in T ables S3, S4.
in a completely unsupervised fashion. For values of /Delta1that are
smaller than the synaptic delay D and T on the order or larger
than D, the network generates SA. For values of T approximately
larger than D and for /Delta1small enough, the dynamics lead to
SA/PA. Lastly PA is obtained for large enough /Delta1and T. These
observations match with the intuition that stimulations lo ng
enough but far delayed in time leads to learning of PA and
that stimulations contiguous in time but short enough leads
to SA. Stimulations between these two conditions (long and
contiguous) leads to a combination of both dynamics, i.e.,
SA/PA, as shown in Figure 10.
2.5. Learning and Retrieval Is Robust to
Noise
Under in vivo conditions neural systems operate with large
amount of variability in their inputs. In order to assess the
eﬀect of highly variable synaptic input current during learnin g
and retrieval, we add a mean zero uncorrelated white noise
to the dynamics when both Hebbian learning and generalized
homeostatic plasticity are included in the network, as descr ibed
in Equation (14). We found that both the synaptic weights
dynamics during learning and the retrieved spatiotemporal
dynamics after learning are robust to noise (see Figure 11), even
when the amplitude of the noise is large (i.e., inputs with values
equal to the standard deviation of the noise lead to a population
to ﬁre at 30% of the maximum ﬁring rate). During sequential
stimulation, the learning dynamics is marginally altered f or both
weak and strong inhibition (compare Figure 11 with Figure 10).
Importantly, the synaptic weights reach very similar station ary
values compared with the case without noise. After learning, even
though the rates stochastically ﬂuctuate in time, the retri eved
spatiotemporal attractors (i.e., PA, SA, dSA, or PA/SA) are
qualitatively similar as in the case without noise (compare
Figure 11 with Figure 10). One qualitative diﬀerence in the case
with external noise, is that in both SA and PA/SA dynamical
regimes random inputs lead to a repetition of the full or partial
learned sequence. Altogether, this simulations show that t he
network can robustly learn and retrieve qualitatively the s ame
spatiotemporal attractors in the presence of external noise.
3. DISCUSSION
We have shown that under sequential stimulation a network
with biologically plausible plasticity rules can learn both PA
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 14 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 10 | Changes in recurrent and feedforward synaptic strengths wi th learning, for different sequences with different tempor al parameters. Left: Dynamics of
recurrent and feedforward connections in the ( s, w) parameter space during sequential stimulation for four di fferent values of /Delta1and T. Black circles (SA), plus signs
(PA), hexagons (dSA), and squares (PA/SA) show the simulated dynamics. Red traces indicate the approximated dynamics de rived in section 6 of
Supplementary Material. Right: Rates dynamics after many presentations of the sequ ence. The ﬁrst population was initialized at high rates, the o thers at low rates.
(A,B) correspond to wI = 1, wmax = 3, and ( T, /Delta1) = { (7, 14), (50, 40), (5, 15), (22, 8.5)} (in ms) and wI = 2, wmax = 3.5, and ( T, /Delta1) = { (11, 14), (50, 40), (5, 15), (23, 8.5)},
respectively. The rest of the parameters can be found in T ables S3, S4. Firing rates of excitatory populations are colored accord ing to their position in the
sequential stimulation.
or SA depending on the stimulus parameters. Two plasticity
mechanisms are needed: (1) Hebbian plasticity with temporal
asymmetry; (2) a stabilization mechanism which prevents the
runaway of synaptic weights while learning. When unsupervise d
Hebbian plasticity is present alone the network fails to stabl y
learn PA or SA, while including a generalized homeostatic
plasticity stabilizes learning. For stable learning, we show that the
learning process is described by a low dimensional autonomou s
dynamical system in the space of connectivities, leading to
a simpliﬁed description of unsupervised learning of PA and
SA by the network from external stimuli. Depending on the
stimulus parameters, the network is ﬂexible enough to learn
selectively both types of activity by repeated exposure to a
sequence of stimuli, without need for supervision. This sugg ests
that cortical circuits endowed with a single learning rule ca n
learn qualitatively diﬀerent neural dynamics (i.e., persist ent vs.
sequential activity) depending on the stimuli statistics.
Using the full characterization of the bifurcation diagram
in the space of ﬁxed feedforward and recurrent connections
developed here, we mapped the evolution of the connectivity
during stimulation in the bifurcation diagram. We analytic ally
and numerically showed that the synaptic weights evolve
in the feedforward—recurrent synaptic connections space
until they reach their steady state (when the number of
sequential stimulations is large). The speciﬁc point of the
steady state in the bifurcation diagram depends solely on
the stimulation parameters—stimulation period T and
time delay /Delta1—and the connectivity initial conditions. We
found that stimulations with long durations and large
delays generically leads to the formation of PA, whereas
stimulations with long enough durations and short delays
leads to the formation of SA. Thus, persistent stimulation
leads to persistent activity while sequential stimulation le ads to
sequential activity.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 15 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
FIGURE 11 | Learning dynamics under noisy stimulation. Same as in Figure 10, but in the presence of a white noise input current, with mean 0 and standard
deviation of 0.3 [i.e., σ = 0.3 in Equation (14)]. Firing rates of excitatory populatio ns are colored according to their position in the sequential stimulation.
3.1. Learning of Sequences in Networks
A growing number of network models have been shown to be
able to learn sequential activity. Models with supervised lea rning
can reproduce perfectly target sequences through minimizati on
of a suitable error function (
Sussillo and Abbott, 2009; Laje
and Buonomano, 2013; Memmesheimer et al., 2014; Rajan
et al., 2016
), but the corresponding learning rules are not
biophysically realistic.
Other investigators have studied how unsupervised learning
rules leads to sequence generation. Early models of networks
of binary neurons showed how various prescriptions for
incorporating input sequences in the connectivity matrix can
lead to sequence generation (see
Kuhn and van Hemmen,
1991)—or, sometimes, both sequence generation or ﬁxed
point attractors depending on the inputs ( Herz et al., 1988 ).
The drawback of these models is that they separated a
learning phase in which recurrent dynamics was shut down
in order to form the synaptic connectivity matrix, and a
retrieval phase in which the connectivity matrix does not
change anymore.
Our model removes this artiﬁcial separation, since both
plasticity rule and recurrent dynamics operate continuously, both
during learning and recall. However, we found that there needs to
be a mechanism to attenuate recurrent dynamics during learn ing
for it to be stable. The mechanism we propose rely on a modiﬁed
version of a standard homeostatic rule. Other mechanisms ha ve
been proposed, such as neuromodulators that would change
the balance between recurrent and external inputs during
presentation of behaviorally relevant stimuli (
Hasselmo, 2006).
The cost of not having supervision is that the network
can only learn the temporal order of the presented stimuli,
but not their precise timing.
Veliz-Cuba et al. (2015) have
recently provided a model which bear strong similarities with
our model (rate model with unsupervised temporally asymmetric
Hebbian plasticity rule), but includes in addition a short-
term facilitation mechanism that allows the network to learn
both order and precise timing of a sequence presented in
input. However, their mechanisms require parameters to be
precisely related.
Models with temporally asymmetric Hebbian plasticity have
also been investigated in the context of the hippocampus (
Abbott
and Blum, 1996; Gerstner and Abbott, 1997; Mehta et al.,
1997; Jahnke et al., 2015; Chenkov et al., 2017; Theodoni
et al., 2018
). In such models, feedforward connectivity is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 16 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
learned through multiple visits of neighboring place ﬁelds,
and sequential activity (“replays”) can be triggered using
appropriate inputs mimicking sharp-wave ripples. Other models
use unsupervised Hebbian plasticity but qualitatively distinc t
mechanisms to generate sequential activity. In particular, several
studies showed that sequences can be generated spontaneousl y
from unstructured input noise (
Fiete et al., 2010; Okubo et al.,
2015). Murray and Escola (2017) showed that sequences can be
generated in networks of inhibitory neurons with anti-Hebb ian
plasticity, and proposed that this mechanism is at work in
the striatum.
3.2. Learning of Persistent Activity With
Unsupervised Hebbian Plasticity
In our model, unsupervised temporally asymmetric Hebbian
plasticity is unstable, and after a number of stimulations,
all synaptic weights increase to the maximum value. The
destabilization occurs during sequential stimulation whe n the
population previously stimulated in the sequence presents
persistent activity at the moment the next population is being
stimulated. This leads to the increase of the feedforward sy naptic
weight between these two populations, producing that both
present PA while the next population in the sequence is being
stimulated. This process continues in each repetition of the
sequential stimulation until all populations in the network
present PA leading to an increase in the synaptic weights to
maximum values. However, previous studies have shown that PA
could be learned without additional stabilization mechani sms.
In
Del Giudice and Mattia (2001) , Del Giudice et al. (2003) ,
and Mongillo et al. (2005) PA is learnt without any stabilizing
mechanism except for short-term depression. These studies ha ve
a number of diﬀerences with ours, however, we believe the
key diﬀerence for stable learning PA is that in these models
there is PA (in the absence of inputs to the network) below
the threshold for LTP induction - something is not currently
present in our model since PA is always at the maximal
rate. Therefore, unlike our model, PA after stimulation doe s
not lead to eﬀective changes in the synaptic connections.
Interestingly, they introduced short term depression to sta bilize
learning by rapidly shutting down high ﬁring rates during
stimulation or PA, which resembles the eﬀect of the generalize d
homeostatic plasticity rule in our model. In
Mongillo et al.
(2003), connectivities with stable recurrent, feedforward and
feedback connections between pairs of populations emerge
from unsupervised Hebbian learning without any stabilizati on
mechanism. After learning, when one population in the pair
presents PA the other transition to PA stochastically after a
period of time due to spike noise. Importantly, as in the previous
models discussed above, the learning thresholds are set in s uch
a way that there is no learning when both populations present
PA. Additionally, during learning the presentations of stim uli
are far apart, and unlike our model learning feedback and
feedforward connections are due to persistent activity in on e
neuron, and the stimulation in the other, followed by a small
increase in the synaptic strengths in each presentation. Last ly,
another diﬀerence with the models above, and with classical
models for persistent delay activity (
Amit and Brunel, 1997 ),
is that in our model the “background state” is at zero activit y.
This is an unrealistic feature stemming from the simpliﬁed
piecewise linear transfer function used in our network (see
Equation 5).
3.3. Stabilization Mechanisms
Consistent with many previous studies (
Dayan and Abbott,
2001), we have shown that a network with unsupervised Hebbian
plasticity under sequential stimulation leads to a runaway o f the
synaptic weights. This instability is due to a positive feed-ba ck
loop generated by the progressive increase of network activi ty
leading to a progressive increase in average synaptic strengt h
when PA or SA are being learned. One possible solution for this
problem was ﬁrst proposed in the context of attractor neural
network models (
Amit et al., 1985; Tsodyks and Feigel’Man,
1988; Amit and Fusi, 1994). In these models, patterns are learned
upon presentation during a learning phase where synapses are
plastic but there is no ongoing network dynamics. After the
learning phase , the learning of attractors is tested in a retrieval
phase, where the network dynamics is ongoing but synaptic
plasticity is not present. Therefore, by compartmentalizing i n
time dynamics and learning, the network dynamics does not
lead to changes in the synaptic weights during retrieval, and
conversely, changes in synaptic weights do not lead to change s
in the dynamics during learning. This separation prevents the
observed runaway of the synaptic weights due to unsupervised
Hebbian plasticity.
However, it is unclear whether such compartmentalization
exists in cortical networks. In this work, we explored the
alternative scenario, in which both plasticity and dynamics
happen concurrently during learning and retrieval (see also
Mongillo et al., 2005; Litwin-Kumar and Doiron, 2014; Zenke
et al., 2015
for a similar approach in networks of spiking
neurons). First, we found that by adding to unsupervised
Hebbian plasticity an instantaneous synaptic normalization
mechanism that maintains constant the sum of incoming
synaptic weights to each population, PA and SA cannot be
stably learned. Second, we found that adding a generalized
homeostatic plasticity to unsupervised Hebbian plasticity lea ds
to stable learning of PA and SA. During sequential stimulati on,
the increase in co-activation between multiple populations due to
recurrent and feedforward connections learned via unsupervi sed
Hebbian plasticity is prevented by suppressing its eﬀect in the
network dynamics. Homeostatic plasticity scales down the overall
connectivity producing a weakly connected network. PA and
SA is prevented to occur during stimulation, which weakens
the positive feed-back loop generated by the increase in co-
activations of neuronal populations. After learning, the dyn amic
variables of the Homeostatic plasticity rule reach a steady s tate
with values similar of what they where before stimulation
(see Figure 8A) and the connectivity learned via unsupervised
Hebbian plasticity can lead to retrieval of PA and SA upon
stimulation (see Figure 8C). The homeostatic variable reaches its
steady state at a value close to one, and the connectivity rec overs,
unmasking the feedforward and recurrent learned architecture.
We have also tried other stabilization mechanisms such as
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 17 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
inhibitory to excitatory plasticity ( Vogels et al., 2011 ) instead of
homeostatic plasticity. In this case we found that stable lea rning
of PA and SA is possible, but for distinct sets of network and
stimulation parameters (data not shown).
As explained in
Zenke and Gerstner (2017) and Zenke
et al. (2017) , in order to prevent the runaway of the synaptic
weights produced by Hebbian plasticity, the timescale of any
compensatory mechanism should be of the same order or
faster than the Hebbian timescale. For generalized homeosta tic
plasticity, the timescale of the homeostatic variable Hi is
dependent on the ﬁring rate of neuron i and the target ﬁring
rate [i.e., φ (ui)/φ (u0)]. When the network ﬁring rate is close to
the target ﬁring rate the homeostatic learning rule is slow, and
the homeostatic mechanism seldom play a role in the dynamics.
On the other hand, for high ﬁring rates the homeostatic plasticity
timescale becomes faster, preventing the runaway of the syna ptic
weights. There is currently an ongoing debate about whether the
timescales of compensatory processes used in theoretical stu dies,
as the ones used here, are consistent with experimental evide nce
(see e.g.,
Zenke and Gerstner, 2017; Zenke et al., 2017 ).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
UP and NB designed, performed the research, and wrote
the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was supported by NIH R01 MH115555, NIH R01
EB022891, and ONR N00014-16-1-2327.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
UP thanks to the Champaign Public Library for providing the
physical space where part of this work has been completed.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fncom.
2019.00097/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abbott, L. F., and Blum, K. I. (1996). Functional signiﬁcance o f long-term
potentiation for sequence learning and prediction. Cereb. Cortex 6, 406–416.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/6.3.406
Abeles, M. (1991). Corticonics: Neural Circuits of the Cerebral Cortex . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Amador, A., Perl, Y. S., Mindlin, G. B., and Margoliash, D. (2013). Elemental
gesture dynamics are encoded by song premotor cortical neurons. Nature 495,
59–64. doi: 10.1038/nature11967
Amari, S.-I. (1972). Learning patterns and pattern sequences by self -organizing
nets of threshold elements. IEEE Trans. Comput. 100, 1197–1206.
doi: 10.1109/T-C.1972.223477
Amit, D. J., and Brunel, N. (1997). Model of global spontaneous act ivity and local
structured activity during delay periods in the cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 7,
237–252. doi: 10.1093/cercor/7.3.237
Amit, D. J., Brunel, N., and Tsodyks, M. (1994). Correlations of cort ical
hebbian reverberations: theory versus experiment. J. Neurosci. 14, 6435–6445.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.14-11-06435.1994
Amit, D. J., and Fusi, S. (1994). Learning in neural networks withmaterial synapses.
Neural Comput. 6, 957–982. doi: 10.1162/neco.1994.6.5.957
Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., and Sompolinsky, H. (1985). Spin-glass mode ls
of neural networks. Phys. Rev. A 32:1007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.
32.1007
Bi, G.-Q. and Poo, M.-M. (1998). Synaptic modiﬁcations in cultu red
hippocampal neurons: dependence on spike timing, synaptic
strength, and postsynaptic cell type. J. Neurosci. 18, 10464–10472.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-24-10464.1998
Bienenstock, E. L., Cooper, L. N., and Munro, P. W. (1982). Theo ry
for the development of neuron selectivity: orientation speciﬁcity
and binocular interaction in visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 2, 32–48.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.02-01-00032.1982
Bittner, K. C., Milstein, A. D., Grienberger, C., Romani, S., and Magee, J. C. (2017).
Behavioral time scale synaptic plasticity underlies ca1 place ﬁelds. Science 357,
1033–1036. doi: 10.1126/science.aan3846
Blum, K. I., and Abbott, L. (1996). A model of spatial map formation
in the hippocampus of the rat. Neural Comput. 8, 85–93.
doi: 10.1162/neco.1996.8.1.85
Bourne, J. N., and Harris, K. M. (2011). Coordination of size and n umber of
excitatory and inhibitory synapses results in a balanced structural plasticity
along mature hippocampal ca1 dendrites during ltp. Hippocampus 21, 354–373.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20768
Brunel, N. (2003). Dynamics and plasticity of stimulus-selective per sistent
activity in cortical network models. Cereb. Cortex 13, 1151–1161.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhg096
Brunel, N. (2005). “Network models of memory, ” in Methods and Models in
Neurophysics, Volume Session LXXX: Lecture Notes of the Les Hou ches Summer
School 2003, eds C. Chow, B. Gutkin, D. Hansel, C. Meunier, and J. Dalibard
(Amsterdam: Elsevier), 407–476.
Cannon, J., Kopell, N., Gardner, T., and Markowitz, J. (2015). Neu ral sequence
generation using spatiotemporal patterns of inhibition. PLoS Comput. Biol.
11:e1004581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004581
Chafee, M. V., and Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1998). Matching pattern s of
activity in primate prefrontal area 8a and parietal area 7ip neurons
during a spatial working memory task. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 2919–2940.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1998.79.6.2919
Chenkov, N., Sprekeler, H., and Kempter, R. (2017). Memory replay
in balanced recurrent networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13:e1005359.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005359
Dayan, P., and Abbott, L. F. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience, Vol. 806. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Del Giudice, P., Fusi, S., and Mattia, M. (2003). Modelling the
formation of working memory with networks of integrate-and-ﬁre
neurons connected by plastic synapses. J. Physiol. Paris 97, 659–681.
doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2004.01.021
Del Giudice, P., and Mattia, M. (2001). Long and short-term syn aptic plasticity
and the formation of working memory: A case study. Neurocomputing 38,
1175–1180. doi: 10.1016/S0925-2312(01)00557-4
Diesmann, M., Gewaltig, M.-O., and Aertsen, A. (1999). Stable propa gation
of synchronous spiking in cortical neural networks. Nature 402, 529–533.
doi: 10.1038/990101
Durstewitz, D., Seamans, J. K., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2000). N eurocomputational
models of working memory. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1184–1191. doi: 10.1038/81460
Erickson, C. A., and Desimone, R. (1999). Responses of macaque peri rhinal
neurons during and after visual stimulus association learning. J. Neurosci. 19,
10404–10416. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10404.1999
Ermentrout, G. B., and Terman, D. H. (2010). Mathematical Foundations of
Neuroscience, Vol. 35. New York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media.
Fiete, I. R., Senn, W., Wang, C. Z., and Hahnloser, R. H. (2010). Spike-time-
dependent plasticity and heterosynaptic competition organize net works to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 18 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
produce long scale-free sequences of neural activity. Neuron 65, 563–576.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.02.003
Foster, D. J., and Wilson, M. A. (2006). Reverse replay of behavio ural sequences
in hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature 440, 680–683.
doi: 10.1038/nature04587
Funahashi, S., Bruce, C. J., and Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1989). Mn emonic coding of
visual space in the monkey’s dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 61,
331–349. doi: 10.1152/jn.1989.61.2.331
Funahashi, S., Bruce, C. J., and Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1990). Visuospatial coding in
primate prefrontal neurons revealed by oculomotor paradigms. J. Neurophysiol.
63, 814–831. doi: 10.1152/jn.1990.63.4.814
Funahashi, S., Bruce, C. J., and Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1991). Ne uronal activity
related to saccadic eye movements in the monkey’s dorsolateral prefron tal
cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 65, 1464–1483. doi: 10.1152/jn.1991.65.6.1464
Fuster, J. M., and Alexander, G. E. (1971). Neuron activity relat ed to short-term
memory. Science 173, 652–654. doi: 10.1126/science.173.3997.652
Fuster, J. M., Bauer, R. H., and Jervey, J. P. (1982). Cellular dis charge in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the monkey in cognitive tasks. Exp. Neurol.
77, 679–694. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(82)90238-2
Gerstner, W., and Abbott, L. (1997). Learning navigational ma ps through
potentiation and modulation of hippocampal place cells. J. Comput. Neurosci.
4, 79–94. doi: 10.1023/A:1008820728122
Gerstner, W., Kistler, W. M., Naud, R., and Paninski, L. (2014). Neuronal Dynamics:
From Single Neurons to Networks and Models of Cognition . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Graupner, M., and Brunel, N. (2012). Calcium-based plasticity model e xplains
sensitivity of synaptic changes to spike pattern, rate, and dendri tic location.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 3991–3996. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1109359109
Grosmark, A. D., and Buzsáki, G. (2016). Diversity in neural ﬁring dynamics
supports both rigid and learned hippocampal sequences. Science 351, 1440–
1443. doi: 10.1126/science.aad1935
Guo, Z. V., Li, N., Huber, D., Ophir, E., Gutnisky, D., Ting, J. T ., et al. (2014). Flow
of cortical activity underlying a tactile decision in mice. Neuron 81, 179–194.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.020
Hahnloser, R. H., Kozhevnikov, A. A., and Fee, M. S. (2002). An u ltra-sparse code
underliesthe generation of neural sequences in a songbird. Nature 419, 65–70.
doi: 10.1038/nature00974
Harvey, C. D., Coen, P., and Tank, D. W. (2012). Choice-speciﬁ c sequences in
parietal cortex during a virtual-navigation decision task. Nature 484, 62–68.
doi: 10.1038/nature10918
Hasselmo, M. E. (2006). The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 16, 710–715. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.09.002
Herz, A., Sulzer, B., Kühn, R., and van Hemmen, J. L. (1988). The Hebb rule: storing
static and dynamic objects in an associative neural network. Europhys. Lett. 7,
663–669. doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/7/7/016
Inagaki, H. K., Fontolan, L., Romani, S., and Svoboda, K. (2019) . Discrete
attractor dynamics underlies persistent activity in the frontal c ortex. Nature
566, 212–217. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0919-7
Izhikevich, E. M. (2006). Polychronization: computation with s pikes. Neural
Comput. 18, 245–282. doi: 10.1162/089976606775093882
Jahnke, S., Timme, M., and Memmesheimer, R. M. (2015). A uniﬁed dyn amic
model for learning, replay, and sharp-wave/ripples. J. Neurosci. 35, 16236–
16258. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3977-14.2015
Jun, J. K., and Jin, D. Z. (2007). Development of neural circuitry f or
precise temporal sequences through spontaneous activity, axon remod eling,
and synaptic plasticity. PLoS ONE 2:e723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00
00723
Keck, T., Toyoizumi, T., Chen, L., Doiron, B., Feldman, D. E., Fox , K., et al.
(2017). Integrating hebbian and homeostatic plasticity: the cu rrent state of
the ﬁeld and future research directions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 372:20160158.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0158
Kim, S. S., Rouault, H., Druckmann, S., and Jayaraman, V. (2017). Rin g
attractor dynamics in the drosophila central brain. Science 356, 849–853.
doi: 10.1126/science.aal4835
Kleinfeld, D., and Sompolinsky, H. (1988). Associative neural netw ork model
for the generation of temporal patterns. theory and application to
central pattern generators. Biophys. J. 54:1039. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(88)
83041-8
Koch, K., and Fuster, J. (1989). Unit activity in monkey parietal cortex related
to haptic perception and temporary memory. Exp. Brain Res. 76, 292–306.
doi: 10.1007/BF00247889
Kuhn, R., and van Hemmen, J. L. (1991). “Temporal association, ” in Models
of Neural Networks , eds E. Domany, J. L. van Hemmen, and K. Schulten
(New York, NY: Springer), 221–285.
Laje, R., and Buonomano, D. V. (2013). Robust timing and motor pat terns
by taming chaos in recurrent neural networks. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 925–933.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3405
Litwin-Kumar, A., and Doiron, B. (2014). Formation and maintenan ce of
neuronal assemblies through synaptic plasticity. Nat. Commun. 5:5319.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms6319
Liu, D., Gu, X., Zhu, J., Zhang, X., Han, Z., Y an, W., et al. (2014). Medial prefrontal
activity during delay period contributes to learning of a working memory task.
Science 346, 458–463. doi: 10.1126/science.1256573
Liu, J. K., and Buonomano, D. V. (2009). Embedding multiple trajecto ries in
simulated recurrent neural networks in a self-organizing manner. J. Neurosci.
29, 13172–13181. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2358-09.2009
Markram, H., Lübke, J., Frotscher, M., and Sakmann, B. (1997). Regu lation of
synaptic eﬃcacy by coincidence of postsynaptic aps and epsps. Science 275,
213–215. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5297.213
McCormick, D. A., Connors, B. W., Lighthall, J. W., and Prince, D. A .
(1985). Comparative electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely
spiny stellate neurons of the neocortex. J. Neurophysiol. 54, 782–806.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1985.54.4.782
Mehta, M. R., Barnes, C. A., and McNaughton, B. L. (1997). Experience-dependent,
asymmetric expansion of hippocampal place ﬁelds. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
94, 8918–8921.
Memmesheimer, R.-M., Rubin, R., Ölveczky, B. P., and Sompolinsky,
H. (2014). Learning precisely timed spikes. Neuron 82, 925–938.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.026
Miller, E. K., Erickson, C. A., and Desimone, R. (1996). Neural mech anisms of
visual working memory in prefrontal cortex of the macaque. J. Neurosci. 16,
5154–5167. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-16-05154.1996
Miller, K. D., and Fumarola, F. (2012). Mathematical equivalence of two common
forms of ﬁring rate models of neural networks. Neural Comput. 24, 25–31.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00221
Miyashita, Y. (1988). Neuronal correlate of visual associative long-term memory
in the primate temporal cortex. Nature 335, 817–820. doi: 10.1038/335817a0
Miyashita, Y., and Chang, H. S. (1988). Neuronal correlate of picto rial
short-term memory in the primate temporal cortex. Nature 331, 68–70.
doi: 10.1038/331068a0
Mongillo, G., Amit, D. J., and Brunel, N. (2003). Retrospective and pro spective
persistent activity induced by hebbian learning in a recurrent cort ical network.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 18, 2011–2024. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02908.x
Mongillo, G., Curti, E., Romani, S., and Amit, D. J. (2005). Learnin g in realistic
networks of spiking neurons and spike-driven plastic synapses. Eur. J. Neurosci.
21, 3143–3160. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04087.x
Murray, J. M., and Escola, G. S. (2017). Learning multiple variable-speed sequences
in striatum via cortical tutoring. Elife 6:e26084. doi: 10.1101/110072
Nakamura, K., and Kubota, K. (1995). Mnemonic ﬁring of neurons in t he monkey
temporal pole during a visual recognition memory task. J. Neurophysiol. 74,
162–178. doi: 10.1152/jn.1995.74.1.162
Naya, Y., Sakai, K., and Miyashita, Y. (1996). Activity of prima te inferotemporal
neurons related to a sought target in pair-association task. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 93, 2664–2669. doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.7.2664
Ngezahayo, A., Schachner, M., and Artola, A. (2000). Synaptic a ctivity modulates
the induction of bidirectional synaptic changes in adult mouse hippocampus. J.
Neurosci. 20, 2451–2458. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-07-02451.2000
Okubo, T. S., Mackevicius, E. L., Payne, H. L., Lynch, G. F., an d Fee, M. S. (2015).
Growth and splitting of neural sequences in songbird vocal developme nt.
Nature 528, 352–357. doi: 10.1038/nature15741
Pereira, U., and Brunel, N. (2018). Attractor dynamics in networks
with learning rules inferred from in vivo data. Neuron 99, 227–238.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.05.038
Rajan, K., Harvey, C. D., and Tank, D. W. (2016). Recurrent netw ork
models of sequence generation and memory. Neuron 90, 1–15.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.02.009
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97


--- Page 19 ---
Pereira and Brunel Unsupervised Learning of Persistent and Sequential Activi ty
Renart, A., Song, P., and Wang, X.-J. (2003). Robust spatial work ing memory
through homeostatic synaptic scaling in heterogeneous cortical n etworks.
Neuron 38, 473–485. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00255-1
Roxin, A., Brunel, N., Hansel, D., Mongillo, G., and van Vreeswijk, C. (2011). On
the distribution of ﬁring rates in networks of cortical neurons. J. Neurosci. 31,
16217–16226. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1677-11.2011
Royer, S. and Paré, D. (2003). Conservation of total synaptic w eight through
balanced synaptic depression and potentiation. Nature 422, 518–522.
doi: 10.1038/nature01530
Sabatini, B. L., Oertner, T. G., and Svoboda, K. (2002). The lif e cycle of ca 2+ ions
in dendritic spines. Neuron 33, 439–452. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00573-1
Sakai, K., and Miyashita, Y. (1991). Neural organization for the long-term memory
of paired associates. Nature 354, 152–155. doi: 10.1038/354152a0
Sjöström, P. J., Turrigiano, G. G., and Nelson, S. B. (2001). Rate, timing, and
cooperativity jointly determine cortical synaptic plasticity. Neuron 32, 1149–
1164. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00542-6
Sussillo, D., and Abbott, L. F. (2009). Generating coherent patte rns
of activity from chaotic neural networks. Neuron 63, 544–557.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.018
Theodoni, P., Rovira, B., Wang, Y., and Roxin, A. (2018). Theta-modulation drives
the emergence of connectivity patterns underlying replay in a network model
of place cells. eLife 7:e37388. doi: 10.7554/eLife.37388
Toyoizumi, T., Kaneko, M., Stryker, M. P., and Miller, K. D. (2014 ). Modeling
the dynamic interaction of hebbian and homeostatic plasticity. Neuron 84,
497–510. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.036
Tsodyks, M., and Feigel’Man, M. (1988). The enhanced storage c apacity
in neural networks with low activity level. Europhys. Lett. 6:101.
doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/6/2/002
Turrigiano, G. G. (2008). The self-tuning neuron: synaptic scalin g of excitatory
synapses. Cell 135, 422–435. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.008
Turrigiano, G. G. (2017). The dialectic of hebb and homeostasis. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B 372:20160258. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0258
Turrigiano, G. G., Leslie, K. R., Desai, N. S., Rutherford, L. C., and Nelson,
S. B. (1998). Activity-dependent scaling of quantal amplitude in neocortical
neurons. Nature 391:892. doi: 10.1038/36103
Veliz-Cuba, A., Shouval, H. Z., Josi´c, K., and Kilpatrick, Z. P. (2015). Networks that
learn the precise timing of event sequences. J. Comput. Neurosci. 39, 235–254.
doi: 10.1007/s10827-015-0574-4
Vogels, T., Sprekeler, H., Zenke, F., Clopath, C., and Gerstner, W. ( 2011).
Inhibitory plasticity balances excitation and inhibition in sensory pathways and
memory networks. Science 334, 1569–1573. doi: 10.1126/science.1211095
Waddington, A., Appleby, P. A., De Kamps, M., and Cohen, N. (2012).
Triphasic spike-timing-dependent plasticity organizes networks t o
produce robust sequences of neural activity. Front. Comput. Neurosci.
6:88. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00088
Wang, X.-J. (2001). Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic pers istent
activity. Trends Neurosci. 24, 455–463. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)01868-3
Wilson, H. R., and Cowan, J. D. (1972). Excitatory and inhibitory
interactions in localized populations of model neurons. Biophys. J. 12:1.
doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(72)86068-5
Zenke, F., Agnes, E. J., and Gerstner, W. (2015). Diverse syn aptic plasticity
mechanisms orchestrated to form and retrieve memories in spiking neural
networks. Nat. Commun. 6:6922. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7922
Zenke, F., and Gerstner, W. (2017). Hebbian plasticity requires c ompensatory
processes on multiple timescales. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 372:20160259.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0259
Zenke, F., Gerstner, W., and Ganguli, S. (2017). The temporal parad ox of hebbian
learning and homeostatic plasticity. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 43, 166–176.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2017.03.015
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Pereira and Brunel. This is an open-access artic le distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 19 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 97
