--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 04 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2022.659316
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316
Edited by:
Si Wu,
Peking University, China
Reviewed by:
Tomoyuki Naito,
Osaka University, Japan
Xavier Otazu,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Spain
*Correspondence:
Xiaochen Liu
xliu9362@uni.sydney.edu.au
Received: 27 January 2021
Accepted: 05 January 2022
Published: 04 February 2022
Citation:
Liu X and Robinson PA (2022) Analytic
Model for Feature Maps in the Primary
Visual Cortex.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 16:659316.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2022.659316
Analytic Model for Feature Maps in
the Primary Visual Cortex
Xiaochen Liu 1,2* and Peter A. Robinson 1,2
1 School of Physics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Au stralia, 2 Center for Integrative Brain Function, The University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
A compact analytic model is proposed to describe the combine d orientation preference
(OP) and ocular dominance (OD) features of simple cells and t heir mutual constraints on
the spatial layout of the combined OP-OD map in the primary vi sual cortex (V1). This
model consists of three parts: (i) an anisotropic Laplacian (AL) operator that represents
the local neural sensitivity to the orientation of visual in puts; and (ii) obtain a receptive
ﬁeld (RF) operator that models the anisotropic spatial proj ection from nearby neurons
to a given V1 cell over scales of a few tenths of a millimeter an d combines with the AL
operator to give an overall OP operator; and (iii) a map that describes how the parameters
of these operators vary approximately periodically across V1. The parameters of the
proposed model maximize the neural response at a given OP wit h an OP tuning curve
ﬁtted to experimental results. It is found that the anisotro py of the AL operator does not
signiﬁcantly affect OP selectivity, which is dominated by t he RF anisotropy, consistent
with Hubel and Wiesel’ s original conclusions that orientat ion tuning width of V1 simple
cell is inversely related to the elongation of its RF . A simpliﬁed and idealized OP-OD map is
then constructed to describe the approximately periodic lo cal OP-OD structure of V1 in a
compact form. It is shown explicitly that the OP map can be app roximated by retaining its
dominant spatial Fourier coefﬁcients, which are shown to su fﬁce to reconstruct its basic
spatial structure. Moreover, this representation is a suit able form to analyze observed
OP maps compactly and to be used in neural ﬁeld theory (NFT) fo r analyzing activity
modulated by the OP-OD structure of V1. Application to indep endently simulated V1
OP structure shows that observed irregularities in the map c orrespond to a spread of
dominant coefﬁcients in a circle in Fourier space. In addition, there is a strong bias toward
two perpendicular directions when only a small patch of loca l map is included. The bias
is decreased as the amount of V1 included in the Fourier trans form is increased.
Keywords: orientation selectivity, ocular dominance, rece ptive ﬁeld (RF), primary visual cortex (V1), cortical maps
1. INTRODUCTION
The aim of this study is to: (i) build a simple and idealized OP-OD map representation of V1 which
is based on the local feature detection in OP and OD, and the mo deling of the neural interaction
between nearby hypercolumns; and (ii) obtain a suitable Fourier domain representation of the local
area of OP-OD map with the range of a few hypercolumns, in order to place it in the form required
to link it to the neural ﬁeld theory (NFT) of neural activities and connections in approximately
periodic structures such as primary visual cortex (V1).


--- Page 2 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
V1 is the ﬁrst cortical area that processes visual inputs from
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus before
projecting output signals to higher visual areas (
Hubel and
Wiesel, 1961, 1962a, 1972; Garey and Powell, 1967; Hendrick son
et al., 1978; Miikkulainen et al., 2005 ). The feedforward visual
pathway from the eyes to V1 involves two main processing
steps: (i) light levels at a given spatial location are detecte d
and converted into neural signals by the retina ganglion cel ls;
and (ii) the neural signals are transmitted to V1 through the
lateral geniculate nuclei (LGN) of the thalamus (
Schiller and
Tehovnik, 2015 ). LGN neurons have approximately circular
receptive ﬁelds with either a central ON region (activity enhanced
by light incident there) surrounded by an OFF annulus (activ ity
enhanced by darkness there), or vice versa ( Hubel and Wiesel,
1961; De Angelis et al., 1995 ). In addition, recent studies
(Suematsu et al., 2012, 2013 ) have found that most LGN neurons
have elongated receptive ﬁelds, which provide considerable
orientation bias. The current study focuses on circular LGN
receptive ﬁelds.
Similarly to other parts of the cortex, V1 can be approximated
as a two-dimensional sheet when studying the spatial structure of
various feature maps (
Tovée, 1996). V1 neurons, which respond
to same eye preference or orientation preference, are arrange d
in columns perpendicular to the cortical surface. Columns do
not have sharp boundaries; rather, feature preferences grad ually
vary across the surface of V1. These maps are overlaid such that
a given neuron responds to several features (
Hubel and Wiesel,
1962b, 1968, 1974a; Miikkulainen et al., 2005 ).
Two prominent feature preferences of V1 cells are their layout
in a combined the OP-OD map, as seen in Figure 1A, which
shows an example from experiment ( Blasdel, 1992 ). Hubel and
Wiesel (1968) found that neurons that respond preferentially to
stimuli from one eye or the other are arranged in alternating
bands across layer 4C of V1 in macaque monkeys, and these
bands are termed left and right OD stripes. The average OD stripe
width in mammals ranges from ∼ 0.5 − 1 mm (
LeV ay et al., 1985;
Horton and Adams, 2005; Adams et al., 2007 ). An OP column,
sometimes called an iso-orientation slab, comprises neuron s that
respond to similar edge orientation in a visual ﬁeld. Each OP
column not only spans several cortical layers vertically, bu t also
extends 25 − 50µm laterally in monkey. Moreover, OP normally
varies continuously as a function of the cortical position, covering
the complete range 0 ◦ to 180 ◦ of edge orientations (
Hubel and
Wiesel, 1974a, 1977; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993 ). Optical
imaging reveals that OP columns are quasiperiodic, and are
arranged as pinwheels, within which each of the OPs varies
azimuthally around a center called a singularity (
Bonhoeﬀer
and Grinvald, 1991, 1993; Blasdel, 1992; Swindale, 1996 ).
Furthermore, the OP in each pinwheel increases either clockw ise
(negative pinwheel) or counterclockwise (positive pinwheel) and
most neighboring pinwheels have opposite signs ( Götz, 1987,
1988). Examples of positive and negative OP pinwheels are
outlined in Figure 1A. The superimposed OD and OP maps
have speciﬁc relationships, including that: (i) most pinwheel s
are centered near the middle of OD stripes; (ii) linear zones,
which are formed by near-parallel OP columns, usually connec t
two singularities and cross the border of OD stripes at right
angles (
Bartfeld and Grinvald, 1992 ), as highlighted in the white
rectangle in Figure 1A. Additionally, various studies ( Mitchison,
1991, 1995; Koulakov and Chklovskii, 2001; Chklovskii and
Koulakov, 2004
) have argued that the appearance of the OP-OD
map reﬂects wiring optimization of local neuron connectivit y,
in which the distance between neurons with similar feature
preference is kept as small as possible.
According to the quasiperiodicity of the feature preference
of V1, previous studies (
Bressloﬀ and Cowan, 2002; Veltz
et al., 2015 ) suggested that the functional maps of V1 can be
approximated by a spatially periodic network of fundamental
domains, each of which is called a hypercolumn. Each
hypercolumn represents a small piece of V1, which consists of
left and right OD stripes with a pair of positive and negative
pinwheels in each, so as to ensure the complete coverage of the
OP and OD selectivity.
Orientation selectivity plays a primary role in early-stage
visual processing. One way to characterize the preferred
orientations of a single neuron is to measure the tuning curve
from its neuronal response to visual stimuli with various
orientations. Figure 1B shows an experimental orientation
tuning curve obtained from single unit responses in area 17 of
adult cat, with optimal orientation angle of 90 ◦ (
Swindale, 1998).
A typical full width at half maximum (FWHM) of such a curve
is ∼ 35◦.
The mapping of inputs from the retina to V1 is organized
in a retinotopic manner. Visual information in nearby region s
within the visual ﬁeld is projected to neighboring ganglion ce lls
in the retina. This spatial arrangement is maintained throug h
the LGN to V1, where the visual signals are further processed
by neighboring V1 neurons. The subregion in the visual ﬁeld,
within which certain features of the visual object tend to ev oke
or suppress neural ﬁring of a given V1 neuron, is termed the
classical receptive ﬁeld (RF) of that neuron (
Hubel and Wiesel,
1962a; Tootell et al., 1982; Skottun et al., 1991; Smith et al .,
2001; Schiller and Tehovnik, 2015). The area around the classical
RF is referred to as the non-classical or extra-classical RF , i n
which a stimulus can modulate the responses evoked by stimuli
in the classical RF (
Allman et al., 1985; Rao and Ballard, 1999;
Henry et al., 2013 ). This paper focuses on the classical RF of
V1 simple cells, which respond best to oriented bars. The spatia l
arrangement of a V1 simple cell RF has separate ON and OFF
subareas, which are elongated in a speciﬁc orientation, and t hese
subareas relate to the ON and OFF regions of LGN RFs that
project to the V1 RF of a given cell. The neuron will be excited
when light illuminates the ON subarea, and be depressed when
light exposed to the OFF subarea (
Hubel and Wiesel, 1968;
Mechler and Ringach, 2002 ). It was ﬁrst proposed by Hubel and
Wiesel (1962a) that the RF of a V1 simple cell can be predicted
by a feed-forward model. Speciﬁcally, they suggested that RF of
a V1 simple cell is formed by combining the circular RFs of
several LGN cells to produce an elongated RF with central ON
region ﬂanked by OFF regions. Figure 2 shows a schematic of
this feed-forward model, which produces a RF with a three-lobed
pattern, as shown in the bottom left corner. In addition, seve ral
studies have suggested that the lateral intracortical exci tatory
and inhibitory connectivities from surrounding neurons also play
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 3 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 1 | Experimental OP-OD properties. (A) Combined OP-OD map of macaque monkey, adapted from Blasdel (1992). The borders of OD stripes are shown in
solid black, and singularities (pinwheel centers) are labe led by white stars. Oriented color bars indicate different O Ps. The blue and red circles outline examples of
positive and negative OP pinwheels, and the white rectangle outlines a linear zone. (B) Experimental orientation tuning curve, adapted from Swindale (1998). The
preferred orientation angle is around 90 ◦. The dots are the data points, and the solid curve is the ﬁtted t uning curve using a von Mises function.
FIGURE 2 | Schematic of the elongated RF of a V1 simple cell, showing the
convergence of several LGN RFs into the V1 RF . The four cells i n the right half
of the ﬁgure represents LGN cells with circular ON center, OFF surround RFs.
The outputs of these LGN cells project to form the elongated V 1 RF shown at
the bottom left. Adapted from Hubel and Wiesel (1962a) .
important roles in a cell’s orientation tuning and RF formatio n
(Gardner et al., 1999; Ferster and Miller, 2000; Mariño et al.,2005;
Finn et al., 2007; Moore IV and Freeman, 2012 ). Moreover, some
studies have discussed the relationship between the size of the RF
and the width of the orientation tuning curve ( Hubel and Wiesel,
1962a; Lampl et al., 2001). These authors predicted that the width
of orientation tuning curve should be inversely associated with
the elongation of the RF.
Numerous experiments have used optical imaging or
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to reveal the
spatial structure of the OP-OD map in mammals including
humans (
Bonhoeﬀer and Grinvald, 1991, 1993; Bartfeld and
Grinvald, 1992; Blasdel, 1992; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993;
Bosking et al., 1997; Y acoub et al., 2008
). Additionally, a number
of models have been proposed for constructing the OP-OD maps
and simulated numerically (
Obermayer et al., 1992b; Swindale,
1992; Erwin et al., 1995; Miikkulainen et al., 2005; Bednar, 2 009;
Barbieri et al., 2012; Stevens et al., 2013 ). The resulting OP-
OD maps obtained from experiments or simulation are only
semiregular, as illustrated inFigure 1A. Hence, it usually requires
many data points to describe the structure of such maps, which
impedes understanding and requires extensive computation to
integrate OP-OD maps into models of neural activity in the
approximately periodically structured V1. Such models would
beneﬁt from a compact approximate analytic representation
of the OP-OD map; e.g., to incorporate its structure into
existing spatiotemporal correlation analyses of gamma-band
oscillations of neural activity using neural ﬁeld theory (NFT ), or
to understand propagation via patchy neural connections in V1
(
Robinson, 2005, 2006, 2007; Liu et al., 2020 ).
NFT averages over the properties of many neurons to model
brain structure and activity at scales from ∼ 0.1 mm to the
whole brain, where it has had many successful comparisons
with experiment (
Deco et al., 2008 ). It is thus well placed to
analyze activity in V1, including in the wider context of brain
activity as a whole (
Robinson, 2006 ), without having to model
every neuron individually, which is impractical. However, to do
this, it is necessary to obtain a compact Fourier representati on
of the approximately periodic mm-scale variations of feature
sensitivity and to ensure that these are mutually consistent
(
Robinson, 2006 ). This formulation then enables the evolution
of the corresponding properties of spatially modulated activity
evoked by various stimuli to be tracked.
The above issues motivate us to derive a compact analytical
representation of the OP-OD map for use in linking the
microscale neural activities to the brain dynamics in a larger scale
of a few tenths of a millimeter using NFT , and for analysis of
properties of OP-OD maps obtained from in-vivo experiments
or computer simulations. In this study we start with an ideali zed
map that is periodic and regularized. The idealization is sui table
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 4 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
in a short scale of a few millimeters, where OD stripes can
be approximated as straight and parallel; at longer scales, the se
stripes deviate in direction over a characteristic correlation length
beyond which they tend toward isotropy on average (
LeV ay et al.,
1985; Adams et al., 2007 ).
To achieve the above aim, we ﬁrst note that it has long
been suggested that oriented visual features such as edges c an
be detected by the Laplacian operator ( Ratliﬀ, 1965; Marr and
Hildreth, 1980; Marr and Ullman, 1981; Marr, 1982; Young,
1987
). Hence, we approximate the local sensitivity of V1 neuron
to the orientation of stimuli by such an operator, which we
allow to be anisotropic. This operator incorporates the detail s
of LGN receptive ﬁelds, as projected to the cortex, and any
anisotropic response at V1, as implemented through local
excitatory and inhibitory wiring between neurons. Other ed ge
detectors have been proposed to exist in V1, and a wider range
have been suggested in the ﬁeld of machine vision. These include:
(i) the Canny operator, which tracks the maximum gradient
points of the Gaussian-smoothed image through a non-maximal
suppression process (
Canny, 1986 ); (ii) the Gabor ﬁlter that
extracts the image features with speciﬁc direction and spatia l
frequencies using a Gaussian modulated sinusoid ( Mehrotra
et al., 1992 ); and (iii) diﬀerence of Gaussian (DoG) ﬁlter, which
consists of two Gaussians of opposite sign and diﬀerent standar d
deviations ( Young, 1987 ). Some of these ﬁlters are suitable for
modeling the receptive ﬁelds of retinal ganglion cells (e.g. , DoG
ﬁlter) and V1 simple cells (e.g., Gabor ﬁlter) ( Ringach, 2002;
Lindeberg, 2013 ). It is worth stressing that we are not aiming
to incorporate the latest and most sophisticated edge detecto rs
from computer vision; rather, we want a simple operator that
can plausibly be implemented in neural tissue. The Laplacian
is a suitable such operator, but use of more complex operators
would not aﬀect the mutual constraints between OD and OP
maps. Secondly, we introduce an RF operator to approximate the
anisotropy of the visual region that projects activity to a giv en
V1 simple cell. The combined Laplacian and RF operators yield
an overall OP operator at each point, whose parameters can be
ﬁtted to yield observed OP tuning widths. Thirdly, we allow t he
properties of the OP operator to vary across V1 approximately
periodically, as described by dominant Fourier coeﬃcients.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we
approximate the hypercolumn with its structure being
compatible with the general features of OP-OD map. Meanwhile,
it also is compatible with NFT; We describe the local sensitiv ity
to stimulus orientation by applying an anisotropic Laplacian
operator to the stimulus. A RF operator is then introduced to
project activity from neighboring neurons to a given point. Then,
in Section 3, the resulting combined OP operator maximizes th e
response of V1 neurons to their preferred stimulus orientatio n
and its parameters are adjusted to match experimental tuning
curves; Moreover, we Fourier decompose the OP and OD
variations on the period of an idealized hypercolumn and
investigate the properties of the resulting Fourier coeﬃcien ts.
The results are then applied to compactly represent and analyze
OP and OD maps generated from widely used simulation
models. Finally, the main ﬁndings are discussed and summarized
in Section 4.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Hypercolumns and OP-OD Maps
In this section, an approximate OP-OD map within a
hypercolumn is proposed, which reproduces the main aspects
of observed maps. It is Fourier decomposed in later sections to
generate a sparse set of Fourier coeﬃcients that can be used in
NFT to study activity across many hypercolumns.
2.1.1. Hypercolumn Arrangement
All feature preferences within a small visual ﬁeld are mapped
to a hypercolumn in V1 (
Hubel and Wiesel, 1962b, 1974a;
Miikkulainen et al., 2005 ). Based on the pinwheel model
introduced by De V alois and De V alois (1990), we approximate
the hypercolumn as a square domain, which consists of left
and right OD stripes of equal width; the structure of OD
map constrains the variation of OP , such that each OD stripe
contains a pair of positive and negative pinwheels for continuo us
(except at pinwheel centers) and complete feature preference
coverage within a hypercolumn. The hypercolumn is consistent
with general observations of visual cortical map formation
from experimental studies (
LeV ay et al., 1985; Bonhoeﬀer and
Grinvald, 1991; Bartfeld and Grinvald, 1992; Obermayer et a l.,
1992a; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993; Erwin et al., 1995; Müller
et al., 2000; Adams et al., 2007
), including that: (i) left-eye
and right-eye OD stripes are arranged as alternating stripes i n
V1 of average width ≈ 1 mm; (ii) OP angles are arranged as
pinwheels; (iii) each pinwheel center coincides with the cent er
of its OD band; (iv) OP is continuous at OD boundaries; and
(iv) neighboring pinwheels have opposite signs. A + sign denotes
a counterclockwise increase of OP around the pinwheel center ,
whereas a − sign denotes a clockwise increase. According to
the rules described above, two distinct arrangements of the
hypercolumn are possible, as illustrated in Figure 3, where each
hypercolumn is 2a wide. Pinwheel arrangement I in Figure 3A is
used for further study in later sections, without loss of gene rality.
However, other arrangements produce analogous results due t o
the fact that the hypercolumn are assumed to be continuous
at boundary and periodic across V1, and other hypercolumn
arrangements can be obtained by either rotating the pinwheel s
clockwise/counterclockwise or swapping the left/right column or
top/bottom row horizontally or vertically of Figure 3A. Note also
that one is free to consider a hypercolumn whose lower left corner
is at the center of the current hypercolumn in Figure 3A. Such
a hypercolumn has exactly the same structure as in Figure 3B,
except for interchange of the left- and right-eye columns.
2.1.2. OD Bands and OP Pinwheel Structure
In our idealized case, we approximate the left and right OD
bands as straight parallel stripes. The degree of eye preferenc e is
approximated as a sinusoidal function/Omega1 (x, y) of cortical position
(x, y). We deﬁne /Omega1 (x, y) by subtracting the response to left eye
stimuli from the response to the right eye (so positive and
negative values indicate R- and L-eye dominance, respective ly)
and write
/Omega1 (x, y) = sin(ux + vy), (1)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 5 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 3 | Schematics of possible hypercolumn arrangements. The two v ertical bands of each hypercolumn represent the left and rig ht OD stripes. The orientated
bars represent the OP within a pinwheel, and the + / − signs indicate the polarity of the pinwheels. (A) Pinwheel arrangement I. (B) Pinwheel arrangement II.
where
u = π
a sin(ξ ), v = π
a cos(ξ ), (2)
where 2a is the period of the OD stripe andξ is the angle at which
the OD stripes measured relative to the x-axis, which is set to
90◦ here (stripes are parallel to the y axis). Figure 4A shows the
resulting OD map with left/right OD bands represented by blac k
and white stripes, respectively; binocular cells tend to be lo cated
near the boundaries between stripes. We note that the exact
proﬁle of OD need not be sinusoidal, but this approximation
suﬃces for the present purpose of examining the links between
OD and OP maps.
Our model also approximates the OP as a function of cortical
location within each hypercolumn. The spatial coordinates of the
hypercolumn are set by placing the origin of the coordinates at
the center of the hypercolumn, whose boundaries are at x = ± a
and y = ± a, as shown in Figure 3. The four pinwheels in a
single hypercolumn are modeled by ﬁrst generating the right- top
pinwheel, and other pinwheels are produced by mirroring the
right-top pinwheel across the x-axis, the y-axis, and then both.
When generating the right-top pinwheel, the x and y coordinates
range from 0 to a and the OP angle ϕ (x, y) at each cortical
position ( x, y) is approximated by the inverse tangent function
deﬁned as
ϕ (x, y) = 1
2

















arctan
( y− y0
x− x0
)
, x> x0, y> y0
π
2 , x = x0, y> y0
arctan
( y− y0
x− x0
)
+ π , x< x0, y> y0
3π
2 , x = x0, y< y0
arctan
( y− y0
x− x0
)
+ 2π , x> x0, y< y0
(3)
where ( x0, y0) = (a/ 2, a/ 2) is the center of the right-top
pinwheel. The 1 / 2 coeﬃcient in front of the inverse tangent
functions is to make the range of ϕ (x, y) to be 0 ◦ to 180◦.
The negative and positive pinwheels on the top half of
hypercolumn are illustrated in Figures 4B,C. Figure 4D shows
a hypercolumn containing four pinwheels. As mentioned
previously, the OP and OD features are approximated as
continuous and periodic for the moment, so V1 can be
approximated as lattice of hypercolumns. Thus, we can construct
an array of our approximated hypercolumns to represent a
piece of V1, which is shown in Figure 4E. In such an array,
the OP structure resembles maps reconstructed from in-vivo
experiments (e.g., Figure 1A), although the OD stripes are
approximated as straight here (
Bonhoeﬀer and Grinvald, 1991,
1993; Blasdel, 1992; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993 ).
2.2. OP Operator
In this section, we derive analytic representations for the O P of
V1 neurons. Firstly, we adopt an anisotropic Laplacian operator
to describe the local response of the system to an edge, which
can include both the near-isotropic response of the LGN plus
any anisotropy introduced by local wiring in V1. We also
introduce the RF operator that describes the projection of activity
from nearby neurons in an anistropic surrounding region. The
combination of these two operators gives an overall OP operato r,
whose parameters we ﬁt to match experimental tuning curves.
Again, we stress that we do not adopt the latest edge detection
operator from machine vision; rather, we seek a simple operator
that can detect the edges while also be plausibly instantiated by
the neural wiring of simple cells. In any event, the precise form
operator chosen does not aﬀect the relationship between OP
and OD maps, so other variants could be used without aﬀecting
our core arguments (but speciﬁcity of OP would be aﬀected,
in general).
2.2.1. Anisotropic Laplacian (AL) Operator
In computer vision, edges with diﬀerent orientation can
be detected by linearly combining the second-order partial
derivatives of the input (
Marr and Hildreth, 1980; Marr,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 6 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 4 | Schematics of visual feature preference maps in V1. (A) OD map with left and right OD bands represented by black and wh ite stripes, respectively. The
color bar indicates the OD sensitivity, with left-eye prefe rence being negative. (B) Negative pinwheel. (C) Positive pinwheel. Both pinwheels are 180 ◦ periodic and the
color bars indicate OP in degrees. (D) Hypercolumn. The vertical line divides the hypercolumn int o left and right OD bands of equal width, while the horizontal and
vertical lines split the hypercolumn into four squares, eac h containing one OP pinwheel. The white and black crosses mar k examples of locations near a pinwheel
center and in an iso-orientation domain, and the circle arou nd each cross indicates the characteristic width of the inte gration region for computing the overall neuron
responses in Section 3.2. The short bars highlight the OP at v arious locations. The 0 and 180 ◦ orientations both appear as horizontal bars. The color bar i ndicates OP
in degrees. (E) Periodic spatial structure of OP and OD across a small piece o f V1 comprising 25 hypercolumns. Black/white stripes indica te left (L) and right (R) OD
bands. One pinwheel is outlined in white and one hypercolumn is outlined in black. The left/right color bar indicates OP an gle in degrees and OD selectivity.
1982; Torre and Poggio, 1986 ). Similarly, we can model the
local sensitivity of V1 simple cells to stimulus orientation ,
by calculating the weighted sum of the second-order partial
derivatives of activity projected from the oriented bar stim uli,
using rotated axes for simplicity. Figure 5A shows an original
x − y coordinate system, and x′− y′axes obtained by rotating the
original axes by an OP angleϕ that is the angle of an oriented bar.
A short bar in an image gives rise to localized, anisotropic
intensity changes (
Torre and Poggio, 1986 ). In the rotated
coordinates, this 2-dimensional intensity change can be de tected
by the weighted second order partial derivatives in the x′
and y′ directions. Hence, we deﬁne an anisotropic Laplacian
operator P as a weighted linear combination of the second order
partial derivatives:
P = a2 ∂ 2
∂ x′2 + b2 ∂ 2
∂ y′2 , (4)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 7 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 5 | Schematics of coordinates and operators. (A) Coordinates used to analyze the anisotropic Laplacian oper ator. Original axes x and y are shown in solid,
while the rotated axes x′ and y′ are dashed. The input stimulus is a bar oriented at angle ϕ . (B) Operators leading to the OP response at cells at r on the cortex. An
oriented bar is mapped to locations R in the receptive ﬁeld, which projects to r via the anisotropic weight function G(r − R) indicated by the solid elliptic contour. The
local anisotropic Laplacian operator P then acts at r. The arrow shows how the neural response are project to measu rement point r via the weight function. The xg
and yg are the major and minor axis of the weight function, respecti vely.
where the rotated coordinates satisfy
x′ = x cosϕ + y sinϕ , (5)
y′ = − x sinϕ + y cosϕ , (6)
where the OPϕ ranges from 0 toπ , and a2 and b2 are constants.
Taking the Fourier transform of both sides of Equation (4)
yields
P(k) = − a2k2
x′ − b2k2
y′ , (7)
where
k2
x′ = (kx cosϕ + ky sinϕ )2 , (8)
k2
y′ = (− kx sinϕ + ky cosϕ )2 . (9)
Substituting Equations (8) and (9) into Equation (7) and the n
performing an inverse Fourier transform yields
P = (a2 cos2ϕ + b2 sin2ϕ ) ∂ 2
∂ x2 + (a2 − b2) sin (2ϕ ) ∂ 2
∂ x∂ y
+ (a2 sin2ϕ + b2 cos2ϕ )∂ 2
∂ y2 . (10)
Since the stimulus S is oriented along the x′ axis, we would need
more weight on ∂ 2/∂ y′2 than on ∂ 2/∂ x′2 to have a maximal
response to the desired orientation; this implies that b2 ≥ a2.
2.2.2. Receptive Field (RF) Operator
Previous studies (
Hubel and Wiesel, 1977; Toth et al., 1997;
Troyer et al., 1998; Ferster and Miller, 2000; Schummers et al .,
2002; Mariño et al., 2005; Finn et al., 2007 ) have suggested that
the orientation tuning of V1 neuron is altered by the excitat ory
(inhibitory) inputs from locally connected neighboring neu rons
(either from the same orientation column or from neighborin g
columns). Thus, we now introduce an RF operator to model the
anisotropic RF that projects to V1 cells. This consists of a weight
function G(R − r), which describes the strength of the neural
projection from locations R, where input stimuli are mapped
to V1, to a cell at location r whose OP is being approximated.
Figure 5B shows a schematic of the RF operator on a piece of
cortex, indicating both the location r and locations R whose
activity projects to r.
We approximate G(r− R) as an anisotropic Gaussian function
whose long axis is oriented at the local OP ϕ at R (
Jones and
Palmer, 1987). If R = (xR, yR) and r = (x, y), we have
G(r − R) = 1
2πσ xσ y
exp
[
− 1
2
(
x2
g
σ 2x
+
y2
g
σ 2y
)]
, (11)
where
xg = (x − xR) cosϕ + (y − yR) sinϕ , (12)
yg = − (x − xR) sinϕ + (y − yR) cosϕ . (13)
The appropriate width of G(r− R) along the xg axis is determined
by three factors: (i) the approximate RF size near the fovea
measured from experiments. Previous studies (
Hubel and Wiesel,
1974b; Dow et al., 1981; Keliris et al., 2019 ) yielded an RF size
of ≈ 0.082◦ at the eccentricity of 1 ◦ in macaque Monkey. We
then transform the RF size in visual degree to the correspondin g
cortical size in mm by adopting the magniﬁcation factor from
Horton and Hoyt (1991) , where the magniﬁcation factor M
(expressed in mm per degree) in monkey is approximated as
M = 12
E + 0.75 , (14)
where E is the eccentricity in degrees. The corresponding cortical
RF size is then ∼ 0.56 mm; (ii) the width of the weight function
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 8 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
should ensure an approximate 30 ◦ fall oﬀ from the measuring
neuron’s maximum response when it is activated by its optimal
orientation (
De V alois et al., 1982; Swindale, 1998; Ringach et al.,
2002; Gur et al., 2005; Moore IV and Freeman, 2012); (iii) In local
connections, the typical axonal projection range of a V1 neuro n
lies between 0.18 and 0.3 mm ( Lund, 1973; Blasdel et al., 1985;
Fitzpatrick et al., 1985; V anni et al., 2020 ). In order to satisfy all
the three factors mentioned above, we choose σ x = 0.18 mm.
2.2.3. Combined OP Operator
Here we combine the anisotropic Laplacian and RF operators
from above to obtain an overall OP operator and adjust its
parameters to match experimental OP tuning curves.
The input that reaches location R on the cortex is
approximated by applying the AL operator to the stimulus S (i.e.,
P{S(R)} in Figure 5B), so that the local orientation sensitivity
is picked out, while the weight function G(R − r) determines
how much response from locations R are projected to r. Hence,
the response at r can be approximated by convolving the weight
function with the OP operator on the stimulus at diﬀerent
location R. It can be written as
I(r) =
∫
G(r − R)P
{
S(R)
}
dR . (15)
In the Fourier domain, the convolution theorem yields
I(k) = G(k)P(k)S(k) . (16)
where the algebraic function P(k) is deﬁned in Equation (7). We
can thus reverse the order of P(k) and G(k) on the right hand
side of Equation (16) and inverse Fourier transform to obtai n
I(r) =
∫
P
{
G(r − R)
}
S(R)dR . (17)
Hence, the response at r becomes the convolution of a new
combined OP operator P
{
G(r − R)
}
with the stimulus itself; the
resulting operator is a Gaussian-derivative operator. This r esult
agrees with previous studies (
Movshon et al., 1978; Graham,
1989), which indicated that V1 simple cell can be modeled as
a linear ﬁlter and its responses are computed as the weighted
integral of the Laplacian-transformed stimulus, with the we ights
given by the RF pattern.
Figure 6A shows a contour plot of the combined OP operator
P
{
G(r − R)
}
with a preferred orientation angle of ϕ = 22.5◦.
The operator has an elongated three-lobe pattern with its majo r
axis along the direction ϕ , with an ON center lobe and two
OFF side lobes. Figure 6B shows a measured RF of V1 simple
cells of macaque monkey (
Ringach, 2002 ), showing that our
OP operator closely resembles the experimental one in spatial
structure. Some studies have used diﬀerent OP operators such a s
Gabor functions, diﬀerence-of-Gaussian functions, or Gaus sian
derivatives to describe the spatial structure of the RF (
Young,
1987; Lindeberg, 2013 ). Second order Gaussian derivatives and
diﬀerence-of-Gaussian functions are dominated by a central
peak ﬂanked by two peaks of opposite sign, and our function
shares these features. Gabor functions and functions invol ving
higher Gaussian derivatives, for example, have smaller additional
peaks, which are observed in a small fraction of V1 simple cells
(
De V alois et al., 2000; Ringach, 2002). However, these additional
features do not change the OP of the cell and do not aﬀect the
results below, which depend on this OP , not the details of how i t
was detected.
3. RESUL TS
3.1. Angular Selectivity of the OP Operator
The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the bell-shaped
OP angle tuning curve plotted from the neuron response by
convolving the RF operator and the stimulus can be used
to parameterize the OP selectivity of the OP operator. The
parameters are tunable by adjusting the ratioσ 2
x/σ 2
y of the weight
function G(r − R) deﬁned in Equation (11), and the ratio b2/ a2
of the anisotropic Laplacian operator P deﬁned in Equation (10).
Hence, we can ﬁnd the optimal parameter values of the combined
OP operator by adjusting its parameters so its tuning curve
matches experiment.
We ﬁrst vary the values of a2 and b2 while keeping their sum
constant by writing
a2 = sin2ψ , (18)
b2 = cos2ψ , (19)
whereψ ranges from 0 to π/ 4 to ensure b2 ≥ a2. We also vary
the ratio σ x/σ y from 1.5 to 6.5 to elongate the weight function
along the xg axis deﬁned in Equation (12). Figure 7 shows the
resulting contour map of the FWHM vs. b2/ a2 andσ x/σ y. The
FWHM varies rapidly with σ x/σ y, with sharper tuning as σ x/σ y
increases. In contrast, the FWHM only sharpens slightly when
b2/ a2 increases.
In order to illustrate the insensitivity of the FWHM to b/ a
more clearly, Figure 8A shows the normalized tuning curves for
ﬁxed σ x/σ y = 2.5, varying b2/ a2 from 1 to 100. The FWHM
decreases by only ∼ 2◦ when b2/ a2 changes from 1 to 5, and
it does not decrease signiﬁcantly further for larger b2/ a2. The
reason for this is that the RF operator envelope deﬁned by G(r −
R) limits the eﬀective lengths of its three lobes to the Gaussia n
envelope’s characteristic width, so they do not change much when
b2/ a2 increases. This agrees with previous studies, which argued
that the OP tuning width of a V1 simple cell varies inversely wit h
the size of its RF (
Hubel and Wiesel, 1962a; Lampl et al., 2001 ).
It is also consistent with the Gaussian derivative model propo sed
by Lindeberg (2013) and Young et al. (2001) for modeling the
spatiotemporal RF of V1 cells. Our results also match Hubel
and Wiesel’s feed-forward model, in which the overall V1 RF
results from the net eﬀect of aggregating isotropic LGN RFs via
anisotropic connections in V1 (
Hubel and Wiesel, 1962a).
The above analysis implies that we can simplify the OP
operator by setting b2 = a2 because their ratio does not
aﬀect the OP tuning width signiﬁcantly. Then the OP operator
P
{
G(r − R)
}
becomes the Laplacian of the weight function
L
{
G(r − R)
}
and the tuning width is controlled by the
elongation of the weight function G(r − R).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 9 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 6 | Comparison of theoretical and experimental OP detection. (A) OP operator P
{
G(R − r)
}
with OP = 22.5◦. The color bar indicates the amplitude of the
operator. (B) RF of macaque monkey V1 simple cell from experiment ( Ringach, 2002). The color bar indicates normalized impulse response stre ngth of the neurons.
FIGURE 7 | Contour map of the FWHM of the OP tuning curve vs. b2/ a2, and
σ x/σ y. The preferred orientation angle at measurement point is 13 5◦. The value
ofσ x/σ y is given by x axis, and the ratio of b2 and a2 is given by y axis. The
color bar represents the FWHM width in degrees.
Previous studies ( Pei et al., 1994; Volgushev et al., 2000;
Gillespie et al., 2001; Lampl et al., 2001; Goris et al., 2015 )
suggested that the linear prediction of orientation tuning c urves
resulting from the spatial structure of receptive ﬁeld maps (suc h
as the OP operator in the current study) showed a better match
with the responses from intracellular membrane potential, rather
than the spike activity. The nonlinear eﬀects imposed by the
transformation of membrane potential to spikes (i.e., spikes a re
produced only when potentials is higher than the spike threshold)
sharpens the ﬁnal tuning curve. From the studies mentioned
above, the FWHM measured from membrane potentials ranges
from 45 ◦ for highly selective cells (i.e., with long and narrow
RF) to 100 ◦ for less selective cells (i.e., with short and wide RF).
In this study, we focus on the high selective cells with narrow
tuning. Thus, we chose to match our model with the experimental
FWHM of 45 ◦, and this corresponds to σ x/σ y ≈ 2. The tuning
curves corresponding to this ratio is shown in Figure 8B for
various optimal OP.
3.2. Tuning Curves vs. Distance From
Pinwheel Center
Early experiments showed that neuron populations near
pinwheel centers have low mean orientation selectivity (i.e .,
broad tuning curve), by using optical imaging with voltage
sensitive dyes (
Blasdel, 1992; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993 ),
although individual neurons in these regions have good OP
selectivity (
Bartfeld and Grinvald, 1992; Maldonado et al., 1997;
Ohki et al., 2006 ). We next compute the overall response at a
measurement site located at r0 [i.e., IOP(r0)] and compare it
with experimental results. The overall responses is computed b y
taking a weighted average of the neural responses around the
measurement location by integrating the responses of all the cells
with a Gaussian weight function centered at r0 over the region:
IOP(r0) =
∫
I(r)W(r − r0)dr , (20)
where
W(r − r0) = 1
2πσ 2r
exp
[
− (r − r0)2
2σ 2r
]
. (21)
The width of the weight function is set to 40 µm, to approximate
the characteristic width of an OP microcolumn and the
experimental range of pinwheel-center eﬀects on OP selectivit y
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 10 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 8 | OP tuning curves. (A) Normalized tuning curves with b2/ a2 set to 1 (blue), 2 (red), 10 (green), 20 (yellow), and 100 (pur ple); and ﬁxing σ x/σ y = 2.5. The
preferred orientation angle is set to 45 ◦. (B) OP tuning curves with orientation angles 0 ◦ (pink), 30 ◦ (blue), 60 ◦ (green), 90◦ (orange), 120 ◦ (yellow), 150 ◦ (brown), and
180◦ (pink), with σ x/σ y = 2 and b2/ a2 = 1.
(Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993; Maldonado et al., 1997; Ohki
et al., 2006; Nauhaus et al., 2008 ).
We consider two cases of tuning curves for measurement
sites with diﬀerent locations in the hypercolumn, one near a
pinwheel center and another one in an iso-orientation domain .
These locations are marked with crosses in Figure 4D, and the
circle around each cross indicates the characteristic widt h of the
weight function in Equation (21). Figure 9A shows the resulting
tuning curve of the overall responses of a measurement site
located in an iso-orientation domain (i.e., the location ma rked
with black cross in Figure 4D) with preferred orientation ≈ 60◦.
It is sharply peaked at the preferred angle with FWHM ≈ 41◦.
In Figure 9B, we plot the tuning curves for an array of cells
that are around the measurement site within the circular reg ion.
Since all the cells are located in the iso-orientation domai n, they
have very similar orientation preferences and tuning curves . The
average response of cells near the pinwheel center is plotted in
Figure 9C, it is much broader than the tuning curve shown in
Figure 9A due to the fact that we average the responses from
neurons with a wide range of OPs, as shown in Figure 9D.
Our predictions agree with the experimental results (
Bartfeld
and Grinvald, 1992; Maldonado et al., 1997; Ohki et al., 2006 ),
who found that individual neurons near the pinwheel center ar e
just as orientation selective as the ones in the iso-orienta tion
domain, and the overall broadly tuned response seen by Blasdel
and Salama (1986) for example is the averaged response of nearby
cells with a wide range of OPs.
We have also investigated how the tuning width and response
strength vary with distance from the pinwheel center, and
compare them with experiment in Figure 10. We calculate half
width at half maximum (HWHM) here, in order to be consistent
with the experimental plots. As expected, our predicted HWHM
decreases when moving away from the pinwheel center to an
iso-orientation domain, while the response strength increas es
with distance, as seen in Figure 10B. Both results match
the experimental ﬁndings shown in Figure 10A, except the
experimental HWHM in iso-orientation domain is wider than
ours; However, our plots do not reproduce the overshoot and
dip in the responses strength and HWHM curves, respectively,
shown in Figure 10A. In order to achieve a better ﬁt to the
experimental data, we thus try the Mexican hat function,
Wmex(r − r0) =
[
1 − (r − r0)2
2σ 2r
]
exp
[
− (r − r0)2
2σ 2r
]
, (22)
as the weight function to average the responses, and the resul ting
plots are shown in Figure 10C. Overshoot and dip features
are visible in this case, implying a better match. Thus, it is
potentially possible to deduce the shape of the weight function
from experimental results such as these, but detailed explora tion
is beyond the scope of the present paper.
3.3. Fourier Analysis of the OP-OD Map
We seek a representation of the OP map in the Fourier domain so
that we can apply it to compactly represent experimental data and
to study spatiotemporal neural activity patterns in periodic V1
structures using NFT , which requires such Fourier coeﬃcients as
input. Thus, in this section, we decompose the OP-OD map of the
hypercolumn that is deﬁned in Section 2.1 in the Fourier domain,
derive the two sets of the Fourier coeﬃcients that represent t he
spatial frequency components of the OD and OP map structure
respectively, and discuss their properties. We also determine th e
least number of Fourier coeﬃcients we need in NFT analysis
while maintaining the essential features of the OP-OD map. Th is
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 11 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 9 | Averaging of OP tuning curves at different distances from a p inwheel center. (A) Tuning curve of averaged responses at measurement site loca ted in
iso-orientation domain (i.e., marked as black cross in Figure 4D). (B) Tuning curves of all the cells surrounding the measurement s ite within the circular region in
iso-orientation domain. (C) Tuning curve of averaged responses at measurement site loca ted near pinwheel center (i.e., marked as white cross in Figure 4D). (D)
Tuning curves of all the cells surrounding the measurement s ite within the circular region near pinwheel center.
is achieved by reconstructing the OP-OD map with a subset of
the coeﬃcients using the inverse Fourier transform.
We analyze the OD map shown in Figure 4A by directly
performing 2D Fourier transform on the map. The magnitude
plot of the resulting Fourier coeﬃcients has 2-fold symmetry and
is shown in Figure 11A. As the OD map is modeled by sinusoidal
function, it only has two dominant K modes, which are located
at k = (± K, 0), where K = π/ a and 2 a is the period of the
OD stripe.
We analyze the OP map in the hypercolumn by ﬁrst applying
a spatial operator O to the map, with O deﬁned as
O = exp [i2ϕ (x, y)]. (23)
This operator preserves the structure and periodicity of the OP -
OD map and allows us to avoid the spurious discontinuities
between 0 ◦ and 180 ◦ orientations, which actually correspond to
the same stimulus orientation (
Swindale et al., 1987 ). This is
important because representation of such discontinuities wo uld
require use of high spatial frequencies, and thus many Fourie r
coeﬃcients. We then perform a 2D Fourier transform on the
resulting map, which yields a sparse set of Fourier coeﬃcients .
Figure 11B shows the magnitude of the Fourier coeﬃcients
of a lattice of 5 × 5 hypercolumns (i.e., Figure 4E). We note
that: (i) the coeﬃcients have 4-fold symmetry, and the four
K modes with lowest spatial frequency are dominant; and (ii)
the lowest K modes are located at ( ±π/ a, 0) and (0, ±π/ a),
where 2 a is the width of hypercolumn. The strong bias toward
vertical and horizontal directions in the Fourier domain is
introduced by the regularized arrangements of the map, such
that the OD stripes are straight and parallel to each other and
the OP pinwheels are approximated as lying on a square grid.
This idealization is suitable for OP-OD maps at short scales
of a few millimeters; as larger areas of V1 are included, the
direction of OD stripes increasingly varies until overall ne ar-
isotropy is attained (
LeV ay et al., 1985; Niebur and Wörgötter,
1994; Adams et al., 2007). We stress that local isotropy of the map
is not possible unless no OP-OD map structure exists to break
that symmetry.
One of our main aims in ﬁnding these Fourier coeﬃcients of
the OP-OD map is to incorporate the OP map structure into
the patchy propagator theory introduced to treat periodic V1
structure in previous studies (
Robinson, 2006, 2007; Liu et al.,
2020). We want to use as few coeﬃcients as possible to simplify
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 12 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 10 | Dependence of tuning properties on distance from a pinwheel
center. (A) Experimental HWHM and response strength vs. distance in µm
from pinwheel center from Swindale et al. (2003) , averaged over 13 pinwheels.
The ﬁlled circles shows the response strength in arbitrary un its, while the open
circles show the HWHM in degrees and the bottom-most curve sh ows the
(Continued)
FIGURE 10 | baseline activity. (B) Predicted HWHM vs. distance (blue) and
Responses strength vs. distance (orange) from pinwheel cen ter, by using a
Gaussian function as weight function for averaging the resp onses. (C)
Predicted HWHM vs. distance (blue) and response strength vs . distance
(orange) from pinwheel center, by using a Mexican hat functi on as weight
function for averaging the responses.
computation, while preserving the essential OP-OD structure .
In order to test how well a small subset of Fourier coeﬃcients
can approximate the OP-OD map, we reconstruct the lattice
of hypercolumns from these coeﬃcients and compare it to the
original one. To reconstruct the OD map, we perform the inverse
Fourier transform including only the two Fourier coeﬃcient s
with the lowest spatial frequency. Likewise, when reconstruc ting
the OP map, we perform the inverse Fourier transform on
the small set of coeﬃcients with lowest spatial frequency. Th e
resulting complex data represents the values that have been
transformed from the OP angles after applying the operator O
deﬁned in Equation (23). We then transform the complex data
back to OP angles via
eiϕ (x,y) = cos[ϕ (x, y)] + i sin[ϕ (x, y)], (24)
whence
ϕ (x, y) = tan− 1
[ sinϕ (x, y)
cosϕ (x, y)
]
. (25)
We ﬁnd that the K modes with lowest spatial frequency (the
yellow squares in both Figures 11A,B) suﬃce to reproduce the
main features of the hypercolumn lattice, and the reconstruct ed
map with combined OP and OD is shown in Figure 11C, which
is very similar to the original one (i.e., Figure 4E) except that the
absence of higher modes leads to diﬀerences of up to 4 ◦ in OP
and some angular contours of the OP map are smoother than
in the original map. This detail is shown in the top left frame o f
Figure 11D, which is to be compared with the frame below it,
which is from the same part of the original lattice.
Figure 11E shows the absolute diﬀerences between the
original OP map in one hypercolumn and the reconstructed one.
The square on the left is a zoomed-in patch that is marked by
the dashed square, and it is extracted in the same location as we
do for the zoomed-in patch in Figure 11D. The largest diﬀerence
is ≈ 4.5◦ near the edges of each pinwheel. Nevertheless, the basic
structure and periodicity of the hypercolumn are all preserved in
the reconstructed lattice. Thus, we can conclude that theK modes
with lowest spatial frequency in Figures 11A,B are suﬃcient for
incorporating the OP-OD map structure into NFT computations.
In V1, the arrangement of hypercolumns is not as regular
as our idealization above. To model the development of
irregularities in the actual structure, one would simulate c ortical
plasticity using NFT driven by an ensemble of input stimuli
with various features using the present OP operators and OP-
OD constraints. As in other branches of physics where local
order gives way to long-range disorder, one would expect that
randomness in the ensemble would break the local symmetries
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 13 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 11 | Representations of the OD-constrained OP-OD map for a latti ce of 25 hypercolumns. (A) Magnitude of Fourier coefﬁcients of the OD map. (B)
Magnitude of Fourier coefﬁcients of the OP map after applying the operator O. In both (A,B), each square on the ﬁgure represents one spatial mode K, and the color
(Continued)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 14 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 11 | bar indicates its magnitude. (C) Reconstructed OP-OD map using the two sets of dominant Fouri er coefﬁcients shown in (A,B). (D) Reconstructed OP
map with the two squares on the top-left are the zoomed-in pat ches of the reconstructed (top) and the original (bottom) la ttice. These are extracted from the same
location that is marked by dashed oval. The color bar indicat es the OP in degrees. (E) Absolute differences between the original hypercolumn OP i n Figure 4E and
the reconstructed one. The square on the left shows a zoomed- in patch that is extracted from the location marked by blue da shed-line. The color bar indicates the
difference in degrees.
over some correlation length, giving rise to disorder in the OP-
OD map across V1 as a whole. For the moment, though, we can
illustrate such situations, and show that the present analysi s has
suﬃcient ﬂexibility to describe them, by adding spatial mode s
around the dominant K modes. Our approach for illustrating the
eﬀects of disorder in a larger-scale OP map is to add K modes
around the previous 2 (for OD) and 4 (for OP) lowest spatial
frequency modes, with magnitude Mk that is deﬁned by Gaussian
envelopes in Kx, Ky, and azimuthal angle/Theta1 :
Mk = exp
[
− (|K| − |K0|)2/ 2/Delta1 2
K
]
exp
[
− (/Theta1 − /Theta1 0)2/ 2/Delta1 2
/Theta1
]
,
(26)
where K0 and /Theta1 0 run over the locations and azimuthal
angles, respectively, of the original K modes with lowest spatial
frequency, /Delta1 K and /Delta1 /Theta1 are the variances of the Gaussian
envelope and we set these to 1
2 K and 20 ◦, respectively, to
match experimental observations. The resulting magnitude pl ot
of the two sets of K modes for OD and OP map are shown in
Figures 12A,B. To approximate the joint structure of OD and OP
maps, we set the magnitude and phase of the two K lobes in the
OD map in Figure 12A to be identical to the left and right K lobes
in the OP map in Figure 12B. Moreover, the top and bottom K
lobes in Figure 12B are obtained by rotating the pair of K lobes
counterclockwise by 90 ◦. The reconstructed OP-OD map using
these two set of K is shown in Figure 12C, which resembles the
OP-OD maps obtained in experiments (
Blasdel, 1992; Bonhoeﬀer
and Grinvald, 1993; Obermayer and Blasdel, 1993). It reproduces
the general feature of the OP maps mentioned in Section 2.1.1,
including: (i) it has both positive and negative pinwheels, an d
most of the neighboring pinwheels have opposite signs; (ii)
linear zones connect two pinwheel centers; and (iii) most of t he
pinwheel centers lie in the middle of the OD stripe.
In previous studies (
Blasdel, 1992; Niebur and Wörgötter,
1994), the Fourier transform of the OP-OD map of the whole of
V1 produced a set of coeﬃcients with near-circular symmetry.
Thus, we construct an OP-OD map by expanding the K modes
more widely in azimuth angle to make the spectrum nearly
isotropic, as shown in Figure 12D. Because the annulus is
sampled by square pixels, it retains a residual 4-fold symmetr y.
The resulting reconstructed OP map shown in Figure 12E has
more irregular arrangement of OP columns, with no signiﬁcan t
preference for horizontal or vertical OD stripes. This ﬁgure a lso
underlines the fact that the map is not locally isotropic even if the
overall Fourier spectrum is.
3.4. Application to OP Maps From a Neural
Network Model
In order to analyze the general properties of more realistic OP
maps, we perform the same Fourier analysis as on the idealized
hypercolumns in previous sections for the OP map generated
from a computational neural network model.
The model of V1 we use here is the Gain Control, Adaptation,
Laterally Connected (GCAL) model (
Stevens et al., 2013 ), which
treats the retina, LGN, and V1 as 2-dimensional sheets, with
neurons in each sheet connected topographically. Neurons not
only connect to a small group of neurons of the lower level she et,
but also laterally connect to the neurons within the same she et.
A Hebbian learning rule is adopted in the model for updating
the connection weights between neurons (
Stevens et al., 2013 ).
Figure 13A shows an example output from the GCAL model
simulation ( Bednar, 2009 ), and we use this map for further
analysis in the Fourier domain.
We process the map in the Fourier domain as follows: (i)
Because the 2D discrete Fourier transform implicitly assume s a
repeated pattern in both dimensions, the OP has discontinuitie s
at the edges. We minimize these edge eﬀects by doubling the
linear dimensions of the array and zero padding the added
region. Additionally, we apply a Gaussian window to the map
to smooth the edges; (ii) Then we apply the operator O
deﬁned in Equation (23), to the resulting map and Fourier
transform it.
Figure 13B shows the resulting Fourier coeﬃcients. The
dominant terms at |k| = K are shown in blue. The ring-shaped
enhancement near the center arises from zero padding and the
large linear size of the overall simulation area, other domi nant
K terms correspond to the periodicity of the hypercolumns
and have 4-fold symmetry similar to the pattern in Figure 11A,
but with a roughly ± 15◦ spread of K. The 4-fold symmetry
is most likely at least partly due to a combination of: (i)
the artifacts introduced by the approximately square unit cell ,
and (ii) a structural bias introduced by the square grid on
which the GCAL model is simulated. In the simulated map
there are roughly ± 15◦ variations, but the Fourier transform
still shows signs of 4-fold symmetry resulting from the squa re
simulation boundaries.
4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
We present a compact analytic description of an idealized
mutually consistent OP-OD map in V1. This includes modeling
both the local neuron sensitivity to the stimulus orientati on and
the weighted projection from nearby neurons, and obtaining
a compact Fourier representation of the resulting structure i n
a form suitable for use in neural ﬁeld theory. The results and
analysis include:
(i) We approximate the periodic OP-OD map in a square
grid of hypercolumn with parallel left and right OD stripes
with equal width and OP pinwheels with alternating signs. The
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 15 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 12 | Illustrative OP-OD map with a distribution of K in Gaussian envelopes centered on principal modes of the ide alized case. (A) Magnitude plot of OD K
modes showing 2-fold symmetry. The color bar indicates the m agnitude. (B) Magnitude plot of OP K modes showing 4-fold symmetry. (C) Illustrative OD-constrained
OP map using the sets of K modes shown in (A,B). The left color bar indicates the OP angle in degrees. (D) Magnitude plot of K modes with approximate circular
symmetry. The color bar indicates the magnitude. (E) Reconstructed map using set of K modes shown in (D). The color bar indicates the OP angle in degrees.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 16 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
FIGURE 13 | Representations of simulated OP maps. (A) OP map generated from GCAL model ( Bednar, 2009), and the color bar indicates the OP angle in degrees.
(B) Magnitude plot of the Fourier coefﬁcients obtained from GCAL OP map. Each pixel-like square represents one spatial mode K, and the color bar indicates its
magnitude.
approximation is idealized but good enough for preserving the
basic structure of the OP-OD map.
(ii) We propose a simple approximate AL operator to detect
the orientation of the stimulus for local neuron. It is a weig hted
sum of second order partial derivatives.
(iii) The OP operator reproduces the spatial arrangement of
the receptive ﬁeld of V1 simple cells. It is derived by ﬁnding th e
neuron responses by combining the AL operator with a weighted
sum of the projections from neighboring neurons. We optimize
the parameters of the operator by controlling the width and angle
selectivity of the response tuning curve, and we ﬁnd that the
orientation tuning is only aﬀected signiﬁcantly by the aspect ratio
of the weight function, not the weights of the second order partial
derivatives for detecting input orientation in local neuron . The
orientation tuning sharpens when we elongate the OP operator
along the orientation axis, in accord with experiment (
Hubel and
Wiesel, 1962a; Lampl et al., 2001 ).
(iv) We account for the lower OP sensitivity and lower
response strength near pinwheel centers by averaging OP over the
characteristic microcolumn scale of 40 µm—near centers many
diﬀerent OPs are averaged together, broadening the tuning curve.
A Mexican hat function gives a better match to experiment,
raising the possibility of using such experimental results to infer
the microscopic connectivity proﬁle.
(v) Fourier analysis of a relatively local OD-constrained O P
map with the range of ∼ 5 hypercolumns in each direction,
were performed to generate two sets of Fourier coeﬃcients
for a compact representation of OD and OP , respectively, and
especially for use in NFT. The resulting Fourier representati on
has 2-fold symmetry for OD and 4-fold symmetry for OP
due to the idealization of parallel straight OD stripes. Only
the K modes with lowest frequency are needed to described
the spatial structure of OP-OD within a hypercolumn. This
simpliﬁes the computational work when we integrate the
OP-OD map into NFT to investigate neuronal activity and
plasticity in V1. Moreover, if we keep these K modes as the
basic modes and add extra modes around it using Gaussian
envelopes, we could reconstruct a more realistic OP-OD map
that is similar to the ones obtained from experiments or
computer simulations.
(vi) We also perform Fourier analysis on the irregular
OP map generated by the GCAL model. The dominant
K modes have approximately square symmetry as an
artifact of the square grid on which the simulations
are done.
Overall, we have focused on modeling the interactions
between hypercolumns and local operators for OP feature
detection, and have succeeded in obtaining a compact
representation of an idealized joint OP-OD map. Notably,
the elongated generalized Gaussian operator dominates in
determining OP and mutual consistency of OP and OD
maps strongly constrains the possible combined maps in
hypercolumns, with four pinwheels, not one, required periodic
unit of the hypercolumn lattice. The Fourier representation
of the idealized structure is suﬃciently compact to be used
in NFT analyses of V1 structure and activity in future
work, with disorder arising from randomness in the drives
of cortical plasticity, for example. Moreover, this study
can potentially serve as the basis for further modeling
of more realistic OP-OD maps on larger scales, and also
of other feature maps including the one for direction of
motion preference.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 17 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
XL developed the analytical model, performed the numerical
computations, produced the ﬁgures, and drafted the manuscript .
PR contributed to developing the model and revised the
manuscript. Both authors contributed to the article and approved
the submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council
under Laureate Fellowship grant FL1401000025, Center
of Excellence grant CE140100007, and Discovery Project
grant DP170101778.
REFERENCES
Adams, D. L., Sincich, L. C., and Horton, J. C. (2007). Complete patte rn of
ocular dominance columns in human primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci . 27,
10391–10403. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2923-07.2007
Allman, J., Miezin, F., and McGuinness, E. (1985). Stimulus speciﬁ c responses
from beyond the classical receptive ﬁeld: neurophysiological mechan isms for
local-global comparisons in visual neurons. Annu. Rev. Neurosci . 8, 407–430.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.ne.08.030185.002203
Barbieri, D., Citti, G., Sanguinetti, G., and Sarti, A. (2012). An uncertainty principle
underlying the functional architecture of V1. J. Physiol. Paris 106, 183–193.
doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2012.03.001
Bartfeld, E., and Grinvald, A. (1992). Relationships between orientation-preference
pinwheels, cytochrome oxidase blobs, and ocular-dominance columns i n
primate striate cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A . 89, 11905–11909.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.24.11905
Baspinar, E., Citti, G., and Sarti, A. (2018). A geometric model of multi-scale
orientation preference maps via Gabor functions. J. Math. Imaging Vis . 60,
900–912. doi: 10.1007/s10851-018-0803-3
Bednar, J. A. (2009). Topographica: Building and analyzing map-leve l simulations
from Python, C/C++, MATLAB, NEST , or NEURON components. Front.
Neuroinform. 3,8. doi: 10.3389/neuro.11.008.2009
Blasdel, G. G. (1992). Orientation selectivity, preference, and
continuity in monkey striate cortex. J. Neurosci . 12, 3139–3161.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.12-08-03139.1992
Blasdel, G. G., Lund, J. S., and Fitzpatrick, D. (1985). Intrinsic connections
of macaque striate cortex: axonal projections of cells outside lamina 4C. J.
Neurosci. 5, 3350–3369. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.05-12-03350.1985
Blasdel, G. G., and Salama, G. (1986). Voltage-sensitive dyes reve al a modular
organization in monkey striate cortex. Nature 321, 579. doi: 10.1038/321579a0
Bonhoeﬀer, T., and Grinvald, A. (1991). Iso-orientation domain s in cat
visual cortex are arranged in pinwheel-like patterns. Nature 353, 429–431.
doi: 10.1038/353429a0
Bonhoeﬀer, T., and Grinvald, A. (1993). The layout of iso-orient ation
domains in area 18 of cat visual cortex: optical imaging
reveals a pinwheel-like organization. J. Neurosc.i 13, 4157–4180.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-10-04157.1993
Bosking, W. H., Zhang, Y., Schoﬁeld, B., and Fitzpatrick, D. (199 7). Orientation
selectivity and the arrangement of horizontal connections in tree shrew striate
cortex. J. Neurosci. 17, 2112–2127. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-06-02112.1997
Bressloﬀ, P. C., and Cowan, J. D. (2002). The visual cortex as a cry stal. Physica D
173, 226–258. doi: 10.1016/S0167-2789(02)00677-2
Canny, J. (1986). A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell . PAMI-8, 679–698. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.
4767851
Chklovskii, D. B., and Koulakov, A. A. (2004). Maps in the brain:
what can we learn from them? Annu. Rev. Neurosci . 27, 369–392.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144226
De V alois, R. L., Cottaris, N. P., Mahon, L. E., Elfar, S. D., and W ilson,
J. A. (2000). Spatial and temporal receptive ﬁelds of geniculate and
cortical cells and directional selectivity. Vis. Res . 40, 3685–3702.
doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(00)00210-8
De V alois, R. L., and De V alois, K. K. (1990).Spatial Vision. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
De V alois, R. L., Yund, E. W., and Hepler, N. (1982). The orientatio n and
direction selectivity of cells in macaque visual cortex. Vis. Res. 22, 531–544.
doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(82)90112-2
DeAngelis, G. C., Ohzawa, I., and Freeman, R. D. (1995). Receptiv e-ﬁeld
dynamics in the central visual pathways. Trends Neurosci . 18, 451–458.
doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(95)94496-R
Deco, G., Jirsa, V. K., Robinson, P. A., Breakspear, M., and Fris ton, K. (2008). The
dynamic brain: From spiking neurons to neural masses and cortical ﬁelds. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 4,e1000092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000092
Dow, B. M., Snyder, A. Z., V autin, R. G., and Bauer, R. (1981).Magniﬁcation factor
and receptive ﬁeld size in foveal striate cortex of the monkey. Exp. Brain Res .
44, 213–228. doi: 10.1007/BF00237343
Erwin, E., Obermayer, K., and Schulten, K. (1995). Models of orient ation and
ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex: a critical comparison. Neural
Comput. 7, 425–468. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.3.425
Ferster, D., and Miller, K. D. (2000). Neural mechanisms of orienta tion
selectivity in the visual cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci . 23, 441–471.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.441
Finn, I. M., Priebe, N. J., and Ferster, D. (2007). The emergenc e of contrast-
invariant orientation tuning in simple cells of cat visual cortex. Neuron 54,
137–152. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.02.029
Fitzpatrick, D., Lund, J. S., and Blasdel, G. G. (1985). Intrinsic connections of
macaque striate cortex: aﬀerent and eﬀerent connections of lamina 4 C. J.
Neurosci. 5, 3329–3349. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.05-12-03329.1985
Gardner, J. L., Anzai, A., Ohzawa, I., and Freeman, R. D. (1999). Linear and
nonlinear contributions to orientation tuning of simple cells in the cat’s striate
cortex. Vis. Neurosci. 16, 1115–1121. doi: 10.1017/S0952523899166112
Garey, L. J., and Powell, T. P. S. (1967). The projection of the latera l
geniculate nucleus upon the cortex in the cat. Proc. R. Soc. B 169, 107–126.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1967.0082
Gillespie, D. C., Lampl, I., Anderson, J. S., and Ferster, D. (2001) . Dynamics of the
orientation-tuned membrane potential response in cat primary visual co rtex.
Nat. Neurosci. 4, 1014–1019. doi: 10.1038/nn731
Goris, R. L. T., Simoncelli, E. P., and Movshon, J. A. (2015). Origi n and
function of tuning diversity in macaque visual cortex. Neuron 88, 819–831.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.009
Götz, K. G. (1987). Do “d-blob” and “l-blob” hypercolumns tessellate the monkey
visual cortex? Biol. Cybern. 56, 107–109. doi: 10.1007/BF00317985
Götz, K. G. (1988). Cortical templates for the self-organization of orientation-
speciﬁc d- and l-hypercolumns in monkeys and cats. Biol. Cybern. 58, 213–223.
doi: 10.1007/BF00364127
Graham, N. (1989). Visual Pattern Analyzers, Vol. 16 . New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gur, M., Kagan, I., and Snodderly, D. M. (2005). Orientation and direction
selectivity of neurons in V1 of alert monkeys: functional relations hips and
laminar distributions. Cereb. Cortex 15, 1207–1221. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhi003
Hendrickson, A. E., Wilson, J. R., and Ogren, M. P. (1978). The neu roanatomical
organization of pathways between the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and
visual cortex in old world and new world primates. J Comp. Neurol . 182,
123–136. doi: 10.1002/cne.901820108
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 17 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 18 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
Henry, C. A., Joshi, S., Xing, D., Shapley, R. M., and Hawken, M. J. ( 2013).
Functional characterization of the extraclassical receptive ﬁeld in macaque
v1: contrast, orientation, and temporal dynamics. J. Neurosci . 33, 6230–6242.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4155-12.2013
Horton, J. C., and Adams, D. L. (2005). The cortical column: A structu re
without a function. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci . 360, 837–862.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2005.1623
Horton, J. C., and Hoyt, W. F. (1991). The representation of the visu al ﬁeld in
human striate cortex: a revision of the classic holmes map. Arch. Ophthalmol.
109, 816–824. doi: 10.1001/archopht.1991.01080060080030
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1961). Integrative action in the ca t’s lateral
geniculate body. J. Physiol. 155, 385. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1961.sp006635
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1962a). Receptive ﬁelds, binocular i nteraction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. J. Physiol. 160, 106–154.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1962.sp006837
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1962b). Shape and arrangement of columnsin cat’s
striate cortex. J. Physiol. 165, 559–568. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1963.sp007079
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1968). Receptive ﬁelds and function al
architecture of monkey striate cortex. J. Physiol . 195, 215–243.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1968.sp008455
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1972). Laminar and columnar distribut ion of
geniculo-cortical ﬁbers in the macaque monkey. J Comp. Neurol. 146, 421–450.
doi: 10.1002/cne.901460402
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1974a). Sequence regularity and geome try
of orientation columns in the monkey striate cortex. J. Comp. Neurol . 158,
267–293. doi: 10.1002/cne.901580304
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1974b). Uniformity of monkey striate co rtex:
a parallel relationship between ﬁeld size, scatter, and magniﬁcatio n factor. J.
Comp. Neurol. 158, 295–305. doi: 10.1002/cne.901580305
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1977). Ferrier lecture: functional ar chitecture
of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci . 198, 1–59.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1977.0085
Jones, J. P., and Palmer, L. A. (1987). An evaluation of the two-d imensional gabor
ﬁlter model of simple receptive ﬁelds in cat striate cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 58,
1233–1258. doi: 10.1152/jn.1987.58.6.1233
Keliris, G. A., Li, Q., Papanikolaou, A., Logothetis, N. K., and S mirnakis, S. M.
(2019). Estimating average single-neuron visual receptive ﬁeld si zes by fMRI.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 6425–6434. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1809612116
Koulakov, A. A., and Chklovskii, D. B. (2001). Orientation prefere nce patterns in
mammalian visual cortex: a wire length minimization approach. Neuron 29,
519–527. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00223-9
Lampl, I., Anderson, J. S., Gillespie, D. C., and Ferster, D. (2001) . Prediction of
orientation selectivity from receptive ﬁeld architecture in simple ce lls of cat
visual cortex. Neuron 30, 263–274. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00278-1
LeV ay, S., Connolly, M., Houde, J., and V an Essen, D. C. (1985). T he
complete pattern of ocular dominance stripes in the striate cortex
and visual ﬁeld of the macaque monkey. J. Neurosci . 5, 486–501.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.05-02-00486.1985
Lindeberg, T. (2013). A computational theory of visual receptive ﬁelds. Biol.
Cybern. 107, 589–635. doi: 10.1007/s00422-013-0569-z
Liu, X., Sanz-Leon, P., and Robinson, P. A. (2020). Gamma-band
correlations in the primary visual cortex. Phys. Rev. E 101, 042406.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.101.042406
Lund, J. S. (1973). Organization of neurons in the visual corte x, area
17, of the monkey (Macaca mulatta). J. Comp. Neurol . 147, 455–495.
doi: 10.1002/cne.901470404
Maldonado, P. E., Gödecke, I., Gray, C. M., and Bonhoeﬀer, T. (1997). Orientation
selectivity in pinwheel centers in cat striate cortex. Science 276, 1551–1555.
doi: 10.1126/science.276.5318.1551
Mariño, J., Schummers, J., Lyon, D. C., Schwabe, L., Beck, O., Wi esing, P.,
et al. (2005). Invariant computations in local cortical networks wi th balanced
excitation and inhibition. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 194–201. doi: 10.1038/nn1391
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human
Representation and Processing of Visual Information. San Francisco, CA: W. H.
Freeman.
Marr, D., and Hildreth, E. (1980). Theory of edge detection. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 207, 187–217. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1980.0020
Marr, D., and Ullman, S. (1981). Directional selectivity and its use in
early visual processing. Proc. R. Soc. Lond B. Biol. Sci . 211, 151–180.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1981.0001
Mechler, F., and Ringach, D. L. (2002). On the classiﬁcation of simple and complex
cells. Vis. Res. 42, 1017–1033. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(02)00025-1
Mehrotra, R., Namuduri, K. R., and Ranganathan, N. (1992). Gabor
ﬁlter-based edge detection. Pattern Recognit . 25, 1479–1494.
doi: 10.1016/0031-3203(92)90121-X
Miikkulainen, R., Bednar, J. A., Choe, Y., and Sirosh, J. (2005). Computational Maps
in the Visual Cortex. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Mitchison, G. (1991). Neuronal branching patterns and the econo my of cortical
wiring. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 245, 151–158. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1991.0102
Mitchison, G. (1995). A type of duality between self-organizing maps and minimal
wiring. Neural Comput. 7, 25–35. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.1.25
Moore, I. V., B. D., and Freeman, R. D. (2012). Development of orienta tion
tuning in simple cells of primary visual cortex. J. Physiol . 107, 2506–2516.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00719.2011
Movshon, J. A., Thompson, I. D., and Tolhurst, D. J. (1978). Spati al summation
in the receptive ﬁelds of simple cells in the cat’s striate cortex. J. Physiol. 283,
53–77. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1978.sp012488
Müller, T. M., Stetter, M., Hübener, M., Sengpiel, F., Bonhoeﬀer, T., Gödecke,
I., et al. (2000). An analysis of orientation and ocular dominance patterns
in the visual cortex of cats and ferrets. Neural Comput . 12, 2573–2595.
doi: 10.1162/089976600300014854
Nauhaus, I., Benucci, A., Carandini, M., and Ringach, D. L. (2 008). Neuronal
selectivity and local map structure in visual cortex. Neuron 57, 673–679.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.01.020
Niebur, E., and Wörgötter, F. (1994). Design principles of columna r organization
in visual cortex. Neural Comput. 6, 602–614. doi: 10.1162/neco.1994.6.4.602
Obermayer, K., and Blasdel, G. G. (1993). Geometry of orientation
and ocular dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. J.
Neurosci. 13, 4114–4129. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-10-04114.
1993
Obermayer, K., Blasdel, G. G., and Schulten, K. (1992a). Statisti cal-mechanical
analysis of self-organization and pattern formation during the dev elopment of
visual maps. Phys. Rev. A 45, 7568–7589. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.7568
Obermayer, K., Ritter, H., and Schulten, K. J. (1992b). A model forthe development
of the spatial structure of retinotopic maps and orientation columns. IEICE
Trans. Fundamentals 75, 537–545.
Ohki, K., Chung, S., Kara, P., Hübener, M., Bonhoeﬀer, T., and R eid, R. C. (2006).
Highly ordered arrangement of single neurons in orientation pinwheels.Nature
442, 925–928. doi: 10.1038/nature05019
Pei, X., Vidyasagar, T. R., Volgushev, M., and Creutzfeldt, O. D. (1994).
Receptive ﬁeld analysis and orientation selectivity of postsynapt ic
potentials of simple cells in cat visual cortex. J. Neurosci . 14, 7130–7140.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.14-11-07130.1994
Rao, R. P. N., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the vi sual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld eﬀects. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580
Ratliﬀ, F. (1965). Mach Bands: Quantitative Studies on Neural Networks . San
Francisco, CA: Holden-Day.
Ringach, D. L. (2002). Spatial structure and symmetry of simple-cell rec eptive
ﬁelds in macaque primary visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol . 88, 455–463.
doi: 10.1152/jn.2002.88.1.455
Ringach, D. L., Shapley, R. M., and Hawken, M. J. (2002). Orienta tion selectivity
in macaque V1: Diversity and laminar dependence. J. Neurosci. 22, 5639–5651.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05639.2002
Robinson, P. A. (2005). Propagator theory of brain dynamics. Phys. Rev. E
72:011904. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.72.011904
Robinson, P. A. (2006). Patchy propagators, brain dynamics, and t he generation
of spatially structured gamma oscillations. Phys. Rev. E 73,041904.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.73.041904
Robinson, P. A. (2007). Visual gamma oscillations: Waves, correlat ions, and other
phenomena, including comparison with experimental data. Biol. Cybern . 97,
317–335. doi: 10.1007/s00422-007-0177-x
Schiller, P. H., and Tehovnik, E. J. (2015). Vision and the Visual System . Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 18 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316


--- Page 19 ---
Liu and Robinson Analytic Model for OP-OD Maps
Schummers, J., Mariño, J., and Sur, M. (2002). Synaptic integrati on by V1
neurons depends on location within the orientation map. Neuron 36, 969–978.
doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)01012-7
Skottun, B. C., De V alois, R. L., Grosof, D. H., Movshon, J. A., Alb recht, D.
G., and Bonds, A. (1991). Classifying simple and complex cells on the ba sis
of response modulation. Vis. Res. 31, 1078–1086. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(91)
90033-2
Smith, A. T., Singh, K. D., Williams, A. L., and Greenlee, M. W. (2001 ). Estimating
receptive ﬁeld size from fMRI data in human striate and extrastriate v isual
cortex. Cereb. Cortex 11, 1182–1190. doi: 10.1093/cercor/11.12.1182
Stevens, J. R., Law, J. S., Antolík, J., and Bednar, J. A. (2013). Mechanisms for stable,
robust, and adaptive development of orientation maps in the primary visua l
cortex. J. Neurosci. 33, 15747–15766. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1037-13.2013
Suematsu, N., Naito, T., Miyoshi, T., Sawai, H., and Sato, H. (2013). Spatiotemporal
receptive ﬁeld structures in retinogeniculate connections of cat. Front. Syst.
Neurosci 7:103. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00103
Suematsu, N., Naito, T., and Sato, H. (2012). Relationship betw een
orientation sensitivity and spatiotemporal receptive ﬁeld structure s of
neurons in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Neural Netw . 35, 10–20.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.06.008
Swindale, N. V. (1992). A model for the coordinated development of
columnar systems in primate striate cortex. Biol. Cybern . 66, 217–230.
doi: 10.1007/BF00198475
Swindale, N. V. (1996). The development of topography in the visual c ortex: a
review of models. Network 7, 161–247. doi: 10.1088/0954-898X_7_2_002
Swindale, N. V. (1998). Orientation tuning curves: Empirical des cription and
estimation of parameters. Biol. Cybern. 78, 45–56. doi: 10.1007/s004220050411
Swindale, N. V., Grinvald, A., and Shmuel, A. (2003). The spatial pat tern
of response magnitude and selectivity for orientation and directi on
in cat visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 13, 225–238. doi: 10.1093/cercor/
13.3.225
Swindale, N. V., Matsubara, J. A., and Cynader, M. S. (1987). Su rface organization
of orientation and direction selectivity in cat area 18. J. Neurosci. 7, 1414–1427.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.07-05-01414.1987
Tootell, R. B. H., Silverman, M. S., Switkes, E., and De V alois, R. L. ( 1982).
Deoxyglucose analysis of retinotopic organization in primate stria te cortex.
Science 218, 902–904. doi: 10.1126/science.7134981
Torre, V., and Poggio, T. A. (1986). On edge detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. PAMI-8, 147–163. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767769
Toth, L. J., Kim, D. S., Rao, S. C., and Sur, M. (1997). Integrati on of local
inputs in visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 7, 703–710. doi: 10.1093/cercor/
7.8.703
Tovée, M. J. (1996). An Introduction to the Visual System . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Troyer, T. W., Krukowski, A. E., Priebe, N. J., and Miller, K. D. (19 98). Contrast-
invariant orientation tuning in cat visual cortex: thalamocortic al input tuning
and correlation-based intracortical connectivity. J. Neurosci . 18, 5908–5927.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-15-05908.1998
V anni, S., Hokkanen, H., Werner, F., and Angelucci, A. (2020). An atomy
and physiology of macaque visual cortical areas V1, V2, and V5/MT:
bases for biologically realistic models. Cereb. Cortex 30, 3483–3517.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhz322
Veltz, R., Chossat, P., and Faugeras, O. (2015). On the eﬀects o n cortical
spontaneous activity of the symmetries of the network of pinwheels i n visual
area V1. J. Math. Neurosci. 5, 11. doi: 10.1186/s13408-015-0023-8
Volgushev, M., Pernberg, J., and Eysel, U. T. (2000). Comparison of t he selectivity
of postsynaptic potentials and spike responses in cat visual cortex. Eur J.
Neurosci. 12, 257–263. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2000.00909.x
Y acoub, E., Harel, N., and U˘gurbil, K. (2008). High-ﬁeld fMRI unveils orientation
columns in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A . 105, 10607–10612.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804110105
Young, R. A. (1987). The Gaussian derivative model for spatial v ision: I. Retinal
mechanisms. Spat. Vis. 2, 273–293. doi: 10.1163/156856887X00222
Young, R. A., Lesperance, R., and Meyer, W. W. (2001). The Gauss ian derivative
model for spatial-temporal vision: I. Cortical model. Spat. Vis. 14, 261–319.
doi: 10.1163/156856801753253582
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizat ions, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may b e evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not gua ranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Liu and Robinson. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 19 February 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 659316
