--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 09 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00086
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86
Edited by:
Yu-Guo Yu,
Fudan University, China
Reviewed by:
Lianchun Yu,
Lanzhou University, China
Tuo Zhang,
Northwestern Polytechnical
University, China
Rubin Wang,
East China University of Science and
Technology, China
*Correspondence:
Kosuke Takagi
coutakagi@mes.biglobe.ne.jp
Received: 23 August 2019
Accepted: 12 December 2019
Published: 09 January 2020
Citation:
Takagi K (2020) Principles of Mutual
Information Maximization and Energy
Minimization Affect the Activation
Patterns of Large Scale Networks in
the Brain.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 13:86.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2019.00086
Principles of Mutual Information
Maximization and Energy
Minimization Affect the Activation
Patterns of Large Scale Networks in
the Brain
Kosuke Takagi*
Independent Researcher, Saitama, Japan
Successive patterns of activation and deactivation in loca l areas of the brain indicate
the mechanisms of information processing in the brain. It is possible that this process
can be optimized by principles, such as the maximization of m utual information and the
minimization of energy consumption. In the present paper, I showed evidence for this
argument by demonstrating the correlation among mutual inf ormation, the energy of
the activation, and the activation patterns. Modeling the i nformation processing based
on the functional connectome datasets of the human brain, I s imulated information
transfer in this network structure. Evaluating the statist ical quantities of the different
network states, I clariﬁed the correlation between them. Fi rst, I showed that mutual
information and network energy have a close relationship, a nd that the values are
maximized and minimized around a same network state. This im plies that there is an
optimal network state in the brain that is organized accordi ng to the principles regarding
mutual information and energy. On the other hand, the evaluation of the network structure
revealed that the characteristic network structure known a s the criticality also emerges
around this state. These results imply that the characteris tic features of the functional
network are also affected strongly by these principles. T o a ssess the functional aspects
of this state, I investigated the output activation pattern s in response to random input
stimuli. Measuring the redundancy of the responses in termsof the number of overlapping
activation patterns, the results indicate that there is a negative correlation between mutual
information and the redundancy in the patterns, suggesting that there is a trade-off
between communication efﬁciency and robustness due to redundancy, and the principles
of mutual information and network energy are important to ne twork formation and its
function in the human brain.
Keywords: functional connectome, information processing, mutu al information, network energy, activation
pattern, large scale brain network


--- Page 2 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
1. INTRODUCTION
Interactions of ∼ 100 billion neurons, which are a part of the
human brain, maintain its functions within a hierarchical a nd
modular network structure (
Azevedo et al., 2009; Meunier et al.,
2010; Park and Friston, 2013 ). Empirical evidence demonstrate
that a stimulus for local excitatory neurons at a cellular lev el can
be etiologically associated with large-scale brain activi ty, which
may propagate through numerous neuronal interconnections
(
Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Beggs, 2008; Lee et al., 2010; Fenno et al.,
2011; Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ). Over the years, studying task
evoked brain activity via whole-brain imaging has been successful
in mapping speciﬁc cognitive functions onto distinct regions o f
the human brain (e.g., Kanwisher et al., 1997).
Furthermore, several studies that have examined the brain’ s
responses to more complex tasks, reported that various cogniti ve
functions arise from interactions between regions of the br ain
rather than independent single activities in distinct regio ns of
the brain ( Ghazanfar and Schroeder, 2006; Bressler and Menon,
2010). In the large-scale networks of the human brain, activatio n
signals from segregated and specialized regions are integra ted in
information processing (Tononi et al., 1994; Hilgetag and Grant,
2000; Sporns, 2013 ). Thus, the brain can be conceptualized as
an information processing system, hereby successive pattern s
of activation and deactivation in multiple distributed regi ons
constitute integrated information processing. Furthermor e, the
brain must adapt to changing environments, so these processes
might be optimized to ensure rapid and ﬂexible response (
Bassett
et al., 2006; Kitzbichler et al., 2009; Clark, 2013; Park and Friston,
2013; Mnih et al., 2015 ). On the other hand, the brain is limited
by its energy requirements and by other biological realities
(
Bullmore and Sporns, 2012 ). Thus, the need to maximize
eﬃciency of information processing and minimize total energ y
consumption may regulate the mechanisms underlying the
structure and the function of the brain (
Linsker, 1990; Friston,
2010; Bullmore and Sporns, 2012 ).
This argument is known as the energy eﬃciency hypothesis,
which covers a wide range of activities from the cellular leve l of
neurons to the global level observed at the scale of the whole
brain (
Bullmore and Sporns, 2012; Yu and Yu, 2017 ). Evidence
for this hypothesis has shown that the energy constraints and
limitations may aﬀect multiple aspects of the brain neurons
by inducing eﬃcient activities (e.g.,
Niven and Laughlin, 2008;
Tomasi et al., 2013; Yu and Yu, 2017 ). The energy consumption
models of neurons have especially been studied in detail, andthey
have revealed the requirements from energy eﬃciency eﬀects o n
neuronal activities or on those at the cortical level follow t he
energy eﬃcient principle ( Wang et al., 2008, 2015, 2018; Wang
and Wang, 2014).
In the present paper, I present evidence that this pattern
is especially the case in the information integrating process es
in a large scale network, demonstrating that maximization
and minimization principles guide the network structure and
activation patterns of the human brain. Based on functional
connectome data acquired using resting-state functional MRI
(fMRI) (
Sporns, 2002; Fox and Raichle, 2007; van den Heuvel
et al., 2008; Greicius et al., 2009; Biswal et al., 2010; V an D ijk
et al., 2010; Brown et al., 2012 ), I simulated information transfer
by applying randomly activated signals to a network represente d
by brain connectivity matrices (Takagi, 2018). I measured mutual
information ( Linsker, 1990 ) between random stimulus signals
and their responses and also quantiﬁed the network energy
associated with these activities (
Hopﬁeld, 1984; Hinton and
Salakhutdinov, 2006 ). By varying the functional connectivity
network between noisy and sparse states, I showed an explicit
correlation between these quantities. The results suggest that
there is an optimal intermediate between these states, where by
mutual information is maximized and the network energy
is minimized.
On the other hand, evaluation of the network structure
around this optimal intermediate state revealed some featur es
that are characteristic of the functional connectome, such as
small-world and criticality (
Watts and Strogatz, 1998; Achard
et al., 2006; Bassett and Bullmore, 2006; Hagmann et al.,
2008; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011; Takagi, 2017, 2018
).
These characteristic attributes are thought to explain the
brain’s rapid adaptive responses to external stimuli and the
robustness of its internal communication (
Kitzbichler et al.,
2009; Chialvo, 2010; Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ). Experiments at
a cellular level demonstrated that neuronal ﬁring successiv ely
propagated similar to neuronal avalanches; however, their si ze
has no characteristic scale ( Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Beggs,
2008). However, analyzing the fMRI dynamics revealed that
the dynamic and statistical properties which regulate activa tion
events on a scale of the whole brain were identical ( Tagliazucchi
et al., 2012 ). This feature of the dynamics appeared across
multiscale from the cellular level to the brain macro scale
is explained by the feature of the criticality, the absence of
the characteristic scale (
Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Beggs, 2008;
Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ). Additionally, optogenetic methods
combined with fMRI facilitate direct visualization of the globa l
level activity caused by local neuronal excitation ( Lee et al.,
2010; Fenno et al., 2011 ). Besides the absence of a characteristic
scale for these dynamical activation events, an identical fe ature
that is predicted from the criticality can be conﬁrmed in
the functional network structure, which was constructed usin g
the spatio-temporal correlations between brain regions. To
illustrate, network node degree statistics exhibit the distri bution
characteristic similar to the critical phenomenon (
Achard et al.,
2006; Bassett and Bullmore, 2006; Hagmann et al., 2008; Taka gi,
2017). Moreover, within these networks, strongly connected
pathways compose core structures with highly connected hub
regions that modulate information processing in the brain
(
Hagmann et al., 2008; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011 ).
Processing in these regions may control multiple brain functi ons
(Rubinov and Sporns, 2011 ). The results show that, to ensure
optimal eﬃciency and energy use, the network structure
converges on this characteristic state exhibiting small-w orld
and criticality.
Further analyses of the simulation results of the informatio n
transfer model revealed direct evidence that this characte ristic
state regulates activation patterns (
Takagi, 2018 ). In the
simulation, response patterns exhibited redundancy in that
they contained repeatedly co-activated regions with diﬀerent
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 3 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
stimulation signals. In the cerebral cortex, activation pat terns
exhibit overlapping that can be measured as the proportion of
regions activated equally in the diﬀerent patterns. This can i n
turn be related to cognitive processes, such as memory retrie val
(
Haxby et al., 2001; Kumaran et al., 2016 ). While functionally
overlapped regions may oﬀer robustness in communication and
facilitate adaptation (
Whitacre, 2010; Bassett et al., 2018 ), excess
overlapping causes interference. This can result in decoding
diﬃculties that can be costly in terms of metabolic consumpti on
(
Kumaran et al., 2016 ). In the present study, the average of the
overlapping numbers depended on the mutual information and
the network energy. It showed the negative correlation to th e
mutual information and the correlation to the network energ y.
The results imply that the principles of mutual information and
network energy strongly aﬀect the activation patterns and the
underlying structure of the functional network in the brain .
On the other hand, it is known that the functional connectivity
is ﬂexible within certain dynamics; for example, alteration s
in diseased brains, or the break-down from criticality in th e
unconsciousness, have been reported (
Tagliazucchi et al., 2016;
Song et al., 2019 ). As such, the robustness of the simulation
results in this paper are validated, in comparison to diﬀerent
datasets, such as those with diﬀerent sized matrices with diﬀerent
sets of nodes and those that were constructed from the struct ural
connections based on diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) (
Sporns
et al., 2005; Brown et al., 2012 ). They also indicate that the
relationships between the mutual information, the energy of the
activation, and the activation patterns that emerge are stab le
within these networks as well.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Connectome Datasets and Information
Transfer Model
2.1.1. Functional Connectome Datasets
I modeled information transfer in the large scale network of the
human brain using a functional connectivity matrix constru cted
from fMRI observation (
Takagi, 2018 ). As explained in the
introduction, a stimulus at the cellular level can trigger avalanche
events at a whole-brain scale due to the characteristic feat ures
of the critical phenomenon. Whole-brain scale observation
through fMRI revealed that neighboring voxels overlapping in
their dynamics show similarities in time series data, becau se of
successive appearances of these events (
Calhoun et al., 2009;
Smith et al., 2011; Smith, 2012; Tagliazucchi et al., 2012 ).
Therefore, it is possible that the information relevant to th e
underlying brain activity is compressed ( Tagliazucchi et al.,
2012). Furthermore, a relevant network model is constructed by
extracting nodes, through independent component analysis or
clustering voxels on the basis of the similarity (
Calhoun et al.,
2009; Smith et al., 2011; Smith, 2012; Tagliazucchi et al., 2 012).
To accurately analyze the network in the whole-brain scale,
hundreds of nodes are typically utilized to construct a netwo rk
from fMRI time series data ( Smith, 2012; Finn et al., 2015 ).
The validity of the network construction is then indicated b y
the robustness for diﬀerent individual subjects ( Smith, 2012;
Finn et al., 2015 ). Here, the validation of the pre-processed
network datasets was demonstrated by the results of my
previous study using the same dataset, which reported a stable
statistical signiﬁcance regarding the network structure (
Takagi,
2018). Additionally, the robustness of the current study and
the consistency with other studies will be discussed in the
ﬁnal section.
For each combination of single regions in the brain, the
connectivity matrix was described as a matrix ( wij), whereby (i, j)
represented the connection weight between regions denoted a s i
or j. For the time series data of the fMRI image, the connectivity
was calculated as the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient betwee n
voxels corresponding to these regions. In the present study, I
used the preprocessed connectivity matrices, which are avail able
from http://umcd.humanconnectomeproject.org/: the websit e of
the USC Multimodal Connectivity Database (
Brown et al.,
2012), which contains matrices constructed from the functional
connectome datasets of the “1,000 connectome project” ( Biswal
et al., 2010 ). The original datasets in this project were obtained
using resting-state fMRI (R-fMRI), which records activation
patterns in brain regions during the resting state and is thought to
describe the common architecture of the human brain (
van den
Heuvel et al., 2008; Greicius et al., 2009; Biswal et al., 201 0;
V an Dijk et al., 2010; Brown et al., 2012). The matrices comprised
N × N elements with N = 177 brain regions and were assumed
to cover the entire brain. The details of the processing seque nce
to construct these matrices are shown in the above website an d,
in this analysis, I use 986 matrices for diﬀerent individuals, which
are available from the same site ( Brown et al., 2012).
Brain activity naturally ﬂuctuates and the connectivity ma trix
contains noise and artifacts (Eguiluz et al., 2005; Fox and Raichle,
2007; Brown et al., 2012 ). To construct the network structure
with signiﬁcant elements, threshold was applied to the matrix
(wij) (
Eguiluz et al., 2005; Brown et al., 2012; Zuo et al., 2012 ).
Because strongly connected pathways form core structures th at
are relevant to the network structure of the brain ( Eguiluz
et al., 2005; Brown et al., 2012 ), I removed connections with
small connectivity weights using a threshold and constructed
the network with the residual connections. After introducin g
the threshold wt for the connectivity weight wij, I obtained a
network description consisting of connections correspondin g
to the |wij| > wt elements. In this analysis, considering the
diﬀerences between individuals, I deﬁned the threshold valu e
of each individual connectivity matrix wt based on the average
connectivity < |w|> and the standard deviation σ |w|. I calculated
< |w| > and σ |w|, and deﬁned the cut-oﬀ threshold in terms of
the following equation:
wt = < |w|> + n · σ |w|, (1)
with a parameter of n.
2.1.2. Structural Connectome Dataset
The simulation results based on the above functional connectome
datasets were compared to the structural connectome, and the
other connectome datasets describing the physical connectio n
between brain regions. The structural connectome datasets are
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 4 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
constructed by the diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) method,
which traces the ﬁber tracts between brain regions and forms
another network at the whole brain scale, known as the structural
connectome (
Sporns et al., 2005 ). The dataset is available from
the above website (http://umcd.humanconnectomeproject.or g/)
with the pre-processed matrix of the connectivity strength be ing
the same to the fMRI cases ( Brown et al., 2012 ). The DTI dataset
is taken from a subsect of the “1,000 connectome project, ” tagged
as “NKI_Rockland” for the “Study Name” item, from the Nathan
Kline Institute (NKI)/Rockland sample in the web site. It contains
the matrices of 196 individuals, and each matrix has N = 188
matrix elements (188 × 188).
2.1.3. Information Transfer
Information in the brain is transferred by successive signa l
propagation; this can be represented by the activated state of
each site (
Tononi et al., 1994; Hilgetag and Grant, 2000; Beggs
and Plenz, 2003; Ghazanfar and Schroeder, 2006; Beggs, 2008 ;
Bressler and Menon, 2010; Sporns, 2013; Takagi, 2018 ). For
each node in the functional network, three states {1, − 1, 0}
were assigned because the responses of neuronal activity can be
categorized as positive and negative ( Fox et al., 2005; Shmuel
et al., 2006 ). In this representation, the inactivated regions were
assigned the 0 state, while the two states at ± 1 represented
positive and negative activation states, respectively.
When considering information transfer, I represented a whole
state of the brain as S = (s1, . . . , sN) for a network size N,
whereby the i-th node was assigned as si ∈ { 1, − 1, 0}. I could
then calculate the responses R = (r1, . . . , rN) ri ∈ { 1, − 1, 0} for
a given connectivity matrix and threshold. For the given set of
S and connectivity matrix ( wij), the response state was evaluated
using the following equation:
rj = σ (
∑
i∈ N
wijsi). (2)
I denoted ∑
i∈ N wijsi as ˆrj, so a threshold of wt, σ ( ˆrj) was deﬁned
as rj = 1, − 1, 0 for cases ˆrj > wt, ˆrj < − wt, and | ˆrj| ≤ wt. In this
simulation, I calculated the information transfer of stimuli S. The
input signals were taken randomly, although I did use the same
probability for positive and negative activation. I then assi gned 1
and − 1 to each input signal si, with the probability p being set to
0 in the other cases with the probability 1 − 2p. Each condition in
this simulation was repeated 100 times with each input signal.
2.2. Statistical Quantities of Information
Transfer Model
2.2.1. Mutual Information
To measure information transfer from the imposed stimuli to
the responses, I evaluated the mutual information for the set
of stimulus signals S and the corresponding responses R. It is
deﬁned as H(R) − H(R|S) with H(R), the information of the
response R, and H(R|S), the conditional entropy. This quantity
was used to assess the eﬃciency of information transfer in th e
neural network models and in real biological data (
Beggs and
Plenz, 2003; Beggs, 2008).
In the analysis, the mutual information of the transfer between
i and j nodes was estimated using the following equation:
m(i, j) = H(si) + H(rj) − H(si, rj), (3)
where the entropy H(si) and H(rj), as well as the joint entropy
H(si, rj), were calculated using the probabilities of each state:
si, rj ∈ {± 1, 0}. Next, this quantity was estimated for the whole
network as follows: m = ∑
j < m(j)) > / N, with averaging as
< m(j) >= (∑
i m(i, j))/ (N − 1) for all possible connections of
each node j.
2.2.2. Network Energy
The energy of the brain network is described in diﬀerent ways,
which are mainly categorized into wiring costs for organizin g the
network structure and those related to their activity. The t otal
number of connections determine the wiring cost to organize t he
network structure (
Achard and Bullmore, 2006; Bullmore and
Sporns, 2012 ). Thus, the wiring cost based on the topological
structure basically describes the energy demands of the bra in
functional network. It is assumed that many characteristic
attributes of the brain network can be explained by minimizin g
the wiring cost (
Bullmore and Sporns, 2012).
Hence, I deﬁned this energy, the wiring cost denoted as EW,
using the following equation:
EW =
∑
i,j
ai,j, (4)
where ai,j denotes the element of the adjacency matrix. For an
undirected topological graph of a given matrix, the connectio n
for each pair of i and j was represented using the adjacency matrix
element, which is connected as ai,j = 1 for |wij| > wt, with
threshold wt, and disconnected as ai,j = 0 in other cases.
On the other hand, the Hopﬁeld energy gives a deﬁnition
related to the dynamics and the associated information of
the neural networks. For a given network state of activation ,
the Hopﬁeld energy provides one deﬁnition of the network
energy. It models the network state of the neurons and can
also be applied to artiﬁcial neuronal networks (
Hopﬁeld, 1984;
Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006). Hopﬁeld networks and similar
types of energy representation have been introduced to descri be
the energy state of neural networks, modeling the spin glass
network (
Hopﬁeld, 1984). One example of the artiﬁcial learning
models that use this type of function is the restricted Boltzma nn
machine, which evolves by adjusting the network variables
according to rules learned from the energy function (
Hinton and
Salakhutdinov, 2006). It is deﬁned as
EH = − (
∑
i,j
riwi,jrj) (5)
whereby I took a bias-free case in accordance with the
transfer model Equation (2).
In the original deﬁnition of the Hopﬁeld energy (
Hopﬁeld,
1984) bias terms are present, such as those expressed as ∑
i ribi
with constant bias bi assigned the value for each node. In
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 5 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
this simulation, they are excluded as the constants under
the assumption of homogeneity of nodes. According to this
simpliﬁcation, the simulation is given in the bias-free form , and
takes 0 for the cases, such as the random state as well as negat ive
values, especially in the low energy states.
However, as the indicator of total activity cost, the Hopﬁeld
energy would be estimated as small as the positive and
negative terms were not included in the deﬁnition. To avoid
this cancelation and estimate the total energy cost for the
activity, I introduced a deﬁnition of the activity cost usin g
the absolute values of each term and compared them with the
values mentioned above Equation (5). The deﬁnition given wa s
as follows:
EA =
∑
i,j
|riwi,jrj| (6)
represents the total energy cost for the activation dynamics . It
assesses the contributions from the positive and the negativ e
signal equally and then evaluates the total amount of signal
activations with their weights. In the discussion, I assess ed the
energy of the functional brain network based on these deﬁnitions.
2.2.3. Overlapping Number in the Activation Patterns
I analyzed the pattern of the response signals R = (ri) using
the overlapping numbers of the diﬀerent signals. I evaluated it in
terms of the number of regions activated or deactivated equa lly
with the diﬀerent patterns. For the set of response patterns Rj =
(rj
i), whereby j is an index of the input state, I counted the number
of the same responses rj
i = rj′
i for the pair j and j′. I normalized
this overlapping number by the total number of regions N. I then
wrote it down as
h(j, j′) =
∑
i
π (rj
i, rj′
i )/ N (7)
where π (rj
i, rj′
i ) is 1 for rj
i = rj′
i and 0 was taken in the other cases.
I then took the averages of all the pairs of Rj and Rj′
.
The deﬁnition of the overlapping number (Equation 7) is the
same as that of the Hamming distance of the information theor y.
It is used, for example, to measure the error in the signal tran sfer.
In the analysis, it was used to analyze the relationship betw een
the activation patterns and eﬃciency of the information tran sfer.
As excess overlapped states indicated that the variation in th e
response S is lost, they resulted in the decrease in the mutual
information entropy.
The program for this network model is available at https://
github.com/coutakagi/fcn2019.git.
2.3. Network Structure and Statistical
Evaluation
The functional connectome is often described in topological or
weighted terms. Diﬀerent measures are required to assess the
topological network structure, especially in terms of critic ality.
To specify the criticality in the activation dynamics, the
characterization is given by the statistics of the avalanch e events.
One measure is the mutual information entropy, such as deﬁned
above, which is maximized in this state in comparison to the
super-critical state (in which excess activation is saturat ed) and
the sub-critical state (in which activations die out due to po or
sensitivity to the stimulus) (
Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Beggs, 2008 ).
This is contrasted to the criticality of the topological stru cture,
which is usually characterized by appearances of the giant
connected component or other states, such as the small-world
topology (
Watts and Strogatz, 1998 ), which are evaluated by
quantities, such as degree or the clustering coeﬃcients.
Besides the total number of connections, topological
structures were measured in terms of the largest connected
component to provide a basic measure of the topological
network. With using the adjacency matrix, the size of each
connected component was then measured in terms of the
number of nodes in each connected subgraph, and these values
determined the largest connected component of each network.
In the present paper, I measured this quantity using R-package
igraph (
Barrat et al., 2004).
On the other hand, to account for connectivity strength
wij, I took the absolute node strength value nsi = ∑
j |wij|
in each node and evaluated its statistical features using a
distribution model (
Takagi, 2017, 2018 ). Due to the criticality
of the brain ( Achard et al., 2006; Bassett and Bullmore, 2006;
Hagmann et al., 2008; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011; Takagi,
2017, 2018
), the distributions of network variables, such as
degree, exhibit a characteristic shape similar to the power la w.
However, when I adapted the power law to the distributions, this
straightforward application was prohibited because the energ y
constraints on brain activity constitute an upper limits (
Takagi,
2017, 2018 ). In the present study, the same assumption was
applied, and I introduced an upper strength limit of nsmax.
Following this assumption, I obtained an expression for the
normalized variable ˜s = (nsmax − ns) as
p(ns) ∝ ( ˜ns)γ = (nsmax − ns)γ , (8)
with a constant γ (
Takagi, 2017, 2018).
Next, I assessed the strength distribution ns in terms of
deviations from this model using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
(KS) distance (
Clauset et al., 2009; Klaus et al., 2011 ). For the
cumulative distribution pe(ns), which was experimentally given,
and that of the model pc(ns), which was ﬁtted to the data, the KS
distance D was deﬁned using the following equation:
D = max
w
|pe(ns) − pc(ns)| (9)
which measures the maximum distance of the model from
the experimental data. If this value was suﬃciently small, th e
network probably exhibits the feature characterized by this
distribution model.
Finally, I measured the clustering coeﬃcient C, also known
as transitivity, for each adjacency matrix. This is another
important topological quantity which is often used as an
indicator of the small-world network (
Watts and Strogatz, 1998).
It is deﬁned as the probability that the adjacent vertices of
a vertex are connected (
Watts and Strogatz, 1998 ). Here, it
is measured for each adjacency matrix, using the R-package
igraph (
Barrat et al., 2004).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 6 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 1 | Activation and deactivation patterns in the local regions, and the information transfer associated with these pattern s. (A) Activation and deactivation in the
brain is illustrated. In this ﬁgure, each circle represents th e states of local regions in the brain, with solid lines corre sponding to the connection between regions.
Activated regions are represented by red circles, while neg atively activated ones are colored in blue. The residual whi te circles correspond to other inactivated states.
(B) The information transfer associated with these patterns is illustrated. The pattern state in the upper side, which is sh own on the line, consists of signals transferred
to the lower sides, where each region state is changed accord ing to the upper input patterns and the connection strengths between the regions.
3. RESUL TS
3.1. Information Transfer Model
To analyze the information processing in the large scale netw ork
of the human brain, I simulated information transfer using
successive activation patterns. Because activity in the bra in can
be observed as activation and deactivation in local regions ,
signal transmission associated with information processin g can
be described in terms of successive changing at each site, wi th
positive or negative activation (
Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Fox
et al., 2005; Ghazanfar and Schroeder, 2006; Shmuel et al., 2 006;
Beggs, 2008; Bressler and Menon, 2010; Takagi, 2018 ). In the
model, the given brain state sites, as illustrated in Figure 1A,
were transferred to successive states, which were determin ed
by the correlation among the sites given by the matrix ( wij)
as Figure 1B.
In the simulation, I calculated the response state R = (ri)
of the randomly stimulated signals S = (sj), as represented
by Equation (2), using the connectivity matrices ( wij) of the
human connectome. Next, as shown in Figure 2, I evaluated
the eﬃciency of transfer of the mutual information, deﬁned
as the average of Equation (3). As part of the preliminary
evaluation, I used randomly selected 100 individual matric es
for calculation. I compared this quantity among the diﬀerent
states, which were varied in terms of the connectivity stren gth
threshold value wt and the activation probability of the input
stimuli. As shown in this ﬁgure, information transfer depend ed
on these parameters, while the activation probability p =
0.05 gave the maximum values for these diﬀerent conditions.
Starting from the ﬂatten values for lower thresholds due to i ts
negative threshold value on the left end, the measurements o f the
mutual information entropy increased to their maximum value s
in the intermediate states. Moreover, the standard deviatio ns
for the thresholds n = 1.0, 0, − 1.0 were evaluated for p =
0.05 as 9.11 × 10− 2, 7.45 × 10− 2, 1.34 × 10− 1. These values
were smaller than their mean values, and these results were
stable. Because I were interested in the state with maximum
mutual information, I used this value, p = 0.05, in the
following simulation.
FIGURE 2 | Mutual information with different activation probabiliti es. Three
different values of the activation probability are shown: p = 0.1, 0.05, 0.01.
These conditions are shown with the dotted, the dashed, and s olid lines,
respectively. The different states are measured, with the t hreshold values on
the x-axis being varied. I took the threshold as < |w|> + n · σ |w| with the
connectivity average < |w|> and its standard deviation σ |w| for each
connectivity matrix. Following this, the mutual informati on is evaluated by
taking the average of Equation (3).
3.2. Network Energy and Efﬁciency of the
Information Transfer
Constraints regarding energy would be a major factor regulat ing
network structure and activity in the brain (
Bullmore and Sporns,
2012). Hence, I evaluated the network energy of each brain
state, which is a basic parameter to analyze brain activity.
Then, I showed the results of the measured energies using thre e
diﬀerent deﬁnitions in Figure 3; in each graph, the connectivity
strength threshold diﬀered. Further, I compared these values
with those of the random networks, which were considered as
the null model. The random networks with the same network
size were determined together with the randomly taken weigh ts
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 7 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 3 | The three different types of energies, the wiring cost (Equa tion 4), the Hopﬁeld energy (Equation 5), and the activity cos t (Equation 6) are shown in (A–C),
respectively, with the solid lines on each graph. They are co mpared with the results of the random network, which are show n in the dashed lines. I applied the same
threshold set of values to Figure 2.
wi,j ∈ [− 1, 1], and 1,000 random matrices were obtained. On
the contrary, the results for the brain network were measure d
using the whole datasets, which contained 986 matrices of
diﬀerent individuals.
The wiring cost deﬁned in Equation (4) is shown inFigure 4A.
It was compared with the wiring cost of the random network,
which appeared as a straight line proportional to n of the
threshold value deﬁned in Equation (1). In comparison with
these networks, it was found that the plotted curve of the brai n
network has a relatively long tail for higher values of wt, which
indicated the well-known attributes of the brain network, s uch as
the scale-free and small-world network, as will be discussed .
The diﬀerence between the brain network and the random
one was enhanced in comparison with the values of the Hopﬁeld
energy. Figure 4B shows the relatively large values for the brain,
while it took almost 0 for the random network due to the
cancellation of the positive and negative terms. To avoid thi s
cancellation and evaluate the total amount of the activity c ost,
I calculated the energy with another deﬁnition given in Equa tion
(6) and plotted it in Figure 3C. The energy for each range except
for 0 states had higher wt values; the activity cost for the random
model was higher than those of the brain network as expected.
3.3. Normalized Energy and the Mutual
Information Entropy
Due to energy constraints, it was assumed that the activitie s for
the information transfer is required to be eﬃcient (
Bullmore and
Sporns, 2012 ). One description of the network eﬃciency for a
given cost was based on the energy consumed during the activity,
which was normalized by the wiring cost to organize the network
structure ( Takagi, 2017 ). Then, at ﬁrst, the Hopﬁeld energy
was normalized with the wiring cost as EH/ EW and shown in
Figure 4A. With regards to mutual information, the correlations
are depicted in Figure 4B, which indicates a negative correlation,
whereby decreasing the network energy resulted in increase s in
mutual information. The same ﬁgure shows that there was a
peak around the maximum point of mutual information, where
mutual information was maximized and the network energy
associated with activity was minimized.
To clarify the cost performance of the activity in the brain,
I took another quantity, EW/ EA, the wiring cost (Equation 4)
normalized by the activity cost (Equation 6). This normalized
quantity represents the wiring cost required to maintain a
unit amount of activity. The measurement is then shown in
Figure 4C, and its correlation with the mutual information
entropy is presented in Figure 4D. It shows the clear correlation
with a sharp peak, around which the mutual information is
maximized and the normalized wiring cost is minimized. These
results (Figures 4B,D) for diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the normalized
energy exhibit the similar behavior and the clear dependency
of the mutual information entropy on the network energy.
Thus, these peaks on correlations deﬁne the optimal state of the
brain functional network, in which the eﬃciency of informat ion
transfer for a given network energy cost was maximized.
3.4. Network Structure and the Optimal
State
I analyzed the network structure around this peak state. At
ﬁrst, the topological network structure of each state around this
point was characterized in terms of the largest component size :
a basic quantity of the network topology. This result is shown in
Figure 5A, wherein the component size is shown normalized to
the network size. In the same graph, the largest component size
of the connected subgraph decreases with increasing thresho ld,
with the normalized size being 1, which corresponds to the full y
connected graph. Next, I took the correlation between mutual
information and this quantity in Figure 5B. The sharp peak on
this graph indicates that maximum information was realized i n
the fully connected graph with minimum connections.
As shown in Figure 6, the topological network graph contains
excess connections in the lower threshold. In this state, si gnals
with information transfer also contain noise due to these exce ss
elements. At the higher threshold value, the network loses th is
fully connected structure, and the graph is fragmented into
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 8 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 4 | Network energy and the correlation with mutual information . (A) The Hopﬁeld energy EH deﬁned in Equation (5) is normalized by wiring cost EW , Equation
(4), and this normalized energy EH/ EW is shown for the different threshold values. I applied the sa me threshold set of values to Figure 2. (B) showed a correlation
between mutual information and the normalized Hopﬁeld energ y. On the x-axis, I took the mutual information calculated us ing the whole datasets of matrices by
applying the method, which is denoted by a solid line ( p = 0.05) (Figure 2). I plotted the corresponding points of each threshold valu e with the network energy on the
y-axis, as given in (A). (C) Another normalized energy, EW / EA where the wiring cost EW is deﬁned as Equation (4) and the activity cost EA is deﬁned as Equation (6), is
shown. The threshold is the same as that of the case of (A). Its correlation with mutual information entropy on (D) is the same as the case of (B).
multiple disconnected sub-components, as shown in Figure 6A.
In this state, mutual communication between disconnected
nodes is hindered, so the eﬃciency of the information transf er
might be reduced. The sharp peak on Figure 5B corresponds
to the boundary state between these two states, where the
network preserves the fully connected structure with minimu m
connections. Combined with the correlation between mutual
information and network energy ( Figures 4B,D, 5B), this result
can be interpreted as showing that eﬃciency and energy
consumption are optimized in this state, with a fully connecte d
structure that eliminates transfer noise.
Because this optimal state resides in the boundary state
between the fully connected and fragmented phases, it constitutes
a critical state, whereby connectivity strength, another i mportant
variable of network structure, shows a characteristic distribution.
To introduce a distribution model for this critical state (Equation
8), I measured the statistical deviation of the total connec tivity
strength of each node ns in Figure 7 using the KS distance,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 9 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 5 | The largest component size of the functional network and the mutual information (A). I showed the largest component size of the topological
representation for each threshold values. I took the averag e of the values of the largest component size, which are norma lized by the total number of nodes in the
topological graph. (B) I show the relation between the mutual information and the la rgest component size. On the x-axis, I took the mutual inform ation calculated
using the whole datasets of matrices by applying the method, which is denoted by a solid line ( p = 0.05) (Figure 2). Then I plot the corresponding points for each
threshold value with the largest component size on the y-axi s, which are given in (A).
FIGURE 6 | I illustrate the three different states of the topological n etwork structures. (A) I show an example of the fragmented sate which contains the di sconnected
components. (B) I show the critical state of the network topology, all compon ents of which are fully connected with the minimum connectio ns. (C) This state is also
the fully connected network, but it contains excess connect ions.
deﬁned as Equation (9). As shown in Figure 7B, the KS distance
measured about 0.07 around its minimum value, which was
a suﬃciently small ﬁtting. Moreover, the model ﬁtting was
validated by comparison to other distribution models (
Takagi,
2017, 2018 ). In the case of node strength, the KS distance
values of this model 6.6 × 10− 2 and of the normal distribution
8.5 × 10− 2 support this model, with its lower value. In
addition, the correlation with mutual information is shown in
Figure 7C, which indicates that the characteristic distribution of
ns depends on this quantity, as is the case with larger component
sizes ( Figure 5B) and with energy ( Figures 4B,D). Therefore,
around the optimal state deﬁned for eﬃciency and energy, the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 10 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 7 | I evaluated the distribution of node strength in terms of dev iation from the distribution model using Kolmogorov-Smirn ov (KS) distance. I showed a
correlation with mutual information. (A) I also showed KS distance values from the distribution model for different threshold values. I assessed this value in ter ms of
node strength, as well as the sum of the absolute values of con nectivity strength for each node, using the distribution mo del. The threshold values were taken as the
same as in the other cases in Figure 2. (B) Using an example, I compared empirical distribution and the distribution model. The distribution was taken as the
threshold < |w|> with n = 0, at which the average KS distance was evaluated as 6.64 × 10− 2. (C) I showed a correlation between mutual information and KS
distance. On the x-axis, I took the mutual information calcu lated using whole datasets of matrices by applying the metho d, which is denoted by a solid line ( p = 0.05)
(Figure 2). I then plotted the corresponding points for each threshol d value with KS distance on the y-axis, as given in (A).
distribution of the node strength converges on this model, an d
the characteristic network structure emerges.
3.5. Activation Patterns and Overlapping
To analyze how this characteristic state regulates informa tion
transfer, I investigated the overlapping patterns of the respon se
signals, applying the results of the information transfer mod el
to Equation (2). As explained above, the repeatedly co-activat ed
regions of diﬀerent stimulation signals are related to cogni tive
processes (
Haxby et al., 2001; Kumaran et al., 2016 ). For the set
of response signals to random stimuli, the number of overlapping
co-activated regions between diﬀerent response signals was
quantiﬁed in terms of Equation (7). The results for diﬀerent
network states are shown in Figure 8A, where the average of the
overlapping numbers is taken for all combinations of responses .
From lower thresholds to higher ones, the overlapping number
decreased with decreasing excess connections. While it took large
values at higher thresholds, it took the minimum value at the
intermediate state.
The correlation to eﬃciency of information transfer is show n
in the next panel ( Figure 8B), in which the mutual information
and the number of the overlapping sites has a strong correlatio n.
As indicated by this graph, the overlapping number took the
minimum value for maximum mutual information. On the other
hand, the same number reduced network energy, as shown
in Figures 8C,D, which show negative correlation. Therefore,
the activation patterns evaluated in terms of the overlapping
numbers are correlated strongly with the statistical quant ities,
network eﬃciency and energy.
The relation between the overlapping number and the
network topological structures were also analyzed in Figure 9,
which shows the direct relation to the small world topology.
As described in the introduction, the small-world structur e is
considered as another relevant attribute of the brain netwo rk.
The clustering coeﬃcient was measured for each threshold
value in Figure 9A. The correlation to the overlapping number
was plotted on Figure 9B, in which a sharp peak around
the minimum overlapping number indicated that the phase
transition occurs around this point (with respect to the
topological structure). The further evidence for the relati on to
small-world topology is given by the changes of this value.
According to the observation in the Watts-Strogatz model (
Watts
and Strogatz, 1998 ), the clustering coeﬃcient is stable near the
state of the small-world topology, which is accompanied by the
phase transition. The changes to the clustering coeﬃcient C
were taken as the diﬀerence from the neighbor value, and were
plotted in Figure 9C (
Takagi, 2018). The correlation against the
corresponding overlapping number is shown in Figure 9D. This
result explicitly shows the dependency of the stability of the
clustering coeﬃcient and the phase transition of the topologi cal
structure. Thus, the minimization of the overlapping number can
be correlated to the small-world topology.
3.6. Comparison to the Different Datasets
In order to verify the robustness of the above results, the
simulation results based on other matrix datasets are presen ted.
The ﬁrst set is the sub-matrix, which is taken with randomly
selected nodes from the original matrix of the functional
connectome. The other set is the structural connectome, whi ch
is constructed using the physical connections of ﬁber tracts in the
brain with the DTI method.
At ﬁrst, the results with the sub-matrix were analyzed
(Figures 10A,B). This simulation uses the connectivity matrices
size in 100 nodes, which are selected randomly from the
total 177 nodes in each original matrix. Comparison of
Figures 4D, 10A shows the relations between the wiring cost and
the mutual information, and the minimization/maximizatio n
relations between these quantities are exhibited adequate ly in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 11 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 8 | I show the number of overlapping patterns in the response sig nals, as well as their correlation with the mutual informati on (A). I showed the average of the
number of overlapping co-activated regions deﬁned as Equati on (7). I took different network states by varying the thresh old, as with the cases in the other ﬁgures. (B) I
showed the correlation between the overlapping patterns gi ven in (A) with the mutual information. On the x-axis, I took the mutual information calculated using the
whole datasets of matrices by applying the method, which is d enoted by a solid line ( p = 0.05) (Figure 2). Then I plotted the corresponding points of each threshold
value by overlapping numbers on the y-axis, which are given i n (A). (C) There was a correlation between the overlapping patterns gi ven in (A) and the normalized
Hopﬁeld energy. On the x-axis, I measured the normalized Hopﬁe ld energy given in Figure 5A. I plotted the corresponding points of each threshold value with the
network energy on the y-axis, as given in (A). (D) A correlation was observed between the overlapping pattern s given in (A) and the wiring cost performance given in
Figure 5C, similar to (C).
these panels. The other relation ( Figure 8D) is also supported by
Figure 10B, which displays the relation between the overlapping
numbers and the wiring cost. These results with the sub-
matrices show that important properties between the overlapping
numbers and the wiring cost are stably obtained. The results
suggest that these values are independent to other factors, such as
the connectivity matrix size or the speciﬁc location of the br ain
regions taken as nodes.
The results with the structural connectome are displayed
in Figures 10C,D. The results observed in the functional
connectome can be conﬁrmed with Figures 10C,D, where the
simulation results exhibit similar properties to those given with
the fMRI datasets (Figures 4D, 8D), respectively. They also agree
with the similarity between the functional and the structur al
connectome, in that the functional connectivity in the rest ring-
state has close relation to the physical connections, such as th e
ﬁber tracts which organize the structural connectivity (
Biswal
et al., 2010 ). Thus, the robustness and the stability of the major
properties obtained in this paper are given more strong evidence
by the results of the structural network datasets. Because t he
structural network is comprised of the ﬁber tracts, the networ k
structure is more stable compared to the functional connecti vity
based on the temporal dynamics correlations. In addition, the
results obtained with the physical connections further clarif y the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 12 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 9 | Clustering coefﬁcient and overlapping number. (A) The clustering coefﬁcient C for the topological description with the adjacency matrix i s averaged and
shown. The threshold values in the x-axis and the correspond ing adjacency matrices are taken to be the same as those in Figure 4. The datasets of the matrix are
also the same to those used in Figure 4. (B) The correlation of the clustering coefﬁcient C (shown in A) to the overlapping number is shown. The overlapping number
is the same to those in Figure 8A. The threshold range in this panel is taken in [ − 1.0, − 2.0] so as to exclude the ﬂat values in the lower thresholds. (C) The differences
of the clustering coefﬁcient in (A) is shown. The difference /Delta1C is calculated as /Delta1C = C(i) − C(i + 1), where the difference is taken with the next value in the gr aph and i
is the number of the threshold position counted from the lowe r side. (D) The correlation of the clustering coefﬁcient difference /Delta1C (shown in C) to the overlapping
number is shown. The values of the overlapping numbers are th e same as those in Figure 8A. The threshold range (which was the same as C) is taken.
meaning of the energy. In particular, wiring cost can be explic itly
related to the real energy cost of the brain for network formation.
4. DISCUSSION
In the present paper, I modeled information transfer in the
brain based on a dataset of the human functional connectome.
As illustrated by Figure 1A, I represented brain activity using
the activation patterns of multiple regions. That is, informa tion
processing was modeled in terms of the dynamics of successive
patterns of activation. These dynamics were described in ter ms
of the changing of activation states, as illustrated in Figure 1B,
wherein positively or negatively activated states were tran sferred
by activating or inactivating connected regions.
4.1. Information Transfer Model and Basic
Statistical Quantities
In this simulation, I calculated the information transfer o f
randomly activated signals using Equation (2). Using this mo del,
I evaluated the mutual information, deﬁned as the average of
Equation (3), and the network energy, deﬁned as Equations
(4–6). They are shown in Figures 2, 4A, respectively. On
the other hand, numerous empirical studies have suggested
that information transfer in the brain is optimized, under
constraints, such as the energy consumption, by maximizing
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 13 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
FIGURE 10 | Correlations in the small size functional network and the st ructural network. In (A,B), the correlation between the quantities shown in Figures 4D, 8D
are estimated, respectively for the small size functional n etwork. The small size network, 100 × 100 matrix, is taken from the original 177 × 177 matrix with randomly
selected 100 nodes. The calculation methods for each panel i s same to corresponding ones in each ﬁgure. The threshold rang e in this panel is taken in [ − 1.0, − 2.0],
the same as in Figure 9 to exclude lower threshold ranges which are almost ﬂat. In pane ls (C,D), the correlation between the same quantities are estimated for the
structural network. The connectivity matrix constructed f rom DTI images are downloaded from the same website as those o f the functional connectome dataset
(http://umcd.humanconnectomeproject.org/) (Brown et al., 2012 ). The evaluation methods are the same as those for the above p anels (A,B).
mutual information in the communication between brain
regions (
Linsker, 1990; Friston, 2010; Bullmore and Sporns,
2012). Therefore, I assessed the correlation between these two
quantities. In these results given in Figures 4B,D, the energy is
evaluated in terms of its cost performance, then the Hopﬁeld
energy normalized by the wiring cost and the wiring cost per
total activity cost are shown, respectively and the decreasi ng
of these quantities indicates the improvement of the cost
performance. I showed these relationships in Figures 4B,D, in
which I plotted the corresponding values of each network state .
The ﬁgure indicated a negative correlation between the valu es,
whereby increases in mutual information led to decreases in
network energy, and vice versa. Thus, these two quantities m ust
be correlated.
In particular, the peak around the maximum mutual
information in Figures 4B,D shows that information transfer
is optimized at this point by maximizing the quantity and
minimizing the energy. According to the theory of the brain
economy (
Bullmore and Sporns, 2012 ), the eﬃciency of
information processing in the brain is likely optimized by trading
oﬀ with energy consumption. Although biological and empirica l
requirements regarding eﬃciency and energy are independent
of each other, the result indicates that they are correlated , so
there may be a mechanism that controls information transfer
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 14 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
while satisfying these two principles regarding the eﬃciency and
the energy.
4.2. Network Structure and Information
Transfer
Network analyses around this optimal state may explain the
mechanism by which information transfer is organized in
the brain. In Figure 5A, to allow topological representation,
I estimated the largest component size of the network. The
correlation with mutual information ( Figure 5B) indicated that
the eﬃciency of information transfer is maximized at the cri tical
point between the fully connected network and the fragmented
network state, which contains disconnected subcomponents. At
this optimal state, the network maintains its fully connected
structure with the minimum number of connections ( Figure 6).
This can be contrasted with the fragmented states, which inh ibit
eﬃcient communication due to disconnections between regio ns.
On the other hand, excess connections generate noise in the
response. Therefore, in the intermediate phase at the optimal
state, information transfer is cost eﬀective, suppressing exc ess
signals, and preserving fully connected structure.
As illustrated in Figure 6, this state can be described as the
topological phase transition between the fully connected and
fragmented phases. In this way, it constitutes a critical sta te.
The distribution shape of node strength, another variable of
the network, corroborates the notion that mutual informati on
is maximized at the critical state. As shown in Figure 7A, the
distribution of node strength converges in the model Equati on
(8), which assumes criticality and energy constraints (
Takagi,
2017, 2018 ). This correlation shows that mutual information
(Figure 7C) increases as the values converge upon the critical
state. This result, along with the weighted network descript ion
(Figure 7B), also suggests that topological states are also
correlated ( Figures 4B,D). Both of these results indicate that
the optimal state regarding the eﬃciency of the information
transfer emerges in the critical state, suggesting that the re is
criticality in the brain, as has been conﬁrmed empirically in
various studies (
Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Achard et al., 2006; Beggs,
2008; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011 ).
Although the state, which was speciﬁed as optimal, depends
on the parameters, such as the threshold value, the criticali ty that
supports its generality. Because the critical state was obtai ned
without adjusting or ﬁne-tuning multiple system parameters, it
indicates that this state has the generality, which was obta ined
regardless of the details of the parameters. In fact, the stab le
results for the large samples about 1,000 individuals imply tha t
these features around the optimal state are general ones, whi ch
emerge commonly and stably for diﬀerent individuals.
This statistical features of node strength provide further
information about the mechanism of the information transfe r
in this optimal state. The distribution of node strength
exhibits a characteristic shape, as illustrated in Figure 7B. The
cumulative distribution curve on the log-log plot indicates
that the network contains a large number of higher strength
nodes, which correspond to hubs in the functional network
and comprise the core structure within networks (
Hagmann
et al., 2008; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011 ). Thanks
to such core networks, whole networks can acquire the
attributes of a small-world structure, allowing eﬃcient
communication with shortened distance between the nodes
(
Bassett and Bullmore, 2006 ) and improved robustness of
information transfer.
4.3. Activation Patterns and Principles of
Energy and Efﬁciency
The importance of these network states in regulating activit y in
the brain can be evaluated using activation patterns. Accordi ng
to the deﬁnition of the information transfer (Equation 2),
the response signals for the random input stimuli might be
determined, reﬂecting the network structure. For example, th e
response probabilities are determined by the combination of
wi,j ̸= 0 elements for each i, and then the overlapping number
would be given accordingly. Then, the overlapping number was
an indicator, which reﬂects the network structure, activat ion
patterns, and information transfer.
In Figure 8A, I evaluated the number of overlapping
activated regions between diﬀerent response signals. The
correlation with eﬃciency of information transfer and
energy are shown in Figures 8B–D, which show that network
structure behaves in a similar way ( Figures 5B, 7C), indicating
that these quantities depend strongly on the overlapping
number. Increase in this quantity to the higher threshold
was explained by the over-inactivated states with many 0
signals. The saturation of the activated signals, the highe r
density of the signals shown in Figure 3C, explains the same
tendency, that is, increasing this quantity from the lower
threshold. In each case, the overlapping number is increased
at this state than during the intermediate states, at which
activated and inactivated signals are balanced. Thus, the
correlation between the mutual information entropy and the
activation patterns can be explained by this quantity, the
overlapping number.
As discussed above, increased overlapping may improve
robustness in signal transfer and facilitate rapid response t o
the outer environment, with shortened communication distan ce
between nodes. Despite these advantages, excess overlapping i n
the activation phase reduces the eﬃciency of the information
transfer and causes the energy loss ( Figures 8B–D). This implies
that excess overlapping causes loss of eﬃciency and increases t he
energy consumption related to information transfer. Thus, t hese
features have a trade-oﬀ relationship; that is, the robustnes s and
the rapidity of responses are balanced with loss of eﬃciency an d
energy in information transfer.
In summary, the present results suggest that the principles of
eﬃciency and energy consumption are important to information
transfer. These principles aﬀect multiple aspects of the functional
network in the brain, and I have shown the connectivity
strength ( Figure 7C), activation patterns ( Figures 8B–D), and
topological network of such structures ( Figure 5B). The same
ﬁgures show the contribution of these principles to statistica l
quantities, in which sharp peaks indicate a strong tendency
toward these quantities. Thus, these principles regarding
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 15 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
eﬃciency and of information transfer are important factors
in regulating the characteristic attributes of the functio nal
network in the human brain, such as network structure and
activation patterns.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. Th is data
can be found here: http://umcd.humanconnectomeproject.org /.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
KT designed the study, conducted the simulations and data
analyses, and wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for English
language editing.
REFERENCES
Achard, S., and Bullmore, E. (2006). Eﬃciency and cost of economica l brain
functional networks. PLoS Comp. Biol. 3:e17. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017
Achard, S., Salvador, R., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., and Bullmore, E. (2006).
A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain functional network
with highly connected association cortical hubs. J. Neurosci. 26, 63–72.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3874-05.2006
Azevedo, F. A., Carvalho, L. R., Grinberg, L. T., Farfel, J. M., F erretti, R. E., Leite,
R. E., et al. (2009). Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal ce lls make
the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. J. Comp. Neurol.
513:532. doi: 10.1002/cne.21974
Barrat, A., Barthelemy, M., Pastor-Satorras, R., and Vespignani, A. (2004). The
architecture of complex weighted networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
3747–3752. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0400087101
Bassett, D., and Bullmore, E. (2006). Small-world brain networks. Neuroscientist
12, 512–523. doi: 10.1177/1073858406293182
Bassett, D., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Achard, S., Duke, T., and Bullmore,
E. (2006). Adaptive reconﬁguration of fractal small-world human brain
functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 19518–19523.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0606005103
Bassett, D. S., Wymbs, N. F., Porter, M. A., Mucha, P. J., Carlson, J. M.,
and Grafton, S. T. (2018). Dynamic reconﬁguration of human brain
networks during learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, 7641–7646.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1018985108
Beggs, J. (2008). The criticality hypothesis: how local cortical networks might
optimize information processing. Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 366,
329–343. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2007.2092
Beggs, J., and Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal avalanches in neocorti cal circuits. J.
Neurosci. 23, 11167–11177. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-35-11167.2003
Biswal, B., Mennes, M., Zuo, X.-N., Gohel, S., Kelly, C., Smith, S. M ., et al. (2010).
Toward discovery science of human brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 4734–4739. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911855107
Bressler, S., and Menon, V. (2010). Large-scale brain networks in cognition:
emerging methods and principles. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 277–290.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.04.004
Brown, J., Rudie, J., Bandrowski, A., V an Horn, J., and Bookheimer , S. (2012).
The UCLA multimodal connectivity database: a web-based platform fo r
brain connectivity matrix sharing and analysis. Front. Neuroinform. 6:28.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2012.00028
Bullmore, E., and Sporns, O. (2012). The economy of brain network organ ization.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 336–349. doi: 10.1038/nrn3214
Calhoun, V., Liu, J., and Adali, T. (2009). A review of group ica fo r fMRI data and
ica for joint inference of imaging, genetic, and ERP data. Neuroimage 45:S163.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.057
Chialvo, D. (2010). Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750.
doi: 10.1038/nphys1803
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated ag ents,
and the future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36:181–204.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Clauset, A., Shalizi, C., and Newman, M. (2009). Power-law distri butions in
empirical data. SIAM Rev. 51, 661–703. doi: 10.1137/070710111
Eguiluz, V., Chialvo, D., Cecchi, G., Baliki, M., and Apkarian, A. (2005).
Scale-free brain functional networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94:018102.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.018102
Fenno, L., Yizhar, O., and Deisseroth, K. (2011). The developmen t
and application of optogenetics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34:389.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113817
Finn, E., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Rosenberg, M., Huang, J., Ch un, M. M., et al.
(2015). Functional connectome ﬁngerprinting: identifying individuals based on
patterns of brain connectivity. Nat. Neurosci. 18:1664. doi: 10.1038/nn.4135
Fox, M., and Raichle, M. (2007). Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in bra in activity
observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8,
700–711. doi: 10.1038/nrn2201
Fox, M., Snyder, A., Vincent, J., Corbetta, M., V an Essen, D. , and Raichle,
M. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic ,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 9673–
9678. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory ? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Ghazanfar, A., and Schroeder, C. (2006). Is neocortex essenti ally multisensory?
Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 278–285. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.04.008
Greicius, M., Supekar, K., Menon, V., and Dougherty, R. (2009). Restingstate
functional connectivity reﬂects structural connectivity in t he default mode
network. Cereb. Cortex 19, 72–78. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn059
Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, C., Wedee n, V. J.,
et al. (2008). Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol.
6:e159. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060159
Haxby, J., Gobbini, M. I., Furey, M. L., Ishai, A., Schouten, J . L., and Pietrini,
P. (2001). Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in
ventral temporal cortex. Science 293, 2425–2430. doi: 10.1126/science.1063736
Hilgetag, C., and Grant, S. (2000). Uniformity, speciﬁcity and varia bility of
corticocortical connectivity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 355, 7–20.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2000.0546
Hinton, G. E., and Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006). Reducing the di mensionality of
data with neural networks. Science 313, 504–507. doi: 10.1126/science.1127647
Hopﬁeld, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded response have collective computational
properties like those of two-state neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81,
3088–3092. doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.10.3088
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., and Chun, M. (1997). The fusiform face area: a
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception.J. Neurosci.
17, 4302–4311. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-11-04302.1997
Kitzbichler, M. G. Smith, M., Christensen, S., and Bullmore, E. (200 9). Broadband
criticality of human brain network synchronization. PLoS Comput. Biol.
5:e1000314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000314
Klaus, A., Yu, S., and Plenz, D. (2011). Statistical analyses su pport power
law distributions found in neuronal avalanches. PLoS ONE 6:e19779.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019779
Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., and McClelland, J. (2016). What learning systems
do intelligent agents need? Complementary learning systems theory updat ed.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 512–534. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.004
Lee, J. H., Durand, R., Gradinaru, V., Zhang, F., Goshen, I., Kim, D.-S., et al. (2010).
Global and local fmri signals driven by neurons deﬁned optogenetically by type
and wiring. Nature 465:788. doi: 10.1038/nature09108
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86


--- Page 16 ---
T akagi Information, Energy, Patterns, and Brain
Linsker, R. (1990). Perceptual neural organisation: some approac hes based on
network models and information theory. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 257–281.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.ne.13.030190.001353
Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., and Bullmore, E. (2010). Modular and
hierarchically modular organization of brain networks. Front. Neurosci.
4:200. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2010.00200
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A., Veness, J., Be llemare, M., et al.
(2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518,
529–533. doi: 10.1038/nature14236
Niven, J., and Laughlin, S. (2008). Energy limitation as a select ive pressure
on the evolution of sensory systems. J. Exp. Biol. 211, 1792–1804.
doi: 10.1242/jeb.017574
Park, H., and Friston, K. (2013). Structural and functional brain n etworks: from
connections to cognition. Science 342:1238411. doi: 10.1126/science.1238411
Rubinov, M., and Sporns, O. (2011). Weight-conserving charact erization
of complex functional brain networks. Neuroimage 56, 2068–2079.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.069
Shmuel, A., Augath, M., Oeltermann, A., and Logothetis, N. (2006) . Negative
functional mri response correlates with decreases in neuronal activi ty in
monkey visual area v1. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 569–577. doi: 10.1038/nn1675
Smith, S. (2012). The future of fMRI connectivity. Neuroimage 62:1257.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.022
Smith, S., Miller, K., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., and Webster, M. (201 1).
Network modelling methods for fMRI. Neuroimage 54:875.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.063
Song, B., Ma, N., Liu, G., Zhang, H., Yu, L., Liu, L., et al. (2019 ). Maximal
ﬂexibility in dynamic functional connectivity with critical d ynamics revealed
by fMRI data analysis and brain network modelling. J. Neural Eng. 16:056002.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/ab20bc
Sporns, O. (2002). Network analysis, complexity, and brain function . Complexity
8, 56–60. doi: 10.1002/cplx.10047
Sporns, O. (2013). Network attributes for segregation and integration in the human
brain. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 162–171. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2012.11.015
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., and Kotter, R. (2005). The human connect ome:
a structural description of the human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1:e42.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042
Tagliazucchi, E., Balenzuela, P., Fraiman, D., and Chialvo, D. (20 12). Criticality
in large-scale brain fMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process a nalysis.
Front. Physiol. 3:15. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00015
Tagliazucchi, E., Chialvo, D., Siniatchkin, M., Amico, E., Bric hant, J.-F.,
Bonhomme, V., et al. (2016). Large-scale signatures of unconscio usness
are consistent with a departure from critical dynamics. J. R. Soc. Interface
13:20151027. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2015.1027
Takagi, K. (2017). A distribution model of functional connect ome
based on criticality and energy constraints. PLoS ONE 12:e0177446.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177446
Takagi, K. (2018). Information-based principle induces small-world to pology and
self-organized criticality in a large scale brain network. Front. Comp. Neurosci.
12:65. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00065
Tomasi, D., Wang, G.-J., and Volkow, N. (2013). Energetic cost of brain
functional connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 13642–13647.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1303346110
Tononi, G., Sporns, O., and Edelman, G. (1994). A measure for brain co mplexity:
relating functional segregation and integration in the nervous system. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91:5033. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.11.5033
van den Heuvel, M., and Sporns, O. (2011). Rich-club organization
of the human connectome. J. Neurosci. 31, 15775–15786.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3539-11.2011
van den Heuvel, M., Stam, C., Boersma, M., and HulshoﬀPol, H. (2008).
Small world and scale-free organization of voxel based resting-sta te
functional connectivity in the human brain. Neuroimage 43, 528–539.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.08.010
V an Dijk, K., Hedden, T., Venkataraman, A., Evans, K., and Lazar , S. (2010).
Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human connect omics:
theory, properties, and optimization. J. Neurophysiol. 103, 297–321.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00783.2009
Wang, R., Tsuda, I., and Zhang, Z. (2015). A new work mechanism o n neuronal
activity. Int. J. Neural Syst. 25:1450037. doi: 10.1142/S0129065714500373
Wang, R., Zhang, Z., and Chen, G. (2008). Energy function and energy
evolution on neural population. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 19, 535–538.
doi: 10.1109/TNN.2007.914177
Wang, Y., Xu, X., and Wang, R. (2018). An energy model of place cell ne twork in
three dimensional space. Front. Neurosci. 12:264. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00264
Wang, Z., and Wang, R. (2014). Energy distribution property and en ergy
coding of a structural neural network. Front. Comp. Neurosci. 8:14.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00014
Watts, D., and Strogatz, S. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-w orld’ networks.
Nature 393, 440–442. doi: 10.1038/30918
Whitacre, J. M. (2010). Degeneracy: a link between evolvability, robustness
and complexity in biological systems. Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 7:6.
doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-7-6
Yu, L., and Yu, Y. (2017). Energy–eﬃcient neural information proc essing in
individual neurons and neuronal networks. J. Neurosci. Res. 95, 2253–2266.
doi: 10.1002/jnr.24131
Zuo, X.-N., Ehmke, R., Mennes, M., Imperati, D., Castellanos, F., Spo rns, O., et al.
(2012). Network centrality in the human functional connectome. Cereb. Cortex
22, 1862–1875. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr269
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 T akagi. This is an open-access article distribu ted under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use , distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the orig inal author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original public ation in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 16 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 86
