--- Page 1 ---
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 22 July 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00066
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66
Edited by:
Uma Shanker Tiwary,
Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Allahabad, India
Reviewed by:
Adam Ponzi,
Okinawa Institute of Science and
Technology Graduate
University, Japan
Alekhya Mandali,
University of Cambridge,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Yoshihisa Fujita
fujita.yoshihisa.4s@kyoto-u.ac.jp
Received: 11 March 2020
Accepted: 08 June 2020
Published: 22 July 2020
Citation:
Fujita Y , Yagishita S, Kasai H and
Ishii S (2020) Computational
Characteristics of the Striatal
Dopamine System Described by
Reinforcement Learning With
Fast Generalization.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 14:66.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00066
Computational Characteristics of the
Striatal Dopamine System Described
by Reinforcement Learning With Fast
Generalization
Yoshihisa Fujita 1*, Sho Yagishita 2,3, Haruo Kasai 2,3 and Shin Ishii 1,3,4
1 Integrated Systems Biology Laboratory, Department of Syste ms Science, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto Universit y,
Kyoto, Japan, 2 Laboratory of Structural Physiology, Center for Disease Bi ology and Integrative Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3 International Research Center for Neurointelligence, The U niversity of
Tokyo Institutes for Advanced Study, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan, 4 Neural Information Processing Laboratories,
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute Internatio nal (ATR), Kyoto, Japan
Generalization is the ability to apply past experience to si milar but non-identical
situations. It not only affects stimulus-outcome relation ships, as observed in conditioning
experiments, but may also be essential for adaptive behavio rs, which involve the
interaction between individuals and their environment. Co mputational modeling could
potentially clarify the effect of generalization on adapti ve behaviors and how this effect
emerges from the underlying computation. Recent neurobiol ogical observation indicated
that the striatal dopamine system achieves generalization and subsequent discrimination
by updating the corticostriatal synaptic connections in di fferential response to reward
and punishment. In this study, we analyzed how computationa l characteristics in this
neurobiological system affects adaptive behaviors. We pro posed a novel reinforcement
learning model with multilayer neural networks in which the synaptic weights of only
the last layer are updated according to the prediction error . We set ﬁxed connections
between the input and hidden layers to maintain the similarity of inputs in the hidden-layer
representation. This network enabled fast generalization of reward and punishment
learning, and thereby facilitated safe and efﬁcient explor ation of spatial navigation tasks.
Notably, it demonstrated a quick reward approach and efﬁcie nt punishment aversion
in the early learning phase, compared to algorithms that do n ot show generalization.
However, disturbance of the network that causes noisy gener alization and impaired
discrimination induced maladaptive valuation. These resu lts suggested the advantage
and potential drawback of computation by the striatal dopam ine system with regard to
adaptive behaviors.
Keywords: generalization, adaptive behaviors, reward lea rning, striatum, dopamine-dependent plasticity,
reinforcement learning, artiﬁcial neural networks
INTRODUCTION
Animals’ survival incorporates reward-seeking behavior ac companied by risks. Outcome
observation resulting from the pairing of a current state and a taken action provide clues to ensure
optimal behaviors, but it may be associated with substantial energy consumption and aversive
experiences. Such a learning process is ineﬃcient and even har mful, especially when animals are


--- Page 2 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
required to adapt to new environments. Animals instead
generalize their previous experiences to predict outcome, eve n
in novel situations. If the prediction due to generalization
is diﬀerent from the actual observation, the prediction is
then reshaped by discrimination learning. Generalization a nd
discrimination may be essential for eﬃcient adaptive behavi ors,
whereas abnormalities in these functions can be maladaptive .
Generalization to an abnormal extent has been implicated in
psychiatric disorders (
Dunsmoor and Paz, 2015; Kahnt and
Tobler, 2016; Asok et al., 2018 ). A recent neurobiological
study presented the possibility that disrupted discriminatio n is
involved in psychotic symptoms ( Iino et al., 2020).
Psychological studies have investigated generalization by
using the conditioning paradigm in behavioral experiments
(
Ghirlanda and Enquist, 2003). If a response has been established
by a stimulus paired with an outcome (i.e., reward or
punishment), then resembling stimuli evoke similar response s.
This “law of eﬀect” depends on the extent that the second
stimulus resembles the ﬁrst stimulus, and is termed “stimul us
generalization” (
Thorndike, 1898; Ghirlanda and Enquist, 2003 ).
Discrimination can then occur if the ﬁrst stimulus is paired w ith
a reward but the resembling stimulus is paired with no reward;
as a consequence, only the ﬁrst stimulus elicits a response. H ow
the brain establishes stimulus generalization has been expl ained,
based on artiﬁcial neural networks (
Shepard and Kannappan,
1991; Ghirlanda and Enquist, 1998; Franks and Ruxton, 2008;
Wisniewski et al., 2012
). These previous studies have focused
on the stimulus–response relationship, although generalizat ion
can be incorporated in the interaction between individuals
and the environment. Reinforcement learning involves this
interaction and is used as a model of reward-driven learning
(
Frank et al., 2004; Doya, 2007; Glimcher, 2011 ). In the ﬁeld
of artiﬁcial intelligence, reinforcement learning in comb ination
with artiﬁcial neural networks achieves a high performance,
which suggests the contribution of generalization to adaptiv e
behaviors (
Mnih et al., 2015). However, neurobiological evidence
indicates that the neural system has a unique computation
for reward-driven learning and generalization, compared to
algorithms used for artiﬁcial intelligence (
Whittington and
Bogacz, 2019 ). This raises the question regarding how its
computational characteristics diﬀer from those of ordinary
algorithms. Advantages and shortcomings should exist with
regard to adaptive behaviors.
Theoretical attempts have focused on separate systems that
process positive and negative values in the brain (
DeLong,
1990; Nambu, 2007; Amemori et al., 2011; Collins and Frank,
2014
), which are not adopted when using ordinary reinforcement
learning. Dopamine and its main target area, the striatum,
play central roles in reward- and punishment-related learnin g
(
Meredith et al., 2008 ). Dopaminergic neurons show a positive
response to a greater-than-expected reward and a negative
response to a less-than-expected reward, which indicates tha t
dopamine codes reward prediction error (
Schultz, 2015 ). The
striatum receives dopamine signals and glutamatergic input
from the cortex and thalamus (
Tepper et al., 2007 ). Dopamine
modulates synaptic plasticity between the cortex and the striatum
during reward-related learning ( Reynolds et al., 2001 ). The
striatum is primarily composed of spiny projection neurons
(SPNs), which can be divided into SPNs that primarily express
the dopamine D1 receptor (D1-SPNs) and SPNs that express
the dopamine D2 receptor (D2-SPNs) (
Surmeier et al., 2010 ).
D1-SPNs respond to phasic increases in dopamine ( Y agishita
et al., 2014 ), whereas D2-SPNs respond to the phasic decreases
in dopamine ( Hikida et al., 2013; Iino et al., 2020 ). Perturbing
the activity of D1- and D2-SPNs inhibits reward learning and
punishment learning, respectively (
Hikida et al., 2013 ). The
advantages of having such separate systems have been discuss ed
in computational studies ( Mikhael and Bogacz, 2016; Elfwing
and Seymour, 2017 ). One study ( Mikhael and Bogacz, 2016 )
demonstrated an advantage in learning reward uncertainty.
Another study (
Elfwing and Seymour, 2017 ) showed the
possibility of achieving safe behaviors.
However, recent neural recordings and optogenetic
manipulations provide some data that suggest diﬀerent
roles of SPNs from those in the existing models (
Cox and Witten,
2019). Our recent experiments with a classical conditioning
task found that D1- and D2-SPNs are diﬀerentially responsible
for stimulus generalization and discrimination (
Iino et al.,
2020). The same series of experiments revealed that stimulus
generalization/discrimination occurred solely by dopamine -
dependent plasticity of SPN spines that receive cortical
inputs, which implies that updating in other connections (e.g. ,
intracortical synaptic connections) would be minor. These
observations suggest learning rules that update the synaptic
weights of the last layer in a multilayer neural network—in o ur
case, corticostriatal connections—are essential. Such lea rning
rules actually enable remarkably fast learning in reservoir
computing (RC) and extreme learning machine (ELM) (
Maass
et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2006; Lukoševi ˇcius and Jaeger,
2009). RC and ELM are neural networks that train only their
readouts (i.e., the last layer connections); RC has recurren t
connections, whereas ELM does not. Iino et al. also showed tha t
administration of methamphetamine, which causes psychosis
(e.g., delusions) in humans, impaired discrimination functi on in
mice by altering dopamine dynamics associated with unexpecte d
reward omission (
Iino et al., 2020 ). Taken together with the
physiological functions of D2-SPN described above, these
ﬁndings suggest that impairment of dopamine-dependent
corticostriatal plasticity of D2-SPNs can induce abnormal v alue
prediction via disrupted discrimination.
In this study, we propose a novel reinforcement
learning model that reproduces stimulus generalization
and discrimination, while accounting for the physiological
characteristics of striatal SPNs. We used a neural network for
value estimation and introduced ﬁxed connections between
the input and hidden layers, as in RC and ELM. RC has the
potential for context-dependent value estimation because of
its recurrent connections. However, for simplicity, we adopt ed
a feed-forward neural network with the same architecture as
ELM. The extent of stimulus generalization depends on the
similarity of stimuli; therefore, we did not use random and
ﬁxed connections as implemented in ordinary ELM. We instead
set the ﬁxed connections so as to maintain the similarity of
inputs in the hidden-layer representation. In addition, we
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 3 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
introduced connections that had weights separately updated
by positive and negative reward prediction errors, while taki ng
into account the diﬀerential roles of D1- and D2-SPNs in
the striatum. This neural network enabled generalization in a
quick manner. We named this model “Outspread V aluation for
Reward Learning and Punishment Learning” (“OV aRLAP”).
Using this model for painful grid-world navigation tasks,
we ﬁrst evaluated the contribution of generalization and
discrimination to adaptive behaviors. The OV aRLAP model
performed safe and eﬃcient exploration, suggesting that
quick generalization of punishment learning contributed
to safe and eﬃcient reward-seeking and pain-avoiding. We
then tested disturbed OV aRLAP in a painless grid-world to
examine whether abnormal generalization and discriminati on
underlies maladaptive behaviors, as implied in psychological and
psychiatric studies (
Buss and Daniell, 1967; Ralph, 1968; Kahnt
and Tobler, 2016 ). We introduced impairment of learning from
negative prediction error, which disables discrimination, based
on the physiological ﬁndings ( Iino et al., 2020 ). We found that
impaired discrimination combined with noisy generalization
induced aberrant valuation, after repeating reward-seekin g
behaviors. These results showed that the unique computation
suggested by the striatal dopamine system facilitated safe an d
eﬃcient exploration, but on the other hand had potential defec ts
which can cause maladaptive behaviors.
METHODS
We developed OV aRLAP to analyze how the computational
characteristics in the striatal dopamine system aﬀect behavi ors.
We ﬁrst evaluated OV aRLAP in a spatial navigation task in
painful grid-worlds by comparing its performance with those
of two other representative algorithms ( Figures 1A,B). We then
examined the behavior of disturbed OV aRLAP in a spatial
navigation task in a painless grid-world ( Figures 1C,D).
Model Description of OVaRLAP
A neural network was used for value estimation in OV aRLAP.
It consists of an input layer, a hidden layer, two pre-output
neurons, and an output neuron ( Figure 1A, left). The input
represents the state at discretized time, t. We applied our
learning method to two types of navigation tasks, both in
two-dimensional grid-worlds, in which position
(
x, y
)
, x ∈
{1, . . ., 20}, and y ∈ {1, . . .20} were simply represented by a
two-dimensional index function:
Iij(x, y, t) =
{1, if i = x and j = y
0, otherwise,
for i = 1, . . ., 20 and j = 1, . . ., 20.
The input signals were transformed by ﬁxed connections into
hidden-layer activity patterns. We set the number of hidden-
layer neurons and the weight of ﬁxed connections so as to
reproduce the shape of the generalization gradient, which has
been commonly observed across various species, behavioral
contexts, and sensory modalities (
Ghirlanda and Enquist, 2003 ).
The number of hidden-layer neurons was set to 900. The hidden-
layer activity hk(x, y, t) for k = 1, . . ., 900 was given by
hk(x, y, t) =
∑
i
∑
j
Mij,kIij(x, y, t)
in which Mij,k is the weight of the ﬁxed connection from the
input-layer neuron
(
i, j
)
to the hidden-layer neuron k. Based on
the deﬁnition of Iij(x, y, t), hk(x, y, t) was also represented as
hk
(
x, y, t
)
= Mxy,k
in which
(
x, y
)
is the agent’s position at time t.
For the generalization capability, we assumed the hidden-layer
representation becomes similar when the input signal is simil ar.
In our case, the values of hk(x1, y1,t) and hk(x2, y2,t) are similar
if position (x1, y1) is close to position ( x2, y2), based on Euclidian
distance. To reﬂect this request, we set the ﬁxed connections Mij,k
to follow the two-dimensional Gaussian function:
Mij,k =
exp
{
−
(
( i− ak) 2
2σ 2
k
+ ( j− bk) 2
2σ 2
k
)}
+ ε ij,k
D
in which D is the number of the input-layer neurons used for
normalization ( D = 400, because of the 20 × 20 grid-worlds);
ak and bk denote the center and are set as ak ∈ {1, . . ., 20},
bk ∈ {1, . . ., 20}, and 20 ( ak − 1) + bk = ceil(400k/900) so that
the central location ( ak, bk) in the 20 × 20 2D space was linearly
correlated with the location ( ˜ak, ˜bk) in 30 × 30 2D space where
˜ak = 1 + ﬂoor((k − 1)/30) and ˜bk = mod(k − 1, 30) + 1; σ 2
k
is the variance sampled from a log-normal distribution with the
metaparameter θ as follows:
σ 2
k ∼ LogN ( − 0.7/θ , 0.7 θ ) ;
and ε ij,k is the noise, as deﬁned below. The distribution
of σ 2
k resulted that the hidden-layer neurons ranged from
neurons that responded to speciﬁc input to neurons that
responded to a wide range of input. This setting is consistent
with physiological observations (
Bordi and LeDoux, 1992 ) and
underlies generalization in OV aRLAP. We set the metaparameter
θ to regulate the amount of generalization. The noise ε ij,k
is unnecessary in normal cases; however, we introduced
it for the purpose of analyzing the eﬀect of abnormal
perturbation in OV aRLAP ( Figure 1C). When simulating
abnormal perturbation, we applied noise ε ij,k by using the
following formulas:
P
(
ε ij,k = A
)
= ρ
and
P
(
ε ij,k = 0
)
= 1 − ρ .
A denotes the noise strength. Apparently, no noise exists if A or
ρ is zero. This noise was initially introduced but not changed
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 4 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 1 | The architecture of TD learning algorithms and the task. (A) Schematic diagrams of OVaRLAP (left), simple TD learning (m iddle), and MaxPain (right). In
OVaRLAP , the value prediction used a neural network with ﬁxed connections (gray arrows) and distinct connections update d by positive and negative TD errors (red
and blue arrows, respectively). In our implementations of si mple TD learning and MaxPain, the predicted value is represe nted by look-up tables in which the state, sk,
indicates a position ( x, y) in the two-dimensional grid-world. (B) The navigation task in the two-dimensional grid-world. The non-gray squares and gray squares
indicate passable and not passable, respectively. The blac k square is the starting position, and the green and yellow sq uares are the goals at which the agent receives
the positive rewards of 1 and 2, respectively. When the agent receives a positive reward, an episode ends so that the agent restarts the task from the starting position.
If an agent hits a wall (i.e., a not passable square), it receiv es a negative reward of − 1, but continues the task by staying at the same square. (C) Schematic diagram of
OVaRLAP in which updating connections, based on the negativ e TD error (blue connections), are impaired. In addition, noi se is introduced to induce an anomaly in the
initialization of the ﬁxed connections between the input and the hidden layers (for the details of noise here, see Section Model Description of OVaRLAP). (D) The
navigation task in the two-dimensional grid-world. The bla ck square is the starting position. The green squares are the goals at which the agent receives a positive
reward of one. If the agent receives a positive reward, a singl e episode ends, and a new episode restarts from the starting p osition. In this task, when the agent hits a
wall (i.e., a gray square), no negative reward is given, and t he agent remains at the same square.
through the learning process. In our simulation experiment, w e
applied diﬀerent realizations of noise ε ij,k under speciﬁc values of
A and ρ , and examined the collective behaviors of the learning.
The two pre-output neurons then received signals from the
hidden-layer neurons. For m = 1, 2, the activities of the pre-
output neurons dm(x, y, t) are given by
dm
(
x, y, t
)
=
∑
k
wm,k(t)hk(x, y, t),
in which wm,k(t) is the weight of the connection from hidden-
layer neuron k to the pre-output neuron m for m = 1, 2 and k =
1, . . ., 900. In this instance, d1
(
x, y, t
)
and d2
(
x, y, t
)
represent
the positive and negative values, respectively. The ﬁnal outpu t of
the network v(x, y, t) integrated these values, as follows:
v
(
x, y, t
)
= d1
(
x, y, t
)
− d2
(
x, y, t
)
.
During the interaction between the agent and the environmen t,
the connection weights wm,k(t) were updated, depending on
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 5 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
the prediction error, δ . To calculate δ , we used an action-value
function Q ( s, a, t) for state s and action a at time t (Sutton and
Barto, 2018 ). We deﬁned Q ( s, a, t) by using the output of the
network, as follows:
Q ( s, a, t) = v
(
x′, y′, t
)
,
in which s = (x, y), a = ()Delta1x, )Delta1y), x
′
= x + )Delta1x, and y
′
= y + )Delta1y.
In our navigation tasks, ( )Delta1x, )Delta1y) = ( 1, 0) , ( − 1, 0), ( 0, − 1) , or
( 0, 1) , if the action was eﬀective. The prediction error δ was
represented by
δ ( t) = r ( s, a) + γQ
(
s
′
, a
′
, t
)
− Q ( s, a, t) ,
in which r ( s, a) is the actual reward, s
′
denotes the state at
time t + 1, a
′
denotes the action at time t + 1, and γ is the
discount factor. We used temporal diﬀerence (TD) learning for
the action-value function (i.e., state–action–reward–st ate–action
[SARSA]) (
Rummery and Niranjan, 1994 ) because the agent
needed to remain at the same square after an ineﬀective action
(i.e., hitting a wall). If we used classical TD learning for t he state-
value function, such ineﬀective actions would have disturbe d the
value learning. The connection weight w1,k(t) for k = 1, . . ., 900
was updated only when δ (t) was positive, and w2,k(t) for k =
1, . . ., 900 was updated only when δ (t) was negative. In the actual
implementation, the updating rules were as follows:
w1,k ( t + 1) =
{
w1,k ( t) + α 1δ (t)hk( x′,y′,t) d1( x′,y′,t)
N1( x′,y′,t) , if δ (t) > 0
w1,k ( t) , otherwise,
and
w2,k ( t + 1) =
{
w2,k ( t) + α 2[− δ (t)]hk(x′,y′,t)d2( x′,y′,t)
N2( x′,y′,t) , if δ (t) < 0
w2,k ( t) , otherwise,
in which α 1 and α 2 are the learning rates and N1
(
x, y, t
)
and
N2
(
x, y, t
)
are the normalization terms, which are represented as
Nm
(
x, y, t
)
= dm
(
x, y, t
) ∑
k
h(x, y, t)2
for m = 1, 2. These normalization terms are introduced to make
sure that.
Q ( s, a, t + 1) =
{Q ( s, a, t) + α 1δ (t), if δ ( t) > 0
Q ( s, a, t) + α 2δ ( t) , otherwise.
Algorithms for Comparison
We also implemented two representative algorithms to compare
with the OV aRLAP model. One algorithm was simple TD
learning (
Sutton and Barto, 2018 ) ( Figure 1A, right top);
in our particular case, the algorithm was SARSA. In our
implementation, a value function of states, vs
(
x, y, t
)
, was
represented as a look-up table and updated as
vs
(
x, y, t + 1
)
= vs
(
x, y, t
)
+ α sδ s(t)
in which α s is the learning rate and δ s is the prediction error,
called the “TD error.” This error is given by
δ s ( t) = r ( s, a) + γ sQs
(
s′, a′, t
)
− Qs ( s, a, t)
in which γ s is the discount factor. The action-value function,
Qs ( s, a, t) , is given by
Qs ( s, a, t) = vs
(
x′, y′, t
)
.
The other algorithm is the MaxPain algorithm ( Elfwing and
Seymour, 2017 ) ( Figure 1A, right bottom). This method is
characterized by its distinct systems for the learning valu es for
reward and pain (or punishment). The policy is dependent
on the linear combination of the two value functions. In our
implementation, we slightly modiﬁed the originally proposed
MaxPain algorithm to make it comparable with the other
methods, while maintaining the essential idea of MaxPain.
First, we used state-value functions of states vr
(
x, y, t
)
and
vp
(
x, y, t
)
, and their linear combination vL
(
x, y, t
)
, to deﬁne the
action-value functions Qr
(
s′, a′, t
)
, Qp
(
s′, a′, t
)
, and QL
(
s
′
, a
′
, t
)
,
as follows:
Qr ( s, a, t) = vr
(
x′, y′, t
)
,
Qp ( s, a, t) = vp
(
x′, y′, t
)
,
and
QL ( s, a, t) = vL
(
x′, y′, t
)
.
Second, we set the linear combination vL
(
x, y, t
)
without
normalization, as follows:
vL
(
x, y, t
)
= vr
(
x, y, t
)
− vp
(
x, y, t
)
.
The couple of state-value functions were implemented as look-up
tables and updated as
vr
(
x, y, t + 1
)
= vr
(
x, y, t
)
+ α rδ r ( t)
and
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 6 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
vp
(
x, y, t + 1
)
= vp
(
x, y, t
)
+ α pδ p(t)
in which α r and α p are the learning rates for reward and pain,
respectively, and δ r and δ p are the prediction errors for reward
and pain, respectively. The prediction errors were calculated ,
depending on whether the reward observation was positive or
negative, as follows:
δ r(t) = ϕ ( r ( s, a)) + γ rQr
(
s
′
, a
′
, t
)
− Qr ( s, a, t)
and
δ p(t) = ϕ ( − r ( s, a)) + γ pQp(s
′
, argmin
(
QL
(
s
′
, a
′
, t
))
, t)
− Qp ( s, a, t)
in which ϕ ( z) = max(z, 0) and γ r and γ p are the discount
factors. A variant of oﬀ-policy Q-learning algorithm was used to
calculate the pain prediction error δ p, which enabled Qp to learn
for maximizing future pain (i.e., for predicting the worst cas e).
These update rules were the same as those in the original study .
Action Selection
We used the softmax behavioral policy consistently for the
three methods. It depends on the value function ˜v
(
x, y, t
)
, i.e.,
v
(
x, y, t
)
for OV aRLAP ,vs
(
x, y, t
)
for the simple TD learning, and
vL
(
x, y, t
)
for MaxPain. The probability that the agent selects an
action a at position
(
x, y
)
at time t is given by
π
(
a
⏐
⏐x, y, t
)
= exp(˜v(x
′
, y
′
, t)/τ )
∑
c exp(˜v(xc, yc, t)/τ )
in which x
′
and y
′
denote the new state after selecting action
a, xc, and yc denote the new state after selecting one of the
possible actions, and τ is the temperature that controls the trade-
oﬀ between exploration and exploitation. In our implementation,
we used the common τ = 0.5, for the three learning methods.
Painful Grid-World Navigation T ask
The purpose of this task was to navigate from the starting position
to either of the two goals, while avoiding hitting the wall. Possible
actions at each time step were moving one step north, south,
east, and west. For example, if the agent moved one step north,
()Delta1x, )Delta1y) = (0, 1). Two goals exist with reward of 1 or 2. If
the agent hits a wall, then it received a negative reward of − 1
and remained at the same position. This was an exceptional
case. In other cases, the agent could by necessity move to the
next square. An episode began when the agent started from the
starting position and ended when the agent reached either of t he
goals. The agent repeated such learning episodes.
A single run consisted of 500 learning episodes, after
initializing the value function so that the value for each
state was zero. We ran 50 separate runs each for OV aRLAP ,
simple TD learning, and MaxPain with a single grid-world
conﬁguration. We conducted ﬁve simulation experiments for
each of which we used a grid-world with a consistent character
but diﬀerent conﬁguration. The structure of each grid-world i s
shown in Figure 1B and in Supplementary Figure S1. We tested
OV aRLAP with various amount of generalization by setting θ as
θ ∈ {0.44, 0.66, 1.0, 1.5, 2.2 }. The value of θ was ﬁxed in each
simulation experiment. We set A = ρ = 0, that is, no noise in the
ﬁxed connections in OV aRLAP. We set the other metaparameters
for each algorithm as follows: α 1 = α 2 = 0.1, and γ = 0.95 for
OV aRLAP;α s = 0.1 and γ s = 0.95 for simple TD learning; and
α r = α p = 0.1, γ r = 0.95, and γ p = 0.5 for MaxPain. OV aRLAP
and MaxPain are extended algorithms from simple TD; therefore,
they used common metaparameters with simple TD, when they
could share them.
The ﬁve conﬁgurations in Supplementary Figure S1 were
generated, based on the following rules, while avoiding
symmetric or similar structures. Each conﬁguration had a wi de
passage from which a narrow passage branched oﬀ. These
passages had ﬁxed widths and lengths. The starting position and
the goal with a reward of one were at either end of a wide passage.
A goal with reward of two was at the end of a narrow passage. The
legend for Supplementary Figure S1 provides further details of
the rules.
Grid-World Navigation T ask for Disturbed
OVaRLAP
The purpose of this task was to navigate from the starting position
to either of four goals. The structure of the grid-world is sho wn
in Figure 1D. Possible actions at each time step were moving
one step north, south, east, and west. Multiple goals existed, ea ch
of which gave a reward of one. Our interest in this experiment
was not in pain aversion; therefore, we did not apply a negative
reward to the actions that resulted in hitting a wall (i.e., n o pain).
The agent simply remained at the same position after hitting a
wall. Even in this no pain setting, the agents after reinforcem ent
learning likely avoid wall hits, due to the discount factor in t he
value functions. An episode began when the agent moved from
the starting position and ended when the agent reached one of
the four goals. A single run consisted of 40,000 time steps in
total (i.e., 378.8 learning episodes on average) after the val ue
function initialization at the onset of the ﬁrst learning episo de.
For each metaparameter setting described below, we performed
50 separate runs for OV aRLAP. We considered the following
cases: normal or no update for a negative TD error (i.e., “inta ct”
or “impaired”) and with or without noise in the ﬁxed connections
(i.e., “noised” or “unnoised”). There were 25 diﬀerent setti ngs
for the noised case, consisting of pairs of noise strength A and
noise fraction ρ , taken from A ∈ {0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4 } and ρ ∈
{0.00125, 0.0025, 0.005, 0.01, 0.02 }, respectively. Although the
values of A and ρ were ﬁxed within each simulation setting, the
noise, ε ij,k, was generated independently for each of the 50 runs
and was ﬁxed within each run. We set the other metaparameters,
as follows: θ = 1; A = ρ = 0 for the unnoised case; α 1 = 0.1;
α 2 = 0.1 for the intact setting (which was the same as in the
previous experiment) and α 2 = 0 for the impaired setting; γ =
0.8; and τ = 0.5.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 7 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
RESUL TS
The Behavior of OVaRLAP
We evaluated OV aRLAP in a spatial navigation task in
painful grid-worlds by comparing its performance with those
of simple TD learning and MaxPain (
Elfwing and Seymour,
2017). Figure 1A shows a schematic representation of these
algorithms. OV aRLAP achieves stimulus generalization based
on the similarity of states ( Figure 2A) because it utilizes a
ﬁxed neural network (gray arrows in Figure 1A, left) for the
preprocessing of the value learning network (blue and red
arrows in Figure 1A, left). By contrast, the other two algorithms,
which have look-up tables, show no stimulus generalization
(Figures 2B,C). The task in this study was to seek rewarded
goals while avoiding painful wall hits in which the agent had t o
manage the trade-oﬀ between obtaining rewards and avoiding
pain ( Figure 1B). We used ﬁve diﬀerent grid-worlds, each of
which had a safe but lowly rewarded goal and a risky but highly
rewarded goal (Supplementary Figure S1).
Figures 3A–C show the average learning curves at each
episode over 50 independent runs for the grid-world shown
in Figure 1B. The reward per step of the OV aRLAP agent was
higher than that of the MaxPain agent, but it did not exceed
that of the simple TD learning agent ( Figure 3A). Compared
to the other agents, the OV aRLAP agent reached each of the
goals with a smaller number of steps in the early learning
phase ( Figure 3B). After 100 learning episodes, all three agents
showed a similar number of steps to reach either of the goals.
With regard to pain aversion, the OV aRLAP agent also showed
quick learning. The OV aRLAP agent exhibited fewer wall hits
in the early learning phase than the other agents did. However ,
after 50 learning episodes, the number of wall hits of the
OV aRLAP agent was comparable to that of the simple TD
learning agent ( Figure 3C). By contrast, the MaxPain agent
ﬁrst hit the walls as many times as the simple TD learning
agent, but the number of wall hits then quickly decreased. Th e
OV aRLAP agent showed its characteristic performance in all of
the ﬁve simulation experiments, each of which had a diﬀerent
grid-world with a similar spatial structure ( Figures 3D–F). The
relative performance of the three agents was consistent when the
starting position was randomized ( Supplementary Figure S2).
We also tested the OV aRLAP agents with various levels
of generalization ( Figure 4A). The results showed that an
increase in generalization led to better performance unless the
generalization became too large, whereas too large generalization
deteriorated the performance ( Figure 4B). These results suggest
that the OV aRLAP agent could learn a reward approach
and pain aversion in a very eﬃcient manner owing to its
proper generalization, whereas it was inferior to the simple TD
in long-term reward learning and to MaxPain in long-term
pain aversion.
Figure 5 shows how the value function developed using the
three methods, in which OV aRLAP exhibited unique proﬁles
(Figure 5, top). First, the values of positions close to the walls
decreased, as did the values of the positions of the walls.
After only ﬁve learning episodes, this generalization constr ucted
a safe passage to the low-reward goal while simultaneously
causing a dip in the value function as a hazard to approach
the risky but high-reward goal. This value hazard completely
disappeared after 500 episodes because the reward learning had
propagated to the squares along the passage to the high-reward
goal. Thus, quick pain learning was essential for aggressive
pain aversion and conservative reward-seeking in the early
learning stage.
The simple TD learning algorithm did not construct any
value hazard to the high-reward goal during its learning
process because no special system existed for pain learning
(Figure 5, middle). The MaxPain algorithm also produced
hazards on the passage to the high-reward goal ( Figure 5,
bottom). In contrast to OV aRLAP , the hazard progressively
increased as the learning proceeded and never ﬂattened owing
to its strong pain learning ability. For this reason, the MaxP ain
algorithm persistently maintained low values on the way to the
high-reward goal.
We further evaluated how the model agent navigates if
the environment is changed to have pain-free walls after the
agent has been trained with painful walls (other than walls,
everything is the same before and after the change). Interestingly,
the OV aRLAP agent quickly unlearnt the past painful stimuli,
compared to the other two models ( Figure 6). This result
indicates that generalization worked not only in the early pha se
of learning but also contributed to relearning timings indu ced by
environmental changes.
The Effect of a Disturbed OVaRLAP
We next examined how the learning behaviors of OV aRLAP
were disturbed by disabling weight updating by negative
TD errors and introducing noise to the ﬁxed network
(Figure 1C). The generalization after obtaining a reward
became a little noisy because of the noise introduction
(Figure 7A). We applied this disturbed OV aRLAP to a grid-
world navigation task without pain ( Figure 1D). We tested each
of the following two-by-two settings: normal or no update
for the negative TD error (i.e., “intact” or “impaired”), and
with or without noise in the ﬁxed network (i.e., “noised”
or “unnoised”).
The impaired noised agent acquired an aberrant value
function: it increased the value for a speciﬁc position distant
from the goals, as if the position would give a positive reward
(Figure 7B, bottom right). The value function of the intact
noised agent was slightly noisy ( Figure 7B, top right), but nearly
the same as that of the intact unnoised agent ( Figure 7B, top
left). The impaired unnoised agent made the values around the
goals higher than those of the intact agents, but the values
for positions distant from the goals remained low ( Figure 7B,
bottom left).
We ran 50 runs for each setting to conﬁrm reproducibility.
For the noised agent, we applied a diﬀerent pattern of noise
in each run. Figure 7C presents the maximum value and
its position in the value function after 40,000 steps in each
run. The intact agents always established the maximum
values at the positions of goals and maintained them
consistent to the actual amount of the rewards the agent
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 8 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 2 | State values after a single update. The value function is upd ated after receiving a positive reward of one once with OVaRL AP (A), simple TD learning (B),
and MaxPain (C) at the center of a two-dimensional grid-world in Figure 1B. For OVaRLAP , the metaparameter θ is set as θ = 1 to introduce a moderate amount of
generalization.
obtained ( Figure 7C, top row). The maximum values of
the impaired unnoised agent were higher than the actual
amount of the rewards ( Figure 7C, bottom left). Their
positions were not necessarily the same as the actual goals,
but they were, at most, two steps away from the goals. In
contrast to these agents, the impaired noised agent produced
maximum values that were quite apart from the actual
goals ( Figure 7C, bottom right). These values were higher
than the actual amount of rewards and were sometimes
exceedingly high.
For the noised case, we tested diﬀerent noise settings
by varying the noise strength and the noise fraction
(Supplementary Figure S3), and for each we performed
50 runs. Supplementary Table S1 provides a summary
of the results and shows that the various levels of noise
induced aberrant valuation if the negative value neuron was
impaired. It also shows that sole large noise did not lead
to aberrant valuation as long as the negative value learning
was intact.
DISCUSSION
The Effect of Generalization and
Discrimination on Behaviors
In this study, we proposed a novel reinforcement learning
model named OV aRLAP to analyze how the computational
characteristics in the striatal dopamine system aﬀect behavi ors.
The OV aRLAP model reproduced stimulus generalization for
both reward learning and punishment learning. Discriminati on
followed generalization to shape the value function, that is ,
inhibiting excessive expectation of reward or punishment
caused by generalization. It was realized by the activity of
one pre-output neuron that oﬀset the activity of the other
pre-output neuron. In the navigation task in painful grid-
worlds ( Figures 3–5), punishment learning due to painful
wall hits was ﬁrst generalized and subsequent unexpected
safeness caused discrimination. By contrast, in the case
of painless grid-world ( Figure 7), generalization for reward
learning was followed by discrimination due to the unexpected
unrewarded outcome.
The OV aRLAP model enabled safe and eﬃcient
exploration in the painful grid-world navigation
task. The transition of the value function for the
OV aRLAP agent shows how stimulus generalization
and discrimination contribute to managing the
trade-oﬀ between reward-seeking and pain aversion
(Figure 5, top).
First, punishment learning due to hitting walls generalized
quickly, as shown in the value function after ﬁve episodes.
It led to a preference for the center of the passage (i.e.,
pain aversion). Indeed, the OV aRLAP agent ﬁrst showed fewer
wall hits than the simple TD learning and MaxPain agents
did ( Figures 3C,F). This contributed to reducing the number
of steps to reach either of the goals in the early learning
phase (Figures 3B,E). Thereafter, The OV aRLAP agent increased
the values of positions close to the walls. This transition
indicated that the agent discriminated between the safe and
painful positions. This discrimination increased the tenden cy
to reach the high-reward goal. In short, stimulus generaliz ation
of punishment learning induced pain aversion, followed by
discrimination for switching to reward-seeking. The simple
TD learning agent did not show pain aversion ( Figure 5,
middle). Its value function was optimized to maximize future
reward, which is consistent with its high reward per step
(Figures 3A,D). The MaxPain agent showed strong pain aversion
based on its separate value learning system to expect future
pain ( Figure 5, bottom row). It achieved very few wall hits
(Figures 3B,E) while maintaining pain aversion and low values
on the way to the high-reward goal, and this corresponded
to a lower reward per step compared to the other agents
(Figures 3A,D).
Stimulus generalization and discrimination were eﬀective
in safe and eﬃcient exploration; however, dysfunction in
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 9 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 3 | Average performance of OVaRLAP , the simple TD learning, and MaxPain in the painful grid-world navigation task. (A) The average reward per step, (B)
the average number of steps to either of the two goals, and (C) the average number of wall hits, based on the three types of ag ents after each number of learning
episodes on the horizontal axis. The grid world shown in Figure 1B was used. The number of steps to either of the two goals and the number of wall hits for the ﬁrst
50 learning episodes are magniﬁed in the top right insets of (B,C), respectively. Each average (on the vertical axis) was obta ined over 50 separate runs and then
smoothed using a moving average over the preceding 11 episod es (on the horizontal axis). The thick lines represent the mo ving averages and the shadow areas
indicate the moving standard deviations. (D–F) The average performance over ﬁve simulation experiments, ea ch of which used a grid-world with different
conﬁgurations. The grid world shown in Figure 1B and its variants were used ( Supplementary Figure S1 presents the details of the variants). (D) The average
reward per step, (E) the average number of steps to either of the two goals, and (F) the average number of wall hits, based on the three types of ag ents after ﬁve
learning episodes and 500 learning episodes, are shown. Eac h bar indicates the average over ﬁve grid-world conﬁgurations , after taking the average over 50 separate
runs with each grid-world conﬁguration. Each error bar repre sents the standard deviation over the ﬁve conﬁgurations. For O VaRLAP , the metaparameterθ was set as
θ = 1 to induce a moderate amount of generalization.
the system may induce aberrant learning behaviors. First,
too large of a generalization deteriorated the performance o f
the OV aRLAP agent ( Figure 4), which is consistent with the
previous reports that generalization to an abnormal extent
is associated with psychiatric disorders (
Dunsmoor and Paz,
2015; Asok et al., 2018 ). Second, the impaired update for
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 10 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 4 | The painful grid-world navigation task for OVaRLAP with var ious amount of generalization. (A) State values after a single update for OVaRLAP with a
variety of metaparameter settings, θ ∈ {0.44, 0.66, 1.0, 1.5, 2.2 }, which control the level of generalization. The value funct ion is updated after receiving a positive
reward of one once at the center of a two-dimensional grid-wo rld in Figure 1B. (B) The average performance over ﬁve simulation experiments, ea ch of which used a
grid-world with a different conﬁguration than the others. Th e grid-world shown in Figure 1B and its variants were used ( Supplementary Figure S1 presents the
details of the variants). The average reward per step (left) , the average number of steps to either of the two goals (middl e), and the average number of wall hits (right),
over ﬁve OVaRLAP agents with different metaparameter settin gs, θ ∈ {0.44, 0.66, 1.0, 1.5, 2.2 }, after ﬁve learning episodes and 500 learning episodes, are s hown.
Each bar indicates the average over ﬁve grid-world conﬁgurati ons, after taking the average over 50 separate runs with each grid-world conﬁguration. Each error bar
represents the standard deviation over the ﬁve conﬁgurations .
the negative TD error combined with the noise in the ﬁxed
connections induced aberrant valuation in OV aRLAP ( Figure 7,
Supplementary Table S1). The value increased by noisy stimulus
generalization was not reshaped by discrimination because
of the impairment of the punishment learning. A single
update of the value was only slightly aﬀected by the noisy
stimulus generalization ( Figure 7A); however, as the number
of arrivals to the actual goals increased, such aberrant upda tes
of the value function would have allotted abnormally high
values to some positions that were actually of no reward
(Figures 7B–C).
Computation Underlying Generalization
The structure of OV aRLAP provides insight into the
neurobiological basis of stimulus generalization and
discrimination. The two pre-output neurons separately
responded to positive and negative prediction errors to
update the connections between the hidden-layer neurons and
the corresponding pre-output neuron. This hybrid learning
system exhibits good correspondence to the striatal dopamine
system in which D1- and D2-SPNs diﬀerentially respond to
dopamine so that the connections between the cortex and the
striatal SPNs are diﬀerently modulated (
Reynolds et al., 2001;
Hikida et al., 2013; Y agishita et al., 2014 ). Transforming the
input into the hidden-layer activity approximates the process b y
which an external stimulus and the internal state are encode d
into neural activity patterns of the cortex. This process is
assumed to be rather independent from dopamine-dependent
plasticity. However, this process should not be based simply
on random connections because the similarity of the inputs
has to be maintained in the encoding process to achieve
stimulus generalization. Instead, encoding could be learned i n a
diﬀerent manner from the reward-related learning. Therefor e,
the ﬁxed connections between the input and hidden layers
in OV aRLAP can be the result of learning for such encoding
process. How the brain learns the encoding process is a topic
for future research, but some implications are derived from
computational models of the primary visual cortex and the
primary auditory cortex that adopted unsupervised learning
(
Hyvärinen and Hoyer, 2001; Terashima and Okada, 2012 ).
The encoding process may also depend on additional
functions other than learning. It has been reported that the
prefrontal dopamine system could be involved in processing
incoming sensory signals such as working memory and
attention (
Ott and Nieder, 2019 ). Although we have not
modeled the prefrontal dopamine system in the current
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 11 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 5 | Transition of the value function for each model in the grid-w orld navigation task. The average state values over 50 separ ate runs after 5, 30, 150, and 500
learning episodes for OVaRLAP (top row), simple TD learning (middle row), and MaxPain (bottom row), when applied to the p ainful grid-world navigation task shown in
Figure 1B. An outline of the grid-world is shown on the ﬂoor of each plot. The black lines indicate walls. The black, green, and yellow circles are the starting position,
the low-reward goal, and the high-reward goal, respectivel y. For OVaRLAP , the metaparameterθ is set as θ = 1 to introduce a moderate level of generalization. For
MaxPain, the result of the subtraction of the value function for the pain from the value function for the positive reward ( i.e., the main factor for decision-making) is
displayed.
OV aRLAP model, one possible implementation would allow
prefrontal dopamine to modify the information transmission
from the input layer to the hidden layer and thereby
alter generalization.
Compared to ordinary reinforcement learning algorithms,
the uniqueness of the OV aRLAP model is that it is characterize d
by fast generalization and separation of positive and negativ e
value learning. Its advantages in safe and eﬃcient explorati on
primarily appeared due to fast generalization, whereas its
potential defect in causing maladaptive behaviors was attrib uted
to fast generalization and also separation of positive and
negative value learning. Mikhael and Bogacz previously
demonstrated the advantage of separation of positive and
negative values (
Mikhael and Bogacz, 2016 ). Their model
coded reward uncertainty into the sum of synaptic weights
of D1- and D2-SPNs. In addition, their model could adjust
for the tendency to choose or avoid risky options by
changing the weight of the positive and negative values,
which is assumed to reﬂect tonic dopamine levels. This
model is consistent with risk-taking behaviors observed in
patients of Huntington’s disease, in which striatal neurons
are closely involved (
Kalkhoven et al., 2014 ). To further
discuss advantages of separation of positive and negative
values is beyond the scope of our current study, although
the OV aRLAP model may also exhibit such advantages. The
OV aRLAP model can encode reward uncertainty in distinct
connections updated by positive and negative TD errors (red
and blue arrows, respectively, in Figure 1A, left), and can
adjust a risk-taking tendency by changing the connection
weights between the pre-output neurons to the output
neuron, which were set as constants for simplicity in the
current study.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 12 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 6 | Relearning values of walls after environmental changes. OV aRLAP , the simple TD learning, and MaxPain were applied to a g rid-world navigation task in
which the agent was trained with painful walls until the 500t h episode and the environment was changed at the 500th episod e to have pain-free walls (other than
walls, everything was the same before and after the change). The grid-world shown in Figure 1B was used. The state-value averaged over all wall positions i s plotted
for each of the three agents, on the horizontal axis indicati ng the number of learning episodes. Each average (on the vert ical axis) is obtained over 50 separate runs
and the shadow areas indicate the standard deviation. For OV aRLAP , the metaparameterθ is set as θ = 1 to introduce a moderate level of generalization.
Hypotheses on Psychiatric Disorders
The potential defect of OV aRLAP that causes maladaptive
behaviors could provide a hypothesis on psychiatric disorders .
Based on the correspondence between OV aRLAP and the
brain, our results with the disturbed OV aRLAP showed the
possibility that the noisy encoding process in the cortex and
the impairment of dopamine-dependent plasticity induce
abnormal stimulus generalization and discrimination, whi ch
may underlie delusional symptoms. The relationship between
cortical disconnectivity and disrupted learning in schizoph renia
has been implied in computational studies (
Hoﬀman and
Dobscha, 1989; Hoﬀman and McGlashan, 1997 ); therefore,
alterations in cortical connectivity could be a cause of a no isy
encoding process. Histological examinations and diﬀusion
tensor imaging studies of patients with schizophrenia reveal ed
reduced dendritic spine density and disrupted white matter
connectivity, respectively (
Garey et al., 1998; Ellison-Wright and
Bullmore, 2009; van den Heuvel et al., 2016 ). Reinforcement
learning models have been used for attempts to explain
positive symptoms, including delusions, in schizophrenia
(
Deserno et al., 2013; Katahira and Y amashita, 2017; Maia and
Frank, 2017 ). However, these studies do not link abnormal
cortical connectivity to positive symptoms. Rather, they
attribute positive symptoms to aberrant salience (i.e., a sur prise
response to non-salient events) (
Kapur, 2003 ). Thus, they
focused on abnormalities in the dopamine system, which
was also supported by neurobiological evidence (
Howes
et al., 2012; Daberkow et al., 2013 ). The OV aRLAP model is
a new corticostriatal learning model that relates delusiona l
symptoms to abnormalities in cortical connectivity and the
dopamine system.
The relationship between abnormal stimulus generalization
and schizophrenia has been investigated in psychological
research (
Buss and Daniell, 1967; Ralph, 1968; Kahnt
and Tobler, 2016 ) based on the hypothesis that abnormal
generalization underlies delusional symptoms in schizophreni a.
Some studies imply heightened stimulus generalization in
schizophrenia (
Ralph, 1968; Kahnt and Tobler, 2016 ). However,
the reported abnormality was not suﬃciently remarkable
for explaining delusion in a straightforward manner. This
could be attributed to the conditioning paradigm used for
their behavioral experiments. Patients with schizophrenia
have various deﬁcits in cognitive function; therefore,
the experimental design needs to be simple to attribute
the result to stimulus generalization rather than other
factors. Computational models may potentially be used to
investigate how a speciﬁc deﬁcit in cognitive function leads
to psychotic symptoms through complex learning processes.
The OV aRLAP model showed that a small abnormality in
stimulus generalization in combination with an unbalanced
response to positive and negative prediction error may induce
aberrant valuation after reward-related learning, includ ing
action selection, state transition, and obtaining rewards from
multiple sources.
Conclusions
The OV aRLAP model updates synaptic weights of the
last layer in a multilayer neural network, which reﬂects
dopamine-dependent plasticity of corticostriatal synapses
(
Reynolds et al., 2001 ). In contrast to ELM ( Huang
et al., 2006 ), where ﬁxed connections between the input
and hidden layers are set randomly, we set the ﬁxed
connections of the OV aRLAP model to maintain the
similarity of inputs in the hidden-layer representation.
The OV aRLAP model enabled fast generalization of
reward and punishment learning. In the painful grid-
world navigation tasks, it demonstrated a quick reward
approach and eﬃcient pain aversion in the early learning
phase and achieved safe and eﬃcient exploration. However,
disturbances of the OV aRLAP network that caused
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 13 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
FIGURE 7 | The TD learning task for disturbed OVaRLAP . (A) The value function is updated after reaching the left-botto m goal of the grid-world shown in Figure 1D
once with OVaRLAP without noise (left) and with noise (right ). (B) The value function after 120 learning episodes in a single ru n for OVaRLAP with intact and impaired
updates (top and bottom rows, respectively) for the negativ e TD error with and without noise (right and left columns, res pectively) in the ﬁxed connections. (C) The
maximum value and its position in the value function after 40 ,000 time steps in total (378.8 learning episodes on average ) in each run. Each panel shows the
maximum values in 50 separate runs for OVaRLAP under the foll owing settings: intact or impaired updates (top or bottom ro w, respectively) for the negative TD error,
and without noise or with noise (left or right column, respec tively) in the ﬁxed connections. In the noisy case, the noise wa s independently introduced to the
initialization of the ﬁxed connections for each run.
noisy generalization and impaired discrimination led to
aberrant valuation.
These results suggested the advantage and potential drawbac k
of generalization by the striatal dopamine system with regar d
to adaptive behaviors. These results are consistent with prev ious
theories in behavioral science (
Dunsmoor and Paz, 2015; Kahnt
and Tobler, 2016; Asok et al., 2018 ), in which generalization is
considered to be adaptive, whereas abnormal generalization i s
implicated in maladaptive behaviors. The OV aRLAP model also
gives insight into the neurobiological basis of generaliza tion and
its dysfunction. The process for encoding external stimuli a nd
internal states into neural activity patterns of the cortex m ay be
learned independently from reward-related learning. Disrupt ion
of this encoding process induced by altered cortical connect ivity
may disturb reward- and punishment-related learning, possib ly
underlying delusional symptoms of psychiatric disorders.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 14 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated for this study are available on reque st to
the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
YF , SY , HK, and SI conceived the study. YF developed, analyzed,
and simulated the models. YF and SI wrote the paper. SY and HK
reviewed drafts of the paper. All authors contributed to the article
and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This research was supported by Grants-in-Aids for Scientiﬁc
Research on Innovative Areas (17H06310 to YF and SI), Science
Research (B) (19H04180 to SI), the Program for Brain/MINDS
(to SI) from AMED, CREST (JPMJCR1652 to HK and SI) from
JST , and World Premier International Research Center Initiative
support (to SY , HK, and SI) from JSPS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Hidetoshi Urakubo for his helpful
comments. This manuscript has been released as a pre-print at
https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.12.873950 (
Fujita et al., 2019).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fncom.
2020.00066/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Amemori, K., Gibb, L. G., and Graybiel, A. M. (2011). Shifting respon sibly:
the importance of striatal modularity to reinforcement learning in unce rtain
environments. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 5:47. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00047
Asok, A., Kandel, E. R., and Rayman, J. B. (2018). the neurobiolog y of fear
generalization. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12:329. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00329
Bordi, F., and LeDoux, J. (1992). Sensory tuning beyond the sen sory system:
an initial analysis of auditory response properties of neurons in the la teral
amygdaloid nucleus and overlying areas of the striatum. J. Neurosci. 12,
2493–2503. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.12-07-02493.1992
Buss, A. H., and Daniell, E. F. (1967). Stimulus generalization and s chizophrenia.
J. Abnorm. Psychol. 72, 50–53. doi: 10.1037/h0020082
Collins, A. G., and Frank, M. J. (2014). Opponent actor learning (OpAL): modeling
interactive eﬀects of striatal dopamine on reinforcement learning a nd choice
incentive. Psychol. Rev. 121, 337–366. doi: 10.1037/a0037015
Cox, J., and Witten, I. B. (2019). Striatal circuits for reward le arning and
decision-making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 482–494. doi: 10.1038/s41583-019-
0189-2
Daberkow, D. P., Brown, H. D., Bunner, K. D., Kraniotis, S. A., Doe llman, M.
A., Ragozzino, M. E., et al. (2013). Amphetamine paradoxically augmen ts
exocytotic dopamine release and phasic dopamine signals. J. Neurosci. 33,
452–463. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2136-12.2013
DeLong, M. R. (1990). Primate models of movement disorders of basal g anglia
origin. Trends Neurosci. 13, 281–285. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(90)90110-V
Deserno, L., Boehme, R., Heinz, A., and Schlagenhauf, F. (2013). Reinforcement
learning and dopamine in schizophrenia: dimensions of symptoms
or speciﬁc features of a disease group? Front. Psychiatry 4:172.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00172
Doya, K. (2007). Reinforcement learning: computational theory an d biological
mechanisms. HFSP J. 1, 30–40. doi: 10.2976/1.2732246/10.2976/1
Dunsmoor, J. E., and Paz, R. (2015). Fear generalization and anx iety:
behavioral and neural mechanisms. Biol. Psychiatry 78, 336–343.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.04.010
Elfwing, S., and Seymour, B. (2017). “Parallel reward and punishment c ontrol in
humans and robots: safe reinforcement learning using the MaxPain algorithm, ”
in Paper Presented at the 2017 Joint IEEE International Conference on
Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-Ep iRob) (Lisbon).
Ellison-Wright, I., and Bullmore, E. (2009). Meta-analysis of diﬀus ion
tensor imaging studies in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res . 108, 3–10.
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.11.021
Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C., and O’reilly, R. C. (2004). By carrot or by stick:
cognitive reinforcement learning in parkinsonism. Science 306, 1940–1943.
doi: 10.1126/science.1102941
Franks, D. W., and Ruxton, G. D. (2008). How robust are neural
network models of stimulus generalization? BioSystems 92, 175–181.
doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2008.02.003
Fujita, Y., Y agishita, S., Kasai, H., and Ishii, S. (2019). Co mputational
characteristics of the striatal dopamine system described by
reinforcement learning with fast generalization. bioRxiv [Preprint] .
doi: 10.1101/2019.12.12.873950
Garey, L. J., Ong, W. Y., Patel, T. S., Kanani, M., Davis, A., Mort imer, A. M.,
et al. (1998). Reduced dendritic spine density on cerebral cortica l pyramidal
neurons in schizophrenia. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 65, 446–453.
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.65.4.446
Ghirlanda, S., and Enquist, M. (1998). Artiﬁcial neural networks as models of
stimulus control. Anim. Behav. 56, 1383–1389. doi: 10.1006/anbe.1998.0903
Ghirlanda, S., and Enquist, M. (2003). A century of generalizatio n. Anim. Behav.
66, 15–36. doi: 10.1006/anbe.2003.2174
Glimcher, P. W. (2011). Understanding dopamine and reinforcement le arning:
the dopamine reward prediction error hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108(Suppl. 3), 15647–15654. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1014269108
Hikida, T., Y awata, S., Y amaguchi, T., Danjo, T., Sasaoka, T.,Wang, Y., et al. (2013).
Pathway-speciﬁc modulation of nucleus accumbens in reward and aver sive
behavior via selective transmitter receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A . 110,
342–347. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1220358110
Hoﬀman, R. E., and Dobscha, S. K. (1989). Cortical pruning and the
development of schizophrenia: a computer model. Schizophr. Bull. 15, 477–490.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/15.3.477
Hoﬀman, R. E., and McGlashan, T. H. (1997). Synaptic elimination,
neurodevelopment, and the mechanism of hallucinated “voices” in
schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 154, 1683–1689. doi: 10.1176/ajp.154.12.1683
Howes, O. D., Kambeitz, J., Kim, E., Stahl, D., Slifstein, M., Abi- Dargham,
A., et al. (2012). The nature of dopamine dysfunction in schizophre nia
and what this means for treatment. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69, 776–786.
doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2012.169
Huang, G.-B., Zhu, Q.-Y., and Siew, C.-K. (2006). Extreme learnin g
machine: theory and applications. Neurocomputing 70, 489–501.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2005.12.126
Hyvärinen, A., and Hoyer, P. O. (2001). A two-layer sparse coding mo del
learns simple and complex cell receptive ﬁelds and topography from
natural images. Vision Res . 41, 2413–2423. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(01)
00114-6
Iino, Y., Sawada, T., Y amaguchi, K., Tajiri, M., Ishii, S., Kas ai, H., et al. (2020).
Dopamine D2 receptors in discrimination learning and spine enlargement .
Nature 579, 555–560. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2115-1
Kahnt, T., and Tobler, P. N. (2016). Dopamine regulates stimulus generalization in
the human hippocampus. Elife 5:e12678. doi: 10.7554/eLife.12678
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66


--- Page 15 ---
Fujita et al. Reinforcement Learning With Fast Generalization
Kalkhoven, C., Sennef, C., Peeters, A., and van den Bos, R. (20 14). Risk-taking and
pathological gambling behavior in Huntington’s disease. Front. Behav. Neurosci.
8:103. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00103
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a frame work
linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. Am. J.
Psychiatry 160, 13–23. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.1.13
Katahira, K., and Y amashita, Y. (2017). A theoretical framework fo r
evaluating psychiatric research strategies. Comput. Psychiatry 1, 184–207.
doi: 10.1162/CPSY_a_00008
Lukoševiˇcius, M., and Jaeger, H. (2009). Reservoir computing approaches
to recurrent neural network training. Comput. Sci. Rev. 3, 127–149.
doi: 10.1016/j.cosrev.2009.03.005
Maass, W., Natschläger, T., and Markram, H. (2002). Real-time computing without
stable states: a new framework for neural computation based on perturb ations.
Neural Comput. 14, 2531–2560. doi: 10.1162/089976602760407955
Maia, T. V., and Frank, M. J. (2017). An integrative perspective o n
the role of dopamine in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 81, 52–66.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.05.021
Meredith, G. E., Baldo, B. A., Andrezjewski, M. E., and Kelley, A. E . (2008).
The structural basis for mapping behavior onto the ventral striatum and
its subdivisions. Brain Struct. Funct. 213, 17–27. doi: 10.1007/s00429-008-
0175-3
Mikhael, J. G., and Bogacz, R. (2016). Learning reward uncertaint y in the
basal ganglia. PLoS Comput. Biol . 12:e1005062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.10
05062
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J.,Bellemare, M. G., et al.
(2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518,
529–533. doi: 10.1038/nature14236
Nambu, A. (2007). Globus pallidus internal segment.Prog. Brain Res. 160, 135–150.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)60008-3
Ott, T., and Nieder, A. (2019). Dopamine and cognitive control i n prefrontal
cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 232, 13–234. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.006
Ralph, D. E. (1968). Stimulus generalization among schizophrenics an d normal
subjects. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 73, 605–609. doi: 10.1037/h0026608
Reynolds, J. N., Hyland, B. I., and Wickens, J. R. (2001). A cellular mechanism of
reward-related learning. Nature 413, 67–70. doi: 10.1038/35092560
Rummery, G., and Niranjan, M. (1994). On-Line Q-Learning Using Connectionist
Systems. Technical Report CUED/F-INFENG/TR 166 . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Engineering Department
Schultz, W. (2015). Neuronal reward and decision signals: from the ories to data.
Physiol. Rev. 95, 853–951. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00023.2014
Shepard, R. N., and Kannappan, S. (1991). “Connectionist implementa tion of
a theory of generalization, ” in Paper Presented at the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 3. Available Online at: http://papers.nips.
cc/paper/351-connectionist-implementation-of-a-theory-of-ge neralization.
pdf
Surmeier, D. J., Shen, W., Day, M., Gertler, T., Chan, S., Tian, X., et al. (2010). The
role of dopamine in modulating the structure and function of striatal c ircuits.
Prog. Brain Res. 183, 149–167. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(10)83008-0
Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
2nd Edn. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Tepper, J. M., Abercrombie, E. D., and Bolam, J. P. (2007). Basal gan glia
macrocircuits. Prog. Brain Res. 160, 3–7. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)60001-0
Terashima, H., and Okada, M. (2012). “The topographic unsupervised learning
of natural sounds in the auditory cortex, ” in Paper Presented at the
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 25 . Available Online
at: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4703-the-topographic-unsupervis ed-learning-
of-natural-sounds-in-the-auditory-cortex.pdf
Thorndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: an experimental stud y of the
associative processes in animals. Psychol. Rev. Monogr. Suppl. 2, 1–8.
doi: 10.1037/h0092987
van den Heuvel, M. P., Scholtens, L. H., de Reus, M. A., and Kahn,
R. S. (2016). Associated microscale spine density and macroscale
connectivity disruptions in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 80, 293–301.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.10.005
Whittington, J. C. R., and Bogacz, R. (2019). Theories of error back-propagation in
the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 235–250. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.005
Wisniewski, M. G., Radell, M. L., Guillette, L. M., Sturdy, C. B., a nd Mercado, E.
(2012). Predicting shifts in generalization gradients with perc eptrons. Learn.
Behav. 40, 128–144. doi: 10.3758/s13420-011-0050-6
Y agishita, S., Hayashi-Takagi, A., Ellis-Davies, G. C., Urakub o, H., Ishii,
S., and Kasai, H. (2014). A critical time window for dopamine actio ns
on the structural plasticity of dendritic spines. Science 345, 1616–1620.
doi: 10.1126/science.1255514
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Fujita, Y agishita, Kasai and Ishii. This is an op en-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited a nd that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 15 July 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 66
