Neurobiology of Disease
Spatiotemporal Patterns of Cortical Activity with Bilateral
Cochlear Implants in Congenital Deafness
Andrej Kral,1,4 Jochen Tillein,1,2 Peter Hubka,1 Dorrit Schiemann,1 Silvia Heid,3 Rainer Hartmann,3 and
Andreas Karl Engel1
1Department of Neurophysiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany,2MedEl Company,
AT-6020 Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Physiology II, J. W. Goethe University, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, and4School of Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas 75083-0688
Congenital deafness affects developmental processes in the auditory cortex. In this study, local field potentials (LFPs) were mapped at the
cortical surface with microelectrodes in response to cochlear implant stimulation. LFPs were compared between hearing controls and
congenitally deaf cats (CDCs). Pulsatile electrical stimulation initially evoked cortical activity in the rostral parts of the primary auditory
field (A1). This progressed both in the approximate dorsoventral direction (along the isofrequency stripe) and in the rostrocaudal
direction. The dorsal branch of the wavefront split into a caudal branch (propagating in A1) and another smaller one propagating
rostrally into the AAF (anterior auditory field). After the front reached the caudal border of A1, a “reflection wave” appeared, propagating
back rostrally. In total, the waves took /H1101113–15 ms to propagate along A1 and return back. In CDCs, the propagation pattern was
significantly disturbed, with a more synchronous activation of distant cortical regions. The maps obtained from contralateral and
ipsilateral stimulation overlapped in both groups of animals. Although controls showed differences in the latency–amplitude patterns,
cortical waves evoked by contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation were more similar in CDCs. Additionally, in controls, LFPs with
contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation were more similar in caudal A1 than in rostral A1. This dichotomy was lost in deaf animals. In
conclusion, propagating cortical waves are specific for the contralateral ear, they are affected by auditory deprivation, and the specificity
of the cortex for stimulation of the contralateral ear is reduced by deprivation.
Key words: deprivation; maturation; development; propagating waves; contralaterality; deafness
Introduction
The sensory cortex represents features of physical stimuli topo-
logically as well as temporally (in temporal firing patterns). Most
investigations of cortical feature sensitivity so far have focused on
only one type of representation. However, because of the parallel
existence of both representations, coordinated spatiotemporal
patterns of cortical activation are likely to occur. In spontaneous
activity, spatiotemporal patterns of cortical activity have been
described both under anesthesia and during sleep (Arieli et al.,
1996; Destexhe et al., 1999). Because of technical reasons, only
few studies concentrated on the spatiotemporal patterns of
evoked activity. These studies described cortical waves evoked by
visual stimuli using optical imaging (Arieli et al., 1996; Sharon
and Grinvald, 2002; Benucci et al., 2007). Propagating waves
emerge when neighboring groups of neurons depolarize and hy-
perpolarize with small delays; in this case, the activity “travels”
through the cortex.
Propagating waves have also been demonstrated in the audi-
tory cortex (Harrison et al., 1998; Nelken et al., 2004; Song et al.,
2006). They are of cortical (or thalamocortical) origin, because
they can be evoked also by intracortical microstimulation (Song
et al., 2006). However, intrinsic optical imaging registers spatially
smeared activity with low temporal resolution (Hess and Scheich,
1996; Spitzer et al., 2001; Nelken et al., 2004), catching only very
slow propagating waves. Neurons, however, process signals
within milliseconds. Only voltage-sensitive dyes could reveal
waves within 100 ms poststimulus (Song et al., 2006). Activity has
been restricted to isofrequency stripes in these studies, because
sinusoidal acoustic stimulation has been used to demonstrate
tonotopic organization with optical means (Harel et al., 2000;
Versnel et al., 2002; Ojima et al., 2005; Song et al., 2006). Both
thalamocortical and corticocortical interactions spread preferen-
tially within isofrequency stripes (McMullen and de Venecia,
1993), but also over a significant distance orthogonal to them
(McMullen and de Venecia, 1993; Velenovsky et al., 2003; Lee
and Winer, 2008a). Thus, both the demonstrated slow velocity of
auditory cortical waves and the observed limitation to the isofre-
quency stripe could result from methodological factors.
Most importantly, the functional significance of cortical
propagating waves remains unclear. Demonstrating an effect of
Received May 25, 2008; revised Nov. 17, 2008; accepted Nov. 25, 2008.
This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grant KR 3370/1-1 and MedEl Company (Inns-
bruck, Austria). We thank Dr. C. Garnham and the anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on a previous version
of this manuscript. Antonia Reimer initiated the work on propagating waves in acoustically stimulated rats in the
laboratory of A.K. We thank Drs. A. Haemisch and B. Tiemann for the breeding of congenitally deaf cats.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Andrej Kral, Laboratory of Auditory Neuroscience, Department of
Neurophysiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246
Hamburg, Germany. E-mail: a.kral@uke.de.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2424-08.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/09/290811-17$15.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 811
auditory experience on propagating waves would support their
role in neuronal processing. This has not yet been attempted. The
specificity of cortical waves with respect to the stimulated ear
(contralaterality) would additionally emphasize their functional
specificity and significance.
The present study investigates the effect of the complete ab-
sence of auditory experience on cortical propagating waves using
electrophysiological methods. As a model of total auditory depri-
vation, congenitally deaf cats (CDCs) were used. These animals
have no hearing experience at all (Heid et al., 1998). In this study,
we demonstrate that a fast cortical wave evoked by cochlear im-
plant stimulation propagates both within the isofrequency stripe
and orthogonally to it, and that the wave is modified by the ab-
sence of hearing experience. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
the wave characteristics also depend on the stimulated ear and
that the contralaterality present in normal controls is reduced in
the absence of hearing experience.
Materials and Methods
The present study was performed using eight animals: four CDCs and
four hearing controls (HCs), all of adult age ( /H1102212 months). All the
experiments were approved by the local state authority and were per-
formed in compliance with the guidelines of the European Community
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (EU VD 86/609/EEC). The
CDCs were selected from a colony of deaf white cats through early hear-
ing screening using brainstem evoked responses with stimulation /H11022120
dB sound pressure level (SPL) (Heid et al. 1998). The CDC has the unique
advantage of an excellent preservation of spiral ganglion cells (Heid et al.
1998), so that the response to electrical stimulation is not affected by the
extensive reductions of spiral ganglion cells described in deafened ani-
mals (Leake et al., 1999; Dodson and Mohuiddin, 2000). To prevent
electrophonic hearing (electrical stimulation of hair cells) in hearing
controls, these animals were deafened at the beginning of the experiment
by intrascalar application of neomycin (Hartmann et al., 1984). Success
of the deafening procedure was confirmed by the absence of brainstem
evoked responses up to 120 dB SPL. In what follows, these adult, previ-
ously hearing, at the beginning of the acute experiment “hair cells-
destroyed,” animals will be referred to as “hearing controls.” The adjec-
tive “hearing” does not refer to the functional state of the cochlea, but
rather to the developmental and functional state of the central auditory
system.
Cochlear implant. The cochlear implant (CI) consisted of a medical-
grade silicone carrier with six electrical contacts. There were five intras-
calar contacts: a small golden ball at the tip (diameter, 0.8 mm) and four
golden rings, with a distance of 1 mm between the electrodes (Behrendt,
1999). The gold contacts were connected to a seven-strand Teflon-coated
stainless-steel braided wire. The intrascalar part of the implant was ta-
pered in the apical direction from a diameter of 1.6 to 0.8 mm. The
extracochlear silicone carrier had a diameter of 1.6 mm. An indifferent
electrode was placed extracochlearly in the midline of the neck. The
stimulation was with the apical most intracochlear electrode versus the
neck electrode. The impedance of each implant electrode at 150 Hz stim-
ulation was /H110215k /H9024.
Animal preparation. The animals were premedicated with 0.25 mg of
atropine intraperitoneally and initially anesthetized with ketamine hy-
drochloride (Ketavet; Parker Davis; 24.5 mg/kg) and propionylproma-
zine phosphate (Combelen; Bayer; 2.1 mg/kg). They were tracheoto-
mized and artificially respirated with 50% O
2 and 50% N 2O, with the
addition of 0.2–1.5% concentration isoflurane (Lilly) to maintain a con-
trolled depth of anesthesia (Kral et al., 1999). End-tidal CO 2 was moni-
tored and kept /H110214%, and the core temperature was kept between 37.5
and 38.5°C using a homeothermic blanket. The status of the animal was
further controlled by measurements of blood gas concentration, pH,
bicarbonate concentration and base excess, glycemia, and oxygen satu-
ration. A modified Ringer’s solution containing bicarbonate and plasma
expander was infused intravenously with additional bicarbonate de-
pending on the status of the acidobasis. Monitoring and correction of
acidobasis was performed every 12 h. The animals were maintained in the
normal range of internal milieu parameters throughout the experiment.
The head of the animal was fixed in a stereotactic holder (Horsley-
Clarke). Both bullae and ear canals were exposed. To record evoked
auditory brainstem responses, a small trephination was drilled at the
vertex and a silver ball electrode (diameter, 1 mm) was attached epi-
durally. The indifferent electrode used for the recordings was inserted
medially in the neck muscles.
Deafness was verified at the beginning of the experiment using brain-
stem responses evoked with condensation clicks (50
/H9262s duration; 200
stimulus repetitions; 33 stimuli per second) applied through a modified
DT 48 speaker (Bayer Dynamics) at intensities /H11022120 dB SPL. The mem-
brane of the speaker was mounted at a distance of 2 cm from the tym-
panic membrane; sound was applied in a closed system into the external
auditory meatus using a cone after the pinna was removed. The absence
of acoustically evoked brainstem responses (including component I, gen-
erated within the auditory nerve) verified complete deafness. The same
procedure was applied to determine the hearing status in controls (HCs).
The hearing threshold determined with brainstem evoked responses was
/H1102140 dB SPL peak equivalent in all HCs used in the experiment. To
prevent electrophonic responses, the hair cells in HCs were then de-
stroyed by a slow instillation of 300
/H9262l of neomycin sulfate into the scala
tympani (within 5 min). The neomycin was left in place for additional 5
min followed by a slow instillation of Ringer’s solution to wash out the
neomycin. Absence of brainstem evoked responses verified a successful
deafening procedure.
Electrical stimulation. For electrical stimulation, cochlear implants
were inserted bilaterally into the cochlea through the round window.
Care was taken to ensure comparable insertion depth bilaterally: in each
ear, the criterion was that the basal-most electrode of the implant was just
recognizable behind the rim of the round window. During the electro-
physiological experiment, charge-balanced pulses (200
/H9262s/phase; repeti-
tion rate, 2 Hz; 100 stimuli) were applied to the cochlear implant in
monopolar configuration. Stimulation was performed with optically iso-
lated current sources (CS1; Otoconsult). To verify comparable positions
of both cochlear implants, electrically evoked brainstem responses with
single biphasic pulses were recorded and the lowest current levels evok-
ing a brainstem response were determined. If the thresholds for stimula-
tion of the left and the right ear differed by /H110222 dB, the ear with higher
thresholds was reimplanted and the thresholds were remeasured. Similar
threshold and similar insertion depth secured a comparable excitation
spread in both auditory nerves.
Determination of cortical threshold currents. A craniotomy was per-
formed above the auditory cortex and the dura was removed. The cortex
was photographed to document the recording positions. To find the
stimulation intensity for subsequent mapping, the lowest current levels
evoking a cortical response (threshold levels) were determined. Using an
x–y–z micromanipulator enabling movements in all three directions
with a precision of 1
/H9262m, a silver-ball macroelectrode (diameter, 1 mm)
was positioned on the surface and cortical thresholds at nine cortical
positions covering the primary auditory cortex (field A1) were deter-
mined to find the value of the lowest cortical threshold. The dorsal end of
the posterior ectosylvian sulcus was used as a reference point. Signals
were preamplified (60 dB by Otoconsult V2 Low-Impedance Amplifier),
amplified at a second stage (20 dB by Otoconsult Amplifier-Filter F1;
filters, 0.010 –10 kHz) and averaged (100 sweeps; repetition rate, 1.57
Hz). The resulting local field potentials (LFPs) were recorded using
custom-made software programmed by the principal author using a 16-
bit National Instruments MIO Card. The signals were stored and thresh-
old current levels were evaluated at all recording positions with a preci-
sion of /H110061 dB. These recordings determined the minimal stimulation
current required for contralateral stimulation (CoS) and ispilateral stim-
ulation (IpS) to evoke a cortical response at one or more of the recording
positions (“cortical threshold current”).
Cortical mapping. Cortical mapping was performed using a Ringer-
filled glass microelectrode (impedance, /H110114M /H9024). Field potentials on the
cortical surface were recorded at 100 –150 cortical positions during stim-
ulation with the cochlear implant using biphasic pulses (200
/H9262s/phase;
stimulation at the ipsilateral and also contralateral ear; stimulation cur-
812 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
rent 10 dB above the lowest cortical threshold determined with the mac-
roelectrode). To obtain the evoked LFP, recordings were averaged over
100 stimulus presentations (repetition rate, 2 Hz). Only averaged LFPs
were evaluated in the present study. Consequently, the ongoing back-
ground activity could not be quantified from these data. With regard to
the morphology of LFPs, the following terminology was used: Positive
components were labeled “P,” and negative, “N,” with indexing increas-
ing with time. Responses with latencies /H11021100 ms were considered
middle-latency responses and were signified by index letters “a” to “c.”
Only the largest component (P
a) was used for component-specific anal -
ysis of amplitude–latency correlations and aural specificity in the present
study.
Cortical activity was evaluated in terms of activation maps, with each
map reflecting the amplitudes of the LFPs at all recording positions at the
given poststimulus time, with linear interpolation of the activity between
the recording positions (spatial interpolation). These cortical activation
maps were constructed from the microelectrode recordings using
custom-made software written in MatLab (Mathworks). Spatiotemporal
activity patterns were obtained by presenting these maps sequentially in
steps of 1 ms. To study the temporal features of the responses indepen-
dently of amplitude variations, the LFPs were additionally amplitude-
normalized by their maximum positive amplitude. The such-obtained
normalized LFPs (nLFPs) were used to study propagation waves only.
Orientation on the cortical surface was based on the sulcal pattern (Reale
and Imig, 1980; Lee and Winer, 2008a,b).
Center of gravity. To quantify the movement of the activity patterns, a
function analogous to the center of gravity (COG) was computed at each
time t, replacing the weight at each coordinate [ x,y] by the amplitude of
the nLFP at the corresponding location as follows:
COG /H20849t/H20850x /H11005
/H20888
j
xj /H18528nLFP /H20849t/H20850j
/H20888
j
nLFP /H20849t/H20850j
COG /H20849t/H20850y /H11005
/H20888
j
yj /H18528nLFP /H20849t/H20850j
/H20888
j
nLFP /H20849t/H20850j
. (1)
Here, nLFP( t)j represents the amplitude-normalized field potential re -
corded at position j at time t, and xj and yj are the coordinates of the jth
recording position. As the focus of this analysis was in revealing the
temporal spread of activity in the cortex, only amplitude-normalized
LFPs were used for computation of COG. From these data, the velocity of
the COG could be determined. For this calculation, the summed distance
traveled by the center of gravity was computed within a moving window
of 5 ms and given in micrometers per millisecond. During the first 6 ms,
the calculated position of the COG was driven by spontaneous activity
(was “random”) and then “jumped” onto an initial position near the
center of A1. This abrupt change, although triggered by the first influence
of the stimulus on the cortex, caused an erroneous peak in the propaga-
tion velocity. Therefore, the velocity of COG in the first 6 ms was
blanked.
Contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation. To compare the propagation
waves for contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation (CoS and IpS), the
Euclidean distance of the center of gravity for CoS and IpS was computed
for each millisecond. These distances were subsequently compared be-
tween CDCs and HCs.
Additionally, from the positive amplitudes of LFPs for contralateral
and ipsilateral stimulation at time t, a contralaterality index was com-
puted for each recording site j using the following formula:
CI /H20849t/H20850j /H11005
LFP c/H20849t/H20850j
/H20849LFP c/H20849t/H20850j /H11001LFP i/H20849t/H20850j/H20850, (2)
where LFPc(t)j represents the amplitude of the LFP evoked by the CoS at
the recording position j and time t, and LFP i(t)j represents the corre -
sponding LFP evoked by ipsilateral stimulation. This index was com-
puted for all positions at every millisecond poststimulus. If both LFPs
were /H1102150 /H9262V, the contralaterality index was set to 0 to avoid random
fluctuations of the LFPs affecting the map. Similarly, ipsilaterality indices
were computed to better visualize the positions showing similar re-
sponses to both kind of stimulation in contrast to nonresponsive sites.
To quantify the difference in morphology of the LFPs evoked by con-
tralateral and ipsilateral stimulation for each recording position j, the
dissimilarity index ( D) was used as follows (Massey and Denton, 1993):
Dj /H110050.5 /H18528/H20888
T |
LFP c/H20849T/H20850j
/H20888
t
LFP c/H20849t/H20850j
/H11002
LFP i/H20849T/H20850j
/H20888
t
LFP i/H20849t/H20850j|
, (3)
where LFPc represents the LFP evoked by the contralateral stimulation,
and LFP i represents the LFP evoked by ipsilateral stimulation. At each
sampled time ( T), the amplitude of the LFP was divided by its temporal
integral over the 100 ms after stimulus, and the summed difference of
these for contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation was taken as a measure
of dissimilarity. The dissimilarity index is not dependent on the maxi-
mum amplitude of the signal, because it is normalized to the temporal
integral. If the two LFPs were the same with opposite polarity, D would
reach 1, whereas if they were identical signals, it would be 0.
For statistical comparisons, the following procedures were used (Sa-
chs, 1968): Data that showed a normal distribution (Pearson–Stephens’s
test, 10% significance level) (Sachs, 1968) were tested using two-tailed t
test (5% significance level). For those data that were not normally dis-
tributed, a two-tailed Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s test was used (5%
significance level). Testing was performed using Systat 11 (Systat Soft-
ware) and the Statistics Toolbox from MatLab (Mathworks).
Results
This study recorded LFPs at the cortical surface in response to
electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve. The initial orienta-
tion at the cortical surface was based on anatomical landmarks
(the sulcal pattern) (Fig. 1 A).
LFP morphology and reproducibility
Recordings were performed by moving one microelectrode along
the primary auditory cortex. Although only the invariant portion
of the cortical response, the evoked LFP, was evaluated at each
position, the time difference between different recordings could
have affected the recorded signals. As a test of reproducibility,
LFPs recorded from adjoining positions taken at different times
were compared. Even if taken more than an hour later, the LFPs
still showed very similar morphology (Figs. 1, 5) (each position
required /H110221 min for a recording; thus, the number of the posi-
tion also approximately indicates the amount of time that has
passed since the beginning of the recording session). The wave-
form comparisons in these figures illustrate that the morphology
of LFPs was much more dependent on position than on the time
the recording was taken.
The spatial resolution of this technique was high: if transitions
in the morphology of LFPs with cortical position took place, they
were discernible as abrupt changes even at positions separated
only by few hundred micrometers (Fig. 1). The mapping method
is simple and allows the analysis of phenomena that so far could
only be addressed using optical imaging techniques.
The morphology of the recorded field potentials was consis-
tent with previous studies (cf. Kral et al., 2002). The first compo-
nents of evoked responses were observed in the latency range of
8 –20 ms, most frequently between 9 and 12 ms. In some regions
of A1, a positive component dominated in this latency range
(designated as P
a) (Fig. 1B), generating “hot spots” in the cortical
map (Fig. 1 A, bottom). In other regions of A1 in HCs, the P a
component was smaller or not observed at all and activity was
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 813
Figure 1. Functional organization of the primary auditory cortex of hearing controls with contralateral electrical stimulation (monopolar configuration). A, Image of the exposed cortex of the right
hemisphere in one of the HCs with the designation of cortical areas based on anatomical landmarks. AAF, Anterior auditory field; A1, primary auditoryfield; ED, dorsal part of the posterior ectosylvian gyrus; PAF,
posterior auditory field; A2, secondary auditory field; AEF, anterior ectosylvian field; SSS, superior sylvian sulcus; PES, posterior ectosylvian sulcus; AES, anterior ectosylvian sulcus. (Figure legend continues.)
814 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
dominated by a negative component (Nb) (Fig. 1B, “A1: Negative
spot”).
Hearing controls
Spatial distribution of electrically evoked responses
When cortical activity was evaluated in terms of the maximum
amplitude of LFPs, consistent with previous studies two to three
cortical hot spots were observed (Fig. 1 A, bottom). The value of
the maximum amplitude varied between individual animals (see
below). At least two of the hot spots were clearly located within
the primary auditory cortex as defined by anatomical landmarks
[i.e., between superior sylvian sulcus (SSS), posterior ectosylvian
sulcus (PES), and anterior ectosylvian sulcus (AES)] (Fig. 1 A,
top). The hot spots were designated in the following way: HS1
was the most rostrodorsal spot, HS2 the rostroventral one, and
HS3 the caudalmost hot spot. HS2 in some animals appeared
near the dorsal end of AES, in part invading into the AES, some-
times even extending rostrally from it (Fig. 1 A). Therefore, HS2
might include nonprimary areas ventral from anterior auditory
field (AAF). However, because of the small latency, as found in
HS1 and HS3, we assume that HS2 includes mainly A1 and pos-
sibly AAF. In some animals, a participation of nonprimary audi-
tory areas in the rostral section of this hot spot is possible.
As a rule, HS1 was located dorsally and caudally from the
dorsal end of AES. This corresponded to the position of the field
A1, extending to the border between A1 and AAF (Phillips and
Irvine, 1982; Schreiner and Urbas, 1986; Lee and Winer, 2008b).
HS3 was located more caudally within A1 (corresponding to the
low-frequency region of A1). This spot was characterized by a
smaller amplitude and a similar latency to HS1 and HS2.
The LFPs recorded at different sites of the mapped cortex had
a region-specific morphology (Fig. 1 B). Within the primary ar-
eas, responses had a high amplitude and one or two positive
components (P
a and Pb), generating the hot spots. Between HS1
and HS3 was a prominent negative region characterized by the
near absence of positive components and the presence of an N b
component (Fig. 1 B, “A1: Negative spot”). The narrow region
separating HS1 from HS2 (central narrow line) was characterized
by a short-duration small amplitude P
a, followed by a sharp and
shallow Nb, further followed by a longer-duration Pb component
(Fig. 1 B, “HS1–HS2”). This line extended further caudally in the
direction of HS3. It could be observed in all hearing controls and
was used as a landmark for mapping.
Most rostral parts of HS1, most likely located already within
AAF (based on anatomical landmarks), showed a high-amplitude
sharp P
a component closely followed by sharp Nb and Pb compo-
nents (Fig. 1 B, “A1–AAF”).
Border positions at the caudal and ventral part of A1 were
characterized by longer latency, smaller amplitude, and longer
duration Pa components (Fig. 1B, “A1–A2”). These regions most
likely correspond to nonprimary auditory fields, the dorsal part
of the posterior ectosylvian gyrus (ED), posterior auditory field
(PAF), and secondary auditory field (A2). Dorsally, the belt re-
gion in the cat (field DZ) (Lee and Winer, 2008a,b) is partially
hidden in the depths of the SSS, with ventral boundaries func-
tionally not clearly specified. The maps obtained from this study
possibly included activity also from this field, although the LFPs
were not obviously different from those from field A1.
Using these LFP characteristics, hot spots and the central nar-
row line were identified in all animals. To compare the reproduc-
ibility of the organization of hot spots, the 100
/H9262V contour of
each hot spot was constructed for every animal. The individual
contour maps were then slightly resized so that the position of the
posterior and the anterior ectosylvian sulcus overlapped in all
animals. In addition, the contour maps were aligned with regard
to the central narrow line (Fig. 1C). Despite a certain variability in
the extent and shape of the hot spots, their position overlapped
well in all HCs (Fig. 1 C), HS3 having a slightly higher variability
in position. HS2 was not observed in one hearing control. In
general, however, the cortical activation maps were clearly repro-
ducible between animals.
Dynamics of spatiotemporal waves
Using the computation of cortical activation maps, the spatio-
temporal dynamics of evoked responses can be revealed with a
millisecond resolution. The dynamics of this data set were partly
obscured by large responses that dominated the map. Obviously,
each stimulus has some cortical representation and will evoke a
more or less structured amplitude map in field A1. However,
because of intrinsic horizontal connections in the auditory cortex
and intraareal spread of activity via thalamocortical projections
(Velenovsky et al., 2003; Lee and Winer, 2008a), activity can re-
cruit larger cortical regions, although with smaller absolute am-
plitudes. To study the temporal features of the responses inde-
pendently of amplitude variations, the LFPs were amplitude
normalized by their maximum positive amplitude to obtain
nLFPs. After this procedure, at each position the maximum pos-
itive amplitude of the nLFP was unitary. Through the use of such
an approach, distinct progression waves became evident (Fig. 2).
In all investigated HCs, the “initiating spot” was located at or near
the rostral portion of the central narrow line. The first response
was prominent at a latency of 7– 8 ms. An initial wave progressed
from the central narrow line dorsally and ventrally (into HS1 and
HS2) (Fig. 2). It reached the dorsal and ventral extent of A1
within 3– 6 ms. The dorsal branch was split into two wavefronts,
one progressing rostrally (into AAF) and one progressing cau-
dally (into A1) (Fig. 3). The caudal part swept across the field A1
and approached field ED. In some animals, this caudal wave was
split into two branches, a ventral one and a dorsal one, that fused
at the caudal end of A1. Afterward, the activation front returned
from the border of field ED rostrally, heading toward the nega-
tivity zone within the next few milliseconds (reflection wave). In
the microdynamics, some interindividual variability could be ob-
served (Fig. 2) (for movies, see supplemental material, available
at www.jneurosci.org). This is not surprising, because the tono-
topic arrangement of the cortex also shows substantial interindi-
vidual variability (Merzenich et al., 1975; Reale and Imig, 1980).
Nonetheless, the general pattern of propagating waves was ob-
served in all controls, with a more variable reflection wave.
To quantify the progression of cortical waves, a center of grav-
ity of cortical activity (COG) was computed for each millisecond
after stimulus and its propagation velocity was determined. The
maximum velocity of the COG was 508/H11006204
/H9262m/ms (this value
4
(Figure legend continued.) Below, Color-coded functional map of responses at 12 ms after stim-
ulus with overlaid numbered recording positions. The crosses on the photograph and the acti-
vation map are used for alignment purposes. The dashed black line represents the central
narrow line. B, Examples of LFPs at different recording positions with the cortical location
indicated in the respective title. Similar morphology of LFPs sampled at different times demon-
strates the reproducibility of the method. Also, characteristic differences at different positions
are discernible. Sample positions in the map (A) are marked by the symbols shown in the corner
of each panel.C, The 100
/H9262V contours of the individual hot spots from all four hearing controls
(individual animals shown in different color). As reference structures, the AES, PES, and the
position and orientation of the central narrow line was used. The blue dashed line represents the
overlapping central narrow line after alignment of the maps from each animal.
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 815
Figure 2. A, B, Example of propagating cortical waves and their variability demonstrated using the normalized amplitudes in two HCs. The general pattern of movement, starting from the
initiation spot, continuing through the HS1 and HS2, splitting into two waves (toward AAF and A1) and then propagating in A1 caudally, was similar in all animals. However, the first HC (A) does not
show a clear reflection wave, in contrast to the second HC (B), where at 18 ms a wavefront traveling from the caudal part of A1 rostrally appears. The crosses localize the dorsal ends of the posterior
and anterior ectosylvian sulcus; the arrows indicate the direction of motion of the propagating wave from the given frame to the following one. The dashed arrows are used to indicate where activity
retracts. The hexagon locates the position of the center of gravity. For movies of the propagating waves, see supplemental material (available at www.jneurosci.org).
816 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
is the average from all HCs; in one animal, it reached the peak
value of 825 /H9262m/ms). The peak velocity was found at 10 –15 ms
after stimulus. The velocity decreased later (within 15–30 ms),
slightly increasing around 100 ms (time of appearance of the
wave P
1). At /H11011150 ms, it reached a stable value near 100 /H9262m/ms,
which we considered the “noise floor.”
The propagation pattern of cortical activity is summarized in
Figure 3. The size of the arrows indicate the approximate extent
of the propagation front (i.e., the area of the cortical tissue in-
volved in the activation), and their direction corresponds to the
direction of the propagation.
Aural dominance
The cortical responses evoked by the contralateral and the ipsi-
lateral input were further compared in electrically stimulated
HCs. The hot spots obtained with contralateral and ipsilateral
stimulation overlapped well in all HCs (Fig. 4C, color and height
profile match; D, amplitude–amplitude relationship of P
a com-
ponents). This could be a consequence of the implantation tech-
nique (with the aim of reaching identical brainstem evoked
thresholds with stimulation at each ear), as well as a consequence
of monopolar stimulation. Consistently, “ipsilateral responses”
had smaller amplitudes than “contralateral responses”: when the
maximum of the contralaterality index for each position was
evaluated in HCs, it reached a mean value of 0.77 /H110060.03 with no
significant differences between individual hearing controls (two-
tailed t test,
/H9251/H110050.05).
The spatial distribution of the contralaterality index over the
auditory cortex was also investigated (Figs. 4 A, 10). A typical
pattern was observed as follows.
First, the distribution of CI over the cortex was patchy.
Patches of higher CI (i.e., strongly dominated by contralateral
input) were interleaved with patches of
small CI. The size and shape of the patches
varied, with a minimum of /H11011500 –1000
/H9262m diameter, corresponding to the size of
two to four cortical minicolumns (two to
three sampled positions with the mapping
technique used). Larger patches were also
observed (see Fig. 10). At positions with
large LFPs, both large and small contralat-
erality indices were observed.
Second, a larger region of high con-
tralaterality index was found at 9 –12 ms
after stimulus in the rostral A1 and in AAF.
This region corresponded in part to HS1
and HS2; however, it also extended more
rostrally. The pattern was reproducible in
all investigated hearing controls (Figs. 4,
10), despite interindividual differences in
detail.
An ipsilaterality index was also com-
puted to better reveal spots with weak con-
tralateral dominance in contrast to nonre-
sponsive sites (in fact, both indices contain
the same information). The distribution of
the ipsilaterality index was complemen-
tary to the contralaterality index in HCs:
the spots with higher ipsilaterality index
were mainly located in the more caudal
part of A1 and caudally to it (field PAF and
ED, based on the sulcal pattern). In fact,
these spots represented positions with
similar amplitudes of LFPs with contralat-
eral and ipsilateral stimulation. They were more variable in posi-
tion than the rostral CI spots, but were again clearly discernible in
all animals.
When the morphology of LFPs evoked with contralateral and
ipsilateral stimulation was compared, the complementarity could
be confirmed (Fig. 4 B): LFPs evoked with contralateral and ipsi-
lateral stimulation were of similar morphology in caudal portions
of A1 (HS3), and clearly different in the rostral part of the cortex
(rostral A1, including HS1 and HS2, and AAF).
Congenitally deprived (deaf) animals
Spatial distribution of electrically evoked responses
In CDCs, the described patterns of cortical activation were
altered in several respects. Similar to HCs, in these animals the
three hot spots were also observed (Fig. 5 A) using the mor-
phology of LFPs as a criterion (Fig. 5 B). The LFPs were more
similar across the auditory cortex than in HCs, but the distinc-
tion of the hot spots and the central narrow line were still
possible. The maximum amplitude of LFPs was variable both
in hearing and deaf animals, and was not significantly differ-
ent between the two groups (hearing, 408 /H11006140
/H9262V; deaf,
426 /H11006273 /H9262V; two-tailed Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s test,
p /H110050.90). The first discernible responses appeared at 7 ms
after stimulus also in CDCs. The position of the hot spots was
more variable than in HCs (Fig. 5 C).
Dynamics of spatiotemporal waves
To compare the spread of activity through the auditory cortex in
deaf and hearing controls, the largest cortical area of responses
with absolute amplitudes /H1102250
/H9262V was determined both for pos-
itive and for negative waves of LFPs. In positive areas, no signif-
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of propagating waves as observed in hearing controls. The initial wave (white arrows) ap-
peared in the initiating spot, propagating first dorsally and ventrally. Then the wave turned rostrally (to AAF) and caudally (to the
caudal end of A1). The more variable reflection wave (gray arrows) started from the border of A1 and ED and traveled rostrally to
end up in the center of A1. The size of the arrows corresponds to the spatial extent of the propagating wavefront (the approximate
size of the cortical tissue involved in the wave).
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 817
Figure 4. Aural specificity of the cortical responses demonstrated with contralaterality measures.A, Snapshots of changes in contralaterality and ipsilaterality index at the auditory cortex (color
scale in the right inset). Poststimulus time is given above each snapshot. At/H1101112 ms, high contralateral dominance is found in rostral parts of the cortex, whereas ipsilateral dominance is highest
in the caudal parts. Shown is the same animal as in Figure 1.B, LFP morphology at distinct recording positions. Blue, Response to contralateral stimulation; red, response to ipsilateral stimulation.
The position is designated in the title of each panel; functional map with the designated positions is shown in Figure 1. At most positions, the peak latency of the response to ipsilateral stimulation
(marked by a vertical line) is longer.C, Overlap of the amplitude maps for contralateral stimulation (height profile) and ipsilateral stimulation (color). The largest responses (peaks in the height profile
and red colors in the color map) overlay very well within field A1.D, The relationship between the amplitude of ipsilaterally and contralaterally evoked Pa component.
818 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
icant difference between deaf and hearing controls was found
(controls, 5.32 mm 2, vs deaf, 2.99 mm 2; two-tailed Wilcoxon–
Mann–Whitney’s test, p /H110050.20). However, CDCs showed a
prominent reduction of areas with negative potentials (controls,
14.3 mm
2, vs deaf, 3.3 mm 2, two-tailed Wilcoxon–Mann–Whit-
ney’s test, p /H110050.0286).
The spatiotemporal wave propagation was clearly altered in
deaf animals (Fig. 6). The cortical wave traveled from an initial
spot in the center of field A1 simultaneously in all directions.
Individual wavefronts, similar to the ones observed in HCs, could
not be identified. Thus, activation of the “deaf” auditory cortex
appeared less structured in space and time. The central narrow
line could also be identified in CDCs. It appeared to be displaced
dorsally compared with HCs. The initiating spot did not have a
Figure 5. Functional organization of the auditory cortex in a congenitally deaf animal.A, Amplitude map with recording positions and a photograph of the auditory cortex.B, Morphology of the
field potentials at different positions of the map.C, Overlap of the 100/H9262V contours after realignment of the maps as in Figure 1.
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 819
Figure 6. A, B, Example of propagating cortical waves and their variability demonstrated using normalized amplitudes in two congenitally deaf animals. The crosses localize the dorsal ends of
the posterior and anterior ectosylvian sulcus; the arrows indicate the direction of motion of the propagating wave from the given frame to the following one. The dashed arrows are used to indicate
where activity retracts, and the hexagon locates the position of the center of gravity. For movies of the propagating waves, see supplemental material (available at www.jneurosci.org).
820 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
clear relationship to this line. Reflection waves could not be iden-
tified in CDCs.
The maximum velocity of the propagating waves was not sig-
nificantly different from hearing controls (two-tailed Wilcoxon–
Mann–Whitney’s test,
/H9251/H110050.05). The center of gravity exhibited
a characteristic translation across the cor-
tex during both contralateral and ipsilat-
eral stimulation. A trajectory of the center
of gravity was computed for every animal,
and then was transposed to the same abso-
lute position and averaged over all hearing
and deaf animals (Fig. 7). In these mean
trajectories, HCs showed a movement in
both the rostrocaudal and dorsoventral di-
rections. In hearing controls, the length of
the COG trajectory within the first 20 ms
(contralateral stimulation) was almost
double that of deaf animals (12.2 /H110062.0
mm in HCs vs 6.9 /H110062.9 mm in CDCs;
two-tailed Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s
test, p /H110050.021). When comparing the co-
ordinates separately, a significant decrease
in the caudorostral extent of the trajectory
was observed in deaf animals when com-
pared with HCs in the first 20 ms after
stimulus (two-tailed Wilcoxon–Mann–
Whitney’s test, p /H110050.013). In total, the
whole trajectory was displaced in average
by 0.7 mm caudally and 0.5 mm ventrally
in deaf animals. Finally, the trajectories
obtained with contralateral and ipsilateral
stimulation were more similar in deaf an-
imals. The median Euclidean distance be-
tween the center of gravity of the map ob-
tained with contralateral stimulation and
that with ipsilateral stimulation within
5–20 ms after stimulus was significantly
larger in HCs than in CDCs (Fig. 7E) (me-
dian, 536
/H9262m in HCs vs 251 /H9262m in deaf
animals; Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s test,
p /H110210.001).
Aural dominance
The microdynamics of the data demon-
strated pronounced changes in aural rep-
resentation in deaf animals. The hot spots
evoked by contralateral and by ipsilateral
stimulation overlapped well in deaf ani-
mals, as they did in HCs (Fig. 8C,D). How-
ever, the activation maps expressed in
terms of contralaterality and ipsilaterality
indices demonstrated differences between
deaf cats and HCs: although the patchy
profile of contralaterality index distribu-
tion was similar to that obtained from
HCs, the patches with higher ipsilaterality
and contralaterality indices overlapped
more than in HCs (Figs. 8A, 10) (compare
Fig. 4 A). To test whether there was also a
general quantitative difference, maximal
contralaterality indices (in time) for each
recording position were determined, the
mean index over space for each animal was
computed, and these means were com-
pared between individual animals. The deaf cats had a signifi-
cantly smaller averaged contralaterality index (HCs, 0.77 /H110060.02;
CDCs, 0.64 /H110060.05; two-tailed t test, p /H110050.0038). This was attrib-
utable to a tendency for larger ipsilateral responses in deaf ani-
Figure 7. Grand mean trajectories of the center of gravity computed from the normalized activation maps. A, In HCs with
contralateral stimulation, the center of gravity moves first rostrally and later caudally, to finally return back rostrally. B, With
ipsilateral stimulation, the rostral movement is less well expressed. C, D, In CDCs, the trajectory was shorter (for details, see
Results). E, Distances between the center of gravity computed for contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation within 5–20 ms after
stimulus. The distance of COG is significantly smaller in CDCs compared with HCs, demonstrating that activation maps with
contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation are more similar in the former group.
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 821
Figure 8. Aural specificity of cortical responses in a deaf animal (the same animal as in Figure 5).A, Snapshots of contralaterality measures at different poststimulus times. A remarkable similarity
of the contralaterality and ipsilaterality shows up, demonstrating that cortical topology has changed in deafness (compare with the hearing contro ls in Fig. 4). B, Morphology of LFPs with
contralateral stimulation (blue) and ipsilateral stimulation (red) at different recording positions. Note the similarity in the morphology and peak latency of the LFPs at most positions. For a map of
recording positions, see Figure 5.C, Overlay of the amplitude profile obtained with contralateral stimulation (height–profile) and ipsilateral stimulation (color). In deaf animalsalso, the hot spots
with contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation can be seen to overlay well (compare Fig. 4).D, The relationship between the amplitudes of ipsilaterally and contralaterally evoked Pa components.
822 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
mals (controls, 282 /H1100659 /H9262V; deaf, 354 /H11006274 /H9262V; two-tailed
Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s test, p /H110050.56). The absence of the
latter significance was attributable to interindividual variability
of LFP amplitudes, which the CI compensates for. The LFPs from
CoS had a similar morphology to those of IpS in all deaf animals
(Fig. 8B). This was also the case for the rostral part of the auditory
cortex, where a prominent difference in the morphology was
observed in HCs. This finding further demonstrates the reduced
specificity for the contralateral ear in deaf animals.
To further assess this aspect, the peak latency of the first pos-
itive component of the LFP (P
a) was plotted as a function of the
amplitude of this peak (Fig. 9A, B). In HCs (Fig. 9A), a prominent
difference with contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation showed
up in all animals. However, in CDCs (Fig. 9B), these profiles were
much more similar. The aural differences in latencies were signif-
icant in all hearing controls (paired two-
tailed t test, value of p in the range between
/H11021/H110210.001 and 0.039) and nonsignificant in
all CDCs (value of p in the range between
0.40 and 0.80). Pooled data from all HCs
demonstrated a mean peak latency of
12.6 /H110062.9 ms for CoS and 13.9 /H110063.5 ms
for IpS. In CDCs, the peak latency for CoS
was 13.5 /H110063.0 ms and for IpS 13.5 /H110063.4
ms. All differences of peak latencies be-
tween CoS and IpS were consequently
pooled and compared (Fig. 8 C). A mean
difference of 1.43 /H110063.73 ms was obtained
for all HCs and/H110020.16 /H110063.42 ms for all CD
animals (positive values mean smaller la-
tencies with CoS) (cf. Phillips and Irvine,
1983; Vischer et al., 1997; Shepherd et al.,
1999). HCs showed shorter latencies with
CoS than with IpS (Fig. 9 C) (two-tailed
Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney’s test, p /H11021
0.001), and this difference disappeared in
CDCs. This finding clearly demonstrates a
deterioration of contralateral specificity in
CDCs, further supported by the smeared
dichotomy of contralaterality and ipsilat-
erality in CDCs (Fig. 10).
To quantify the morphological differ-
ence of LFPs obtained with contralateral
and ipsilateral stimulation, a dissimilarity
index was computed within the hot spots.
In HCs, HS1 had a significantly higher dis-
similarity index than HS3 (Fig. 11) (two-
tailed t test, p /H110050.00036). In contrast, deaf
animals showed no difference in dissimi-
larity index between the hot spots. CDCs
had a significantly higher dissimilarity in-
dex in HS3 than HCs (two-tailedt test, p /H11005
0.007). Consequently, the caudorostral
binaural organization is significantly
blurred in congenital auditory
deprivation.
Discussion
This study revealed fast evoked cortical
propagating waves using electrophysio-
logical methods and for the first time
demonstrated that hearing experience
significantly affects these waves. In deaf-
ness, propagating waves had less spatio-
temporal fine structure, showing a more synchronized cortical
activation. Furthermore, cortical contralateral dominance was
compromised in congenital deafness: propagating waves
and amplitude–latency relationships showed smaller aural dif-
ferences, contralaterality index diminished, and field A1 lost
its segregation into specific contralateral and ipsilateral
regions.
Hearing controls
The general pattern of cortical activation in controls corre-
sponds well to previous studies: the observed HS1 and HS2
correspond in location to the representation of the electro-
stimulated part of the auditory nerve [compare Imig and Reale
(1980) and Reale and Imig (1980) with Kral et al. (1998)]
Figure 9. Amplitude–latency relationships of component Pa with stimulation at the contralateral and the ipsilateral ear.A,
Controls demonstrate a complex relationship between latencies and amplitudes, with a prominent difference in latency distribu-
tion with contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation. On average, contralateral responses have shorter latencies.B, In congenitally
deaf animals, these differences are less pronounced; amplitude–latency relationships for contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation
are similar. Also, the range of latencies is smaller.C, Statistical comparison of peak latencies in hearing and deaf animals. Controls
demonstrate shorter peak latencies with contralateral stimulation. In deaf animals, latencies are not different. ***p /H110210.001.
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 • 823
(Dinse et al., 1997; Raggio and Schreiner, 1999; Bierer and
Middlebrooks, 2002; Kral et al., 2006). HS1 includes the ex-
pected border between A1 and AAF (Knight, 1977; Phillips
and Irvine, 1982; Schreiner and Urbas, 1986). At this spot, the
cortical propagating wave broke apart into two wavefronts,
one traveling caudally (through A1) and one rostrally
(through AAF). As the tonotopic gradient of A1 and AAF is
reversed and the unit latencies are similar (Knight, 1977; Phil-
lips and Irvine, 1982; Schreiner and Urbas, 1986), the breakup
of the propagating wave would be expected at the A1–AAF
border, provided the wave initiated at the high-frequency rep-
resentation and propagated to the low-frequency representa-
tion in both fields. The central narrow line in its caudal part
likely corresponds to the “high-threshold ridge” observed in
unit activity with CI stimulation (Raggio and Schreiner, 1999).
The pattern of HS1 and HS2 corresponds well to the pattern of
feline callosal connections (Imig and Reale, 1981).
Previous studies described propagating waves along the corti-
cal isofrequency stripes (Song et al., 2006) (cf. Mendelson et al.,
1997). In the present study, CI stimulation also evoked cortical
propagating waves progressing in dorsal and ventral directions
(along isofrequency stripes). Normalization of the amplitudes
uncovered additional components propagating in the caudoros-
tral direction. Pure tone stimulation (Harel et al., 2000; Versnel et
al., 2002; Ojima et al., 2005; Song et al., 2006) might have limited
the spread of cortical activation in previous optical imaging stud-
ies. The waves described here extended well outside the represen-
tation of the electrostimulated region in the cochlea (HS1 and
HS2). A spread of the wave over the whole field A1 could be
essential for integration of stimulus properties represented at dis-
tant parts of A1. Because the LFPs outside the hot spots had small
amplitude, this cortical wave is assumed to be insufficient to drive
all neurons above their threshold, but it provides synaptic input
also for neurons outside of the hot spots.
Evoked waves recruiting the whole sensory area are consistent
with findings from other sensory systems (Arieli et al., 1996; Pe-
tersen et al., 2003; Benucci et al., 2007). A pattern of initial (pri-
mary) and reflection waves similar to those of the present study
has been described in the visual cortex using voltage-sensitive
dyes (Xu et al., 2007), whereas reflection waves were more vari-
Figure 10. Comparison of laterality measures in the remaining three hearing and deaf animals. Shown are snapshots at latencies when high indices were distributed over the largest cortical
region. A, A dichotomy of contralaterality and ipsilaterality index with respect to cortical position is clearly discernible in hearing controls: In the rostral part of A1, high contralaterality is found,
documenting a large difference in amplitude between ipsilaterally evoked and contralaterally evoked LFPs. In the caudal part of the investigated cortical region, similar LFP amplitudes for ipsilateral
and contralateral stimulation (i.e., the largest ipsilaterality indices) were found.B, In deaf animals, this dichotomy disappeared.
Figure 11. The profile of the dissimilarity index in controls (black bars). A smaller dissimi-
larity index was found in HS3 than in HS1. This difference disappeared in deaf cats (gray bars).
Error bars indicate SD. **p /H110210.01; ***p /H110210.001.
824 • J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
able than primary waves. A cochlear traveling wave cannot be the
reason for the cortical waves observed here, because hair cells
have been destroyed at the beginning of the present experiments.
The waves most likely represent a cortical phenomenon (Song et
al., 2006) with thalamic contributions. Unfortunately, thalamic
and cortical phenomena cannot be distinguished by the present
methodology. Future research will show how the propagating
waves depend on exact stimulus features.
The observed wave was very fast (/H11011500
/H9262m/ms) and appeared
with a short latency (cf. Song et al., 2006). Such a fast wave is of
significance, because its spatiotemporal pattern falls into the in-
tegration window of neuronal processing and consequently can
be made use of computationally. The long time course observed
with intrinsic optical methods is most likely attributable to the
delay between neural and vascular reactions.
In hearing controls, propagating waves differed with con-
tralateral and ipsilateral stimulation. Contralateral domi-
nance of these waves was the consequence of differences in
morphology of individual LFPs between contralateral and ip-
silateral stimulation. These are attributable to differences in
their generators in the depths of the auditory cortex (for re-
view, see Mitzdorf, 1985; Kral and Eggermont, 2007). Both the
direction of transmembrane currents as well as their location
within the cortical column determine the polarity of the LFPs
recorded at the cortical surface. A difference in morphology of
LFPs results from differences in the pattern of synaptic cur-
rents in the underlying cortical column. If the surface-
recorded LFPs are very similar for CoS and IpS, the aural
convergence most likely takes place subcortically (cf. Nelken
et al., 2008). However, a difference in morphology of the LFPs
demonstrates a different activation of the cortical column, and
hence a difference in cortical input and/or processing of the
aural inputs at the recording site. This demonstrates a “corti-
cal contribution” to aural-specific processing.
Higher dissimilarity of LFPs evoked by contralateral and
ipsilateral stimulation in HS1 and HS2 (compared with HS3)
thus demonstrates more pronounced “cortical” aural-specific
processing in the rostral part of A1 in hearing cats. Also, cal-
losal connections are more extensive in the rostral part of A1
(i.e., in the high-frequency representation) (Imig and Brugge,
1978; Bozhko and Slepchenko, 1988). Because of the acoustic
shadow of the head, a coherent representation of space
throughout the midline requires callosal interactions (Imig
and Reale, 1980; Imig et al., 1986; Poirier et al., 1995). This is
of less significance in the lower frequency range, in which no
head shadow exists ( /H110213– 6 kHz for the cat). The lower fre-
quency range is represented in the few millimeters rostral from
PES, where HS3 (containing similar morphology of LFPs) was
found. The high dissimilarity of LFPs in AAF could be ex-
plained by preferential connections to “contralateral-
dominant suppression columns” in A1 (Imig and Reale, 1981;
Phillips and Irvine, 1982).
The present data further demonstrated a patchy aural rep-
resentation in field A1 (patch sizes of /H110111000
/H9262m). Discontin-
uous aural representation (Imig and Reale, 1980; Middle-
brooks and Zook, 1983) is known to relate to different parallel
thalamocorticothalamic circuits (Velenovsky et al., 2003).
However, the organization of the contralaterality index did
not include stripes parallel to the tonotopic axis (“binaural
bands”), as some studies have suggested (Middlebrooks and
Zook, 1983). The existence of “bands” has been in fact an
extrapolation from recordings within smaller patches of cor-
tical tissue. Although we did not investigate binaural interac-
tions per se, the present data with mapping of the whole field
A1 show that cortical aural organization corresponds more to
patches than bands [for similar implications, see Reale and
Kettner (1986) and Nelken et al. (2008)].
Congenitally deaf animals
The present study demonstrated that the cortical propagating
waves are significantly shaped by auditory experience. The trajec-
tories of the propagating waves were significantly shorter in
CDCs. At the same time, neither the extent of the positive acti-
vated area nor the propagation velocity was significantly different
from HCs. This implies that, in CDCs, the activity propagated
more synchronously in different directions, instead of giving rise
to distinct propagating waves.
CDCs additionally showed less pronounced differences in ac-
tivation patterns obtained with contralateral and ipsilateral stim-
ulation. We observed a decrease in aural dominance and changes
in the pattern of aural representation in CDCs. Changes in aural
representation have been demonstrated after monaural neonatal
cochlear ablation (Kitzes and Semple, 1985; Moore and Kitzes,
1985; Reale et al., 1987; McMullen and Glaser, 1988; McMullen et
al., 1988). The present study extends these observations by dem-
onstrating that contralateral dominance is the consequence of
“normal” hearing experience beyond balanced aural input. As
aural representation is reorganized on the way from thalamus to
cortex (Middlebrooks and Zook, 1983), this finding further indi-
cates a deficit in cortical processing. Deterioration of cortical
processing is further supported by the partial disappearance of
the difference in LFPs with contralateral and ipsilateral stimula-
tion and the above-described changes in propagating waves in
CDCs.
Only minor effects of binaural neonatal deafening on aural
representation could be demonstrated in the midbrain (Shep-
herd et al., 1999), contrasting with the present findings in the
auditory cortex. Binaural congenital auditory deprivation thus
affects more the patterning of cortical neuronal networks,
whereas the analysis established at lower levels of auditory system
is rudimentarily preserved. The development of auditory cortex
continues up to the age of sexual maturity (Brugge et al., 1988;
Eggermont, 1996; Kral et al., 2005) and depends on auditory
experience (Kral et al., 2005). Therefore, the susceptibility of cor-
tical circuits to the absence of sensory input is higher than that of
subcortical networks.
The cortical representation of auditory space is unknown. The
spatial location is coded by many broadly tuned neurons in a
distributed manner (Middlebrooks et al., 1994). Space might be
represented by the differences in activity in two channels: the
ipsilaterally sensitive and contralaterally sensitive neurons
(Stecker et al., 2005). Under this assumption, the deaf individual
with reduced contralateral specificity would underestimate the
deviation of the sound source location relative to the midline.
That would in practice correspond to a partial collapse of audi-
tory space to midline locations.
References
Arieli A, Sterkin A, Grinvald A, Aertsen A (1996) Dynamics of ongoing
activity: explanation of the large variability in evoked cortical responses.
Science 273:1868 –1871.
Behrendt M (1999) Entwicklung und Herstellung eines Cochlea-
Implantates zur chronischen Stimulation von geho¨rlosen weißen Katzen.
Frankfurt am Main, Germany: J. W. Goethe University.
Benucci A, Frazor RA, Carandini M (2007) Standing waves and traveling
waves distinguish two circuits in visual cortex. Neuron 55:103–117.
Bierer JA, Middlebrooks JC (2002) Auditory cortical images of cochlear-
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009
• 29(3):811– 827 • 825
implant stimuli: dependence on electrode configuration. J Neurophysiol
87:478 – 492.
Bozhko GT, Slepchenko AF (1988) Functional organization of the callosal
connections of the cat auditory cortex. Neurosci Behav Physiol
18:323–330.
Brugge JF, Reale RA, Wilson GF (1988) Sensitivity of auditory cortical neu-
rons of kittens to monaural and binaural high frequency sound. Hear Res
34:127–140.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M (1999) Spatiotemporal analysis of lo-
cal field potentials and unit discharges in cat cerebral cortex during nat-
ural wake and sleep states. J Neurosci 19:4595– 4608.
Dinse HR, Godde B, Hilger T, Reuter G, Cords SM, Lenarz T, von Seelen W
(1997) Optical imaging of cat auditory cortex cochleotopic selectivity
evoked by acute electrical stimulation of a multi-channel cochlear im-
plant. Eur J Neurosci 9:113–119.
Dodson HC, Mohuiddin A (2000) Response of spiral ganglion neurones to
cochlear hair cell destruction in the guinea pig. J Neurocytol 29:525–537.
Eggermont JJ (1996) Differential maturation rates for response parameters
in cat primary auditory cortex. Aud Neurosci 2:309 –327.
Harel N, Mori N, Sawada S, Mount RJ, Harrison RV (2000) Three distinct
auditory areas of cortex (AI, AII, and AAF) defined by optical imaging of
intrinsic signals. Neuroimage 11:302–312.
Harrison RV, Harel N, Kakigi A, Raveh E, Mount RJ (1998) Optical imaging
of intrinsic signals in chinchilla auditory cortex. Audiol Neurootol
3:214 –223.
Hartmann R, Topp G, Klinke R (1984) Discharge patterns of cat primary
auditory fibers with electrical stimulation of the cochlea. Hear Res
13:47– 62.
Heid S, Hartmann R, Klinke R (1998) A model for prelingual deafness, the
congenitally deaf white cat—population statistics and degenerative
changes. Hear Res 115:101–112.
Hess A, Scheich H (1996) Optical and FDG mapping of frequency-specific
activity in auditory cortex. Neuroreport 7:2643–2647.
Imig TJ, Brugge JF (1978) Sources and terminations of callosal axons related
to binaural and frequency maps in primary auditory cortex of the cat.
J Comp Neurol 182:637– 660.
Imig TJ, Reale RA (1980) Patterns of cortico-cortical connections related to
tonotopic maps in cat auditory cortex. J Comp Neurol 192:293–332.
Imig TJ, Reale RA (1981) Ipsilateral corticocortical projections related to
binaural columns in cat primary auditory cortex. J Comp Neurol
203:1–14.
Imig TJ, Reale RA, Brugge JF, Morel A, Adrian HO (1986) Topography of
corticocortical connections related to tonotopic and binaural maps of cat
auditory cortex. In: Two hemispheres– one brain: functions of the corpus
callosum (Lepore F, Ptito M, Jasper HH, eds), pp 103–115. New York:
Alan R. Liss.
Kitzes LM, Semple MN (1985) Single-unit responses in the inferior collicu-
lus: effects of neonatal unilateral cochlear ablation. J Neurophysiol
53:1483–1500.
Knight PL (1977) Representation of the cochlea within the anterior auditory
field (AAF) of the cat. Brain Res 130:447– 467.
Kral A, Eggermont JJ (2007) What’s to lose and what’s to learn: develop-
ment under auditory deprivation, cochlear implants and limits of cortical
plasticity. Brain Res Rev 56:259 –269.
Kral A, Hartmann R, Mortazavi D, Klinke R (1998) Spatial resolution of
cochlear implants: the electrical field and excitation of auditory afferents.
Hear Res 121:11–28.
Kral A, Tillein J, Hartmann R, Klinke R (1999) Monitoring of anaesthesia in
neurophysiological experiments. Neuroreport 10:781–787.
Kral A, Hartmann R, Tillein J, Heid S, Klinke R (2002) Hearing after con-
genital deafness: central auditory plasticity and sensory deprivation.
Cereb Cortex 12:797– 807.
Kral A, Tillein J, Heid S, Hartmann R, Klinke R (2005) Postnatal cortical
development in congenital auditory deprivation. Cereb Cortex
15:552–562.
Kral A, Tillein J, Heid S, Klinke R, Hartmann R (2006) Cochlear im-
plants: cortical plasticity in congenital deprivation. Prog Brain Res
157:283–313.
Leake PA, Hradek GT, Snyder RL (1999) Chronic electrical stimulation by a
cochlear implant promotes survival of spiral ganglion neurons after neo-
natal deafness. J Comp Neurol 412:543–562.
Lee CC, Winer JA (2008a) Connections of cat auditory cortex: I. Thalamo-
cortical system. J Comp Neurol 507:1879 –1900.
Lee CC, Winer JA (2008b) Connections of cat auditory cortex: II. Commis-
sural system. J Comp Neurol 507:1901–1919.
Massey D, Denton N (1993) American apartheid. Segregation and the mak-
ing of the underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP.
McMullen NT, de Venecia RK (1993) Thalamocortical patches in auditory
neocortex. Brain Res 620:317–322.
McMullen NT, Glaser EM (1988) Auditory cortical responses to neonatal
deafening: pyramidal neuron spine loss without changes in growth or
orientation. Exp Brain Res 72:195–200.
McMullen NT, Goldberger B, Suter CM, Glaser EM (1988) Neonatal deaf-
ening alters nonpyramidal dendrite orientation in auditory cortex: a com-
puter microscope study in the rabbit. J Comp Neurol 267:92–106.
Mendelson JR, Schreiner CE, Sutter ML (1997) Functional topography of
cat primary auditory cortex: response latencies. J Comp Physiol A Neu-
roethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 181:615– 633.
Merzenich MM, Knight PL, Roth GL (1975) Representation of cochlea
within primary auditory cortex in the cat. J Neurophysiol 38:231–249.
Middlebrooks JC, Zook JM (1983) Intrinsic organization of the cat’s medial
geniculate body identified by projections to binaural response-specific
bands in the primary auditory cortex. J Neurosci 3:203–224.
Middlebrooks JC, Clock AE, Xu L, Green DM (1994) A panoramic code for
sound location by cortical neurons. Science 264:842– 844.
Mitzdorf U (1985) Current source-density method and application in cat
cerebral cortex: investigation of evoked potentials and EEG phenomena.
Physiol Rev 65:37–100.
Moore DR, Kitzes LM (1985) Projections from the cochlear nucleus to the
inferior colliculus in normal and neonatally cochlea-ablated gerbils.
J Comp Neurol 240:180 –195.
Nelken I, Bizley JK, Nodal FR, Ahmed B, Schnupp JW, King AJ (2004)
Large-scale organization of ferret auditory cortex revealed using contin-
uous acquisition of intrinsic optical signals. J Neurophysiol
92:2574 –2588.
Nelken I, Bizley JK, Nodal FR, Ahmed B, King AJ, Schnupp JW (2008) Re-
sponses of auditory cortex to complex stimuli: functional organization
revealed using intrinsic optical signals. J Neurophysiol 99:1928 –1941.
Ojima H, Takayanagi M, Potapov D, Homma R (2005) Isofrequency band-
like zones of activation revealed by optical imaging of intrinsic signals in
the cat primary auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 15:1497–1509.
Petersen CC, Grinvald A, Sakmann B (2003) Spatiotemporal dynamics of
sensory responses in layer 2/3 of rat barrel cortex measured in vivo by
voltage-sensitive dye imaging combined with whole-cell voltage record-
ings and neuron reconstructions. J Neurosci 23:1298 –1309.
Phillips DP, Irvine DR (1982) Properties of single neurons in the anterior
auditory field (AAF) of cat cerebral cortex. Brain Res 248:237–244.
Phillips DP, Irvine DR (1983) Some features of binaural input to single
neurons in physiologically defined area AI of cat cerebral cortex. J Neu-
rophysiol 49:383–395.
Poirier P, Lepore F, Provenc ¸al C, Ptito M, Guillemot JP (1995) Binaural
noise stimulation of auditory callosal fibers of the cat: responses to inter-
aural time delays. Exp Brain Res 104:30 – 40.
Raggio MW, Schreiner CE (1999) Neuronal responses in cat primary audi-
tory cortex to electrical cochlear stimulation. III. Activation patterns in
short- and long-term deafness. J Neurophysiol 82:3506 –3526.
Reale RA, Imig TJ (1980) Tonotopic organization in auditory cortex of the
cat. J Comp Neurol 192:265–291.
Reale RA, Kettner RE (1986) Topography of binaural organization in the
primary auditory cortex of the cat: effects of changing interaural intensity.
J Neurophysiol 56:663– 682.
Reale RA, Brugge JF, Chan JC (1987) Maps of auditory cortex in cats reared
after unilateral cochlear ablation in the neonatal period. Brain Res
431:281–290.
Sachs L (1968) Statistische Auswertungsmethoden. Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York: Springer.
Schreiner CE, Urbas JV (1986) Representation of amplitude modulation in
the auditory cortex of the cat. I. The anterior auditory field (AAF). Hear
Res 21:227–241.
Sharon D, Grinvald A (2002) Dynamics and constancy in cortical spatio-
temporal patterns of orientation processing. Science 295:512–515.
Shepherd RK, Baxi JH, Hardie NA (1999) Response of inferior colliculus
826
• J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009• 29(3):811– 827 Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness
neurons to electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve in neonatally deaf-
ened cats. J Neurophysiol 82:1363–1380.
Song WJ, Kawaguchi H, Totoki S, Inoue Y, Katura T, Maeda S, Inagaki S,
Shirasawa H, Nishimura M (2006) Cortical intrinsic circuits can sup-
port activity propagation through an isofrequency strip of the guinea pig
primary auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 16:718 –729.
Spitzer MW, Calford MB, Clarey JC, Pettigrew JD, Roe AW (2001) Sponta-
neous and stimulus-evoked intrinsic optical signals in primary auditory
cortex of the cat. J Neurophysiol 85:1283–1298.
Stecker GC, Harrington IA, Middlebrooks JC (2005) Location coding
by opponent neural populations in the auditory cortex. PLoS Biol
3:e78.
Velenovsky DS, Cetas JS, Price RO, Sinex DG, McMullen NT (2003) Func-
tional subregions in primary auditory cortex defined by thalamocortical
terminal arbors: an electrophysiological and anterograde labeling study.
J Neurosci 23:308 –316.
Versnel H, Mossop JE, Mrsic-Flogel TD, Ahmed B, Moore DR (2002) Op-
tical imaging of intrinsic signals in ferret auditory cortex: responses to
narrowband sound stimuli. J Neurophysiol 88:1545–1558.
Vischer MW, Bajo VM, Zhang JS, Calciati E, Haenggeli CA, Rouiller EM
(1997) Single unit activity in the inferior colliculus of the rat elicited by
electrical stimulation of the cochlea. Audiology 36:202–227.
Xu W, Huang X, Takagaki K, Wu JY (2007) Compression and reflection of
visually evoked cortical waves. Neuron 55:119 –129.
Kral et al.• Cortical Waves in Deafness J. Neurosci., January 21, 2009
• 29(3):811– 827 • 827