Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Level Invariant Representation of Sounds by Populations of
Neurons in Primary Auditory Cortex
Srivatsun Sadagopan and Xiaoqin Wang
Laboratory of Auditory Neurophysiology, Departments of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205
A fundamental feature of auditory perception is the constancy of sound recognition over a large range of intensities. Although this
invariance has been described in behavioral studies, the underlying neural mechanism is essentially unknown. Here we show a putative
level-invariant representation of sounds by populations of neurons in primary auditory cortex (A1) that may provide a neural basis for
the behavioral observations. Previous studies reported that pure-tone frequency tuning of most A1 neurons widens with increasing
sound level. In sharp contrast, we found that a large proportion of neurons in A1 of awake marmosets were narrowly and separably tuned
to both frequency and sound level. Tuning characteristics and firing rates of the neural population were preserved across all tested sound
levels. These response properties lead to a level-invariant representation of sounds over the population of A1 neurons. Such a represen-
tation is an important step for robust feature recognition in natural environments.
Key words: primary auditory cortex; frequency tuning; level invariance; neural coding; awake primate; marmoset
Introduction
The range of sound intensities in the environment is vast, but
behavioral studies have shown that auditory perception is robust
despite large variations in sound level. In humans, psychophysi-
cal measures of speech recognition in quiet show a monotonic
and saturating increase in performance with increasing sound
level (Hirsh et al., 1954; Studebaker et al., 1993). In noise, perfor-
mance saturates (Hirsh et al., 1954) or slightly degrades (Stude-
baker et al., 1999) with increasing sound level. These observations
suggest that the representation of sounds at some stage of the
auditory pathway should be relatively independent of sound
level. However, frequency tuning curves of neurons in the audi-
tory periphery and brainstem widen at higher sound levels (No-
moto et al., 1964; Kiang, 1965; Popper and Fay, 1992). It is un-
clear where and how such level-intolerant tuning is transformed
into a level-invariant representation that could account for be-
havioral observations.
The response of a neuron to pure tones of varying frequency
and level, known as its frequency response area (FRA), is a fun-
damental receptive field measure in the auditory system. Subcor-
tical FRAs, up to the inferior colliculus (IC), are mostly level
intolerant in that FRAs become wider at higher sound levels
(Rose et al., 1963; Popper and Fay, 1992; Davis, 2005), with a few
exceptions. Level-tuned units have been reported in the dorsal
cochlear nucleus (Spirou and Young, 1991) and the IC (Yang et
al., 1992; Ramachandran et al., 1999; LeBeau et al., 2001), but
their best levels (BLs) (sound level eliciting maximal response)
are confined to a narrow range of near-threshold values. In the IC
of the echolocating bat, Suga observed neurons that were nar-
rowly tuned to tones (“pure-tone selective” units) and in some
cases to sound level (“closed” response maps) as well (Suga,
1965a, 1969). Rouiller et al. (1983) reported that 74% of neurons
in the auditory thalamus of anesthetized cats were nonmonotoni-
cally tuned to stimulus intensity using a metric based on slope
changes in the rate-level function.
At the cortical level, Suga (1965b) observed that a small num-
ber (4 of 140) of units in the auditory cortex of anesthetized bats
exhibited closed response areas. In subsequent studies of the
Doppler-shifted constant frequency (DSCF) area of the unanes-
thetized bat, many level-tuned units were found that had an over-
representation of the frequency and amplitude range corre-
sponding to commonly observed echo frequencies and
amplitudes (Suga, 1977; Suga and Manabe, 1982). The notion of
“level-tolerant” receptive fields that maintain sharp frequency
tuning with increasing level was introduced in these studies. Suga
hypothesized that level-tuned units may create an amplitude-
spectrum representation of stimuli on the cortical surface and aid
in maintaining sharp frequency tuning over all sound levels.
Based on these observations, Suga recognized the necessity of
level-tolerant selectivity of neural responses, especially because
communication and biosonar sounds could occur over different
distances (Suga, 1992).
In awake primate auditory cortex, neurons with nonmono-
tonic rate-level functions spanning a wide range of best levels
have been observed (Brugge and Merzenich, 1973; Pfingst and
O’Connor, 1981). In particular, 78% of units in auditory cortex
were found to have nonmonotonic rate-level functions in the
Received June 16, 2007; revised Feb. 20, 2008; accepted Feb. 20, 2008.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DC-03180 (X.W.). We thank Elias Issa and Dr. Yi
Zhou for many helpful comments and suggestions and Dr. Cory Miller for comments on this manuscript. We also
thank Ashley Pistorio and Jenny Estes for assistance with animal care.
Correspondence should be addressed to Srivatsun Sadagopan or Xiaoqin Wang, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, 720 Rutland Avenue, 412 Traylor, Baltimore, MD 21205. E-mail: vatsun@jhu.edu or
xiaoqin.wang@jhu.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2743-07.2008
Copyright © 2008 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/08/283415-12$15.00/0
The Journal of Neuroscience, March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 • 3415
study by Pfingst and O’Connor (1981). However, these early
studies did not systematically explore the relationship between
frequency and level tuning, leaving open the possibility that non-
monotonic rate-level tuning is limited to frequencies at or near
the best frequency (BF) of a unit. In the /H1101125 years since these
studies, however, many studies have described FRAs of primary
auditory cortex (A1) neurons as level intolerant in a variety of
species such as cats (Calford et al., 1983; Heil et al., 1992; Schre-
iner et al., 2000; Moshitch et al., 2006), rats (Kilgard and Mer-
zenich, 1999; Tan et al., 2004), mice (Linden et al., 2003), ferrets
(Shamma et al., 1993), and macaque monkeys (Recanzone et al.,
2000), to name a few. Except for the study by Recanzone et al.
(2000), the above cited studies were all conducted in anesthetized
animals. In A1 of anesthetized cats, a small number of studies
observed neurons with closed FRAs ( /H1101120% of sampled units in
the study by Sutter, 2000) or nonmonotonic rate-level functions
(/H1101123% of sampled units in the study by Phillips and Irvine,
1981).
Outside A1, a large fraction of units in the posterior field of the
auditory cortex of the cat were found to exhibit nonmonotonic
rate-level functions (Phillips and Orman, 1984). Polley et al.
(2006) reported that 76% of units in the ventral auditory field of
the rat had nonmonotonic rate-level functions, but their best
levels were restricted to a near-threshold range. Thus, although a
few studies have reported nonmonotonic level tuning at the level
of auditory cortex, the majority of studies have reported a level-
intolerant representation of sounds in A1. The significance of
level-tuned neurons in A1 and their implications for a level-
invariant representation remain unclear.
In the present study, we systematically measure FRAs in A1 of
awake marmosets and show that a majority of FRAs exhibit level-
tuned properties in quiet and noise. On the basis of these obser-
vations, we propose a representational framework for sounds in
A1 that is different from previously described systems. Further-
more, the FRAs measured in A1 of awake marmosets are much
more sharply tuned in frequency than shown in previous studies,
resulting in fine frequency resolution at all sound levels. This
could reflect a significant transformation in the representation of
sounds that takes place between the subcortical pathway and the
auditory cortex. We suggest that level-invariant coding in A1 is an
important mechanism for coding sounds in dynamic and noisy
acoustic environments.
Materials and Methods
Neurophysiology. We recorded from the right hemispheres of two awake
marmoset monkeys. Details of surgical and experimental procedures are
described in a previous publication (Lu et al., 2001). All experimental
procedures were in compliance with the guidelines of the National Insti-
tutes of Health and approved by the Johns Hopkins University Animal
Care and Use Committee. A typical recording session lasted 4 –5 h, dur-
ing which an animal sat quietly in a specially adapted primate chair with
its head immobilized. The experimenter monitored the behavior of the
animal via a television camera mounted inside the sound-proof chamber.
When the animal was observed to close its eyes for a prolonged period of
time, the experimenter ensured the animal opened its eyes before the
next stimulus set was presented. A tungsten microelectrode (impedance
2– 4 M/H9024; A-M Systems, Carlsborg, WA) was positioned within a small
craniotomy ( /H110111 mm diameter) using a micromanipulator (Narishige,
Tokyo, Japan) and advanced through the dura into cortex using a hy-
draulic microdrive (Trent-Wells, Los Angeles, CA). The contact of the
electrode tip with the dural surface was verified visually, which allowed us
to estimate the depth of each recorded unit. The estimated recording
depth may not accurately reflect true recording depth because of tissue
growth on the surface of the dura over multiple recording sessions. The
experimenter typically advanced the electrode by /H1101125–50
/H9262m and
waited for a few minutes to allow the tissue to settle. During this period,
a set of search stimuli were played that typically consisted of pure tones
(/H110115 steps per octave), bandpassed noise, linear frequency modulated
(lFM) sweeps, and marmoset vocalizations at multiple sound levels. This
strategy of “burst” electrode movements with long waits while playing a
wide array of stimuli helped us detect and isolate single units with very
low spontaneous activity and avoid biases toward any particular kind of
units. Proximity to the lateral sulcus, clear tone driven responses in the
middle cortical layers and tonotopic relationship with other recorded
units were used to determine whether a recording location was within
A1.
Acoustic stimuli. Stimuli were generated digitally in Matlab (Math-
Works, Natick, MA) at a sampling rate of 97.7 kHz using custom soft-
ware, converted to analog signals (Tucker-Davies Technologies, Ala-
chua, FL), attenuated (Tucker-Davies Technologies), power amplified
(Crown Audio, Elkhart, IN), and played from a loudspeaker (Fostex
FT-28D or B&W-600S3) situated /H110111 m in front of the animal. The
loudspeaker had a flat frequency response curve (/H110065 dB) across the range
of frequencies of the stimuli used, with a calibrated level (at 1 kHz) of
/H1101190 dB sound pressure level at a set level of 0 dB attenuation. Stimuli
consisted of pure tones, usually 100 ms long with 5 ms cosine ramps,
delivered every 300 ms in pseudorandom order and repeated five to eight
times. We sampled the frequency axis in 0.1 octave steps (over a range of
2 octaves) and the level axis in 20 dB steps (over a range of 80 dB). These
sampling intervals were chosen so that, in most cases, responses in at least
two sampling bins were ensured. In some cases, we measured rate-level
functions at the BF of a unit by delivering BF tones in 5 or 10 dB steps of
sound level over a range of 90 dB. Wideband noise masker was generated
using a real-time digital signal processor (RX6; Tucker-Davies Technol-
ogies), gated by a cosine window and started at least 500 ms before
beginning probe tone delivery. The root mean square level of the masking
noise was matched to peak-to-peak tone level and normalized every5so f
delivery to ensure consistent presentation levels. The noise signal (atten-
uated appropriately) was added to the probe signal before amplification
using a custom-built signal summer.
Analysis. We recorded the responses of 460 single units in A1 of two
awake marmosets to pure-tone stimuli that spanned a wide range of
frequencies and sound levels with sufficient sampling density. However,
not all tested neurons responded significantly to these stimuli because of
the high selectivity of auditory cortex neurons in the awake condition
(Wang et al., 2005). We first verified that at least one stimulus evoked a
significant excitatory response within a 150 ms window beginning 15 ms
after stimulus onset using the t test ( p /H110210.01) compared with mean
spontaneous activity over the entire stimulus set. A total of 348 of 460
units met this criterion. We used 15 ms as response latency for our
windowing because the median latency (defined as time to 10% maxi-
mum response after stimulus onset) for “I”/“V” and “O” units was 21
and 25 ms, respectively, and the minimum latency was 16 ms over the
entire population. Seventy-three units were excluded from additional
analyses because they either responded only at the loudest level tested
(n /H1100534) or their frequency tuning at one or more sound levels differed by
more than two estimated bandwidths from the BF calculated at the best
level ( n /H1100539). The latter group of excluded units had “patchy” or ill-
defined FRAs, for which estimating bandwidth, level-tuning width, and
related parameters were rendered noisy by sudden “jumps” in frequency
tuning with sound level. There was no systematic relationship between
BF and sound level in the FRAs of these units. Frequency tuning curves of
the remaining 275 units were then computed at each level, thresholded at
20% of peak response, and smoothed using a five-point moving window.
We then fit an area-matched rectangle to a tuning curve at a given sound
level by fixing its position at the centroid of the tuning curve and its
height at maximum firing rate. The calculated widths of the rectangles
were then taken as measures of bandwidth at that sound level. For a
Gaussian function, this measure closely approximates the full-width at
half-maximum, with the added advantage of not assuming any underly-
ing tuning curve shape. The rectangle fit also takes into account long-
tailed tuning curves, leading to conservative bandwidth estimates. The
bandwidth of the unit was taken as the bandwidth at BL. For comparison
with previous studies, we also measured quality factor (Q) values (Schre-
3416 • J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex
iner et al., 2000), defined as the BF of a unit divided by its bandwidth,
typically at 10 or 40 dB above threshold. Based on the bandwidth mea-
sures at each level, we then computed a shape index (SI), defined as the
ratio of the bandwidth computed at the loudest level to the bandwidth at
the BL. O-shaped FRAs tended to have decreasing bandwidths with in-
creasing levels, leading to small SI values (in most cases close to zero). I-
and V-shaped FRAs had increasing bandwidths that led to SI values equal
to or greater than one. We used SI of 0.75 as the boundary to classify
whether a unit belongs to the O or V and I categories. A visual inspection
of a subset of the data verified this to be a satisfactory criterion.
To measure how separable the frequency and level tuning curves were,
we determined what fraction of variance of the original FRA could be
accounted for by a simple cross product of frequency and level tuning at
BL and BF. O-shaped FRAs with a single peak were readily decomposed
into a single frequency and level tuning curve leading to high separability
(r
2) values. I-shaped FRAs were similarly separable, but V-shaped FRAs
were usually not. We used r 2 /H110050.75 to separate single and multi-peaked
O units. To measure shifts caused by masking noise, we determined the
ratio of shift caused in the BL to the magnitude of noise masker relative to
the BL. Rate-level functions in these experiments were measured by pre-
senting CF tones in 10 or 5 dB steps. In most cases, units exhibited shifts
in BL when the noise masker level was equal to the BL (relative masker
level of zero). In these cases, any positive shift in BL /H110225 dB was taken to
be a 100% shift. We typically used Wilcoxon’s rank-sum tests to compare
medians and Kolmogorov–Smirnoff tests to compare distributions when
more than one peak was observed in a distribution.
Model. We modeled the A1 neurons studied here as simplified, spec-
trally linear integrators with difference-of-Gaussian shaped frequency
tuning. O units were modeled with Gaussian tuning to a BL, and V units
had linearly increasing response rate and bandwidth with level. We added
balanced inhibition such that a stimulus with bandwidth covering the
excitatory and both inhibitory regions would produce zero response. In
both cases, parameters were drawn with replacement from our experi-
mental data. To avoid units being tuned completely outside the range
covered by stimulus spectra, we constrained stimulus frequencies and
unit BFs to a range of 2–16 kHz. The maximum firing rate of the O and V
units were then adjusted to match the data medians, with the rates adapt-
ing to 40% of maximum level (time constants, 20 ms for O units, 15 ms
for V units to simulate transient responses). We used 300 stimuli consist-
ing of tone pips, lFM sweeps, random frequency contours, natural and
reversed vocalizations, and environmental sounds, most of which we
regularly used for other experiments in our laboratory. Stimuli were
windowed every 10 ms using overlapping and causal exponential kernels.
In each segment, Fourier transforms were computed, and stimulus levels
were determined. These were then convolved with the FRA of a model
unit to produce the response rate in each bin. The average of these rates
was considered as the firing rate of that neuron in response to the stim-
ulus. Because of the nonparametric nature of the test stimulus set, we
used excess kurtosis of the firing rate distribution as a measure of selec-
tivity and sparseness (Lehky et al., 2005). Briefly, if a single neuron re-
sponded with more or less the same mean firing rate to all 300 stimuli in
the set, the distribution of the firing rates of this neuron across all stimuli
would be well described by a normal distribution with an excess kurtosis
of zero. However, if the neuron were highly selective, it would respond
with high rates to very few stimuli and not respond to most stimuli,
leading to a highly skewed firing rate distribution with high excess kur-
tosis. Similarly, response sparseness can be defined as the excess kurtosis
of the distribution of firing rates of all 300 neurons in response to a single
stimulus. Note that, by sparseness, we mean that few units of the popu-
lation respond to a given stimulus simultaneously, and this term does not
imply that each unit fires only a few spikes. To measure the response
precision, we first computed the magnitude spectrum of the response
histogram of each unit in response to each stimulus. The precision of
each response was then defined as the fraction of power at frequencies
/H1102210 Hz. This measure characterizes the “peakiness” of the peristimulus
time histogram (PSTH); high values reflect high-frequency modulations
of the PSTH resulting from temporally precise firing.
Results
The analyses presented here were based on 275 units that re-
sponded significantly to at least one stimulus, responded to at
least one sound level other than the loudest level tested, and did
not have “patchy” FRAs that resulted from scattered frequency
tuning across sound level (see Materials and Methods). We sam-
pled over a large range of BFs (0.5–28 kHz).
Figure 1. A1 FRA shapes. Frequency tuning curves (white lines) were computed at different levels, and area-matched rectangles (black boxes) were fit to them todetermine bandwidth at each
level and used to compute an SI. Blue lines on margins are “slices” of the FRA and denote frequency tuning at best level (top) and level tuning at best frequency (right). These were later used to
determine separability of the FRA.A–D , Based on FRA shape, neurons were classified as V (A), I (B), and O (C, D) units (color map corresponds to normalized response rate). Corresponding spike
rasters show stimulus-dependent temporal dynamics of the response (shaded area is stimulus duration; black dots are spikes falling inside our analysis window). Stimuli are ordered in blocks of
increasing tone frequency. Within each frequency block, sound level is varied (gray box inC corresponds to a single frequency bin, expanded in inset).
Sadagopan and Wang• Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008 • 28(13):3415–3426 • 3417
Distinct types of FRAs in A1
Figure 1 shows representative examples of the three types of FRAs
that we observed in A1 of awake marmosets. The neuron in Fig-
ure 1 A is referred to a s a V unit in this paper. The V shape of its
FRA reflects the dependence of frequency tuning bandwidth on
sound level. Figure 1B depicts an I unit, which exhibited the same
bandwidth at all levels tested, resulting in a characteristic
I-shaped FRA. Together, these two types of responses are similar
to traditional descriptions of FRAs in A1 (Recanzone et al., 2000;
Schreiner et al., 2000; Moshitch et al., 2006). In the present study,
however, only 100 of 275 FRAs (36%) were classified as V or I
shaped. The majority of units we observed (175 of 275, 64%) had
O-shaped FRAs, such as the examples in Figure 1,C and D. These
O units were narrowly and separably tuned to both frequency and
sound level.
To classify these FRA types, we measured an SI, defined as the
ratio of bandwidth at the highest sound level tested to the band-
width at the best sound level (see Materials and Methods). This
measure determines whether frequency tuning widens or sharp-
ens with increasing sound level. Because O units were level tuned,
we expected the bandwidths of these units to drop close to zero at
loud sound levels, leading to SI values near zero. Because V and I
units responded better at louder sound levels, we expected the
bandwidths of these units at the loudest sound level to be equal to,
or greater than, their bandwidths at the BL, leading to an SI of one
or greater. Our data revealed a bimodal distribution of SI (Fig.
2 A) with peaks at zero and one. We separated O units from I and
V units using a criterion of SI/H113490.75. This classification boundary
took into account O units tuned to high sound levels whose band-
widths decreased, but did not drop to zero, at the loudest level
tested.
Analyses revealed that the SI alone could not distinguish be-
tween V and I units because the BL was often the loudest level
tested for both types. Therefore, we measured to what extent the
entire FRA could be reconstructed using independent frequency
and level tuning components (Fig. 2 B) (see Materials and Meth-
ods). Because frequency and level tuning of I units did not inter-
act, their FRAs were separable (r
2 /H113500.75), whereas the FRAs of V
units were usually not separable. However, the r 2 values of V and
I units were distributed smoothly along a continuum, and we
could not reliably distinguish between these two FRA types.
Therefore, we lumped V and I units together for all subsequent
analyses. Most O units, however, could be expressed as a cross
product of a level tuning curve (at BF) and a frequency tuning
curve (at BL), but, consistent with a previous study in awake
marmoset A1 (Kadia and Wang, 2003), a minority of O units
(n /H1100550, /H1101120% of the total population) were multipeaked and
could not be separated ( r
2 /H110210.75) into independent frequency
and level tuning curves. We did not observe significant differ-
ences in the distributions of SI, BL, monotonicity, or frequency
tuning widths between O units with r
2 /H110210.75 and r 2 /H113500.75 and
therefore did not separate O units based on separability for the
purposes of the present study. Median separabilities of O ( r 2 /H11005
0.9) and I/V ( r 2 /H110050.69) FRAs were significantly different ( p /H11021
0.0001, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test).
Figure 2C shows the distribution of the BLs of all units. The
BLs of O units covered a large range, whereas the V units usually
preferred the highest tested levels. We measured the ratio of the
response rate of a unit at the loudest level tested to its response
rate at the BL, termed it monotonicity index (MI), to establish a
correlate with previous studies (Pfingst and O’Connor, 1981). An
MI near zero indicates highly nonmonotonic rate-level charac-
teristics, whereas an MI near one indicates a monotonic rate-level
function. Most O units were strongly nonmonotonic (median MI
of 0.25), and most I/V units were strongly monotonic (median
MI of 1) (Fig. 2 D). The fraction of nonmonotonic units we ob-
served (MI /H113490.75; /H1101164% over entire response duration, /H1101176%
during sustained response) was similar to that found in a previ-
ous study of A1 in awake and behaving macaques (78%) (Pfingst
and O’Connor, 1981). We did not observe any differences be-
tween the BF distributions of O and I/V units (Fig. 2 E).
In Figure 3A, we analyze the frequency tuning bandwidth and
level tuning width for all units. Whereas I/V units populated this
two-dimensional parameter space broadly and showed some
overlap, O units were more selective, as evidenced by their clus-
tering near low values. The median bandwidth of I/V units at BL
was 0.52 octaves ( n /H11005100), comparable with data from A1 of
anesthetized cats (Schreiner et al., 2000; Moshitch et al., 2006) or
awake macaques (Recanzone et al., 2000). In terms of Q values,
I/V units exhibited a median Q
10 dB of 3.8 and median Q 40 dB of
1.8, similar to data from anesthetized cat A1 (Schreiner et al.,
2000).
The median bandwidth of O units, however, was only 0.25
octaves ( n /H11005175), significantly smaller than that of I/V units
( p /H110210.0001, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test). We also measured level
tuning widths of O and I/V units by fitting rectangles to the
rate-level functions at BF (see Materials and Methods). O units
Figure 2. Distinct response types to pure-tone stimuli.A, The distribution of SIs computed
from the FRAs of 275 tone-responsive A1 units was bimodal. We used SI of 0.75 as a boundary to
separate O (black;n /H11005175) from I and V (gray;n /H11005100) units.B, Distributions of separability
(r
2) computed for O and I/V units. The majority of O units were separable into frequency and
level tuning components. C, Distribution of best sound levels separated by unit type. O units
covered lower sound levels, whereas most I/V units preferred high sound levels with a few
exceptions. D, MI was strongly correlated with FRA shape. Most O units were strongly non-
monotonic (MI of 0.25), and most V units had monotonic rate-level functions (MI of 1).E,N o
significant difference was observed between the BF distributions of O and I/V units.F, Q values
calculated at best level show that O units are much more sharply tuned than I/V units. All values
are medians; **p /H110210.01, statistical significance determined with Wilcoxon’s rank-sum tests for
equal medians.
3418 • J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex
responded to a narrow range of sound levels (median level tuning
width of 25 dB), but, unlike O-shaped FRAs in the IC (Ram-
achandran et al., 1999), their BLs covered a wide range of sound
levels (Figs. 2 C,4 A). In comparison, I/V units responded to a
broader range of sound levels (median level tuning width of 32
dB). For O units, median Q
10 dB and Q40 dB values were 11.8 and
infinity, much higher than those of I/V units. We preferred the
bandwidth at BL to describe O unit tuning rather than Q values
for two reasons: (1) O units could not be conceptualized in terms
of a threshold and quality factor and (2) Q
40 dB for most O units
was infinity and therefore unsuitable for comparisons. However,
to facilitate comparison with previous data, we calculated a Q
value at the BL of I/V and O units that reflects the bandwidth of a
neuron at its widest point. At BL, I/V and O units had median Q
values of 2.7 and 5.9, respectively. The distributions of Q values at
BL are shown in Figure 2 F. These data suggest that the selectivi-
ties of most neurons in A1 with respect to frequency and level
tuning are much sharper than described previously (Calford et
al., 1983; Recanzone et al., 2000; Schreiner et al., 2000; Moshitch
et al., 2006).
Functionally, the different tuning properties of O and I/V
units described here may be associated with different scales of
representation in A1. Because I/V units populate frequency-level
parameter space broadly, they may be better suited for detecting
sounds at a coarse resolution, especially during early response
periods. In contrast, O units may be better used for discriminat-
ing sounds at a finer scale throughout the duration of the re-
sponse. These unit types also exhibited different response dy-
namics that could change the scale of representation over time.
The raster plots in Figure 1, for example, suggest that the tempo-
ral evolution of the response is stimulus dependent. Typically, V
and I units exhibited transient responses at many frequency-level
combinations and sustained responses near their preferred stim-
uli (Wang et al., 2005) (Fig. 1 A, B).
To quantify response dynamics, we compared tuning proper-
ties of O and I/V units that were active both during the onset
(/H1134950 ms after stimulus onset) and sustained (next 100 ms) por-
tions of the response for at least one stimulus (114 O units and 36
V units). Figure 3 B is a plot of the distribution of the difference
between the SI during the sustained and onset response for O and
I/V units. The FRAs of most O units did not change shape over
time (median SI difference of 0). Conversely, the SI of V units
showed a significant reduction during the sustained portion of
response (median SI difference of /H110020.2) ( p /H110210.001, Wilcoxon’s
rank-sum test), indicating a sharpening of their FRAs. Although
the median bandwidth and level tuning width of the O units
remained unchanged during the sustained portion of response,
these two metrics decreased (sharpened) by 25 and 30%, respec-
tively, in the V units ( p /H110210.01, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test) as the
response became more sustained (Fig. 3 C).
During the sustained portion of the response, the resolution of
the I/V unit population approached that of the O unit population
(Fig. 3C). In fact, the fraction of O units increased from 64 to 76%
(114 of 150 neurons) when only the sustained response was ana-
lyzed. To summarize, whereas O units maintained a fine scale of
processing throughout response duration, I/V units started out at
a coarse scale and moved toward a finer processing scale with
time. However, the sharpening of tuning properties did not affect
the BLs of I/V units. It has been suggested in a previous study that
such stimulus-dependent changes in response dynamics might
create an initial widespread activation in auditory cortex that
become more restricted depending on how well stimulus param-
eters match the spectral and temporal tuning characteristics of a
neuron (Wang et al., 2005). Here we suggest a similar initial
detection activation of many I/V units that narrows over time to
a finer scale of processing based on the tuning properties of these
neurons that adds to the population of already fine-tuned O
units. This sharpening of receptive field size may be comparable
with observations in the primary visual cortex (Malone et al.,
2007). The sharpening occurs at a timescale similar to those ob-
served in some higher visual areas such as posterior inferotem-
poral cortex (Brincat and Connor, 2006) and the middle tempo-
ral area (Pack et al., 2001).
The apparent restriction of the best level of O units to a 0 – 60
dB range (Fig. 2 C) may be an experimental edge effect. In the
reported experiments, the loudest level tested was 80 dB, and the
level axis was sampled at 20 dB intervals. This meant that all units
with a best level of 80 dB were by definition classified as I/V units,
because we did not record responses at higher sound levels. It is
likely that some of these I/V units would have been classified as O
units had we been able to observe responses at higher levels.
Therefore, our estimate of the proportion of O units among the
responsive neurons (175 of 275, 64%) should be viewed as a lower
bound of this type of A1 units. In addition, during the sustained
portion of the response, the proportion of O units increases to
76%, and the bandwidth and level tuning width of the I/V units
approaches that of the O units (Fig. 3 C). Therefore, we suggest
that a larger proportion of neurons participate in level-invariant
Figure 3. Temporal dynamics of O and I/V unit tuning properties.A, O and I/V units encode
frequency-level space differently (distributions are on margins). O units were finely tuned in
both frequency (0.25 octaves) and level (25 dB), whereas I/V units were broadly tuned to
frequency (0.52 octaves) and responded to a broader range of levels (32 dB).B, Distribution of
SI difference between the onset (first 50 ms) and sustained (next 100 ms) of the response. O
units retain shape throughout response duration, whereas V units show decreased SI during the
sustained response window, indicating sharpening of the FRA.C, When the onset (on, first 50
ms) and sustained (sus, next 100 ms) portions of the response were analyzed separately (me-
dians and interquartile range are plotted), the bandwidth and level tuning width of I/V units
dropped by 25 and 30%, respectively, and approached the resolution of the O units as the
response developed over time. O units, conversely, retained the same resolution over the entire
response duration. All values are medians; **p /H110210.01, statistical significance determined with
Wilcoxon’s rank-sum tests for equal medians.
Sadagopan and Wang• Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008 • 28(13):3415–3426 • 3419
coding in A1 over a wider range of sound
levels than indicated by the data shown in
Figure 2C. The number of O units we ob-
served was substantially greater than what
has been reported previously in anesthe-
tized animals. For example, Sutter (2000)
reported that 20.4% of neurons in anesthe-
tized cat A1 had circumscribed FRAs. Sim-
ilarly, a previous study (Phillips and Irvine,
1981) reported that 23% of neurons in
anesthetized cat A1 had nonmonotonic
rate-level functions. The number of non-
monotonic units we found in our study is
comparable with a previous study in awake
behaving macaques (Pfingst and
O’Connor, 1981).
The O units also differed from I/V units
in other physiological properties that may
explain why the predominance of O units
in A1 has not been reported previously,
even in unanesthetized preparations (Re-
canzone et al., 2000). Median spontaneous
rate (O, 1.74 spikes/s; I/V, 4 spikes/s) and
maximum driven rate (O, 22 spikes/s; I/V,
42 spikes/s) of O units were approximately
half of the corresponding measures in I/V
units. This suggests that O units would be
harder to find than I/V units if the strategy
for isolating a neuron during an experi-
ment involved listening for spontaneous
spikes while changing electrode position in
a continuous manner. Because of their nar-
rower tuning and lower maximum driven
rate, O units would also be harder to drive
if experimental stimuli did not sample the
frequency and level axes finely. In compar-
ison, Recanzone et al. (2000) report a mean
spontaneous rate of 8.2 spikes/s and a mean
peak driven rate of 39.3 spikes/s in A1.
These values resemble our I/V units, lend-
ing support to our hypothesis that O units
may have been missed previously because
of search biases. We reduced the magni-
tude of these biases in our experiments by
not relying on a fixed set of search stimuli
while searching for neurons, sampling the
frequency axis at a relatively high density,
testing stimuli across a wide range of sound
levels, and advancing the electrode in
bursts with relatively long pauses (see Ma-
terials and Methods, Discussion). Because
of technical limitations, we could not accu-
rately determine spatial or laminar distri-
butions of O and I/V units. Additional ex-
periments are necessary to address
questions regarding anatomical organization of these response
types.
Level invariance can be implemented by the O
unit population
Figure 4A illustrates the different strategies by which populations
of I/V and O units cover frequency-level space. Individual O units
within a given frequency range are tuned to different sound levels
and completely cover the range of sound levels collectively but
maintaining similar frequency and level tuning widths. I/V units,
conversely, clearly exhibit a loss of frequency resolution with
increasing sound level. The covariance of frequency and level
tuning in V units may make it difficult to parse frequency and
level solely based on firing rate. The V unit in Figure 4 B, for
example, had a low threshold (0 dB) and monotonically increas-
ing firing rate with level. For this unit, frequency tuning curves at
Figure 4. Invariance of O unit tuning properties with level.A, Comparison of I/V and O unit coverage of the frequency and level
axes. Lines (top) correspond to receptive field extents of randomly selected I/V units at half-maximal firing rate. This represents
a traditional view of auditory cortex in which stimulus amplitude is represented by units with different thresholds. Frequency
resolution decreases with increasing level. Ellipses (bottom) correspond to O unit receptive fields at half-maximal firing rate. This
representation of stimulus space is different from the traditional view, in which amplitude in each frequency range is encoded by
multiple units tuned to a smaller range of levels and frequency tuning width is independent of level (colors of lines and ellipses
correspond to best frequency for clarity).B, The dependence of frequency tuning on level in I/V units leads to confusion in the
readout. Frequency tuning curves are plotted for an example low-threshold V unit at different levels (lines of increasing satura-
tion correspond to tuning curves at increasing levels). At maximum firing rate (dashed blue lines), there is only one possible
readout, but when the firing rate changes to a half-maximal level (dashed cyan lines), a number of possibilities covering a
frequency range of/H110111 octave and an amplitude range of/H1101180 dB must be resolved.C, In the O unit population, however, this
readout is much simpler. Even for an O unit responding over a 40 dB range, the number of possibilities at half-maximal rate and
the spread of possible parameter values are restricted.D, E, Population summary of the invariance of tuning properties of O units
with level. Regardless of best sound level, O units were narrowly tuned in frequency and level.F, The maximum firing rate of O
units in response to pure tones also did not change with sound level. (**p /H110210.01, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test).
3420 • J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex
five levels, from 0 to 80 dB were obtained in 20 dB steps. At the
maximal firing rate of the unit of /H1101180 spikes/s, there was no
ambiguity in readout with respect to frequency. When the firing
rate of this unit changed to a half-maximal level ( /H1101140 spikes/s),
however, a number of possible conditions, involving frequency-
level combinations over a range of 80 dB and/H110111 octave had to be
resolved. The number of possible frequency-level combinations
to be disambiguated for a typical O unit (Fig. 4C), however, were
much fewer and spanned a smaller parameter range than the V
unit shown in Figure 4 B. In a population-average-based readout
scenario, it would require pooling of a significantly smaller num-
ber of O units to arrive at the “correct” stimulus parameters.
Thus, a separable response to frequency and level is an advanta-
geous coding strategy.
Over the population of O units, we observed that frequency
tuning bandwidth (Fig. 4 D) and level tuning width (Fig. 4 E) did
not depend on the best sound level around which the unit re-
sponded. The level tuning width at the lowest level (0 dB) was
significantly smaller ( p /H110210.01, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test), but
this is likely attributable to an edge effect (because we did not
sample lower levels, we could observe only half of the level tuning
curve). Importantly, the maximum firing rate of the units in
response to pure tones also did not vary with sound level (Fig.
4 F). This effectively normalizes the neural representation of the
stimulus at all sound levels and removes the influence of sound
level on firing rate. In other words, independent of mean stimu-
lus intensity, similar tuning widths and firing rates ensure that the
stimulus is processed and represented in the same way at all
sound levels. This enables similar read-out mechanisms to be
used by downstream neurons without dependence on sound
level. Together, these data form the basis for our argument that
the O unit population is level invariant.
We explored this concept further by studying pure-tone re-
sponses in the presence of a continuous wideband noise masker.
Figure 5A shows FRAs of an O unit measured without and with
the addition of the masking noise at its BL. Although this unit
preferred 3.2 kHz tones presented at 10 dB in quiet (Fig. 5A, left),
addition of noise (at 10 dB) resulted in a shift of the BL of the unit
to 20 dB (Fig. 5 A, right) without changing its frequency or level
tuning widths. We measured the shift in BL caused by adding a
noise masker at multiple sound levels in 26 units that remained
strongly nonmonotonic in both quiet and noise (MI /H113490.5) (Fig.
5B). The addition of a noise masker at levels equal to or greater
than BL of these units caused a 67% shift ( p /H110210.0001, Wilcox-
on’s rank-sum test) of the BL toward louder levels. Addition of
the masker at levels lower than the BL of the units produced no
observable shift. Because observing a small shift is dependent on
sampling resolution, it is unclear whether any BL shifts occurred
at low masker levels. These observations are consistent with shifts
measured in anesthetized cat A1 (Phillips and Cynader, 1985).
They suggest that O units are robust to dynamic shifts in envi-
ronmental noise conditions. One interpretation of these data are
that the population of O units is also signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
tolerant. Although large changes in SNR cause different neurons
to become active, O units accommodate smaller changes by dy-
namically shifting their BL to account for prevailing noise condi-
tions. We focused on O units in testing the effect of adding back-
ground noise in the present study and did not collect sufficient
data to rigorously analyze threshold shifts of the I/V population.
In a few examples tested, I/V units also showed threshold shifts in
the presence of a noise masker, similar to shifts observed in pre-
vious studies in anesthetized cat A1 (Phillips and Cynader, 1985).
Tuning to sound level and shifts in best level with the addition
of a noise masker typically generalized to stimuli more complex
than tones. For example, the units in Figure 6A show similar best
levels and level tuning widths when tested with pure tones at BF
or with upward or downward lFM sweeps passing through the
units BF. We typically observed that best level, level tuning width,
and monotonicity index were preserved between tones and com-
plex stimuli (data forn /H1100513 units using lFM sweeps shown in Fig.
6 B). In a few tested units (Fig. 6C), similar shifts in best level were
observed when a noise masker was added to lFM stimuli.
A model of level-invariant coding in A1
Figure 7 summarizes our interpretation of these data as a concep-
tual model. Consider the representation of pure tones or lFM
sweeps by a population of entirely O or V units on the cortical
surface. For pure tones at low sound levels (0 dB) (Fig. 7 A, left
panel), only O units encoding that frequency-level combination
and V units with sufficiently low threshold respond. On the cor-
tical surface, the representations of the stimulus in both popula-
tions are similar. When the sound level is increased (to 80 dB)
(Fig. 7A, right panel), O units that responded previously to the 0
dB sound stop firing, and a new subpopulation of O units, tuned
to the 80 dB sound level, are now responsive. However, the nature
of the representation of the stimulus on the cortical surface by O
units does not change. In comparison, many more units in the V
unit population become active, including units not tuned (at
threshold) to the stimulus frequency, leading to widespread acti-
vation of the cortical surface.
For time-varying stimuli such as lFM sweeps (Fig. 7 B), a loss
of temporal resolution also occurs at high sound levels. When the
stimulus is presented at a low level (left panel), its representation
on the cortical surface is a tightly propagating wave of activity
across O units that respond at stimulus level and low threshold V
units (“freeze frames” at 50 and 100 ms after stimulus onset are
shown). When sound level increases, the pattern of activity is
retained in the O units because of the property of level invariance.
However, the neural activity becomes smeared out in frequency
and time in the V population. The neuron highlighted in black,
for example, responds over a 50 ms duration. It “sees” the lFM
sweep before the instantaneous frequency of the stimulus has
reached its BL (at threshold), simply as a result of increased band-
Figure 5. Effect of a continuous noise masker on O units.A, When continuous masker noise
(dashed line; masker level of 10 dB) was added while presenting tones to an O unit, the best
level of that unit shifted while maintaining frequency and level tuning.B, Over the population
of strongly nonmonotonic units (black histogram;n /H1100573 comparisons from 26 neurons, 2–3
masker levels per neuron), we observed a 50% shift in best level. However, because of our low
sampling resolution, it is unclear whether shifts occurred at low masker levels (cyan;n /H1100522).
When these data are plotted for maskers at or louder than the best level of the unit (red;n /H11005
51), the observed shift was higher (67%). This implies that the same units continue to encode
sounds when there are dynamic shifts in noise conditions without altering their tuning proper-
ties (**p /H110210.01, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test).
Sadagopan and Wang• Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008 • 28(13):3415–3426 • 3421
width at loud levels. Figure 7C illustrates this temporal smearing
of response that results from increasing bandwidth. For narrowly
tuned units (bottom panel), the stimulus crosses the excitatory
portion of the receptive field of the neuron quickly, resulting in a
temporally precise response. When frequency tuning bandwidth
is broad (top panel), the stimulus stays in the excitatory receptive
field for a proportionately longer duration, resulting in a re-
sponse that is smeared out in time. This ultimately leads to lower
spectral and temporal resolution and fundamentally changes the
representation of the stimulus at the population level. For exam-
ple, in a study of lFM responses in anesthetized cat A1, Heil et al.
(1992) report that, at higher intensities, neural responses to FM
sweeps were initiated at earlier instantaneous frequencies. Such
systematic influences of level on response timing may be attrib-
uted to a widening FRA.
This conceptual model helped us visualize how robustly dif-
ferent unit types code simple signals (like tones). However, to
generalize our observation to a broader class of sounds, measures
of population activity that reflect an underlying loss of resolution
in single neurons were necessary. Two such measures are the
selectivity and sparseness of a population of neurons (Lehky et al.,
2005). The loss of spectral and temporal resolution of V units
with level described above, for example, can be thought of as a
loss of selectivity (a unit responding to more stimuli) and a loss of
sparseness (more units in the population responding to a single
stimulus). Based on these ideas, we hypothesized that selectivity
and sparseness of a population of O units would remain the same
with level, whereas both parameters would decrease with level in
a population of V units when more complex stimuli are
presented.
To verify these predictions, we simulated a population of O
and V neurons with FRA parameters drawn from the aforemen-
tioned data. For simplicity, each neuron was modeled as a linear
spectral integrator (Barbour and Wang, 2003) with difference-of-
Gaussian-shaped frequency tuning curves (O’Connor et al.,
2005) and balanced inhibitory sidebands. O units were also tuned
to a BL, whereas V units exhibited linearly increasing response
strength and tuning bandwidth with sound level. Figure 8 A
shows examples of model O and V units. The addition of inhib-
itory sidebands and assumption of linearity are parsimonious
and necessary to ensure that the model behaves realistically. For
example, most A1 units in our experiments are nonresponsive to
wideband noise but are responsive to band-limited noise whose
bandwidth restricted to the excitatory peak. Sample responses of
model neurons to commonly used stimuli are shown in Figure
8 B.
Figure 9A is a snapshot of the activity of 300 O (left panel) and
V (right panel) neurons, respectively, in response to 300 complex
stimuli at four different sound levels. The “grayness” of each pixel
indicates the response strength of a single neuron to one of the
stimuli. It is evident that the fraction of gray pixels, which reflects
population activity across all stimuli, remains similar across all
sound levels in the O unit population (Fig. 9 A, left). This is en-
abled by the level-invariant nature of stimulus representation by
O units. In the V unit population, conversely, an increase in level
resulted in more V units responding to more stimuli (increasing
number of gray pixels with level). We quantified these observa-
tions using nonparametric measures of selectivity and sparseness
(Lehky et al., 2005).
Figure 9B is a plot of medians and interquartile distances of
these parameters for populations of O and V units at four differ-
ent sound levels. Selectivity and sparseness of the O unit popula-
tion were similar at all sound levels and considerably higher than
V units even at moderate levels (O and V medians at 40 dB:
selectivity, 11 and 3.6; sparseness, 17.5 and 1.7, respectively). Al-
though V units matched the performance of O units at threshold
(median selectivity, 13; sparseness, 36), they exhibited a system-
atic degradation with rising level (distributions of both parame-
ters at all sound levels are significantly different from all other
levels for V units; p /H110210.0001, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum tests). This
systematic degradation could be attributed directly to the in-
crease of frequency tuning bandwidth of model V neurons with
increasing sound level.
One testable prediction that emerged from this model was the
different temporal precision of O and V unit responses. Because
bandwidths of V units were broader at louder sound levels, their
responses were modulated at lower frequencies. This occurred
because stimuli tended to stay within their excitatory receptive
fields for longer durations (Fig. 7 C). In O units, however, the
combination of narrowly tuned excitation flanked by inhibition
shaped the response histograms precisely. When we measured
precision (Fig. 9C), defined here as the fraction of high-frequency
power ( /H1102210 Hz) in the response histogram (see Materials and
Figure 6. Level tuning typically generalized to more complex stimuli.A, Two example units
whose level tuning curves were similar for pure-tone and lFM stimuli. B, Correlation of level
tuning parameters (best level, level tuning width, and monotonicity index) derived using pure-
tone and lFM stimuli measured from 13 single units. C, In a few units tested, best level shifts
attributable to the addition of wideband noise masker also occurred for lFM stimuli with mag-
nitudes similar to pure-tone stimuli.
3422 • J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex
Methods), the V units showed a gradual decrease with increasing
level (Fig. 9C, top), whereas the O units retained similar response
precision at all sound levels (Fig. 9C, bottom). Precision of the O
unit population at 0 and 60 dB were 0.7 and 0.7044, respectively,
remaining relatively unchanged with varying level. However, pre-
cision of the V unit population at 0 and 60 dB were 0.8 and
0.6261, a 22% decrease over the range of sound levels tested.
Precision of the V unit population decreased significantly ( p /H11021
0.01, Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test) with each increase in level (in
steps of 20 dB).
Data derived from these simulations helped us understand the
activity of a population of O or V units in response to complex
stimuli. Broadening of frequency tuning bandwidth with increas-
ing level in single V units profoundly affected the nature of pop-
ulation activity (and, therefore, the neural representation of the
stimuli) when complex stimuli were presented. These results fur-
ther underscore the advantage of the level-invariant coding strat-
egy that is implemented by the O unit population.
Discussion
The present study investigated single units in A1 of awake mar-
mosets that were narrowly tuned to both frequency and sound
level, distributed across a wide range of frequencies and sound
levels. We propose based on these observations a framework for a
robust representation of sounds across the large variations of
intensity that are found in natural acoustic environments. In-
stead of thinking about these units tuned to sound level as encod-
ing “best level” using their peak location, we propose that the O
units remove the influence of sound level on frequency tuning so
that variations in frequency content can now be coded in firing
rate without the confounding influence of level. Whereas O units
are involved in level-invariant processing, I/V units are well
suited for an equally important function. The broad bandwidths
Figure 7. Conceptual model of a level-invariant representation in A1.A, Diagram of a cortical sheet of neurons responding to a pure tone. Gray circles represent individual neurons, ordered by
best frequency and best level, and grayscale fill represents response rate. When a pure tone (at 5 kHz, for example) is presented at a low level (0 dB; left), only O units tuned to low levels and
low-threshold V units respond. In both cases, because of narrow frequency tuning, spread of activity is restricted to a small number of neurons. When sound level is increased (80 dB; right), O units
tuned to this level start responding but the units tuned to low levels stop firing. The pattern of activity generated is just as restricted as low sound levels. However, activity spreads over a range of
V units coding different frequencies and sound levels, leading to a loss of spectral resolution.B, If a linear frequency modulated sweep (gray bar indicates spectral extent of sweep; small black arrows
indicate instantaneous frequency of sweep) is presented as the stimulus at low levels (0 dB; left), a tight packet of activity propagates with the sweep across the cortical surface (snapshots of the
population at 50 and 100 ms into the sweep are shown). When level is increased (80 dB; right), activity packets are just as well resolved in the O unit population. In the V unit population, there is
temporal and spectral degradation. The neuron highlighted in black, for example, is active over a duration of 50 ms, starting to fire before the sweep “reaches” its BF (computed at threshold) and
firing well after the sweep has crossed its BF.C, Temporal precision of response is also affected by bandwidth. When an lFM sweep (black line) crosses the excitatory receptive field (shaded gray) of
a narrowly tuned unit (bottom), response duration (double arrow) is short. However, for broadly tuned units (top), response is smeared out over time.
Figure 8. Model O and V units and their responses to common stimuli.A, FRAs of O and V
units that were modeled as spectrally linear integrators with difference of Gaussian-shaped
receptive fields with response parameters drawn from our experimental data.B, Model O and V
unit responses to commonly used stimuli. Both types of model units were responsive to pure
tones, bandpass noise (with bandwidth limited to the excitatory part of their receptive fields),
and marmoset twitter calls. Neither class responded to wideband noise.
Sadagopan and Wang• Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008 • 28(13):3415–3426 • 3423
of I/V units allow them to analyze the context in which a sound is
heard over a wide parameter range and helps establish a reference
point for overall sound level based on prevailing background
conditions. They can thus act as “detectors” of sounds or back-
ground signals over a wide range of frequencies and levels.
In contrast to our results, previous studies in anesthetized cat
(Schreiner et al., 2000; Moshitch et al., 2006) and awake primates
(Recanzone et al., 2000) show that most A1 units have V-shaped
FRAs. Several factors could lead to the discrepancy between the
results of the present and previous studies: (1) anesthetic effects
and related laminar biases, (2) coarse sampling with search stim-
uli, (3) search biases attributable to inherent differences in re-
sponse properties between O and I/V units, and (4) potential
species specificity. Most studies of anesthetized A1 were restricted
to layer 4 because of the difficulty of driving layer 2/3 neurons
under anesthesia, whereas the present study sampled the supra-
granular layers extensively in the awake marmoset. It is conceiv-
able that the shape of the FRA is affected by anesthesia and lam-
inar position. However, this does not explain why the study by
Recanzone et al. (2000) in awake macaques did not encounter as
many O units as we did.
One likely source of this discrepancy is a unit search bias.
Because O units are narrowly tuned to frequency and level, ex-
perimental stimuli need to finely sample frequency and level axes.
Using coarser spacing in frequency and searching only at one or
two moderately loud levels would bias the experimenter toward
V units because they are more widely tuned and have monotonic
rate-level functions. The inherent differences in basic response
properties such as the higher spontaneous and driven rates of V
units make this bias toward V units stronger. This possibility is
supported by the higher spontaneous and peak driven rates of
neurons reported by Recanzone et al. (2000) in their study, which
is comparable with those of our I/V units. We avoided these
biases by searching at multiple sound levels, using a battery of
search stimuli that was not restricted to tones and by depending
less on stimulus-driven responses to isolate single units. A second
possibility is the difference in stimulus delivery. Whereas Recan-
zone et al. (2000) delivered stimuli to the contralateral ear, we
presented stimuli from a speaker situated directly in front of the
animal.
It is unlikely that our results differ from previous results be-
cause of species specificity of this phenomenon. Neurons similar
to O units are predominant in the DSCF of bats (Suga, 1977; Suga
and Manabe, 1982), and high proportions of strongly nonmono-
tonic units have also been found in A1 of awake macaques
(Brugge and Merzenich, 1973; Pfingst and O’Connor, 1981). One
study reported that strongly nonmonotonic units were found
more often when recording single-unit responses (28%) than
multiunit responses (8%) in anesthetized cat A1 (Sutter and
Schreiner, 1995). Furthermore, multiunit responses recorded
from middle layers of barbiturate-anesthetized marmoset A1
showed predominantly V-shaped FRAs (X. Wang, unpublished
data). Another multiunit study of the A1 in anesthetized marmo-
sets (Philibert et al., 2005) also indicates a prevalence of V-shaped
FRAs (Q
40 dB /H11021Q10 dB , suggesting V-shaped FRAs). Philibert et
al. (2005) concluded that the functional organization of marmo-
set A1 is similar to that found in the owl monkey (Recanzone et
al., 1999) and the squirrel monkey (Cheung et al., 2001). These
studies suggest that, within the same species, different physiolog-
ical states may lead to different response properties related to
sound level.
Experimental data from several studies have revealed that the
pattern of cortical activation as a function of level is not predicted
by underlying single-unit tuning curves. For example, Heil et al.
(1994) show that, in anesthetized cat A1, mean cortical activation
increases with increasing intensity at low and moderate levels and
saturates at high levels, whereas spatial patterns of activation
along isofrequency contours continue to change at high levels. If
all A1 neurons were O shaped with their thresholds and best levels
equally distributed across sound levels, there would be no change
in mean cortical activation with increasing sound level. The in-
crease in mean activation observed by Heil et al. (1994) can be
explained by the activity of I/V neurons that increase their firing
rate with increasing level at low and moderate levels before satu-
rating at high levels. An important difference is that the present
study was based on single-units classified as either O or I/V
Figure 9. Simulation of O and V unit responses to test population level invariance.A, Nor-
malized responses of 300 O (left) or V (right) units to a battery of 300 complex stimuli at multiple
levels. Units are sorted by selectivity and stimuli are sorted by efficacy (gray shading indicates
response strength) for display clarity. Whereas similar numbers of O units responded to similar
numbers of stimuli at al levels, more V units became active in response to more stimuli as level
increased. B, Indicators of population activity remained constant with level in the simulated O
unit population but degraded in the V unit population. Selectivity and sparseness (lines are
interquartile range, and intersection points are medians) of the O unit population (gray lines;
black, 60 dB; lightest gray, 0 dB) remained constant, with sound level indicating level invariance
of the population. The V unit population (red lines; red, 60 dB; lightest pink, 0 dB) resembled the
O unit population at a low level (0 dB) but gradually lost selectivity and sparseness with increas-
ing sound level.C, This model predicts decreasing precision of V unit responses with increasing
sound level as a consequence of increasing bandwidth, whereas precision of O unit responses
remain constant with level.
3424 • J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex
shaped, whereas Heil et al. (1994) study was based on multiunits
recorded from middle cortical layers. It is not clear what propor-
tions of O- and I/V-shaped units were included in the mean
multiunit activity observed by Heil et al. (1994). The change in
spatial patterns with increasing sound level observed by Heil et al.
(1994) represents a different way of signaling changing sound
level than the intensity coding mechanism proposed in the
present study. Phillips et al. (1994) showed that the pattern of
cortical activation bears little relationship to the threshold CF
contour map in anesthetized cat A1. This may be primarily ex-
plained by the spatially unorganized occurrence of nonmono-
tonic units along isofrequency contours that are rendered inac-
tive with a change in level. Another study in cat auditory cortex
using consonant–vowel speech sounds found that, although spa-
tial activation was strongly intensity dependent, the pattern of
activation was patchy (Wong and Schreiner, 2003). Our results
and our proposed model partially concur with these studies. The
small population of monotonic I/V units might account for the
increase in mean spatial activation, with “patchiness” being a
consequence of different spatially unorganized O units firing at
different sound levels.
Another interesting issue is how O-shaped FRAs are gener-
ated. It is as yet unclear to what extent O-shaped FRAs are created
at A1 or inherited from subcortical stations. For example, a large
proportion of nonmonotonic units have been found in the audi-
tory thalamus (Rouiller et al., 1983). Alternatively, the evolution
of V unit responses over time to O unit-like responses (Fig. 3B, C)
might point to a cortical inhibition source as a likely candidate for
shaping O-like responses. For example, intracellular data from
nonmonotonic units in anesthetized cats revealed strong inhibi-
tion at loud sound levels (Ojima and Murakami, 2002). A more
recent study demonstrated that unbalanced synaptic inhibition,
likely of cortical origin, underlies intensity tuning in rat A1 (Tan
et al., 2007). A recent study found that behavioral training could
cause over-representation of target-specific sound levels in the
auditory cortex of rats. This shows that the best level of cortical
units is amenable to top-down influences, again suggesting a
strong cortical influence on level tuning (Polley et al., 2006).
Another likely possibility is a combination of both factors.
Namely, thalamocortical inputs that are weakly nonmonotonic
may be sharpened further by cortical inhibition, leading to the
strongly level-tuned neurons that we observe.
It is also important to ask why O units are necessary for audi-
tory processing and how they fit into the processing hierarchy.
Many studies suggest that receptive field structure reflects an
efficient representation of stimulus space (Simoncelli, 2003;
Smith and Lewicki, 2006). Marmosets make both loud (phee
calls) and quiet (trill calls) vocalizations that are highly tonal in
nature (Agamaite, 1997; DiMattina and Wang, 2006). One might
hear the same sound in a variety of listening conditions, such as
distance from source, occlusion by intervening objects, and
changing ambient noise conditions. Variability in all these con-
ditions determines the effective intensity at which the sound is
heard, but the quality of the sound remains unaffected. O units
may reflect an internal representation of this statistical indepen-
dence of frequency and level, exploiting this property to code
sounds efficiently. Note that we are not proposing that the encod-
ing of absolute sound level is not important in A1. Rather, this
could be accomplished at subcortical processing stations or by
the population of I/V units in A1. We only argue that implement-
ing level-invariant coding at an early stage of cortical processing is
a highly desirable property that can simplify computational goals
of the auditory cortex, such as feature or object recognition. Level
invariance at the population level among the O units in A1 might
provide information to cortical areas higher in the auditory hier-
archy in which level invariance can be seen in single neurons. For
example, a recent study found scale-invariant multiunit re-
sponses in the auditory cortex of anesthetized bats (Firzlaff et al.,
2007). In the context of echolocation, object scale is associated
with changes in amplitude and delay of the reflected echolocation
pulse. A level-invariant representation of such sounds could be a
potential first stage in achieving this scale invariance.
It is unclear how the sound level invariance proposed here
compares mechanistically with invariance to intensity dimen-
sions in other modalities. This is attributable to the fact that the
tuning to stimulus intensity observed in A1 has not been ob-
served in other sensory cortices. For example, neural response
rates increase monotonically as a function of stimulus indenta-
tion in primary somatosensory cortex (Wang et al., 1995), as a
function of whisker deflection velocity in barrel cortex (Wilent
and Contreras, 2004), and as a function of stimulus contrast in
primary visual cortex (Skottun et al., 1987). Even neurons in
higher cortical areas such as macaque area V4 respond with
monotonically increasing rates as stimulus contrast increases
(Williford and Maunsell, 2006). Therefore, the tuning to sound
level exhibited by A1 units and the mechanisms by which inten-
sity invariance is implemented by these units is possibly unique to
auditory processing.
References
Agamaite JA (1997) A quantitative characterization of the vocal repertoire
of the common marmoset. Master’s thesis, Johns Hopkins University.
Barbour DL, Wang X (2003) Auditory cortical responses elicited in awake
primates by random spectral stimuli. J Neurosci 23:7194 –7206.
Brincat SL, Connor CE (2006) Dynamic shape synthesis in posterior infero-
temporal cortex. Neuron 49:17–24.
Brugge JF, Merzenich MM (1973) Responses of neurons in auditory cortex
of the macaque monkey to monaural and binaural stimulation. J Neuro-
physiol 36:1138 –1158.
Calford MB, Webster WR, Semple MM (1983) Measurement of frequency
selectivity of single neurons in the central auditory pathway. Hear Res
11:395– 401.
Cheung SW, Bedenbaugh PH, Nagarajan SS, Schreiner CE (2001) Func-
tional organization of squirrel monkey primary auditory cortex: re-
sponses to pure tones. J Neurophysiol 85:1732–1749.
Davis KA (2005) Spectral processing in the inferior colliculus. Int Rev Neu-
robiol 70:169 –205.
DiMattina C, Wang X (2006) Virtual vocalization stimuli for investigating
neural representations of species-specific vocalizations. J Neurophysiol
95:1244 –1262.
Firzlaff U, Schuchmann M, Grunwald JE, Schuller G, Wiegrebe L (2007)
Object-oriented echo perception and cortical representation in echolo-
cating bats. PLoS Biol 5:1174 –1183.
Heil P, Rajan R, Irvine DRF (1992) Sensitivity of neurons in primary audi-
tory cortex to tones and frequency-modulated stimuli. I. Effects of varia-
tion of stimulus parameters. Hear Res 63:108 –134.
Heil P, Rajan R, Irvine DRF (1994) Topographic representation of tone in-
tensity along the isofrequency axis of cat primary auditory cortex. Hear
Res 76:188 –202.
Hirsh IJ, Reynolds EG, Joseph M (1954) Intelligibility of different speech
materials. J Acoust Soc Am 26:530 –538.
Kadia SC, Wang X (2003) Spectral integration in A1 of awake primates:
neurons with single- and multipeaked tuning characteristics. J Neuro-
physiol 89:1603–1622.
Kiang NY (1965) Discharge patterns of single fibers in the cat’s auditory
nerve. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Kilgard MP, Merzenich MM (1999) Distributed representation of spectral
and temporal information in rat primary auditory cortex. Hear Res
134:16 –28.
LeBeau FEN, Malmierca MS, Rees A (2001) Iontophoresis in vivo demon-
strates a key role for GABA
A and glycinergic inhibition in shaping fre -
Sadagopan and Wang• Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008 • 28(13):3415–3426 • 3425
quency response areas in the inferior colliculus of guinea pig. J Neurosci
21:7303–7312.
Lehky SR, Sejnowski TJ, Desimone R (2005) Selectivity and sparseness in
the responses of striate complex cells. Vision Res 45:57–73.
Linden JF, Liu RC, Sahani M, Schreiner CE, Merzenich MM (2003) Spec-
trotemporal structure of receptive fields in areas A1 and AAF of mouse
auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol 90:2660 –2675.
Lu T, Liang L, Wang X (2001) Neural representation of temporally asym-
metric stimuli in the auditory cortex of awake primates. J Neurophysiol
85:2364 –2380.
Malone BJ, Kumar VR, Ringach DL (2007) Dynamics of receptive field size
in primary visual cortex. J Neurophysiol 97:407– 414.
Moshitch D, Las L, Ulanovsky N, Bar-Yosef O, Nelken I (2006) Responses of
neurons in primary auditory cortex (A1) to pure tones in the halothane-
anesthetized cat. J Neurophysiol 95:3756 –3769.
Nomoto M, Suga N, Katsuki Y (1964) Discharge pattern and inhibition of
primary auditory nerve fibers in the monkey. J Neurophysiol 27:768 –787.
O’Connor KN, Petkov CI, Sutter ML (2005) Adaptive stimulus optimiza-
tion for auditory cortical neurons. J Neurophysiol 94:4051– 4067.
Ojima H, Murakami K (2002) Intracellular characterization of suppressive
responses in supragranular pyramidal neurons of cat primary auditory
cortex in vivo. Cereb Cortex 12:1079 –1091.
Pack CC, Berezovskii VK, Born RT (2001) Dynamic properties of neurons
in cortical area MT in alert and anesthetized macaque monkeys. Nature
414:905–908.
Pfingst BE, O’Connor TA (1981) Characteristics of neurons in auditory cor-
tex of monkeys performing a simple auditory task. J Neurophysiol
45:16 –34.
Philibert B, Beitel RE, Nagarajan SS, Bonham BH, Schreiner CE, Cheung SW
(2005) Functional organization and hemispheric comparison of primary
auditory cortex in the common marmoset ( Callithrix jacchus ). J Comp
Neurol 487:391– 406.
Phillips DP, Cynader MS (1985) Some neural mechanisms in the cat’s au-
ditory cortex underlying sensitivity to combined tone and wide-spectrum
noise stimuli. Hear Res 18:87–102.
Phillips DP, Irvine DR (1981) Responses of single neurons in physiologi-
cally defined primary auditory cortex (A1) of the cat: frequency tuning
and responses to intensity. J Neurophysiol 45:48 –58.
Phillips DP, Orman SS (1984) Responses of single neurons in posterior field
of cat auditory cortex to tonal stimulation. J Neurophysiol 51:147–163.
Phillips DP, Semple MN, Calford MB, Kitzes LM (1994) Level-dependent
representation of stimulus frequency in cat primary auditory cortex. Exp
Brain Res 102:210 –226.
Polley DB, Steinberg EE, Merzenich MM (2006) Perceptual learning directs
auditory cortical map reorganization through top-down influences.
J Neurosci 26:4970 – 4982.
Popper AN, Fay RR, eds (1992) The mammalian auditory pathway: neuro-
physiology. New York: Springer.
Ramachandran R, Davis KA, May BJ (1999) Single-unit responses in the
inferior colliculus of the decerebrate cats. I. Classification based on fre-
quency response maps. J Neurophysiol 82:152–163.
Recanzone GH, Schreiner CE, Sutter ML, Beitel RE, Merzenich MM (1999)
Functional organization of spectral receptive fields in the primary audi-
tory cortex of the owl monkey. J Comp Neurol 415:460 – 481.
Recanzone GH, Guard DC, Phan ML (2000) Frequency and intensity re-
sponse properties of single neurons in the auditory cortex of the behaving
macaque monkey. J Neurophysiol 83:2315–2331.
Rose JE, Greenwood DD, Goldberg JM, Hind JE (1963) Some discharge
characteristics of single neurons in the inferior colliculus of the cat. I.
Tonotopical organization, relation of spike counts to tone intensity, and
firing patterns of single elements. J Neurophysiol 26:294 –320.
Rouiller E, de Ribaupierre Y, Morel E, de Ribaupierre F (1983) Intensity
functions of single unit responses to tone in the medial geniculate body of
cat. Hear Res 11:235–247.
Schreiner CE, Read HL, Sutter ML (2000) Modular organization of fre-
quency integration in primary auditory cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci
23:501–529.
Shamma SA, Fleshman JW, Wiser PR, Versnel H (1993) Organization of
response areas in ferret primary auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol
69:367–383.
Simoncelli EP (2003) Vision and the statistics of the visual environment.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:144 –149.
Skottun BC, Bradley A, Sclar G, Ohzawa I, Freeman RD (1987) The effects
of contrast on visual orientation and spatial frequency discrimination: a
comparison of single cells and behavior. J Neurophysiol 57:773–786.
Smith EC, Lewicki MS (2006) Efficient auditory coding. Nature
439:978 –982.
Spirou GA, Young ED (1991) Organization of dorsal cochlear nucleus type
IV unit response maps and their relationship to activation by bandlimited
noise. J Neurophysiol 66:1750 –1768.
Studebaker GA, Gilmore C, Sherbecoe RL (1993) Performance-intensity
functions at absolute and masked thresholds. J Acoust Soc Am
93:3418 –3421.
Studebaker GA, Sherbecoe RL, McDaniel MD, Gwaltney CA (1999) Mono-
syllabic word recognition at higher-than-normal speech and noise levels.
J Acoust Soc Am 105:2431–2444.
Suga N (1965a) Analysis of frequency-modulated sounds by auditory neu-
rones of echo-locating bats. J Physiol (Lond) 179:26 –53.
Suga N (1965b) Functional properties of auditory neurones in the cortex of
echo-locating bats. J Physiol (Lond) 181:671–700.
Suga N (1969) Classification of inferior collicular neurones of bats in terms
of responses to pure tones, frequency-modulated sounds and noise
bursts. J Physiol (Lond) 200:555–574.
Suga N (1977) Amplitude spectrum representation in the doppler-
shifed-CF processing area of the auditory cortex of the mustached bat.
Science 196:64 – 67.
Suga N (1992) Philosophy and stimulus design for neuroethology of
complex-sound processing. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
336:423– 428.
Suga N, Manabe T (1982) Neural basis of amplitude-spectrum representa-
tion in the auditory cortex of the mustached bat. J Neurophysiol
47:225–255.
Sutter ML, Schreiner CE (1995) Topography of intensity tuning in cat pri-
mary auditory cortex: single-neuron versus multi-neuron recordings.
J Neurophysiol 73:190 –204.
Sutter ML (2000) Shapes and level tolerances of frequency tuning curves in
primary auditory cortex: quantitative measures and population codes.
J Neurophysiol 84:1012–1025.
Tan AY, Zhang LI, Merzenich MM, Schreiner CE (2004) Tone-evoked ex-
citatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances of primary auditory cortex
neurons. J Neurophysiol 92:630 – 643.
Tan AY, Atencio CA, Polley DB, Merzenich MM, Schreiner CE (2007) Un-
balanced synaptic inhibition can create intensity-tuned auditory cortex
neurons. Neuroscience 146:449 – 462.
Wang X, Merzenich MM, Sameshima K, Jenkins WM (1995) Remodeling of
hand representation in adult cortex determined by timing of tactile stim-
ulation. Nature 378:71–75.
Wang X, Lu T, Snider RK, Liang L (2005) Sustained firing in auditory cortex
evoked by preferred stimuli. Nature 435:341–346.
Wilent WB, Contreras D (2004) Synaptic responses to whisker deflection in
rat barrel cortex as a function of cortical layer and stimulus intensity.
J Neurosci 24:3985–3998.
Williford T, Maunsell JH (2006) Effects of spatial attention on contrast re-
sponse functions in macaque area V4. J Neurophysiol 96:40 –54.
Wong SW, Schreiner CE (2003) Representation of CV-sounds in cat pri-
mary auditory cortex: intensity dependence. Speech Commun 41:93–106.
Yang L, Pollack GD, Resler C (1992) GABAergic circuits sharpen tuning
curves and modify response properties in the mustache bat inferior col-
liculus. J Neurophysiol 68:1760 –1774.
3426
• J. Neurosci., March 26, 2008• 28(13):3415–3426 Sadagopan and Wang • Level Invariance in Primary Auditory Cortex