Stimulus contrast modulates functional connectivity in visual
cortex
Ian Nauhaus1, Laura Busse2, Matteo Carandini2,3, and Dario L Ringach1,4,5
1Biomedical Engineering Department, University of California Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.
2Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute, 2318 Fillmore Street, San Francisco, California 94115, USA.
3UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, 11-43 Bath Street, London EC1V 9EL, UK.
4Department of Neurobiology, University of California Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.
5Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.
Abstract
Neurons in visual cortex are linked by an extensive network of lateral connections. To study the
effect of these connections on neural responses, we recorded spikes and local field potentials (LFPs)
from multi-electrode arrays that were implanted in monkey and cat primary visual cortex. Spikes at
each location generated outward traveling LFP waves. When the visual stimulus was absent or had
low contrast, these LFP waves had large amplitudes and traveled over long distances. Their effect
was strong: LFP traces at any site could be predicted by the superposition of waves that were evoked
by spiking in a ∼1.5-mm radius. As stimulus contrast increased, both the magnitude and the distance
traveled by the waves progressively decreased. We conclude that the relative weight of feedforward
and lateral inputs in visual cortex is not fixed, but rather depends on stimulus contrast. Lateral
connections dominate at low contrast, when spatial integration of signals is perhaps most beneficial.
Neurons in primary visual cortex (area V1) receive input from the thalamus and from an
extensive network of lateral connections. The relative strength of these two signals remains
controversial. One view holds that the responses of V1 neurons are largely determined by local
processing of thalamic inputs1-5, whereas another view states that V1 responses are
substantially shaped by long-range lateral connections6-13. An implicit assumption in this
debate has been that the relative weight of feedforward and lateral connectivity signals is fixed
and is independent of the stimulus. We hypothesized that experimental findings supporting
one or the other view could be reconciled if this relative weight was dependent on stimulus
conditions.
To test this idea, we simultaneously recorded spiking activity and LFPs from multi-electrode
arrays that were implanted in primary visual cortex in monkeys and cats. The LFP reflects the
membrane potential of a local population of neurons. By computing spike-triggered LFP
Correspondence should be addressed to I.N. (inauhaus@gmail.com)..
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed in the execution of the experiments, the analysis of the data and the writing of the manuscript.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Neuroscience website.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2009 January ; 12(1): 70±76. doi:10.1038/nn.2232.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
averages14, we assessed the strength of postsynaptic activity at one cortical site that was caused
by spiking at another location. Hence, this postsynaptic activity is a measure of functional
connectivity between the site where the spikes are recorded and the site where the LFP is
measured.
The LFP, especially in the absence of a sensory stimulus, is a highly variable signal
characteristic of ongoing activity. We found that this activity was the result of the superposition
of a myriad of traveling waves, each originating from spikes in a region spanning millimeters
of cortex. Spikes at any given site generated a radial traveling wave of LFP activation
representing net depolarizing synaptic input, whose amplitude decreased with distance. When
the stimulus was absent, these lateral contributions extended over a large area and strongly
influenced cortical activity, allowing us to predict the waveform of the spontaneous LFP traces
with reasonable accuracy.
As the contrast of the visual stimulus increased, both the spatial footprint of lateral connectivity
and its effect on visual responses were progressively reduced. These findings indicate that the
relative weight of feedforward and lateral inputs is not fixed, but is contrast dependent. Our
results offer a new conceptual framework that could help reconcile two views of cortical
processing that have previously been believed to be incompatible.
RESULTS
We recorded spike activity and LFPs across 10 × 10 arrays of electrodes that were implanted
in primary visual cortex of anesthetized monkeys (area 17) and cats (area 18). Previously, we
established that the LFP represents a measure of local postsynaptic activity in a ∼250-μm radius
of the recording site15. Thus, sampling 400-μm intervals allows for estimates of postsynaptic
activity in neuronal populations that are largely nonoverlapping.
To investigate how the spiking activity at one cortical site evoked synaptic input at another
site, we calculated spike-triggered LFPs14 (Fig. 1a). First, we selected an electrode as the
reference site for the spiking activity (Fig. 1a). Then, we computed spike-triggered averages
of the LFP signals across the entire electrode array (Fig. 1a). The spike-triggered LFP average
was analyzed to estimate its peak (negative) amplitude and the time to peak relative to the
generating spike (Fig. 1b). This procedure was repeated by selecting all possible reference
electrodes in the array.
Cortical spikes trigger traveling waves of LFP activity
We first characterized spike-triggered LFPs during spontaneous activity and found that spikes
at any given electrode site created outward propagating waves of LFP activity across the cortex.
The time to peak increased linearly with radial distance as 
 , where d represents the cortical
distance and v is the propagation speed (Fig. 2). This propagation speed was, on average, 0.24
± 0.20 m s−1 in monkeys and 0.31 ± 0.23 m s−1 in cats (mean ± s.d.). The propagating wave
that we observed following cortical spikes is reminiscent of the spread of activity that has
previously been reported in response to a small visual stimulus8,16-18. This spread of activity
constitutes a traveling wave that propagates at ∼0.3 m s−1 in cats17 and at 0.09–0.25 m s−1 in
monkeys18. These speeds of propagation suggest that the activity may travel along long-range
horizontal connections19, whose propagation speed in cats is ∼0.3 m s−1 (ref. 20).
The peak amplitude of these radial waves decayed with distance from the spikes in an
approximately exponential manner, 
 , where M is the magnitude of the wave
(Fig. 2). The space constant λ captures the rate at which the amplitude falls off with distance;
Nauhaus et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
during spontaneous activity, it averaged 2.1 ± 0.6 mm for monkeys (mean ± s.d., n = 99 sites)
and 5.8 ± 1.9 mm for cats (n = 116 sites). The parameter B represents an asymptotic baseline
amplitude achieved at large cortical distances.
The tight temporal correspondence of the spikes and the waves, the linear dependence of wave
delay on cortical distance, and the temporal asymmetry of the correlations suggest that the
spikes caused the LFP waves. Temporal asymmetry refers to the fact that a spike at location
A correlates with a delayed LFP response at location B, whereas a spike at location B correlates
with a delayed LFP response at location A. A fixed common input to locations A and B would
not be able to generate this asymmetric temporal pattern of correlations.
Predicting the LFP from the spiking of neuronal populations
To further test the causal relationship between spikes and LFP waves, we asked whether the
LFP signal at one site could be predicted from spiking at remote locations. This is a demanding
test, as the LFP in the absence of a stimulus is a highly variable signal and, to the best of our
knowledge, no computational model has succeeded in predicting it quantitatively.
We found that the waveform of the LFP signal measured during spontaneous activity can in
fact be well predicted given knowledge of the individual spike times across the array (Fig.
3a,b). Having chosen an arbitrary site for measuring the LFP, we computed the average spike-
triggered waveforms from spikes at each remaining site in the array. Superposition of these
waves on the basis of the actual spike times at these sites yielded a simple linear prediction of
the LFP trace. This prediction was markedly accurate (Fig. 3a) and the accuracy increased as
the area over which the spikes were integrated extended to encompass a larger cortical region
(Fig. 3b). The improved accuracy obtained by summing from distal sites is further evidence
against a single common input to the entire area, as the contributions from increasingly distant
sites arrive with correspondingly increasing delay. On average, linear superposition accounted
for 46% of the LFP variance in monkeys and 51% of the variance in cats (Fig. 3b), with the
residual being largely restricted to high temporal frequencies (Fig. 3c).
These results indicate that the synaptic input to a local region during spontaneous activity is
largely explained by the effect of spikes at distal cortical locations. Specifically, the synaptic
input to neurons during spontaneous activity can be thought of as the superposition of a myriad
of traveling waves originating from individual spikes distributed over an extended region of
cortex.
Lateral connectivity depends on preferred orientation
Lateral connectivity in visual cortex is thought to be related to maps of orientation preference.
Anatomical studies indicate that horizontal connections have a tendency to privilege sites with
similar orientation preference18,21. Imaging studies, accordingly, suggest that activity at sites
with similar orientation preference may be more strongly correlated9,10.
We therefore asked whether the traveling waves showed a bias toward sites with similar
orientation preference (Fig. 4). We first accounted for the strong dependence on cortical
distance by subtracting the exponential fits from the data points corresponding to each reference
electrode. The residual amplitudes measured at each site were then z scored and plotted as a
function of the absolute difference in orientation preference between the site and the reference
location. Orientation preference at each site was computed by reverse correlation in the
orientation domain6. The population data showed a significant effect of orientation on
functional connectivity, whereby sites with similar orientation preference were linked more
strongly than those with orthogonal preferences (t test, n – 2 degrees of freedom, P o 2 ×
10−7; Fig. 4). When tested individually on each animal, we found that the effect was statistically
Nauhaus et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
significant in three of the four animals (cats and in one monkey, P < 0.002; one monkey, P =
0.82).
Thus, our results are largely consistent with those of prior studies. The differences in the overall
magnitude of the effect may be a consequence of the different measures that were used, LFPs
rather than voltage sensitive–dye signals. Because of the different spatial scales of the
orientation maps in the two species, it is perhaps not surprising that the effect was harder to
detect in monkeys. Orientation preference maps in monkeys have smaller periodicity than in
cats, and thus the effect of orientation could be overwhelmed by the strength of the effect of
cortical distance.
Lateral connectivity depends on contrast
The phenomena discussed so far concern spontaneous activity, that is, the ongoing activity
measured in the absence of visual stimulation. These phenomena were profoundly modified
by the introduction of a strong visual stimulus (Fig. 5). We measured spikes and LFP traces
during the presentation of a set of full-field drifting gratings at 100% contrast. We computed
spike-triggered LFPs for this driven activity with the same methods that we employed in the
analysis of spontaneous activity. First, the amplitudes of the spike-triggered LFPs were much
smaller during driven activity than during spontaneous activity (Fig. 5). There was, therefore,
a global tendency for the cortex to become decorrelated during strong visual stimulation
relative to its spontaneous state. Second, there was a clear change in the shape of the fall-off
function, with space constants in the driven condition being substantially smaller than those
in the spontaneous condition. This reduction of the space constant indicates that the relative
synaptic input to a given region became more spatially restricted at high contrast.
To quantify this stimulus-induced modulation of lateral connectivity, we computed ratios from
parameters in the exponential fits: a ratio of space constants, 
 , and a ratio of magnitudes,
 (Fig. 6a). When comparing the spontaneous condition to the driven condition, space
constants in both cats and monkeys decreased by a factor of 4.2 ± 2.4 (3.0 ± 2.3 in monkeys
and 5.5 ± 2.1 in cats, geometric mean ± geometric s.d.), whereas the magnitudes decreased, on
average, by a factor of 2.2 ± 1.9 (1.7 ± 1.8 in monkeys and 2.7 ± 1.9 in cats, in all cases a t test
of the log-ratio yielded P < 10−20).
The change in functional connectivity introduced by high-contrast visual stimulation represents
an extreme of a gradual change seen with progressively stronger stimuli. In two monkeys, we
collected data from drifting gratings at an intermediate contrast (25%) and found that the
modulation of lateral connectivity depended smoothly on contrast (Fig. 6b).
As a control experiment, we repeated the analysis by triggering on the spikes of well-isolated
single units rather than on those collected as multi-unit activity (Fig. 7). Indeed, an artifactual
cause for the changes seen during visual stimulation would occur if visual stimulation changed
the pool of neurons contributing to the multi-unit activity. The results that we obtained from
single-unit activity were very similar to those that we obtained from multi-unit activity. The
observed differences in spike-triggered LFPs space constants and magnitudes between
spontaneous and driven conditions did not depend on the type of spike isolation (Fig. 7,
compare with Fig. 5), providing further evidence that stimulus contrast modulates the strength
and extent of lateral connectivity.
Along similar lines, we asked whether the change in functional connectivity induced by stimuli
could be observed directly in the subthreshold responses, which are more directly related to
synaptic inputs than spike trains (Fig. 8). We therefore studied the cross-correlations between
Nauhaus et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
LFP signals at pairs of sites. As expected, these cross-correlation functions did not show any
evidence of traveling waves (the functions peaked at time zero independently of the distance
between sites). Indeed, considerations of symmetry dictate that there is no reason why synaptic
activity in one location of cortex should consistently precede activity in another location. The
correlation functions, however, did show a clear weakening with increasing contrast (Fig. 8),
providing further evidence that increasing stimulus strength decouples cortical activity in
space.
DISCUSSION
We measured spike-triggered averages of LFP signals across a cortical patch as a measurement
of effective cortical connectivity. This analysis circumvents problems that are associated with
spike cross-correlation measurements, such as the low probability of finding two cells with
significant interactions22,23 and the nonlinear dependence of correlation coefficients on the
mean spike rate of the cells under consideration24-26. This method allowed us to study how
lateral connectivity is modified when the stimulus contrast is changed without having to
account for changes in feedforward processing between retina and cortex (such as changes in
temporal delays with contrast). Furthermore, the technique enabled us to study lateral
connectivity even in the absence of a visual stimulus.
We found that a spike induced a wave of LFP activity moving away from the spike location.
A number of attributes of these traveling waves suggest that they propagate along long-range
horizontal connections in visual cortex. First, similar to horizontal connections19, the waves
extended over a distance of millimeters. Second, similar to horizontal connections20, the waves
traveled at the relatively slow speed of ∼0.3 m s−1. Third, similar to horizontal
connections18,21, the waves had a tendency to privilege sites with similar orientation
preference.
Alternative explanations for the traveling waves, based on common input from outside V1,
seem much less likely. In principle, our traveling waves could result from LGN inputs in two
ways. First, there might be divergence of LGN afferents, with retinotopically corresponding
areas receiving input before more distal areas. Second, there might be traveling waves in LGN
itself, which would then be simply reflected in the responses of area V1. Both of these
possibilities seem very unlikely given the results of experiments using LFP averages in V1
triggered by spikes in the LGN. First, the spatial spread of LFPs triggered from spikes in the
thalamus and measured in V1 falls off with a space constant of ∼0.2 mm14, smaller than what
we observed by at least a factor of 10. Second, temporal delays in the LFP averages that are
triggered by thalamic spikes differ by less than 100 μs across the V1 area that is being innervated
(J.-M. Alonso and J. Jin, State University New York College of Optometry, personal
communication; see also ref. 27), whereas our differential delays were 100-fold higher, on the
order of tens of milliseconds. Finally, we ruled out traveling waves in the LGN by the
dependence of the spike-triggered LFPs on relative orientation (Fig. 4).
Our observation of traveling waves caused by cortical spikes is consistent with prior studies
that measured LFP16 and membrane potential8 responses in V1 neurons as a function of focal
visual stimulation. These studies found an increase in the latency of depolarization that was
triggered by a focal visual stimulus as the stimulus was moved away from the center of the
receptive field under consideration. On the basis of our results, one can reinterpret these data
by assuming that focal visual stimulation evoked local spiking activity in V1 that propagated,
by means of horizontal connections, to the target neurons.
In addition to a systematic dependence of the time to peak on cortical distance, the spike-
triggered LFP signal exhibited a nonzero response before the occurrence of the spike. This
Nauhaus et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
‘noncausal’ response has also been noted in dual intracellular recordings, where the average
membrane potential of one cell was triggered by the spikes of a nearby neuron28. Activity
before the spike may be the result of contributions from various sources. A first source consists
of correlation in space: common correlated input received by both cortical locations28. A
second source consists of correlation in time: spiking at one location may by autocorrelated in
time, and a wave that appears to originate from a given spike may in fact originate, in part,
from a preceding spike. Indeed, when we corrected the spike-triggered LFPs by factoring out
the autocorrelation of the spike train, the resulting traces were somewhat narrower in time, but
peaked at the same time (Supplementary Fig. 1 online), leading to a reduction of the noncausal
signal at negative times. A third contribution may originate from the band-limited nature of
the LFP signal and its characteristic 1/f spectrum, which would prevent the spike-triggered
LFP from showing sharp transients.
The progressive disappearance of the traveling waves as the contrast was increased indicates
that the relative balance between feedforward and lateral signals is not a fixed quantity, as has
been previously assumed. Both the magnitude and the spatial extent of lateral interactions in
visual cortex increased markedly as stimulus contrast was reduced, being maximal at zero
contrast. This finding promises to reconcile two apparently opposite views: the view that the
responses of V1 neurons are largely determined by local processing of thalamic inputs1-5 and
the view that V1 responses are substantially shaped by long-range lateral connections6-13,
29.
These effects of contrast on lateral connectivity are consistent with studies of spatial integration
in single neurons that found decreased spatial summation at higher contrast levels12,30-32.
On average, these studies found a threefold change in the scale of spatial summation, which is
comparable to the average change that we observed in the space constant (Fig. 6a). Future
measurements using similar techniques could indicate whether the lateral interactions that we
have observed are sufficient to explain the reported changes in spatial summation.
The effects of contrast that are revealed by our results are also consistent with a number of
additional, previously disconnected observations. First, the strength of traveling waves elicited
in V1 by focal visual stimuli is markedly reduced when those stimuli are embedded in large,
high-contrast patterns16. Second, increasing contrast reduces the correlated response
variability among pairs of nearby neurons in macaque V1 (ref. 33). Finally, increasing contrast
decreases the trial-to-trial variability of membrane potential responses in cat V1 (ref. 34),
suggesting that there is a decreased role of intracortical connections.
The finding that the effectiveness of lateral connectivity depends heavily on contrast suggests
that there might be a relationship between lateral connectivity and the many phenomena of
contrast gain control that have been observed in cortex. Perhaps increasing the effectiveness
of lateral connectivity acts to increase cortical amplification, whereas decreasing it would
decrease cortical amplification. This scenario predicts that the effectiveness of lateral
connectivity, spatial summation and cortical gain must necessarily be linked to one another.
A recent study relying on voltage-sensitive dye imaging of primary visual cortex reported that
spatial correlations in V1 are independent of stimulus contrast35, whereas our results using
correlations between LFP signals show a clear effect of contrast (Fig. 8). There are a few
reasons for this apparent discrepancy. First, the stimuli used in these two studies differed
considerably; we used large stimuli, whereas the prior study used localized Gabor patches.
When using a localized Gabor patch, cortical areas surrounding the stimulus are likely to be
in a state that is not very different from the spontaneous regime and the effect of lateral
interactions may not be affected much by varying the contrast of the stimulus. Second, our
Nauhaus et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
contrast levels ranged from 0% (spontaneous) to 100%, whereas the comparisons of the prior
studies were carried out on the basis of a smaller range of 7% and 25% contrast.
The exact cellular and network mechanisms that are involved in modulating lateral connectivity
are unknown and require further study. One conjecture, based on a computational model of
spatio-temporal integration, is that increases in background synaptic activity can reduce the
spatial scale of integration in the dendritic tree by a factor of 3 to 5 (refs. 36,37), a prediction
that compares well with the magnitude of our effects. Another possibility, suggested by
measurements in vitro, is that a weak stimulus will only recruit excitatory horizontal signals,
but a strong stimulus may also recruit di-synaptic inhibitory signals20,38. The interaction
between the two signals may result in an effective decrease in lateral coupling as the stimulus
contrast increases.
Our findings demonstrate that the relative weight of feedforward and lateral inputs is
determined, at least in part, by the strength of the visual stimulus. The stronger the visual
stimulus, the more the system will work in a feedforward mode, where local signals are
faithfully processed and transmitted by the cortical population. When the visual stimulus is
weak, the system attempts to integrate information across visual space, and therefore relies
more on cortical network interactions21. This suggests that the role of intra-cortical
connectivity would be best revealed when using weak stimulation39. Conversely, high-contrast
stimuli would be expected to drive the local circuitry into a feedforward mode. Our findings,
therefore, suggest that two apparently incompatible views of cortical processing may represent
the ends of operating regimes that are largely determined by the strength of the sensory input.
METHODS
Animal preparation
The main data reported here were obtained in two cats and two monkeys (data from an
additional monkey and cat are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2 online). Experiments were
conducted according to the Guidelines for the Care and Use of Mammals in Neuroscience and
Behavioral Research from the US National Institutes of Health.
Experiments in monkeys were conducted at the University of California Los Angeles under
the supervision of the Chancellor's Animal Research Committee. Young adult monkeys
(Macaca fascicularis, 3.2–4.2 kg) were sedated with acepromazine (30–60 μg per kg of body
weight), anesthetized with ketamine (5–20 mg per kg, intramuscular) and then anesthetized
again with isofluorane (1.5–2.5%, vol/vol). An endotracheal tube was inserted to allow
artificial respiration. All surgical sites were infused with local anesthetic (2% xylocaine, wt/
vol, subcutaneous). After this initial surgery, the anesthesia was switched to a combination of
sufentanil (0.05–0.2 μg per kg per h) and propofol (2–6 mg per kg per h).
Experiments in cats were conducted at the Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute under the
supervision of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Young adult cats (2–4 kg)
were anesthetized first with ketamine (22 mg per kg, intramuscular) and xylazine (1.1 mg per
kg, intramuscular), and then with sodium penthotal (0.5–2 mg per kg per h, intravenous) and
fentanyl (typically 10 μg per kg per h, intravenous), supplemented with inhalation of N2O
(typically a 70:30 ratio with O2). Cats received an anticholinergic agent (atropine sulfate, 0.05
mg per kg, intramuscular, daily) and the nictitating membranes were retracted with topical
phenylephrine.
Pupils were dilated with ophthalmic atropine and gas-permeable contact lenses were fitted to
protect the corneas. Eye movements were prevented by a neuromuscular blocker, pancuronium
Nauhaus et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
bromide (0.10 mg per kg per h in monkeys, 0.15 mg per kg per h in cats), that was administered
after surgical procedures were complete.
To ensure a proper level of anesthesia throughout the duration of the experiment, we
continuously monitored rectal temperature, heart rate, end-tidal CO2, airway pressure and
electroencephalography (via a neonatal monitor in monkeys and a veterinary monitor in cats).
In monkeys, we also measured noninvasive blood pressure, urine output and urine-specific
gravity (every 4–5 h to ensure adequate hydration). Drugs were administered in balanced
physiological solution to deliver a fluid volume of 5–10 ml per kg per h. Rectal temperature
was maintained near 38.0 °C in cats and near 37.5 °C in monkeys. Expired CO2 was maintained
at near 4.3% in cats and at near 5.0% in monkeys by adjusting the stroke volume and ventilation
rate of a respiration pump. Animals were administered a broad-spectrum antibiotic (in
monkeys, we used bicillin at 50,000 injectable units per kg, administered every other day; in
cats, we used cephazolin at 20 mg per kg intramuscular, administered twice daily) and anti-
inflammatory steroid (dexamethasone, 0.5 mg per kg every other day in monkeys and 0.4 mg
per kg daily in cats).
Electrophysiology and visual stimulation
We implanted a 10 × 10 electrode array (400-μm separation and 1.5-mm electrode length) in
area V1. In cats, V1 includes both areas 17 and 18, and we placed the electrodes in area 18
because of its accessibility from the surface of the brain. To avoid excessive cortical damage,
the arrays were inserted at high speeds (around 8 m s−1) using a pneumatic insertion device.
Insertion depths were about 0.8–1 mm. Although we lack histological confirmation, most of
our recordings probably originated in the superficial layers of the cortex. The array and
surrounding tissue was covered in 1.5% agar to improve stability.
A Cerebus 128-channel system (Cyberkinetics) was used to sample the data. In each channel,
we set thresholds to ∼4 s.d. of the background noise. Threshold crossing were considered to
be multi-unit activity and were pooled together to trigger the averaging of LFPs at other
locations. The average firing rate of multi-unit activity in the spontaneous condition was 20
spikes per s, whereas we obtained rates of 80 spikes per s at 100% contrast. LFP signals were
sampled at 2 kHz with a wide-band front-end filter (0.3–500 Hz). We further digitally filtered
them using an eighth-order high-pass Butterworth filter with a cutoff of 3 Hz and a tenth-order
low-pass Butterworth filter with a cutoff at 90 Hz. After filtering, the signals for each channel
were independently z scored. The spike-triggered average of the LFPs was carried out on these
normalized signals (in absolute terms, the amplitude peak of the LFP triggered at the same
electrode was ∼12 μV on average). In the spontaneous condition, the animals were looking at
a uniform screen of the same mean luminance as in the driven condition. In the driven condition,
the animals were shown drifting gratings at one fixed orientation (total of 40-s stimulation).
For each electrode, the orientation that generated the largest response was used. The spatial
and temporal frequency of the grating was set to drive most of the cells isolated by the array
and was fixed across the experimental conditions. The stimulus was large (at least 10 × 10
degrees of visual angle) and the receptive fields were located near the center of the patch. The
typical overlap of receptive fields across the array in a couple of these experiments is shown
in Supplementary Figure 2. In addition to the spontaneous condition, we ran this experiment
at contrast levels of 25% and 100%.
The amplitude data as a function of distance was fitted by the equation 
 , with
d representing cortical distance and M, B and λ being parameters (with λ being the space
constant, M being the magnitude and B being a baseline amplitude). For each condition, we
first fitted the equation in the driven condition, as they usually showed a clear saturation level
Nauhaus et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(Fig. 2a). The baseline that we obtained from this fit was then fixed and the equation was fitted
again for the spontaneous and low-contrast conditions. The time to peak data as a function of
distance was fitted with 
 , where v represents the propagation speed of the wave. For the
distribution of velocities, we selected those cases where the correlation between the measured
time to peak and distance achieved a significance level of 0.001, resulting in n = 83 electrodes
in monkey and n = 84 in cat. For the magnitudes, we restricted the analyses to those cases
where the exponential fits accounted for more than 50% of the variance, resulting in n = 116
electrodes in monkey and n = 99 in cat.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to B. Malone, A. Benucci and S. Katzner for help with data collection and valuable discussions. This
work was supported by grants from the US National Institutes of Health (EY-17396 to M.C., EY-12816 and EY-18322
to D.L.R.) and DARPA (FA8650-06-C-7633 to D.L.R.), an Oppenheimer/Stein Endowment Award (D.L.R.), a Scholar
Award from the McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience (M.C.) and a Leopoldina fellowship (BMBF-
LPD9901/8-165 to L.B.). M.C. holds the GlaxoSmithKline/Fight for Sight Chair in Visual Neuroscience.
References
1. Reid RC, Alonso JM. Specificity of monosynaptic connections from thalamus to visual cortex. Nature
1995;378:281–284. [PubMed: 7477347]
2. Priebe NJ, Ferster D. Inhibition, spike threshold and stimulus selectivity in primary visual cortex.
Neuron 2008;57:482–497. [PubMed: 18304479]
3. Ferster D, Chung S, Wheat H. Orientation selectivity of thalamic input to simple cells of cat visual
cortex. Nature 1996;380:249–252. [PubMed: 8637573]
4. Ferster D, Miller KD. Neural mechanisms of orientation selectivity in the visual cortex. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci 2000;23:441–471. [PubMed: 10845071]
5. Chung S, Ferster D. Strength and orientation tuning of the thalamic input to simple cells revealed by
electrically evoked cortical suppression. Neuron 1998;20:1177–1189. [PubMed: 9655505]
6. Ringach DL, Hawken MJ, Shapley R. Dynamics of orientation tuning in macaque primary visual cortex.
Nature 1997;387:281–284. [PubMed: 9153392]
7. Sompolinsky H, Shapley R. New perspectives on the mechanisms for orientation selectivity. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol 1997;7:514–522. [PubMed: 9287203]
8. Bringuier V, Chavane F, Glaeser L, Fregnac Y. Horizontal propagation of visual activity in the synaptic
integration field of area 17 neurons. Science 1999;283:695–699. [PubMed: 9924031]
9. Kenet T, Bibitchkov D, Tsodyks M, Grinvald A, Arieli A. Spontaneously emerging cortical
representations of visual attributes. Nature 2003;425:954–956. [PubMed: 14586468]
10. Tsodyks M, Kenet T, Grinvald A, Arieli A. Linking spontaneous activity of single cortical Neurons
and the underlying functional architecture. Science 1999;286:1943–1946. [PubMed: 10583955]
11. Allman J, Miezin F, McGuinness E. Stimulus specific responses from beyond the classical receptive
field: neurophysiological mechanisms for local-global comparisons in visual neurons. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci 1985;8:407–430. [PubMed: 3885829]
12. Levitt JB, Lund JS. Contrast dependence of contextual effects in primate visual cortex. Nature
1997;387:73–76. [PubMed: 9139823]
13. Angelucci A, et al. Circuits for local and global signal integration in primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci
2002;22:8633–8646. [PubMed: 12351737]
14. Jin JZ, et al. On and off domains of geniculate afferents in cat primary visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci
2008;11:88–94. [PubMed: 18084287]
15. Katzner S, et al. Local origin of field potentials in visual cortex. Neuron. in the press
Nauhaus et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
16. Kitano M, Niiyama K, Kasamatsu T, Sutter EE, Norcia AM. Retinotopic and nonretinotopic field
potentials in cat visual cortex. Vis. Neurosci 1994;11:953–977. [PubMed: 7947408]
17. Benucci A, Frazor RA, Carandini M. Standing waves and traveling waves distinguish two circuits in
visual cortex. Neuron 2007;55:103–117. [PubMed: 17610820]
18. Grinvald A, Lieke EE, Frostig RD, Hildesheim R. Cortical point-spread function and long-range
lateral interactions revealed by real-time optical imaging of macaque monkey primary visual cortex.
J. Neurosci 1994;14:2545–2568. [PubMed: 8182427]
19. Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN. Clustered intrinsic connections in cat visual cortex. J. Neurosci 1983;3:1116–
1133. [PubMed: 6188819]
20. Hirsch JA, Gilbert CD. Synaptic physiology of horizontal connections in the cats' visual cortex. J.
Neurosci 1991;11:1800–1809. [PubMed: 1675266]
21. Bosking WH, Zhang Y, Schofield B, Fitzpatrick D. Orientation selectivity and the arrangement of
horizontal connections in tree shrew striate cortex. J. Neurosci 1997;17:2112–2127. [PubMed:
9045738]
22. Nowak LG, Munk MH, James AC, Girard P, Bullier J. Cross-correlation study of the temporal
interactions between areas V1 and V2 of the macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiol 1999;81:1057–1074.
[PubMed: 10085333]
23. Song S, Sjöström PJ, Reigl M, Nelson S, Chklovskii DB. Highly nonrandom features of synaptic
connectivity in local cortical circuits. PLoS Biol 2005;3:e68. [PubMed: 15737062]
24. de la Rocha J, Doiron B, Shea-Brown E, Josic K, Reyes A. Correlation between neural spike trains
increases with firing rate. Nature 2007;448:802–806. [PubMed: 17700699]
25. Dorn JD, Ringach DL. Estimating membrane voltage correlations from extracellular spike trains. J.
Neurophysiol 2003;89:2271–2278. [PubMed: 12686584]
26. Aertsen AM, Gerstein GL. Evaluation of neuronal connectivity: sensitivity of cross-correlation. Brain
Res 1985;340:341–354. [PubMed: 4027655]
27. Hoffman KP, Stone J. Conduction velocity of afferents to cat visual cortex: a correlation with cortical
receptive field properties. Brain Res 1971;32:460–466. [PubMed: 5134590]
28. Lampl I, Reichova I, Ferster D. Synchronous membrane potential fluctuations in neurons of the cat
visual cortex. Neuron 1999;22:361–374. [PubMed: 10069341]
29. Shapley R, Hawken M, Ringach DL. Dynamic's of orientation selectivity in the primary visual cortex
and the importance of cortical inhibition. Neuron 2003;38:689–699. [PubMed: 12797955]
30. Sceniak MP, Ringach DL, Hawken MJ, Shapley R. Contrast's effect on spatial summation by macaque
V1 neurons. Nat. Neurosci 1999;2:733–739. [PubMed: 10412063]
31. Cavanaugh JR, Bair W, Movshon JA. Nature and interaction of signals from the receptive field center
and surround in macaque V1 neurons. J. Neurophysiol 2002;88:2530–2546. [PubMed: 12424292]
32. Polat U, Mizobe K, Pettet MW, Kasamatsu T, Norcia AM. Collinear stimuli regulate visual responses
depending on cell's contrast threshold. Nature 1998;391:580–584. [PubMed: 9468134]
33. Kohn A, Smith MA. Stimulus dependence of neuronal correlation in primary visual cortex of the
macaque. J. Neurosci 2005;25:3661–3673. [PubMed: 15814797]
34. Finn IM, Priebe NJ, Ferster D. The emergence of contrast-invariant orientation tuning in simple cells
of cat visual cortex. Neuron 2007;54:137–152. [PubMed: 17408583]
35. Chen Y, Geisler WS, Seidemann E. Optimal decoding of correlated neural population responses in
the primate visual cortex. Nat. Neurosci 2006;9:1412–1420. [PubMed: 17057706]
36. Bernander O, Douglas RJ, Martin KA, Koch C. Synaptic background activity influences
spatiotemporal integration in single pyramidal cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1991;88:11569–
11573. [PubMed: 1763072]
37. Destexhe A, Pare D. Impact of network activity on the integrative properties of neocortical pyramidal
neurons in vivo. J. Neurophysiol 1999;81:1531–1547. [PubMed: 10200189]
38. Weliky M, Kandler K, Fitzpatrick D, Katz LC. Patterns of excitation and inhibition evoked by
horizontal connections in visual cortex share a common relationship to orientation columns. Neuron
1995;15:541–552. [PubMed: 7546734]
39. Douglas RJ, Martin KA. Recurrent neuronal circuits in the neocortex. Curr. Biol 2007;17:R496–
R500. [PubMed: 17610826]
Nauhaus et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.
Spike-triggered LFPs as a measure of functional connectivity. (a) The spike-triggered average
of the LFP signal at different locations in the array is shown. The array consisted of a 10 × 10
array of electrodes, but the corners were not wired, resulting in 96 active electrodes. Grid
separation was 400 μm between adjacent electrodes. In this example, reference spikes
originated from the electrode that is indicated by the circle. The spike-triggered LFP average
across the entire array is shown by the traces. The calculation of spike-triggered LFPs was
repeated for all possible reference locations. (b) Measurements of the spike-triggered LFP. For
each spike-triggered LFP average, we computed two parameters: the maximum peak (negative)
deflection and the time at which it peaked. From these data, we analyzed how the amplitude
and time to peak depended on the cortical distance between the reference spike location and
the target LFP location.
Nauhaus et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2.
Spikes initiate traveling waves of LFPs in the cortex. Examples are shown from one array that
was implanted in monkey V1 (top) and one penetration in cat V1 (bottom). Each row depicts
data from the spike-triggered LFPs from a single spiking location. Left, the dependence of time
to peak as a function of cortical distance from the triggering electrode is shown, both as an
image (left) and as a scatter plot (right). Middle, the amplitudes of the signals are shown in a
pseudo-color map to the left (the location of the reference spike corresponds to that of the
darkest red–saturated pixel) and scatter plots of amplitude versus distance obtained by re-
plotting the data are shown on the right. Estimated space constants appear at the inset. Estimated
propagation velocities appear at the inset. Right, curves representing average LFP waveforms
at three different distances from the location of the reference spikes are shown. The blue curve
is the waveform at the spike location. The gray curve is the average waveform at distances of
≥400 μm and <2,400 μm, and each red curve is the average at a distance of ≥2,400 μm and
<3,600 μm. The dependence of magnitude and time to peak are evident in these average curves.
Nauhaus et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3.
Predictions of LFPs from the spiking activity across a neuronal population. (a) Predictions for
the LFP were generated on the basis of the linear superposition of the traveling waves induced
by spikes across the entire array. Shown here are two examples of measured (black) and
predicted (red) LFPs at one site in a cat and monkey. The vertical bar represents 2 s.d. of the
LFP. (b) The predictions improved as the integration region, centered on the target LFP
location, increased. The maximum amount of variance accounted for saturated for regions over
∼1.2 mm in radius. Error bars represent ± s.e.m. (c) Predictions best captured the low temporal-
frequency components of the LFP. The graph shows the coherence between measured and
predicted responses in the monkey and cat. Coherence was largest in the band between 2 and
15 Hz and decreased steadily to reach a baseline level at ∼35 Hz.
Nauhaus et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4.
Sites with similar orientation preference are more strongly linked than sites with dissimilar
orientation preference. The abscissa represents the absolute difference in orientation between
the reference site and the site of the spike-triggered LFP. The ordinate corresponds to residual
z-score values of the amplitude after subtracting the distance dependence predicted by the
exponential fits. Plotted are the mean and standard error bars for three different bins of
orientation difference. Two of the bins were plotted twice to make the curve symmetric solely
for presentation purposes.
Nauhaus et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5.
Visual stimulation modifies the effective lateral connectivity in the cortex. Each row shows
the dependence of the spike-triggered LFP amplitudes as a pseudo-color image in spontaneous
and driven conditions and as scatter plots. The top two examples correspond to two different
monkeys. The bottom two are from two different cats. The solid curves in the scatter plot are
best exponential fits to the data and the estimated space constants appear at the inset.
Nauhaus et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 6.
Effect of contrast on the magnitude and spatial extent of lateral interactions. (a) Histograms of
the ratio of space constants 
  (top) and the ratio of magnitudes 
  (bottom). The effect
was robust and similar in both monkeys and cats. The average ratio is shown at the inset of
each histogram. (b) Smooth dependence on contrast. The plots show the mean values of the
space constant and magnitude for three different contrast levels: 0 (spontaneous), 25 and 100%
contrast. These represent the average behavior in two monkeys. Error bars represent ± s.e.m.
Nauhaus et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 7.
Results are unchanged by triggering on multi-unit or single-unit activity. In those cases where
single-unit activity could be well isolated, we obtained results that were very similar to those
obtained using multi-unit activity as the triggering events. The figure shows kernels obtained
by triggering with well-isolated cells. These should be compared to those obtained with multi-
unit activity in the middle panels of Figure 5.
Nauhaus et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 8.
Correlation between pairs of LFP signals shows a contrast dependence that is similar to spike-
triggered averaging of LFPs. The graphs depict the correlation coefficients between LFPs as
a function of cortical distance for spontaneous and driven stimulus conditions. The correlation
coefficients fell off more rapidly with cortical distance in the driven condition (100% contrast
full-field drifting gratings) than in the spontaneous case. Error bars represent ± s.e.m.
Nauhaus et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 January 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript