Spatiotemporal receptive fields of barrel cortex revealed by 
reverse correlation of synaptic input
Alejandro Ramirez1,2, Eftychios A. Pnevmatikakis2,3,4, Josh Merel2,3,4, Liam Paninski2,3,4, 
Kenneth D. Miller1,2,3, and Randy M. Bruno1,2
1Dept. of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2Kavli Institute for Brain Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
3Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
4Dept. of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Abstract
Of all sensory areas, barrel cortex is among the best understood in terms of circuitry, yet least 
understood in terms of sensory function. We combined intracellular recording in rats with a novel 
multi-directional multi-whisker stimulator system to estimate receptive fields by reverse 
correlation of stimuli to synaptic inputs. Spatiotemporal receptive fields were identified orders of 
magnitude faster than by conventional spike-based approaches, even for neurons with little spiking 
activity. Given a suitable stimulus representation, a linear model captured the stimulus-response 
relationship for all neurons with surprisingly high accuracy. In contrast to conventional single-
whisker stimuli, complex stimuli revealed dramatically sharpened receptive fields, largely due to 
adaptation. This phenomenon allowed the surround to facilitate rather than suppress responses to 
the principal whisker. Optimized stimuli enhanced firing in layers 4-6 but not 2/3, which remained 
sparsely active. Surround facilitation through adaptation may be required for discriminating 
complex shapes and textures during natural sensing.
The rodent barrel cortex has become a popular model system for diverse neuroscience 
studies ranging from tactile sensation, sensorimotor integration, structural and functional 
plasticity, cortical development, to neurological disease. Perhaps surprisingly, the sensory 
properties of barrel cortex neurons have remained mysterious. For technical reasons, most 
previous studies have investigated response properties by isolated deflections of single facial 
whiskers1-6. Barrel cortex neurons may, however, be highly sensitive to multi-whisker 
stimuli involving complex interactions of space, time, and direction of whisker movement. 
During exploration, a rodent contacts objects simultaneously with multiple whiskers7,8 and 
discriminates object textures, shapes, and locations with psychophysical thresholds similar 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence: Prof. Randy M. Bruno, 701 West 168 Street, Box 143, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, Phone: 
212-305-0181, randybruno@columbia.edu. 
Author Contributions RMB conceived the study. AR and RMB designed the experiments. AR performed the experiments. AR, EAP, 
JM, KM, LP, and RMB designed the analyses. AR performed the analyses. AR and RMB wrote the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2014 June ; 17(6): 866–875. doi:10.1038/nn.3720.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to humans with their fingertips9. The importance of multi-whisker integration is further 
suggested by the axons of pyramidal neurons spanning multiple cortical columns, and in 
some cases the entire barrel field10. How do neurons in barrel cortex respond to 
spatiotemporally complex stimuli?
Studies using single-whisker stimuli have concluded that the surround receptive field is 
largely suppressive, with stimulation of the central principal whisker alone being an equally 
or more potent driver of neural activity than co-stimulation of the principal whisker and 
surrounding whiskers11-15. Facilitatory surrounds have been noted only in a minority of cells 
under specific conditions, such as short delays between whisker deflections16,17. Several 
groups have applied complex multi-whisker stimuli13,14,17,18 but had to predict in advance 
the relevant stimulus dimensions. An alternative approach with a long history in the visual 
and auditory systems is “reverse correlation”, mathematically deducing a neuron’s receptive 
field from its responses to a set of random stimulus patterns sampled from a large space of 
relevant dimensions19.
When the dimensionality of a stimulus space is high, a large number of spikes are required 
to identify the receptive field. However, many neurons in the cortex have low firing rates20, 
and sparse firing has been well documented in barrel cortex under a variety of conditions, 
including anesthesia, sedation, quiet wakefulness, and active behavior21,22. Indeed, a recent 
study found that, even when focusing on the most active layers of barrel cortex, only one 
quarter of all extracellular recordings discharged a sufficient number of spikes for reverse 
correlation23. Seemingly silent neurons may reflect overall sparse firing among neurons or 
experimental inability to identify the optimal stimuli for highly selective neurons20.
Here, we overcome these low firing rates to study receptive fields by recording 
intracellularly, gaining access to information contained in the subthreshold synaptic inputs 
normally hidden to extracellular recording. Combining this with a novel multi-whisker 
stimulator system that moves 9 whiskers independently in any direction allowed exploration 
of a vast stimulus space. Our method identified spatiotemporal receptive fields (STRFs) 
even for neurons with little or no spiking activity, orders of magnitude faster than 
conventional spike-based approaches. Surprisingly, given a suitable stimulus representation, 
the response of a neuron could be captured by a simple model where responses to 
movements of different whiskers add linearly. In contrast to conventional single-whisker 
stimuli, complex stimuli revealed dramatically sharpened receptive fields, largely due to the 
effects of adaptation. Under these conditions, the surround facilitated rather than suppressed 
responses to the principal whisker. This switch in spatiotemporal receptive fields may be 
essential for discriminating complex shapes and textures during natural sensing.
Results
Subthreshold stimulus-response model
We performed whole-cell recordings from the barrel cortex of rats, administered local 
anesthetics and a sedative, which better approximate wakefulness than general anesthesia 
does21. The receptive field center or “principal whisker” (PW) and eight surround whiskers 
(SWs) simultaneously received spatiotemporally complex stimuli (Fig. 1a, left) via piezo-
Ramirez et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
electric actuators that could move in arbitrary angles and at speeds up to 2200°/sec. This 
system allowed exploration of a greater amount of the stimulus space than multi-whisker 
stimulator systems used in previous studies, which were often restricted to motion along a 
single axis18,23. Each of the nine whiskers was stimulated with high-velocity deflections of 
fixed temporal structure (5-ms rise and 5-ms decay; Supplementary Fig. 1a), mimicking the 
stick-slip events known to occur during natural contact with surfaces7. Deflections occurred 
stochastically in time at a frequency of ~9.1 Hz, similar to natural whisking frequencies8, as 
well as in arbitrary directions (“complex multi-whisker stimulation”; Fig. 1a, right). Thus, 
our paradigm had naturalistic features while still exploring the stimulus space thoroughly.
We initially investigated models in which responses were a nonlinear function of the 
stimulus (further discussed below). Surprisingly, we ultimately found that response variance 
was best explained by a model in which responses were a linear function of the stimulus, but 
after a nonlinear stimulus transform (an input nonlinearity model24). The stimulus, initially 
represented as the x-y positions of each stimulator over the last 100 msec (the “X-Y” 
representation), was transformed into an “8-directional” representation using 45° bins (Fig. 
1b; Supplementary Fig. 1a). This new stimulus representation, in which each directional bin 
is an independent stimulus with no explicit relationship to other directions, is similar to the 
sensory transformation occurring at the whisker follicles, where individual primary afferents 
innervate a limited circumference of a follicle and are consequently tuned to a limited range 
of directions25.
Because the stimuli are uncorrelated with regard to whisker and time, the relationship 
between the stimulus and instantaneous membrane potential can be computed as the voltage-
weighted average stimulus (VWA, Fig. 1c), an intracellular analogue of the classic spike-
triggered average stimulus (STA). The VWA yields the neuron’s filter, an estimate of its 
subthreshold spatiotemporal receptive field, illustrated as a matrix of 72 possible spatial 
dimensions (9 whiskers × 8 directional bins) by 100 1-ms time bins (Fig. 1c, left). Its dot 
product with the stimulus vector predicts the instantaneous voltage, which can also be used 
to infer spiking responses (Fig. 1c, right).
We measured the trial-to-trial variability and spike-threshold experimentally for neurons that 
fired at least 1 spike during stimulation (53/86) and predicted the average spiking response 
by applying the appropriate noisy-threshold operation to the VWA (Supplementary Fig. 1b). 
Applying a spike threshold nonlinearity to the membrane potential in the presence of 
substantial trial-to-trial variability (noise) results in an established power law relationship26. 
The predicted STA of the noisy-threshold model (STA’) was, on average, only weakly 
correlated with the actual STA calculated from spikes (0.323 ± 0.242). However, many of 
our neurons fired sparsely throughout the recording (31/57 fired < 100 spikes), possibly 
causing STAs to poorly estimate their receptive fields. Indeed, the correlation of STA’ and 
STA was proportional to cells’ firing rates, being strongest for highly active neurons (Fig. 
1d). The VWA therefore provides an effective surrogate for the STA and may be used to 
obtain accurate receptive field estimates for neurons in all layers, even for low firing rates or 
high noise.
Ramirez et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Finally, the VWA provides an additional advantage over the STA: speed. Under a 
conservative estimate of 1000 spikes to accurately estimate receptive fields, most neurons 
would require prohibitively long recording times to produce a sufficient number of spikes. 
Median firing rates throughout the period of complex multi-whisker stimulation were 0.057 
(L2), 0.03 (L3), 1.01 (L4), 0.84 (L5 slender-tufted), 8.86 (L5 thick-tufted), and 0.02 Hz 
(L6). The least active neurons, such as in L2/3, would require ~7 hours of recording for STA 
estimation. By contrast, the VWA converges after 200 seconds of recorded data for all 
neurons, irrespective of laminar location, and reaches 80% of that estimate within 30 
seconds (Fig. 1e, N = 86). Subthreshold estimation is therefore highly efficient, providing in 
minutes a receptive field that would otherwise take hours of spike recording. This further 
allows receptive fields to be determined online and immediately played back.
Linearity of cortical responses in S1
We calculated subthreshold spatiotemporal filters for 86 neurons. Model accuracy was 
tested by using the filters to predict neuronal responses to novel stimuli not used in filter 
calculations (cross-validation). The linearized model predicted subthreshold responses with 
an average accuracy (R2) of 0.488 ± 0.149 (mean ± SD) throughout the depths of a cortical 
column (Fig. 2a, red lines). The highest R2 values occurred at depths of 500-900 μm (0.513 
± 0.126) corresponding to lower layer 3 (L3) and upper layer 4 (L4), and at depths of 
1400-1800 μm (0.605 ± 0.126) corresponding to layer 6 (L6). The worst performance 
occurred at depths of 200-600 μm (0.473 ± 0.121) corresponding to layers 2/3 (L2/3), and at 
depths of 1000-1400 μm (0.331 ± 0.155) corresponding to layer 5 (L5).
In the visual and auditory systems, L2/3 and L5 have been reported to exhibit more 
nonlinear behavior than L4 (ref 27,28). The drop in model performance in L2/3 and L5 might 
simply reflect inability of the linearized model to capture such nonlinearity. Alternatively, 
these layers might simply have more variable responses and neural noise. While background 
synaptic inputs may be behaviorally relevant, neural variability is noise with regard to the 
model and cannot be predicted from the stimulus. To determine whether noise accounts for 
weaker prediction of L2 and L5 activity, we measured the trial-to-trial variability of 
responses (Fig.2a, gray line) to repeated trials of identical stimuli (frozen noise; Fig. 2b). 
This measure estimates the fraction of neural response variance attributable to noise, with 
the sensory stimulus driving the remainder, the predictable variance. The model captured 
less response variance in L2/3 and L5, where the variability was correspondingly higher, 
than in other layers (Fig. 2a). As a result, the fraction of predictable variance captured by the 
model was not significantly different between layers (p = 0.36, ANOVA) and was 
remarkably high for all neurons (0.729 ± 0.207).
For each neuron, we plotted the performance of the model on training data and testing data 
against the trial-to-trial variability (noise) of the neuron (Fig. 2c). Extrapolating the 
regressions of both data sets to the y-intercept gives the predicted performance of the model 
under conditions of zero-noise, here between an R2 of 0.64 and 0.68 (Fig. 2c). These 
metrics, while intuitive, are known to potentially overestimate trial-to-trial variability and, 
conversely, underestimate performance due to noise29. However, unbiased estimators29 
Ramirez et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
yielded a similar upper bound of predictable variance of 0.75 ± 0.06 and a lower bound of 
0.58 ± 0.03 (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Prediction by a quadratic model, widely used in reverse correlation studies, was also 
checked. Such models should capture nonlinear interactions between whiskers. Predictions 
of responses to novel stimuli were calculated for linear and quadratic models in the X-Y 
space (X,Y) or the 8-dimensional (8-Dim) stimulus transformed space (Fig. 3a; n = 39 cells). 
The linear model in the X-Y space was inadequate (mean R2 0.034 ± 0.0362, median 
0.0179), and the quadratic model performed far better (mean R2 0.303 ± 0.155, median 
0.306). One might interpret this as evidence of strong non-linear interactions between 
whiskers, but linear models are constrained to produce equal and opposite responses along a 
stimulus dimension (X or Y) and will fail for neurons driven equally by opposing directions 
(e.g., 0° and 180°). Indeed, the quadratic model given an 8-dimensional representation is not 
significantly better (mean R2 0.319 ± 0.165; p = 0.65, t-test), demonstrating that the main 
nonlinearity captured here by the quadratic model relates to directional tuning, rather than 
whisker interactions. In fact, the linear model in the 8-dimensional representation (mean R2 
0.397 ± 0.167, median 0.398) outperformed the quadratic models (p = 0.01, 0.04; t-tests), 
suggesting that the linear model is a sufficient and parsimonious description of neural 
responses and that the more complex quadratic model is prone to fitting noise. Prediction 
was unaffected by rotating the directional bins of the 8-dimensional representation, 
indicating that cardinal directions play no special role in barrel cortex coding and that the 
level of directional discretization used in our model is adequate (Supplementary Fig. 3). 
Furthermore our linear model was successful over a substantial range of whisker deflection 
frequencies, demonstrating model robustness across conditions (Supplementary Fig. 4). 
Linear approaches are further appealing, being simple to calculate and producing filters 
(receptive fields) that are visually intuitive and biologically interpretable.
Spatiotemporal receptive fields in S1
Having validated the linear model, we analyzed the filters, which are an estimate of the 
spatiotemporal receptive field. For each STRF, time preceding neural activity is represented 
on the y-axis, and whisker identities and angles are represented on the x-axis (Fig. 4a). 
Metrics such as latency, angular tuning, receptive field size, degree of excitation and 
inhibition, directional consistency of the whiskers, and inter-whisker temporal relationships 
can be extracted from this single plot. Whiskers are ordered from whisker 1 (W1) through 9 
(W9) with the PW in the center. Each whisker is represented by eight columns 
corresponding to the eight angle bins (0-45°, 46-90°, and so on).
STRFs were normalized for each neuron so the maximum excitatory excursion from 
baseline is red and an equally large inhibitory excursion would be blue. The example neuron 
(Fig. 4a) responds predominantly to 5 whiskers, the PW, W2, W4, W6 and W1, in that 
order, and weakly to W3. The tuning for the PW and W2 is broad, peaking at 270° and 180°, 
respectively. Conversely, W1, W4, and W6 have comparatively sharper tuning, with peaks 
at 270°, 225°, and 90°. The vector strength for these 5 whiskers, a measure of the 
consistency of preferred directions across whiskers, is 0.48 (0: no consistency, 1: perfect 
consistency). Subtle timing differences suggest that the best combination of stimuli for this 
Ramirez et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
neuron is to move W1, W2, and W6 simultaneously, followed 2 milliseconds later by the 
PW and W4.
We examined the STRFs for all neurons that could be unambiguously identified 
morphologically and classified according to cell type and laminar location (N = 71). Cells 
were classified into six excitatory types: L2 (N = 9), L3 (N = 14), L4 (N = 13), layer 5 
slender-tufted neurons (L5st) (N = 16), layer 5 thick-tufted neurons (L5TT) (N = 11), and 
L6 (N = 8). Reconstructions and STRFs for example cells are shown in Fig. 4b. Simple 
single-whisker receptive fields are seen predominantly in L4, L3, and L6, while more 
complex multi-whisker receptive fields are seen in L2, L5st, and L5TT cells. Strong 
inhibition was seldom seen, and inhibitory excursions were generally weaker and longer 
lasting than excitatory excursions.
STRFs were averaged according to layer and cell type. To our surprise the PW was 
overwhelmingly the strongest stimulus for neurons in all layers (Fig. 5a), and the temporal 
structure of the RF was similar across neurons and layers (i.e., low rank; Supplementary Fig. 
5). This contrasts starkly with previous reports of ubiquitous broad subthreshold responses 
spanning multiple whiskers1-4. Previous studies, however, inferred receptive field size by 
overlaying the activity measured from individual whiskers stimulated in isolation with 
substantial inter-trial intervals1-5. STRFs of neurons calculated from such conventional, 
sequentially-presented single-whisker stimuli (Fig. 5b) were strikingly different from their 
STRFs obtained using complex stimuli (Fig. 5a). In particular, STRFs measured using 
simple stimuli were broad in all layers, especially for L2 and L5TT cells as observed 
previously1,2, unlike STRFs for complex stimuli.
Complex multi-whisker stimuli shrunk STRFs, both in number of whiskers eliciting 
responses (Fig. 5c) and fraction of response power accounted for by the surround (Fig. 5d). 
Asymmetric surrounds, potentially resulting from asymmetric cross-whisker inhibitory 
effects11,12, were absent in complex stimulus filters (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7). 
Response onset latencies were similar for simple versus complex stimuli (Fig. 5e). On the 
other hand, complex stimuli predict that neurons’ maximal responses should result from PW 
deflections lagging surround deflections by only a few milliseconds (Fig. 5f, black). This 
timescale mirrors instances of facilitation seen previously in minorities of cells16,17. The 
consistency of preferred directions across significantly responsive whiskers was moderate in 
all layers (Fig. 5g; ref 6). Directional correspondence of center and surround whiskers 
spanned a broad range, indicating that neurons are not exclusively tuned to correlated or 
antagonistic surrounds (Supplementary Fig. 7c). PW directional tuning was sharpest in deep 
layer neurons, particularly L5TT and L6, yet unaffected by the use of simple vs complex 
stimuli (Fig. 5h).
Facilitatory surrounds through adaptation
While simple single-whisker stimuli are brief isolated events, complex multi-whisker stimuli 
engage the whiskers in a sustained and continuous fashion. Adaptation to sustained stimuli 
could potentially explain the reduction in RF size seen during complex multi-whisker 
stimulation. To examine the underlying membrane potential dynamics involved in the 
adaptation process, we averaged responses of neurons across many trials of complex multi-
Ramirez et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
whisker stimuli (Fig. 6a). Trial-averaged responses showed clear stimulus-onset transients 
and tonic sustained depolarizations of 1-5 mV for all neurons and layers (Fig. 6b). Both PW 
and SW deflections at the beginning of a trial induced large depolarizations relative to 
baseline (Fig. 6c). As the neuron adapted to the stimulus and reached a steady state in the 
mean membrane potential, both the PW and SW post-synaptic potentials (PSPs) became 
smaller, and SW PSPs were often no longer able to drive responses above the steady-state 
voltage (Fig. 6c). SW responses adapted far more than PW responses (Fig. 6d; PW: 9.02 ± 
4.98 vs 6.23 ± 3.62 mV, SW: 3.06 ± 2.64 vs 0.811 ± 0.526 mV), leading to the overall 
sharpening of the receptive field (Fig. 5).
To examine how adaptation might affect multi-whisker integration, we played back 
predicted optimal stimuli to a subset of neurons. The combination of whiskers, angles, and 
times predicted to drive the maximal peak response was determined from on-line calculation 
of the STRF (see Methods). We delivered the optimized pairwise (best 2-whisker) 
combination of whisker deflections as well as the optimized multi-whisker combination to 
the neurons in the absence of background stimuli (unadapted) and embedded within our 
otherwise random complex stimuli (adapted) (Fig. 7a,b). We then checked whether 
responses could be predicted by the sum of responses to individual whisker deflections. 
Consistent with previous studies15, unadapted responses to both pairwise and multi-whisker 
optimized stimuli added sublinearly (Fig. 7c, red; p < 0.0001 for both, sign test). Responses 
were, however, significantly more linear in the adapted state (blue; p < 10−5 for left; p = 
0.005 for right; comparison of slopes test). Summation of pairwise stimuli was highly 
sublinear prior to adaptation (slope 0.346, r 0.738) but more linear under adapted conditions 
(left; slope 0.723, r 0.506). Responses to optimized multi-whisker deflections also showed 
greater linearity after adaptation (right; adapted: slope 0.491, r 0.631; unadapted: slope 
0.223, r 0.442).
Approximate linearity due to adaptation suggests that surround inputs should enhance the 
response of the neuron to the PW alone, despite surround suppression observed in barrel 
cortex neurons during conventional stimulation8,11,12,30,31. To examine the degree to which 
the surround was facilitatory versus suppressive, we compared the PSP responses of neurons 
to pairwise and multi-whisker stimuli versus PW stimulation. In the adapted state, responses 
to pairwise stimuli were 1.33 ± 1.15 times greater than to PWs alone (Fig. 7d, left, blue; p = 
0.002, sign test). When neurons were unadapted, however, responses to pairwise stimuli 
were only 0.895 ± 0.373 times the amplitudes of responses to PWs alone (red; p = 0.002, 
sign test). For the optimized multi-whisker stimuli, the surround inputs facilitated the 
response in the adapted neuron by a factor of 1.28 ± 0.43 (Fig. 7d, right, blue; p < 10−9, 
sign test) but suppressed activity in unadapted neurons by 0.893 ± 0.269 (red; p = 0.36, sign 
test). This transition from a suppressive surround to a facilitatory surround during adaptation 
occurred for neurons in all layers and was independent of how closely the preceding 
surround deflections (not involved in the optimal stimulus) occurred as well as the number 
of SWs deflected (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Spiking output followed a pattern similar to subthreshold input (Fig. 8a). Of 33 neurons 
presented with both single-whisker and optimized stimuli, only half ever fired spikes (4/17 
L2/3, 6/9 L4 and 7/7 L5/6). The log-log plot in Fig. 8b shows those that responded to both 
Ramirez et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
types of stimuli, with adaptation significantly facilitating spiking by a factor of 1.78 ± 1.04 
and unadapted conditions weakly suppressing or not facilitating spiking (0.85 ± 0.3; p = 
0.02, 0.30, respectively; sign tests). Neural adaptation therefore allows surround inputs to 
become facilitatory in S1 while they remain suppressive when the neuron is unadapted. 
Moreover, while optimized multi-whisker stimuli were able to increase firing rates of 
adapted L4 and L5/6 neurons, firing in L2/3 was not significantly driven by optimized 
stimulus playback (Fig. 8c) suggesting that coding in the superficial layers in particular is 
not purely tactile.
Discussion
Spatiotemporal receptive fields of barrel cortex neurons have been largely enigmatic. 
Nevertheless, pioneering studies of spatial and temporal interactions uncovered substantial 
surround suppression, depending on the combination and sequence of whiskers and their 
directions of movement11. Subsequent studies by multiple groups parametrically exploring 
2-whisker deflections have repeatedly confirmed suppressive interactions17,32-34. However, 
while surrounds are normally suppressive for pairs of whisker deflections at low frequency, 
high frequency stimulation can reveal facilitation in 19% of neurons17 and even short 
sequences of whisker deflections (i.e., PW-SW-PW) can “suppress suppression”33. That 
weakening of suppression is consistent with the transition we observed as neurons adapted 
to stimuli and surrounds became facilitatory. Moreover, by playing back optimized multi-
whisker stimuli we demonstrated that facilitation may in fact dominate over suppression 
during sustained stimuli.
A recent study deflecting 24 whiskers along the rostrocaudal axis found that the relative 
directions of center and surround movements also impact activity. Specifically, discharges 
of ~15% of recorded neurons are enhanced by deflecting the center whisker in the same 
direction or opposite direction of the surround23. Indeed we observed some neurons strongly 
tuned to correlated or anticorrelated surrounds, but our data, based on 360° of movement, 
additionally reveal a broad spectrum of center-surround relationships (Fig. 4; Supplementary 
Fig. 7c).
Reverse correlation in S1
Our linear STRF model captured the correct subthreshold stimulus-response relationship for 
neurons in all cortical layers (Fig. 2). Sensory physiology has a long history of studying 
spiking receptive fields by reverse correlation using both linear models and linear-nonlinear 
Poisson models. The combination of intracellular recordings and our stimulator system 
allowed us to extensively sample the stimulus space and map STRFs for neurons spanning 
the depths of an S1 cortical column. Our simple linear model of the stimulus-response 
relationship was able to account for 73% of predictable synaptic input after an appropriate 
stimulus transformation. Our data reveal that neurons receiving substantial background 
synaptic input, particularly in L2 and L5, are the most difficult to predict (Fig. 2a,d). 
Isolating the neural noise from the predictable component of the responses revealed that the 
linear model works equally well across layers. Thus, nonlinear interactions cannot 
Ramirez et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
necessarily be inferred from poor overall linear model performance, which may reflect high 
levels of neural noise in specific cell types.
The accuracy of our linear model could be partially due to our re-representation of stimuli in 
a manner similar to their natural encoding at the periphery and by central synapses. In the 
whisker system, primary afferents initially encode direction and space using discrete clusters 
of mechanoreceptors around a limited circumference of individual whisker follicles25. 
Relatively labeled lines maintain this code from the periphery to the cortex35-37. We 
represented direction in 45° bins, similar to the half widths of neurons’ directional tuning 
curves. With a standard Cartesian representation of direction instead, prediction would 
require a nonlinear model simply because many neurons respond equally well to opposite 
directions of motion whereas linear models using Cartesian representations require opposite 
responses to opposing motions. Linear sensory integration is consistent with active synaptic 
inputs being spatially or temporally distributed across dendritic arbors38,39. Models of other 
sensory modalities may benefit from finding analogous stimulus representations encoded by 
presynaptic inputs in which the stimulus-response relationship can be estimated using linear 
methods24.
Another contributor to the model’s accuracy is likely our use of intracellular recording, 
which reveals additional information normally masked by the spike generation nonlinearity 
and removes noise inherent therein. An intracellular study of auditory cortex using a 
reasonable stimulus transform found that linear models performed poorly, predicting on 
average only 11% of subthreshold response variance40, and a similar spike-based study 
captured ~19% of suprathreshold response variance29. It remains unclear how to compare 
the percentage of predictable variance explained by a subthreshold model to that by a 
suprathreshold model. While subthreshold receptive fields may seem irrelevant as 
information is propagated by spike output rather than subthreshold input, ultimately the 
stimulus driving the maximal synaptic input is the same stimulus driving spike output. To 
the extent presently known, spike output is a power law function of synaptic input26. Indeed 
our VWAs correlated well with actual STAs when adequate numbers of spikes were 
available (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 1).
Finally, our stimuli were purposefully chosen to mimic the high-velocity events common 
during natural whisking and thought important for sensation7,34,41. Though naturalistic in 
their kinematics, these stimuli were stochastic (“white”) with regard to space, direction, and 
time, sampling unbiasedly along potentially important stimulus dimensions while keeping 
data collection and analysis tractable. Models built using white noise stimuli can be poor 
predictors of responses to natural visual scenes, which contain strong spatial correlations42. 
Strong correlation of neighboring whiskers is not apparent from videography of rats during 
sustained contact with textures7, but initial encounters with an object may induce significant 
spatial and temporal correlations, such as arc contacts being near synchronous and row 
contacts being sequentially ordered. Object shapes could further contribute to such 
correlations. Studies of possible high-order correlations during natural whisking, which 
might necessitate the use of nonlinear models, are needed.
Ramirez et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Coding in barrel cortex
Rodents repetitively sweep all of their whiskers back and forth across surfaces when 
exploring their environments7,8. Our results show that a major consequence of sustained 
multi-whisker input during natural whisking will be to dramatically sharpen receptive fields 
in spatial extent and tighten the temporal latencies between whiskers (Fig. 5). For example, 
L5 thick-tufted pyramidal neurons were equally well driven by most whiskers when mapped 
with conventional single-whisker stimuli as noted previously2,5 but became highly focused 
on the PW during complex stimuli. In fact identifying the PW of this cell type is very 
difficult using only single-whisker stimuli. The switch in coding with repetitive whisking 
may be especially important for corticofugal cells such as those in L5 that signal numerous 
subcortical, behaviorally relevant structures (i.e., thalamus, striatum, spinal cord, brainstem, 
superior colliculus).
Similar laminar analyses of visual cortex showed that thalamorecipient layers, such as L4 
and L6, possess simple receptive fields reminiscent of their thalamic inputs27. Recently, we 
discovered that thalamocortical synapses converge even more densely onto L5TT neurons 
than L6 cells43, but our L5TT STRFs here look nothing like those in L6. This likely reflects 
local, rather than thalamocortical, circuit differences between the two layers. This disparity 
also underscores the challenge in inferring connectivity from receptive fields and vice versa.
In contrast to L5, coding in superficial layers has been particularly difficult to study23. This 
stems from the sparse activity in L2/3 under a variety of conditions5,20,22,43. Conceivably, 
the effective stimuli for L2/3 barrel cortex neurons have been previously missed. Our study 
is the first able to explore a large stimulus space for L2/3 despite its seemingly low firing 
rates. We observed that optimized stimuli for activating synapses onto L2/3 cells are very 
similar to those for other, more robustly spiking layers (Fig. 5a), but still do not reliably 
drive L2/3 to threshold (Fig. 8c). Impoverished stimuli are therefore unlikely to explain 
previous reports of sparse firing in L2/3. The activity of L2/3, rather than being highly 
selective for stimuli, may be gated by top-down and/or neuromodulatory inputs present only 
during active behavior44 or may be a sparse coding system under all conditions.
The role of surround receptive fields
Complex stimuli induced a tonic depolarization in all layers (Fig. 6). Further studies are 
needed to determine whether this reflects the number of whiskers stimulated or a general 
activation of the cortical network. During these depolarized steady-state conditions, all 
whiskers evoked smaller PSPs than at stimulus onset. Counterintuitively, the surround 
receptive field under steady-state conditions facilitated responses to the PW, contrary to the 
well-established surround suppression observed in numerous studies of barrel cortex11-15. 
Surround suppression between pairs of whisker deflections at fixed latencies does not derive 
from hyperpolarizing or shunting inhibition32,45, but rather reduced synaptic input. Synaptic 
depression at the thalamocortical and corticocortical synapses as well as reduced cellular 
driving force may contribute to this adaptation46,47. Our results not only confirm such 
observations regarding initial transient responses but also demonstrate that persistently 
adapted conditions render the integration of whisker inputs more nearly linear relative to 
unadapted conditions, allowing surround facilitation (Fig. 7). Stimulus-dependent 
Ramirez et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
linearization has been observed in subthreshold responses of visual cortical neurons48 and 
may be a ubiquitous feature of cortical processing. Finally, the sufficiency of a linear model 
for 9 whiskers moving in 360° suggests that spiking models predicting activity evoked by 
rostrocaudal movements of two individual whiskers34 may scale to many whiskers and 
directions. Incorporating adaptation in those spiking models was critical for accurate 
prediction. Linear models of barrel cortex may benefit from incorporating such history 
dependence, perhaps especially for arbitrary and natural stimuli.
Ethologically, adaptation may allow neurons to transition from simple stimulus detectors to 
discriminators of stimuli3,49,50. Indeed, adaptation enhanced the acuity of individual neurons 
(Fig. 5). Additionally, adaptation allowed multi-whisker stimuli to more effectively drive 
responses than the PW alone (Fig. 8). Such effects may allow neurons in S1 to discriminate 
objects during active tactile exploration employing multiple whiskers, yet still serve as 
indiscriminate detectors of salient stimuli when not actively exploring. Adaptation induced 
by repetitive whisking might be required to classify object shapes and textures. Behavioral 
studies examining the effect of adaptation on detection versus discrimination are needed.
Conclusion
By exploiting additional information available from intracellular recording, we have been 
able to explore the sensitivity of neurons to stimuli varying in space, direction, and time by 
reverse correlation. Our results demonstrate that a linear model, given an appropriate 
stimulus transform, accounts well for the predictable subthreshold activity in rat barrel 
cortex. This method reveals STRFs an order of magnitude faster than conventional spike-
based techniques, even for neurons firing few or no spikes. These STRFs differ starkly from 
receptive fields based on conventional stimuli. The surround receptive field, long thought to 
be predominantly suppressive, becomes facilitatory during more natural conditions.
Methods
Animal Preparation and Physiology
All procedures were approved by the Columbia University Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee. Forty adult female (weight 130-340 g, mean 210 g) Wistar rats (Hilltop 
Laboratories) were used. During surgery animals were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane 
(1-3% in O2), and body temperature was maintained at 37° by a heating blanket. Eyes were 
coated with lubricating ointment to prevent drying. Cannulae were inserted into the trachea 
(for mechanical ventilation), left femoral artery (for blood pressure monitoring) and right 
jugular vein (for drug infusion). A metal post for stabilizing the head was attached to the 
skull by dental acrylic. Screws were inserted in the right frontal and parietal bones for 
electrocorticogram (“EEG”) recording. Small (~0.5 × 0.5 mm) craniotomies were made over 
left barrel cortex, and the dura removed. The acrylic was extended around the craniotomies 
to create a well for retaining artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF; in mM: 135 NaCl, 5.4 
KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 1.0 MgCl2, and 5.0 HEPES; pH 7.2). Bupivacaine was applied to cannulae 
incisions and the scalp surrounding the acrylic and reapplied periodically.
Ramirez et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
For neural recordings, isoflurane was discontinued, and the rat was maintained in a lightly 
narcotized state by intravenous infusion of fentanyl (~10 μg / kg / hr). To prevent 
spontaneous whisker movement, neuromuscular blockade was induced with pancuronium 
bromide (1.6 mg / kg / hr), and the animal artificially respired (90-100 breaths/min) using a 
positive-pressure ventilator. A computer continuously monitored electrocorticogram, mean 
arterial pressure (MAP), arterial pulse rate, and tracheal airway pressure. Experiments were 
terminated if these indicators could not be maintained within normal physiological ranges.
Craniotomies were mapped extracellularly to identify the underlying barrel.Glass pipettes 
with tips of ~5 μm inside diameter (ID) were filled with aCSF and inserted vertically to a 
microdrive depth of 700-1000 μm. Signals were amplified, band-pass filtered at 0.3-9 kHz, 
and played over an audio monitor. Whiskers were deflected manually using hand-held 
probes to determine the principal whisker (PW) corresponding to locations within a 
craniotomy.
Patch pipettes were pulled from 2 mm unfilamented borosilicate glass. Tip ID was ~0.5-1 
μm. Pipettes were tip-filled with (in mM) 135 K-gluconate, 10 HEPES, 10 phosphocreatine-
Na2, 4 KCl, 4 ATP-Mg, 0.3 guanosine triphosphate, and 0.4% biocytin (pH 7.2, osmolarity 
~300). Cells were searched for blindly in voltage-clamp mode using pulses. Whole-cell 
recordings were made in Bridge mode and digitized at 32 kHz. Seal resistance was > 1 GΩ, 
access resistance 5.2-51.5 MΩ (mean 26.3 MΩ), and spike height and overall membrane 
potential (Vm) were stable throughout the recording. No holding current was used. Pipette 
capacitance was neutralized prior to break in. A large ground shield was placed between the 
electrodes and whisker-stimulator system to minimize stimulus artifact.
Histology and Morphological Analysis
After recordings, the rat was deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/ml) until 
a drop in MAP and desynchronization of EEG was observed. Rats were perfused 
transcardially with cold 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer followed by 4% paraformaldehyde 
(in 0.1 M buffer). Barrel cortex was cut tangentially in 100-μm vibratome sections. Sections 
were stained for cytochrome oxidase (CO) and subsequently biocytin. Seventy-one cells 
were recovered and could be unambiguously identified morphologically. Cells were 
classified as barrel- or septal-related and by layer according to methods described 
previously43. Example cells were reconstructed using a Neurolucida system with a 40X/
1.3NA oil-immersion objective.
Stimulus Presentation
Whiskers were trimmed to a length of ~10 mm. Nine multi-directional piezoelectric 
stimulators were used to deflect individual whiskers. After mapping the barrel identity, the 9 
stimulators were arranged around the face so that the stimulator corresponding to the PW 
was located at the center and the remaining 8 stimulators occupied the immediate 
surrounding whiskers. The opening of a stimulator was slipped over the whisker and 
positioned at ~7mm from the base of the hair.
Two different stimulus protocols were used to probe whisker responses: a complex multi-
whisker stimulus protocol, and a simple single-whisker stimulus protocol. Complex multi-
Ramirez et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
whisker stimulus trials lasted 1000 ms with a 1-second inter-trial interval. The nine whiskers 
moved simultaneously and continuously in random directions in any of 360° (1° resolution) 
and at random times as a Poisson process with a mean rate of 10 Hz during non-refractory 
periods, with a refractory period after each pulse initiation of 10ms (the length of each 
pulse). This made the actual pulse rate on each whisker ~9.1Hz. All pulses followed the 
same trajectory of velocity vs. time with maximum speed of 2200°/second and a maximum 
excursion of 850 um (~7°). The pulse was a symmetric parabolic movement with a 5-ms 
rise, no hold, and 5-ms fall.
During each trial of simple single-whisker stimuli, one of the 9 whiskers was selected 
randomly and moved in one of the eight cardinal directions with ramp-and- hold movement 
having a total amplitude of 850 um (~7°), rise-time of 10 ms, a hold of 200 ms, and decay 
time of 10 ms. Trials lasted 500 ms with a 1-second interval between consecutive trials. 
Each whisker and angle combination occurred at least 10 times, resulting in a total of 720 
trials.
Receptive Field Mapping
Data were analyzed using custom-written MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA) routines 
running on an 8-core Linux server with 64GB RAM.
Whole-cell recordings were preprocessed before calculating the stimulus-response function 
or STRFs. Action potentials were removed by linearly interpolating between the points just 
before and just after the action potential, and a median filter (200-ms) was subtracted to 
remove slow changes over the course of the experiment due to fluctuations in the animal’s 
state or network dynamics. The trace was then zero-meaned.
Standard reverse correlation, applied in a nonlinearly transformed stimulus space, was used 
to map receptive fields to complex multi-whisker stimuli. The stimulus ensemble s was 
transformed from an (x, y, t) representation to a binned polar representation (d1, d2, …, d8, 
t). Specifically, stimulus pulses occurring in each of the full 360° were re-encoded in 45° 
bins (Supplementary Fig. 1a) where s’ is the stimulus in the new 8-dimensional 
representation. This transform roughly approximates the transformation occurring at the 
whisker follicle.
The subthreshold stimulus response function of the neuron can then be described using the 
following linear model:
The model gives the expected instantaneous voltage of the neuron, at time t given the 
(transformed) stimulus that occurred before the voltage response, 
 . The stimulus is 
passed through a spatiotemporal filter, 
 , and has an offset and noise added, b and εt, 
respectively. The vector 
  represents the stimulus movements that occurred in all 9 
whiskers over the 100 ms preceding the voltage response. Only steady-state (adapted) 
responses were modeled.
Ramirez et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Note that each whisker is represented with 8 directional dimensions, making the spatial 
dimensionality of the stimulus segment 72, and the temporal dimensionality 100. Thus the 
stimulus segments preceding each voltage response can be described as a matrix of size 100 
× 72, which is vectorized to obtain a stimulus vector 
 , which is size 7200 × 1. Because 
both the voltage and the stimulus are zero-meaned, the offset b becomes zero.
The parameters for the spatiotemporal filter 
  can be estimated in general using linear, 
ordinary least squares, multiple regression (OLS).
S’ is a matrix whose columns are the vectors 
  for each time t, and is therefore 
dimensionality [N × 7200] where N is the number of 1ms time bins of data. The vector 
  is 
a column vector that contains the voltage observation at each time t, and is size [N × 1]. 
Because our stimulus is binary with respect to the presence of absence of a stimulus and the 
movements between whiskers and angles are uncorrelated, the stimulus prior (S’S’T) can be 
approximated as proportional to the identity matrix. The filter 
  is therefore easily 
calculated as the voltage-weighted average (the “reverse correlation” estimate),
where N is the total number of voltage observations. Rank-reduced regression approaches, 
which place stronger priors on the form of the filter 
  and should lead to stable estimates 
given less data, did no better (see Separability and shared structure below).
To test the accuracy of the model we used the spatiotemporal filter, 
 , to predict activity of 
the neuron to novel stimuli (cross-validation). We first trained our model on 300 trials of 
unique complex multi-whisker stimuli. We next tested the model on the trial averaged 
response to 10 trials of unique stimuli, averaged over 10 stimulus presentations (frozen 
noise). The rationale here is to train the model on as general a stimulus as possible, but test it 
on as “noise-free” a neural response as attainable. Additionally, the frozen noise approach 
allows estimation of the predictable variance of a neuron, varp,:
As well as the noise variance varn,:
Ramirez et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
where the brackets 〈 〉 represent an average over the trials, the subscript (i) denotes the 
response of the i-th trial of frozen noise (i = 1,…, 10), and the notation cov refers to 
covariance, and n is the number of trials of frozen noise (10). For covariance and variance 
calculations, expectations are with respect to time. A similar calculation can be made for the 
average signal power, and the average noise power in the response29.
To calculate STRFs using simple single-whisker stimuli, we used the conventional approach 
(“forward correlation”), taking the average zero-meaned voltage response for 100 ms 
following each possible stimulus presentation (9 stimulators × 8 angles = 72 possible 
stimulus presentations). Each average voltage response corresponds to the equivalent of a 
single column in the STRF and the 72 responses were assembled in appropriate order.
To predict the STA from VWA, the STA’ (see Supplementary Fig. 1), we first measured the 
mean spike threshold and mean Vm variance of each neuron that fired at least 1 action 
potential during recording. Threshold was determined by detecting large changes in dV/dt, 
indicative of spike onset. Vm variance was calculated from 10 trials of frozen noise. The 
actual stimuli were projected through the VWA to predict subthreshold responses to the 300 
trials and added to temporally correlated Gaussian noise that matched the cell’s true 
variance. When the modeled response passed threshold, a binary spike followed by a 10-ms 
refractory period was recorded. This spike train was then used to produce the STA’. For 
additional simulation trials, new random stimuli were generated.
Quadratic Model
The subthreshold stimulus response function of the neuron can be described with the 
following quadratic model:
where 
 , 
 , b and εt, and, represent the same as above. The matrix A represents an 
additional quadratic term, where off-diagonal values can be thought of as pairwise 
interactions of all whiskers across times, and has dimensionality 7200 × 7200. As above, the 
quadratic model is fit using regression analysis. Because the dimensionality of parameters in 
the quadratic model is high, the quadratic model is prone to overfitting. We therefore 
initially reduced the dimensionality of the stimulus space by performing voltage-weighted 
covariance analysis (VWC), an analogue of classic STC. The stimulus is weighted by the 
voltage and then a PCA-like analysis is performed which identifies dimension (eigenvectors) 
which account for the majority of the variance in responses. Significant positive and 
negative eigenvectors are then used to filter the stimulus. Regression analysis was then 
performed on the filtered subspace. This significantly reduced the dimensionality of the 
analysis, allowing for more efficient estimates that are less prone to overfitting.
Ramirez et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Separability and shared structure
Supplementary Fig. 5 decomposes the receptive field of each neuron into temporal and 
spatial (whisker) basis components. Each RFs is characterizable by the “rank,” the number 
of basis components required to reconstruct the RF (a “separable” RF has rank one). To fit a 
rank-R RF we followed the method proposed in ref 24 with the voltage response of each 
neuron modeled as a linear function of temporal and spatial features of the binned input. We 
re-write the linear model of the voltage response:
as (for each neuron, indexed by i)
where v(t) is the voltage response of neuron i at time t. 
  is reshaped into S(t), a matrix 
version of the stimulus (100 × 72, generally L lags by P features), and indexed to correspond 
to the binary stimulus at each time for T timesteps. We ignore bias for notational 
convenience, but a bias term is included in the analysis.
The desired rank R of each individual RF is specified in advance. The set of vectors 
and 
  for r = 1…R are respectively the temporal and spatial basis components for the 
neuron i. These vectors are equivalent to the RF represented in 
  with 
yielding the rank R voltage weighted average of L lags by P features. Our empirical analysis 
showed that R = 1…3 is adequate (see also Fig. 4) to capture the full RF for each of the 
neurons analyzed (Supplementary Fig. 5). See also ref 51 for related results.
The shared structure of temporal basis components can also be leveraged to estimate the RFs 
using less data (a regularization) by sharing information across neurons. To fit the separable 
RF model for all neurons jointly while enforcing shared components (
  and 
  for r = 
1…R, & i = 1…N), we alternate between the following convex optimization problems:
where 
  and 
  are the vectors formed by concatenating 
  and 
  vertically over r = 
1…R, and Q and A are the matrices formed by concatenating vectors 
  and 
Ramirez et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
horizontally over neurons i = 1…N (such that Q has dimensions (L × R) by N and A has 
dimensions (P × R) by N). Qreshaped is a reshaped matrix Q with dimensions L by (N × R). 
Areshaped is a reshaped matrix A with dimensions angles by (whiskers × N × R). λq & λa are 
tunable parameters specifying the extent to which the neurons share a basis, fit by cross-
validation here. The nuclear norm penalty 
  is a convex relaxation of the rank of the 
matrix52 and therefore enforces low rank structure. Applied here, this penalty will enforce 
that the temporal components across neurons will be shared. We similarly regularize for 
appropriate components in Areshaped which enforces a shared basis of tuning to different 
stimulation angles across whiskers and neurons. To solve this penalized problem, we 
alternate between objectives (in the style of alternating least squares), using the alternating 
direction method of multipliers53 to solve each regularized subproblem.
The resulting solutions Q and A correspond to the RFs, and due to the pooling of 
information across neurons, the RFs can be fit much better when less data is available than 
they could if they were fit independently. For example, when the VWAs are fit in a 
particularly low data regime (5-sec worth of data per neuron), they are underfit and perform 
poorly when used to predict voltage. In this regime, the R = 1 regularized model improves 
the prediction quality dramatically (increasing the correlation on average by a factor of 
almost 2).
Analysis of Receptive Field Properties
To estimate significant whisker responses, 99% confidence limits on noise were calculated 
using a selected portion of the STRF representing spontaneous background activity (the first 
5 ms of each STRF, for all whiskers and directions). Whisker responses exceeding these 
limits were deemed significant. Surround power was defined as the power contained in the 
SWs over the total power contained in the receptive field. Power was calculated as the 
average square deviation from the mean over the full STRF.
Onset latency was defined as the first time the receptive field exceeded these 99% 
confidence limits. Surround latency was defined as the average latency difference between 
the PW and the significantly responsive SW’s. Surround latency was not calculated for 
neurons lacking significantly responsive SWs.
The preferred direction for a whisker was defined as the direction with largest STRF time-
peak response. For the vector strength calculation, the preferred direction for each 
significantly responsive whisker is first represented as a unit-vector (length 1) in the 
appropriate direction. Each significantly responsive whisker is thus given equal influence in 
the calculation of the vector strength. The vector strength is then calculated by taking the 
algebraic mean of the unit vectors. A vector strength of 1 signifies that all unit vectors are 
aligned, or coherent, and a vector strength of 0 signifies that unit vectors are anti-coherent 
and cancel out.
The mean PW directional tuning was defined as the strength of response (peak value) to the 
preferred direction of the PW divided by the summed strength of the PW response to all 
directions. Tuning can take on values anywhere from (0.125-1), where a 1 indicates that all 
Ramirez et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of the response is contained within the preferred direction and a value of 0.125 indicates a 
flat tuning curve where all values are preferred equally.
Average STRFs for each layer (Figs. 4 and 5) were plotted with the PW in the middle. SW 
identities were always the same with respect to the PW, i.e. SW2 and SW8 were always in 
the same arc as the PW, while SW4 and SW6 were always in the same row as the PW. PW 
tuning was always shown with the preferred response in the middle bin (180-225° in Fig. 
5a,b), and the tuning curves, or polar plots, were shifted accordingly.
Stimulus Playback
For stimulus playback experiments, STRF of complex multi-whisker stimuli were calculated 
online and significant whisker responses were determined as above. The best combination of 
whiskers, times, and angles was defined as the combination that produced the largest peak 
voltage response. This combination was extracted from the STRF, for both pairwise stimuli 
and multi-whisker stimuli. Because the model is linear, the best pairwise or multi-whisker 
stimuli can easily be determined by examining the STRFs and finding the direction with 
largest peak response for all significantly responsive whiskers, as well as the optimal time 
lags between them to make their peaks coincide in time. This exact stimulus combination 
was then delivered back to the neuron in the absence of any background stimuli to measure 
the response to optimal stimuli when the neuron was in an unadapted state and compared to 
the same stimuli when embedded within the complex multi-whisker presentation, the 
adapted state.
Statistics
Statistical tests were implemented in Matlab. Sample sizes were not pre-determined, but 
retrospective analysis shows that the power of our significance tests was generally >90%. 
Our sample sizes are also similar to those of previous studies5,23,27.Stimuli were computer 
randomized (see Stimulus Presentation), but no randomization of samples (cells or animals) 
was needed in our design.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Stefano Fusi, Mattia Rigotti, Kate Hong, Elaine Zhang, and Chris Rodgers for comments on the 
manuscript, Drew Baughman for technical support, and David Pfau for participating in pilot experiments. This 
project was supported by NINDS RO1 NS069679, the Rita Allen Foundation, and the Grossman Center for 
Statistics of Mind (RMB); NINDS F31 NS076338-01 (AR); R01-EY11001 and the Gatsby Charitable Foundation 
through the Gatsby Initiative in Brain Circuitry at Columbia University (KM); NSF CAREER award (LP).
References
1. Brecht M, Roth A, Sakmann B. Dynamic receptive fields of reconstructed pyramidal cells in layers 
3 and 2 of rat somatosensory barrel cortex. J Physiol. 2003; 553:243–265. [PubMed: 12949232] 
2. Manns ID, Sakmann B, Brecht M. Sub- and suprathreshold receptive field properties of pyramidal 
neurones in layers 5A and 5B of rat somatosensory barrel cortex. J Physiol. 2004; 556:601–622. 
[PubMed: 14724202] 
Ramirez et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
3. Moore CI, Nelson SB. Spatio-temporal subthreshold receptive fields in the vibrissa representation of 
rat primary somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol. 1998; 80:2882–2892. [PubMed: 9862892] 
4. Zhu JJ, Connors BW. Intrinsic firing patterns and whisker-evoked synaptic responses of neurons in 
the rat barrel cortex. J Neurophysiol. 1999; 81:1171–1183. [PubMed: 10085344] 
5. de Kock CP, Bruno RM, Spors H, Sakmann B. Layer- and cell-type-specific suprathreshold 
stimulus representation in rat primary somatosensory cortex. J Physiol. 2007; 581:139–154. 
[PubMed: 17317752] 
6. Hemelt ME, Kwegyir-Afful EE, Bruno RM, Simons DJ, Keller A. Consistency of angular tuning in 
the rat vibrissa system. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 104:3105–3112. [PubMed: 20668277] 
7. Ritt JT, Andermann ML, Moore CI. Embodied information processing: vibrissa mechanics and 
texture features shape micromotions in actively sensing rats. Neuron. 2008; 57:599–613. [PubMed: 
18304488] 
8. Carvell GE, Simons DJ. Biometric analyses of vibrissal tactile discrimination in the rat. J Neurosci. 
1990; 10:2638–2648. [PubMed: 2388081] 
9. Diamond ME, von Heimendahl M, Knutsen PM, Kleinfeld D, Ahissar E. ‘Where’ and ‘what’ in the 
whisker sensorimotor system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008; 9:601–612. [PubMed: 18641667] 
10. Bruno RM, Hahn TT, Wallace DJ, de Kock CP, Sakmann B. Sensory experience alters specific 
branches of individual corticocortical axons during development. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:3172–3181. 
[PubMed: 19279254] 
11. Simons DJ. Temporal and spatial integration in the rat SI vibrissa cortex. J Neurophysiol. 1985; 
54:615–635. [PubMed: 4045540] 
12. Brumberg JC, Pinto DJ, Simons DJ. Spatial gradients and inhibitory summation in the rat whisker 
barrel system. J Neurophysiol. 1996; 76:130–140. [PubMed: 8836214] 
13. Drew PJ, Feldman DE. Representation of moving wavefronts of whisker deflection in rat 
somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol. 2007; 98:1566–1580. [PubMed: 17567777] 
14. Hirata A, Castro-Alamancos MA. Cortical transformation of wide-field (multiwhisker) sensory 
responses. J Neurophysiol. 2008; 100:358–370. [PubMed: 18480364] 
15. Higley MJ, Contreras D. Integration of synaptic responses to neighboring whiskers in rat barrel 
cortex in vivo. J Neurophysiol. 2005; 93:1920–1934. [PubMed: 15548623] 
16. Shimegi S, Ichikawa T, Akasaki T, Sato H. Temporal characteristics of response integration 
evoked by multiple whisker stimulations in the barrel cortex of rats. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:10164–
10175. [PubMed: 10559424] 
17. Ego-Stengel V, Mello e Souza T, Jacob V, Shulz DE. Spatiotemporal characteristics of neuronal 
sensory integration in the barrel cortex of the rat. J Neurophysiol. 2005; 93:1450–1467. [PubMed: 
15496491] 
18. Jacob V, Le Cam J, Ego-Stengel V, Shulz DE. Emergent properties of tactile scenes selectively 
activate barrel cortex neurons. Neuron. 2008; 60:1112–1125. [PubMed: 19109915] 
19. Sharpee TO. Computational identification of receptive fields. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2013; 36:103–
120. [PubMed: 23841838] 
20. Barth AL, Poulet JF. Experimental evidence for sparse firing in the neocortex. Trends Neurosci. 
2012; 35:345–355. [PubMed: 22579264] 
21. Constantinople CM, Bruno RM. Effects and mechanisms of wakefulness on local cortical 
networks. Neuron. 2011; 69:1061–1068. [PubMed: 21435553] 
22. O’Connor DH, Peron SP, Huber D, Svoboda K. Neural activity in barrel cortex underlying 
vibrissa-based object localization in mice. Neuron. 2010; 67:1048–1061. [PubMed: 20869600] 
23. Estebanez L, El Boustani S, Destexhe A, Shulz DE. Correlated input reveals coexisting coding 
schemes in a sensory cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:1691–1699. [PubMed: 23160042] 
24. Ahrens MB, Paninski L, Sahani M. Inferring input nonlinearities in neural encoding models. 
Network. 2008; 19:35–67. [PubMed: 18300178] 
25. Ebara S, Kumamoto K, Matsuura T, Mazurkiewicz JE, Rice FL. Similarities and differences in the 
innervation of mystacial vibrissal follicle-sinus complexes in the rat and cat: a confocal 
microscopic study. J Comp Neurol. 2002; 449:103–119. [PubMed: 12115682] 
Ramirez et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
26. Priebe NJ, Ferster D. Inhibition, spike threshold, and stimulus selectivity in primary visual cortex. 
Neuron. 2008; 57:482–497. [PubMed: 18304479] 
27. Martinez LM, et al. Receptive field structure varies with layer in the primary visual cortex. Nat 
Neurosci. 2005; 8:372–379. [PubMed: 15711543] 
28. Atencio CA, Sharpee TO, Schreiner CE. Cooperative nonlinearities in auditory cortical neurons. 
Neuron. 2008; 58:956–966. [PubMed: 18579084] 
29. Sahani M, Linden JF. How linear are auditory cortical responses? Advances in neural information 
processing systems. 2003; Ed 15:277–284.
30. Mirabella G, Battiston S, Diamond ME. Integration of multiple-whisker inputs in rat 
somatosensory cortex. Cereb Cortex. 2001; 11:164–170. [PubMed: 11208671] 
31. Simons DJ, Carvell GE. Thalamocortical response transformation in the rat vibrissa/barrel system. 
J Neurophysiol. 1989; 61:311–330. [PubMed: 2918357] 
32. Higley MJ, Contreras D. Nonlinear integration of sensory responses in the rat barrel cortex: an 
intracellular study in vivo. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:10190–10200. [PubMed: 14614077] 
33. Boloori AR, Stanley GB. The dynamics of spatiotemporal response integration in the 
somatosensory cortex of the vibrissa system. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:3767–3782. [PubMed: 
16597730] 
34. Boloori AR, Jenks RA, Desbordes G, Stanley GB. Encoding and decoding cortical representations 
of tactile features in the vibrissa system. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:9990–10005. [PubMed: 20668184] 
35. Minnery BS, Simons DJ. Response properties of whisker-associated trigeminothalamic neurons in 
rat nucleus principalis. J Neurophysiol. 2003; 89:40–56. [PubMed: 12522158] 
36. Bruno RM, Khatri V, Land PW, Simons DJ. Thalamocortical angular tuning domains within 
individual barrels of rat somatosensory cortex. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:9565–9574. [PubMed: 
14573536] 
37. Bruno RM, Sakmann B. Cortex is driven by weak but synchronously active thalamocortical 
synapses. Science. 2006; 312:1622–1627. [PubMed: 16778049] 
38. Longordo F, To MS, Ikeda K, Stuart GJ. Sublinear integration underlies binocular processing in 
primary visual cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:714–723. [PubMed: 23644484] 
39. Varga Z, Jia H, Sakmann B, Konnerth A. Dendritic coding of multiple sensory inputs in single 
cortical neurons in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:15420–15425. [PubMed: 
21876170] 
40. Machens CK, Wehr MS, Zador AM. Linearity of cortical receptive fields measured with natural 
sounds. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:1089–1100. [PubMed: 14762127] 
41. Jadhav SP, Wolfe J, Feldman DE. Sparse temporal coding of elementary tactile features during 
active whisker sensation. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:792–800. [PubMed: 19430473] 
42. Smyth D, Willmore B, Baker GE, Thompson ID, Tolhurst DJ. The receptive-field organization of 
simple cells in primary visual cortex of ferrets under natural scene stimulation. J Neurosci. 2003; 
23:4746–4759. [PubMed: 12805314] 
43. Constantinople CM, Bruno RM. Deep cortical layers are activated directly by thalamus. Science. 
2013; 340:1591–1594. [PubMed: 23812718] 
44. Polack PO, Friedman J, Golshani P. Cellular mechanisms of brain state-dependent gain modulation 
in visual cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:1331–1339. [PubMed: 23872595] 
45. Higley MJ, Contreras D. Cellular mechanisms of suppressive interactions between somatosensory 
responses in vivo. J Neurophysiol. 2007; 97:647–658. [PubMed: 17065248] 
46. Katz Y, Heiss JE, Lampl I. Cross-whisker adaptation of neurons in the rat barrel cortex. J 
Neurosci. 2006; 26:13363–13372. [PubMed: 17182787] 
47. Chung S, Li X, Nelson SB. Short-term depression at thalamocortical synapses contributes to rapid 
adaptation of cortical sensory responses in vivo. Neuron. 2002; 34:437–446. [PubMed: 11988174] 
48. Fournier J, Monier C, Pananceau M, Fregnac Y. Adaptation of the simple or complex nature of V1 
receptive fields to visual statistics. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:1053–1060. [PubMed: 21765424] 
49. Fanselow EE, Nicolelis MA. Behavioral modulation of tactile responses in the rat somatosensory 
system. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:7603–7616. [PubMed: 10460266] 
Ramirez et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
50. Wang Q, Webber RM, Stanley GB. Thalamic synchrony and the adaptive gating of information 
flow to cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:1534–1541. [PubMed: 21102447] 
51. Geffen MN, Broome BM, Laurent G, Meister M. Neural encoding of rapidly fluctuating odors. 
Neuron. 2009; 61:570–586. [PubMed: 19249277] 
52. Recht B, Fazel M, Parrilo PA. Guaranteed Minimum-Rank Solutions of Linear Matrix Equations 
via Nuclear Norm Minimization. Siam Rev. 2010; 52:471–501.
53. Boyd S, Parikh N, Chu E, Peleato B, Eckstein J. Distributed optimization and statistical learning 
via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Found. Trends Mach. Learn. 2011; 3:1–122.
Ramirez et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Reverse correlation of intracellular recordings can rapidly and accurately identify 
spatiotemporal receptive fields (STRFs)
a, Schematic of the experimental setup. Left, barrel cortex neurons were recorded 
intracellularly during complex multi-whisker stimulation (sparse noise) to 9 whiskers. Right, 
schematic of complex multi-whisker stimulation. Arrows represent independent deflections 
of 9 whiskers. Deflections occur stochastically in time and direction (any of 360°). b, 
Nonlinear stimulus representation. Whisker movements are represented in an 8 angle-binned 
space instead of Cartesian space. c, The voltage-weighted average (VWA) of stimulus 
patterns estimates the spatiotemporal filter (K) for an individual neuron. The accuracy of the 
Ramirez et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
spatiotemporal filter is tested by predicting the response of the neuron to novel stimuli 
(cross-validation). The filter accurately predicts both the subthreshold response of the 
neuron as well as the spiking response. d, The relationship between the VWA and the STA 
is plotted as the correlation coefficient (R) between the predicted STA (STA’) and the true 
spike-triggered average (STA). The STA’ is the prediction calculated using the VWA and 
the appropriate noisy-threshold operation. As the number of spikes used for STA estimation 
increases, the mean correlation between the STA’ and STA becomes stronger, irrespective of 
laminar location or cell type of the recorded neuron. e, The speed of convergence for the 
VWA as a function of the amount of amount of data (seconds) used to train the model. The 
plot is on population data, dashed lines and shaded areas represent ± 1 SD.
Ramirez et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Linearized model captures a majority of the predictable synaptic input for neurons in 
all layers of S1
a, Depth dependent relationship of the model performance and neural variability. Model 
performance (red) – defined as the cross-validated prediction of the VWA on trial averaged 
responses; – and neural variability (grey) – defined as the trial-to-trial variability between 
repeated presentations of identical stimuli, are plotted as a function of recording depth for 
each neuron. There is an inverse relationship between the model performance and neural 
variability in all neurons and layers. b, Responses of a neuron to ten repetitions of the same 
stimulus (gray traces) to illustrate neural variability along with the average response (blue) 
and predicted response (red). The two examples correspond to the data points inside red 
boxes in 2A, and represent examples of neurons with high prediction quality and low 
variability (top) and low prediction quality and high variability (bottom). c, The model 
performance (R2) tested on single-trial responses using training data (black) and cross-
validation/test data (grey) is plotted against the trial-to-trial variability for each neuron. 
Convergence of the test-performance and training-performance at zero variability between 
an R2 of 0.64 and 0.68.
Ramirez et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Comparison of models
a, In order to verify the superiority of the stimulus-transformed linear model over other 
linear and nonlinear models (quadratic regression), we compared the performance of these 
different models on a subset of neurons (N=39). For the four models, calculated either in the 
(x,y) space or the 8 dimensional stimulus transformed space (8-dim) we show jitterplots and 
boxplots of the cross-validated prediction, R2. The red line indicates median values. The 
linear model in the (x,y) space had an R2 0.0340 ± 0.0362 and a median value of 0.0179, 
and performed significantly worse than the linear model in the 8-Dim representation (p-
value < 0.001, t-test). The quadratic regression in the (x,y) space had an R2 0.303 ± 0.155 
and a median value of 0.306. The quadratic regression in the 8-Dim representation had an 
average R2 of 0.319 ± 0.165, a median value of 0.322, and did not perform significantly 
better than the quadratic regression in the (x,y) space (p-value = 0.65, t-test). The linear 
model in the 8-Dim representation performed significantly better than the quadratic (x,y) 
and the quadratic 8-Dim (p-values = 0.0113, 0.0416 respectively; t-test) and had an average 
R2 of 0.397 ± 0.167.
Ramirez et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Example whisker spatiotemporal receptive fields (STRFs) for morphologically 
identified cells across layers
a, Left top, the pinwheel corresponds to 8 angle bins used to represent the tuning of the 
individual whiskers. Left bottom, schematic of the 9 whisker stimulators arranged on the 
rat’s face with the PW in the center and 8 SWs. Middle, a representative STRF for a layer 5 
slender tufted (L5st) neuron. Each whisker contains 8 columns corresponding to movement 
in one of the 8 angle bins. Collapsing over time reveals the angular tuning for each whisker 
(bottom, dashed lines represent 99% significance) and is equivalent to unwrapping the polar 
Ramirez et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
plots of the same data (top). Collapsing over space reveals the average latency of response 
for each neuron, illustrated by the 9 black vertical curves overlying the STRF. b, Example 
STRFs for morphologically identified and reconstructed neurons from each layer.
Ramirez et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Complex stimuli reveal dramatically sharpened receptive fields relative to conventional 
stimuli
Population averaged STRFs were calculated for neurons of the same cell type. a, Population 
STRFs based on complex multi-whisker stimuli. b, Population STRFs simple single-whisker 
stimulation for the same neurons as in A. c – h, Receptive field properties for complex 
(black) versus simple (gray) stimuli (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; TL, p < 0.1; all 
tests were non-parametric two sided rank-sum test). Bars, means ± SEM. c, Adapted STRFs 
had significantly fewer responsive whiskers than unadapted STRFs. d, For adapted STRFs 
Ramirez et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the total fraction of the response power contained in the surround receptive field was 
significantly less than in unadapted neurons. e, Onset latency of the receptive field (usually, 
but not always, the onset of the PW response) was unchanged between groups. f, The 
average latency between the onset of the PW response and the mean onset of the SW 
responses was shortened for adapted STRFs, and was significant in L2 (p<0.05, t-test). g, 
The vector strength, a measure of coherence or directional similarity between significantly 
responsive whiskers, was highest in infra and supra-granular layers but was unchanged 
between simple stimuli and complex stimuli (0 anti-coherent, 1 perfectly coherent). h, 
Directional tuning of the PW, defined as strength of response to the preferred direction 
divided by the summed response to all directions, was always higher during complex stimuli 
but results were not significant (0.125 = no tuning preference; 1.0 = tuned to a single 
direction).
Ramirez et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 6. Neural adaptation underlying receptive field changes
a, The trial averaged response of a neuron over 300 unique trials of complex stimulus (blue) 
and the response to a single trial (black) reveals a strong stimulus transient and tonic 
depolarization that is dependent on stimulus onset. b, Comparison of the mean Vm at 
stimulus onset and during steady-state response reveals a tonic depolarization of 1-5 mV for 
each cell type and layer. c, The response to PW deflections (red) and the eight SW 
deflections (black) depends on the state of the neuron and/or circuit. The average PW and 
SW deflections were measured during the five epochs indicated by the arrows. The trial 
Ramirez et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
averaged response is shown in blue. d, For all neurons (N = 86), the average PSP amplitude 
and peak Vm for PW and the average for the eight SWs (as in C) are plotted in time. Peak 
potentials for the PW (red) and SWs (black) remain relatively invariant and the main factor 
affecting PSP size is the tonic depolarization of membrane potential during adaptation.
Ramirez et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 7. Adaptation linearizes summation of synaptic inputs and allows surrounds to facilitate 
rather than suppress responses
a, The best pairwise stimulus for each neuron was determined from the VWA and played 
back in isolation (unadapted, left) or embedded within random surround stimuli (adapted, 
right). Black, trial-averaged responses of a neuron to each of the two whiskers, R(PW) or 
R(SW). Circles, stimulus onset. The pairwise deflection, R(PW+SW), is shown in red 
(unadapted) or cyan (adapted). b, same as in panel a but for the best multi-whisker stimuli 
(2-9 whiskers). c, For all neurons (N = 46 unadapted in red; N = 75 adapted in blue/cyan) 
Ramirez et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
response to the pairwise deflection R(PW+SW) was plotted against the sum of responses to 
individual deflections R(PW)+R(SW). Cyan points represent neurons observed during both 
adapted and unadapted conditions and therefore have a red counterpart. Blue points 
represent neurons observed only during adaptation. Pairwise summation is nearly linear 
during adaptation (blue and cyan) (slope 0.723, r 0.506, p < 10−8) and sub-linear under 
unadapted conditions (red) (slope 0.346, r 0.738, p < 10−9). Similar behavior was observed 
for the optimal multi-whisker stimuli (right) (N=33 unadapted, 36 adapted; 33 matched 
pairs) (adapted: slope 0.491, r 0.631, p < 10−7; unadapted: slope 0.223, r 0.442, p < 10−9). d, 
For the same data as in c responses to pairwise deflections [R(PW+SW)] were compared to 
responses to the PW deflections alone [R(PW)]. Surround inputs facilitated the PW response 
during adaptation but suppressed the PW response without adaptation.
Ramirez et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 8. Spiking responses are facilitated by the surround in adapted neurons yet spiking 
remains sparse in superficial layers
a, Examples of spiking neurons during the delivery of optimal stimuli in unadapted neurons 
(left) and adapted neurons (right). b, Surround inputs facilitate the PW response in adapted 
neurons but suppress the PW response in unadapted neurons (p = 0.02, 0.30, respectively; 
two-sided sign test). c, Evoked spiking activity in adapted and unadapted neurons 
demonstrates that the PW alone is the most effective driver of spiking activity in unadapted 
neurons but optimal multi-whisker stimuli are more effective in adapted neurons.
Ramirez et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript