A whole-brain monosynaptic input connectome to neuron 
classes in mouse visual cortex
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
Identification of structural connections between neurons is a prerequisite to understanding brain 
function. Here we developed a pipeline to systematically map brain-wide monosynaptic input 
connections to genetically defined neuronal populations using an optimized rabies tracing system. 
We used mouse visual cortex as the exemplar system and revealed quantitative target-, layer- 
and cell-class-specific differences in its presynaptic connectomes. The retrograde connectivity 
indicates the presence of ventral and dorsal visual streams and further reveals topographically 
organized and continuously varying subnetworks mediated by different higher visual areas. The 
visual cortex hierarchy can be derived from intracortical feedforward and feedback pathways 
mediated by upper- and lower-layer input neurons. We also identify a new role for layer 6 
neurons in mediating reciprocal interhemispheric connections. This study expands our knowledge 
of the visual system connectomes and demonstrates that the pipeline can be scaled up to dissect 
connectivity of different cell populations across the mouse brain.
Introduction
The identity and function of neurons are determined not only by the inherent molecular 
and physiological characteristics of individual cells, but also by the synaptic connectivity 
through which diverse neuronal types form circuits. Although brain-wide connectomics at 
single-cell resolution is currently beyond our grasp for complex nervous systems with over 
*Correspondence: shenqiny@alleninstitute.org, and hongkuiz@alleninstitute.org.#Current address: CNC Program, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA†Current address: Cajal Neuroscience, Seattle, W A 98102, USA.
Author contributions
H.Z., J.A.H., A. Cetin, S.M. and S.Y . contributed to overall project design. A. Cetin designed and orchestrated the viral tracing 
technology as well as viral production capability and established these with help from S.Y ., T.Z. and M.T.M. S.Y ., T.Z. and M.T.M. 
performed virus production. A. Cetin, S.Y ., T.L.D. and B.O. conducted initial proof-of-principle studies. A.W. and P.A.G. supervised 
surgical procedures with contributions from B.O., C.N., K.M., S.L, A. Cho, L.C., K.N., N.H., E.G., J.L., R.A, R.H., and J.S. P.A.G. 
supervised ISI procedures with contributions from S.C., S.S., E.K.L., F.G., and T.N. M. McGraw. supervised histological processing 
with contributions from T.E., J.B., M. Maxwell., H.G., A.G., K.B., and A.R. P.R.N. coordinated imaging procedures with contributions 
from R.E., M.G., S.R., L.P., N.I.D., N.K.N. and M.J.T. L.N., L.K. and W.W. performed informatics data processing. K.E.H. and S.Y . 
coordinated workflow and carried out quality control. M.N. contributed to the development of data visualization tools. Q.W., S.M., 
J.A.H., A. Cetin, S.Y . and H.Z. formulated data generation and analysis strategies. S.Y ., A. Cetin, J.A.H., B.T. and H.Z. supervised the 
project. S.Y . analyzed data and prepared figures. S.Y . and H.Z. wrote the manuscript with inputs from all authors.
Competing Interests
J.A.H., K.E.H., P.R.N. and K.N. are currently employed by Cajal Neuroscience. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Code Availability
The Allen Mouse Brain Common Coordinate Framework version 3 (CCFv3) ontology (http://atlas.brain-map.org/) was used to define 
brain regions. The R software (R version 3.6.0) was used for statistical tests and generation of graphs. Hierarchical clustering was 
conducted using the pvclust package (pvclust_2.2-0) in R (R version 3.6.0). Numbers of starter cells in confocal images were 
quantified using the Cell Counter plugin in ImageJ (ImageJ 2.0.0-rc-43/1.53j).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2023 February ; 26(2): 350–364. doi:10.1038/s41593-022-01219-x.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
millions of neurons, different strategies have been applied to reveal the connectivity at 
distinct levels of resolution, including anterograde and retrograde tracing, brain-wide full 
morphology reconstruction, multiple-patch clamp recording, optogenetics-assisted circuit 
mapping, and electron microscopy.
Systematic mapping of afferent connectivity to specific cell populations has been greatly 
aided by the introduction of the monosynaptic, retrograde trans-synaptic rabies virus 
system1,2. Rabies glycoprotein (RG)-deleted rabies viruses can be coupled with various 
genetic and viral tools to ensure cell-type specific labeling of direct presynaptic inputs3–15. 
Many efforts have been made to improve the efficiency and specificity of rabies virus 
tracer while reducing its toxicity, including the construction of recombinant rabies viruses 
from the CVS N2c virus strain16, utilization of an engineered RG4, and generation of a 
double-deletion-mutant rabies virus17 and a self-inactivating rabies virus18. In addition, an 
intersectional rabies tracing strategy targeting Flp- and Cre-double labeled neurons has been 
generated to conduct cell-type-specific circuit tracing with greater accuracy19.
In our effort to build the Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas, we combined viral 
tools, transgenic mouse lines, high-throughput imaging, and informatics to map brain-wide 
efferent connections at the level of cell classes20,21. By delivering recombinant adeno-
associated viruses (AA V) with Cre-dependent expression of EGFP to target brain areas of 
Cre transgenic lines, we labeled axons from selective Cre+ neuronal classes and subclasses. 
Our informatics pipeline, which includes registration of image series to the Allen Mouse 
Brain Common Coordinate Framework (CCF) and automatic segmentation of fluorescent 
axonal projections22,23, enabled quantification and comparison of whole-brain projections 
across multiple regions and cell classes. The resulting high-resolution mesoscale projection 
maps provide the foundation for in-depth dissection of the logic of mouse brain connectivity.
Aiming to construct a complementary afferent map of mouse brain-wide connectivity, 
we developed an improved version of the monosynaptic rabies virus tracing system and 
incorporated rabies-mediated presynaptic input mapping into our pipeline. Our system 
consists of a single AA V helper virus that allows the accurate identification of starter 
neurons and a rabies virus expressing nucleus-localized EGFP marker to facilitate automatic 
quantification of presynaptic inputs. In this study, we utilized this pipeline to map 
brain-wide, cell-class-specific, presynaptic connectomes for the mouse visual cortex, 
including both primary and higher visual areas. Mouse visual cortex contains at least ten 
visuotopically organized cortical areas24–27. These visual areas are strongly interconnected 
to form a hierarchical network with two visual streams as revealed by anterograde 
tracing20,28, similar to what have been known in primates and cats29. In primates, visual 
cortical hierarchy was defined by feedforward and feedback connections via laminar 
distribution of retrogradely labeled neurons30. It remains largely unknown whether visual 
hierarchy and streams in mouse can also be defined with retrograde tracing.
By applying the monosynaptic rabies tracing system to Cre driver mouse lines labeling 
different glutamatergic excitatory and GABAergic inhibitory neuron subclasses20,31, our 
results reveal quantitative target-, layer- and cell-class-specific differences in the retrograde 
connectomes. We find that the retrograde connectomes of the same cell classes in different 
Yao et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
target areas are more different from each other than the retrograde connectomes of different 
cell classes in the same target area. Layer (L)-specific features are also identified, for 
example, L4 neurons receive more thalamic inputs and fewer inputs from higher-order 
association cortical areas, whereas L6 neurons are the main targets of contralateral/callosal 
inputs. Our study confirms previous findings of the dorsal and ventral streams in the 
mouse visual cortex28 and further reveals distinct subnetworks in the medial and lateral 
parts of the dorsal stream as well as several transitional areas between the streams or 
subnetworks. Finally, our previous study showed that the hierarchical organization among 
different areas of the mouse visual cortex can be derived from axon termination patterns 
in the anterograde connectomes20, here we demonstrate that it can also be derived from 
the retrograde connectomes independently, via the feedforward and feedback projections 
mediated by upper- and lower-layer input neurons, respectively.
Results
A pipeline for the mesoscale retrograde connectome
To systematically map whole-brain presynaptic inputs to different cell classes, we 
established a standardized pipeline based on our pipeline for projection mapping across 
the entire brain20,21 (Figure 1). The monosynaptic cell-type-specific rabies tracing system 
consists of EnvA-pseudotyped and glycoprotein-deleted rabies virus (EnvA RVdG, in 
CVS N2c strain) expressing histone-tagged EGFP (H2B-EGFP) and AA V helper virus 
conditionally expressing the red fluorescent protein dTomato, the EnvA receptor (TV A), and 
the rabies glycoprotein (RG). This system was coupled with Cre-driver mouse lines to reveal 
inputs to defined cell classes or types.
We re-engineered several features of pre-existing rabies tracing tools10,16,32 to facilitate 
accurate identification of starter cells and automatic quantification of presynaptic inputs 
(Figure 1a). Our AA V helper virus used the FLEX strategy to conditionally express a 
tricistronic cassette of TV A66T-P2A-dTomato-P2A-RG under the control of human synapsin 
promoter (hSyn), and the ATG of the tricistronic cassette was placed 5’ to the FLEX sites32 
(Figure 1a). The co-expression of TV A, dTomato, and RG from the same expression cassette 
allows unambiguous identification of starter neurons33. This single AA V helper, with the 
use of the attenuated form of TV A, TV A66T, significantly reduced spurious virus labeling in 
the absence of Cre (Extended Data Figure 1a–c, Supplementary Table 1). Our rabies tracer 
is based on the CVS N2cdG rabies strain16 and expresses H2B-EGFP. Compared with the 
EGFP-expressing and H2B-EGFP-expressing SAD B19dG rabies viruses (Extended Data 
Figure 1d–f, Supplementary Table 1), the H2B-EGFP-expressing CVS N2cdG virus mediates 
stringent nucleus labeling, which facilitates automatic quantification of presynaptic cells by 
minimizing neurite labeling. This is the virus that we have used throughout the paper and 
will refer to simply as RV-H2B-EGFP.
We performed several control experiments to verify the specificity of the rabies virus tracing 
system in the absence of Cre, in the absence of RG provided by AA V helper virus, or in 
transgenic lines in which Cre is expressed in non-neuronal cell types (Extended Data Figure 
2, Supplementary Table 1). The results confirm that the presynaptic labeling is specific 
for the Cre+ neuronal starter cells expressing the tricistronic cassette and infected with 
Yao et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the RV-H2B-GFP rabies virus. Our rabies tracing strategy presents minimal non-specific 
labeling in the absence of Cre and enables unambiguous identification of starter cells and 
automatic quantification of presynaptic inputs.
Cell-class-specific mapping of inputs to visual areas
We utilized our retrograde connectome pipeline to systematically map the presynaptic inputs 
of neurons in the visual areas by layers and cell classes. Half of all injections were guided by 
maps derived from ISI (271/519), while others (248/519) were conducted using atlas-derived 
stereotaxic coordinates (Extended Data Figure 3a). After excluding experiments showing 
no virus labeling, tissue damage, segmentation error, or wrong targeting, 303 experiments 
across ten excitatory neuron Cre lines, seven interneuron Cre lines, and one Cre line labeling 
both excitatory neurons and interneurons were included in the analysis (Figure 2a, Extended 
Data Figure 3a, Supplementary Tables 2–3). Many of these Cre lines were previously used 
in the Allen Mouse Connectivity Atlas to identify the organization of cortical connections in 
the mouse brain20, as well as in previously published rabies studies. All but one experiment 
(which targeted the temporal association area, TEa) successfully targeted the visual areas 
(jointly labeled as VIS), including primary visual cortex (VISp, or V1), and higher visual 
areas (HV As) such as lateral visual area (VISl, or LM), posteromedial visual area (VISpm, 
or PM), anteromedial visual area (VISam, or AM), anterior area (VISa, or A), anterolateral 
area (VISal, or AL), rostrolateral visual area (VISrl, or RL), laterointermediate area (VISli, 
or LI), postrhinal area (VISpor, or POR), and posterolateral area (VISpl, or PL). Fourteen 
experiments targeted a subarea of the primary somatosensory area barrel field (SSp-bfd) 
bordering VISrl, which corresponds to previously defined VISrll (or RLL) region and 
displays extension of retinotopic organization lateral to VISrl25, and thus we refer to this 
barrel field subarea as SSp-bfd-rll. Locations of all injection centroids were plotted onto the 
CCFv3 cortical flat map (Figure 2b).
We quantified presynaptic inputs in each brain region using an automated image 
segmentation algorithm trained to detect the fluorescence signal from nucleus-localized 
H2B-EGFP23. We validated the accuracy of automatic signal detection and quantification of 
inputs following registration to the Allen CCFv322 by obtaining high correlation between the 
informatically measured per structure input signal volume (sum of detected signal in mm3) 
and manual counting of labeled cells (Extended Data Figure 3b–h). Therefore, we used the 
automatically calculated input signal volume of each structure for subsequent analysis.
We find that dTomato-labeled starter cells show distinct layer-specific distribution patterns 
consistent with the Cre expression. The numbers of starter neurons vary between Cre lines 
and between different experiments within the same Cre line (Extended Data Figure 3i–j, 
Supplementary Table 2). Although the overall presynaptic labeling signal increases with 
the number of starter cells, there is not a strong linear correlation (R2 = 0.54) between the 
number of starter cells and total input signal volume within the brain (Extended Data Figure 
3k). It suggests that postsynaptic cells may receive convergent inputs from presynaptic cells, 
which in turn can make divergent connections to different postsynaptic cells. Previously, we 
compared whole-brain projections across animals by normalizing the projection signals to 
the size of the infection area20. Here, due to the lack of strong linear correlation between 
Yao et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
whole brain input signal and the number of starter cells in the injection site, we instead use 
the fraction of whole brain inputs as our measure of connectivity strength per region, i.e., the 
input signal volume per brain structure divided by the total input signal volume of the entire 
brain.
We next constructed a brain-wide matrix for inputs to the visual areas, focusing on the 
fraction of whole brain inputs from 314 anatomical structures at a mid-ontology level from 
the CCFv3 (Figure 2c, Supplementary Table 3). Hierarchical clustering analysis of the inputs 
from the 314 brain regions shows separation of all 303 experiments into three major clusters 
that are correlated with the spatial proximity of the injection sites: the VISp and posterior 
and lateral HV A cluster (VISpor, VISpl, VISl and VISal), the anterolateral cluster (SSp-bfd-
rll, and VISrl), and the anteromedial cluster (VISam, VISpm, and VISa). Compared to the 
brain-wide output projections from mouse visual areas20, presynaptic inputs come from a 
broader collection of brain regions (Figure 2c). Visual areas receive the strongest inputs 
from isocortex, followed by thalamus and hippocampal formation (HPF) (Extended Data 
Figure 3l). Fifteen cortical areas account for the majority of isocortical inputs excluding 
the visual and medial modules where the injection targets locate, and nine thalamic nuclei 
account for the majority of thalamic inputs (Extended Data Figure 3m–n).
Brain-wide inputs to VISp and HVAs
We compared presynaptic inputs across all experiments in VISpor, VISli, VISp, VISl, 
VISal, VISrl, VISa, VISpm, VISam and SSp-bfd-rll. Comparison of bilateral inputs from 
the isocortical modules20 and the rest of the brain to these ten target areas reveals overall 
similar, but quantitatively different global input patterns to different targets, with dominant 
inputs from the isocortical modules and thalamus (Figure 3a). Visual areas also receive 
strong presynaptic inputs from HPF, which are mainly found in lateral entorhinal cortex 
(ENTl), medial entorhinal cortex (ENTm), CA1 and the post-, pre- and parasubiculum 
(POST, PRE, and PAR) (Extended Data Figure 4).
Inputs from other anatomical structures each provide less than 1% of whole brain inputs, 
and the fractions of inputs span more than three orders of magnitude (Extended Data Figure 
4, Supplementary Table 3). The distribution of subcortical inputs strongly suggests the 
involvement of neuromodulatory systems in regulating visual cortical function. Clustered 
inputs are found in NDB and substantia innominata (SI), consistent with the innervation 
of visual cortex by basal forebrain cholinergic neurons34,35. Our results reveal sparse locus 
coeruleus (LC) inputs to both VISp and HV As, suggesting that visual cortex is part of 
the ascending noradrenergic efferent pathway innervating the limbic system, midbrain, 
thalamus, basal forebrain and neocortex36,37. In dorsal raphe (DR) where dorsal cortex-
projecting serotonin neurons were previously identified38, sparsely labeled presynaptic 
neurons are also found. Identification of monosynaptic projections from neuromodulatory 
neurons to both VISp and HV As suggests that locally released neuromodulators can affect 
all levels of visual information processing.
We then focused on individual cortical and thalamic source regions that send most inputs to 
visual target areas (Extended Data Figure 3m–n) and used the average from all experiments 
(including all Cre lines) in the same target to compare the input strength from a given 
Yao et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
presynaptic region to the ten visual targets (Figure 3b–d). The input patterns strongly 
support the presence of two subnetworks equivalent to the dorsal and ventral cortical 
streams. The nodes in the dorsal and ventral streams of the mouse visual system were 
adopted from previous studies based on the anterograde projection strength, with VISl, 
VISli, VISpl and VISpor in the ventral stream, and VISal, VISrl, VISa, VISam and VISpm 
in the dorsal stream28. We find that dorsal stream areas tend to receive higher proportions of 
inputs from each other and lower proportions of inputs from ventral stream areas, whereas 
ventral stream areas receive notable inputs from areas in both streams (Figure 3b–c). We 
also place SSp-bfd-rll as part of the dorsal stream, because it shows similar input pattern 
characteristic of dorsal stream structures as its adjacent area VISrl. VISp in general has 
similar input pattern as the ventral stream node, VISl. However, VISp can be distinguished 
from VISl and other HV As based on the preference for inputs from the dorsal lateral 
geniculate complex (LGd) of thalamus over the lateral posterior nucleus (LP) of thalamus 
(Figure 3d).
Within the dorsal stream, anterolateral areas such as VISal, VISrl and SSp-bfd-rll present 
strong inputs among themselves, while receiving relatively few inputs from the medial areas 
such as VISam and VISpm (Figure 3b–c). In contrast, VISam and VISpm show strong 
mutual connections, while VISpm receives relatively few inputs from the anterolateral areas 
(Figure 3b–c). In addition, the anterolateral areas receive higher proportions of inputs from 
the somatomotor module, whereas the medial areas VISam and VISpm receive higher 
proportions of inputs from RSP, ACA and ventrolateral orbital area (ORBvl) (Figure 3b–
c). The anterolateral and medial areas also have distinct thalamic input patterns, with 
VISam and VISpm receiving strong inputs from anteromedial nucleus (AM) and lateral 
dorsal nucleus (LD) and anterolateral areas receiving strong inputs from posterior complex 
(PO) and ventral anterior-lateral complex (V AL) (Figure 3d). Such input patterns can be 
observed in both excitatory neuron and interneuron experiments (Extended Data Figure 
5). To evaluate the similarity of input patterns between different targets, we calculated 
Spearman’s correlation coefficients (R) for experiments within the same target and across 
different targets (Figure 3e). Our results suggest the possibility of two subnetworks in the 
dorsal stream, one consisting of medial areas of VISam and VISpm and the other consisting 
of anterolateral areas of VISal, VISrl, SSp-bfd-rll and VISa, with a gradual transition 
between the two subnetworks from medial to lateral.
Our results also suggest that VISal and VISpm may be transitional areas between dorsal and 
ventral streams. VISal’s cortical input pattern is generally more similar to other dorsolateral 
HV As, but it also receives inputs from ventral HV As (albeit weakly) as well as lateral 
cortical areas (e.g., TEa and AUDp) like the ventral HV As do (Figure 3b–c). VISpm’s 
cortical input pattern is the most similar to VISam, but also receives more inputs from 
ventral HV As (e.g., VISl) and TEa than dorsolateral HV As and somatomotor areas (Figure 
3b–c). Furthermore, VISal shows high inter-area correlations with areas in both dorsal and 
ventral streams, and VISpm shows high inter-area correlations only with VISam, VISl and 
VISp (Figure 3e). Hierarchical clustering of the input patterns for all experiments (Figure 
2c) also places VISal in the posterior/ventral cluster. Together, the identification of these 
transitional areas between the dorsal and ventral streams and the above two subnetworks 
Yao et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
within the dorsal stream suggests that the mouse visual cortical system is more complex than 
a simple two-stream system.
Given the unique input pattern to each visual area, we further investigated the effects of 
different starter cell classes on the input patterns. We find that the correlation between input 
patterns of different cell classes in the same target is higher than that of the same cell class in 
different targets (Figure 3f). Using experiments in VISrl and VISpm as examples, regardless 
of the starter cell classes, VISrl receives characteristically higher proportions of inputs from 
ACAd, MOs, and SSp-bfd than VISpm, whereas VISpm receives higher proportions of 
inputs from ACAv, and RSP than VISrl (Figure 3g). The results suggest that the presynaptic 
input patterns, as quantified by our tracing system, are predominantly determined by the 
spatial location of the starter cells, and that different cell classes in the same target receive 
similar global input patterns.
Visual responses in the mouse VISpor have been shown to rely on the colliculo-cortical 
pathway and are independent of the geniculo-cortical pathway39. The proportions of LP 
inputs to VISpor were over 10 times those of LGd inputs (Figure 3h), consistent with the 
major relay of SC visual input through LP to VISpor. Sparse SC inputs are found in 11% 
of all experiments (Supplementary Table 3), and the mean proportion of SC inputs is at 
~0.001% of whole brain inputs. However, two VISpor experiments using the Cux2-IRES-
Cre line consistently showed inputs from SC, sensory related (SCs), up to around 0.2% of 
total inputs (Figure 3h–i). This result suggests a potential direct monosynaptic connection 
between SCs and VISpor, in addition to the disynaptic connection between SC and VISpor 
via LP. Better genetic tools targeting more defined cell types in VISpor are required to 
further dissect the identities of monosynaptic connection from SCs to VISpor.
Brain-wide inputs to excitatory neurons in different layers
We next focused on quantifying the brain-wide inputs to different Cre-defined glutamatergic 
excitatory neuron subclasses within a single target area, VISp. Despite the variation in starter 
cell numbers and layer distributions (Extended Data Figure 6a–c), the overall input patterns 
to VISp are similar between different Cre driver lines (Extended Data Figure 6d–e), with 
most inputs arising from isocortex, followed by thalamus and HPF. Compared to other 
layer-specific lines, the L4 line receives a significantly higher proportion of inputs from 
thalamus (p < 0.001, Tukey multiple comparisons of means), consistent with the notion that 
feedforward signal from the visual thalamus is mostly received by L4 neurons in the visual 
cortex40–44.
We constructed an input connectivity matrix for experiments targeting 9 Cre-defined 
excitatory neuron populations in VISp (Figure 4a, Extended Data Figure 7a), and compared 
that to the brain-wide output projection matrix (Supplementary Table 4) for the same Cre-
defined neuron populations in VISp (Figure 4b, Extended Data Figure 7b). VISp receives the 
highest proportions of inputs from areas within the visual module, followed by visual areas 
within the medial module. Outside these areas, VISp excitatory neurons receive the majority 
of inputs from ACA and ORB in the prefrontal module, TEa and ectorhinal (ECT) areas in 
the lateral module, SSs, SSp-bfd, and MOs in the somatomotor module, RSP in the medial 
module, and the auditory module.
Yao et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The striking similarity between the intracortical input and output patterns of VISp reveals 
the reciprocity of corticocortical connections (Figure 4a–b). However, it is interesting to 
note that the interconnection between VISp and auditory areas (AUD) is not symmetric in 
strength. All VISp excitatory neuron populations receive high proportions of inputs from 
but send weak projections to AUD, consistent with anterograde tracing data (Experiments 
554421791 and 536299435 in Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas)20,21.
Out of the nine thalamic nuclei with the strongest inputs to VISp (Figure 4a), three nuclei, 
LGd, LP and LD, collectively account for more than 70% of the thalamic inputs. These three 
nuclei also receive strong VISp projections from L6 CT neurons labeled by Ntsr1-Cre as 
well as L5 ET neurons labeled by Rbp4 and A93 Cre lines (Figure 4b), with L6 CT mainly 
targeting LGd and L5 ET preferentially targeting LP and LD. The brain-wide monosynaptic 
input matrix also reveals that VISp receives strong inputs from ENTl, ENTm, PAR, POST, 
CLA and NDB (Extended Data Figure 7a).
We then compared the input patterns of excitatory neurons in different layers of VISp 
(Figure 4a,c, Extended Data Figure 7a,c). L4 neurons receive the least proportions of 
inputs from higher-order association cortical areas, including ACA, ORBvl, TEa and RSP, 
as well as from subcortical input areas, and receive a significantly higher proportion of 
inputs from LGd (between L4 neurons and those from other layers: p < 0.005, Tukey 
multiple comparisons of means). In contrast, L2/3, L5 and L6 neurons generally receive 
higher proportions of inputs from higher-order association cortical areas, and both L5 and 
L6 neurons receive the highest proportions of inputs from RSPv as compared to other 
association cortical areas45,46. Both RSP and ACA send the highest proportions of inputs 
to L6 neurons, while ORBvl sends the highest proportion of inputs to L5 neurons. These 
layer-specific input patterns are supported by the axon lamination patterns from cortical and 
thalamic areas to VISp (Figure 4d), where ORBvl axons primarily ramify in L1 and L5 
of VISp, ACAd axons mainly reside in L1 and L6, RSPv axons are mainly found in L6, 
followed by L5 and L1, and axons from LGd mainly ramify in L4.
Subsequently, we analyzed the laminar distribution of cortical inputs to excitatory neurons in 
different layers (Figure 4e–k). Presynaptic input neurons in higher-order association cortical 
areas are often located in deep layers (L5 and L6), regardless of the layer location of starter 
cells in VISp. For example, in ipsilateral ACAd, L5 contains the most presynaptic neurons 
compared to other layers, with a similar preference for L5 observed for inputs to excitatory 
neurons located in different layers of VISp (Figure 4e). A notable exception is ipsilateral 
ORBvl, in which VISp L2/3, L4 and L5 neurons preferentially receive inputs from L2/3 
ORBvl whereas no preference in layer distribution is found for input to L6 neurons of VISp 
(Figure 4f). We also observe interesting patterns of differential layer preference in inputs 
from homotypic ipsilateral and contralateral cortical areas to VISp (Figure 4g–k).
These distinct features in brain-wide input patterns to excitatory neurons in different layers 
of VISp can also be found in VISl (Extended Data Figure 7d–l, Supplementary Table 5). 
Similar to VISp, L4 of VISl overall receives higher proportions of inputs from thalamic 
areas and lower proportions of inputs from higher-order cortical areas, most input neurons 
Yao et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
in higher-order cortical areas reside in deep layers, and ipsilateral and contralateral cortical 
areas present different laminar distribution of input neurons to the same target.
Distinct presynaptic inputs to L6 excitatory neurons of visual areas
L6 CT and L6b neurons (labeled by Ntsrt1 and Ctgf Cre lines) in VISp clearly receive 
a higher proportion of their inputs from the contralateral cortex compared to excitatory 
neurons in the other layers (Figure 4a, Extended Data Figure 6d). These inputs mostly 
originate from the contralateral visual, medial, and auditory modules. A comparison with 
L5 neuron populations (labeled by Tlx3, A93-Tg1 and Rbp4 Cre lines) shows that these 
L6 neurons receive similarly high proportions of inputs from ipsilateral HV As and RSP as 
the L5 neurons, but significantly higher proportions of contralateral inputs (p < 0.01, Tukey 
multiple comparisons of means, Figure 4l).
To further investigate whether the layer distribution of starter neurons is the key factor in 
determining the level of contralateral inputs, we identified 89 experiments in VISp and 
HV As with starter cells restricted to a single layer and compared the contralateral and 
ipsilateral inputs between the experiments. Overall, L6 neurons across VIS receive a higher 
proportion of contralateral inputs from all six isocortical modules than neurons in other 
layers (Extended Data Figure 8a–c). Quantitative analysis suggests that the effect of layer 
on the ratio of contralateral to ipsilateral isocortical inputs is significant (two-way ANOV A, 
p < 0.001), and that the location of the target site (VISp or HV As) does not significantly 
affect the ratio of contralateral to ipsilateral isocortical inputs (p = 0.37). As shown for 
the homotypic contralateral inputs to L6 neurons (Extended Data Figure 8d), presynaptic 
neurons mediating interhemispheric connectivity of the visual areas mainly locate in deep 
layers (L5 and L6). Our results suggest that L6 of the visual areas has distinct retrograde 
connectivity compared to the other layers.
Brain-wide inputs to VISp interneurons
To explore presynaptic inputs to distinct GABAergic interneurons, we employed various 
Cre lines labeling major interneuron subclasses: Pvalb-Cre, Sst-Cre, Vip-Cre and Ndnf-Cre, 
as well as Gad2-Cre to cover all cortical interneurons. Even though the majority of Ndnf-
expressing neurogliaform cells are in L1, in our experiments starter cells in the Ndnf line 
were found in L2 with the exception of one experiment targeting VISl. We believe that tissue 
damage caused by injections disproportionally ablates L1 cells, leading to the absence of L1 
starter cells in most experiments.
Despite variation in starter cell numbers (Extended Data Figures 3, 6, 9a) and layer 
distribution (Extended Data Figures 6, 9b), the overall global patterns are again similar 
between Cre lines, regardless of excitatory or inhibitory classes (Figure 5a, Extended 
Data Figures 6, 9c–d). Compared to excitatory neurons, interneurons in VISl, VISp and 
VISam overall receive a higher proportion of their inputs from thalamus and ipsilateral 
cortical module where the target areas locate and a lower proportion of their inputs from 
contralateral cortical modules (Figure 5b), suggesting that intra-module inputs exert greater 
influence on interneurons than excitatory neurons.
Yao et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
We then focused on different interneuron subclasses in VISp and find that the three 
interneuron subclasses, Sst, Vip and Pvalb, receive similar patterns of inputs from ipsilateral 
cortical and thalamic areas (Figure 5c). We divided the 39 interneuron experiments in VISp 
from all Cre lines into four different groups based on the depth of starter cell population: 
the Top group contained experiments with starter cells restricted to L2/3 (we found very 
few L1 starter cells), whereas the Upper, Lower, and Bottom groups had progressively more 
starter cells in deep layers (Figure 5d). Although starter cells in these groups are rarely 
restricted to a single layer, we find distinct input patterns of interneurons, especially between 
the Bottom group and others. The Bottom group receives a significantly lower proportion 
of inputs from LGd compared to the Upper and Lower groups (p < 0.01, independent two 
sample t test (two-sided)), and significantly higher proportions of inputs from ACA and RSP 
compared to all other groups (ACA: p < 0.001, RSP: p < 0.05, independent two sample t test 
(two-sided)) (Figure 5e). Consistent with the observation of L6 excitatory neurons receiving 
extensive contralateral cortical inputs, the Bottom group also receives higher proportions 
of contralateral cortical inputs than the other groups (Figure 5e). Statistically significant 
differences in inputs from the contralateral non-visual cortical modules were found between 
the Bottom group and the other three groups (p < 0.05, independent two sample t test 
(two-sided)). Interneuron subclasses with starter cells mostly outside of L6 tend to receive 
lower proportions of contralateral inputs than the Bottom group,, whereas Gad2 experiments 
with many starter cells in L6 receive comparable levels of contralateral inputs as the Bottom 
group (Figure 5f).
Local inputs to excitatory and inhibitory neurons
In experiments where starter cells were restricted to a specific layer of VISp or VISl, we 
also examined local inputs (Figure 6, Extended Data Figure 9e–h). We define the layer 
preference of any local inputs as the fraction of inputs in that layer compared to all local 
inputs. We find that starter cells in each layer have characteristic local input patterns.
For VISp excitatory neurons (Figure 6a–h), L2/3 neurons preferentially receive inputs from 
L4 and L5. L4 neurons receive the fewest inputs from L2/3 and preferentially receive inputs 
from L4 and L5. L5 neurons receive strong inputs from L2/3 to L6, with a preference for 
L2/3 and L5 inputs, and L6 neurons preferentially receive inputs from deeper layers. With 
the exception of L2/3, starter cells receive dense inputs from other cells in the same layer. 
Our results shown dense inputs from L4 to L2/3, despite weak inputs from L2/3 to L4, 
and dense reciprocal inputs between L2/3 and L5. Excitatory neurons in VISl also exhibit 
characteristic local input patterns similar to excitatory neurons in VISp (Extended Data 
Figure 9e–h).
Considering the layer-specific local input patterns observed in excitatory neurons, we 
compared local input patterns of interneurons among the four different groups based on 
the depth of starter cell distributions (Figure 6i–j). The Top group includes two Ndnf 
experiments and two Vip experiments, with the Ndnf starter cells receiving a higher 
proportion of inputs from L5, and the Vip starter cells receiving higher proportions of inputs 
from L4 and L5. The Upper, Lower, and Bottom groups each exhibit distinct local input 
patterns, with the Bottom group receiving a higher proportion of inputs from L6 than the 
Yao et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Upper group. Our results suggest cell-class- and layer-dependent local input patterns for 
both excitatory neurons and inhibitory interneurons47,48.
Hierarchical order defined by presynaptic inputs
We explored whether the laminar distribution of presynaptic inputs among visual areas 
reveals the hierarchical ordering of these areas. In primates, the hierarchy of visual cortical 
areas was derived by designating feedforward connections originating from superficial 
layers in a lower area and terminating in L4 in a higher area, and feedback connections 
originating from deeper layers in a higher area and terminating outside L4 in a lower area29. 
Other studies used the fraction of labeled presynaptic supragranular neurons (SLN), defined 
as the number of labeled neurons in L2/3 divided by the sum of labeled neurons in supra- 
and infra-granular layers (L2/3 + L5 + L6), to derive a hierarchical ordering of the primate 
visual cortical areas that was consistent with the Felleman and Van Essen hierarchy29,30. 
Unlike what was described for primates, L4 neurons in mouse VISp do appear to play an 
important role as the other layers in information relay to HV As. A preference for L4 inputs 
from VISp is particularly noticeable for VISrl and SSp-bfd-rll, with the highest fraction of 
VISp inputs coming from L4 (Extended Data Figure 10).
In an effort to identify a quantitative hierarchical parameter for visual cortical areas using 
retrogradely labeled cells, we first compared the laminar distribution of presynaptic inputs 
for the connections between VISp and VISam (Figure 7a), which were shown to lie at 
the base and the top of the visual area hierarchy previously20. Accordingly, inputs from 
VISam to VISp are considered feedback, whereas those from VISp to VISam are considered 
feedforward inputs. We find that the percentages of L2/3 and L4 inputs from VISp to VISam 
are significantly higher than those from VISam to VISp, and the percentage of L5 inputs 
from VISam to VISp is significantly higher than that from VISp to VISam (p < 0.001, two 
sample t-test, in both cases). In contrast, the percentage of L6 input does not differ between 
the two directions. Inputs from L2/3/4 and L5 of other visual areas to VISp or VISam 
present complementary patterns consistent with the predicted relative hierarchical positions 
of each source area and target area based on laminar projection patterns (Figure 7b–c). 
Inputs from almost all other ipsilateral cortical areas to VISp also show lower fractions 
of L2/3/4 inputs and higher fractions of L5 inputs than intra-VISp inputs (Figures 7d–f), 
consistent with the distinct roles of L2/3/4 and L5 in feedforward and feedback information 
relay. In contrast, the fraction of L6 inputs is not correlated with feedforward or feedback 
hierarchical orders (Figure 7b–c) but shows a lateral to medial gradient with higher inputs 
from the lateral areas and lower from the medial areas (Figure 7d–f).
Our observations suggest that the ratio of inputs from the superficial L2/3/4 to the sum of 
inputs from the superficial layers and L5 [i.e., (L2/3 + L4) / (L2/3 + L4 + L5), hereinafter 
referred to as the h index] could be used to quantify the hierarchical positions of the mouse 
visual areas. We calculated the average h index for presynaptic inputs from 10 source 
visual areas to 9 target visual areas, using both excitatory and inhibitory neuron experiments 
(Figure 7g). For a given target, inputs from VISp exhibit the highest h index values as 
compared to the HV As, consistent with VISp at the lowest hierarchical position, and inputs 
Yao et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
from HV As of higher hierarchical positions in the ventral and dorsal streams have lower h 
index values as compared to other HV As in the same stream.
To explore whether h index can serve as a quantitative parameter for hierarchical distance 
between cortical areas, we performed correlation analysis of h values measured between 
common cortical source areas and paired visual targets (Figure 7h). We hypothesized that 
if the measured h index faithfully reflects the hierarchical distance between the target area 
and the source area, the difference between h values measured for a common source area 
and paired target areas would be the hierarchical distance between the two target areas. 
This relationship would be translated into a best-fit line with a slope equal to 1 and an 
intercept indicating the hierarchical distance between the two target areas when plotting 
paired h values measured for common cortical source areas. We compared the paired h 
values between all cortical source areas and five target visual areas, with VISpm excluded 
for the lack of L4 experiments and VISa excluded for low sample size. Overall, we found 
a fair correspondence between the best fit lines based on the least-squares criterion and the 
best fit with a slope equal to 1. We then fit a linear regression model to the measured h 
values between cortical source areas and the five visual areas with the hierarchical level of 
VISp set at zero. The relative hierarchical orders of cortical areas were estimated to best 
predict the measured h index values. A strong correlation (R2 = 0.94) was found between the 
predicted h values and the measured values (Figure 7i). The estimated hierarchical levels for 
the visual areas (Figure 7j) are overall consistent with the predicted hierarchy based on the 
cell-type-specific projection20, with the exception that the linear model fitting h-index values 
places VISa at the top of the dorsal stream instead of VISam. Consistent with our previous 
findings, we find that the hierarchy in the mouse visual cortex is shallow, especially for the 
dorsal stream.
Discussion
Here we present the construction and validation of a retrograde connectome pipeline for 
the mouse brain, with a focus on the visual cortical areas. With improved virus tools 
and informatic processing, our pipeline can be utilized to conduct large-scale systematic 
mapping of brain-wide presynaptic inputs at the cell class or type level. Together with our 
anterograde projection mapping pipeline, the current work proves the feasibility to build a 
comprehensive, directional, and 3D connectivity atlas of the mouse brain at the cell type 
level.
Target, layer and cell class co-define input connectivity
Our retrograde connectome dataset reveals that the presynaptic inputs to defined neuronal 
classes are determined predominantly by target area, followed by layer distribution of starter 
cells and Cre line-defined cell classes. In contrast to the highly differential cell-class-specific 
anterograde projection patterns, rabies tracings from Cre-defined cell classes in the same 
target reveal overall similar global input patterns (Figures 3f–g, 4a,c, Extended Data Figure 
7d,f). Similar results were obtained when we applied the same approach described in this 
study to another mouse cortical area, the primary motor cortex49, as well as in several recent 
retrograde rabies tracing studies targeting different cell classes in the medial prefrontal 
Yao et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
cortex33,50, visual cortex51–53, or somatosensory cortex19. Across target areas, both VISp 
and HV As receive the most inputs from isocortex, followed by thalamus and HPF (Figure 
3a). Strong cortical inputs are often from source areas that receive strong visual area inputs, 
indicating reciprocal connections between visual cortex and other cortical modules (Figure 
4a–b, Extended Data Figure 7d–e). Each target area in visual cortex exhibits unique input 
patterns, distinguishing dorsal stream HV As from ventral stream ones, and anterolateral 
HV As from anteromedial ones (Figure 3b–e).
Under the overall similar global input patterns, we also observe quantitative differences in 
inputs to layer- and Cre-defined starter cell classes (Figure 4a,c, Extended Data Figures 
6, 7d,f)47,48,54. In VISp, compared to excitatory neurons in other layers, L4 excitatory 
neurons receive the highest inputs from LGd and lowest inputs from higher-order association 
cortical areas. Similarly, VISl L4 excitatory neurons receive the highest inputs from LP and 
lowest inputs from association cortical areas. L4 neurons also contribute to the feedforward 
interareal connections together with L2/3 neurons55. For example, SSp-bfd-rll receives 
inputs preferentially from L4 of VISp and several other HV As (Extended Data Figure 10)19.
We find that L6 CT and L6b neurons in VISp, as well as in HV As, receive significantly 
higher proportions of contralateral cortical inputs than any other layers do (Figure 4a,c,l, 
Extended Data Figures 6d, 8a–c). VISp L6 excitatory neurons also receive high proportions 
of inputs from ipsilateral HV As and RSP (Figure 4c,l), as shown previously45,46,54. Previous 
studies revealed two major subclasses of excitatory neurons in L6 with distinct output 
projection patterns, the corticocortical projecting intratelencephalic (IT) subclass and the 
corticothalamic projecting (CT) subclass31,45. Diversity in input connectivity was also 
shown between these two L6 subclasses in VISp, with L6 IT receiving predominantly local 
inputs and L6 CT receiving higher proportions of inputs from HV As and RSP45,46. Our 
results confirmed the strong inputs from HV As and RSP to L6 CT neurons, but we have 
not investigated the inputs to L6 IT neurons. Interestingly, the contralateral presynaptic input 
neurons to L6 neurons in VISp and HV As were mainly located in deep layers (L5 and L6) 
(Extended Data Figure 8d), indicating that interhemispheric connectivity is mainly mediated 
by the callosal projecting L5 IT neurons20,56 and L6 IT neurons31,52. Together, these 
findings suggest that L6 excitatory cell classes in visual cortex have unique connectivity 
patterns and are main players in bridging connectivity between two hemispheres as well as 
linking interhemispheric inputs with the feedback inputs from higher cortical areas.
Among the inhibitory interneurons, we also find that inputs to interneurons are mainly 
determined by target area and layer distribution of starter cells (Figure 5). Our observation 
is in line with a recent rabies tracing study which found strong similarity in local and 
long-range inputs to L2/3 excitatory and inhibitory neuron types54. Consistent with the 
L6 excitatory neurons, interneurons in deep layers also receive higher proportions of 
contralateral inputs than interneurons in superficial layers. Overall, the comprehensive 
retrograde connectomes presented in this study provide a foundational resource for more 
refined investigation of the circuit functions of different neuronal classes in visual cortex.
Yao et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Hierarchical organization and subnetworks of the visual cortex
In this study we explored the possibility of predicting the hierarchical positions of 
mouse visual cortical areas by the laminar distribution patterns of presynaptic neurons, 
an alternative approach from prediction based on laminar termination patterns of axon 
projections20. The feedforward and feedback connections in the mouse visual areas are 
gauged by the ratio of L2/3/4 inputs to L2/3/4/5 inputs. Using this quantitative parameter, 
we obtain a hierarchy of the visual areas, which places VISp at the bottom, and VISa and 
VISpor at the top of the hierarchy in the dorsal stream and the ventral stream, respectively 
(Figure 7). This hierarchy is largely consistent with those derived from axon termination 
patterns20,57, and the anatomical hierarchy revealed by both output and input connectivity 
patterns mirrors the functional hierarchical organization of mouse visual cortical areas58.
Our retrograde tracing shows VISa at the top of dorsal stream hierarchy, which is different 
from anterograde tracing showing VISam at the top. It’s worth noting that VISa in mouse 
dorsal stream has larger receptive field than VISam24, and VISa doesn’t have a complete 
visual field, whereas VISam does25,26. Our current study also identifies two subnetworks 
in the dorsal stream; the dorsolateral subnetwork consists of anterolateral areas of VISal, 
VISrl, SSp-bfd-rll and VISa and receives major inputs from cortical and thalamic areas 
in the somatomotor module, whereas the dorsomedial subnetwork consists of medial areas 
of VISam and VISpm and receives major inputs from cortical and thalamic areas in the 
medial association module (Figure 3b–e). There is a gradual transition between the two 
subnetworks with VISa being the transitional area between them. These unique features of 
VISa support our current finding that VISa is higher in hierarchical level than VISam.
Our retrograde connectomes also reveal other transitional areas (Figure 3b–e). SSp-bfd-rll 
is physically located in somatosensory cortex, barrel field, and receives abundant thalamic 
inputs from VPM. SSp-bfd-rll also has strong reciprocal connections with VISp and other 
dorsolateral HV As59, making it a transitional area between visual and somatosensory 
systems. VISal has reciprocal connections with both dorsolateral and ventral HV As, and 
receives inputs from both somatomotor and lateral cortical modules, making it a transitional 
area between dorsolateral and ventral networks. Similarly, VISpm is strongly interconnected 
with VISam, VISp and VISl, and to a lesser extent with other ventral HV As, and receives 
inputs from medial module strongly but also from lateral module. Thus, VISpm is a 
transitional area between dorsomedial and ventral networks60.
VISpor sits at the top of the ventral stream hierarchy within the cortical network. It also 
receives strong inputs from LP and possibly direct inputs from SCs (Figure 3h–i), supporting 
its involvement in the colliculo-cortical pathway that is independent of the geniculo-cortical 
pathway39. VISpor also receives substantial inputs from its neighboring HPF region (Figure 
3a).
Overall, our comprehensive retrograde connectomes have enabled a systematic investigation 
of the network structure of the mouse visual cortical system, revealing specific pathways and 
areas at the intersections of different pathways. These results suggest that the mouse visual 
cortex is more complex than a simple two-stream system. There are several topographically 
organized and continuously varying subnetworks mediated by the HV As surrounding VISp. 
Yao et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
These subnetworks likely play key roles in integrating visual function with a variety of other 
cortical and subcortical systems.
METHODS
All experimental procedures related to the use of mice were approved by the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee of the Allen Institute for Brain Science, in accordance with 
NIH guidelines.
Outline of the data generation and processing pipeline
The AA V helper virus and the monosynaptic rabies tracer were sequentially injected to 
the same target site with a three-week interval, followed by imaging of the whole brain 
one week after rabies infection. As this study focused on the visual cortex, our target 
site identification was mostly guided by intrinsic signal imaging (ISI) of the visual areas. 
To repeat injections that failed repeatedly under the guidance of ISI as well as to add 
replicates to expand our data set, additional experiments were conducted using stereotaxic 
injection coordinates specific for each target site. Rabies-labeled brains were imaged using 
serial 2-photon tomography (STPT) at every 100 μm, with a total of 140 images for each 
brain. Injection site polygons were manually drawn based on the expression of dTomato 
from the AA V helper virus, and the centroids of injection site polygons were later used to 
verify and assign the injection target areas. Image series were processed in the informatics 
pipeline for automatic segmentation of signal and registration to the Allen Mouse Brain 
Common Coordinate Framework version 3 (CCFv3)22 for subsequent data analyses. Brain 
sections were collected after STPT and those around the injection sites were further 
immunostained to enhance the dTomato signal. Starter cells were quantified after confocal 
imaging of the stained sections. Rigorous manual quality control steps were conducted to 
exclude experiments with noticeable tissue damage, injection failure, imaging failure or 
segmentation errors.
Animals
To identify presynaptic inputs to different neuronal populations in the visual cortex, we 
used 18 Cre-transgenic mouse lines (in congenic C57BL/6J background, aged 2-6 months, 
either gender depending on availability), Emx1-IRES-Cre (JAX 005628, Kevin Jones)61, 
Sepw1-Cre_NP39 (MMRRC 036190, Nathaniel Heintz and Charles Gerfen)62, Cux2-IRES-
Cre (MMRRC 031778, Ulrich Mueller)62, Nr5a1-Cre (JAX 006364, Brad Lowell)63, 
Tlx3-Cre_PL56 (MMRRC 036547, Nathaniel Heintz and Charles Gerfen)64, A93-Tg1-Cre 
(JAX 017346, Allen Institute for Brain Science)65, Rbp4-Cre_KL100 (MMRRC 031125, 
Nathaniel Heintz and Charles Gerfen)64, Ntsr1-Cre_GN220 (MMRRC 030648, Nathaniel 
Heintz and Charles Gerfen)64, Syt6-Cre_KI148 (MMRRC 032012, Nathaniel Heintz and 
Charles Gerfen)64, Ctgf-2A-dgCre (JAX 028535, Allen Institute for Brain Science)65, Gad2-
IRES-Cre (JAX 010802, Z. Josh Huang)66, Ndnf-IRES2-dgCre (JAX 028536, Allen Institute 
for Brain Science)65, Pvalb-IRES-Cre (JAX 008069, Silvia Arber)67, Sst-IRES-Cre (JAX 
013044, Z. Josh Huang)66, Vip-IRES-Cre (JAX 010908, Z. Josh Huang)66, Chat-IRES-Cre 
(JAX 006410, Brad Lowell)68, Htr3a-Cre_NO152 (MMRRC 036680, Nathaniel Heintz and 
Charles Gerfen)64, and Calb1-IRES2-Cre (JAX 028532, Allen Institute for Brain Science)65. 
Yao et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
These Cre lines had been previously utilized together with anterograde AA V viral tracers for 
the construction of the Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas. The expression patterns of 
these lines can be found in the Allen Institute Transgenic Characterization data portal (http://
connectivity.brain-map.org/transgenic). To quantify the spurious rabies virus labeling, wild-
type C57BL/6J mice were used. To compare different recombinant rabies and AA V helper 
viruses, Cre transgenic mice labeling neurons and non-neuronal cells were used. We used 
three non-neuronal Cre lines to validate the monosynaptic retrograde tracing system, Olig2-
Cre (JAX stock number 025567, William Richardson)69, Tek-Cre (JAX 004128, Richard 
Flavell)70, and Aldh1l1-CreERT2 (JAX 023748, Nathaniel Heintz)71, which express Cre in 
oligodendrocytes, vascular endothelium, and astrocytes, respectively. Male and female adult 
mice aged 78-155 days old (median of 90 days old) were used for experiments. The specific 
genotypes, genders and ages of mice used for each experiment are listed in Supplementary 
Tables 1 and 2. Mice were housed under 14h:10h light-dark cycle with ad libitum access to 
food and water.
Virus design, preparation and titer information
The cell line used for AA V production was HEK293T cells (ATCC, CRL-11268). The cell 
lines used for rabies virus production and titration were HEK293t-TV A800 cells, B7GG 
cells, and BHK-EnvA cells (Callaway lab, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies), and 
N2A-N2c(G) and N2A-EnvA_cytG cells (Jessell lab, Columbia University).
AA V viruses and rabies viruses used in the mesoscale retrograde connectome pipeline 
were generated at the Allen Institute for Brain Science. The AA V helper viruses utilize 
the Cre-dependent FLEX strategy and contain the tricistronic cassettes of Syn-DIO-TV A-
dTomato-RV G, followed by a short bovine growth hormone polyadenylation sequence. The 
Kozak sequence and the start codon of TV A are located 5’ to the FLEX switch, while the 
TV A (lacking a start codon)-P2A-dTom-P2A-RV G cassette is within the FLEX cassette 
and inverted respective to the promoter. The AA V helper virus selected for the mesoscale 
retrograde connectome pipeline utilizes a mutant TV A, TV A66T, and the RV G from the 
CVS N2c strain.
The AA V1 serotype of the helper virus was produced using a helper-free HEK293 cell 
system followed by iodixanol gradient purification. Multiple batches of AA V1-Syn-DIO-
TV A66T-dTom-CVS N2c G virus were used in the course of the mesoscale connectivity 
project, and the titers of the virus preps were in the range of 2 x 1012 to 1 x 1013 GC/ml.
The CVS N2cΔG-H2B-EGFP rabies virus was generated by replacing GFP in the rabies 
genomic plasmid RabV CVS-N2c(deltaG)-EGFP (Addgene, Plasmid #73461) with H2B-
EGFP flanked by 5’ XmaI and 3’ NheI-KasI sites. EnvA CVS N2cΔG-H2B-EGFP rabies 
virus was generated from the genomic plasmid as described previously16. The titers of EnvA 
CVS N2cΔG-H2B-EGFP rabies virus preps used in the study were adjusted to be around 5 x 
109 GC/ml.
The SAD B19ΔG-H2B-EGFP virus was generated by inserting the H2B-EGFP sequence 
into the gG locus of the pSADdeltaG-F3 plasmid (Addgene, Plasmid #32634). The EnvA 
SAD B19ΔG-H2B-EGFP rabies virus was generated from the genomic plasmid as described 
Yao et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
previously72. The EnvA SAD B19ΔG-GFP virus was obtained from the Salk Institute. Both 
EnvA SAD B19ΔG-H2B-EGFP and EnvA SAD B19ΔG-GFP viruses were diluted to 5 x 109 
GC/ml to match that of the EnvA CVS N2cΔG-H2B-EGFP virus.
Surgery
All mice received unilateral injections into a single target region in the left hemisphere 
(except that twelve mice received injections in the right hemisphere). For monosynaptic 
retrograde tracing of whole brain inputs to Cre-defined cell populations, the AA V helper 
virus was injected first into the target site, followed 3 weeks later by another injection in 
the same location with the EnvA CVS N2cΔG-H2B-EGFP rabies virus. After one week 
survival, animals were sacrificed, and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains 
were dissected and post-fixed in 4% PFA at room temperature for 3–6 h and then overnight 
at 4°C.
To precisely target each visual area, functional mapping of visual field space by intrinsic 
signal imaging (ISI) was used to guide injection placement20. An image of the surface 
vasculature was acquired to provide fiduciary marker references on the surface of the brain. 
An overlay of the visual field map over the vasculature fiducials was used to identify 
the target injection site. For injections that failed repeatedly under the guidance of ISI, 
transcranial injections were conducted using stereotaxic injection coordinates specific for 
each target site. The anterior/posterior (AP) coordinates are referenced from the transverse 
sinus (TS), the medial/lateral (ML) coordinates are distance from midline at Bregma, and the 
dorsal/ventral (DV) coordinates are measured from the pial surface of the brain. Stereotaxic 
coordinates for each area are as follows: VISp (6 subareas) (VISp-1: AP:1.50(TS), ML:
−2.55, and DV:0.3, 0.6; VISp-2: AP:2.59(TS), ML:−2.55, and DV:0.3, 0.6; VISp-3: 
AP:1.90(TS), ML:−3.10, and DV:0.3, 0.6; VISp-4: AP:1.05(TS), ML:−3.50, and DV:0.3, 
0.6; VISp-5: AP:0.75(TS), ML:−3.00, and DV:0.3, 0.6; VISp-6: AP:0.61(TS), ML:−2.10, 
and DV:0.3, 0.6), VISl (AP:1.4(TS), ML: −4.10, DV:0.3, 0.6); VISpm (AP:1.9(TS), ML: 
−1.60; DV:0.3, 0.6), VISam (AP: 3.0(TS), ML: −1.70, DV:0.3, 0.6), VISal (AP: 2.4(TS), 
ML: −3.70, DV:0.3, 0.6, Angle:15°), and VISrl (AP: 2.8(TS), ML:−3.30, DV: 0.3, 0.6). For 
some target areas, injections were made at two depths to label neurons throughout all six 
cortical layers. The AA V1 helper virus was injected using the iontophoresis method, with 
current settings of 3 μA, 7 sec on/off cycles and 5 min total. The EnvA rabies virus was 
injected using a nanoinjector, and a total of 500 nl was delivered in 23 nl increments over a 3 
min and 10 sec interval.
Tamoxifen-inducible Cre line (CreER) mice were treated with 0.2 mg/g body weight of 
tamoxifen solution in corn oil via oral gavage once per day for 5 consecutive days starting 
the week following AA V helper virus injection. Trimethoprim-inducible Cre line mice were 
treated with 0.3 mg/g body weight of trimethoprim solution in 10% DMSO via oral gavage 
once per day for 3 consecutive days starting the week following AA V helper virus injection. 
Rabies virus was injected 3 weeks post induction. All mice were deeply anesthetized before 
intracardial perfusion, brain dissection, and tissue preparation for serial imaging.
Yao et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Serial two photon tomography
The injected brains were imaged by STPT (TissueCyte 1000, TissueVision Inc. Somerville, 
MA) as described previously with a few modifications20,21. In brief, brains were embedded 
in agarose block followed by co-embedding with polyacrylamide. Imaging proceeded along 
the rostral-caudal axis beginning from the caudal end of the brain. The specimen was 
illuminated with 925 nm wavelength light. Two-photon image tiles for red and green 
channels with a nominal resolution of 0.875 μm x 0.875 μm x 2 μm x-y-z were taken at 
40 μm below the cutting surface. The laser power and photo-multiplier tube (PMT) voltage 
were set at 190 mW (measured at the objective) and ~600 V (equal on all channels). In order 
to compensate for variation between imaging systems and specimens, these parameters are 
adjusted on each imaging run using an observed level of autofluorescence in the red channel. 
The following procedures were conducted: locate the central canal of the brain stem; locate 
the surface of the tissue; adjust the objective piezo stage such that the image plane is 40 μm 
deep in the specimen; move 700 μm laterally, exposing an area of uniform tissue structure; 
adjust the PMT voltage such that the mean intensity of this area falls within the range of 
600-650; from the central canal, the specimen is then centered laterally within the imaging 
area and the acquisition is commenced. After an entire brain section was imaged, a 100-μm 
section was removed from the specimen by the vibratome, followed by imaging of the next 
plane. Scanned image tiles were stitched to form a single high-resolution image. Images 
from 140 sections were collected to cover the full range of mouse brain. Upon completion of 
imaging, sections were retrieved and stored in PBS with 0.1% sodium azide at 4°C.
Starter cell identification and quantification
The starter cells are those with both AA V helper virus and EnvA RV-H2B-EGFP infection, 
and thus have red fluorescence in the soma and green fluorescence in the nuclei. For starter 
cell quantification, TissueCyte brain sections were sorted according to the rostrocaudal 
axis. Around 20 100-μm sections flanking the virus injection sites were identified, mounted 
on gelatin coated glass slides, and immunostained to enhance dTomato red fluorescence 
signal. The immunofluorescence staining was conducted using an automated slide stainer 
(Biocare, IntelliPATH FLX). Slides were blocked in Image iT FX Signal Enhancer (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific Cat# I3693) for 45 minutes, followed by 1-hour incubation in a blocking 
solution containing 1% normal goat serum (Vector Laboratories Cat#S1000) and 1% Triton 
X (VWR). Sections were then incubated in the anti-RFP primary antibody solution (1% 
goat serum, 1% Triton X, Rockland Cat# 600-401-379, RRID:AB_2209751, 1:2000) for 1.5 
hours, and then in the secondary antibody solution (1% goat serum, 1% Triton X, and 1:500 
goat anti-rabbit conjugated with Alexa Fluor 594, Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# A-11012, 
RRID:AB_2534079) for 2 hours at room temperature after rinsing with 0.1% Triton X wash 
solution. All sections were stained with 5 μM DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific D1306) and 
coverslipped using Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech Cat# 0100-01B). Stained sections 
were imaged using a Leica SP8 TCS confocal microscope under a 10x objective. Starter 
cells were counted in ImageJ using the Cell Counter plugin. We manually delineated layers 
1 to 6, using the DAPI staining fluorescence and background fluorescence in each image, 
and assigned starter cells to layers 1, 2/3, 4, 5, and 6.
Yao et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Image data QC and annotation
The acquired TissueCyte STPT images and the confocal images went through several steps 
of quality control processes: annotation QC, staining QC, starter cell QC, and segmentation 
QC. Specimens that did not pass any one of the QC steps were considered fails and removed 
from the pipeline. After TissueCyte imaging, specimens were assessed for surgical and 
imaging quality through Annotation QC. Failures at this step included no green signal, 
TissueCyte imaging error, tissue damages, and poor surgical targeting. Tissue damages at 
the injection sites were classified into 5 levels, None (no damage detected), Very minor (1 
section with detectable damage usually at brain surface), Minor (1-3 sections with detectable 
damage usually at brain surface), Moderate (3-6 sections with damage effecting cortical 
layers or signal with damage possibly effecting starter cells), and Severe (significant damage 
to tissue and signal in multiple sections). Specimens with moderate damage were followed 
up by inspecting slides/confocal images, and those with damages affecting starter cells 
were failed. Specimens with severe damages were failed. Polygons were drawn around 
the injection site to link the injection site to the Allen Mouse Brain Common Coordinate 
Framework, version 3 (CCFv3). Specimens having passed Annotation QC were sent for 
the next step of mounting, and immunostaining for starter cell identification. Staining 
QC identified and removed specimens in which no red-fluorescent cells were found after 
immunostaining-mediated enhancement of red fluorescence signal from the AA V helper 
virus. Starter cell QC further removed specimens in which no starter cells were identified 
after confocal imaging. Finally, specimens with errors in the subsequent informatics data 
pipeline steps were identified in the Segmentation QC step.
Image data processing
STPT images were processed and registered to the CCFv3 through our informatics data 
pipeline (IDP)22,23. The signal detection algorithm was modified to detect nuclear objects 
with high sensitivity, which accepts out-of-focus nuclei and has lower contrast requirements. 
In addition, high intensity pixels near the detected objects were included into the signal 
pixel set. Detected objects near hyper-intense artifacts occurring in multiple channels were 
removed. The output was a full resolution mask that classified each pixel as either signal 
or background. An isotropic 3D summary of each brain was constructed by dividing each 
image series into 10 μm × 10 μm × 10 μm grid voxels. Total signal was computed for each 
voxel by summing the number of signal-positive pixels in that voxel. Each image stack was 
registered in a multi-step process using both global affine and local deformable registration 
to the 3D CCFv3 as previously described22,23.
Analysis of whole brain presynaptic inputs to the visual areas
The accuracy of targeting was verified by overlaying the injection site polygon of each 
experiment to the ISI image or by identifying the anatomical structure where the injection 
centroid was located in the CCFv3. Since the signal detection algorithm was optimized to 
detect sparse presynaptic labeling with high sensitivity, the automatically detected volume 
of input signal can have false positives where high background signal is falsely identified 
as input signal. False positives tend to occur more frequently in brain structures with low 
input signal and high background fluorescence such as the cerebellum and are rarely found 
Yao et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
in areas with strong input signals such as the isocortex. In order to remove this type of 
artifacts, we identified a set of 92 negative brains that were processed through the pipeline, 
but showed no rabies-mediated GFP expression, and used this negative dataset to calculate 
the threshold of false positive signal, i.e., the value of mean input signal volume plus 6 
standard deviations for each of the 314 ipsilateral and 314 contralateral major structures of 
the brain. Any structure not passing this threshold was set to “0”. A manually validated 
binary mask was then applied to further remove artifacts in informatically-derived measures. 
Following these two steps, input signal volume in a given structure was normalized to the 
total inputs of the brain. The post-threshold, masked, normalized input signal volumes were 
used to build the weighted connectivity matrix.
Using automated image registration to CCFv3, we quantified input signal by layer within 
each cortical target. This automatic quantification process assigned input signal volume to 
layers 1, 2/3, 4, 5, 6a and 6b. Input signals in layers 6a and 6b were combined to represent 
input signals in layer 6. When analyzing the fraction of inputs in a given cortical area across 
layers, the threshold for per structure input signal volume was set at 0.0004. Any structure 
below this threshold was set as “0”, and no fraction of layer inputs was calculated. This 
threshold value is higher than 99% of input signal volumes measured for structures in the 
negative dataset and is equivalent to ~10 labeled cells based on our comparison of input 
signal volume and manual counting. We reasoned that cortical areas below this threshold had 
very sparse RV-labeled neurons, which could lead to extreme values when calculating the 
layer-specific contribution of inputs.
Hierarchical clustering in Figure 2 was conducted using the pvclust package ( pvclust_2.2-0) 
in R (R version 3.6.0). The agglomerative method used in hierarchical clustering was 
“ward.D”, and the distance measure used was correlation. The R software was used for 
statistical tests and generation of graphs.
Estimation of hierarchical levels
We first identified a quantitative hierarchical parameter h based on the anatomical features 
of feedback and feedforward connections, with h calculated as the ratio of layers 2/3/4 
inputs to layers 2/3/4/5 inputs. We used the linear regression analysis to estimate a set of 
hierarchical levels that best predict the measured h values. A model can be specified as 
Y = Xβ, wherein Y is a vector containing the h values of all source areas to each target, 
β contains the estimated hierarchical levels assigned to each area, and X is the incidence 
matrix. X is constructed so that each column corresponds to one of the 43 cortical areas and 
each row corresponds to a connection between two areas. All of the elements of a row are 
zero except in the two columns corresponding to the areas participating in the connection, 
with the source area taking the value of −1 and the target area taking the value of 1. The 
hierarchical level of the primary visual area was set at zero.
Limitations of rabies virus tracing and data analysis methods
The monosynaptic rabies virus tracing system is a powerful tool in its ability to selectively 
infect starter cells and label only the first-order presynaptic neurons. However, although we 
have improved our virus tools to further enhance specificity and efficiency, there are still 
Yao et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
limitations of this strategy, which should be taken into consideration when interpreting the 
results.
Due to the high affinity between TV A and EnvA, low-level leaky expression of TV A in 
the absence of Cre is sufficient for rabies infection8,11,13,73. Although the leaky expression 
of RG is often too low to allow trans-synaptic transportation of rabies virus, these cells 
can be mistakenly counted as local trans-synaptically labeled cells. Our AA V helper virus 
is specifically designed to reduce spurious expression in the absence of Cre by utilizing 
TV A66T, and rare labeling in wild type animals are restricted to the injection site. However, 
AA V1 serotype can transport retrogradely along the axon at a low frequency. It is possible 
that the AA V helper virus can infect neurons in a brain area with direct input to the visual 
area, in effect creating new starter cells if the Cre-driver line in use also has expression 
there, leading to the labeling of neurons in upstream areas without direct connection with 
the visual area. Therefore, independent connection mapping strategies are required to verify 
novel connections revealed by rabies tracing.
The mechanisms by which rabies viruses are transported across synapses, as well as the 
tropism of cell types and synapse types, are not fully understood. It is possible that the 
rabies virus tracing system does not reveal all presynaptic neurons, even though we used 
the CVS N2c strain which has higher trans-synaptic efficiency. Rabies virus may not cross 
all synapses with equal efficiency, leading to preferential representation of certain cell types 
within the presynaptic connectome. The efficiency of trans-synaptic spread of rabies virus is 
also affected by the expression level of RG in the starter neurons, which is in turn limited 
by the expression of Cre from the driver lines, the titers of the AA V helper virus and rabies 
virus tracer, as well as the number of viral particles successfully delivered to the target sites.
We applied our informatics pipeline to automatically register image series to the CCFv3 
and quantify whole-brain input signals. Our method allows us to compare input patterns 
across different experiments, but it falls short of direct counts of presynaptic cells per 
brain structure. The automatic signal detection process can generate false positive signals 
which are background signals picked up as input signals. We subtracted a standard threshold 
from all experiments in an attempt to remove false positive signals, which do not take into 
consideration background variations among different experiments.
We conducted comparisons across experiments using fractions of the whole-brain total 
inputs, which reduce variability between experiments. This normalization method is the 
more appropriate approach than normalizing by the number of starter cells, because of 
the non-linear relationship between the numbers of starter cells and input cells due to the 
existence of convergent and divergent connections (that can also be variable between cell 
types). However, normalization using fractions of total inputs could lead to overestimated 
fractions of inputs from major source areas in experiments with small numbers of starter 
cells, as well as underestimating the fraction of inputs per brain structure for cell types 
receiving broader inputs across the brain.
Yao et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Statistics & Reproducibility
No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. However, our previous studies 
demonstrated that n=1 experiment per source area and Cre line is sufficient to reveal 
the anterograde projectome20,21. We therefore included in our retrograde connectome 
experiments with n>=1 per target and Cre lines. Specimens that did not pass the quality 
control processes of our pipeline were excluded. The experiments were not randomized. The 
Investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment, 
because imaging and informatic processing were automatically processed and quantified, 
and the results were quantitative and did not require subjective judgment. Data distribution 
was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested.
Yao et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Comparison of different AA V helper viruses and rabies viruses for 
monosynaptic retrograde tracing.
(a-c) Comparison of spurious rabies infection from AA V helper viruses expressing wild-
type TV A and mutant TV A66T. Tricistronic AA V helper viruses were constructed to 
conditionally express either the wild-type TV A or TV A66T, together with dTomato and 
RG (a). Cre-negative wild-type mice were sequentially injected with AA V helper viruses 
and EnvA-pseudotyped recombinant rabies viruses expressing EGFP. Each AA V helper 
virus/rabies virus pair was tested in two wild-type mice. Top-down view of whole brains 
(b) and observation of the injection sites under the confocal microscope (c) revealed fewer 
Yao et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
spurious rabies infection from AA V helper virus expressing TV A66T. (d-f) Comparison 
of monosynaptic retrograde tracing in VISp using SAD B19 strain of recombinant RV 
expressing EGFP (d, similar results observed in 6 independent experiments) or H2B-EGFP 
(e, similar results observed in 7 independent experiments) or CVS N2c strain of recombinant 
RV expressing H2B-EGFP (f, similar results observed in 303 experiments). Note that 
in H2B-EGFP expressing SAD B19 experiment there is still green fluorescence in the 
processes of infected and transmitted neurons (e), due to the very high-level transgene 
expression in this rabies strain, whereas in CVS N2c experiment H2B-EGFP is strictly 
contained within nuclei of infected and transmitted neurons (f). Scale bars, 100 μm in b, 
1 mm in panels showing full brain sections in d-f, and 500 μm in panels showing selected 
brain areas in d-f.
Yao et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. Validation of the AA V helper virus and recombinant rabies used in the 
retrograde connectomic pipeline in wild-type mice and non-neuronal Cre lines.
(a) Sequential two-photon images of a Cre-negative wild-type mouse brain injected with the 
AA V helper virus and EnvA-pseudotyped CVS N2cΔG rabies virus expressing H2B-EGFP. 
Similar results observed in 3 independent experiments. (b) Absence of RV-labeled neurons 
except a few H2B-EGFP-expressing cells in the injection site. Virus injection was targeted 
to VISp and validation was conducted in two wild-type mice. Left and middle panels: 
corresponding 2D atlas plate of Allen CCFv3 and the section image from the outlining 
Yao et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
box in a showing the injection site. Right panel: Image magnified from the box in the 
middle panel. Applying the monosynaptic rabies tracing to wild-type mice led to only a few 
H2B-EGFP-labeled cells in the injection site, but no starter cells in the injection site and 
no H2B-GFP-labeled cells outside the injection site. This shows that our system does not 
have the issue of spurious local rabies virus uptake due to low-level expression from the 
AA V helper in the absence of Cre, or local infection by small quantities of non-pseudotyped, 
RG-coated RVdG virus particles that may be present in the EnvA-pseudotyped rabies virus 
preparation. We then confirmed that the trans-synaptic transfer of the recombinant rabies 
relies on the expression of rabies G from the AA V helper. A G-minus version of the 
AA V helper virus, which conditionally expresses TV A66T and dTomato after Cre-mediated 
recombination, was injected into Cre+ mice, followed by the injection of rabies virus three 
weeks later. We observed H2B-EGFP-labeled cells only at the injection site and nowhere 
else in the brain. This finding confirms that the presynaptic labeling is specific for the 
Cre+ starter cells expressing the tricistronic cassette and infected with the RV-H2B-GFP 
rabies virus. (c) Sequential two-photon images of rabies labeling in an astrocyte-specific 
Cre mouse brain injected with hSyn promoter-driven AA V helper virus and recombinant 
rabies virus into VISp. Similar results observed in 4 independent experiments. (d-e) Left and 
middle two panels: corresponding 2D atlas plates of Allen CCFv3 and the section images 
from the boxes in c. Right panels: Representative images magnified from the boxes in the 
middle panels reveal sparse labeling around the injection site (d) and in LGd (e). We tested 
the monosynaptic rabies tracing system in three non-neuronal Cre lines, Olig2-Cre, Tek-Cre, 
and Aldh1l1-CreERT2, which express Cre in oligodendrocytes, vascular endothelium, and 
astrocytes, respectively. Among all experiments using the non-neuronal Cre lines, with 
either the hSyn-driven AA V helper virus used in the pipeline or a similarly constructed 
CMV-driven helper virus, sporadic long-distance H2B-EGFP-labeled cells were found only 
in 50% of the injected Aldh1l1-CreERT2 mice. Our results show that the occasionally 
infected non-neuronal cells do not support the spread of rabies virus to neurons in local or 
distant areas.
Yao et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. Overview of experiments included in the final dataset, automatic input 
signal detection and characterization of inputs to cell classes defined by Cre lines in the visual 
cortex.
(a) Flow chart showing the injection methods, and numbers of experiments passing each QC 
step. QC1 excluded experiments with no rabies virus labeling or with tissue damage. QC2 
excluded experiments with segmentation errors that prevent quantitative analysis or with 
targeting sites falling outside the visual cortex. One experiment targeting TEa was included 
in the final data set. For experiments guided by ISI, target validation was performed by 
overlaying injection polygons with sign maps derived from ISI, and overlaying injection 
Yao et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
centroids in the CCFv3. Inconsistency between ISI-assigned targets and CCFv3-derived 
targets were observed in 15 out of the total 136 ISI-guided experiments in the final data set. 
We assigned injection targets based on the overlaying of injection polygons with sign maps. 
(b-g) Relationship between per structure input signal volume measured by the informatics 
data pipeline and manual cell counts. Linear correlation between input signal volume and 
manually counted input cells was shown in various brain areas. In the six example structures 
from cortex, thalamus and cortical subplate, strong positive linear correlations were found 
between automatic measurement and manual counts (R2 in the 0.62-0.98 range). (h) Slopes 
from linear correlations between informatically measured input signals and manual cell 
counts in various brain areas. The numbers of independent experiments are as follows: CLA: 
n=11; ORB: n=10, ACA: n=11, RSP: n=19; LGd: n=19; LP: n=19. (i) Number of starter 
cells for experiments categorized in Cre lines. Box plots show median and interquartile 
range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or smallest value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the 
hinge. The numbers of independent experiments are as follows: Emx1: n=7, Sepw1: n=19; 
Cux2: n=29; Nr5a1: n=25; Rbp4: n=25; Tlx3: n=26; A93-Tg1: n=19; Ntsr1: n=21; Ctfg: 
n=19; Syt6: n=1; Gad2: n=6; Ndnf: n=6; Vip: n=24; Pvalb: n=33; Sst: n=40; Chat: n=1; 
Htr3a: n=1; Calb1: n=1. (j) Distribution of numbers of starter cells across all experiments. 
(k) Relationship between numbers of starter cells and total inputs from the whole brain. 
(l) Fractions of inputs from isocortex, thalamus and HPF to the mouse visual cortex. Dots 
represent the median values of input signals. (m-n) Fractions of total inputs from non-VIS 
isocortical areas (m) and thalamic areas (n). Brain areas are ordered according to their levels 
of input signals. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. A total of 303 independent experiments 
were included.
Yao et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. Representative images of presynaptic inputs to the visual areas from 
anatomical structures outside of cortex and thalamus.
Coronal STPT images and their corresponding 2D atlas plates in Allen CCFv3 show labeled 
presynaptic neurons in OLF (a-a”), HPF (b-b”), CTXsp (c-c”), STR (d-c”), PAL (e-e”), 
HY (f-f”), MB (g-g”), pons (h-h”), and MY (i-i”). Claustrum (CLA) in CTXsp, diagonal 
band nucleus (NDB) in PAL, and lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) in HY each represent 
~0.1% of whole brain inputs; globus pallidus, external segment (GPe) in PAL, basolateral 
amygdalar nucleus (BLA) in CTXsp, and zona incerta (ZI) in HY each account for ~0.01% 
of whole brain inputs; dorsal peduncular area (DP) in OLF, locus ceruleus (LC) in pons, 
Yao et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and superior colliculus (SC) in MB each account for ~0.001% of whole brain inputs; areas 
in MY each account for ~0.0001% of whole brain inputs. Rare inputs in several structures 
of MY are also found in less than 10% of all experiments (Supplementary Table 3), which 
could be missed using other connectivity mapping techniques. Clustered inputs are found 
in NDB (fraction of whole brain inputs in NDB > 0 in 93% of all experiments), substantia 
innominata (SI) (fraction of whole brain inputs in SI > 0 in 75% of all experiments), LC 
(fraction of whole brain inputs in LC > 0 in 66% of all experiments), and DR (~0.01% 
of whole brain inputs, found in 63% of all experiments). The numbers of independent 
experiments with similar results are 121 in a, 61 in a’, 52 in a”, 254 in b, 165 in b’, 137 in 
b”, 278 in c, 187 in c’, 149 in c”, 236 in d, 187 in d’, 68 in d”, 226 in e, 110 in e’, 152 in e”, 
275 in f, 224 in f’, 198 in f”, 214 in g, 187 in g’, 33 in g”, 231 in h, 193 in h’, 193 in h”, 53 
in i, 52 in i’, and 30 in i”. Enlarged views of boxed areas are shown in the right-hand panels 
for each major brain structure. Arrows highlight the location of single labeled cells.
Extended Data Figure 5. Connectivity matrices comparing the inputs to Rbp4 (a) and Sst (b) 
neurons in the visual areas from within the visual cortex, non-visual isocortical modules, and 
thalamus.
Gray indicates experiments not available. In the matrix, each row represents experiments 
with the same target area, and each cell shows the fraction of the total inputs in a given input 
structure measured from a single experiment or the average when n > 1.
Yao et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 6. Brain-wide input patterns to excitatory neuron subclasses in different 
layers of the primary visual cortex.
(a-b) Overview of the layer selectivity and number of experiments of each transgenic Cre 
line (a) and the numbers of starter cells grouped by Cre lines (b) for the 48 experiments 
in VISp. (c) Laminar distribution of starter cells for each Cre line. For each transgenic 
line, different experiments are indicated by different colors. Box plots show median and 
interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or smallest value no further than 1.5 
× IQR from the hinge. The numbers of independent experiments are as follows: Sepw1: 
Yao et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
n=3; Cux2: n=13; Nr5a1: n=10; Rbp4: n=11; Tlx3: n=12; A93-Tg1: n=6; Ntsr1: n=4; Ctfg: 
n=3; Emx1: n=2. (d) Representative 3D visualization of brain-wide inputs to neurons in 
different layers of VISp. (e) Brain-wide input patterns of major brain structures to different 
layer-specific excitatory neuron subclasses labeled by Cre lines.
Extended Data Figure 7. Comparison of subcortical inputs to excitatory neurons in different 
layers of VISp and brain-wide input patterns to excitatory neuron subclasses in VISl.
(a) Connectivity matrix showing presynaptic inputs from the ipsilateral and contralateral 
HPF, CTXsp, STR, and PAL to excitatory neurons in different layers of VISp. Each row of 
Yao et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the matrix represents the mean per structure fraction of total input signals for experiments 
in each Cre line. Rows are organized based on layer-specific distribution of the starter cells. 
Brain regions are ordered by ontology order in the Allen CCFv3. (b) Connectivity matrix 
showing normalized projections from VISp to the brain regions shown in (a). Anterograde 
tracing experiments (Supplementary Table 4) from the Cre mouse lines used in (a) and 
C57BL/6J were included, and rows represent the mean per structure fraction of total 
projection signals for experiments in each mouse line. (c) Comparison of ENTl, ENTm, and 
CLA inputs to excitatory neurons in different layers of VISp. Box plots show median and 
interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or smallest value no further than 1.5 × 
IQR from the hinge (same below). The numbers of independent experiments are as follows: 
L2/3: n=16; L4: n=10; L5: n=29; L6: n=7. (d) Connectivity matrix showing normalized 
inputs from the ipsilateral and contralateral isocortex, and ipsilateral thalamus to excitatory 
neurons in different layers of VISl. Each row of the matrix represents the mean per structure 
fraction of total input signals for experiments in each Cre line. Rows are organized based 
on layer-specific distribution of the starter cells. The cortical areas are ordered first by 
module membership (color coded) then by ontology order in the Allen CCFv3. The ten 
thalamic nuclei are ordered based on the strength of inputs, and are color coded by the 
thalamocortical projection classes (blue: core, green: intralaminar, brown: matrix-focal, and 
red: matrix-multiareal). (e) Connectivity matrix showing normalized axon projections from 
VISl to the ipsilateral and contralateral isocortex, and ipsilateral thalamus shown in (d). 
Anterograde tracing experiments (Supplementary Table 5) from the Cre mouse lines used 
in (d) and C57BL/6J were included, and rows represent the mean per structure fraction 
of total projection signals for experiments in each mouse line. (f) Comparison of inputs 
from ipsilateral and contralateral cortical areas and thalamic nuclei to excitatory neurons in 
different layers of VISl. The inset shows fraction of inputs from VISp to excitatory neurons 
in different layers of VISl. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. The numbers of independent 
experiments are as follows: L2/3: n=5; L4: n=4; L5: n=11; L6: n=8. (g-h) Representative 
STPT images showing laminar termination patterns of axon projections in VISl from higher-
order association cortical areas and thalamic nuclei (g) and laminar distribution patterns 
of presynaptic input cells in the cortical areas that project to VISl (h). Ipsi, ipsilateral 
hemisphere. Contra, contralateral hemisphere. (i-j) Quantification of laminar distribution 
of inputs from ACAd (i, numbers of independent experiments: L2/3: n=3; L5: n=10; L6: 
n=7) and ORBvl (j, numbers of independent experiments: L2/3: n=2; L5: n=11; L6: n=7) to 
excitatory neurons in different layers of VISl. The fraction of layer inputs is calculated as 
the fraction of the total input signals in a given source area across layers. (k-l) Comparison 
of L5 and L6 preference for medial (k) or lateral (l) source cortical areas in the ipsilateral 
and contralateral hemispheres sending presynaptic inputs to VISl. The preference score for a 
given cortical area is calculated as (L5 input - L6 input) / (L5 input + L6 input). Each source 
cortical area was colored according to its preference score. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. 
The numbers of independent experiments included are as follows: ACAd (Ipsi): n=35; ACAv 
(Ipsi): n=26; RSPd (Ipsi): n=40; RSPv (Ipsi): n=43, RSPagl (Ipsi): n=36, AUDp (Ipsi): 
n=39, AUDv (Ipsi): n=30; TEa (Ipsi): n=42, ECT (Ipsi): n=30, ACAd (Contra): n=8; ACAv 
(Contra): n=4; RSPd (Contra): n=14; RSPv (Contra): n=10, RSPagl (Contra): n=13, AUDp 
(Contra): n=17, AUDv (Contra): n=13; TEa (Contra): n=26, ECT (Contra): n=14. Scale bars, 
500 μm. We also find generally consistent input patterns to excitatory neurons in different 
Yao et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
layers of other HV As as of VISp and VISl, though due to smaller number of experiments in 
each layer of each region (Figure 2a) we do not provide quantitative analysis here.
Extended Data Figure 8. Comparison of contralateral cortical inputs to excitatory neuron 
subclasses in different layers of visual areas.
(a) Comparison between ipsilateral (left) and contralateral (right) brain-wide inputs to 
excitatory neuron subclasses with starter cells restricted to either L2/3, L4, L5 or L6 of 
visual areas. A total of 89 experiments with starter cells restricted in a single layer were 
identified, and the target areas included both VISp and HV As. (b) Comparison between 
Yao et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ipsilateral (top) and contralateral (bottom) isocortical inputs for each cortical module to 
excitatory neuron subclasses with starter cells restricted to either L2/3 (n=20 numbers 
of independent experiments), L4 (n=18 numbers of independent experiments), L5 (n=25 
numbers of independent experiments) or L6 (n=27 numbers of independent experiments) of 
visual areas. (c) Representative top-down view of inputs to Ntsr1 and Ctgf Cre line-labeled 
L6 and L6b cell types in visual areas. (d) Laminar distribution of presynaptic inputs from 
the homotypic contralateral areas to Ntsr1 and Ctgf Cre line-labeled neurons in visual areas 
shown in (c). The fraction of layer inputs is calculated as the fraction of the total input 
signals in a given source area across layers. L1 is excluded from the analysis due to overall 
lack of signal in this layer. Box plots show median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers 
show the largest or smallest value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge. The numbers 
of independent experiments are as follows: Ntsr1 in VISp: n=4; Ctgf in VISp: n=3; Ntsr1 in 
VISl: n=4; Ctgf in VISl: n=4; Ntsr1 in VISam: n=2; Ctgf in VISam: n=2; Ntsr1 in VISrl: 
n=2; Ctgf in VISrl: n=2; Ntsr1 in VISal: n=2; Ctgf in VISal: n=3.
Yao et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. Analysis of brain-wide input patterns to interneuron subclasses in 
VISp, and comparison of local inputs to excitatory neurons in different layers of VISl.
(a) Summary of the numbers of starter cells for each interneuron subclass. Each dot 
represents one individual experiment. (b) Laminar distribution of starter cells for each 
interneuron subclass. For each transgenic line, different experiments are indicated by 
different colors. Box plots show median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show 
the largest or smallest value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge (same below). 
The number of independent experiments included are as follows: Gad2: n=2; Ndnf: 
Yao et al. Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
n=2; Pvalb: n=9; Sst: n=17; Vip: n=9. (c) Representative 3D visualization of brain-wide 
inputs to interneuron subclasses in VISp. (d) Overview of brain-wide inputs to different 
interneuron subclasses. (e-h) Layer-specific inputs of ipsilateral VISl to excitatory neurons 
in L2/3 (e, n=5 independent experiments), L4 (f, n=4 independent experiments), L5 (g, 
n=11 independent experiments) and L6 (h, n=8 independent experiments) of VISl and 
representative images of local VISl inputs. Starter cells are identified by the co-expression of 
dTomato from the AA V helper virus and nucleus-localized H2B-EGFP from the rabies virus.
Extended Data Figure 10. Comparison of laminar distribution of visual inputs to SSp-bfd-rll 
(a-b) and VISrl (c-d).
(a, c) Laminar distribution of inputs from various visual areas to SSp-bfd-rll (a, the numbers 
of independent experiments are: VISli and VISpm: n=5, VISl and VISa: n=12; VISp, VISal, 
and VISrl: n=13; VISam: n=7) and VISrl (c, the numbers of independent experiments are: 
VISli and VISpm: n=20, VISl and VISa: n=21; VISp: n=23; VISal and VISrl: n=22; VISam: 
n=19). Box plots show median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or 
smallest value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge. (b, d) Representative images of 
inputs from VISp, VISpm and VISal to SSp-bfd-rll (b) and VISrl (d).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Yao et al. Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Authors 
Shenqin Y ao1,*, Quanxin Wang1, Karla E. Hirokawa1,†, Benjamin Ouellette1, 
Ruweida Ahmed1, Jasmin Bomben1, Krissy Brouner1, Linzy Casal1, Shiella 
Caldejon1, Andy Cho1, Nadezhda I. Dotson1, Tanya L. Daigle1, Tom Egdorf1, 
Rachel Enstrom1, Amanda Gary1, Emily Gelfand1, Melissa Gorham1, Fiona Griffin1, 
Hong Gu1, Nicole Hancock1, Robert Howard1, Leonard Kuan1, Sophie Lambert1, 
Eric Kenji Lee1, Jennifer Luviano1, Kyla Mace1, Michelle Maxwell1, Marty T. 
Mortrud1, Maitham Naeemi1, Chelsea Nayan1, Nhan-Kiet Ngo1, Thuyanh Nguyen1, 
Kat North1,†, Shea Ransford1, Augustin Ruiz1, Sam Seid1, Jackie Swapp1, Michael 
J Taormina1, Wayne Wakeman1, Thomas Zhou1, Philip R. Nicovich1,†, Ali Williford1, 
Lydia Potekhina1, Medea McGraw1, Lydia Ng1, Peter A. Groblewski1, Bosiljka 
Tasic1, Stefan Mihalas1, Julie A Harris1,†, Ali Cetin1,#, Hongkui Zeng1,*
Affiliations
1Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Transgenic Colony Management, Neurosurgery & Behavior, Lab Animal Services, Molecular 
Genetics, Imaging, Histology, Technology, and Project Management teams at the Allen Institute for technical 
and management support. We thank Thomas R. Reardon, Andrew J. Murray and Ian Wickersham for providing 
cell lines and plasmids for the establishment of rabies virus production at the Allen Institute. This work was 
supported by the Allen Institute for Brain Science and by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) of the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) under award number U19MH114830 to H.Z. The funders had no role in study 
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. The content is solely 
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of NIH and its subsidiary 
institutes. We thank the Allen Institute founder, Paul G. Allen, for his vision, encouragement, and support.
Data Availability
Plasmids for the generation of recombinant viruses will be deposited in Addgene. All 
anterograde tracing data (including high-resolution STPT images, and informatically 
processed axonal projections across brain structures) are available through the Allen 
Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas portal (http://connectivity.brain-map.org/). A link for each 
anterograde tracing experiment is provided in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5. Original 
images for trans-synaptic rabies viral tracing will be or already are available through 
the Brain Image Library (BIL) (https://www.brainimagelibrary.org/). A link for each 
trans-synaptic rabies tracing experiment that has been deposited in BIL is provided in 
Supplementary Table 2. Normalized presynaptic input volumes as fractions of total inputs 
across the brain for all rabies virus tracing experiments and preliminary retrograde labeling 
data from initial informatic quantification are listed in Supplementary Table 3.
References:
1. Callaway EM Transneuronal circuit tracing with neurotropic viruses. Current opinion in 
neurobiology 18, 617–623, doi:10.1016/j.conb.2009.03.007 (2008). [PubMed: 19349161] 
2. Callaway EM & Luo L Monosynaptic Circuit Tracing with Glycoprotein-Deleted Rabies Viruses. J 
Neurosci 35, 8979–8985, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0409-15.2015 (2015). [PubMed: 26085623] 
Yao et al. Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
3. Beier KT et al. Rabies screen reveals GPe control of cocaine-triggered plasticity. Nature 549, 345–
350, doi:10.1038/nature23888 (2017). [PubMed: 28902833] 
4. Kim EJ, Jacobs MW, Ito-Cole T & Callaway EM Improved Monosynaptic Neural Circuit 
Tracing Using Engineered Rabies Virus Glycoproteins. Cell reports 15, 692–699, doi:10.1016/
j.celrep.2016.03.067 (2016). [PubMed: 27149846] 
5. Lo L & Anderson DJ A Cre-dependent, anterograde transsynaptic viral tracer for mapping output 
pathways of genetically marked neurons. Neuron 72, 938–950, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.12.002 
(2011). [PubMed: 22196330] 
6. Lo L et al. Connectional architecture of a mouse hypothalamic circuit node controlling social 
behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 7503–7512, doi:10.1073/pnas.1817503116 (2019). 
[PubMed: 30898882] 
7. Miyamichi K et al. Cortical representations of olfactory input by trans-synaptic tracing. Nature 472, 
191–196, doi:10.1038/nature09714 (2011). [PubMed: 21179085] 
8. Miyamichi K et al. Dissecting local circuits: parvalbumin interneurons underlie broad feedback 
control of olfactory bulb output. Neuron 80, 1232–1245, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.08.027 (2013). 
[PubMed: 24239125] 
9. Osakada F et al. New rabies virus variants for monitoring and manipulating activity and gene 
expression in defined neural circuits. Neuron 71, 617–631, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.005 
(2011). [PubMed: 21867879] 
10. Wall NR, Wickersham IR, Cetin A, De La Parra M & Callaway EM Monosynaptic circuit 
tracing in vivo through Cre-dependent targeting and complementation of modified rabies virus. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 21848–
21853, doi:10.1073/pnas.1011756107 (2010). [PubMed: 21115815] 
11. Watabe-Uchida M, Zhu L, Ogawa SK, Vamanrao A & Uchida N Whole-brain mapping of direct 
inputs to midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron 74, 858–873, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.017 
(2012). [PubMed: 22681690] 
12. Weible AP et al. Transgenic targeting of recombinant rabies virus reveals 
monosynaptic connectivity of specific neurons. J Neurosci 30, 16509–16513, doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2442-10.2010 (2010). [PubMed: 21147990] 
13. Weissbourd B et al. Presynaptic partners of dorsal raphe serotonergic and GABAergic neurons. 
Neuron 83, 645–662, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.06.024 (2014). [PubMed: 25102560] 
14. Wickersham IR, Finke S, Conzelmann KK & Callaway EM Retrograde neuronal tracing with a 
deletion-mutant rabies virus. Nature methods 4, 47–49, doi:10.1038/nmeth999 (2007). [PubMed: 
17179932] 
15. Wickersham IR et al. Monosynaptic restriction of transsynaptic tracing from single, genetically 
targeted neurons. Neuron 53, 639–647, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.033 (2007). [PubMed: 
17329205] 
16. Reardon TR et al. Rabies Virus CVS-N2c(DeltaG) Strain Enhances Retrograde Synaptic Transfer 
and Neuronal Viability. Neuron 89, 711–724, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.01.004 (2016). [PubMed: 
26804990] 
17. Chatterjee S et al. Nontoxic, double-deletion-mutant rabies viral vectors for retrograde targeting 
of projection neurons. Nature neuroscience 21, 638–646, doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0091-7 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29507411] 
18. Ciabatti E, Gonzalez-Rueda A, Mariotti L, Morgese F & Tripodi M Life-Long Genetic and 
Functional Access to Neural Circuits Using Self-Inactivating Rabies Virus. Cell 170, 382–392 
e314, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.014 (2017). [PubMed: 28689641] 
19. Hafner G et al. Mapping Brain-Wide Afferent Inputs of Parvalbumin-Expressing GABAergic 
Neurons in Barrel Cortex Reveals Local and Long-Range Circuit Motifs. Cell Rep 28, 3450–3461 
e3458, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2019.08.064 (2019). [PubMed: 31553913] 
20. Harris JA et al. Hierarchical organization of cortical and thalamic connectivity. Nature 575, 195–
202, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1716-z (2019). [PubMed: 31666704] 
21. Oh SW et al. A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature 508, 207–214, doi:10.1038/
nature13186 (2014). [PubMed: 24695228] 
Yao et al. Page 39
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
22. Wang Q et al. The Allen Mouse Brain Common Coordinate Framework: A 3D Reference Atlas. 
Cell 181, 936–953 e920, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.007 (2020). [PubMed: 32386544] 
23. Kuan L et al. Neuroinformatics of the Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas. Methods (San Diego, 
Calif 73, 4–17, doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.12.013 (2015). [PubMed: 25536338] 
24. Wang Q & Burkhalter A Area map of mouse visual cortex. The Journal of comparative neurology 
502, 339–357, doi:10.1002/cne.21286 (2007). [PubMed: 17366604] 
25. Zhuang J et al. An extended retinotopic map of mouse cortex. eLife 6, doi:10.7554/eLife.18372 
(2017).
26. Garrett ME, Nauhaus I, Marshel JH & Callaway EM Topography and areal organization of mouse 
visual cortex. J Neurosci 34, 12587–12600, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1124-14.2014 (2014). 
[PubMed: 25209296] 
27. Gamanut R et al. The Mouse Cortical Connectome, Characterized by an Ultra-Dense Cortical 
Graph, Maintains Specificity by Distinct Connectivity Profiles. Neuron 97, 698–715 e610, 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.12.037 (2018). [PubMed: 29420935] 
28. Wang Q, Sporns O & Burkhalter A Network analysis of corticocortical connections reveals ventral 
and dorsal processing streams in mouse visual cortex. J Neurosci 32, 4386–4399, doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.6063-11.2012 (2012). [PubMed: 22457489] 
29. Felleman DJ & Van Essen DC Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. 
Cereb Cortex 1, 1–47, doi:10.1093/cercor/1.1.1 (1991). [PubMed: 1822724] 
30. Markov NT et al. Anatomy of hierarchy: feedforward and feedback pathways in macaque visual 
cortex. The Journal of comparative neurology 522, 225–259, doi:10.1002/cne.23458 (2014). 
[PubMed: 23983048] 
31. Tasic B et al. Shared and distinct transcriptomic cell types across neocortical areas. Nature 563, 
72–78, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0654-5 (2018). [PubMed: 30382198] 
32. Kohara K et al. Cell type-specific genetic and optogenetic tools reveal hippocampal CA2 circuits. 
Nature neuroscience 17, 269–279, doi:10.1038/nn.3614 (2014). [PubMed: 24336151] 
33. Ahrlund-Richter S et al. A whole-brain atlas of monosynaptic input targeting four different 
cell types in the medial prefrontal cortex of the mouse. Nat Neurosci 22, 657–668, doi:10.1038/
s41593-019-0354-y (2019). [PubMed: 30886408] 
34. Huppe-Gourgues F, Jegouic K & Vaucher E Topographic Organization of Cholinergic Innervation 
From the Basal Forebrain to the Visual Cortex in the Rat. Front Neural Circuits 12, 19, 
doi:10.3389/fncir.2018.00019 (2018). [PubMed: 29662442] 
35. Li X et al. Generation of a whole-brain atlas for the cholinergic system and mesoscopic projectome 
analysis of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, 415–420, 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1703601115 (2018). [PubMed: 29259118] 
36. Bari BA, Chokshi V & Schmidt K Locus coeruleus-norepinephrine: basic functions and insights 
into Parkinson’s disease. Neural Regen Res 15, 1006–1013, doi:10.4103/1673-5374.270297 
(2020). [PubMed: 31823870] 
37. Schwarz LA et al. Viral-genetic tracing of the input-output organization of a central noradrenaline 
circuit. Nature 524, 88–92, doi:10.1038/nature14600 (2015). [PubMed: 26131933] 
38. Ren J et al. Single-cell transcriptomes and whole-brain projections of serotonin neurons in the 
mouse dorsal and median raphe nuclei. eLife 8, doi:10.7554/eLife.49424 (2019).
39. Beltramo R & Scanziani M A collicular visual cortex: Neocortical space for an ancient midbrain 
visual structure. Science 363, 64–69, doi:10.1126/science.aau7052 (2019). [PubMed: 30606842] 
40. Antonini A, Fagiolini M & Stryker MP Anatomical correlates of functional plasticity in mouse 
visual cortex. J Neurosci 19, 4388–4406 (1999). [PubMed: 10341241] 
41. Humphrey AL, Sur M, Uhlrich DJ & Sherman SM Projection patterns of individual X- and Y-cell 
axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus to cortical area 17 in the cat. J Comp Neurol 233, 
159–189, doi:10.1002/cne.902330203 (1985). [PubMed: 3973100] 
42. LeVay S & Gilbert CD Laminar patterns of geniculocortical projection in the cat. Brain Res 113, 
1–19, doi:10.1016/0006-8993(76)90002-0 (1976). [PubMed: 953720] 
43. Ji XY et al. Thalamocortical Innervation Pattern in Mouse Auditory and Visual Cortex: Laminar 
and Cell-Type Specificity. Cereb Cortex 26, 2612–2625, doi:10.1093/cercor/bhv099 (2016). 
[PubMed: 25979090] 
Yao et al. Page 40
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
44. Cruikshank SJ, Urabe H, Nurmikko A V & Connors BW Pathway-specific feedforward circuits 
between thalamus and neocortex revealed by selective optical stimulation of axons. Neuron 65, 
230–245, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.12.025 (2010). [PubMed: 20152129] 
45. Velez-Fort M et al. The stimulus selectivity and connectivity of layer six principal cells 
reveals cortical microcircuits underlying visual processing. Neuron 83, 1431–1443, doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2014.08.001 (2014). [PubMed: 25175879] 
46. Velez-Fort M et al. A Circuit for Integration of Head- and Visual-Motion Signals in Layer 6 
of Mouse Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron 98, 179–191 e176, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.02.023 
(2018). [PubMed: 29551490] 
47. Xu X & Callaway EM Laminar specificity of functional input to distinct types of inhibitory 
cortical neurons. J Neurosci 29, 70–85, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4104-08.2009 (2009). [PubMed: 
19129386] 
48. DeNardo LA, Berns DS, DeLoach K & Luo L Connectivity of mouse somatosensory and 
prefrontal cortex examined with trans-synaptic tracing. Nat Neurosci 18, 1687–1697, doi:10.1038/
nn.4131 (2015). [PubMed: 26457553] 
49. Munoz-Castaneda R et al. Cellular anatomy of the mouse primary motor cortex. Nature 598, 
159–166, doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03970-w (2021). [PubMed: 34616071] 
50. Sun Q et al. A whole-brain map of long-range inputs to GABAergic interneurons in the mouse 
medial prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 22, 1357–1370, doi:10.1038/s41593-019-0429-9 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31285615] 
51. Kim EJ, Juavinett AL, Kyubwa EM, Jacobs MW & Callaway EM Three Types of Cortical 
Layer 5 Neurons That Differ in Brain-wide Connectivity and Function. Neuron 88, 1253–1267, 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.002 (2015). [PubMed: 26671462] 
52. Liang Y et al. A Distinct Population of L6 Neurons in Mouse V1 Mediate Cross-Callosal 
Communication. Cereb Cortex 31, 4259–4273, doi:10.1093/cercor/bhab084 (2021). [PubMed: 
33987642] 
53. Liu YJ et al. Tracing inputs to inhibitory or excitatory neurons of mouse and cat visual cortex with 
a targeted rabies virus. Curr Biol 23, 1746–1755, doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.033 (2013). [PubMed: 
23993841] 
54. Brown APY et al. Analysis of segmentation ontology reveals the similarities and differences in 
connectivity onto L2/3 neurons in mouse V1. Sci Rep 11, 4983, doi:10.1038/s41598-021-82353-7 
(2021). [PubMed: 33654118] 
55. Kim EJ et al. Extraction of Distinct Neuronal Cell Types from within a Genetically Continuous 
Population. Neuron 107, 274–282 e276, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2020.04.018 (2020). [PubMed: 
32396852] 
56. Peng H et al. Morphological diversity of single neurons in molecularly defined cell types. Nature 
598, 174–181, doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03941-1 (2021). [PubMed: 34616072] 
57. D’Souza RD et al. Hierarchical and nonhierarchical features of the mouse visual cortical network. 
Nat Commun 13, 503, doi:10.1038/s41467-022-28035-y (2022). [PubMed: 35082302] 
58. Siegle JH et al. Survey of spiking in the mouse visual system reveals functional hierarchy. Nature 
592, 86–92, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03171-x (2021). [PubMed: 33473216] 
59. Masse IO, Ross S, Bronchti G & Boire D Asymmetric Direct Reciprocal Connections Between 
Primary Visual and Somatosensory Cortices of the Mouse. Cereb Cortex 27, 4361–4378, 
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhw239 (2017). [PubMed: 27522075] 
60. Han X, Vermaercke B & Bonin V Diversity of spatiotemporal coding reveals specialized visual 
processing streams in the mouse cortex. Nat Commun 13, 3249, doi:10.1038/s41467-022-29656-z 
(2022). [PubMed: 35668056] 
Methods-only references:
61. Gorski JA et al. Cortical excitatory neurons and glia, but not GABAergic neurons, are produced 
in the Emx1-expressing lineage. J Neurosci 22, 6309–6314, doi:20026564 (2002). [PubMed: 
12151506] 
Yao et al. Page 41
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
62. Franco SJ et al. Fate-restricted neural progenitors in the mammalian cerebral cortex. Science (New 
York, N.Y 337, 746–749, doi:10.1126/science.1223616 (2012). [PubMed: 22879516] 
63. Dhillon H et al. Leptin directly activates SF1 neurons in the VMH, and this action by 
leptin is required for normal body-weight homeostasis. Neuron 49, 191–203, doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2005.12.021 (2006). [PubMed: 16423694] 
64. Gerfen CR, Paletzki R & Heintz N GENSAT BAC cre-recombinase driver lines to study the 
functional organization of cerebral cortical and basal ganglia circuits. Neuron 80, 1368–1383, 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.016 (2013). [PubMed: 24360541] 
65. Daigle TL et al. A Suite of Transgenic Driver and Reporter Mouse Lines with Enhanced Brain-
Cell-Type Targeting and Functionality. Cell 174, 465–480 e422, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.035 
(2018). [PubMed: 30007418] 
66. Taniguchi H et al. A resource of Cre driver lines for genetic targeting of GABAergic neurons 
in cerebral cortex. Neuron 71, 995–1013, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.026 (2011). [PubMed: 
21943598] 
67. Hippenmeyer S et al. A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS transcription 
factor signaling. PLoS biology 3, e159, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030159 (2005). [PubMed: 
15836427] 
68. Rossi J et al. Melanocortin-4 receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate energy balance 
and glucose homeostasis. Cell metabolism 13, 195–204, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2011.01.010 (2011). 
[PubMed: 21284986] 
69. Zawadzka M et al. CNS-resident glial progenitor/stem cells produce Schwann cells as well as 
oligodendrocytes during repair of CNS demyelination. Cell Stem Cell 6, 578–590, doi:10.1016/
j.stem.2010.04.002 (2010). [PubMed: 20569695] 
70. Koni PA et al. Conditional vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 deletion in mice: impaired 
lymphocyte migration to bone marrow. J Exp Med 193, 741–754, doi:10.1084/jem.193.6.741 
(2001). [PubMed: 11257140] 
71. Octeau JC et al. An Optical Neuron-Astrocyte Proximity Assay at Synaptic Distance Scales. 
Neuron 98, 49–66 e49, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.003 (2018). [PubMed: 29621490] 
72. Osakada F & Callaway EM Design and generation of recombinant rabies virus vectors. Nat Protoc 
8, 1583–1601, doi:10.1038/nprot.2013.094 (2013). [PubMed: 23887178] 
73. Do JP et al. Cell type-specific long-range connections of basal forebrain circuit. Elife 5, 
doi:10.7554/eLife.13214 (2016).
Yao et al. Page 42
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Pipeline identifying monosynaptic inputs to specific neuronal populations in the visual 
cortex.
(a) Viral tools for mapping monosynaptic inputs to Cre-expressing neurons. The tricistronic 
AA V helper virus conditionally expresses TV A66T, dTomato, and rabies glycoprotein of the 
CVS N2c strain (CVSg) after Cre-mediated recombination. The EnvA-pseudotyped CVS 
N2cΔG rabies virus expresses histone-EGFP (H2B-EGFP) from the rabies G gene locus 
in the recombinant rabies virus genome. (b) ISI-based targeting, stereotaxic injection, and 
experimental timeline for virus injections and brain collection. (c) Sequential two-photon 
images were acquired at 100 μm interval and a total of 140 images were obtained for 
each brain. (d) Target sites were annotated by drawing injection polygons based on the 
expression of dTomato from the AA V helper virus. (e) Image series was automatically 
segmented and registered into the Allen CCFv3. (f) Injection site was verified post hoc by 
overlaying the injection site detected by AA V helper expression with an ISI image, and/or 
by overlaying the injection centroid to CCFv3. (g) Starter cell characterization. Sections 
around the planned injection site were collected and dTomato signal was enhanced by 
immunostaining. Starter cells were then detected by co-expression of dTomato and nuclear 
EGFP, and layer-distribution of the starter cells was analyzed.
Yao et al. Page 43
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Identification of monosynaptic inputs to Cre-labeled neuronal classes in different visual 
areas.
(a) Summary of Cre mouse lines, target areas, and numbers of the 303 experiments in 
the visual areas. The injection target areas were verified based on overlay of injection site 
polygons with ISI images and/or the position of injection site polygons in Allen CCFv3. 
(b) Mapping of each injection centroid in the cortical flat map (with six cortical modules 
labeled: prefrontal, lateral, somatomotor, visual, medial and auditory). Color indicates 
different visual areas. Twelve injections were performed into the right hemisphere, the 
Yao et al. Page 44
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
remaining 291 injections were performed into the left hemisphere, and injection site was 
verified post-hoc. Locations of all injection centroids were plotted onto the CCFv3 cortical 
flat map, with the right hemisphere injection centroids flipped to their corresponding sites 
in the left hemisphere for comparative analysis. (c) Connectivity matrix showing normalized 
inputs from the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres for all experiments. Each row 
represents a single experiment. Columns are ordered by 12 major brain divisions; rows are 
organized according to hierarchical clustering of the input patterns. The input signal per 
structure was measured by the informatics data pipeline and represented by per structure 
input signal volume (sum of detected signal in mm3) after thresholding to minimize false 
positive signals (see Methods), and then normalized to the total inputs of the whole brain. 
Value in each cell of the matrix represents the input signal volume in the given brain area as 
the fraction of total inputs of the brain. Color in the “Target” represents the verified injection 
target area of the experiment in each row, as color-coded in (b).
Yao et al. Page 45
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Comparison of brain-wide inputs to neurons in the primary visual cortex and higher 
visual areas.
(a) Comparison of whole-brain inputs to the visual areas. Inputs from isocortex were divided 
into six modules. Numbers of independent experiments for each target are in Figure 2a. 
Box plots show median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or smallest 
value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge. Somo, somatomotor. OLF, olfactory areas. 
HPF, hippocampal formation. CTXsp, cortical subplate. STR, striatum. PAL, pallidum. TH, 
thalamus. HY , hypothalamus. MB, midbrain. MY , medulla. CB, cerebellum. (b-d) Matrices 
Yao et al. Page 46
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
showing inputs to visual area targets from top input areas. Each cell represents the average 
value of fraction of total inputs from a given input area in all the experiments for a given 
target. Visual input areas are separated into dorsal and ventral streams and ordered based 
on their hierarchical organization. Non-visual input cortical areas are grouped by module 
membership. Input thalamic areas are ordered by previously predicted hierarchical orders20. 
Areas in the sensory-motor cortex related or polymodal association cortex related part of 
thalamus are highlighted in pink or blue, respectively. (e) Matrix showing Spearman’s R 
between experiments within the same target (intra-target, mean of Rs between experiments 
of different Cre lines) and between experiments across different targets (inter-target, mean 
of Rs between experiments of same Cre line in different targets). (f) Frequency distributions 
of intra-target and inter-target Spearman’s R. A curve was fit to each distribution. (g) 
Comparison of inputs between VISrl (Rbp4: n=1, Sst: n=2) and VISpm (Rbp4: n=2, Sst: 
n=3). (h) Comparison of LGd, LP and SCs inputs to VISpor in 14 experiments. Each 
symbol represents one experiment. (i) Example of a Cux2-IRES-Cre VISpor experiment. 
Two independent experiments led to similar results. Left: Injection centroid mapped to 
VISpor in Allen CCFv3. Middle: Brain section containing the injection site and labeling in 
SCs. Right: Confocal image of the injection site and labeling in LGd and LP.
Yao et al. Page 47
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Comparison of brain-wide input patterns to excitatory neuron subclasses in different 
layers of the primary visual cortex.
(a-b) Matrix showing inputs from the isocortex and thalamus to excitatory neurons in 
different layers of VISp (a) and matrix showing the reciprocal axonal projections from 
VISp (b). Each row represents the mean fraction of total input or projection signals per 
structure in each mouse line. Cortical module memberships and thalamocortical projection 
classes20 (blue: core, green: intralaminar, brown: matrix-focal, and red: matrix-multiareal) 
are color-coded. (c) Comparison of inputs to excitatory neurons in different layers of VISp 
Yao et al. Page 48
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(independent experiments: 16, 10, 29 and 7 for L2/3, L4, L5 and L6, respectively). Data 
are shown as mean ± s.e.m. The inset shows local VISp inputs. (d) Laminar termination 
patterns of axon projections in VISp from source areas (ACAd: n=3; ORBvl: n=2; TEa, 
n=1; RSPv: n=2; LGd: n=5; and LP: n=1). (e-i) Laminar distribution pattern of input cells 
in ACAd, ORBvl, RSPv and TEa projecting to excitatory neurons in VISp. The fraction of 
layer inputs is calculated as the fraction of the total input signals in a given source area 
across layers. L1 is excluded from the analysis due to overall lack of signal in this layer. 
Independent experiments: e, 11, 2, 21 and 5 for L2/3, L4, L5 and L6, respectively; f, 10, 1, 
24, 3 for L2/3, L4, L5 and L6, respectively; RSPv in g,h: Ipsi: 14, 4, 25, and 7 for L2/3, 
L4, L5 and L6, respectively; Contra: 3, and 4 for L5 and L6 respectively; TEa in g,i: Ipsi: 
12, 3, 24, and 5 for L2/3, L4, L5 and L6, respectively; Contra: 6, 10 and 4 for L2/3, L5 
and L6, respectively. (j-k) Comparison of L5 and L6 preference for medial (j) or lateral (k) 
source cortical areas sending inputs to VISp. A preference score for a given cortical area 
(L5 input - L6 input) / (L5 input + L6 input) shows that ipsilateral inputs to VISp come 
preferentially from L5 of medial areas and L6 of lateral areas, whereas contralateral inputs 
to VISp present an opposite bias. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. Independent experiments: 
Ipsi: ACAd: n=56; ACAv: n=40; RSPd: n=73; RSPv: n=78, RSPagl: n=61, AUDp: n=56, 
AUDv: n=43; TEa: n=65, ECT: n=37; Contra: ACAd: n=9; ACAv: n=8; RSPd: n=17; RSPv: 
n=12, RSPagl: n=16, AUDp: n=14, AUDv: n=10; TEa: n=27, ECT: n=11. (l) Comparison of 
inputs to L6 and different L5 cell populations in VISp (L6: n=7; Rbp4: n=11; Tlx3: n=12; 
A93-Tg1: n=6). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Tukey multiple comparisons of means: L6 vs 
Rbp4: p=0.0015, L6 vs Tlx3: p=0.000004, L6 vs A93-Tg1: p=0.000015. Box plots show 
median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or smallest value no further 
than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge. Scale bars, 500 μm.
Yao et al. Page 49
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Comparison of brain-wide input patterns to different interneuron subclasses in the 
primary visual cortex.
(a) Frequency distribution of Spearman’s R values for brain-wide input patterns to different 
excitatory neuron (EN) subclasses, those to different interneuron (IN) subclasses, and Rs 
measured between EN input patterns and IN input patterns. (b) Comparison of ipsilateral 
(left) and contralateral (right) inputs from the visual and medial cortical modules and 
thalamus to EN and IN cell classes located in the VISl (square), VISp (circle), and VISam 
(diamond). The numbers of EN experiments are 64 for VISp, 30 for VISl, and 14 for 
Yao et al. Page 50
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
VISam. The numbers of IN experiments are 39 for VISp, 26 for VISl, and 12 for VISam. 
Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. (c) Comparison of ipsilateral cortical inputs and thalamic 
inputs to Sst (n=17), Pvalb (n=9) and Vip (n=9) cells in VISp. Data are shown as mean 
± s.e.m. (d) Heatmap of starter cell layer distribution for the 39 interneuron experiments 
in VISp separating experiments into different depth groups. (e) Comparison of inputs from 
ipsilateral and contralateral cortical areas and thalamic nuclei to interneuron groups located 
in different depths of VISp. The numbers of independent experiments included are as 
follows: Top: n=5, Upper: n=10; Lower: n=16; Bottom: n=8. Data are shown as mean ± 
s.e.m. (f) Comparison of contralateral cortical inputs between the Bottom group and various 
interneuron subclasses. The numbers of independent experiments included are as follows: 
Bottom: n=8; Sst: n=17, Pvalb: n=9; Vip: n=9; Ndnf: n=2, Gad2: n=2. Data are shown as 
mean ± s.e.m. Independent two sample t test (two-sided), **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05, Bottom 
vs Sst: p=0.018, Bottom vs Vip: p=0.017, Bottom vs Ndnf: p=0.0030, and Pvalb vs Ndnf: 
p=0.016.
Yao et al. Page 51
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 6. Comparison of local inputs to excitatory neurons and inhibitory interneurons in 
different depths of the primary visual cortex.
(a-d) Layer-specific inputs of ipsilateral VISp to excitatory neurons in L2/3 (a, n=16 
independent experiments), L4 (b, n=10 independent experiments), L5 (c, n=29 independent 
experiments) and L6 (d, n=7 independent experiments) of VISp. (e-h) Representative images 
showing layer-specific local inputs to excitatory neurons in L2/3 (e), L4 (f), L5 (g) and L6 
(h) of VISp. Left panels show STPT images of brain sections containing starter cells, and 
right two panels are confocal microscopic images showing the distribution of starter cells 
and local inputs. Starter cells are identified by the co-expression of dTomato from the AA V 
helper virus and nucleus-localized H2B-EGFP from the rabies virus. (i) Comparison of local 
input patterns to Ndnf-Cre and Vip-Cre experiments with Top distribution of starter cells 
(Ndnf and Vip: n=2 independent experiments). (j) Comparison of local inputs to Sst and 
Pvalb experiments with different depths of starter cell distribution. Representative images 
containing the injection sites are provided for Sst-Cre and Pvalb-Cre experiments in the 
Upper and Bottom groups. The numbers of independent Sst-Cre experiments in the Upper, 
Lower, and Bottom groups are 2, 10, and 4, respectively, and those of Pvalb experiments in 
the Upper, Lower, and Bottom groups are 6, 1, and 2, respectively. Data are shown as mean 
Yao et al. Page 52
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
± s.e.m. Box plots show median and interquartile range (IQR). Whiskers show the largest or 
smallest value no further than 1.5 × IQR from the hinge.
Yao et al. Page 53
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 7. Relative hierarchical positions of the primary visual cortex and higher visual areas.
(a) Laminar distribution of inputs for connections between VISp and VISam. Mean fraction 
of layer-specific inputs between the source area and the target area was used. (b-c) 
Comparison of laminar distribution of visual area inputs to VISp (b, n=103 independent 
experiments) and VISam (c, n=26 independent experiments). Each dot represents the mean 
(± s.e.m.) fraction of layer-specific inputs. . Arrows indicate ascending order of hierarchical 
positions of the dorsal and ventral streams. (d-f) Comparison of the fraction of layer-specific 
inputs from various cortical areas (colored according to the mean fraction of inputs) to 
Yao et al. Page 54
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
VISp. (g) Matrix of h index of inputs from the 10 visual areas to the 9 targets. Each cell 
represents the mean h index of inputs in a given source area to a target area. Light gray 
denotes no availability of data. (h) Pairs plots showing the correlation of measured h index 
values of cortical source areas sending inputs to specific pairs of target areas. Each point 
represents the average pair of h index values obtained in a given source area to a pair of 
target areas. Red lines are the best fit lines (least-squares regression lines), and blue lines are 
the lines with a slope equal to 1 that best fit the points. (i) Correlation between measured 
and predicted h index values between cortical source areas and the five target visual areas 
in panel h. (j) Estimated hierarchical levels obtained by the linear regression model. The 
hierarchical level of VISp was set at zero. Error bars indicate 90% confidence intervals, with 
centrers representing the predicted hierarchical values for other visual areas. Visual areas are 
separated into the dorsal and ventral streams (to the right and left of VISp, respectively). 
Numbers of independent experiments: VISl: n=56, VISp: n=103, VISal: n=20, VISrl: n=23, 
and VISam: n=26.
Yao et al. Page 55
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript