An interactive framework for whole-brain maps at cellular 
resolution
Daniel Fürth1, Thomas Vaissière2, Ourania Tzortzi1, Yang Xuan1, Antje Märtin1, Iakovos 
Lazaridis1, Giada Spigolon1, Gilberto Fisone1, Raju Tomer3, Karl Deisseroth3, Marie 
Carlén1, Courtney A. Miller2,4, Gavin Rumbaugh2, and Konstantinos Meletis1
1Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SWEDEN
2Department of Neuroscience, Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA
3Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
4Department of Molecular Medicine, Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA
Abstract
To deconstruct the architecture and function of brain circuits, it is necessary to generate maps of 
the neuronal connectivity and activity on a whole brain scale. New methods now enable large-
scale mapping of the mouse brain at cellular and subcellular resolution. We developed a 
framework to automatically annotate, analyze, visualize, and easily share whole-brain data at 
cellular resolution, based on a scale-invariant and interactive mouse brain atlas. This framework 
enables connectivity and mapping projects in individual laboratories, across imaging platforms, as 
well as multiplexed quantitative information on the molecular identity of single neurons. As a 
proof of concept, we generated a comparative connectivity map of five major neuron types in the 
corticostriatal circuit, as well as an activity-based map to identify hubs mediating the behavioral 
effects of cocaine. Thus, this computational framework provides the necessary tools to generate 
brain maps that integrate data from connectivity, neuron identity and function.
The structural and functional mapping of the brain and neural circuits is currently a major 
endeavor in neuroscience1,2. Large projects have been initiated to map the mouse brain in 
terms of cell types and their activity, long-range connectivity patterns and microcircuit 
connectivity3. Examples of projects to map connectivity and cell types include the Mouse 
Brain Architecture project4, the Allen mouse brain connectivity atlas5, and the Mouse 
connectome project6. A challenge central to all such large-scale efforts is the need to 
develop and implement standardized systems to collect, analyze, visualize and share whole-
Contributions
D.F. conceived and developed the computational framework, performed experiments and contributed to data collection, analyzed data, 
and wrote the paper. T.V . contributed to the computational framework, performed experiments, collected data, and contributed to 
writing of the paper. O.T., Y .X., A.M., I.L., and G.S. performed experiments and contributed to data collection. G.F. supervised 
experiments on corticostriatal tracing. R.T. and K.D. developed and performed COLM experiments. M.C. supervised experiments, and 
contributed to writing of the paper. C.A.M. supervised experiments, contributed to the computational framework and to writing of the 
paper. G.R. supervised experiments, contributed to the computational framework and to writing of the paper. K.M. conceived and 
supervised the project, and wrote the paper.
Competing financial interests
D.F. is a stakeholder in Histohub AB. The other authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2018 January ; 21(1): 139–149. doi:10.1038/s41593-017-0027-7.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
brain data7. Advances in experimental methods for the dissection of connectivity and 
function through for example genetic labeling of connections and neuronal activity at a 
whole-brain scale now enable the detailed mapping of circuits8,9. As a consequence, in 
addition to the large-scale collaborative projects, an increasing number of individual 
laboratories have initiated ambitious brain-mapping projects10–15. However, the lack of 
standardized and accessible computational tools often limits the power and feasibility of 
large-scale whole-brain mapping efforts.
Here we provide an open source software solution to support whole-brain mapping efforts to 
generate, organize and share whole-brain mapping projects derived from light microscopy. 
We have developed WholeBrain (http://wholebrainsoftware.org/), to allow investigators to 
quantify and spatially map multidimensional data from whole-brain experiments, and 
compare results across experiments, in a single standardized anatomical reference atlas. We 
further developed Openbrainmap (http://openbrainmap.org), to support visualization and 
sharing of data within and between laboratories, in an interactive web-based framework. The 
whole computational framework is designed to be robust and flexible, allowing its 
application to a wide variety of imaging systems (e.g. widefield, confocal, light-sheet), and 
labeling approaches (e.g. fluorescent proteins, immunohistochemistry and in situ 
hybridization). Together, this computational framework offers a wide range of tools: 
powerful image processing pipelines for mapping labeled neurons in a standardized brain 
atlas, Bayesian statistical packages handling nested hierarchical data, and a framework to 
produce interactive representations of neuroanatomical data. The framework is available as 
an open-source R package16, and we have produced intuitive and concrete guidance through 
step-by-step video tutorials, allowing for rapid implementation of the system in a standard 
laboratory environment. Here we demonstrate how WholeBrain and Openbrainmap can be 
employed to discover brain structure-function relationships, by integrating multidimensional 
anatomical, molecular, and functional datasets.
RESULTS
Vector and raster representation in neuroanatomy
All maps are the result of efforts to visually represent the physical world (Fig. 1a). A 
comprehensive neuroanatomical framework must be able to handle any type of data that can 
be described as spatially located within the volume of the brain, just as a geographical 
information system is used to analyze and represent different types of data mapped onto the 
earth’s surface.
In general, maps can be constructed using either raster or vector graphics (Fig. 1b–c). Raster 
graphics represent data in a grid-cell structure (pixels or voxels) parceled into a row and 
column matrix (Fig. 1b). This raster-based analysis is the norm in neuroscience today, 
exemplified by approaches to processing whole-brain calcium imaging17 statistical 
parametric mapping in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)29 , differential gene 
expression as in the Allen Gene Expression Atlas (AGEA)18, and analysis of whole-brain c-
fos expression in behavioral conditions15 (additional comparisons of recent approaches to 
mouse brain mapping can be found in Supplementary Table 1). We have aimed to construct a 
comprehensive framework to represent data at cellular resolution, based on vector graphics 
Fürth et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to allow mapping of features through the use of points and curves (Fig. 1d–f). The advantage 
of this approach is that data can be represented simultaneously in multiple coordinate 
reference systems: image pixels, stereotactic coordinates, and the actual tissue dimensions, 
instead of only transforming data into a single spatial reference frame.
Scale-invariant reference atlas
Mapping of the tissue coordinates of individual features (e.g. neurons) into a standardized 
reference atlas is normally performed using raster or polygon graphics19. We have instead 
generated a reference atlas of the adult mouse brain based on smooth curves, which can 
enhance the possibilities to efficiently represent, share and edit anatomical definitions in a 
standardized reference atlas.
We therefore decided to represent brain regions as smooth surfaces using Non-Uniform 
Rational B-Splines (NURBS) (Fig. 1g). To generate a 3D anatomical reference atlas, we 
lofted points between adjacent coronal sections. Compared to existing reference atlases 
based on solids (Fig. 1h) or polygons (Fig. 1i), this approach offers a number of advantages. 
First, the atlas becomes scale-invariant and can be easily applied on images of any pixel 
resolution. This feature enables comparison of image data across microscope systems. 
Second, atlas intersections with an arbitrary angle can be computed (Fig. 1j). This feature 
supports projects where visualization of regions and pathways is better achieved at angles 
others that the canonical (e.g. coronal, sagittal). Third, the topological representation of 
brain regions becomes data efficient and project results can be efficiently shared in a small 
format. Fourth, the NURBS format enables editing of the brain atlas to accommodate 
customization and atlas improvements.
The reference atlas is based on the neuroanatomical definitions found in the Allen Institute 
mouse reference atlas, thereby integrating the available neuroanatomical and molecular 
data5,19. As an example, this feature enables queries of gene expression from the Allen in 
situ hybridization atlas for any given stereotactic coordinate. In addition, the reference atlas 
can easily interfaced with other applications, for example by standardization of tissue 
sectioning using custom 3D printed brain blocks (Supplementary Fig. 1a–d), or through 
generation of polygon-shaped areas for automated laser capture microdissection (LCM) of 
defined brain nuclei (Supplementary Fig. 1e–j).
Interactive web interface
We further developed an interactive web interface to allow investigators to rapidly and in a 
standardized format visualize mapping results and also share data with collaborators. The 
aim was to develop an interface where data visualization could be performed directly in a 
standard Internet browser and without setting up a server. In this interface, detected features 
such as cell bodies and the fit of the reference atlas to the tissue can be visualized as an 
overlaid layer of vector graphics on the original raster image (Fig 2a–c), http://
openbrainmap.org/example_section/, queried directly as tabulated summary statistics (Fig 
2d–e), or rendered in stereotactic coordinates within the reference atlas (Fig 2f).
To enable rapid visualization and data sharing, output is provided as a browser-based 
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) file with associated image tiles. As an example, 
Fürth et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
raster data from a single raw image of a coronal brain section (16 bit, 300–400 Mb) is 
represented as a set of JPEG tiles of different resolutions (approximately 20 Mb in total). For 
the purpose of transmission of segmentation and registration results over asynchronous 
browser/server communication, we constructed an open standard format for spatial features, 
along with their non-spatial attributes, based on JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), (see 
method section for further details). The web-interface is designed with mobile-first 
principles, supporting use in mobile devices, and offers users the ability to further draw, edit 
or define regions of interest (Fig. 2g).
Segmentation by multiresolution decomposition
Segmentation is the process of assigning labels to distinct parts of an image, in order to mark 
features of interest such as labeled cell bodies and fiber tracts. In large mapping projects, it 
is essential to implement automated approaches to feature segmentation, which can be 
applied to all images with minimal manual intervention.
We used multiresolution decomposition20, as an approach to automatically segment 
fluorescently labeled cell bodies and fiber tracts. In this segmentation approach, features of 
different size (e.g. cell body, cell process) can be detected by their mapping on a distinct 
spatial scale. As an example, an apical dendrite (~1–2 µm thickness) is defined on a smaller 
spatial scale than a cell body (~10–20 µm diameter). Genetic labeling of dendrites and cell 
bodies can therefore be decomposed by designating segmentation of these features on 
separate scales.
To decompose the image into different spatial scales (Fig. 3a–b) the image data is sent 
through a stationary wavelet filter bank composed of a set of high-pass and low-pass filters 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a–b). At each iteration, the output of the high-pass branch is stored as 
a set of coefficients, which are called detail coefficients (Fig. 3c–e). Detail coefficients 
contain information on the correlation between a wave-like function (wavelet) at a specific 
scale and the fluorescent signal at a specific location in the image. More decompositions at 
lower resolution levels are obtained by iterating the procedure on the output of the low-pass 
branch. The output of the low-pass branch at each iteration are called approximation 
coefficients because at each level the approximation to the image at that resolution level 
becomes coarser and the detail coefficients indicate what detail in the image is lost (Fig. 3a–
f). We extracted individual features by thresholding the fluorescence intensity for the detail 
coefficients of interest (i.e. d3 for cell bodies in Fig. 3c–e) . We then extracted each feature 
by applying a standard connected components algorithm21, which groups connected pixels 
by their border (Fig. 3g–h).
To address the sensitivity of the approach, we evaluated the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in 
manually defined regions of interest (neurons versus processes) after applying 
multiresolution decomposition, compared to binary thresholding of the fluorescent signal in 
the original image (Fig. 3g). We found that the SNR for segmentation of neurons reached a 
peak at a theoretical sampling scale period of 10.24 µm, similar to the size of a cell body 
(Fig. 3i). Similarly, we found that the SNR for processes reached a peak at sampling period 
of 2.56 µm (i.e. the approximate diameter of an apical dendrite). In summary, detail 
Fürth et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
coefficients at separate spatial scales can be used to identify genetically marked cell bodies 
and processes.
In addition, multiresolution decomposition is particularly valuable for comparison and 
integration of imaging results obtained from different microscope systems. In essence, 
features segmented from low and high-resolution images can be directly compared by 
analyzing detail coefficients at scales with similar scale periods (Supplementary Fig. 2c–i). 
Multiresolution decomposition therefore supports data gathering and comparison of 
segmentation results across imaging platforms, projects and laboratories.
Registration to standardized atlas
Image registration is the process by which sets of images (e.g. coronal mouse brain sections) 
are transformed into another coordinate system (e.g. stereotactic coordinate system or a 
reference atlas). Traditional registration algorithms in neuroimaging follow a voxel-based 
analysis15,18,22. Registration using voxel-based atlases such as Allen mouse brain Reference 
Atlas 201119 or Waxholm space23 are limited to 21.5 to 25 µm, and even newer isotropic 
renditions such as next generation common coordinate framework (CCF v3,24) are still 
limited to a voxel resolution of approximately 10 µm. In order to decrease computational 
time, these registration approaches most often require matching of image resolutions by 
upsampling the lower-resolution atlas and downsampling the imaged brain sections. In 
contrast, we decided to perform image registration by segmenting out the contour of the 
brain section utilizing the inherent autofluorescence of the brain section itself (Fig. 3j–k). In 
this way, image registration does not introduce artifacts derived from pixel interpolation 
associated with upsampling of the reference atlas. In addition, it is not necessary to dedicate 
one imaging channel for the registration process, which reduces image acquisition time and 
facilitates fluorescent multi-channel experiments (multiplexing).
To generate landmarks between the brain tissue and the reference atlas, the segmented 
contour of the imaged brain section is reduced into a set of points25. To achieve this, the two 
initial principal components are first extracted from the position of the pixels defining the 
tissue section contour (Fig. 3l). Next, intersection points between the principal components 
and the tissue contour are extracted and stored as the initial first level of reference points 
(Fig. 3m). By default, four iterations (n = 4) are executed resulting in 32 = 2n+1 reference 
points along the contour of the brain section (Supplementary Fig. 3). The two sets of 
reference points (atlas and tissue section reference points) constitute a set of correspondence 
points, which align the atlas and the tissue section (Fig. 3m). These correspondence points 
are then pruned26 in order to minimize effects of tissue damage or distortions on the 
registration result. These correspondence points are used as input to solve analytically the 
minimization of the bending energy of a thin-plate splines (TPS) deformation field27. The 
deformation field can then be used to generate a mapping between every coordinate in the 
brain tissue section (Fig. 3j) to that of the reference brain atlas (Fig. 3n). Using this 
approach, a collection of individual brain sections can be reconstructed into a 3D 
representation of the imaged data a (Supplementary Video 1).
In cases where the automated registration has resulted in incorrect placement of region 
boundaries, it is possible to change or remove correspondence points manually and rerun the 
Fürth et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
TPS algorithm (Supplementary Fig. 4). To estimate how the measurement accuracy 
depended on the angle of tissue sectioning and the registration plane, we compared detection 
of labeled neurons obtained in a number of regions from brains sectioned in the coronal or in 
the sagittal plane (Supplementary Fig. 5). As a measurement of registration accuracy, we 
defined the difference in the percentage of labeled cells found in each anatomical subregion 
in sagittal compared to coronal reconstructions. The average error across all anatomical 
regions was found to be 0.29% (SD = 0.96%, n = 239 brain regions) as defined by the Root 
Mean Squared Error (RMSE, see Supplementary Fig. 6–7). Importantly, reconstructed 3D 
brains can be resliced at arbitrary angles, although the sampling strategy will still impose 
limitations on the spatial resolution that can be obtained (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Fiber tract tracing
To construct mesoscale connectomes it is necessary to perform fiber tract tracing5. Fiber 
tracts are geometrical features extended in space (spatially coherent) with a set of 
orientations at different locations. We used the properties of coherency and orientation to 
further increase the SNR for segmentation of fiber tracts and cell processes by computing 
the structure tensor on the detail coefficients of interest followed by segmentation of 
topological skeletons (details in supplementary methods). The segmented topological 
skeletons together with the associated orientation of each pixel (Fig. 4e–g), can be used as 
input to tertiary tractography approaches28.
Resolving identity of fiber tracts across sectioned tissue is challenging. It is therefore 
desirable to perform fiber tracing in 3D, for example in intact clarified brain tissue imaged 
using confocal or light-sheet microscopy (Fig. 4a–j). For processing of three dimensional 
image stacks (Fig. 4h) we developed a set of 2.5D algorithms that segments out processes 
and cell bodies along the z-stack plane (Fig. 4i). This approach is comparable in speed to the 
2D image processing, but assures the accuracy of running 3D wavelet filters by running an 
additional connected components algorithm across the z-stack after combined wavelet and 
structure tensor on each z-plane.
Mapping of single cell co-expression
We further applied our approach to determine at the single neuron level the expression of 
markers after imaging of fluorescent proteins (e.g. EGFP) and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
In order to map the anatomical distribution of neuron types, we chose to determine the 
spatial distribution of interneurons using transgenic labeling in combination with 
immunohistochemistry. We used a transgenic mouse line (Lhx6::EGFP) in combination with 
detection of parvalbumin-expressing (PV ALB) and neuropeptide Y-expressing (NPY) 
interneurons. Automated image analysis resulted in the segmentation of 9021 labeled cells in 
a single coronal mouse brain section (Fig. 5): Lhx6::EGFP: 66% (n = 5958), PV ALB::Cy5: 
63% (n = 5701), NPY::Cy3: 15% (n = 1342). The processing time for segmentation and 
registration to the atlas was approximately 30 seconds, indicating the scalability of whole-
brain mapping projects based on our framework. Further demonstrating the advantages of an 
automated framework, we could with high resolution assign the position of each of these 
9021 labeled cell bodies to 116 unique regions (Fig. 5a–d). This type of comprehensive 
Fürth et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
mapping of single neurons generates detailed anatomical definitions that can for example 
describe the relative distribution of neuron types across cortical layers and in different 
anatomical subregions (Fig. 5e). We confirmed the non-overlapping distribution of PV ALB 
and NPY (n = 0) in Lhx6-expressing cells (Fig. 5g–h) (37% of cortical NPY co-express 
Lhx6::EGFP, n = 238, and 73% of cortical Pvalb co-express Lhx6::EGFP, n = 2752). In 
contrast to cortex, in the striatum 84% of NPY positive cells were also Lhx6::EGFP positive 
(n = 101).
We further investigated the laminar distribution of the five different neuron clusters and 
found that PV ALB+ (PV ALB only) as well as NPY+ (NPY only) were primarily localized to 
layer II/III of primary somatosensory cortex barrel field (SSp-bfd), whereas Lhx6+ (Lhx6 
only) and Lhx6+/NPY+ (Lhx6 and NPY co-expressing) were enriched in layer V (Fig. 5e).
Importantly, our framework further enables quantification of the average fluorescence 
intensity of each single cell for all labeling channels, resulting in a quantitative description 
of expression levels at the single cell level, and therefore also population clustering in a 
manner similar to gating in flow cytometry (Fig. 5f). Using the quantitative information for 
each fluorescent channel, we could cluster neurons into five distinct populations based on 
expected maximization with Gaussian mixture models (Fig. 5h,i). These clusters could then 
be superimposed on the reference atlas to align molecular and anatomical definitions of the 
map (Fig. 5h). For example, we found that the majority of PV ALB-positive and 
Lhx6::EGFP-negative neurons (PV ALB+/Lhx6−) can be found in the thalamic reticular 
nuclei (RT) (Fig. 5 g,i), and that Lhx6+ (Lhx6::EGFP+/PV ALB-/NPY−) cells were for 
example found preferentially in zona incerta (ZI) and in medial amygdalar nucleus (MEA).
This approach can similarly quantify gene expression on the subcellular level through 
detection of single mRNA molecules with fluorescent in situ hybridization (Supplementary 
Figure 9)
Tracing connectivity using modified rabies virus and transgenic mice
Whole-brain mapping of monosynaptic connectivity using modified rabies viruses can 
generate large datasets of cell-type-specific connectomes at the mesoscale level29–31. We 
applied rabies virus tracing to identify the presynaptic partners of defined neuronal subtypes 
in the corticostriatal pathway (Supplementary Video 2). We used a Cre-mediated genetic 
targeting approach to limit the uptake of rabies virus to defined neuron types in Cre-
expressing mouse lines. We first mapped the whole-brain inputs to excitatory versus 
inhibitory neurons in the motor cortex (MOp), through Camk2a-Cre and Gad2-Cre mice 
respectively (Fig. 6a–d). To target the main neuron types in striatum (CPu), we used D1-Cre, 
D2-Cre and Chat-Cre mice to target either medium spiny neurons (MSNs) of the direct 
versus indirect pathway, or cholinergic interneurons, respectively (Fig. 6e–j). We mapped the 
precise neuroanatomical distribution of the labeled presynaptic neurons at a whole-brain 
scale, which produced a rich dataset that included whole-brain tracing data from 15 mice 
and 349959 annotated neurons (Fig. 6k–l).
The quantitative comparison across a large number of animals and experiments allowed us 
to search for cortical regions that showed connectivity patterns similar to the thalamus (i.e. 
Fürth et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
innervating both MOp and CPu), which can be anatomically and functionally described as 
contextual units32,33, instead of input units to motor cortex. We therefore analyzed the 
whole-brain tracing dataset to specifically identify cortical subregions that exhibited dense 
targeting of both MOp and CPu. We identified three candidate regions that satisfied the 
criteria of serving as contextual units: primary somatosensory cortex (SSp), anterior 
cingulate area (ACA), and orbital cortex (ORB). We further analyzed the cell type-specific 
organization of SSp, ACA, and ORB inputs to striatum, and found that the ipsilateral inputs 
in ORB (ORBvl and ORBl) displayed a preferential targeting towards D1+ striatal cells (Fig. 
6m). ORB cortex therefore displays a unique connectivity pattern among the corticostriatal 
network, preferentially targeting striatal D1+ neurons.
To investigate the laminar distribution of the corticostriatal organization further, we explored 
our dataset to identify proposed cell type-specific connectivity patterns. Unlike previous 
studies that have relied on a small number of cortical neurons34,35, we quantified a large 
number of presynaptic neurons in the corticostriatal pathway (320055 neurons) after 
monosynaptic rabies tracing from distinct striatal subtypes. We analyzed the laminar 
distribution of the cell type-specific corticostriatal inputs in SSp and we found the major 
inputs to D1+ and D2+ striatal neurons were found in layer V , although we also found layer 
II/III and IV inputs (Fig. 6f,h,n). Inputs to Chat+ striatal neurons were primarily located in 
layer V and VI in SSp (Fig. 6j,n). In comparison, we found that inputs to Camk2a+ and 
Gad2+ in MOp primarily originated from layer II-III of SSp, but could be also found in layer 
V (Fig. 6n).
Comparing inputs to the striatal neuron subtypes on the whole-brain scale, we found that 
D2+ striatal neurons display preferential input from neurons in cortical regions compared to 
subcortical structures, whereas D1+ and Chat+ striatal cells receive a more balanced 
cortical-subcortical input (Fig. 6o). This evidence supports a discrete cell type-specific 
pattern of connectivity both in the corticostriatal pathway as well as in the input balance 
from cortical versus subcortical regions.
Decoding motor behavior from whole-brain intermediate early gene activity
In order to investigate the behavioral relevance of the corticostriatal organization identified 
by monosynaptic rabies tracing, we performed a whole-brain functional assay. Labeling of 
neurons based on expression of immediate early genes (e.g. c-fos) as a proxy measure of 
neural activity has been a valuable for the identification of regions and neuron types that are 
recruited during behavior36.
Studies have mapped the cocaine induced c-fos expression in cortical and basal ganglia 
circuits37,38, and more recently similar approaches have mapped c-fos at a whole-brain 
scale13,14. We selected acute cocaine administration as an assay to map how motor function 
recruits distinct corticostriatal circuits. We exposed mice to cocaine or saline and then 
imaged c-fos expression, to identify neurons and regions that displayed activation that 
correlated with increased motor activity. Motor response was monitored during 20 minutes 
in an open field (Fig. 7a) for mice injected with 20 mg/kg cocaine or saline (n = 4 mice, per 
group), and brains were sectioned (M = 93.6 sections per brain, SD = 11.2 sections per 
brain) and stained for c-fos as well as DAPI (Fig. 7b–d).
Fürth et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
In order to segment cell nuclei and determine the c-fos fluorescence intensity we computed 
the tensor energy on detail coefficients for subsequent watershed segmentation (Fig. 7e–g 
and Supplementary Fig. 9). The segmentation algorithm is based on spatial frequency 
analysis, allowing segmentation of nuclei independently of their signal intensity, which 
resulted in detection of c-fos signal over a wide dynamic range (Fig. 7c–f). We mapped the 
position of c-fos expressing neurons at the whole-brain scale (Fig. 7h).
We focused our analysis on activity mapping to ORB based on the corticostriatal 
connectivity pattern. We found that cocaine did not significantly change the number of c-fos 
positive nuclei in ORB (344 versus 325 c-fos positive nuclei, χ12 = 1, P = 0.32, Fig. 7i). We 
instead found that cocaine significantly increased the c-fos intensity levels (t492 = 15.21, P 
< .001 Fig. 7j), as well as the c-fos signal variance (Bartlett’s K2 = 174.21, df = 2, P < .001, 
Fig. 7k).
To further map the brain regions that are functionally linked to the increased locomotion 
after cocaine administration we used linear mediational analysis on the whole-brain c-fos 
data. We first characterized the marginal distribution of the behavior across animals by a 
monotonic four-parametric cumulative Weibull distribution (Fig. 7l). As a measurement of 
the relative contribution of a specific brain region to the mediated effect we estimated the 
proportion of the total effect of cocaine on locomotion that is mediated by c-fos expression 
(i.e. relative mediated effect) (Fig. 7m). This analysis revealed that orbital cortex (ORB) is a 
key region mediating the behavioral effect and accounted for approximately 7% of the 
relative mediated effect (Pαβ = .071, 95% C.I. [0.00 – .898]). We found that the c-fos 
fluorescence intensity correlated to velocity better than absolute c-fos+ cell counts (Fig. 
7n,o), and that variance in cell counts increased with average number of c-fos+ neurons 
(Supplementary Fig 11). We therefore normalized the variance in c-fos fluorescent intensity 
to DAPI in subsequent analysis. We asked whether we could classify the observed relation in 
ORB between c-fos induction and locomotion into a distinct form of gain control: either 
input gain, output gain or range compression. (Fig. 7p–r). We kept the saturation level fixed 
at a velocity of 90 cm/s and estimated the fixed-effect of cocaine on the other two 
cumulative Weibull parameters (slope and intercept) (Fig. 7s). Using the marginal 
cumulative density function as prior, we sampled from the posterior density distributions of 
the fixed-effect of cocaine. We compared the posterior fixed-effect of cocaine on either 
intercept or slope to that of our prior N(0, 0.1) based the Savage-Dickey density ratio test. 
We found that the cocaine-induced locomotion most likely depends on modulation of the 
input gain in orbital cortex ORB (BF10 = 1.4) rather than range compression (BF10 = 1.1) 
(Fig. 7t). Taken in combination with our tracing dataset (where ORB was identified as a 
contextual layer targeting preferentially D1+ striatal neurons) these data support ORB as a 
major corticostriatal hub mediating locomotor effects of cocaine.
DISCUSSION
For invertebrate model organisms, there has been considerable progress in developing 
methods to map and visualize the complete nervous system connectome based on electron 
microscopy reconstructions39–41. Although detailed reconstruction of the mouse nervous 
system at a similar scale would be valuable, there are considerable challenges in acquiring 
Fürth et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and analyzing data at that scale42. To define the organization of circuits in the mouse brain, 
it is now becoming possible to generate a complete map of the cell type-specific 
connectivity using combinations of advanced transgenic, labeling and imaging methods at 
the cellular scale. In spite of great progress in labeling methods, methods to register and map 
neurons have to a large extent still relied on manual inspection or registration, and have not 
been scalable for the analysis of large datasets or for integration of multiple projects into one 
database. To address these needs, we have developed a computational framework to facilitate 
comprehensive investigations of mouse brain circuits at the cellular level.
We have developed a computational framework that enables the automated segmentation of 
labeled neurons at a whole-brain scale that is independent of imaging method. Based on this 
computational framework, data can be analyzed and presented in a scale-invariant whole-
brain mouse atlas that allows for the rapid comparison and sharing of data between projects 
and laboratories. A key advantage of our framework is the ability to rapidly visualize and 
share whole-brain data using commonly available infrastructure. To facilitate integration of 
this platform, we provide video tutorials for common applications (http://
wholebrainsoftware.org/tutorials).
We present the application of the computational framework to the whole-brain mapping of 
rabies tracing data derived from different neuron subtypes in the corticostriatal pathway, and 
in combination with whole-brain definition of cocaine-induced neuronal activity using c-fos 
mapping. Using whole-brain rabies tracing, we identified that orbital cortex (ORB) displays 
characteristics of a contextual layer in the corticostriatal pathway, possibly shaping 
interactions between primary motor cortex and the striatum, and furthermore preferentially 
targets the direct pathway D1-expressing striatal neurons. We could further integrate this 
connectivity pattern with cocaine-induced activity changes, using whole-brain segmentation 
of c-fos levels in single neurons after cocaine administration, which identified the ORB as a 
major mediator of cocaine induced locomotion.
We anticipate that the versatility and accessibility of this framework will promote integration 
of new technologies and user-based modifications. For example, neuroanatomical methods 
that leverage the power of next-generation sequencing will be of importance for the 
development of computational neuroanatomy, including: lineage tracing by barcoded 
DNA43, connectivity tracing of individual neurons by expressing RNA barcodes44, in situ 
sequencing45,46, and spatial transcriptomics47.
We expect that an increasing focus on whole-brain characterization of neurons, circuits and 
activity will benefit from a unified and intuitive approach to data analysis. Importantly, our 
framework can integrate future advances in imaging, incorporate new molecular data to 
improve neuroanatomical definitions, and support data sharing in mapping projects.
Methods
Virus construction and production
A protocol modified from48 was used to produce rabies virus. To make EnvA pseudotyped 
rabies virus, unpseudotyped rabies viral particles were transferred onto BHKEnvA2 cell 
Fürth et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
lines on day 1. To decrease the contamination of glycoprotein coated rabies virus, cells were 
then trypsinized, washed and replated in a new cell culture flask. This procedure was 
repeated for two days. Collected supernatants were then filtered by 0.45 µm filter and 
ultracentrifuged at 60,000 g for at least two hours on day 4. TV A, mCherry and RG were 
amplified from pCMMPTV A80029 (Addgene plasmid 15778), pAA V--EF1adouble floxed-
hChR2(H134R)-mCherry-WPRE-HGHpA (Addgene plasmid 20297), and pHCMV-Rabies 
G49 (Addgene plasmid 15785) by Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes, 
Finland), respectively. One round of overlapping Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was 
then performed to fuse TV A and mCherry together, using TV A Forward (NheI) and mCherry 
Reverse (AscI) as primers. A similar approach was used to create a TV A-t2A-RG PCR 
product. Inserts were digested by NheI and AscI (New England Biolabs, UK) and cloned 
into the pAA V-EF1a-DIO plasmid backbone. Transformation was done in NEB-10b E. coli 
(New England Biolabs, UK) and bacteria were plated on 50 mg/mL ampicillin LB agar 
plates. Plasmid DNA was extracted from cultured colonies and confirmed by NheI and AscI 
digestion. Positive clones were sent for sequencing (Eurofins MWG Operon, Germany), and 
the results were analyzed with National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) 
BLAST. Confirmed plasmids were sent to Gene Therapy Center Vector Core at the 
University of North Carolina (North Carolina, NC) for virus production.
Viral injections
Animal experiments were carried out following guidelines of the Stockholm municipal 
committee, the Scripps Research Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the 
Stanford University Institutional review panel approval. All viral injections into the striatum 
(Drd1a-cre (EY262)50 n = 4, Drd2-cre (ER44)50 n = 3, Adora2a-cre [GENSAT: KG139] n = 
1, Chat-IRES-cre [Jax: 006410] n = 4) were done at the following coordinates from bregma 
AP: +0.6 mm, ML: +2.2 mm, DV: −3.5 to −3.2 mm (500 nl). Injections into the motor cortex 
(Camk2a-cre [Jax: 005359] n = 4, Gad2-cre [Jax: 010802] n = 4) were done at AP: 1.5 mm, 
ML: 1.5 mm, DV: −0.4 mm (500 nl). Injections were performed in 2–6 months old mice 
under isoflurane anesthesia and injected with buprenorphine post surgery. In all mice the 
second injection was performed after 2–4 weeks with (EnvA)SADΔG-EGFP or 
(EnvA)SADΔG-ChR2(H134R)-mCherry (Adora2a-cre n = 1, D1-cre n = 2, Chat-cre n = 3) 
at the same location, for the striatal injections we either used AA V5-TV A-t2a-RG as or a 
dualvector helper virus system (AA V5-EF1a-DIO-TV A-mCherry and AA V5-EF1a-DIO-RG, 
1:1 ratio). In experiments with Camk2a-cre and Gad2-cre animals we used AA V9-
CAGFLEXRG [Addgene plasmid 48333] and AA V9-CAG-FLEX-TV A-mCherry [Addgene 
plasmid 48332] in 1:1 ratio.
Immunohistochemistry
All immunohistochemsitry was performed in either wild type C57BL/6J mice (n = 4 cocaine 
treated, n = 4 saline treated) for c-fos, or as in the example provided in quantitative single 
cell co-expression analysis provided a single Lhx6-EGFP [Jax: 3839374]. All animals were 
male and between 8–13 weeks old. Brain sections were cut at 40 µm thick on a vibratome 
(Leica VT1000, Leica Microsystems GmbH) and were placed in sodium citrate (10 mM 
Sodium Citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 6) for 1–2 min for antigen retrieval followed by wash 
in TBST (0.3% Triton). After antigen retrieval blocking was performed with 5% donkey 
Fürth et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
serum in TBST for one hour at room temperature (RT). Sections were then incubated with 
primary antibody (c-fos 1:1000 (Santa Cruz, anti-goat, sc-52, Lot G2612), parvalbumin 
1:1000 (antiguinea pig, Swant, Lot GP72), neuropeptide Y 1:500 (anti-rabbit, Peninsula, Lot 
T-4070), or Forkhead box protein P2 1:500 (anti-rabbit, Abcam, Lot GR91556-1, for FoxP2 
n = 3 C57BL/6J mice were used), on a shaker at RT overnight. The following day sections 
were washed at RT with TBST for 10 min followed by incubation for 5 hours with 
secondary antibody (1:500 Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated antibody (Jackson Immuno, 
711-545-152, Lot: 100709), Cy5-conjugated (Jackson Immuno, 706-175-148, Lot: 110663), 
Cy3-conjugated (Jackson Immuno, 711-165-152, Lot: 114518)) at RT on a shaker. Washing 
was performed at RT in TBST for 10 min followed by TBS (10 min), and then with 1×PBS 
(10 min). For c-fos staining DAPI (1:50000, Biotium, 40011, Lot: 11D1017) was added to 
PBS and incubated for 4 min at RT. Sections were mounted with SlowFade Gold antifade 
reagent (Life Technologies, 10 ml, S36936) and then imaged.
In situ hybridization
RNA in situ hybridization was performed using the RNAscope fluorescent multiplex assay 
(Advanced Cell Diagnostics, ACD, Hayward, CA) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. In brief, C57BL/6J mouse brains were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde and 
le for post-fixation in 4%PFA overnight. The brains were subsequently cryoprotected by 
being immersed in a 15% sucrose solution (in PBS) overnight at 4 °C, the process was 
repeated with a 30% sucrose solution. e brains were then frozen in OCT on dry ice and 
stored at −80 °C. Cryosections (14 µm) were made using CryoStar NX70 cryostat 
(ThermoScientific) and stored at −80 °C until further processing. Immediately before RNA 
in situ hybridization, cryosections were washed once in PBS (1×). Subsequently, the sections 
were boiled in pretreatment reagent 2 for 5 minutes, washed in ddH2O and immersed in 
100% ethanol. Sections were dried at room temperature and a hydrophobic barrier was 
drawn around the individual sections using an ImmEdge Hydrophobic Barrier Pen (Vector 
Labs, Inc.). All following incubation steps were performed in a HybEZTM Hybridization 
System oven (ACD). Next, the sections were incubated with protease 4 solution (ACD) for 
30 minutes at 40°C. Then sections were washed twice in fresh ddH2O and subsequently 
hybridized with multiplexed probes: MmSlc32a1-Ch1 (Alexa488), Mm-Slc17a6-Ch3 
(Atto647) and Mm-Pdyn-Ch2 (Atto550) for two hours at 40 °C. After hybridization, the 
sections were washed twice in RNAscope wash buffer (ACD) and four consecutive 
amplification steps were performed using the RNAscope Fluorescent Multiplex Detection 
reagents 1–4 (amplifier 4 variant A was used for fluorescent labeling). After the last 
amplification step, the sections were immersed in DAPI for 30 seconds and immediately 
covered with a coverslip, using a protective fluorescent mounting medium. smFISH 
experiments were imaged on confocal microscope with 40× optical magnification and fifteen 
optical z-planes.
smFISH quantification
Segmentation of individual transcripts was done on each channel separately. Before binary 
segmentation of transcripts the raw confocal image was processed with a grey morphology 
top hat filter to decrease background noise. To assign individual transcripts to single cell 
nuclei the cell nuclei (DAPI) were segmented by first preprocessing the DAPI image by 
Fürth et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
extracting the tensor structure energy followed by binary segmentation and watersheding. 
The perinuclear zone was then obtained by iterative dilatations on the binary segmented cell 
nuclei. Cell nuclei were then assigned to perinuclear zones by a point in polygon algorithm. 
The transcript gene identity, position within perinuclear zone as well as position within a 
given cell nuclei was used as input to the affinity propagation clustering algorithm42 using a 
negative squared distances similarity measure and initial number of clusters set to number of 
detected cell nuclei using the apclusterK() function in the apcluster R package51.
Widefield imaging
Imaging was done at 10×/0.40 NA (15506285 HCX PL APO 10×/0.40 CS, Leica 
Microsystems GmbH) on a fluorescent microscope (Leica DM6000B, Leica Microsystems 
GmbH) with motorized stage automatically controlled through µManager52. Images were 
acquired by a Hamamatsu OrcaFLASH 4.0 digital camera (C11440-22CUORCA-Flash4.0 
V2 Digital CMOS camera, Hamamatsu Photonics K.K.) at 16 bit depth resolution with 2048 
× 2048 pixels. All widefield imaging except for rabies injections done in Camk2a-cre and 
Gad2-cre animals were done on the Leica DM6000B. For Camk2a-cre and Gad2-cre mice 
we used an IN Cell Analyzer 6000 with the 10×/0.45 NA objective (GE Healthcare Life 
Sciences, Chicago, US).
Confocal imaging
Confocal imaging was done on a Zeiss LSM 510 or a LSM 800 confocal microscope (Zeiss 
GmbH). For co-localization with immunohistochemistry (Figure 5) a 15 step z-stack 
covering the 40 µm section was imaged using LSM 800 with 20x/0.8 NA objective. For in 
situ hybridization imaging was done using LSM 800 with 40x/1.3 NA oil immersion 
objective. All images had a 16 bit depth. Supplementary figure 2 used Zeiss LSM 510 for 
confocal images. Objectives for the Zeiss LSM 510 are specified in the supplementary 
figure.
Light-sheet CLARITY imaging
Brains were perfused and incubated with CLARITY monomer solution containing 1% 
acrylamide, 0.0125% bis-acrylamide, and 4% PFA and then polymerized at 37 °C for 6–7 
hours. Brains were passively cleared in SDS Borate Buffer (pH 8.5) at 37 °C for 4–5 weeks, 
equilibrated in Focusclear for imaging and imaged using COLM methods53. Analysis of 
light-sheet data differ from sectioned tissue in that the distance between adjacent optical 
planes is normally much smaller that the distance between adjacent sectioned planes. 
Therefore an additional post-processing step is needed for segmentation to assure that 
segmented connected components that accord across z-planes are not counted several times. 
This postprocessing step included a connected component algorithm running across the z-
stacks on the binarized image.
Cocaine induced locomotion
To measure locomotion only open field test was performed as a behavioral test on wild type 
mice. Cocaine hydrochloride (C5776, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in 9 mg/ml sodium 
chloride and administered at a single dose of 20 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection. Mice 
Fürth et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
were returned to the home cage for 5 minutes for the drug to begin to take hold and then 
placed inside the open-field arena. The control group (saline) were injected intraperitoneal 
with the vehicle (NaCl 9 mg/ml) . Mice (n = 4, per group, all male) were monitored in open 
field using the TSE Multi Conditioning System (TSE Systems GmbH). Mice were randomly 
assigned and counterbalanced by treatment (cocaine vs. saline), time of testing (done at four 
time points in the middle of the day) and conditioning system (box A vs. box B). After each 
20 min session the mouse was brought back to its home cage and 90 minutes after the 
injection brains were harvested by transcardial perfusion with 1×PBS followed by 4% PFA 
under sodium pentobarbital (0.15 mg/kg) anesthesia. To aid immunohistochemistry 
perfusion was done with 4% PFA in 1 × PBS (pH 7.4) (with picric acid and glutaraldehyde) 
fresh on the day of perfusion. Brains were further fixated in 4% PFA at 4◦C overnight. All 
animals were housed in groups of 3–5 mice. All mice were housed on a 12:12h non-reversed 
light:dark cycle.
NURBS atlas
We started from the scalable vector graphics (SVG) files of the original 2008 Allen reference 
atlas. We manually redefined and adjusted each plate. After that we simplified points along 
the outer contours of each brain region using the same set of PCA generating 
correspondence points, starting with the brain section outline. Adjacent sections were then 
merged in a sequential manner by the lofting technique. The NURBS atlas was adjusted 
manually using the trial version of Maya (Autodesk, Inc) when needed.
Computing intersection of a plane with NURBS surfaces
We use a general strategy to obtain a curve from intersection of two surfaces where the steps 
involved are: (i) determining parametric curves, (i) transforming curve segments and surface 
patches to Bézier form, (iii) convex hull intersection test to determine whether the curve can 
be approximated by a line, (iv) obtain intersection points in Euclidean space from 
intersecting lines and quadrilaterals (v) connecting intersection points to curves by a 
marching scheme. Through this processes a set of tests are performed at each stage and in 
case a proper curve cannot be approximated the algorithm halts and throws an exception for 
that intersection.
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) data format for serialization
Segmentation and registration results can either be transferred to collaborators as a tabulated 
tidy data frame or for serialization on the web through a collection of name/value pairs 
based on JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). The open format describes the 
neuroanatomical spatial features of an image, along with non-spatial attributes. The format is 
called RosettaBrainJSON (http://openbrainmap.org/rosettabrainjson/) and is licensed under 
Creative Commons (CC BY 4.0).
R package and dependencies
Higher level analysis and plotting functions were written in base R with image processing 
done through calls to C++ code via the Rcpp package54,55. For plotting in R of raster images 
png package was used56. For vector processing and import into R the packages grImport57, 
Fürth et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
XML58 were used. For 3D rendering the packages rgl and misc3d were used59,60. For 
general data handling and preprocessing dplyr was used61. All of these packages are 
dependencies of the Wholebrain R package.
The following C/C++ libraries were used: OpenCV 3.3 62 (for image processing), FFTW3 
3.363 (for computations of the discrete Fourier transform), Eigen 3.364 (for linear algebra, 
numerical solvers etc.). For providing open source C++ classes that we built upon we thank 
Rafat Hussain (wavelets), Matthias Schmieder (thin-plate splines), and Pete Gadomski 
(coherent point drift). C/C++ code was compiled using Apple LLVM version 8.1.0 
(clang-802.0.42) on macOS, gcc 4.9 on Linux and Rtools 3.4 together with mingw-w64 v3 
on Windows 7.
Multiresolution decomposition
A filter bank F transforms an input x into an output y = F(x). Let Gj be the low pass filter at 
the jth level and Hj the high pass filter at the jth level. As stated in the main text the Haar low 
pass filter Gj simply averages adjacent entries of its input, in matrix form:
G j = 1
2
1 1
1 1
1 1
⋱
1 1
1
,
The Haar high pass filter Hj computes half the difference between successive input samples, 
in matrix form:
H j = 1
2
1 −1
1 −1
1 −1
⋱
1 −1
1
,
Where the size of the filters n × n matches the size of the image initially. Normally one 
would then downsample the signal to avoid antialiasing when reconstructing the signal. But 
in our case it is more important to create a shift-invariant output of the filter bank and this 
can be achieved by upsampling the filter by starting with the identity matrix and insert 
empty rows in it and multiply with the filter thereby creating holes of zeros in it, hence the 
original French name algorithm à trous (with holes), or more commonly the stationary 
wavelet transform (SWT) due to its shift-invariant properties65. Upsampling is represented 
in matrix form as an array of size 2n × n:
Fürth et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
U j =
1
1
1
⋱
1
1
,
The combined operation of low pass filtering and then upsampling is represented as the low 
pass branch Lj:
L j = U jG j = 1
2
1 1
1 1
1 1
⋱
1 1
1
,
Similarly the high pass branch Bj is given by:
B j = U jH j
The low pass branch is sent forward and at each stage the output from the high pass branch 
is stored as the set of detail coefficients dj (Supplementary Figure 2b). The output can hence 
be seen as rewriting the input x in terms of another basis to produce the output y = F(x), so 
the output from a filter bank with three levels, J = 3, is:
y =
L3L2L1
B3L2L1
B2L1
B1
x =
a3
d3
d2
d1
,
Where aJ is the set of approximation coefficients and dj are the detail coefficients. When 
applying the filter bank to a two-dimensional signal one obtains additional detail coefficients 
row-wise, column-wise and diagonal.
Filter bank is merely one specific form of implementation of hierarchical decomposition. 
More generally put hierarchical decomposition via filter banks writes a signal in terms of 
new basis to find this basis one can use the dilation function, also known as at the scaling 
function:
ϕ(2 j − 1t) = 2 ∑
k
g(k)ϕ(2 jt − k),
as well as the wavelet function:
Fürth et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
w(2 j − 1t) = 2 ∑
k
h(k)ϕ(2 jt − k),
For the Haar wavelet substituting the low pass filter into Equation 1 gives us the case 
definition:
ϕ(t) = ϕ2t + ϕ(2t − 1) = 1 if  t ∈ [0, 1)
0 otherwise
Equation 4 gives us the Haar scaling function. Likewise the high pass filter can be 
substituted into Equation 2, giving us the Haar wavelet function:
ϕ(t) = ϕ2t − ϕ(2t − 1) =
1 if  t ∈ [0, 0.5)
−1 if  t ∈ [0.5, 1)
0 otherwise
The Haar wavelet function is the simplest wavelet but WholeBrain comes packaged with a 
total of 44 different wavelets. It is still an open question, which wavelet is best suited for 
neuroanatomical segmentation but we are quite satisfied with the output from Debauchies 
wavelet 2 (db2). In addition to the filter bank implementation WholeBrain comes with the 
possibility to construct biorthogonal wavelets using the lifting scheme. The lifting scheme 
does not require any computation using the Fourier transform and it is also possible to 
construct an integer wavelet transform, that is, a wavelet transform that maps integers to 
integers which most of the time is more suitable for microscope images that are most of the 
time encoded with uint16 bit depth.
Segmentation of features by thresholding wavelet coefficients
Instead of running an inverse transform at each scale, hence increasing the computational 
time, we simply added the detail coefficients for a given scale together by a weighted 
average and this weighted average was subsequently used for binary segmentation by 
thresholds defined by the user. Individual features such as cell bodies are segmented from 
the thresholded weighted detail coefficients by a standard connected components 
algorithm21. In cases such as immunohistochemistry of cell nuclei (e.g. c-fos) additional 
steps with the computation of tensor structure on the detail coefficients and subsequent 
extraction of the tensor structure trace or energy, tr(T), (see Segmentation of processes using 
tensor structure) is done followed by thresholding and watersheding (see Supplementary 
Figure 10c,d). In the case of c-fos experiments we used the Shannon entropy based binary 
thresholding66 for DAPI and c-fos cell nuclei segmentation.
Segmentation of processes using tensor structure
Anatomically a cell body can more or less be perceived as a point feature; the most 
important parameter is its location. This is not true for a fiber tract or a cell process 
outgrowth where it is better conceived as a geometrical feature extended in space (spatially 
coherent) with a set of orientations at different locations. We here leverage these additional 
Fürth et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
properties of coherency and orientation to increase the SNR for segmentation of fiber tracts 
and processes. We extracted the orientation as well as coherency of fluorescent signals at the 
set of detail coefficients where the SNR for processes peaked (d1) by first computing the 
gradient magnitude from Scharr operator gradient67 and then computing its associated 
structure tensor68 defined for each location as the 2 × 2 symmetric positive matrix T:
T =
〈 f x, f x〉w 〈 f x, f y〉w
〈 f x, f y〉w 〈 f y, f y〉w
Where fx and fy are the Scharr derivatives of the detail coefficients d1(x, y), along the 
columns, x, and rows, y, respectively. Furthermore, the weighted inner product between two 
arbitrary images g and h is defined as:
〈g, h〉w = ∬ℝ2w(x, y)g(x, y)h(x, y)dxdy
Where w is the Gaussian weighting function who’s standard deviation, or Kernel size, 
determines the area of interest, which is set and determined by the user’s imaging resolution 
relative to the size of the labeled cell outgrowth processes. Once the structure tensor, T, is 
computed it is trivial to obtain following three properties for each location in d1: orientation, 
coherency, and trace matrix.
Orientation, θ:
θ = 1
2 arctan 2
〈 f x, f y〉w
〈 f y, f y〉w − 〈 f x, f x〉w
,
Coherency, C:
C =
λmax − λmin
λmax + λmin
,
Where where λmax and λmin are the largest and the smallest eigenvalue of the tensor, 
respectively.
Trace, tr(T), is defined as:
tr(T) = 〈 f x, f x〉w + 〈 f y, f y〉w,
The trace of the tensor structure is not primarily used for segmentation of processes, but 
mentioned in Segmentation of features by thresholding wavelet coefficients quite useful for 
segmentation of cell nuclei with differential fluorescent intensity (e.g. immunohistochemical 
fluorescent labeling of immediate early genes. Fig. 6, and Supplementary Fig. 10). The 
Fürth et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
coherency on a set of small-period detail coefficients, e.g. d1, is used for binary 
segmentation of labeled processes.
For processes such as dendrites and axons, in order to obtain a thin shape that is equidistant 
to the boundaries of the labeled processes (i.e. a topological skeleton) we applied the Zhang-
Suen thinning algorithm69 on the binary segmented image. The skeleton is then pruned 
similar to70 into end-points (less than two neighboring segmented pixels), junctions (more 
than two neighboring segmented pixels), and slabs (exactly two neighboring segmented 
pixels). The endpoints and junctions together with the segmented cell-bodies can then be 
seen as nodes which delineates the slabs as belonging to a subset of pixels defining vertices, 
all of which in the end are used for visualization of labeled processes online (Fig. 2c).
Since several pruning and tractograhy algorithms are already available28,71–73, and the user 
might want to create their own, the output is also provided for each single pixel that form the 
segmented topological skeletons together with the pixel's associated orientation (seen 
represented as hue in Fig. 4e–g).
Registration with non-rigid free-form deformation (FFD) using thin-plate splines (TPS)
To map the coordinates of a target image to that of a reference image we here used the 
method of thin-plate splines (TPS). We start out by segmenting the overall contour of both 
the target brain section and the reference brain section from the standardized atlas. Using the 
contours of the overall brain section as well as any detected hollow regions within the 
boundaries of the brain section such as ventricles the algorithm then extracts the principal 
axes using principal component analysis. Based on the intersection of the principal axes with 
the contour we iteratively generated a set of homologous correspondence points between the 
two sections by the following algorithm25:
1. Set level l = 1
2. While l ≤ L
3. Generate a midpoint qi between pi and pi+1 such that q = (pi + pi+1)/2. Where the 
points are indexed based on their clockwise alignment on the contour perimeter.
4. Find a point xi on the contour between pi and pi+1 such that xi lies on the shortest 
distance from a line intersecting the contour and midpoint qi perpendicularly to 
the line between pi and pi+1
5. Iterate steps 3–5 until the whole contour has been traced in a clockwise order, i.e. 
pi = pn] and pi+1 = p1.
6. Make a new vector p′ where all new xi and qi are interleaved together with pi.
7. Increment the level l = l + 1. Set p′ = p + q + x as the new vector p = p′.
The output of the above steps can be seen in Supplementary figure 2, it is up to the user to 
define how many levels L that is needed for getting a good correspondence. The more levels 
added the more correspondence points generated and the computational complexity of thin-
plating itself is 0(n3) where n is the number of correspondence points.
Fürth et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The TPS interpolation δ(x, y) minimizes the bending energy:
Iδ = ∬ℝ2(δxx
2 + 2δxy
2 + δyy
2 )dxdy
With the form:
δ(x, y) = a1 + axx + ayy + ∑
i = 1
n
wiU(‖(xi, yi) − (x, y)‖),
Where, a1, ax, ay and U(r) = r2log r are the affine parameters and wi are the thin-plate splines 
parameters. The TPS interpolation should have square integrable derivatives if the following 
two conditions hold:
∑
i = 1
n
wi = 0 and ∑
i = 1
n
wixi = ∑
i = 1
n
wiyi = 0
A linear system is obtained for the TPS coefficients and a regularization parameter, λ = 
0.001, is added to control amount of smoothing to avoid ripples in the obtained transform. If 
λ = 0 exact interpolation is performed227,25.
Statistical analysis
For all statistical inferences made we examined distribution assumptions with Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test of equality as well as Bartlett’s test of equal variances, these tests are only 
reported when significant deviation from assumptions were observed. For non-parametric 
count data between two groups we used Pearson’s chi-squared test of independence. 
Student’s t-test was used when assumptions were met with adjusted degrees of freedom in 
cases where equal variances cannot be assumed. Only two-sided tests were performed. For 
clustering of single-cell coexpression analysis we used the R package Mclust with expected 
maximization and gaussian mixture models. For linear regression analysis of locomotion 
regressed on c-fos intensity background autofluorescent was added as a covariate rather than 
excluding data points with high autofluorescent due to staining variability. All statistical 
analysis were done in R55. For Bayesian analysis as well as meditational analysis see section 
Estimating mediating effects of c-fos expression to cocaine induced locomotor activity and 
section Psychophysical scaling by gradient-based Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). For 
signal-to-noise ratio evaluation in Figure 3 the Rose criteria74 was used.
No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are 
similar to those reported in previous publications30,31. Injections considered outside of the 
stereotactic coordinates were excluded and not further imaged or processed. We did not 
perform any replication experiments. Pseudo-randomization was performed for the cocaine 
administration study. In cocaine administration experiment we counter balanced the 
assignment of mice to each group (cocaine vs. saline) × (boxA vs. boxB) × (time of testing).
A Life Sciences Reporting Summary is available.
Fürth et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Estimating mediating effects of c-fos expression to cocaine induced locomotor activity
Mediational analysis was done in R using the MBESS package following75.
Psychophysical scaling by gradient-based Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
We assume that motor behavior observed in Figure 7l can be described with the four 
parametric Weibull density distribution, f(x):
f (x; k; λ) =
k
λ
x
λ
k − 1
e−(x/λ)k, x ≥ 0
0, x < 0
Which give the cumulative density distribution:
F(x; k; λ) = 1 + e−(x/λ)k, x ≥ 0
0, x < 0
Which we directly translate into the psychophysical scaling between average velocity for the 
ith mouse, vi, and relative variance in c-fos activation, xi:
vi = 0.9 1 − exp
−xi
λ
k
+ 1
Where x is defined as:
x =
σc − fos
2
σc − fos
2 + σDAPI
2
Where k is the shape, or slope, parameter and λ is the location, or intercept, parameter. 0.9 
and 1 are estimated from the marginal distribution of the locomotor behavior itself and sets 
the output range. Likewise we set λ = 0.55 and k = 2.5 based on initial fit to the marginal 
distribution then we estimated the effect of cocaine with prior Gaussian(0, 0.1). Bayesian 
statistics was done in R using the rstan76 package.
Code access and supplementary software instructions
Source code can be accessed at http://www.github.com/tractatus/.
Data availability statement
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study if not already 
available on www.wholebrainsoftware.org, www.github.com/tractatus or 
www.openbrainmap.org are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request. 
Source code is licensed with GPLv3 license.
Fürth et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
K.M. acknowledges financial support from the Swedish Research Council (VR 2012-02049), from the Karolinska 
Institutet (KID-funding supporting D.F., O.T., A.M.), from the Strategic Neuroscience Area at Karolinska Institutet 
(StratNeuro) for rabies virus production, and from the Swedish Brain Foundation (Hjärnfonden). Additional 
financial support for the project was from a National Institute of Mental Health grant (MH109795 to G.R., K.M. 
and C.M.) and a National Institute on Drug Abuse grant (DA0036376, to C.M.). D.F. would like to thank Julio 
Bernardi and Jay H. Lee for fruitful discussions about the software or the paper.
References
1. Alivisatos AP, et al. The brain activity map project and the challenge of functional connectomics. 
Neuron. 2012; 74:970–974. [PubMed: 22726828] 
2. Mitra PP. The circuit architecture of whole brains at the mesoscopic Scale. Neuron. 2014; 83:1273–
1283. [PubMed: 25233311] 
3. Denk W, Briggman KL, Helmstaedter M. Structural neurobiology: missing link to a mechanistic 
understanding of neural computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2012; 13:351–358. [PubMed: 22353782] 
4. Bohland JW, et al. A proposal for a coordinated effort for the determination of brainwide 
neuroanatomical connectivity in model organisms at a mesoscopic scale. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009; 
5
5. Oh SW, et al. A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature. 2014; 508:207–214. [PubMed: 
24695228] 
6. Zingg B, et al. Neural networks of the mouse neocortex. Cell. 2014; 156:1096–1111. [PubMed: 
24581503] 
7. Osten P, Margrie TW. Mapping brain circuitry with a light microscope. Nat Meth. 2013; 10:515–
523.
8. Livet J, et al. Transgenic strategies for combinatorial expression of fluorescent proteins in the 
nervous system. Nature. 2007; 450:56–62. [PubMed: 17972876] 
9. Tomer R, et al. SPED light sheet microscopy: fast mapping of biological system structure and 
function. Cell. 2015; 163:1796–1806. [PubMed: 26687363] 
10. Freeman J, et al. Mapping brain activity at scale with cluster computing. Nat. Methods. 2014; 
11:941–950. [PubMed: 25068736] 
11. Hunnicutt BJ, et al. A comprehensive thalamocortical projection map at the mesoscopic level. Nat. 
Neurosci. 2014; 17:1276–1285. [PubMed: 25086607] 
12. Hintiryan H, et al. The mouse cortico-striatal projectome. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:1100–1114. 
[PubMed: 27322419] 
13. Renier N, et al. Mapping of brain activity by automated volume analysis of immediate early genes. 
Cell. 2016; 165:1789–1802. [PubMed: 27238021] 
14. Ye L, et al. Wiring and molecular features of prefrontal ensembles representing distinct 
experiences. Cell. 2016; 165:1776–1788. [PubMed: 27238022] 
15. Kim Y , et al. Mapping social behavior-induced brain activation at cellular resolution in the mouse. 
Cell Rep. 2015; 10:292–305. [PubMed: 25558063] 
16. R Development Core Team. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation 
for Statistical Computing; 2008. 
17. Ahrens MB, et al. Brain-wide neuronal dynamics during motor adaptation in zebrafish. Nature. 
2012; 485:471–477. [PubMed: 22622571] 
18. Ng L, et al. An anatomic gene expression atlas of the adult mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 2009; 
12:356–362. [PubMed: 19219037] 
19. Lein ES, et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature. 2007; 
445:168–176. [PubMed: 17151600] 
Fürth et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
20. Mallat SG. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet representation. IEEE 
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1989; 11:674–693.
21. Suzuki S, Abe K. Topological structural analysis of digitized binary images by border following. 
Comput. Vis. Graph. Image Process. 1985; 30:32–46.
22. Friston, KJ., Penny, WD., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, SJ., Nichols, TE. Statistical parametric mapping : 
the analysis of functional brain images. Academic Press; 2006. 
23. Johnson GA, et al. Waxholm Space: An image-based reference for coordinating mouse brain 
research. NeuroImage. 2010; 53:365–372. [PubMed: 20600960] 
24. Allen Mouse Common Coordinate Framework. Technical white paper: Allen mouse common 
coordinate framework. 2015. Available at: http://help.brain-map.org/download/attachments/
2818171/MouseCCF.pdf
25. Mitra J, et al. A thin-plate spline based multimodal prostate registration with optimal 
correspondences. Signal-Image Technol. Internet-Based Syst. SITIS 2010 Sixth Int. Conf. On 7–
11. 2010; doi: 10.1109/SITIS.2010.12
26. Kaick, O van, Hamarneh, G., Zhang, H., Wighton, P. Contour correspondence via ant colony 
optimization. in. Proc. 15th Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications 
(PG’2007). 2007; 271
27. Bookstein FL. Principal warps: thin-plate splines and the decomposition of deformations. IEEE 
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1989; 11:567–585.
28. Quan T, et al. NeuroGPS-Tree: automatic reconstruction of large-scale neuronal populations with 
dense neurites. Nat. Methods. 2016; 13:51–54. [PubMed: 26595210] 
29. Wickersham IR, et al. Monosynaptic restriction of transsynaptic tracing from single, genetically 
targeted neurons. Neuron. 2007; 53:639–647. [PubMed: 17329205] 
30. Watabe-Uchida M, Zhu L, Ogawa SK, Vamanrao A, Uchida N. Whole-brain mapping of direct 
inputs to midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron. 2012; 74:858–873. [PubMed: 22681690] 
31. Pollak, Dorocic I., et al. A whole-brain atlas of inputs to serotonergic neurons of the dorsal and 
median raphe nuclei. Neuron. 2014; 83:663–678. [PubMed: 25102561] 
32. Jordan MI, Jacobs RA. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the EM algorithm. Neural Comput. 
1993; 6:181–214.
33. Graybiel AM. The basal ganglia and chunking of action repertoires. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 1998; 
70:119–136. [PubMed: 9753592] 
34. Wall NR, De La Parra M, Callaway EM, Kreitzer AC. Differential innervation of direct- and 
indirect-pathway striatal projection neurons. Neuron. 2013; 79:347–360. [PubMed: 23810541] 
35. Guo Q, et al. Whole-brain mapping of inputs to projection neurons and cholinergic interneurons in 
the dorsal striatum. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10
36. Sagar S, Sharp F, Curran T. Expression of c-fos protein in brain: metabolic mapping at the cellular 
level. Science. 1988; 240:1328–1331. [PubMed: 3131879] 
37. Graybiel AM, Moratalla R, Robertson HA. Amphetamine and cocaine induce drug-specific 
activation of the c-fos gene in striosome-matrix compartments and limbic subdivisions of the 
striatum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1990; 87:6912–6916. [PubMed: 2118661] 
38. Pich EM, et al. Common neural substrates for the addictive properties of nicotine and cocaine. 
Science. 1997; 275:83–86. [PubMed: 8974398] 
39. Zheng Z, et al. A complete electron microscopy volume of the brain of adult drosophila 
melanogaster. bioRxiv. 2017; doi: 10.1101/140905
40. Eichler K, et al. The complete connectome of a learning and memory centre in an insect brain. 
Nature. 2017; 548:175–182. [PubMed: 28796202] 
41. White JG, Southgate E, Thomson JN, Brenner S. The structure of the nervous system of the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 1986; 314:1–340. 
[PubMed: 22462104] 
42. Frey BJ, Dueck D, Helmstaedter M. Cellular-resolution connectomics: challenges of dense neural 
circuit reconstruction. Science. 2013; 10:501–507.
43. McKenna A, et al. Whole-organism lineage tracing by combinatorial and cumulative genome 
editing. Science. 2016; 353
Fürth et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
44. Kebschull JM, et al. High-throughput mapping of single-neuron projections by sequencing of 
barcoded RNA. Neuron. 2016; 91:975–987. [PubMed: 27545715] 
45. Lee JH, et al. Highly multiplexed subcellular RNA sequencing in situ. Science. 2014; 343:1360–
1363. [PubMed: 24578530] 
46. Larsson C, Grundberg I, Soderberg O, Nilsson M. In situ detection and genotyping of individual 
mRNA molecules. Nat Meth. 2010; 7:395–397.
47. Ståhl PL, et al. Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections by spatial 
transcriptomics. Science. 2016; 353:78–82. [PubMed: 27365449] 
48. Wickersham IR, Sullivan HA, Seung HS. Production of glycoprotein-deleted rabies viruses for 
monosynaptic tracing and high-level gene expression in neurons. Nat Protoc. 2010; 5:595–606. 
[PubMed: 20203674] 
49. Sena-Esteves M, Tebbets JC, Steffens S, Crombleholme T, Flake AW. Optimized large-scale 
production of high titer lentivirus vector pseudotypes. J. Virol. Methods. 2004; 122:131–139. 
[PubMed: 15542136] 
50. Gong S, et al. Targeting Cre recombinase to specific neuron populations with bacterial artificial 
chromosome constructs. J. Neurosci. 2007; 27:9817–9823. [PubMed: 17855595] 
51. Bodenhofer U, Kothmeier A, Hochreiter S. APCluster: an R package for affinity propagation 
clustering. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:2463–2464. [PubMed: 21737437] 
52. Edelstein A, Amodaj N, Hoover K, Vale R, Stuurman N. Computer control of microscopes using 
µManager. Curr. Protoc. Mol. Biol. 2001; doi: 10.1002/0471142727.mb1420s92
53. Tomer R, Ye L, Hsueh B, Deisseroth K. Advanced CLARITY for rapid and high-resolution 
imaging of intact tissues. Nat Protoc. 2014; 9:1682–1697. [PubMed: 24945384] 
54. Eddelbuettel D, et al. Rcpp: seamless R and C++ integration. J. Stat. Softw. 2011; 40:1–18.
55. R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2008. 
56. Urbanek, S. png: Read and write PNG images. 2013. Available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=png
57. Murrell P. Importing Vector Graphics: The grImport Package for R. J. Stat. Softw. 2009; 30:1–37. 
[PubMed: 21666874] 
58. Lang, D.T. & Team, the C. XML: Tools for Parsing and Generating XML Within R and S-Plus. 
2017. 
59. Adler, D., Murdoch, D. rgl: 3D Visualization Using OpenGL. 2017. Available at: https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=rgl
60. Feng D, Tierney L. Computing and Displaying Isosurfaces in R. J. Stat. Softw. 2008; 28
61. Wickham, H., Francois, R., Henry, L., Müller, K. dplyr: a grammar of data manipulation. 2017. 
Available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dplyr
62. Bradski G. The OpenCV library. Dr Dobbs J. Softw. Tools Prof. Program. 2000; 25:120–123.
63. Frigo M, Johnson SG. The Design and Implementation of FFTW3. Proc. IEEE. 2005; 93:216–231.
64. Guennebaud, G., Jacob, B. Eigen v3. 2010. Available at: http://eigen.tuxfamily.org
65. Holschneider, M., Kronland-Martinet, R., Morlet, J., Tchamitchian, P. A Real-Time Algorithm for 
Signal Analysis with the Help of the Wavelet Transform. In: Combes, PJ-M.Grossmann, PA., 
Tchamitchian, PP., editors. Wavelets. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1990. p. 286-297.
66. Huang L-K, Wang M-JJ. Image thresholding by minimizing the measures of fuzziness. Pattern 
Recognit. 1995; 28:41–51.
67. Scharr, H. Optimal operators in digital image processing. University of Heidelberg; 2000. 
68. Rezakhaniha R, et al. Experimental investigation of collagen waviness and orientation in the 
arterial adventitia using confocal laser scanning microscopy. Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 
2012; 11:461–473. [PubMed: 21744269] 
69. Zhang TY , Suen CY . A Fast Parallel Algorithm for Thinning Digital Patterns. Commun ACM. 
1984; 27:236–239.
70. Arganda-Carreras I, Fernández-González R, Muñoz-Barrutia A, Ortiz-De-Solorzano C. 3D 
reconstruction of histological sections: Application to mammary gland tissue. Microsc. Res. Tech. 
2010; 73:1019–1029. [PubMed: 20232465] 
Fürth et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
71. Wearne SL, et al. New techniques for imaging, digitization and analysis of three-dimensional 
neural morphology on multiple scales. Neuroscience. 2005; 136:661–680. [PubMed: 16344143] 
72. Rodriguez A, Ehlenberger DB, Dickstein DL, Hof PR, Wearne SL. Automated three-dimensional 
detection and shape classification of dendritic spines from fluorescence microscopy images. PLoS 
ONE. 2008; 3
73. Wang Y , Narayanaswamy A, Tsai C-L, Roysam B. A broadly applicable 3-D neuron tracing 
method based on open-curve snake. Neuroinformatics. 2011; 9:193–217. [PubMed: 21399937] 
74. Rose, A. Vision: Human and Electronic. Plenum Press; 1973. 
75. Preacher KJ, Kelley K. Effect size measures for mediation models: quantitative Strategies for 
communicating indirect effects. Psychol. Methods. 2011; 16:93–115. [PubMed: 21500915] 
76. Carpenter B, et al. Stan: A probabilistic programming language. J. Stat. Softw. Artic. 2017; 76:1–
32.
Fürth et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1. A reference atlas based on vector graphics
In cartography an object (a) is usually represented either in raster format (b) or vector 
format (c). Similarly, brain tissue (d) can be represented as raster images (e) or composed of 
geometric points and curves in a vector format (f). (g) Brain regions defined by polygons 
(green) are non-scalable compared to regions obtained from Non-Uniform Rational B-
splines, NURBS, (purple). In 3D reference atlases can be defined based on different 
geometrical primitives; (h) voxels can be reduced to primitive solids such as cubes, (i), 
polygon surfaces provide a more compact representation of the surface only, and (j) NURBS 
provide a representation of the surface based on smooth B-splines where intersections in the 
form of curves can be computed to an arbitrary cutting plane.
Fürth et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. A framework for standardizing and sharing neuroanatomical data
(a) Coronal section from D1-Cre mouse with rabies tracing targeted to the dorsal striatum, 
right hemisphere, green: rabies-EGFP, gray: bright-field. (b) Registration of atlas regions as 
well as segmentation of 1108 individual cell bodies, color coded according to region, light 
blue: striatum (STR), green: cortex (CTX). (c) Segmented rabies-EGFP labeled processes. 
(d) Quantification of segmented cell bodies. (e) Quantification of segmented processes. (f) 
Web-based vector representation of results registered to reference atlas. Scale bars: 500 µm 
(g) Interactive web-based annotation and navigation tools.
Fürth et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Method for segmentation and registration
(a) Wavelet multiresolution decomposition. (b) Original image tile. (c) Detail coefficients d1 
at a scale period of 1.28 µm. (d) Coefficients at d3 with scale period 10.24 µm. (e) 
Coefficients at d5 with scale period 40.96 µm. (f) Approximation coefficients. (g) Top: 
original 16-bit image tile. Bottom: segmented processes with their direction color-coded by 
hue as well as cell bodies as white circles. Scale bar: 500 µm (h) Top: segmentation result 
separated into cell bodies. Bottom: segmented process. (i) Comparison of binary 
segmentation on different detail coefficients to a human annotator (n = 273 cell bodies), red: 
cell bodies, blue: processes, gray horizontal line: SNR of 1:1, green dashed line: Rose 
criteria SNR 5:1 [33]. Error bars: 95% confidence intervals around the mean. (j) Image 
section of rabies-EGFP targeted to dorsal striatum in D2-Cre mouse, purple lines: 
transformed reference atlas, light blue grid: backward warp transform from atlas to original 
image. (k) Segmentation of brains section based on autofluorescence (vertical purple line). 
Pink shaded area indicates range of fluorescent intensity where cell bodies can be found. (l) 
Correspondence generation by principal components, red dots: intersection with contour, 
white dots: midpoints. (m) 32 correspondence points between original contour, gray, and 
reference atlas, red. (n) Forward warp transform, light blue, of segmentation output into 
stereotactic space.
Fürth et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Compatibility of the framework with different imaging systems
(a) Compatibility of the framework with different imaging systems, including widefield, 
confocal, and light-sheet fluorescent microscopy. Raw fluorescent images of rabies EGFP 
for (b) widefield (c) confocal, and (d) light-sheet microscopes. Segmentation result of both 
cell bodies (white circles) and processes (color coded according to angle) for (e) widefield 
(f) confocal, and (g) light-sheet images in (b–c). (h) Cortical neurons from a volume imaged 
with light-sheet microscopy in a Thy1-eYFP mouse. (i) Segmentation algorithm applied 
across z-stacks (2.5D filter). (j) Cell bodies individually segmented from fluorescent signal 
attributed to processes and fiber tracts.
Fürth et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Mapping of molecular identity and neuron types
(a) Section of a Lhx6::EGFP transgenic mouse (green) stained for parvalbumin (magenta, 
PV ALB::Cy5) and neuropeptide Y (NPY::Cy3). (b) Segmented Lhx6::EGFP positive cells 
and their co-expression with either PV ALB (magenta) or NPY (red), green denotes 
Lhx6::EGFP neurons negative for both NPY and PV ALB. (c) PV ALB::Cy5 positive cells 
and their co-expression with either Lhx6::EGFP (green) or NPY (red), no co-expression 
between PV ALB and NPY . (d) NPY::Cy3 positive cells (red) and co-expression with 
Lhx6::EGFP (green). (e) Laminar distribution of cell types in primary somatosensory cortex 
barrel field (SSp-bfd). (f) Definition of molecular signal at the single cell level (background, 
Fürth et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
"back.", n = 400 pixels, signal, "sign.", n = 16 pixels). (g) 9021 segmented cell bodies 
registered to 116 unique regions in the reference atlas and clustered into five discrete classes 
based on fluorescent intensity alone. (h) Clustering of cells based on fluorescent intensity 
alone into five discrete populations (green: Lhx6-EGFP+ only, magenta: PV ALB+ only, red: 
NPY+ only, yellow: NPY+/Lhx6-EGFP+ co-expressing, light blue: PV ALB+/Lhx6-EGFP+ 
co-expressing). Pie chart illustrates percentage overlap. (i) Clustering based on marker 
identity (top) compared to clustering based on neuroanatomical location for each cell 
(bottom). Lines represent single neurons mapping between the two types of clustering 
(molecular identity versus anatomical). Neurons are sorted in ascending order according to 
their relative fluorescent intensity in each cluster (top gradient on each cluster). Anatomical 
color-coding is shown in the representative section, −1.5 mm from bregma (scale bar: 1 
mm).
Fürth et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 6. Retrograde monosynaptic tracing of corticostriatal networks
(a) Reconstruction of inputs to Camk2a neurons in motor cortex by targeted injection of 
glycoprotein-deleted EGFP expressing EnvA pseudotyped rabies virus, SADΔG-
EGFP(EnvA). EGFP labeled neurons are color-coded based on anatomical location, see (l). 
(b) Cortical input to Camk2a neurons in motor cortex in orbital cortex (ORB), anterior 
cingulate area (ACA) and primary somatosensory area, SSp. Bottom: cortical overview of 
inputs from cortical cells roughly above −2.25 mm dorsoventral from the midline cortical 
surface.(c,d) Same as (a,b) but for Gad2 neurons in motor cortex. (e, f) D1+ medium spiny 
neurons in dorsal striatum. (g, h) D2+ medium spiny neurons in dorsal striatum. (i, j) 
Fürth et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Cholinergic interneurons in dorsal striatum.(k) llustration of rabies-EGFP labeling in 
individual brains (from five different transgenic Cre-lines) used for cell-type specific input 
comparisons. The brain in the very front is a composite where all neurons are combined (n = 
161,294 neurons across five mice). (l) Violin plot of monosynaptic inputs from major input 
regions (n = 4 mice for each genotype). (m) Laterality of cortical inputs in specific regions 
(ORB, ACA, SSp). (n) Layer-specificity of monosynaptic inputs from SSp. Colors as in (l). 
(o) Proportion of inputs from subcortical regions. Circles show individual mice. Colors as in 
(l). Error bars: +/− one standard error of measurement. Scale bars: 500 µm.
Fürth et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 7. Decoding motor behavior by immediate early gene activity
(a) Behavioural track tracing from open-field test in two mice injected with either cocaine or 
saline. (b) Coronal sections from the same mice showing the major steps of preprocessing 
before segmentation. (c) Close up on orbital cortex (ORB) and c-fos:Alexa488 staining. (d) 
Same field of view but DAPI. (e) Postfiltering segmentation steps include computing tensor 
structure and performing watershed-based segmentation. (f) Segmentation result, red, 
overlaid on images of c-fos, and (g) DAPI. (h) Whole-brain 3D reconstruction of same mice 
as in a–j. (i) Violin plot of cell count estimates obtained from ORB as shown in f–g, white 
circle marks median. (j) Normalized fluorescent intensity for 2135 individual nuclei in ORB. 
(k) Violin plot of variance σ2 estimates of fluorescent intensity in ORB, white circle marks 
median. (l) Cumulative distribution of locomotor velocity in open field across eight mice, 
gray line best fit four-parametric Weibull. (m) Meditational regression analysis for c-fos 
whole-brain data. (n) Velocity in open-field test as a function of cell count of c-fos positive 
nuclei of the orbital cortex in saline (coral) and cocaine (turquoise) treated mice, numbers 
indicate animal identification number. (o) Velocity as function of mean fluorescent c-fos 
intensity, thick gray line indicates regression line when autofluorescence is added as a 
covariate, gray area; 80% CI. (p) Gain control by input gain. (q) Output gain, or (r) Range 
compression. (s) Velocity as a function of DAPI standardized c-fos variance. (t) Posterior 
Fürth et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
estimates of the effect of cocaine on slope and intercept, error bars 70% (thick) and 80% 
(thin) CI. n = 4 mice per group (cocaine, saline).
Fürth et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 June 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript