Cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony between prefrontal 
parvalbumin interneurons supports behavioral adaptation during 
rule shift learning
Kathleen K.A. Cho1,2,3, Thomas J. Davidson2,4,5, Guy Bouvier4,5, Jesse D. Marshall6, Mark 
J. Schnitzer5,7, Vikaas S. Sohal1,2,3,*
1Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA USA
2Kavli Institute for Fundamental Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA USA
3Weill Institute for Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA USA
4Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA USA,
5Howard Hughes Medical Institute
6Department of Organismic & Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA USA
7Departments of Biology and Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA USA, University 
of California, San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Lane, San Francisco, CA 94143-0444
Abstract
Organisms must learn novel strategies to adapt to changing environments. Activity in different 
neurons often exhibits synchronization that can dynamically enhance their communication and 
might create flexible brain states that facilitate changes in behavior. We studied the role of gamma-
frequency (~40 Hz) synchrony between prefrontal parvalbumin interneurons, in mice learning 
multiple new cue-reward associations. V oltage indicators revealed cell type-specific increases of 
cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony between parvalbumin interneurons, when mice received 
feedback that previously learned associations were no longer valid. Disrupting this 
synchronization by delivering out-of-phase optogenetic stimulation caused mice to perseverate on 
outdated associations, an effect not reproduced by in-phase stimulation or out-of-phase stimulation 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Corresponding author: Vikaas S. Sohal. vikaas.sohal@ucsf.edu.
Author Contributions
K.K.A.C. and V .S.S. designed experiments and wrote the manuscript. K.K.A.C. performed all the experiments, except G.B. performed 
and analyzed the opto-tagging experiment. T.J.D. and K.K.A.C. set up the LED photometry rig and the dual-site TEMPO rig. 
K.K.A.C. generated AA V5-I12b-BG-DIO-eYFP. J.D.M. and M.J.S. provided guidance, advice, and feedback on the acquisition and 
analysis of TEMPO data. K.K.A.C. and V .S.S. analyzed the data.
Competing interests Statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Code availability
Scripts used to analyze dual-site TEMPO data are deposited at https://github.com/sohallab/dual-site-TEMPO
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2020 July ; 23(7): 892–902. doi:10.1038/s41593-020-0647-1.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
at other frequencies. Gamma synchrony was specifically required when new associations utilized 
familiar cues that were previously irrelevant to behavioral outcomes, not when associations 
involved novel cues, or for reversing previously learned associations. Thus, gamma synchrony is 
indispensable for reappraising the behavioral salience of external cues.
Reporting Summary
Further information on research design is available in the Life Sciences Reporting Summary 
linked to this article.
Introduction
Adapting to a changing environment requires detecting when behavioral strategies become 
outdated, then suppressing them and learning new ones. Deficits in this ability are hallmarks 
of prefrontal dysfunction in schizophrenia, classically measured by the Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Task (WCST)1,2. Like the WCST, many natural behaviors also involve rapidly 
learning novel strategies that use external cues which were previously unimportant. 
Mechanisms underlying this kind of adaptation remain unknown. Synchrony between 
activity in different neurons may regulate how those neurons interact with each other and 
their downstream targets3–13. Thus, by transiently enhancing interactions between specific 
neurons, synchrony could generate dynamic brain states that facilitate behavioral adaptation. 
Synchronized gamma-frequency (~30–80 Hz) activity occurs in the medial prefrontal cortex 
(mPFC) when rodents change behavior14–16. Interneurons, particularly those expressing 
parvalbumin (PV), generate synchronized gamma-frequency activity. However, it remains 
deeply controversial whether gamma synchrony between activity in different regions 
contributes to behavior or simply reflects increased PV interneuron recruitment17,18.
To address this, we studied a task involving the type of behavioral adaptation outlined 
above14,15,19–22. Each trial, mice choose between two bowls to find hidden food rewards 
(Fig. 1a,c). Each bowl contains different odor and texture cues. Mice first form an initial 
association between one cue and reward, then learn a “rule shift” from odor to texture (or 
vice versa). By contrast, during a “rule reversal” the type of rule (odor or texture) does not 
change, but the previously unrewarded cue now becomes rewarded (Fig. 1b). Unlike tasks 
requiring well-trained mice to switch between previously learned behaviors, in this task mice 
form new associations using familiar cues that were previously either irrelevant (rule shift) 
or predictive (rule reversal) with respect to behavioral outcomes.
Several observations indicate that rule shifts, but not rule reversals, depend on interneuron-
generated rhythmic mPFC activity. mPFC lesions disrupt rule shifts but not rule reversals19. 
Inhibiting prefrontal GABAergic interneurons similarly disrupts rule shifts but not initial 
associations or rule reversals14, and mutant mice with abnormal PV interneurons and 
deficient task-evoked mPFC gamma power have the same pattern of impairments14. In these 
mutant mice, stimulating prefrontal interneurons at gamma-frequencies (40–60 Hz) 
normalizes learning during rule shifts14. Thus, synchronized gamma-frequency mPFC 
activity can improve pathological behavior, although its role in normal behavior remains 
unclear. In fact, gamma-frequency stimulation of prefrontal interneurons improves sensory 
Cho et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
detection, attention, and social behavior22–24. However, none of these studies have directly 
addressed two fundamental questions: first, do these behavioral effects require 
synchronization across brain regions, or is enhancing rhythmic inhibition within local 
circuits sufficient? Second, even if artificially increasing synchrony improves behavior, is 
naturally-occurring synchrony necessary for normal behavior?
Here we explored how cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony between prefrontal PV 
interneurons contributes to learning during rule shifts. Gamma-frequency synchrony 
between PV interneurons in the left and right mPFC increases during rule shifts but not 
initial associations or rule reversals. Delivering weak gamma-frequency optogenetic 
stimulation out-of-phase between the left and right mPFC disrupts rule shifts, whereas in-
phase stimulation has no effect. This disambiguates the role of cross-hemispheric synchrony 
from that of rhythmic inhibition within a local circuit. Furthermore, perturbing cross-
hemispheric synchrony does not affect initial associations or rule reversals. Thus, there is a 
1:1 correspondence between whether a type of learning normally elicits increased gamma 
synchrony, and whether it is disrupted when that synchrony is perturbed.
Results
PV interneurons are recruited after rule shift errors.
We used bulk calcium imaging25,26 (fiber photometry) to explore how PV interneurons are 
normally recruited during rule shifts (Fig. 1d–f; Extended Data Fig. 1). We injected AA V1-
Syn-FLEX-GCaMP6f27 into the mPFC of PV-Cre mice and implanted an optical fiber to 
measure fluorescence (Fig. 1d). We examined activity time-locked to trial start, decisions 
(indicated by digging in one bowl), trial end (cessation of digging), and intertrial intervals 
(Fig. 1c). Supplementary videos 1–4 show task mechanics and time-locked photometry 
traces. On error trials, PV interneuron activity increased after decisions, i.e., when animals 
failed to receive rewards that would have been expected based on the previously learned 
association (Fig. 1e,f). PV activity did not increase following correct decisions (Fig. 1e,f). 
Because rule shifts are uncued, the absence of expected rewards signals that previously 
learned associations are no longer valid.
Cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony between PV interneurons increases after rule shift 
errors.
We examined whether this PV activity at critical behavioral timepoints was associated with 
gamma-frequency synchronization across sites using TEMPO (Trans-membrane Electrical 
Measurements Performed Optically). TEMPO utilizes bulk fluorescence from the voltage 
indicator Ace2N-4AA-mNeon (‘Ace-mNeon’) to monitor specific cell types28. We injected 
AA V into mPFC bilaterally to drive Cre-dependent Ace-mNeon expression in PV-Cre, Ai14 
mice and implanted optical fibers to measure Ace-mNeon and tdTomato fluorescence from 
PV interneurons in the left and right mPFC (Fig. 2a,b). Some mice were additionally 
injected with AA V1-Synapsin-tdTomato. tdTomato provides non-voltage-dependent 
reference signals. We measured signals from both prefrontal cortices (Fig. 2c) while mice 
learned an initial association and rule shift (Fig. 2d).
Cho et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fluorescence from genetically encoded voltage indicators is strongly contaminated by 
hemodynamic artifacts28,29 such that non-neuronal artifacts dominate conventional spectral 
analyses of these signals (power or coherence). Previous studies have addressed this using 
unsupervised methods to separate signal from noise in single-site recordings28,29. However, 
this fails to resolve gamma-frequency signals in freely-behaving mice. We overcame this 
barrier by leveraging dual-site recordings. To quantify zero-phase lag cross-hemispheric 
synchronization, we filtered all signals around a frequency of interest, then predicted the 
right Ace-mNeon signal using a linear model based on the left Ace-mNeon signal, left 
tdTomato signal, and right tdTomato signal (Fig. 2e). At every point in time, we compared 
this model’s performance to predictions from 100 models that used the actual tdTomato 
signals but time-shifted versions of the left Ace-mNeon signal. The tdTomato signals capture 
shared sources of noise (hemodynamic signals, movement artifacts, fiber bending, etc.) and 
the shuffled left Ace-mNeon signal matches the degrees of freedom. Thus, the degree to 
which the model based on actual signals outperforms those based on shuffled signals should 
reflect the amount of information the left Ace-mNeon signal carries about the right Ace-
mNeon signal, i.e., the (zero-phase lag) cross-hemispheric synchronization between 
prefrontal PV interneurons. This metric measures synchrony within a band centered around 
a frequency of interest, e.g., 30–50 Hz, which reflects synchrony ~40 Hz. Using this method, 
we analyzed the first five rule shift trials (Fig. 2f–i). (We hypothesize that these trials are 
crucial for learning and hence most likely to exhibit learning-related signals). Cross-
hemispheric PV interneuron synchronization at 30–50 Hz was significantly higher following 
errors than at baseline or following correct decisions (Fig. 2f–i). Notably, error-related 
synchrony was frequency-specific. For both lower (15–25 Hz) and higher (50–70 Hz) 
frequency bands, cross-hemispheric PV interneuron synchronization was similar at baseline, 
after correct decisions, and after errors.
Synchronization at arbitrary phase lags can be expressed as the sum of in-phase and 90 
degree out-of-phase components. Therefore, to explore potential synchrony at non-zero 
phase lags, we measured synchronization using left mPFC PV interneuron Ace-mNeon 
signals that were phase-shifted 90 degrees (Extended Data Fig. 2). In this case, there were no 
differences in 30–50 Hz synchronization at baseline vs. after correct or incorrect decisions 
(Extended Data Fig. 2); it is specifically the zero-phase lag component of gamma-frequency 
synchronization that increases following rule shift errors. We also measured voltage 
dynamics from somatostatin (Sst) interneurons using Sst-Cre mice (Fig. 2j–m; Extended 
Data Fig. 3a–d). Cross-hemispheric synchrony between prefrontal Sst interneurons did not 
increase following errors, even though, similar to PV interneurons, Sst interneuron 
photometry signals increase after rule shift errors (Extended Data Fig. 3e–i). Thus, the 
synchronization we found is specific for trial outcome, frequency, phase lag, and cell type. 
These are controls for nonspecific artifacts related to movement, respiration, hemodynamics, 
etc.
Increased gamma synchrony also occurs in LFP recordings
To validate that TEMPO tracks aspects of network activity that can also be measured in 
other ways, we simultaneously recorded TEMPO signals and local field potentials (LFPs) 
from the left and right mPFC during rule shifts. Zero-phase lag synchronization computed 
Cho et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
from left vs. right mPFC LFPs reproduced our key TEMPO finding: ~40 Hz cross-
hemispheric synchrony increases for errors during rule shifts, compared to correct trials (Fig. 
2n–p). Notably, in LFP recordings, lower frequency synchrony also increased (Fig. 2p), 
possibly reflecting the fact that TEMPO is cell-type specific, whereas LFP recording is not. 
Thus, within PV interneurons, increases in ~40 Hz synchrony may be most prominent, 
whereas other cell types may generate LFP synchrony at lower frequencies.
Increased gamma synchrony is specific for rule shifts
Next we examined whether increased gamma synchrony is specific for rule shifts, or more 
generically reflects error detection or reinforcement. First, the increases in PV interneuron 
photometry signals that follow rule shift errors do not occur after initial association errors 
(Fig. 3a–d). Second, TEMPO showed no differences between cross-hemispheric PV 
interneuron gamma synchrony on correct vs. incorrect trials during initial associations (Fig. 
3g) or rule reversals (Fig. 3h). Thus, 30–50 Hz synchrony was significantly higher after rule 
shift errors than following errors during initial associations (Fig. 3i) or rule reversals (Fig. 
3j). Notably, this difference was specific for 30–50 Hz.
Both rule shifts and rule reversals are uncued. Therefore, the nature of the rule change, and 
any associated differences in synchrony, should only become apparent over time. To confirm 
that this is the case, we analyzed trial-by-trial differences in gamma synchrony for incorrect 
vs. correct trials, during rule shifts vs. rule reversals. Indeed, the tendency for gamma 
synchrony to be higher on incorrect vs. correct trials during rule shifts but not rule reversals 
was difficult to discern during the first two trials of a rule change, then became significantly 
larger over the next three trials (Extended Data Fig. 4k).
Note: we quantified synchrony using the fraction of 1-second time windows for which the 
R2 between actual TEMPO signals exceeds that for 99% of time-shuffled signals. This 
bootstrapped metric is sparse in time. Therefore, we obtained a meaningful estimate of 
synchrony by averaging over many 1-second windows per trial and all trials of a given type, 
e.g., time windows following errors including the following intertrial intervals (ITIs). As a 
consequence, our estimate of synchrony has low temporal resolution and cannot pinpoint 
specific moments of high synchrony. Rather we can only say that synchrony tended to be 
higher during a set of time windows, e.g., those following errors. This makes it difficult to 
link moments of high synchrony to specific behaviors, e.g., digging or immobility. 
Nevertheless, when we restricted our analysis to time windows which fell during ITIs, cross-
hemispheric PV interneuron gamma synchrony was higher during ITIs following rule shift 
errors than ITIs following initial association or rule reversal errors (Extended Data Fig. 4l). 
This indicates that increased gamma synchrony was not just a direct byproduct of specific 
movements or events occurring during the trial period, but rather reflects feedback from the 
prior trial.
Now, we cannot fully rule out that feedback from the prior trial alters ITI behavior in ways 
that mediate increased gamma synchrony. However, we consider this unlikely because 
behavior is not grossly different during ITIs following rule shift errors vs. those after initial 
association errors. We scored videos of ITI behavior. These were of limited quality, because 
the camera was focused on the test cage, not the holding cage, and the holding cage was 
Cho et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
partially covered by a translucent lid. Therefore, our analysis only assessed whether mice 
moved from one part of the cage to another. The fraction of timepoints spent moving was 
almost identical during ITIs following rule shift (RS) or initial association (IA) errors (RS: 
68% moving vs. IA: 70% moving; Extended Data Fig. 4m–n).
We also analyzed PV photometry signals during ITIs (Extended Data Fig. 1f). During rule 
shifts, these were higher for ITIs following errors than correct trials. Notably, this was not 
the case during initial associations. Thus, increases in PV interneuron activity and gamma 
synchrony that occur after RS errors persist into the subsequent ITI, when mice are in 
holding cages and task-related cues are absent. Finally, while we could not pinpoint specific 
moments of high synchrony as outlined above, we did characterize behavior at the time of 
dF/F peaks, both during trials (Extended Data Fig. 1g), and ITIs (Extended Data Fig. 1h–i). 
During trials, peak PV interneuron activity was not consistently associated with any specific 
behavior, and could occur while mice were digging before removal of the non-chosen bowl, 
or after bowl removal while mice were digging, moving, or immobile. During ITIs, peak PV 
interneuron activity occurred during both movement and immobility, and the fraction of 
peaks associated with each condition did not differ between ITIs following IA vs. RS errors. 
Thus, peaks in PV activity are not driven by specific behaviors, and differences in PV 
activity during ITIs following RS vs. IA errors do not reflect gross differences in movement.
Perturbing gamma synchrony disrupts learning during rule shifts
To directly test the functional significance of increased synchrony following rule shift errors, 
we would like to artificially manipulate cross-hemispheric gamma synchronization between 
PV interneurons. We previously showed that 40 Hz stimulation of interneurons delivered in-
phase across the left and right mPFC does not impair rule shifts in normal mice14. Critically, 
whereas others have examined behavioral effects of 40 Hz stimulation of PV interneurons 
using light powers ~5–7 mW22,24, we used ~1 mW. Light power is not the only determinant 
of optogenetic efficacy, as ChR2 expression varies. Nevertheless, another study that 
stimulated PV interneurons at 40 Hz using ~1 mW observed only slight changes in 
excitatory neuron firing rates23. Thus, one strategy would be using modest optogenetic 
stimulation to entrain PV interneurons in the left vs. right mPFC with different phase 
relationships, to determine whether these patterns, which should elicit similar changes in 
levels of inhibition but differentially affect cross-hemispheric synchronization, produce 
similar vs. distinct behavioral effects.
Based on this, we performed two experiments. First, stimulating prefrontal PV interneurons 
at 40 Hz but out-of-phase between hemispheres disrupts rule shift learning (Fig. 4a–e). Mice 
receiving out-of-phase stimulation took significantly longer to learn compared to either 
control (eYFP-expressing) mice, or to themselves on a different day with no stimulation. 
Because odor-texture pairings vary randomly from trial to trial, during rule shifts mice can 
make perseverative and random errors. Perseverative errors occur when the originally-
rewarded cue and the newly-rewarded cue are in different bowls, and the mouse chooses the 
originally-rewarded one. Random errors occur when the originally-rewarded and newly-
rewarded cues are in the same bowl, but the mouse chooses the other bowl. Out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation specifically increased perseverative errors (Fig. 4b,c; Extended Data Fig. 5a–
Cho et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
f). Next, a different cohort of PV-Cre mice underwent: a) out-of-phase 20 Hz stimulation, b) 
out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation, and c) in-phase 40 Hz stimulation, delivered to PV 
interneurons in the left vs. right mPFC during rule shifts (Fig. 4d). Out-of-phase 20 Hz 
stimulation did not disrupt rule shifts (Fig. 4e; compare to Fig. 2d). Again, out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation markedly disrupted rule shift learning and increased perseveration, but when 
we delivered in-phase 40 Hz stimulation the next day, the same mice again learned normally 
(Fig. 4e; Extended Data Fig. 5g–i). This phenomenon was specific to PV interneurons: 
stimulating Sst interneurons out-of-phase (at 20 or 40 Hz) did not affect rule shifts 
(Extended Data Fig. 6).
To clarify how these patterns of optogenetic stimulation affect microcircuit activity, first we 
recorded from mPFC using silicon probes in head-fixed PV-Cre mice injected with virus for 
Cre-dependent ChR2 expression during 40 Hz PV interneuron stimulation (using the same 
light power as our behavioral experiments). Putative PV interneurons were single units with 
fast-spiking waveforms and reliable short latency responses to stimulation (8/10 fast-spiking 
units met our criteria)30. Stimulation strongly entrained “optogenetically-tagged” PV 
interneurons (Extended Data Fig. 7). Stimulation also entrained regular-spiking neurons, but 
only modestly suppressed their overall spike rate (4.87 ± 0.35 vs. 4.07 ± 0.33 spikes/sec 
before vs. during stimulation, respectively; n = 237 cells). A second experiment recorded 
LFPs from mPFC in freely moving PV-Cre mice injected with virus to drive Cre-dependent 
ChR2 expression, while delivering 40 Hz optogenetic stimulation, either in- or out-of-phase 
between hemispheres (Extended Data Fig. 8). (We also recorded while delivering light in 
control ChR2-negative mice). Both patterns produced a slight bump ~40 Hz and suppressed 
high frequency (60–200 Hz) activity (relative to baseline recordings without stimulation). 
This suppression, which likely reflects the ability of optogenetically-evoked inhibition to 
reduce overall mPFC activity, was most prominent >150 Hz and similar in magnitude for in- 
vs. out-of-phase stimulation.
Perturbing gamma synchrony does not affect initial associations or rule reversals
Given that gamma synchrony increased during rule shifts but not initial associations or rule 
reversals, we wondered whether it is specifically necessary for rule shifts, or whether 
perturbing gamma synchrony would also disrupt these other types of learning. To examine 
this, we stimulated prefrontal PV interneurons at 40 Hz, but out-of-phase across the two 
hemispheres during initial associations or rule reversals. In contrast to its ability to disrupt 
rule shifts, out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation did not affect learning during initial associations 
or rule reversals (Fig. 4f–h). Unlike initial associations or rule reversals, rule shifts require 
mice to stop utilizing one set of cues, and to instead learn a new association which 
reappraises the behavioral significance of cues that were previously irrelevant to the 
outcome of each trial. In fact, once mice learned an initial association and rule shift, out-of-
phase 40 Hz stimulation did not disrupt the ability of mice to revert to the original rule 
(Extended Data Fig. 9). For this, we switched back to the original rule (i.e., initial 
association) after mice learned a rule shift, and only delivered out-of-phase stimulation 
while switching back to the original rule. This provides additional confirmation that 40 Hz 
synchrony is specifically required for behavioral reappraisal, not generic forms of learning 
or switching.
Cho et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Gamma synchrony fails to increase in mutant mice that exhibit perseveration
Finally, to evaluate how changes in gamma synchrony might contribute to, or be targeted to 
alleviate, pathological phenotypes, we exploited Dlx5/6+/− mice, which have abnormal PV 
interneurons, deficient task-evoked gamma oscillations, and perseveration during rule 
shifts14. The error-related photometry signals normally observed in wild-type (Dlx5/6+/+) 
PV interneurons during rule shifts were significantly attenuated in Dlx5/6 mutants (Fig. 
5e,f). By contrast, PV interneuron photometry signals following correct decisions were 
unaltered (Fig. 5c,d). In contrast to normal mice, in mutants 30–50 Hz cross-hemispheric 
synchronization was not higher after rule shift errors vs. correct decisions (Fig. 5g–i; 
Extended Data Fig. 10b,i–l). Correspondingly, the normal increase in 30–50 Hz cross-
hemispheric PV interneuron synchronization following rule shift errors (relative to correct 
trials) was significantly attenuated in Dlx5/6+/− mice compared to wild-types (Fig. 5j). This 
difference was specific for frequency (30–50 Hz vs. 15–25 or 50–70 Hz), task (rule shift vs. 
initial association or rule reversal), and cell type (PV vs. Sst interneurons) (Fig. 5j; Extended 
Data Fig. 10q–s; Fig. 5k–n; Extended Data Fig. 10c,d,m–p).
Only in-phase gamma-frequency PV interneuron stimulation rescues perseveration
We previously found that 40 Hz stimulation of mPFC interneurons rescues learning during 
rule shifts in Dlx5/6 mutant mice14. Our new results suggest that gamma synchrony between 
prefrontal PV interneurons during the early portions of a rule shift may be particularly 
critical for this effect. We tested this three ways. First, restricting optogenetic stimulation to 
only PV interneurons and just the first five rule shift trials was sufficient to rescue learning 
in Dlx5/6 mutants (Fig. 6a–c; Extended Data Fig. 10e,f). Second, 20 or 40 Hz stimulation of 
PV interneurons that was out-of-phase between hemispheres did not improve rule shift 
learning in mutants (Fig. 6d–f; Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). However, consistent with our 
earlier findings14, in-phase 40 Hz stimulation rescued their rule shift performance (Fig. 6f; 
Extended Data Fig. 10e–h). (Importantly, without optogenetic stimulation, rule shift 
performance in Dlx5/6 mutants does not improve over three consecutive days of testing14). 
These results show that gamma-frequency activity in prefrontal PV interneurons is not 
sufficient to facilitate rule shifts unless it is precisely synchronized across hemispheres. 
Finally, in-phase, 40 Hz stimulation bilateral stimulation of Sst interneurons did not improve 
rule shift performance in Dlx5/6 mutants (Extended Data Fig. 6l–p).
A pro-cognitive pharmacological intervention specifically increases gamma synchrony
Optogenetic stimulation might be viewed as ‘artificially’ altering gamma synchrony. 
Therefore, we explored whether manipulations engaging endogenous physiological 
mechanisms also increase gamma synchrony and elicit similar behavioral effects. For this, 
we used low (sub-anxiolytic and sub-sedative) doses of the benzodiazepine clonazepam. We 
previously14 showed that clonazepam (0.0625 mg/kg, I.P.), like 40 Hz optogenetic 
stimulation, normalizes rule shifts in Dlx5/6+/− mice (we also reproduced that here: Fig. 7a–
c). Now, using TEMPO, we found that clonazepam increased cross-hemispheric gamma 
synchrony between prefrontal PV interneurons in Dlx5/6+/− mice (Fig. 7d,e,h). This 
specifically occurred after rule shift errors (not at baseline period or after correct decisions) 
(Fig. 7f,g) and for 30–50 Hz (Fig. 7h).
Cho et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Discussion
These results directly address long-standing controversies about the functional significance 
of synchronization across neuronal structures31–33,7,8,11,18. We found a double dissociation 
between therapeutic or disruptive effects elicited by in-phase vs. out-of-phase stimulation. 
This confirms that certain aspects of behavior depend on cross-hemispheric gamma 
synchrony between PV interneurons, not just rhythmic inhibition in local circuits. 
Furthermore, in both stimulation and TEMPO experiments, gamma synchrony was not 
involved in generic aspects of learning, decision-making, or flexibility, but rather specifically 
contributed to behavioral reappraisal: the formation of new associations based on familiar 
cues that were previously irrelevant to behavioral outcomes. This study focuses on normal 
behavior, but experiments in Dlx5/6 mutant mice independently validate this relationship 
between gamma synchrony and behavioral reappraisal. Notably, this type of learning occurs 
without extensive prior training, differentiating it from the switching between well-learned 
behaviors that is commonly studied in mice. Learning that reappraises the salience of 
external cues is critical for adaptation to changing environments.
Extracting synchrony from genetically encoded voltage indicators
Several controls confirm that our method measures task-dependent changes in gamma-
frequency synchronization between PV interneurons. Increased synchrony after errors is 
specific for: 1) the gamma band, 2) rule shifts, and 3) PV interneurons. If the increased 
synchrony we observed was driven by non-neuronal artifacts, kinetics of Ace-mNeon, etc., 
then it should have been present in both PV and Sst interneurons. If increased synchrony 
was driven by nonspecific aspects of PV neuron activity (as opposed to gamma-frequency 
activity), synchrony should have increased in other frequency bands. And if this increased 
synchrony was driven by nonspecific aspects of our task, e.g., generic reward or error 
signals, movements mice make after errors, etc., it should have been observed during rule 
reversals and initial associations (as well as rule shifts). Finally, increased gamma synchrony 
was only observed for in-phase Ace-mNeon signals, not when one Ace-mNeon signal was 
shifted 90 degrees out-of-phase (~6 ms). This confirms that this increased ability to predict 
one Ace-mNeon signal using the other reflects synchrony between these signals, not the fact 
that they have similar autocorrelations or higher-order statistics.
In addition to the negative controls described above, clonazepam enhanced gamma 
synchrony. This represents a positive control that our method is sensitive to manipulations 
known to enhance PV interneuron output and gamma oscillations.
LFPs and signals from genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVIs) measure different 
things and are contaminated by distinct noise sources. Thus, there is not likely to be a 1:1 
correspondence between them. Nevertheless, we used LFPs to validate the essence of our 
GEVI findings: cross-hemispheric LFPs exhibit increased gamma-frequency (~40 Hz) 
synchrony after incorrect trials, relative to correct ones, during rule shifts. The precise 
relationship between LFPs and GEVI signals remains an important topic for future studies.
Our current approach does not measure absolute levels of synchrony, because the variation 
in measurements across mice is high, making it necessary to perform some kind of within-
Cho et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
mouse normalization. As a result, we cannot exclude the possibility that baseline gamma 
synchrony is elevated in Dlx5/6 mutant mice (relative to normal, Dlx5/6+/+ mice), such that 
the failure of these mice to increase gamma synchrony during rule shifts reflects a ceiling 
effect. Another limitation is that while GEVIs are ideal for measuring mesoscale patterns of 
activity within sparse cell types, our approach does not reveal how individual neurons might 
encode information via the phase of their firing. Finally, while it may be possible to detect 
action potentials by specifically imaging the soma of neurons, bulk measurements from 
voltage indicators should be dominated by subthreshold signals, for two reasons. First, 
spikes are very brief compared to subthreshold oscillations. Second, most neuronal surface 
area is located in the dendrites (~96% for PV interneurons34), and spike propagation into PV 
interneuron dendrites is poor35.
The significance of zero-phase lag synchronization
Increases in gamma synchrony occurred for simultaneously recorded Ace-mNeon signals, 
but not when one signal was shifted 90 degrees out-of-phase. This indicates that the 
population-level phase lag is near zero. This may seem puzzling, because synaptic 
communication between the hemispheres involves time delays that are commonly assumed 
to produce phase differences. In fact, zero-phase lag synchrony commonly emerges in 
bidirectionally coupled oscillators, even when they communicate with significant delays. 
Consider two phase oscillators, representing the hemispheres, which emit output (spikes) 
upon completing each cycle. Assume this output reaches the other oscillator after a quarter-
cycle delay (~6 ms for 40 Hz), perturbing the phase of the post-synaptic oscillator 
proportional to the cosine of its current phase. (Such coupling is not hard to imagine: 
suppose that output arriving when excitatory neuron firing approaches its peak recruits more 
excitation, accelerating the next cycle, whereas output arriving later, when inhibitory 
neurons have been recruited, mainly increases inhibition, delaying the next cycle). For weak 
coupling, this system exhibits zero-phase lag synchrony, even though these two oscillators 
communicate with a quarter cycle delay.
Another potential concern is about the function of zero-phase lag synchrony. We have 
previously shown that inputs modulated at gamma frequency transmit greater information to 
downstream neurons than non-rhythmic inputs9. Suppose that the left and right mPFC 
converge on a common downstream target. Then, when they are synchronized with zero-
phase lag, inputs from the left and right mPFC hemispheres will summate in downstream 
neurons in a manner preserving the gamma-frequency modulation within each individual 
signal. By contrast, when activity is out-of-phase between hemispheres, the rhythmic 
modulation of their summated input will be degraded, compromising information 
transmission to downstream targets. Thus, cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony may 
potentiate prefrontal outputs to other regions that serve to update the behavioral salience of 
external cues. Indeed, we observed that 40 Hz optogenetic stimulation of PV interneurons 
strongly entrained regular spiking (RS) units. An important future direction is determining 
whether specific classes of prefrontal pyramidal neurons, projecting to particular targets, 
exhibit increased gamma synchrony during rule shifts. This may be true for projections to 
dorsomedial striatum, nucleus accumbens, and/or mediodorsal thalamus, because these 
Cho et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
projections are important for cognitive flexibility15,36,37 and PV interneurons strongly 
inhibit mPFC neurons which project bilaterally to these structures38.
Whatever the function of cross-hemispheric synchrony is, it is specific for synchrony ~40 
Hz, as optogenetically disrupting 20 Hz synchronization did not disrupt rule shift 
performance. The simplest explanation for this is that out-of-phase 20 Hz stimulation does 
not prevent PV interneurons from synchronizing at frequencies ~40 Hz. Indeed, the 
previously described coupled oscillators which normally synchronize at 40 Hz continue to 
do so even when receiving simulated out-of-phase stimulation at half their natural frequency 
(i.e., 10 ms pulses at 20 Hz).
Optogenetically perturbing synchrony
Optogenetic stimulation and inhibition are commonly used to test the causal significance of 
specific patterns of neural activity. However, optogenetic manipulations induce firing that is, 
by definition, ‘artificial.’ Several observations indicate that our optogenetic results inform 
normal circuit function, rather than simply inducing non-physiological states. First, we used 
modest optogenetic stimulation that we and others found did not markedly alter overall 
levels of circuit activity. Second, we delivered exactly the same pattern of stimulation to 
each PFC, either in- or out-of-phase, and behavior was completely normal during in-phase 
stimulation. Thus, the disruptive effects of out-of-phase stimulation cannot be attributed to 
excessive PV interneuron firing or hypersynchrony within one hemisphere. Rather, the 
disruption of rule shifts must reflect the induction of artificial (nonzero) phase differences.
Finally, in-phase stimulation, which does not affect behavior in normal mice, rescues rule 
shift performance in mutant mice. This same effect can be produced using sub-anxiolytic 
and sub-sedative doses of clonazepam14, which also restore increases in gamma synchrony 
normally seen in wild-type mice after rule shift errors. This suggests that in-phase 
stimulation is functionally similar to clonazepam, which acts by enhancing endogenous PV 
interneuron output. Thus in-phase stimulation may reproduce physiologically and 
therapeutically-relevant states, rather than creating aberrant ones. In this way, optogenetic 
experiments reveal how specific aspects of normally-occurring activity (zero-phase lag 
cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony between PV interneurons) contribute to behavior.
Clinical relevance
Disruptions in PV interneurons and gamma synchrony39–41 are hypothesized to contribute to 
cognitive deficits at the core of schizophrenia42–43. Deficits in PV interneurons and gamma 
synchrony may also contribute to cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease44 and driving 
synchronized gamma oscillations may ameliorate behavioral and neuropathological aspects 
of this disorder45–46. Our findings suggest that interventions that restore gamma oscillations 
may treat cognitive deficits, but only when they involve the proper cell types and reproduce 
endogenous patterns of synchronization.
In individuals at high risk for psychosis, deficits in the ability to learn new associations 
based on previously irrelevant cues are strongly correlated with impairments in insight, the 
capacity to appraise and modify distorted beliefs about anomalous experiences47. Impaired 
insight plays a central role in the development and maintenance of psychosis48. This 
Cho et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
suggests that gamma synchrony may be relevant to psychosis itself (not just cognitive 
dysfunction) in schizophrenia.
METHODS
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by Vikaas Sohal (vikaas.sohal@ucsf.edu).
Mice
All animal care, procedures, and experiments were conducted in accordance with the NIH 
guidelines and approved by the Administrative Panels on Laboratory Animal Care at the 
University of California, San Francisco. Mice were group housed (2–5 siblings) in a 
temperature-controlled environment (22–24°C), had ad libitum access to food and water, and 
reared in normal lighting conditions (12-h light-dark cycle), until rule shift experiments 
began. Dlx5/6 mice (Wang et al., 2010, Cho et al., 2015) were backcrossed to C57Bl/6 mice 
for at least 6 generations and then crossed to the Cre driver lines: PV-Cre (The Jackson 
Laboratory), Sst-Cre (The Jackson Laboratory), and Ai14 (The Jackson Laboratory). Both 
male and female adult mice (10–20 weeks at time of experiment) were used in the 
behavioral experiments. All experiments were done using Dlx5/6+/− mice and their age-
matched Dlx5/6+/+ littermates (crossed to PV-Cre, Sst-Cre, and/or Ai14 lines). All 
experiments that contained different groups of mice, e.g., Dlx5/6+/+ and Dlx5/6+/− mice or 
ChR2-expressing and eYFP-expressing mice, were performed blind to genotype and/or virus 
injected. This was the case for all experiments except for the experiments shown in Figure 3 
(in which all mice were Dlx5/6+/+, PV-Cre, Ai14) and Figures 6a–c (in which all mice were 
Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre and expressed ChR2). All subjects were randomly assigned to different 
experimental conditions used in this study. Animals included in each experiment are 
described in Supplementary Table 1.
When we initially began experiments, we were uncertain whether the Ai14-driven tdTomato 
fluorescence would be comparable in magnitude to the mNeon fluorescence, so as noted 
below, we also injected a subset of animals with virus to drive additional tdTomato 
expression. It turned out that the reference fluorophore signals were similar in magnitude / 
adequate in both cases, so in later cohorts, we no longer injected additional tdTomato virus.
Cloning of viral constructs
To produce AA V5-I12b-BG-DIO-eYFP (2.1E+ 13 vg/mL), we introduced MluI and BamHI 
compatible sticky ends to the DlxI12b-BG sequence with PCR. The pAA V-EF1α-DIO-eYFP 
(Addgene) was then cut with MluI/BamHI and ligated to the PCR insert to exchange the 
EF1α promoter for DlxI12b-BG. Virus was packaged by Virovek (Hayward, CA) with 
serotype AA V5.
To produce AA V1-CAG-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon (2.23E+13 vg/mL), we received pAA V-
CAG-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon from Mark J. Schnitzer (Stanford University). Virus was 
packaged by Virovek with serotype AA V1.
Cho et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Surgery
Male and female mice were anaesthetized using isoflurane (2.5% induction, 1.2–1.5% 
maintenance, in 95% oxygen) and placed in a stereotaxic frame (David Kopf Instruments). 
Body temperature was maintained using a heating pad. An incision was made to expose the 
skull for stereotaxic alignment using bregma and lambda as vertical references. The scalp 
and periosteum were removed from the dorsal surface of the skull and scored with a scalpel 
to improve implant adhesion. Viruses were infused at 100–150 nL/min through a 35-gauge, 
beveled injection needle (World Precision Instruments) using a microsyringe pump (World 
Precision Instruments, UMP3 UltraMicroPump). After infusion, the needle was kept at the 
injection site for 5–10 min and then slowly withdrawn. After surgery, mice were allowed to 
recover until ambulatory on a heated pad, then returned to their homecage.
For behavioral experiments using Cre-dependent optogenetic opsins, mice were injected 
bilaterally in the mPFC, near the border between the prelimbic and infralimbic cortices (1.7 
anterior-posterior (AP), ±0.3 mediolateral (ML), and −2.75 dorsoventral (DV) millimeters 
relative to bregma) with 1 μL of AA V5-EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP (7.4E+ 12 vg/mL; UNC 
Virus Core) or 1 μL of AA V5-I12b-BG-DIO-ChR2-eYFP or 1 μL of AA V5-EF1α-DIO-
eYFP (6E+ 12 vg/mL; UNC VIrus Core) per hemisphere, to selectively target neurons 
expressing Cre. Dlx5/6, Sst-Cre mice were injected bilaterally in the mPFC (1.7 (AP), ±0.3 
(ML), and −2.75 (DV)) with 1 μL of AA V5- EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP or 1 μL of AA V5-
EF1α-DIO-eYFP per hemisphere. After injection of virus, a 200/240 μm (core/outer) 
diameter, NA=0.22, dual fiber-optic cannula (Doric Lenses, DFC_200/240–
0.22_2.3mm_GS0.7_FLT) was slowly inserted into mPFC until the tip of the fiber reached a 
DV depth of −2.25. Implants were affixed onto the skull using Metabond Quick Adhesive 
Cement (Parkell). We waited at least 5 weeks after injection before behavioral experiments 
to allow for virus expression. For experiments using LFP recordings, standard-tip 0.4 MΩ-
impedance tungsten microelectrodes (Microprobes) were used. The coordinates were 
adjusted to accommodate experiments whereby LFP electrodes were affixed to the fiber 
implant and protruded 200–300 μm beyond the fiber tip. A common reference screw was 
implanted into the cerebellum: −5 (AP), 0 (ML) and a ground screw was implanted at −5 
(AP), −3 (ML). After affixing the electrodes in place using Metabond (Parkell), connections 
were made to the headstage of a multi-channel recording system (Pinnacle Technology, 
Inc.).
For behavioral experiments used in photometry experiments, mice were injected unilaterally 
at 4 depths (DV: −2.75, −2.5, −2.25, −2.0) at the following AP/ML for mPFC: 1.7 AP, 0.3 
ML with 4 × 0.2 μL of AA V2/1-Syn-FLEX-GCaMP6f-WPRE-SV40 (2.28E+ 13 vg/mL; 
UPenn Virus Core). After injection of virus, a 400/430 μm (core/outer) diameter, NA=0.48, 
multimode fiber implant (Doric Lenses, MFC_400/430–0.48_2.8mm_ZF2.5_FLT) was 
slowly inserted into the mPFC until the tip of the fiber reached a DV depth of −2.25. We 
waited at least 4 weeks after injection before behavioral experiments to allow for virus 
expression.
For behavioral experiments used in dual-site TEMPO experiments, mice were injected 
bilaterally at 3 depths (DV: −2.5, −2.25, −2.0) at the following AP/ML for mPFC: 1.7 AP, 
±0.3 (ML) with 3 × 0.2 μL of AA V1-CAG-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon (Virovek) or with the 
Cho et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
addition of 0.1 μL per depth of AA V2-Syn-tdTomato (1.23E+ 12 vg/mL; SignaGen 
Laboratories). After injection of virus, a 400/430 μm (core/outer) diameter, NA=0.48, 
multimode fiber implant (Doric Lenses, MFC_400/430–0.48_2.8mm_ZF1.25_FLT) was 
slowly inserted into the mPFC at a 12° angle using the following coordinates: 1.7 (AP), 
±0.76 (ML), −2.13 (DV). We waited at least 5 weeks after injection before behavioral 
experiments to allow for virus expression.
For in vivo awake head-fixed recordings, PV-Cre mice were injected unilaterally in the 
mPFC, near the border between the prelimbic and infralimbic cortices (1.7 anterior-posterior 
(AP), +0.3 mediolateral (ML), and −2.75 dorsoventral (DV) millimeters relative to bregma) 
with 1 μL of AA V5-EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP (7.4E+ 12 vg/mL; UNC Virus Core), to 
selectively target neurons expressing Cre. At least 3 weeks later, mice were implanted with a 
circular head bar at least 2 weeks before the day of the recording. The animals were 
anesthetized with 2% isoflurane, the scalp was removed and the skull was disinfected with 
alcohol and povidone iodine and scored with bone scraper. The edge of the skin was glued to 
the skull and the metal head bar was sterilized and mounted using dental cement Relyx 
Unicem 2 automix (3M ESPE). The head bar was stereotactically mounted with the help of 
an inclinometer (Digi-Key electronics 551–1002-1-ND). The inclinometer was instrumental 
in calibrating the angle of the two axes of the head bar in relation to the sagittal and medio-
lateral axes of the head. Following the bar implantation, black dental cement was used to 
build a recording well surrounding the recording site. The surface of the skull above the 
right PFC was not covered with dental cement but coated with a thin layer of transparent 
cyanoacrylate glue. Animals were injected subcutaneously with 0.1mg/kg buprenorphine 
and checked daily after the head bar surgery. For at least 4 days before recording, mice were 
habituated to head fixation within the recording setup.
On the day before recording, mice were anesthetized with 2% isoflurane and the layer of 
cyanoacrylate glue covering the recording sites was drilled off. The dura was not removed, 
and the exposed brain was kept moist with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF; 140mM 
NaCl, 5mM KCl, 10mM d-glucose, 10mM HEPES, 2mM CaCl2, 2mM MgSO4, pH 7.4). 3 
out of 4 animals were recorded a second time at least 8 hours after the first recording. The 
electrode was moved from 0.3 ML, 1.5 AP to 0.3 ML, 1.7 AP, so more anterior. The depth of 
the recorded units varied between 1.78 to 2.42 mm from pia.
Rule shift task
This cognitive flexibility task was described in Cho et al., 2015. Briefly, mice are singly-
housed and habituated to a reverse light/dark cycle and food intake is restricted until the 
mouse is 80–85% of the ad libitum feeding weight. At the start of each trial, the mouse was 
placed in its home cage to explore two bowls, each containing one odor and one digging 
medium, until it dug in one bowl, signifying a choice. As soon as a mouse began to dig in 
the incorrect bowl, the other bowl was removed, so there was no opportunity for “bowl 
switching.” (Digging is defined as the sustained displacement of the media within a bowl). 
The bait was a piece of a peanut butter chip (approximately 5–10 mg in weight) and the 
cues, either olfactory (odor) or somatosensory and visual (texture of the digging medium 
which hides the bait), were altered and counterbalanced. All cues were presented in small 
Cho et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
animal food bowls (All Living Things Nibble bowls, PetSmart) that were identical in color 
and size. Digging media were mixed with the odor (0.01% by volume) and peanut butter 
chip powder (0.1% by volume). All odors were ground dried spices (McCormick garlic and 
coriander), and unscented digging media (Mosser Lee White Sand Soil Cover, Natural 
Integrity Clumping Clay cat litter).
After mice reached their target weight, they underwent one day of habituation. On this day, 
mice were given ten consecutive trials with the baited food bowl to ascertain that they could 
reliably dig and that only one bowl contained food reward. All mice were able to dig for the 
reward. Mice do not undergo any other specific training before being tested on the task. 
Then, on Days 1 and 2 (and in some cases, on additional days as well), mice performed the 
task (this was the testing done for experiments). After the task was done for the day, the 
bowls were filled with different odor-medium combinations and food was evenly distributed 
among these bowls and given to the mouse so that the mouse would disregard any 
associations made earlier in the day.
Mice were tested through a series of trials. The determination of which odor and medium to 
pair and which side (left or right) contained the baited bowl was randomized (subject to the 
requirement that the same combination of pairing and side did not repeat on more than 3 
consecutive trials) using http://random.org. On each trial, while the particular odor-medium 
combination present in each of the two bowls may have changed, the particular stimulus 
(e.g., a particular odor or medium) that signaled the presence of food reward remained 
constant over each portion of the task (initial association and rule shift). If the initial 
association paired a specific odor with food reward, then the digging medium would be 
considered the irrelevant dimension. The mouse is considered to have learned the initial 
association between stimulus and reward if it makes 8 correct choices during 10 consecutive 
trials. Each portion of the task ended when the mouse met this criterion. Following the initial 
association, the rule shift portion of the task began, and the particular stimulus associated 
with reward underwent an extra-dimensional shift. For example, if an odor had been 
associated with reward during the initial association, then a digging medium was associated 
with reward during the rule shift portion of the task. The mouse is considered to have 
learned this extra-dimensional rule shift if it makes 8 correct choices during 10 consecutive 
trials. When a mouse makes a correct choice on a trial, it is allowed to consume the food 
reward before the next trial. Following correct trials, the mouse is transferred from the home 
cage to a holding cage for about 10 seconds while the new bowls were set up (intertrial 
interval). After making an error on a trial, a mouse was transferred to the holding cage for 
about 2 minutes (intertrial interval). All animals performed the initial association in a similar 
number of trials (average: 10–15 trials). We were blind to genotype and/or virus injected. 
Videos were manually scored with a temporal resolution of 1 second.
For analyses (described below), we chose the onset of digging as the time of a decision for 
two reasons. First, as noted above, once a mouse began to dig in the incorrect bowl, the other 
(correct) bowl was removed. Second, only upon the commencement of digging could a 
mouse determine whether reward was present in the chosen bowl and obtain feedback about 
whether or not it had made a correct choice. We regarded the end of digging (i.e., the 
beginning of a sustained period of not digging) as the end of the trial because immediately 
Cho et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
following this timepoint, the mouse was removed from the test cage and placed in a holding 
cage for the intertrial interval.
Rule reversal task
This cognitive flexibility task was described in Cho et al., 2015. Similar to the mechanics of 
the rule shift task described above, following the initial association, the rule reversal portion 
of the task began, and the particular stimulus associated with reward underwent an intra-
dimensional shift. For example, if an odor had been associated with reward during the initial 
association, then the previously uncued odor was associated with reward during the rule 
reversal portion of the task. The mouse is considered to have learned this intra-dimensional 
rule reversal if it makes 8 correct choices during 10 consecutive trials.
Mice that were involved in both the rule shift and rule reversal tasks were randomly assigned 
the order of tasks over the course of two days.
In vivo optogenetic stimulation
In-phase ChR2 stimulation: A 473 nm blue laser (OEM Laser Systems, Inc.) was coupled to 
the dual fiber-optic cannula (Doric Lenses) through a 200 μm diameter dual fiber-optic 
patchcord with guiding socket (Doric Lenses, Inc.) and 1×2 intensity division fiber-optic 
rotary joint (Doric Lenses, Inc.), and adjusted such that the final light power was ~0.5 mW 
total, summed across both fibers and averaged over light pulses and the intervening periods. 
A function generator (Agilent 33500B Series Waveform Generator) connected to the laser 
generated a 40 Hz train of 5 ms pulses.
Out-of-phase ChR2 stimulation: The stereotaxically implanted dual fiber-optic cannula was 
coupled to two separate 473 nm blue lasers via a dual fiber-optic patch cord with fully-
separated optical paths that were each connected to separate fiber-optic rotary joints. Again, 
light power was adjusted such that the final output was ~0.5 mW across both fibers. 
Different function generators connected to each laser, in order to generate out-of-phase 
stimulation. For the experiments shown in Figures 4d–e and Figures 6d–f, these two function 
generators were not connected in any way, except that we verified (by eye) that the light 
pulses were delivered at non-overlapping times, producing phase differences between 72 and 
288 degrees. For the experiments shown in Figures 4a–c and Figures 4f–h, one function 
generator was triggered at the time when the other function generator switched off, so the 
phase difference was exactly 72 degrees. Stimulation was generated using either a 20 Hz 
train of 10 ms pulses or a 40 Hz train of 5 ms pulses.
For all experiments in which we delivered optogenetic stimulation to behaving mice, light 
stimulation began once mice reached the 80% criterion during the initial association portion 
of the task. Mice then performed three additional initial association trials with the light 
stimulation before the rule shift portion of the task began. The light stimulation did not alter 
the performance or behavior of the mice during these three extra trials of the initial 
association. Experiments were performed blind to genotype and/or virus injected.
Cho et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Drug administration
Clonazepam at indicated concentrations (0.0625 mg/kg, Sigma) was diluted in the vehicle 
solution (PBS with 0.5% methylcellulose) then injected (I.P.) in a volume of 0.01 ml/kg 30 
min prior to behavioral testing.
Fiber photometry design and recording
The photometry apparatus and analysis was based on Lerner et al., 2015, with some 
modifications described below.
A fiber-optic stub (400 μm core, NA=0.48, low-autofluorescence fiber; Doric Lenses, 
Quebec, Canada, MFC_400/430–0.48_2.3mm_ZF2.5_FLT) was stereotaxically implanted in 
mPFC. A single fiber was used to both deliver excitation light and collect emitted 
fluorescence from the recording site. A matching fiber-optic patch cord (Doric Lenses, 
MFP_400/430/1100–0.48_2m_FC-ZF2.5) provided a light path between the animal and a 
miniature, permanently-aligned optical bench, or ‘mini cube’ (Doric Lenses, FMC2_AF405-
GCaMP_FC). Two excitation LEDs (470 nm ‘blue’ and 405 nm ‘violet’, Thorlabs M470F1 
and M405FP1) were connected to the ‘mini cube’ by a patch cord (200 μm core, NA = 0.39, 
Doric Lenses) and controlled by an LED driver (Thorlabs DC4104), and connected to an 
RX-8 real-time processor (Tucker Davis Technologies). Excitation light is delivered at 470 
nm to stimulate GCaMP6f fluorescence in a Ca2+-dependent manner and at 405 nm, an 
excitation isosbestic wavelength for GCaMP6f, to perform ratiometric measurements of 
GCaMP6f activity, correcting for bleaching and artifactual signal fluctuations. Blue 
excitation was sinusoidally-modulated at 210 Hz and violet excitation was modulated at 330 
Hz. The GCaMP6f emission signal was collected through a patchcord (Doric Lenses, 
MFP_600/630/LWMJ-0.48_0.5m_FC-FC) and focused onto a femtowatt photoreceiver 
(Newport, Model 2151) with a lensed, permanently-aligned FC coupler (Doric Lenses). 
Each of the two modulated signals generated by the two LEDs was independently recovered 
using standard synchronous demodulation techniques implemented on the RX-8 real-time 
processor. The commercial software Synapse (Tucker-Davis Technologies) running on a PC 
was used to control the signal processor, write data streams to disk, and to record 
synchronized video from a generic infrared USB webcam (Ailipu Technology, Shenzhen, 
China, ELP-USB100W05MT-DL36). Files were then exported for analysis to MATLAB 
(Mathworks).
For every experiment, the far end of the patch cord and the 2.5 mm diameter zirconia optical 
implant ferrule were cleaned with isopropanol before each recording, then securely attached 
via a zirconia sleeve.
LFP recording
Data was recorded at 1 kHz and analog signals were digitized by a multichannel real-time 
signal processor (Tucker-Davis Technologies, Alachua, Florida; RX-8). The commercial 
software Synapse (Tucker-Davis Technologies) running on a PC was used to control the 
signal processor, write data streams to disk, and to record synchronized video from a generic 
infrared USB webcam (Ailipu Technology, Shenzhen, China, ELP-USB100W05MT-DL36). 
Channels shared a common reference (cerebellum). In one experiment, LFPs were recorded 
Cho et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
in freely moving mice in their home cage, either when optogenetic stimulation was absent 
(baseline period) or during delivery of optogenetic stimulation to prefrontal PV interneurons. 
Patterns of optogenetic stimulation and methods for expressing ChR2 in PV interneurons 
were the same as in behavioral experiments (see above). In another experiment, we recorded 
LFPs from the left and right mPFC while mice performed the rule shift task.
In vivo awake head-fixed recordings
Extracellular recordings from PFC were performed using opto silicon probes: ASSY-37 H4 
(acute 32 channel H4 opto-electrode, 1 shank, 9 mm length). The recording electrodes were 
controlled with Luigs & Neumann micromanipulators and stained with DiI lipophilic dyes 
(Life Technologies) for post hoc identification of the electrode track. We recorded the 
signals at 30 kHz using an Intan system (RHD2000 USB Interface Board, Intan 
Technologies). Automated spike sorting was then carried out using KiloSort (https://
github.com/cortex-lab/Kilosort) by manual curation of the units using Phy (http://phy-
contrib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/template-gui/). Light power was adjusted such that the final 
output was ~0.25 mW when delivering 40 Hz, 5ms pulses for DIO-ChR2 activation. Units 
were identified and all following analysis was carried out using routines written in Matlab. 
We excluded units with refractory period violations greater than 1%. Neurons were 
considered as putative PV neurons when their firing increased and was significantly different 
from the baseline activity (P < 0.01) during 5 ms blue light pulse activation at 1Hz. Regular 
spiking (RS) and fast spiking (FS) neurons were identified based on spike shape. The 
average peristimulus time histogram of PV cell responses was calculated from minute 1 
through 4 of the 40 Hz, 5 ms ChR2 activation.
Dual-site voltage-sensor photometry (TEMPO)
High-bandwidth bandwidth time-varying bulk fluorescence signals were measured at each 
recording site using the TEMPO technique described in Marshall et al., 2016, with some 
modifications as described below.
Optical apparatus
A fiber-optic stub (400 μm core, NA=0.48, low-autofluorescence fiber; Doric Lenses, 
MFC_400/430–0.48_2.8mm_ZF1.25_FLT) was stereotaxically implanted in each targeted 
brain region. A matching fiber-optic patch cord (Doric Lenses, MFP_400/430/1100–
0.48_2m_FC-ZF1.25) provided a light path between the animal and a miniature, 
permanently-aligned optical bench, or ‘mini-cube’ (Doric Lenses, FMC5_E1(460–
490)_F1(500–540)_E2(555–570)_F2(580–680)_S). A single fiber was used to both deliver 
excitation light to and collect emitted fluorescence from each recording site. The far end of 
the patch cord and each 1.25mm diameter zirconia optical implant ferrule were cleaned with 
isopropanol before each recording, then securely attached via a zirconia sleeve.
The mini-cube optics allow for the simultaneous monitoring of two spectrally-separated 
fluorophores, with dichroic mirrors and cleanup filters chosen to match the excitation and 
emission spectra of the voltage sensor and reference fluorophores in use (‘mNeon’ voltage 
sensor channel: Ex. 460–490 nm, Em. 500–540 nm; ‘Red’ control fluorophore: Ex. 555–570 
nm, Em. 580–680 nm). The mini-cube optics are sealed and permanently aligned and all 5 
Cho et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ports (sample to animal, 2 excitation lines, 2 emission lines) are provided with matched 
coupling optics and FC connectors to allow for a modular system design.
Excitation light for each of the two color channels was provided by a fiber-coupled LED 
(Center wavelengths 490 nm and 565 nm, Thorlabs M490F3 and M565F3) connected to the 
mini-cube by a patch cord (200 μm, NA=0.39; Thorlabs M75L01). Using a smaller diameter 
for this patch cord than for the patch cord from the cube to the animal is critical to reduce 
the excitation spot size on the output fiber face and thus avoid cladding autofluorescence. 
LEDs were controlled by a 4-channel, 10kHz-bandwidth current source (Thorlabs DC4104). 
LED current was adjusted to give a final light power at the animal (averaged during 
modulation, see below) of approximately 200 μW for the mNeon channel (460–490 nm 
excitation), and 100 μW for the Red channel (555–570 nm excitation).
Each of the two emission ports on the mini-cube was connected to an adjustable-gain 
photoreceiver (Femto, Berlin, Germany, OE-200-Si-FC; Bandwidth set to 7kHz, AC-
coupled, ‘Low’gain of ~5×10^7 V/W) using a large-core high-NA fiber to maximize 
throughput (600 μm core, NA=0.48 (Doric lenses, MFP_600/630/LWMJ-0.48_0.5m_FC-
FC).
Note that, for dual-site recordings, two completely independent optical setups were 
employed, with separate implants, patch cords, mini-cubes, LEDs, photoreceivers, and lock-
in amplifiers.
Modulation and lock-in detection
At each recording site, each of the two LEDs was sinusoidally modulated at a distinct carrier 
frequency to reduce crosstalk due to overlap in fluorophore spectra. The corresponding 
photoreceiver outputs were then demodulated using lock-in amplification techniques. A 
single instrument (Stanford Research Systems, SR860) was used to generate the modulation 
waveform for each LED and to demodulate the photoreceiver output at the carrier frequency. 
To further reduce cross-talk between recording sites, distinct carrier frequencies were used 
across at each site (mNeon site 1: 2 kHz; mNeon site 2: 2.5 kHz; Red site 1: 3.5 kHz; Red 
site 2: 4 kHz). Low-pass filters on the lock-in amplifiers were selected to reject noise above 
the frequencies under study (cascade of 4 Gaussian FIR filters with 84 Hz equivalent noise 
bandwidth; final attenuation of signals are approximately −1dB (89% of original magnitude) 
at 20 Hz, −3dB (71% of original magnitude) at 40 Hz, and −6dB (50% of original 
magnitude) at 60 Hz).
TEMPO recording
Analog signals were digitized by a multichannel real-time signal processor (Tucker-Davis 
Technologies, Alachua, Florida; RX-8). The commercial software Synapse (Tucker-Davis 
Technologies) running on a PC was used to control the signal processor, write data streams 
to disk, and to record synchronized video from a generic infrared USB webcam (Ailipu 
Technology, Shenzhen, China, ELP-USB100W05MT-DL36). Lock-in amplifier outputs 
were digitized at 3 kHz.
Cho et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Histology and imaging
All mice used for behavioral and imaging experiments were anesthetized with Euthasol and 
transcardially perfused with 30 mL of ice-cold 0.01 M PBS followed by 30 ml of ice-cold 
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Brains were extracted and stored in 4% PFA for 24 h at 
4 °C before being stored in PBS. 50 μm and 70 μm slices were obtained on a Leica VT100S 
and mounted on slides. All imaging was performed on an Olympus MVX10, Nikon Eclipse 
90i, Zeiss LSM510, and Zeiss Axioskop2. Representative images for all figures are enlarged 
in Supplementary Figure 1. We verified that all mice had virus-driven expression and optical 
fibers located in the mPFC.
Fiber photometry analysis
For calculating peak GCaMP6f signals during activity time-locked to task-related events: the 
beginning of each trial, the time of each decision (indicated by the mouse beginning to dig in 
one bowl), and the beginning and end of each intertrial interval, a least-squares linear fit was 
applied to the 405 nm control signal to align it to the 470 nm signal. The dF/F time series 
was then calculated for each behavioral session as: ((470 nm signal - fitted 405 nm signal) / 
fitted 405 nm signal). For points of interest (e.g., time of decision), peak dF/F was calculated 
as the most extreme dF/F value at time 0–4 seconds (positive or negative) for PV-Cre 
experiments and at time 4–8 seconds (positive or negative) for Sst-Cre experiments. 
Experiments were performed, scored, and analyzed blind to genotype.
LFP analysis
To analyze changes in power in our LFP data, we computed spectrograms from completely 
non-overlapping time windows and compared unnormalized power (measured in log units) 
during 40 Hz optical stimulation to the power during the baseline period.
To quantify zero-phase lag synchrony between LFPs recorded from the left and right mPFC, 
we calculated the square of the real part of the wavelet cross spectrum, obtained from the 
wcoherence function in Matlab.
TEMPO analysis
Analysis of TEMPO data was facilitated using the signal processing toolbox and MATLAB 
(Mathworks), using the following functions: fir1, filtfilt, and regress. All four signals during 
the entire time series of the experiment (left mNeon, left tdTomato, right mNeon, right 
tdTomato) were first filtered around a frequency of interest. To quantify zero-phase lag 
cross-hemispheric synchronization between left and right mNeon signals, we performed a 
linear regression analysis to predict the right mNeon signal using the following inputs: left 
mNeon signal, left tdTomato signal, and right tdTomato signal. The goodness of fit is 
compared to how well the regression works if the left mNeon signal is shuffled, i.e., if we 
use a randomly chosen segment of the original left mNeon signal, instead of the segment 
recorded at the same time as the right mNeon signal. R2 values are calculated as a function 
of time using one second segments and compared to the 99th percentile of the distribution of 
R2 values obtained from 100 fits to randomly-shuffled data. The fraction of timepoints at 
which the R2 obtained from actual data exceeds the 99th percentile of the R2 values obtained 
Cho et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
from shuffled data was used to measure zero-phase lag synchronization between the left and 
right mNeon signals.
We performed this analysis at the time of the decision (e.g., immediately following the 
beginning of digging in one bowl, until the end of digging), and smoothed measurements 
over a 5 minute time window following the time point of interest. We also confirmed that 
our TEMPO findings did not change when we did not smooth over any window but instead 
simply averaged R2 values from the start of the trial until the end of the subsequent intertrial 
interval. To measure 90 degree out-of-phase synchronization, the filtered left mNeon signal 
was simply advanced 90 degrees relative to the right mNeon signal, before performing the 
analysis described above. Experiments were performed, scored, and analyzed blind to 
genotype. Note: mice that did not make both correct and incorrect decisions in the first 5 
trials of a task could not be used for analyses which compared activity on correct vs. 
incorrect decisions.
Data analyses and statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 7 (GraphPad) and detailed in the 
corresponding figure legends. Quantitative data are expressed as the mean and error bars or 
shaded areas represent the standard error of the mean (s.e.m.). Group comparisons were 
made using one-way repeated measures or two-way ANOV A followed by Tukey’s or 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests to control for multiple comparisons, respectively. Paired and 
unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were used to make single-variable comparisons or with 
Welch’s correction for unequal variance. Similarity of variance between groups was 
confirmed by the F test. Measurements were taken from distinct samples. P = *, < 0.05; **, 
< 0.01; ***, < 0.001; ****, < 0.0001. Comparisons with no asterisk had P > 0.05 and were 
considered not significant. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes 
but our sample size choice was based on previous studies (Cho et al., 2015) and are 
consistent with those generally employed in the field. Data distribution was assumed to be 
normal but this was not formally tested.
Extended Data
Cho et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 1: 
Photometry signals from PV interneurons and behavior during rule shifts in mice used for 
photometry experiments. a, PV-Cre mice had a unilateral FLEX-GCaMP6f injection and 
fiber-optic implant in mPFC for photometry (scale bar, 100 μm). b, Rule-shift (RS) 
performance of PV-Cre mice (n = 8) used for photometry experiments. c, Numbers of 
perseverative (P) or random (R) errors during the rule shift of PV-Cre mice (n = 8). d, 
Averaged PV interneuron photometry signal (dF/F), aligned to the start of each trial, for 
correct (white line) vs. incorrect trials (black line; n = 8). e, Averaged PV interneuron 
photometry signal (dF/F), aligned to the start of the intertrial interval (ITI), for correct (white 
line) vs. incorrect trials (black line; n = 8) for the first ten seconds of ITIs. f, Peak dF/F 
during the entire intertrial interval (ITI), usually lasting around two minutes. Signals are 
significantly higher on incorrect rule shift trials than correct rule shift trials (n = 8 mice; two-
way ANOV A; main effect of outcome: F1,14 = 26.53, ***P = 0.0001; task X outcome 
Cho et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
interaction: F1,14 = 7.47, *P = 0.016; RS correct versus incorrect, post hoc t(14) = 5.58, ***P 
= 0.0001; IA correct versus incorrect, post hoc t(14) = 1.71, P = 0.22). g, Mouse behavior 
scored at the time of the peak dF/F signal during rule shift error trials (n = 31 error trials of 8 
mice). h, Mouse behavior scored at the time of the peak dF/F signal during initial 
association error ITI (n = 21 error ITIs of 8 mice). i, Mouse behavior scored at the time of 
the peak dF/F signal during rule shift error ITI (n = 31 error ITIs of 8 mice). Data are shown 
as means (b, c); error bars (b, c) and shading (d, e) denote s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A 
followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used. Comparisons were not significant 
unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 2: 
Cross-hemispheric synchrony of PV interneurons at non-zero phase lag. a, Schematic: 
analysis to measure out-of-phase synchrony. In this case, one Ace-mNeon is signal is shifted 
90 degrees out-of-phase relative to the other signals, before following the procedure outlined 
in Figure 2e. b–d, Out-of-phase 30–50 Hz synchrony (n = 12 mice) did not differ between 
the baseline period and RS correct trials (two-way ANOV A; frequency X condition 
interaction: F2,33 = 0.16, P = 0.86; post hoc t(33) = 1.35, P = 0.56), baseline period and RS 
incorrect trials (two-way ANOV A; frequency X condition interaction: F2,33 = 0.06, P = 0.94; 
post hoc t(33) = 0.05, P > 0.99), or correct and incorrect trials (two-way ANOV A; frequency 
X condition interaction: F2,33 = 0.05, P = 0.95; post hoc t(33) = 1.53, P = 0.41). Two-way 
ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used. Comparisons were not 
significant.
Cho et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 3: 
Learning during rule shifts in mice used for TEMPO measurements from Sst interneurons, 
and photometry signals from Sst interneurons during rule shifts. a, Sst-Cre, Ai14 mice had 
bilateral AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± AA V-Syn-tdTomato injections and fiber-optic 
implants in mPFC. b, Representative images of tdTomato (red) and Ace-mNeon (green) 
fluorescence in a coronal section of mPFC (left), alongside a high power image (right). Scale 
bars: 100 μm and 25 μm, respectively. c, Rule-shift (RS) performance of Sst-Cre, Ai14 mice 
(n = 5) used for dual-site TEMPO imaging. d, Number of perseverative (P) and random (R) 
errors during the rule shift of Sst-Cre, Ai14 mice (n = 5). e, Sst-Cre mice had a unilateral 
FLEX-GCaMP6f injection and fiber-optic implant in mPFC for photometry (scale bar, 100 
μm). f, Rule-shift (RS) performance of Sst-Cre mice (n = 4) used for photometry 
experiments. g, Numbers of perseverative (P) or random (R) errors during the rule shift Sst-
Cre mice (n = 4). h, Averaged Sst interneuron photometry signal (dF/F), aligned to the time 
of dig, which indicates a decision, for correct (white line) vs. incorrect trials (purple line; n = 
4). i, Peak dF/F during the 4–8 sec following the decision (this was the time at which peak 
Sst activity occurred). Sst interneuron photometry signals are significantly higher on 
incorrect than correct trials (n = 4 mice; two-tailed, paired t-test; t(3) = 4.65, *P = 0.02). Data 
are shown as means (c, d, f, g, h); error bars (c, d, f, g) and shading (h) denote s.e.m.
Cho et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 4: Cross-hemispheric synchrony between prefrontal PV interneurons for 
various frequency bands and types of trials.
a, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± AA V-Syn-tdTomato 
injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: Initial association 
(IA) followed by rule shift (RS) or rule reversal (RR); Day 2: IA followed by the rule change 
(RS or RR) that was not performed on Day 1. b, During learning of the IA that preceded the 
RS, synchrony was not different after correct decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 7 
mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.51, P = 0.48; frequency X 
condition interaction: F2,18 = 0.20, P = 0.82). c, During learning of this IA, synchrony was 
not different after incorrect decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 7 mice; two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.39, P = 0.54; frequency X condition interaction: 
F2,18 = 0.07, P = 0.94). d, IA performance was not different across days (n = 7 mice; two-
tailed, paired t-test; t(6) = 1.29, P = 0.25). e, There was no difference in synchrony after 
correct trials during learning of the IA on Day 1 vs. 2 (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; main 
effect of day: F1,18 = 0.02, P = 0.89; frequency X condition interaction: F2,18 = 1.48, P = 
0.26). f, There was no difference in synchrony after incorrect trials during learning of the IA 
Cho et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
on Day 1 vs. 2 (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: F1,18 = 3.05, P = 0.10; 
frequency X condition interaction: F2,18 = 0.03, P = 0.97). g, During the RR, synchrony was 
not different after correct decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 7 mice; two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.28, P = 0.60; frequency X condition interaction: 
F2,18 = 1.24, P = 0.31). h, During the RR, synchrony was not different after incorrect 
decisions vs. the baseline period (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: 
F1,18 = 0.09, P = 0.77; frequency X condition interaction: F2,18 = 0.30, P = 0.74). i, 
Synchrony after correct decisions did not differ between the IA vs. RS (n = 7 mice; two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.13, P = 0.73; frequency X condition interaction: 
F2,18 = 1, P = 0.39). j, Synchrony after correct decisions did not differ between the RR vs. 
RS (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.16, P = 0.70; 
frequency X condition interaction: F2,18 = 2.55, P = 0.11). k, The plot shows the average 
gamma synchrony on correct vs. incorrect trials, during the first 2 (‘early’) or next 3 (‘late’) 
trials of a rule shift (RS) or rule reversal (RR). In order to average together values from 
different mice (n = 7), each synchrony value was computed relative to the average gamma 
synchrony measured during the first 5 RS and RR trials from the same mouse. We 
performed ANOV A on the gamma synchrony from each of the first 5 trials during a rule 
shift (RS) or rule reversal (RR), including the following factors and interaction terms: mouse 
(F6,59 = 1.72, P = 0.13), type of rule change (RS vs. RR) (F1,59 = 3.74, P = 0.06), correct vs. 
incorrect trial outcome (F1,59 = 2.64, P = 0.11), an interaction of correct-incorrect X RS-RR 
(F1,59 = 11.12, **P = 0.0015), and an interaction of correct-incorrect X RS-RR X early vs. 
late trials (i.e. first 2 vs. next 3 trials) (F1,59 = 4.28, *P = 0.043). l, Following errors, 
synchrony during the intertrial interval (ITI) was specifically higher in the 30–50 Hz band 
during the RS than during the IA (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; condition X frequency 
interaction: F4,36 = 3.217, *P = 0.023; 30–50 Hz post hoc t(6) = 3.55, *P = 0.036) or RR 
(two-way ANOV A; 30–50 Hz post hoc t(6) = 3.97, *P = 0.022). m, Mouse behavior scored 
during the initial association error ITI for the first 5 IA dual-site TEMPO trials (n = 10 error 
ITIs of 8 mice). n, Mouse behavior scored during the rule shift error ITI for the first 5 RS 
dual-site TEMPO trials (n = 17 error ITIs of 8 mice). There is no difference in seconds of 
movement between IA and RS (two-tailed, paired t-test; t(6) = 0.52, P = 0.62) nor in seconds 
of not moving between IA and RS (two-tailed, paired t-test; t(6) = 0.56, P = 0.59). Two-way 
ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used in panels b–c and e–j, l. 
Comparisons were not significant unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5: Types of errors during rule shifts (RS) in the presence of various forms of 
optogenetic stimulation in PV-Cre mice.
a, d, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-eYFP or AA V-DIO-ChR2 injections and 
fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation 
during the rule shift (RS); Day 2: no stimulation. b, e, Representative images showing mPFC 
expression of eYFP (b) or ChR2-eYFP (e) (scale bar, 100 μm). c, f, Optogenetic stimulation 
increases perseverative errors in ChR2-expressing mice (n = 5) compared to eYFP-
expressing (n = 5 mice) controls (two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: F1,8 = 20.8, **P = 
0.0018; main effect of virus: F1,8 = 8.96, *P = 0.017; day X virus interaction: F1,8 = 14.89, 
**P = 0.0048). There is no change in random errors (two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: 
F1,8 = 0, P > 0.99; main effect of virus: F1,8 = 0, P > 0.99; day X virus interaction: F1,8 = 
0.89, P = 0.37). c, Light delivery does not affect the number of perseverative or random 
errors in eYFP-expressing controls (perseverative: post hoc t(8) = 0.50, P > 0.99; random: 
post hoc t(8) = 0.67, P > 0.99). f, Optogenetic stimulation of PV interneurons on Day 1 
increased the number of perseverative errors compared to no stimulation on Day 2 (post hoc 
t(8) = 5.95, ***P = 0.0007), but does not affect random errors (post hoc t(8) = 0.67, P > 0.99). 
g, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP injections and fiber-optic implants in 
mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-phase 20 Hz stimulation; Day 2: out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation; Day 3: in-phase 40 Hz stimulation. h, Representative image showing mPFC 
ChR2 expression (scale bar, 100 μm). i, Out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 2) increases 
perseverative errors but does not affect random errors, relative to out-of-phase 20 Hz 
stimulation (Day 1) or in-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 3) (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; 
main effect of day: F2,16 = 13.5, ***P = 0.0004; Day 1 vs. Day 2 perseverative: ***P = 
0.0002, Day 2 vs. Day 3 perseverative: ****P = 0.00003, Day 1 vs. Day 3 perseverative: P > 
Cho et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
0.99; Day 1 vs. Day 2 random: P > 0.99, Day 2 vs. Day 3 random: P > 0.99, Day 1 vs. Day 3 
random: P > 0.99). Two-way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were 
used.
Cho et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6: Behavior and types of errors during rule shifts (RS) in the presence of 
various forms of optogenetic stimulation in Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre and Sst-Cre mice.
a, e, Sst-Cre mice had bilateral injections of AA V-DIO-eYFP (a, ‘Sst-eYFP’) or AA V-DIO-
ChR2-eYFP (e, ‘Sst-ChR2’) along with fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: 
Day 1: no light stimulation; Day 2: out-of-phase 20 Hz stimulation; Day 3: out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation. b, Representative image showing mPFC ChR2 expression (scale bar, 100 
μm). c, g, Light delivery did not affect performance in either Sst-eYFP (c; n = 4 mice) or 
Sst-ChR2 (g; n = 5) mice (two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: F2,14 = 2.53, P = 0.12; 
Cho et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
main effect of virus: F1,7 = 0.01, P = 0.92; day X virus interaction: F2,14 = 0.59, P = 0.57). d, 
Sst-eYFP mice showed no change in perseverative or random errors from Day 1 to Day 2 to 
Day 3 (n = 4 mice; two-way ANOV A; day X type of error interaction: F2,9 = 1.18, P = 0.35). 
h, Sst-ChR2 mice showed no change in perseverative or random errors from Day 1 to Day 2 
to Day 3 (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; day X type of error interaction: F2,16 = 0.81, P = 
0.46). i,m, Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre mice had bilateral control virus (AA V-DIO-eYFP or AA V-
i12b-DIO-eYFP) or AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP (m) injections and fiber-optic implants in 
mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: no stimulation; Day 2: 40 Hz stimulation. j,n, 
Representative eYFP (j) and ChR2-eYFP (n) expression in the mPFC of Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre 
mice (scale bar, 100 μm). k,o, Light delivery did not affect performance in Sst-eYFP-
expressing (k; n = 4 mice) or Sst-ChR2-expressing (o; n = 8) mutant mice (two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of day: F1,10 = 0.08, P = 0.79; main effect of virus: F1,10 = 0.002, P = 
0.96; day X virus interaction: F1,10 = 2.69, P = 0.13). l, Sst-eYFP expressing mutants 
showed no change in perseverative or random errors from Day 1 to Day 2 (n = 4 mice; two-
way ANOV A; day X type of error interaction: F1,6 = 0.16, P = 0.70). p, Sst-ChR2 expressing 
mutants showed no change in perseverative or random errors from Day 1 to Day 2 (n = 8 
mice; two-way ANOV A; day X type of error interaction: F1,14 = 0.64, P = 0.44). Two-way 
ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used. Comparisons were not 
significant unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 7: Single unit recordings from PV interneurons and regular spiking neurons 
in the mPFC of awake, head-fixed mice.
a, Schematic of opto-silicon probe recording PFC in awake head-fixed mice (top panel). 
Histology of the recording electrode (bottom panel, scale = 1mm). b, Example raster plot of 
a putative PV cell responding to ChR2 activation. Stimulation at 1 Hz (5 ms illumination, 
0.25 mW). The blue line represents the duration of ChR2 stimulation (5 ms). c, Average 
peristimulus time histogram (PSTH) of PV cell responses during 40 Hz ChR2 stimulation (n 
= 8 PV cells, time bin = 1 ms). The blue line indicates the period of ChR2 stimulation (5 ms 
flash) at 40 Hz. PV cells fired 0.49 ± 10 spikes per 40 Hz cycle at a latency of 1.82 ± 0.34 
ms following the onset of each light flash. d, Baseline subtracted and peak normalized 
activity of all putative PV cells (green line; n = 8 cells, 3 mice) and all the regular-spiking 
(RS) cells (black line; n = 237 cells, 4 mice). Mean firing rate of RS cells was 4.9 vs. 2.1 
spikes/sec at the peak vs. trough of each cycle, respectively. The blue line indicates the 
period of ChR2 stimulation (5 ms flash) at 40 Hz. Data are shown as means (c, d) and 
shading (c, d) denote s.e.m.
Cho et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 8: Changes in the power spectra of prefrontal LFPs elicited by in- vs. out-of-
phase stimulation of PV interneurons.
a–d, Difference between the power spectra for LFPs recorded during light stimulation vs. at 
baseline for control mice (PV-Cre mice injected with AA V-DIO-eYFP, n = 6 recordings from 
3 mice) receiving (a) in- or (c) out-of-phase stimulation, or for PV-Cre mice (n = 12 
recordings from 6 mice) injected with AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP receiving (b) in- or (d) out-of-
phase stimulation. Positive (negative) values correspond to higher power during periods of 
stimulation (at baseline). e, Quantification of average change in 40 Hz power in various 
Cho et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
conditions (relative to baseline). The change was significantly different from 0 for PV-ChR2 
in-phase condition (n = 12 recordings from 6 mice; two-tailed, paired t-test; t(11) = 2.24, *P 
= 0.047) and for PV-ChR2 out-of-phase condition (n = 12 recordings from 6 mice; two-
tailed, paired t-test; t(11) = 2.34, *P = 0.039). f, Quantification of average change in 150–200 
Hz power in various conditions (relative to baseline). The change was significantly different 
from 0 for PV-ChR2 in-phase condition (n = 12 recordings from 6 mice; two-tailed, paired t-
test; t(11) = 2.40, *P = 0.036) and for PV-ChR2 out-of-phase condition (n = 12 recordings 
from 6 mice; two-tailed, paired t-test; t(11) = 2.65, *P = 0.023). Two-tailed, paired t-tests 
were used. Data are shown as means; shading (a–d) and error bars (e,f) denote s.e.m.
Cho et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 9: Out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation does not disrupt the ability of PV-Cre mice 
to revert to an initial association.
a, Schematic for task: The mouse learns an initial association (IA), then a rule shift (RS). 
After the mouse learns the RS, the task reverts to the original rule, i.e., the rule learned 
during the IA with out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation. b, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-
eYFP (‘PV-eYFP’) or AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP (‘PV-ChR2’) injections and fiber-optic 
implants in mPFC. Experimental design: no stimulation during learning of the IA or RS. 
Then, when the rule reverts to the IA, out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation is delivered. c, In PV-
eYFP mice (n = 5), there was no difference in the number of trials needed to reach the 
criterion during initial learning of the IA (when no light was delivered) vs. when reverting to 
the IA after learning the RS (when light stimulation was delivered; two-tailed, paired t-test; 
t(4) = 1.31, P = 0.261). d, In PV-ChR2 mice (n = 5), there was no difference in the number of 
trials needed to reach the criterion during initial learning of the IA (when no light was 
delivered) vs. when reverting to the IA after learning the RS (when light stimulation was 
delivered; two-tailed, paired t-test; t(4) = 0.466, P = 0.666). Two-tailed, paired t-tests were 
used. Comparisons were not significant unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 10: Behavior and cross-hemispheric synchrony between prefrontal PV or Sst 
interneurons during rule shifts, baseline periods, or learning of initial associations in Dlx5/6+/− 
mice and wild-types.
a, Rule-shift (RS) performance for photometry experiments in Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre and 
Dlx5/6+/+, PV-Cre mice. Compared to wild-type littermates (n = 8), mutant mice (n = 7) 
make more perseverative errors (two-way ANOV A; main effect of genotype: F1,13 = 43.6, 
****P = 0.00002; main effect of error type: F1,13 = 24.7, ***P = 0.0003; error type X 
genotype interaction: F1,13 = 10.5, **P = 0.006; post hoc t(26) = 6.55, ****P = 0.000001), 
but similar numbers of random errors (post hoc t(26) = 1.36, P = 0.37). b, Rule-shift 
Cho et al. Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
performance for mice used in dual-site TEMPO experiments. Compared to wild-type mice 
(n = 12), mutant mice (n = 8) make more perseverative errors (two-way ANOV A; main 
effect of genotype: F1,18 = 89.4, ****P =0.00000002; main effect of error type: F1,13 = 
137.3, ****P = 0.0000000007; type of error X genotype interaction: F1,18 = 46.5, ****P = 
0.000002; post hoc t(36) = 11.6, ****P = 0.0000000000002), and random errors (post hoc 
t(36) = 2.43, *P = 0.04). c, Compared to wild-type mice, Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre, Ai14 mice make 
more perseverative errors (n = 5 mice in each cohort; two-way ANOV A; main effect of 
genotype: F1,8 = 42.3, ***P = 0.0002; main effect of error type: F1,8 = 30.7, ***P = 0.0005; 
error type X genotype interaction: F1,8 = 17.0, **P = 0.003; post hoc t(16) = 7.12, ****P = 
0.000005), but numbers of random errors are comparable (post hoc t(16) = 0.38, P > 0.99). d, 
Synchrony was not different between Dlx5/6++-, Sst-Cre, Ai14 and Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre, Ai14 
mice during the baseline period (n = 5 mice in each cohort; two-way ANOV A; main effect of 
genotype: F1,8 = 0.77, P = 0.41; frequency X genotype interaction: F2,16 = 0.05, P = 0.95). e, 
Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP injections and fiber-optic 
implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: no stimulation; Day 2: in-phase 40 Hz 
stimulation during the first 5 RS trials. f, In-phase 40 Hz stimulation on Day 2 reduces 
perseverative errors relative to no stimulation on Day 1 (n = 6 mice; two-way ANOV A; main 
effect of day: F1,10 = 18.32, **P = 0.0016; main effect of error type: F1,10 = 49.9, ****P 
=0.000034; post hoc t(10) = 3.98, **P = 0.005); there was no change in random errors (post 
hoc t(10) = 2.07, P = 0.13). g, Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP 
injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-phase 20 
Hz stimulation; Day 2: out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation; Day 3: in-phase 40 Hz stimulation. 
h, Perseverative errors are reduced by in phase 40 Hz stimulation on Day 3, compared to 
either out-of-phase 20 Hz stimulation on Day 1 or out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation on Day 2 
(n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: F2,16 = 11.6, ***P = 0.0008; main effect 
of error type: F1,8 = 31.5, ***P = 0.0005; Day 1 vs. Day 2 perseverative: P > 0.99, Day 2 vs. 
Day 3 perseverative: ***P = 0.0005, Day 1 vs. Day 3 perseverative: **P = 0.0016). There 
are no changes in random errors across days (post hoc Day 1 vs. Day 2: P > 0.99, Day 2 vs. 
Day 3: P > 0.99, Day 1 vs. Day 3: P = 0.33). i, Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral 
AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± AA V-Syn-tdTomato injections and fiber-optic implants in 
mPFC. j, Representative images of tdTomato (red) and Ace-mNeon (green) fluorescence 
within PV interneurons in a coronal section of mPFC (left), alongside a high power image 
(right). Scale bars: 100 μm and 25 μm, respectively. k, In mutants, PV interneuron 
synchrony was not different after correct decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 8 
mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,21 = 1.89, P = 0.18; frequency X 
condition interaction: F2,21 = 0.35, P = 0.71). l, PV interneuron synchrony was not different 
after incorrect decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 8 mice; two-way ANOV A; main 
effect of condition: F1,21 = 3.31, P = 0.083; frequency X condition interaction: F2,21 = 0.04, 
P = 0.96). m, Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± 
AA V-Syn-tdTomato injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. n, Representative images 
of tdTomato (red) and Ace-mNeon (green) fluorescence in Sst interneurons within a coronal 
section of mPFC (left) from a Dlx5/6+/−, Sst-Cre, Ai14 mouse, alongside a high power 
image (right). Scale bars: 100 μm and 25 μm, respectively. o, In mutants, Sst interneuron 
synchrony was not different after correct decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 5 
mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of frequency: F2,12 = 9.88, **P = 0.003; frequency X 
Cho et al. Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
condition interaction: F2,12 = 0.58, P = 0.58). p, Sst interneuron synchrony was not different 
after incorrect decisions vs. during the baseline period (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main 
effect of frequency: F2,12 = 4.95, *P = 0.027; frequency X condition interaction: F2,12 = 
0.44, P = 0.66). q, Learning of an initial association (IA) was similar in mutants (n = 6) and 
their wild-type (n = 11) littermates (two-tailed, unpaired t-test; n = 11; t(15) = 0.202, P = 
0.842). r, There was no difference in cross-hemispheric PV interneuron synchronization 
between mutant (n = 6 mice) and wild-type (n = 11 mice) littermates at baseline (two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of genotype: F1,15 = 0.45, P = 0.51; genotype X frequency interaction 
F2,30 = 1.11, P = 0.34). s, During learning of an initial association, changes in PV 
interneuron synchrony following errors (relative to synchrony after correct decisions) is 
similar in mutants (n = 6 mice) and their wild-type (n = 11 mice) littermates (two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of genotype: F1,15 = 0.07, P = 0.80; genotype X frequency interaction: 
F2,30 = 0.16, P = 0.86). Data are shown as means (a–c); error bars (a–c) denote s.e.m. Two-
way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used. Comparisons were 
not significant unless otherwise noted.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIMH (R01MH106507 to V .S.S. and K99MH108720 to K.K.A.C.), the Brain and 
Behavior Foundation (NARSAD Young Investigator Award to K.K.A.C.), the McKnight Foundation (Memory and 
Cognitive Disorders award to V .S.S.), and the Brain Research Foundation (Scientific Innovations Award to V .S.S.). 
We appreciate helpful feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript from Loren Frank and Massimo Scanziani.
References
1. Young DA, Davila R, & Scher H. Unawareness of illness and neuropsychological performance in 
chronic schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 10, 117–124 (1993). [PubMed: 8398943] 
2. Shad MU, Tamminga CA, Cullum M, Haas GL, & Keshavan MS Insight and frontal cortical 
function in schizophrenia: a review. Schizophr. Res. 86, 54–70 (2006). [PubMed: 16837168] 
3. von der Malsburg C. The correlation theory of brain function. Internal Report 81–82, Dept. 
Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry (1981).
4. Abeles M, Prut Y , Bergman H, & Vaadia E. Synchronization in neuronal transmission and its 
importance for information processing. Prog. Brain Res. 102, 395–404 (1994). [PubMed: 7800829] 
5. Singer W. Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the definition of relations? Neuron 49, 111–125 
(1999).
6. Salinas E & Sejnowski TJ Correlated neuronal activity and the flow of neural information. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 8, 539–550 (2011).
7. Fries P. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through coherence. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 9, 474–480 (2005). [PubMed: 16150631] 
8. Fries P. Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a fundamental process in cortical computation. 
Ann. Rev. of Neurosci. 32, 209–224 (2009). [PubMed: 19400723] 
9. Sohal VS, Zhang F, Yizhar O, & Deisseroth K. Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms enhance 
cortical circuit performance. Nature 459, 698–702 (2009). [PubMed: 19396159] 
10. Fries P. Rhythms for cognition: communication through coherence. Neuron 88, 220–235 (2015). 
[PubMed: 26447583] 
11. Sohal VS How close are we to understanding what (if anything) gamma oscillations do in cortical 
circuits? J. Neurosci. 36, 10489–10495 (2016).
Cho et al. Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
12. Bastos AM, Loonis R, Kornblith S, Lundqvist M, & Miller EK Laminar recordings in frontal 
cortex suggest distinct layers for maintenance and control of working memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 115, 1117–1122 (2018). [PubMed: 29339471] 
13. Miller EK, Lundqvist M, & Bastos AM Working memory 2.0. Neuron 100, 463–475 (2018). 
[PubMed: 30359609] 
14. Cho KKA et al. Gamma rhythms link prefrontal interneuron dysfunction with cognitive 
inflexibility in Dlx5/6+/− mice. Neuron 85, 1332–1343 (2015). [PubMed: 25754826] 
15. Marton TF, Seifikar H, Luongo FJ, Lee AT, & Sohal VS Roles of prefrontal cortex and 
mediodorsal thalamus in task engagement and behavioral flexibility. J. Neurosci. 38, 2569–2578 
(2018). [PubMed: 29437889] 
16. Karlsson MP, Tervo DG, & Karpova AY Network resets in medial prefrontal cortex mark the onset 
of behavioral uncertainty. Science 338, 135–139 (2012). [PubMed: 23042898] 
17. Cardin JA Snapshots of the brain in action: Local circuit interactions through the lens of gamma 
oscillations. J. Neurosci. 36, 10496–10504 (2016).
18. Ray S & Maunsell JH Do gamma oscillations play a role in cerebral cortex? Trends Cogn Sci. 19, 
78–85 (2015). [PubMed: 25555444] 
19. Bissonette GB et al. Double dissociation of the effects of medial and orbital prefrontal cortical 
lesions on attentional and affective shifts in mice. J. Neurosci. 28, 11124–11130 (2008).
20. Ellwood IT et al. Tonic or phasic stimulation of dopaminergic projections to prefrontal cortex 
causes mice to maintain or deviate from previously learned behavioral strategies. J. Neurosci. 37, 
8315–8329 (2017). [PubMed: 28739583] 
21. Canetta S et al. Maternal immune activation leads to selective functional deficits in offspring 
parvalbumin interneurons. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 956–68 (2016). [PubMed: 26830140] 
22. Cao W et al. Gamma oscillation dysfunction in mPFC leads to social deficits in neuroligin 3 
R451C knockin mice. Neuron 97, 1253–1260 (2018). [PubMed: 29503190] 
23. Siegle JH, Pritchett DL, & Moore CI Gamma-range synchronization of fast-spiking interneurons 
can enhance detection of tactile stimuli. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1371–1379 (2014). [PubMed: 
25151266] 
24. Kim H, Ahrlund-Richter S, Wang X, Deisseroth K, & Carlén M. Prefrontal parvalbumin neurons in 
control of attention. Cell 164, 208–218 (2016). [PubMed: 26771492] 
25. Gunaydin LA et al. Natural neural projection dynamics underlying social behavior. Cell 157, 
1535–1551 (2014). [PubMed: 24949967] 
26. Lerner TN et al. Intact-brain analyses reveal distinct information carried by SNc dopamine 
subcircuits. Cell 162, 635–647 (2015). [PubMed: 26232229] 
27. Chen TW et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature 499, 295–
300 (2013). [PubMed: 23868258] 
28. Marshall JD et al. Cell-type-specific optical recording of membrane voltage dynamics in freely 
moving mice. Cell 167, 1650–1662 (2016). [PubMed: 27912066] 
29. Carandini M et al. Imaging the awake visual cortex with a genetically encoded voltage indicator. J. 
Neurosci. 35, 53–63 (2015). [PubMed: 25568102] 
30. Pi HJ et al. Cortical interneurons that specialize in disinhibitory control. Nature 7477, 521–524 
(2013).
31. Ray S, Ni AM, & Maunsell JH Strength of gamma rhythm depends on normalization. PLoS. Biol. 
11, e1001477 (2013).
32. Shadlen MN & Movshon JA Synchrony unbound: a critical evaluation of the temporal binding 
hypothesis. Neuron 24, 67–77 (1999). [PubMed: 10677027] 
33. Palmigiano A, Geisel T, Wolf F, & Battaglia D. Flexible information routing by transient 
synchrony. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 1014–1022 (2017).
34. Tukker JJ et al. Distinct dendritic arborization and in vivo firing patterns of parvalbumin-
expressing basket cells in the hippocampal area CA3. J Neurosci, 33, 6809–6825. [PubMed: 
23595740] 
35. Hu H, Gan J, & Jonas P. Fast-spiking, parvalbumin+ GABAergic interneurons: From cellular 
design to microcircuit function. Science 345, 1255263 (2014).
Cho et al. Page 39
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
36. Otis JM et al. Prefrontal cortex output circuits guide reward seeking through divergent cue 
encoding. Nature, 543, 103–107 (2017). [PubMed: 28225752] 
37. Bissonette GB & Roesch MR Neurophysiology of rule switching in the corticostriatal circuit. 
Neuroscience, 345 64–76 (2017). [PubMed: 26851774] 
38. Phillips EAK & Hasenstaub AR Asymmetric effects of activating and inactivating cortical 
interneurons. eLife 5, pii: e18383 (2016).
39. Gonzalez-Burgos G, Cho RY , & Lewis DA Alterations in cortical network oscillations and 
parvalbumin neurons in schizophrenia. Biol. Psy. 77, 1031–1040 (2015).
40. Uhlhaas PJ & Singer W. Oscillations and neuronal dynamics in schizophrenia: the search for basic 
symptoms and translational opportunities. Biol. Psy. 77, 1001–1009 (2015).
41. Senkowski D & Gallinat J. Dysfunctional prefrontal gamma-band oscillations reflect working 
memory and other cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Biol. Psy. 77, 1010–1019 (2015).
42. Green MJ Cognitive impairment and functional outcome in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. J. 
Clin. Psych. 67, 36–42 (2006).
43. Minzenberg MJ & Carter CS Developing treatments for impaired cognition in schizophrenia. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 35–42 (2012). [PubMed: 22178120] 
44. Verret L et al. Inhibitory interneuron deficit links altered network activity and cognitive 
dysfunction in Alzheimer model. Cell 149, 708–721 (2012). [PubMed: 22541439] 
45. Iaccarino HF et al. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies microglia. 
Nature 540, 230–235 (2016). [PubMed: 27929004] 
46. Martorell AJ et al. Multi-sensory gamma stimulation ameliorates Alzheimer’s-associated 
pathology and improves cognition. Cell 177, 256–271 (2019). [PubMed: 30879788] 
47. Ohmuro N et al. The relationship between cognitive insight and cognitive performance among 
individuals with at-risk mental state for developing psychosis. Schizophr. Res. 192, 281–286 
(2018). [PubMed: 28442249] 
48. Lappin JM et al. Insight in individuals with an at risk mental state. Schizophr. Res. 90, 238–244 
(2007). [PubMed: 17215109] 
Cho et al. Page 40
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1: Prefrontal PV interneurons are recruited after errors during rule shifts.
a, Rule shift task schematic. On each trial, a mouse chooses one of two bowls, each scented 
with a different odor (O1 or O2) and filled with a different textured digging medium (TA or 
TB), to find a food reward. Mice first learn an initial association (IA) between one of these 
cues (e.g., odor O1) and food reward (the cue associated with reward is indicated in orange). 
Once mice reach the learning criterion (8/10 consecutive trials correct), this association 
undergoes an extra-dimensional rule shift (RS; e.g., from O1 to TA). b, Rule reversal task 
schematic. Mice learn an initial association (IA) between one cue (e.g., odor O1) and food 
reward (the rewarded cue is indicated in orange). Once mice reach the learning criterion, this 
association undergoes an intra-dimensional rule reversal (RR), e.g., from O1 to O2. c, Trial 
timeline. A mouse begins each trial by entering the home cage, then makes a decision, 
indicated by digging in one bowl. If the mouse is correct, food reward is consumed. The 
mouse is then transferred to the holding cage until the next trial. The intertrial interval is 
longer after incorrect choices. d, Representative image showing mPFC FLEX-GCaMP6f 
expression in a PV-Cre mouse (scale bar, 100 μm). e, Averaged PV interneuron photometry 
signal (dF/F), aligned to the time of dig, which indicates a decision, for correct (white line) 
vs. incorrect trials (black line; n = 8 mice). f, Peak dF/F during the 4 sec following the 
decision. Signals are significantly higher on incorrect than correct trials (n = 8 mice; two-
tailed, paired t-test; t(7) = 3.93, **P = 0.006). Data are shown as means (e); shading (e) 
denotes s.e.m.
Cho et al. Page 41
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2: Cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony of PV interneurons increases after errors during 
rule shifts.
a, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± AA V-Syn-tdTomato 
injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. b, Representative images of tdTomato (red) and 
Ace-mNeon (green) fluorescence in a coronal section of mPFC (left), alongside a high-
power image (right). Scale bars: 100 μm and 25 μm, respectively. c, Schematic for dual-site 
TEMPO measurements. Each fiber-optic implant, for delivering illumination and collecting 
fluorescence, connects to a mini-cube coupled to two LEDs and two photoreceivers (PR) to 
Cho et al. Page 42
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
separately excite and collect emitted fluorescence from Ace-mNeon and tdTomato. Two 
lock-in amplifiers modulate LED output and demodulate PR signals, which are then 
acquired by a multichannel real-time signal processor. d, Initial association (IA) and rule 
shift (RS) performance in this cohort (n = 12 mice). e, Overview of dual-site TEMPO 
analysis: tdTomato and Ace-mNeon fluorescence signals from each hemisphere are filtered 
around a frequency of interest, then both tdTomato signals and one Ace-mNeon signal are 
used to model the second Ace-mNeon signal. Performance is compared to models based on 
shuffled versions of the first Ace-mNeon signal. f, R2 values, measuring zero-phase lag ~40 
Hz cross-hemispheric PV interneuron synchrony, during the last 3 IA trials and the first 5 RS 
trials in one mouse. g, Synchrony was not different after correct decisions vs. during the 
baseline period (n = 12 mice; two-way ANOV A; condition X frequency interaction: F2,33 = 
1.05, P = 0.36). h–i, 30–50 Hz synchronization was specifically higher after RS errors than 
during the baseline period (n = 12 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,33 = 
10.51, **P = 0.003; frequency X condition interaction: F2,33 = 8.23, **P = 0.001; 15–25 Hz: 
post hoc t(33) = 0.43, P > 0.99; 30–50 Hz: post hoc t(33) = 5.18, ****P = 0.00003; 50–70 Hz: 
post hoc t(33) = 0.007, P > 0.99) or after RS correct decisions (n = 12 mice; two-way 
ANOV A; condition X frequency interaction: F2,33 = 7.32, **P = 0.002; post hoc t(33) = 4.36, 
***P = 0.0004). j, R2 values, measuring zero-phase lag ~40 Hz cross-hemispheric Sst 
interneuron synchrony during the last 3 IA trials and the first 5 RS trials in one mouse. k–m, 
Cross-hemispheric Sst synchrony (n = 5 mice) was not different between the baseline period 
and RS correct trials (two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,12 = 0.07, P = 0.79; 
main effect of frequency: F2,12 = 6.07, *P = 0.015; condition X frequency interaction F2,12 = 
0.10, P = 0.90), baseline period and RS incorrect trials (two-way ANOV A; main effect of 
condition: F1,12 = 0.47, P = 0.51; main effect of frequency: F2,12 = 7.34, **P = 0.008; 
condition X frequency interaction: F2,12 = 0.26, P = 0.78), nor correct and incorrect trials 
(two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,12 = 0.25, P = 0.63; main effect of 
frequency: F2,12 = 4.66, *P = 0.03; condition X frequency interaction: F2,12 = 0.034, P = 
0.97). n, In a cohort of PV-Cre mice used for simultaneous dual-site TEMPO measurements 
and LFP recordings (n = 5 mice), 30–50 Hz synchronization between left and right PV 
interneuron TEMPO signals was specifically higher after RS errors than after RS correct 
decisions (two-way ANOV A; frequency X condition interaction: F2,12 = 7.13, **P = 0.009; 
post hoc t(12) = 2.83, *P = 0.045). o, Difference in zero-phase-lag LFP wavelet coherence 
following errors relative to after correct decisions (i.e., incorrect – correct; n = 5 mice). p, 
LFP wavelet coherence was higher at 20 and 40 Hz following RS errors than after correct 
decisions (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,12 = 21.40, ***P = 
0.0006; main effect of frequency: F2,12 = 1.86, P = 0.199; condition X frequency: F2,12 = 
0.17, P = 0.85; 20 Hz post hoc t(12) = 2.85, *P = 0.04; 40 Hz post hoc t(12) = 2.96, *P = 
0.04). Data are shown as means (d, o); error bars (d, o) denote s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A 
followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used, unless otherwise noted. 
Comparisons were not significant, unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 43
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3: Cross-hemispheric synchrony does not increase during initial associations and rule 
reversals.
a, Averaged PV interneuron photometry signal (dF/F), aligned to the time of dig, which 
indicates a decision, for correct (brown line) and incorrect trials (yellow line) during the 
initial association (IA) (n = 8 mice). b, Peak dF/F during the 4 sec following the decision. 
Signals are comparable during correct and incorrect IA trials (n = 8 mice; two-tailed, paired 
t-test; t(7) = 0.44, P = 0.67). c, Averaged PV interneuron photometry signal (dF/F), aligned to 
the time of dig, which indicates a decision, for incorrect trials during the IA (yellow line) or 
rule shift (RS) (black line; n = 8 mice). d, Peak dF/F during the 4 sec following the decision. 
Signals on incorrect trials are significantly lower during the IA than the RS (n = 8 mice; two-
tailed, paired t-test; t(7) = 2.87, *P = 0.024). (Note: to be conservative and include all data, 
we did not exclude one datapoint which appeared to be an outlier; however, had this 
datapoint been excluded, this P value would have been 0.0096). e, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had 
bilateral injections of AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon ± AA V-Syn-tdTomato in mPFC and 
fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: IA followed by RS or RR; Day 
2: IA followed by the task not performed on Day 1. f, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice performed rule 
shifts (RS) and rule reversals (RR) in a similar number of trials (n = 7 mice; two-tailed, 
paired t-test; t(6) = 0.92, P = 0.39). g, During the IA, synchrony did not differ following 
correct vs. incorrect trials (n = 7 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 
0.0007, P = 0.98; condition X frequency interaction: F2,18 = 0.068, P = 0.93). h, During the 
RR, synchrony did not differ following correct vs. incorrect trials (n = 7 mice; two-way 
ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,18 = 0.10, P = 0.76; condition X frequency interaction 
F2,18 = 4.55, *P = 0.025; 15–25 Hz: post hoc t(18) = 0.25, P > 0.99; 30–50 Hz: post hoc t(18) 
= 1.71, P = 0.32; 50–70 Hz: post hoc t(18) = 2.50, P = 0.07). i, Following errors, synchrony 
was specifically higher for the 30–50 Hz band during RS than IA (n = 7 mice; two-way 
Cho et al. Page 44
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ANOV A; condition X frequency interaction: F2,18 = 6.02, **P = 0.0099; 30–50 Hz post hoc 
t(18) = 3.42, **P = 0.009). j, Following errors, synchrony was specifically higher in the 30–
50 Hz band RS than RR (two-way ANOV A; condition X frequency interaction F2,18 = 3.96, 
*P = 0.038; 30–50 Hz post hoc t(18) = 2.64, *P = 0.0499). Data are shown as means (a, c); 
shading (a, c) denotes s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc 
comparisons, unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 45
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4. Out-of-phase, but not in-phase, gamma-frequency stimulation of PV interneurons 
disrupts learning during rule shifts but not during initial associations or rule reversals.
a, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had injections of AA V-DIO-eYFP or AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP in mPFC 
and fiber-optic implants bilaterally in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation during the rule shift (RS); Day 2: no stimulation. b–c, Out of phase 40 Hz 
stimulation impairs rule shift performance in ChR2-expressing mice compared to eYFP-
expressing controls (n = 5 mice in each cohort; two-way ANOV A; main effect of day: F1,8 = 
40.2, ***P = 0.0002; main effect of virus: F1,8 = 32.5, ***P = 0.0005; day X virus 
interaction: F1,8 = 47.3, ***P = 0.0001). b, Performance of eYFP-expressing controls did 
not change from Day 1 to 2 (n = 5 mice; post hoc t(8) = 0.38, P > 0.99). c, Out-of-phase 40 
Hz stimulation of PV interneurons across hemispheres during the RS on Day 1 impaired rule 
shifts in ChR2-expressing mice, compared to no stimulation on Day 2 (n = 5 mice; post hoc 
t(8) = 9.34, ****P = 0.00003). d, PV-Cre mice had bilateral injections of AA V-DIO-ChR2-
eYFP and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-phase 20 Hz 
stimulation; Day 2: out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation; Day 3: in-phase 40 Hz stimulation. e, 
Out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 2) impairs rule shifts relative to out-of-phase 20 Hz 
stimulation (Day 1) or in-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 3) (n = 5 mice; one-way repeated 
measures ANOV A followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, main effect of treatment: 
F1.294,5.175 = 25.3, **P = 0.003; Day 1 vs. Day 2: *P = 0.025, Day 2 vs. Day 3: **P = 0.006, 
Day 1 vs. Day 3: P = 0.47). f, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice had bilateral injections of AA V-DIO-eYFP 
or AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: 
out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation during the initial association (IA); Day 2: no stimulation 
during the IA, followed by out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation during the rule reversal (RR). g, 
Out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation does not affect the ability of ChR2-expressing mice to learn 
Cho et al. Page 46
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
an IA (n = 5 mice in each cohort; two-tailed, unpaired t-test; compared to control eYFP-
expressing mice; t(8) = 0.69, P = 0.51). h, Out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation does not affect the 
ability of ChR2-expressing mice to learn a RR (n = 5 mice in each cohort; two-tailed, 
unpaired t-test; compared to control eYFP-expressing mice; t(8) = 0.89, P = 0.40). Data are 
shown as means (g, h); error bars (g, h) denote s.e.m. Two-way ANOV A followed by 
Bonferroni post hoc comparisons, unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 47
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 5: Cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony fails to increase during rule shifts in mutant mice.
a, Representative FLEX-GCaMP6f expression in a Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mouse (scale bar, 100 
μm). b, Rule shift (RS) performance is impaired in mutant mice (blue; n = 7 mice) compared 
wild-type (Dlx5/6+/+) littermates (black; n = 8 mice; two-tailed, unpaired t-test; t(13) = 7.82, 
****P = 0.000003). c, Averaged dF/F from PV interneurons in mutant (blue; n = 7 mice) vs. 
wild-type (black; n = 8 mice) mice, aligned to the time of correct decisions. d, Peak PV 
interneuron dF/F values during the 4 sec following correct decisions during rule shifts were 
similar in Dlx5/6+/− (blue; n = 7 mice) vs. wild-types (black; n = 8 mice; two-tailed, 
unpaired t-test; t(13) = 0.79, P = 0.44). e, Averaged dF/F from PV interneurons in mutant 
(blue; n = 7 mice) vs. wild-types (black; n = 8 mice), aligned to the time of incorrect 
decisions. f, Peak dF/F from PV interneurons during the 4 sec following incorrect decisions 
is significantly decreased in Dlx5/6+/− mice (blue; n = 7 mice) compared to wild-types 
(black; n = 8 mice) (two-tailed, unpaired t-test; t(8.085) = 3.18, *P = 0.01). g, R2 values, 
measuring zero-phase lag ~40 Hz cross-hemispheric interneuron synchronization between 
TEMPO signals from PV interneurons in mutant mice during the last 3 IA and first 5 RS 
Cho et al. Page 48
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
trials in one Dlx5/6+/− mouse. h, In Dlx5/6+/− mice, cross-hemispheric PV interneuron 
synchronization was not different following errors vs. correct decisions (n = 8 mice; two-
way ANOV A; main effect of condition: F1,21 = 0.09, P = 0.77; condition X frequency 
interaction: F2,21 = 0.29, P = 0.75). i, Rule shift performance is impaired in mutant mice 
(blue; n = 8 mice) compared to wild-type (black) littermates (n = 12 mice; two-tailed, 
unpaired t-test; t(8.071) = 7.40, ****P = 0.00007). j, Increases in PV interneuron synchrony 
following errors (relative to synchrony after correct decisions) are significantly attenuated in 
mutants (n = 8 mice) compared to wild-type littermates (n = 12 mice), specifically in the 30–
50 Hz frequency band (two-way ANOV A; genotype X frequency interaction: F2,36 = 3.98, 
*P = 0.028; 15–25 Hz: post hoc t(54) = 1.15, P = 0.76; 30–50 Hz: post hoc t(54) = 2.67, *P = 
0.03; 50–70 Hz: t(54) = 0.63, P > 0.99). k, R2 values, measuring zero-phase lag ~40 Hz 
cross-hemispheric Sst interneuron synchronization during the last 3 IA and first 5 RS trials 
in one Dlx5/6+/− mouse. l, In mutants (n = 5 mice), cross-hemispheric Sst interneuron 
synchrony is similar following correct vs. incorrect decisions (two-way ANOV A; main effect 
of condition: F1,12 = 0.70, P = 0.42; main effect of frequency: F2,12 = 2.16, P = 0.16; 
condition X frequency interaction: F2,12 = 0.71, P = 0.51). m, Rule shift performance is 
impaired in mutants (n = 5 mice) compared to wild-type littermates (n = 5 mice; two-tailed, 
unpaired t-test; t(8) = 8.64, ****P = 0.00003). n, Changes in Sst interneuron synchrony 
following errors (relative to synchrony after correct decisions) are not different in mutants (n 
= 5 mice) vs. wild-types (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of genotype: F1,8 = 
0.06, P = 0.82; genotype X frequency interaction: F2,16 = 0.54, P = 0.59). Data are shown as 
means (b–f, i–j, m–n); error bars (b, d, f, i–j, m–n) and shading (c, e) denote s.e.m. Two-
way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons were used, unless otherwise 
noted.
Cho et al. Page 49
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 6: Restoring cross-hemispheric PV interneuron gamma synchrony is required to rescue rule 
shift performance in Dlx5/6+/− mutant mice.
a, Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-ChR2-eYFP injections and fiber-optic 
implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: no stimulation; Day 2: in-phase 40 Hz 
stimulation during the first 5 RS trials. b, Representative ChR2-eYFP expression in the 
mPFC of a Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mouse (scale bar, 100 μm). c, In-phase 40 Hz stimulation on 
Day 2 normalizes rule shift performance in mutant mice (n = 6 mice; two-tailed, paired t-
test; t(5) = 10.3, ***P = 0.0001). d, Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre mice had bilateral AA V-DIO-ChR2-
eYFP injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: Day 1: out-of-
phase 20 Hz stimulation; Day 2: out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation; Day 3: in-phase 40 Hz 
stimulation. e, Representative ChR2-eYFP expression in the mPFC of a Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre 
mouse (scale bar, 100 μm). f, In mutants (n = 5 mice), in-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 3), 
but not out-of-phase 40 Hz stimulation (Day 2), rescues rule shift performance (one-way 
repeated measures ANOV A followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, main effect of 
treatment: F1.451,5.806 = 12.98, **P = 0.009; Day 1 vs. Day 2: P = 0.98, Day 2 vs. 3: *P = 
0.016, Day 1 vs. 3: *P = 0.01). Two-way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post hoc 
comparisons were used, unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 50
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 7: Low-dose clonazepam increases cross-hemispheric gamma synchrony during rule shifts in 
mutant mice.
a, Dlx5/6+/−, PV-Cre, Ai14 mice (n = 5 mice) had bilateral AA V-DIO-Ace2N-4AA-mNeon 
± AA V-Syn-tdTomato injections and fiber-optic implants in mPFC. Experimental design: all 
mice received vehicle only (veh) on Day 1. On Day 2, some mice received clonazepam (clz; 
n = 3 mice); others received vehicle. On Day 3, we administered clz to those mice that 
received veh on Day 2 (n = 2 mice). b, Low-dose clonazepam normalizes rule shift 
performance in mutants (n = 5 mice; two-tailed, paired t-test; t(4) = 8.07, **P = 0.0013). c, 
Cho et al. Page 51
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Low-dose clonazepam decreases perseverative and random errors (n = 5 mice; two-tailed, 
paired t-test; t(4) = 6.15, **P = 0.0036 for perseverative, t(4) = 6.53, **P = 0.0028 for 
random). d, R2 values, measuring zero-phase lag ~40 Hz cross-hemispheric interneuron 
synchronization between TEMPO signals from PV interneurons in one Dlx5/6+/− mouse, 
during the last 3 IA and first 5 RS trials, in the vehicle condition. e, R2 values, measuring 
zero-phase lag ~40 Hz cross-hemispheric interneuron synchronization between TEMPO 
signals from PV interneurons in the same mutant mouse, during the last 3 IA and first 5 RS 
trials in the clonazepam condition. f, During the baseline period, synchrony did not differ 
between the vehicle and clonazepam conditions (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect 
of treatment: F1,12 = 1.37, P = 0.26; frequency X treatment interaction: F2,12 = 3.22, P = 
0.08). g, Synchrony did not differ following correct trials in the vehicle and clonazepam 
conditions (n = 5 mice; two-way ANOV A; main effect of treatment: F1,12 = 0.08, P = 0.78; 
interaction F2,12 = 1.60, P = 0.24; 15–25 Hz: post hoc t(12) = 0.19, P > 0.99; 30–50 Hz: post 
hoc t(12) = 1.57, P = 0.43; 50–70 Hz: post hoc t(12) = 0.88, P > 0.99). h, Following RS errors, 
synchrony was specifically higher in the clonazepam condition for the 30–50 Hz band (n = 5 
mice; two-way ANOV A; treatment X frequency interaction: F2,12 = 8.63, **P = 0.005; 30–
50 Hz post hoc t(12) = 3.73, **P = 0.009). Two-way ANOV A followed by Bonferroni post 
hoc comparisons were used, unless otherwise noted.
Cho et al. Page 52
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 November 25.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript