Opponent control of behavior by dorsomedial striatal pathways 
depends on task demands and internal state
Scott S. Bolkan1,#, Iris R. Stone1,#, Lucas Pinto1, Zoe C. Ashwood1, Jorge M. Iravedra 
Garcia1, Alison L. Herman1, Priyanka Singh1, Akhil Bandi1, Julia Cox1, Christopher A. 
Zimmerman1, Jounhong Ryan Cho1, Ben Engelhard1, Jonathan W. Pillow1,2,*, Ilana B. 
Witten1,2,*
1Princeton Neuroscience Institute; Princeton University; Princeton, NJ 08544; USA
2Department of Psychology; Princeton University; Princeton, NJ 08544; USA
Abstract
A classic view of the striatum holds that activity in direct and indirect pathways oppositely 
modulates motor output. Whether this involves direct control of movement, or reflects a cognitive 
process underlying movement, remains unresolved. Here we find that strong, opponent control 
of behavior by the two pathways of the dorsomedial striatum (DMS) depends on the cognitive 
requirements of a task. Furthermore, a latent state model (a hidden markov model with generalized 
linear model observations) reveals that—even within a single task—the contribution of the two 
pathways to behavior is state-dependent. Specifically, the two pathways have large contributions 
in one of two states associated with a strategy of evidence accumulation, compared to a state 
associated with a strategy of repeating previous choices. Thus, both the demands imposed by 
a task, as well as the internal state of mice when performing a task, determine whether DMS 
pathways provide strong and opponent control of behavior.
INTRODUCTION
The striatum is composed of two principal outputs, the direct and indirect pathways, which 
are thought to exert opposing effects on behavior1. In support of this view, many influential 
studies have shown that pathway-specific activation of the striatum produces opposing 
behavioral biases2–14. For example, direct or indirect pathway activation oppositely 
influences locomotion2–4,14, licking5,11,15, left/right rotations2,3,11,16, repetition/cessation of 
activation-paired behaviors6–8, and left/right movements to report value-based decisions9,13.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-terms
*correspondence: iwitten@princeton.edu, pillow@princeton.edu.#These authors contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions
S.S.B. performed the experiments. I.R.S. developed the GLM-HMM. S.S.B. and I.R.S. analyzed the data with guidance from J.W.P. 
and I.B.W. L.P., Z.C.A., and B.E. provided technical and analysis support. J.M.I., A.L.H., and P.S. aided behavioral training. A.B. 
performed histology. J.C. provided support for electrophysiology. C.A.Z. and J.R.C provided support for the virtual corridor. S.S.B. 
and I.B.W. conceived the experimental work. S.S.B., I.R.S., J.W.P. and I.B.W. interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2022 March ; 25(3): 345–357. doi:10.1038/s41593-022-01021-9.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Despite this pioneering work, it remains unresolved whether the endogenous activity 
of the two pathways provides opposing control over the generation of movements, or 
instead contributes to the cognitive process of deciding which movement to perform. 
This is in part because pathway-specific manipulations have disproportionately relied on 
artificial and synchronous activation, rather than inhibition of endogenous activity2–11,13. 
The imbalance towards reports of activation suggests a wealth of negative results from 
inhibition, raising questions about the function of the endogenous activity, and whether it 
contributes to cognition. In fact, most previous pathway-specific activation studies have not 
used cognitively demanding tasks, making it difficult to dissociate a role in the decision 
towards a movement versus the generation of the movement itself2–4,6,11,14,17. In contrast, 
studies of the striatum that were not pathway-specific have instead focused on cognitively 
demanding behaviors18–25. Taken together, this raises the possibility that striatal pathways 
exert opposing control of movement in the context of decision-making, rather than directly 
controlling motor output irrespective of cognition.
Thus, to determine if the contribution of endogenous activity in striatal pathways depends 
on cognition, we examined the effects of pathway-specific inhibition across a set of virtual 
reality tasks that had the same motor output and similar sensory features, but different 
cognitive requirements. This allowed us to ask if a task’s demands determined the effect of 
pathway-specific inhibition on behavior. Second, we used a latent state model to identify 
time-varying states within the same task. This allowed us to determine if the contribution of 
each pathway to behavior changed across time, even within the same task.
We found that inhibition of neither pathway produced a detectable influence on behavior 
as mice navigated a virtual corridor in the absence of a decision-making requirement. In 
contrast, pathway-specific inhibition produced strong and opposing biases on decisions 
based on the accumulation of evidence in a virtual T-maze26, and had weaker effects on 
choice during less demanding task variants. Our latent state model further revealed that even 
within the evidence accumulation task, mice occupy different states across time that differ 
in the weighting of sensory evidence and trial history, as well as the extent that pathway-
specific inhibition impacts choice. Thus, by comparing the effects of pathway-specific 
inhibition across behavioral tasks, and across time within a task, we conclude that both 
demands of the task and internal state of the mice determine whether striatal pathways exert 
strong and opposing control over behavior.
RESULTS
Inhibition of pathway-specific DMS activity is effective
We first sought to validate the effectiveness of halorhodopsin19 (NpHR)-mediated inhibition 
of indirect and direct striatal pathway activity in awake, head-fixed mice (Fig. 1a and 
Extended Data Fig. 1a–b). Toward this end, we bilaterally delivered virus carrying Cre-
dependent NpHR to the dorsomedial striatum (DMS) in transgenic mouse lines (A2a-Cre/
D2R-Cre/D1R-Cre), which we verified to have high degrees of specificity and pentrance for 
each pathway (Supplementary Fig. 1). We confirmed that 532-nm (5mW) light delivery to 
the DMS through a tapered optical fiber produced rapid, sustained, and reversible inhibition 
of spiking in mice expressing NpHR in the indirect (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1c–e, 
Bolkan et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
n = 18/60, 30% of neurons significantly inhibited) or direct pathway (Fig. 1c and Extended 
Data Fig. 1f–h, n = 21/50, 42% of neurons significantly inhibited). Moreover, we observed: 
(1) minimal excitation during illumination27,28 (Extended Data Fig. 1d,g, left), (2) minimal 
effects on spiking upon laser offset (Extended Data Fig. 1d,g, right), indicating limited post-
inhibitory rebound, and (3) stability in the efficacy of inhibition across time (Supplementary 
Fig. 2). All together, our findings indicate that NpHR-mediated inhibition of DMS pathways 
is effective.
DMS pathway inhibition does not impact virtual corridor navigation
To determine if endogenous activity in DMS pathways provides bidirectional control of 
motor output in the absence of a decision, we carried out unilateral inhibition of indirect 
and direct pathways in head-fixed mice running on an air-supported ball to traverse a 
2-dimensional linear corridor in virtual reality (VR) (Fig. 1d–f, 6-cm × 330-cm corridor). 
Illumination of the DMS was restricted to 0–200cm (laser on 30% of trials; hemisphere of 
illumination alternated across days). The parameters of the virtual corridor and inhibition 
period were selected to closely match the stem of the VR-based T-maze decision-making 
tasks that are the focus of subsequent experiments.
We found no detectable impact of pathway-specific DMS inhibition, nor DMS illumination 
alone, on multiple indicators of motor output during virtual corridor navigation. This 
included measures of velocity, x-position or view angle relative to the laser hemisphere, and 
distance traveled (Fig. 1g–j; see Extended Data Fig. 2 for additional measures). Similarly, 
we obtained null effects of pathway-specific inhibition on velocity (and spatial preference) 
in freely behaving mice in a conditioned place preference assay (Supplementary Fig. 3).
These negative findings argue against a major involvement of endogenous activity in DMS 
pathways in the execution of movement in the absence of a decision. This is consistent with 
the dearth of reports demonstrating strong and opposing modulation of behavior by striatal 
pathways using pathway-specific optogenetic inhibition.
Three virtual reality T-mazes with varying cognitive demands
We next considered the possibility that rather than contributing directly to a motor output, 
endogenous activity in DMS pathways may instead have opposing influence over decisions 
in a manner that is dependent on cognitive demand. To test this idea, we trained mice to 
perform a set of VR-based, decision-making tasks26 that shared identical motor readouts 
(left or right choice), had highly similar sensory environments, yet differed in their cognitive 
requirements (Fig. 2a–b).
The first task was an “evidence accumulation” task, in which visuo-tactile cues were 
transiently presented on each side of the central stem of a virtual T-maze according to a 
Poisson distribution (“cue region”, 0–200cm), and mice were rewarded for turning to the 
maze side with the greater number of cues (Fig. 2a,b; black, left). Thus, mice were required 
to continually accumulate sensory cues over several seconds into a memory (or motor plan) 
that guided their left/right decision.
Bolkan et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
In two additional control tasks, we made modifications intended to weaken the cognitive 
demands of each task. In the first control task (“no distrators”), cues were presented on the 
rewarded maze side during the same maze region (0–200cm) according to the same Poisson 
distribution, but distractor cues on the non-rewarded arm side were omitted (Fig. 2a–b; 
magenta, middle). The absence of distractors on the non-rewarded side meant that each cue 
signaled reward with 100% probability, and thus gradual evidence accumulation was not 
required. Further ensuring that evidence accumulation was not required, an additional cue 
at the end of the maze was present only during the cue period (0–200cm) to signal the 
rewarded side.
In the second control task (“permanent cues”), the sensory statistics of the cues were 
identical to that in the evidence-accumulation task, but rather than transient visual cue 
presentation, visual cues were permanently visible from trial onset (Fig. 2a–b; cyan, right). 
This maintained the same conceptual task structure of the evidence accumulation task while 
decreasing the memory demands, as the sensory cues (or the motor plan) did not need to be 
remembered until the cues were passed.
We assessed how task demands impacted choice accuracy in each task. Consistent with the 
greatest cognitive and mnemonic demand in the evidence accumulation task, we found that 
overall choice accuracy was significantly lower compared to both control tasks (Fig. 2c, 
one-way ANOV A of task on accuracy, p = 1.3×10−23, F2,80 = 109.4; unpaired, two-tailed 
Wilcoxon ranksum test between evidence accumulation vs. no distractors, p = 2.1×10−11, z = 
−6.7, and evidence accumulation vs permanent cues, p = 3.9×10−7, z = −5.1).
While the motor requirements of a decision were the same across tasks (crossing an x-
position threshold at the end of the central stem, see Methods), we examined the possibility 
that cross-task differences in cognitive requirements altered movement within the stem 
of the maze (0–300cm). We observed no consistent cross-task differences in velocity, 
x-position or view angle on left or right choice trials, nor distance traveled (Fig. 2d–g; 
see Extended Data Fig. 3a–f for additional measures). We further compared the relationship 
between behavior in the stem of the maze and choice across tasks by using a decoder 
to predict choice based on the trial-by-trial x-position or view angle (Extended Data Fig. 
3g–j) at successive maze positions (0–300cm in 25-cm bins). While we were able to 
predict choice from either measure above chance levels in all three tasks (consistent with 
previous studies26), choice prediction accuracy was statistically indistinguishable across 
tasks (Extended Data Fig. 3g–j). Together, this indicated that cross-task differences in task 
demands did not prompt mice to systematically adopt distinct motor strategies.
Behavioral effects of DMS pathway inhibition depend on task demand
We performed unilateral inhibition of DMS indirect and direct pathways restricted to the 
cue region (0–200-cm) of each task (Fig. 3a–b; laser on 10–20% of trials; hemisphere 
of illumination alternated across days). We found that inhibition of the indirect pathway 
produced a large bias towards contralateral choices during the accumulation of evidence task 
(Fig. 3c and 3d, left), which was significantly greater than that observed in control animals 
that did not express opsin (Fig. 3e, average contralateral bias: DMS indirect, 42.3 +/− 4.4%, 
vs. no opsin, 5.9 +/− 3.6%). Similarly, inhibition of the direct pathway also produced a large 
Bolkan et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
choice bias during the accumulation of evidence task (Fig. 3d, middle; average contralateral 
bias: DMS direct, −36.8 +/− 8.6%), which was also significantly greater than that observed 
in control animals (Fig. 3e). However, in this case the direction of the choice bias was in 
the opposite (ipsilateral) direction to that observed with indirect pathway inhibition (also see 
Extended Data Fig. 4a–i for psychometric curves).
Providing a stark contrast to the large effects of pathway-specific DMS inhibition on choice 
during the evidence accumulation task, inhibition of either pathway had significantly less 
impact on choice during the “no distractors” and “permanent cues” control tasks (Fig. 3f–k; 
also see Extended Data Fig. 5a–c; unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum test of indirect 
pathway inhibition evidence accumulation vs no distractors, p = 8.0×10−4, z = 3.4, or 
evidence accumulation vs permanent cues, p = 0.001, z = 3.3; and direct pathway inhibition 
evidence accumulation vs no distractors, p = 0.002, z = −3.1, or evidence accumulation vs 
permanent cues, p = 0.005, z = −2.8). In fact, the effects of pathway-specific DMS inhibition 
on choice bias in either control task did not significantly differ from those observed in 
control animals (Fig. 3h, for “no distractors”; Fig, 3k, for “permanent cues”; see also 
Extended Data Fig. 4a–i for psychometric curves).
Thus, inhibition of DMS pathways elicited strong and opposing effects on choice in the task 
with the greatest cognitive demand, which required the accumulation of sensory evidence 
across multiple seconds to arrive at a decision and had a far limited impact on choice in task 
variants with reduced cognitive demand.
While DMS pathway inhibition had minimal impact on movement in a virtual corridor 
(Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2), we considered the possibility that pathway-specific 
DMS inhibition altered motor performance in a manner that depended on the cognitive 
demands of the task. We found no cross-task differences in the effects of pathway-specific 
inhibition on measures of velocity, distance traveled, or per-trial standard deviation in view 
angle (Extended Data Fig. 6a–i). However, we found subtle but opposing effects of pathway-
specific inhibition on average x-position and view angle (Extended Data Fig. 6j–k) in the 
evidence accumulation task. The direction of these biases was similar in the control tasks, 
but consistently smaller than in the evidence accumulation task. Thus, in line with the close 
relationship between x-position/view angle and choice in the absence of inhibition in each 
task (Extended Data Fig. 3g–j), pathway-specific DMS inhibition produced the same general 
pattern of cross-task effects on choice bias (Extended Data Fig. 5b–d) and x-position/view 
angle (Extended Data Fig 6j–k). As the quantitative relationship between x-position or 
view angle and choice is indistinguishable across tasks in the absence of neural inhibition 
(Extended Data Fig. 3g–j), cross-task differences in motor strategy does not provide a 
trivial explanation for these effects. Rather, taken together with the absence of an effect of 
pathway-specific DMS inhibition on motor output in the virtual corridor (Fig. 1h–i), these 
data imply that the effects of inhibition on behavior depends on cognitive demands.
Little effect of NAc pathway inhibition on choice
We next sought to determine whether opponent control of choice by striatal pathways 
during the evidence accumulation task was specific to DMS, or if it extended to the 
ventral striatum. Towards this end, we delivered unilateral laser illumination to the nucleus 
Bolkan et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
accumbens (NAc) of mice expressing NpHR in the indirect or direct pathways (or non-
opsin control mice), which was restricted to the cue-region (0–200cm) of the evidence 
accumulation task (Fig. 3l–p; see also Extended Data Fig. 4j–l).
Providing a clear functional dissociation between DMS and NAc, effects of pathway-
specific NAc inhibition on choice bias were significantly smaller than those observed with 
inhibition of DMS pathways (Extended Data Fig. 5e–f; unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon 
ranksum test of DMS vs NAc indirect pathway inhibition, p = 2.6×10−4, z = 3.6; of DMS 
vs NAc direct pathway inhibition, p = 1.8×10−4, z = −3.7), and were also not significantly 
different from NAc control animals (Fig. 3o–p). It is unlikely that this dissociation between 
DMS and NAc can be explained by greater co-expression of pathway-specific markers in 
ventral versus dorsal striatum29, as both subregions exhibited equally low co-localization of 
D1R and D2R receptors (Supplementary Fig. 1j–l).
Bernoulli GLM does not fully capture psychometric curves
Our inactivation experiments suggest that DMS pathways make strong contributions to 
behavior during a cognitively demanding evidence accumulation task, but do not contribute 
strongly to similar tasks with weaker cognitive demands. However, even during the evidence 
accumulation task, it is possible that the animals’ level of cognitive engagement varies over 
time. This raises the possibility that the contributions of the two pathways to behavior could 
change over time, even within the same task.
To address this possibility, we sought to understand the factors that contribute to decisions in 
the evidence accumulation task. As a first step, we used a Bernoulli generalized linear model 
(GLM) to predict choice based on a set of external covariates (Fig. 4a–b). These covariates 
included the sensory evidence (difference between the number of right and left cues, or 
“Δ cues”), the recent choice and reward history, the delivery of optical inhibition (“laser”), 
as well as a bias. Note that we set the value of the laser covariate to +1 (or −1) on trials 
with right (or left) hemisphere inhibition, and zero otherwise. A positive (or negative) GLM 
weight on this covariate thus captured an ipsilateral (or contralateral) “laser”-induced bias in 
choices relative to the hemisphere of inhibition. For the choice history covariates, a positive 
weight indicates a tendency toward repeating past choices (see Methods for details).
We fit the GLM to aggregated behavioral data from mice inhibited in each DMS pathway 
and found that sensory evidence, trial history, and optical inhibition all contributed to 
predicting choice (Fig. 4c–d). As expected, the effect of inhibition of each pathway was 
large and opposite in sign. However, the GLM did not accurately capture the animal’s 
psychometric curve, describing the probability of a rightward choice as a function of the 
sensory evidence (Fig. 4e–f). This led us to consider variants of the standard GLM that 
might better account for choice behavior.
GLM-HMM better explains choice data with DMS inhibition
The standard GLM describes choice as depending on a fixed linear combination of sensory 
evidence, trial history, and optical inhibition. However, an alternative possibility is that 
mice use a weighting function that changes over time. To test this idea, we adopted a 
latent state model that allowed different GLM weights in different states, using the same 
Bolkan et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
external covariates as the standard 1-state GLM (Fig. 4). The model consists of a Hidden 
Markov Model (HMM) with Bernoulli Generalized Linear Model (GLM) observations, or 
GLM-HMM30–33 (Fig. 5a–b). Each hidden state is associated with a unique set of GLM 
weights governing choice behavior in that state. Probabilistic transitions between states 
occur after every trial, governed by a fixed matrix of transition probabilities (see Methods 
for details).
The GLM-HMM explained the choice data in the evidence accumulation task better than the 
GLM across multiple measures. We compared the likelihood of each animal’s data under the 
GLM-HMM to the standard Bernoulli GLM using cross-validation with held-out sessions 
(3-state GLM-HMM in Fig. 5; see Extended Data Fig. 7a–e for more information on model 
selection and demonstration that ~3–5 latent states was sufficient to reach a plateau in 
likelihood). The 3-state GLM-HMM achieved an average of 6.2 bits/session increase in 
log-likelihood, making an average session ~76 times more likely under the GLM-HMM 
(Fig. 5c). Furthermore, the GLM-HMM correctly predicted choice on held-out data more 
often than the GLM, especially on laser trials (Fig. 5d; average improvement across mice 
of 1.6% on all trials, 3.5% on trials with optical inhibition, and 4.1% on trials with optical 
inhibition when considering only mice with at least 100 inhibition trials).
Most interestingly, the GLM-HMM was better able to capture the temporal structure in 
the effect of inhibition on choice. Specifically, the choice data contained long runs in 
which choice was consistent with the bias direction predicted by pathway-specific inhibition 
(“laser”), a feature which GLM-HMM simulations recapitulated, but GLM simulations did 
not (Fig. 5e–f). Thus, taken together, the GLM-HMM provided a better model of the choice 
data than a standard GLM, particularly on trials with pathway-specific DMS inhibition.
GLM-HMM identifies states with varying DMS-dependence
We examined the state-dependent weights of the GLM-HMM and found substantial 
differences across states in the weighting of sensory evidence, previous choice, and most 
intriguingly, inhibition of DMS pathways (Fig. 6a–b). In particular, two of the three states 
(states 1 and 2) displayed a large weighting of sensory evidence on choice, while the “laser” 
weight was large only in state 2. In contrast, in state 3 choice history had a larger weight 
than in the other states, and neither sensory evidence nor “laser” had much influence on 
choice.
To characterize state-dependent psychometric performance, we used the fitted model to 
compute the posterior probability of each state given the choice data and assigned each 
trial to its most probable state (Fig. 6c–d). We then examined the psychometric curves for 
trials assigned to each state. In state 3, performance was low (Fig. 6g) and DMS inhibition 
had little effect on behavior (Fig. 6c–d). This is consistent with the high GLM weight on 
choice history in this state, and low weights on sensory evidence and laser (Fig. 6a–b). This 
implies relatively little contribution of DMS pathways during a task-disengaged state when 
mice pursued a strategy of repeating previous choices rather than accumulating sensory 
evidence. When considered together with comparisons of the effect of pathway-specific 
DMS inhibition in control T-maze tasks where performance is high (Fig. 2c) but effects 
Bolkan et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of inhibition are limited (Fig. 3f–k; Extended Data Fig. 5b–c), this implies a dissociation 
between task performance and the contributions of DMS pathways to behavior.
Compared to state 3, sensory evidence heavily modulated behavior in both states 1 and 
2, and performance was accordingly high (Fig. 6c–d,g). Interestingly, the effect of DMS 
pathway inhibition was much larger in state 2. These results were again consistent with the 
GLM weights: both state 1 and 2 had high weighting of sensory evidence, low weighting 
of choice history, but greatly differed in their weighting of the “laser” (Fig. 6a–b). The 
discovery of state 2 implies that DMS pathways contribute most heavily to choices in 
a state in which mice are pursuing a strategy of evidence accumulation, consistent with 
cross-task comparisons of the effects of inhibition (Fig. 3). The discovery of state 1, which 
differed most noticeably from state 2 in the extent that the laser affected choice, may suggest 
the existence of another neural mechanism for evidence accumulation with minimal DMS 
dependence.
We found that GLM-HMM simulations closely recapitulated these state-dependent 
psychometric curves (Fig. 6e–f). This not only validated our fitting procedure, but also 
provided additional evidence that a multi-state model provides a good account of the 
animals’ decision-making behavior during the evidence accumulation task.
While the effect of the laser differed across states, the probability of being in a particular 
state did not change on or after trials with optical inhibition (Fig. 6i), implying that DMS 
pathway inhibition itself did not generate transitions between states. In addition, the fraction 
of trials with optical inhibition was equivalent across states (~15% of all trials in each state; 
Fig. 6h). This implies that the model did not identify states simply based on the presence of 
laser trials.
We obtained similar states when fitting the model to a combined dataset including all groups 
of mice (those receiving DMS indirect and direct pathway inhibition, as well as control 
mice receiving DMS illumination in the absence of NpHR, Extended Data Fig. 7f). As when 
fitting each group separately, the combined fit revealed that both inhibition groups contained 
a single state with large weights on sensory evidence and the laser. In contrast, the control 
mice had small laser weights across all three states.
We also examined the results of fitting the 4-state GLM-HMM (Extended Data Fig. 7d–e), 
given it had a slightly higher cross-validated log-likelihood than the 3-state model (Extended 
Data Fig. 7a). In this case, the weights for states 1 and 2 were very similar to the 3-state 
model; the key difference was that the choice history state (state 3 of the 3-state model), was 
further subdivided into two states that differed in having a slight contralateral versus a slight 
ipsilateral bias. This suggests that while the model may uncover finer-grained structure 
in the data beyond 3-states (Extended Data Fig. 7d–e), these states yield diminishing 
interpretive insight on the weighting of sensory evidence, choice history, and DMS pathway 
inhibition across time.
Bolkan et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Diversity in timing and number of GLM-HMM state transitions
The fitted transition matrix revealed a high probability of remaining in the same state 
across trials (Fig. 7a–b). These transition probabilities produced a diversity in the timing 
and number of state transitions across sessions, which we visualized by calculating the 
maximum posterior probability of each state on each trial (Fig. 7c–d; see Methods, GLM-
HMM). In some sessions, mice persisted in the same state, while in many sessions, 
mice visited two or even all three states (example sessions in Fig. 7c–d; summaries of 
state occupancies across sessions in Fig. 7e–h; and summary of all individual mice in 
Supplementary Fig. 4). Average single-state dwell times ranged from 39–86 trials (Fig. 7g). 
This was shorter than the average session length of 194 trials, consistent with visits to 
multiple states per session.
While individual sessions were heterogeneous in terms of their state occupancies, averaged 
across sessions, the posterior probability of being in each state tended to be stable across 
trials (Fig. 7e; Extended Data Fig. 8a–b). Model simulations recapitulated these state 
transition characteristics, including dwell times and state occupancies (Extended Data Fig. 
9), further indicating our model captures latent structure in our data.
One notable exception in the stability of posterior probabilities of each state across time 
was an increase in state 3 probability towards the end of a session (Extended Data Fig. 8a), 
potentially reflecting a decrease in task engagement related to reward satiety. Consistent 
with a relationship to satiety, within-session transitions into state 3 were associated with 
higher amounts of previously accumulated reward and higher preceding rates of reward 
(Extended Data Fig. 8c–d,e–f). In addition, while the posterior probability of each state 
showed minimal modulation surrounding a rewarded trial, the probability of state 3 was 
much more likely surrounding trials with excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 8g–h,i–j), an 
indicator of non-goal directed movement and task disengagement. Indeed, the probability 
of state 3 gradually increased and decreased approximately 25 trials prior to and following 
excess travel trials, consistent with the average state 3 dwell time (Fig. 7e).
Given the presence of sessions in which mice occupied a single state, we considered model 
variants that disallowed within-session state transitions. Our goal was to determine if these 
variant models could provide a better explanation of the data, or alternatively, if within 
session state transitions are in fact an important structural feature for explaining the data. In 
one model variant, we disallowed transitions between states entirely (Fig. 7k). In the other, 
we tested the possibility that state 2, which is unique in the strength of its laser weight, 
captured a session-specific feature of inhibition by disallowing transitions in and out of that 
state (Fig. 7l). Using cross-validation, we found that neither alternative model explained the 
data as well as a model with unrestricted transitions (Fig. 7m), indicating that within-session 
transitions between states was an important feature of the model.
Motor performance across GLM-HMM states
Given the close relationship between excess travel and the posterior probability of state 3, 
we considered the possibility that other measures of motor behavior varied across states. 
We found that on trials without DMS pathway inhibition (Extended Data Fig. 10a–g,o–u), 
Bolkan et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
mice exhibited no obvious differences across states in velocity, x-position, or view angle 
(Extended Data Fig. 10a–d,o–r). However, during state 3 relative to state 1 and 2, we 
observed an increased tendency in measures of non-goal directed movements (Extended 
Data Fig 10e–g,s–u). This is consistent with the higher probability of state 3 around 
trials with excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 8h,j), and the interpretation of state 3 as a 
task-disengaged state.
We also considered the possibility that DMS pathway inhibition had state-dependent effects 
on motor output (Extended Data Fig. 10h–n,v–bb). We observed limited effects of inhibition 
on velocity, per-trial standard deviation in view angle, and distance traveled across all three 
states. However, similar to our cross-task comparisons (Extended Data Fig. 6j,k), DMS 
pathway inhibition produced a small but opposing bias in average x-position (Extended 
Data Fig. 10j,x) and view angle (Extended Data Fig. 10k,y), which was greatest in the 
state with the largest laser weight (state 2, Fig. 6). This is consistent with our conclusions 
that the effects of DMS inhibition on behavior are state-dependent, and that x-position and 
view angle are closely linked indicators of choice in the context of VR-based T-maze tasks 
(Extended Data Fig. 3g–j).
DISCUSSION
Our findings indicate that opposing contributions of DMS pathways to movement is minimal 
in the absence of a decision (Fig. 1), while the pathways provide large and opponent 
contributions to decision-making. Moreover, this contribution depends on the demands of 
a task (Fig. 2), as the effect of inhibition is much larger during decisions that require 
evidence accumulation relative to control tasks with weaker cognitive requirements yet 
similar sensory features and motor requirements (Fig. 3). The GLM-HMM further revealed 
that even within the evidence accumulation task, the contribution of DMS pathways to 
choice is not fixed. For example, DMS pathways have little contribution when mice pursue a 
strategy of repeating previous choices during the evidence accumulation task (Fig. 6). Thus, 
together our findings imply that opposing contributions of DMS pathways to behavior are 
task- and state-dependent.
Cross-task differences in effects of DMS pathway inhibition
Our finding that DMS activity contributes to the evidence accumulation task, but not to task 
variants with weaker cognitive demands, is broadly consistent with previous work based 
on lesions, pharmacology, and recordings implicating DMS in short-term memory and the 
dynamic comparison of the value of competing options19–22,25,34–37. But then why have 
most previous optogenetic pathway-specific manipulations emphasized an opposing role 
for DMS pathways in the direct control of motor output2,3,16,4,8,11, rather than on decision-
making? Prior work has overwhelmingly relied on the synchronous activation of striatal 
pathways, as opposed to the inhibition employed here. While DMS pathway activation is 
sufficient to bias movements such as spontaneous rotations, we observed relatively little 
impact of inhibition on behavior in the absence of a decision (Fig. 1). Taken together with 
previous work, our findings may thus imply limits in the use of artificial activations in 
assessing striatal pathway function. Our results may also imply that DMS pathways would 
Bolkan et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
not necessarily display opposing correlates of movements14,18,38–41, but rather opposing 
correlates of a decision process12,13,20,22,34,37.
While our observations are consistent with the classic view of opposing contributions of 
striatal pathways to behavior1, several prominent studies have instead challenged this view 
by reporting non-opposing behavioral effects of activating each pathway42–48. This may be 
because the pathways of a specific striatal subregion only exert opposing control on behavior 
in a specific context, for example during cognitively demanding decision-making as shown 
here for the DMS, or during an interval timing task that requires the proactive suppression 
of actions, as shown for the dorsolateral striatum28. Along these lines, our comparison to 
NAc pathways, where inhibition produced weak effects on behavior in similar directions 
(Fig. 3p), may imply that we have not discovered the context in which NAc pathways have 
opposing contributions to behavior.
We designed our T-maze tasks to have very similar sensory features and identical motor 
requirements, and yet very different cognitive demands, as assessed by task accuracy. That 
being said, the sensory features were not identical. Therefore, while unlikely, we cannot 
rule out that the subtle sensory differences contributed to the cross-task differences in 
the effect of pathway inhibition. A future direction would be to maintain an identical 
sensory environment across tasks and instead change the decision-making rule to be more 
cognitively demanding.
Within-task changes in effects of DMS pathway inhibition
In addition to our cross-task comparison, we reveal the novel insight that mice occupy 
time-varying latent states within a single task and that the contribution of DMS pathways 
to choice depends on the internal state of mice. The application of a GLM-HMM was 
critical in uncovering this feature of behavior, allowing the unsupervised discovery of latent 
states that differ in how external covariates were weighted to influence a choice32,49,50. This 
provided two insights on the contributions of DMS pathways to behavior.
First, the impact of DMS inhibition was diminished when mice occupied a task-disengaged 
state in which choice history heavily predicted decisions, while conversely, the impact of 
DMS inhibition was accentuated when mice occupied a task-engaged state in which sensory 
evidence strongly influenced choice (Fig. 6). This strengthens our conclusion from our 
cross-task comparison, which is that DMS pathways have a greater contribution to behavior 
when actively accumulating evidence towards a decision output.
Second, mice occupied two similar task-engaged states that were modestly distinguished in 
overall accuracy (Fig. 6g) and prominently distinguished by the influence of DMS inhibition 
on choice (Fig. 6a–d). While transitions between these two states were relatively rare on 
the same day, there were days that included both states (Fig. 7). The discovery of these 
two states leads to the intriguing suggestion that mice are capable of accumulating evidence 
towards a decision in at least two neurally distinct manners: one that depends on each DMS 
pathway (state 2), and another that does not (state 1). This is reminiscent of demonstrations 
that neural circuits have significant capacity for compensation to perturbations51,52, and our 
Bolkan et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
modeling approach may provide a new avenue for the identification of such compensatory 
mechanisms that will facilitate their future study.
While our work focused on the 3-state GLM-HMM, our conclusions do not depend on 
assuming exactly three states. In fact, the cross-validated log-likelihood of our data is higher 
for four states than three. Yet the conclusions from the 4-state model were similar to those 
from the 3-state model (compare Fig 6a–b to Extended Data Fig. 7d–e), and additional gains 
in log-likelihood decrease significantly for larger numbers of states. Nevertheless, it will be 
important for future work to compare the GLM-HMM framework employed here, which 
assumes discrete states, to models that assume continuously varying states33,53.
All together, our studies provide new perspectives on the neural mechanisms by which DMS 
pathways exert opponent control over behavior, with particular emphasis on the importance 
of accounting for task demands, internal state and associated behavioral strategies when 
assessing neural mechanisms. Toward this end we expect our behavioral and computational 
frameworks to be of broad utility in uncovering the neural substrates of decision-making in a 
wide range of settings.
METHODS
Animals
For optogenetic experiments we used both male and female transgenic mice on heterozygous 
backgrounds, aged 2–6 months of age, from the following three strains backcrossed to a 
C57BL/6J background (Jackson Laboratory, 000664) and maintained in-house: Drd1-Cre 
(n = 45, EY262Gsat, MMRRC-UCD), Drd2-Cre (n = 24, ER44Gsat, MMRRC-UCD), and 
A2a-Cre (n = 18, KG139Gsat, MMRRC-UCD). An additional 35 mice were excluded from 
all optogenetic analyses due to failed task acquisition (n = 11 mice) or failed viral/fiberoptic 
targeting of DMS (n = 8) or NAc (n = 16). An additional 4 Drd1-Cre mice, 3 A2a-Cre mice, 
and 2 Drd2-Cre mice were used for electrophysiological characterization of halorhodopsin 
(NpHR)-mediated inhibition, or fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) characterization 
of Cre expression profiles. FISH experiments also utilized 2 Drd1a-tdTomato mice (Jax, 
016204). Mice were co-housed with same-sex littermates and maintained on a 12-hour 
light – 12-hour dark cycle. All surgical procedures and behavioral training occurred in 
the dark cycle. All procedures were conducted in accordance with National Institute of 
Health guidelines and were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee at Princeton University.
Surgical procedures
All mice underwent sterile stereotaxic surgery to implant ferrule coupled optical fibers 
(Newport, 200 μM core, 0.37 NA) and a custom titanium headplate for head-fixation 
under isoflurane anesthesia (5% induction, 1.5% maintenance). Mice received a preoperative 
antibiotic injection of Baytril (5mg/kg, I.M.), as well as analgesia pre-operatively and 
24-hours later in the form of meloxicam injections (2mg/kg, S.C.). A microsyringe pump 
controlling a 10μl glass syringe (Nanofill) was used to bilaterally deliver virus targeted to 
either the DMS (0.74 mm anterior, 1.5 mm lateral, −3.0 mm ventral) or the NAc (1.3 mm 
Bolkan et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
anterior, 1.2 mm lateral, −4.7 mm ventral). For optogenetic inhibition, the following viruses 
were used: AA V5-eF1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-EYFP-WPRE-hGH (UPenn, 1.3 × 1013 parts/mL) 
or AA V5-eF1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-EYFP-WPRE-hGH (PNI Viral Core, 2.2 × 1014 parts/mL, 
1:5 dilution). For fluorescence in situ hybridization experiments, AA V5-eF1a-DIO-EYFP-
hGHpA (PNI Viral Core, 6.0 × 1013 parts/mL) was used to label D1R+ and D2R+ neurons 
in D1R-Cre and A2A-Cre transgenic lines. In all experiments, virus was delivered at a rate 
of 0.2 μL/min for a total volume of 0.3–0.7 μL in the DMS, or 0.3–0.4 μL in the NAc. To 
accommodate patch fiber coupling, optical fibers were implanted at angles (DMS: 15°, 0.74 
mm anterior, 1.1 mm lateral, −3.6 mm ventral; NAc: 10°, 1.3 mm anterior, 0.55 mm lateral, 
−5.0 ventral) and were then fixed to the skull using dental cement. Mice were allowed to 
recover and closely monitored for 5 days before beginning water-restriction and behavioral 
training.
Optrode recording for NpHR validation
Following the surgical procedures described above, Cre-dependent NpHR was virally 
delivered bilaterally to the DMS of mice (n = 3 A2a-Cre; n = 2 D1R-Cre) via small (~300-
uM) craniotomies made using a carbide drill (Extended Data Fig. 1a). The craniotomies 
were filled with a small amount of silicon adhesive (Kwik-Sil, World Precision instruments) 
and then covered with UV-curing optical adhesive (Norland Optical Adhesive 61), while 
a custom-designed headplate for head-fixation was cemented to the skull. Following a 
recovery period of >4 weeks, awake mice were head-fixed on a plastic running wheel 
attached to a breadboard via Thorlabs posts and holders, which was fixed immediately 
adjacent to a stereotaxic setup (Kopf) enclosed within a Faraday cage (Extended Data Fig. 
1b). Silicon and optical adhesive was removed from the craniotomies and a 32-channel, 
single-shank silicon probe (A1×32-Poly3, NeuroNexus) coupled to a tapered optical fiber 
(65 uM, 0.22 NA) was stereotaxically inserted under visual guidance of a stereoscope 
and allowed to stabilize for ~30 minutes. Signals were acquired at 20 kHz using a digital 
headstage amplifier (RHD2132, Intan) connected to an RHD USB data acquisition board 
(C3100, Intan). A screw implanted over the cerebellum served as ground. Continuous signal 
was imported into MATLAB for referencing to a local probe channel and high-pass filtering 
at 200 Hz, and then imported into Offline Sorter v3 (Plexon) for spike thresholding and 
single-unit sorting. During recording, the optical fiber was connected via a patch cable to 
a 532-nm laser, which was triggered by a TTL pulse sent by a pulse generator controlled 
by a computer running Spike2 software. TTL pulse times were copied directly to the RHD 
USB data acquisition board. Laser sweeps consisted of forty deliveries of 5-s light (5-mW, 
measured from fiber tip), separated by 15-s intertrial intervals. From 1–3 recordings were 
made at different depths within a single probe penetration (minimum separation of 300-
uM), with each hemisphere receiving 1–3 penetrations at different medial-lateral or anterior-
posterior coordinates. For recordings in mice carried out over multiple days, craniotomies 
were filled with Kwik-Sil and covered with silicone elastomer between recordings (Kwik-
Cast, World Precision Instruments).
VR Behavior
Virtual reality setup.—Mice were head-fixed over an 8-inch Styrofoam® ball suspended 
by compressed air (~60 p.s.i.) facing a custom-built Styrofoam® toroidal screen spanning 
Bolkan et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
a visual field of 270° horizontally and 80° vertically. The setup was enclosed within a 
custom-designed cabinet built from optical rails (Thorlabs) and lined with sound-attenuating 
foam sheeting (McMaster-Carr). A DLP projector (Optoma HD141X) with a refresh rate of 
120 Hz projected the VR environment onto the toroidal screen (Fig. 1e).
An optical flow sensor (ADNS-3080 APM2.6), located beneath the ball and 
connected to an Arduino Due, ran custom code to transform real-world ball rotations 
into virtual-world movements (https://github.com/sakoay/AccumTowersTools/tree/master/
OpticalSensorPackage) within the Matlab-based ViRMEn54 software engine (http://
pni.princeton.edu/pni-software-tools/virmen). The ball and sensor of each VR rig were 
calibrated such that ball displacements (dX and dY, where X (and Y) are parallel 
to the anterior-posterior (and medial-lateral) axes of the mouse) produced translational 
displacements proportional to ball circumference in the virtual environment of equal 
distance in corresponding X and Y axes. The y-velocity of the mouse was given by dY2/dt, 
where dt was the elapsed time from the previous sampling of the sensor. The virtual view 
angle of mice was obtained by first calculating the current displacement angle as: ω = atan2 
(−dx ⋅ sin (dY), |dY|). Then the rate of change of view angle (θ) for each sampling of the 
sensor was given by:
dθ
dt = sin(ω) ⋅ min e1.4 ω 1.2
− 1, π
2 − θ (1)
This exponential function was tuned to (1) minimize the influence of small ball 
displacements and thus stabilize virtual-world trajectories, and (2) increase the influence 
of large ball displacements in order to allow sharp turns into the maze arms26.
Reward and whisker air puffs were delivered by sending a TTL pulse to solenoid valves 
(NResearch), which were generated according to behavioral events on the ViRMEn 
computer. Each TTL pulse resulted in either the release of a drop of reward (~4–8ul of 10% 
sweetened condensed milk in water v/v) to a lick tube, or the release of air flow (40-ms, 15 
psi) to air puff cannula (Ziggy’s Tubes and Wires, 16 gauge) directed to the left and right 
whisker pads from the rear position. The ViRMEn computer also controlled TTL pulses sent 
directly to a 532-nm DPSS laser (Shanghai, 200mW).
Behavioral shaping.—Following post-surgical recovery, over the course of 4–7 days 
mice were extensively handled while gradually restricting water intake to an allotted volume 
of 1–2 mL per day. Throughout water-restriction mice were closely monitored to ensure no 
signs of dehydration were present and that body mass was at least 80% of the pre-restriction 
value. Mice were then introduced to the VR setup where behavior was shaped to perform 
the accumulation of evidence task as previously described in detail26 (Supplementary Fig. 
5a) or the permanent cues (control #2) task (Supplementary Fig. 5f). We tested a total of 32, 
34 and 20 mice in the accumulation of evidence, no distractors (control #1), and permanent 
cues (control #2) tasks, respectively. No mice received optogenetic testing in all three tasks, 
but 7 mice received optogenetic testing in the accumulation of evidence and no distractors 
Bolkan et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
task, and 19 mice received optogenetic testing in the no distractors and permanent cues tasks 
(Supplementary Table 1).
Shaping followed a similar progression in both tasks. In the first four shaping mazes of both 
procedures, a visual guide located in the rewarded arm was continuously visible, and the 
maze stem was gradually extended to a final length of 300-cm (Supplementary Fig. 5a,f). 
In mazes 5–7 of the evidence accumulation shaping procedure (Supplementary Fig. 5a), 
the visual guide was removed and the cue region was gradually decreased to 200-cm, thus 
introducing the full 100-cm delay region of the testing mazes. The same shift to a 200-cm 
cue region and 100-cm delay region occurred in mazes 5–6 of the permanent cues shaping 
procedure, but without removing the visibility of the visual guide (Supplementary Fig. 5f). 
In mazes 8–9 of evidence accumulation shaping, distractor cues were introduced to the 
non-rewarded maze side with increasing frequency (mean side ratio (s.d.) of rewarded::non-
rewarded side cues of 8.3::0.7 to 8.0::1.6 m−1). Distractor cues were similarly introduced 
with increasing frequency in mazes 6–8 of the permanent cues shaping procedure, while the 
visual guide was removed in maze 7 and 8. In all evidence accumulation shaping mazes 
(maze 1–9) cues were only made visible when mice were 10-cm from the cue location and 
remained visible until trial completion. In the final evidence accumulation testing mazes 
(maze 10 and 11) cues were made transiently visible (200-ms) after first presentation (10-cm 
from cue location), while the mean side ratio of rewarded::non-rewarded side cues changed 
from 8.0::1.6 (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 10) to 7.7::2.3 m−1 (Supplementary Fig. 5a, 
maze 11). In contrast, throughout all shaping (maze 1–6) and testing mazes (maze 7–8) of 
the permanent cues task, cues were visible from the onset of a trial.
The median number of sessions to reach the first evidence accumulation testing maze (maze 
10) was 22 sessions, while the mean number of sessions was 23.0 +/− 0.8 (Supplementary 
Fig. 5b–c). Mice typically spent between 2–5 sessions on each shaping maze before 
progressing to the next, with performance increasing or remaining stable throughout 
(Supplementary Fig. 5d–e; maze 9: 74.1 +/− 9.8 percent correct). The median number 
of sessions to reach the first permanent cues (control #2) testing maze (maze 7) was 17 
sessions, while the mean number of sessions was 18.0 +/− 1.5 (Supplementary Fig. 5g–j). 
Mice typically spent between 2–4 sessions on each shaping maze before progressing to the 
next, with performance increasing or remaining largely stable throughout (Supplementary 
Fig. 5g–j; maze 6: 87.0 +/− 4.3 percent correct).
Optogenetic testing mazes.—The evidence accumulation task took place in a 330-cm 
long virtual T-maze with a 30-cm start region (−30 to 0-cm), followed by a 200-cm 
cue region and finally a 100-cm delay region (Fig. 2a, black, left). While navigating the 
cue region of the maze mice were transiently presented with high-contrast visual cues 
(wall-sized “towers”) on either maze side, which were also paired with a mild air puff (15 
p.s.i, 40-ms) to the corresponding whisker pad. The side containing the greater number of 
cues indicated the future rewarded arm. A left or right choice was determined when mice 
crossed an x-position threshold > |15-cm|, which was only possible within one of the maze 
arms (the width of choice arms were +/− 25-cm relative to the center of the maze stem). 
Mice received reward (~4–8 μL of 10% v/v sweetened condensed milk in drinking water) 
followed by a 3-s ITI after turning to the correct arm at the end of the maze, while incorrect 
Bolkan et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
choices were indicated by a tone followed by a 12-s ITI. In each trial, the position of 
cues was drawn randomly from a spatial Poisson process with a rate of 8.0 m−1 for the 
rewarded side and 1.6 m−1 for the non-rewarded side (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 10) 
or 7.3::2.3 m−1 (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 11). Note that only maze 10 data was used 
for cross-task comparisons of optogenetic effects with permanent cues and no distractors 
control tasks in order to precisely match cue presentation statistics (Fig. 2–3; Extended Data 
Fig. 3–6). Visual cues (and air puffs) were presented when mice were 10-cm away from 
their drawn location and ended 200-ms (or 40-ms) later. Cue positions on the same side 
were also constrained by a 12-cm refractory period. Each session began with warm-up trials 
of a visually-guided maze (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 4), with mice progressing to the 
evidence accumulation testing maze after 10 trials (or until accuracy reached 85% correct). 
During performance of the testing maze if accuracy fell below 55% over a 40-trial running 
window, mice were transitioned to an easier maze in which cues were presented only on the 
rewarded side and did not disappear following presentation (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 
7). These “easy blocks” were limited to 10 trials, after which mice returned to the main 
testing maze regardless of performance. Behavioral sessions lasted for ~1-hour and typically 
consisted of ~150–200 trials.
All features of the “no distractors” (control #1) task (Fig. 2b, magenta, middle; 
Supplementary Fig. 5a,g, maze 12) were identical to the evidence accumulation task 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 10) except: (1) distractor cues were removed from the non-
rewarded side, and (2) a distal visual guide located in the rewarded arm was transiently 
visible during the cue region (0–200-cm).
All features of the “permanent cues” (control #2) task (Fig. 2b, cyan, right; Supplementary 
Fig. 5g, maze 8) were identical to the evidence accumulation task except: (1) reward and 
non-reward side visual cues were made permanently visible from trial onset. As in the 
evidence accumulation task, whisker air puffs were only delivered when mouse position 
was 10-cm from visual cue location. Note that mice underwent optogenetic testing on two 
permanent cues mazes (maze 7 and maze 8). Maze 8 shared identical reward to non-reward 
side cue statistics (8.0::1.6 m−1) as maze 10 of the evidence accumulation task. Therefore, 
for all cross-task comparisons of optogenetic inhibition only data from these mazes were 
analyzed (Fig. 2–3; Extended Data Fig. 3–6).
To discourage side biases, in all tasks we used a previously implemented debiasing 
algorithm26. This was achieved by changing the underlying probability of drawing a left 
or a right trial according to a balanced method described in detail elsewhere26. In brief, the 
probability of drawing a right trial, pR, is given by:
pR = eR
eR + eL
(2)
Where (eR and eL) are the weighted average of the fraction of errors the mouse has made in 
the past 40 right (and left) trials. The weighting for this average is based on a half-Gaussian 
with σ = 20 trials in the past, which ensures that most recent trials have larger weight on the 
Bolkan et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
debiasing algorithm. To discourage the generation of sequences of all-right (or all-left) trials, 
we capped eR and eL to be within the range [0.15, 0.85]. Because the empirical fraction of 
drawn right trials could significantly deviate from pR , particularly when the number of trials 
is small, we applied an additional pseudo-random drawing prescription to pR. Specifically, if 
the empirical fraction of right trials (calculated using a σ = 60 trials half-Gaussian weighting 
window) is above pR, right trials were drawn with probability 0.5pR, whereas if this fraction 
is below pR, right trials were drawn with probability 0.5(1 + pR).
Virtual corridor.—Following shaping in the behavioral tasks above mice were transitioned 
to free navigation in a virtual corridor arena in the same VR apparatus described above. 
The virtual corridor was 6-cm in diameter and 330-cm in effective length (Fig. 1e–f). This 
included a start region (−10 to 0-cm), a reward location (310-cm) in which mice received 
4 μL of 10% v/v sweetened condensed milk in drinking water, and a teleportation region 
(320-cm) in which mice were transported back to the start region following a variable ITI 
with mean of 2-s. Mice were otherwise allowed to freely navigate the virtual corridor over 
the course of ~70 minute sessions. The virtual environment was controlled by the ViRMEn 
software engine, with real-to-virtual world movement transformations as described above.
Optogenetics during VR behavior
According to a previously published protocol55, optical fibers (200uM, 0.37 NA) were 
chemically etched using 48% hydrofluoric acid to achieve tapered tips of lengths 1.5–2 
mm (DMS-targeted) or 1–1.5 mm (NAc-targeted). Following behavioral shaping in VR 
(and >6weeks of viral expression) mice underwent optogenetic testing. On alternate daily 
sessions, optical fibers in the left or right hemisphere were unilaterally coupled to a 532-nm 
DPSS laser (Shanghai, 200 mW) via a multi-mode fiberoptic patch cable (PFP, 62.5 μM). 
On a random subset of trials (10–30%), mice received unilateral laser illumination (5 mW, 
measured from patch cable) that was restricted to the first passage through 0–200-cm of the 
virtual corridor (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2), or the cue region (0–200cm) of each 
T-maze decision-making task (Fig. 3). The laser was controlled by TTL pulses generated 
using a National Instruments DAQ card on a computer running the ViRMEn-based virtual 
environment.
Conditioned place preference test
Mice underwent a real-time conditioned place preference (CPP) test with bilateral 
optogenetic inhibition paired to one side of a two-chamber apparatus (Supplementary Fig. 
3). The CPP apparatus consisted of a rectangular Plexiglass box with two chambers (29-cm 
× 25-cm) separated by a clear portal in the center. The same grey, plastic flooring was used 
for both chambers, but each chamber was distinguished by vertical or horizontal black and 
white bars on the chamber walls. During a baseline test, mice were placed in the central 
portal while connected to patch cables coupled to an optical commutator (Doric) and were 
allowed to freely move between both sides for 5 minutes. In a subsequent 20-min test, mice 
received continuous, bilateral optogenetic inhibition (532-nm, 5-mW) when located in one 
of the two chamber sides (balanced across groups). Video tracking, TTL triggering, and data 
analysis were carried out using Ethovision software (Noldus). Mice who displayed a bias for 
one chamber side greater than 45-s during the baseline test were excluded from analysis.
Bolkan et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Behavior analyses
Data selection.—See Supplementary Table 1 for a list of all mice with optogenetic testing 
data in the virtual corridor, the accumulation of evidence, no distractors, or permanent 
cues tasks. The following describes the trial selection criteria for inclusion in analyses 
throughout.
For cross-task comparisons (Fig. 2–3; Extended Data Fig. 3–6) we analyzed only trials 
from evidence accumulation maze 10 (Supplementary Fig. 5a), “no distractors” maze 12 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a,g), and “permanent cues” maze 8 (Supplementary Fig. 5g), which 
each followed matching rewarded- and non-rewarded side cue probability statistics (save for 
the by-design absence of non-rewarded cues in the “no distractors” control task). For model-
based analyses of the evidence accumulation task (Fig. 4–7, Extended Data Fig. 7–10) both 
maze 10 and maze 11 data were included, which differed only modestly in the side ratio of 
reward to non-reward side cues (Supplementary Fig. 5a, ~50% of trials were maze 10 or 11). 
In all tasks and all analyses throughout we removed initial warm-up blocks (Supplementary 
Fig. 5a, maze 4, approximately 5–15% of total trials). For model-based analyses of the 
evidence accumulation task (Fig. 4–7, Extended Data Fig. 7–10), we included interspersed 
“easy blocks” capped at 10 trials in length (Supplementary Fig. 5a, maze 7, see description 
above). These trial blocks comprised approximately ~5% of total trials, were included to 
avoid gaps in trial history, and were treated identical to the main evidence accumulation 
mazes by the models. These trials were removed from cross-task comparisons of optogenetic 
inhibition (Fig. 2–3; Extended Data Fig. 3–6).
For analysis of optogenetic inhibition during virtual corridor navigation (Fig. 1 and 
Extended Data Fig. 2) we removed trials with excess travel >10% of maze stem (or >330-
cm) and mice with <150 total trials from measures of y-velocity, x-position, and average 
view angle. Trials with excess travel had similar proportions across laser off and laser on 
trials and pathway-specific inhibition and control groups (indirect pathway: 8.1% of laser off 
and 8.2% of laser on trials; direct pathway: 8.2% of laser off and 8.1% of laser on trials; 
no opsin control: 7.0% of laser off and 6.9% laser on trials; exact trial N in figure legends). 
Excess travel trials reflected the minority of trials in which mice made multiple traversals 
of the virtual corridor, thus skewing measures of average y-velocity, x-position, and view 
angle during the majority of “clean” corridor traversals. Importantly, we excluded no trials 
in direct measurements of distance, per-trial view angle standard deviation, and trials with 
excess travel in order to detect potential effects of pathway-specific DMS inhibition (or 
DMS illumination alone) on these measures (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2).
Similarly, for all cross-task comparisons (Fig. 2–3; Extended Data Fig. 3–6) we removed 
trials with excess travel for all analyses comparing choice, y-velocity, x-position, and 
average view angle. To better capture task-engaged behavior we also only considered trial 
blocks in which choice accuracy was greater than >60% for these measures. Excess travel 
trials were not excluded for cross-task comparisons of effects on measures of distance, 
per-trial view angle standard deviation, and trials with excess travel. Exact trial and mouse N 
are reported in figure legends throughout.
Bolkan et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
For cross-state comparisons of motor output measures (Extended Data Fig. 10) we did 
not exclude trial blocks with choice accuracy <60%, given that different GLM-HMM 
states were associated with performance levels. However, for the reasons outlined above 
we removed excess travel trials from measures of y-velocity, x-position, and average view 
angle, and additionally only considered mice who occupied all three GLM-HMM states 
after trial selection. For measures of per-trial standard deviation in view angle, distance, and 
excess travel we applied no trial selection criteria, but only mice who occupied all three 
GLM-HMM states were included for analysis. Exact trial and mouse N are reported in the 
legend.
General performance indicators.—Accuracy was defined as the percentage of trials in 
which mice chose the maze arm corresponding to the side having the greater number of 
cues (Fig. 2c). For measures of choice bias, sensory evidence and choice were defined as 
either ipsilateral or contralateral relative to the unilaterally-coupled laser hemisphere. Choice 
bias was calculated separately for laser-off and laser-on trials as the difference in choice 
accuracy between trials where sensory evidence indicated a contralateral reward versus when 
sensory evidence indicated an ipsilateral reward (% correct, “contralateral”–“ipsilateral”, 
positive values indicate greater contralateral choice bias) (Fig. 3d,g,j,o). Delta choice bias 
was calculated as the difference in contralateral choice bias between laser-off and laser-on 
trials (“on”–“off”, positive values indicate laser-induced contralateral choice bias) (Fig. 
3e,g,k,p). In Extended Data Fig. 8c–f, reward at GLM-HMM state transition reflects the 
total amount of reward (mL) received from the start of the session up to the trial prior to a 
state transition (mice typically receive 1–1.5 mL per session). Reward rate at GLM-HMM 
state transition was calculated as the sum of reward received from the start of the session up 
to the trial prior to a state transition, divided by the sum of all trial durations from the start of 
the session up to the trial prior to a state transition. GLM-HMM transitions were defined as a 
within-session change in the most likely state based on the posterior probability of each state 
(see GLM-HMM below for more details).
Psychometric curve fitting.—Psychometric performance was assessed based on the 
percentage of contralateral choices as a function of the difference in the number of 
contralateral and ipsilateral cues (#contra-#ipsi) (Fig 6c–f; Extended Data Fig. 4). In 
Extended Data Fig. 4, transparent lines reflect the mean performance of individual mice 
in bins (−16:4:16, #contra-#ipsi) of sensory evidence during laser off (black) and on (green) 
trials, while bold lines reflect the corresponding mean and s.e.m across mice. In Fig. 
6, psychometric curves were fit to the following 4-parameter sigmoid using maximum 
likelihood fitting56:
p choice = "right" Δ = λ + 1 − λ − γ
1 + exp − Δ − σ μ (3)
Where λ and γ are the right and left lapse rates, respectively, σ is the offset, μ is the slope, 
and Δ is the difference in the number of contralateral and ipsilateral cues on a given trial. 
Each point in Fig. 6c–f represents the binned difference in cues in increments of 4 from −16 
Bolkan et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to 16 (as in Extended Data Fig. 4), from which we calculated the percentage of contralateral 
choice trials for each bin.
Motor performance indicators.—Y-velocity (cm/s) was calculated on every sampling 
iteration (120 Hz, or every ~8ms) of the ball motion sensor as dY/dt where dY was the 
change in Y-position displacement in VR and dt was the elapsed time from the previous 
sampling of the sensor. The y-velocity for all iterations in which a mouse occupied y-
positions from 0–300-cm in 25-cm bins were then averaged across iterations in each bin 
to obtain per-trial y-velocity as a function of y-position. Binned y-velocity as a function of 
y-position was then averaged across trials for individual mice, and the average and standard 
error of the mean across mice reported throughout (Fig. 1g; Fig. 2d; Extended Data Fig. 
6a–c; Extended Data Fig. 10b,p,i,w; averaged across y-position 0–200cm in Extended Data 
Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b).
X-position trajectory (cm) as a function of y-position was calculated per trials by first taking 
the x-position at y-positions 0–300cm in 1-cm steps, which was defined as the x-position at 
the last sampling time t in which y(t) ≥ Y, and then averaging the y-position bins of 25-cm 
from 0 to 300cm. Binned x-position as a function of y-position was then averaged across 
left/right (or ipsilateral/contralateral) choice trials for individual mice, and the average and 
standard error the mean across mice was reported throughout (Fig. 1h; Fig. 2e; and Extended 
Data Fig. 10c,q; averaged across y-positions 0–200cm in Extended Data Fig. 2c; Extended 
Data Fig. 3c; Extended Data Fig. 6j–l; and Extended Data Fig. 10j,x). Average view angle 
trajectory (degrees) was calculated in the same manner as x-position (Fig. 1i; Fig. 2f; and 
Extended Data Fig. 10d,r; average across y-positions 0–200cm in Extended Data Fig. 2d; 
Extended Data Fig. 3d; Extended Data Fig. 6j–l; and Extended Data Fig. 10k,y). View angle 
standard deviation was calculated by first sampling the per-trial view angle from 0–300cm of 
the maze in 5-cm steps. The standard deviation in view angle was then calculated for each 
trial, and then averaged across trials for individual mice. The average and standard error 
of the mean across mice are reported throughout (Extended Data Fig. 2e; Extended Data 
Fig. 3f; Extended Data Fig. 6g–i; and Extended Data Fig. 10e,s,l,z). This measure sought to 
capture unusually large deviations in single trial view angles, which would be indicative of 
excessive turning or rotations.
Distance traveled was measured per trial as the sum of the total x and y displacement 
calculated at each sampling iteration t, as dX2 +   dY 2. Distance traveled per trial was then 
averaged across trials for individual mice and the average and standard error of the mean 
across mice was reported throughout (Fig. 1j; Fig. 2g; Extended Data Fig. 2f; Extended Data 
Fig. 6d–f, left; Extended Data Fig. 10f,t,m,aa). Excess travel was defined as the fraction of 
trials with total distance traveled per trial (calculated as above) greater than 10% of maze 
length (or >330cm). The average and standard error of the mean across mice was reported 
throughout (Extended Data Fig. 2g; Extended Data Fig. 3e; Extended Data Fig. 6d–f, right; 
and Extended Data Fig. 10g,u,n,bb).
Decoding of choice based on the trial-by-trial x-position (Extended Data Fig. 3g,i) or view 
angle (Extended Data Fig. 3h,j) of mice was carried out by performing a binomial logistic 
regression using the MATLAB function glmfit. In Extended Data Fig. 3g–h, the logistic 
Bolkan et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
regression was fit separately for individual mice at successive y-positions in each T-maze 
stem (0–300cm in 25-cm bins), where the trial-by-trial average x-position (or view angle) 
at each y-position bin (calculated as above) was used to generate weights predicting the 
probability of a left or right choice given a particular x-position (or view angle) value. 
Individual mouse fits were weighted according to the proportion of left and right choice 
trials. 5-fold cross-validation (re-sampled for new folds 10 times) was used to evaluate 
prediction accuracy on held-out trials. A choice probability greater than or equal to 0.5 was 
decoded as a right choice, and prediction accuracy for individual mice was calculated as the 
fraction of predicted choices matching actual mouse choice, averaged across cross-validation 
sets. The same approach was used in Extended Data Fig. 3i–j, except that the training data 
was randomly sampled across all mice from a single task (50% of total trials, re-sampled 
50 times; train on data from evidence accumulation, no distractors, or permanent cues task). 
The learned weights were then used to predict choice based on held out x-position (or 
view angle) data from all three tasks, with prediction accuracy calculated as the fraction 
of predicted choices matching actual choice, parsed by individual mice, and averaged 
across cross-validation sets. A package of code for behavioral analysis in VR-based T-maze 
settings is available at: https://github.com/BrainCOGS/behavioralAnalysis. In addition, all 
analyses described here can be replicated at https://github.com/ssbolkan/BolkanStoneEtAl.
General statistics and Reproducibility
We performed one-way ANOV As to assess effects of the factor task (three levels: evidence 
accumulation, no distractors, or permanent cue) on choice accuracy (Fig. 2c), distance 
traveled (Fig. 1g), average y-velocity (0–200cm) (Extended Data Fig. 3b), average x-
position (0–200cm) on left or right choice trials (Extended Data Fig 6c), average view 
angle (0–200cm) on left or right choice trials (Extended Data Fig. 3d), percent trials with 
excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 3e), per-trial standard deviation in view angle (Extended 
Data Fig. 3f), delta (laser on-off) choice bias (Extended Data Fig. 5b–d), delta (laser 
on-off) distance traveled (Extended Data Fig. 6d–f, left), delta (laser on-off) percent trials 
with excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 6d–f, right), delta (laser on-off) per-trial standard 
deviation in view angle (Extended Data Fig. 6g–i), delta (laser on-off) average x-position 
(0–200cm) (Extended Data Fig. 6j–l, left), and delta (laser on-off) average view angle (0–
200cm) (Extended Data Fig. 6j–l, right). Post-hoc comparisons between tasks were made 
when a main effect of the factor task had a p-value less than alpha <0.05/2 to account for 
multiple group comparisons (Extended Data Fig. 5b–d). One exception to this is Extended 
Data Fig. 6j–l, where all post-hoc comparisons were made for laser effects on delta (on-off) 
x-position and view angle (and displayed with corresponding exact p-values) to provide 
greater clarity around trend-level effects. We did not assume normality of the data in all 
post-hoc comparisons, which used the non-parametric, unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon rank 
sum test. A p-value below 0.025 was considered significant in order to correct for multiple 
comparisons (p = 0.05/2 comparisons per group). Exact p-values, degrees of freedom, and 
z-statistics are reported in the text and/or legends.
We performed one-way ANOV As to assess effects of the factor group (three levels: indirect 
pathway inhibition, direct pathway inhibition, or no opsin illumination) on delta (laser 
on-off) y-velocity (Extended Data Fig. 2b), delta (laser on-off) x-position (Extended Data 
Bolkan et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2c), delta (laser on-off) view angle (Extended Data Fig. 2d), delta (laser on-off) per-trial 
standard deviation in view angle (Extended Data Fig. 2e), delta (laser on-off) distance 
(Extended Data Fig. 2f), delta (laser on-off), and delta (laser on-off) percent trials with 
excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 2g), and delta (laser on-off) preference (i.e. time) and 
speed during the real-time conditioned place preference test (Supplementary Fig. 3).
We performed a repeated-measure one-way ANOV A to assess effects of the within-subject 
factor state (three levels: GLM-HMM state 1, 2, or 3) on within-session accumulated reward 
or reward rate prior to GLM-HMM transition (Extended Data Fig. 8c–f), per-trial standard 
deviation in view angle (Extended Data Fig. 10e,s), distance traveled (Extended Data Fig. 
10f,t), percent trials with excess travel (Extended Data Fig. 10g,u), delta (laser on-off) 
average x-position 0–200cm (Extended Data Fig. 10j,x), delta (laser on-off) average view 
angle 0–200cm (Extended Data Fig. 10k,y), delta (laser on-off) per-trial standard deviation 
in view angle (Extended Data Fig. 10l,z), delta (laser on-off) distance traveled (Extended 
Data Fig. 10m,aa), and delta (laser on-off) percent trials with excess travel (Extended Data 
Fig. 10n,bb). Post-hoc comparisons between groups were made when a main effect of the 
factor task had a p-value <0.05. One exception is in Extended Data Fig. 6j,k,x,y, where 
all post-hoc comparisons were made for laser effects on delta (on-off) x-position and view 
angle (and displayed with corresponding exact p-values) to provide greater clarity around 
trend-level effects. We did not assume normality of the data in all post-hoc comparisons, 
which used the non-parametric, unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test. A p-value 
below 0.025 was considered significant in order to correct for multiple comparisons (p 
= 0.05/2 comparisons per group). Exact p-values, degrees of freedom, and z-statistics are 
reported in the text and/or legends.
In Fig. 3e,h,k,p, we used the non-parametric, unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test to 
assess effects of indirect or direct pathway inhibition versus no opsin illumination of brain 
tissue on delta (laser on-off) choice bias. A p-value below 0.025 was considered significant 
in order to correct for multiple comparisons (p = 0.05/2 comparisons per group). Exact 
p-values, degrees of freedom, and z-statistics are reported in the text and/or legends.
Related to Fig. 1a–c, Extended Data Fig. 1, and Supplementary Fig. 2, we used a paired, 
two-tailed Wilcoxon signrank test on cross-trial average firing rates (baseline pre versus 
laser on or laser on versus laser post) to determine significance of laser modulation of single 
neuron activity. A bonferroni-corrected p-value was used to determine significance (p < 
0.00083 for 60 indirect pathway neurons or p < 0.001 for 50 direct pathway neurons).
All experiments, but not analysis, were conducted blind to experimental conditions. All 
experiments were conducted over multiple cohorts (see Supplementary Table 1 for details 
of individual mouse testing across experiments). Individual cohorts consisted of a random 
selection of test groups (e.g. DMS indirect and direct pathway inhibition, and DMS no-opsin 
mice). We did not account for cohort effects in our statistical analyses, but no obvious 
cohort-dependent effects were qualitatively observable. No statistical method was used to 
predetermine group sample sizes; rather animal and trial N were targeted to match or exceed 
similar studies.
Bolkan et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Bernoulli GLM
Coding of covariates and choice output.—We coded the external covariates (referred 
to as inputs in Fig. 4b) and output (the mouse’s choice) on each trial as follows:
Δ cues: an integer value from −16 to 16, divided by the standard deviation of the Δ 
cues across all sessions in all mice, representing the standardized difference between 
the number of cues on the right and left sides of the maze.
Laser: a value of 1,−1, or 0 depending on whether optogenetic inhibition was on the 
right hemisphere, left hemisphere, or off, respectively.
Previous choice: a value of 1 or −1 if the choice on a previous trial was to the right or 
left, respectively. We set the value to 0 at the start of each session when there was an 
absence of previous choices (e.g. for the third trial of a session, previous choices 3–6 
would be coded as 0).
Previous rewarded choice: a value of 1, −1, or 0 depending on whether the previous 
choice was correct and to the right, correct and to the left, or incorrect, respectively.
Choice output: a value of 1 or 0 depending on whether the mouse turned right or left.
Fitting.—We used a Bernoulli generalized linear model (GLM), also known as logistic 
regression, to model the binary (right/left) choices of mice as a function of task covariates. 
This also corresponds to a 1-state GLM-HMM (Fig. 4; Extended Data Fig. 7a). The model 
was parameterized by a weight vector (carrying weights for sensory evidence, choice and 
reward history, and DMS inhibition). On each trial t, the weights map the external covariates 
to the probability of each choice yt. The model can be written as:
p yt = 1 xt = 1
1 + exp −wTxt
(4)
We then fit the model by penalized maximum likelihood, which involved minimizing the 
negative log-likelihood function plus a squared penalty term on the model weights. The 
log-likelihood function is given by the conditional probability of the choice data Y = y1, …, 
yT given all the external covariates X = x1, … xT, considered as a function of the model 
parameters:
log(p(Y ∣ X, w)) = ∑
t = 1
T
log p yt ∣ xt
= ∑
t = 1
T
yt log p yt = 1 ∣ xt + ∑
t = 1
T
1 − yt  log 1 − p yt = 1 ∣ xt
(5)
We then minimized the loss function, given by −log p Y |X, w + 1
2 wT w, using python’s 
scipy.optimize.minimize. This can be interpreted as a log-posterior over the weights, with 
12wTw representing the negative log of a Gaussian prior distribution with mean zero and 
variance 1, which regularizes by penalizing large weight values. A variance of 1 was chosen 
Bolkan et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
because the resulting penalty was sufficient to resolve cases where the weights would grow 
unusually large and lead to decreases in the log-likelihood over the course of fitting. We 
computed the posterior standard deviation of the fitted GLM weights (shown as error bars in 
Fig. 4c–d) by taking the diagonal elements of the inverse negative Hessian (matrix of second 
derivatives) of the log-posterior at its maximum57,58.
GLM-HMM
Model architecture.—To incorporate discrete internal states, we used a hidden Markov 
model (HMM) with a Bernoulli GLM governing the decision-making behavior in each state. 
The model is defined by a transition matrix and a vector of GLM weights for each state. The 
transition matrix contains a fixed set of probabilities that govern the probability of changing 
from a state z ∈ {1, …, K} on trial t to any other state on the next trial. We refer to these as 
transition probabilities, which can be abbreviated as follows:
Pij = p(zt + 1 = j zt = i) (6)
Each GLM has a unique set of weights wk that map the external covariates xt (coded as 
described in the section Bernoulli GLM) to the probability of the choice yt for each of the k 
states. These probabilities can be expressed as a modified version of equation (4)
p yt = 1 xt, zt = j = 1
1 + exp −w j
Txt
(7)
where wj is the vector of GLM weights for state j. Note that in this expression, the 
choice probability depends on both the external covariates (inputs) and the state via the 
state-dependent GLM weights30–32. We refer to these as “observation probabilities”, which 
can be abbreviated as follows:
ϕij = p(yt = j xt, zt = i) (8)
Fitting.—We fit the GLM-HMM to the data using the expectation-maximization (EM) 
algorithm31. The EM algorithm computes the maximum likelihood estimate of the model 
parameters using an iterative procedure that involves an E-step (expectation), in which 
the posterior distribution of the latent variables is calculated, followed by an M-step 
(maximization), in which the values of the model parameters are updated given the posterior 
distribution of the latents. These steps are repeated until the log-likelihood of the model 
converges on a local optimum58.
The log-likelihood (also referred to as the log marginal likelihood) is obtained from the 
joint probability distribution over the latent states Z = z1, … , zT and the observations Y = 
y1, … , yT on each trial given the model parameters θ. Marginalizing over the latents, the 
log-likelihood is computed as the log of the sum over states of the marginal probabilities and 
is written:
Bolkan et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
log p Y X, θ = log ∑
Z
p(Y, Z X, θ) (9)
The set of parameters θ governing the model consists of a transition matrix and the state-
dependent GLM weights, which we described above. We initialized the transition matrix 
by sampling each row from a Dirichlet distribution, with a larger concentration parameter 
over the entries along the diagonal (αii = 5, αij = 1), reflecting a slight bias towards 
self-transitions. For the GLM weights, we reasoned that the true values for each state would 
likely be in approximately the same range as the true values for the one-state (GLM) case. 
Therefore, we initialized the per-state GLM weights wk with k ∈ {1, … , K} by first fitting 
a basic GLM (see Bernoulli GLM) to find w0. Then, since we didn’t want the initial weights 
to be the same in each state, we initialized wk = w0 + ϵk where ϵ     N 0, 0.2  .
The goal of the E-step of the EM algorithm is to compute p(Z| X, Y, θ), the posterior 
probability of the latent states given the observations and the model parameters. This 
can be obtained using a two-stage message passing algorithm known as the forward-
backward algorithm31. The forward pass, sometimes called “filtering,” finds the normalized 
conditional probability αzt for each state z at trial t by iteratively computing
α zt = p zt ∣ y1: t, x1: t
= p yt ∣ zt, xt
p yt ∣ y1: t − 1
∑
k = 1
K
p zt − 1 = k, y1: t − 1 ∣ x1: t − 1 p zt ∣ zt − 1 = k
= ct−1ϕzt − 1, yt ∑
k = 1
K
α zt − 1 = k Pk, zt
(10)
where ct = p(yt|y1:t − 1) is a scale factor ensuring the probabilities over states sum to 1, which 
is computed by summing the unnormalized probabilities. We set the prior distribution over 
states before the first trial, denoted αz0, to be the uniform distribution. Note that this is 
a normalized version of the forward-backward algorithm that avoids underflow errors (see 
Bishop Chapter 13)58.
The backward step, also referred to as “smoothing,” takes the information from the forward 
pass and works in the reverse direction, carrying the information about future states 
backwards in time to further refine the latent state probabilities. Here we find the normalized 
conditional probability βzt for each state z at trial t by iteratively computing
β zt = p yt + 1: T ∣ xt + 1: T, zt
p yt + 1: T ∣ y1: t
= 1
p yt + 1 ∣ y1: t
∑
k = 1
K p yt + 2: T ∣ xt + 2: T, zt + 1 = k
p yt + 2: T ∣ y1: t + 1
p yt + 1 ∣ zt + 1 = k, xt + 1 p
zt + 1 = k ∣ zt
= ct + 1
−1 ∑
k = 1
K
β zt + 1 = k ϕk, yt + 1Pzt, k
(11)
Bolkan et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
where β zT = 1.
From these two conditional probabilities we can calculate the marginal posterior 
probabilities of the latent states
γ zt = p zt|X, Y , θ = α zt β zt (12)
which was the goal of the E-step. We can also compute the joint posterior distribution of two 
successive latents
ξ zt, zt + 1 = α zt β zt + 1 Pzt, zt + 1ϕzt + 1, yt + 1 (13)
which will be important for computing updates in the M-step. Because the format of 
the data included sessions from several different mice over many days, we computed the 
forward-backward pass separately for each session. This ensured that the learned transition 
probabilities would not take into account the effect of the last trial of one session on the first 
trial of the next session.
The M-step of the EM algorithm takes the newly computed posterior probabilities over the 
latents and uses them to update the values of the model parameters (equations (6)–(8)) by 
maximizing the expression for P and w. Since the transition probabilities are fixed, we can 
compute their updates using the closed form solution:
P jk = ∑t = 2
T ξ ztj, zt + 1, k
∑l = 1
K ∑t = 2
T ξ ztj, zt + 1, l
(14)
This closed-form update can be derived by applying the appropriate Lagrange multipliers to 
the complete-data log-likelihood function (see Bishop Chapter 13, p. 616)58.
Maximization for w involves minimizing the negative of the log-likelihood function, 
weighted by the marginal posterior probabilities of the latent states, plus a squared penalty 
term on the model weights. This penalty can be interpreted as the negative log of a Gaussian 
prior with mean zero and variance 1, which regularizes by penalizing large weight values. 
The resulting loss function is
L w = ∑
t = 1
T
∑
k = 1
K
γ zt = k  log p yt xt, zt = k − 1
2 wkTwk (15)
which we optimized using numerical optimization and the L-BFGS-B algorithm as 
previously described (see Bernoulli GLM).
Both E and M steps of the EM algorithm are guaranteed to increase the log-posterior. We 
alternated E and M steps until the difference between the log-posteriors over ten iterations 
was smaller than a given tolerance (tol = 1e-3). Because the EM algorithm only guarantees 
that the log-likelihood will converge upon a local optimum58, we fit the model 20 times 
using different initializations of the weights and transition matrix and verified that the top 
Bolkan et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
four or more fits all converged on the same solution (meaning that the weights for each fit 
were the same within a tolerance of +/− 0.05) in order to confirm that the algorithm had 
indeed found the global optimum. After determining the best fit, we computed the posterior 
standard deviation of the fitted GLM weights (shown as error bars in Fig. 6a–b and Extended 
Data Fig. 7d–f) by computing the inverse Hessian of the optimized log-posterior using 
python’s autograd package.
Model selection.—In Extended Data Fig. 7a, we performed cross-validation on the data 
from both the indirect and direct pathway inhibition groups. To obtain a test set, we selected 
~20% of sessions from the data to hold out from model fitting. Test sessions were chosen 
by randomly selecting an approximately equal number of sessions from each of the 13 mice 
in either group. Constraining the held-out data in this way ensured that the cross-validation 
results were not affected by possible individual differences across mice. We then calculated 
the log-likelihood of the test data after fitting the model under parameterizations of 1–5 
states to the remaining ~80% of sessions. We express the log-likelihood in units of bits per 
session (bps), defined as
Lbps = l ⋅ L − L0
T ⋅ log 2
(16)
where l is the average session length, T is the number of trials in the test set, and L0 is the 
log-likelihood of the test set data under the bias-only Bernoulli GLM. To obtain the bias 
term b we computed
b = T rigℎt
T rigℎt + T left (17)
where T(side) is the number of trials in the test set in which the mice turned in that direction. 
For all cross-validation results presented in the paper, we report the averaged Lbps from 
five different test sets. We followed the same procedure as above in Extended Data Fig. 
7c, selecting the optimal number of previous choices using a 3-state GLM-HMM under 
parameterizations of 1–8 previous choices while holding the number of all other external 
inputs (Δ cues, laser, bias, and previous rewarded choice) constant. In Extended Data Fig. 
7b, we simulated data from the inferred parameters (see Simulating data) for a 2-state 
GLM-HMM fit to the real data for the indirect pathway inhibition group. We then performed 
cross-validation as described above on both the full simulated dataset (“all data”) and for 
a small subset (“5% of data”). We chose to simulate from the 2-state model in order to 
differentiate the simulation from the real data and to demonstrate the results for an arbitrary 
choice in the true number of states.
Testing.—In Fig. 5c, we compared the performance of the GLM-HMM to the GLM by 
calculating the log-likelihood of the test sets of individual mice. To do so, we held out data 
and fitted the model across all animals using the same procedure described above. However, 
we then split the test set by mouse (thus creating 13 different test sets) and calculated 
the log-likelihood for each individual animal, thus expressing the log-likelihood in units of 
mouse bits per session (mbps):
Bolkan et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Lmbps = l ⋅ Lm − L0m
T m ⋅ log 2
(18)
Here, Lm is the optimized log-likelihood of the model in question (either the GLM or 3-state 
GLM-HMM) for a single mouse. Similarly, L0m is the optimized log-likelihood under the 
bias-only Bernoulli GLM and Tm is the total number of trials for that mouse. We then 
repeated the procedure for five test sets and took the average of the results for each mouse.
In Fig. 5d, we evaluated the prediction accuracy of the GLM for each animal by taking the 
same training and test sets that we used to find the log-likelihoods and using equation (2) to 
calculate the probability of turning right on each trial. We then compared this probability to 
the mouse’s actual choice on that trial, labelling the trial as correct if the model predicted 
a 50% or greater probability of turning in the direction of the mouse’s true choice. We 
then calculated the prediction accuracy for each mouse as the number of correct trials 
divided by the total number of trials for that mouse. To evaluate the prediction accuracy 
of the GLM-HMM for each animal, we computed p(yt|x1:t − 1, y1:t − 1), or the predictive 
distribution for trial t of the test set using the observations from trials 1 to t − 1. This arises 
from averaging over the state probabilities given previous choice data to get a prediction 
for a particular trial. That is, we ran the forward pass (see Fitting) to obtain the state 
probabilities p(zt|x1:t − 1, y1:t − 1), computed the initial choice probabilities p(yt|xt, zt) using 
equations (7) & (8), and then calculated the predictive distribution as follows:
p yt ∣ x1: t − 1, y1: t − 1 = ∑
k = 1
K
p yt ∣ xt, zt = k p zt = k ∣ x1: t − 1, y1: t − 1 (19)
We then ran this forward over all the trials in the test set for each mouse. Finally, we 
computed the prediction accuracy using the same method described for the GLM prediction 
accuracy.
State assignments.—To determine the most likely state on each trial (Fig. 6c–i; Fig. 7g,j; 
Extended Data Fig. 7g–h; Extended Data Fig. 8, 10; and Supplementary Fig. 4), we assigned 
each trial to the state with maximum marginal probability given the inputs and choice data, 
as computed by the forward backward algorithm:
st = arg max
z
p zt ∣ X, Y, θ (20)
Simulating data.—For the analyses in Fig. 6e–f, Extended Data Fig. 7, and Extended 
Data Fig. 9, we evaluated the ability of the 3-state GLM-HMM to predict choices and state 
transitions that matched the animals’ actual behavior in each state. For the covariates for the 
simulation, we kept the evidence (Δ cues) and optogenetic inhibition from the real data, but 
populated the trial history covariates using simulated previous choices. To simulate choices 
on each trial, we first computed the observation probabilities (equations (7) & (8)) using xt′
Bolkan et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(the external covariates) and wk (the learned weights from the model fitted to real data). The 
state k on each trial was randomly chosen from a distribution given by the learned transition 
probabilities Pzt + 1, zt from the model fitted to real data. We then randomly generated 
choices yt′ from the distribution of observation probabilities. Repeating this process for each 
trial to obtain x1:T′ and y1:T′, we fit the model to the simulated data using the same procedure 
described previously (see Fitting) to obtain the posterior probability over states. For Fig. 
6e–f and Extended Data Fig. 7, we computed the psychometric curves for each state using 
these posterior probabilities and the simulated choices (see Psychometric curve fitting).
Model comparisons.—For the two alternative model comparisons with restricted 
transition probabilities (Fig. 7k–m), we fit the 3-state GLM-HMM using the same general 
procedure as described above. However, in the case where we disallowed transitions during 
a session, (Fig. 7k), we fixed the transition matrix to the identity matrix and only fit the 
state-dependent GLM weights. In the case where we disallowed transitions in and out of 
state 2 (Fig. 7l), we derived a constrained M step that forced the transition probabilities for 
state 2 to 0. In detail, the constrained M step involved zeroing out the transition probabilities 
associated with state 2 and then renormalizing so the rows of the transition matrix summed 
to 1. Note that the three sessions that appear to still allow transitions in and/or out of state 
2 for mice inhibited in the direct pathway of the DMS (Fig. 7l, right) were due to rare cases 
where the model had high uncertainty about the state, and the most probable state flipped 
between state 2 and another state at some point during the session. In Fig. 7m, solid curves 
denote the average log-likelihood for five different test sets. Held-out data for test sets was 
selected as a random 20% of sessions, using the same number of sessions for each mouse.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization and stereological quantification
In situ hybridization (Supplementary Fig. 1) was performed using the RNAscope Multiplex 
Fluorescent Assay (ACD, No. 323110) with the following probes: Mm-Drd1a (406491), 
Mm-Drd2-C2 (406501-C2, 1:50 dilution in C1 solution), and Cre-01-C3 (474001-C3, 1:50 
dilution in C1 solution). Likely due to lower expression of Cre mRNA in D1R-Cre and 
A2a-Cre mice we did not detect unambiguous Cre fluorescent signal in these lines. We 
therefore relied on Cre-dependent viral expression of AA V5-DIO-EYFP to report Cre+ 
neurons alongside Drd1a and Drd2 probes in sections from 2 D1R-Cre and 2 A2R-Cre 
mice, but used all three probes in sections from 2 D2R-Cre mice. In D1R-Cre and A2R-Cre 
mice the Drd1a and Drd2 probes were fluorescently linked to TSA Plus Cy-3 and TSA 
Plus Cy-5, respectively (Perkin Elmer). In D2R-cre mice, Drd1a, Drd2, and Cre probes 
were linked to TSA Plus Cy-3, TSA Plus Fluorescein, or TSA Plus Cy-5, respectively. 
All fluorophores were reconstituted in DMSO according to Perkin Elmer instructions and 
diluted 1:1200 in TSA buffer included in the RNAscope kit. Post in situ hybridization slides 
were cover-slipped using Fluoromount-G containing DAPI (SouthernBiotech).
We then obtained 20x confocal z-stacks from the DMS, NAcCore, and NAcShell in all 
lines and manually quantified specificity, penetrance, and D1R+/D2R+ overlap using LASX 
software (Leica). Specificity was determined as the percentage of the following: GFP+ 
neurons co-expressing Drd1 in D1R-Cre mice (DMS, n = 5 sections, 193 cells; NAcCore, n 
= 5 sections, 298 cells; NAcShell, n = 5 sections, 363 cells), GFP+ neurons co-expressing 
Bolkan et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Drd2 in A2A-Cre mice (DMS, n = 4 sections, 144 cells; NAcCore, n = 4 sections, 326 
cells; NAcShell, n = 4 sections, 312 cells), or Cre+ neurons co-expressing Drd2 in D2R-Cre 
mice (DMS, n = 5 sections, 1,302 cells; NAcCore, n = 5 sections, 1,104 cells; NAcShell, n 
= 5 sections, 1,187 cells). Penetrance was determined as the percentage of Drd2+ neurons 
co-expressing Cre in D2R-Cre mice (DMS, n = 5 sections, 1,269 cells; NAcCore, n = 5 
sections, 1,055 cells; NAcShell, n = 5 sections, 1,144 cells). We did not assess penetrance in 
D1R-Cre or A2a-Cre lines because our Cre-dependent viral reporter did not fully penetrate 
all Cre+ neurons. Quantification of D1R+/D2R+ overlap in striatal regions was carried out 
on 2 D2R-Cre mice and/or 2 D1R-tdTomato mice and measured as both the percentage 
of D1R+ neurons that were D2R+ (DMS, n = 10 sections, 2,423 cells; NAcCore, n = 10 
sections, 2,196 cells; NAcShell, n = 10 sections, 2,220 cells) and the percentage of D2R+ 
neurons that were D1R+ (DMS, n = 5 sections, 868 cells; NAcCore, n = 5 sections, 834 
cells; NAcShell, n = 5 sections, 874 cells).
Histology
Mice were anesthetized with a 0.05 mL injection of Euthasol (i.p.) and transcardially 
perfused with 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by fixation with 4% 
paraformaldehyde (PFA). Whole brains with intact fiberoptic implants were post-fixed 
in 4% PFA for 1–3 days, followed by brain dissection and another 24 hours of post-
fixation in PFA. For optogenetic experiments, brains were then transferred to PBS for 
coronal sectioning (50 μM) on a vibratome. Viral expression and fiberoptic placements 
were assessed under slide-scanning (NanoZoomer, Hamamatsu) or single slide (Leica) 
epifluorescent microscopes (Supplementary Fig. 6). For FISH experiments, post-fixation 
dissected brains were transferred through a sucrose gradient: 10% sucrose in PBS for 6–8 
hours, 20% sucrose in PBS overnight, and 30% sucrose in PBS overnight. Coronal sections 
(18 μM) containing the DMS and NAc were made using a cryostat, mounted uncoverslipped 
on Superfrost plus slides (Fisher), and stored at −80° prior to the FISH protocol. After 
the FISH protocol, tile-scanning and cellular resolution images of cover-slipped slides were 
acquired using a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP8).
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study is publicly available on figshare at the 
following public Digital Object Identifier: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.17299142.v1.
Code Availability
Code for general use applications of GLM-HMM analyses developed in this study, 
including all applications to the present data set, are available on GitHub at the 
following public repository: https://github.com/irisstone/glmhmm. Code to analyze data and 
regenerate all other plots in this study is publicly available at https://github.com/ssbolkan/
BolkanStoneEtAl.
Bolkan et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1. Optogenetic inhibition of DMS pathways is effective, generating little 
post-inhibitory rebound, nor excitation during the inhibition period
(a) Schematic of viral delivery of AA V5-eF1a-DIO-NpHR to the dorsomedial striatum 
(DMS) of A2a-Cre or D1R-Cre mice. (b,i) Schematic of electrophysiological recording 
and laser delivery (532-nm, 5-mW) to the DMS in awake, head-fixed mice ambulating 
on a running wheel. (b,ii) Example recording electrode tracks and cre-dependent NpHR 
expression in an A2a-Cre mouse targeting the indirect pathway of the DMS. (b,iii) As 
in b,ii but in a D1R-Cre mouse targeting the DMS direct pathway. (b,iv) Schematic of 
silicon optrode recording tip, including tapered optical fiber coupled to a 32-channel silicon 
probe. (c) Two example peristimulus time histograms (PSTH) (top) and raster plots of 
trial-by-trial spike times (bottom) from single neurons recorded from the DMS of an 
A2a-Cre mouse. Inset at top displays average spike waveform (black) and 100 randomly 
Bolkan et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
sampled spike waveforms (grey) for each neuron. A trial consisted of 5-s without laser 
(pre, −5 to 0-s), 5-s of 532-nm light (5-mW) delivery (on, 0 to 5-s), followed by a 10-s 
ITI (40 trials per recording site). The first 2-s following laser offset (post, 5–7-s) was 
used to assess post-inhibitory effects. (d) Left: Histogram of change in average firing rate 
(on-pre, Hz) for all neurons (n = 60) recorded from the DMS of A2a-Cre mice (n = 3). 
Colors indicate non-significant (black, n = 38 neurons), significantly decreased (red, n = 18 
neurons) or increased (green, n = 4 neurons) changes in firing rate determined via paired, 
two-tailed signrank comparison of average across-trial baseline (pre) or laser (on) firing 
rates. A Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold was used to account for multiple neuron 
comparisons (p < 0.00083, or p = 0.05/60 neuron comparisons). Right: same as left but for 
change in firing rate (post-pre, Hz): non-significant (n = 55 neurons), significantly decreased 
(n = 4) or increased (n = 1). Insets display pie-chart summaries of the proportion of 
non-significant (black unfilled), significantly decreased (red) or increased (green) neurons. 
(e) Left: Mean +/− SEM z-scored firing rate across all non-significantly modulated on vs 
pre (black, n = 38) or significantly decreased on vs pre (red, n = 18) neurons recorded 
from A2a-Cre mice. Right: same as left but for all non-significantly modulated post vs 
pre (black, n = 55) or significantly decreased post vs pre (red, n = 4) neurons. (f) Same 
as c but for example neurons recorded from the DMS of D1R-Cre mice. (g) Same as 
d but for all neurons (n = 50) recorded from the DMS of D1R-Cre mice (n = 2). Left 
(on-pre): non-significant (n = 27), significantly decreased (n = 21), or increased (n = 2). 
Right (post-pre): non-significant (n = 46), significantly decreased (n = 2) or increased (n = 
2). A Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold was used to account for multiple neuron 
comparisons (p < 0.001, or p = 0.05/50 neuron comparisons). (h) same as e but for neurons 
recorded from the DMS of D1R-Cre mice.
Bolkan et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 2. Non-significant motor effects of DMS pathway inhibition compared to 
non-opsin expressing controls during virtual corridor navigation
(a) Schematic of virtual corridor and unilateral delivery of 532-nm light (5-mW) restricted to 
0–200cm. (b) Difference in average y-velocity (cm/s) during laser on and off trials (on-off) 
for mice receiving indirect (n = 7 mice, n = 1,712 laser off and n = 1,288 laser on trials) 
or direct (n = 6 mice, n = 1,088 laser off and n = 757 laser on trials) pathway inhibition 
of the DMS, or DMS illumination alone (no opsin; n = 5 mice, n = 1,178 laser off and n 
= 827 laser on trials). p-value denotes significance of one-way ANOV A of group on delta 
y-velocity (p = 0.98, F2,13 = 0.02). (c) Same as b but for difference in x-position (cm, on-off) 
contralateral to the laser hemisphere (p = 0.60, F2,13 = 0.53). (d) Same as c but for difference 
in view angle (deg, on-off) contralateral to the laser hemisphere (p = 0.20, F2,13 = 1.90). (e) 
Same as c but for difference in mean standard deviation in view angle (deg, on-off). The 
mean of the standard deviation in view angles sampled in 5-cm steps from 0–300 cm were 
calculated per trial, and then averaged across all laser off (or on) trials for a mouse (p = 0.94, 
F2,16 = 0.06). Indirect: n = 7 mice, n = 2,109 laser off and n = 1,574 laser on trials; direct: 
n = 6 mice, n = 1,330 laser off and n = 930 laser on trials; no opsin: n = 6 mice, n = 1,688 
laser off and n = 1,199 laser on trials). (f) As in e but for difference in total distance travelled 
(cm, on-off) to complete a trial (p = 0.93, F2,16 = 0.08). (g) As in e but for the difference 
in percentage of trials with excess travel (defined as >10% of corridor length to reward, or 
>330cm) (p = 0.76, F2,18 = 0.28). Throughout solid black lines indicate mean +/− S.E.M. 
across mice and transparent ‘x’ denote individual mouse mean throughout.
Bolkan et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 3. Similar motor performance across three virtual reality T-mazes
Schematic of three virtual reality (VR)-based T-mazes that differ in task requirements. (b) 
Average y-velocity (cm/s) of mice during the cue region (0–200cm) of the accumulation of 
evidence task (black, n = 32 mice, n = 52,381 trials), no distractors (ctrl #1) task (magenta: 
n = 32 mice, 56,783 trials), or permanent cues (ctrl #2) task (cyan: n = 20 mice, n = 
27,870 trials). Solid bars denote mean +/− S.E.M. across mice while transparent ‘x’ denotes 
individual mouse mean. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on y-velocity (p = 0.51, 
F2,80 = 0.67). (c) Same as b but for average x-position (cm) during the cue region (0–200cm) 
on left and right choice trials. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on x-position (left 
choice: p = 0.50, F2,80 = 0.70; right choice: p = 0.37, F2,80 = 1.0). (d) Same as b but 
for average view angle (degrees) during the cue region (0–200cm) on left and right choice 
trials (left choice: p = 0.53, F2,80 = 0.64; right choice: p = 0.70, F2,80 = 0.37). (e) As in b 
but for average percent of trials with excess travel (defined as travel >10% of maze stem, 
Bolkan et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
or >330cm). Accumulation of evidence: n = 32 mice, n = 53,833 trials; control #2 (no 
distractors): n = 32 mice, n = 60,074 trials; control #2 (permanent cues): n = 20 mice, n = 
29,192 trials. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on excess travel (p = 0.06, F2,81 = 
2.9). (f) As in b but for mean standard deviation in view angle (degrees) per trial (n as in e). 
p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on view angle deviation (p = 0.07, F2,81 = 2.8). (g) 
Average accuracy of decoding left/right choice based on the trial-by-trial x-position (cm) of 
mice as a function of y-position in the maze (0–300cm in 25-cm bins). Training and test trial 
sets were selected within individual mice (80% train, 5-fold cross-validation, re-sampled 
10 times). Left: Each ‘x’ depicts decoding accuracy at each y-position bin for individual 
mice performing the evidence accumulation (black), no distractors (ctrl #1, magenta), or 
permanent cues (ctrl #2, cyan) tasks. Right: Group mean and +/−S.E.M. across mice for 
each task (n as in b). (h) Same as f but for average accuracy of decoding left/right choice 
based on the trial-by-trial view angle (degrees) of mice (n as in b). (i) Average accuracy of 
decoding left/right choice based on the trial-by-trial x-position (cm) of mice as a function of 
y-position in the maze (0–300cm in 25-cm bins). Training trial sets were randomly selected 
across all mice (50% total trials, re-sampled 50 times) performing either the accumulation 
of evidence (left, AoE, black), no distractors (middle, ctrl#1, magenta), or permanent cues 
(right, ctrl#2, cyan) tasks. Testing trial sets were the 50% of held-out trials in the task 
used for training, or all trials in the alternate tasks. Top: Each ‘x’ depicts average decoding 
accuracy across all training/tests sets at each y-position bin for individual mice performing 
the evidence accumulation (black), no distractors (ctrl #1, magenta), or permanent cues (ctrl 
#2, cyan) tasks. Right: Group mean and +/−S.E.M. across mice for each task (n as in a). (j) 
Same as I but for average accuracy of decoding left/right choice based on the trial-by-trial 
view angle (degrees) of mice (n as in b).
Bolkan et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 4. Effects of pathway-specific DMS and NAc inhibition on psychometric 
performance across virtual reality tasks.
(a) Schematic of unilateral indirect pathway DMS inhibition with choice defined ipsilateral 
or contralateral to the hemisphere receiving 532-nm laser illumination. (b) Schematic of 
three virtual reality based decision-making tasks (left: accumulation of evidence; middle: 
control #1, no distractors; right: control #2, permanent cues) and laser illumination restricted 
to the cue region (0–200cm). (c) Percent of contralateral choice trials as a function of the 
difference in sensory cues (contralateral-ipsilateral) binned in increments of 5 from −15 to 
15. Transparent lines indicate individual mouse mean during laser off (grey) and on (green) 
trials for mice receiving indirect-pathway DMS inhibition during the evidence accumulation 
Bolkan et al. Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(black, left), no distractors (magenta, ctrl#1, middle), or permanent cues (cyan, ctrl#2, right). 
Thick lines indicate mean +/− S.E.M. across mice at each evidence bin during laser off 
(black) and on (green) trials. (d) Same as a but for mice receiving unilateral direct pathway 
DMS inhibition. (e) same as b. (f) Same as c but for mice receiving direct pathway DMS 
inhibition. (g) Same as a but for mice receiving unilateral DMS illumination in the absence 
of NpHR (no opsin). (h) Same as b. (i) same as c but for mice receiving unilateral DMS 
illumination in the absence of NpHR (no opsin). (j) Schematic of unilateral inhibition of 
NAc indirect (left) or direct (middle) pathway, or NAc illumination in the absence of NpHR 
(no opsin). (k) Schematic of accumulation of evidence task and delivery of 532-nm light 
during the cue region (0–200cm). (l) As in c but for psychometric comparison between 
groups receiving NAc indirect or direct pathway inhibition, or NAc illumination in the 
absence of NpHR (no opsin).
Bolkan et al. Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5. Effects of pathway-specific DMS inhibition on choice are larger in the 
most demanding task, and stronger than effects of pathway-specific NAc inhibition
(a) Schematic of three virtual reality based decision-making tasks (left: accumulation 
of evidence; middle: control #1, no distractors; right: control #2, permanent cues). (b) 
Schematic of unilateral indirect pathway DMS inhibition with choice defined ipsilateral 
or contralateral to the hemisphere receiving 532-nm laser illumination (top). Difference in 
choice bias (%, contralateral - ipsilateral) between laser on and off trials (on-off) in mice 
performing the accumulation of evidence (AoE, black), no distractors (ctrl #1, magenta), 
or permanent cues (ctrl #2, cyan) tasks. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on delta 
(on-off) choice bias (p = 1.0 × 10−5, F2,22 = 20.2). Post-hoc comparisons reflect unpaired, 
two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum tests on delta (on-off) choice bias (AoE, n = 11, vs ctrl #1, n = 
7: p = 8.0 × 10−4, z = 3.4; AoE vs ctrl #2, n = 7: p = 0.001, z = 3.3). (c) Same as b but for 
direct pathway DMS inhibition. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) 
choice bias (p = 0.001, F2,23 = 9.4). Post-hoc comparisons reflect two-tailed, unpaired 
Wilcoxon ranksum tests (AoE, n = 10, vs ctrl #1, n = 9: p = 0.002, z = −3.0; AoE vs ctrl 
#2, n = 7: p = 0.005, z = −2.8). (d) Same as b but for DMS illumination in the absence of 
NpHR (no opsin). p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) choice bias (p 
= 0.09, F2,16 = 2.8). Post-hoc comparisons reflect two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum 
tests (AoE, n= 11, vs ctrl #1, n = 4: p = 0.65, z = 0.46; AoE vs ctrl #2, n = 6: p = 0.06, 
z = 1.8). (e) Schema of evidence accumulation task (left), unilateral inhibition of indirect 
pathway in the DMS (middle left) or NAc (middle right), and delta (on-off) choice bias in 
mice receiving indirect pathway DMS (n = 11) or NAc (n = 9) inhibition (right). Statistical 
comparison reflects two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test (DMS vs NAc: p = 2.6 
× 10−4, z = 3.6). (f) Same as e but for direct pathway DMS (n = 10) or NAc (n = 10) 
inhibition. Statistical comparison reflects two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test (DMS 
vs NAc: p = 1.8 × 10−4, z = −3.7). Throughout solid bars denote mean +/− S.E.M. across 
mice and transparent ‘x’ denote individual mouse means.
Bolkan et al. Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6. Inhibition of DMS pathways has limited impact on motor performance 
across VR-based decision-making tasks
(a) Mean +/− S.E.M. y-velocity (cm/s) as a function of y-position (0– 300cm in 25cm 
bins) during laser off (black) or laser on (green) trials across mice receiving DMS indirect 
pathway inhibition during the evidence accumulation (left: n = 11 mice, n = 16,935 laser 
off and n = 3,390 laser on trials), no distractors (middle, ctrl #1: n = 7 mice, n = 13,706 
laser off and n = 3,288 laser on trials) or permanent cues (right, ctrl #2: n = 6 mice, n = 
4,033 laser off and n = 929 laser on trials). (b) Same as a but for mice receiving direct 
pathway inhibition during the evidence accumulation (left: n = 10 mice, n = 14,030 laser off 
and n = 3,103 laser on trials), no distractors (middle, ctrl #2: n = 8 mice, n = 14,647 laser 
off and n = 3,682 laser on trials) or permanent cues (right, ctrl #3: n = 7 mice, n = 6,061 
laser off and n = 1,494 laser on trials) tasks. (c) Same as a but for mice receiving DMS 
illumination in the absence of NpHR (no opsin) during the evidence accumulation (left: n 
= 11 mice, n = 21,422 laser off and n = 5,113 laser on trials), no distractors (middle, ctrl 
#1: n = 4 mice, n = 3,654 laser off and n = 901 laser on trials), or permanent cues (right, 
ctrl #2: n = 4 mice, n = 3,975 laser off and n = 923 laser on trials) tasks. (d) Mean +/− 
S.E.M. in delta (on-off) distance (cm) traveled (left) and delta (on-off) trials (%) with excess 
Bolkan et al. Page 39
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
travel greater than 10% of maze stem (or >330cm) (right) in mice receiving indirect pathway 
inhibition during the evidence accumulation (black, n = 11 mice, n = 22,090 laser off and 
n = 4,378 laser on trials), no distractors (magenta, n = 7 mice, n = 14,826 laser off and n 
= 3,591 laser on trials), or permanent cues (n = 6 mice, n = 4,447 laser off and n = 1050 
laser on trials) tasks. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) distance (p 
= 0.45, F2,22 = 0.81) or excess travel (p = 0.52, F2,22 = 0.66). (e) Same as d but for delta 
(on-off) distance (cm) traveled (left) or delta percent trials with excess travel (right) in mice 
receiving direct pathway inhibition during the evidence accumulation (black, n = 10 mice, 
n = 20,914 laser off and n = 4,721 laser on trials), no distractors (magenta, n = 9 mice, n 
= 15,778 laser off and n = 3,992 laser on trials), or permanent cues (n = 7 mice, n = 6,430 
laser off and n = 1,591 laser on trials) tasks. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on 
delta (on-off) distance (p = 0.13, F2,23 = 2.2) or excess travel (p = 0.50, F2,23 = 0.71). (f) 
Same as d but for delta (on-off) in distance (cm) traveled (left) or percent trials with excess 
travel (right) in mice receiving DMS illumination in the absence of NpHR (no opsin) during 
the evidence accumulation (black, n = 11 mice, n = 28,557 laser off and n = 6,772 laser 
on trials), no distractors (magenta, n = 5 mice, n = 4,118 laser off and n = 1,002 laser on 
trials), or permanent cues (n = 6 mice, n = 4,360 laser off and n = 1,038 laser on trials) tasks. 
p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) distance (p = 0.06, F2,19 = 3.3) or 
excess travel (p = 0.23, F2,19 = 1.6). (g) Same as d but for delta (on-off) in per-trial standard 
deviation in view angle in mice receiving DMS indirect pathway inhibition across tasks (p 
= 0.34, F2,22 = 1.1, n as in d). (h) Same as g but for mice receiving DMS direct pathway 
inhibition across tasks (p = 0.27, F2,23 = 1.4, n as in e). (i) Same as g but for mice receiving 
DMS illumination (no opsin) in the absence of NpHR (p = 0.03, F2,19 = 4.3, n as in f). (j) 
Delta (on-off) x-position (cm) (left) or view angle (degrees) (right) during the cue region 
(0–200 cm) in mice receiving DMS indirect pathway inhibition during the accumulation of 
evidence (black), no distractors (control #1, magenta), or permanent cues (control #2, cyan) 
tasks (n as in a). One-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) x-position (p = 0.01, F2,22 = 
5.6). Post-hoc, two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test on delta (on-off) x-position (AoE 
v control #1: p = 0.2, z = 1.3; AoE v control #2: p = 0.004, z = 2.9; control #1 v control #2: 
p = 0.13, z = 1.5). One-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) view angle (p = 0.14, F2,22 
= 2.2). Post-hoc, two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test on delta (on-off) view angle 
(AoE v control #1: p = 0.58, z = 0.5; AoE v control #2: p = 0.24, z = 1.78; control #1 v 
control #2: p = 0.52, z = 0.6). (k) Same as j but for mice receiving DMS direct pathway 
inhibition (n as in b). One-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) x-position (p = 0.08, F2,23 
= 2.8). Post-hoc, two-tailed unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test on delta (on-off) x-position 
(AoE v control #1: p = 0.13, z = −1.5; AoE v control #2: p = 0.1, z = −1.6; control #1 v 
control #2: p = 0.46, z = −0.7). One-way ANOV A of task on delta (on-off) view angle (p 
= 0.02, F2,23 = 3.6). Post-hoc, two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon ranksum test on delta (on-off) 
view angle (AoE v control #1: p = 0.21, z = −1.3; AoE v control #2: p = 0.03, z = −2.1; 
control #1 v control #2: p = 0.24, z = −1.6). (l) Same as j but for mice receiving DMS 
illumination in the absence of NpHR (no opsin, n as in c). One-way ANOV A of task on 
delta (on-off) x-position (p = 0.24, F2,18 = 1.54). Post-hoc, two-tailed, unpaired Wilcoxon 
ranksum test on delta (on-off) x-position (AoE v control #1: p = 0.21, z = −1.24; AoE v 
control #2: p = 0.51, z = 0.06; control #1 v control #2: p = 0.04, z = 2.0). One-way ANOV A 
of task on delta (on-off) view angle (p = 0.23, F2,18 = 1.56). Post-hoc, two-tailed, unpaired 
Bolkan et al. Page 40
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Wilcoxon ranksum test on delta (on-off) view angle (AoE v control #1: p = 0.84, z = 0.19; 
AoE v control #2: p = 0.20, z = 1.2; control #1 v control #2: p = 0.24, z = 1.7). Throughout 
solid bars denote mean +/− S.E.M. and transparent ‘x’ indicates individual mouse mean.
Extended Data Fig. 7. Model selection and control data analyses for the GLM-HMM
(a) Comparison of the log-likelihood of the data using GLM-HMMs with different numbers 
of states for mice inhibited in the DMS direct pathway (dark gray), or indirect pathway (light 
gray), and mice without DMS opsin (black). All values are relative to the log-likelihood 
of the standard GLM (1-state GLM-HMM). Values are calculated in bits per session (see 
Methods). Solid curves denote mean +/− S.E.M. of five different test sets. Held-out data for 
test sets was selected as a random 20% of sessions, using the same number of sessions for 
Bolkan et al. Page 41
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
each mouse. (b) Same as a but with different numbers of previous choice covariates using 
a 3-state GLM-HMM. (c) Comparison of the log-likelihood of simulated data using GLM-
HMMs with different numbers of states. Data was simulated from a 2-state GLM-HMM 
that had been fit to data for mice inhibited in the indirect pathway of the DMS and then 
cross-validation performed either on the entire simulated dataset (~54000 trials, left) or a 
subset of 5% of the data (2600 trials, right). All values are relative to the log-likelihood 
of the 1-state GLM. Values are calculated in bits per session (see Methods). Solid curves 
denote the average of five different test sets. Held-out data for test sets was selected as a 
random 20% of sessions. Performing cross validation on a small subset of the data serves to 
demonstrate that the log-likelihood does in fact decrease as the model starts to overfit. This 
is difficult to see with large datasets where overfitting is less of a concern and therefore the 
log-likelihood begins to flatten rather than decrease. (d) Fitted GLM weights for the 4-state 
model using aggregated data from all mice inhibited in the indirect pathway of the DMS. 
Error bars denote (+/−1) posterior standard deviation for each weight. The magnitude of 
the weight represents the relative importance of that covariate in predicting choice, whereas 
the sign of the weight indicates the side bias. (e) Same as d but for mice inhibited in the 
DMS direct pathway. (f) GLM weights fitted to a concatenated data set consisting of the 
indirect, direct, and control (no opsin) groups. Solid lines on the left connect covariates 
that are shared across groups. Horizontal marks on the right denote laser weights, which 
were learned separately for each group. Error bars denote the posterior standard deviation 
of each weight. (g) Percent of contralateral choice based on the difference in contralateral 
versus ipsilateral cues in each trial for mice in the control (no opsin) group. To compute 
psychometric functions, trials were assigned to each state by taking the maximum of the 
model’s posterior state probabilities on each trial. Error bars denote +/−1 S.E.M. for light 
off (solid) and light on (dotted) trials. Solid curves denote logistic fits to the concatenated 
data across mice for light off (solid) and light on (dotted) trials. (h) Same as f but for data 
simulated from the model fit to mice in the control group (see Methods).
Bolkan et al. Page 42
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 8. GLM-HMM state 3 is associated with indicators of task disengagement
(a) The mean posterior probability of each state over the first and last 50 trials of a session, 
averaged across all sessions for mice inhibited in the indirect pathway of the DMS (n=271 
sessions). (b) Same as a but for mice receiving DMS direct pathway inhibition (n=266 
sessions). (c) Mean +/− S.E.M. of the cumulative reward received in a session prior to 
transitions into state 1 (n = 142), state 2 (n = 85), or state 3 (n = 237) in indirect pathway 
mice. One-way ANOV A of transition state on cumulative reward (p = 1.0 × 10−6; F2,460 = 
14.2). Unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum comparison between transition types (state 1 
vs 2: p = 0.96, z = −0.03; state 2 vs 3: p = 0, z = −3.6; state 1 vs 3: p = 0, z = −4.5). (d) 
Mean +/− S.E.M. of the reward rate (uL/min) in a session prior to transitions into each state 
for indirect pathway mice. Reward rate was calculated as the sum of reward received from 
the start of the session up to the transition trial divided by the sum of the duration of all 
trials from the start of the session up to the transition trial. One-way ANOV A of transition 
state on reward rate (p = 4.1 × 10−14; F2,460 = 32.9). Unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum 
comparison between transition types (state 1 vs 2: p = 0.55, z = −0.6; state 2 vs 3: p = 
0, z = −4.9; state 1 vs 3: p = 0, z = −7.4). (e) Same as c but for direct pathway mice 
(state 1: n = 140; state 2: n = 29; state 3: n = 159). One-way ANOV A of transition state 
on cumulative reward (p = 0.14; F2,325 = 1.99). Unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum 
comparison between transition types (state 1 vs 2: p = 0.35, z = −0.9; state 2 vs 3: p = 
0.78, z = −0.27; state 1 vs 3: p = 0.08, z = −1.74). (f) Same as d but for direct pathway 
mice. One-way ANOV A of transition state on reward rate (p = 8.7 × 10−10; F2,325 = 22.6). 
Bolkan et al. Page 43
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum comparison between transition types (state 1 vs 2: p 
= 0.49, z = 0.69; state 2 vs 3: p = 0.0, z = −4.2; state 1 vs 3: p = 0.0, z = −5.9). (g) The mean 
posterior probability of each state aligned +/− 25 trials to trials in which reward was received 
for indirect pathway mice. (h) Same as g but state probability aligned to trials with excess 
travel (defined as 10% greater than the maze stem, or 330cm). (i) Same as g but for direct 
pathway mice. (j) Same as h but for direct pathway mice.
Extended Data Fig. 9. Model simulations recapitulate transition and state characteristics of real 
data
(a) Transition probabilities of the model fit to data from mice inhibited in the DMS indirect 
pathway (black) and from five simulated datasets generated from the model fit to mice 
inhibited in the indirect pathway of the DMS (gray), shown separately for diagonal (left) and 
off-diagonal (right) probabilities. (b) Same as a but for mice inhibited in the direct pathway 
of the DMS. (c) The posterior probability of each state over the first and last 50 trials of a 
session, averaged across all sessions for mice inhibited in the indirect pathway of the DMS 
(n=271). Dark lines denote average for real data (same as Fig. 7E) and faded lines indicate 
averages for each of the five simulations. (d) Same as c but for mice inhibited in the direct 
pathway of the DMS (dark lines are the same as shown in Fig. 7F). (e) Dwell times showing 
Bolkan et al. Page 44
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the average consecutive number of trials that mice inhibited in the DMS indirect pathway 
spent in each state for real data (left; range 39–86 trials, average session length 202 trials, 
same as shown in Fig. 7g) and one simulated dataset (right; range 60–71 trials, average 
session length 202 trials). Black dots show averages for individual mice (n=13). We removed 
the last run in each session (including any run that lasted the entire session length) from the 
analysis, as the termination of the session prematurely truncated the length of those runs. (f) 
Same as e but without removing the last run in each session for real data (left; range 51–118 
trials, average session length 202 trials) and one simulated dataset (right; range 65–93 trials, 
average session length 202 trials). (g) Same as e but for mice inhibited in the direct pathway 
of the DMS for real data (left; range 52–59 trials, average session length 185 trials, same 
as shown in Fig. 7g) and one simulated dataset (right; range 61–66 trials, average session 
length 185 trials). Black dots show averages for individual mice (n=13). (h) Same as g but 
without removing the last run in each session for real data (left; 67–89 trials, average session 
length 185 trials) and one simulated dataset (right; range 74–110 trials, average session 
length 185 trials).
Bolkan et al. Page 45
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 10. Comparison of motor performance across GLM-HMM states with and 
without pathway-specific DMS inhibition
(a) Schematic denoting analysis of motor performance across GLM-HMM states on laser 
off trials only (panels b-g) in mice unilaterally coupled to a fiberoptic for indirect pathway 
inhibition. (b) Average y-velocity (cm/s) during laser off trials as a function of y-position 
in the maze (0–300 cm in 25-cm bins) in indirect pathway mice across GLM-HMM states 
(state 1, blue: n = 13,394 trials; state 2, yellow: n = 13,570 trials; state 3, red: n = 16,982 
trials). (c) As in b but for average x-position (cm) on ipsilateral or contralateral choice trials 
(n as in b). (d) As in c but for average view angle (degrees) on ipsilateral and contralateral 
choice trials (n as in b). (e) Mean per-trial standard deviation in view angle during laser 
off trials across GLM-HMM states (state 1, blue: n = 13,854 trials; state 2, yellow: n = 
14,201 trials; state 3, red: n = 18,258 trials). p-value denotes one-way repeated measures 
ANOV A of state on view angle deviation (p = 0.06, F2,24 = 3.2). (f) As in e but for average 
distance traveled (cm) per trial. p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of state 
Bolkan et al. Page 46
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
on distance (p = 0.02, F2,24 = 5.0, n as in e). (g) As in e but for average percent of trials 
with excess travel. p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of state on excess 
travel (p = 0.0004, F2,24 = 10.9, n as in e). (h) Schematic denoting analysis of effects of 
indirect pathway DMS inhibition on motor performance across GLM-HMM states in i-n. 
(i) As in b but for average y-velocity on laser off (black) or laser on (green) trials across 
GLM-HMM states (n of laser off trials as in b-g, n of laser on trials: state 1, blue: n = 2,302 
trials; state 2, yellow: n = 1,858 trials; state 3, red: n = 3,005 trials). (j) As in c but for delta 
(on-off) x-position (cm) during the cue region (0–200cm) across GLM-HMM states in mice 
with indirect pathway inhibition. p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of 
state on delta x-position (p = 3.2×10−4, F2,24 = 11.4, n as in i). Post-hoc comparisons reflect 
two-tailed, paired Willcoxon signed rank tests between states (state 1 vs state 3: p = 0.07, z = 
1.7; state 1 vs state 2: p = 0.006, z = 2.7; state 2 vs state 3: p = 0.03, z = 2.4). (k) As in j but 
for delta (on-off) view angle (degrees). p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A 
of state on delta view angle (p = 1.2×10−5, F2,26 = 18.7, n as in i). Post-hoc comparisons 
reflect two-tailed, paired Willcoxon signed rank tests between states (state 1 vs state 3: p = 
0.009, z = 2.6; state 1 vs state 2: p = 0.001, z = −3.18; state 2 vs state 3: p = 0.002, z = 
−3.1). (l) Same as e but for delta (on-off) mean per-trial view angle standard deviation across 
GLM-HMM states in mice with indirect pathway inhibition (n of laser off trials as in e-g, 
n of laser on trials: state 1, blue: n = 2,887 trials; state 2, yellow: n = 2,713 trials; state 3, 
red: n = 2,970 trials). p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of state on delta 
view angle deviation (p = 0.97, F2,24 = 0.03, n as in l). (m) Same as f but for delta (on-off) 
in mean per-trial distance (cm) traveled across GLM-HMM states with indirect pathway 
inhibition (p = 0.68, F2,24 = 0.38, n as in l). (n) Same as g but for delta (on-off) in percent of 
trials with excess travel across GLM-HMM states with direct pathway inhibition (p = 0.08, 
F2,24 = 2.8, n as in l). (o) As in a but schematic denoting analysis of motor performance 
across GLM-HMM states on laser off trials only in mice unilaterally coupled to a fiberoptic 
for direct pathway inhibition in p-u. (p) As in b but for y-velocity (cm/s) on laser off trials 
across GLM-HMM states in direct pathway mice (state 1, blue: n = 12,294 laser off and n 
= 2,302 laser on trials; state 2, yellow: n = 9,201 laser off and n = 1,858 laser on trials; 
state 3, red: n = 16,239 laser off and n = 3,005 laser on trials). (q) As in c but x-position 
(cm) for direct pathway mice (n as in p). (r) As in d but for view angle (degrees) for direct 
pathway mice (n as in p). (s) As in e but for mean per-trial view angle standard deviation 
across GLM-HMM states in direct pathway mice (state 1, blue: n = 13,403 laser off and n = 
2,508 laser on trials; state 2, yellow: n = 9,555 laser off and n = 1,969 laser on trials; state 
3, red: n = 18,292 laser off and n = 3,450 laser on trials). p-value denotes one-way repeated 
measures ANOV A of state on per-trial view angle standard deviation (p = 0.12, F2,24 = 2.3). 
(t) As in f but for distance (cm) in direct pathway mice (p = 0.1, F2,24 = 2.5). (u) As in 
g but for percent trials with excess travel in direct pathway mice (p = 0.14, F2,24 = 2.1). 
(v) As in h but schematic denoting analysis of effects of direct pathway DMS inhibition 
on motor performance across GLM-HMM states in w-bb. (w) As in i but for the mean 
y-velocity (cm/s) on laser on (green) and off (black) trials across GLM-HMM states in direct 
pathway mice. (x) As in j but for the delta (on-off) x-position (cm) across GLM-HMM states 
in direct pathway mice. p-value denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of state on 
delta x-position (p = 7.9×10−5, F2,24 = 14.9). Posthoc comparisons reflect two-tailed, paired 
Willcoxon signed rank tests between states (state 1 vs state 3: p = 0.06, z = 1.8; state 1 vs 
Bolkan et al. Page 47
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
state 2: p = 0.005, z = 2.8; state 2 vs state 3: p = 0.005, z = 2.8). (y) As in k but for delta 
(on-off) view angle (degrees) across GLM-HMM states in direct pathway mice. p-value 
denotes one-way repeated measures ANOV A of state on delta view angle (p = 2.6×10−4, 
F2,24 = 12.3). Posthoc comparisons reflect two-tailed, paired Willcoxon signed rank tests 
between states (state 1 vs state 3: p = 0.03, z = 2.3; state 1 vs state 2: p = 0.003, z = 2.98; 
state 2 vs state 3: p = 0.03, z = 2.1). (z) As in l but for delta (on-off) mean per-trial view 
angle standard deviation (degrees) in direct pathway mice (p = 0.40, F2,24 = 0.94, n as in 
s-u). (aa) as in m but for delta (on-off) in mean distance (cm) traveled in direct pathway 
mice (p = 0.43, F2,24 = 0.89). (bb) as in n but for delta (on-off) in percent trials with excess 
travel in direct pathway mice (p = 0.90, F2,24 = 0.1). Throughout solid colored bars denote 
mean +/− S.E.M. while transparent grey lines reflect individual mouse mean.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the entire BRAINCoGs team as well as the Witten and Pillow labs for feedback 
on this work. We thank S. Stein and S. Baptista for technical support in animal training, and C. Kopecs for 
technical assistance. This work was supported by grants from NIH R01 DA047869 (IBW), F32MH118792 (SSB), 
F32NS101871 (LP), K99MH120047 (LP), U19 NS104648-01 (JWP, IBW), ARO W911NF1710554 (IBW), Brain 
Research Foundation (IBW), Simons Collaboration on the Global Brain (JWP, IBW), 1R01MH106689 (IBW), and 
the New York Stem Cell Foundation (IBW). IBW is a NYSCF—Robertson Investigator.
REFERENCES
1. Alexander GE & Crutcher MD Functional architecture of basal ganglia circuits: neural substrates of 
parallel processing. Trends Neurosci. 13, 266–271 (1990). [PubMed: 1695401] 
2. Kravitz A V et al. Regulation of parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control of basal 
ganglia circuitry. Nature 466, 622–626 (2010). [PubMed: 20613723] 
3. Roseberry TK et al. Cell-Type-Specific Control of Brainstem Locomotor Circuits by Basal Ganglia. 
Cell 164, 526–537 (2016). [PubMed: 26824660] 
4. Bartholomew RA et al. Striatonigral control of movement velocity in mice. Eur. J. Neurosci 43, 
1097–1110 (2016). [PubMed: 27091436] 
5. Bakhurin KI et al. Opponent regulation of action performance and timing by striatonigral and 
striatopallidal pathways. eLife 9, e54831 (2020). [PubMed: 32324535] 
6. Lobo MK et al. Cell Type–Specific Loss of BDNF Signaling Mimics Optogenetic Control of 
Cocaine Reward. Science 330, 385–390 (2010). [PubMed: 20947769] 
7. Kravitz A V , Tye LD & Kreitzer AC Distinct roles for direct and indirect pathway striatal neurons in 
reinforcement. Nat. Neurosci 15, 816–818 (2012). [PubMed: 22544310] 
8. Yttri EA & Dudman JT Opponent and bidirectional control of movement velocity in the basal 
ganglia. Nature 533, 402–406 (2016). [PubMed: 27135927] 
9. Tai L-H, Lee AM, Benavidez N, Bonci A & Wilbrecht L Transient stimulation of distinct 
subpopulations of striatal neurons mimics changes in action value. Nat. Neurosci 15, 1281–1289 
(2012). [PubMed: 22902719] 
10. Nonomura S et al. Monitoring and Updating of Action Selection for Goal-Directed Behavior 
through the Striatal Direct and Indirect Pathways. Neuron 99, 1302–1314.e5 (2018). [PubMed: 
30146299] 
11. Lee J, Wang W & Sabatini BL Anatomically segregated basal ganglia pathways allow parallel 
behavioral modulation. Nat. Neurosci 23, 1388–1398 (2020). [PubMed: 32989293] 
Bolkan et al. Page 48
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
12. Cui L et al. Asymmetrical choice-related ensemble activity in direct and indirect-pathway 
striatal neurons drives perceptual decisions. 2021.11.16.468594 https://www.biorxiv.org/content/
10.1101/2021.11.16.468594v1 (2021) doi:10.1101/2021.11.16.468594
13. Tang Y et al. Opposing regulation of short-term memory by basal ganglia direct and indirect 
pathways that are coactive during behavior. 2021.12.15.472735 https://www.biorxiv.org/content/
10.1101/2021.12.15.472735v1 (2021) doi:10.1101/2021.12.15.472735
14. Parker JG et al. Diametric neural ensemble dynamics in parkinsonian and dyskinetic states. Nature 
557, 177–182 (2018). [PubMed: 29720658] 
15. Chen Z et al. Direct and indirect pathway neurons in ventrolateral striatum differentially regulate 
licking movement and nigral responses. Cell Rep. 37, 109847 (2021). [PubMed: 34686331] 
16. Lee HJ et al. Activation of Direct and Indirect Pathway Medium Spiny Neurons Drives Distinct 
Brain-wide Responses. Neuron 91, 412–424 (2016). [PubMed: 27373834] 
17. Lee HJ et al. Activation of Direct and Indirect Pathway Medium Spiny Neurons Drives Distinct 
Brain-wide Responses. Neuron 91, 412–424 (2016). [PubMed: 27373834] 
18. London TD et al. Coordinated Ramping of Dorsal Striatal Pathways preceding Food Approach and 
Consumption. J. Neurosci 38, 3547–3558 (2018). [PubMed: 29523623] 
19. Balleine BW, Delgado MR & Hikosaka O The Role of the Dorsal Striatum in Reward and 
Decision-Making. J. Neurosci 27, 8161–8165 (2007). [PubMed: 17670959] 
20. Yartsev MM, Hanks TD, Yoon AM & Brody CD Causal contribution and dynamical encoding in 
the striatum during evidence accumulation. eLife 7, e34929 (2018). [PubMed: 30141773] 
21. Lau B & Glimcher PW Value Representations in the Primate Striatum during Matching Behavior. 
Neuron 58, 451–463 (2008). [PubMed: 18466754] 
22. Ding L & Gold JI Separate, Causal Roles of the Caudate in Saccadic Choice and Execution in a 
Perceptual Decision Task. Neuron 75, 865–874 (2012). [PubMed: 22958826] 
23. Barnes TD, Kubota Y , Hu D, Jin DZ & Graybiel AM Activity of striatal neurons reflects dynamic 
encoding and recoding of procedural memories. Nature 437, 1158–1161 (2005). [PubMed: 
16237445] 
24. Yin HH et al. Dynamic reorganization of striatal circuits during the acquisition and consolidation 
of a skill. Nat. Neurosci 12, 333–341 (2009). [PubMed: 19198605] 
25. Akhlaghpour H et al. Dissociated sequential activity and stimulus encoding in the dorsomedial 
striatum during spatial working memory. eLife 5, e19507 (2016). [PubMed: 27636864] 
26. Pinto L et al. An Accumulation-of-Evidence Task Using Visual Pulses for Mice Navigating in 
Virtual Reality. Front. Behav. Neurosci 12, (2018).
27. Owen SF, Liu MH & Kreitzer AC Thermal constraints on in vivo optogenetic manipulations. Nat. 
Neurosci 22, 1061–1065 (2019). [PubMed: 31209378] 
28. Cruz BF, Soares S & Paton JJ Striatal circuits support broadly opponent aspects of action 
suppression and production. http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.06.30.180539 (2020) 
doi:10.1101/2020.06.30.180539.
29. Kupchik YM et al. Coding the direct/indirect pathways by D1 and D2 receptors is not valid for 
accumbens projections. Nat. Neurosci 18, 1230–1232 (2015). [PubMed: 26214370] 
30. Bengio Y & Frasconi P An Input Output HMM Architecture. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst 7, 
427–234 (1994).
31. Escola S, Fontanini A, Katz D & Paninski L Hidden Markov Models for the Stimulus-Response 
Relationships of Multistate Neural Systems. Neural Comput. 23, 1071–1132 (2011). [PubMed: 
21299424] 
32. Calhoun AJ, Pillow JW & Murthy M Unsupervised identification of the internal states that shape 
natural behavior. Nat. Neurosci 22, 2040–2049 (2019). [PubMed: 31768056] 
33. Ashwood ZC et al. Mice alternate between discrete strategies during perceptual decision-making. 
bioRxiv 2020.10.19.346353 (2021) doi:10.1101/2020.10.19.346353.
34. Donahue CH, Liu M & Kreitzer AC Distinct value encoding in striatal direct and indirect pathways 
during adaptive learning. bioRxiv 277855 (2018) doi:10.1101/277855.
Bolkan et al. Page 49
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
35. Shin JH, Kim D & Jung MW Differential coding of reward and movement information in 
the dorsomedial striatal direct and indirect pathways. Nat. Commun 9, 404 (2018). [PubMed: 
29374173] 
36. Delevich K, Hoshal B, Collins AG & Wilbrecht L Choice suppression is achieved through 
opponent but not independent function of the striatal indirect pathway in mice. bioRxiv 675850 
(2020) doi:10.1101/675850.
37. Frank MJ & Badre D Mechanisms of Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning in Corticostriatal 
Circuits 1: Computational Analysis. Cereb. Cortex 22, 509–526 (2012). [PubMed: 21693490] 
38. Cui G et al. Concurrent activation of striatal direct and indirect pathways during action initiation. 
Nature 494, 238–242 (2013). [PubMed: 23354054] 
39. Barbera G et al. Spatially Compact Neural Clusters in the Dorsal Striatum Encode Locomotion 
Relevant Information. Neuron 92, 202–213 (2016). [PubMed: 27667003] 
40. Sippy T, Lapray D, Crochet S & Petersen CCH Cell-Type-Specific Sensorimotor Processing 
in Striatal Projection Neurons during Goal-Directed Behavior. Neuron 88, 298–305 (2015). 
[PubMed: 26439527] 
41. Jin X, Tecuapetla F & Costa RM Basal ganglia subcircuits distinctively encode the parsing and 
concatenation of action sequences. Nat. Neurosci 17, 423–430 (2014). [PubMed: 24464039] 
42. Soares-Cunha C et al. Activation of D2 dopamine receptor-expressing neurons in the nucleus 
accumbens increases motivation. Nat. Commun 7, 1–11 (2016).
43. Cole SL, Robinson MJF & Berridge KC Optogenetic self-stimulation in the nucleus accumbens: 
D1 reward versus D2 ambivalence. PLOS ONE 13, e0207694 (2018). [PubMed: 30496206] 
44. Vicente AM, Galvão-Ferreira P, Tecuapetla F & Costa RM Direct and indirect dorsolateral striatum 
pathways reinforce different action strategies. Curr. Biol 26, R267–R269 (2016). [PubMed: 
27046807] 
45. Tecuapetla F, Jin X, Lima SQ & Costa RM Complementary Contributions of Striatal Projection 
Pathways to Action Initiation and Execution. Cell 166, 703–715 (2016). [PubMed: 27453468] 
46. Geddes CE, Li H & Jin X Optogenetic Editing Reveals the Hierarchical Organization of Learned 
Action Sequences. Cell 174, 32–43.e15 (2018). [PubMed: 29958111] 
47. Wang L, Rangarajan KV , Gerfen CR & Krauzlis RJ Activation of Striatal Neurons Causes a 
Perceptual Decision Bias during Visual Change Detection in Mice. Neuron 98, 669 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29723503] 
48. Peak J, Chieng B, Hart G & Balleine BW Striatal direct and indirect pathway neurons differentially 
control the encoding and updating of goal-directed learning. eLife 9, e58544 (2020). [PubMed: 
33215609] 
49. Eldar E, Morris G & Niv Y The effects of motivation on response rate: A hidden semi-Markov 
model analysis of behavioral dynamics. J. Neurosci. Methods 201, 251–261 (2011). [PubMed: 
21782849] 
50. Ahilan S et al. Forgetful inference in a sophisticated world model. bioRxiv (2018) 
doi:10.1101/419317.
51. Goshen I et al. Dynamics of Retrieval Strategies for Remote Memories. Cell 147, 678–689 (2011). 
[PubMed: 22019004] 
52. Fetsch CR et al. Focal optogenetic suppression in macaque area MT biases direction discrimination 
and decision confidence, but only transiently. eLife 7, e36523 (2018). [PubMed: 30051817] 
53. Roy NA et al. Extracting the dynamics of behavior in sensory decision-making experiments. 
Neuron 109, 597–610 (2021). [PubMed: 33412101] 
METHODS REFERENCES
54. Aronov D & Tank DW Engagement of Neural Circuits Underlying 2D Spatial Navigation in a 
Rodent Virtual Reality System. Neuron 84, 442–456 (2014). [PubMed: 25374363] 
55. Hanks TD et al. Distinct relationships of parietal and prefrontal cortices to evidence accumulation. 
Nature 520, 220–223 (2015). [PubMed: 25600270] 
Bolkan et al. Page 50
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
56. Wichmann FA & Hill NJ The psychometric function: I. Fitting, sampling, and goodness of fit. 
Percept. Psychophys 63, 1293–1313 (2001). [PubMed: 11800458] 
57. Pillow JW, Ahmadian Y & Paninski L Model-based decoding, information estimation, and 
change-point detection techniques for multineuron spike trains. Neural Comput. 23, 1–45 (2011). 
[PubMed: 20964538] 
58. Bishop CM Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics). 
(Springer-Verlag, 2006).
Bolkan et al. Page 51
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1 |. Pathway-specific DMS inhibition has no detectable impact on movement in mice 
navigating a virtual corridor.
(a) Schematic of viral delivery of Cre-dependent halorhodopsin (NpHR) to the dorsomedial 
striatum (DMS) of A2a-Cre, D2R-Cre, or D1R-Cre mice (left). Schematic of optrode (right): 
a 32-channel silicon probe coupled with tapered optical fiber, which delivered 532-nm 
(5-mW) light to the DMS of awake, ambulating mice. (b) Example peristimulus time 
histograms (PSTH) (top) and rasters of trial-by-trial spike times (bottom) from a DMS 
single-unit recorded in an ambulating A2a-Cre mouse expressing Cre-dependent NpHR 
(indirect pathway). Inset: average spike waveform (black) and 100 randomly sampled spike 
waveforms (grey). A trial consisted of 5-s without laser (pre, −5 to 0-s), 5-s laser sweep 
(on, 0 to 5-s), and 10-s ITI (40 total trials). (c) As in b but for DMS single-unit in a D1R-
Bolkan et al. Page 52
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Cre mouse expressing Cre-dependent NpHR (direct pathway). (d) Schematic of bilateral 
fiberoptic implantation of DMS and unilateral illumination in behaving mice, with example 
histology from a mouse expressing NpHR in the indirect (left, D2R-/A2a-Cre) or direct 
(middle, D1R-Cre) pathways, or control mouse without opsin (right, no opsin, A2a-/D2R- or 
D1R-Cre). 532-nm light (5-mW) was delivered unilaterally to the left or right hemisphere on 
alternate testing sessions and lateralized behavior was defined as ipsilateral or contralateral 
relative to the laser hemisphere. (e) Schematic of head-fixation of mice in a virtual reality 
(VR) apparatus allowing 2-D navigation. Displacements of an air-suspended spherical ball in 
the anterior-posterior (and medial-lateral) axes of the mouse controlled y- (and x-) position 
movements in a visual VR environment. (f) Schematic of virtual corridor 6-cm in width and 
330-cm in length, consisting of a start region (−10–0cm), an inhibition region (0–200cm) in 
which mice received unilateral 532-nm light on a random subset of trials (30%), a reward 
location (310cm) where mice received reward, and a teleportation location (320cm) where 
mice were transported to the start region following a variable ITI with mean of 2-s. (g) 
Average y-velocity (cm/s) across mice as a function of y-position (0–300cm in 25-cm bins) 
while navigating the virtual corridor on laser off (black) or laser on (green) trials in groups 
receiving DMS indirect (left, n = 7 mice, n = 1,712 laser off and n = 1,288 laser on trials) 
or direct pathway inhibition (middle, n = 6 mice, n = 1,088 laser off and n = 757 laser on 
trials), or illumination of the DMS in the absence of NpHR expression (right, no opsin, n 
= 5 mice, n = 1,178 laser off and n = 827 laser on trials). (h) Same as g but for average 
x-position (cm) contralateral to the unilaterally-coupled laser hemisphere. (i) Same as g 
but for view angle (degrees, contralateral to laser hemisphere). (j) Average across-mouse 
distance travelled (cm) to traverse the virtual corridor during laser off (black) or laser on 
(green) trials for mice receiving DMS indirect (n = 7 mice, n = 2,109 laser off and n = 1,574 
laser on trials) or direct pathway inhibition (n = 6 mice, n = 1,330 laser off and n = 930 laser 
on trials), or DMS illumination in the absence of NpHR (n = 6 mice, n = 1,688 laser off and 
n = 1,199 laser on trials). Solid bars depict mean +/−S.E.M. across mice; grey lines indicate 
individual mouse mean.
Bolkan et al. Page 53
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2 |. A set of virtual reality T-mazes have similar sensory features and identical motor 
requirements but different cognitive demands.
(a) Schematic of three virtual reality (VR)-based T-maze tasks. (b) Example mouse 
perspective at the same maze position (−10cm, 120cm, 195cm, and 295cm) from the 
example trial depicted in a of the evidence accumulation (left, black), no distractors (middle, 
ctrl #1), or permanent cues (right, ctrl #2) tasks. (c) Average choice accuracy (% correct) 
across mice performing the accumulation of evidence (black, n = 32 mice, n = 52,381 trials), 
no distractors (magenta, ctrl #1: n = 31 mice, n = 56,783 trials), or permanent cues (cyan, 
ctrl #2: n = 20 mice, n = 27,870 trials) tasks. p-value denotes one-way ANOV A of task 
on accuracy (p = 1.3 × 10−23, F2,80 = 109.4). Asterisks indicate statistical significance of 
post-hoc, unpaired, two-tailed ranksum comparisons of accuracy between groups (top to 
bottom: ***p = 3.9 × 10−7, z = −5.1; ***p = 2.1 × 10−11, z = −6.7; ***p = 2.1 × 10−5, 
z = 4.3). (d) Average y-velocity (cm/s) across mice as a function of y-position (0–300 cm 
in 25cm bins) during performance of each task (colors and n as in c). (e) Same as d but 
for average x-position (cm) on left and right choice trials. (f) Same as d but for average 
view angle (degrees) on left and right choice trials. (g) Average distance (cm) traveled per 
trial across mice (evidence accumulation, n = 32 mice, n = 53,833 trials; no distractors 
(control #1): n = 32 mice, n = 60,074 trials; permanent cues (control #2): n = 20 mice, n 
= 29,192 trials). p-value reflects one-way ANOV A of task on distance (p = 0.16, F2,81 = 
1.8). Throughout solid bars denote across mouse mean values +/−S.E.M. and transparent ‘x’ 
indicate individual mouse mean.
Bolkan et al. Page 54
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3 |. Inhibition of DMS but not NAc pathways has strong and opposing influence on choice 
during an evidence accumulation task, while having weaker effects during task variants with 
diminished cognitive demands.
(a) Schematic of bilateral viral delivery of Cre-dependent NpHR to the dorsomedial striatum 
(DMS). (b) Schematic of bilateral fiberoptic implantation of the DMS and unilateral 
inhibition in behaving mice, with example histology from a mouse expressing NpHR in the 
indirect (left, D2R-/A2a-Cre) or direct (middle, D1R-Cre) pathways, or DMS illumination 
in the absence of NpHR (right, no opsin, A2a-/D2R- or D1R-Cre). 532-nm light (5-mW) 
was delivered unilaterally to the left or right hemisphere on alternate testing sessions and 
choice bias contralateral or ipsilateral to the hemisphere of inhibition was quantified. (c) 
Schematic of the evidence accumulation task with delivery of 532-nm light restricted to the 
Bolkan et al. Page 55
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
cue region (0–200cm) on a random subset of trials (10–20%). (d) Average across mouse 
choice bias during the evidence accumulation task. Choice bias was defined as the difference 
between percent correct performance on trials when the correct choice was contralateral or 
ipsilateral to the inhibited hemisphere (% correct, contralateral-ipsilateral, positive values 
indicate a contralateral bias). Bias was calculated separately on laser off (black) and laser 
on (green) trials for mice receiving unilateral indirect pathway inhibition (left, n = 11 mice, 
n = 16,935 laser off and n = 3,390 laser on trials), unilateral direct pathway inhibition 
(middle: n = 10 mice; n = 14,030 laser off and n = 3,103 laser on trials), or unilateral 
illumination of the DMS in the absence of NpHR (right, n = 11 mice, n = 21,422 laser 
off and n = 5,113 laser on trials). (e) Difference in contralateral choice bias (% correct, 
contralateral-ipsilateral) between laser off and on trials (% bias, on-off) in mice performing 
the evidence accumulation task and receiving indirect pathway inhibition, direct pathway 
inhibition, or DMS illumination in the absence of NpHR. Asterisks indicate significance 
of unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum comparison of indirect to no opsin: ***p = 
1.1×10−4, z = 3.9; direct to no opsin: ***p = 2.2×10−4, z = −3.7). (f-h) Same as c-e but for 
the no distractors (control #1) task. Indirect: n = 7 mice, n = 13,706 laser off and n = 3,288 
laser on trials; direct: n = 9 mice, n = 14,647 laser off and n = 3,682 laser on trials; no opsin: 
n = 4 mice, n = 3,654 laser off and n = 901 laser on trials. Asterisks indicate significance of 
unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum comparison of indirect to no opsin: not significant 
(n.s.), p = 0.22, z = 1.2. Direct to no opsin: not significant (n.s.), p = 0.08, z = −1.8. (i-k) 
As in c-e but for the permanent cues (control #2) task. Indirect: n = 7 mice, n = 4,033 laser 
off and n = 929 laser on trials; direct: n = 7 mice, n = 6,061 laser off and n = 1,494 laser on 
trials; no opsin: n = 6 mice, n = 3,975 laser off and n = 923 laser on trials. Asterisks indicate 
significance of unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum comparison of indirect to no opsin: 
not significant (n.s.), p = 0.13, z = 1.5. Direct to no opsin: not significant (n.s.), p = 0.62, 
z = 0.5. (l) As in a but for bilateral viral delivery of Cre-dependent NpHR to the nucleus 
accumbens (NAc). (m) Same as b but for bilateral fiberoptic implantation of the NAc and 
unilateral inhibition in behaving mice, with example histology from a mouse expressing 
NpHR in the indirect (left, D2R-/A2a-Cre) or direct (middle, D1R-Cre) pathways, or NAc 
illumination in the absence of NpHR (right, no opsin, A2a-/D2R- or D1R-Cre). (n-p) As in c 
but for pathway-specific NAc inhibition during the accumulation of evidence task. Indirect: 
n = 9 mice, n = 11,978 laser off and n = 2,604 laser on trials; direct: n = 10 mice, n = 15,430 
laser off and n = 3,348 laser on trials; no opsin: n = 7 mice, n = 9,819 laser off and n = 1,488 
laser on trials. Asterisks indicate significance of unpaired, two-tailed Wilcoxon ranksum 
comparison of indirect to no opsin: not significant (n.s.), p = 0.86, z = 0.18; direct to no 
opsin: not significant (n.s.), p = 0.04, z = 2.0. Throughout solid bars denote across mouse 
mean values +/−S.E.M. and transparent ‘x’ indicate individual mouse mean. To account for 
multiple group comparisons we considered p-values significant after Bonferroni correction 
(2 comparisons).
Bolkan et al. Page 56
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4 |. A GLM reveals that sensory evidence, DMS pathway inhibition, and trial history 
predict choice during the evidence accumulation task, but does not precisely recapitulate the 
shape of the psychometric curve.
(a) Schematic of the evidence accumulation task and the coding of the external covariates 
for an example trial. (b) Schematic of the Bernoulli GLM for an example trial, showing the 
relationship between external covariates (inputs) and choice on each trial. On each trial, a 
set of GLM weights maps each input (Δ cues, laser, bias, previous choice, and existence 
of a previous rewarded choice) to the probability of each outcome through a sigmoid 
function, which gives the probability of a “righward” choice on the current trial. (c) Fitted 
GLM weights using aggregated data from all mice in the indirect pathway DMS inhibition 
group. The magnitude of each weight indicates the relative importance of that covariate in 
Bolkan et al. Page 57
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
predicting choice, whereas the sign of the weight indicates the direction of the effect (e.g. 
a negative laser weight indicates that if inhibition is in the right hemisphere, the mice will 
be more likely to turn left, while a positive weight on previous choice indicates that if the 
previous choice was to the right, in the current trial this will bias the mice to turn right 
again). Error bars denote (+/−1) posterior standard deviation credible intervals. (d) Same 
as c but for mice receiving DMS direct pathway inhibition. (e) Fraction of contralateral 
choice trials as a function of the difference in contralateral versus ipsilateral cues for laser 
off (black) and on (green) trials, for mice receiving indirect pathway DMS inhibition for 
the data (left) and for simulations of the model (right). Error bars denote 95% confidence 
intervals around the fraction of choices in each bin of the data; solid curves denote logistic 
fits (n=13 mice, n = 46,313 laser off and n = 8,570 laser on trials). (f) Same as e but for the 
mice receiving direct pathway inhibition of the DMS (n=13 mice, n = 41,250 laser off and n 
= 7,927 laser on trials).
Bolkan et al. Page 58
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5 |. A GLM-HMM better explains choice during the evidence accumulation task than the 
GLM, particularly on trials with DMS pathway inhibition.
(a) Example sequence of 3 trials of the evidence accumulation task, showing the relationship 
between external covariates (inputs), latent state, and choice on each trial. On each trial, 
the latent state defines which GLM weights map inputs (Δ cues, laser, previous choice, 
and previous rewarded choice) to the probability of choosing right or left. The transition 
probability P governs the probability of changing states between trials. See Methods for 
information on how the inputs were coded. (b) Schematic of GLM-HMM. The model 
has 3 latent states with fixed probabilities of transitioning between them. Each state is 
associated with a distinct decision-making strategy, defined by a mapping from external 
covariates, or inputs, such as Δ cues, to choice probability. (c) Cross-validated log-likelihood 
Bolkan et al. Page 59
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
demonstrating the increased performance of the GLM-HMM over a standard Bernoulli 
GLM on held-out sessions. Dots represent model performance for individual mice (n=13 
for each group). (d) Same as c but showing prediction accuracy as a fraction of the choices 
correctly predicted by each model across all trials (left) or on the subset of trials when the 
laser was on (right). (e) Histograms showing the number of consecutive laser trials for which 
the animal’s choice was in the same direction as the expected biasing effect of the laser (i.e. 
a choice contralateral to the laser hemisphere during DMS indirect pathway inhibition). Data 
(black), GLM simulation (blue), GLM-HMM simulation (pink). For the simulations, data 
of the same length as the real data was generated 100 times and the resulting histograms 
averaged. Curves denote smoothed counts using a sliding window average (window size = 
3 bins). Shaded regions around the GLM and GLM-HMM curves indicate 95% confidence 
intervals. (f) Same as e but for mice receiving direct pathway inhibition of the DMS, 
therefore laser-biased choices are defined as those ipsilateral to the hemisphere of inhibition.
Bolkan et al. Page 60
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 6 |. A GLM-HMM uncovers states during the evidence accumulation task with different 
weighting on sensory evidence, choice history, and DMS pathway inhibition.
(a) Fitted GLM weights for 3-state model from mice in the indirect pathway DMS inhibition 
group. Error bars denote (+/−1) posterior standard deviation for each weight. The magnitude 
of the weight represents the relative importance of that covariate in predicting choice, 
whereas the sign of the weight indicates the side bias (e.g. a negative laser weight indicates 
that if inhibition is in the right hemisphere, the mice will be more likely to turn left, while 
a positive weight on previous choice indicates that if the previous choice was to the right, 
in the current trial this will bias the mice to turn right again). (b) Same as a but for the 
direct pathway group. (c) Fraction of contralateral choices as a function of the difference in 
contralateral versus ipsilateral cues in each trial for mice in the indirect pathway inhibition 
Bolkan et al. Page 61
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
group. To compute psychometric functions, trials were assigned to each state by taking the 
maximum of the model’s posterior state probabilities on each trial. Error bars denote +/−1 
SEM for light off (solid) and light on (dotted) trials. Solid curves denote logistic fits to the 
concatenated data across mice for light off (solid) and light on (dotted) trials. (d) Same as 
c but for the mice receiving direct pathway inhibition of the DMS. (e) Same as c but for 
data simulated from the model fit to mice receiving indirect pathway inhibition of the DMS 
(see Methods). (f). Same as e but for mice receiving direct pathway inhibition of the DMS. 
(g) Performance in each state for mice receiving DMS inhibition in the indirect pathway 
(left) and direct pathway (right), shown as the percentage of total trials assigned to that state 
in which the mice made the correct choice. Colored bars denote the average performance 
across all mice. Black dots show averages for individual mice (n=13 mice for both groups). 
(h) Percentage of laser-on trials that the model assigned to each state for mice receiving 
DMS inhibition in the indirect pathway (left) and direct pathway (right). Colored bars denote 
the average performance across all mice. Black dots show averages for individual mice 
(n=13 mice for both groups). (I) The posterior probability of each state for the five trials 
before and after a laser-on trial, averaged across all such periods (n=8570, indirect; n=7927, 
direct).
Bolkan et al. Page 62
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 7 |. Diversity across sessions in the timing and number of GLM-HMM state transitions.
(a) Transition probabilities for the indirect pathway group. (b) Same as a but for the direct 
pathway group. (c) The posterior probability of being in each state for each trial for 3 
example sessions from a mouse in the indirect pathway group. (d) Same as c but for two 
mice from the direct pathway group. (e) Dwell times showing the average consecutive 
number of trials that the mice spent in each state for mice with indirect (left; range 39–
86 trials, average session length 202 trials) and direct (right; range 52–59 trials, average 
session length 185 trials) pathway inhibition. Black dots show averages for individual mice 
(n=13 mice for both groups). (f). The fraction of trials that the mice spent in each state in 
each session. Each dot represents an individual session (n=271, indirect pathway; n=266, 
direct pathway). Color-coding reinforces the state composition of each session (e.g. blue 
Bolkan et al. Page 63
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
indicates the mouse spent 100% of the session in state 1). A small amount of Gaussian 
noise was added to the position of each dot for visualization purposes. Grey arrows identify 
the example sessions shown in c and d. (g) The fraction of sessions in which the mice 
entered one, two, or all three states. Gray bars denote the average fraction of sessions for 
all mice. Black dots show averages for individual mice (n=13 mice for both groups). (h) 
Time spent in each state represented as a percentage of total trials for mice inhibited in 
the indirect pathway (left) and direct pathway (right). Colored bars denote the average state 
occupancies across all mice. Black dots show averages for individual mice (n=13 mice 
both groups). (i) Same as f except state assignments were obtained from a model in which 
the transition probabilities were restricted to disallow transitions between states (i.e. all 
off-diagonal transition probabilities equal zero; see Methods). (j) Same as f except state 
assignments were obtained from a model in which transitions were disallowed between state 
2 and the other states. (k) Comparison of the cross-validated log-likelihood of the data when 
fitting GLM-HMMs with the reduced models from i and j, relative to the log-likelihood of 
the full model, in bits per session.
Bolkan et al. Page 64
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 September 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript