High frequency bursts facilitate fast communication for human 
spatial attention
Kianoush Banaie Boroujeni1,*, Randolph F. Helfrich2, Ian C. Fiebelkorn3, J. Nicole Bentley4, 
Peter Brunner5, Jack J. Lin6, Robert T. Knight7, Sabine Kastner1,8
1Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
2Departments of Psychology and Neurology and the Wu Tsai Institute, Y ale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
3Department of Neuroscience and Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, NY 14627, USA
4Department of Neurosurgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA
5Department of Neurosurgery, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA
6Department of Neurology and Center for Mind and Brain, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA
7Departments of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA
8Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
Abstract
Brain-wide communication supporting flexible behavior requires coordination between sensory 
and associative regions but how brain networks route sensory information at fast timescales to 
guide action remains unclear. Using human intracranial electrophysiology and spiking neural 
networks during spatial attention tasks, where participants detected targets at cued locations, 
we show that high-frequency activity bursts (HFAb) mark temporal windows of elevated 
population firing that enable fast, long-range communications. HFAbs were evoked by sensory 
cues and targets, dynamically coupled to low-frequency rhythms. Notably, both the strength of 
cue-evoked HFAbs and their decoupling from slow rhythms predicted behavioral accuracy. HFAbs 
synchronized across the brain, revealing distinct cue- and target-activated subnetworks. These 
subnetworks exhibited lead-lag dynamics following target onset, with cue-activated subnetworks 
preceding target-activated subnetworks when cues were informative. Computational modeling 
suggested that HFAbs reflect transitions to population spiking, denoting temporal windows for 
network communications supporting attentional performance. These findings establish HFAbs as 
*Corresponding author: Kianoush Banaie Boroujeni. kb9590@princeton.edu.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, K.B.B. and S.K.; Methodology, K.B.B.; Formal Analysis, K.B.B.; Modeling, K.B.B.; Investigation, R.F.H., R.T.K. 
and J.J.L.; Software, R.F.H. and I.C.F.; Visualization, K.B.B; Writing – Original Draft, K.B.B.; Writing – Review & Editing, K.B.B., 
R.F.H., I.C.F., J.N.B., P.B., J.J.L., R.T.K., and S.K..; Supervision, S.K.
Competing Interest: The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2026 February ; 29(2): 435–444. doi:10.1038/s41593-025-02160-5.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
signatures of population state transitions, supporting information routing across distributed brain 
networks.
Prioritizing information from the external environment to guide ongoing behavior and 
upcoming actions requires fast coordination of neural activity in large-scale networks 
distributed across distant brain areas.1–6 This coordination allows information to be routed 
selectively from sensory to higher level executive brain networks.7–9 Previous research, 
particularly in non-human primates, has shown that selective information routing emerges 
through dynamically changing neuronal interactions.2,10,11 Such studies highlight the role of 
oscillatory dynamics and transient changes in inter-areal coherence in enabling attentional 
selection and the flexible reconfiguration of neural pathways according to task demands. 
Yet, most prior investigations have focused on pairwise interactions between a few brain 
areas, leaving open the question of how fast neural dynamics emerge and enable flexible, 
large-scale information routing across distributed networks.
Investigating these questions in the human brain is challenging due to spatial or temporal 
constraints of available techniques. Studies examining network-level interactions have 
largely been based on connectivity maps derived from functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI). While fMRI studies provide valuable insights into functional networks, 
the temporal resolution cannot capture sub-second routing dynamics in attention tasks.12–15 
Electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) offer high temporal 
resolution but have limited spatial resolution.16,17 Lastly, single unit recordings provide 
both fine temporal and spatial signals but lack the broad coverage for addressing questions 
of brain-wide network communication.2,6,18 Human intracranial electroencephalography 
(iEEG), offers a unique opportunity to address these challenges by providing spatially 
localized and temporally precise neural signals from multiple brain regions.19,20 High-
frequency activity detected in iEEG signals correlates with different cognitive functions, 
including attention,19–24 and has been reported to index aggregated spiking activity, 
dendritic post-synaptic activity, state transitions into spiking regimes, or spike current 
leakage to local field potentials (LFPs).25–29 Additionally, high-frequency activities show 
long-range phase synchronization with different frequency bands, making them candidates 
for studying fast brain-wide communications.21,30–33 However, iEEG studies of attention 
have predominantly focused on fast-slow interactions, such as cross-frequency coupling 
between high- and low-frequency rhythms, which may not fully capture the dynamics of 
fast-fast interactions between high-frequency activities.21,30,34–37
Here, we address this gap by identifying transient high-frequency activity bursts 
(HFAbs) in human iEEG data from epilepsy patients performing spatial attention tasks, 
hypothesizing that HFAbs reflect periods when neural populations establish temporal 
alignment across distributed regions, creating windows for selective information routing. 
HFAbs during sensory cue processing predicted successful detection of upcoming targets. 
They were locally phase-locked to slow rhythms (4–25 Hz), and transiently decoupled 
during cue and target processing, with decoupling associated with correct performance. 
Across brain networks, HFAbs temporal relationships were largely characterized by 
zero-lag synchronization, identifying functionally specialized subnetworks with distinct 
Boroujeni et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
topographical distributions and temporal activation sequences. Specifically, HFAbs in cue-
subnetwork preceded target-subnetwork activity following target onset, when sensory cues 
provided relevant information about the target location. Using computational modeling, 
we found that HFAbs mark state transitions in neural populations into a spiking 
state, characterized by bouts of elevated neuronal firing, indicating enhanced population 
excitability enabling synchronized and temporally ordered activation patterns across regions.
Results
HFAbs track spatial attention and predict behavioral accuracy
We analyzed iEEG data from two spatial attention tasks in which patients were cued 
either exogenously or endogenously to a spatial location to detect visual targets (Fig. 1a, 
Extended Data Fig. 1a). Throughout the paper, the main figures focus on the results of 
experiment 1, while the results of experiment 2 are presented as supplementary information, 
unless mentioned otherwise (for brain group-average heatmap plots, we combined both 
experiments to improve 3D rendering coverage).
In experiment 1, patients performed a spatial attention task.23 Each trial started with the 
presentation of two vertical or horizontal bar stimuli. Patients were instructed to fixate their 
gaze at the center of the display. A transient spatial cue appeared at the end of one bar, 
exogenously cueing an upcoming target location. Following a delay period, a target (i.e., 
luminance changes at perceptual threshold) appeared at the cued location or infrequently at 
equally distant non-cued locations. Patients responded when they detected the target (Fig. 
1a). In experiment 2, patients were endogenously cued to a hemifield and reported a target if 
it appeared in the cued hemifield3 (Extended Data Fig. 1a, see Methods, see Extended Data 
Fig. 1b for detailed performance breakdowns).
First, we used an adaptive method6 and detected bursts of high frequency activity at each 
electrode (HFAbs, 65–115 Hz, intermittent high amplitude events lasting more than 2.5 
frequency cycles, average burst length 36.2 ms; Fig. 1b). The frequency band was selected 
based on average spectral peaks observed across subjects (91.2 ± 20.9 Hz , n = 12, see 
Methods). HFAbs occurred frequently (0.1 ± 0.01 Hz) on average in our data, approximately 
15-fold higher than recently described cortical ripples (0.006 ± 0.0008 Hz),33 suggesting 
distinct characteristics of HFAbs despite overlapping spectral properties (see Methods). We 
then calculated the HFAb density (HFAb events per unit of time) for each electrode to 
examine their evoked response during different task epochs. HFAbs showed higher density 
averaged across all electrodes in response to both cue and target (Fig. 1c). We measured 
HFAb responses following cue and target onsets across different trial outcomes (hit, reject, 
miss, and false alarm). At the population level, HFAbs activated to cue onsets in correct 
hit and reject trials (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < 0.001) and differed significantly from 
missed and false alarm trials (Kruskal-Wallis test, p = 0.001, Dunn’s test, p = 0.008 and 
p = 0.01, respectively; Fig. 1d). Target responses were also enhanced in correct hit trials 
compared to other outcome conditions (Kruskal-Wallis test, p < 0.001; Dunn’s test, p < 
0.001; Fig. 1d). Similar results were observed in experiment 2 (Extended Data Fig. 1c,d). 
Overall, 10.7 ± 2% of channels (n = 12) showed significant activation to cues, whereas 
33.2 ± 3% of channels (n = 12) were responsive to targets (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p 
Boroujeni et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
< 0.05). The broader activation to targets is in accord with greater complexity of target 
processing, engaging brain regions involved in sensory processing, motor planning, and 
decision-making. Among channels that responded to cues and/or targets, HFAb responses to 
targets were negatively correlated with those to the cue (Spearman correlation, p < 0.001, 
r = −0.36, Fig. 1e), suggesting distinct electrode populations process cues and targets. Cue 
responses were prominent in occipital and parietal regions, including areas in extrastriate 
cortex, intraparietal sulcus (IPS), temporoparietal junction (TPJ), superior parietal lobule 
(SPL), and inferior parietal lobule (IPL) (Fig. 1f), whereas target responses were more 
widely distributed including superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyrus, precentral and 
postcentral gyrus, IPL, SPL, and TPJ (Fig. 1g). This activation profile was evident only 
for correct trials both for cue- and target responses (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). It is worth 
noting that for experiment 2, we also observed enhanced cue responses in the frontal gyrus 
consistent with more top-down attentional control in endogenous cueing. See Extended Data 
Table 1 for detailed electrode positions of the cue.
We investigated the effect of cue validity (targets at cued vs uncued location) and laterality 
(visual field ipsilateral versus contralateral to electrodes) on cue and target responses using a 
Generalized Linear Mixed Effect (GLME) model (see Methods). We found a main effect of 
outcome on both cue response (t = 2.8, p = 0.005) and target response (t = 15.2, p < 0.001), 
a main effect of validity on the target response (Fig. 1i, t = 4.7, p < 0.001), and a main effect 
of laterality on the cue response (Fig. 1j, t = 5.1, p < 0.001). No significant main effect was 
observed for laterality on target (p = 0.13), or validity on cue responses (Extended Data Fig. 
1g, p = 0.32, See Extended Data Fig. 1h for experiment 2).
Given that HFAb activation to sensory cues was associated with outcome accuracy, we 
examined if HFAb density following cue onset in cue responsive electrodes (Cue+) predicted 
correct trials. A classifier was trained on the grand mean of HFAb density across selected 
electrodes using a 350 ms sliding window around the cue onset, with trial-level outputs 
labeled as correct or incorrect (see Methods). In Cue+ electrodes, HFAb density within 500 
ms post-cue predicted correct performance above baseline and chance levels (binomial test, 
FDR corrected for dependent samples, p < 0.05, Fig. 1k). This prediction was consistent 
across both experiments (Extended Data Fig. 1i) and was not dependent on an individual 
subject.
These findings indicate that HFAbs occur frequently in response to sensory cues and targets 
and exhibit distinct spatial profiles across the brain. HFAbs predicted performance accuracy 
following cues on a trial-by-trial basis. Together, these spatially selective and behaviorally 
predictive responses support HFAbs as neural signatures of attention-related processing.
HFAbs are coupled to slow rhythms and decouple in response to cues and targets
High-frequency activity dynamics in brain networks are linked to low-frequency dynamics, 
especially through phase-locking relationships with theta rhythms (4–8 Hz).30 We asked 
whether HFAbs synchronized to the phase of low-frequency rhythms, and whether these 
cross-frequency dynamics were associated with task variables. For each electrode, we 
extracted the LFP around the HFAb centers and measured both the HFAb-triggered LFP 
average and the phase locking value (PLV) of HFAb peaks to low-frequency LFP dynamics. 
Boroujeni et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Spectral analysis revealed HFAb-triggered spectral peaks (Fig. 2a, top) and phase locking 
peaks (Fig. 2a, bottom) in theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–14 Hz), and beta (15–25 Hz) frequency 
bands. Phase-locking peaks occurred at one or more narrow frequency bands, showing 
different mean phases (Fig. 2b; see Extended Data Fig. 2 for additional single-electrode 
examples, mean phase distributions in theta/alpha and beta bands across subjects, and 
spectral and phase-locking peak details). Phase-locking was evident in most electrodes 
across all subjects (reliable peaks in 97.8% ± 0.8% of electrodes; mean peak frequency 9 ± 
0.24 Hz; significant peaks marked by black dots, Fig. 2c; see Extended Data Fig. 3a,b for 
topography of phase-locking peak frequencies).
To test whether sensory cues or target processing affected HFAb phase-locking, we 
analyzed time-resolved PLV in sliding windows around cue and target onsets (HFAb 
count controlled per window; see Methods). HFAbs showed a transient decrease in their 
phase-locking (decoupling) in theta/alpha and beta frequency bands following cue and target 
onsets (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 3c, randomization test, p < 0.05, FDR corrected for 
dependent samples). This decoupling was not attributable to event-triggered potentials or 
the measurement approach (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e see Methods). Furthermore, changes 
in HFAb coupling strength were only observed in correct trials, not in incorrect trials (Fig. 
2e,f, HFAb counts controlled across trial conditions, see Methods, see Extended Data Fig. 3f 
for individual examples). Similar results were observed in experiment 2 (Extended Data Fig. 
3g).
Next, we examined whether changes in electrodes’ HFAb coupling to low frequencies were 
related to their responsiveness to cues and targets. For each subject, we correlated coupling 
ratios (changes in HFAb coupling to <25 Hz after cues or targets relative to baseline; 
see Methods) with burst density. Coupling ratios at cue and target onsets were negatively 
correlated with burst density following these events suggesting that electrodes with strong 
HFAb responses also showed decoupling (Fig. 2g,h, Spearman correlation, r = −0.22, p < 
0.001, and r = −23, p<0.001, respectively). GLME models showed a main effect of cue 
response on coupling ratio after cue onset (Fig. 2g t = −6.17, p < 0.001), and of target 
response after target onset (Fig. 2h, t = −5.05, p < 0.001). No significant cross-effects were 
observed (cue response after target onset: p = 0.15; target response after cue onset: p = 0.21; 
Extended Data Fig. 3h,i).
Overall, HFAbs were predominantly phase-locked to theta, alpha, and beta rhythms. 
However, their coupling strength to slower rhythms decreased during cue and target 
processing, specifically in correct trials. This selective decoupling during correct trials 
suggests that releasing HFAbs from their default phase-locked state may facilitate the 
transition from internally regulated network activity to externally driven sensory processing 
required for successful task performance.
HFAbs synchronized brain-wide and their network-level synchronization identified 
functionally specialized subnetworks
We found that HFAbs evoked by cue and target demonstrated different topographical 
distributions, largely non-overlapping responsive electrode populations. Additionally, HFAbs 
transiently decoupled from local low-frequency rhythms during task events, suggesting 
Boroujeni et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
reduced local rhythmic constraints during active processing. The distinct spatial patterns and 
release from local phase-locking raise the possibility that HFAbs may instead synchronize 
with HFA in distant regions processing similar information. We therefore asked whether 
brain networks could be divided to distinct subnetworks based on the temporal relationships 
of their HFAbs, and whether subnetworks with similar synchronization patterns are 
functionally specialized.
We considered HFAbs outside the cue/delay and target/response periods to avoid stimulus-
driven synchronization effects and measured the power of high frequency activity (65–175 
Hz, HFA, to capture broader spectral contents) in one electrode aligned to the center of 
HFAb events in another electrode (HFAb-triggered HFA). HFAb-triggered HFA between 
electrodes showed synchronized high-frequency amplitude increases (Fig. 3a, similar 
results were observed for HFAb-HFAb). These synchronized patterns exhibited rhythmic 
modulation at low-frequency rhythms, with spectral peaks predominantly in the theta band 
(4–8 Hz) (Fig. 3b, top). These patterns were consistent across subjects and experiments 
(Fig. 3b, bottom, Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). HFAb synchronization strength (the sharpness 
of HFAb-triggered HFA) was inversely related to inter-electrode distance, with closer sites 
showing stronger synchronization (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 4c, Spearman correlation 
between HFAb-triggered HFA kurtosis and electrode distances, r = −0.25, p < 0.001).
To extract temporal relations of high-frequency activity across electrode pairs, we used 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of HFAb-triggered HFA. 
The first component (PC1) reflected zero-lag synchronized and near-symmetric distributions 
of high-frequency activity in all subjects, explaining over 20% of the total variance (Fig. 
3d, see Extended Data Fig. 4d for experiment 2). We projected HFAb-triggered HFAs onto 
PC space and used a resampling-based consensus K-means clustering technique to identify 
robust clusters of electrodes based on their scores on the synchronized PC (Extended Data 
Fig. 4f, see Methods). The clustering algorithm identified the most stable clusters (electrodes 
consistently grouped together across multiple runs) for each cluster number (K = 2–8, Fig. 
3e, Extended Data Fig. 5). A series of accuracy metrics was used to determine the optimal 
number of clusters for each subject through a voting poll, selecting the cluster number that 
outperformed others across the majority of metric (Extended Data Fig. 6a–c).
Next, we examined whether these clusters were functionally specialized, revealing 
functional subnetworks within the larger brain networks. All subjects (except one excluded 
due to insufficient electrodes) showed clusters with distinct cue- and target-evoked activation 
profiles (Fig. 3f, see Extended Data Fig. 6d for individual examples). Clusters activated 
by cues and targets were labeled as cue− or target-subnetworks, respectively (Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test, p < 0.05; FDR corrected). Cue-subnetworks were predominantly located in 
occipital and parietal regions (e.g., IPS, TPJ, SPL, IPL), whereas target-subnetworks were 
more widely distributed across different brain areas including parietal, motor, premotor, 
and frontal cortices (Fig. 3g, see Extended Data Table 1 for individual subject electrode 
locations).
Lastly, similar to Fig. 1h, we tested whether cue responses in cue- and target-subnetworks 
could predict trial outcomes. HFAb density averaged across electrodes in cue-subnetworks 
Boroujeni et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
within 98–374 ms post-cue predicted successful detection of upcoming targets (binomial 
test, P < 0.001, FDR corrected for dependent samples). This prediction was specific to 
cue-subnetwork (Fig. 3h) and was not driven by a single subject (see Extended Data Fig. 
6e–g for classifier details in both experiments). It is worth noting that HFAbs in both cue- 
and target-subnetworks, predicted trial outcome following target onset (Extended Data Fig. 
6h).
As a control, we re-referenced datasets from common average referencing to local 
composite referencing (LCR, each electrode was referenced to its nearest neighbors, 
see Methods), This re-referencing did not alter any of the main results. Together, these 
findings suggest that large-scale brain networks show synchronized HFAb patterns, with 
their synchronization identifying functionally specialized subnetworks that exhibit distinct 
temporal dynamics. Furthermore, HFAbs in cue-subnetworks following cue onset were 
predictive of performance accuracy.
HFAbs in cue-subnetworks precede target-subnetworks
Our observation that HFAb responses in cue-subnetworks predict performance suggests 
their involvement in target detection, raising a key question: do cue-subnetworks route 
information to target-subnetworks during target processing, implying directional flow 
that supports attentional performance? To address this question, we used two different 
approaches (only subjects whose electrode coverage included both cue- and target-
subnetworks were considered; n = 3 in experiment 1, and n = 3 in experiment 2). First, 
we measured HFAb-triggered HFA during target-to-response period and tested whether 
HFAbs showed temporally ordered activity between cue and target-subnetworks within 
this window. On average, HFAbs in cue-subnetworks preceded HFA in target-subnetworks 
during target processing (Fig. 4a, permutation test, p < 0.05, see Extended Data Fig. 7a for 
individual example). We further quantified the distribution of HFAb-triggered HFA peaks for 
individual subjects. The HFA peak distribution in target-subnetworks showed a mean at 39.7 
± 4.4 ms (n = 3) after HFAbs in cue-subnetworks and was significantly different from the 
opposite direction (Fig. 4b, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.05). Similar results were found in 
experiment 2 (Extended Data Fig. 7b). For comparison, no lead-lag patterns were observed 
during the cue-to-target interval (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Topographically, and at the level of 
individual subjects, HFAbs in the occipital, posterior parietal, and frontal areas led over the 
motor/premotor areas during target processing (Fig. 4c, see Extended Data Fig. 7d for more 
examples).
Next, we used delayed mutual information (DMI) to further quantify temporal dependencies 
between cue and target-subnetworks. DMI revealed (i) when cue and target-subnetworks 
shared maximum information relative to target onset, and (ii) time-lags of maximum inter-
predictability. DMI peaked 285.4 ± 18 ms after target onset (Fig. 4d; n = 3). Time-lag 
distributions showed cue-subnetworks preceded target-subnetworks by 48.8 ± 23 ms during 
target processing (Fig. 4d, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < 0.001, n = 3; see Extended Data 
Fig. 7e for individual heatmaps). The temporal precedence occurred only after target onset, 
not during cue processing (Extended Data Fig. 7f), and specific to valid-cue trials, indicating 
it is not merely visual hierarchy activation, but reflects routing only when cue information is 
Boroujeni et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
relevant for target detection (Fig. 4e). This pattern was consistent across individuals and both 
experiments (Extended Data Fig. 7e–h).
Overall, these results demonstrate that subnetworks, identified by their network-level HFAb 
synchronization patterns show temporal sequences during task events. Specifically, when 
cues provide valid spatial information about the target, HFAbs in cue-subnetworks precede 
those in target-subnetworks following target onset.
Computational modeling of HFAbs through spiking neural networks
We first developed a computational model using spiking neural networks to investigate both 
the mechanisms underlying HFAbs and their functional role in attentional performance. We 
simulated two interconnected networks, each consisting of 1000 neurons (80% excitatory, 
20% inhibitory; Fig. 5a, Extended Data Fig. 8a, see Methods). Each network was fed by 
external input currents primarily to the excitatory population.
We implemented two recording sites on top of each network measuring electrical field 
dynamics of postsynaptic and transmembrane potentials (Fig. 5a,b, Extended Data Fig. 8b,c, 
see Methods). Simulated iEEG signals showed low-frequency spectral peaks corresponding 
to network resonance frequencies and high-frequency (65–115 Hz) peaks, consistent with 
experimental data (Fig. 5c). To investigate the neural mechanisms underlying HFAbs, we 
calculated the spike density for the population of neurons, and the HFAb density from each 
recording site. HFAb density correlated with spike density compared to random timings 
(randomization test, p < 0.05) consistent with previous empirical findings.25,28,38 When 
feeding the network different levels of external nonrhythmic current coherence (Extended 
Data Fig. 8c), we observed a linear increase in the correlation between HFAb and spike 
densities as input coherence increased (Spearman correlation, r = 0.87, p < 0.001, Fig. 
5d). These findings suggest that HFAbs emerge when coherent external inputs drive neural 
populations into elevated firing states, indicating that HFAbs reflect input-driven population 
excitability rather than spontaneous fluctuations in neural activation.
Next, we examined HFAb phase-locking to slower rhythms. HFAbs triggered spectral peaks 
and showed phase locking to theta, alpha and beta bands (4–25 Hz, Fig. 5e), depending on 
synaptic time constants, external input strength, and neural connectivity strength, consistent 
with previous computational findings.39 To test network mechanisms underlying decoupling 
during cue and target processing, we modeled feedforward networks and measured time-
resolved PLV in both networks after feeding one with a brief input pulse (~50% of neurons 
receiving brief in-phase inputs; Fig. 5f, Extended Data Fig. 8e,f). The external impulse 
increased HFAb rate and desynchronized both networks, resulting in transient decoupling 
of HFAbs from low-frequency rhythms (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.001, Fig. 5i, 
Extended Data Fig. 8g,h). These results reveal that external inputs shift neural networks 
from internally regulated states (HFAbs phase-locked to slow rhythms) to externally driven 
states, mirroring the empirical decoupling observed during cue and target processing.
We also examined HFAb synchronization patterns between networks. Reciprocally 
connected networks and networks with correlated external inputs showed synchronized 
high frequency activity (Fig. 5g), while feedforward networks showed lead-lag patterns 
Boroujeni et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
within 150 ms of HFAbs (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.001, Fig. 5h). Overall, these 
inter-network HFAb patterns showed intrinsically generated rhythmic fluctuations, though 
rhythmic external inputs could also entrain its rhythms to HFAb synchronization patterns 
between networks (Spearman correlation, r = 0.83, p < 0.001, Fig. 5i). These findings 
suggest that inter-network HFAb patterns reflect both structural connectivity and shared 
input statistics, providing mechanistic support for the zero-lag synchronization within 
subnetworks and lead-lag patterns between subnetworks observed empirically.
To link network dynamics to behavioral performance, we extended our model to a four-
network architecture with spatially selective cue networks connected to target networks. All 
networks were activated by a shared decaying input initiated at trial onset. Cue networks 
responded transiently to cue onset and decayed thereafter. Target presentation was modeled 
as an additional input to the target networks. If targets appeared at cued locations, cue 
networks showed weak reactivation (Fig. 5j, Extended Data Fig. 8i,j, see Methods). We ran 
the model for 150 trials with valid and invalid cue conditions. Valid cues increased burst 
response in target networks following target onsets (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.001, Fig. 
5k). Delayed mutual information analysis revealed that cue networks temporally preceded 
target networks specifically for valid trials, with maximal information transfer occurring 
after target onset (Fig. 5l, Extended Data Fig. 8k), mirroring our empirical findings of 
cue-subnetwork precedence. We implemented a detection threshold model to test how 
cue-driven input enhances target detection. When fitting detection thresholds to invalid 
trials, valid cues consistently increased HFAb rates above threshold, resulting in higher 
detection probability (Fig. 5m, Extended Data Fig. 8l). This provides a mechanistic account 
of how cue information enhances behavioral performance through increased state transition 
probability by inputs from cue networks.
Our modeling results demonstrate that HFAbs reflect transitions in neural populations 
into spiking states. HFAbs are phase locked to low-frequency rhythms, but transient 
inputs disrupt this coupling. HFAb synchronization patterns between networks depend on 
connectivity and task structure, with behavioral relevance demonstrated through enhanced 
detection rates when cue-driven inputs increase target network burst rates.
Discussion
Here we present a framework for understanding mechanisms of large-scale information 
routing in brain networks at fast timescales. We characterize high-frequency activities 
as discrete burst events (HFAbs), rather than continuous fluctuations, supported by 
computational and animal electrophysiology studies emphasizing their circuit-level origins 
and roles in long-range communication.6,40–44 This quantification allows a millisecond-
resolution, network-level account of selective attention that extends beyond traditional 
pairwise interareal interactions. Our findings revealed that HFAbs were synchronized across 
distributed cortical networks, identifying functionally specialized subnetworks for cue and 
target processing. Importantly, HFAbs in cue-subnetworks following sensory cues predicted 
trial-by-trial performance accuracy and temporally preceded HFAbs in target-subnetworks 
during target processing when cues were informative. Complementing these findings, our 
computational modeling showed HFAbs emerge from bouts of elevated excitatory drive to 
Boroujeni et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
local networks, marking fast state transitions in neural populations that support attention 
processes.
Our analysis of both exogenous and endogenous attention tasks revealed conserved 
mechanisms despite distinct control pathways. In both tasks, valid cue information enhanced 
target-triggered HFAb responses, and cue subnetworks showed temporal precedence over 
target subnetworks only when the cue was informative. These preserved findings across both 
tasks suggest that information routing signified by HFAb dynamics represents a fundamental 
mechanism for transforming cue information into spatial priority signals, regardless of 
whether attention is stimulus-driven or top-down controlled.45,46 However, task-specific 
differences emerged in the timing of lateralized processing; exogenous attention showed 
laterality effects during cue processing, reflecting stimulus-driven nature of peripheral cues, 
while endogenous attention showed laterality only during target processing, consistent 
with the internal maintenance and deployment of spatial attention from symbolic cues.46 
These findings support the argument that while attentional control signals may rely on 
different cortical pathways, more posterior for exogenous and involving frontal regions for 
endogenous attention, they converge onto common selection mechanisms in parietal and 
sensory areas.47,48
A main finding of our study revealed that the most prominent pattern of high-frequency 
dynamics in the brain network was zero-lag synchronization (Fig. 3d), consistent with 
previous studies showing phase locking of high-frequency dynamics in brain networks.31–33 
Zero-lag synchronization patterns are thought to enhance large-scale information processing 
and facilitate representational states of sensory information in the brain.49–51 While 
our results cannot directly identify the origins of these synchronized interactions, two 
mechanisms might explain these patterns: subcortical inputs,52–55 particularly higher-order 
thalamic nuclei,52,56–58 or direct intracortical interactions.29,59–61 Our modeling supports 
both these possibilities showing correlated inputs to distinct neural networks, or reciprocal 
connections between spiking networks could drive such long-range synchronization (Fig. 
5g).
We further showed that network-level baseline synchronization of high-frequency dynamics 
reliably identifies distinct functional brain subnetworks. While the baseline state did 
not contain cue or target processing periods, it could identify subnetworks with unique 
activation patterns in response to those behavioral events (Fig. 3). This approach 
diverges from conventional methods for delineating brain network organizations and 
communications, such as fMRI, which primarily focuses on low-frequency BOLD signal 
fluctuations.62,63 By leveraging high-frequency dynamics, we demonstrate a link between 
baseline neural activity and task-induced network activation patterns, suggesting that 
intrinsic network fluctuations can affect behavioral responses at millisecond timescales. 
Identifying these subnetworks at fast time scales is critical to capture rapid state transitions 
in brain networks, which may underlie the temporal structures necessary for adaptive 
information routing during behaviorally relevant events.64 Our findings demonstrate 
that brain subnetworks, identified by their network-level HFAb synchronization, exhibit 
lead-lag patterns during behavioral events. Specifically, cue-subnetworks preceded target-
subnetworks during target presentation when spatial cues provided relevant information 
Boroujeni et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
about target locations (Fig. 4). Our modeling provided a mechanistic account for this, 
showing that inputs from cue networks during target processing increase the probability of 
state transitions in target networks, reflected by elevated HFAb rates (Fig. 5k,m). Overall, 
these observations uniquely bridge the gap between studies focusing on local and cross-
regional mechanisms of fast information routing6,36,41,42,44,56 and those examining network 
dynamics beyond pairwise interactions,15,65 providing new insight into the mechanisms of 
selective attention.
Another key observation was the coupling dynamics of HFAbs and local low-frequency 
activities. We found that phase-locking of HFAbs to low-frequency dynamics occurs even 
with random external input patterns in modeling, and this is a widespread phenomenon 
in iEEG signals, consistent with previous studies.30,66,67 However, our findings further 
showed that HFAbs transiently decouple from local low-frequency phases in response to 
both cue and target events (Fig. 2). Our modeling supports this observation, showing 
that transient inputs interrupt the default state coupling of HFAbs to low frequencies 
(Fig. 5f). These network interferences, characterized by brief and strong responses, can 
temporarily induce local cross-frequency decoupling, possibly by increasing response 
heterogeneity and disrupting the timing of inhibitory and excitatory neuron activation.68 
This desynchronization may enhance cognitive processes such as selective attention, 
perception, and memory retrieval by facilitating the processing of new information and 
suppressing internally regulated activity states.68–71 We observed that this decoupling, 
accompanied by increased HFAb density following cue and target events, resembled a 
desynchronized up-state, a brain state characterized by activated but desynchronized neural 
activity across cortical networks. Importantly, this decoupling was more pronounced in 
correct trials during both cue and target processing, suggesting that desynchronization 
correlates with accurate cognitive performance (Fig. 2f).
It is worth noting that the HFAbs identified in this study share spectral features with cortical 
ripples recently described in human studies,33,38,72 However, HFAbs exhibit different 
characteristics suggesting specialized functions. While both show synchronization and 
correlate with population spiking, HFAbs in our data occurred ~15-fold more frequently 
than ripples, with shorter durations (~36 vs 50–100 ms).33,72 Ripples are largely described in 
support of memory maintenance with consistent phase-locking to slow waves,72,73 whereas 
HFAbs show performance-dependent decoupling from oscillations and directional lead-lag 
patterns between functional subnetworks. These distinctions suggest that ripple-band high-
frequency bursts constitute a general population-level mechanism that can flexibly switch 
between binding (memory) and routing (attention) modes, with HFAbs instantiating the 
routing mode during active sensory processing.
In summary, our study provides a multilevel approach to understanding large-scale cortical 
communications, showing that HFAbs are markers of fast population state transitions that 
enable selective information routing through zero-lag synchronization within subnetworks 
and lead-lag temporal sequences between subnetworks.
Boroujeni et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Methods
Experimental model and subject details
Participants. Intracranial recordings were obtained from 12 epilepsy patients who 
underwent pre-surgical monitoring with implanted grid electrodes. Study 1 included seven 
patients (35.99 ± 12.42 years; mean ± SD; 5 females; see23 for further details). Patients 
were recruited from the University of California, Irvine Medical Center, USA (n = 6) and 
California Pacific Medical Center (CPMC), San Francisco, USA (n = 1). Study 2 included 
5 patients (30.20 ± 1186 years; mean ± SD; 1 female, 3 patients were excluded from the 
original study due to their limited electrode coverages; see3 for further details) from Johns 
Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, MD, USA (N = 1) and Stanford Hospital, CA, USA (N = 
4). The electrode placement was entirely guided by clinical considerations, and all patients 
provided written informed consent to participate in the study. All procedures were approved 
by the Institutional Review Board at each site, as well as the Committee for Protection of 
Human Subjects at the University of California, Berkeley (Protocol number: 2010–02-783) 
and were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Experimental design and procedure
Behavioral tasks. Participants performed a spatial attention task in each experiment. 
In experiment 1, participants performed a variant of the Egly-Driver task;74,75 see23 for 
further details) Behavioral data were collected with Presentation Software (Neurobehavioral 
Systems). Subjects were seated approximately 60 cm from the laptop screen. Subjects 
started each trial by pressing a left mouse button. On each trial, after appearance of a 
fixation cross, two bars appeared vertically or horizontally on the screen, followed by a 
brief spatial cue (100 ms), presented after 400–800 ms at one of the four corners of the 
bar stimuli. The spatial cue indicated the location where the target was most likely to 
appear (72% cue validity) and occurred pseudo-randomly in any of the four quadrants. A 
variable cue-to-target interval (500 – 1700 ms) was introduced after the cue during which 
participants sustained spatial attention at the cued location. Targets could randomly appear 
at any point during the cue-target interval, and participants released the mouse button to 
report a detected target. Infrequent catch trials (10%) during which no actual target appeared 
were used to track the false alarm rate. Auditory feedback indicated whether the trial was 
performed correctly. The target luminance was adjusted every 15 trials, if necessary, by 
increasing/decreasing the RGB value, in order to achieve an overall approximate accuracy of 
80%. The experimenter monitored continuous fixation. All participants responded by using 
the hand contralateral to the implanted grid, except for participant S5 who had bilateral grids 
and responded by using the left hand. Participants performed up to 5 blocks of 60 trials each 
(190 trials ± 67; mean ± SD).
Experiment 2 (Extended Data Fig. 1) used EPrime software (Psychology Software Tools) 
to control stimulus presentation (see Szczepanski et al., 2014 for more details). Subjects 
were seated approximately 60 cm away from the laptop screen. Each trial began with red 
circles (distractors) dynamically switching on and off on a dark background. A spatial 
cue guided participants to the right or left hemifield, and the cue remained on the screen 
throughout the trial. Subjects were instructed to maintain fixation and only covertly shift 
Boroujeni et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
their attention to the cued hemifield. Through the trial, the experimenter monitored eye 
movements and ensured central fixation. After a variable cue-target interval (1000 – 2000 
ms), a blue square target appeared on the screen (~62/38% on the cued/uncued hemifields). 
The target remained on the screen until the subject responded or the trial ended (2000 ms 
timed out). Subjects were asked to report a target seen in a cued hemifield by pressing a 
button while withholding a response if the target was seen in a non-cued hemifield. Targets 
appeared randomly during the cue-target interval. Three out of five subjects responded with 
the hand ipsilateral to the grid. Each participant completed six blocks (each 42 trials). 
The experimenter monitored eye movements and ensured central fixation throughout both 
experiments.
ECoG data acquisition. Electrophysiological and peripheral (photodiode) data were 
collected using a Nihon Kohden recording system at UC Irvine, CPMC and Children’s 
Hospital (128/256 channel, 1000/5000 Hz sampling rate), a Tucker Davis Technologies 
recording system at Stanford (128 channel, 3052 Hz sampling rate), or a Natus Medical 
Stellate Harmonie recording system at Johns Hopkins (128 channel, 1000 Hz sampling rate).
Electrode localization. In experiment 1, the electrodes were localized by transforming 
both the pre-implant MRI and the post-implant computed tomography CT into Talairach 
space. For all subjects, MNI coordinates were also calculated for each electrode location, 
which was used for group-level visualizations.23 In experiment 2, post-implant CT was 
aligned to the pre-implant MRI and all were transformed into MNI space across subjects.3 
Strip or grid electrodes were implanted with 1 cm spacing. One participant (S5) had an 
additional 8 contact depth probe inserted into the occipital cortex. Electrode positions were 
primarily determined using the VTPM atlas.76 For electrodes without an assigned label, 
the process was repeated using the AFNI atlas.77 The assigned positions were manually 
verified and adjusted based on electrode reconstructions visualized in native Talairach 
space. Electrodes near the Temporoparietal Junction (TPJ) were manually localized, as TPJ 
definitions were not available in either the VTPM or AFNI atlases (see Helfrich et al., 2018 
for more details).
iEEG Data. Preprocessing: All intracranial EEG channels were manually examined by 
a neurologist for epileptiform activity and artifacts. Affected channels and epochs were 
excluded. The raw data was preprocessed using the EEGLAB and Fieldtrip toolbox 
Field Trip toolbox78 Version 20230118 in MATLAB, The Mathworks Inc. R2023b; https://
www.mathworks.com/. Preprocessing included notch filtering at 60 Hz and all harmonics, 
as well as referencing the data to the common mean of electrodes.3,23 Then, the data was 
time locked to individual trials. Trials were 8 seconds long, −3 to +5 seconds around cue 
onsets in the experiment 1 and −2 to +6 seconds around cue onsets in the experiment 
2. As a control, we re-referenced the datasets from common average referencing to local 
composite referencing (LCR), a spatial Laplacian estimate relative to nearest neighbors. This 
re-referencing did not alter any of the main results.
Boroujeni et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Analysis of high frequency activity bursts (HFAbs)
HFAb detection and density analysis. We adopted an adaptive burst detection 
approach, similar to previous work,6 to identify high-frequency oscillatory bursts (65–115 
Hz) at each electrode. The frequency band was selected based on spectral peaks observed 
across all individuals (87 Hz trials ± 14; mean ± SD) and in the modeling. Similar analyses 
were conducted for a broader band (65–175 Hz) and the low gamma band (35–65 Hz). 
While the broader band produced similar results, the low gamma band yielded inconsistent 
responses and noisy clustering. We selected the frequency band based on spectral peaks 
across individuals and in the modeling. First, we applied a zero-phase Butterworth bandpass 
filter to the padded signal and then calculated the analytic signal xt using the Hilbert 
transform. We extracted the instantaneous amplitude as the real part of the analytic signal 
zt following eq. 1:
z(t) = x(t) + iy(t) = a(t)eiθ(t)
eq. 1
where y(t) is the Hilbert transform of x(t):
y(t) = 1
π∫
−∞
+∞
x(τ)
t − τ dτ .
eq. 2
The instantaneous energy 79 IE(t) of the signal is calculated from its Hilbert transform:
IE(t) = ∫
0
ωN
H2(t, ω) dω
eq. 3
ω(t) = dθ(t)
dt
eq. 4
where ω(t) corresponds to instantaneous angular velocity. If the frequency band is narrow 
and if the instantaneous frequency (eq. 4) is small enough, it can be approximated by 
squared a(t), which is the instantaneous amplitude. The marginal mean energy of the signal 
then can be estimated as eq. 5:
IE = 1
T ∫
0
T
a(t)2dt
eq. 5
Boroujeni et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
where T represents the duration of the signal. For skewed energy distributions in empirical 
data, we determined a median absolute deviation (MAD) threshold by setting it to 3.3 times 
plus the median energy.
To qualify as a burst, the energy level had to exceed this threshold for at least 1.5 cycles 
of the upper bond frequency, and the instantaneous amplitude needed to surpass 2 times 
the RMS of the peaks. Burst boundaries were marked by the closest points to a burst peak 
where either the instantaneous energy fell below the signal’s mean energy or the deviation 
in instantaneous frequency exceeded the mean change plus two standard deviations. This 
was to exclude multi-component or noisy events. Bursts were considered significant if their 
duration was at least 2.5 times the upper bond frequency cycle and exceeded the average 
span of adjacent local minima of the energy function. Finally, when bursts were too close 
(less than five frequency cycles apart), only the burst with the higher energy peak was kept. 
For comparison to ripple, we also quantified ripples in our data by calculating z-score of 
instantaneous energy, and finding events lasting longer than 3 cycles above a value of 2.5.33 
We observed extremely rare events in our data with ripple characteristics.
To estimate how HFAb events are distributed over time, we calculate the HFAb density 
by convolving a vector of burst events with a gaussian window of 500 ms and a standard 
deviation of 100ms. After estimating the HFAb density for each channel and trial, we 
investigated whether the cue and target stimuli affected burst density. For each electrode, 
the average burst density aligned to the cue and target onsets were calculated separately. 
Following that, we normalized timeseries to the baseline (1000 ms before each event onset) 
by subtracting the mean and dividing it by the standard deviation (see Fig. 1c). This is a 
similar approach to the peri-stimulus time histogram (PSTH) for spike trains 80.
Visualization of individual and group average responses on 3D brains. To 
visualize how HFAb responses were topographically organized in the 3D brains, we plotted 
both individual (Extended Data Fig. 1f) and group responses to cue (Fig. 1f) and target onset 
(Fig. 1g). Each electrode value was calculated as the mean of Z-scores within 500 ms of cue 
and target onset. For individual subjects, the plotted value for each electrode was linearly 
attenuated with distance from the electrode and for a sphere of 1 cm radius (illustrating 
correct versus incorrect trials separately, Fig. 1h, Extended Data Fig. 1f). The group average 
plot (Fig. 1f,g, Extended Data Fig. 2e) was calculated using electrode locations from both 
experiments to better cover the entire brain. The MNI coordinates of electrodes were used 
for rendering on a template brain (subject S4 from experiment 1 and subject S12 from 
experiment 2 were excluded due to suboptimal wrapping of Tal to MNI spaces). We set 
the value of all mesh surfaces to zero for each subject. Then, similar to the plotting for 
individual data, we calculated the value for mesh surfaces by using linear attenuation (the 
sphere radius was set to 2.5 cm in order to achieve a smoother visualization of the whole 
brain). As a last step, we averaged the surface values across all subjects to find consistent 
patterns of activations for the cue and target. We plotted the data onto 3D brain for correct 
and incorrect trials separately.
Statistical analysis of HFAb responses to cues and targets events. After 
calculating the burst density and finding PSTH for each channel, we examined whether 
Boroujeni et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the HFAb responses evoked by cues (within a window of 500 ms after cue onset) and 
targets (750 ms after target) were significantly different from baseline. This analysis was 
done at the network level. The average responses of electrodes within the defined time 
window were determined using the normalized HFAb density for each channel. Wilcoxon 
signed-rank tests were then used to examine if there was a non-zero response at the network 
level to cue and target onsets. Also, we performed a linear regression analysis of the cue and 
target responses in electrodes under the null hypothesis that the cue and target responses are 
independent (Fig. 1e).
To test whether cue and target responses were different when grouped by trial outcomes, we 
used the Kruskial Wallis test under the null hypothesis that cue, and target responses do not 
differ by outcome condition. For pairwise comparisons between different groups, we used 
Dunn’s test 81 with Tukey-Kramer multiple comparison correction (Fig. 1d).
Identifying cue-responsive electrodes. We identified Cue+/− electrodes by 
determining increased HFAb rate or density profile within window of 500 ms after cue 
onsets. For each electrode, we compared the average HFAb density following cue onset with 
that at baseline using Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Electrodes with significant increases in HFAb 
rate after cue onset were labeled as Cue+ electrodes, while the remaining electrodes were 
labeled as Cue− electrodes, which was subsequently used in the classification (Fig. 1k).
Generalized Linear Mixed Effect Models. We used generalized linear mixed effects 
(GLMEs) models to examine the effects of each task variable on HFAb response to cue 
and target events. Three main predictors were used for the independent variables: Laterality 
(if the cue was either ipsilateral or contralateral to the electrode) with two levels (Ipsi and 
Contra), Validity (if the target appeared at the cued location) with two levels (valid and 
invalid), and trial outcome with four levels (Correct hit, False alarm, Correct Rejection, 
Miss). Since not all subjects had trials for all four outcome conditions, an alternative 
analysis also considered outcome as a binary variable (Correct and Incorrect) with a logit 
link function. The random effect was determined by considering groups as subject and 
channel labels. The response variable was either the mean burst density in response to the 
target or the cue. The GLME is then formalized as shown in eq. 6:
Responsecue/target = Laterality + V alidity + Outcome + (1 ∣ Subject ) + (1 ∣ Cℎannel) + b + ε
eq. 6
Training classifiers for predicting trial outcome based on HFAb density 
around cue onset. A time-resolved classification approach was used to determine how 
accurately HFAb responses evoked by sensory cues could predict trial outcomes. First, we 
selected electrodes that showed a significant HFAb responses to the cue presentation (Cue+ 
electrodes, see above), for which we then calculated the average HFAb density for Cue+ 
electrodes for each trial and subject. Next, we tested whether the average burst density in 
sliding windows around the cue onset could predict the outcome at the trial level with a 
sliding window of 350 ms and a step of 25 ms. We used binary Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) with one-to-one comparisons of HFAb density in sliding windows with five folds 
Boroujeni et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of cross-validation. For training each SVM, a vector of the HFAb density in each sliding 
window was used along with a vector of outcome labels (“Correct” = 1, “Incorrect” = 0). 
The classifier used a Gaussian radial basis function kernel with a scaling factor of one. We 
assured that the number of correct and incorrect trials used in the training was identical, to 
prevent sample size biases. As the number of incorrect trials were lower than the number of 
correct trials, we randomly sampled correct trials with a sampling size equal to the number 
of incorrect trials in each fold. For each sliding window, we trained the classifier 1000 times 
and calculated the average accuracy and confusion matrix across all iterations and folds. 
(Fig. 1k).
To determine whether HFAb density after cue onset could more accurately predict trial 
outcome than chance and baseline, we used a binomial test on the accuracy of each 
window against the maximum value of baseline and chance-level prediction accuracy. 
After obtaining a p-value for each binomial test, we corrected the p-values using false 
discovery rate (FDR) for dependent samples with a 0.05 alpha level 82 to correct for multiple 
comparisons error rate across all windows. We performed this procedure separately for 
each experiment (Fig. 1k). In our main analysis, we pooled data across all subjects in each 
experiment due to the low number of trials per subject. However, to ensure that the results 
were not solely dependent on one subject, we ran a control analysis in which one subject 
was left out each time and the classifier was trained and tested. Controlled analyses in both 
experiments demonstrated that our observation was not based solely on one subject. We 
used a similar approach for training the classifier on cue and target-subnetworks to train the 
classifier on cue and target-subnetworks, as further detailed in the ‘Identifying synchronous 
subnetworks’ section.
HFAb-triggered spectrum and Phase Locking Value (PLV) analysis. To 
understand the spectral dynamics of HFAbs and local population activities, we performed 
HFAb-triggered spectrum analyses using HFAb centers as discrete points. We estimated the 
PLV of points (burst centers) to their local field activity dynamics (both in the modeling and 
electrophysiological data) in order to investigate the phase synchronization of HFAbs within 
their local networks. We calculated the HFAb-triggered spectrum using an adaptive window 
around HFAbs. We extracted a window centered around each selected point (HFAb center), 
which covered 2.5 cycles of the frequency of interest before and after the selected point. 
This window was then multiplied by a Hanning window. We estimated the power spectrum 
for each window using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for frequencies ranging from 1 
Hz to 100 Hz. To account for trial-wise power variations, triggered spectrum estimates were 
normalized by dividing by total power. We averaged spectrum estimates across all points 
and trials to calculate the final HFAb-triggered spectrum. Following the analysis of the 
HFAb-triggered spectrum, a PLV calculation was performed to quantify the level of phase 
consistency of the HFAbs across trials for the frequencies of interest. The phase angle for 
each frequency was calculated based on the FFT results from the HFAb-triggered spectrum 
analysis. The PLV of HFAbs at each frequency was then calculated as the mean resultant in 
eq. 7:
Boroujeni et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
PLV(f) = 1
N ∑n = 1
N
eiϕf, n
eq. 7
where N is the total number of HFAbs and ϕf,n denotes the phase angle for the nth HFAb at 
frequency f. The statistical significance of the observed PLV values was determined using 
a non-parametric permutation test with 1000 permutations and the Rayleigh test corrected 
for multiple comparisons, at 0.05. Peaks that passed both tests and had a prominence 
of 25% higher than the PLV range were considered significant (shown in black dots in 
Fig. 2c). We further quantified the phases at peak frequencies (Extended Data Fig. 2a), 
peak width (Extended Data Fig. 2d), and the power ratio of peak frequency relative to 
baseline (Extended Data Fig. 2e,f) to ensure that HFAb phase-locking occurred within 
narrow frequency bands.
Time-resolved PLV analysis. To quantify the temporal dynamics of the phase 
synchronization of HFAbs with the low frequency LFP during cue and target processing, 
we extracted the phase of HFAbs at each frequency as explained above. Then, we used a 
sliding window of 500 ms with a step of 25 ms between −1500 and 1500 ms around the cue 
and target onsets separately. PLV was calculated for each sliding window and across all trials 
(different types of trials were analyzed separately, e.g., correct trials and incorrect trials). 
We set a minimum number of data points of 50 bursts for the analysis (to achieve reliable 
statistics on circular data, ). We measured the PLV for 1000 samples of 25 HFAbs drawn 
randomly from a population of HFAbs in each time bin to control for the number of bursts. 
The PLV for each time bin was calculated as the average PLV across all randomly drawn 
samples. The average PLV value for each subject and for all subjects in each experiment was 
calculated separately.
To test whether HFAb phase synchronization differed during cue and target processing, we 
used a channel-specific randomization test. For each recording channel and time bin, 1000 
subsamples of HFAbs were randomly selected from the baseline period (within 1 second 
before each event). For each channel, each time bin, and each frequency, we calculated the 
upper and lower bond CIs (2.5% most extreme PLVs). For multiple comparison correction, 
we repeated this procedure 1000 time and found the most extreme 2.5% value across all 
CIs for time bins under the null hypothesis that the PLV for each time bin and frequency is 
not significantly different from the baseline value. Each time-frequency bin was considered 
significant if it differed from the critical values (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Each electrode and 
frequency band (theta/alpha (4–14 Hz) and beta (15–25 Hz)) for a time bin was considered 
significant if it showed a significantly different PLV from the baseline in more than 25% 
of the frequency points in that frequency band. Next, we computed the mean number of 
electrodes with significantly different PLVs than the randomized PLV distribution for each 
subject. Using the binomial test, we determined whether the proportion of electrodes with 
significantly lower PLV after the cue and target onset was different from the baseline level as 
well as the chance level (5%, Fig. 2d). To adjust for multiple comparisons, we used FDR for 
dependent samples and an alpha level of 0.05.
Boroujeni et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
We also performed a control analysis to ensure that event-evoked iEEG signals are not 
confounding the variation in synchronization. First, we extracted −1.5 to 1.5 seconds around 
cue- and target-aligned iEEG signals for each electrode and trial. We averaged the data 
across all trials and removed the average event-triggered iEEG signal from individual trials. 
The same synchronization and statistical analyses were then performed on the trial with 
event-evoked iEEG subtracted. Subtraction of event-evoked iEEG did not change the main 
results pattern (Extended Data Fig. 3d). While our main analyses controlled for HFAb 
counts, we also conducted a control analysis using pairwise phase consistency (PPC), a 
measure commonly used to quantify spike-field synchronization that is unbiased by event 
count. Results were consistent with our PLV analysis (Extended Data Fig. 3e).83
Analysis of Coupling ratio. A Coupling Ratio (CR) index was defined to compare PLV 
after cue and target events as compared to baseline. We used this CR index also to visualize 
coupling variation in both 3D brain renderings (Fig. 2e), and the average network level 
coupling analysis (Fig. 2g,h). We calculated the coupling ratio by:
CR =
P LVevent − P LVbaseline
P LVbaseline
eq. 8
Where the P LVbaseline is the average PLV for each electrode within 1 second before the 
event, and P LVevent is the average PLV for each electrode within 0.5 seconds after the event. 
In this context, network decoupling is defined as a negative CR value indicating a reduction 
in PLV relative to the baseline. We show the CR value at both cue and target events for each 
subject.
We also used GLME models to investigate the effect of cue and target response on the 
coupling ratio following cue and target onsets (Fig. 2g,h). The GLME is formalized as 
shown in eq. 9:
Coupling Ratiocue/ target = Responsecue + Responsetarget + (1 ∣ Subject) + b + ε
eq. 9
Quantification and Spectral analysis of HFAb-triggered HFA
We calculated the interaction between HFAbs and HFA between each pair of electrodes. To 
estimate HFA, first we used a zero-phase Butterworth filter with cut-off frequencies of 65 
Hz and 175 Hz to bandpass filter the signal. We chose the HFA frequency band broader to 
capture larger spectral content (similar results were obtained by choosing 65–115 Hz band). 
Next, we performed a Hilbert transform and used the real part of the analytical signal as 
HFA amplitude (eq. 1). We extracted a duration of one second around each HFAb from the 
HFA signal. We then calculated the HFAb-triggered HFA for each individual burst event as 
well as the average value for all bursts between each pair of electrodes. Our main analyses 
were restricted to HFAb-triggered HFA that occurred outside of the main behavioral epochs; 
either before cues or after target detection (Extended Data Fig. 4e, for those without a 
Boroujeni et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
response 1 second following target presentation). To control for any burst-independent 
correlations of iEEG signals across electrodes, we first calculated the HFAb-triggered HFA 
using randomly assigned burst times. Each burst was jittered with a random time lag of 
±1000 ms. We then subtracted this jittered HFAb-triggered HFA from the original for further 
analysis.
We calculated the spectral power of HFAb-triggered HFA across all electrode pairs to assess 
how HFA is organized relative to HFAbs recorded on other channels. The power spectral 
density was computed over the ±500 ms time window using a hanning taper. Additionally, 
we analyzed peak prominence for all pairs and plotted the distribution of spectral peaks. 
For each pair of electrodes, we extracted the prominent spectral peaks and plotted their 
distribution.
Dimensionality reduction of high-frequency temporal relation patterns. To 
identify prominent temporal patterns of high-frequency activities within the brain network, 
we analyzed a high-dimensional space of HFAb-triggered HFA across all electrode pairs 
for each subject, with each electrode pair representing a single dimension. Using the HFAb-
triggered HFA population, we calculated the covariance matrix C by:
C = 1
n − 1 ∑i = 1
n
Xi − X Xi − X T
eq. 10
where Xi shows each HFAb-triggered HFA time series, n is the total number of electrode 
pairs, X is the marginal mean, and XT is the transpose matrix of X. We found the 
eigenvectors of C as in eq. 11:
C = V DV T
eq. 11
where V columns are the eigenvectors and principal components (PCs), and D contains 
eigenvalues indicating how much variance each component explains (Fig. 3d). In all 
participants, PC1 showed a near-symmetric activity state and explained more than 10% 
of variance in HFAb-triggered HFA dynamics over the population of electrode pairs (we 
used multistep Wilcoxon rank-sum test to examine if there was asymmetry of HFA within 
mirrored time windows around the HFAbs). By projecting the original data to the PC vector 
space, we calculated the HFAb-triggered HFA scores as:
Score = XC
eq. 12
We then used the scores of electrode pairs on the first component as their loading values on 
the synchronous component of the population (Extended Data Fig. 4).
Boroujeni et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Identifying synchronous subnetworks. Based on the scores of each electrode pair 
on the synchronous principal component, we generated a network synchrony matrix that 
describes synchronous inter-electrode interactions. For each electrode, we then defined a 
vector of variables with a dimension equal to the total number of electrodes. Each element 
of this vector describes the score of an electrode pair on the synchronous component. 
This vector was defined for all electrodes, which generated a matrix in which each row 
represented one observation (electrode) and each column represented the score of the 
observed electrode on another electrode.
Si = Score Xi, 1: n
eq. 13
Using this matrix, we clustered the electrodes using resampling-based consensus K-Means 
algorithm with a correlational defined distance as in eq. 14:
di, j = 1 − r(Si, Sj)
eq. 14
where di,j is the correlation distance between two electrodes i and j. The correlational 
distance between two electrodes is low when they show synchronous activity, and similar 
synchronization patterns to the rest of the network. First, we used several clustering indices, 
including Hubert, Silhouette, Davies-Bouldin, Calinski-Harabasz, Hartigan, Homogeneity, 
and Gap, to find an optimal range of cluster numbers (between 2 and 8 for all subjects) 
84–87.
For each cluster number, we ran the K-means algorithm 1000 times. The sample size was 
subsampled and only 25 percent of electrodes were randomly selected for each clustering 
(we ensured that each cluster had at least an average of 5 data points). After running the 
clustering 1000 times, a probability matrix for electrode pairs was defined as the ratio of 
numbers that electrode pairs clustered together, divided by the number of electrode pairs 
in the same random sampling for K-Means clustering. This ratio was calculated for all 
electrode pairs and used to create a matrix of pair-wise grouping probabilities. We then 
ran a second K-means clustering algorithm on this matrix to identify clusters that were 
similar in their network-level pair-wise grouping likelihood. Using a similar approach and 
random sampling of electrodes, we generated another pair-wise grouping probability matrix 
indicating how often electrodes were clustered together based on their pair-wise grouping 
likelihood (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Using this hierarchically defined pair-wise clustering 
likelihood, we ran a final K-means clustering on all electrodes, labeling them according 
to the probability of being stably grouped together for each cluster number. For each K 
(cluster number), we calculated clustering accuracy, confusion (probability of non-diagonal 
clusters), a confusion rank, and a ratio from dividing median accuracy (diagonals) by median 
confusion. We normalized each of the measures between 0 and 1 (1 showing the best, and 
0 showing the worst performance between all clusters). We used these four measures and in 
a non-parametric vote, we chose the cluster number that outperformed others in this voting 
Boroujeni et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
pool. This non-parametric measure shows how well each K performs to detect more stable 
clusters with high accuracy and low confusion level and estimate the optimal number of 
clusters. While there is no definitive answer on what number of clusters is the best, we 
selected the optimal number of clusters using this method to conduct further analysis. In 
summary, this clustering technique reduces clustering biases caused by outlier electrode 
pairs in all clustering realizations as well as stabilizes clusters.
To determine whether identified clusters were functionally specialized, we compared their 
responses evoked by cues and targets to their baseline activity levels. We calculated the 
averaged baseline normalized burst density within windows of 500 ms after cue onset and 
750 ms after target onset. The Wilcoxon test was used to determine if this response was 
non-zero across the electrodes in each subnetwork. We corrected for multiple comparisons 
by using FDR for dependent samples with an alpha level of 0.05. Clusters that were 
significantly activated by cue events are referred to as “cue-subnetworks” and clusters that 
were significantly activated by target events are referred to as “target-subnetworks”. We use 
“subnetworks” to indicate that these are functionally specialized modules within the larger 
brain-wide network engaged during attention. We consider the overarching network for each 
subject to be a network of all nodes. A subnetwork here is used to describe “modules” that 
we observe within the larger brain networks. The cue and target-subnetworks were found 
in each data set for the optimal number of clusters. For datasets, for which the optimal 
number of clusters did not contain distinct cue and target-subnetworks, if existed, we chose 
the next K (cluster number) with highest ranking in the clustering measures that contained 
both subnetworks (only in subject S12 we observed this).
Time-lag analysis between cue and target-subnetworks
We calculated the HFAb-triggered-HFA for pairs of electrodes during the period between the 
target onset and the manual response to understand how the HFAbs were temporally ordered 
after the target onset in both the cue and target-subnetworks. Next, we compared HFAb-
triggered HFA between electrodes in cue- and target-subnetworks to determine whether 
there was any asymmetry in the distribution of HFAbs between the two subnetworks. A 
total of six subjects (3 in experiment 1 and 3 in experiment 2) showed both stable cue and 
target-subnetworks. We then calculated once the HFAb-triggered HFA when HFA in the 
target-subnetwork was measured around the HFAbs in cue-subnetworks, and when the HFA 
in the cue-subnetwork was measured around the HFAbs in target-subnetworks. A lead state 
was indicated by HFAbs followed by stronger HFA power; a lag state was when HFAbs 
followed stronger HFA power.
First, we measured the maximum asymmetry around the HFAb onset across all subjects (by 
calculating the absolute difference between windows of varying lengths, 25 ms to 250 ms 
every 25 ms). We then calculated the averaged HFAb-triggered-HFA within 150 ms of HFAb 
onsets where asymmetry was at its maximum. Next, we asked if the value differed based on 
the directionality of the two subnetworks. For both directions, we used the Wilcoxon test to 
determine whether the asymmetry around HFAb onset is non-zero. Additionally, we tested 
whether HFAb-triggered HFA differs between the two directions after and before HFAbs.
Boroujeni et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
To assess differences in HFAb-triggered HFA between cue- and target subnetworks, we used 
a non-parametric permutation testing approach. For each time bin (25ms) in the −500 to 
+500 ms window relative to HFAb onset, we calculated the observed difference in mean 
HFA between cue→target and target→cue electrode pairs. To test for significant differences 
between HFAb-triggered HFA in different directions, we used a permutation test with 10000 
iterations, in which randomly shuffled electrode pair labels and generated a null distribution 
of mean differences. For each bin, a p-value was computed by comparing the observed 
difference in the two opposite directions, to the permutation distribution. To correct for 
multiple comparisons across time points, we used FDR correction for dependent samples at 
α= 0.05 (Fig. 4a). Additionally, cluster-based correction was implemented with a minimum 
cluster size threshold of 25 ms to identify temporally contiguous significant effects. Peak 
analysis was performed by identifying the maximum HFA amplitude and corresponding 
latency for each electrode pair after applying a 25 ms smoothing window (to avoid spurious 
peaks). Peak times are reported as mean ± standard error across all electrode pairs within 
each subject and task. We used Wilcoxon rank sum to test if the peak time distributions were 
significantly different in the opposite directions (Fig. 4b).
For each subject, we visualized the lead/lag interactions between stable cue and target-
subnetworks. To achieve a better visualization of lead/lag interactions, we measured the 
HFA peak time for each electrode in cue/target-subnetworks relative to HFAb onset across 
all cluster numbers. Each electrode that was a member of the target-subnetwork or the 
cue-subnetwork was analyzed to determine its median peak-time-lag relative to the other 
cluster members. A median peak-time-lag of all electrodes satisfying this condition was then 
plotted, with red representing a lead, and blue representing a lag (Fig. 4c).
Delayed Mutual Information Analysis. We used mutual information (MI) which is a 
non-linear metric used in information theory to estimate the shared information between 
different time segments in two electrodes to find where their mutual predictability is 
maximized. For each electrode, we extracted data (HFAb density) from −1500 ms to 
1500 ms around the target onset (and for the control analysis, around the cue onset). We 
normalized the data and calculated MI for segments of 750 ms sliding every 50 ms. The MI 
between electrodes X and Y is given by eq. 15:
MI(X, Y) = ∑x ∈ X w ∑y ∈ Y w p(x, y) log p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
eq. 15
where p(x, y) is the joint probability distribution function of each windowed segment of 
electrodes X and Y, and p(x) and p(y) are their marginal probability distributions. We 
estimated the probability distribution for each variable and for the joint distributions using 
a histogram-based approach and binning the data (the number of bins was selected based 
on the Freedman-Diaconis rule 88 to balance the trade-off between estimation resolution and 
statistical reliability.
To further quantify how information is directionally coupled between cue and target-
subnetworks, we calculated delayed mutual information (DMI). The DMI was calculated 
Boroujeni et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
by comparing the temporal dynamics and dependencies between these two subnetworks 
(Fig. 4d).
The DMI between X and Y was calculated similar to MI, except that one of the timeseries 
was delayed incrementally to determine whether the past of one electrode is a better 
predictor of the future of the other electrode. The delay time-lag ranged from −500ms to 
500ms with a step of 25ms, as in eq. 16.
DMI(X, Y) = ∑x ∈ X w ∑y ∈ Y w
τ p(x, y) log p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)
eq. 16
where Xw is segmented windows of electrode X, and Ywτ is segmented windows of electrode 
Y shifted by a time lag of τ.
The DMI analysis of each electrode pair can inform us about (i) when the electrodes 
showed maximum inter-predictability relative to an event onset (e.g., target), and (ii) at 
what time-lag the inter-predictability was maximized. To address this question, we extracted 
the DMI peaks in a 2D space, which gave us both the time-lag and the timepoint relative 
to the event onset where two electrodes showed maximum DMI values. We then asked 
if the time-lag of this peak is different between electrodes in the cue-subnetworks and 
electrodes in the target-subnetworks. For example, when we shifted the timeseries of 
electrodes in target-subnetworks, for each electrode in the cue-subnetwork, we measured 
its mean DMI relative to electrodes in target-subnetworks. We determined at what time 
lag and at what time relative to target onset DMI was maximized. We used the Wilcoxon 
test to see if the maximum DMI time-lag (τmax) occurred between electrodes in cue and 
target-subnetworks was non-zero. The lead and lag patterns in inter-predictability between 
cue and target-subnetworks were then determined by the sign of the average over τmax for all 
electrodes in the shifting subnetworks.
Modeling iEEG by spiking neural networks: We investigated high frequency activity 
in general and high frequency burst events in particular using a limited network of two 
recording sites placed on two interconnected networks of spiking neurons. For modeling 
the spiking networks, we used a framework described in6. Neuronal point-source models 
can accurately simulate electrical fields in cortical neural networks.89 Two cubic neuronal 
structures were simulated in three dimensions. Synaptic dynamics and connectivity patterns 
were implemented as explained in6. Each cubic network consisted of 1000 neurons (10 × 
10 × 10, xyz). We modeled neurons as spherically symmetric points in a 3D grid (with r 
units on each axis). A recording disk was implemented on top of each network at a distance 
three times greater than the network depth (Fig. 5a). Pairwise connectivity was calculated 
based on anatomical studies (discussed below) and a distant-dependent Gaussian rule.90,91 
The distant dependent connectivity factor is:
Boroujeni et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
P (d) = P0 e
−( d
r )
2
σ2
eq. 17
where r is the grid unit, d is the distance between two neurons, σ is the standard deviation 
of distances between neurons (Barral and Reyes, 2016), and P0 is a structural scaling factor 
(Extended Data Fig. 8a) reflecting the maximum connection probability across the network 
(see Extended Data Table 2).
Four interneuron types were used: Parvalbumin (PV), Calbindin (CB), Calretinin (CR), 
and Cholecystokinin (CCK) expressing interneurons. Excitatory neurons were divided into 
regular spiking neurons (70%), intrinsic low-threshold spiking bursting neurons (10%), and 
fast adapting regular spiking neurons (20%).
Neuron models. We used Izhikevich neuron model 92 for simulating regular spiking, burst 
spiking, fast spiking and low-threshold spiking neurons. Each neuron is modeled by a series 
of differential equations as in eq 18.
dv
dt = 0.04v2 + 5v + 140 − u + I
du
dt = a(bv − u)
eq. 18
where variables v and u denote neural membrane potential and membrane recovery, 
respectively. Parameters a and b define the recovery rate and sub-threshold fluctuations 
sensitivity, respectively. For after-spike resenting the model uses two auxiliary equations as 
in eq. 19,
if v > 30 mV , then v = c
u = u + d
eq. 19
the parameter c resets the value of membrane potential v after a spike, and the parameter 
d adjusts the after-spike recovery variable u. Parameters for different neuron types were 
chosen as suggested in 93 to approximately generate firing patterns of each neuron type (See 
Extended Data Table 2 for each neuron type parameter).
Neural connectivity. Besides distance-based connectivity factors, neuron types had 
different connection probabilities. We adapted the scaling factor for connectivity between 
excitatory neurons and inhibitory interneurons from 91. Additionally, rodent anatomical 
studies were considered in determining the connectivity among different types of neurons. 
Generally, PV interneurons inhibit themselves and VIP interneurons (likely similar to CR), 
whereas SOM interneurons (likely similar to CB) do not inhibit each other, and VIP 
Boroujeni et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
interneurons disinhibit SOM interneurons preferentially 94,95. The connectivity between 
networks was defined by a probability and a rate of connection. This connectivity was 
attributed primarily to excitatory neurons (90%).
Simulation of post-synaptic potentials. For each neuron the postsynaptic potentials 
were modeled by a biexponential function as in eq. 20,
g(t) = e− t
τr − e− t
τd
eq. 20
where τr and τd denote the rise and decay time constant of postsynaptic current, respectively. 
The biexponential function was implemented through a second-order ordinary differential 
equation as in eq. 21.
d2g(t)
dt2 = −
τd + τr
τdτr
dg(t)
dt − g(t)
τdτr
eq. 21
Where t is time relative to spike, and g(t) is the synaptic conductivity. The rise time was 
set similarly to ~1ms for all neurons while the decay time for pyramidal neurons were and 
interneurons varied from ~6ms to 24ms96–99 as shown in Extended Data Table 2.
Network external inputs. Each network was fed external currents to generate firing 
rates similar to cortical neurons. Each neuron received a cosine input. The objective was to 
first control externally induced rhythmicity in network activation by frequency, as well as 
phase coherence between the input function and neurons. On average, each network received 
external input sufficient to generate a 5 Hz firing rate.100 The external input to pyramidal 
neurons was three times greater than the external input to inhibitory neurons. In addition, a 
Brownian noise (1f2) was added to the input as per previous experimental observations.101
For nonrhythmic input, we considered slow and ultraslow oscillatory (<1 Hz) input to 
each neuron with an initial phase lag. Then a coherence index was used to determine the 
distribution of phase lags among neurons. Thus, the phase range was defined:
φ = 2π (1 − coℎerence)
eq. 22
For nonrhythmic input, we ran 100 simulations in which coherence varied from 0 to 1 
with a step size of 0.01 (Fig. 5e). For Networks with reciprocal connections, we fed the 
networks with uncorrelated inputs, but both networks were reciprocally connected (Fig. 5g). 
The connectivity strength was changed by one order of magnitude from 0.001 to 0.1 and 
the simulation was run 100 times for each value. For networks with feedforward connection, 
we simulated feedforward networks in which the connections between the two networks are 
Boroujeni et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
unidirectional. The connectivity strength was changed from 0.001 to 0.1 by one order of 
magnitude (Fig. 5h). For the rhythmic input, we incrementally increased the cosine input 
frequency up to 12 Hz for each simulation run (Fig. 5i). For networks with shared input, 
we ran 100 simulations in which networks were not connected but received correlated inputs 
(5–25 percent of neurons received the same input, not shown).
To investigate the effect of an external stimuli on directional networks, we simulate a 
feedforward network as explained before with an internetwork connectivity ratio of 9 to 
1 (network 1 and 2 respectively, Extended Data Fig. 8e). We then fed network 1 with an 
external input pulse of 500 ms duration and 250 ms duty cycles (Extended Data Fig. 8f). 
The input was fed to 50 percent of neurons in the network 1. We then calculated the time 
resolved PLV in both networks as explained before (Fig. 5f, Extended Data Fig. 8g).
Integration of postsynaptic currents and neural activities at the recording 
sites. For each simulation, we estimated the field potential at two recording sites (black 
disks Fig. 5a). By assuming neurons as point-source field, we measured field dynamics at 
each recording site by summing the attenuated membrane potentials and the postsynaptic 
currents from all neurons. We estimated the voltages at the recording disk by considering 
membrane and post-synaptic potentials as electrical dipoles (with negligible distance 
between poles relative to the recording disk). The electric filed is then represented by 
E(r,t), where r and t denote the distance from the source and the time, respectively. The 
extracellular potential is then calculated by:
E = − ∇ V
eq. 23
Using Ohm’s law, the electric field at distance r from each dipole with a current density of 
In(t) is equal to:
E(r, t) =
In(t)
4πr3σ
eq. 24
with In(t) represented as:
In(t) = Im(t) + Isyn(t)
eq. 25
where σ denotes the medium conductivity (which we assumed is independent of distance 
from sources). Im(t) and Isyn(t) are the transmembrane current and the synaptic current of 
each neuron respectively. By integrating the electric field, we calculated the potential at the 
disk by:
Boroujeni et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
V (r, t) = −
∞
r
E r′, t dr′ = −
∞
r In(t)
4πr′2σ
dr′
V (r, t) =
In(t)
4πr2σ
eq. 26
The voltage recorded at each site is calculated as in eq 27:
V (t) = 1
4πr2 i = 1
N In(t)
ri
eq. 27
where ri is the distance between the recording disk and the itℎ point-source, and N is equal to 
the total number of neurons in each network.
We used a non-ohmic filter to attenuate higher frequencies by getting insights from.102 We 
implemented an exponential attenuation in the frequency domain. First for each signal we 
computed the FFT. We then applied an exponential attenuation factor to the magnitude of 
the frequency components (Extended Data Fig. 8b). This factor exponentially decreases the 
amplitude for higher frequencies as in eq. 28:
A(f) = e−αf
eq. 28
Where A(f) is the attenuation factor for frequency f, and α is a parameter that controls the 
rate of exponential decay which we set to 0.01. After multiplying the attenuation factor, we 
performed the inverse FFT (iFFT) to transform the signal back to the time domain.
For each condition, we ran simulations 100 times, each simulating iEEG signals and neural 
activity for three seconds. We detected HFAbs at each recording site and calculated the 
amplitude of the analytical signal as explained in (eq. 1). Next, we examined whether there 
was a correlation between HFAb density and aggregated spike density in each network. 
The spike density was calculated and smoothed using a Gaussian window of 25 ms. We 
measured the correlation coefficient between aggregated spike density and burst density for 
each simulation. On average, HFAb events were significantly correlated with spike densities 
in each network.
In a control condition, we randomly assigned burst times and examined the correlation 
between burst density and spike density. This randomization was performed 1000 times and 
we found the 95% confidence interval under the null hypothesis that burst density is not 
related to spike density. All other analyses of the modeling results were conducted in a 
similar manner to those of the experimental data.
Boroujeni et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Four-Network Model of Spatial Attention: We extended our model to a four-network 
architecture mimicking the cue-target processing hierarchy (Fig. 5j). The model contained 
two spatially-selective cue networks (N1, N2) and two target networks (N3, N4), with 
dominant feedforward connections from cue to target networks (5 times stronger than 
feedback).103 Intra-network connection strength was set 2 times greater than the inter-
network connectivity strength.104 To simulate the spatial attention task, we implemented 
three distinct external input functions:
Trial initialization: A decaying exponential input (τ= 4s) was delivered to all networks at 
trial onset, decreasing to 25% of initial amplitude by trial end simulating baseline states 
maintained throughout the trial.
Cue processing: Upon cue presentation, one cue network received spatially-selective input 
modeled as a double-exponential function (τrise = 50ms, τdecay = 1s).56,105
Target processing: Target networks received double-exponential input 
(τrise = 100ms, τ = 500ms) at target onset. In valid trials, where targets appeared at cued 
locations, the previously activated cue network received additional weak reactivation at 50% 
of original cue amplitude, simulating either feedback or sustained attention signals from 
frontal-parietal networks or inputs from subcortical structures such as pulvinar.56,105,106
We simulated 150 trials for each condition (valid and invalid cues) with 4s trial duration. 
HFAbs were detected using identical parameters as empirical data, and we calculated 
HFAb responses in each network and delayed mutual information (DMI) between cue-target 
network pairs.
HFAb-based detection modelling. To link burst dynamics to behavioral performance, 
we extracted HFAb rates from target networks within 500ms windows following target onset 
for both valid and invalid conditions. Detection probability was modeled using a logistic 
function:
P (detect ∣ x) = logit−1 β0 + β1x
where x represents HFAb rate, and β0,β1 are model parameters estimated via maximum 
likelihood. We fitted detection thresholds to invalid trials to achieve ~85% accuracy 
(matching empirical performance), then evaluated whether valid trials exceeded this 
threshold. In addition, HFAb rates were binned into 100 bins spanning the full range to 
calculate detection probabilities for each condition (Fig. 5m).
Boroujeni et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1. Behavioral performance and HFAb activation patterns across 
experiments.
a, Task structure of experiment 2. Subjects hold their gaze fixation to the center of a 
screen (a white plus sign) with red circles turning on and off. A spatial cue endogenously 
cues subject’s attention to a hemifield. A target appears at one hemifield and subjects 
should report whether the target was seen in the cued hemifield. The brain shows the 
localization of electrodes across all subjects. b, Reaction times (top) and accuracy (bottom) 
Boroujeni et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
for individual subjects (n=7 in experiment 1, and n=5 in experiment 2) across valid, invalid, 
and catch trials (trials with no targets in experiment 1). Box plots show median (center 
line), interquartile range (box bounds = 25th–75th percentile), and whiskers extending to 
non-outlier minima and maxima (values within 1.5×IQR). c, Population-averaged HFAb 
density around cue (top) and target (bottom) onsets, similar to Fig. 1b in experiment 2 (mean 
± SEM). d, HFAb responses grouped by trial outcomes (correct hit, correct reject, miss, 
false alarm) for cue (top) and target (bottom) epochs [median ± SEM], (n=5). Asterisks 
indicate significant differences (Kruskal-Wallis test p = 0.003 for cue, and p <0.001 for 
target response; followed by Dunn's test, p < 0.05). e, Group topography of cue (left) and 
target (right) response for incorrect trials. f, Individual subject topographies for correct and 
incorrect trials, similar to Fig. 1h. g,h, HFAb responses comparing valid/invalid cues and 
contra/ipsi laterality conditions for experiments 1 (g, n=6, GLME, n.s.) and 2 (h, n=5), 
similar to Fig. 1i,j (median ± SEM). Horizontal lines indicate a significant main effect of 
validity on target (GLME, t = 5.03 p < 0.001), and laterality on target (GLME, t = 2.23, 
p = 0.025). i, Classifier accuracy predicting trial outcomes for cue-responsive (Cue+) and 
cue-unresponsive (Cue−) in experiment 2 (error bars: SEM across realizations and cross 
validations). Red line indicates significant prediction above baseline and chance (two-sided 
binomial test, p < 0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple dependent comparisons).
Boroujeni et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 2. HFAb phase-locking to low-frequency rhythms across subjects.
a, Individual examples showing HFAb phase distributions at the peak (left), phase-locking 
value (PLV , middle), and HFAb-triggered spectrum (right) from different subjects. Peak 
frequencies noted for each example in red and blue circles. b, Phase histograms of HFAbs 
at theta/alpha (8 Hz, purple) and beta (20 Hz, green) frequencies for all subjects. Orange 
and red lines indicate circular means. c, Distribution of peak phases across all electrodes. d, 
Distribution of phase-locking peak widths (mean: 7.3 ± 0.3 Hz). e, Relationship between 
peak frequency and power ratio (HFAb-triggered/baseline), colored by phase value. f, 
Boroujeni et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Distribution of power enhancement ratios at phase-locking frequencies (median: 2.1-fold 
increase), dashed line shows 1.
Extended Data Fig. 3. HFAb synchronization with low frequency activity in experiment 1 and 2.
a, Group-average spatial pattern of observed frequency peak of HFAb phase locking to 
LFP. b, Individual examples showing the spatial pattern of the observed frequency peaks 
of the HFAb phase locking to LFP. c, Corresponding to Fig. 2e, showing the proportion 
of time-frequency points where phase locking was significantly lower than baseline (p < 
0.05, two-sided random permutation test). d, Similar to Fig. 2e, but after removing event-
related potential from the LFP (see Methods). e, Group-average heatmaps of pairwise phase 
consistency (PPC) as a measure for HFAb synchronization to LFPs, Similar to Fig. 2e. f, 
Examples of the coupling ratio between HFAb and low frequency (4–25 Hz) LFP following 
cue and target onsets in correct and incorrect trials. g, Similar to Fig. 2e for experiment 
2. h,i, Regression plots showing correlation of coupling ratios following cue onset with 
Boroujeni et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
target responses (green, h), and coupling ratios following target onset with cue responses 
(purple, i). Scatter points denote electrodes, lines indicate individual subjects with orange 
line showing the regression across all subjects.
Extended Data Fig. 4. A network clustering approach based on the synchronization of HFAbs 
between electrodes.
a, The average HFAb-triggered HFA for individuals in experiment 2. b, The normalized 
PSD for HFAb-triggered HFA in experiment 2. c, HFAb-triggered HFA for electrodes 
distanced in 4 different quantiles (25,50, 75, 100 mm), ranging from green (short) to red 
(long) in experiment 2, similar to Fig. 3c. d, The first and second principal components of 
HFAb-triggered HFA for individual subjects in experiment 2. e, A schematic demonstration 
of network clustering algorithm. We used HFAbs outside of cue/delay and target/response 
periods. The network synchrony matrix shows the loading values for each electrode pair on 
the synchronized component. A K-means clustering was performed on randomly selected 
electrode samples for different cluster numbers (K = 2 to 8). We calculated a pair-wise 
grouping probability matrix in which each element indicates how likely it is that two 
electrodes will be grouped together. The next step was clustering with network subsampling, 
similar to the previous step but based on the pairwise grouping likelihood matrix. The final 
clustering of the pair-wise grouping likelihood results indicated stable clusters for each K 
(see Methods).
Boroujeni et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 5. Organization of clusters based on cluster numbers.
Columns from left to right show the results for cluster numbers K = 2 – 8. The cluster IDs 
are sorted by cluster stability.
Boroujeni et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 6. Clustering results for individual subjects.
a, Color-coded loading values on the synchronized PC (left) and the pairwise grouping 
probability (right) for each subject. b, Electrode distributions for optimal cluster numbers. 
c, Cluster number selection using four metrics with nonparametric voting rank (black). The 
accuracy is determined by the median diagonals, the confusion by the median nondiagonal, 
selectivity by the relative rank of the diagonal over the highest nondiagonal rank, and 
stability by the relative rank of the diagonal over the nondiagonal rank. d, HFAb density 
around cue and target onsets for each cluster, similar to Fig. 3f, across subjects. Shaded error 
Boroujeni et al. Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
bars indicate the standard error of the means, thicker lines indicate significant functional 
subnetworks. e, Leave-one-subject-out classifier analysis, similar to Fig. 3h. f, g, Classifier 
accuracy predicting correct trials (green), errors (brown), and overall accuracy (gray) for (f) 
experiment 1 and (g) experiment 2. h, outcome prediction by cue- and target-subnetworks 
following target onset. Shaded error bars show standard error of the mean. Thick lines in 
panels e-h indicate timepoints above baseline and chance (two-sided binomial test, p < 0.05, 
FDR-corrected for multiple dependent comparisons).
Boroujeni et al. Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Data Fig. 7. Temporal precession between cue and target-subnetworks.
a, HFAb-triggered HFA examples for individual subjects (mean ± SEM), similar to Fig. 4a. 
b, Top: Group-level average of HFAb-triggered HFA in experiment 2 (n=3), similar to Fig. 
4b. Shaded regions indicate significant lead-lag patterns (two-sided permutation test, p < 
0.05; red: cue leads, [135–244] ms, blue: target leads, [−298 to −155] ms). Bottom: Peak 
time-lag distributions in experiment 2 (n = 3, medina ± SEM: 14.9 ± 4.7 ms, two-sided 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test between directions; *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01, ***: p < 0.001). 
c, HFAb-triggered HFA during cue/delay period, Similar to Fig. 4a. d, Lead-lag pattern 
topography for individual subjects, similar to Fig. 4c. e, DMI heatmaps for individual 
subjects, similar to Fig. 4d. f, DMI analysis around cue onset, similar to Fig. 4e. g, Group-
average DMI in experiment 2 (n=3), similar to Fig. 4d. DMI peaked 297.7 ± 19.6 ms after 
target onset with 125.6 ± 26.2 ms time-lag (n = 3). h, DMI peak distributions for invalid/
valid trials in experiment 2 (n=3), similar to Fig. 4e.
Extended Data Fig. 8. Computational modeling of iEEG signal.
Boroujeni et al. Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
a, Connection probability between neurons decreases with distance. b, Frequency-dependent 
attenuation factor for iEEG signals at the recording disks. c, A complete trial simulation 
example. Raster shows the activity of neurons in one network (bottom, blue and red show 
excitatory and inhibitory neurons, respectively). Raw and attenuated traces correspond to 
field dynamics of the same network. d, Network activity with coherent (top) and random 
(bottom) input phases. e, Connectivity matrix for feedforward network (N1→N2, each 
scatter point indicates whether two neurons have excitatory (blue) or inhibitory (red) 
connections). f, An input design evaluating how a transient stimulus affects HFAb coherence 
with LFP in a network as shown in E (network 1 (top) receives an impulse input). g, PLV 
changes in both networks following transient input, similar to Fig. 5g. h In both networks 
1 and 2, the PLV drops within 500ms of stimulus onset (p < 0.001, two-sided Wilcoxon 
test). I, Normalized HFAb rate relative to stimulus onset. j, Four-network architecture and 
example raster activity during spatial attention task simulation. k, HFAb rate distributions 
in target networks for valid versus invalid trials. l, Normalized DMI between cue and target 
networks following cue onset, similar to Fig. 5l.
Extended Data Table 1.
List of brain areas containing electrodes that showed significant HFAb response to cue (cue 
+) and target (target +, see Methods), as well as electrodes in cue- and target-activated 
subnetworks. The abbreviations are: Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG), Temporoparietal Junction 
(TPJ), Visual area 3b (V3b), human Visual area 4 (hV4), Intraparietal Sulcus (IPS1, IPS2, 
IPS3, IPS5), Middle Frontal Gyrus (MFG), Middle Temporal Gyrus (MTG), Inferior Parietal 
Lobule (IPL), Lateral Occipital area 2 (LO2), Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG), Superior 
Temporal Gyrus (STG), Inferior Temporal Gyrus (ITG), Frontal Eye Field (FEF), Fusiform 
Gyrus (FFG), Inferior Occipital Gyrus (IOG), Parahippocampal Gyrus (PHG), Middle 
Occipital Gyrus (MOG), human Middle Temporal/V5 (hMT), Superior Parietal Lobule 
(SPL), and Lateral Occipital area 1 (LO1).
Subject 
ID
Cue + Target + Cue Subnetworks Target Subnetworks
S1 IFG, TPJ, V3b, 
hV4
ISP0, MFG, MTG, TPJ
S2 Cingulate Gyrus, 
ISP2, IFG, IPL, 
LO2, MFG, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
SFG,
Cingulate Gyrus, ISP1, 
ISP3, IPL, MFG, 
Paracentral Lobule, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG, 
STG
Cingulate Gyrus, 
ISP2, ISP3, 
IFG, IPL, MTG, 
Paracentral Lobule, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, 
STG
Cingulate Gyrus, ISP1, ISP2, 
ISP3, IFG, IPL, MFG, 
MTG, Paracentral Lobule, 
Postcentral Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, SFG, STG
S3 IPL IFG, IPL, ITG, MTG, 
Orbital Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, SFG, STG, TPJ
IFG, IPL, ITG, MFG, MTG, 
Postcentral Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, STG, TPJ
S4 IPL, MFG, hMT, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
LO2
Angular Gyrus, FEF, 
FFG, IFG, IPL, 
MFG, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG, 
STG, TPJ,
Angular Gyrus, Anterior 
Cingulate, Cingulate Gyrus, 
FEF, FFG, IFG, IOG, IPL, 
ITG, MFG, MTG, PHG, 
Postcentral Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, SFG, STG, TPJ
S5 FFG, ISP2, ISP3, 
LO2, MOG, 
MTG, Postcentral 
Gyrus, hMT
FEF, FFG, IPL, 
MTG, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG, 
TPJ
FFG, LO2, ISP3, 
MOG, Postcentral 
Gyrus, hMT, 
Postcentral Gyrus
FEF, IPL, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG
Boroujeni et al. Page 39
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Subject 
ID
Cue + Target + Cue Subnetworks Target Subnetworks
S6 FEF, IPL, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
SFG, TPJ
FEF, IPL, MFG, 
Paracentral Lobule, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, 
Precuneus, SFG, STG, 
TPJ
FEF, ISP2, ISP3, IPL, 
MFG, Paracentral Lobule, 
Precentral Gyrus, Precuneus, 
SFG, STG, TPJ
S7 ISP2, ISP3, IPL, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
SFG, SPL, TPJ
FEF, ISP2, ISP3, 
ISP5, IPL, Paracentral 
Lobule, Postcentral 
Gyrus, Precentral Gyrus, 
Precuneus, SFG, SPL, TPJ
ISP2, ISP3, ISP5, 
IPL, SPL, TPJ, 
Postcentral Gyrus,
FEF, ISP2, ISP3, ISP5, 
IPL, Paracentral Lobule, 
Postcentral Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, Precuneus, SPL, 
SFG, TPJ
S8 LO1 FEF, ISP1, ISP2.MFG FEF, ISP1, ISP2, MFG
S9 ISP2, ISP3, MFG, 
STG
ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, MFG, 
MTG, Precentral Gyrus, 
SFG, STG
ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, 
MFG, STG
ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, MFG, 
MTG, Precentral Gyrus, 
SFG, STG
S10 ISP2, ISP3, MFG, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
FEF
FEF, ISP2, ISP3, 
IFG, IPL, MFG, 
MTG, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG, 
STG
FEF, ISP2, IPL, 
MFG, Postcentral 
Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus, SFG, STG
FEF, ISP2, IFG, IPL, MFG, 
MTG, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG, STG, 
TPJ, V3b
S11 ISP2, MFG, hV4 ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, IFG, 
MFG, MTG, Postcentral 
Gyrus, STG
S12 ISP2, ISP3, 
Postcentral Gyrus
FEF, ISP1, ISP2, 
ISP3, IPL, MFG, 
MTG, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus, SFG
ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, 
Postcentral Gyrus, 
MFG, Precentral 
Gyrus,
FEF, ISP1, ISP2, ISP3, IPL, 
MFG, MTG, Postcentral 
Gyrus, Precentral Gyrus, 
SFG
Extended Data Table 2.
Parameters used for modeling different neuron types. The parameter a indicates a recovery 
rate variable, b the sensitivity to sub-threshold fluctuations, c the membrane potential, d 
adjusts the after-spike recovery variable, τr synaptic potential rise time, and τd synaptic 
potential decay time (see Methods). The last 5 rows indicate the connectivity weight matrix 
between different cell types.
Cell-type Parameters Pyr PV CCK CB CR
population 0.76 0.07 0.02 0.9 0.06
a 0.02 0.1 0.05 0.02 0.02
b 0.2 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23
c −65 −65 −65 −65 −65
d 8 2 2 2 2
τr 1 1 1 1 1
τd 6.4 8 12.4 16 16
Pyr 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
PV 0.6 0.4 0.25 0.15 0.05
CCK 0.6 0.25 0.4 0.15 0.05
CB 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.05 0.25
CR 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.6 0.05
Boroujeni et al. Page 40
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the C.V . Starr Fellowship (KBB), German Research Foundation, Emmy Noether 
Program (DFG HE8329/2–1; RFH), NIBIB (P41-EB018783; PB), NINDS (R01NS021135; RTK), and NEI 
(2R01EY017699; SK), NIH (1R01MH137624; SK), NIMH (2R01MH064043, P50MH132642; SK). The funders 
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, the decision to publish, or the preparation of this 
manuscript.
Data Availability
Preprocessed data used for generating these results are deposited at Figshare and will 
be accessible through https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.30434683.107 Source data are 
provided with this paper.
Code Availability
Custom programming codes for analysis and modeling are available from https://
github.com/banaiek/Attentional_Routing/.
References
1. Saalmann YB, Pigarev IN & Vidyasagar TR Neural Mechanisms of Visual Attention: How 
Top-Down Feedback Highlights Relevant Locations. Science 316, 1612–1615 (2007). [PubMed: 
17569863] 
2. Gregoriou GG, Gotts SJ, Zhou H & Desimone R High-Frequency, Long-Range Coupling Between 
Prefrontal and Visual Cortex During Attention. Science 324, 1207–1210 (2009). [PubMed: 
19478185] 
3. Szczepanski SM et al. Dynamic Changes in Phase-Amplitude Coupling Facilitate Spatial Attention 
Control in Fronto-Parietal Cortex. PLOS Biology 12, e1001936 (2014). [PubMed: 25157678] 
4. Buschman TJ & Kastner S From Behavior to Neural Dynamics: An Integrated Theory of Attention. 
Neuron 88, 127–144 (2015). [PubMed: 26447577] 
5. Fiebelkorn IC & Kastner S Functional Specialization in the Attention Network. Annu Rev Psychol 
71, 221–249 (2020). [PubMed: 31514578] 
6. Banaie Boroujeni K & Womelsdorf T Routing states transition during oscillatory bursts 
and attentional selection. Neuron https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.06.012 (2023) doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2023.06.012.
7. Womelsdorf T & Fries P Neuronal coherence during selective attentional processing and sensory–
motor integration. Journal of Physiology-Paris 100, 182–193 (2006). [PubMed: 17317118] 
8. Lakatos P, Karmos G, Mehta AD, Ulbert I & Schroeder CE Entrainment of Neuronal Oscillations as 
a Mechanism of Attentional Selection. Science 320, 110–113 (2008). [PubMed: 18388295] 
9. Siegel M, Donner TH, Oostenveld R, Fries P & Engel AK Neuronal Synchronization along 
the Dorsal Visual Pathway Reflects the Focus of Spatial Attention. Neuron 60, 709–719 (2008). 
[PubMed: 19038226] 
10. Buschman TJ & Miller EK Top-Down Versus Bottom-Up Control of Attention in the Prefrontal 
and Posterior Parietal Cortices. Science 315, 1860–1862 (2007). [PubMed: 17395832] 
11. Siegel M, Buschman TJ & Miller EK Cortical information flow during flexible sensorimotor 
decisions. Science 348, 1352–1355 (2015). [PubMed: 26089513] 
12. Canolty RT et al. Oscillatory phase coupling coordinates anatomically dispersed functional cell 
assemblies. PNAS 107, 17356–17361 (2010). [PubMed: 20855620] 
Boroujeni et al. Page 41
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
13. Braun U et al. Dynamic reconfiguration of frontal brain networks during executive cognition in 
humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 11678–11683 (2015).
14. Bassett DS & Sporns O Network neuroscience. Nat Neurosci 20, 353–364 (2017). [PubMed: 
28230844] 
15. Avena-Koenigsberger A, Misic B & Sporns O Communication dynamics in complex brain 
networks. Nat Rev Neurosci 19, 17–33 (2018).
16. Brookes MJ et al. Measuring functional connectivity using MEG: Methodology and comparison 
with fcMRI. NeuroImage 56, 1082–1104 (2011). [PubMed: 21352925] 
17. Hari R & Parkkonen L The brain timewise: how timing shapes and supports brain function. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370, 20140170 (2015).
18. Higley MJ & Cardin JA Spatiotemporal dynamics in large-scale cortical networks. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology 77, 102627 (2022). [PubMed: 36115252] 
19. Lachaux J-P, Axmacher N, Mormann F, Halgren E & Crone NE High-frequency neural activity and 
human cognition: past, present and possible future of intracranial EEG research. Prog Neurobiol 
98, 279–301 (2012). [PubMed: 22750156] 
20. Parvizi J & Kastner S Human Intracranial EEG: Promises and Limitations. Nat Neurosci 21, 
474–483 (2018). [PubMed: 29507407] 
21. V oytek B et al. Oscillatory dynamics coordinating human frontal networks in support of goal 
maintenance. Nat Neurosci 18, 1318–1324 (2015). [PubMed: 26214371] 
22. Haller M et al. Persistent neuronal activity in human prefrontal cortex links perception and action. 
Nat Hum Behav 2, 80–91 (2018). [PubMed: 29963646] 
23. Helfrich RF et al. Neural Mechanisms of Sustained Attention Are Rhythmic. Neuron 99, 854–
865.e5 (2018). [PubMed: 30138591] 
24. Martin AB et al. Temporal Dynamics and Response Modulation across the Human Visual 
System in a Spatial Attention Task: An ECoG Study. J. Neurosci. 39, 333–352 (2019). [PubMed: 
30459219] 
25. Ray S & Maunsell JHR Different Origins of Gamma Rhythm and High-Gamma Activity in 
Macaque Visual Cortex. PLOS Biology 9, e1000610 (2011). [PubMed: 21532743] 
26. Banaie Boroujeni K, Tiesinga P & Womelsdorf T Adaptive spike-artifact removal from local 
field potentials uncovers prominent beta and gamma band neuronal synchronization. Journal of 
Neuroscience Methods 330, 108485 (2020). [PubMed: 31705936] 
27. Leszczyński M et al. Dissociation of broadband high-frequency activity and neuronal firing in the 
neocortex. Science Advances 6, eabb0977 (2020). [PubMed: 32851172] 
28. Leonard MK et al. Large-scale single-neuron speech sound encoding across the depth of human 
cortex. Nature 626, 593–602 (2024). [PubMed: 38093008] 
29. Zolnik TA et al. Layer 6b controls brain state via apical dendrites and the higher-order 
thalamocortical system. Neuron 112, 805–820.e4 (2024). [PubMed: 38101395] 
30. Canolty RT & Knight RT The functional role of cross-frequency coupling. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 14, 506–515 (2010). [PubMed: 20932795] 
31. Arnulfo G et al. Long-range phase synchronization of high-frequency oscillations in human cortex. 
Nat Commun 11, 5363 (2020). [PubMed: 33097714] 
32. Williams N et al. Modules in connectomes of phase-synchronization comprise anatomically 
contiguous, functionally related regions. NeuroImage 272, 120036 (2023). [PubMed: 36966852] 
33. Garrett JC et al. Binding of cortical functional modules by synchronous high-frequency 
oscillations. Nat Hum Behav 1–15 (2024) doi:10.1038/s41562-024-01952-2.
34. Jensen O & Colgin LL Cross-frequency coupling between neuronal oscillations. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 11, 267–269 (2007). [PubMed: 17548233] 
35. Jiang H, Bahramisharif A, van Gerven MAJ & Jensen O Measuring directionality between 
neuronal oscillations of different frequencies. NeuroImage 118, 359–367 (2015). [PubMed: 
26025291] 
36. Kam JWY et al. Default network and frontoparietal control network theta connectivity supports 
internal attention. Nat Hum Behav 3, 1263–1270 (2019). [PubMed: 31477910] 
Boroujeni et al. Page 42
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
37. Johnson EL et al. A rapid theta network mechanism for flexible information encoding. Nat 
Commun 14, 2872 (2023). [PubMed: 37208373] 
38. Tong APS, Vaz AP, Wittig JH, Inati SK & Zaghloul KA Ripples reflect a spectrum of synchronous 
spiking activity in human anterior temporal lobe. eLife 10, e68401 (2021). [PubMed: 34779398] 
39. Onslow ACE, Jones MW & Bogacz R A Canonical Circuit for Generating Phase-Amplitude 
Coupling. PLOS ONE 9, e102591 (2014). [PubMed: 25136855] 
40. Colgin LL et al. Frequency of gamma oscillations routes flow of information in the hippocampus. 
Nature 462, 353–357 (2009). [PubMed: 19924214] 
41. Akam T & Kullmann DM Oscillations and Filtering Networks Support Flexible Routing of 
Information. Neuron 67, 308–320 (2010). [PubMed: 20670837] 
42. Palmigiano A, Geisel T, Wolf F & Battaglia D Flexible information routing by transient synchrony. 
Nat Neurosci 20, 1014–1022 (2017). [PubMed: 28530664] 
43. Lundqvist M, Herman P, Warden MR, Brincat SL & Miller EK Gamma and beta bursts during 
working memory readout suggest roles in its volitional control. Nat Commun 9, 394 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29374153] 
44. Hahn G, Ponce-Alvarez A, Deco G, Aertsen A & Kumar A Portraits of communication in neuronal 
networks. Nat Rev Neurosci 20, 117–127 (2019). [PubMed: 30552403] 
45. Corbetta M & Shulman GL SPATIAL NEGLECT AND ATTENTION NETWORKS. Annu Rev 
Neurosci 34, 569–599 (2011). [PubMed: 21692662] 
46. Chica AB, Bartolomeo P & Lupiáñez J Two cognitive and neural systems for endogenous 
and exogenous spatial attention. Behavioural Brain Research 237, 107–123 (2013). [PubMed: 
23000534] 
47. Katsuki F & Constantinidis C Bottom-up and top-down attention: different processes and 
overlapping neural systems. Neuroscientist 20, 509–521 (2014). [PubMed: 24362813] 
48. V ossel S, Geng JJ & Fink GR Dorsal and Ventral Attention Systems: Distinct Neural Circuits but 
Collaborative Roles. Neuroscientist 20, 150–159 (2014). [PubMed: 23835449] 
49. König P, Engel AK & Singer W Relation between oscillatory activity and long-range 
synchronization in cat visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 92, 290–
294 (1995).
50. Roelfsema PR, Engel AK, König P & Singer W Visuomotor integration is associated with zero 
time-lag synchronization among cortical areas. Nature 385, 157–161 (1997). [PubMed: 8990118] 
51. Uhlhaas PJ et al. Neural Synchrony in Cortical Networks: History, Concept and Current Status. 
Front Integr Neurosci 3, 17 (2009). [PubMed: 19668703] 
52. Gollo LL, Mirasso C & Villa AEP Dynamic control for synchronization of separated cortical areas 
through thalamic relay. NeuroImage 52, 947–955 (2010). [PubMed: 19958835] 
53. Gollo LL, Mirasso CR, Atienza M, Crespo-Garcia M & Cantero JL Theta Band Zero-Lag Long-
Range Cortical Synchronization via Hippocampal Dynamical Relaying. PLOS ONE 6, e17756 
(2011). [PubMed: 21408082] 
54. Saalmann YB & Kastner S Cognitive and Perceptual Functions of the Visual Thalamus. Neuron 
71, 209–223 (2011). [PubMed: 21791281] 
55. Logothetis NK et al. Hippocampal–cortical interaction during periods of subcortical silence. 
Nature 491, 547–553 (2012). [PubMed: 23172213] 
56. Saalmann YB, Pinsk MA, Wang L, Li X & Kastner S The Pulvinar Regulates Information 
Transmission Between Cortical Areas Based on Attention Demands. Science https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1223082 (2012) doi:10.1126/science.1223082.
57. Vijayan S & Kopell NJ Thalamic model of awake alpha oscillations and implications for stimulus 
processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109, 18553–18558 (2012).
58. Fiebelkorn IC, Pinsk MA & Kastner S The mediodorsal pulvinar coordinates the macaque 
fronto-parietal network during rhythmic spatial attention. Nat Commun 10, 215 (2019). [PubMed: 
30644391] 
59. Gollo LL, Mirasso C, Sporns O & Breakspear M Mechanisms of Zero-Lag Synchronization in 
Cortical Motifs. PLOS Computational Biology 10, e1003548 (2014). [PubMed: 24763382] 
Boroujeni et al. Page 43
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
60. Zolnik TA et al. Layer 6b Is Driven by Intracortical Long-Range Projection Neurons. Cell Reports 
30, 3492–3505.e5 (2020). [PubMed: 32160552] 
61. Menara T, Qin Y , Bassett DS & Pasqualetti F Relay Interactions Enable Remote Synchronization in 
Networks of Phase Oscillators. IEEE Control Systems Letters 6, 500–505 (2022).
62. Smith SM et al. Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, 13040–13045 (2009).
63. Srivastava P et al. Models of communication and control for brain networks: distinctions, 
convergence, and future outlook. Netw Neurosci 4, 1122–1159 (2020). [PubMed: 33195951] 
64. Engel TA, Schölvinck ML & Lewis CM The diversity and specificity of functional connectivity 
across spatial and temporal scales. NeuroImage 245, 118692 (2021). [PubMed: 34751153] 
65. Battiston F et al. Networks beyond pairwise interactions: Structure and dynamics. Physics Reports 
874, 1–92 (2020).
66. Jensen O, Gips B, Bergmann TO & Bonnefond M Temporal coding organized by coupled alpha 
and gamma oscillations prioritize visual processing. Trends in Neurosciences 37, 357–369 (2014). 
[PubMed: 24836381] 
67. Chapeton JI, Haque R, Wittig JH, Inati SK & Zaghloul KA Large-Scale Communication in the 
Human Brain Is Rhythmically Modulated through Alpha Coherence. Current Biology 29, 2801–
2811.e5 (2019). [PubMed: 31422882] 
68. Harris KD & Thiele A Cortical state and attention. Nat Rev Neurosci 12, 509–523 (2011). 
[PubMed: 21829219] 
69. Hanslmayr S, Staudigl T & Fellner M-C Oscillatory power decreases and long-term memory: the 
information via desynchronization hypothesis. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6, (2012).
70. Hanslmayr S, Staresina BP & Bowman H Oscillations and Episodic Memory: Addressing 
the Synchronization/Desynchronization Conundrum. Trends in Neurosciences 39, 16–25 (2016). 
[PubMed: 26763659] 
71. Beaman CB, Eagleman SL & Dragoi V Sensory coding accuracy and perceptual performance 
are improved during the desynchronized cortical state. Nat Commun 8, 1308 (2017). [PubMed: 
29101393] 
72. Dickey CW et al. Widespread ripples synchronize human cortical activity during sleep, waking, 
and memory recall. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119, e2107797119 (2022). [PubMed: 35867767] 
73. Verzhbinsky IA et al. Co-occurring ripple oscillations facilitate neuronal interactions between 
cortical locations in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, e2312204121 
(2024).
74. Egly R, Driver J & Rafal RD Shifting visual attention between objects and locations: Evidence 
from normal and parietal lesion subjects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 123, 161–
177 (1994). [PubMed: 8014611] 
75. Fiebelkorn IC, Saalmann YB & Kastner S Rhythmic Sampling within and between Objects 
despite Sustained Attention at a Cued Location. Current Biology 23, 2553–2558 (2013). [PubMed: 
24316204] 
76. Wang L, Mruczek REB, Arcaro MJ & Kastner S Probabilistic Maps of Visual Topography in 
Human Cortex. Cereb Cortex 25, 3911–3931 (2015). [PubMed: 25452571] 
77. Lancaster J. l. et al. Automated labeling of the human brain: A preliminary report on the 
development and evaluation of a forward-transform method. Human Brain Mapping 5, 238–242 
(1997). [PubMed: 20408222] 
78. Oostenveld R, Fries P, Maris E & Schoffelen J-M FieldTrip: Open Source Software for Advanced 
Analysis of MEG, EEG, and Invasive Electrophysiological Data. Computational Intelligence and 
Neuroscience 2011, 156869 (2011). [PubMed: 21253357] 
79. Boashash B Estimating and Interpreting the Instantaneous Frequency of a Signal – Part 1: 
Fundamentals. in Proceedings of the Ieee 520–538 (1992).
80. Hill MRH, Fried I & Koch C Quantification and classification of neuronal responses in kernel-
smoothed peristimulus time histograms. Journal of Neurophysiology 113, 1260–1274 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25475352] 
81. Dunn OJ Multiple Comparisons among Means. Journal of the American Statistical Association 56, 
52–64 (1961).
Boroujeni et al. Page 44
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
82. Benjamini Y & Yekutieli D False Discovery Rate–Adjusted Multiple Confidence Intervals for 
Selected Parameters. Journal of the American Statistical Association 100, 71–81 (2005).
83. Vinck M, van Wingerden M, Womelsdorf T, Fries P & Pennartz CMA The pairwise phase 
consistency: A bias-free measure of rhythmic neuronal synchronization. NeuroImage 51, 112–122 
(2010). [PubMed: 20114076] 
84. Milligan GW & Cooper MC An examination of procedures for determining the number of clusters 
in a data set. Psychometrika 50, 159–179 (1985).
85. Jain AK & Dubes RC Algorithms for Clustering Data. (Prentice-Hall, Inc., USA, 1988).
86. Halkidi M, Batistakis Y & Vazirgiannis M On Clustering Validation Techniques. Journal of 
Intelligent Information Systems 17, 107–145 (2001).
87. Vendramin L, Campello RJGB & Hruschka ER Relative clustering validity criteria: A comparative 
overview. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal 3, 209–235 
(2010).
88. Freedman D & Diaconis P On the histogram as a density estimator:L2 theory. Z. 
Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw Gebiete 57, 453–476 (1981).
89. Billeh YN et al. Systematic Integration of Structural and Functional Data into Multi-scale Models 
of Mouse Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron 106, 388–403.e18 (2020). [PubMed: 32142648] 
90. Potjans TC & Diesmann M The Cell-Type Specific Cortical Microcircuit: Relating Structure and 
Activity in a Full-Scale Spiking Network Model. Cerebral Cortex 24, 785–806 (2014). [PubMed: 
23203991] 
91. Barral J & D Reyes A Synaptic scaling rule preserves excitatory–inhibitory balance and salient 
neuronal network dynamics. Nat Neurosci 19, 1690–1696 (2016). [PubMed: 27749827] 
92. Izhikevich EM Which model to use for cortical spiking neurons? IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Networks 15, 1063–1070 (2004). [PubMed: 15484883] 
93. Izhikevich EM Simple model of spiking neurons. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 14, 
1569–1572 (2003). [PubMed: 18244602] 
94. Pfeffer CK, Xue M, He M, Huang ZJ & Scanziani M Inhibition of inhibition in visual cortex: 
the logic of connections between molecularly distinct interneurons. Nat Neurosci 16, 1068–1076 
(2013). [PubMed: 23817549] 
95. Karnani MM et al. Cooperative Subnetworks of Molecularly Similar Interneurons in Mouse 
Neocortex. Neuron 90, 86–100 (2016). [PubMed: 27021171] 
96. Medalla M, Gilman JP, Wang J-Y & Luebke JI Strength and Diversity of Inhibitory Signaling 
Differentiates Primate Anterior Cingulate from Lateral Prefrontal Cortex. J. Neurosci. 37, 4717–
4734 (2017). [PubMed: 28381592] 
97. Gilman JP, Medalla M & Luebke JI Area-Specific Features of Pyramidal Neurons—a Comparative 
Study in Mouse and Rhesus Monkey. Cerebral Cortex 27, 2078–2094 (2017). [PubMed: 
26965903] 
98. Medalla M & Luebke JI Diversity of Glutamatergic Synaptic Strength in Lateral Prefrontal versus 
Primary Visual Cortices in the Rhesus Monkey. J. Neurosci. 35, 112–127 (2015). [PubMed: 
25568107] 
99. Amatrudo JM et al. Influence of Highly Distinctive Structural Properties on the Excitability of 
Pyramidal Neurons in Monkey Visual and Prefrontal Cortices. J. Neurosci. 32, 13644–13660 
(2012). [PubMed: 23035077] 
100. Roxin A, Brunel N, Hansel D, Mongillo G & Vreeswijk C van. On the Distribution of 
Firing Rates in Networks of Cortical Neurons. J. Neurosci. 31, 16217–16226 (2011). [PubMed: 
22072673] 
101. Milstein J, Mormann F, Fried I & Koch C Neuronal Shot Noise and Brownian 1/f2 Behavior in 
the Local Field Potential. PLOS ONE 4, e4338 (2009). [PubMed: 19190760] 
102. Bédard C, Kröger H & Destexhe A Modeling Extracellular Field Potentials and the Frequency-
Filtering Properties of Extracellular Space. Biophysical Journal 86, 1829–1842 (2004). [PubMed: 
14990509] 
103. Deco G & Rolls ET Neurodynamics of Biased Competition and Cooperation for Attention: 
A Model With Spiking Neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 94, 295–313 (2005). [PubMed: 
15703227] 
Boroujeni et al. Page 45
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
104. Markov NT et al. A Weighted and Directed Interareal Connectivity Matrix for Macaque Cerebral 
Cortex. Cerebral Cortex 24, 17–36 (2014). [PubMed: 23010748] 
105. Zhou H, Schafer RJ & Desimone R Pulvinar-Cortex Interactions in Vision and Attention. Neuron 
89, 209–220 (2016). [PubMed: 26748092] 
106. Buffalo EA, Fries P, Landman R, Liang H & Desimone R A backward progression of attentional 
effects in the ventral stream. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 361–365 
(2010).
107. Banaie Boroujeni Kianoush; Helfrich Randolph F.; Fiebelkorn Ian C.; Bentley Nicole; Brunner 
Peter; Lin Jack J; et al. (2025). Preprocessed Burst-triggered HFA Datasets for individual 
subjects. figshare. Dataset. 10.6084/m9.figshare.30434683
Boroujeni et al. Page 46
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1. HFAb activation profile predicts behavioral outcome on a trial-by-trial basis.
a, Experiment 1 task outline: two bars appear on the screen, followed by a transient cue 
indicating the likely target location. After a variable delay, a near-threshold contrast change 
appears at the cued or, less often, at an equidistant uncued location. In 10% of trials no 
target appears. Subjects report the change detection. b, An example trial showing detected 
high-frequency bursts (HFAbs, in red) around the cue onset. The brain shows localization 
of electrodes across all subjects in experiment 1. c, Normalized HFAb density for individual 
subjects and the group average, aligned to the cue (left) and target onset (right); shaded error 
bars denote mean ± SEM. d, HFAb responses to cues (top) and targets (bottom) grouped 
by trial outcome (n=6, median ± SEM, each line represents one subject, with thick lines 
showing group average, horizontal lines showing significant differences between groups 
(Dunn’s test, p < 0.05), and asterisks denoting non-zero responses, Wilcoxon signed-rank 
test, *: p < 0.001). e, Correlation of HFAb responses to cue and target, for channels with 
significant activation to either or both cue and target (each point represents one channel, 
each line represents regression for one subject, the orange line shows regression across all 
channels). (e, g) Group average heatmap 3D rendering of HFAb responses to (a) cues and 
(g) targets for correct trials. h, An individual subject example of HFAb responses to cue and 
target, for correct and incorrect trials (black circles indicate electrode locations). (i,j), HFAb 
responses to (i, GLME, t = 4.7, *: p < 0.001) targets for valid and invalid cue conditions 
Boroujeni et al. Page 47
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and (j, GLME, t = 5.1, *: p < 0.001) to cues ipsi- and contra-lateral to electrodes (n=6, 
median ± SEM). k, Classifier accuracy in predicting trial outcome based on HFAb density 
around the cue onset for cue responsive electrodes and cue unresponsive electrodes (error 
bars: SEM across realizations and cross validations). Red lines indicate points significantly 
above baseline and chance (two-sided binomial test, p < 0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple 
dependent comparisons).
Boroujeni et al. Page 48
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2. HFAbs dynamically phase lock to low-frequency LFPs and decouple transiently after cue 
and target onsets.
a, HFAb-triggered LFP spectrum (top) and phase locking values (PLV , bottom) across 
all electrodes in both experiments (each line represents one subject). b, Examples of 
phase-frequency distribution of HFAbs for an electrode with theta phase locking (top) and 
beta phase locking (bottom). Polar histograms of phase distributions at the phase-locking 
frequencies are shown in the right-hand panels. c, PLVs for individual electrodes (each 
row). Black dots indicate the maximum peak of PLV for each electrode, and white dashed 
lines indicate subject boundaries. Phase-locking peak distribution is shown above. d, Top: 
time-resolved PLV analysis averaged across all subjects aligned to cue (left) and target 
(right) onsets in experiment 1. Bottom: The proportion of time points where phase locking 
dropped significantly below the baseline averaged across all electrodes (two-sided random 
permutation test, p < 0.05). Thick lines indicate segments significantly different from the 
chance level (two-sided binomial test, p < 0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple dependent 
comparisons; see Methods). e, Example subject brain heatmap showing coupling ratio 
between HFAb and low frequency (4–25 Hz) LFPs after cue (top) and target onsets (bottom) 
for correct and incorrect trials. f, Proportion of time points with significant decoupling 
from low-frequency LFPs (4–25 Hz) after cue and target onsets for correct and incorrect 
trials. g, h, Regression plots showing correlation of coupling ratios following cue onset with 
cue responses (green, g), and coupling ratios following target onset with target responses 
Boroujeni et al. Page 49
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
(purple, h). Scatter points denote electrodes, lines indicate individual subjects with orange 
line showing the regression across all subjects.
Boroujeni et al. Page 50
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3. Network-level synchronization of HFAbs identifies functionally specialized subnetworks.
a, HFAb-triggered HFA measured between electrode pairs during baseline periods (outside 
cue/delay and target/response epochs). Top: example electrode pair; bottom: group average 
across all pairs for individual subjects. b, Normalized power spectral density (PSD) of 
HFAb-triggered HFA for each electrode relative to all others (white dashed lines indicate 
subject boundaries), bottom: mean PSD across all electrodes for individual subjects (red 
dots denote peaks). c, HFAb-triggered HFA HFAb-triggered HFA as a function of inter-
electrode distance quartiles (25, 50, 75, and 100 mm), colored from green (short) to 
red (long). d, The first two principal components of HFAb-triggered HFA for individual 
subjects. e, Example subject showing pairwise grouping probability matrix for optimal 
K=8 clusters (top, white lines indicate cluster boundaries, clusters are ordered by stability, 
see Methods) and corresponding electrode topography (bottom). f, HFAb density around 
cue and target onsets for each cluster from panel e (mean ± SEM; thick lines indicate 
significant responses, p < 0.05, two-sided Wilcoxon test, FDR-corrected for multiple 
dependent comparisons). g, Group topography of electrodes, in clusters with significant 
cue responses (“cue-subnetworks”) and target responses (“target-subnetworks”) across all 
subjects. h, Performance classifier trained on mean HFAb density across electrodes in 
cue-subnetworks (purple) and target-subnetworks (green) around cue onset (error bars: 
SEM across realizations and cross-validations). Red lines indicate points significantly 
above baseline and chance (two-sided binomial test, p < 0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple 
dependent comparisons).
Boroujeni et al. Page 51
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4. Cue-subnetworks precede target-subnetworks during target processing.
a, Group-average HFAb-triggered HFA during target processing showing temporal 
relationships between subnetworks (mean ± SEM): HFA in target-subnetworks aligned to 
HFAbs in cue-subnetworks (purple) versus HFA in cue-subnetworks aligned to HFAbs in 
target-subnetworks (green). Shaded regions indicate significant lead-lag patterns (two-sided 
permutation test, p < 0.05; red: cue leads, [65 313] ms, blue: target leads, [−250 −37] ms). 
b, Time-lag distributions of HFAb-triggered HFA peaks for individual subjects (medina ± 
SEM; n=3, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test between directions; *: p < 0.05, **: p < 
0.01, ***: p < 0.001). c, An individual example of topographic visualization of lead-lag 
patterns between cue and target subnetwork electrodes averaged across cluster numbers 
during target processing period (see Extended Data Fig. 7 for more examples). The lead 
and lag temporal patterns are shown in a color gradient from red to blue. d, Group average 
heatmaps of normalized delayed mutual information (DMI) heatmaps showing temporal 
dependencies when shifting cue-subnetwork relative to fixed target-subnetwork (left) and 
vice versa (right). The white line indicates the time-lag distribution of DMI peaks across 
electrode pairs. The cross signs indicate the median of DMI peak time-lags ± SEM. e, 
Comparisons of DMI peak distributions between the two opposite directions (green for 
shifting the cue-subnetwork and purple for shifting the target-subnetwork) for valid (right) 
and invalid cue (left) trials. Individual subjects shown as crosses (n=3, median ± SEM across 
electrode pairs).
Boroujeni et al. Page 52
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 5. Computational modeling of HFAbs in spiking neural networks.
a, Two interconnected cubic networks of point source 1000 spiking neurons 1000 (80% 
excitatory, 20% inhibitory) with recording electrodes measuring field potentials above each 
network (bottom: raster plots) b, Example trial showing simulated iEEG signal, population 
spike density with raster, detected HFAbs (red), and resulting HFAb density. c, The power 
spectral density (PSD) of iEEG signals. d, Correlation between HFAb and spike density 
increases linearly with external input coherence. e, HFAb phase distribution at different 
frequencies (bottom), and Phase-locking value (PLV) across all HFAbs (top). f, PLV of 
HFAbs to low frequencies following transient input (thick black line). g,h, HFAb-triggered 
HFA between reciprocally connected (g) and feedforward (h) networks with varying 
connectivity strengths (purple and green traces show HFAb-triggered HFA when HFAbs are 
extracted from N1 and N2, respectively). i, PSD over the HFAb-triggered HFA for rhythmic 
inputs of varying frequencies. j, Four-network model simulating spatial attention task: two 
spatially selective cue networks (N1, N2) with dominant feedforward projections to target 
networks (N3, N4); cue and target networks activate to cue and target onsets, respectively, 
cue networks reactivate when targets appear at cued locations. k, HFAb responses in cue 
Boroujeni et al. Page 53
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
networks to cue onset (left) and target networks to target onset (right) for valid (purple) and 
invalid (green) trials (mean ± SEM). l, Delayed mutual information heatmaps between cue 
and target networks for valid (left) and invalid (right) conditions showing temporal precision 
of cue over target networks following target onset. m, Detection rates as a function of HFAb 
threshold demonstrating enhanced detection for valid versus invalid trials.
Boroujeni et al. Page 54
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 December 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript