Attractor dynamics reflect decision confidence in macaque 
prefrontal cortex
Siyu Wang1,*, Rossella Falcone1,2,*, Barry Richmond1, Bruno B. Averbeck1,†
1Laboratory of Neuropsychology, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda MD, 20892-4415
2Current affiliation: Leo M. Davidoff Department of Neurological Surgery, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx,NY , 10461.
Abstract
Decisions are made with different degrees of consistency, and this consistency can be linked to the 
confidence that the best choice has been made. Theoretical work suggests that attractor dynamics 
in networks can account for choice consistency, but how this is implemented in the brain remains 
unclear. Here, we provide evidence that the energy landscape around attractor basins in population 
neural activity in prefrontal cortex reflects choice consistency. We trained two rhesus monkeys 
to make accept/reject decisions based on pretrained visual cues that signaled reward offers with 
different magnitudes and delays-to-reward. Monkeys made consistent decisions for very good and 
very bad offers, but decisions were less consistent for intermediate offers. Analysis of neural 
data showed that the attractor basins around patterns of activity reflecting decisions had steeper 
landscapes for offers that led to consistent decisions. Therefore, we provide neural evidence that 
energy landscapes predict decision consistency, which reflects decision confidence.
Keywords
population dynamics; decision certainty; prefrontal cortex; neurophysiology
INTRODUCTION
Decisions are made with varying levels of certainty. For example, we may be certain 
about which political candidate we prefer, but less certain about which entree to order at 
†Correspondence to: Bruno B. Averbeck, Ph.D., Laboratory of Neuropsychology, NIMH/NIH, Building 49 Room 1B80, 49 Convent 
Drive MSC 4415, Bethesda, MD 20892-4415, bruno.averbeck@nih.gov.*equal contribution
Author Contributions
R.F. and B.R. designed the behavioral task. R.F. collected the data. S.W. and B.A. developed the analytical approach. S.W. analyzed 
the data. S.W. and B.A. wrote the manuscript, with input from R.F. and B.R.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Code Availability
Custom spike sorting and data analysis codes were used. Codes for the custom spike sorter can be found at https://github.com/
wangxsiyu/WangGit_Pilot_SpikeSorter.git. Custom MATLAB scripts used to perform all analysis and generate all figures can be 
found at https://github.com/wangxsiyu/Paper_NN-A81142A.git
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2023 November ; 26(11): 1970–1980. doi:10.1038/s41593-023-01445-x.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
a restaurant. When we are certain about a choice, we are more likely to make that choice 
consistently. However, when we are uncertain, our choices are less consistent, and we may 
change our mind before making a final decision1. There is a substantial body of literature 
looking at theoretical, behavioral, and neural aspects of decision certainty, also referred 
to as decision confidence2–4. It has been shown that prefrontal and parietal cortical areas 
represent decision certainty5–8. While these studies have established that multiple brain 
areas contribute to decision certainty, they have not examined the network computational 
mechanisms that drive variability in decision making under different levels of certainty.
A prominent family of models that account for flexible decisions are the two-state attractor 
models. In these models, decisions are made when network activity settles into one of two 
attractor basins9–15. The models operationalize the idea that decision-related neural activity 
can be modeled as an object frictionally sliding on a landscape characterized by two valleys 
separated by a hill16. The valleys represent the attractor basins. The ball starts on top of 
the hill and is pushed into one of the valleys by evidence in favor of one of the choices. 
The decision corresponds to the valley in which the ball ends up17. These models account 
for a wide range of behavior including perceptual and value-based decision making12,13, 
and working memory17. Change-of-mind and variability in decision making is accounted 
for in these models by assuming that transient stimuli or noise pushes neural activity from 
one attractor basin (i.e., valley) to another13,18–20. Theoretical work using artificial network 
simulations suggests that choice consistency can be accounted for by the shape of the energy 
landscape around the attractor basins. When energy landscapes have steep sides and deep 
basins, corresponding to a high hill between the valleys, decisions will be made consistently, 
because it is hard to drive activity from one basin to another. However, when energy 
landscapes are relatively flat and attractor basins are shallow, decisions will be made less 
consistently, because it is easier to drive activity between attractor basins. It has been shown, 
for example, that reinforcement learning can increase the energy separation between the 
attractor basins, as optimal choices are learned, which can lead to increased consistency of 
choices21,22. When attractor basins are shallower, before values have been learned, choices 
are less consistent21.
Despite these advances in theory, less work has examined directly the dynamics in neural 
activity that underlies variability in decision making. Dynamical systems models have been 
used to understand neural activity in motor control23, decision making24–26, representation 
of head direction in rodent anterior thalamic nuclei27 and the encoding of aggression in 
the hypothalamus28. Most studies have focused on the average trajectories that underlie 
movements and choices as they unfold. Recently, however, researchers have examined flow 
fields and energy landscapes underlying these mean trajectories27 and explicitly examined 
attractor dynamics by fitting dynamical system models to neural data26,28. Studies on 
the computations underlying decision making have focused on evidence integration or 
drift-diffusion models29,30. These models have led to substantial insights, but they do not 
incorporate fixed-point dynamics, which may be an important component of neural decision 
mechanisms. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no direct neural evidence that 
the geometry of attractor basins, which reflect the energy landscape that drives neural 
activity, predicts decision certainty. In this work, we investigated population dynamics of 
prefrontal neurons using high channel-count recordings (768 channels;31) while monkeys 
Wang et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
performed a decision-making task. We trained monkeys to choose between rejecting and 
accepting offers of different reward sizes and delay. By linking neural attractor dynamics 
to decision certainty, we provide evidence that the energy landscape in prefrontal cortex 
predicts decision certainty in behavior.
RESULTS
We trained rhesus monkeys to perform a decision-making task32(Fig.1A). In this task, 
animals had to reject or accept an offer by releasing a bar at different times. In each 
trial, animals were presented with one of nine possible reward offers, signaled by a visual 
stimulus. Each offer was a combination of reward size (2, 4 or 6 drops) and delay (1, 5 or 10 
seconds; Fig.1B). Monkeys began a trial by touching a bar and holding it for 500ms. Then 
a red square was presented at the center of the screen for 500ms. After that, one of the nine 
visual cues (Fig.1B) was presented behind the central red square. The central square stayed 
red for a random period between 1500 and 3500ms before it turned purple. To reject the 
offer, the monkey had to release the bar before the square turned purple. After an offer was 
rejected, a new trial started, with a new cue randomly selected from the set of possible cues. 
To accept the offer, the monkey had to hold the bar until the red square turned purple and 
then release it between 200ms and 1200ms after the presentation of the purple square. After 
an offer was accepted, the purple square turned green, and the designated number of drops 
was delivered at the indicated delay. The visual cue was turned off during reward delivery. 
The monkeys completed on average 848 (Monkey V) and 761 (Monkey W) valid trials per 
session. Data from 16 sessions (8 per monkey) were analyzed.
We computed the proportion of times that monkeys accepted each offer, p accept  (Fig.1C). 
Monkeys almost always accepted offers with large rewards and short delays (e.g., 6 drops 
and 1s delay), and almost always rejected offers with small rewards and long delays (e.g., 
2 drops and 10s delay). For other offers (e.g., 4 drops and a 5s delay), the acceptance 
probability was intermediate. The decision consistency for each offer was quantified by the 
entropy of choices (see Methods). Entropy is a natural measure of uncertainty in probability 
distributions33. Lower entropy characterized consistent choices for both the best and worst 
offers. Higher entropy characterized inconsistent choices for intermediate offers (Fig.1D).
We also analyzed whether decision consistency was reflected in reaction time. Reaction 
times for reject decisions (from cue onset to bar release) peaked between 300 and 
450ms for the two monkeys (Fig.1E, Supplementary Fig.S1A). We found that the average 
reaction time correlated significantly with decision consistency for each offer in reject 
decisions (p < 0.001 for both monkeys, Fig.1F). Reaction times were slower when decision 
consistency was smaller. This correlation may not entirely reflect decision consistency, but 
rather motivation. As a negative control, we analyzed response time for accept decisions 
(from purple dot to bar release). Accept response time also significantly correlated with 
decision consistency (p = 0.001 for monkey V , p < 0.001 for monkey W, Supplementary 
Fig.S1B). Since the decision, presumably, has already been made when the dot turns 
purple (Supplementary Fig.S1C), this correlation should not reflect the decision-making 
calculation. Rather it may reflect the speed of simple visual-motor reaction time. To control 
for the effect of motivation, we performed an additional combined regression analysis (see 
Wang et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Methods) which included both p(accept), the probability of accepting an offer which serves 
as a measure of motivation, and choice entropy which serves as a measure of decision 
consistency. Our results showed that both p(accept) and choice entropy significantly predict 
reaction time for monkey W (p < 0.01 for p(accept), p < 0.05 for entropy), and only choice 
entropy statistically predict reaction time for monkey V (p > 0.05 for p(accept), p < 0.05 for 
entropy). This further suggests that decision consistency is reflected in reaction times, after 
controlling for motivation.
Neurons in PFC show task-relevant activity
While the monkeys performed the behavioral task, we recorded the extracellular activity of 
neurons from prefrontal cortex using a bilateral implant of 8 multielectrode Utah-arrays (96 
electrodes each), 4 in each hemisphere (Fig.1G). We recorded on average 326.9 (Monkey 
V) and 527.5 (Monkey W) neurons simultaneously per session for the two monkeys. The 
recorded neurons were evenly distributed across left and right hemispheres.
We aligned the neural activity to the onset of the visual offer cues in each trial. Then we 
counted the spikes within a sliding window (50ms width, 50ms steps) from 1000ms before 
cue onset to 2000ms after cue onset for each trial and neuron. We performed a sliding 
window multivariate ANOV A analysis on spike counts (Fig.2A, Supplementary Fig.S2). 
The results showed that a significant proportion of neurons responded to the offer features 
(reward size, delay, and their interaction) and the choice.
Next, we carried out principal component analysis (PCA) on the simultaneously recorded 
neurons from each session. PCA was done on the mean spiking activity for each offer 
cue and each choice type (accept vs reject) in 50ms bins from 0 to 1000ms after 
cue onset. The first 20 principal components accounted for about 65% of the variance 
(Supplementary Fig.S3A). We could decode trial-by-trial choice (accept vs. reject), using 
a linear SVM with 10-fold cross validation, at close to 90% accuracy based on the 
neural population activity projected into the 20-dimensional PCA subspace (Fig.2B). We 
were also able to decode information about reward size and delay from the 20-D neural 
subspace (Supplementary Fig.S3B, C). Adding more dimensions did not increase decoding 
performance (Supplementary Fig.S4). The decoding of the two monkeys’ choices were 
above baseline from 200ms after cue onset.
Neural trajectories and energy landscapes in choice subspace
We examined the neural dynamics underlying decisions in a one-dimensional neural 
subspace using activity in the simultaneously recorded neurons from each session from 
each animal. This allowed us to visualize the way in which population activity, including 
trial-to-trial variability in population activity, tended to evolve as decisions developed. We 
began by reconstructing a numerical approximation to the energy landscape in this 1-D 
subspace (see Methods). To carry out this analysis we first projected the 20-dimensional 
population activity in each trial and each time bin, Pt, onto the one-dimensional choice 
dimension defined by the SVM (Fig.3A, B). This gave us a point in the 1-D space, Xt, at 
each time t. We then computed time derivatives, δt = Xt + Δt − Xt, in the 1-D space (Fig.3B). 
This was done for all times considered, and all trials. We binned the derivatives in the 1-D 
Wang et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
space, by finding all points Xt that fell into each spatial bin along the 1-D axis (Fig.3C) 
and calculated the average derivative δt for all points starting at Xt that fell into each bin. 
This provided an estimate, on average, of how the neural activity evolved in this 1-D space, 
as a function of location in the 1-D space. These derivatives are estimates of the vector 
field for the dynamics underlying population activity (34, see Methods). The vector field 
characterizes the forces, driven by cortical networks and their inputs, acting on activity as it 
evolves through time.
In the next step we spatially integrated these average derivatives, across the 1-D space, to 
generate an estimate of the potential function that drove neural activity (Fig.3D, illustration, 
Fig.3E, data). On average, neural activity evolves from high potential energy to lower 
potential energy, similar to an object frictionally sliding on a landscape. Points with small 
spatial derivatives led to flat spots in the energy landscape, because when the neural 
activity fell into these locations it tended to stay close to these locations, on average. 
Correspondingly, points with large spatial derivatives led to steep spots on the energy 
landscape, because neural activity that fell into these locations tended to evolve away from 
them quickly, in the direction of decreasing energy (Fig.3D). Stated another way, population 
activity tends to move from a high potential position to a low potential position, following 
the gradients.
We examined the energy landscapes computed separately for the accepted and rejected trials. 
For these analyses we averaged across cue conditions. We merged the landscapes at the 
SVM decision point (position 0), such that the landscape on one side of the decision point 
was derived from analyses of the accept trials, and the landscape on the other side was 
derived from analyses of the reject trials. By plotting these energy landscapes over time, our 
results showed that the attractor basins for accept and reject choices were deepest at around 
the time of the decision (~300 to 600ms after cue onset) (Fig.3F). We overlaid the average 
activity in this space, for accept and reject decisions, and it could be seen that the average 
followed the low point on the landscape across time (Fig.3F).
While an energy landscape defined as the integral of the flow vectors can be computed in the 
1-D subspace, true energy functions for higher dimensional neural subspaces may not exist. 
The existence of an energy function implies that the integration of gradients in the vector 
field between two points along different paths lead to the same quantity, or correspondingly 
that the integral along a closed path is zero. For 3 dimensions, the existence of an energy 
function requires the curl of the field (see Methods) to be zero at all points in space. 
Although we do not have access to the curl at all points in space, we empirically estimated 
the curl around the mean population trajectory based on our local estimate of the recurrent 
dynamics in a 3-dimensional neural subspace (see Methods). The estimated curl was not 
significantly different from zero at most time points (Supplementary Fig.S5). This does not 
prove the existence of an energy function. But we did not observe statistically significant 
non-zero curls. A non-zero curl would violate the assumption of the existence of an energy 
function.
Wang et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The geometry of attractor basins predicts choice consistency
We further investigated how the energy landscape in the 1-D subspace changed as a function 
of decision consistency. We tested the hypothesis that shallower basins at the time of 
decision were associated with lower decision consistency. During decision formation, neural 
activity will tend to frictionally slide downhill on these landscapes, towards the low points 
(attractor basins) that represent the decisions. However, neural activity is also subject to 
noise, and the noise can drive the neural activity out of one basin and into another. Our 
hypothesis, therefore, suggests that deeper attractor basins will lead to more consistent 
decisions because variability in neural activity is less likely to stochastically drive population 
activity out of the deeper basins.
We computed the energy landscape separately for each of the nine cues, averaged across 
trials in which both accept and reject choices were made. These energy landscapes were 
computed for each session and averaged across sessions. We found that the landscapes 
had steeper basins following presentation of cues that had high decision consistency 
(accept decisions for large reward short delay, or rejection decisions for small reward long 
delay) and shallower attractor basins following cues that had low decision consistency 
(intermediate reward and delay) (Fig.4).
Most of the landscapes appeared to have only one basin as opposed to two basins. This is 
partially because we have more data for the basin that corresponds to the more favorable 
choice by the animal for each cue. For example, the population activity rarely visits the 
negative portion of the 1-D subspace for cues which animals always choose to accept, 
thus we do not have an estimate of the reject basin. Furthermore, because our observation 
of population position is a noisy readout of the true position, this noise could potentially 
flatten the observed landscape. Partially because of this, there appears to be 1 basin even 
for cues that had low decision consistency in which both positive and negative parts of 
the subspace were visited. However, when we reconstructed the basins separately for these 
cues, for accept and reject choices, it could be seen that they had separate basins for 
each choice (Extended Data Fig.1). We further examined this by comparing the fit of one 
and two basin models, and found that our data was better fitted by a two-basin model 
compared to a one-basin model (one-basin model: AIC = 2533.8; two-basin model: AIC = 
2515.0). The minima of the reconstructed basins also shifted outward for consistent choices 
(Fig.4), which was also reflected in the mean choice trajectories (Extended Data Fig.2). 
These reconstructed landscapes are, therefore, consistent with our hypothesis. However, the 
differences across conditions could reflect differences in noise for the different conditions as 
well as the evidence in favor of each choice, as opposed to differences in attractor dynamics. 
Therefore, in the next analysis, we fit models to estimate the neural dynamics, as well as the 
effect of evidence, derived from a probabilistic model, and the overall noise level.
We fit dynamical systems models to compare three hypotheses that can account for the 
neural activity during decision formation. The simplest model assumes that activity in 
prefrontal cortex reflects only the decision, without reflecting either the evidence used 
to arrive at the decision, or neural dynamics. The second hypothesis is that the activity 
reflects a (strict) drift diffusion process. Drift-diffusion processes assume perfect integration 
of evidence, and no underlying fixed-point dynamics. Finally, we examined the hypothesis 
Wang et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
that choices are driven by both evidence accumulation and fixed-point dynamics. These 
three hypotheses can be compared by fitting a single model and examining the parameters. 
Specifically, we fit a model which predicted the time dependent neural activity as a function 
of a cue dependent evidence term, bzi, derived from the behavior (Extended Data Fig.3A, 
also see Methods), and a cue and decision dependent dynamics term, ai Xt − x0, j :
Xt + 1 = Xt − ai Xt − x0, j + bzi + ηt
In this model t is time, i refers to one of the nine different cues and j indexes choice. The 
variables ai,b, and x0,j are twelve free parameters, fit by nonlinear regression, to predict the 
time-dependent neural activity, Xt, and ηt is zero-mean Gaussian white noise. The variable ai
characterizes the fixed-point dynamics. We refer to ai as the retraction coefficient. A larger 
ai reflects a steeper attractor basin. The variable b characterizes the strength of the evidence 
in favor of each choice, and the variable x0,j characterizes the fixed-point of the undriven 
system for each choice (i.e., reject vs. accept). The undriven fixed point is an estimate 
of the mean position in state space to which the activity would go when the evidence 
term, zi, was 0 in the model. The evidence terms zi, were constants defined by fitting the 
choice consistency and reaction time behavioral data (Extended Data Fig.3A). The variable 
zi was estimated using three different versions of drift diffusion model-fitting methods. The 
results were similar between the three model-fits (Supplementary Fig.S6, S7). Note that 
if prefrontal activity represents a drift-diffusion process, then ai= 0 and b> 0, and if the 
activity reflects only the choice without dynamics, then ai= 1 and b= 0.
When examining the coefficients of the model, we found that the choice process, x0,j, was 
strongly represented around the reject decision reaction time and reflected the decision 
(Fig.5A). Further, we found that the activity was affected by the evidence in favor of each 
choice, zi (Fig.5B). The evidence term was non-significant during the baseline hold, and 
peaked early, while the decision was being formed, but before the mean reaction time 
(Fig.5B). Finally, we found that there were also significant fixed-point dynamics that did 
not reflect a perfect integration process, but that did reflect decision consistency (Fig.5C). 
We further examined whether the depth of the attractor, characterized by the coefficients 
on the recurrent dynamics, ai, reflected choice entropy (Fig.5D, E). We found that, at 
the time of choice, the dynamics were correlated with the choice entropy across cues 
(Fig.5E). This correlation also was non-significant during the baseline hold, and became 
significant during choice formation, after the cues were shown (Fig.5D). When the monkeys 
made consistent, low entropy decisions, either accept or reject, the retraction coefficients 
were larger (Fig.5C). Thus, we found evidence for fixed-point dynamics in choice-related 
prefrontal cortex activity. We further found that the depth of the attractor basins reflected 
choice confidence, consistent with our numerical reconstruction of the energy landscape 
(Fig.4) because a larger retraction coefficient reflects a steeper energy function. Thus, 
consistent decisions had deeper attractor basins, and inconsistent decisions had shallower 
basins.
Wang et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
We further examined the relationship between evidence accumulation and neural activity 
by fitting a variation of the model (Extended Data Fig.4), in which we estimated a single 
constant, ℎi, for each cue, without explicitly including the evidence term, zi:
Xt + 1 = Xt − ai Xt − x0, j + ℎi + ηt .
Thus, in this model we fit an evidence constant directly to the neural activity. We then 
compared the cue dependent constant, ℎi, fit to the neural data, to the cue dependent 
evidence term derived from the behavior, zi, and found that they correlated significantly, 
following onset of the cues (Extended Data Fig.3B). This further supports the hypothesis 
that prefrontal neural activity reflects both evidence accumulation and fixed-point dynamics.
To exclude the possibility that the number of accept or reject choices for a particular cue 
drives the differences in estimates of retraction coefficients based on our model fitting 
procedure, we also conducted a control analysis. We refit the model after matching the 
number of trials between the consistent and inconsistent choice conditions. Our analysis 
suggests that the retraction coefficient was significantly larger even after matching the 
number of trials in the different conditions (Supplementary Fig.S8). We also controlled for 
the effect of ongoing change-of-mind on our model estimates. To consider changes-of-mind 
during the choice period, we predicted the current choice preference in each time bin 
(instead of using the final choice of the animal) and attributed the activity classified in 
this way to accept or reject decisions for the analysis. By repeating our linear dynamical 
system analysis using moment-by-moment estimates of choice, instead of the final choice, 
we accounted for the potential differences in the amount of “changes-of-mind” between 
different cue conditions. In this alternative analysis, our results still hold (Supplementary 
Fig.S9).
To further support our findings, we examined a 1-D choice dimension determined by an 
alternative classifier (see Methods, and Extended Data Fig.5A–E). The estimated retraction 
coefficients, using choice dimensions defined by the SVM classifier vs the alternative 
classifier, were significantly correlated (Extended Data Fig.5F). We also repeated our 
analysis in a 3-dimensional subspace spanned by the 1-D choice dimension and the first 
two principal components of the residual activity orthogonal to the choice dimension. 
Eigenvalues of the recurrent matrix were computed, in place of the 1-D retraction 
coefficients. Consistent with our 1-D analysis, we found similar correlations between choice 
entropy and the eigenvalues in the 3-D analysis. Larger eigenvalues, which reflect a steeper 
basin, were associated with low choice entropy and high choice consistency (Extended Data 
Fig.6A–C). Moreover, the vector connecting the fitted undriven fixed points for accept and 
reject decisions in the 3-D analysis aligns with the 1-D choice dimension, and the cosine 
similarity between the two peaked at the time of choice (Extended Data Fig.6D). Thus, 
analyses in 3-dimensions lead to results that agree with our findings in 1-dimension.
We also examined how individual neurons’ responses to value affect the observed attractor 
dynamics. A separate sliding window multivariate ANOV A analysis with two features, 
choice and value, was carried out to examine individual neuron’s tuning to offer value. 
Wang et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Behaviorally, offer value is reflected in the probability that the monkeys accept each offer. 
The results showed that the percentages of neurons that respond positively to value (accept 
probability) were 46.5% for Monkey V , and 37.8% for monkey W. Neurons that respond 
more to better offers also have higher loading weights on the 1-D choice dimension 
(Extended Data Fig.7C). As a sanity check, we examined mean firing rates of individual 
neurons, and showed that negative preferring neurons have enhanced firing rates for reject 
offers, whereas positive preferring neurons have enhanced firing rates for accept offers 
(Extended Data Fig.7A–B). Next, we repeated our dynamical system analysis using only 
positive, only negative or a mixture of positive and negative value neurons. For each session, 
the number of neurons for the three groups was selected to be the minimum between 
the number of positive and negative neurons to control for differences in population size. 
A random sample was taken for the other group and the mixture group. We observed 
that attractor retraction coefficients were larger for consistent offers for all three groups 
(Extended Data Fig.8). This suggests that attractor dynamics do not differentially reflect 
activities of positive or negative offer preferring neurons.
The steepness of attractor basins predicts reaction time
Since the derivatives in steeper basins are larger, we hypothesized that reaction times 
would also be smaller for steeper basins, under the assumption that choices are triggered 
when neural activity reaches a defined location in state space, which we refer to as the 
choice zone11,23,35. In theory, it takes fewer steps for neural activity to reach the choice 
zone in steeper basins with higher retraction coefficients. Similar to the analysis of choice 
consistency vs retraction coefficients, we correlated the retraction coefficients with reaction 
time across cues. We found that the retraction coefficients significantly correlated with 
reaction time at the time of decision for reject choices in both monkeys (Fig.6A–C).
As a negative control, we also computed the correlation between retraction coefficients 
extracted at the average reaction time for reject choices and response times for accept 
choices. Our results showed only a weak correlation between retraction coefficients and 
accept response time in Monkey W (p = 0.02), and none in Monkey V (p > 0.05) (Extended 
Data Fig.9). This supports the suggestion that the correlation between reaction time for 
reject decisions and retraction coefficients is not merely due to the behavioral correlation 
between reaction time and decision consistency because the correlation is weaker for accept 
decisions. However, this only holds statistically in monkey V . Together, this supports our 
hypothesis that steeper attracter basins (higher α) are associated with shorter reaction times.
DISCUSSION
In this paper, we investigated the neural underpinnings of choice consistency by analyzing 
dynamics in prefrontal population activity during decision making. We found that attractor 
basins were shallower following cues that signaled intermediate value offers, which also led 
to lower decision consistency. Correspondingly, attractor basins were deeper following cues 
that signaled high or low value offers, that led to higher decision consistency. By fitting 
linear dynamical systems models to the neural data we found that the retraction coefficients, 
which characterize the energy landscape around the attractor, correlated significantly with 
Wang et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
both the entropy of choice and reaction time at the time of decision. Larger retraction 
coefficients, which are consistent with steeper energy landscapes, were associated with cues 
that elicited consistent decisions. Our results provide neural evidence that attractor dynamics 
predict decision consistency.
To visualize the dynamics of neural activity, we estimated the energy landscape in the state 
space of population activity. However, the existence of a true energy function is non-trivial 
and requires curls of the vector field to be zero (or in higher dimensions, the partial 
derivatives of the dynamics equation to be symmetric) at all spatial points in the neural state 
space. We estimated the curl around the mean population trajectory based on our fitted linear 
dynamical systems model in a 3-dimensional subspace. We did not observe curls statistically 
different from zero. However, this does not prove the existence of an energy function. First, 
failure to reject a null hypothesis does not prove the null hypothesis, thus failure to detect 
a non-zero curl does not prove the curl to be zero. Second, we only estimated the curl 
around the mean population trajectory and do not have global estimates of the curl at other 
spatial locations of the state space. Whether different neural systems, and different systems 
under different conditions, have energy functions is an interesting question. Considering 
whether networks in the brain have potential functions opens up several interesting neural 
and behavioral questions. Given plasticity rules, like spike-timing dependent plasticity, one 
wonders whether it is possible to ever return to the same brain state. Future studies are 
needed to directly examine the curl in different neural systems under different tasks.
We fit locally linear dynamical systems models, that let us compare three hypotheses, 
that can account for decision related activity in prefrontal cortex. The simplest hypothesis 
was that prefrontal activity would represent the choice, independent of the evidence that 
supported that choice, or dynamics related to the choice-formation process. The second 
hypothesis was that prefrontal activity would reflect a drift-diffusion process, that integrated 
evidence in favor of each choice. The third hypothesis was that prefrontal activity would 
reflect both evidence accumulation and fixed-point dynamics, consistent with network 
models that instantiate decision processes. We found that our dynamical systems model 
results supported the third hypothesis. Prefrontal activity reflected both the evidence in favor 
of each choice, as well as fixed-point dynamics. Furthermore, the dynamics were related to 
choice consistency, such that choices made with greater consistency were characterized by 
deeper attractor basins. The dynamical systems models also agreed with direct numerical 
reconstructions of the energy landscapes, which also reflected choice consistency. This 
association between energy landscapes and choice consistency has been predicted with 
computational models19,21,22. Intuitively it follows from the assumption that steeper 
landscapes will more likely lead to consistent decisions given the inherent stochasticity in 
neural activity. Variability in neural activity is less likely to drive neural population activity 
out of a deeper attractor basin. This association between choice consistency and the energy 
landscape has not been shown previously in neural activity, to our knowledge.
In our case, monkeys made accept and reject decisions based on the utility of an offer. 
Because reject decisions led to a random draw from the possible offers in the next trial, 
each trial’s offer could be compared to the average offer and the delay to the next trial. 
Consistent with previous work on this paradigm32,36, we found that offers were consistently 
Wang et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
accepted or rejected when the utilities were well above or below the average. Offers with 
intermediate values, however, were sometimes accepted and sometimes rejected. Because 
internal representations of offer values are stochastic, and choice probability is a function 
of value differences6,37, this leads to situations where choices are made with varying 
levels of consistency. Choice consistency can be related to decision certainty and decision 
confidence, which is the subjective probability that the chosen option has the highest 
value3,5,8,38–40. Consistently accepted or rejected offers reflect high confidence choices, 
because the probability that the monkey is making the highest value decision is closer to 1, 
whereas inconsistently accepted or rejected offers reflect low confidence choices, because 
the probability that the monkey is making the highest value decision is closer to 0.5.
Several mechanisms have been proposed for representation of decision confidence. For 
example, drift-diffusion models (DDMs) have been developed to account for information 
integration in perceptual inference, value-based decision making, and memory recall tasks, 
and used to model decision confidence6,38,41. In perceptual inference, it is assumed that 
an internal process is integrating noisy information from an external stimulus38. In value-
based decision making it is assumed that an internal process is integrating a noisy internal 
representation of offer value6,37. Across these models, the integration process can be related 
to a Bayesian posterior probability that a given choice is correct, and these posteriors can be 
used to define decision confidence. These models, and the associated Bayesian posteriors, 
provide good descriptions of the formal mechanism that gives rise to confidence, in many42, 
but not all43,44 conditions. However, they do not specify the neural mechanisms by which 
the brain implements these formal computations.
Network models for perceptual and value-based decision making have also been 
developed10–12,14,18,20,45. These models reproduce changes in mean population activity 
with decision confidence14,45. They do this by integrating activity from pools of neurons 
representing chosen and unchosen options. Because neural activity levels are higher for 
options when they are chosen with high confidence, confidence can be read out by 
integrating across the chosen and unchosen option pools. This suggests a mechanism by 
which activity levels related to certainty about chosen options14 can be converted directly 
to choice-independent confidence estimates8. Changes in the energy landscape of most 
of these networks, when choices are driven by different levels of information, have not 
been explored. Recent work, however, has examined changes in neural dynamics when 
reinforcement learning drives decisions from uncertain to more certain21. This study found 
that before learning which of two option was more valuable, in an RL task46, choice options 
were not well separated across the energy landscape. However, after learning, the options 
were better separated.
In empirical work, previous studies have shown that certainty, or probability distributions 
over sensory variables, can be estimated by decoding probabilistic population codes42,47,48, 
or through related sampling models49. When choice is decoded from neural activity, 
posterior probabilities of choices have also been shown to reflect decision consistency, 
and therefore average decision confidence3,5,50. Single neurons in OFC have been shown 
to directly encode decision confidence, independent of chosen actions, in odor and auditory 
Wang et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
discrimination tasks8,51. Thus, mean activity levels have been shown to reflect decision 
confidence.
We also found that the fixed-point of the dynamics, related to the mean choice-related 
activity, associated with options that were chosen more consistently was represented farther 
from the decision boundary. The fixed-point of the dynamics is given by fp = x0, j + b
ai
zi. 
Therefore, if we know the fixed point of the undriven (zi= 0) dynamics, x0,j, decision 
confidence can be read out by observing the fixed-point into which the system settles, at the 
decision time. (Note that ai also scales with zi and therefore ai has to scale sub-linearly for 
this to hold.) This distinguishes the dynamical representation of evidence, from a DDM with 
a bound, because activity level (the position of the diffusion particle) and time have to be 
available to estimate the Bayesian posterior in a DDM. Furthermore, in our model activity 
settles into a fixed point that represents the evidence in a time-independent way. In a DDM, 
activity continues to increase over time, unless one assumes a sticky bound, and therefore it 
never directly represents the evidence. Whether perceptual decision-making processes would 
also show dynamics similar to what we have seen in the context of value-based decision 
making is an open question.
Because the fixed point reflects the evidence, confidence would not have to be estimated 
from the energy landscape, i.e., one would not have to compute an estimate of the energy 
landscape on a single trial to estimate confidence, even though the dynamics are correlated 
with decision confidence. The dynamics, however, reflect the energy required to change a 
decision. Flatter dynamics reflect the fact that choices are less consistent when they are 
associated with cues that predict intermediate value offers. The dynamics we have observed, 
therefore, likely reflect the changeability of a deliberative choice process when cues 
represent intermediate value offers, or a commitment to a decision when cues represent very 
good or very bad offers. Due to the correlational nature of our analysis, future perturbation 
studies are required to examine the causal role of attractor dynamics in change-of-mind and 
decision confidence. Related dynamics may also underlie observed variability in population 
neural choice representations seen in other decision-making tasks52,53. Because dynamics 
are also correlated with mean distances in decision space, this also raises the question of 
whether dynamics and posterior probabilities are linked, in an obligatory way, in biological 
and artificial networks.
Conclusion
There is a substantial body of theoretical work that studies how computations in networks 
can underlie complex behavior12,16,27,54–58. However, there has been less experimental 
progress in this area, except in motor control59 and hippocampal circuitry27,58. In the 
present study, we have begun to make progress on linking computations in networks to 
population representations during decision making. We found that neural dynamics reflected 
choice consistency and reaction times, when monkeys accepted and rejected offers with 
different values. The neural dynamics for consistent decisions were characterized by deep 
attractor basins and large retraction coefficients in a dynamical systems model. The neural 
dynamics for inconsistent decisions had shallower attractor basins and correspondingly 
smaller retraction coefficients. Thus, the dynamic landscape of population neural activity 
Wang et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
in prefrontal cortex reflects choice commitment during value-based decision making. These 
results extend the insights into behavior that can be obtained by studying populations 
of simultaneously recorded neurons, and directly link theoretical work on network 
computations to experimental results.
METHODS
Animals
All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the ILAR Guide for the 
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Animal Care and Use 
Committee of the National Institute of Mental Health. Two male monkeys (Macaca mulatta, 
W – 6.5 kg, age 4.5yo, V – 7.5 kg, age 5yo) were used as subjects in this study. No statistical 
methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes, but our sample size of two monkeys is the 
field standard.
Decision-making task
Monkeys were trained to perform a decision-making task while they were seated in front 
of a computer screen. In this task, animals had to choose to either reject or accept a 
reward offer that differs in reward size (drops) and delay time. Different reward offers were 
indicated by different pretrained visual cues that indicate different combinations of reward 
size (2, 4 or 6 drops) and delay time (1, 5 or 10s). In each trial, one of the 9 visual cues was 
pseudo-randomly selected and presented.
On each trial, animals had to first touch the bar and hold it for 500ms. Next, a small red 
square was presented at the center of the screen for 500ms. After that, one of the 9 visual 
cues was presented behind the red square at the center of the screen. The center square 
stayed red for a discrete random period at one of the five levels (1.5, 2, 2.5, 3 or 3.5 seconds) 
before it became purple. Animals reported their decisions by either releasing the bar anytime 
during the red period to reject the current offer or between 200 and 1200 ms after the purple 
square was presented to accept the offer. If the animal rejected the offer, a new trial started 
immediately. If the animal accepted the offer, the purple square became green and liquid 
reward of the indicated size was delivered after the indicated delay. The visual cue was 
turned off during reward delivery. If the monkeys released the bar before cue onset, within 
200ms of presentation of the purple square onset or if they never released the bar during 
the trial, an error cue appeared on the screen for 1000 ms and the trial was considered an 
error. After an error trial the same cue was presented in the next trial. Error trials from both 
animals were excluded from the analysis.
Data collection
A noncommercial software package, REX (version 8.0,61), was used to control stimuli 
in the decision-making task. A commercial software package, Ripple Grapevine (version 
3.2, https://rippleneuro.com/ripple-products/grapevine-processors/), was used for neural 
recordings. Custom software (WangSpikeSorter; version 1.0) was used to perform offline 
spike sorting. Neurons that did not significantly predict any task related feature (reward size, 
Wang et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
delay, choice) were excluded from the analysis. Data collection was performed blind to the 
conditions of the experiments.
Computation of choice consistency and decision evidence
Choice consistency is quantified by the entropy of choices. The entropy of choices is 
defined as the entropy of a Bernoulli process in which binary choices are generated with 
probability p and 1 −p. Specifically, the choice entropy can be written as a function Hp of 
the probability that animals accept the offer, p.
H p = − p log2 p − 1 − p log2 1 − p
Decision evidence on the other hand is estimated by the drift rate in the drift diffusion 
model. The amount of evidence for choice of option i at time t can be estimated by62:
d t, i = 2 2erfcinv 2* 1‐FC t, i
FC is the fraction of correct (preferred for that cue) choices, in this case F C = max p, 1 − p .
The drift rate for each cue, i, was then estimated as
zi = d t + t0
2 t .
Where, t0 is a non-decision time and t is the reaction time minus the non-decision time. 
The non-decision time is not immediately available in this task. However, previous work 
has shown that non-decision time is under 200 ms. Therefore, we calculated evidence under 
a series of non-decision times (0, 50, 100, 150, and 200ms), and examined correlations in 
evidence, across cues, for different values of non-decision time. For the extreme values (0 vs 
200ms), the calculated drift rates are correlated at R = 0.99, p < 0.01. Since estimated drift 
rates using different non-decision-times are strongly correlated, we adopted the average of 
the 5 sets of estimated drift rates as the final estimate for drift rates.
The accept decision times are not immediately available, since animals make accept 
decisions by not releasing the bar when the cue is presented, until the center red square turns 
purple which happens 1.5–3.5s after cue onset. Note that accept decision time is different 
from the accept response time analyzed in Supplementary Fig. 1, which instead measures 
the bar release reaction time after the red dot turns purple. Therefore, we inferred the accept 
decision times using the regression between entropy and reaction time for reject choices, and 
then using the entropy for accept choices. We carried out this approximation in two ways. 
First, we fit a linear model between reject RT and entropy for each session and estimated the 
accept decision time based on the session-specific regression model. Second, we fit a linear 
model between reject RT and entropy by pooling data from all sessions and estimate the 
accept decision time based on the pooled regression model. Results using either approach 
were similar.
Wang et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
In addition to using closed-form formulas to calculate drift rates as stated above, we also 
directly fit two variants of the drift diffusion model (DDM), vanilla DDM and DDM with 
collapsing bound, directly to the trial-by-trial reaction time and choice data. Since we only 
have access to trial-by-trial reaction time for reject trials, analysis was restricted to reject 
trials. Model-fitting was carried out using a recently published python library pyDDM 
(version 0.6.1)63. Drift rates estimated using all three methods (closed-form solution, vanilla 
DDM, and DDM with collapsing bound) significantly correlate with each other in both 
animals (Supplementary Fig. S6).
For correlation of reaction time and choice-entropy, the reaction times were z-scored within 
each session. For plotting purposes, the z-scored reaction times were transformed to the 
overall reaction times, by multiplying by the overall average (i.e., across session) standard 
deviation and adding the overall average reaction time. This transformation does not affect 
the statistics, because all values were multiple by the same constant, and the same constant 
was added to all values.
For the combined reaction time regression, we have
RT Entropy ⋅ Monkey + p accept ⋅ Monkey + 1 ∣ session
Both interactions between entropy and monkey, and between p(accept) and monkey were 
included in the model. A random effect of session was included to account for variations of 
RTs across sessions. The dependent variable here is reaction time, for both accept trials and 
reject trials. Reaction time for reject trial is the interval between cue onset and bar release 
while the square is red. Reaction time for accept trials, on the other hand, measures the 
response time between when the red square turns purple and bar release.
Analysis of single unit responses
ANOV As were applied to the single unit data to assess response association in sliding 
windows (50ms bin, 50ms steps) time locked to offer cue onset. The dependent variable 
was the spike count in each time bin. The ANOV A included main effects of choice, delay 
time, reward size, and interactions between delay time and reward size. A separate ANOV A 
was carried out which included the main effects of cue accept probability and choice. Data 
distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested.
Dimensionality reduction of population activity and decoding analysis
All population analyses were conducted on simultaneously recorded neurons from a single 
session from a single animal. We performed dimensionality reduction using Principal 
Component Analysis. The mean spiking activity of each neuron was computed for each 
visual cue and each choice in 50 ms bins from 0 to 1000 ms after cue onset. This led to 
18 time series of mean firing activity for each neuron. The time-series for the different 
conditions were then appended into one long vector for each cell, and the covariance matrix 
across simultaneously recorded neurons from a single session was then computed. The first 
20 principal components of the covariance matrix were kept for further analysis as they 
Wang et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
explained above 60% of the total variance. Including additional dimensions did not increase 
decoding performance for predicting monkeys’ choices (Supplementary Fig. S4).
A linear Support Vector Machine classifier was used to predict trial-by-trial variations in 
three task variables (choice, delay time and reward size) separately based on the first 20 
principal component scores at each time bin. We used a 10-fold cross validation to evaluate 
the accuracy of the classifier.
In order to estimate and visualize the attractor dynamics of the population activity, we 
further projected the 20-dimensional neural data (based on Principal Component Analysis as 
described above) onto a single dimension, the choice dimension. The choice dimension was 
defined by the Support Vector Machine classifier and was the dimension perpendicular to 
the separating hyperplane in the SVM classifier. An alternative way of defining the choice 
was by computing the difference between the average population activity vector in the 
20-dimensional subspace for accept vs reject trials. Results using this alternative definition 
were included in Extended Data Fig. 5.
Estimation of the energy landscape in the 1-dimensional neural subspace
We reconstructed the energy landscape by numerically estimating the flow field in a 
1-D space, and then spatially integrating the flow field34. Thus, we assume the neural 
dynamics of the population activity Xt, are governed by a first-order (at this point potentially 
nonlinear) system,
dXt
dt Xt = x
= f x .
And then defined the spatial derivative of the potential function Vx,
− dV
dx = f x .
For a first order system, − dV
dx = dXt
dt . Therefore, the potential function, Vx, which we 
assume exists, is given by the spatial integral of the time derivative.
To estimate the time derivative, we defined the population activity in the 1-D subspace at 
time t and trial i as Xti. We first computed the expected value, E, of the time derivative of 
population activity Xt at binned spatial locations x, x + Δx  and time t, with the expectation 
taken over trials, i.
dXt
dt Xt = x
= Ei, s.t. Xti ∈ x, x + Δx
Xt + Δt
i − Xt
i
Δt
The interval Δt = 50ms. Then we took the spatial integral over these time derivatives to get 
the potential function Vx,t at location x and time t,
Wang et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
V x, t =
−∞
x dXt
dt Xt = X
dX ≈ ∑
p < x
dXt
dt
Xt = p
Δx
The integral results in an arbitrary constant. Potentials were always set to 0 at the center of 
the 1-D decision space.
Linear dynamics analysis
Furthermore, we fit a linear dynamical system model to estimate the retraction coefficient 
a for each reward offer. Here we assume that in the low-D space(s) the dynamics could be 
approximated as a first-order linear system in which we model both fixed-point dynamics 
and evidence input to the system. This gives the following equation:
Xt + 1 = Xt − ai Xt − x0, j + bzi + ηt
Here Xt is the activity at time t, and ηt is zero-mean Gaussian white noise. The coefficients ai
characterize the depth of the attractor, with larger values corresponding to deeper attractors. 
The coefficient b characterizes the strength of the evidence, and x0,j is the fixed point of the 
undriven dynamics zi= 0 which also corresponds to the choice-related component of the 
fixed-point.
This model was fit to activity projected into the 1-D choice dimension, averaged in 50 ms 
bins. Thus, the activity in a 50 ms bin, Xt was used to predict the activity in the next 50 ms 
bin, Xt+ 1. The model was fit to data from all correctly executed trials. From this regression, 
the retraction coefficient ai was extracted.
Parameter recovery analysis of the linear dynamical model suggests that our model can be 
robustly fit to the data (Supplementary Fig. S10). We also performed posterior predictive 
checks to see if our model could qualitatively capture the differences in energy landscape 
that we observed in Fig. 4. In this analysis, we start with the recorded neural activity at the 
−1000ms bin, then simulated bin-by-bin the population activity in the next time bin using 
our fitted model. The noise term in the model is sampled from the empirical distribution of 
residuals from the model. Our model could indeed qualitatively capture the data (Extended 
Data Fig. 10).
We also fit a variant of the equation given as:
Xt + 1 = Xt − ai Xt − x0, j + ℎi + ηt .
In this equation, ℎi is a cue-specific term reflecting evidence accumulation. We fit ℎi as a 
constant, and then subsequently correlated ℎi with zi.
Wang et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Multi-dimensional linear dynamics analysis and calculation of curls
A multi-dimensional version of the linear dynamics analysis was also estimated in a 3-D 
subspace. A principal component analysis was performed on the residual neural activity 
orthogonal to our 1-D choice dimension. The 3-D subspace was then composed of the 
choice dimension and the first two principal components of the residual activity.
Xt + 1 = Xt + X0, j − Xt Ai + Hi + ηt
Here Xt+ 1 and Xt are 3 dimensional vectors and represent the population activity at time 
t. The 3 × 3 matrix Ai is the recurrent matrix. X0,j is the fixed point for choice j.Hi is 
the constant drift for cue i.ηt is zero-mean Gaussian white noise. Because the dynamics 
were non-stationary, the model was fit to a moving window of 3 time bins from each trial. 
The window was advanced by 50 ms, and 3 bins of 50 ms were fit, etc. Thus, for each 
time window, we used 3 consecutive time bins from each trial, and all valid trials, for 
one regression fit. This gave us temporal resolution on the change in dynamics, while also 
providing pooling over time within each trial (3 time bins) to increase statistical power.
Eigen values of the recurrent matrices Ai were computed for each cue i. Correlations 
between the eigenvalues and choice entropy were computed.
The 3-dimensional curl around the population activity Xt in the 3-D subspace was computed 
as A23 − A32, A13 − A31, A12 − A21 . Here Aij represents the element of the recurrent matrix A at 
the itℎ row and jtℎ column.
Extended Data
Extended Figure 1. 
The manifolds for reject (dotted lines) and accept (solid lines) choices for Monkey V 
(panel A) and Monkey W (panel B) for intermediate cues. Intermediate cues are defined as 
cues with p(accept) between 0.25 and 0.75. The lines are separated by the probability of 
Wang et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
accepting the offer. Positive values in the choice dimensions reflect accept choices. Data are 
presented as mean values +/− SEM.
Extended Figure 2. 
A-B. Position in 1-D choice dimension vs. time for each cue for monkey V (panel A) 
and monkey W (panel B). Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. The colors reflect 
p(accept), red reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly accept, green reflects cues 
signaling offers that monkeys mostly reject, and yellow reflects cues signaling offers that 
monkeys have intermediate probabilities of accepting. C-D. Correlation of position of mean 
trajectory at the mean reaction time and entropy for accept and reject decisions for monkey 
V (panel C) and monkey W (panel D). For monkey V , r = −0.72, p < 0.001; for monkey W, r 
= −0.62, p < 0.001. E-F. Significance of correlation of entropy and position of mean activity 
over time for monkey V (panel E) and for monkey W (panel F). A two-tailed one-sample 
Wang et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
t-test was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. N = 8 for each 
animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM.
Extended Figure 3. 
A. Evidence in favor of choice estimated from behavior (see Methods). N = 8 for each 
animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. B. Correlation of the behaviorally 
extracted evidence zi and the evidence term fitted from the neural data ℎi over time. A 
two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for multiple 
comparison. N = 8 for each animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. C and D. 
Correlations between zi and ℎi at the mean reaction time for monkey V and W respectively. 
For monkey V , r = 0.82, p < 0.001; for monkey W, r = 0.67, p < 0.001.
Wang et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Figure 4. 
Parameters in the evidence model. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. For 
plots that show data separately for each monkey, N = 8 as SEM was computed across 
sessions for each animal. A. Choice related activity, characterized as the undriven fixed 
points, x0,j, over time. Note the darker color curve is accept decision and lighter color curve 
is reject decision, for each monkey. B. Strength of evidence-driven neural activity over time 
by offer cue. The colors reflect p(accept), red reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys 
mostly accept, green reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly reject, and yellow 
reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys have intermediate probabilities of accepting. 
C. Retraction coefficients are higher for consistent choices. A one-tailed paired t-test was 
performed at each time bin between certain and uncertain conditions by first averaging 
between accept and reject conditions, uncorrected for multiple comparison. D. Retraction 
coefficient significantly correlates with choice entropy across the 9 cues. A two-tailed 
one-sample t-test was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. E. 
Correlation between retraction coefficient and choice entropy at median reaction time for 
Monkey V (left) and Monkey W (right). For monkey V , r = −0.62, p < 0.001; for monkey W, 
r = −0.56, p < 0.001. * = 0.05, ** = 0.01, *** = 0.001
Wang et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Figure 5 –. 
Model coefficients estimated when activity projected on choice-dimension estimated by 
vector difference in means for accept vs. reject decisions. A-E. Model parameters for 
dynamics model after data projected onto the 1-D choice dimension defined by the 
difference in mean responses for accept and reject trials. N = 8 for each animal. Data are 
presented as mean values +/− SEM. Significance values as in Fig. 5. E. For monkey V , r 
= −0.45, p < 0.001; for monkey W, r = −0.56, p < 0.001. F. Correlation between retraction 
coefficients defined in the 1-D choice dimension defined by either the SVM or the projection 
onto the line defined by the difference in mean responses for each condition. The retraction 
coefficients were strongly correlated (r = 0.78, p < 0.001).
Wang et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Figure 6. 
A-C. Correlation between the three eigenvalues of the retraction matrix for each cue, and 
the behavioral entropy of that cue. A two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed at each 
time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. D. Alignment of the vector connecting the 
3D undriven fixed point and the 1-D choice dimension. N = 8 for each animal. Data are 
presented as mean values +/− SEM.
Extended Figure 7. 
A and B. Mean firing rates of neurons in response to different offers as a function of 
value-coding, where 1 is preference for better options, and 0 is preference for worse options. 
The colors reflect p(accept), red reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly accept, 
green reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly reject, and yellow reflects cues 
Wang et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
signaling offers that monkeys have intermediate probabilities of accepting. C. Weight of 
each neuron on the 1-D choice dimension as a function of value coding. N = 8 for each 
animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM.
Extended Figure 8 –. 
A-C. Correlation between the retraction coefficient for each cue, and the behavioral entropy 
of that cue. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. A two-tailed one-sample t-test 
was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. D-F. The retraction 
coefficients over time for certain vs uncertain cues. N = 8 for each animal. Data are 
presented as mean values +/− SEM. A one-tailed paired t-test was performed at each time 
bin between certain and uncertain conditions by first averaging between accept and reject 
conditions, uncorrected for multiple comparison.
Wang et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Extended Figure 9. 
A. The correlations between retraction coefficients and reaction time for accept decisions 
over time. A two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for 
multiple comparison. N = 8 for each animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. B. 
The correlations between retraction coefficients at average reaction time for reject decisions 
and reaction time for accept decisions (monkey V , r = −0.05, p = 0.753). C. Same as B for 
monkey W (monkey W, r = −0.38, p = 0.021).
Extended Figure 10 –. 
Energy landscape for simulated data from the linear dynamical system model. The colors 
reflect p(accept), red reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly accept, green 
reflects cues signaling offers that monkeys mostly reject, and yellow reflects cues signaling 
offers that monkeys have intermediate probabilities of accepting. Data are presented as mean 
values +/− SEM.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Wang et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the intramural research program of NIMH (ZIA MH002928 BA). The authors thank 
Cary Robinson and Yi Wei for their assistance in spike sorting.
Data Availability
Data from the manuscript can be found in the following figshare repository.
Wang, Siyu; Falcone, Rossella; J. Richmond, Barry; Averbeck, Bruno (2023). data for 
“Attractor dynamics reflect decision confidence in macaque prefrontal cortex”. figshare. 
Dataset. https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.21701282
References
1. Resulaj A, Kiani R, Wolpert DM & Shadlen MN Changes of mind in decision-making. Nature 461, 
263–266 (2009). 10.1038/nature08275 [PubMed: 19693010] 
2. Fleming SM & Frith CD The cognitive neuroscience of metacognition. (Springer, 2014).
3. Kepecs A & Mainen ZF A computational framework for the study of confidence in humans and 
animals. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 367, 1322–1337 (2012). 10.1098/rstb.2012.0037 
[PubMed: 22492750] 
4. Pouget A, Drugowitsch J & Kepecs A Confidence and certainty: distinct probabilistic quantities for 
different goals. Nat Neurosci 19, 366–374 (2016). 10.1038/nn.4240 [PubMed: 26906503] 
5. Kiani R & Shadlen MN Representation of confidence associated with a decision by neurons in the 
parietal cortex. Science 324, 759–764 (2009). 10.1126/science.1169405 [PubMed: 19423820] 
6. De Martino B, Fleming SM, Garrett N & Dolan RJ Confidence in value-based choice. Nat Neurosci 
16, 105–110 (2013). 10.1038/nn.3279 [PubMed: 23222911] 
7. Lebreton M, Abitbol R, Daunizeau J & Pessiglione M Automatic integration of confidence in the 
brain valuation signal. Nat Neurosci 18, 1159–1167 (2015). 10.1038/nn.4064 [PubMed: 26192748] 
8. Kepecs A, Uchida N, Zariwala HA & Mainen ZF Neural correlates, computation and behavioural 
impact of decision confidence. Nature 455, 227–231 (2008). 10.1038/nature07200 [PubMed: 
18690210] 
9. Prat-Ortega G, Wimmer K, Roxin A & de la Rocha J Flexible categorization in perceptual decision 
making. Nat Commun 12, 1283 (2021). 10.1038/s41467-021-21501-z [PubMed: 33627643] 
10. Machens CK, Romo R & Brody CD Flexible control of mutual inhibition: a neural model of 
two-interval discrimination. Science 307, 1121–1124 (2005). [PubMed: 15718474] 
11. Wong KF, Huk AC, Shadlen MN & Wang XJ Neural circuit dynamics underlying accumulation 
of time-varying evidence during perceptual decision making. Front Comput Neurosci 1, 6 (2007). 
10.3389/neuro.10.006.2007 [PubMed: 18946528] 
12. Wang XJ Probabilistic decision making by slow reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron 36, 
955–968 (2002). [PubMed: 12467598] 
13. Deco G, Rolls ET, Albantakis L & Romo R Brain mechanisms for perceptual and reward-
related decision-making. Prog Neurobiol 103, 194–213 (2013). 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.01.010 
[PubMed: 22326926] 
14. Insabato A, Pannunzi M, Rolls ET & Deco G Confidence-related decision making. J Neurophysiol 
104, 539–547 (2010). 10.1152/jn.01068.2009 [PubMed: 20393062] 
15. Wong KF & Wang XJ A recurrent network mechanism of time integration in perceptual decisions. 
J Neurosci 26, 1314–1328 (2006). 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3733-05.2006 [PubMed: 16436619] 
16. Amit DJ Modeling brain function : the world of attractor neural networks. (Cambridge University 
Press, 1989).
17. Inagaki HK, Fontolan L, Romani S & Svoboda K Discrete attractor dynamics underlies persistent 
activity in the frontal cortex. Nature 566, 212–217 (2019). 10.1038/s41586-019-0919-7 [PubMed: 
30728503] 
Wang et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
18. Atiya NAA, Rano I, Prasad G & Wong-Lin K A neural circuit model of decision uncertainty 
and change-of-mind. Nat Commun 10, 2287 (2019). 10.1038/s41467-019-10316-8 [PubMed: 
31123260] 
19. Averbeck BB Pruning recurrent neural networks replicates adolescent changes in working memory 
and reinforcement learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119, e2121331119 (2022). 10.1073/
pnas.2121331119 [PubMed: 35622896] 
20. Atiya NAA, Huys QJM, Dolan RJ & Fleming SM Explaining distortions in metacognition with 
an attractor network model of decision uncertainty. PLoS Comput Biol 17, e1009201 (2021). 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009201 [PubMed: 34310613] 
21. Marton CD, Schultz SR & Averbeck BB Learning to select actions shapes recurrent dynamics 
in the corticostriatal system. Neural Netw 132, 375–393 (2020). 10.1016/j.neunet.2020.09.008 
[PubMed: 32992244] 
22. Finkelstein A et al. Attractor dynamics gate cortical information flow during decision-making. Nat 
Neurosci 24, 843–850 (2021). 10.1038/s41593-021-00840-6 [PubMed: 33875892] 
23. Shenoy KV , Sahani M & Churchland MM Cortical control of arm movements: a 
dynamical systems perspective. Annu Rev Neurosci 36, 337–359 (2013). 10.1146/annurev-
neuro-062111-150509 [PubMed: 23725001] 
24. Okazawa G, Hatch CE, Mancoo A, Machens CK & Kiani R Representational geometry of 
perceptual decisions in the monkey parietal cortex. Cell 184, 3748–3761 e3718 (2021). 10.1016/
j.cell.2021.05.022 [PubMed: 34171308] 
25. Mante V , Sussillo D, Shenoy KV & Newsome WT Context-dependent computation by recurrent 
dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature 503, 78–84 (2013). 10.1038/nature12742 [PubMed: 
24201281] 
26. Galgali AR, Sahani M & Mante V Residual dynamics resolves recurrent contributions to 
neural computation. Nat Neurosci 26, 326–338 (2023). 10.1038/s41593-022-01230-2 [PubMed: 
36635498] 
27. Chaudhuri R, Gercek B, Pandey B, Peyrache A & Fiete I The intrinsic attractor manifold and 
population dynamics of a canonical cognitive circuit across waking and sleep. Nat Neurosci 22, 
1512–1520 (2019). 10.1038/s41593-019-0460-x [PubMed: 31406365] 
28. Nair A et al. An approximate line attractor in the hypothalamus encodes an aggressive state. Cell 
186, 178–193 e115 (2023). 10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.027 [PubMed: 36608653] 
29. Gold JI & Shadlen MN Banburismus and the brain: decoding the relationship between sensory 
stimuli, decisions, and reward. Neuron 36, 299–308 (2002). [PubMed: 12383783] 
30. Drugowitsch J, Moreno-Bote R, Churchland AK, Shadlen MN & Pouget A The cost 
of accumulating evidence in perceptual decision making. The Journal of neuroscience : 
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 32, 3612–3628 (2012). 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4010-11.2012
31. Mitz AR et al. High channel count single-unit recordings from nonhuman primate frontal cortex. J 
Neurosci Methods 289, 39–47 (2017). 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2017.07.001 [PubMed: 28687520] 
32. Falcone R et al. Temporal Coding of Reward Value in Monkey Ventral Striatal Tonically 
Active Neurons. J Neurosci 39, 7539–7550 (2019). 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0869-19.2019 [PubMed: 
31363063] 
33. Abramson N Information Theory and Coding. 1 edn, (McGraw-Hill, 1963).
34. Strogatz SH Nonlinear dynamics and Chaos : with applications to physics, biology, chemistry, and 
engineering. (Addison-Wesley Pub., 1994).
35. Berlemont K & Nadal JP Perceptual Decision-Making: Biases in Post-Error Reaction 
Times Explained by Attractor Network Dynamics. J Neurosci 39, 833–853 (2019). 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1015-18.2018 [PubMed: 30504276] 
36. Minamimoto T, La Camera G & Richmond BJ Measuring and modeling the interaction among 
reward size, delay to reward, and satiation level on motivation in monkeys. J Neurophysiol 101, 
437–447 (2009). 10.1152/jn.90959.2008 [PubMed: 18987119] 
37. Lee E, Seo M, Dal Monte O & Averbeck BB Injection of a dopamine type 2 receptor antagonist 
into the dorsal striatum disrupts choices driven by previous outcomes, but not perceptual inference. 
J Neurosci 35, 6298–6306 (2015). 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4561-14.2015 [PubMed: 25904783] 
Wang et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
38. Drugowitsch J, Mendonca AG, Mainen ZF & Pouget A Learning optimal decisions with 
confidence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 24872–24880 (2019). 10.1073/pnas.1906787116 
[PubMed: 31732671] 
39. Khalvati K, Kiani R & Rao RPN Bayesian inference with incomplete knowledge explains 
perceptual confidence and its deviations from accuracy. Nat Commun 12, 5704 (2021). 10.1038/
s41467-021-25419-4 [PubMed: 34588440] 
40. Lak A et al. Orbitofrontal cortex is required for optimal waiting based on decision confidence. 
Neuron 84, 190–201 (2014). 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.039 [PubMed: 25242219] 
41. Charles L & Yeung N Dynamic sources of evidence supporting confidence judgments and error 
detection. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 45, 39–52 (2019). 10.1037/xhp0000583 [PubMed: 
30489097] 
42. Geurts LS, Cooke JRH, van Bergen RS & Jehee JFM Subjective confidence reflects 
representation of Bayesian probability in cortex. Nat Hum Behav 6, 294–305 (2022). 10.1038/
s41562-021-01247-w [PubMed: 35058641] 
43. Li HH & Ma WJ Confidence reports in decision-making with multiple alternatives violate the 
Bayesian confidence hypothesis. Nat Commun 11, 2004 (2020). 10.1038/s41467-020-15581-6 
[PubMed: 32332712] 
44. Adler WT & Ma WJ Comparing Bayesian and non-Bayesian accounts of human confidence 
reports. Plos Computational Biology 14 (2018). https://doi.org:ARTNe1006572 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1006572
45. Rolls ET, Grabenhorst F & Deco G Decision-making, errors, and confidence in the brain. J 
Neurophysiol 104, 2359–2374 (2010). 10.1152/jn.00571.2010 [PubMed: 20810685] 
46. Seo M, Lee E & Averbeck BB Action selection and action value in frontal-striatal circuits. Neuron 
74, 947–960 (2012). 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.037 [PubMed: 22681697] 
47. Beck JM et al. Probabilistic population codes for Bayesian decision making. Neuron 60, 1142–
1152 (2008). 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.021 [PubMed: 19109917] 
48. Zhang K, Ginzburg I, McNaughton BL & Sejnowski TJ Interpreting neuronal population activity 
by reconstruction: unified framework with application to hippocampal place cells. J Neurophysiol 
79, 1017–1044 (1998). 10.1152/jn.1998.79.2.1017 [PubMed: 9463459] 
49. Haefner RM, Berkes P & Fiser J Perceptual Decision-Making as Probabilistic Inference by Neural 
Sampling. Neuron 90, 649–660 (2016). 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.03.020 [PubMed: 27146267] 
50. Averbeck BB, Sohn JW & Lee D Activity in prefrontal cortex during dynamic selection of action 
sequences. Nat Neurosci 9, 276–282 (2006). [PubMed: 16429134] 
51. Masset P, Ott T, Lak A, Hirokawa J & Kepecs A Behavior- and Modality-General Representation 
of Confidence in Orbitofrontal Cortex. Cell 182, 112–126 e118 (2020). 10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.022 
[PubMed: 32504542] 
52. Rich EL & Wallis JD Decoding subjective decisions from orbitofrontal cortex. Nature 
Neuroscience 19, 973–980 (2016). 10.1038/nn.4320 [PubMed: 27273768] 
53. Enel P, Wallis JD & Rich EL Stable and dynamic representations of value in the prefrontal cortex. 
Elife 9 (2020). ARTN e54313 10.7554/eLife.54313
54. Sussillo D & Abbott LF Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural networks. 
Neuron 63, 544–557 (2009). 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.018 [PubMed: 19709635] 
55. Khona M & Fiete IR Attractor and integrator networks in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 23, 744–766 
(2022). 10.1038/s41583-022-00642-0 [PubMed: 36329249] 
56. Sejnowski TJ On the stochastic dynamics of neuronal interaction. Biol Cybern 22, 203–211. 
(1976). [PubMed: 953078] 
57. Zhang K Representation of spatial orientation by the intrinsic dynamics of the head-direction cell 
ensemble: a theory. J Neurosci 16, 2112–2126 (1996). 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-06-02112.1996 
[PubMed: 8604055] 
58. Yoon K et al. Specific evidence of low-dimensional continuous attractor dynamics in grid cells. Nat 
Neurosci 16, 1077–1084 (2013). 10.1038/nn.3450 [PubMed: 23852111] 
59. Russo AA et al. Motor Cortex Embeds Muscle-like Commands in an Untangled Population 
Response. Neuron 97, 953–966 e958 (2018). 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.004 [PubMed: 29398358] 
Wang et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
60. Bartolo R & Averbeck BB Prefrontal Cortex Predicts State Switches during Reversal Learning. 
Neuron 106, 1044–1054 e1044 (2020). 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.03.024 [PubMed: 32315603] 
Methods-only references
61. Hays A V , Richmond BJ, Optican LM (1982) A UNIX-based multiple process system for real-time 
data acquisition and control. WESCON Conference Proceeding, pp 2/1–1 to 2/1–10. OSTI ID: 
5213621.
62. Costa VD, Kakalios LC & Averbeck BB Blocking serotonin but not dopamine reuptake alters 
neural processing during perceptual decision making. Behav Neurosci 130, 461–468 (2016). 
10.1037/bne0000162 [PubMed: 27513807] 
63. Shinn M, Lam NH & Murray JD A flexible framework for simulating and fitting generalized 
drift-diffusion models. Elife 9 (2020). 10.7554/eLife.56938
Wang et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 1 –. 
Behavioral task, behavior, and recording sites. A. Temporal-discounting task32. In each trial, 
the animals first touched a bar, after which a red dot was presented. Next, a cue, which 
indicated the reward size (drops) and delay, was shown. If the animals released the bar 
before the red dot turned purple, the trial was considered rejected and, in the next trial, a new 
randomly selected cue was presented. If they held the bar until the red dot turned purple, 
and then released the bar between 200 and 1200 ms, the trial was considered accepted, and 
the indicated drops of liquid reward were delivered after the indicated delay. B. The nine 
visual cues used to indicate reward size and reward delay. C. Probability of accepting the 
given offer as a function of each offer of reward size and delay for the two monkeys. N = 
8 for each animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. D. Entropy of p(accept) 
for each offer. N = 8 for each animal. Data are presented as mean values +/− SEM. Note 
entropy is high when offers are not consistently accepted or rejected, and low when offers 
are consistently accepted or rejected. E. Reaction time distributions for the two monkeys for 
reject trials only. F. Reaction time vs. decision entropy for reject trials. Note that individual 
points correspond to individual sessions. For monkey V , r = 0.82, p < 0.001; for monkey W, r 
Wang et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
= 0.82, p < 0.001. G. Recording locations in left and right hemispheres in each animal60. PS: 
Principal Sulcus; Arc: Arcuate Sulcus; CS: Central Sulcus.
Wang et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2 –. 
Neuron populations in PFC encode choice, and the offer value. Error bar indicates +/− SEM. 
n = 16 for both animals or n = 8 for each animal. A. Fraction of single neurons across 
both monkeys and recording sessions that significantly encoded each indicated task factor 
assessed with a multivariate ANOV A (F-test, alpha level set to 0.05). B. Decoding accuracy 
for accept vs. reject decisions from the 20-D PCA space defined for each session, as a 
function of time relative to cue onset.
Wang et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3. 
Reconstruction of energy landscape. A. The choice dimension defined by the SVM 
classifier, i.e., the dimension that is orthogonal to the separating hyperplane in the high-
dimensional neural space (20-D PCA space). B. (cartoon) Activity, Pt, in 50 ms time bins, 
in high-dimensional neural space is projected onto the 1-D choice dimension. This results in 
a time series of projected activity, Xt. Activity was analyzed in 50 ms bins, so Δt = 50 ms . 
Panel B illustrates the projected temporal trajectory of a single trial. C. (cartoon) Illustration 
of the temporal derivatives for 3 trials and the computation of mean derivatives in each 
spatial bin in the choice dimension. D. (cartoon) Integration over the mean derivatives 
in each spatial bin gives us the energy landscape or potential function. At each spatial 
location, the derivative of the energy landscape equals the mean derivative derived in C. 
E. The computed energy landscape for reject decisions at an example time point. F. The 
evolution of the energy landscapes, within the 1-D choice dimension, over time for both 
Wang et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
monkeys for accept and reject decisions. Position 0 is the SVM decision boundary and 
time 0 is cue onset. The light green line indicates the average activity for reject trials, 
and the red line indicates the average activity for accept trials. For the portion of the state 
space that was unvisited, there is no gradient or potential estimate, and it is left blank. The 
choice-dimension for all bins was the same and defined at the mean reaction time in each
Wang et al. Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4 –. 
Numerical estimate of energy landscapes for each cue. Data are presented as mean values 
+/− SEM. A-B. The landscapes have qualitatively shallower attractor basins following 
presentation of cues that had low decision consistency for the two monkeys. The lines 
are separated by the probability of accepting the offer, and correspondingly, positive values 
in the choice dimensions reflect accept choices. We also examined landscapes separated by 
accept and reject decisions for the uncertain decisions (Extended Data Fig.1).
Wang et al. Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5 –. 
Neural activity reflects evidence accumulation and fixed-point dynamics. Error bars 
represent standard error of the mean. For plots that show data separately for each monkey, 
N = 8 as SEM was computed across sessions for each animal. A. Choice related activity, 
characterized as the undriven fixed points, x0,j, over time. Note the darker color curve is 
accept decision and lighter color curve is reject decision, for each monkey. B. Strength 
of evidence-driven neural activity over time, coefficient b. The curve peaks at 375 ms for 
monkey V and 325 ms for monkey W. A two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed at 
each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. C. Retraction coefficients are higher 
for more certain decisions for both reject and accept choices. Certain accept = 90%+ vs. 
uncertain 50–90%. And certain reject 0–10% vs. uncertain 10–50% accept choices. Further, 
coefficients differ from both 0 and 1 and therefore there are fixed-point dynamics, and 
the system is not a perfect integrator. A one-tailed paired t-test was performed at each 
time bin between certain and uncertain conditions by first averaging between accept and 
reject conditions, uncorrected for multiple comparison. D. Correlation between retraction 
coefficient for each cue, and the behavioral entropy of that cue. A high retraction coefficient 
parameter corresponds to a steeper basin. A two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed at 
each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. E. The retraction coefficients correlated 
significantly with decision consistency at the time of decision (i.e., mean reaction time in 
each session for each monkey). For monkey V , r = −0.56, p < 0.001; for monkey W, r = 
−0.64, p < 0.001. * = 0.05, ** = 0.01, *** = 0.001
Wang et al. Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 6 –. 
Retraction coefficients vs reaction time. For plots that show data separately for each monkey, 
N = 8 as SEM was computed across sessions for each animal. A. The correlations between 
retraction coefficients and reaction time for reject decisions over time. A two-tailed one-
sample t-test was performed at each time bin, uncorrected for multiple comparison. B. 
The correlations between retraction coefficients at median time of reject decision time and 
reaction time for reject decisions (monkey V , r = −0.82, p < 0.001). C. Same as B for 
monkey W (monkey W, r = −0.59, p < 0.001).
Wang et al. Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 February 05.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript