Predictive encoding of motion begins in the primate retina
Belle Liu1,2,5, Arthur Hong1,2,5, Fred Rieke1,3, Michael B. Manookin3,4,✉
1Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
2Institute of Systems Neuroscience, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
3Vision Science Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
5These authors contributed equally: Belle Liu, Arthur Hong.
Abstract
Predictive motion encoding is an important aspect of visually guided behavior that allows animals 
to estimate the trajectory of moving objects. Motion prediction is understood primarily in the 
context of translational motion, but the environment contains other types of behaviorally salient 
motion correlation such as those produced by approaching or receding objects. However, the 
neural mechanisms that detect and predictively encode these correlations remain unclear. We 
report here that four of the parallel output pathways in the primate retina encode predictive motion 
information, and this encoding occurs for several classes of spatiotemporal correlation that are 
found in natural vision. Such predictive coding can be explained by known nonlinear circuit 
mechanisms that produce a nearly optimal encoding, with transmitted information approaching the 
theoretical limit imposed by the stimulus itself. Thus, these neural circuit mechanisms efficiently 
separate predictive information from nonpredictive information during the encoding process.
✉Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.B.M. manookin@uw.edu.
Author contributions
M.B.M. conceived and designed the study. F.R. and M.B.M. performed the experiments. B.L., A.H., F.R. and M.B.M. designed 
the analytical techniques. M.B.M. wrote the analysis code and constructed the computational models. B.L., A.H., F.R. and M.B.M. 
interpreted the results. M.B.M wrote the original version of the manuscript. B.L., A.H., F.R. and M.B.M. reviewed and edited the 
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-021-00899-1.
code availability
Software code for data analysis is available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Visual stimulus and data 
acquisition code are available at https://symphony-das.github.io/ and https://stage-vss.github.io/.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-021-00899-1.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41593-021-00899-1.
Peer review information Nature Neuroscience thanks Botond Roska, Gregory Schwartz and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for 
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2021 September ; 24(9): 1280–1291. doi:10.1038/s41593-021-00899-1.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
To survive, animals must collect information from the environment that can be used to guide 
their future actions. Most important to behavior are those aspects of past experience that 
allow an animal to reliably estimate salient features of the environment in the future, that 
is, predictive information. Making reliable estimates of the future is challenging for at least 
two reasons. First, most of the information that is available in the environment is not useful 
for making predictions, and distinguishing this predictive information from nonpredictive 
information can be challenging1. Second, neurons are limited in the amount of information 
they can transmit in the time spans that are relevant to behavior. Thus, to effectively utilize 
their limited signaling capacity, neural circuits must discard nonpredictive information and 
preferentially transmit predictive information during the encoding process1–3.
Understanding how neural circuits separate predictive and nonpredictive information is 
a fundamental problem in computational and systems neuroscience. Making progress on 
this question has been challenging, in part because some experimental contexts contain 
several types of salient information, making it difficult to determine the type of information 
that should be predicted1. For this reason, visual motion provides an ideal experimental 
framework for studying predictive encoding because the type of information to be estimated 
is straightforward. Behaviorally relevant motion produces correlations between two or more 
points in space and time4–9, and neural circuits must utilize these correlations to estimate, on 
the basis of the past positions of an object, where that object is likely to be in the future—a 
function we refer to as predictive motion encoding10–14.
We studied predictive motion encoding in parasol and smooth monostratified ganglion 
cells, retinal output neurons that project to brain regions that contribute to motion 
processing in primates15–17. Responses from these cells were measured to different 
classes of spatiotemporal correlation that occur during visual motion6,18 and with distinct 
behavioral relevance19. We report that these cells encode predictive information about 
motion correlations in their spike outputs. The encoding of this information about future 
motion is nearly optimal—neural responses represent virtually all the predictive information 
available in the stimuli. Further experiments show that this predictive encoding is present 
at the synaptic output of diffuse bipolar cells and emerges downstream of horizontal cells 
in the outer retina. Thus, the primate visual system begins predicting and encoding future 
motion trajectories at the second visual synapse.
Results
Primate ganglion cells encode motion correlations.
Motion in natural environments produces correlations between two or more points in space 
and time5,18,20,21. In primates, sensitivity to two-point motion correlations arises in the 
retina22, but sensitivity to three-point (higher-order) spatiotemporal correlations is thought 
to first occur in the visual cortex4. To determine whether the primate retina encoded these 
higher-order correlations, we measured the spike outputs of ganglion cells—the retinal 
output neurons—to several classes of stimuli containing correlations between three points 
in space and time4,5,8,9,18. Two general classes of three-point correlations were tested: (1) 
diverging correlations that consisted of a point in space that separated to two points in 
Liu et al. Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
space at a later time, and (2) converging correlations where two points in space merged 
to a single point at a later time (Fig. 1). These types of correlation can arise when 
objects approach (diverging correlations) or recede away from (converging correlations) an 
observer4–6,8,18,23,24. These three-point correlations were further subdivided into positive or 
negative on the basis of the parity of the correlated points—that is, whether the diverging or 
converging points were brighter (positive parity) or dimmer (negative parity) than the mean 
intensity. For the sake of clarity, we refer to the contrast (that is, triangle contrast) of the 
predominant diverging or converging points rather than to the parity.
The three-point motion stimuli lacked two-point spatiotemporal correlations (Fig. 1c)4,18. 
Thus, if the cells were insensitive to these three-point correlations, their encoding of these 
stimuli should be similar to encoding of a stimulus lacking spatiotemporal correlations 
(uncorrelated condition; Fig. 1). We compared information encoding across stimulus types 
by estimating the amount of information that a cell’s response in one interval of time 
encoded about the stimulus in another interval of time—the time-shifted mutual information 
(bin width, 16.7 ms; Methods; Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 1). This method measures 
the amount of information that can be obtained about a stimulus from neural responses—a 
stimulus that produces increased information rates relative to the uncorrelated condition 
indicates that neural responses encode more information about that stimulus. We first 
compared the peak values of the information curves across stimulus conditions and cell 
types, and we later analyzed the temporal properties of these curves (Fig. 1e,f).
We measured the responses of six different ganglion cell types to these stimuli—midget, 
parasol and smooth monostratified cells that each come in On and Off subtypes that 
prefer increments or decrements in light intensity, respectively25. Smooth monostratified 
and parasol ganglion cells showed peak information rates that were ~twofold (100%) higher 
relative to the uncorrelated stimulus for three-point motion stimuli in which the stimulus 
contrast was aligned with the contrast polarity of the cell—positive triangle contrasts for 
On cells and negative triangle contrasts for Off cells (Fig. 1f; P ≤ 0.02; Wilcoxon signed 
rank test). These increased information rates for the three-point motion correlations indicate 
that smooth monostratified and parasol cells encode these correlations in their spike outputs. 
These data indicate that sensitivity to three-point correlations is not entirely cortical in 
origin, but occurs in the retina4. We next investigated the dependence of this encoding on 
spike timing.
Information encoding occurs with high temporal precision.
The analysis presented in Fig. 1 calculated the time-shifted mutual information for a time 
window corresponding to the stimulus update rate (Δt, 16.7 ms). However, many neurons 
can encode stimulus features on timescales of only a few milliseconds26–32. To determine 
the relationship between spike timing and the encoding of motion correlations, we calculated 
the mutual information between the stimulus and spike response of a cell after randomly 
varying spike times. Spikes were binned in 1-ms intervals and the timing of each spike was 
determined by drawing a random value from a Gaussian distribution with a mean centered at 
the time of the original spike and s.d. between 0 and 100 ms (Fig. 2 and Methods).
Liu et al. Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Spike timing could affect information across a range of timescales. If information encoding 
were determined solely by the statistics of the stimulus, information should decrease only 
when the variation in spike timing exceeded the update interval of the stimulus itself (16.7 
ms). However, if encoding occurred on finer timescales, information should decrease rapidly 
with fine-grained changes in spike timing. Our analysis supported the latter premise that 
these primate ganglion cell types encoded information on relatively fine timescales. Encoded 
information decayed rapidly after shifting spike timing by only a few milliseconds (Fig. 
2b, top). This decline continued such that, at time shifts of 50 ms, information about the 
stimulus was almost completely degraded.
To determine the threshold at which variation in spike timing significantly degraded 
information, we calculated the sensitivity index (d′) between the original and shifted spike 
trains (Methods). Lower d′ values indicate that the information content of the shifted 
condition was similar to the original spike train, whereas larger index values indicate 
that information between the two spike trains is more distinct (that is, degraded). The 
sensitivity index increased rapidly at time shifts between 1 and 20 ms, consistent with a 
rapid degradation in information. We defined a significant change in information as a 5% 
increase in d′ relative to the saturating amount. Across cells and stimulus conditions, this 
threshold was reached in <4 ms (Fig. 2c). This high sensitivity of information to variations 
in spike timing was also observed when a Bernoulli distribution rather than a Gaussian 
distribution was used to shift spike timing, indicating that encoding these motion stimuli 
requires a high amount of temporal precision (Extended Data Fig. 2).
To determine whether spike timing near frame transitions contained more information 
than spikes occurring in the middle of a frame, we normalized frame timing relative to 
the measured lag from the photoreceptors. We then calculated the encoded information 
relative to the onset of each stimulus frame (Fig. 2d,e). We found that information did not 
vary significantly across time bins for any of the cell types, which further indicates that 
information encoding occurred on much finer timescales than the update rate of the stimulus.
Encoding timescales match stimulus correlation structure.
The correlations inherent to visual motion mean that the motion trajectory leading up to 
a particular time (t ≤0) provides information about the likely trajectory of motion at later 
time points (t >0). This information can then be used to estimate motion trajectories and to 
guide behavior3,10,33–35. The motion stimuli used in our study, because of their correlation 
structure, contained this type of predictive information within a time window of around 
50 ms (Fig. 3). To determine whether the timescales of encoding match the timecourse of 
available information in the stimulus, we calculated the mutual information between a cell’s 
spike output and the stimulus at different time lags relative to the stimulus presentation 
(Extended Data Fig. 1). We then compared these results to the measured mutual information 
between the stimulus and itself at the same time lags. The temporal profile of information 
available in the stimulus was shifted to account for the time lag between the presentation of 
the stimulus at the level of the photoreceptors and the ganglion cell output (~30–50 ms; Fig. 
3a). This time lag was calculated directly from the spatiotemporal receptive field measured 
for each cell (Methods).
Liu et al. Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Ganglion cell encoding of the stimulus closely matched the timecourse of the information 
contained within the stimulus itself (Fig. 3). For the uncorrelated noise condition, which 
contained information about itself only within the window of a single frame (~16.7 ms), 
the cell encoded stimulus information in a relatively short time window. These time 
windows became broader for encoding of motion stimuli, indicating that the timecourse over 
which the cell encoded these stimuli depended on the timecourse of available information 
contained within the motion stimuli. Furthermore, the first- and second-order statistics were 
identical for the uncorrelated stimulus and the stimuli containing three-point correlations, as 
all of these stimuli lack pairwise spatiotemporal correlations (Fig. 1c). Thus, any differences 
in information encoding between the uncorrelated stimulus and the three-point correlation 
stimuli must occur because the ganglion cells were sensitive to higher-order statistics 
contained in those stimuli.
In addition to tracking the correlation structure in the stimuli, encoding was shifted to future 
(that is, positive) time lags for two-point positive and diverging correlations (Fig. 3b,c). 
This shift indicates that the cell’s response at a given time predicts the pattern of motion at 
future time points. This pattern in which a cell’s responses anticipate subsequent motion is 
characteristic of predictive motion encoding10,11,13.
The observed displacement in the time-shifted mutual information towards future time lags 
could arise from the effects of motion correlations on the retinal circuit, but could also arise 
from other aspects of the stimulus. To distinguish between these possibilities, we extracted 
the motion correlations from the stimulus and used these correlations in calculating the time-
shifted mutual information (Extended Data Fig. 3). This analysis showed the same pattern of 
predictive motion encoding as we observed in Fig. 3. Thus, the predictive displacement in 
the time-shifted mutual information for pairwise and diverging correlations arises from the 
motion correlations in the stimulus.
This predictive encoding did not occur for all motion correlations tested. It was not present 
for converging correlations, as encoded information was not shifted to positive time lags 
for these stimuli (Fig. 3). These differences in encoding could not arise from differences in 
available information, which was identical for all of the motion stimuli at all time shifts (Fig. 
3d). Thus, the differences in encoding of these stimuli reflect a selectivity for predictive 
information in pairwise and diverging correlations22,24. In the next section, we further 
investigate this relationship between stimulus classes by determining how closely cellular 
encoding of predictive information in these stimuli approximates an optimal encoding.
Predictive encoding nearly optimal for motion correlations.
A single neuron cannot encode all the information available in a sensory input. Thus, the 
encoding scheme adopted by a neuron creates a compressed representation in which much of 
the information in the incoming stimulus is discarded (that is, lossy compression; Fig. 4a). 
Further, on the basis of this compression scheme, one can determine the maximal amount of 
predictive information that can be encoded given the amount of information encoded about 
the past stimulus trajectory2. The predictive information in neural responses can then be 
compared to this optimal encoding (Fig. 4b).
Liu et al. Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 4c. The solid black line delineates the boundary 
for optimal predictive encoding (Ifuture) as a function of the information about the past 
stimulus trajectory (Ipast). The shaded regions to the upper left define values for predictive 
information that are not theoretically attainable. Indeed, the entire predictive domain of 
the curve was unattainable for the uncorrelated noise stimulus, which lacked predictive 
information, and this was also reflected in a lack of measured predictive information (Fig. 
4c, upper left).
For the motion correlations, which contained predictive information, the relationship 
between cellular encoding of this information and the optimal boundary varied both with 
cell type and stimulus type. As indicated by the data in Fig. 3, ganglion cells encoded 
predictive information for two-point correlations and three-point diverging correlations. 
Further, this encoding was nearly ideal for smooth monostratified and parasol ganglion cells, 
which captured between 70% and 100% of the available predictive information for stimulus 
parities aligned with the cells’ preferred contrast polarity (Fig. 4c). This indicates that the 
spike output of these cells retains most of the predictive information contained in these 
stimuli. Midget (parvocellular-projecting) ganglion cells, however, encoded relatively less 
predictive information in their spike outputs to these stimuli. In these cells, mean values 
were between 38% and 80% of the limit for the two-point and diverging correlations; 
predictive encoding was particularly low for Off midget cells. Thus, predictive encoding 
varied with cell type.
Unlike the two-point and diverging motion correlations, cellular encodings of converging 
motion correlations fell far off the optimal boundary (Fig. 4c). Parasol and smooth 
monostratified cells encoded less than 50% of the available predictive information for 
these stimuli. This lack of strong predictive encoding for converging correlations is 
consistent with our previous work demonstrating a preference for approaching motion in 
these cell types. Approaching motion, which produces diverging correlations on the retina, 
elicited significantly larger responses than receding motion, which produces converging 
correlations24. The data presented in the current study go further to indicate these 
neurons encode predictive information about diverging correlations that could be utilized 
to anticipate future motion trajectories.
Predictive encoding is nearly optimal at low contrast.
Due to noise introduced in retinal processing, decreasing the contrast of a stimulus 
diminishes the signal-to-noise ratio and limits the amount of encoded information36. To 
determine whether encoding of predictive information was also diminished at low contrast 
(that is, low signal-to-noise ratio), we calculated past and future information encoded in the 
same cell at three different stimulus contrasts (contrasts: 0.25, 0.5, 1.0).
The relative amount of information encoded about the past and future varied with stimulus 
contrast (Fig. 5). Past information gradually increased with contrast and showed only weak 
saturation at the highest contrast level (Fig. 5b). Future information showed a greater degree 
of saturation relative to past information. This saturation was more pronounced at times 
farther into the future such that, for the longest lag (+50 ms), the encoded information 
depended only weakly on contrast. This saturation in future information resulted in a higher 
Liu et al. Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
ratio of future-to-past information encoding at lower contrasts—a trend that again was 
strongest for time lags farther into the future (Fig. 5c). Thus, these cells encoded the greatest 
relative amount of predictive information at low contrast, when the signal-to-noise ratio was 
lowest.
We next asked whether the greater saturation in future information affected the relationship 
between cellular encoding and the optimal boundary defined by the information bottleneck. 
This relationship varied with stimulus contrast and time lag. At a time lag of +17 ms, 
encoding of future information was near the optimal boundary at all contrasts (Fig. 5d, top). 
At later time lags, however, the lowest contrast stimulus maintained a position near the 
optimal boundary, but the higher contrasts separated from this boundary. These data indicate 
that, at low contrast, parasol and smooth monostratified cells encode nearly all of the 
available future information for pairwise and diverging correlations. Further, these cells most 
optimally encoded predictive motion information at low contrast, when the signal-to-noise 
ratio was the lowest. We return to the implications of these results in the Discussion.
Predictive motion encoding arises early in visual pathway.
The encoding of spatiotemporal correlations in ganglion cells indicates that information 
about these correlations must be present in the signals from cone photoreceptors. Ganglion 
cells also showed a selectivity for these motion correlations relative to the uncorrelated 
stimulus and showed predictive encoding for a subset of these correlations. Where in the 
circuit does such selectivity arise? To answer this question, we assayed three different points 
in the circuit: (1) the voltage responses of horizontal cells in the outer retina, (2) amacrine 
cell inhibitory synaptic outputs and (3) diffuse bipolar cell excitatory synaptic outputs (Fig. 
6). We performed horizontal cell recordings in whole-cell, current-clamp, and inhibitory and 
excitatory synaptic currents were measured in whole-cell, voltage-clamp (Methods).
Horizontal cells receive excitatory synaptic inputs directly from cone photoreceptors and 
thus provide a window into neural processing early in the visual stream. We recorded the 
membrane potential of H1 horizontal cells to our stimulus set and computed the time-shifted 
mutual information between each cell’s membrane potential and the stimulus (Methods). 
Pairwise correlations produced higher mutual information values than the uncorrelated 
stimulus (Fig. 6a,d). Three-point correlations, however, showed similar information values to 
the uncorrelated control condition, indicating that horizontal cells lacked selectivity for these 
correlations.
A similar pattern was observed in the inhibitory synaptic input from amacrine cells to the 
ganglion cells (Fig. 6b). However, inhibitory input to these cells arises from the opposite 
polarity pathway (that is, crossover inhibition), so the stimuli were not aligned with the 
preferred contrast polarity of these amacrine cells (Methods). Nonetheless, the absence of 
selectivity to three-point correlations in horizontal cells and amacrine cells and the presence 
of this selectivity in ganglion cells indicates that information about three-point correlations 
is transmitted through the retina with high gain.
Unlike horizontal and amacrine cells, the diffuse bipolar cell synaptic output showed both 
selectivity for two-point and three-point motion correlations and also predictive encoding of 
Liu et al. Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
these correlations (Fig. 6c). For excitatory synaptic currents, motion correlations produced 
peak information rates that were higher than the uncorrelated condition. Further, two-point 
and three-point diverging correlations shifted information rates towards future time lags just 
as was observed in the ganglion cell spike outputs. These results indicate that the selective 
sensitivity to three-point correlations emerges at some point between the synaptic inputs and 
synaptic outputs of diffuse bipolar cells.
We also estimated the efficiency with which these circuit components encoded predictive 
information using the information bottleneck model (Fig. 6e). Indeed, the pattern of 
information in the excitatory synaptic inputs mirrored that observed in the spike outputs 
of parasol and smooth monostratified ganglion cells—encoding of predictive information 
approached the optimal boundary for both pairwise motion and diverging motion 
correlations. Inhibitory synaptic input also approached the boundary for these stimuli, but 
the overall magnitude of encoded future information was lower (Methods). Further, future 
information encoding in H1 horizontal cells fell away from the boundary, indicating that 
this nearly ideal encoding of future information emerges primarily in the diffuse bipolar cell 
circuitry. We next investigated the contribution of neural mechanisms in diffuse bipolar cells 
to the prioritized encoding of predictive motion information.
Circuit nonlinearities favor predictive information encoding.
Our physiological recordings indicated that predictive encoding of motion largely arose 
in the bipolar cells that provided synaptic inputs to smooth monostratified and parasol 
ganglion cells (Fig. 6). Two known mechanisms in diffuse bipolar cells could contribute 
to encoding predictive motion information—electrical coupling and nonlinear synaptic 
release. Electrical coupling occurs in both the On- and Off-type bipolar cells of the primate 
retina37–39 and the input–output relationships of these cells are also strongly rectified 
(that is, nonlinear)22,24,40,41. Together these components could work to enhance encoding 
of future information by increasing cellular responsiveness to correlated stimuli through 
electrical coupling and by discarding weaker responses from uncorrelated stimuli with the 
output nonlinearity.
We tested this hypothesis using a computational model of the bipolar cell subunits on the 
basis of direct excitatory synaptic input recordings from parasol and smooth monostratified 
ganglion cells22,24. In this model, the shape of the output nonlinearity was modified by 
shifting the threshold at which an input begins to produce subunit responses (Fig. 7 and 
Methods). Model outputs were estimated to the motion stimuli (contrast, 0.5). Past and 
future information were calculated for the model across a range of thresholds. To determine 
whether electrical coupling between bipolar cells could contribute to encoding predictive 
information, we compared the subunit model with a model that was identical except that 
model subunits shared a portion of their responses through coupling (coupled subunit 
model).
We calculated the ratio of encoded future-to-past information to determine whether the 
output threshold or coupling would bias encoding of predictive information. The coupled 
model showed a higher proportion of future versus past information encoded for all of the 
stimuli when the output threshold was in the range of ~0.5–0.75. Thus, subunit coupling 
Liu et al. Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
biased encoding of predictive information, but only when combined with a moderately high 
output threshold (Fig. 7d). Further, the coupled subunit model outperformed the model 
lacking coupling at all contrasts tested, indicating that coupling would enhance predictive 
motion encoding across a broad range of stimulus conditions (threshold, 0.6; Fig. 7e).
These modeling results support the hypothesis that known properties of diffuse bipolar 
cells—electrical coupling and input–output nonlinearities—shape the type of information 
that these cells encode (Fig. 8). In summary, the correlations inherent in visual motion 
cause sequential stimulation of neighboring bipolar cells. As the motion excites a bipolar 
cell, a portion of the current from that cell passes to its neighbors. This shared current 
means that the neighboring cells will depolarize more as the motion stimulus passes through 
their receptive fields than if coupling were absent. Similar potentiation from electrical 
coupling will not occur for stimuli lacking spatiotemporal correlations or for two-point 
negative correlations, as sequential depolarization of neighboring neurons is required for this 
mechanism to be effective (Figs. 1 and 3).
Response thresholds contribute by discarding weak responses, which, due to the effects of 
network coupling, tend to lack strong spatiotemporal correlations. Thus, these mechanisms 
bias transmission of correlated inputs which, in the case of motion stimuli, contain 
information about the probable future trajectory of a moving object. Furthermore, our 
modeling results extend previous work on these neural mechanisms to demonstrate that they 
bias neural networks to both pairwise and higher-order motion correlations22,40.
Discussion
Principles of efficient encoding have greatly enhanced our understanding of neural 
systems42–48, but classical applications of this paradigm do not provide a method for 
distinguishing different bits of information on the basis of their behavioral relevance1. 
The information bottleneck provides a framework for assigning priority to different bits of 
information on the basis of their salience to behavior—at a minimum, predictive information 
should be prioritized during encoding as only such information can be used to guide an 
animal’s behavior1–3,10,34. Yet, prediction can be difficult to study, as the stimulus properties 
that should be predicted can often be difficult to identify and control.
Visual motion provides a straightforward setting in which to study predictive coding, as 
the stimulus property that should be predicted is clear—one must use information about 
the past locations of an object to estimate where it is likely to be at some point in the 
future. Here, we found that four ganglion cell pathways in the primate retina effectively 
encode predictive information about visual motion (Fig. 3). Application of the information 
bottleneck technique showed that these cells selectively discard nonpredictive information 
and represent as much predictive information as possible given their overall encoding 
capacity for pairwise and diverging motion correlations in their spike outputs (Fig. 4). 
Further, the mechanisms that likely contributed to predictive motion encoding were distinct 
from those proposed previously (Figs. 7 and 8)11–14.
Liu et al. Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
We identified two distinct neural mechanisms that could contribute to motion prediction 
within the receptive field center of these ganglion cells—electrical coupling and nonlinear 
synaptic release in retinal bipolar cells (Fig. 7). These mechanisms work together to encode 
predictive information and discard nonpredictive information available in the incoming 
visual inputs. Electrical coupling between neighboring bipolar cells selectively enhances the 
response of the bipolar cell network to correlated inputs that contain predictive information. 
The output thresholding mechanism present in bipolar cell synaptic outputs then discards 
the weaker uncorrelated components of the input that lack predictive information (Fig. 
8)22,24,40. In this way, bipolar cell networks selectively funnel predictive information to 
postsynaptic ganglion cells.
The encoding of predictive information by smooth monostratified and parasol ganglion 
cells was nearly optimal (Figs. 4 and 6). Initiating these predictive computations early 
in the visual stream allows the primate retina to provide a more refined representation 
of visual motion to downstream brain regions22,24,25,49,50. Indeed, smooth monostratified 
and parasol ganglion cells send axonal projections to brain regions that are critical to 
motion detection in primates—the superior colliculus and the magnocellular layers of the 
lateral geniculate body15–17. These brain regions show sensitivity for some of the motion 
correlations studied in the present work. For example, the superior colliculus contributes to 
processing of several types of motion, including approaching motion that produces diverging 
correlations17. Further, lesioning of the magnocellular lateral geniculate body devastates an 
animal’s ability to determine the direction of lateral motion, which produces both pairwise 
and higher-order spatiotemporal correlations16. Thus, predictive information from the retina 
can be used by these brain regions to estimate visual motion.
Efficient versus predictive encoding.
Our study shows how early visual circuits can use correlations in incoming stimuli to predict 
future motion. In the literature, ‘prediction’ is used in at least two different ways that are, 
in many ways, diametrically opposed to each other. In the context of efficient neural coding, 
prediction is a tool for compressing incoming sensory signals—neurons discard information 
that is predictable from past inputs and principally encode only those features that vary from 
that prediction. Thus, the encoding of stimulus features depends inversely on their likelihood 
of occurring in the environment46–48,51,52.
The second definition of predictive coding, consistent with the use in the present study, 
indicates that stimulus information should be encoded on the basis of its salience to animal 
behavior1–3,10,34. In this model, the information that can be used to estimate future states 
of the environment carries the greatest importance for guiding animal behavior and, thus, 
should be prioritized during neural encoding—this information is also termed predictive 
information.
Distinguishing between these hypotheses can be difficult as both models can make similar 
predictions for empirical data. For example, the results of our experiment to test encoding 
at different stimulus contrasts can be interpreted to support both models (Fig. 5). At low 
contrast, the ratio of encoded future-to-past information was greater than at high contrast. 
Classical efficient coding predicts that, as the signal-to-noise ratio increases, as with 
Liu et al. Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
increasing contrast, the circuit should increasingly decorrelate the input. This decorrelation 
would remove some of the correlations in the stimulus needed to predict the future motion 
trajectory42–47. Thus, the relative amount of future information would decrease at high 
contrast.
In the context of the second model, predictive future information is prioritized and thus 
encoding approaches the information bottleneck boundary at low contrast. At high contrast, 
the circuit more readily encodes information about the past and the ratio of future-to-past 
information decreases3,10,33,34. While both models can explain these results, the latter model 
in which future information is prioritized during encoding is consistent with the neural 
mechanisms that likely contribute to predictive motion encoding in the primate retina—
electrical coupling and nonlinear input–output functions of the diffuse bipolar cell networks.
Information that can be used to predict the future position of a moving object contains 
stronger spatiotemporal correlations than past information that is nonpredictive. Electrical 
coupling and nonlinear synaptic transmission in the bipolar cell network produces stronger 
responses to correlated versus uncorrelated stimuli22,24,40. Thus, due to electrical coupling, 
at low contrast the more strongly correlated future information will drive the bipolar cell 
network harder than nonpredictive information about the past that has weaker correlations. 
The weaker uncorrelated stimuli will then be discarded by the synaptic output nonlinearity 
whereas the stronger predictive information will be transmitted. Furthermore, stimuli with 
weaker correlations (for example, nonpredictive past information) will have a better chance 
of making it through the output nonlinearity at higher contrasts, which would explain the 
decrease in the ratio of future-to-past information at high contrast.
However, efficient coding and predictive coding are not mutually exclusive hypotheses. 
Neural circuits can remove predictable correlations in sensory inputs (that is, efficient 
coding) while still preserving information needed to predict the trajectory of a moving object 
(that is, predictive coding). Indeed, theoretical and empirical evidence indicates that removal 
of redundant information and encoding of information about the future are both critical 
components of neural coding in dynamic environments34,51.
A classic example of efficient coding is the difference-of-Gaussians receptive field structure 
in the early visual system, which discards the low spatial frequencies that are common in 
nature; removing this predictable structure through decorrelation allows visual circuits to 
encode surprising features that vary from the prediction43,44. However, this decorrelation 
of the spatial frequency information does not eliminate the phase information in the input 
image. This is a critical distinction because spatial frequency information is a statistical 
measure of an ensemble of natural images and, as such, is biased toward the average image. 
The phase information, however, is specific to individual images and can be used to identify 
features in those images. Thus, neural mechanisms could utilize this phase information in 
estimating future states of the environment (that is, predictive coding) while simultaneously 
removing redundant spatial frequency information through decorrelation (that is, efficient 
coding).
Liu et al. Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Motion sensitivity arises early in the primate visual stream.
The asymmetrical distribution of bright and dark intensities in nature produce correlations 
between three or more points in space and time during visual motion5,18,20,21. Indeed, 
behavioral studies have shown that humans and other animals utilize these higher-order 
correlations in estimating motion direction4,8,9,53. Sensitivity to these correlations arises 
early in the visual stream of some species54. In humans and nonhuman primates, 
this sensitivity was thought to arise first in the visual cortex4. Our findings indicate, 
however, that sensitivity to higher-order spatiotemporal correlations arises much earlier than 
previously thought—it is present in the synaptic outputs of diffuse bipolar cells at the second 
synapse of the visual stream. Thus, it appears that both flies and primates, with visual 
systems that evolved independently, use a similar strategy of extracting and encoding these 
correlations early in visual processing4,23,54. Further, the mechanisms identified here are 
also engaged during approaching motion, indicating that this behaviorally salient motion 
would also produce predictive encoding24.
The common structure of natural scenes indicates that many sighted animals are faced 
with the problem of estimating motion from spatiotemporal correlations. Moreover, motion 
estimation is one of many prediction problems that animals must solve to survive and 
reproduce. The neural mechanisms supporting motion prediction identified in this work—
subunit pooling and nonlinear thresholding—are features shared across vertebrate evolution 
in the retina and other brain regions. Thus, future studies may shed light on how these and 
other neural mechanisms contribute to predictive encoding throughout the brain.
Methods
These experiments were done using an in vitro preparation of macaque monkey retina 
from three different macaque species (Macaca fascicularis, Macaca mulatta and Macaca 
nemestrina) of either sex. Tissues were obtained from terminally anesthetized animals that 
were made available through the Tissue Distribution Program of the National Primate 
Research Center at the University of Washington. All procedures were approved by the 
University of Washington Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Cellular recordings were performed in a whole-mount retinal preparation. To aid with 
cellular visualization, horizontal cell recordings were made with pigment-epithelium 
removed, and all other recordings were done with the pigment-epithelium intact. Recordings 
were performed from macular, midperipheral, and peripheral retina (2–8 mm, 10–30° foveal 
eccentricity). Data were acquired at 10–kHz using a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Molecular 
Devices), Bessel filtered at 3–kHz (900–CT, Frequency Devices), digitized using an ITC-18 
analog-digital board (HEKA Instruments) and acquired using the Symphony acquisition 
software package (http://symphony-das.github.io).
Recordings were performed using borosilicate glass pipettes containing Ames medium for 
extracellular spike recordings from ganglion cells. Current-clamp recordings from horizontal 
cells were performed using an intracellular solution containing: 123 mM K-aspartate, 10 
mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 4 mM Mg-ATP 
and 0.5 mM Tris-GTP. Whole-cell voltage-clamp experiments were performed to measure 
Liu et al. Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the excitatory synaptic currents generated from bipolar cell input or the inhibitory synaptic 
currents from amacrine cell input. Excitatory and inhibitory synaptic currents were isolated 
by holding ganglion cells at the chloride (about −70 mV) or cation (0 mV) reversal potential, 
respectively. These voltage-clamp recordings were performed using an intracellular solution 
containing: 105 mM Cs methanesulfonate, 10 mM TEA-Cl, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mM EGTA, 
2 mM QX-314, 5 mM Mg-ATP and 0.5 mM Tris-GTP, pH ~7.3 with CsOH.
Midget, parasol and smooth monostratified ganglion cells were targeted for recording under 
infrared illumination on the basis of somatic size and shape. Cell type was confirmed on 
the basis of a combination of light response properties, receptive field measurements and 
confocal imaging of cellular morphology.
Visual stimuli.
Visual stimuli were generated using the Stage software package (http://stage-vss.github.io) 
and displayed on a customized digital light projector designed specifically for studying 
visual processing in Old World primates24,55. All stimuli in this work were updated at 
60 Hz. Stimuli were presented at medium to high photopic light amounts with average 
L/M-cone photoisomerization rates (R*) of ~1.5 × 104 −5.0 × 105 s−1. Contrast values are 
given in Michaelson contrast. ‘Glider’ stimuli with distinct spatiotemporal correlations were 
generated as described in Jonathan Victor’s previous work7,18. Recordings were performed 
for ~40 min in each cell to obtain the data needed for the information-theoretic analysis 
(37.8 ± 19.6 min; mean ± s.d.; n = 89 cells).
Mutual information calculations.
Mutual information quantifies how much knowing the response (R) of a neuron can reduce 
the uncertainty about a presented stimulus (S). Neural responses were binned at the stimulus 
presentation rate (update rate, 60 Hz; bin width, 16.7 ms) for all analyses with the exception 
of the data in Fig. 2, which were binned at 1 kHz (bin width, 1 ms). We estimated the 
amount of information that cellular responses at a particular time (rt) provided about the 
stimulus at time, t′ (st′), where t′ = t +Δt using equation (1).
I Rt; St′ = ∑
st′ ∈ St′
∑
rt ∈ Rt
P st′, rt log2
P st′, rt
PR rt PS st′ (1)
where PR(r) is the distribution of responses in a single cell, PS(s) is the stimulus distribution 
and Pst′,rt is the joint distribution of stimuli presented at time t′ and responses r observed 
at time t. In other words, responses were fixed in time, the stimulus was shifted for each 
time bin between ±0.5 s and the mutual information was computed at each of these time 
shifts10,30,56–59.
Response levels were determined by either counting the number of spikes occurring in a 
time bin (extracellular recordings) or distributing analog responses across six levels (current-
clamp and voltage-clamp recordings). Varying the number of response levels between four 
and eight for the analog data did not noticeably affect the information computations, so we 
used a value near the center of that range. These mutual information calculations required 
Liu et al. Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
converting the spatial dimensions of our stimuli into a single value for each time bin. We did 
this by first identifying the four spatial regions of the stimulus that were centered over the 
receptive field. Each of the 16 possible stimulus patterns for those four regions was assigned 
a value between 0 and 15.
To correct for inflation error in our mutual information calculations, stimulus and response 
data were subsampled randomly at fractions of 0.5–1.0. Information was calculated 50 times 
for each fraction and information was extrapolated for an infinite number of samples10,60. 
Inflation error was estimated as the s.d. of the information calculated for data subsampled at 
a fraction of 0.5 divided by 2. An error value below 0.02 was a criterion for inclusion in our 
study and, in all cases, error values were <6 × 10−3 bits per spike (ref. 10).
On a conceptual level, the time-shifted mutual information analysis provides an important 
behavioral constraint on the efficient encoding of motion in the primate retina. As part of 
this work, we have carefully characterized the spatiotemporal correlations in the stimuli used 
in this study, such that we know precisely how these correlations influence our calculations 
(Figs. 1 and 3). We then use this knowledge to directly compute how these correlations can 
be used to infer the future stimulus trajectory (Figs. 4, 5 and 6).
Correlations in the neural response that are produced by stimulus correlations mean that the 
information values we report constitute a reasonable lower bound on the actual information 
encoded by these neurons. As mentioned above, the stimulus entropy is four bits for each 
time bin as the stimulus can take on 24 (which equals 16) possible states with equal 
probability. Accounting for some of the temporal correlations by analyzing several time 
bins would greatly increase the number of states that the stimulus could take, increasing 
the stimulus entropy. If, for example, three time bins were used to account for a 50 ms 
window, the stimulus entropy would increase to 12 bits (212, which equals 4,096 possible 
states). Further, the information encoded by the neurons is likely to be redundant between 
successive time bins because of these stimulus correlations, and this redundancy in the 
neural responses would increase the mutual information. Thus, our information estimates for 
neural encoding of the spatiotemporal correlations are certainly an underestimate relative to 
the uncorrelated control stimulus.
However, the amount of data from each cell that is required to perform this analysis is 
prohibitive. For information-theoretic analyses to work properly, a good rule of thumb is 
to obtain at least ten times as many data samples as the number of states in the joint 
probability matrix P st′, rt 10,60. For the four-bit stimulus example, the probability matrix 
would comprise 16 rows for the stimulus states and, in our recordings, at most eight columns 
for the possible response states (16 × 8). Our rule of thumb would then dictate that we obtain 
at least 1,280 samples, requiring about 21 s of recording time for each stimulus class—a 
very reasonable proposition. If, however, we used three neighboring time bins, the joint 
probability matrix would be 4,096 × 512 and we would need 20,971,520 samples or more 
than 242 days of continuous recording for each stimulus class from each cell, which is not 
physically possible in the lifespan of a typical experiment. Thus, a full treatment of the 
stimulus correlations was not possible.
Liu et al. Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Despite this, the relative information encoding at past and future time lags provided strong 
evidence of predictive encoding for some stimulus types. The correlation structure was 
identical between the different classes of spatiotemporal correlation (Fig. 3). Thus, if these 
correlations affected our calculations in a mysterious way that was not taken into account, 
these effects should be the same for all of our motion correlations. However, we observed 
very different time-dependent encoding behaviors for these stimuli—predictive encoding 
for some stimuli, but not for others (Figs. 3 and 4). Moreover, this asymmetry was not 
observed in horizontal cells, but emerged first in bipolar cells (Fig. 6). These findings lend 
further support to the premise that our calculations constitute a close approximation of the 
information encoded by the cells under study.
Information bottleneck calculations.
We used the information bottleneck method to determine the optimal encoding/compression 
schemes for the stimuli used in this study2. The idea is that the past stimulus, Spast, can 
be compressed into a representation (Z) that retains sufficient information that can be used 
to estimate future motion trajectories (Sfuture). The optimal mapping between Spast and its 
compressed representation Z was determined by solving equation (2):
max
Spast Z
I Z; Sfuture − λI Z; Spast (2)
where the Lagrangian multiplier, λ, determines how much information is retained about the 
past stimulus. Varying the value of λ reflects different tradeoffs between representing the 
greatest possible amount of information about the future and producing a more compressed 
representation. Large values of λ exemplify the former case and, thus, poor representations 
of future information are strongly penalized. For small λ values, the goal is to achieve 
compression and we are, thus, more likely to ignore disparities in how Z represents future 
information57.
Given the relatively low dimensionality of our stimuli (16 possible states on a single frame), 
solving equation (2) for each of the possible compression schemes was a computationally 
tractable problem. Thus, we computed I(Z; Sfuture) and I(Z; Spast) for every possible stimulus 
mapping in Z. This process was repeated for three future time lags of +17, +33 and 
+50 ms. Detailed methods for computing the bottleneck are given elsewhere2,61. Briefly, 
the algorithm was initialized with Z ≡ Spast and Z was modified by merging different 
combinations of the 16 possible stimulus states. Mutual information I(Z; Sfuture) and I(Z; 
Spast) was calculated from the corresponding joint probability matrices, P(sfuture, z) and 
P(spast, z) for each of the possible mergings using equation (1).
Computing the temporal lag in visual processing.
We calculated the spatiotemporal receptive fields of our cells to estimate the temporal lag 
between the presentation of light stimuli at the level of the cone photoreceptors and the 
output of the retinal neurons in our study. Receptive fields were determined from the average 
stimulus preceding a spike62:
Liu et al. Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
F = 1
nsp
X⊤R (3)
where X is a matrix with the rows containing time samples and the columns containing the 
spatiotemporal sequence in the previous 0.5 s. R is a column vector containing the spike 
counts in the corresponding time bins of X and nsp is the spike count. The time lag was then 
defined as the time bin at which the spatiotemporal filter (F) reached a maximum (On-type 
cells) or minimum (Off-type cells).
Stimulus autocorrelation calculations.
To confirm that the three-point motion stimuli lacked net two-point spatiotemporal 
correlations, we calculated the autocorrelation functions of these stimuli. Stimulus 
autocorrelation for a stimulus sequence, X, was determined by first subtracting the mean 
stimulus (μ) and then taking the outer product of the result with itself.
CXX = (X − μ)(X − μ)⊤ (4)
where X is a matrix in which the rows are time points and the columns are the 
spatiotemporal sequence of contrasts occurring in the preceding second.
Low information rates for inhibitory synaptic inputs.
Our inhibitory synaptic recordings showed relatively modest time-shifted mutual 
information values for higher-order motion correlations, yet amacrine cells receive synaptic 
input directly from bipolar cells, and bipolar cell output showed sensitivity to these 
correlations (Fig. 6). This apparent discrepancy likely arose from the fact that parasol and 
smooth monostratified cells primarily receive inhibitory synaptic inputs from amacrine cells 
with the opposite contrast polarity. For example, an Off-type amacrine cell provides the 
dominant inhibitory synaptic inputs to On-type parasol ganglion cells63,64. However, for our 
synaptic input recordings, we only recorded three-point correlations in which the contrast 
aligned with the preferred contrast polarity of the recorded ganglion cells. This ensured that 
we could obtain the large amount of data required for our analysis from each of the needed 
stimulus classes while also maintaining the stability of our whole-cell recordings.
We expect diverging and converging correlations that are opposite in polarity to the preferred 
contrast of the inhibitory amacrine cell will poorly drive predictive encoding. For example, 
three-point correlations that are positive contrasts would hyperpolarize Off-type bipolar 
cells such that the correlations contained in the stimulus would not exceed the threshold 
for synaptic release and would, thus, be discarded. Instead, these Off bipolar cells would 
depolarize most strongly at switches from positive to negative contrasts, similar to the 
response pattern expected for the uncorrelated stimuli. Such a response pattern would 
contain little information about the past motion trajectory of a positive-contrast stimulus. 
Indeed, this same pattern of relatively weak encoded information was observed in the 
ganglion cells to diverging and converging correlations that were of nonpreferred contrast 
polarity (Figs. 1 and 3). Thus, we expect that inhibitory inputs to stimuli aligned with 
Liu et al. Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
the preferred contrast polarity of these amacrine cells would show a similar pattern to our 
excitatory synaptic input recordings.
Sensitivity index calculations.
We evaluated a cell’s ability to accurately detect a change in information using the 
sensitivity index (d′), which measures the amount of overlap between the information 
distributions in the original spike train and after shifting spike timing:
d′ = μoriginal − μshifted
1
2 σoriginal
2 + σshifted
2 (5)
where μoriginal and μshifted are the mean of the original and shifted information distributions 
and σoriginal2 and σshifted2 are the variances of those distributions, respectively. We defined 
an increase in discriminability (d′) of threshold of 5% as a significant degradation in 
information relative to the original spike train. The value of 5% was on the basis of the 
threshold originally proposed by Fisher that has become generally accepted in statistical 
analyses65.
Computational model.
To understand the origins of predictive motion encoding in primate retina, we modeled 
the diffuse bipolar cells that provide excitatory synaptic input to parasol and smooth 
monostratified ganglion cells. A lattice of model bipolar cells was created with a mean 
spacing of 32 μm66–68 and spatiotemporal filtering of stimulus inputs was based upon direct 
physiological measurements24.
The stimulus (S) was convolved with each model bipolar cell’s spatiotemporal receptive 
field (F) to determine the cell’s response (R) before the output thresholding stage.
R(t) = ∫0
t
dτ∫ d2xF (x, τ)S(x, t − τ) (6)
where x is a vector of spatial contrast values and τ is the temporal shift. Noise in the 
bipolar responses was simulated by adding Poisson fluctuations to the resulting bipolar 
cell responses on the basis of our previous estimate of noise in the diffuse bipolar cells at 
photopic mean light amounts22.
Coupling between bipolar cells was also modeled according to previous measurements22 and 
using equation (7). The response of each bipolar cell following coupling was determined by 
adding the change due to coupling to the response before coupling (R0).
Ri(t) = R0i(t) + ∑
j = 1
n
g R0i(t) − R0j(t) exp −di, j/λ (7)
Liu et al. Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
where g is the coupling gain or portion of the response shared between bipolar cells, λ is the 
coupling length constant, di,j is the pairwise Euclidean distance between the ith and jth cells 
and n is the total number of bipolar cells in the model.
Responses in the model bipolar cell network were then normalized, and output thresholding 
was then applied by setting values below the threshold equal to zero, and renormalizing the 
outputs between 0 and 1. A piecewise nonlinear function (that is, ReLU) was then applied to 
the thresholded responses:
R(t) = R(t), if R(t) > 0
0, otherwise
(8)
Effect of spike timing on information encoding.
To ensure that this low tolerance for variation in spike timing was not a result of using 
a Gaussian distribution, we repeated this analysis using a Bernoulli distribution to shift 
spike timing. Each spike was shifted either forward or backward in time by a given value 
(±Δ) and mutual information was recomputed. The change in mutual information was then 
calculated as was done for the original analysis. The results of this analysis were similar 
to the analysis performed using a Gaussian distribution to jitter spike timing—information 
was degraded significantly when spikes were jittered by only 1–4 ms for all of the cell types 
and conditions (compare Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 2b). This analysis further supports 
the premise that these neurons encode information on timescales much shorter than a single 
frame presentation.
We estimated the error in our information calculations using two independent methods. First, 
we randomly shuffled spike times for the full trace and computed the mutual information 
between the stimulus and shuffled responses. This was done 50 times for each cell and our 
error estimate was the average information calculated across these independent trials. We 
also estimated the error by calculating the mutual information between the correlated stimuli 
and the spike times obtained from the uncorrelated stimulus in the same cell. Again, the 
estimate of information error was obtained by taking the average of 50 different random 
combinations of the stimulus sequence and the uncorrelated spikes. Both of these techniques 
produced similarly low error rates of <0.05 bits s−1 (Extended Data Fig. 2c).
Information calculations for local motion correlations.
We performed an alternative analysis to determine the time-shifted mutual information in 
our cells. For this analysis, the stimulus was collapsed to a single value in each time bin 
by directly computing the motion correlations as described previously6. Briefly, the strength 
of spatiotemporal correlations in each time bin C(t) was determined from the product of 
contrasts at points in space and time that corresponded to the space and time lags in 
the motion stimulus and subtracting the spatially reversed contrast values as described in 
equation (9) for three-point correlations69.
Liu et al. Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
C(t) = ∑
i = 1
n
S yi, t − τ1 S yi, t − τ2 S yi + 1, t − τ3
−S yi + 1, t − τ1 S yi + 1, t − τ2 S yi, t − τ3
(9)
where τx represents the time shift associated with a spatial shift in the correlation6.
This approach did not provide a means to compare information in the motion stimuli to the 
uncorrelated control stimulus, so we did not use it as our primary information measure. 
However, the technique did serve as another demonstration that the cells under study 
show predictive encoding for triplet diverging motion correlations. Mutual information for 
diverging correlations was shifted to future time lags while converging correlations were 
shifted to time lags in the past (Extended Data Fig. 3). Further, this shift to past time lags 
was particularly prominent for the negative-contrast converging correlations (Extended Data 
Fig. 3, right).
Statistics and reproducibility.
Statistical methods were not used to predetermine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are 
similar to those reported in previous publications24,25. The effects described in the work 
were consistent across cells and the sample sizes for all cells was sufficient to demonstrate 
repeatability of the effects described.
In each area of the tissue, contrast sensitivity was measured in parasol ganglion cells. A 
peak-to-trough spike rate of 25 spikes s−1 to a 5% contrast modulation was required for 
inclusion of the parasol cells or surrounding cells in this study. No data were excluded from 
the present study.
Data randomization and blinding.
This study did not involve any traditional experimental groups. All experiments were 
performed from the same organisms and data were pulled randomly from a database without 
selection by investigators. This study did not involve traditional experimental groups that 
could be blinded. All data were pulled from a database and analyzed with the same code 
without selection. In this way, the investigators were blind to the measurements calculated in 
each cell type.
Analysis and statistics.
We performed all statistical analyses in MATLAB (v.R2020b, Mathworks). Mutual 
information calculations were written in C (Apple Clang v.12.0) and compiled and run 
in MATLAB. Final figures were created in MATLAB (v.R2020b), Igor Pro (v.8) and Adobe 
Illustrator (Creative Cloud, v.2021). All data are reported as the mean ± s.e.m. unless 
otherwise stated. Data were not assumed to be normally distributed and, thus, statistical 
significance was determined using the Wilcoxon signed rank test for paired samples and the 
Mann–Whitney U-test for unpaired samples. To determine whether information encoding 
varied significantly as a function of time relative to stimulus onset, the Kruskal–Wallis test 
was used.
Liu et al. Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Reporting Summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting 
Summary linked to this article.
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Overview of time-shifted mutual information calculations.
To quantify the amount of information that a neuron’s response at a particular time (Rt) 
contained about the past and future stimulus trajectory (St+Δt), we computed the time-shifted 
mutual information. The stimulus sequence was shifted relative to the response and mutual 
information was computed between the stimulus and response for each time shift (Δt). This 
was done for time shifts between ± 0.5 seconds.
Extended Data Fig. 2 |. Information encoding occurs on short timescales.
a, Example spike train for a one-second portion of a stimulus containing diverging positive 
correlations (top). To measure the relationship between spike timing and information 
transmission, each spike was randomly shifted forward or backward in time (±Δ, bottom). 
The process was repeated for each spike train in each cell at several time shifts (0–100 
ms). b, Spike timing shift at which the sensitivity index increased by 5% relative to the 
condition with spike time unaltered (Δ, 0 ms). Data are shown across six stimulus conditions 
and six ganglion cell types. Number of cells in the population are indicated in parentheses. 
c, Error in information estimates determined by randomly shuffling spike times (open 
circles) or by using the spike times from the uncorrelated traces in the same cell (closed 
circles). Error estimates were not significantly different between these techniques (p-value: 
two-positive, 0.40; two-negative, 0.78; diverging positive, 0.11; converging positive, 0.34; 
Liu et al. Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
diverging negative, 0.47; converging negative, 0.78; two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test; n 
= 73 cells). Circles and error bars indicate mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Local motion signals show temporally shifted profiles.
Local motion signals show temporally shifted profiles. Third-order spatiotemporal 
correlations were extracted directly from stimulus sequences. The time-shifted mutual 
information profile for diverging correlations showed shifts toward future time points, 
whereas converging information was shifted toward past time lags.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank S. Cunnington for technical assistance. Tissue was provided by the Tissue Distribution Program at the 
Washington National Primate Research Center (WaNPRC; supported through NIH grant P51 OD-010425) and 
we thank the WaNPRC staff, particularly C. English and A. Baldessari, for making these experiments possible. 
C. Chen assisted in tissue preparation. We thank S. Palmer, S. Wang and G. Gutierrez for helpful discussions, 
and C.-C. Chiao for supporting B.L. and A.H. This work was supported in part by grants from the NIH (NEI 
R01-EY027323 to M.B.M.; NEI R01-EY029247 to E.J. Chichilnisky, F.R., and M.B.M.; NEI R01-EY028542 to 
F.R.; NEI P30-EY001730 to the Vision Core), Research to Prevent Blindness Unrestricted Grant (to the University 
of Washington Department of Ophthalmology), Latham Vision Research Innovation Award (to M.B.M.), the Alcon 
Young Investigator Award (to M.B.M.), the Taiwanese Ministry of Science and Technology (108-2813-C-007-085-
B to A.H.) and a travel award to B.L. and A.H. from the Taiwanese Ministry of Education (C.-C. Chiao, principal 
investigator).
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
References
1. Bialek W, Nemenman I & Tishby N Predictability, complexity, and learning. Neural Comput. 13, 
2409–2463 (2001). [PubMed: 11674845] 
Liu et al. Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
2. Tishby N, Pereira FC & Bialek W The information bottleneck method. In Proc. 37th Annual 
Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing (eds. Hajek B & Sreenivas RS) 
368–377 (Univ. of Illinois, 1999).
3. Salisbury JM & Palmer SE Optimal prediction in the retina and natural motion statistics. J. Stat. 
Phys. 162, 1309–1323 (2016).
4. Clark DA et al. Flies and humans share a motion estimation strategy that exploits natural scene 
statistics. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 296–303 (2014). [PubMed: 24390225] 
5. Fitzgerald JE, Katsov AY , Clandinin TR & Schnitzer MJ Symmetries in stimulus statistics shape the 
form of visual motion estimators. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 12909–12914 (2011). [PubMed: 
21768376] 
6. Nitzany EI & Victor JD The statistics of local motion signals in naturalistic movies. J. Vis. 14, 10 
(2014).
7. Nitzany EI, Loe ME, Palmer SE & Victor JD Perceptual interaction of local motion signals. J. Vis. 
16, 22 (2016).
8. Fitzgerald JE & Clark DA Nonlinear circuits for naturalistic visual motion estimation. eLife 4, 
e09123 (2015). [PubMed: 26499494] 
9. Chen J, Mandel HB, Fitzgerald JE & Clark DA Asymmetric ON–OFF processing of visual motion 
cancels variability induced by the structure of natural scenes. eLife 8, e47579 (2019). [PubMed: 
31613221] 
10. Palmer SE, Marre O, Berry MJ 2nd & Bialek W Predictive information in a sensory population. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 6908–6913 (2015). [PubMed: 26038544] 
11. Berry MJ 2nd, Brivanlou IH, Jordan TA & Meister M Anticipation of moving stimuli by the retina. 
Nature 398, 334–338 (1999). [PubMed: 10192333] 
12. Schwartz G, Taylor S, Fisher C, Harris R & Berry MJ Synchronized firing among retinal ganglion 
cells signals motion reversal. Neuron 55, 958–969 (2007). [PubMed: 17880898] 
13. Johnston J & Lagnado L General features of the retinal connectome determine the computation of 
motion anticipation. eLife 4, e06250 (2015).
14. Leonardo A & Meister M Nonlinear dynamics support a linear population code in a retinal 
target-tracking circuit. J. Neurosci. 33, 16971–16982 (2013). [PubMed: 24155302] 
15. Rodieck RW & Watanabe M Survey of the morphology of macaque retinal ganglion cells that 
project to the pretectum, superior colliculus, and parvicellular laminae of the lateral geniculate 
nucleus. J. Comp. Neurol. 338, 289–303 (1993). [PubMed: 8308173] 
16. Schiller PH, Logothetis NK & Charles ER Functions of the colour-opponent and broad-band 
channels of the visual system. Nature 343, 68–70 (1990). [PubMed: 2296292] 
17. Billington J, Wilkie RM, Field DT & Wann JP Neural processing of imminent collision in humans. 
Proc. Biol. Sci. 278, 1476–1481 (2011). [PubMed: 20980303] 
18. Hu Q & Victor JD A set of high-order spatiotemporal stimuli that elicit motion and reverse-phi 
percepts. J. Vis 10, 9.1–16 (2010).
19. Yilmaz M & Meister M Rapid innate defensive responses of mice to looming visual stimuli. Curr. 
Biol. 23, 2011–2015 (2013). [PubMed: 24120636] 
20. Field DJ Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response properties of cortical 
cells. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4, 2379–2394 (1987). [PubMed: 3430225] 
21. Dong DW & Atick JJ Statistics of natural time varying images. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst. 6, 
345–358 (1995).
22. Manookin MB, Patterson SS & Linehan CM Neural mechanisms mediating motion sensitivity 
in parasol ganglion cells of the primate retina. Neuron 97, 1327–1340.e4 (2018). [PubMed: 
29503188] 
23. Leonhardt A et al. Asymmetry of drosophila ON and OFF motion detectors enhances real-world 
velocity estimation. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 706–715 (2016). [PubMed: 26928063] 
24. Appleby TR & Manookin MB Selectivity to approaching motion in retinal inputs to the dorsal 
visual pathway. eLife 9, e51144 (2020). [PubMed: 32091390] 
25. Rhoades CE et al. Unusual physiological properties of smooth monostratified ganglion cell types in 
primate retina. Neuron 103, 658–672.e6 (2019). [PubMed: 31227309] 
Liu et al. Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
26. Reinagel P & Reid RC Temporal coding of visual information in the thalamus. J. Neurosci. 20, 
5392–5400 (2000). [PubMed: 10884324] 
27. Gollisch T & Meister M Rapid neural coding in the retina with relative spike latencies. Science 
319, 1108–1111 (2008). [PubMed: 18292344] 
28. Uzzell VJ & Chichilnisky EJ Precision of spike trains in primate retinal ganglion cells. J. 
Neurophysiol. 92, 780–789 (2004). [PubMed: 15277596] 
29. Bialek W, Rieke F, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR & Warland D. Reading a neural code. Science 
252, 1854–1857 (1991). [PubMed: 2063199] 
30. Rieke F, Warland D, de Ruyter van Steveninck R & Bialek W Spikes: Exploring the Neural Code 
(The MIT Press, 1997).
31. de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Lewen GD, Strong SP, Koberle R & Bialek W Reproducibility and 
variability in neural spike trains. Science 275, 1805–1808 (1997). [PubMed: 9065407] 
32. Panzeri S, Petersen RS, Schultz SR, Lebedev M & Diamond ME The role of spike timing in the 
coding of stimulus location in rat somatosensory cortex. Neuron 29, 769–777 (2001). [PubMed: 
11301035] 
33. Bialek W, De Ruyter Van Steveninck RR & Tishby N Efficient representation as a design principle 
for neural coding and computation. In Proc. 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information 
Theory, 659–663 (IEEE, 2006).
34. Chalk M, Marre O & Tkačik G Toward a unified theory of efficient, predictive, and sparse coding. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 186–191 (2018). [PubMed: 29259111] 
35. Sederberg AJ, MacLean JN & Palmer SE Learning to make external sensory stimulus predictions 
using internal correlations in populations of neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 1105–1110 
(2018). [PubMed: 29348208] 
36. Abbott LF & Dayan P The effect of correlated variability on the accuracy of a population code. 
Neural Comput. 11, 91–101 (1999). [PubMed: 9950724] 
37. Jacoby RA, Wiechmann AF, Amara SG, Leighton BH & Marshak DW Diffuse bipolar cells 
provide input to OFF parasol ganglion cells in the macaque retina. J. Comp. Neurol. 416, 6–18 
(2000). [PubMed: 10578099] 
38. Kántor O et al. Bipolar cell gap junctions serve major signaling pathways in the human retina. 
Brain Struct. Funct. 222, 2603–2624 (2017). [PubMed: 28070649] 
39. Luo X, Ghosh KK, Martin PR & Grünert U Analysis of two types of cone bipolar cells in the retina 
of a new world monkey, the marmoset, Callithrix jacchus. Vis. Neurosci. 16, 707–719 (1999). 
[PubMed: 10431919] 
40. Kuo SP, Schwartz GW & Rieke F Nonlinear spatiotemporal integration by electrical and chemical 
synapses in the retina. Neuron 90, 320–332 (2016). [PubMed: 27068789] 
41. Turner MH & Rieke F Synaptic rectification controls nonlinear spatial integration of natural visual 
inputs. Neuron 90, 1257–1271 (2016). [PubMed: 27263968] 
42. van Hateren JH A theory of maximizing sensory information. Biol. Cybern. 68, 23–29 (1992). 
[PubMed: 1486129] 
43. Atick JJ & Redlich AN Towards a theory of early visual processing. Neural Comput. 2, 308–320 
(1990).
44. Srinivasan MV , Laughlin SB & Dubs A Predictive coding: a fresh view of inhibition in the retina. 
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 216, 427–459 (1982). [PubMed: 6129637] 
45. Dan Y , Atick JJ & Reid RC Efficient coding of natural scenes in the lateral geniculate nucleus: 
experimental test of a computational theory. J. Neurosci. 16, 3351–3362 (1996). [PubMed: 
8627371] 
46. Fairhall AL, Lewen GD, Bialek W & de Ruyter Van Steveninck RR Efficiency and ambiguity in an 
adaptive neural code. Nature 412, 787–792 (2001). [PubMed: 11518957] 
47. Brenner N, Bialek W & de Ruyter van Steveninck R Adaptive rescaling maximizes information 
transmission. Neuron 26, 695–702 (2000). [PubMed: 10896164] 
48. Sharpee TO et al. Adaptive filtering enhances information transmission in visual cortex. Nature 
439, 936–942 (2006). [PubMed: 16495990] 
Liu et al. Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
49. Frechette ES et al. Fidelity of the ensemble code for visual motion in primate retina. J. 
Neurophysiol. 94, 119–135 (2005). [PubMed: 15625091] 
50. Chichilnisky EJ & Kalmar RS Temporal resolution of ensemble visual motion signals in primate 
retina. J. Neurosci. 23, 6681–6689 (2003). [PubMed: 12890760] 
51. Hosoya T, Baccus SA & Meister M Dynamic predictive coding by the retina. Nature 436, 71–77 
(2005). [PubMed: 16001064] 
52. Rao RP & Ballard DH Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some 
extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87 (1999). [PubMed: 10195184] 
53. Yildizoglu T, Riegler C, Fitzgerald JE & Portugues R A neural representation of naturalistic 
motion-guided behavior in the zebrafish brain. Curr. Biol. 30, 2321–2333.e6 (2020). [PubMed: 
32386533] 
54. Zavatone-Veth JA, Badwan BA & Clark DA A minimal synaptic model for direction selective 
neurons in drosophila. J. Vis. 20, 2 (2020).
55. Appleby TR & Manookin MB Neural sensitization improves encoding fidelity in the primate 
retina. Nat. Commun. 10, 4017 (2019). [PubMed: 31488831] 
56. Shannon CE A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J 27, 379–423 (1948).
57. Bialek W Biophysics: Searching for Principles (Princeton Univ. Press, 2012).
58. Chien J-F Encoding the Light Intensity in Retina’s Firing Rate. Master’s thesis, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei (2017).
59. Chen KS, Chen C-C & Chan CK Characterization of predictive behavior of a retina by mutual 
information. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11, 66 (2017). [PubMed: 28775686] 
60. Strong SP, de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Bialek W & Koberle R On the application of information 
theory to neural spike trains. Pac. Symp. Biocomput. 1998, 621–632 (1998).
61. Slonim N & Tishby N in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems V ol 12 (eds. Solla 
SA et al..) 617–623 (MIT Press, 2000).
62. Chichilnisky EJ A simple white noise analysis of neuronal light responses. Network 12, 199–213 
(2001). [PubMed: 11405422] 
63. Cafaro J & Rieke F Noise correlations improve response fidelity and stimulus encoding. Nature 
468, 964–967 (2010). [PubMed: 21131948] 
64. Cafaro J & Rieke F Regulation of spatial selectivity by crossover inhibition. J. Neurosci. 33, 
6310–6320 (2013). [PubMed: 23575830] 
65. Fisher RA The arrangement of field experiments. J. Ministry Agric. Great Britain 33, 503–513 
(1926).
66. Boycott BB & Wässle H Morphological classification of bipolar cells of the primate retina. Eur. J. 
Neurosci. 3, 1069–1088 (1991). [PubMed: 12106238] 
67. Tsukamoto Y & Omi N ON bipolar cells in macaque retina: type-specific synaptic connectivity 
with special reference to OFF counterparts. Front. Neuroanat. 10, 104 (2016). [PubMed: 
27833534] 
68. Tsukamoto Y & Omi N OFF bipolar cells in macaque retina: type-specific connectivity in the outer 
and inner synaptic layers. Front. Neuroanat. 9, 122 (2015). [PubMed: 26500507] 
69. Hassenstein B & Reichardt W Systemtheoretische Analyse der Zeit-, Reihenfolgen- und 
V orzeichenauswertung bei der Bewegungsperzeption des Rüsselkäfers Chlorosphanus. Z. 
Naturforsch. B 11, 513–524 (1956).
Liu et al. Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 1 |. Ganglion cells show sensitivity to higher-order correlations.
a, Stratification pattern and central projections of the macaque retinal ganglion cells (RGC) 
recorded as part of this study. Parasol and smooth monostratified cells stratify in similar 
regions of the neuropil and project to brain nuclei involved in motion processing. LGN, 
lateral geniculate nucleus b, Top, Example space–time plots for seven of the stimulus 
classes used in the study. Bottom, Spike rate (in spikes s−1) as a function of the time for 
these stimuli in an On-type smooth monostratified ganglion cell. c, Autocorrelation for the 
stimulus types showing space (y axis) as a function of time (x axis). Correlation values 
ranged between −1 (black) and 1 (white) with gray values equal to zero. d, Morphology 
from an Off-type smooth monostratified ganglion cell recorded as part of this study. Scale 
bar, 0.1 mm. e, Example time-shifted mutual information curve showing mutual information 
(y axis) as a function of time shift (x axis). Shaded region indicates peak value of the 
information curve used in comparing encoding between stimulus conditions. f, Peak values 
for the time-shifted mutual information for six types of motion correlation relative to the 
information for the uncorrelated stimulus. Data are shown for several ganglion cell types. 
mono., monostratified. Circles and error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Liu et al. Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 2 |. Information encoding occurs on short timescales.
a, Example spike train for a 1-s portion of a stimulus containing diverging positive 
correlations (top). To measure the relationship between spike timing and information 
transmission, each spike was randomly shifted in time. Time shifts were drawn from a 
Gaussian distribution with a mean corresponding to the timing of the original spike and a 
s.d. (σ, bottom). The process was repeated for each spike train in each cell at several s.d. 
(0–100 ms). b, Normalized information (top) and sensitivity index (d′, bottom) as a function 
of the s.d. of spike timing (x axis) across On smooth monostratified ganglion cells (n = 20). 
Solid lines show either a single-exponential fit (top) or a sigmoidal (bottom) to the data. 
Circles and error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m. c, Spike timing s.d. at which the sensitivity 
index increased by 5% relative to the condition with spike time unaltered (σ, 0 ms). Data 
are shown across six stimulus conditions and six ganglion cell types. Information encoding 
degraded at short timescales for both the uncorrelated stimulus and motion correlations, 
indicating that encoding occurred at a much finer time scale than the temporal structure of 
the stimuli. Number of cells in the population are indicated in parentheses. Circles and error 
bars indicate mean ± s.e.m. d, The receptive field of each neuron was determined from the 
uncorrelated stimulus and the temporal component was used to determine the delay in visual 
processing (left). The measured delay was then used to align the stimulus and response, and 
the average information in each stimulus frame was determined (bin width, 1 ms; right). 
e, Information per spike as a function of time following the onset of each stimulus frame. 
Information did not vary significantly across time bins for any of the cell types (P ≥ 0.31, 
Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance). Shaded regions indicate mean ± s.e.m. In 
each cell, frame onset was corrected for the time lag from presenting stimuli at the level of 
photoreceptors and the peak of the temporal component of the receptive field measured with 
uncorrelated noise as in d. Solid lines and shading indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Liu et al. Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 3 |. Timescales of encoding match higher-order correlations.
a, The spatiotemporal receptive field was measured for the uncorrelated stimuli in each cell. 
The peak (On cells) or trough (Off cells) of the temporal receptive field was used as the 
measure of lag in visual processing and was defined as t = 0 for subsequent measures of 
past and future information. b, Ratio of future-to-past information for six primate ganglion 
cell types across the seven stimulus classes used in this study. This ratio was <1 for several 
stimulus classes because the temporal filter was not symmetrical between past and future 
points relative to the peak (that is, strongly biphasic) as in a. Circles and error bars indicate 
mean ± s.e.m. c, Information rate (bits s−1) as a function of the time delay (ms) for seven 
stimulus classes in an On smooth monostratified ganglion cell. d, Information that each 
stimulus class contains about itself as a function of the time delay. The peak was shifted 
relative to the measured lag for signal transmission from the photoreceptors to the ganglion 
cell output. Information decayed linearly as a function of time shift due to stochastic 
elements in the stimuli.
Liu et al. Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 4 |. Encoding of predictive information is nearly optimal for certain stimulus classes.
a, Left, a potential lossy information encoding scheme that could be used to represent 
components of a high-dimensional stimulus in the neural output. Right, this neural 
representation can allocate bandwidth for encoding information about the past stimulus 
history (Ipast) and information that can be used to anticipate future motion (Ifuture). 
b, Information bottleneck boundary for available past and future information at three 
future time lags for the stimulus containing spatiotemporal correlations. c, Encoding of 
predictive information (Ifuture; y axis) versus past information (Ipast; x axis) for the seven 
stimulus classes. The black solid line indicates the theoretical boundary for predictive 
information and the shaded region defines the theoretically unattainable values. Predictive 
information was nearly optimal for two-point positive, diverging positive and diverging 
negative correlations. Cellular representations of converging correlations lacked similar 
predictive information. d, Encoded future information (Ifuture) in six cell types relative to 
the theoretical maximum value defined by the information bottleneck. Values are given as a 
percentage of the boundary value for the six stimulus classes used in this study. Number of 
cells in the population are indicated in parentheses. Circles and error bars indicate mean ± 
s.e.m.
Liu et al. Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 5 |. Ganglion cells optimally encode future information at low contrast.
a, Information rate (bits s−1) as a function of the time delay (ms) for three stimulus classes in 
an On smooth monostratified ganglion cell. Results are shown at three different contrasts for 
each stimulus class. b, Relationship between encoded information as a function of stimulus 
contrast. Results are shown for past information and three future time lags. Diverging 
correlations were positive parity for On cells and negative parity for Off cells, here and 
below. c, Ratio of future (Ifuture) to past (Ipast) information as a function of contrast in the 
same cells as in b (n = 16 cells). d, Encoding of predictive information (Ifuture; y axis) 
versus past information (Ipast; x axis) (n = 16 parasol and smooth monostratified cells). 
Measurements were taken at three different stimulus contrasts and three time lags. Circles 
and error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Liu et al. Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 6 |. Information encoding varies with retinal processing stage.
a, Membrane potential in an H1 horizontal cell for four of the stimulus classes (left) and 
mutual information for the stimuli in the same cell (right). Peak information was similar 
between the uncorrelated condition and the three-point motion conditions, but was much 
higher for the two-point condition. b, Same as a for the inhibitory synaptic currents in an 
On smooth monostratified ganglion cell. These currents showed a similar pattern observed 
in the horizontal cell, with a high information rate for the two-point motion correlations 
and smaller rates for the other stimulus classes. c, Excitatory synaptic currents for the same 
cell as in b. Here, the pattern shifted, with three-point motion correlations producing higher 
information rates relative to the uncorrelated condition and with predictive shifts toward 
positive time lags for the two-point and diverging motion stimuli. d, Mutual information 
for two-point, diverging and converging motion correlations relative to the information for 
the uncorrelated stimulus. Diverging and converging correlation data are shown for stimulus 
parities aligned with a cell’s preferred contrast—positive parities for On-type cells and 
negative parities for Off-type cells. e, Encoding of predictive information (Ifuture; y axis) 
versus past information (Ipast; x axis) for the four stimulus classes. The black solid line 
indicates the theoretical boundary for predictive information and the shaded region defines 
theoretically unattainable values (n: horizontal cells, 2; Off inhibition, 4; On inhibition, 11; 
Off excitation, 6; On excitation, 15). Circles and error bars indicate mean ± s.e.m.
Liu et al. Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 7 |. Subunit coupling and high output thresholds favor encoding of predictive information.
a, Model in which an output threshold was placed at the output of the model bipolar cell 
subunits. Left, the stimulus (contrast, 0.5) was filtered by receptive field subunits. Subunit 
outputs were passed through an output threshold and then pooled at the level of the model 
ganglion cell at the ganglion cell output to determine circuit response. Right, encoded 
information as a function of response threshold. Curves are shown for past information, 
total future information and future information at three time lags. b, The coupled subunit 
model was identical to the model in a except that model subunits were coupled and shared a 
portion of their responses before the output threshold. c, Left, distribution of model subunit 
responses (bottom), which served as input to the thresholded input–output nonlinearity (top). 
Right, shapes of subunit input–output relationships at three different threshold amounts. d, 
Ratio of total future information to past information (Ifuture:Ipast) for the two models as 
a function of threshold. e, Ratio of future-to-past information as a function of stimulus 
contrast for the two models at a threshold of 0.6. The coupled subunit model showed higher 
ratios at all contrasts.
Liu et al. Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig. 8 |. Proposed mechanisms contributing to predictive motion encoding.
a, Space–time plots showing the four enforced triplets for diverging and converging positive 
correlations. In On-type cells, three of the four diverging triplets will produce an increased 
response at t = 1 relative to t = 0, while this would occur for only one of the four converging 
triplets. Thus, the diverging correlations will produce responses that are more likely to 
exceed the bipolar cell output threshold. Most of the converging triplets will produce weaker 
responses at t = 1, meaning that these correlations are more likely to be discarded by the 
bipolar cell output nonlinearity. b, Diverging correlations first depolarize a few bipolar cells 
and depolarization spreads to neighboring bipolar cells through electrical coupling. This 
spreading activation primes cells at the leading edge of the motion such that subsequent 
activation of these cells increases depolarization of their synaptic terminals. This results 
in an increase in the voltage of the terminal that, along with the shape of the output 
nonlinearity, produces a much larger synaptic output relative to the unprimed condition. c, 
Converging correlations first activate many bipolar cells and then activate fewer of these 
cells. This pattern of activation does not take advantage of bipolar cell priming. d,e, Model 
bipolar cell network output for the diverging (d) and converging (e) stimuli. Bipolar cells at 
the leading edge of the diverging stimulus are primed through electrical coupling and then 
subsequently stimulated, engaging the mechanisms described in b. However, for converging 
correlations, primed bipolar cells are not subsequently stimulated. f, Subunit priming speeds 
response kinetics. A Gaussian stimulus was convolved with a temporal filter and subunit 
priming was simulated by increasing the result by 10%. Primed and unprimed responses 
(right) were then generated after passing inputs from the linear filtering stage through an 
Liu et al. Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
output nonlinearity. Priming quickened response kinetics relative to the unprimed condition. 
Responses shown for the shaded region of the linear response.
Liu et al. Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 March 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript